A HISTORY OF ANCIENT CEREMONIES. CONTAINING An Account ^f their Rise and
Growth, their first Entrance into the Church, and their gradual Advancement to
Superstition therein.

Written originally in French, but now, for general information and benefit,
faithfully translated into English.

The Second Impression Corrected, the first being, 1668.

Mark 7. v. 7, 8, 9. -- In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of men; for laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the
Tradition of men, etc. He said likewise unto them, Full well do ye frustrate
the Commandment of God, that ye may keep your own Tradition. London, Printed in
the Year, 1669.

THE TRANSLATOR to the READER.
THe Degeneracy of the Church ( Christian Reader) from that Faith, which was by
the Apostles, delivered to the Saints; by Christ himself to the Apostles; and
by God the Father, to Christ; is matter of sad and serious, but seasonable
speculation: The Primitive Church, was by reason of her more immediate
Conjunction with the Sun of Righteousness, a burning and shining Light; but
alas! How is the Noble Vine become a Degenerate Plant! yielding instead of the
Clusters of Canaan, the wild Grapes of Gomorrah! What Tares have there been
sown in God's Enclosure! What Chaff mixed with his Wheat! What store of Wood,
Hay and Stubble, in stead of Gold, Silver and precious Stones in his Sanctuary!
How is Christ's Body Mystical become an Ichabod! This burning and shining Light
becoming successively ever after the first Century and Age of the Church, for
the space of fourteen hundred years downwards, either, 1. decayed and remitted,
cooled or clouded; the Light of Truth eclipsed with (its common Bushel)
Ignorance; the heat of Zeal rebated into (its ordinary Quench-coal) sinful
Neutrality and Luke-warmness. Or, 2. divided, (and that with no less cruelty
toward Christ's Mystical Body, than was used toward the Baptist's natural
one); she frequently shining, when she did not burn; or else burning, when she
did not shine; Light and Heat, Truth and Zeal, very rarely concurring both
together (at least in any eminent degree) in her declining state; so that
either her Faith was dead, being without works, (the fruits of Zeal) or else
her Zeal blind, being without Knowledge, (one degree of Faith) she,
Sampson-like, losing both sight and life in the Temple of Idols. Or, 3. and
lastly, (which is worst of all) depraved; Light and Truth, with Error and
Heresy; Hea^ and Zeal, with the strange Fire of Ido^latry and Superstition,
Jewish-Pagan Rites and Ceremonies, the truest Marks of the False Church of
Rome, (many or most of which my self have been an Eyewitness and Spectator of
abroad) both the one and the other gradually introduced into the Church, and
vigorously propagated, even to an Universal Corruption, in matter both of
Doctrine and Worship therein; (especially since the Rise, and during the Reign
of Antichrist, who has not failed to join the Serpent with the Dragon, Policy
with Cruelty, for that end; for which very reason our Retreat and Secession
from that Adulterous Church should be, (to speak with St. Jerome) a thousand
times the dearer and more precious to us; Hieron. ad Marcellan.
and may we, in conformity to a higher Oracle, never say a Confederacy to her
more, except upon God's own terms of Accommodation, Jer. 15. 19.
Let her return unto thee, but return not thou unto her); till that blessed day
of power whereon the jealous God, zealous for his Truth and Worship, raised up
and animated those famous Champion-Worthies, Luther and Calvin, with their
fellow-Reformers, Wisdom's Advocates as well as Children, unto a rescuing of
the Truth, holden so long in unrighteousness, and an earnest contest for the
(abovenamed) Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, dictated by God's
own Spirit, recorded in his Word, and by a continued series and succession of
his Servants, Professors under both Testaments, ever since the War was first
commenced between the two Seeds, without interruption owned and maintained,
professed, preserved, propagated, and through his good Providence ( Truth's
chief Guardian) happily transmitted and conveyed to us at last; (God having
never left himself without a Witness of his Truth in the Church, more then of
his Power in the World) which they polished and refined, and (for the hand of
the Lord was with them) recovered to a considerable degree of primitive light
and luster, resolving all into original Authority, the Law and the Testimony:
Howbeit our Adversaries of the Romish Church do ignorantly or insolently,
charge the Reformed Religion with Enthusiastic Novelty, as being of an hundred
and fifty years date, and of yester-day; calculating its Rise by its
Resurrection, the Sunrising, by a Sunshine; as if its Reformers were its
Authors, and they Founders where they were only Repairers: Whereas themselves
do in the mean time like the Gibeonites, under color of the rags and tatters
of their superstitious Ceremonies, and the dry and moldy Bread of their
corrupt Doctrines, pretend to be come from far; as if the Ancient of Days were
the Parent of their novel and spurious Brat; but we who have consulted the
mouth of the Eternal God, have not so learned Christ, being informed and
ascertained by the only Infallible One, that how specious and plausible to
flesh and blood, soever, their Religion be (it being ever, as I have observed,
fuller of carnal and meritricious Allurement, than of Argument), yet from the
beginning it was not so.

Now Reader, being that this ensuing Treatise (dedicated under its first
Edition, by its Anonymus, but judicious and sober learned Author, to King
Charles the First, of blessed Memory; and under the last, with Additions by
another very good hand, to King Charles the Second, our present Sovereign)
comprehends a brief Historical Account of the whole; more especially, of the
Rise and Growth of Church-Rites and Ceremonies; their first Introduction into
the Church, and their gradual propagation and advancement to Superstition in
it; of the witnesses of Truth all along that dark and tedious Interval of about
fourteen hundred years under the greatest Defection, Superstition, and Torrid
Zone of Antichristian Persecution, namely, Fathers, Councils, Confessors,
Martyrs, and other pious Zealots and Votaries, valiant for the Truth, all which
died in the Faith, and many of them for it; the Names and successful Endeavors
of the first Reformers (those Trees of Righteousness, whereby the Waters of the
Sanctuary, imbittered with Romish Wormwood, (Revel. 8. 11.) were sweetened); and
many other particulars specified in the useful and fruitful Preface prefixed to
the Treatise (from which I have only lopt off what I judged to be more
luxuriant and superfluous at the beginning of it) to which I refer thee; so
that what is contained in the Writings of Fathers and other Church-Histories,
as those, of Sozomen, Eusebius, Epiphanius, the Magdenburgian Centuriators,
etc. at large, is here represented by way of short Compend and Breviary; I
therefore conceiving the Translation of the same into our Vernacular Tongue (a
thing more recreative than laborious) to be well worthy of my more spare-hours,
and the perusal thereof of thine; have accordingly effected the same; not
doubting but that this light Manual may prove amongst us, like the Manna
amongst the Jews, grateful to every palate, but what is tainted and
fore-stalled with the Babylonish Cup: Yet for the better prevention of mistakes
and mis-apprehensions which might happily arise from anything herein related or
asserted, let it suffice, and remember that I am not Author but Translator
only, save in a few explicatory verbal Additions, either noted with an Asterism
in the Margent, or else included within a Parenthesis in the body of the
Treatise.

Tho. Douglas.

The PREFACE.
AS touching the benefit, (dear Reader) which may accrue from what is presented
to thee in this Treatise, and the Additions made thereunto by a person desirous
of thy welfare: If so be that God has vouchsafed thee deliverance from
Superstition and Error, by perusal hereof thou shall be confirmed in the
profession of the Truth: but in case thou art still envassalled under the Yoke
of Popery, thou shall hereby be given to understand how far thou art enslaved
in that bondage; thou shall see that the opiniative adherence of the Jews to
Legal Ordinances; the invincible Obstinacy of Pagans in pursuit of their
superstitious Ceremonies; the vain-curious arrogance of their Philosophers, who
have affected at the same time to embrace Christianity, and to profound by
Humane Reason the more sublime Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, and to
discourse the same according to their own carnal sense and apprehension; have
been the persons that laid the Foundation of external Pomp, and of those many
Heresies which have molested, and do still molest the Church of God: Add
hereunto that proportionably to the increase of Ignorance and Barbarism through
the inundation of Goths and Vandals, and I know not what other Barbarous
Nations, who quite destroyed all good Literature; and the constitution of that
savage People wholly consisting either of Pagans or Arrians, there ensued
hereupon a horrid Medley in Religion: But which is yet matter of greater
wonder, during the time that those Barbarians made havoc of the Roman Empire
and sacked it in the West, the Bishop of Rome, to the end that he might
proselyte and bring over to himself the former, to wit, the Pagans, permitted
them to intermingle many of their own Superstions with Christianity, content
that they should only change the names of their false Deities into those of the
blessed Apostles, or those of the Martyrs or Confessors of the Truth; it being
ever proper to Error readily to entertain whatever has any resemblance or
affinity with it self: and forasmuch as that Pagan People had an extreme
Veneration for their Prelates; this Bishop, who had already attained to a great
sway, partly, because of the dignity of the City wherein he had his residence,
The Bishop of Rome, together with those of Constantinople, Alexandrina,
Antioch, and Jerusalem, did at the same time assume the title of Archbishop, by
concession from Constantine, when he translated the seat of his Empire to
Constantinople, they being in those days Dependants upon the Emperors.
as being esteemed the Head of the Empire; and partly, in regard of the Title
of ARCHBISHOP, acquired in the time of Constantine the Great; that he might
more firmly keep the hold that he had got, assumed to himself, not only the
proud-swelling Title of Pope; but likewise, that nothing might be wanting to
the accomplishment of Prophetic Predictions; his Habits of Purple and Scarlet,
and Ornaments of Gold and Pearl, by the relation of Cardinal Baronius himself.
Clouis the first Christian King, sent a Crown of Gold to Pope Hormisda, an.
514. and ever from that time forwards their Ambition became illimited; the
conjuncture of Times, the impotency and weakness of the Western Emperors, and
their own particular Civil Interests, having greatly contributed to the
erection of Papal Authority: And for this reason did that Parracide Phocas, who
murdered the Emperor Mauritius, whereupon he usurped the Empire, so frankly
confer upon Boniface III. the title of Oecumenick or Universal Bishop, to the
end that he might maintain his Authority in Italy by recommendation of this
same Ecclesiastical Power, which was held with the people, by reason of their
gross Ignorance and Superstition, in mavelous esteem: This Pope hereby
declaring that he made but slight account of the saying of Gregory the Great,
his Predecessor, mentioned in this Treatise, Epist. 34 ib. 4.
namely, That He who should assume to himself the title of Universal Bishop,
should be the Forerunner of Antichrist; Epist. 32. lib. 4.
that that name of Blasphemy, says he elsewhere, ought to be far from the
heart of Christians, which robs those who possess the Priesthood, of the
honor of the same, when another does vainly affect to challenge it to himself,
that if we be accessory to the maintaining hereof, we by so doing, corrupt the
Faith of the whole Church; Ep. 24. lib. 6.
because, (as he adds) if there be one only Bishop called Universal, the whole
Church must needs be ruined, in the ruin of that one Universal. But the Popes
were never tardy in closing with offered advantages; nor in engrossing of them
upon such fair emergent opportunities; their Interests being, as has been
observed, interwoven and twisted with those of Secular Princes: Such was the
liberality of Pepin, and of the Emperor Charles the Great, who upon other
considerations bestowed upon them the Lieutenancy of Ravenna, and the City of
Rome, that they were in process of time by them effectually promoted to
Temporal Monarchies and Principalities.

In this so horrible a confusion the title of Archbishop, which was given to
none but those of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, as
will appear hereafter, was assumed by the Bishops of the Metropolitan Cities,
as succeeding therein to the Pagan Arch-Priests, like-as Inferior Bishops, to
to their Priests; as well in this, that they wore, after their example, a white
Mitre enriched with Gold and Pearl, as in that they conformed to them in the
exercise of an exorbitant Power: for we blame not herein a lawful and well
regulated Title, nor yet an external Badge of dignity in the Heads of Order, so
it be free from worldly pomp and vanity, and only used as matter of Order and
Decency, according to which the Apostle exhorts that all things be done in the
Church. 1 Cor. 14. 40.
But contrariwise so far were they from containing of themselves there, that
nothing might be wanting to a total depravation, their shaven and unmarried
Priests have affected to imitate those of the Goddess Cybelleo, See lib. 11 the
11 Book of Apuleius his Golden Ass Lamprid. de Relig. vet. Romans Alex. ab Alex.
lib. 4 and 5.
or those of the Goddess Jeses; the Religious have in a manner succeeded the
Vestal Virgins; their holy Water to the Lustral: and it is not improbable that
their Purgatory, according to the description which those of the Romish Church
give us of it, has been likewise devised according to the model of that
described by Virgil in the 6th Book of his Aeneides; See the Book of Baruch,
chap. 6.
and to the great disparagement of the Christian Religion, which we cannot
mention without extreme condolency, have the Images of Saints been substituted
in the room of Pagan Idols; which in imitation of them, they array with
sumptuous apparel, crown with garlands, kiss, offer incense to; present with
Tapers, and burning Lamps; and after the same example carry about upon their
shoulders: Insomuch that in stead of demolishing of the Pantheon, they have
repaired it under another name Sancta Maria Rotunda
; and so far are they from christianizing of Pagans, that they have paganized
Christians. It were an easy matter, might we here expatiate to make those
things more fully and exactly to appear; as likewise how that many, even great
and learned persons in the Church of Rome, do unanimously accord in the case;
and having lost all shame, do glory in this same Mymmick and Apish
substitution: but what has been said may suffice as it were by the way,
plainly enough to discover them.

Like-as Pagan Idolatry and Superstition has been the cause of such a
prodigious extravagancy, we might likewise with no small probability assert,
that the Followers of Marcion, Arrius, Nestorius, Eutiches and other Heretics,
who marred or destroyed the Orthodox Doctrine concerning the Humanity of Jesus
Christ, were the Authors or Abettors of Transubstantiation, and those that made
way for the entrance of that gross opinion, which is a stone of stumbling both
to Jews and Mahometans, and the main obstacle that forestalls their closure
with the Truth of the Gospel; witness on that behalf the famous Averrhoes, who
said, He never found any Religion more absurd, than that of those who pretend
to make their own God, and then to eat him. This is the reason why thenceforth
taking up a resolution, he cries out, I would sooner choose to die, and that my
soul might be with the Philosophers, than to have any communion with the
Christian Communion. Whereunto may well be added, what is reported by Seiur de
Boulaye le Goux, in his Travels, namely that himself and his companions, all
Christians, being by the Turks immured in some certain Prison in Natolia,
suffered many affronts and injuries from them, who unto the rest super added
this as the severest of all, that they were the Disciples and Worshippers of (
Mange Dieu) the Breaden God.

These many tumultuary Revolutions and fearful Disturbances that befell the
Church, which shall be noted hereafter, should not, notwithstanding, scandalize
the Faithful, this being no other than what was foretold; and we know what that
dreadful Comination of our Lord is touching Rev. 2. 5.
the removing of the Candlestick out of his place, in those Churches which did
not continue in their first works: and that of St. Romans 11. 17, etc.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, whom considering as proselyted from
Gentilisme; and upon that account calling them the Branches of a wild
Olive Tree, who were transplanted and ingraffed into the genuine and true
Olive, namely JESUS CHRIST, Genesis 12. 3 and 18. 18. and 21. 12. and 26. 4. Romans
9. 4, 5.
descended of the Jews according to the flesh, in whom all the Promises were
made to the Fathers; He declares unto them, that in case they should through
supercilious pride and ambition, magnify and over-advance themselves above the
native branches, who for their sakes were broken off, they might justly expect
the like entertainment and non-indulgence.

But that which is yet more considerable is, the grand Apostasy and defection
which the Spirit of God has advertised us should happen under the manifestation
of the Man of Sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Rev. 17. 1 Timothy 4. 1.
having been pleased in diverse places to notify to us, both the time of his
Rise, and the place of his Residence; the color of his Apparel, the number of
his Name, the nature of his Doctrine, even to the very least Circumstances
which may any wise tend to a particular designation of him; to the end that he
might be discerned when exhibited, and fellowship with him shunned, as being of
all things in the world the most pestilential.

St. Paul informs us, 2 Thessalonians. 2, 7, etc
that in his time the Mystery of Iniquity should begin to work, and that that
which should hinder his manifestation should be the then prevailing Power in
the Earth, upon whose ruins the Kingdom of Antichrist should be erected: And
it is very probable that this was the main Reason why the primitive Christians
ever were so importunate in their prayers to God for the preservation of the
Roman Empire, as wisely foreseeing that the destruction and overthrow thereof
would produce a lamentable revolution in the Church, and the revelation of that
Man of Sin, whereof without all doubt they had some previous advertisement
given them by the Apostle; ^^r in the same Chapter where that Prop^ecy is
contained, he bespeaks them thus; Y^ know what withholdeth, etc. and --
remember you not that when I was yet with you, I told ye these things: Where,
out of a holy prudence, he expresses himself in a covert manner, left
otherwise he might expose himself to the rancour and malice both of Potentates
and People, who were already but too much fomented and incensed into an
opposition to the Faithful. This is the very persuasion of the Ancient Doctors
of the Church touching this matter, some of whose Testimonies, in regard of the
importance of the subject, and for justification of our own sense therein, we
shall here subjoyn. Tertullian answering to a Question by himself propounded in
the case, Vid. Tertul. Apologet cap 32. and ad Scapul. cap. 1.
What else is this, says he, than the Roman Empire, whose Apostate-party
dispersing themselves into ten several Kingdoms, shall gain Followers to
Antichrist? and then shall that Wicked be revealed. St. Jerome expresses
himself thus, Hieron. ad Algos.
Antichrist shall not appea^ till the Roman Empire be destroyed, and the
Nations revolt from it; that which St. Paul durst not speak openly, for fear
lest by so doing he might have accelerated upon the Church a Persecution, which
was then but newly hatched. St. Chrysostom in 2 These. cap. 2. Vide Ambros. ibid
Origin. in Matt. tract. 27. Aug. de Civ. Dei, lib. 20. c. 19. etc.
Chrysostom gives the same reason for it; For (says he) as long as the dread
of that great Empire shall continue, no person will with his good will submit
himself to Antichrist; but when that shall be once overthrown, he shall possess
himself of the vacant Empire, and usurp Dominion over both God and man.

Furthermore; That is well worthy of our consideration which the beloved
Disciple of our Lord teaches us in his first general Epistle, 1 John 2. 18.
namely, that in the last time (for thus he describes the Gospel-Oeconomy,
since we ought not to expect any other) in which they had learned, that Antich,
should appear, there were already many Antichrists; and such in effect were
Ebion and Cerinthus, who taught that Jesus Christ was not the Son of God, nor
co-essential with the Father; those would have destroyed his Divinity: and he
who should by way of eminency, bear the name of Antichrist, being, as the same
Apostle teaches, guided by the very self-same spirit of impiety and error,
should endeavor, what in him lies, the ruin of the truth of his Humanity, the
glory of his Royalty, the dignity of his Priesthood, and the excellency of his
Prophecy; and indeed what less can be said of him who is represented to us as
the person that should oppose himself to all that is called God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
or is worshipped? and that even to the being seated in the Temple of God, that
is to say (according as all the Fathers do interpret it) the Church of Christ;
which may give us to understand, according to the dialect of Holy Scripture,
that he shall therein preside, and exercise a Sovereign and Absolute Dominion,
demeaning himself as if he were God. But let us see how the great and famous
Lights of Antiquity have expressed themselves in reference hereunto: behold how
S. Chrysostom speaks, Chrysostom. in 2 Thessalonians. 2. hom. 3.
-- in the Temple of God, not that which is in Jerusalem, but in the Temple of
the Churches. Theodor in Epist. Divin. Decret.
And Theodoret more particularly, The Apostle calls the Temple of God, the
Churches, wherein Antichrist shall possess himself of the first and chief
place, commanding that he be therein acknowledged for a God. Aug. de Civ. Dei,
l. 20 c. 19 Vide Hilar. cont. Aurent. Oecumen. in 2 These. 2. Theophil. ibid
Theodor. ibid. etc.
But S. Augustine instrusts us herein yet farther, Shall his seat be, says he,
upon the ruins of the Temple of Solomon, or rather shall it not be in the
Church? for the Apostle would never have called the Temple of God, the Temple
of a Devil: and therefore some conceive Antichrist to be a Prince with a great
company of attendants, and judge that it were more proper to pronounce in the
Latin, as it is in the Greek (...), 2 These. 2. 4. In Templum, non in templo
[into] the Temple of God, and not [in] the Temple of God; in that he shall be
seated, as if himself were the Temple of God, himself the Church. What will
this be other then to expel our Lord Jesus Christ his Chair? and to deny that
he is come in the flesh to be King and Head of the Church? to vilify his
Priesthood? and to deride his sacred Doctrine with a no less then Diabolical
Impudency.

This moreover should be a sign of his coming, Rev. 17.
namely, that ten Kings shall begin to reign at the same time, having all one
and the same Counsel, and shall give their Power and Authority to the
Apocalyptick Beast, which is represented to us drunk with the blood of the
Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and in all probability it
is not without some special import that the Holy Ghost does so plainly
distinguish the Witnesses of the Truth into two Bands, but that we are to
understand by the one, those whose blood was shed under the Pagan Emperors; by
the other, those whose blood should be in like manner spilt and poured out
under the Tyranical Reign of the grand Enemy of Jesus Christ.

His Residence is also noted to be in the great City, situated upon seven
Mountains, which in St. John's time reigned over the Kings of the Earth, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 11. 8
where also our Lord was crucified in the person of his members; and spiritual
Babylon which God exhorts his People to come out of; Rev. 18. 4
lest being partakers of her sins, they might likewise receive of her plagues.
We are informed also, that that great Whore should be arrayed with Purple and
Scarlet, and decked with Gold and precious stones, having upon her head a name
written, MYSTERY; whereby is insinuated to us, that there should be nothing in
her but what is altogether secret and mysterious, or at least pretended to be
such: The number of his name 666. is another Riddle (in the Mystery of
Iniquity) which we leave to be read by any that list to undertake it; whatever
the interpretation of it be, Iren. ad verse. Haeres. lib. 5. cap. 25 and 30.
whether what Irenaeus and others gather from the numeral value and
signification of the Greek Characters, (...), Latin, or somewhat else.

Finally; This Mother of Fornications is represented to us, having in her hand
a Golden Cup full of Abominations, Rev. 17. 4
and filthiness of her Fornication, for our further instruction, namely, that
she should propound and obtrude such Doctrines as carried with them some
outward decorum, a gilded and specious outside, and of such an enchanting
quality and influence, as that all the Kings and People in the Earth shall run
after her, to drink of this her envenomed Cup: And that which obliegeth us to
stand more strictly upon our guard, is Jesus Christ's prediction, Mat. 24. 23,
etc.
that many should come in his Name, and say, Lo here is Christ, or, lo there is
Christ, but that we should not believe it; that those Impostors should aspire
to teach in his Name; and make ostentation of their extraordinary gifts,
mock-miracles, and Exorcisms, in casting out of Devils by his Authority; to
whom notwithstanding he should infallibly say, to their everlasting confusion
in that great day whereon he is to judge the quick and the dead, I never knew
you; depart from me ye workers of iniquity.

But behold an Advertisement well-worthy of our most serious consideration,
which the Spirit of God has given us in these terms; 1 Timothy 4. 1, etc.
Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the Faith, giving themselves up to seducing Spirits and doctrines of
Devils, speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences cauterized;
forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created for them which believe and know the Truth, to be received with
thanksgiving: Henceforth a Believer should be greatly deficient to his duty,
should he not narrowly examine all those Circumstances and Marks of that grand
Apostasy and Defection, whereof God has given so accurate and exact an
enumeration; and arm himself with matter both of Caution and Confidence,
wherever he shall chance to meet with them; resolving to shun the company of
all that bear those Marks in their foreheads, or bear any cursed conformity
thereunto. Christians, as many of you as embrace the Faith of a stranger, if ye
belong indeed to the Flock of the Lord Jesus, John 10.
hearken to the Voice of that good Shepherd, and know that his Prophetic
Spirit has not declared those things unto us in vain; take occasion from hence
to glorify God, who has made known unto us his Counsels in his Word, Romans 15.
4.
wherein whatsoever is contained was written for our instruction, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope. There be who
conceal the truth of those Oracles of God, fomenting in you malicious
prejudices against such as do in strictness adhere thereunto: They tell you
that the Word of the living God is no more than a dead letter, Romans 1. 16.
whereas it is no less than the very Power of God unto Salvation to every one
that believes; that it is obscure, notwithstanding what the Royal Prophet has
taught us, namely, that it is a lamp to our feet, Psalm. 119. 105, 130, etc. See
Psalm. 19. 8, 9, etc.
and a light unto our paths; and, that Man after God's own heart has employed
the greatest part of his Divine Hymns in magnifying of those Celestial Rays,
and that Admirable Splendor which is universally refulgent in all its parts.
They presume moreover to taxit of Imperfection and Insufficiency;
notwithstanding those glorious surpassing Elogies given it by the great Apostle
of the Gentiles, S. Paul, namely, 2. Tim. 3. 16, 17.
that it is inspired of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, and for Instruction in Righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect and thoroughly furnished to every good work^ They allege that it is not
the common peoples part to read it; albeit our Lord Jesus Christ has said in
express terms, John 5. 39.
Search diligently the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life,
and they are they that testify of me; Acts 17. 11.
whence the Jews of Berea are commended for giving of themselves to conference
and reading of the Scriptures; as Timothy likewise, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
whom the Apostle gives this advantageous Testimony to, that from a Child he
had known the holy Scriptures. They forestall you with a disrelishing prejudice
and aversation to such as profess a sequacious obedience to the Word of Truth,
espousing the same for their only Canon and Rule both of Faith and manners, as
if they were the very filth and offscouring of the world, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
not considering that God has chosen weak things, yea things contemptible and
despised, to confound the things that are mighty. They tell you that the
Company of such Professors is but small and inconsiderable; but yet, be it
known unto them, they are those to whom Jesus Christ has said, Luke 12: 32.
Fear not little Flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the
Kingdom; and how little reckoning soever they make of them, yet are they
nevertheless the Children of that Woman of Wonder who is represented to us in
the Revelation, having the Sun for a garment, Rev. 12. 1, etc.
the Stars for a Crown, and the Moon for a footstool: whereby is given us to
understand that she is privileged and exalted above the inconstancy and
volubility of things here below, against whom the Devil has vomited out Floods
of Water, that is to say in a Prophetic style, has stirred up the People and
Nations of the Earth to wage War with her, and to devour her; but God has
given her Wings, that she might flee into the place which himself has prepared
for her, to be there fed during the thousand two hundred and threescore
prophetic days, wherein the Truth of God shall be declared by the Witnesses
clothed in Sackcloth; by which days, according to the usual signification of
such terms in holy Writing, is notified to us the time that the Persecution of
the Church under the Reign of Antichrist should continue, as by that forelorn
Apparel, the slight Entertainment which the Word of God and the Publishers
thereof should meet withal in and from the World.

If then there be in you any good inclination, take heed that ye stifle it not
to your own misery and confusion; abandon your Errors, and come rank your
selves amongst the Children of the Kingdom; come and embody with them into the
Communion of the King of Glory his Spouse, whose beauty is internal, Psalm. 45.
borrowing nothing from earthly pomp or ornament: Come, but not by stealth as
Joseph of Arimathea; nor yet by night only, as Nicodemus; but rather, after
their example, ashamed of such reproachful pufillanimity and cowardice; Come,
even then when he is persecuted to the very Cross, to remand and rescue his
Body Mystical; may your heart, which before possibly resembled that Rock out of
which our Lord's Tomb was hewn, become a heart of flesh, and a
fitting-Repository for the same, that from rest and repose as yet afforded it
therein, it might appear to the World that ye have so far interessed your
selves in its defense, as that none can henceforth doubt but that your selves
are a part of that sacred Corporation. Let the example of those two goodly
personages animate you unto the like generous resolutions; and see that ye
prefer or overrate not your wordly advantages, which ye fear ye shall lose by
the means; for are ye Counselors, men rich and honorable? Matt. 27. 57. Luke
23. 50. John 3. 10.
such was Joseph of Arimathea: or principal Doctors in your Community (very
Masters in your Israel)? such was Nicodemus: yet did those count all things but
loss and dung for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus: all the
hatred and contempt of those of their own Nation; the scorn and mockery of
Infidels; the rage and fury both of the one and the other, could not restrain
them from glorifying of God, nor associating themselves with his persecuted
Church, even then when she seemed destitute of all succor and refuge. Shall
earthly advantages be dearer to you than Heavenly ones?Know ye not that
terrible threat of our Lord, that he will spue the Lukewarm out of his sacred
mouth? Rev. 3. 16.
and that the fearful and unbelievers, etc. shall be expelled the holy
Jerusalem, Rev. 21. 8*
and thrown headlong into the Lake burning with fire and brimstone? Mark 8. 38.
For whosoever (says he) shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed
when he comes in the glory of his Father, with the holy Angels, and, Whosoever
shall confess me before men, Mat 10. 32, 33.
him will I confess also before my Father which is in Heaven; but whosoever
shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which is in
Heaven. It is not sufficient then that we believe with the heart unto
Righteousness, Romans 10. 10.
^ut we must likewise confess with the mouth unto Salvation. Think not that the
example of David, 1 Samuel 21 12, 13, 14.
in retiring to the ^ouse of the Philistines for shelter from Persecution, will
bear you excused, he having his own private reasons for justification of
himself in that particular; And as touching his counterfeiting himself a
madman amongst them, that was ^ure expense of reputation; so that instead of
any warrant from thence, ye should take pattern by the extravagancies of
Superstition and Error, to the miserable jeopardy and hazard of your eternal
interest; which one consideration o^ght to strike you with horror and dread,
and deter you from the commission of such an heinous and prejudicial piece of
cowardice. Slight not then the wholesome Admonitions which are here given you;
Judge. 16.
henceforth reject spiritual Delilah, who having once shaved off your hair, We
may well say that the strength of the Christian Church was as much
proportionably impaired after the 5th and 6th ages, when as every one affected
to shave himself, and embrace a Monastic life, which contributed not a little to
the furtherance of Superstition and Error.
quite emasculating and overpouring of you, and by degrees reducing you into a
miserable slavery, has also plucked out the eyes of your understanding, and in
fine led you in triumph into the Temple of Superstition: Cut all those
Philistine-cords assunder with the sacred Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God;
anoint your Eyes with that admirable Eye Salve; and then shall ye be more
happy, than Sampson who lost his Life (where many have lost their Inocency) in
the Temple of Idols; ye shall depart out of that of Error with glory and
triumph, and be translated into the Liberty of the Children of God: What an
happy exchange will ye find it? when in stead of Wood and Stone which they
present you with, together with I know not what numerous Relics of Saints,
Cords of St. Francis, Scapularies, hallowed Grains, and Tatters of Moncks, and
many things more of no better value; ye shall feed upon the living Bread of the
Word of God; and suck of the sacred Breasts of his Consolations? When ye shall
seek no longer for the Living to the Dead, (as ye have done hitherto, with
those of whom God complains by the mouth of one of his Prophets) but to the
Law, Isa. 8. 20. Exodus 28. 30.
and to the Testimony; to the Urim, and to the Thummim, that is to say, to the
Light of the Old Testament, and to the Perfection of the New, which shall
conduct you to Him who lives for ever and ever, Heb. 12. 24.
and to JESUS the Mediator of the New Covenant, whose Blood speaks better
things than that of Abel? What Joy! when God shall no more be as a Barbarian to
you? and they shall no more bespeak you in Latin; a Language, which the
greatest part of you understand not; yea, a sign of Wrath threatened by God to
his People, 1 Cor. 14. 21, 22.
as is recorded by the Apostle Paul in that excellent Chapter ( 1 Cor. 14.)
which may suffice wholly to subvert such a monstrous and faulty procedure:
With what abhorrency will ye then loath that cursed Tradition of Men, which
like that of the Pharisees, taxed by our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel, has
disannulled the Commandment of God? Mark 7. 13.
Then shall ye soon acknowledge, that from the beginning it was not so; and that
all those humane Observances, bred in the night of Error and Ignorance, which
are either taught or practiced by you, have not the least affinity with the
simplicity and purity of the Ancient Christian Religion. Herein the ensuing
Treatise will be greatly subservient and advantageous to you, which does by way
of Compend or Breviary present you with a true account of the Rise and Progress
of so many fatal and unhappy Innovations; to the end that ye may perceive and
avouch, that how specious soever they be, yet there is not any thing more base
and despicable. But briefly, if ye carefully traverse the Will and Testament of
your Heavenly Father, namely, the holy Scriptures, ye shall easily know and
acknowledge, how widely ye have deviated from that Canon of Truth, besides or
against which, if a very Angel from Heaven should gospel (...). Gal. 1. 8.
unto you, he ought to be with you accursed: For this reason, if ye will be
persuaded to rank and enter your selves unto the society of those who wholly
and precisely adhere thereunto, owning and using it for the only Compass,
whereby they regulate both matters of Faith and the order of Divine Worship, ye
shall undoubtedly be constrained to say with the Patriarch Jacob, -- Surely the
Lord is in this place, Genesis 28. 16, 17.
and we knew it not. How dreadful is this place! this is none other but the
House of God! this is the Gate of Heaven. Psalm 122. 2.
-- may our feet stand within thy Gates, O Jerusalem.

As for your Believers, whom God has vouchsafed to congregate already into the
Sheepfold of the Lord Jesus; ratify the truth and purity of that Doctrine
which ye profess, with holiness and integrity of life, that those who obey not
the Word, may be won without the Word, by your truly Christian Conversation.
Make it appear to them that ye are no enemies to good works, which ye are
wrongfully charged with; since we teach that those are the products of the Holy
Ghost; by those God is glorified; by those our neighbors are edified; and
those be infallible marks and testimonies of our Election, and the way leading
to the Kingdom of Heaven. If we thus fruitfully trade the Talent received from
the bounteous liberality of God our Sovereign Master, he will superadd many
more, and crown in us the first fruits of our new graces, and blessings, and
because he is faithful who also has so promised, will another day own and
remunerate them with all his Heavenly Glory, and the inexpressible Joys of a
blessed Immortality, and that upon the account not of any merit of condignity
but purely a compact of grace and mercy; since of a truth, as the ways of sin
is death, as the great Apostle and Doctor of the Gentiles has taught us, so
the gift of God is eternal life, Romans 6. 25.
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Now, To the Father who has from all Eternity appointed so great and glorious
a Salvation for us in his Son; To the Son, who has with his precious Blood
merited and procured that Salvation; And to the Holy Ghost, who applies the
same, sealing us up thereunto, and giving us thereof infallible assurances; To
those Three glorious Persons of the thrice-holy and sacred Trinity, one only
true God, blessed for ever, be Praise, Honor and Glory, Power, Dominion and
Kingdom, henceforth, even from everlasting to everlasting.

Amen. Rev. 22. 20.
Come, Lord Jesus, come. Amen.
1 Cor. 3. 12, 13. -- If any man build on this Foundation, Gold, Silver,
Precious Stones; Wood, Hay, Stubble; every man's Work shall be made manifest:
for the Day shall declare it, etc.
Tertullian in his Apology for Christians, chap. 6. TEll me, where is your
Religion? where is that Reverence which is due from you to your Fathers? whom
ye are become so exceedingly unlike to, in your habit, in your course of life,
in your manners, in your opinions, and finally in your language? Ye still
applaud Antiquity, and yet daily engross Novelties; thus whilst ye, as much as
possibly ye can, deviate from the laudable Institutions of your Ancestors, ye
plainly discover, that of the things by them established, ye retain only that
which is of no value, forasmuch as ye reject that which is.
A TREATISE OF Ancient Ceremonies.
THe desire of being informed by what means and degrees the Christian Religion
is become degenerate from its ancient purity; what Ceremonies have been
introduced into it; and upon what Foundations those have been raised, wherein
all the Romish Religion does at this day consist, is a piece of curiosity, not
less fruitful, than delightful: In pursuit of which, setting aside many and
diverse particulars, litigious Controversies, fabulous Narratives, and the
vanity of spurious Books; our purpose is to abridge, and by way of succinct
memorial to represent, according to the genuine truth of History, the original
of the prime Ceremonies which have been bred and broached from tim^ to time
successively, especially till about six hundred years, after the Nativity of
our Lord Jesus Christ; for from that tim^ forwards, Superstition driving on
with a ful^ Sail, did so quickly and withal so generally spread it self, that
scarcely was there discernable the least tract of true Christianity. When those
grand Architects and Master Builders, whom God had singled out to the
Apostleship, had built the Sanctuary upon that only Foundation and chief
Cornerstone, Christ; there was not in the whole Fabric, Bar nor Buckle which
did not exactly correspond to the pattern showed them from the Heavenly Mount.
The Declaration of the grace of God which brings salvation to all Men;
Worshipping of Him, through one only Mediator; Baptizing with Water unto the
Remission of Sin; Communicating in commemoration of the Lord's death, under the
two Signs of Bread and Wine; singing of Hymns, and Psalms of thanksgiving;
Reading of the Holy Scriptures in a known tongue, etc. was all the Ancient
Religion* Then was acknowledged no object of adoration, other then God; nor
Intercessor than Christ; nor Expiatory Sacrifice, than that of his Death; nor
Justification other than through Faith: There was not a word then of an Altar
at the Supper; nor of Images in Temples; nor of an Universal Bishop in the
Church; nor of Souls in Purgatory, nor of a Queen in Heaven: Then the Spouse of
Christ in all her more glorious apparel, had no greater Ornament then that she
was without Ornament; and the mystical Jerusalem instead Rev. 21.
of glittering with pompous Ceremonies, shone with purity of Doctrine, and
sanctity of Life. But when once God had received up into (a higher Orb of)
glory, those great Luminaries which did illustrate and besparkle the Firmament
of his Church; Egesip. apud Eusebius. lib. 3. cap. 29.
the sacred Band of the Apostles once removed out of this lower World; and the
Generation which had the honor to be the eternal Wisdoms immediate
Earwitnesses, dislodged of their secular Mansion; then was there a Door opened
to Humane Inventions: for those who succeeded them in that work, though they
retained the same Foundation, yet did, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 26. ex Iren.
in stead of Gold, Silver, and precious Stones, build with Wood, Hay and
Stubble. Howbeit the Disease grew not so soon to that extremity, which it
afterward acquired; this so universal and prodigious an alteration was not
brought to pass in an instant, nor yet by one only Instrument; the current of
many Ages, the Introduction of new terms, the Pomp of Paganism, the weakness
of Opponents, the ignoranee of the People, the connivance of their Teachers,
the suppression of religious Books, worldly prudence, and superstitious zeal,
did with a kind of emulation contribute hereunto, erecting by little and little
that Tower of Babel, even to the very Pinnacle of iniquity: and like as in
Nebuchadnezar's Statue* the head was of gold, the arms and breast of silver,
the thighs of brass, and the legs and feet of iron and earth; even so when we
reflect upon the Visage of the ancient Church, it appears to have been
altogether pure as Gold; but according as we descend to subsequent Ages, we may
perceive therein a plain palpable declension and degeneracy, until at last we
arrive at an Age of Iron, and stuff quite different from the first. This
Innovation was commenced from things which might have been judged in and of
themselves, matters purely indifferent, had not the sequel proved fatal and
pernicious, they having been advanced from an indifferency to superstition; for
they were for the most part useful observances for the time then being; but in
after times ill explained, and worse applied: They made their first entrance
into the Church, in the second Century or Age thereof, that is to say, about
the hundred and tenth year of our Redemption: Those of them who are the most
remarkable, do here ensue: (all related according to the order of time
respectively, wherein they had their rise.)

Anno 110. etc.
IT being customary with the Jews, when ever they made their solemn appearances
before God, always to carry along with them some present or other in their
hands, especially of the fruits of the Earth, in token of homage and
acknowledgment; the ancient Christians, whereof a great part was descended of
the Jews, followed that example, insomuch that at their public Assemblies,
every one brought along with him a certain quantity of Bread and Wine, Iren.
lib. 4. cap. 32.
or of the first fruits thereof, in corn, grains or grapes, which were
sanctified and consecrated to God by prayer; afterward of this same Bread and
Wine they apportion'd one part for the Communion of the holy Supper, another
was eaten in common, (for the Agapes, or Love Feasts were continued after the
Days of the Apostles) and the Surplusage was either distributed amongst the
poor, or else did of proper right appertain to Ecclesiastic Persons. Those
presents testified the devotion of the givers; Cyprian. lib. de operib. and
Eleemos.
insomuch that this charity beginning by degrees to wax cold; the Doctors
exclaimed and severely inveighed against the rich, in that, though themselves
brought nothing with them, yet they were not ashamed to eat their share of what
was contributed by the poorer sort. Now the gifts thus presented by the People
were called Offerings: From thence it came to pass also, that the Eucharist was
sometimes called a Sacrifice, or an Oblation; not expiatory, but gratulatory
only; for the Fathers of that Age say, Iren. lib. 4. cap 32.
that They offered to God the first fruits of his Creatures, which words cannot
be understood of the Body of Jesus Christ, howbeit they served for a pretense
afterward, for changing of the Supper into a real Sacrifice. Amongst the other
Innovations of those times, Justin. martyr. defens. ad Antonin.
we should likewise recount the mixture of Water with Wine in the Eucharist, a
practice which was never authorized either by the Sacramental Institution, nor
yet by Apostolic Ordinance; It might nevertheless have been tolerated as a
matter of indifferency; but at this day it is reckoned amongst things
necessary. Iren apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 23. and 26.
There was another custom foisted in at the same time, for they judged it
advisable to carry the Eucharist to such as were not present in the Assembly;
more especially to the sick; likewise in case any Bishop, or any other Person
of Quality being a stranger, had arrived at their Cities, they presented them
with some of the Sacramental Bread and Wine, congratulating them by that symbol
of Fraternal communion. Justin. martyr. defens. ad Antonin. Tertullian lib. de
oratione.
It was also an usual thing with them, when public Prayers were ended, to kiss
one another interchangeably with a holy kiss, in token of peace and
brotherhood: After that they proceeded to levy censures against those who,
prayer ended, did frustrate themselves of this same kiss of peace, which was
amongst them a signal of Reconciliation, but is at this day changed into a
ridiculous Ceremony.

There were at the same time diverse Fasts introduced, not under the notion of
any Ordinance or necessary observance, nor yet by way of distinction of Meats,
blood excepted and things strangled, Iren. apud Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 24.
the use o^ which was prohibited for a time; but o^^ of custom only, and that
proceeding no^ from the public Authority of the Church, but from the
simplicity of private persons* for in case any had made distinction o^ meats,
for conscience sake, forbearing the use of Flesh and Wine; and thus prejudiced
their health by immoderate fasting* or would have had the Church tied to
particular Laws, Ignat. ad Her. Iren. ad Vctor.
and prescription of the times, duration and forms of fasting: Antiquity
without all peradventure would have suppressed such, as appears by the instance
of that Arch-heretick Montanus, whom it condemned for attempting in like manner
to stifle and infringe Christian liberty.

It was the custom of most Churches at that time to hold their Assemblies upon
Wednesdays and Fridays, Clem. Alexandr. Stromat. lib. 5.
in order to the celebration of the Sacraments and public Prayer; and that
they might be the better prepared for due attendance thereupon, they gave
themselves to fasting upon those days; this they did not that they believed
fasting to be essential to holiness, for they rejected the Fast of the
Sabbath Day, which yet was the prime day of their religious exercises: But
there was an anniversary Fast, which they celebrated before the Feast of
Easter, whence the Quadragetimal time proceeded; and it is of importance to
know what the intent of the ancient Church was herein: Some allege that, that
observance tended to an imitation of the miraculous Fast of the Son of God; but
it is evident from Evangelical History, that the time of our Saviors Fast was
previous to the Passover by the space of six Months; proof sufficient, that
Antiquity had some other end and aim in the celebration of this Fast, else
doubtless they would have pitched upon a time coincident with that wherein our
Savior fasted; Eusebius. lib. 1. cap. 24. ex Iren.
behold then the true account. There was an Order at that time established in
the Church, that the Feast of Easter approaching, those who were obliged to do
public penance should present themselves to be re-ingratiated and received
into peace with her. At the same time the Catechumenes Such as werenewly
instructed in the principles of the Christian Religion, but not as yet
baptized; or if baptized, not as yet admitted to the Sacrament of the Supper.
were baptized, for those Days were particulary appropriated to that work; and
for as much as those were things of great moment, the Church proceeded therein
with fasting and prayer; besides that, at the same time they behoved to prepare
themselves for the Commemoration of the Death and Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
and for the solemn Communion upon the Easter Day ensuing. But to show that this
observance did depend upon the Liberty of the Church, and not upon any
peremptory imposed Law, we must remark the diversification which attended that
Custom; Theophil. Eusebius. ex Iren.
for in some Churches this Fast lasted three Weeks; in others seven Days only,
and in others forty Days; and from this quarantine came the name of the
Quadragesimal, (our Lent) which was formerly called the Paschal Fast.

Anno 160. etc.
NOw this Age was, by reason of violent Persecutions which lasted along time
after, full of horror; all the Provinces of the Roman Empire being bedewed,
and all the Judicatori^s therein over-glutted with Christian blood; Torments
exquisite, terror universal, revolts frequent, yea there were found amongst
them who to palliate their infamous cowardice, taught that martyrdom was but
matter of mere indifferency, Iren. lib. 3. cap. 4.
reckoning it extreme folly and madness to suffer death for their profession.
The Sepulchers of Martyrs were loaded with reproaches, and their memory with
execrations; for the rage and malice of their Enemies not satisfied with their
Death, extended the Persecution to their very Bones; and that they might
deprive Christians of the hope of a future Epist. Martyrum Galliae apud Eusebius.
lib. 5.
resurrection (one of the main Arguments of their constancy) they frequently
exposed their dead bodies to the hunger-bitten rage of ravenous Beasts, placing
guards and sentinels day and night, to hinder any that might attempt to give
them burial; all that remained of them was burnt, and the Ashes thrown into
Rivers, or scattered in the Air: The Church, then that they might enkindle zeal
in the People, and dispose them for the glory of Martyrdom, presented them
with new Incentives for excitation and encouragement. The Grecians did yearly
celebrate the memorial of their Heroes, and such illustrious Persons as had
died valiantly in defense of their Country; and this solemnity was performed
about their Tombs, Eusebius* de praeparat. Evang. Cyril. contra Jul.
to the end that they might by so doing animate and encourage the surviving
unto the like atchievments: Christians judging this to be a very proper means
to persuade many Persons to suffer death for the Gospel, and to confirm others
in such a magnanimous resolution, did imitate their example: Their main care
then in the first place was to bury their Martyrs, and where they could not
recover the whole body, they endeavored carefully to gather up the very least
fragments, in case the fury of their Persecutors had left any remainder; now
those Relics were honorably interred without any such custom as afterward
came to pass; Epist. Smyrn. Epist. martyrum Galliae.
For although Martyrdom was reputed a most glorious thing, and those blessed
souls were very precious with the Church, yet so it was that all the honor
that they afforded their bodies, was an honorable Interment, nothing different
from the common: After this the custom was introduced of an anniversary
commemoration of the combats and constancy of Martyrs, Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 9.
and 15.
upon the same days whereon they had suffered death (called by them the Days of
their Nativity, in regard that upon them, they were installed in another life)
and in the same place where they were buried; from thence it came to pass that
Cemeteries became the Ordinary places of their Assemblies, for those
anniversary days returned very frequently, by reason of the great number of
Martyrs, by whose death most days of the year were renowned: Upon those days
then the whole Church assembled together in the same place where the Sepulchers
of their valiant Champions were, as if she meant to warm her Zeal at their
Ashes, and to spirit her self thereby for a more prompt Commemoration of their
Martyrdom: Public Prayers, and the Exposition of the Scriptures being
finished, they rehearsed in order the Names of those who had been upon that Day
put to death for the Truth; they likewise related the several conflicts by them
sustained, whose fierceness inhaunc'd their constancy; their courage also was
displayed in terms full of applause and admiration; their glorious Trophies,
and the rich Garlands propounded as the prize of their Victory, finished the
Panegyric, which consisted in thanksgiving to God for giving them the victory;
the whole action was concluded with the Celebration of the Eucharist. Now the
intent of those Solemnities was in the first place to show that such as were
dead in Christ, are still alive, both in God, and in the memory of the Church;
and in the next place to animate and encourage the People unto the like
sufferings: This was the design of the primitive Christians, for thus do they
explain themselves. Epist. Smyrn.
We can never (say they) abandon Christ, nor serve any other; we adore Christ
as the Son of God; and we cherish the Martyrs as the Disciples and Followers of
our Lord; we solemnize the day of their nativity, which is that of their death;
in remembrance of such as have conflicted for the Truth, and in order to the
exercising and exciting of others thereunto. We hope to be made capable of the
like graces, and at last Compartners and Fellow-sharers in the same Glory.

Amongst the heads of Discipline observed in those times, this was one of the
most material; Such as were convicted of any notorious crime, were obliged to
make confession of it publicly, Iren. lib. 1 cap. 9.
in the face of the whole Church, to beg pardon, and to undergo whatever should
be imposed upon them; which done, they enjoined them some kind of satisfaction,
whereby they behoved to manifest the sincerity of their repentance: This they
did to contain others in their duty, as also to prevent the blame and reproach
of the Christian Religion amongst Infidels, as if it gave indulgence to Vice,
through silence under it; Now they pretended not by this public Repentance, to
make satisfaction to God (to whom none can render the least compensation for
the least offense committed) but only to the scandalized Church, or to an
injured Neighbor.

Anno 195.
THis second Age we must needs conclude with a famous Controversy commenced
therein. Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22.
It is the constant opinion of the Writers of Ecclesiastical History, that the
Apostles never imposed any Law, obliging the Church to the observance of any
Feast whatsoever, no not so much as that of Easter; but that such Solemnities
were voluntarily introduced by Christians, and authorized by custom; And in
effect, the very diversity of usage found amongst them in that observance, does
abundantly manifest the indifferency of the thing it self: For all the Churches
of Asia the less, did celebrate the Feast of Easter, upon the fourteenth day of
the Month of March, after the manner of the Jews; alleging that this was
their constant practice ever since Saint John did exercise his Apostleship in
Ephesus: But the European Christians, in regard they would have no manner of
communion with the Jews, did celebrate the same upon the Sabbath following;
howbeit thi^ difference did nothing infringe the unio^ of the Churches: But
about the year 195^ it began to be controverted, the one party laboring to
reduce the other to the terms of one and the same Custome^ touching which
difference, several Councils were held, the Eastern in opposition to the
Western; and both in fine fomented t^ that excess of heat and passion, as that
Victo^ Bishop of Rome made bold by a Process and Act of Jurisdiction, (till
then unhear^ of,) to excommunicate all the Asiatick Churches; whereupon he was
censure^ by sundry Bishops, Ireneus Superintendent in the French Churches, by
name, who did both by Reason and Example remonstrate to him, that such
observances were things arbitrary and indifferent, and that diversity therein
did never heretofore interrupt mutual correspondence amongst the Churches.

Anno 200. etc.
THe Age ensuing was very fruitful in Ceremonies, for besides that they
retained many things proceeding from Jewish Custom; The Pagans also
incorporating themselves into the Christian Church, in^ermingled therewith many
and various Pagan Rites. Now the Observances of that time were not all
continued, for many of them having been afterward buried in oblivion, are not
at all practiced at this day: Cypr Ser. 5. de lapsis, and Epist. ad Caec. l. 2.
Ep. 3.
For the Church of Rome does not approve that the Eucharist be administered to
little Children, which was practiced then, and a long time after that; nor that
it be celebrated in the Evening; nor that the Baptized be made to taste of Milk
and Honey, Tertul. lib. de corona militis.
as is practiced in Africa; nor of the Cannon forbidding People to pray
^neeling upon the Sabbath Day, and from Easter to Whitsuntide, Tertul: ib*
and commanding them to Pray standing, whence the term stations had its rise;
nor the custom of giving the Eucharist to Women, to be by them carried to
their Houses, kept in Coffers, and eaten in a corner; nor that of sending it to
the Sick, by the hands of Children; nor of that notorious abuse which was then
in the Church of Rome, of propining pure Water instead of Wine, under pretense
of sobriety, in the Celebration of the Sacrament; nor yet of that Prayer
whereby they besought God for a proorastination of the last Day; nor of many
other Ceremonies which we pass with silence. Let us then take a view of such as
serve for modern pretense, and the respective sources whence they are sprung.

It was a Pagan Custom, that those who came out of Baths (the use whereof was
very frequent) did anoint themselves with Oil; Wrestlers also, and such as
were to run a career, that they might become the more supple and active, were
accustomed to oil, and anoint their Bodies: Christians possibly in imitation
hereof anointed those whom they Baptized in an Athleti^k (or Champion-like)
capacity, who were singled out to combat the World; which Ceremony they
authorized by the Old Testament, alleging that it was derived from Judaisme:
This Unction however can make nothing for the pretended Sacrament of
Confirmation, nor was it ever applied to dying Persons, as is practiced at this
day.

We have seen how that they carried their Offerings into the Church; now for as
much as they held their Assemblies upon the Days solemnized for the Martyrs,
the Offerings presented by them upon those Days, Tertul: Cypr:
were entitled Sacrifices, or Oblations offered in memory of the Saints, the
circumstance of the Day occasioning that title; for nothing passed in that
action, relating ^o the Saints, other than simple Commemoration; and those
Offerings were not the Body of Jesus Christ, but Bread and Wine only, or the
very first fruits themselves, employed unto several ends and uses.

It is further remarkable, Hieron. in Iren. lib. 2 cap. 11. and in Ezech. cap.
18.
that to induce every one to contribute something, the Names of those who
offered, and the offering it self, were with a loud voice Proclaimed in the
Church; which yet was by many disallowed of, even a long time after.

At the same time offerings for the dead had their rise, Cypr. lib. 3. Ep. 15.
and 16.
whereof we must know the Institution; for though they might be reckoned
amongst the Customs ushe^'d in by Pagans, nevertheless the intent of them was
quite another thing than what they were afterward applied to. Any one then
having departed this life, Aug epist. 64. Origin. lib. 3. in Job Tertul. de
Moneg. Cypr. lib. 8 Epist. 6.
the year fully exspired, they commemorated in the Assembly the Name of the
defunct upon that day; declaring how happy he was having dyed in faith; and all
that were present, besought God that he would grant them the like exit; which
done, the Parents or Friends of the Deceased, that they might render his memory
honorable, presented the Church, or the Poor, present at the action, with a
certain quantity of Bread, or other Alimentals; many of them also at the same
time, took Order that their Names might after their Death through such acts of
charity continue in a sweet savor in the Church, bequeathing to that effect
certain testamentary Legacies to be yearly paid to the Legatees upon the day of
their decease; upon which Foundations the Anniversaries were grounded: Now
those Offerings were only Memorials of the devotion of the dead, not expiatory
Sacrifices; for the very Women, who were never permitted to sacrifice, did yet
offer in Memory of their Deceased Husbands: besides, many presented such
Offerings upon their birthday, this being an act of recognition only, and a
piece of homage paid to God, who gave them life upon that Day.

Then also began praying for the dead, Tertul. de Corona militis.
which the Christians of that Age confess to be founded upon Custom, and not
upon Scripture, ranking it amongst many other observances, which are at this
Day disallowed of by the Church of Rome^ Now we must carefully remark in what
sense Antiquity prayed for the dead, for she never believed that they were shut
up in place of torment; Justin. Martyr. Quest. 60. and 76. Iren. lib. 5 Tertul.
contra marcion. lib. 4. cap 34. and lib de anima, cap. 55.
and the Doctrine of Purgatory was as yet as unknown as fabulous; but she held
that the departed Souls of the faithful were not admitted into the joy of the
beatifick Vision, till after the day of Judgment, and that they were reserved
in some certain subterraneous place, till the Day of the Resurrection: she
prayed then for the Consummation of their Glory, and earnestly entreated that
she might be joined with them, and have part in the Resurrection of the Just:
But we shall see more fully hereafter in what terms, Tertul. de moneg.
and with what intent they then prayed for the dead: In the mean time, let us
take a view of some other Ceremonies then also broached.

The Pagans observed an infinite number of superstitions in their very ordinary
converse. Christians were intermingled and promiscuously conversant with them,
not only in the same City, but in the same House, at the same Table, and in the
same Bed, so that there were frequently different Religions in one and the same
Family. Aug. de verb. Apo. Sermon. 8. and in Psalm. 41. Tertul. de corona militis.
This promiscuous converse notwithstanding, they resolved to be known and
acknowledged for Christians, and for a proof of their Faith in the Crucified
One, they introduced the use of the Sign of the Cross, Origin. H^mil. 2* in
P^a. 38* Cypr* lib* d* Haeret* Baptiz.
and for as much as this Faith was judged reproachful and ignominious, they
formed that signal upon their forehead, in witness that they were not ashamed
of the Cross of Christ; at their entering into, or coming out of their Houses,
or Baths; sitting down at, or rising up from their Table; lying down in their
Beds at Night, or rising in the Morning, they always marked their fore heads
with the sign of the Cross; which was afterward received into Baptism: Tertul
in Ap^loget.
But this Sign was only a badg of their profession, and a kind of implicit
calling upon the name of Christ; and the virtue attributed to the Cross, was
not extended to the Sign formed in the Air, but was appropriated to Christ
only, whose Name was tacitly invoked by that signal.

We have mentioned the satisfactions whereunto Delinquents were obliged; now
this term ought to be safely understood; for when the Ancients speak of
satisfying God, they pretend not that a Man may by that action redeem temporal
punishments; but that the Commandment of God enjoining repentance, and holding
it equitable that the same be outwardly mani^ested, is thereby satisfied: Now
those satisfactions were certain penalties, or reparatory mulcts imposed upon
Penitents, whe^eof this was the form. In case any one ^ad apostatized, whether
through error o^ infirmity, or had fallen into some enormo^s crime, the Church
would not presently receive such an one into her Communon, what repentance
soever he did testify* but she appointed him a certain space (...) time,
sometimes for some years togethe^, within which he ought to give proofs o^ true
contrition: Tertul. lib. de paenit.
She enjoined him also to stand bolt upright in a distinct Corner ^f the
Assembly, which was the proper place ^f Penitents, in a mournful habit and
visa^, often with sackcloth and ashes, with tea^^ and supplications to God, and
requests (...) his Brethren that they would pray for ^im. She appointed him
likewise private fas^, sometimes reducing him to Bread and W^ter; and thus it
behoved him to accomp^ish the prefixed time of his Repentance, before ever he
could be readmitted into the peace of the Church.

But for as much as it came (...) pass that many were, or at least it was
fea^ed, might be prevented by Death, before ^hey had consummated, or even
before ever they had begun that prescr^bed time; the Church taking the same
unto consideration, did provide accordi^gly; for left they should be either
hardened into an obstinacy, or swallowed up of despair, she frequently remitted
of that severity; so (...) that if one had been condemned to a t(...)n years
abstinence from the Communion she accepted of five; sometimes also (...)e
penalty was commuted into some more tolerable consideration; and this
moderation they used not only toward those which were under the more
imme(...)iate approach of death, lest they should expire without a previous
reconciliation to the Church; but likewise toward su(...) as seemed by a more
than ordinary d(...)gree of contrition, to compensate what (...)as wanting of
the prefixed term thereof: This mitigation was managed by the pru(...)ence of
the Church, who weighing the (...)ircumstances and quality of the offense(...)
received such into her peace, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 36.
in who(...) so ever she perceived sufficient testimonies of a serious
repentance, not exp(...)cting till the period of time hereunto pre(...)xt
should elapse: Such procedures were (...)earmed Relaxations, or Remissions: A
long time after that they gave them the title of Indulgences, but in quite
anothe(...) sense, than what they are taken in at this day; f(...)r this term
signified no more in those Days, than a discharge, or an allay and
mitiga(...)ion of Ecclesiastical censures and penalties, with which the Church
did by way of charitable Indulgency, gratify Penitents.

Now we must note, that for as much as Martyrdom was very honorable amongst
Christians, and those who were Prisoners for the Faith, did by a frequent
intercourse of Letters maintain a Correspondence with the Church, who also
highly esteemed of those blessed Witnesses of and for the Truth, affording them
what Consolation they could; the Penitents desirous of solace under that more
rigid part of Discipline, addressed themselves to those Martyrs, soliciting
them to intercede with the Church on their behalf, as well knowing what credit
they had with her, and of what influence their Recommendation was: the Martyrs
hereupon made enquiry into the life and repentance of those Delinquents, and in
case they found them sincere and upright, they employed their utmost Intrest in
interceding with the Church by Letter from Prison, to this effect, that she
would please in favor of them, to admit of such and such Persons into her
Communion, which they readily obtained of her: and it is not to be forgotten,
how that those Penitents having frequently abused the facile nature of the
Martyrs, either through their misinformation, or through over-importunate
solicitations, whereby they extorted from them that intercession, the Church
complained of that abuse; which occasioned a breach of Discipline: Now this is
the only Intercession of Saints, which was acknowledged in those days; and how
much it differs from that which was introduced afterward, is easy to
determine.

Anno 240. etc.
ABout the Year 240, there happened a new kind of Devotion; for whereas
formerly they required the Martyrs, whilst yet Prisoners, to join their
Supplications with those of other Christians, and to pray here below for them
and with them; Cypr. lib. 5. Epist. 1. ^d Cornel.
they began instead of that to admonish them, that after their death, they
should be mindful of the living; yea, Christians did even mutually indent and
covenant one with another, that who ever should first exchange this life for
another, should remember the surviving, and implore God in the behalf of them
after their own decease: Which, howbeit it was but the particular zeal of some
few, yet served afterward to pave the way to the Intercession of Saints.

Then also began the use of Confession to be partly restrained, and partly
enlarged beyond what it was formerly: Penitents were the only Persons upon whom
it was imposed; it was never made but in public, in the face of the whole
Congregation; and even Malefactors failed not to discharge their Consciences
into the hands of the Church, before that themselves fell into those of the
Executioner: But for as much as reproach and obloq^y did commonly attend those
whose faults were thus displayed to the open view of the whole World, Origin.
Hom. 2. in Psalm. 37.
they therefore ordered that Delinquents should in the first place consult
their Pastor, Leo. Epist. 69. Sozom. lib. 9. cap 35. Aug. de symb. de Catech.
lib. 1. cap. 6.
who cognoscing upon the nature of the offense, should consider whether it were
convenient to declare the same in public, or only to mention it in general,
without specification of the crime it self: There were many also who out of
shame shunned public confession. It came to pass likewise about the Year 260.
that when as such as had abandoned themselves to the Apostasy, which fell out
under the Persecution stirred up by Decius, required to be readmitted into the
Church, there were many who withstood their reception, alleging that they were
not longer capable of readmission into Her; and under that pretense many did
separate themselves, which made way to the Schism of the Novatians. It was
therefore found expedient, for avoiding of scandal accrewing to many from
public confessions, to change the same into private ones; and to that purpose
it was decreed, that out of their many Pastors, they should choose one of a
good Conversation, Sozom. trip. histor. lib. 9. cap. 35.
a prudent Person, and capable of a secret to whom that charge should be
committed; from thence came the Penitentiaries: Howbeit this change happened
only at the beginning in the Greek Church; for the Western Church retained the
Custom of public confession, until the time of Leo Bishop of Rome, about the
Year 450. Finally, whereas public confession was only of more notorious and
enormous Crimes, the same being once changed into particular, they began to
recommend it to practice, exhorting the People to confess their very least
escapes and defects, (from the beam to the mote:) and that more frequently then
they were well able to do. Now this confession was not of Divine Right, nor did
Antiquity ever believe it to be such; for afterward, to wit, about the Year
396. upon occasion of a scandal arising from it, it was abolished by Nectorius
Bishop of Constantinople; that which he would never have attempted, had they
believed that it was of Divine Institution: Neither did it consist in a
scrupulous enumeration of all thoughts, words, and actions, which might be
accounted faulty; for in the Church of Constantinople, which was one of the
most populous amongst them, there was of the whole Clergy but one only Person,
whose charge it was to receive Confessions, which had not been sufficient for
so great a multitude, had every one been obliged to repair to confession, and
to render a particular account of all his actions: It was not therefore judged
needful for obtaining of remission of sin, but useful for instruction of the
ignorant, for consolation to the afflicted, for reforming of sinners, for
resolving of such difficulties as might ripen into a case of Conscience, and
(lastly) for counsel to the perplexed.

Authors of the same Age make mention also of certain Virgins, Cypr. lib. 1.
Ep. 9. and 11.
who consecrated themselves to God; whereof this is the original: The then
reigning Persecutions obliged Christians to involve themselves as little as
might be, in the affairs of the World. Now for as much as the liberty of that
Profession is frequently fettered and infringed with the encumbrances which
attend a married state, there were many Virgins, who with the concurrent advice
and consent of their Parents, resolved to live in perpetual continency, and to
join themselves with greater strictness then ordinary to Jesus Christ: They
presented themselves therefore to the Church* who with Solemn Prayer
recommended them to God, and the care of the Poor to them, whom they were to
succor in their sickness, and relieve in their necessities; for it was unto
such deeds of charity that they devoted themselves. But as touching the Vow of
Celibacy, it was in their own liberty to relinquish that condition, when ever
it seemed good to them; and in case they conceived that they could serve God
with greater integrity in a state of Marriage, than in that of Virginity; the
Vows of Continency also were not as yet esteemed irrevocable.

We have said that they carried the Eucharist to the Sick, and that they
administered the same afterward even to little Children; but for as much as
those, either through infirmity of Body, or through tenderness of years, could
not conveniently receive the Cup, they therefore sometimes dipped the Bread in
the Wine, that so they might receive the whole Sacrament entire; for the
People, both Men and Women, did promiscuously communicate under both Signs:
Now albeit this expedient of soaking, or dipping the Bread in the Wine, was
never practiced but in such extraordinary cases; yet notwithstanding many
affected to make it a general custom, introducing it into the ordinary
communion of the Church; of which usage some Tracts were continued in after
time, as we shall show in its proper place.

Anno 300. etc.
ABout the Year 300. and afterward, there were many Ceremonies introduced;
Persecution continued even til* then. Now, behold Emperors, who submit their
Scepters to Christ's Sheep-hook, and throw their Crowns at the Foot of his
Cross: The Church sprung out of the Ashes of her own Children, as yet of a
sanguine complexion, is received into savor with the great Constantine, and
hence forth reposing her self under the shade of his Laurel, does (as it were)
renew her youth: she is removed from the Wilderness into Cities, from Caves
into Palaces, from Deserts into Churches, and from poverty into plenty and
pompous abundance.

This prosperous change produced diverse effects; People repaired to the Church
in crowdes: But yet the simplicity of Christianity did dis-relish many, who had
still before their Eyes the pomp and magnificence of Paganism: they therefore
judged it necessary to re-attire Religion with the more splendid and ornamental
Ceremonies, to the end that through the splendor of her Ornaments she might
become the more august and acceptable; and like as they had done formerly, in
compliance with Jews and Gentiles, whose only talk was of Sacrifices; our
Christians gave the Supper, Eusebius. Greg. Nyssen. Council. N^cen. de tabulis
sacris.
the Title of Sacrifice; and the Table, the Name of Altar. Howbeit, the
Language used then, was not meant in that sense, which was put upon it
afterward; for when ever they mention the Altar, they understand the Table,
which was placed in the midst of the Assembly, whereupon they laid the
Offerings that were presented by the Faithful. And thus they explain
themselves, when they speak of the Eucharist.

Now, one of the first occupations that Christians, under their respite from
persecution, busied themselves in, was this: The Bodies of many of their
Martyrs were buried in the wide open Fields, or else exposed to the Highways,
and their Graves covered with filth and nastiness; they began therefore to drag
their Bodies out of the places where they were interred, and to transport them
into Cities, in order to a more honorable Sepulture; which transportation was
performed with some solemnity, the whole Church assisting thereat, with Singing
of Psalms, the Coffin covered with a rich Cloth; after that, they interred the
Body under the Communion Table; Ambros. lib. 10 Epist. 85.
(for the custom of laying them upon the Altar was not as yet practiced;) This
zeal flamed yet further, even to a research after the Bones of the ^ntient
Prophets, to which notwithstanding they yielded no kind of adoration.

The building and beautifying of Churches was another product of this peace,
which with solemn Prayer, they devoutly consecrated to God; whereunto
Superstition did in after times add the Ceremonies of Consecration.

Now we must know, that the Infidels endeavored what they could to abolish the
memory of Christ's Sepulcher, which was in Jerusalem, heaping dust and dung
upon it; and built in the same place the Temple of Venus, wherein they
sacrificed: The devotion of this Emperor Constantine, was such, as that he
demolished those execrable Monuments; and instead of them, caused a sumptuous
Temple to be built in the very same place where the Sepulcher of Christ was; He
built another upon the Mount of Olives; and a third in Bethlehem.

At that time Palestina, being purged from Idols, many Christians prompted by a
pious curiosity, traveled to those places which had been ennobled with the
presence and miracles of the Son of God; especially with a purpose to see the
Sepulcher wherein he was laid: Greg. Nyssen. Epist. de euntib. Hyerosolym.
Hierong.
But this same repairing to Jerusalem, being afterward reckoned matter of
Religion, that error was suppressed by the most eminent Doctors of this Age.

It was in this Journey that Helena the Mother of Constantine found (as they
say) the true Cross, and the very Nails with which our Lord was fastened
thereunto: and however the History be suspected, yet is it therein attested
that Constantine caused one of those same Nails to be put into the Bit of his
Horses Bridle; thus fitting the Relic for his Horse's Mouth, he showed that
he meant nothing less than to iss it with his own; Nor did Helena her self (the
supposed Inventress) ever adore the wood of the Cross, Ambros.
as one of the Fathers of the same Age has observed.

We must here remember, that the Primitive Christians had no other Cross than
the bare Sign of it, which they formed in the Air: Now they report, that
Constantine, whilst as yet interpendent and wavering between Paganism, and the
Christian Profession, saw one day in the Firmament, a Cross, In hoc signo
vinces.
with these words: In this Sign thou shall overcome: The import of which device
may best appear from the practice and procedure of Constantine himself, who in
memory of that Vision, caused the form of the Cross to be made in his own
Standard, having above upon the top of it the two first Letters XP.
of Christ's Name, as is to be seen in ancient Meddals at this day: The Sign
then by which he overcame, was the Name, not the naked Cross of Jesus Christ:
He caused also his own Statue to be erected with his Sign, which he likewise
ordered to be formed upon his Moneys, and painted upon his Ensigns, and the
Armor of his Shouldiers: But we must note, that for a long time after, there
was not any Cross received into Churches.

Christians, during the persecution (...) quently met together in private, an^^
Night. This Custom, notwithstanding the emergent Peace, they still retained;
Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita Constant. Epipha. lib. 3.
whence we read that Constantine continued the sacred Vigils, even till broad
Daylight, and caused big Tapers and Torches to be lighted up throughout the
whole City, for their more commodious intercourse in going and coming in the
Night; as Lamps also in their Meeting-places, to give light to all there
present; the Office of lighting of which belonged to the Acolytes: One of the
principal Vigils or Eves of the Year, was that of the Night immediately
preceding Easter, observed in Memory of the Resurrection of Christ; for they
passed the whole Night without sleep, as watching for that Morning-hour wherein
our Lord rose again from the Dead: Those Vigils and Tapers were hitherto used
without any Superstition.

Behold here another sequel of what was practiced in the times of persecution.
Many Christians, that they might shun that tempest, retired unto Deserts, and
hid themselves in solitary places; whence it came to pass that Persecution
ceasing, that solitude, being with several become habituated, and customary,
they confined themselves thereunto, and spent the remainder of their Days
therein; whether because of the inveteracy of such a manner of life, or for
that the plainness hereof did better suit with them, than the dinning noise of
Cities; or lastly, because they suspected a return of the old storm: But others
there were acted with such a desire of imitating and following of them, that
there were many, who even in the midst of the great calm and quiet of the
Church, began to affect a solitary life. Thus did that become voluntary, and
matter of choice, which by reason of the Persecution was before that
compulsory, and matter of constraint: Hence the original of a Monastic life,
Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 13.
whose first foundation was about the same time laid in Egypt by Antonius;
afterward, it was extended to Syria, by Hilarion; to Armenia, by Eustachius
Bishop of Sebastia; to Greece, by S. Basile; and to Italy, by S. Ambrose: Now
though it be too true, that many superstitious observances did accompany this
piece of Innovation, insomuch that Men suffered their Hair to grow to the
length of that of Women) Epipha. lib 3. haeres. 80.
yet was this Monastic profession quite another thing, than what it is at
present; for such as in those Days devoted themselves thereunto, were not tied
to it by vow, observed no nice distinction of meats or habits, hunted not after
merit, nor once believed thereby to attain unto that persection which is
attributed to it at this day: and it is further remarkable, that the first
Monks were Laymen, not capable of any Ecclesiastical Function; that they
maintained themselves upon their own hand-labor, and not in a mendicant or
precarious way: and finally, that they married, many of them having Wives and
Children; for marriage was in them accounted lawful, Athanas. Epist. ad Dracon.
which at this day would seem monstrous, in persons of the like profession.

Anno 320. etc.
TOgether with a Monastic Life, the Rules of Abstinency entered, which were
soon after received into the Church; till which time Fasts were free and
arbitrary; the Montanists being the only Persons who affected to enact Laws,
and prescribe Forms therein; and it is observable, that they urged the same
reasons, Tertul. contra Psychicos.
and used the same terms that the Church of Rome does at this day; but those
Antiquity condemned, maintaining the free unrestrained liberty of Fasts, till
about the year 320. About this time, in regard the profession of Monks ought to
consist in a more strict manner of life, than that of others, they imposed Laws
upon them, more especially regulating their days, and manner of Fasting, which
Laws passed from the Monks to the Clergy, from the Clergy to the whole Church:
Now howbeit it be true, that many held abstinency for a kind of perfection,
Hieron. Epist. ad Marcel. Idem in Epist. ad Galat. cap. 4. Sozom. lib. 3 cap.
13. Gang. synod. cap. 2.
and others reckoned it a thing necessary and meritorious; yet notwithstanding,
the Lawgivers themselves, the Councils likewise, and the most eminent Writers
of that Age, when they declare the sense of the Church therein, affirm that
Fasts are matters arbitrary, that they appointed certain particular times of
Fasting, only for order-sake; that the reason why some certain meats were
forbidden, was only to the end, that by such austerity, they might be the
better disposed for the service of God; that some being permitted to eat flesh,
Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 11.
and others prohibited; namely such as might by eating scandalize others, that
prohibition was not as yet framed under pain of a mortal sin or damnation: and
in effect, during the Fast of Lent, the Church refrained, not only from Flesh,
but from Wine also; which yet many authorize by the example of the Nazarites;
Chrysostom. Sermon de Jejun. Theophil. Alex. in Epist. Epipha. in compend doct.
and consequently this were to urge a rigid Jud^ical observance. But in brief,
the diversity observed in those days, in point of Fasting, is considerable; for
some abstained only from the flesh of Land-beasts, but did eat of Birds; others
refrained even from Bread; others again would not taste any fruit coming of
Trees. As touching the times; from Easter till Whitsuntide, there was not any
one Fast day: Socrat. lib. 5. cap. 22. Ambros. lib. de Elia and Iejan. cap. 10.
and in Epist. ad Roman. cap. 14. Basil. Hom. 2. de Jejun. Epipha. Haeres. 75.
In Greece, and Alexandria, Lent continued six weeks; at Rome, only three;
moreover, there were two Days in every week, whereupon they did not fast at
all, to wit, Saturday, and the Sabbath Day: In other places this Fast lasted
but five or six days; in some Churches, it was alternative and interchangeable,
they fasting only one week in two: now the very diversity used in such
observances was a proof of their indifferency, which yet was afterward turned
into a necessity; and what progress it made, we shall quickly see.

Anno 325.
LEt us in the mean time consider what passed in the grand Council of Nice,
which afforded many Constitutions subservient to the sequel of this History.
That they might the better preserve a due union amongst the many Churches
dispersed into so many several places, they found it expedient to reduce them
all under certain General Pr^cincts; to which purpose they settled Metropolitans
in the more eminent Cities; each of whom ought to supervise the Churches within
his own respective Jurisdiction: Thus the Bishop of Alexandria was entrusted
with those of Egypt, Lybia, and generally of all Affrique: the Bishop of Rome
with the neighboring Churches, and afterward with all those of the West:
those of Antioch and Jerusalem, with the adjoining Provinces: This preheminency
was conferred upon them, by reason of the dignity of those Cities wherein they
exercised their several Episcopacies; Insomuch that Rome being the capital City
of the Empire, the Bishop thereof did hereupon challenge precedence to all the
rest, notwithstanding he held his own Diocese and Jurisdiction apart by
himself. The institution of those Patriarchs founded only upon Custom, Council.
Nicen. Can. 6. and 7.
this Council authorized by Decree, whereby they ordained that that Order
should be continued, consulting therein the maintaining of that dignity to the
Metropolitan, which they had acquired by Custom: To those four, a fifth was
added afterward, namely he of Constantinople, for as much as that City was the
Imperial Seat; and the Council of Chalcedon held about the year 450. Council.
Chalced. Can. 28.
decreed that he should hold the second place, as being Bishop of New-Rome;
that the Bishop of Rome should have the precedence, that being the Capital
City; but that the Bishop of Constantinople should enjoy the same (respective)
primacy, and equal Prerogatives, for as much as that City had the same Senate,
the same Badges of honnourary, and equal Rites and Privileges with old Rome,
which we here remark by way of anticipation, since it will be needful that we
mention it hereafter: In the mean time we must note, that in this and
succeeding Ages many general Councils were held, wherein the Bishop of Rome was
never President; proof sufficient that the other Metropolitans did not
acknowledge him for their Superior: that the name of Pope was common to all
Bishops, as appears by diverse writings of those times; whence it is, that
amongst Grecians and Germains to this day, Priests are called Popes; that is to
say, Fathers, according to the ancient signification of the name: that all the
Patriarchal Churches, as having been dignified with the Residence of the
Apostles themselves, were named Apostolical, Sozom: lib. 1. cap. 16.
which Title that of Rome has ever since retained, though common to her with
the rest; for we must know, that the Chair of Antioch, in that St. Peter
resided there, and that of Jerusalem possessed by S. James, were entitled
Apostolic Seats, as well as that of Rome.

This Council of Nice determined the difference concerning the Feast of Easter,
and Decreed, that all the Churches should Celebrate the same, upon one and the
same Day, namely the Sabbath Day after the full Moon (or middle) of March. Now
for as much as the use of Ephemerides was not so common, as it is at this day,
and Astrology was best known in Egypt, they therefore gave it in charge to the
Bishop of Alexandria, that he should yearly publish to the other Churches, the
time of Easter-Feast, by express Letters, which were by them termed Paschal
Epistles; Epistolae Paschales
and afterward for the same purpose the Golden Number was invented, howbeit in
the judgment of many Mathematicians, there be frequent abuses in that
Calculation.

In the same Council there was a Question moved, Decret. did. 26. Can.
Caenomanens. Eusebius. lib. 4. cap. 23. Council. Ancyr. (...).
touching the ^elibacy, or the unmarried state of Ecclesiastical Persons, which
many affected to introduce: Certain it is, that till then, marriage was ever
reckoned allowable in persons of that capacity, only some few there were, who
soon after the death of the Apostles, began to reject the same; which yet was
no sooner by them attempted, than suppressed: But about the year 308. in some
Provincial Councils, the first Laws touching Celibacy were enacted, whereof
this was the Form: They demanded of such as desired to be preferred to any
Ecclesiastic charge, whether they would refrain from marriage or not; if they
answered yes, they were never afterward permitted to marry; but in case they
replied no, they allowed, that after their Election, they might marry; but then
the Election, was for some time deferred, to the end, that if possible, they
might find out some or other who could content himself to live unmarried: Now
this they did, not that they thought marriage was inconsistent with the Clergy,
but because of the poverty of the Churches, as not having means sufficient for
the maintenance of the Families of their Pastors: and thus they passed to a
peremptory prohibition of the same, to the end, that Church goods might not be
distributed amongst their Wives and Children, or else lest natural affection to
their own flesh and blood, might happily hinder or interfere with the functions
of their charge: This is the only account, by their own confession, which their
Legislatours could ever give hereof, which yet has hitherto been judged
impertinent, Leo. Novel. 2.
since that by the same reason it would follow, that all who have Parents or
Brothers, etc. should thereupon be incapable of any Ecclesiastic charge or
office: Now those prejudications were transferred from particular Synods, to
that general one of Nice; wherein it was debated whether it were convenient to
oblige Churchmen to abstinency from marriage; most votes carried it in the
affirmative; but Paphnutius, a Person of great renown, and a sufferer for the
Gospel, (one who was never married) standing up, opposed that determination,
Heb. 13. 4
judging according to Scripture, that marriage is honorable in all: His
opinion prevailed, zozom. lib. 1. cap. 1. and 11. Hieron. lib. 1. contra Iovin.
Ocean. ^ist. tripart. lib. 6. cap 14. Niceph. lib. 11. cap. 19. Greg. in orat.
de obit. caesar and Gorg. Athanas. in Epist. ad Dracant.
and was approved of by the whole Assembly, which yet decreed, that such as
were received already into the number of the Clergy, being as yet unmarried,
should not marry at all. This Decree was not founded upon any Law, but upon
custom only, and that not universally received; for after this Council many
famous Bishops married: St. Hilary, Gregory Nyssene, Gregory Nazianzen, the
Father of St. Basil the great, and a great many more Ecclesiastics, were
married during their Episcopacy; howbeit there be many, who so much magnify
Celibacy, as that they obtrude it for a thing necessary.

Anno 350. etc.
IF we proceed a little further, we shall meet with a new term in the Latin
Church, whereof yet the sense has been changed: The Sermon being finished,
they celebrated the Eucharist: But now there were three sorts of Persons, who
were not permitted to be present at that action, namely, the Catechumenes, who
were not as yet sufficiently instructed in the mysteries of Religion; the
Penitents, who were not as yet received into the peace of the Church; and (
Daimoniacks) such as were possessed with Devils: Sermon ended, the Deacon
intimated to all such, that it behoved them to withdraw, dismissing them in
these terms, Ite missa est; which word (being only valedictory*) signified the
Conge, or solemn leave taken of them; and was no wise understood in that sense,
which is at this day put upon it: In succeeding Ages, all the public Exercises
of the Church, were called Mass^s, because they were all concluded with an
Orison, immediately following upon the ^issa; that is to say, the Conge (or
Valediction.)

Anno 370. etc.
YEt was not this term so dangerous, as the new Rhetoric, which they begun
soon after to display. The Church celebrated the memorial of the Saints, by a
simple recital of their virtues, and by exhorting of every one to an imitation
thereof: To those Panegyricks, they added the Ornaments of Language; the great
Orators, with whom the Chairs were then well furnished, producing what ever the
Rules of Eloquence to them suggested; Nazianz. orat. 1. in Julian.
Thus about the Year 370. in the Commemoration of the Martyrs, they began to
use Prosopopeias and Apostrophees: one of them declaims in this manner, Hear
ye People, ye that live already, and ye that are as yet unborn; hear
likewise thou Soul of great Constantine, if so be there be any sense in thee,
etc. Nazianz. orat. 2. in Julian.
for (says he) I am constrained to bespeak him, just as if he were present,
and as if he were one of the Auditory: The same Author, in the second Oration
which he makes upon the same subject, directs his Speech to the Soul of Julian
the Apostate, which yet he believed to be in Hell. There is then a vast
difference between those oratorions Apostrophees, and the Invocation of Saints;
a Figure of Rhetoric, and an act of worship; and yet was this strain of
Oratory a prelude to a gross ensuing abuse; for after this example did the
ignorant People begin by little and little to address their requests to Saints
departed, as if their rude dialect or meaning had been to them intelligible:
But we must remark, that neither then nor for a long time after was the
Invocation of Saints practiced in the Church; but on the contrary, this
superstitious Brat hatched by (the cacozealous fervor of) a few private
Persons, was condemned (as illegitimate) Epiphan haeres. 78. 79.
by the Doctors of that age, who teach that the Saints are indeed advanced to
true honor and rest in glory, but yet ought not to be by us magnified beyond
what is convenient; that the Sacred Virgin was never intended for an object of
adoration, but that the luxuriant honor to her ascribed, did proceed from some
superstitious Females, ^ ( silly Women) accomplices with such as in Jeremiah's
time worshipped the Queen of Heaven; that the comparison made by those who urge
the example of Kings, Ambros. in Romans cap. 1.
to whom addresses are usually made by the intervention of Courtiers or
Officers, is altogether impertinent; like as some Heretics of those times,
especially in the Province of Phrygia, had their recourse to God by the
mediation of Angels, Council. Laodi^. apud Theod. in Epist ad Coloss. cap. 2.
having amongst them the Oratories of St. Michael; this Invocation of Angels
was also condemned of Heresy, by the Council of ^^aodicea, held about the year
368.

In those times many Persons, what through curiosity, what through zeal,
resorted to the places where the more eminent Martyrs were interred; for we have
seen how careful the Church was in collecting of their Bones, yea in
transporting them from remote places, and disposing of them to magnificent
Sepulchers: It was a mere natural affection that prompted every one with a
curious desire to see those Bodies which were sometime the Temples of the holy
Ghost; this is the reason why St. Chrysostom said; Chrysostom. hom. 22. in Romans
hom. 8. in Ephesians.
I esteem of the City of Rome, not because of the Pillars of Marble, but
because of the Pillars of the Church therein the Bodies of St. Peter (supposed
to have been there) and St. Paul; who can afford me at present the favor of
being stretched out all along upon the Body of St. Paul? Of being nailed to his
Sepulcher? Of beholding the dust of that Body which bore the marks of the Lord
Jesus, and that mouth by which Christ himself spoke? I covet to see the
Sepulcher wherein is enclosed that armor of righteousness, that armor of
light, those members which still live, and were dead whilst living. I covet to
see those Chains, those bonds, etc. The intent then of those visits, was, that
they might be confirmed in the same Faith for which those Martyrs suffered,
that so they might have part in the same Resurrection, and this they besought
God for by Prayer, poured out over their Sepulchers. Now those places became
the more famous, by reason of a rumor spread, that miracles were wrought by
their means; for Arrianisme being then become very general, it is possible that
God might at that time have confirmed by miracles, the Orthodox Faith: Howbeit
so it was, that this persuasion drew the People to those Sepulchers, but
Superstition at the same time followed thereupon; for then began the belief,
Basil in 40. Martyr. Basil. August. Ambros.
that there was a kind of Divine virtue subjected in those Relics, prevalent
against the maladies of the Soul, as well as those of the Body: It was
generally believed that the Bodies of the Saints were as so many tutel^ry
Guardians and Fortresses to the Cities wherein they were kept, in so much that
every one coveted to have some of them; and for this very reason they began to
transport them from one place to another; The common People spent the Vigils
(or Wakes) in the cemeteries of the Martyrs; thither they carried Victuals,
that they might be thereby sanctified; yea, they lighted up Tapers in broad Day
light, in token (said they) of joy and triumph: But we must likewise note, that
all those were the procedures of private Persons only, and no wise approved of
by the Church; true it is, the Bishops were constrained by the prevailing
multitude, to connive at those abuses, whereof yet they acknowledged the
enormity: Aug. Epist. 119. Council. Elibert. c. 34. and 35.
This toleration nevertheless did not forestall their utmost endeavor, for
stopping of that torrent; for at the same time, both Doctors and Councils
condemned those extravagancies, prohibited the lighting up of Torches in honor
of the Martyrs, Aug. de Morib. Eccles. Cathol. cap. 34. Cypr. l(...)b 10.
Contra Iul. Council. Carthag. 5. cap. 14. Hieron. contra Vigilant.
interdicted Vigils, repressed those who carried victuals to their Sepulchers,
as having derived that custom from Paganism, and taught that the Relics of
Saints ought to be buried, and not transported from place to place; that the
custom of swearing by the Relics of the Dead was purely Paganish, and that
many built Sepulchers for Martyrs, merely out of vain frivolous dreams.

Anno 380. etc.
THe original of praying for the dead, we have seen in the former age; come we
now to view the growth, and progress of the same: This custom, sprung
originally from a natural affection in the surviving, was at length received
into the Church, and in after time continued therein. Eusebius. de vita Constant.
lib. 4. cap. 7.
The Emperor Constantine being dead, all the People prayed for his Soul; but
as we have already noted, those Prayers were made in a sense quite other than
at present; for all the Fathers of the first ages, were of an opinion, which is
at this day rejected by the Church of Rome, namely, that the Souls of the
righteous are reserved in a common Receptacle until the Resurrection: Ambros.
orat. de Valent. Chrysostom. hom. 23. in matthew. Epiphan. haeres 75. Chrysostom.
Liturg. in matthew. hom. 32.
and upon this supposition they ground their praying for the dead: Now for
these reasons did the Church pray for them, viz. 1. To the end, God might
please to glorify them in due time, hastening their Resurrection. 2. To the
end, the Judge might upon the last day be propitious to them, and not deal with
them in rigor. 3. It is remarkable, that they prayed even for the Patriarchs,
for the Prophets, for the Evangelists, for the Apostles, for the Martyrs, yea,
and for the Virgin Mary, whom yet they believed not to be in Purgatory; but
their end herein was, that it might please God to increase their glory; whence
we must note by the way, how far they were from praying to the Saints, since
that they prayed for them; and the truth is, antiquity informs us, that one
of the main reasons why they prayed for them, Epipha. haeres 75.
was, that they might by so doing distinguish them from Christ, whom none
prays for, but all pray to.

4. But which is yet more strange, Chrysostom. Sermon. 3. ad Phil. hom. 69.
they went so far as to pray for the very damned; to the end they might procure
for them (said they) some allay and mitigation of their pain; for, in as much
as misguided zeal is no where bounded, they affected to extend their charity,
even as far as Hell it self, being strongly opiniated that the Prayers of the
Church in the behalf of the damned, Id. Sermon. 41. ad Corinth. hom. 61. and in
Johan. hom. 21.
might be available for qualifying and asswaging of their torments, and
rendering of their infernal state more supportable; thus did they
inconsiderately kindle strange fire upon the Altar, Aug. Enchyrid. cap 110.
and made their censors smoke through the superstitious flames of a
preposterous devotion.

But, Origin. contra Cells. Iren. lib: 1. cap. 14. Epipha. haeres. 37. Eusebius.
Hist. Eccles. lib. 7. cap. 37.
behold an innovation of a lamentable sequel: The primitive Christians had not
as yet received any Images; this the Pagans upbraided them with, as a notorious
defect: The Church had condemned the Gnostics, famous Heretics who used
Images, even that of Christ himself; Eusebius says in his Ecclesiastical
History, that this usage was derived from Pagans, who were accustomed to honor
the memory of their Deliverers with Portraits and Images; Athanas. Eusebius.
which, that they might cloth their Idolatry with a specious pretext, they yet
further alleged to be as so many Books representing Divine things: The
Emperor Constantine caused the Image of the good Shepherd to be made, but not
with any intent of having it placed in a Church: The Statue of Daniel in Brass
was also erected in the middle of the Marketplace of Constantinople: Eusebius. ad
Constant. lib. 3. cap. 3. and 48.
The same Historian Eusebius writing to the Emperess Constance, tells her that
Christ, even as he is Man, cannot be represented by the Pensil: True it is, at
the same time there was a Statue shown in Cesarea, Eusebius.
which they said was that of Jesus Christ, erected before that in a private
House, where the Woman was cured of the bloody flux, mentioned in the Gospel,
Niceph. lib. 1. cap. 40. and lib. 2. cap. 37. Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 20.
was also represented; and fron that Statue undoubtedly the Portrait (...)
Jesus Christ in Nicephorus was drawn and afterward imitated by Statuarie and
Painters. Now for as much as Juid^ the Apostate had caused it to be defaced and
the Pagans, in despite to Christ, ha^ broken it into pieces; the Christians
recollected all the fragments, and placed them in the Church. But about the
year 380. they began to embellish the Churches, wherein they assembled, with
Pictures, whereby they represented the sufferings of the Martyrs, Greg. Nyssen.
rendering them more palpable and affective to the beholders; as also some
Scripture-Histories, as Abraham's Sacrifice, Aug. de Consens. Evang. lib. 1.
cap. 10. Basil Orat. in S. Barth.
Christ's Miracles, etc. And for as much as the Agapes or Feasts of their
Assemblies, were as yet practiced by Christians, the objects there presented
before their Eyes, were of use to preven^ intemperancy: We must therefore
remark, that those Images were only Historical, (serving for commemoration
only) not for veneration: Nyssen. orat. in Theod: ^
Likewise, that the same were no other than plain Pictures: For Statues were
not received into Churches, till a long time after: But briefly, that which was
most remarkable herein, was the opposition then banded up against this novelty,
there having been even Councils, Council. Elibart. cap. 36.
which expressly prohibited the use of Pictures in the Church. Moreover, such
was the Devotion of many, even after this innovation, that they would not
endure any Image in their Churches: Epiphanius, one of the most famous Men of
those times, relates this passage, Epipha. Epist. ad Johan. Patriarc.
Hierosolym.
that being in a certain Village in Palestine, he observed at the Church-entry
a painted Cloth, having like the Picture of Christ, or some Saint upon it; Now
when that I beheld (says he) that they had as it were, under color of
Scripture-authority, placed the Image of a Man, in the Church of Christ, I cut
that Cloth, and councelled them much rather to wrap up the dead Corpse of some
poor Person therein.

Anno 386.
THe Celibacy of Ecclesiastics was hitherto used, more through private
devotion, than by virtue of any public suffrage, and determination of the
Church: But about the Year 386. Syricius Bishop of Rome, Distinct. 82*
was the first that did by public Decree (provided there be nothing of forgery
in the case) prohibit marriage to the Clergy of the Churches within his
Jurisdiction; Synod. Turon. 2. cap. 18. Salvian. lib. 5. de Provid.
howbeit this was not universally observed, for even till the year 950. we
find in the Catalogue of History throughout all the Provinces of Europe, a
great number of Ecclesiastic Persons married; famous Doctors impugning the Law
of Celibacy; and, which is yet more, Roman Bishops descended of Ecclesiastical
Parents, who were married even during their Clerk-ship, as was Boniface I.
Felix III. and Gelasius I. thus many Ages passed before that this Decree was
received.

Anno 400. etc.
WE now enter upon that time whereof St. Augustine complained, Aug. ad Ianuar.
Epist. 119. cap. 19.
saying, that it was so universally stuffed with Ceremonial Observances, that
the condition of the Jews living under the servile Yoke of the Law, was much
more supportable, (than that of Christians under the Gospel) as we shall see in
good part. Howbeit we shall omit diverse Rites introduced in the fifth age,
which were never approved of by the Church of Rome; as the burning of the
superplus and remainder of the Sacrament, after that all had communicated;
Council. Carthag. 3.
the sending of the Sacrament to new married couples, to be by them jointly
received at home in their own Houses; the thrusting of the same into the mouth
of the dead, a most profane abuse! We shall likewise forbear to mention all
those innovations, which having been commenced before, were continued in after
time; and shall only note the progress of the same, and the rise of such as
followed thereupon, each according to the order of time, wherein they began to
appear.

As therefore we have already seen in what respect Primitive Antiquity prayed
for the dead, in like manner we must know what was the intent of the Vigils,
which ensued upon that usage. It was an ancient custom, that as soon as any
one had given up the Ghost, they called some Ecclesiastic Persons, who spent
the whole night with the friends of the dead, entertaining them with some
serious and seasonable discourses, grounded upon the Word of God, for their
instruction and comfort: To this purpose they sung also Psalms, disposed by way
of Antiphonies, or Versicles, interchangeably answering one another; and
recommended the departed Soul to God, to the end, that pardoning its sins, he
would vouchsafe to preserve it from Hell, and eternal Death; Judge it in mercy
upon the last day, and give to its Body a glorious Resurrection; but never to
the end that he might deliver it out of Purgatory, though that be the
consequence drawn from thence at this day; and indeed the Greek Church Prays
for the Dead, which yet never believed a Purgatory.

To those Funeral acts another Ceremony was added; It was a Pagan custom, that
their Champions who had won the prize in wrestling, were conducted to their
Houses with Songs of Triumph, and burning Torches, in token of honor and
congratulation; this our Christians applied to their dead, as those, who after
that they had fought the good fight, had finished their course, and obtained
the Crown of Glory: They then interred them with singing of Psalms, by way of
thanksgiving to God, and consolation to the surviving; as also with lighted
Tapers, in honor of the burial of the deceased; for the reason of that
Ceremony is thus expressed by S. Chrysostom, who lived in the beginning of
this Age. Tell me, Chrysostom. Sermon. 4. ad Heb.
what mean the Lamps lighted up at Funerals? Is it not because we accompany the
dead, as so many magnanimous Champions. What mean the Hymns? Is it not because
we glorify God, and render thanks to him, for that he has already crowned the
defunct, delivering him from all his toil and dolor? Is it not for this very
end, that we sing Psalms and Hymns? And why call thou upon the Priests and
Singing-men? Is it not for comfort to thy self, and for honor to the deceased?

The formalities observed by the Church, in the reception of Penitents, Council.
Araus. Council. Agath. cap. 11. and 37.
were likewise multiplied; which in those Days were thus practiced: When any
one, who had incurred excommunication, petitioned that he might be released from
that censure, making protestation of repentance; the Bishop, who had
excommunicated him, and twelve Priests with him, repaired to the Church-door,
where the Penitent presenting himself clothed with Sackcloth, barefooted,
with a dejected countenance, his head covered with ashes, weeping and sighing,
implored forgiveness, and promised amendment of life for the future; Then the
Bishop taking him by the hand, gave him entrance into the Church, and admission
to the Communion: But in case he did again relapse into any crime, he was no
more capable of admission to Penance, but dealt with as one relapsed, so as
that they never gave him the Sacrament, save only at the very point of death.
Then also were Crosses received into Churches, whereas formerly they were only
represented upon Money and Military Banners; but held only for mere memorials
of Christ's death, and not for objects of adoration: Cyril. contra Julian. lib.
6.
for so do the Christians of those times explain themselves therein: It is
further remarkable, that theirs was only the simple form and figure of the
Cross, and that the Image of the Crucifix was not received into the Church,
till a long time after.

Authors of the same age make mention of a custom, Aug. de Civit. Dei lib. 10.
cap. 12. Chrysostom.
which was afterward turned into Superstition: As long as the gift of miracles
are subjected in the Church, she was endowed with an especial virtue of
dispossessing and chasing away Devils; but this gift being once antiquated and
superseded, they found no better expedient in the case, than to conduct the
possessed into the place of public Assemblies, to the end that the Church
might pray for and over them; and those Prayers frequently obtained deliverance
for those poor Demoniacks: But they afterward constituted Exorcists, under the
notion of an Office, to whom they attributed Jurisdiction over Devils,
empowering them to torment, and chase away the same, by virtue of their
conjurations.

Now many had hitherto disputed about the state of Souls after death: Origin.
in Exodus hom. 6. and in Psalm. 36. hom. 3. and in Luc. hom. 14.
But Origin, who lived about the year 230. and who may well be called the
Origin of many Errors, seems to have been the first that made way or entrance
to the belief of Purgatory. This Doctor taught, that all Men, the faithful as
well as the ubelieving, shall pass through that Fire, which shall consume the
World upon the last day, after the Resurrection; Ambros. in Psalm. 118.
which opinion was embraced by many, but condemned by the Church; nor can any
thing be urged from hence in favor of Purgatory; for that, whereof Origin
spoke, is not as yet kindled, and is in every respect different from that of
the Church of Rome: But those controversies touching the condition and mansion
of Souls departed, beginning to multiply about the year 400. some certain
Persons corrupted with the fabulous Narratives of Pagans, conceited with them,
that they are purged and refined in some place or other, before that ever they
be received up into Heaven: Those discourses were managed by way of problem,
Aug. in E^chyrid. cap. 67: and 69: and de Civit: Dei lib: 21: cap: 26
and not in form of a positive assertion; and in this sense St. Augustine
writes, and resolves the whole question by a may be. Thus the first Doctrine
concerning Purgatory was problematical only, not Dogmatical, or matter of
faith, till a long-time after that, as we shall see in its proper place;
Nevertheless, for the Readers satisfaction, we shall hear subjoyn the testimony
of two Fathers, amongst the many of the first Antiquity; to the end, that it
may appear what the belief of the Primitive Church was, Justin. Martyr. Quest.
and Respons. ad Orthodox. quest. 75. in respons.
touching the state of Souls departed: St. Justine Martyr, who lived in the
130. year of our Lord, speaks of it thus: After the dissolution of the Body
(says he) there is immediately a separation made of the just, and of the
unjust: for they are conducted by the Angels, to places worthy of them; namely,
the Souls of the just, to Paradise, where they enjoy the society of Angels and
Archangels, yea, and the very Face of our Savior Jesus Christ himself; but
those of the unjust to the infernal mansions. St. Irenaeus Bishop of Lions,
Iren. lib. 5. cap 7.
in the year 160. The Preachers (says he) who are the Disciples of the
Apostles, affirm, that those who are translated from hence, are transported
into Paradise, that being prepared for just Men, and such as have the spirit,
the place whither St. Paul was caught up, where he heard things unutterable;
and that they should continue there till the consumma^ion and end of the World,
seeing incorruption. And thus Erasmus in his animadversions upon that Father
observes, and good ^eason he had, De purgatorio nulla mentio; that there is no
mention made by him of ^urgatory; justly acknowledging, that that ^ious Author
spoke as one wholly unacquainted with any such Fable; Index Expurg: Belgic.
page 72: Index Expurg: Hispanic. page 136:
and for this reason, it was ordered by the Expurgatory Index, both of Spain,
and of the Low Countries, that that note of Erasmus should be quite obliterated.

Anno 450. etc.
IT has been already observed, when, how, and by what degrees the public
Confession of Penitents, was changed into a private one, in the Greek Church
only: But about the year 450. the same alteration did likewise befall the
Western Churches, which had ever till then retained the use of public
Confession.

Christian liberty also in matter of Fasts, was maintained, Chrysostom. in Matthew.
him. 47. Cyril. in Levitic. hom. 10. Aug. Epist. 80. and 118.
till about this time: The Doctors that flourished in this age, having taught,
that Christ never commanded (...) to imitate his Fast of forty days; that
Fasting is the last and lowest of virtues; that true Fasting consists in
abstinency from sin; that Fasting indeed is commanded in the Scriptures, but as
touching the particular days of Fasting, nor Christ, nor his Apostles did ever
enact any Ordinance; that it is matter of freedom and indifferency to fast upon
some certain Days; that the choice and distinction of meats is not matter of
Religion, etc. We have likewise seen how that Fasts were diversely observed,
both as to their time and manner, and that they abstained not only from flesh,
but from Wine also; and we may yet further observe, how much the Fasts of the
first differed from those of modern ages* in that the Lent of the ancients did
ever begin upon the Sabbath, which followed immediately upon that of
Whitsuntide: But the liberty of the Church herein was through the Laws of new
Councils, Ambros. sermon. 34:
and multiplicity of Fasts at length suppressed: For Leo I. Bishop of Rome, did
about the year 460. ordain the observance of four Solemn anniversary Fasts;
namely, Lent, Whitsuntide, the seventh, and tenth Months; not denying, but that
the two last were in imitation of Judaisme. There be some Authors, who speaking
of the Fast of the four times (or four Weeks of Ember or Imber-days) and of the
Institution thereof, give this reason for the same: Pope Gelasius had decreed,
Sermon 4. de Iejun. septini mensis.
that the Ordination of Priests and Deacons should be performed upon those
Days; now for as much as that action was after the example of the Primitive
Church, ( Acts 13. and 14.) managed with Fasting and public Prayer, the Fast
of the four times was hereupon introduced; and notwithstanding those
Ordinations were not performed any more at that time, yet was the custom of of
Fasting afterward continued: In like manner, as touching the Vigils of Saints,
the name indeed was retained, but the use of them quite changed; for the Wakes
upon the Night preceding the solemnity of any Saint, were turned into Fasts,
howbeit the name of Vigil remained. The Fast of Rogations came to pass soon
after, for there happening in several places in Lyonoise in France, diverse
Earthquakes Conflagrations, and many dangers incurred through wild Beasts;
those public calamities moved Mamert Bishop of Vienne in Daulphinoise, to
ordain, that upon some certain Days every year, there should be public Prayers
made with Fasting, and acts of repentance: Thus were the Rogations instituted,
which reached even to Foreign Provinces, as we shall see straight.

Anno 470. etc.
We have seen some seeds and beginnings of the Invocation of Saints, toward
the end of the preceding age; It was not used in the Church, but only amongst
some private Persons, and that as yet with some hesitation. They began then to
conceive new opinions touching the Martyrs, to rely upon their Intercession,
and to attribute virtue to their Sepulchers. St. Augustine tells us, that the
stronger and better Christians had no such custom, but the weaker sort only,
and those too by way of Indulgence. This abuse prevailed so much, as that the
transportation of Relics, the resorts of People, the honors conferred upon
Saints, which at the beginning were tolerable, were now advanced to an excess:
The Body of Chrysostom being transported to Constantinople, Niceph. lib. 14.
cap. 43.
the Emperor Theodosius kneeled down before it, praying it to forgive his
Parents, who had persecuted it whilst living: But against this Superstition,
the Fathers of this age, like as their Predecessors before them, remonstrate
after this manner: Aug. lib. de cura pro mortuis, cap. 13. and contra Parmen.
lib. 2. cap. 8. and de Civit. lib. 8. cap 27. Cyril. contra Jul. lib. 6.
Chrysostom. Hom. 5. in Matthew. Theodor. in 2 Epist. ad Corinth.
The Souls of the dead intermedle not with the affairs of the living: The
Saints are not our Mediators: We applaud the Martyrs, as those who have fought
in the defense of the truth, and maintained the purity of the Faith; we worship
them not, build them no Churches, offer them no Sacrifice: But to what purpose
then are those solemnities? To the end, that we may thereby glorify God,
because of their victory, and encourage our selves to follow their example,
that we may share in their Crown and reward: But that we may attain thereunto,
must the Saints be invoked? In no wise; but we will only implore aid from the
true God himself, who made them both Men and Martyrs. This then was the
Language of the Church; and we must remember, that for as much as in the
Assembly, before the Communion, they celebrated the memorial of the Saints; St.
Augustine speaking of that Commemoration, informs us, that the names of the
Martyrs were then rehearsed in rank and order, as the servants of God, who had
overcome the World, through the Confession of their Faith, but that they were
not invoked; which is at this day verified by the more ancient Liturgies,
Chrysostom. in Matthew. Hom. 26. and in Epist. ad Corinth. Hom. 18. and in 1 ad
Tim. cap. 2 Justin. Irenaeus. Tertul.
and set Forms of public Prayer and thanksgiving; for the Church prayed for
the believing and unbelieving, for Magistrates, for friends and foes, for
present and absent, for Penitents for Demoniacks, and in general, for the whole
World: Now, that they might excite the People to the greater fervency in
Prayer, the Pastor used this Exhortation, Sursum corda, Lift up your hearts on
high; whereunto they gave this only Answer, Habemus ad Dominum, We yield them
to the Lord; for in the whole action they invoked none other than God.

In this age were likewise introduced (as we have said) Letanies or Rogations
first in the Eastern Church, and afterward in the Western; the Pestilence at
Constantinople, and the Earthquakes at Lions and adjacent places, administering
the occasion hereof. From thence they were extended upon the like occurrences,
throughout the whole, both East and West; now behold the Form of the same; They
digested into certain Articles the public calamities and necessities, praying
for the peace from on high, and the salvation of Souls, for the prosperity of
Gods holy Churches, for both Clergy and People, for higher Powers, and the
peace of the whole World, for that Province and City, for the fruitfulness of
the Earth, for health, for such as were engaged in a journey or voyage, for the
sick, for the imprisoned, etc. every one of those Articles being pronounced
with a loud voice by the Pastor, the People answered to each thereof, Kyrie
Eleison, Lord have mercy upon us. They afterward added other clauses, but the
Invocation of Saints had no place in those Letanies: Niceph. lib. 15. cap. 18.
One Peter Gnapheus, or Foulon Patriarch of Antioch, was the first that foisted
the same into the Prayers of the Church, about the year 470. And we must note,
that this Person was corrupted with the Eutychian Heresy, for which he was
condemned by the fifth General Council; thus did Superstition, which at first
was only private, become public at last; and the Commemoration of Saints, was
changed into Invocation; insomuch, that in stead of addressing their discourse
to the living, in order to their imitating of the Saints, they now direct it to
the Saints in the behalf of the living; howbeit this same Invocation of Saints
was at the beginning used only by the Greeks; for the Latin Church received it
not till above an hundred and twenty years after, as we shall also see in due
time and place.

Anno 490.
LEt us conclude this fifth Century with an observation which offered it self
about the same time. It has been said, that many had at the celebration of the
Eucharist, introduced the custom of soaked or dipped Bread, for the benefit of
such as could not use the Cup. This usage was condemned by Julius Bishop of
Rome, about the year 340. Howbeit in the Church of Rome, the Priest does still
dip a moiety of the Host in the Wine of the Chalice* adding at the same time,
that, this immersion conduces to eternal life in the receivers: This expedient
so generally used, carries in it a demonstrative evidence that Antiquity gave
the Communion under the two species, choosing much rather in an exigence wherein
they could no better order it, to give soaked or steeped Bread, then to
administer the Sacrament under that only species. Now about the year 440. the
Manichees who held Wine in abomination, as the Turks do at this day, attempted
to introduce the Communion, under one only species: Leo. Sermon. quad. 4.
And whereas there were many in the Church tainted with that heresy, they were
discerned by this token, that they made some hesitation about receiving of the
Chalice. This superstition was suppressed toward the year 490. Distinct. 2.
Canon. Comperimus.
by Pope Gelasius, who ordained, that they should either receive the Sacrament,
whole and entire, or else wholly abstain from and forbear it, conformably to
what was decreed by Leo, his Predecessor, who impeached of Sacrilege all
those who repulse the Cup of redeeming blood; an Ordinance which condemns the
mutilation of the Sacrament introduced in after-time by the Romish Church.

Anno 500. etc.
WE are now arrived at the year 500. The Historical use of Images was received
into Churches, which was the only use that Christians applied them to for above
an hundred years after their first introduction; but now the People began to
degenerate into abuse herein, and Images were advanced from contemplation to
veneration: Many Bishops willing to suppress this Idolatry, caused them to be
broken into pieces within their several Diocesses, but the popular torrent
prevailing over their zeal, this same abomination, enforced by custom, was in
fine authorized by those, whose part it was to reform it; but a long time
after, as we shall show in its proper place: Let us take a view of some
innovations, which came to pass at the same time.

Anno 528.
AMongst the many other Miracles practiced in the Church, in the time of the
Apostles, the anointing of the sick was one, by virtue whereof they recovered
bodily health: Now, howbeit the gift of Healing was, together with other
Miracles, become antiquated, yet did some Heretics affect to retain the use of
this same Unction, though now vacated of its pristine efficacy, addressing it
to another end; for, about the year 180. Irenaeus. lib. 1. cap. 18.
the Valentinians anointed their sick with Oil, when ever they perceived them
to be under the approach of death, adding thereunto certain Prayers, pretending
that the same did conduce to soul-salvation: This superstition found no
entertainment, save amongst some certain Heretics, the Church ever having it
in detestation: But about the year 528. Felix IV. Bishop of Rome, instituted
extreme Unction, which was afterward amplified with Ceremonies, and received
in the quality of a Sacrament; Now from what source it sprung, is no hard
matter to determine.

Anno 535.
Toward the year 535. Agapet I. ordained Processions before Easter Feast,
Petrus de Natal.
for which they give this goodly reason: For as much, say they, as after the
Resurrection of our Lord, the Angels said to the Women, Tell the Disciples,
that he goes before you into Galilee: Matt. 28.
Now from this Procession of Easter, those of the Sabbath Days did afterward
proceed.

Anno 536.
VIgilius his Successor, Petrus de Natal.
ordained, that those that celebrated the Mass should direct their Faces
toward the East; and from thence it came to pass, that Altars for the most
part were all turned Eastwards.

To this Vigilius, is likewise attributed the Feast of Purification, Rhenan. in
Tertul. lib. 5. adver. Marcion.
(or Candlemass) whereof they give this account; The Pagans were wont, in the
beginning of February, to celebrate the Feast of Proserpina, with burning
Tapers; now, for a diversion from this piece of Pagan-impiety, they instituted
the same day, and the same thing, in honor of the Virgin Mary.

Anno 600.
COrruption was now become universal, and nothing is henceforth to be seen but
horror; we shall only run over the more principal. The most notable change
that befell Religion, came to pass toward the year 600. This time was very
dark; the Sun of Truth over-clouded, and the brightest Stars fell from Heaven:
Then was Gregory I. Bishop of Rome, who not only approved of former
Innovations, but super-added new ones: They substituted Saints in the room of
Gods, to whom they dedicated Churches, Festivals, and sacrificing Priests;
Private superstitions were advanced even to an invoking of them; which
Invocation was now become public in the Latin Church; for, Gregory entered
the Virgin Mary into the Letanies, and in process of time they acquired the
same honor to all the Saints.

Whereas formerly there were only plain Pictures in Churches, they now erected
Statues therein; not those of Saints only, but likewise those of Emperors,
howbeit they did not as yet allot thereunto any kind of worship.

The opinion of Purgatory heretofore conceived by a few, began now to be
confirmed, howbeit their belief was as yet far different from the modern, in
the thing; for they held, that (departed) Souls did diverse ways expiate their
own sins, by Baths, Ice, Sinks, Hanging in the Air, etc. so doubtful hitherto
was both the place and pain of Purgatory: nor had this Doctrine any other
foundation, than the prejudices of Pagans, the pretended apparitions of
Spirits, and vulgar credulity.

Those persuasions nevertheless traveled with friendship to antiquated
Ceremonies, whose scope was the solacing of the dead; They believed also, that
the Eucharist might be beneficial to them, and therefore made it subservient to
this Superstition; turning a Sacrament for the living, into a Sacrifice for the
dead: Thus also, whereas the Offerings for the dead, were no other than Alms
bestowed in memory of their piety, they now receive the term of Oblation into
the very Sacrament it self, and that in expiation of their sins.

Now proportionably to the Introduction of new Doctrines, or new Ceremonies,
was the form of Divine Worship always chopped and changed, as well in the
Eucharist, as in public Prayers: Liturgies were always different, not only in
several Provinces, but even frequently in one and the same; witness amongst the
Greeks those which are ascribed to St. Dionysius, Basile, Chrysostom; and
amongst the Latins, those attributed to St. Ambrose, Augustine and Isidore;
yet notwithstanding, as they were conformable to one another in substance, so
likewise they had many things common in point of Form: Now, Gregory undertaking
to redress and new-model all Church-Forms, altered and added many passages; and
out of this same medley, composed the Office of the Mass, after the same Form
well-nigh, wherein it is to be seen at this day; borrowing the same from Hebrew
and Greek Clauses, as Kyrie eleison from the Greeks, and Hallelujah from the
Church of Jerusalem.

We must note moreover, that the ancient Church receiving the Offerings
presented by the People, besought God, that those fruits of charity might
become acceptable to him; to which purpose, they pronounced these Orisons, We
pray thee to accept of, and bless these gifts, these presents, these holy
Sacrifices, etc. Vouchsafe to regard them with a serene and propitious aspect,
and to accept of them, as thou did^ of the offering of thy righteous Child
Abel, etc. Command that they be conveyed to thine holy Altar, by the hands of
thine Angel. Those Orisons were retained in the Canon of the Mass, but
alienated to quite another intent; for, whereas they were formerly rehearsed
over the Eleemosynary presents of the Faithful, they are now pronounced over
the Body of Jesus Christ, by an absurdity full of Sacrilege; inasmuch as they
do in express terms pray for Jesus Christ, paralleling Him with the Sacrifices
offered by the Patriarchs of old.

Then was the Gregorian Hymn received into the Canon of the Mass; till the year
368. there was not yet any singing used in the Roman Church. Damasus Bishop of
Rome, about the same time wrote to St. Jerome, that he would send him the Greek
Psalter, Because (said he) we are so studious of simplicity, that upon the very
Sabbath Day there is only read one of the Epistles of the Apostle, and one of
the Chapters of the Gospel, and the beauty of Psalms does not appear in our
mouths. Now the Psalms were wont at first to be sung whole and entire by all
the People, in one uniform and continued Song, but afterward by way of
Diapsalm or pawse and intermission: Finally, toward the year, 418. Celestine
I. appointed them to be sung by way of Antiphony (or Anthem) that is to say,
interchangeably ^y Versicles, wherein the Clergy and the people did by turns
answer one another: After that they distinguished herein the ^ntroites, sung at
the beginning of the ^ervice; the Gradual, when the Deacon ^^scended the
Pulpit-steps, in order to the ^ecture; and the Offertory, whilst the People
presented their Offerings. Gregory ^hen composed an Antiphonairy, (a Book ^f
Anthems) for the whole course of the ^ear, and Versicles and Responsals for
every day thereof: He likewise constituted a College (or Quire) of
Singing-men, to ^ing the Office.

And as if he had projected the reducti^n of Judaisme, Rabar. de Instit. Cler.
lib. 1 cap. 14.
he borrowed diverse Ce^emonies therefrom: for he it was that ^egan to
introduce Unction into the Priestly Order, and Pontifical Habits in ^mitation
of the Priests and Levites: We ^ust note by the way, whence it came to pass
that the Monks are otherwise apparel^ed, than the common People: In times past
their Apparel was not in the least distinguished from that of others, save in
^he simplicity and plainness thereof; but afterward like as Habits amongst Men
continue not long in one fashion, they were altered amongst Seculars, but were
always retained in the same fashion amongst the Monks; and from hence arose the
distinction of the one from the other: And indeed the Coat of the Monks of St.
Benedict, which are the most ancient, A kind of Garment wrought with Purple,
like studds of Iron or nail heads worn of old by the Senators of Rome.
is nothing else then that Latus Clavus, which was of old worn by the Romans:
Lest therefore they should make way to an innovation in point of habit, they
ever affected to confine themselves to the ancient form; which yet by little
and little they prevaricated from, and declined; howbeit this fashion of
vesture being always appropriated to them, it came to pass, that at length they
attributed a kind of sanctity to it: The same likewise befell Ecclesiastics:
But Gregory, in pursuit of an universal change, imposed upon them new fashioned
Habits, conformable to the pattern of those which are specified in the
Ceremonial Law.

He likewise ordained the use of perfumes, and the Relics of Saints, at the
Consecration of Churches; as also a space for the reception of the Tapers: And
afterward Sabinian his Successor, ordered that the Lamps should continue in
Churches perpetually burning; whereas antiquity never lighted them but in the
Night time, to give light to the Assemblies.

Now Gregory h^^ing founded a new form of Divine Service, caused the same to be
received throughout all the Western Churches, in token of Subjection: This
design, which was put in execution in diverse places, produced such a confusion,
as remains incomposed to this very day. The Latin Tongue was generally known
throughout Europe, the Roman Empire having spread it over all the Provinces
under its command: The Western Churches had then the form of Divine Service in
this Language, which was at that time understood by all; but in process of
time, through the intercourse of barbarous Nations, dispersed throughout the
Empire; new tongues offering, the Latin became estranged: Yet notwithstanding,
they still retained the use thereof in Churches, though the People had already
lost the knowledge of the same: And indeed not only are the Mysteries of
Religion in Churches, but likewise matters of Justice in Palaces (and
Judicatories) still managed in Latin; like as all contracts and agreements,
are also written in the same Language; nor is it as yet an hundred years since
this barbarism was expelled France.

Anno 605.
HItherto was the Church governed by diverse Patriarchs, each of whom had his
several Jurisdiction apart: Every one of those within his respective
Patriarchy, enacted Laws, and assembled Councils; in which quality He of Rome
acted, but only as the rest, to wit, within the limits of his own Jurisdiction;
yet notwithstanding, so it was, that he frequently affected an universal
preheminency over all the Churches; sometimes laboring by might and main to
transfer to himself the appeals of the other Bishops; sometimes prevailing upon
the addresses of such as in hopes of succor from him, implored his assistance;
yea sometimes alleging forged and spurious Acts, as at the sixth Council of
Carthage, which crushed that attempt: Now in that of Chalcedon, held about the
year 450. it was said, that the Bishops of Rome and of Constantinople were of
an equal dignity; nevertheless, they procured the Primacy, the one in emulation
of the other, and many were the contests and controversies commenced between
them upon this occasion; yea, in the year 472. the Emperor Leo determining in
favor of him of Constantinople, conferred upon him the precedence to all the
other Bishops, and from thence he was styled Oecumenick: But when once ^hocas
attained to the Empire, by murdering of ( Mauricius) his Predecessor, this
same Parricide was on the one side offended, with Cyriacus Bishop of
Constantinople, who refused to countenance his inhumanity; on the other side he
feared lest that the condign hatred of his actions might occasion a revolt
against himself in Italy; insomuch that Boniface III. through offers made of
his good services, obtained of him, that the Church of Rome should be the
Capital Church, and that the Bishop of Rome should be called the Sovereign and
Universal Bishop; thus by an Imperial Edict, and not by any Divine Right was
there an Universal Bishop created in the Church; the quality which Gregory
himself declined, Greg. Epist. 34. lib. 4.
none could possibly affect, but the Forerunner of Antichrist: It was under
color of this specious Title, that the Bishops of Rome has ever from thence
forwards exerted and executed all the Acts of their pretended Primacy.

Boniface IV. soon after opened the Pantheon at Rome, and erected therein the
Images of all the Saints, Platin. in Bonifac 4
in the room of the Pagan-Gods: This is the Temple which is at this day called,
St. Mary the Round* In Italian Santa Maria Rotonda, denominated from its
orbicular Form, accounted a piece of the rarest Architecture in the World.
And it is observable, that at the same time, namely in the year 610. that
Monster Mahomet, the scourge of Christianity, showed himself.

Anno 690.
TIll about the year 690. the Church used only the figure
of the Cross, consisting of two traverse pieces of wood; and they were wont to
represent Jesus Christ under the form of a Lamb, which was only a symbolical
Picture: But the fourth general Council ordained, that the Image of Christ, in
his humane shape, should be affixt to the Cross, only to re-mind us (say they)
of his conversation in the flesh, his passion and death: Thus began the use of
the Crucifix; but without any kind of adoration.

Anno 700. etc.
THen also were Private Masses obtruded, wherein the Priest communicated all
alone: This corruption sprung from the luke-warmness of the People; heretofore,
when as zeal was as yet vigorous, the whole Assembly did communicate, and that
every day of the Week; but this devotion waxing cold, the Communion was
restricted to the Sabbath, and the more solemn days: The Clergy nevertheless
still communicated every day; but in fine, the Clergy likewise neglecting the
Communion, there was none but the Priest alone that did communicate: From hence
it came to pass, that instead of one great Bread, which they were accustomed to
break for the use of the whole multitude, they now consecrated only one small
one of the bigness of a penny, as being sufficient for one individual Person:
Likewise, instead of the great Vessels used for the Sacramental Wine, they used
Viols in their Mass-Service: But forasmuch as the People having once abandoned
the Communion, did withal decline the presenting of any more Offerings; that
they might oblige them to a continuance (...) that liberality, they gave them
to unde^^stand, that though they did not any mo^ communicate, yet Divine
Service should not cease to be useful and available t^ them, provided they
would continue the assistance of their customary Offerings; and instead of the
Communion, they gave them Bread, over which they prayed, called hallowed Bread:
Thus were private Masses substituted in the room of the holy Supper: and yet
nevertheless the Priest, when he communicates all alone by himself, does still
use the same terms, which he was wont to pronounce, when there were many
Communicants; for he prays that the Sacrament might tend to the Salvation of
all the receivers; even then I say, when as himself is the sole and only
partaker.

Moreover, from the relinquishing of the Eucharist, another change proceeded;
for, when that this exercise was more than ordinarily frequented, the whole was
pronounced with a loud voice, save that in the first antiquity, after an
Exhortation made by the Pastor, every one present prayed with a submissive
voice, to the end that God might vouchsafe to bless the work; but the remaining
part thereof, especially the institution of the Supper, was pronounced very
loud, so as that the whole Assembly might hear; afterward there being but a
small appearance of persons, that offered themselves to the Communion, the
Priest began to speak with a more low voice; and finally, there being none
present, but the Priest himself only, who communicated, he did at length utter
the words of Consecration so low, as that none but himself could understand
them: This is called the secret of the Mass, sprung from a misprision of the
Sacrament, held, at this day, for a mystery.

Anno 780.
IT has been said, that it was an ancient custom in the Church, Chrysostom.
lib. 1. de Com punct. cord. ^ Aug. sermon. de vigil. Pasch.
that Christians before the Communion, did interchangeably give each other the
kiss of peace, in token of fraternal union and concord; for the Lord's* Prayer
ended, they said, Peace be with us, and with that, the Christians did mutually
salute one another: But forasmuch, as many acquitted themselves herein, more
out of Ceremony, than true Charity, they checked and severely rebuked those
whose kiss of peace was only matter of lip-labor: Now about the year 780. Leo
the Second changed this symbol of reconciliation, into a superstitious vanity,
instituting that Plate of Silver or Copper, which after Consecration is
presented to be kissed: And in this very particular, one may perceive how much
the ancient Ceremonies have been either diverted, or perverted, through
successive alterations therein.

Anno 790.
BUt behold the Idolatry, which under the vail of darkness, was propagated in
the Church, even to the very Sanctuary: Images were only as so many memorative
objects in Churches, yet did the vulgar begin to exhibit honor to them;
whereupon disputes were commenced: In this difference, reasons of State offered
themselves, which are to be seen in History; for upon other accounts are Images
pretended, in subserviency to their interest.

The Latins and the Greeks, and afterward the Greeks amongst themselves, took
occasion from hence of much altercation; one while demolishing, and breaking
down the Images; another while re-erecting of them. Finally, Irene Empress of
Constantinople, a Pagan both by Nation and Religion, a Woman of many notorious
enormities, assembled a Council at Nice, excluding from it the best Doctors,
and employing menaces, violence, and all manner of artifice, whereby she might
compass her design: Thus this Conventicle molded and modeled according to her
own mind, producing, instead of offers of reason, nothing but impertinencies,
in behalf of the Images; concluded upon adoration, contrary to the judgment of
all solid Antiquity, and the opposition then generally made to a piece of such
palpable impiety: For at the same time the Emperor Charles the great converted
a Council at Frankefort, wherein that of Nice was condemned, being declared
false and abusive, and the Decree touching Images incassated and made null;
thus was (their resolved) Adoration suppressed: But being that Images were
always continued in Churches, this Superstition, whereunto the People were
strongly inclined, did at last recover it self and prevail. This second Council
of Nice was held toward the year 790.

Anno 880.
POpe Adrian was the first that advised the Canonization of Saints; imitating
herein the Apotheoses (or Consecrations) used amongst the Romans under
Paganism; a thing which till then was unheard of in the Church* The Authority
of canonizing Saints was afterward confirmed by Decree, as we shall see in its
proper place.

Anno 965.
POpe John IV. baptized the great Bell of St. John Lateran (in Rome) nameing it
after his own name: Thence came the custom of baptizing Bells, and giving them
names.

Anno 1000. etc.
FRom the time above mentioned, till about the year 1000. those corruptions
were not only continued, but likewise gradually multiplied: To the consecration
of Churches, they added sprinkling of holy Water, with a Nose-gay of Hyssop,
pronouncing these words of the Psalmist, Attollite portas, etc. Lift up your
Gates, etc. the Bishop in the mean time rapping at the Gate with his
Pastoral-staff; the mingling of the Ashes and Water, of the Salt and the Wine
of Exorcisme; of painted and graven Characters; and certain confused Prayers:
Finally, the anniversary Feast of every Church, in memory of the day of its
dedication.

And like as the Sacrament of the Eucharist was changed into a Sacrifice, even
so the Priests, which were called to preach the Gospel, were then ordained to
sacrifice, they began to create them with these words, Accipe potestatem, etc.
Receive thou power to offer sacrifice to God, to celebrate Masses, as well for
the living, as for the dead.

Anno 1003.
POpe John xix. instituted the Feast of All Souls, appointing it to be
celebrated upon the Morrow after All Saints.

Anno 1050.
BUt behold the sum of the whole matter: That they might defend the
Sacrifice, which they pretend to offer in the Mass; they behoved to deny the
whole Essence of the Sacrament, and falsify and belly all that ever Antiquity
has believed in the case, whose sense and several judgments therein, do here
ensue.

S. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, and a Disciple of the Apostles in the 72 d.
Epist. 9. ad Philadelph.
year of our Lord, expresses himself thus: There is one only Flesh of our Lord
Jesus, and one only blood, which was shed for our sins; one only Bread also was
broken for us, and one only Cup was distributed to us: Could he possibly make a
more manifest opposition between the Body of Christ broken upon the Cross, and
the Bread broken in the Supper?

Justin Martyr, toward the year 130. Our Christ has vouchsafed to make and
use Dialog. 2. advers. Triph.
the Sacramental Bread in Commemoration of his Body, formed for such as believe
in him, for whose sake he became passible; the Cup also he ordained to be made
and used with thanksgiving, in Commemoration of his Blood.

Ireneus Bishop of Lions, in the year 160. When once the Chalice being filled,
Lib. 5.
and the Bread being broken, has received the (benedictive) word of God, it
becomes the Sacrament of the Blood and Body of Christ, whereby the substance of
our flesh is augmented, and compounded. Certainly none can say that our flesh
is augmented, nor compounded of the real flesh and blood of Christ, but only of
the substance of the bread, which this Father plainly acknowledges to continue
in the Eucharist, even after the Consecration of the same.

Clemens Alexandrinus, in the year 190. Christ took of the Wine, Paedagog, lib.
2. cap. 2.
and blessed the Wine, saying, take, drink, This is my blood, the blood of the
Vine, denominating by way of Allegory, the Word, which shed his blood for the
remission of sins, a sacred liquor of joy and gladness, etc. Now that that
which he blessed was true Wine, he further shows, saying to his Disciples, I
will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, etc. This very same reason do we
urge to prove, that they drank Wine at the Supper. Briefly, it is remarkable,
that he disputes against the Encratites, who held the drinking of Wine to be
unlawful; alleging for their conviction, the example of Jesus Christ, who
drank Wine at the Supper; which were a ridiculous Argument, if so be Wine had
ceased to be Wine, after that Christ had drank thereof.

Tertullian, in the year 205. does th^s explain the words of Jesus Christ: Lib.
4. Contra Marcton. cap. 40. and lib. 3. cap. 19.
This is my Body, that is to say, the Figure of my Body; Moreover, Jesus Christ
called Bread his Body, to the end that thou might thereby understand, that
he appointed Bread to be the Figure of his Body.

Cyril, Catech. 14 sub finem. Catech. mist. 5.
Bishop of Jerusalem, in the year 320. declares to us, that The Flesh is now
absent; and that that which we are commanded to taste of, is the Figure of his
Body and Blood.

Eusebius Bishop of Cesarea, Demonst. Evangel. lib. 8. cap. 8.
says, that our Lord has taught us to serve him with Bread, as a sign of his
Body.

Gregory Bishop of Nazianze, in the year 350. in his second Oration concerning
Easter, speaks thus of Sacramental participation: We partake indeed of the
(Christian) Passover in a Figure, albeit more clearly than at the ancient
Passover; for the ancient Passover, I dare say so, was a more obscure figure
of a Figure.

Macairus the Egyptian, Hom. 27.
speaking of those who lived before Jesus Christ: It never entered into their
hearts, that there should be a Baptism of Fire, and of the Holy Ghost, and
that they should offer in the Church Bread and Wine, as a Figure of his flesh
and of his blood, and that those who partake of the Bread which is visible,
should feed spiritually upon the Flesh of our Lord.

Ephraim of Syria, in the year 360. in his Treatise against the curious
Inquisitours, into the nature of the Son of God: Observe heedfully, how, that
taking the Bread into his hands, he blesses and breaks it, in Figure of his
immaculate Body; and blesses the Cup in figure of his precious Blood.

Ambrose, Lib. 4. cap. 5. and 6.
or the Author of the Book of Sacraments: See that this offering turn into an
acceptable, and reasonable account, to us, which is the figure of the body and
blood of our Lord.

Gaudentius Bishop of Bress, in his second Treatise upon Exodus: The figure of
Christ's body is received in the bread: Moreover, the blood of the Lamb is fitly
represented under the species of Wine.

Chrysostom Bishop of Constantinople, in the year 386. in an Epistle to
Cesarius the Monk, does thus unfold this great Mystery: Before that the bread
be sanctified, we name it bread; but it being once by Divine grace sanctified,
it is certainly freed from the appellation of bread, and is dignified with the
name of the Lords body, howheit the true nature of bread does still continue
therein: Turrianus and Gregory of Valence, both Jesuits, perceiving themselves
to be wonderfully racked and puzzled with this passage, do most groundlesly
aver, that it was none of Chrysostom's, but of one John of Constantinople,
which is confession sufficient, since that it bears the mark of its antiquity:
This Epistle has been seen by many, in a Manuscript in the Bibliotheque of
Florence, by which, if not stifled by our Adversaries, the common fate of what
ever is contrary to themselves, it may be easily verified to be of a truth the
genuine testimony of the great Chrysostom.

But it is high time that we hearken to holy Augustine, who flourished in the
year 410. behold how he explains himself in his 12 th. Chapter against
Adimantus: The Lord doubted not to say, this is my body, when as he gave the
sign of his body, and upon the third Psalm: The Lord admitted Judas to the
Banquet, at which he recommended, and gave to his Disciples the figure of his
body and blood.

The same Father, upon the 98. Psalm, wherein he expounds these words of our
Lord, If ye eat not the flesh of the Son of Man, ye shall not have life,
brings in our Savior speaking thus, Understand spiritually that which I have
told you, ye shall not eat this body which ye see, neither shall ye drink that
blood which my Crucifiers shall shed; I have recommended to you a sacred sign,
which being spiritually understood shall give you life.

And in the third Book of Christian Doctrine, Chap. 16. When the Lord says, if
ye eat not the flesh of the Son of Man, and drink not his blood, ye shall have
no life in your selves, he seems to command an impiety or great crim^^ This
then is a Figure whereby he enjoyneth us to communicate in the Lords death and
Passion, and delightfully and profitably to remember, that his Flesh was
crucified and bruised for us.

And in his first Treatise, upon the first of St. John: The Lord comfort us,
who can no longer feel him with the Hand, but only by the touch of faith.

And in the 53d. Sermon, upon the words of our Lord: Every one almost calls
that the body of Christ, which is a sacred sign thereof.

Theodoret Bishop of Cyre, in the year 420. in his first Dialogue, entitled the
Immutable, speaking of these words: This is my body, says, the Lord has
dignified the visible signs, with the appellation of his own body and blood,
not changing of their nature, but adding grace to nature: a little before he
had said, the Lord has conferred upon the sign, the name of his own body.

And in the second Dialogue, entitled The Inconfused: The Divine Mysteries are
signs of the true body. And a little after, he brings in an Eutychian
Heretic, maintaining Transubstantiation, to whom he answers in these words:
Thou art caught in a Net of thine own twisting, for even after Consecration,
the mystical signs change not their nature, but remain for sub^^^nce, form and
figure, the same as before.

Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, In Johan. lib. 4. cap. 19. Ibid. lib. 9. cap. 29.
in the year 440. Christ gave to his Disciples morsels of bread, saying, take,
eat, this is my body: He says also, that the faithful believe, that though he
be absent from us in the body, yet are all things, and even our selves governed
by him: Again, though he be absent in the Body, appearing before his Father,
and sitting at his right hand, yet nevertheless he is present in his Saints by
his Spirit.

The same Father speaking of Nestorius; Apolog. in Anathemat. lib. 2.
Has he not turned, says he, our mystery into an Anthrop^phagy, that is to
say, a manducation of Man's flesh, through an irreligious entangling of the
spirits of the faithful through vain conceits, and attempting to subject to
humane ratiocinations, things which surpass all manner of scrutiny, save that
of faith only.

Gelasius himself Bishop of Rome, about the year 590. speaks thus; Gelas.
Contra Eutych. and Nester.
Certainly the Sacraments which we receive of the body and blood of Christ, are
a Divine thing, whence also we are by them, made partakers of the Divine
nature; yet nevertheless the substance or nature of the (...)read and the Wine
does uncessantly continue such, and the Image and resemblance of the body and
blood of Christ, is infallibly celebrated in the exhibition of those mysteries.

Facundus an African Bishop, who in the 550th. year of our Lord, wrote in
defense of the three heads or points of the Council of Chalcedon: The Sacrament
of Adoption, to wit Baptism, may be called the Adoption, upon the very same
account, that we call the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, which consists
in the consecrated Bread and Cup, his own body and own blood: Not that the
Bread is indeed his body, and the Cup his Blood, in proper speech; but hecause
that the mystery of his body and blood is contained therein.

Dionysius falsely surnamed the Areopagite an Author, of whom we know not
certainly in what time he lived, howbeit to procure the greater Authority to
his writings, he assumed the name of Dionysius the Areopagite, mentioned in the
Book of Acts, chap. 17. verse. 34. But diverse reasons move us to believe, that
he flourished about the end of the fourth Age; others make him more ancient;
whoever he was, he does more than ten times in one Chapter, In Eccles.
Hierarch. cap. 1. and 3. etc.
term that which is given to us in the Supper, Images, Signs and Symboles,
and says, that the Communion of Bread and Wine, is a commemoration of that
most Divine Supper, at which, the signs of things therein celebrated, were
first of all instituted; therefore he calls Jesus Christ a worker of signs,
adding, that by them Christ is represented and received.

Whence Maximus his Scholar, Maxim. in cap. 1. and 3. Eccles. Hierarch.
who lived about the year 630. We attain not to an immediate discovery of the
things themselves in matters Divine, but we arrive at perfection, through the
intervention of signs; such as is the Cup of blessing, as the Apostle calls
it, and the Bread which we break; those things are signs only, not the Truth
it self: Moreover, recommending to consideration the expressions of that same
Dionysius called the ^reopagite: Note, says he, that he every where terms the
Divine Sacrifice, Symbolical or Figurative; and that the holy Offerings, are
signs of more real heavenly things.

But toward the year 840. some through their Hyperbolical terms, others
through questions moved touching the alteration of signs, did by degrees give
occasion for conceiting of a new opinion concerning the Sacrament; which being
in fine in the year 1059. ripened into perfection, it was declared in the
Lateran Council under Nicholas the Second, Canon. Ego. Berengar. did. 2.
that the ^read and the Wine are the very body and blood of Christ; and that he
is sensibly felt, broken, and crumbled by the teeth of believers; Expressions
absurd and impious, and disowned by the Church of Rome at this day.

We shall here, in pursuit of the order of time, annex to all those testimonies
of Fathers by us produced, that which is contained in the Roman Decretal,
collected by Gratian, the Father of the Canonists, who lived about the year
1160. He in the second distinction of the Consecration, in the Canon, Hoc est,
expresses himself thus: The heavenly ^read, which is the Flesh of Christ, is
in a peculiar respect called the body of Christ, howbeit, to speak truly, it be
a sacred sign of Christ's body, to wit, of Him, who becoming visible, palpable,
mortal, was at last crucified!

And upon the Gloss of the Doctors, has these words, worthy of consideration:
The Heavenly Sacrament, wherein the flesh of Christ is truly represented, is
called the body of Christ, but improperly, for it is so called after a manner
congruous and peculiar to it self, howbeit, not according to the real truth of
the thing but by way of a significant mystery; so that the sense runs thus:
It is called the body of Christ, that is to say, this is thereby signified.
Judge then sober Reader, how much, and how far the Church of Rome is at present
departed from the sense and belief of the ancient Fathers, even that of the
times of the famous Canonist Gratian.

We will conclude this Chapter with that which we read in Justin Martyr his
second Apology for Christians; to the end, that it may appear what the practice
was of pure Antiquity, as well in the Celebration of the holy Supper, as in all
the other parts of the Divine Service of the Primitive Church; and that one may
th^reby be able to judge who approaches nearest thereunto; whether those of
the Church of Rome, which has wholly deac'd and perverted the model of true
Religion, and utterly destroyed that spiritual worship, which we owe to God; Or
those, who to save themselves from her Pit of Error, and Dunghill of
Superstition, have abandoned her Communion: Behold then how that pious Author
speaks; Justin. Martyr. in Apolog. 2. ad Antonin.
Upon the Sabbath days, we assemble our selves both in City and Country, in one
place; the Lecture is made from the Writings of the Prophets, or the Apostles;
the Lecturer ceasing, he that presides makes the Exhortation, admonishing to an
imitation of those excellent things; which done, we rise up and pray to God:
after this, they present him of the Fraternity that presides, with bread and
drink of Wine and Water, which he receiving, yields praise and glory to the
Father of all, in the name of his Son, and by his holy Spirit; in which act of
thanksgiving, he is the more prolix, to the end, that they might be rendered
worthy of those things, through that Spirit: and prayers and thanksgiving being
finished, all the People present, gives consent by acclamation, saying, Amen,
which is to say in the Hebrew Tongue, So be it: Now after that the President
has given thanks, and all the People has by acclamation consented; those who
are named Deacons with us, administer to all that are present, Bread Wine and
Water, being blessed; and carry the same to such as are absent: and this repast
is with us, called the Eucharist. Proceed we to another point, and view the
sequel and progress of those innovations.

Anno 1055.
AT this time, under Victor II. the Redemption of Penances was introduced: For
it was enacted that they might be lawfully converted into penalties of another
nature, as pecuniary Mulcts under the notion of Alms, Donatives bestowed in
favor of the Church, Pilgrimages, and other things equivalent, proportionably
to the years of penance allotted them; and that such as had not wherewithal to
accommodate themselves herein, might redeem their years of penance, with the
number of Psalms sung by them, with Fastings in the strength of Bread and
Water, with scourging and scarifying of themselves, and other kinds of
voluntary mortification; whence the custom of whipping proceeded, and from the
same source, the Batusses, An order of Friars who in their nightly processions
do extremely whip and scarifie themselves.
and Penitents.

Now by those exchanges and redemptions, the ancient Discipline was utterly
subverted: We have seen that the Indulgences were no other than certain
relaxations, or limitations of Church-penalties, intended for curtailing of the
time prescribed to Penitents, before that they could be readmitted to the
Communion: But the virtue of those Indulgences was afterward extended beyond
this World, for shortening of the years of their abode in Purgatory; a thing
which the Primitive Christians never once dreamed of: We have likewise
observed, that the Penitents, who ordinarily were very numerous, tendered
themselves to the Church, having their faces covered with ashes, in token of
humility; from whence it was, that the Church of Rome derived that vain
Ceremony of Ash Wednesday, at the beginning of Lent: And in this action, they
sing the very same things which they sung heretofore, when as there was any
number of Persons doing of public Penance.

Anno 1090.
URban II. that he might advance Superstition, ordained (about the year 1090.)
that upon every Saturday a Mass should be said in honor of the Virgin Mary.

Chaplets or Pater-nosters were at the same time invented by Peter the Hermit,
Polydor. Vergil. lib. 5. cap. 9.
together with the Office and Hours of our Lady.

Anno 1160.
ALexander III. decreed the Canonization of Saints; and ordained that none
should be from thence-forward acknowledged Saint, but whom the Pope first
declared such.

Anno 1212.
CHrist's corporal presence in the Sacrament had already gained some credit,
but they were not as yet agreed upon the pretended conversion of signs: Behold
then how that a little after the year 1215. in the Lateran Council, Innocent
III. determines the Form thereof; who wills all to believe that the Bread is
transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, and the Wine into his Blood: Thus
was Transubstantiation ratified, and that as an Article of Faith.

In pursuance of this Decree, it was ordered, that all Churches should be
furnished with a Cabinet, for a conservatory to lodge and keep the Host in;
whereas formerly, what remained after the Communion, was either burnt, or else
given to be eaten by little Children; or lastly, the Clergy immediately
dispatched it: It was then therefore that the use of Pixes began.

Anno 1220. and 1230.
HOnorius III. did for the same reason, about the year 1220. institute the
adoration of the Host; and Gregory IX. added the little Bell, thereby to
advertise every one of kneeling.

About the same time the Chaplets, or Pater nosters, which were invented by
Peter the Hermit, as has been said above, were put in use at the
recommendation of Dominicus, the Founder of the Jacobins, who for this very
reason passes for the Author of that goodly piece of devotion.

Anno 1245.
THe Council of Lions, in the year 1245. ordained that Cardinals should wear
red-Hats, and scarlet-Clokes.

Anno 1250.
NOw Transubstantiation, when authorized, was attended with this sequel and
conclusion ensuing thereupon, namely, that The Laity ought to rest contented
with the Host being that the blood of Christ is contained in it, as well as in
the Chalice: But this was not received without debate; insomuch, that many
Churches along time after retained the two species, as necessary: Nevertheless,
this rape and retrenchment of the Cup in the Communion of Laics, was
afterward universally extended, and finally authorized by Decree, as will yet
further appear: In the mean time, that they might in some kind gratify the
People, they introduced the custom of giving them Wine to wash their mouth
withal, instead of that portion of the Sacrament which they had (most
sacrilegiously) robbed them of.

Anno 1260.
THe adoration of the Host being introduced, Urban IV. upon the pretended
Revelation of a Nun, in the Province of Liege, instituted the Feast of God with
its Octaves; and Thomas Aquinas composed the Office.

Anno 1300.
BOniface VIII. instituted and celebrated the first Jubilee, ordaining, that
for the future, it should be solemnized from one hundred years, to another; but
Clemens VI. reduced it to fifty; Gregory XI. to thirty three; and finally, Paul
II. to twenty five.

Anno 1360.
ABout the year 1360. began the custom of walking the Host, and of tarrying
it under a Canopy in Procession; Those of Pavy were the first practitioners
hereof; after whose example, the same was used all over Christendom.

Anno 1366.
URban V. sent in Lent to Joanna Queen of Sicily, a Rose of Gold; and made a
Decree, whereby he ordained the Consecration of the like, every year, upon the
Lent-Sunday, called Laetare.

Anno 1414.
BEfore the Council of Constance, held in the year 1414. the Communion of the
Laics under one only sign, was practiced more through Toleration, than
Authority; But that Council enacted a Decree touching the same, whose terms
and tenor full of sacrilege and impiety, should strike all true Christians
with horror: behold how it was framed: Though Christ did after Supper
institute and administer to his Disciples, the venerable Sacrament, Council.
Constant. sess. 13
under the two signs of bread and wine, and in the pr^mitive Church, it was so
observed; yet thi^ notwithstanding, the custom of the Church should be held
for a Law, who has commanded under pain of excommunication, that thos^ who
offend against this Decree, by giving the Communion to the People under the two
spe^cies, and preach to them the equity of the same, be effectually punished,
and dealt with all as Heretics, by delivering them up t^ the Secular Power,
whose assistance shall b^ employed to that effect: This was that very Council,
who to justify their perjury i^ the case of John Huss, whom contrary t^ public
Faith, they caused to be burnt, passed and propagated it for a Maxim, that
Faith ought not to be kept with Heretics.

Anno 1458.
POpe Calixtus III. ordained that they should ring a Bell at the Hour o^
Midday, like as they did in the Evening for an All-hail to the Virgin Mary; to
the end, that such as were engaged in continual War with the Turks, might b^
assisted by this kind of Devotion.

Anno 1470.
ONe Alane de la Roch of the Order of the Jacobins, moved by certain Visions,
invented the Rosary of the Virgin Mary, which was by Sixtus IV. afterward
approved.

Illimited Superstition had infallibly advanced yet further, and, it is to be
feared, had at last quite oppressed, and, as it were, stifled the Christian
Religion, under the insupportable burden of Ceremonies; had not God in his
mercy in some sort renewed the Light of his Word, by the Preaching and Doctrine
of Luther, Zuinglius, Melancthon, Bucer, Calvin, and many other excellent
personages, whom his Providence raised up to rescue the same from under that
Bushel which did so woefully eclipse it, and to disentangle it from the briars
of School Divinity, and from the corrupt Glosses of Decretalists, and other
Doctors and Assertours of Papal Authority; although that even hitherto, God who
never left himself without a witness, as well in the work of Grace as in that of
Nature, did from time to time successively stir up faithful Witnesses and
Confessors of his Truth, who always have withstood the Errors and Novelties
introduced into their Religion; whence we cannot better conclude this Treatise,
than by way of succinct representation of the prime Defenders of this same
Heavenly Faith.

Anno 792.
IT has been already observed, what their several judgments were, until the
seventh Age, touching diverse points controverted at present between us and
those of the Church of Rome; and amongst others, particularly that of the
Eucharist: and likewise in the matter of Images, unto which Article we shall
only add, That from the year 792. the Synod of Grenado in Spain, did equally
condemn both usage and veneration, that the Emperor Charles the Great, over
and above the result of the Council of Frankfort by him assembled, caused a
Book, This Book was published by Monsieur du Tillet.
bearing his own name, to be printed in opposition to that abuse; and that
Claudius Bishop of Turine, and many other excellent Doctors, did then publish
diverse Treatises in order to the expugning and subverting of the same.

Anno 826.
WAlfrid Abbot of St. Gal, De Offic. Divin. cap. 7, 8, 19. and 23.
in his Book of Divine Offices, does severely inveigh against superfluous
Ceremonies and Images; as also against Divine Service in a strange and unknown
tongue; saying, that the Apostles never celebrated the Eucharist with the
Canon, nor the Offertory, nor yet several other pieces which the Greeks and
Latins have forged at their own pleasure; and that they were contented with
the addition only of the Lord's Prayer to the words of Institution. But it is a
long time ago since Rome attempted to impose her Yoke upon the whole Earth,
since from the year 723. as is reported by Aventine, Gregory II. sent one
Winfrid whom he had created Primate and Archbishop of all the Countries on the
other side the Rhine, to preach, inform and reform those Churches after the
model and example of that of Rome; whereupon the same Author tells us, that
there were many Bishops and Priests who would not in the least acknowledge him,
calling him the author of lies, a disturber of the Christian Peace, and a
corrupter of the Faith of Christians.

Anno 840.
RAbanus Maurus Archbishop of Mayence, De Institut. Cleric. lib. 3. cap. 12
and 13. Lib. 1. cap. 31. and lib. 2. cap. 2 and 14.
and Disciple to Alcuinus, whom he esteemed the most knowing person of all the
Learned of those times, in his Book of the Institution of Clerks, speaking of
the Sacrament of the Supper, says, that when we are commanded to eat the
flesh, and to drink the blood of our Lord, it is a figurative locution, and
that this mystery is spiritual. And for this reason Thomas of Walden in an
Epistle to Pope Martin V. who came to the Popedom in the year 1417, holds that
he sens'd the holy Sacrament amiss, and ranks him with Heretics.

Anno 849.
BErtram, a Preacher of great fame; as well by reason of his profound knowledge
of the holy Scriptures, as for his inculpable^life, in a Treatise, entitled,
Of the Body and Blood of our Lord, which he addressed to the Emperor Charles
the Bald, upon that Emperors demanding of his Judgment touching the many
Controversies moved about that Doctrine, did, in resolution to what was
propounded to him, plainly demonstrate by the Authority of Scripture, of St.
Augustine, and the ancient Doctors, that there is no such thing as
Transubstantiation in the Supper, but that the Bread and the Wine remain in
their first substance, under and by which the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ
are in an invisible and spiritual manner distributed, and apprehended by faith
alone. That there is a spiritual body in this mystery; that it is a mystical
and spiritual comprehension of him, and not that very Body which he assumed in
the womb of the blessed Virgin. He sticks not to say that the Body of Christ is
therein; for as much as the Spirit of Christ is there, that is to say, the
power and efficacy of the Word of God, which does not only nourish, but also
purges and purifieth the soul. We find not that this great man was ever
reprehended or reckoned an Heretic because of this Doctrine.

Anno 869.
AT this time flourished John Erigine (or Erwine) otherwise a Scots-man,
skilled in the Greek, Arabic, and Chaldaick Tongues, a most famous and
incomparable Divine, all which, by the relation of Antoninus himself,
Archbishop of Florence, Vincent of Beauvais, Sabellicus, Volateran, and
Platina, was accompanied with singular holiness of life: He was likewise so
greatly endeared to Charles the Bald, King of France and Emperor, that he was
by him detained in France, where he received from him very honorable
entertainment: Occasion then offering it self for his declaring of his
judgment touching the Doctrine of the Eucharist, he expressed himself therein
in a Book bearing the very same Title with that of Bertram, wherein in like
manner by the authority of the Divine Scriptures, and of pious Fathers,
especially of St. Augustine, he establishes and confirms the truth of the same
Faith which that learned Bertram had taught a little before: In fine, by reason
of his great renown, it came to pass, that, Alfred King of England having
founded the College (now University) of Oxford, gave him an invitation to the
Presidency thereof.

Anno 950.
IT is recorded by William of Malmsbury, Albert. Vrant. Metropol. lib. 1. cap.
9. Baschas. Rabert. de corp. and sang. Dom. cap. 14. Guil. Malmsh: lib. 3. cap.
27. Jodoc. Cocc. Thesaur. tom. 2. lib. 6. de Eucharist.
that the belief both of the reality and of the conversion of Signs, which
were by degrees foisted into this Age of Ignorance and Barbarism, was
vigorously opposed, and that diverse Questions touching the same were agitated
in England; one party explaining it one way, the other quite another: Those who
held the Affirmative part, that they might the more dexterously proselyte their
Adversaries, obtruded Prodigies and Miracles, averring that in the room of the
Species, they saw a comely little Infant, which was thrust into the mouths of
the Communicants instead of Bread; that there was Blood found in the Chalice;
that a (devout) Ass worshipped the Hostie; and abundance of such Miracles, ^ut
so gross and ridiculous, as that the bare mentioning of them may suffice to
discover their impertinency and forgery: Whereupon Gabriel Biel in his 51
Lesson o^ the Canon of the Mass, observed not a^iss, that those apparitions of
flesh and blood w^^rwith they entertained the people, might happen through
Diabolical delusion, for deceiving of the simple, God permitting it so to be.

Anno 292.
THere was a Synod or Council of all the Churches in France, Synod. Rhemens.
cap. 1. and 2. etc. cap. 28. etc.
held at Rhemes, wherein Arnulphus Bishop of Orleans, the learned and most
eloquert person of those times, was set apart for the conduct and managery of
affairs; It appears by the Acts of that Synod, that this famous Bishop,
cognoscing upon matters therein agitated, represents to that reverend Assembly,
that all the Po^es of this Age were branded with Notori^us Crimes, Murders and
Tyrannies; Monsters of men, full of Infamy, devoid of all Knowledge both Divine
and Humane: who else ( says he) think ye that man is, who sits upon a high
and lofty Throne, glittring with Gold and Purple, but the Antichrist
infallibly, sitting in the Temple of God, whose Marbles, etc. are as fit to be
consulted as himself: He adds further, that i^ were much better to require the
judgmen^ of the Bishops of the Low Countries and (...) Germany, than of that
City which is at th^^ day exposed to sale, and weighs Judgme^^s in the unjust
balance of filthy lucre, etc. That therefore Assemblies might be held without
his privity, since that the Canon of Nice, acknowledged by the Church of Rome
in all Councils and Decrees, enjoyneth no such thing, as that regard should be
had to the authority of the Bishop of Rome; that her Ministers are those of
Antichrist, who seems to be near at hand; that the Mystery of Iniquity does
already work, since that which should let, to wit, the Roman Power, is already
removed; that that Man of Sin which opposes and exalts himself above the
Name and Service of God, begins to be revealed; Religion exposed to ruin, the
Name of God trampled under foot with i^punity, and Religious Worship vilified,
even by the chief Priests themselves; this being all the care that Rome takes
of others, (...) of her self.

Anno 1050.
BErenger Archdeacon of Angiers, did profoundly confute the real presence, and
other abuses ushered into the Doctrine of the Lord's Supper. True it is, that
in the year 1059, having made his appearance before the Lateran Council,
whither he was cited, out of fear of some cruel usage, he signed a Confession
contrary to his judgment, mentioned below in its proper place: but after his
return into France he retracted the same, and confirmed his Proselytes, which
were so numerous, that William of Malmsbury in his 3d Book of the History of
England, does attest, that all France was full of his Doctrine; which is
confirmed by Matthew of Westminster, who adds, that not only the French, but
also greatest part of the Italians and English embraced the same; It was
exactly conformable to that of Bertram and John Erigine, by the relation of his
Adversaries; amongst whom Lanfranck then Abbot and afterward Archbishop of
Canterbury, writing against him in his Book of the Eucharist, represents it to
us thus: The Sacrifice of the Church, says Berenger, is compounded of two
things, the one visible, the other invisible; of the Sacrament, and the thing
signified in the Sacrament; which thing signified, that is to say, the Body of
Christ, if it were presented before our eyes, were visible; but being exalted
to Heaven, and sitting on the righthand of the Father, until the restitution of
all things, as the Apostle Peter speaks, it cannot be brought back from Heaven,
where in the person of Christ it consists of God and Man: Now the Sacraments of
the Lords Table, to wit, the consecrated Bread and Wine, are not in the least
changed or altered, but remain in their proper substances, having a resemblance
of the things whereof they are Sacraments, etc. This he taught till the year
1091, wherein he died with so great reputation, that Hildebert, who was
afterward Bishop of Mentz, in an Epitaph which he made upon him, called him
The Pillar of the Church, the Glory and Hope of the Clergy: The Doctrine which
he opposed, being at that time so little rooted, that Pope Gregory VII, who
came to the Popedom in the year, 1073, did, by the report of Cardinal Benno
and Matthew Paris, appoint a Fast to three Cardinals, to the end that God might
please to reveal whether of the two opinions was Truth, that of Berenger, or
that of the Church of Rome; and, upon what account soever it was, certain it is
that be threw the holy Sacrament into the fire in the presence of the
Cardinals, as appears by the relation of Cardinal Benno himself, who was
contemporary with this Pope; so that it is more than probable that he believed
not the same to be the real Body of Christ.

Anno 1120.
HOnorius Bishop of Alton now flourished, who wrote with no less Learning than
Truth, of Free Will, and Predestination, according to the exact judgment of
those who rejected the determinations of the Roman Church; in whose face, such
was his Zeal and Valor, he feared not to call her and her creatures, in one of
his Dialogues which he composed, the grand Apocalyptick Beast and Babylon. And
indeed, none should account it strange that any, acted with the least motion of
true Piety, did declaim at this rate, being that none, for the most part,
mounted the Papal Chair other than abominable Letchers, Murderers, Necromancers
and other Monsters; insomuch that Cardinal Benno, who (as has been said) lived
in the time of Pope Gregory VII, in his Treatise of the Lives of Popes,
averreth, That from Sylvester II until then, which was the space of an hundred
years, even ^ll that time, the prime study in the Papal Court was that of the
execrable know^edge of Magic; with whom William of Malmsbury does well accord,
who said, That damnable Art, which came from Spain, was become so general, even
in France, that public Schools were kept wherein it was taught: And Glaber, a
Monk of Clugny, says expressly, that about the 1000 th year of our Lord, the
Christian Faith began much to decay and degenerate from its primitive vigor,
men generally addicting themselves to Divination and Sorcery: See Baronius's
Annals, in the 9, 10, and 11 Ages.
And hence Cardinal Baronius himself speaks thus; What face had the Roman
Church, how much was she polluted, when as Whores, not less potent than
beastly, bore sway in Rome? by whose means their Paramour-mock-Popes were
intruded into St. Peter's Chair: Christ (says he) was asleep in the Ship, and
there was none to awaken him. He further adds, that the Cardinals, Priests and
Deacons, preferred by means of those Monsters, did imitate them, treading in
their very steps; and coveted nothing more than that the Lord might be
overtaken with an everlasting sleep. It was under the covert of those thick
darknesses that the Doctrine of Transubstantiation took deep root; and the
greatest part of the other abuses in the Church of Rome, was firmly established.

Anno 1136.
PEter de Bruis a Priest, and his Disciple Henry of Toulouse, who had been once
a Monk; Arnold Hot; one Joseph, and one Esperon, filled all parts of France
with their Fame and Doctrine; They held the same Opinions with those of
Bertram, Erigene and Berenger, touching the Eucharist; and rejected, as those
did who are a little after called Waldenses, all the erroneous Doctrines and
Superstitions of Popery. St. Bernard informs us that Alphonsus Count of St.
Giles, did protect them, and permitted them to preach publicly at St. Giles
and Toulouse, where they gained a great many Proselytes; yea, that many
Princes, Bishops, and Persons of quality, countenanced and held a
correspondence with them: Yet notwithstanding, listening to the representations
of Calumny, he joins to what he alleges concerning the truth of their Belief,
all that they were charged with by the Vulgar; to wit, that they prohibited the
use of Meats, like as the Manichees did, and perpetrated amongst themselves
execrable acts and villainies; which yet are no other accusation than what are
common to them with the primitive Christians; yea and all such, even till the
time of the last Reformation, as have set themselves against the Church of
Rome, which has ever impeached with Heresy, and branded with some notorious
crime, all that have refused to own her, or have endeavored by the Word of God
to reprove her, and reduce her to duty: After this very manner dealt they in
this Age by Teuchelin or Tudem, Peter de Blois, John Roscelin, a learned
person, and one of the repairers of the University of Paris; the most learned
Peter Abelard; one named Arnoul, whom they put to death at Rome, mentioned by
Platina; Arnold de Bresse, with many others.

Anno 1160.
PEter de Valdo of Lyonois, a person of an inculpable life, and well skilled in
the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, full of good works and alms-deeds, whose
house was a very sanctuary to the distressed poor, to whom he not only
distributed of his temporal good things which God had given him in abundance,
but likewise imparted of the true and better substance, that is to say, the
knowledge of the Heavenly Truth, wherewith God had honored him. This good man
did vigorously oppose the Romish Errors and Abuses, and being that he taught
the very same Doctrine with that of Peter de Bruis and his Associates, he had
in conjunction with them a great number of Proselytes, who were scattered in
Piedmont, Daulphine, Provence, Languedock, and other places of France and
England; as also in the Kingdom of Naples, in Germany, Bohemia, Moravia,
Hungaria, Sclavonia, Poland, and other places of Europe; where diverse names
were given them, as the Poor of Lions, Paterins, Humilists, and others, hateful
and infamous, taken from the Heresies or horrid crimes charged upon them: But
the chief that were in France were those of the Waldenses and Albigenses; the
rest of them whom God miraculously preserved till this present time, in some
parts of Provence, and diverse Valleys of Piedmont, being joined to our Churches
from the very beginning of the Reformation; They disowned, as they do at this
day, Papal Authority, Transubstantiation, Purgatory, the Invocation of Saints,
Images, Merits, Monastic Vows, and all other Opinions which were in like
manner rejected by the Reformed Churches of those times: they embraced for
their only Rule both of Faith and Practice, the Old and New Testament: their
course of life also was simple and unblamable, by the very relation of Claudius
de Seissel Bishop of Marseilles, who in a Book written against them, howbeit he
terms them misled in matter of Doctrine, See John de Serres in the life of
Lewis VIII. and the History of the Waldenses and Albigenses, of John Paul
Perrin, l. 1. c. 5. The Monk des Valees Sernay. James Riberia; the Memorials of
Toulouse; William Paradin. Annal. de Burg. 2. Holagarny.
yet nevertheless acknowledges that as touching Life and Manners, they were
without reproach amongst men, giving themselves with all their might, unto the
observance of the Commandments of God, And many other sober Writers, howbeit
their Adversaries also, have yet likewise acquitted them, though not from all,
yet at least from the more heinous accusations: Amongst whom was the Monk of
the Valleys Sernay, and James of Riberia, who lived in* the time wherein the
Count de Montfort fomented so cruel a War against them, namely in the beginning
of the 13th Century: so that we might easily gather, that, as has been said,
all the grudge they bore them, and all the horrid accusations which they
devised, on purpose to brand them and make them odious, all those proceeded
from no other cause than that they withstood the Pope and his Innovations, and
for their animating the people against them: Hence also it was that the Popes,
to the end they might quite exterminate them, published diverse Croisades
Christian Expeditions against the Turks or other Infidels, so termed, from the
badge of the Cross, worn by all engaged therein.
after the year 1208, till the year 1243; during which time terrible Massacres
were committed, there being, by the relation of some Historians, above two
hundred thousand cut off. Yet notwithstanding, we cannot think that any man of
Reason would once imagine that if their colors had been as black as those
wherein Rome and the Monks do paint them, Alphonsus King of Aragon, Raymond
Count of Toulouse, Histor. de Foix. Epist. of Peter de Vin. 25, 26, and 27
the Prince de Bearn, the Counts de Foix, Bigorre, St. Gilles, Comings,
Carmain, Villemur; Vicount de Beziers, and Carcassonne, and many other Barons
and Persons of Honor, would ever have upheld and protected them; especially
the King of Aragon, and the Vicount de Beziers, who were of a contrary
Religion: nor that any others would ever have embraced their Faith, thereby
becoming the objects of public hatred, and exposing themselves to exile and
misery: Add moreover, James of Riberia in his Collections touching the City of
Toulouse, makes mention of that Conference which was held in the year 1206 at
Montreul near to Carcassonne: whereof the Reformed of that Country keep the
Original to this day. See the History of the Waldenses, done by John Paul
Perrin.
that the Legates of Pope Innocent III. attended with many Abbots and Doctors of
the Romish Communion, being assembled to hold a Conference with some of the
Pastors of the poor Waldenses and Albigenses, the only thing propounded at
that Conference, upon the part of the said Pastors, was these three ensuing
Positions.

1. That the Mass with Transubstantiation, was a mere humane Invention. 2.
That the Church of Rome was no Church of Christ, but a Church of Confusion,
drunken with the blood of Martyrs. 3. That the policy of the Romish Church, was
nor good, nor holy, nor over established by Jesus Christ.
From whence it is evident that therein lay the very crise and sum of the
controversy, and the chief controverted points of their Belief, which in the
year 1281, as appears by an Extract of the Municipal Privileges of Realmont in
Albigeoise, was still professed by a great number of persons throughout all
those quarters; and indeed this proved no unfruitful Seminary, being that not
only the City of Realmont, but likewise the whole Province of Languedock, and
other adjacent places, God having in the beginning of the last Century, caused
his Word as it were to regerminate and sprout afresh, yielded a more goodly and
plentiful harvest, than that of the other parts of this Kingdom.

Anno 1315.
NOw in this year appeared that great person, Guy de Pa^pignan. Bernard. de
Luxemburg. and Balaeus.
Arnauldus de Villa Nova, Doctor in Medicine, and Chancelour of the University
of Montpellier, well skilled in the Latin, Greek and Arabic tongues, for his
knowledge in the Liberal Sciences the very wonder of his Age, who in many
excellent Treatises by him composed, does mightily inveigh against the Errors
of the Romish Church; he said, that he perceived the very face of Antichrist,
in the Papacy and the order of Monks: That Divines have wickedly confounded
Philosophical Dreams with sacred Scripture; that in the Sacrifice, so
denominated from the Altar, the Priest offered naught to God; and that the
Masses did nothing avail either the quick or the dead; that Papal Constitutions
were no other than humane Traditions, containing only the doctrines of humane
works: and he proved by the Prophet Daniel, and many other Authorities, that
Antichrist should in the height of Tyranny persecute the Faithful. For which
Opinions he was by the Jacobins of Tarascon judged a Heretic; and whilst the
King of Sicily was sending him to the Pope, he died at Genoua: James King of
Aragon in an Epistle written to the same King of Sicily his Brother, gave him a
very good testimony.

Anno 1371.
JOHN VVICKLIFF Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the University of Oxford, a
person of an exemplary life and conversation, was at this time a strenuous
Defender of the Truth of the Gospel, zealously withstanding the corruptions and
superstitions of Popery; he was protected as long as King Edward III lived:
This Prince, as also the Prince of Wales, John Duke of Aquitany and of
Lancaster his Brother, the Earl of Salisbury, the Baron of Cobham, Lewis
Clifford, William Nevil, and John Montaigue, Knights; Thomas Latimer, Robert
Ridgly, Chancelour of the University of Oxford, and many other Lords and
persons of the prime Nobility and Clergy of England, adhering to the Doctrine
of the said Wickliff, by the relation of Thomas of Walden, and Croxton in his
Chronicle, who wrote against him: But under the Reign of Richard II, through
the solicitation of the Pope and Monks, he was banished: afterward being
recalled from Exile, he died peaceably in the year 1386, in the Parish of
Luterworth where he had been Pastor: But forasmuch as the Rage and Fury of the
Adversaries does exasperate them unto a Persecution of the Faithful (not only
to death, but) even to the very grave; the Bones of this man of God were in the
year 1451, at the instigation of the Court of Rome, dug up and publicly
burnt; whose Ashes were in their time a Mystical Seed.

Anno 1414.
JOhn Huss Batchelour in Divinity, and Jerome of Prague Doctor of the Sorbonne,
persons of great Learning, and no less integrity of Life, who had from the year
1400 published the Truth of the Gospel in Bohemia; having reaped some
first fruits amongst the remnant of the Waldenses in those Countries, and
amongst some others that had professed the Doctrine of Wickliff; they did so
laboriously cultivate and improve the Lord's Field, as that they left an
abundant and excellent harvest behind them. Now forasmuch as the whole Kingdom
of Bohemia was through means of their Preaching and Doctrine, reduced from
obedience to the Pope, and the Ceremonies of the Romish Church; the Council of
Constance required King Wenceslaus to send the said Huss thither, to whom the
Emperor Sigismond gave very ample Letters of safe conduct, to the end that he
might not scruple to surrender himself; yet notwithstanding, without any regard
had thereunto, he was within twenty six days after his arrival, committed to
Prison, and after an hard and tedious incarceration, most unjustly condemned to
be burnt alive as an Heretic; howbeit he had clearly demonstrated to them the
truth of his Doctrine by the Word of God, and the pregnant Testimonies of
Christian Antiquity; in pursuance whereof he maintained, that the Church of
Rome had departed from the Doctrine of the Apostles, in pursuit of the riches
and delights of the world, hunting after Dominion and Primacy, embezeling
Church-goods, which did of proper right belong t^ the Poor, in pomps and filthy
and infamous expenses; confounding herewith the Ordinances of God, or at
leastwise guilty of a voluntary and deliberate contempt of the same; That the
Pope has no such Authority as he challenges over the Church, and that
Indulgences are null; That the Bread and the Wine remain untransubstantiated in
the Supper; and that the Communion should be equally distributed to all under
both kinds: That there is no such thing as Purgatory: That Saints departed
ought not to be invoked, nor Images worshipped; and that all those things, with
their like appendants, have no other foundation than that of the corruption and
vanity of a humane spirit. Veritas odium parit.
But forasmuch as the Truth does ever purchase hatred from the Wicked, as being
naturally averse and adverse thereunto; this was the cause of that cruel usage
which he met withal from his Enemies; which he endured with a truly
Christian-Constancy, rehearsing as he was going to the place of Execution, or
rather of Triumph, diverse verses of the Psalms, especially of the 31st and
51st, and oftentimes these words, taken partly out of the 31st, I recommend my
spirit into thy hands, for thou have redeemed me, Lord Jesus, thou God of
Truth; and as the Executioner was setting fire to the Faggots, he said three
times with a strong and loud voice, Jesus Christ, thou Son of the living God,
have mercy upon me. Thus did this holy Martyr finish all his labors, resigning
his soul to God, upon the 6th of July 1415.

That other faithful Witness of the Truth, Jerome of Prague, did likewise seal
the same with his blood upon the 30th of May 1416, after many sharp conflicts
with his Adversaries, whom he confounded and struck dumb with the same weapons,
namely, the Word of God, and the Testimonies of the ancient Doctors of the
Church, being endued with an admirable eloquence and vigor of spirit: He came
to Constance with a purpose to solicit in behalf of his Colleague in the
sacred Ministry; but apprehending danger, he retired, and in his retreat, was
betrayed and detected. Aeneas Sylv. seu Pius II. Hist. Bohem. cap. 36. Pogius
Florentinus, Epist ad Leonard Aretin.
He encountered death with such an ecstasy of joy, that when as they began to
kindle the Faggots, he began to sing Divine Praises with a holy hymn, which by
the very relation of Aeneas Sylvius, who was afterward Pope, called Pius II,
and of Pogius of Florence who was one of the Spectators, he continued in the
midst of the flames, till that his blisfull soul took wing for Heaven, there to
bear a part in the harmonious new Song in the presence of its Savior, and the
company of Angels, and all the Saints and faithful ones, whose tears are all
for ever wiped away in that beatisick Sabbatism of Glory, and eternal bliss.

But what shall we say more? for the time would fail us should we instance in
all who after those two saithful Witnesses, espoused the defense of the same
Truth, which the greatest part of them have, as they before them, sealed with
their blood: We behoved to make mention of that great Assembly of persons at
Doway, in the year 1421, who held the Doctrine of the Waldenses, of whom a
great number, as is reported by Monstrelet, was sacrificed to the flames:
Balaeus Cent.
of William White, and Alexander Fabrice, Englishmen, who in the year 1429
wrote in the defense of Wickliff's Doctrine; which Reynauld Peacock Bishop of
Chichester in like manner maintained in the year 1457. Naucler. Annal. de Siles.
We behoved likewise to show, that George Poggebrach King of Bohemia, together
with his Subjects, owned to the day of his death, the profession of the Truth
against the Determinations of Rome; and that the King of Poland stood inclined
to its defense: Likewise, that, in the year 1480, The Continuator of the Abbot
of Vsperg.
John of Vessalia, Basil of Groningue, Stephen Bralfer, and Paul, Notary of
Tubinge, Doctors in Divinity, did in like manner in Germany withstand the
Doctrine of the Romish-Church; for controlling of whose vanity and many
corruptions, Jerome Savonarole was burnt at Florence in the year 1498:
notwithstanding which, John Francis Picus, Count of Mirandula, failed not to
write in his behalf, and in like manner to reprehend the very same abuses: That
in the year 1505, Paul Scriptoris did in his Lectures in the University of
Tubinge, publicly declaim against Transubstantiation: And that in the year
1507, Thomas More of Brockford, an Englishman, was burnt at Norwich, for
preaching against the then prevailing Superstitions of the Church. We behoved
moreover to produce that goodly Confession presented in the year 1508, to King
Vladislaus by the persecuted Waldenses in Hungary, which was exactly
conformable to that of the Protestant and Reformed Churches: And likewise
observe all that is recorded by that great Lawyer Charles du Moulin, in his
History of the French Monarchy, on purpose to give the World to understand what
reception the Doctrine and Life of those of Cabrieres and Merindol, found with
King Lewis XII, which gave such ample satisfaction to that great Prince, as
that upon the report therein made to him of the same, he swore that they had
more goodness and worth in them, than himself and all his subjects besides.
Finally, we behooved in like manner for the honor of that incomparable Monarch,
to add, how that, after the example of Philip the Fair, one of his
Predecessors, he quelled the sauciness and petulancy of Julius II, who had
excommunicated him, having assembled a Council at Pisa, in order to the
reforming of the Church, both in its Head and Members; and caused batter the
Golden Species, with this Inscription, PERDAM BABYLONIS NOMEN, C, A, D. I will
utterly destroy the name of Babylon; and had not (injurious) Death suddenly
snatched him away, he had undoubtedly put an happy essay to a through
Reformation. But enough of that, we being now arrived at,

Anno 1517.
MArtin Luther, together with those his Contemporaries whom God raised up for
the same work, did in this year strike that great blow which did so mightily
shake the Papal Power, and restore to Sovereign Princes who heretofore trembled
under the Censures of Rome About the year 1080 the Emperor Henry IV. after
that he had been persecuted by Gregory VII, was obliged to ask him his pardon
barefooted, and to suffer many other indignities. In the year 1180, the
Emperor, Frederick Barbarousse, being at Venice, and stooping down to kiss the
feet of Alexander III, he put his foot upon his neck, saying, Super Aspidem and
Basiliscum, etc. The Popes prevailed so much after that time, that in Italy
they quite abolished the Authority of the Emperors, whom they dispatched away
to conquer the Holy Land, whilst they in the mean time, under forged pretenses,
dispoyled them, or stirred up enemies against them, to their ruin.
, that lawful (though controlled) Authority, which they hold of none but God
himself: and this was so mavelous, that after that time the greatest part of
Germany, the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, Ireland, Swedland, Denmark and
Norway; the most rich and potent Provinces of the Low Countries; the
illustrious Cantons of Switzerland; a considerable part of France, Poland,
Lithuania, Hungary, Bohemia, Silesia, Moravia, Austria, Transylvania, Prussia,
and Livonia; not to reckon those secret and hidden ones, who await the time of
their Redemption, in Italy, Spain, and other Regions wherein the Light of the
Truth has not as yet scattered the thick Clouds of Popish Darkness; that the
greatest part (I say) of those Kingdoms and Republics were from that time
forward wholly emancipated and disengaged from under the bondage of Papal
(both) Power and Error; which, amongst many others, has been likewise rejected
by a great number of their own authors or abettors, sufficient proof, that it
was the Divine Hand of Omnipotency that gave those signal blows, captivating
all those thoughts and imaginations, under the yoke of his obedience.

In case our Adversaries allege, 1. That those whom God raised up for this
great and glorious work of Reformation were so inconsiderable, as that there is
no manner of respect due to such abject and inglorious Instruments; And 2.
being the business which they attempted, was of such an extraordinary nature,
they ought to have wrought Miracles for authorizing of the same: It is no hard
matter to assoyl those Objections: In the first place then, for satisfaction to
the former; We grant indeed that there is but little or nothing at all of
excellency in them, being considered in and of themselves; but if they be eyed
with respect to the manutenency of Him who set them to work, they are no wise
base or contemptible; There needs no more but the smart of a silly Insect to
quell and confound the pride of Pharaoh, and extort from him a confession of
the Finger of God, who, that the Power of his Arm, and the greatness of his
infinite Majesty might become the more obvious and acknowledgeable, can at
pleasure serve the interests of his Glory upon the most inglorious means, even
despicable vermin: For this reason our Lord Jesus Christ, that he might humble
and debase the Synagogue, confound and baffle the fondness and arrogance of the
Philosophers, reduce and defeat the Error and Superstition of Paganism, triumph
gloriously over the swelling ambition and vanity of the Emperors, and cause
the whole Earth to bend to the sacred Yock of his Cross; would not make use of
any of those renowned Worldlings, but of poor Fishermen, a Mechanic
Tentmaker, and an ignominious Publican, who yet notwithstanding caught whole
Empires and Kingdoms in their Nets, assembling the whole World under the
Tabernacle of the God of Jacob, and making the most obstinate and rebellious
Tributaries to his Anointed.

And after the same method did he proceed in the restoration of the Gospel,
which he used in the first publication of it; as we have seen above, where we
have noted the mavelous exploits of the chief persons whom he has employed
in his admirable Conquests. Insult therefore no more, but rather confess with
the Psalmist, Psa. 118. 23
This is Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes: Which they also have
proclaimed aloud, having always in imitation of the Apostles said, Acts 3. 12,
and 16.
Such things were not wrought by us, but only in the Name and Authority of our
Lord Jesus Christ; And with the Church in the book of Psalms, Psalm. 115.
Not unto us, Lord, not unto us, but unto thy great Name be rendered all the
honor and glory. With the like facility we answer to the other Objection,
urged from the defect of Miracles: True it is, had those good men taught any
other doctrine than that of the Gospel, in that case it had been requisite that
they should have given some visible testimonies of their Calling; besides that,
according to the Apostles caution, Gal. 18.
he ought to be an Anathema, though he were an Angel from Heaven, whosoever
preaches any other Gospel than what has been already evangelized: He has
likewise taught us, that all those extraordinary gifts which the munificent God
did so liberally distribute, for authorizing of the Truth of Christian Religion
in its infancy, should cease and become antiquated: And our Lord Jesus Christ
has admonished us, that whoever should brag or make ostentation hereof, Matthew.
24.
should be very Teachers of lies, making such a plausible show of the same, as
that they should be able (if it were possible) to deceive the very Elect: And
yet notwithstanding, what more specious or signal ones can any desire, than
their very subsistence amidst the raging persecution of their enemies, when as
they were like unto Moses in Egypt in the hands of Pharaoh's Daughter, yet,
such is the Providence of God, they never failed to meet with their true
Mother, who nourished them upon her chaste and untainted breasts; that is to
say, some sound Teachers who caused them to suck the sincere Milk of the sound
knowledge of God's Word; as the Israelites in the Deserts of Arabia, they did
still feed upon Manna from Heaven, and were furnished with vessels of Gold and
Silver, which they had taken out of the houses of the Egyptians, whereof to
make sacred Vessels and stately Ornaments for the service and beauty of the
Sanctuary: If at any time they have, 1 Kin. 17. 6.
with the Prophet Elijah, by means of a persecuting Jezebel, been constrained
to make a Cave their hiding place, the very Ravens, turning Purveyours, have
furnished them with necessary food. When as they were like the Prophet Daniel
in the Den of Lions, Dan. 6. 22. and 3. 25.
or like his three Fellow-Captives in Babylon, in the fiery Furnace, they have
been in like manner gloriously and miraculously preserved; the Son of God
being, according to his solemn promise made to us in his Gospel, Mat. 18 20
ever present with two or three wherever met together in his Name. Finally,
since they were with a strong hand rescued out of that spi^ual captivity; what
has not God done? ^at continues he not still to do, in their ^half? Should
our very Enemies, their ^nds laid upon their breasts, become our ^dges, and do
us right, they should ^ickly acknowledge, that had not THIS ^ORK been OF GOD,
and had not ^r Faith been from Heaven, as not being ^ported by Humane means,
nor, as Ma^metism, maintained by Blood and Cruel^; but, on the contrary, by
exasperated ^d implacable Enemies, persecuted to the ^most; that it had been
long ere now ut^ly subverted and destroyed; which yet, ^ugre a fierce and open
War prosecuted ^ainst it for the space of seven or eight ^ndred years, has
been with no less won^r than renown, sustained and defended; ^e Lord having, in
performance of his so^mn Promises made in his Word, Isa. 54. etc.
never ^t nor forsaken it, being ever present for (...) succor and relief; and
wheresoever ^r way lies, through the Fire, or through ^e Wilderness, Mat. 28. 18
he will be always with us, ^en to the end of the World.

Surcease then your cavilling about the nature of Instrumen^s, and the quality
of ^ose who speak and preach to you. True ^deed, Genesis 2. 7.
they are formed of earth and clay, but God has gifted and inspired the^ with
the breath of a divine and heaven^ly life: Ezekiel. 37. etc.
They be the dry Bones in the Pro^phets Vision, which when by the Spirit o^ God
miraculously quickened, did in fin^ cover the whole Earth: God has cut an^
polished them after the manner of Gold Diamonds and Pearl, and exposed them t^
open view: In case the Sun of Righteous^ness should in order to the more
accurat^ elaboration of this same Gold, find it fu^^ther expedient to pass it
through the fu^^nace, this were to put a higher and more considerable value
upon it: should he in order to the polishing of them Di^^mond-like, fasten them
to the wheel (...) affliction; his end herein likewise were to put a more
sparkling luster upon the^ and through the several forms engrave^ upon them by
his Spirit, to render the^ a thousand times more bright and refu^^gent.
Finally, those magnificent Pear^ of the Orient from on high (...). Luke. 1. 27.
wherein (...) neither spot nor wrinkle, are nowhere (...) be found but in the
Ocean and bottom (...) the deep Sea of adversity and temptation whereof God who
has whitened them (...) the blood of his Son, has made a good Chain, which he
vouchsafes to fasten upon the Breasts of his Compassion, or to wear as a noble
Bracelet upon the Arm of his Mercies, and that he may crown all those Graces,
Psalm. 56. 8.
likeas (as he assures us) he botleth our tears, he carefully reposeth and
locketh up all those rich Pearls of price in his own Treasury.

Wherefore we can never enough lament the occecation and blindness of men, who
not knowing the time of their visitation, have loved the darkness of Error
rather than the light of Truth, which has with such a mavelous efficacy
shone out toward those who were in darkness and in the region of the shadow of
death, that after the dawning of those blessed days of Reformation, until
which those poor souls were so miserably entangled through vain Philosophy and
the Rudiments of the world, Col. 2. 8.
which were not after Christ, that with them Aristotle was in a manner more
esteemed of than an Apostle; that after (I say) that admirable change the
sacred Volume of the Word of God, which was to them before a Book sealed with
seven seals, and hard to be understood, did through the several Translations of
the same into the most part of the vulgar Languages of Europe, become general
and common, It was in like manner after the same time that the Exposition of
Divine Books was re-established in the Church instead of fabulous Legends,
which were formerly the ordinary subject of their Sermons: Nor had they come
this length, but upon design to supplant the simple, and through the shame and
reproach which they sustained to see that we make that sacred Word the very
foundation and subject matter of our Doctrine and Exhortations, but that which
they have ever offered and still offer such violence unto, as that, so little
inquisitive are they after the establishment of the Truth therein contained,
their main care and business is to defend and maintain their Errors. And upon
this very account do they traduce and misapply the Writings of the Ancient
Doctors of the Church, which being humane, and consequently fallible, can never
serve for a Rule or Judge in matters of Religion, insomuch that even they
themselves refer us to the sacred Canon of Divine Scriptures; But failing of
their reckoning, as touching the Writings of the Fathers, as well as the Word of
God, and perceiving that all solid Antiquity does deposite and testify in our
favors, as we have showed above, they suppress and stifle the most goodly and
precious Monuments, and the Originals of rich pieces of Christian Antiquity, or
else mangle, change, and miserably deface them wherever their own Cause is
discountenanced; and, fearing lest that refuge might also fail them, their
Doctors have, in pursuance of an Order of the Council of Trent, framed
Expurgatory Indices, conformably whereunto they exhibit to us the Writings of
the Fathers: and not contented to pay us in clipped money, they also force upon
us false and naughty allay, obtruding many spurious pieces for the product of
Antiquity, or of some of the Fathers, which yet were never theirs; as may
easily appear, if we compare the Counterfeit with the true Coin; which is no
other than what the more soberlearned of the Romish Communion themselves have
been always constrained to confess; Nevertheless we doubt not but that we
shall still find, even in those mutilous forms, matter enough for satisfying of
them, and for subverting and destroying of Error by its own weapons: Who then
will not judge from hence of the goodness and equity of our Cause? who can
infer the naughtiness or desperacy of that of our party, against whom they
having commenced so criminal a process, would yet notwithstanding, be Judges in
their own fact; and refusing to understand our defenses, traduce us as guilty,
and accordingly condemn us in the force and form (as the saying is) of a
proscription of sackage; And (that we may the better characterize that
precipitant spirit by which they are acted) perceiving that all Right and
Reason failed them, they for supply of that defect, betook themselves to
Menaces, Violence, Torments, cruel Punishments, Perjuries, Massacres, etc. yea,
there is no manner of Artifice or Stratagem imaginable, which they have not
employed, and which they do not still employ, through the sanguinary Consults
of their Congregation A society of the choicest and most exquisit Heads both
for natural and artificial parts, in a College in Rome, called Il Colleggio di
propaganda la Feed; whose constant business and occupation is to consult and
contrive the Propagation of the Romish Faith, and that by all means and methods
imaginable, whether of Policy or Cruelty, or both, the Serpent and the Dragon
jointly, and Draco-like to enact sanguinary and bloody Laws, Constitutions and
Decrees thereunto relating, executed by their active Emissaries (who are moved
by them, as so many Poppets, by an invisible hand) their proselyting Seminary
Priests and Jesuits; their Impostours and workers of Mock-Miracles, those
lying Wonders, the Charracteristick of the Romish Church; their mercenary
Instruments employed in massacres, and all mischiefs, perpetrated by Fire or
Sword, or otherwise, and the like: And whether or not, the City of London, that
famous Metropolis of the Protestant World, was in its late and (almost
unparalled) Conflagration ( Anno 1666, Men's. September.) consumed by a Coal
from their Altar, must needs by all that are impartially concerned in either
Interests of Great Britain (Sacred or Civil) be reckoned an Enquiry worthy of
an English Parliament.
of the Propagatours of the Faith, in order to the utter perverting or
subverting of the Truth by us professed. But they have sufficiently hammered
upon that Anvil, all their tools will undoubtedly split upon it at last; and
God, out of love to his great Name, will render his Truth and the Professors of
the same everlastingly triumphant over all its and their combined enemies. Let
them not allege, that we ought to have continued still in their communion, and
not to have separated from them; since that was a thing which we could not
possibly do, without a mortal wound to our Consciences, in giving to the
Creature, that which is due to the Creator only; and without involving and
embruing of our selves into a thousand Superstitions; Moreover, we never went
away from their communion, till by themselves chased away, through their
persecuting of us with Fire and Sword: It was fairly done of them forsooth,
after just motives of our Retreat and withdrawment, and their cruel and rigid
procedure against us, to turn the same into our reproach: For though after the
Councils of Constance, Basil, and Pisa, a Reformation was judged expedient and
necessary, it being the universal sense of all, That the Church behoved to be
reformed both in head and members; Rome nevertheless ever loath to part with
what she has once got, obstinately maintains not only the Doctrinals, which
were the main ground of our separation; but even the most foppish and
ridiculous appertinants of her Creed and servile Ceremonies; fearing, says
Cardinal Prenestine to Pope Hadrian, lest having confessed her Error and
Deviation in one point, occasion might happily be from thence administered of
examining of the rest, and of resolving the same into a reference or
Com-promise. This is thereason why the Council of Trent instead of redressing
Abuses, See the History of the Council of Trent, done by Soavius Poland, and
the Instructions and Letters concerning the said Council, printed at Paris by
Sebastian Cramoisy, An. 1654. page 1^6
has indeed confirmed them; all being therein carried-on according to the
Popes will and pleasure, who was in that Convention both Judge and Party;
whereupon Monsieur de Lansack, one of the French Ambassadors in that Council,
said very facetiously in a Letter to Monfieur de Lisle Ambassador at Rome,
that the Pope had sent the Holy Ghost from Rome to Trent in a Cloakbag; the
Legates and Council acting or enacting nothing but what he appointed them; and
albeit several Bishops inclined to make some opposition in defense of the
Authority of their Character, yet this proved ineffectual, they having in fine
submitted their necks under the Papal-Yoke. Though all this succeeded very
luckily according to the hearts desire of the Popes of Rome; yet
notwithstanding, from that time forwards they conceived such a disgust and
aversion to Councils, that they never cared more to propound the assembling of
another; fearing lest they might set about that happy Reformation, which (as
has been said) was with such importunity desired, and so absolutely necessary
both in head and members: All that they busied themselves about after that,
was, what yet well became them, the regulating of the Hoods, Hosen and Shoes
of Monks, the number of whom, instead of reducing, they contrariwise augmented
under the Badges of their Saints, Francis, Dominicus, Ignatius Loyola, and some
other modern ones; insomuch that the whole, far from reforming misusages,
tended only to foment Scandal in such as were acquainted with true Piety; those
Reverend Fathers having well nigh resolved all the Christian Religion, and
Divine Worship, into the practice of numerous Ceremonies and superstitious
observances, for therein consists all their business; scrupulously annexing
their professed Sanctity to ridiculous Mystical Vestments, and foppish
fantastical gesticulations: and whereas God will be worshipped in Spirit, Joh.
4. 24.
and in Truth, they pretend to satisfy him with (instead of a true) a
superficial, and (instead of a Spiritual) a bodily service, which the Apostle
informs us, profits little. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Howbeit, to be sure they cloak under their counterfeit humility and devotion,
an extreme and indeed unsufferable pride and vanity, as may sufficiently appear
by the continual attempts made upon the Ordinaries, namely Archbishops, Bishops
and Curates, who undergo all imaginable difficulties in stoping the current of
the Seraphicks, and other Regulars, more especially of such as have devoted
themselves to the Sea of Rome, and their General or Superior, by so strict a
vow, that when ever they believe their own Interests to be under debate, they
ought to acknowledge no other person in the world.

May the Lord commiserate his Church, and put it into the hearts of Christian
Kings and Princes to call, as the abovenamed great Emperors, Constantine,
Theodosius, and Charles the Great have done before them, a religious and free
Council, wherein all parties abandoning prejudices and animosities, might in
good earnest give themselves to an enquiry after the Truth in the Word of God,
which should be hearkened to as the only decisive Oracle, whose right it is to
determine all Controversies depending between the Church of Rome and those who
protest against her Doctrine; and that the more obscure passages of the holy
Scripture might be expounded by others more clear, so as that we might attain
to the right understanding of the Scripture by the very Scripture it self, Neh.
8. 8.
according to the practice of the Levits, when they instructed the People of
God after their return from the Babylonish Captivity; that the Ancient Fathers
and Doctors of the Church, and Writers of Ecclesiastical History, by whose
means we might be informed of the various revolutions and interchanges which
have there^n occurred, might be likewise received as a subsidiary help for
satisfaction to the more obstinate and opiniative; and that Kings called of God
unto this great work, might in concurrence with a privy Council consisting of
some of the more Learned and more sober of both parties, prudentially weigh the
validity of Reasons urged, the sincerity of Procedure, and the merit of the
Cause. We should quickly make it to appear, that we have a veneration for
Episcopal Government, and that we are no enemies to order, ornanment, or
decency, nor yet to Ceremonies, provided the whole be reduced to ancient usage,
and there be nothing therein derogatory to that Honor and Religious Worship
which we owe to God only: And as touching the Sacraments, if the Word of God
may be umpire, as without all peradventure it ought to be, we should soon
likewise condescend upon their number; And in conformity to that sacred
directory, Mat. 26. 26. and Mark 14. 22. etc. 1 Cor. 11. 24.
observing our Savior's practice, and that which St. Paul, by virtue of his
Commandment, has enjoined us to do in like manner; we should take the Bread,
we should all drink of the Cup of blessing, in commemoration of the inestimable
Death of our dear Redeemer, whose Flesh and Blood is meat and drink indeed,
whereby we are nourished unto an eternal life. We should know, without further
debate, that this Union is wrought by the mediation of his Spirit, who uniteth
and conjoyneth us to himself, after an ineffable, but a true and real manner;
Ephesians. 3. 17.
Christ dwelling in our hearts by Faith, which is the mouth of our souls, by
which we feed upon him; whereunto the conversion of Bread into Flesh is not at
all necessary, but the Elevation of Faith unto Heaven, its genuine and proper
act; for, as our Lord has taught us, Joh. 6. 63.
it is the Spirit that quickens; the flesh profits nothing: The words that
I speak unto you, they are spirit, and they are life; that is to say, they are
of a spiritual and vivifick virtue, as well in the publication of the Gospel,
as in the participation of the holy Supper, wherein the Bread and the Wine, are
Signs, Gages, and Memorials of that which is therein represented to us, whose
Name they bear, as is usual in all Sacraments; Genesis 17. 10. Exodus 12. 21
as also because they are not only significative, but likewise exhibitive of
the thing signified to the Faithful and worthy Communicant, so as shall be
showed straight. And certainly this same Real-Presence and Participation may be
easily enough conceived, without the necessary admission of a Local and gross
one; for if it must be acknowledged that the Sun, whilst bounded within its
sphere, does yet communicate warinth, life, and nourishment, and that truly,
really, substantially to Vegetables; can any one doubt without Blasphemy, that
the glorious Body of our Lord and Savior, the true Sun of Righteousness, who
carries health and life in his Divine Rays, is furnished with less virtue
than that Globe of fire and light, which himself has enlightened? Or that his
Humane Nature, which he has united personally to his Divinity, cannot by its
means mystically unite it self to our souls, in order to their warmth,
quickening and nourishment, but that his sacred Body must needs first redescend
to us here below, to be prostituted to a thousand indignities, as would
necessarily follow upon that local and gross carnal Presence, which is taught
and professed in the Communion of Rome.

We should not stick to call the sacred Ceremony of the Lord's Supper, a
Sacrifice, but only an Eucharistical or a Gratulatory Sacrifice, there being
none Expiatory, Heb. 9. 25, 26, 27.
other than that which our Lord Jesus offered upon the Cross, as the Apostle in
the Epistle to the Hebrews proves. We should in like manner accord, that none
can ever eat of the Supper of our Lord with too much preparedness, for fear of
profaning so sublime and dreadful a Mystery, to use the notion of the Fathers,
forasmuch as those who approach unworthily, and without a serious examination
of their consciences, that they may know whether they are furnished with Faith,
Repentance, and Charity, which are qualifications prerequired to the worthy
participation of that holy Communion, do, instead of receiving the Gages of
their Salvation, take and receive, in St. Paul's d^alect, their own
Condemnation. In fine, we should make it yet further appear, touching many
other controverted points, that we are not so odious or hateful as we are
represented: But it may suffice to have remarked the more principal ones, from
which one may judge whether there may be place for promising our selves any
reunion between those of the Church of Rome and us, by holding of a Council in
the manner by us propounded, never doubting but that God would crown with his
Blessing, the design of so August and Venerable an Assembly; and that the
Bishops, Doctors, and Ministers of Christ constituting the same, humbling of
themselves in the first place before the Father of Lights, from whom comes
every good and perfect gift, as also every one of us in like manner with
Repentance, Fasting and Tears, thereby with fervency imploring the assistance
of his Holy Spirit, he would infallibly vouchsafe the same unto us; and grant
that the Spirit of Charity, Truth, Peace, and Concord might preside in a most
singular manner in the midst of that Reverend and Pious Council, whose Members
should all of them be like unto the Golden Snuffers of the Tabernacle, Exodus
25. 38
eminent for purity and excellency of qualification, to the end they might be
the more effectually serviceable in their sacred use of ridding away what is
superfluous, and that (great Thief Antichrist) which eclipseth the light and
brightness of the Candle of Truth: That were an happy day indeed, which yet to
us is rather matter of wish and woulding, than fixed hope and expectation;
howbeit there is nothing impossible with God, who has his own times and
seasons, and holds the hearts of all Kings and People of the earth, in his own
hand. Ephesians. 3. 20, 21.
Now unto Him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or
think, according to the power that works effectually in us; Unto him be glory
in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages, World without

END.
A Summary of those Ceremonies whose Original is reported in this History,
according to the respective order of Time wherein they had their Rise.
Anno 110, etc.
THE Original of the Custom of carrying Offerings into the Church. Why the
Eucharist was called a Sacrifice. The mixture of Water with Wine in the Supper.
The Custom of carrying the Eucharist to such as were not able to present
themselves in the Assemblies. The Kiss of Peace. Fasting upon Friday: and the
Original of the Quadragesimal time, or Lent.

Anno 160. etc.
The rise of the Custom of celebrating the Memorials of Saints, the Days of
their Nativity, and of assembling in Cemeteteries. Of the Confession and
Satisfaction used in the primitive Church.

Anno 195.
Of the Controversy commenced about the Feast of Easter Day: The first
Juridical attempt of the Bishop of Rome.

Anno 200. etc.
Novel Ceremonies not practiced at this day. Unction received into Baptism. The
custom of offering in Commemoration of Saints. The manner how Offering for the
Dead took its beginning. The original of praying for the Dead. The reason why
Christians first used the sign of the Cross. Of the Indulgences of the
primitive Church. How Martyrs interceded with the Church in the behalf of
Penitents.

Anno 240. etc.
Preludes to the Intercession of Saints. Why public Confession was changed
into particular; the rise of Penitentiaries. What the Profession of Virgins
was. Whence the use of dipped Bread in the Eucharist proceeded.

Anno 300. etc.
Why the Table was called an Altar. Why they began to transport the Corpses of
Martyrs from one place to another. The Dedication of Temples. The structure of
the Temple of the holy Sepulcher. Why Pilgrimages into the Holy Land were
undertaken. The invention of the Cross. The reason of erecting and painting of
Crosses. Whence the Vigils of Festivals, and the use of Tapers in the Churches,
proceeded. The original of a Monastic Life.

Anuo 320.
The manner how Rules of Abstinence, and Laws touching Fasting, entered the
Church.

Anno 321.
The first Institution of Patriarchs: A Decree concerning Easter-Feasts.
Controversies about, and the Commencement of Celibacy.

Anno 350, etc.
Apostrophees directed to Saints. Pilgrimages undertaken to the Sepulchers of
Martyrs.

Anno 380.
The progress of Prayers for the Dead, and in what sense they were conceived.
In what manner and quality Images were received into Temples.

Anno 386.
The Celibacy of Ecclesiastical persons ratified by Decree.

Anno 400.
The Rise of the Vigils of the Dead; Whence the use of Chanting, and Wax
Candles at Burials, proceeded. Formalities observed in the reception of
Penitents. Crosses introduced into Temples. The manner of the Church her
proceedure toward Demoniacks. The first conjectures about Purgatory among
Christians.

Anno 450. etc.
Christian Liberty oppressed by reason of Fasts. The Institution of the Fasts
of the Four Times, and of the Rogations. Vigils of Saints converted into Fasts.

Anno 470. etc.
The Invocation of Saints by whom first of all introduced into the Church.

Anno 490.
The attempt of some Heretics affecting to reject the Cup in the Sacrament of
the Eucharist.

Anno 500. etc.
The original of worshipping of Images amongst the Vulgar.

Anno 528.
Extreme Unction, by whom instituted.

Anno 535.
Processions, by whom ordained.

Anno 536.
Whence it came to pass that Altars were placed in the East. The institution
of the Feast of Candlemass.

Anno 600. etc.
The Invocation of Saints introduced into the Latin Church. Statues erected in
Temples. The progress of the belief of Purgatory. The Eucharist converted into
a Sacrifice for the Dead. The Canon of the Mass by whom composed. The
Mass-Song. The Unction and Original of Priestly Vestments. Perfumes, and the
Relics of Saints in the Consecration of Temples. Tapers lighted in
broad-day-light. The Rise of the Service in the Latine-Tongue.

Anno 605.
The manner how the Bishop of Rome obtained the title of Universal.

Anno 690.
The time wherein the use of Crucifixes began.

Anno 700. etc.
The original of private Masses. Whence it came to pass that the Priest uses a
low voice in Consecration.

Anno 780.
The Original of the Kiss of Peace.

Anno 790.
The Adoration of Images ratified by Decree.

Anno 880.
(...) of the Canonization of Sa^^*

Anno 965.
The (...) Author of the Baptization of Bells.

Anno 1000.
The form of the Consecration of Temples. The time when Priests were authorized
to offer Sacrifice.

Anno 1003.
The Institution of the Feast of All Souls.

Anno 1050. etc.
The Original of the belief of carnal manducation of Christ's Body.

Anno 1055.
The Original of redeeming of Penances. The Extent of Indulgences, even to
Purgatory. The Rise of the Ceremony of Ash Wednesday.

Anno 1090.
The Institution of Saturnday-Mass, in honor of the Virgin- Mary.

Anno 1160.
Canonization of Saints, by whom decreed.

Anno 1212.
The establishment of Transubstantiation; and original of Pixes.

Anno 1220. and 1230.
The adoration of the Hostie, and of the sound of the Bell. The invention of
Chaplets or Pater-nosters.

Anno 1245.
Of the Red Hats, and Scarlet Cloaks, worn by the Cardinals.

Anno 1250.
The manner how the Laics were at first deprived of the Cup.

Anno 1260.
The institution of the Feast of God.

Anno 1300.
The Institution of the year of Jubilee.

Anno 1360.
The manner how they began to walk and carry the Hostie in Procession.

Anno 1366.
Whence it came to pass that the Pope does every year consecrate a Rose of Gold.

Anno 1414.
The deprivation of the Cup authorized by Decree.

Anno 1458.
The sound of the Bell at the hour of midday; and the reason of that
observance.

Anno 1470.
The Rosairy of the Virgin Mary, by whom invented.

FINIS.

