PALINODIA.

Sive Fama Vapulans: Occasioned by her Retractation of her precipitate censure
of Mrs ANNE GIBBS,

By her real Convert and Re-admirer, R. W.

An. Mar. a Schur. in Apol. Nec viclasse tuas leges Astraea putabor;
Quippe suum tribui cuilibet ipsae jubes.
Let me not seem, Astraea, to dethrone
Thy Laws, thou bid'st that all should have their own.
Printed, Anno Virginis parturientis, 1662.

Ex spelunca Juxta tumescentis Laugherni ripas 9bris 26, 1662.
Fama Vapulans.
PROTASIS, Ad Musam.
PIsh, prithee sleep, my Muse, do not molest
The Thespian Vestalls, let them take their rest.
Alas! this purblind world will never see,
Do what thou can, their own stupidity:
Perhaps some civilized men may daign
To look upon this issue of thy brain
With candor, but the vulgar are a rude,
Malignant, headstrong, hare-brain'd multitude.
A Carnaval to them presents more sport
Then the elaborate Opera's of the Court;
And in their Dances they had rather follow
Pan's rustic reeds, then th'harp of god Apollo.
Well, if thou will not, I can say no more,
Then let thy Sonnets rant, thy Satyrs rore.
Belch Io-paeans on this ponderous theme,
And thunder execrations against them.
I Have spoke to Sabrine, and she will inspire,
And let her Nymphs bring fuel to, thy fire:
That 'spite of all opponents every page
May be replete with true poetic rage,
And swell with holy fury against all those
That dare the chaste Panaletha oppose.
EPITASIS.
REcta in curiam, we here present
LVCRETIA adjudg'd incontinent
By a pretended court proclaimed of late
In Fame's great name, which we seek to abate.
In that Tribunal it was showed how she
Had forfeited her claim to chastity.
The reason urged was this. How else could those,
For she had Camrades you must know, expose
Themselves upon a Stage, or to the life
Personate Annabell', or Harebrain's wife?
But see the fallacy, my Author vows
A man may act those things he never knows.
Think you that none can persenate a sin
But that which he himself has wallowed in?
You may as well aver Players are made
Apprentices to every manual Trade.
Or, 'cause you know they act and speak such things
That appertain to Princes, say they are Kings.
Al^ss poor Dramaticks, striving to shun
One gulf, ye full into another run.
Histrio-mastix carp'd at ye because
He thought your men before broke Natur's Laws
In using Women's clothes, but Cynthius aurem
Vellit, and we have got a Quiescas for him.
Yet now that they perform their parts themselves,
Your Scenes are threatend by as dangerous shelves.
The cursed Hydra Mome assaults their names,
Mistaking what is their glory for their shames:
They Are impudent Sluts cries one, for otherwise
How could they thus surfeit Spectators eyes
With their lascivious gestures? 'nother swears
If they be honest he will forfeit's ears.
Nay Lais too will say, as I hear tell,
Can they be chaste? it is impossible.
Thinking perhaps that she, although she can
Within her chamber boldly treat a man,
Yet could not on a Theater obtrude
Her confidence before a multitude.
And therefore by her Logic does infer
They needs must be as errand Whores as her.
So Clodius Maechos too, but wise men know
They Are never the more honest for pretending so.
If seeming sanctity be all thou have
Whereby to judge these Sodom Apples chaste,
Those that have found some rotten at the core,
May well conclude each woman is a whore.
Reader, we have been defendant hitherto,
But now we mean to speak as Plaintiff too.
CATASTASIS.
PEace shameless Trumpetress, do not delude
With Phantasms the too credulous multitude.
Silence thy brazen Trumpet, that no further
It calumnize the innocent Recorder.
Recant those false Alarms of thy rude blast
Which have the fair LUCRETIA's shrine defaced.
Let Albion that rich Caskanet inhance.
And not reject it out of ignorance.
Let not Exoticks, who already do
For Horses, 'count her the Hell for actors too.
Oh how can she, whose face long since confuted
The Divine Heathen's Artifices Scenici qui imitantur affectus etc. hoc Jndicio
imitantur verecundiam, Dejiciunt vultum, verba submittunt, etc. Ruborem sibi
exprimere non pessunt. Sen. ad Luc. Ep. 11.
maxim, be reputed
Unchaste? when it is the first Lucretia's glory
That we by this do now believe her Story.
When had it not been sensibly to us
Demonstrated, 't had still seemed fabulous.
Who saw those rosy blushes that did deck
The intervals of her inamell'd cheek
At sight of Sextus, or the complacency
Wherewith she acted her self-butchery?
But would conclude she his vile act abhorred
As much in deed as most do now in word.
Who saw with what reluctance and disgust
She yielded but in show to Brothwel's lust.
But must assert her chastity, or swear
There is not one deserves a St^la here.
CATASTROPHE.
ANd now thou swift'st of Fama malum quo non aliud velocius ullum,
Mebilitate viget, viresque acquirit eundo.
Virg. Aen. 4.
evils which do gain
By motion strength, in flying force obtain;
Say not my Muse was secretly suborned
I Would have thee know such offices she scorned
Quite from her infancy, and does detest
To plead for prejudice or interest.
'Twas love to Truth which made me to incur
The vulgar hate, which overruled her.
'Would Pantemimick Teletes had lived
In these depraved times, how'd he have grieved
And wrung his hands, to see his Art abused
And his beloved Pupil's name misused.
It Is not that Dionysia, whose fame
Long since gave great Who for his action was called Gesticulatoriam Dionysiam,
from a she Chironomer of that name.
Hortensius his name;
She joins not Esau's hands to Jacob's voice,
Nor does she perpetrate the sinallest vice
Against his hand-law, but won the Palm in spite
Of famous Roscius Delicias suas, so he used to call him.
Cicero's delight.
Who, had he lived until this last worst age
Had lacked a Patron to repel the rage
Of the Rabble; Tully would have changed his cause,
And rescued chaste LVCRETIA from the jaws
Of envious obloquy, making each one
Lay's hand on's mouth and act Sigalion.
But why do I expatiate abroad?
'Twas meant for an Abridgement, not a Code.
May thou inherit base Cassandra's fate,
As the demerit of thy vilder hate.
Thereby supporting her now totterring State,
Whom many envy, few can emulate.
FINIS
LUCRETIAE SACRUM.
Auctariolum.
Anne Gibbs nagrammatiks. Sing Ben-ab
Your pardon, Fairest, that, into the quire
Of your Adorers, my discordant Lyre
Has thus far ventured, stricken to the same
By the Cabalistick accents of your name.
To which she thought her self obliged in duty
For to submit as vassal of your beauty.
And by her President Each Fathers Son,
She hopes, will modul forth an Unison.
That to your glory this versatile round
May still with Echoed Diapasons sound.
Votivum.
Mrisay all those Constellations, we allow
A happy geniture, still smile on you,
Never let ought Malignant once molest
Natures Aenigma lodging such a guest.
Excel in power as goodness, to defend you,
Good and propitious Stars always attend you.
Intrinsic and externe formositie
Beatify your Gordian nuptial tie.
But when the Fates conclude that you must die,
Survive in bliss to all Eternity.
Cui non datur.
FINIS

