A PINDARIQUE To Their Sacred Majesty's, JAMES II. And His Royal Consort Queen
MARY, On Their joint CORONATIONS At Westminster, April 23. 1685.

By JOHN WILSON.

-- Sine vindice tuti.

LONDON: Printed for Joseph Knight, and Francis Saunders, at the Blew Anchor in
the lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1685.

To Their Sacred MAJESTY'S The King and Queen, On Their Joint CORONATIONS, etc.
I.
WHile, That First-matter (whatsoever it was)
That Fluid Infinite,
Lay, yet inseparate,
Naught could be said to Be, but a void Mass,
Or indigested Lump, without a Soul:
Only, a dull, dead, heavy Night,
Or a worse Darkness sat
Sat Brooding on the Whole:
But when the Mighty Fiat past,
The unwieldy Chaos broke;
Each 'tangled Element was winged with Have,
Fought out its way, and to its Center took;
The Sun appeared; The Earth, Shot-forth,
An Universal Monarch bore the Sway;
Glory on High, and Peace on Earth,
Was the great Song; until her Gyant-brood,
Disturbed That Heavenly Lay;
And, Topsy-turvy'ing every thing, Embrew'd,
Their harmless Mother, with Seditious Blood.
II.
Such was our Case at home: This, England's, She,
(To pass the rest) that from an Heptarchy,
Weathered so many Centuries;
Nor knew more Lords than One,
Yet spread her Branches to the Ocean;
How was She Rackt, with Fears, and Jealousies?
Her Beauty, and her Bands, how gone?
Her Order Lost; Her Seamless Coat,
Torn into Rags: What cannot a Faction Vote!
One might have Sought, and sought (too true)
Her, in her self, yet mist her too,
She was so smeared with blood:
While all along, The stupid Crowd,
Snarle at the Stone, but kiss the Hand, that threw:
'Til moyl'd, and tired they stood; and then,
Consid'ring What they would done;
Soon as the Scales fell from their Eyes,
Came up to the lost Paths again,
Adored the Majesty they had slain;
Marked out some Heads for Sacrifice,
And with united Echoes, Rent the Skies.
III.
And now, your Royal Brother once restored,
Who was not Instrumental in it?
One might have found, Ten honest Men,
Before one factious Lord:
Where was That He, that did not give the Hint?
Treason! and Traitor! Bless us! What
Means the harsh Phrase, to Men regenerate?
So Smooth, and Slick, was every Face again:
The People Shout! The Houses vie
Who shall Do most: All all is the Cry!
Yet He, Out-did 'em: 'twas but Ask, and Have;
So glad He was, not to Destroy, but Save.
Thus Basking in his Beams they lay,
Till Fat, and Wanton with their Ease,
They must Rise-up to Play;
Their Nourishment, turned to Disease;
They lift the Heel, Snuff up the Wind, and Bray:
And as we see a Swelling Sea,
Keep Rolling, tho the Storm be spent;
Having no more to Wish to Be,
They must be now, Secure, or Insolent:
Your Happy Brother Found, and Broke the Clew;
To keep it Such, was left (Great SIR) to You.
IV.
You, You in whom, Your Royal Ancestors
Tho Dead, yet Speak, and Live anew;
Their mighty Deeds, break-forth in You,
And their forgotten Urnes, bear Flowers.
Nor do You raise the Dead, alone,
But in the Living, Emulation;
So that Who'd Speak it right, must Call
You, Coeur de Lion, An Original,
At least, the united Excellence of All,
Did not the Royal Harrys claim a Share;
(The Seventh of England, and the Fourth of France)
They never said Go, but Let us on;
So Caesar, past the Rubicon:
Full well They knew, Subjects delight,
To have a King, Will See 'em fight:
Nor Rashly yet: Nature's advance,
Is not by Leaps, but Steps: And such too, are,
Yours; (Royal SIR') Their Crowns, and Virtues Heir.
But I Am too blame -- Who beats on Ages past,
Hunts a foiled Chase: Be what they will,
You have Performed so much, this Last,
The Next, must set You' for Example still.
V.
Which of 'em All, more Glorious Hazards ran?
With greater Conduct, or with less Concern?
Such, That the Best, might from You Learn,
To be A General, or A Private Man.
Flanders did Feel, and France Confess,
Your Early Arms, when from Your blooming Youth,
Turein made Judgment of Your future Growth:
Thus Hercules,
Gave the Essay,
What He would prove another day:
And beardless Alexander, put to rout
The World, ere Caesar thought, of setting-out.
Nor has the Omen failed (Great SIR) in You:
You returned safe, and Fraught with Laurels too:
They Like the Soil; Root, and become,
A Safeguard, to Your Oak at home,
Let her between 'em grow,
And with her humble Sprigs, adorn Your Brow,
For, that she spreds anew, is all Your Own;
Fortune, has nothing in it; She,
Finds only Matter, to us; We,
We give it Form, and Her, her Deity.
VI.
Nor has the thrice-asserted British Main,
Less owned You, when as often in-vain,
The Dutch disputed the Dominion,
Your Arms o'rer-ul'd the Plea;
They Dread your Flag, and at Your Thunder, Flee:
Fain would The Watery God have saved his own;
And in disorder -- Thus -- We Will meet alone:
He Watched his time, and had it; Threw a Shelf,
And sunk Your Ship; But, seeing You afloat,
He now, feared for himself,
And in confusion, fled Your single Boat.
What shall I add? The Lion of the North,
Had half brok-loose again;
But at Your very setting-forth,
He Trembled; and on sight, came-in;
Came-in, and Couched; Rouse him, Who ever he be,
H'as led the Peaceful way, to the other Three:
Nor was it strange; Falcons Pursue
The rankest Wing; The same did You;
Whose generous Sword, did never vie
A Triumph, but a Victory;
Nor made more use of That, than to forgive;
You Quelled the Stubborn, bad the Humble, Live.
And now, Possess us All: Tho yet,
Do what we can, we must be still Ingrate.
VII.
But, I Am deceived, or We Are already such;
'Twas Rome's, and Athens Best Men's Fate,
To have deserved too much:
Your Royal Father's, only fault:
And if to have pursued the noblest ends;
Firm to Your Word, and Constant to Your Friends;
T'ave minded Other's safety, not Your Own,
Nor to be Dazzled with A Crown,
Be, to be Crim'nal (SIR) You're Guilty too:
Or, if repeated Injuries, may bear
The name of Gratitude, You, had Your Share;
But Your Stanch Virtue, brought You through.
Thus, as one Good, begets another Good,
Your Resolution, gave You Fortitude,
And made You More than Conqueror:
You gave the Torrent way; Withdrew,
And ( Parthian-like) by wheeling, You subdue:
At least, so Broke the Faction, Every one
Has washed his Hands of Your Exclusion:
We'are All one Mothers Sons; All join,
In this Great Days Solemnities:
Not that a Coronation adds more
To You, (in all respects, Full-King before;)
Than to the Intrinsic value of Your Coin,
The Stamp, which carries, only This,
That it declares, What, and Whose Image it is.
VIII.
But stay -- What Is here! -- Another Star at Noon!
One? -- it is A Constellation!
You, no less Gracious, than Royal Queen!
The Abstract of whatever Good has been,
Nor That, by Art, but Inclination:
In whom, no single This, or That,
But Every Grace, and Virtue meet;
So fully too, that we may guess,
What the First Woman in Perfection, was:
To these, That Beauty, That variety,
Multitude, Mixture, Correspondency,
That Free, yet Awful Majesty;
You might be taken for A Kind, alone;
And would, but that You 'owe's A Son;
You Have One, We wait, Another James the Great;
And Modena, famed for Heroic Men,
Assures us, You Will not miss the Strein:
Let him (if possible) be Greater yet:
Let him -- I go too far -- The Rest, I Will guess;
But had gone further, were my Reverence less.
IX.
How Happy are Ye then, most Royal Pair,
You, in A Queen; She, in Her Partener;
And All Good Subjects, in their Humble share!
Let Others Now, Plot; Let Them Raise
Their Old, or New Utopias;
Let Them Cajole, Coax, Fucus, Cant,
Their Beldam Pus, The Covenant:
Let Them swear On, and Off; nay, till it be,
That Others, Yawn for company:
Let Them Doubt, Whisper, Murmur; Form,
Those hollow Blasts, into a Storm:
Your Virtue is impenetrable Mail;
And Great is Truth, and will prevail;
When They, like Arrows, Shot against a Wall;
Or Ruins, Break themselves, on What, they fall.
Thus Seated, on That Rock of Truth,
While Clouds, and Storms, gather Below,
It Is All Serene, Above: Loose Winds, may blow;
Impostumated Billows, rise;
And Hurricanes, threaten the Skies;
But in Despite, of their spent Froth,
Your Station is secure: You bear aloof,
And wrapped in Your own Laurel, Thunder proof.
X.
Hark! Hark (Most Mighty SIR') The General Shout,
Shows, the Heart's willing, And the Tongue, speaks out!
All honest Men would have You so,
Safe in Your Self, and in Your Subjects too;
Dreaded Abroad; at Home, loved, and revered;
Without a Noisy, Resty Herd,
But such, as Represent, not Personate;
Such, as Design You, Truly Great;
And studying to Salve, not Move Debate,
Shall still Assert You (What You are)
The single Arbiter, of Peace, and War:
And make Your Foes Confess, Tho the Sun Warms
At Liberty, Contract it once, it Burns.
FINIS.

