personification of Music, playing a lute MUSIC.
Although the Cannon, and the Churlish Drum
Have struck the Quire mute, and the Organs Dumb:
Yet Musicks Art with Air and String, and Voice
Makes glad the Sad, and Sorrow to Rejoice.


SELECT AIRS AND DIALOGUES For One, Two, and Three Voices; TO THE THEORBO-LVTE
or BASSE-VIOL.

John Wilson Charles Colman
Doctors in Music. Henry Laws William Laws Nicholas Laneare William Webb
Gentlemen and Servants to his late Majesty in his Public and Private Music.
And other Excellent Masters of Music.
LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid for John Playford, and to be sold at his Shop in
the Inner Temple, near the Church door. 1659.

TO ALL LOVERS OF VOCAL MUSIC.
GENTLEMEN,
THis Book has found such general welcome, that the Impression is all bought
off, and I am called upon for more; which has caused me to Reprint it, but
with very large Additions: I have not given you all my store, but with good
Advice Selected only such Airs and Dialogues as are known to be Excellent, as
well as now most in Request; and those so familiar and easy, as are useful to
the Teacher, and commodious for the Scholar, especially such as live Remote
from London. The Music is of Three Varieties, and is therefore printed
destinct: First, those for One Voice, next for Two, and then those for Three:
The whole contains One hundred twenty four choice Songs, and all (except very
few) of late Compositions, In the setting forth of which, my care, pains, and
charge has not been small, by procuring true and exact Coppies, and daily
attending the oversight of the Press, as no prejudice might redound either to
the Authors or Buyers: And herein I resolve to meet with those Mistakers, who
have taken up a new (but very fond) opinion, That Music cannot as truly be
Printed as Pricked, (and which is more ridiculous) that no Choice Airs or
Songs are permitted by Authors to come in print, though it is well known that
the best Musical Compositions, either of our own or Strangers, have been and
are tendered to the World by the Printers hand; To convince the former, an to
testify my Gratitude to those Excellent Masters, from whose own hands I
received most of these Compositions; do I say thus much, that this my present
Endevor and care in the true and exact publishing this Book will redound to
Public Benefit, and the Authors Reputation, as well as my own Advantage;
which may give yet further Encouragement to

A Faithful Servant to all Lovers of Music, JOHN PLAYFORD.

An Alphabetical TABLE of the AIRS and DIALOGUES in this Book.
A
ABout the sweet bag of a Be 3 As I walked forth one Summers day 13 Amor merere
ched' amor merere 15 Amidst the Mirtles as I walked 19 A Willow Garland thou
did send 19 A Lover once I did espy 25 Ambitious Love farewell 32 Ask me why
I send you here 50
B
Bring back my Comfort 6 Bid me but live, and I will live 30 Bright Aurelia I
do owe 30 By all the Glories willingly I go 45 Beauty and Love once fell at
odds 55 Brightest, since your pitying eye 64
C
Come Lovers all to me 2 Catch me a Star that is falling 11 Come noble Nymphs do
not hide 14 Come from the Dungeon to the Throne 26 Come my Sweet while every
strain 26 Come Cloris leave thy wandering 31 Change Platonicks, change for shame
34 Come Adonis come away 37 Come lovely Phillis since it thy will is 51 Cloris
farewell I now must go 51 Cloris false love made Clora weep 52 Come O come, I
brook no stay 55 Conbelse gella de cretezza 67
D
Dear leave thy home and come 23 Do see how unregarded now 63
F
Fuggi Fuggi da lieti amanti 15 Fain would I Cloris ere I die 39 Fain would
Cloris whom my heart 47 Faith be no longer coy 56 From hunger and cold 64
G
Go and bestride the southern wind 44 Go little winged Archer and convey 50
H
He that will love must be my Scholar 8 He that loves a Rosy cheek 23 How long
shall I a Martyr be 40 How cool and temperate am I grown 42 How am I changed
from what I was 58 How happy ar't thou and I 58
I
In vain fair Cloris you design 9 If the quick spirit of your eye 18 I love
thee for thy sicklenesse 22 I do confess thou art smooth and fair 24 I prithee
turn that face away 29 I can love for an hour 37 I am confirmd a woman can 38
In faith I cannot keep my sheep 42 I wish no more thou should love me 48 I
love a Lass but cannot show it 55 I will not trust thy tempting Graces 56
L
Like Hermit poor in pensive place 1 Love I must tell thee I Will no longer 12
Ladies you that seem so nice and cold 20 Let longing Lovers sit and pine 21
Ladies fly from Loves smooth Tales 31 Lay that sullen Garland by thee 33 Little
love serves my turn 35 Let not thy Beuty make thee proud 54
M
Mistake me not, I am as cold as hot 10 Man's life is but vain, for it is 62
N
No more blind Boy, for see my heart 7 No, no, Fair Heretic 46 No, no, I never
was in love 65
O
Of thee kind Boy I ask no Red or White 43
P
Phyllis why should we delay 17
S
She that that loves me for my self 2 Stay, stay, O stay, that heart I vow 5
See see, how careless men are grown of late 36 Silly heart forbear, those are
murdering eyes 57 Since love has in thine and mine eye 59
T
Take, O take those lips away 1 It Is not in the power for all thy scorn 10 Thou
art not fair for all thy Red 16 Take heed fair Cloris how you tame 21 Tell me
not I my time mispend 22 To love thee without flattery 28 Tell me ye wandering
Spirits of the Air 41 Tell not I die, or that I live by thee 49 Tell me no more
her eyes are like 57 It Is wine that inspires 65
V
Victorious Beauty though your eyes 20 Victoria, Victoria il micorae 66
W
Wake my Adonis, do not dye 4 Why dearest should you weep 6 Why should thou
swear I am forsworn 16 Whilst I listen to thy voice Cloris 25 Were thou yet
fairer then thou art 27 What means this strangeness now of late 48 When Caelia
I intend to flatter you 58
The TABLE of the Second Part of this Book, being Dialogues for Two Voices.
I Prithee keep my Sheep for me A Dialogue between Phyllis and Clorillo by M.
Lanear 68 Dear Sylvia let thy Thirsis know A Dialogue between Sylvia and
Thirsis 70 Did you not once Lucinda vow A Dialogue between a Shepherd and
Lucinda by D. Colman 72 Come my Daphne come away A Dialogue between Daphne and
Strephon 74 Forbear fond Swain I cannot love A Dialogue between a Shepherd and
Shepherdess 75 Tell me Shepherd do thou love A Dialogue between a Shepherd
and a Nymph 77 Shepherd in faith I cannot stay A Dialogue between Strephon and
Phyllis 78 Vulcan, O Vulcan my Love A Dialogue between Venus and Vulcan 79
Charon, o Gentle Charon A Dialogue between Charon and Philomel 80 Thirsis kind
Swain come near A Dialogue between Thirsis and Damon 82
A TABLE of the GLEES and Songs for Two Voices.
TO Bacchus we to Bacchus sing 84 Bring out the cold Chine 86 He that a Tinker,
a Tinker will be 88 Fly Boys, fly Boy to the Cellars bottom 90 See, see the
Bright Light shine 110 Turn Amarillis to thy Swain 112
The TABLE of the Third Part of this Book, being Songs or Ballads for Three
Voices.
I Wish no more thou should love me 91 Though I am young and cannot tell 92
Come Cloris hie we to the Bowers 93 When Troy Town for ten years 94 From the
fair Lavinian shore 95 Where the Bees suck there suck I 96 When love with
unconfined wings 97 Do not fear to put thy feet 98 In the merry Month of May 99
O my Clarissa thou cruel fair 100 Gather your Rose Buds 101 Fear not Dear Love
that I reveal 102 Fine young Folly though you were 103 Sing fair Clorinda
whilst you may 104 Smiths are good fellows 106 Music thou Queen of souls 108
Now we are met lets merry be 114
ADVERTISEMENT.
Courteous Sirs,
Because I mean to deal very openly, and cover nothing (though never so small)
I must beg the Buyer to take notice that the Folia from 52 to 62 are mistaken
by the Printer; As for other Errata's in the Music (whereof all Books have
some) they are so very few, small and inconsiderable, that I hope I shall need
only to crave the Judicious to mend with their Pen.

A Catalogue of MUSIC Books sold by John Playford at his Shop in the Temple.
Books for Vocal MUSIC.
1. Mr. Wilby's Madrigals of 3, 4, 5 and 6 Voices. 2. Orlando Gibon's 5 Parts
for Viols and Voices. 3. Dr. Champian's Airs for 1, 2, or 3 Voices. 4. Mr.
Walter Porter's first set of Airs and Mardrigals for 2, 3, 4, and 5 Voices,
with a Through Bass; for the Organ or Theorbo Lute, the Italian way: Printed
1639. 5. Mr. Walter Porter's second Set of Psalms or Anthems for two voices to
the Organ or Theorbo-Lute: Printed 1657. 6. Mr. William Child (late Organist of
his Majesty's Chapel at Windsor) his Psalms for three voices, after the
Italian way, to be sung to the Organ, the which are Engraven on Copper plates:
Printed 1656. 7. Select Airs and Dialogues by Dr. Wilson, Dr. Colman, Mr.
Henry Laws, and others: Reprinted witth large Additions 1659. 8. Airs and
Dialogues set forth by Mr. H. Laws, viz. his First Book fol. Printed 1653.
Second Book fol. Printed 1655. Third Book fol. Printed 1658.
9. Mr. John Gamble his first and second book of Airs and Dialogues, first
printed 1657, second 1659. 10. A Book of Catches and Rounds collected and
published by John Hilton 1651, and now with large additions by John Playford,
newly Reprinted 1658. 11. An Introduction to the Skill of Music, Vocal and
Isntrumental, with Instructions for the Violin by J. Playford, newly Reprinted
1658. 12. The Art of Descant, or composing Music in parts, written by Dr.
Champian, and enlarged by Mr. Christopher Simpson, printed 1655.
Books for Instrumental MUSIC.
1. Mr. East Set of Fancies for Viols, containing 6 Fantasies for two
Bass-Viols, 9 Fantazies for two Trebles and a Bass, and 12 Fantazies of 4
parts. 2. Court Airs, for two parts, Bass and Treble, Viols or Violins,
containing 245 Airs, Corants and Sarabands, Composed by Dr. Coleman. Mr.
William Laws, Mr. John Jenkins, Mr. Ben Rogers of Windsor; Mr. Christopher
Sympson, and others: Printed 1656. 3. Mr. Matthew Lock his Little Consort of
Three parts, Pavans, Almains, Corants and Satabands, for Two Trebles and a
Bass, for Viols or Violins: Printed 1657. 4. Musicks Recreation on the Lyra
Viol, Containing 100 Lessons, viz. Preludiums, Almains, Corants, Sarabands, and
several new and pleasant Tunes for the Lyra Viol, with Instructions for
beginners: printed 1656. 5. A Book of New Lessons for the Cithren and Gittern,
containing many new and pleasant Tunes, with plain and easy Instructions for
Beginners thereon: Printed 1659. 6. The Dancing Master, containing 132 New and
Choice Country Dances, Directing the Learner the manner how to understand the
several Figures and Movements thereof; Also the Tunes set over each Dance, very
useful to such as Practice on the Treble Violin; In which Book is added 42
French Corants, and other Tunes to be played on the Treble Violin: printed 1657.
All sorts Ruled Raper for Music ready Ruled, also Books of several Sizes
ready bound up of very good Ruled Paper; Also very good Ink to prick Music.
Music Books shortly to come forth.
A most Excellent Treatise of Music, Entitled, The Violist, or an
Introduction to play Division to a Ground, Teaching all things necessary to the
Knowledge of the Viol, as also the Rudiments of Composition by a Method more
short and easy then has been heretofore delivered. Written by the most
Knowing Master of that Instrument, Mr. Christopher Simpson. Also a Book for the
Virginals, containing variety of new and choice Lessons, also Toys, and Jigs,
Fitted for the practice of young Learners.
A Lovers Melancholy Repose.
Mr. Nich. Laneare.
^ LIke Hermit poor in pensive place obscure,
^ I mean to spend my days of endless doubt,
^ to wail such woes as time cannot recure,
^ where none but love shall ever find me out.
^ And at my gates, and at my gates despair shall linger still,
^ to let in death, to let in death when love and fortune will.
A Gown of gray my body shall attire,
My staff of broken hope whereon I Will stay,
Of late repentance linkt with long desire,
The Couch is framed whereon my limbs I lay,
And at my gates, etc.
My food shall be of care and sorrow made,
My drink naught else but tears fallen from mine eyes,
And for my light in this obscure shade,
The flame may serve, which from my heart arise,
And at my gates,
Loves ingratitude.
Dr. Wilson.
^ TAke, O take those lips a -- way,
^ that so sweetly were forsworn,
^ and those eyes that break of days,
^ light that do mislead the morn,
^ but my kisses bring again
^ seals of love though seals in vain.
Hide, O hide those Hills of Snow
That thy frozen Blossom bears;
On whose tops the Pinks that grow,
Are yet of those that April wears:
But first set my poor heart free,
Bound in those Icy Chains by thee.
Cupid's weak Artillery.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ COme Lovers all to me, and cease your mourning:
^ Love has no shafts to shoot, no more brands burning:
^ He means my pains shall you from pains deliver,
^ for in my breast h'as emptied all his Quiver.
^ Had he not been a child he would have known,
^ h'as lost a thousand servants to kill one.
Love preferring Virtue above Wealth.
Mr. William Web.
^ SHe that loves me for my self,
^ for affection, not base pelf,
^ never regarding my descent,
^ gesture, feature, but intend,
^ she, on -- ly she, she, only she, deserves to be be -- loved of me.
She that loves me for no end,
But because I am her friend;
Never doubting my desire,
But believed it sacred fire:
She, only she, deserves to be beloved of me.
She that loves me with reslove
Never to alter till dissolve;
Slighting all things, that stern fate
May hereafter seem to threat:
She, only she, deserves to be beloved of me.
A strife betwixt two Cupids reconciled.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ ABout the sweet Bag of a Be,
^ two Cupids fell at ods;
^ and whose the pretty prize should be,
^ they vowed to ask the gods:
^ which Venus hearing thither came,
^ and for their boldness stripped them,
^ and taking thence from each his flame,
^ with robs of Myrtle whipped them:
^ which done, to still their wanton cries,
^ and quiet grown sh'ad seen them,
^ she kissed and dried their dove-like eyes,
^ and gave the Bag between them.
Venus lamenting her lost Adonis.
Dr. Colman.
^ WAke my Adonis, do not die,
^ one life's enough for thee and I;
^ where are thy looks, thy wiles
^ thy fears, thy frowns, thy smiles?
^ a -- las, in vain, I call,
^ one death has snatched them all;
^ yet death's not deadly in that face
^ death in those looks it self has grace;
^ 'twas this, 'twas this I feared,
^ when thy pale ghost appeared,
^ this I presaged, when thun -- dering Jove
^ tore the best Mittle in my grove,
^ when my sick rose buds lost their smell,
^ and from my temples untoucht fell,
^ and 'twas for some such thing,
^ my Dove first hung her wing.
^ Whither art thou my Deity gone?
^ Venus in Venus there is none:
^ in vain a godess now am I,
^ only to grieve and not to die:
^ but I will love my grief,
^ make tears my tears relief,
^ and sorrow shall to me
^ a new Adonis be:
^ And this the fates shall not rob me of whilst I
^ a godess am to grieve and not to die.
To his Love Answering No.
Dr. Colman.
^ STay, stay, O stay, that heart, I vow it is mine
^ ravished from hence by her whose parts divine;
^ words cannot fully speak, now feels her cure,
^ whose on -- ly No, sent from her lips most pure,
^ makes it thus range from me, woe's me that No,
^ lost me that heart, and fills its place with woe.
O hold it fast, I come yet let it sly,
I cannot move, it is pity both should die;
Perhps she may relent, and with one yea
Give us a second life, treble our bliss;
If not, farewell my heart, I Have pleased mine eyes,
Since thou art lost, sees thee her sactifice.
On his Loves Absence.
Mr. Edward Colman.
^ BRing back my comfort and return,
^ for well thou know that I
^ in such a vigorous passion burn,
^ that missing thee I dye:
^ return, return, insult no more,
^ return, return, and me restore
^ to those sequestered joys I had before.
Absence in most, that quenches love,
And cooles their warm desire;
The ardor of my heat improves,
And makes the flame aspire:
The maxim therefore I deny,
And term it though a tyranny,
The Nurse to Faith, to Love, to Constancy.
Beauty clouded with grief.
Mr. Edward Colman.
^ WHy dearest should you weep, when I
^ relate the sto -- ry of my woe?
^ let not the swarthy mist of my
^ black fate o'recast thy beauty so:
^ For each rich pearl lost on that score
^ adds to mischance and wounds, and wounds your servant more.
Quench not those stars that to Die bliss should guide;
O stay that precious tear!
Nor let those drops upon my deluge tide
To drown thy beauty there,
That cloud of sorrow makes it night,
You lose your Lusters, but the World its Light.
On Loves Artillery.
Mr. Jeremy Savil.
^ NO more blind Boy, for see my heart is made thy quiver, where remains no
void place for an -- other dart; and a -- las that conquest gains small praise,
that on -- ly brings away a tame and un -- resisting prey: behold a noble Foe
all armed, desires they weak Ar -- til -- le -- ry, that has thy bow and
quiver charmed, a Rebel Beauty conquering thee; if thou dare e -- quall
combat try, would her, for it is for her I dye.

On the Vicissitudes of Love.
Mr. William Laws.
^ HE that will not love, must be
^ my Scholar, and learn this of me,
^ there be in love as many fears
^ as the Summer corn has ears;
^ sighs, and sobs, and troubles more
^ than the sand that makes the shore:
^ Now an Ague, then a Fever,
^ both tormenting Lovers e -- ver.
^ Would thou know besides all these,
^ how hard a Woman it is to please?
^ how high she is prized whose worth's but small?
^ little thou^t love, or naught at all.
A false design to be cruel.
The Lady Deerings Composing.
^ IN vain fair Chloris, you design,
^ to be cruel, to be kind,
^ for we know with all your arts,
^ you never hold but willing hearts;
^ men are too wise grown to expire
^ with broken shafts, and painted fire.
II.
And if among a thousand Swains
Some one of Love, or Fate complains;
And all the stars in heaven defy,
With Cloro's lip, or Celia's eye:
It Is not their love the Youth would choose,
But the glory to refuse.
III.
Then wisely make your prize of those
Want wit, or courage to oppose;
But tempt me not that can discover
What will redeem the fondest Lover:
And fly the list, lest it appear
Your power is measured by our fear.
IV.
So the rude wave securely shocks
The yielding Bark, but the stiff rocks
If it atempt, how soon again
Broke and dissolved it fills the Main:
It foams and roars, but we deride
Alike its weakness, and its pride.
Constancy in Love.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ It Is not in the power of all thy scorn
^ or un -- relenting hate,
^ to quench my flames, or make them burn
^ with heat more temperate:
^ still do I struggle with despair,
^ and ever court disdain;
^ and though you never prove less severe,
^ I Will dote up -- on my pain.
(2)
Yet meaner beauties cannot claim
In Love this tyranny,
They must pretend and equal flame,
Or else our passions die:
You fair Clarinda you alone
Are prized at such a rate,
To have a Votary of one
Whom you do reprobate.
On Inconstancy.
Mr. Tho. Brewer.
^ MIstake me not, I am as cold as hot: Mistake me not, I am as cold as hot:
^ Although my tongue betray my heart ore'night,
^ ere morn, ere morn, ere morn I Am altered quite.
II.
Sometime I burn, and straight to Ice I turn,
There Is nothing so unconstant as my mind,
I change {vocal join} {vocal join} with every wind.
III.
Perhaps in jest, I said I loved thee best,
But 'twas no more, then what not long before
I vowed {vocal join} {vocal join} to twenty more.
IV.
Then prithee see, thou giv'st no heed to me;
For when I cannot keep my word a day,
What hope {vocal join} {vocal join} had thou to stay.
On Women's Inconstancy.
John Playford.
^ CAtch me a Star that is fall -- ling from the Sky,
^ Cause an Immortal creature for to die;
^ Stop with thy hand the Current of the Seas,
^ Pierce the earths Center to the Antipodies;
^ Cause Time return, and call back Yesterday,
^ Cloth Ja -- nu -- a -- ry like the month of May;
^ Weigh me an ounce of Flame, Blow back the wind;
^ Then have thou found Faith in a Woman's mind.
A Resolution not to Love.
John Playford.
^ LOve I must tell thee,
^ I Will no longer be a Victive to thy beardless Deity;
^ nor shall this heart of mine, now it is returned,
^ be offered at thy shrine, or at thy Altar burned.
^ Love like Religions made an Ayrie name,
^ to awe those souls whom want of wit makes tame.
II.
There Is no such thing as Quiver, Shaft, or Bow,
Nor does Love wound, but we Imagine so:
Or if it does perplex and grieve the mind,
It Is the poor masculine sect: women no sorrow find.
It Is not our parts or person that can move 'um,
Nor is it men's worth, but wealth, makes women love 'um.
III.
Reason henceforth, not Love, shall be my guide,
Our fellow Creatures shall not be deifide:
I Will now a Rebel be, and so pull down
That distaffe Hierarchy and females fancied crown.
In these unbridled times who will not strive
To free his neck from all prerogative.
A Forsaken Lovers Complaint.
Mr. Robert Johnson.
^ AS I walked forth one Summers day,
^ to view the Medows green and gay,
^ a pleasant Bower I espide
^ standing fast by a river side;
^ and in it a Maiden I heard cry,
^ Alas! Alas! there is none e're loved as I.
II.
Then round the meadow did she walk,
Catching each flower by the stalk;
Such flowers as in the meadow grew,
The Dead-mans Thumb, and Herb all blew.
And as she pulled them, still cried she,
Alas! Alas! none e're loved like me.
III.
The Flowers of the sweetest sents
She bound about with knotty Bents,
And as she bound them up in Bands
She wept, she sight'd and wrung her hands,
Alas! Alas! Alas! cried she,
Alas none was e're loved like me.
IV.
When she had filled her Apron full
Of such green things as she could cull,
The green leaves served her for a Bed
The Flowers were the Pillow for her head:
Then down she laid, never more did speak;
Alas! Alas! with Love her heart did break.
At a Masque, to invite the Ladies to Dance.
Mr. William Webb.
^ COme come noble Nymphs and do not hide
^ the joys for which you so provide;
^ If not to mingle with us men,
^ what make you here? go home a -- genesis
^ Your dressings do confess
^ by what we see, so curious parts
^ of Pallas, and Aracknes Arts,
^ that you could mean no less.
II.
Why do you were the Silkworms toyls?
Or glory in the Shel-fish spoils?
Or strive to show the grains of Ore
That you have gathered long before?
Whereof to make a Stock
To graff the greener Emtauld on,
Or any better watered Stone,
Or Ruby of the Rock.
III.
Why do you smell of Ambergris,
Whereof was formed Neptunes Niece,
The Queen of Love? unless you can
Like Sea-born- Venus, love a man?
Try, put your selves unto't:
Your Looks, and Smiles, and Thoughts that meet;
Ambrosian-hands, and Silver-feet,
Do promise you will do it.
An Italian Air.
^ FUg -- gi, fuggi, fuggi, de lieti aman i empia dona cagion de -- pi -- an --
ti. Che non gia per essere Crudele ma per essere ingrata and infidele egni core
t'ha ni horrore, fuggi, fuggi, fuggi, che chiti mira perch vivi pe -- ange e
sos pira.

Fuggi, fuggi, fuggi, fallace fera
Frede in fernale empia ma gera
Che se been hai di donna l' aspetto
Di furia un come nascendi nel petto
Tutta danno tutt' ing anno
Fuggi, fuggi, fuggi, ch'ogn un che t'ama
Il tuo ben piange, e il tuo mal brama.
A French Air.
^ AMor merere che d' amor merere, amor merere che d' amor merere; amor me
fuge, amor me struge, non pos a pue, non pos a pue.

Loves Scrutiny.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ WHy should thou swear I am forsworn,
^ since thine I vowed to be?
^ Lady it is already morn,
^ it was last night I swore to thee,
^ this fond impos -- si -- by -- li -- tie.
II.
Have I not loved thee much and long,
A tedious twelve hours space?
I should all other Beauties wrong,
And rob thee of a new embrace,
Should I still door upon thy face.
III.
Not that all Joys in thy brown hair
By others may be found:
But I will search the black, the fair,
Like skillful Mineralists that found
For treasuers in unplowed ground.
IV.
Then if when I have loved thee round,
Thou prove the pleasant she,
In spoil of meaner Beauties crowned,
I laden will return to thee,
Even sated with variety.
No Beauty without Love.
Mr. Nich. Launere.
^ THou art not fair for all thy red and white, for all those Rosy or -- na
-- ments in thee. I will not, {vocal join} smooth thy fancy, thou shall prove
that Beauty is no Beauty without Love, no Beauty without Love.

^ THou art not sweet nor made of mere delight, nor fair, nor sweet unless thou
pity me. I will not, {vocal join} smooth thy fancy, thou shall prove that
Beauty is no Beauty without Love, no Beauty without Love.

II.
Yet love not me, nor seek thou to allure
My thoughts with beauty, were it now divine;
Thy smiles and kisses I cannot endure,
I Will not be wrapped up in those arms of thine,
Now show if thou be a woman right,
Embrace, and kiss, and love me in dispite.
Delays in Love breeds Danger.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ PHillis, why should we de -- lay,
^ plea -- sures shorter than the day?
^ Could we, which we never can,
^ stretch our lives beyond three span,
^ Beauty like a Shadow flies,
^ and our Youth before us dies.
II.
Or would Youth and Beauty stay,
Love has wings, and will away;
Love has swifter wings than time,
Change in love too often does chime;
Gods that never change their state,
Very often their love and hate.
III.
Phillis, to this truth we owe
All the love betwixt us now;
Let not you and I require
What has been our past desire;
On what Shepherds you have smiled,
Or what Nymphs I have beguiled.
^ Leave it to the Planets two,
^ what we shall here -- af -- ter do,
^ for the joy we now may prove,
^ take ad -- vice of present love.
On Caelia's Coyness.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ IF the quick spirit of your Eye
^ now languish, and a -- non must dye;
^ If every sweet and every grace
^ must fly from that for -- sa -- ken face:
^ Then Caelia let us reap our joys,
^ e're time such good -- ly fruit destroys.
II.
Or if that Golden Fleece must grow, for ever free from aged Snow;
If those bright Suns must know no shade, nor your fresh Beauty ever fade;
Then Caelia fear not to bestow,
What still being gathered, still must grow.
^ Thus either Time his sickle brings
^ in vain, or else in vain his wings.
Loves sweet Repose.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ AMidst the Mirtles as I walk,
^ Love and my Sighs thus enter talk;
^ Tell me said I, in deep distress,
^ where I may find my Shepherdess.
Then Fool (said Love) know thou not this,
In every thing that is good she is,
In yonder Tulip go and seek,
There thou shall find her Lip and Cheek.
It Is true, said I, and thereupon,
And went and plucked them one by one
To make a part a union,
But on a sudden all was gone.
In that inamell'd Fancy by
There shall thou find her curious Eye;
In bloom of Peach, in Roses bud
There wave the streams of her blood.
At which I stopped; said Love, these be
Fond man, resemblances of thee;
For as these Flowers thy joy must dye,
Even in the turning of an eye.
And all thy hopes of her must wither,
As do those Flowers when knit together.
A Willow Garland sent for a Newyeers-gift.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ A Willow Garland thou did send
^ last day perfumed to me,
^ which did but only this portend,
^ I was for -- sook of thee.
II.
Since that it is, I Will tell the what,
To morrow thou shall see
Me wear the Willow, after that
To dye upon the tree.
III.
As Beasts unto the Alter go
With Garlands, so I
Will with my Willow wreath also
Come forth, and sweetly die.
Loves Victory.
Mr. William Webb.
^ VIctorious Beauty! though your Eyes
^ are able to sub -- due an host,
^ and therefore are un -- like to boast
^ the ta -- king of a lit -- tle prize,
^ do not a single heart despise.
II.
I came alone, but yet so armed
With former love I durst have sworn
That as that privy coat was worn,
With characters of beauty charmed,
Thereby I might have escaped unharm'd.
III.
The Conquest in regard of me,
Alas is small! but in respect
Of her that did my Love protect,
Where it divulged, deserved to be
Recorded for a Victory.
IV.
But neither steel nor stony brass
Are proofs against those looks of thine,
Nor can a beauty less divine,
By any heart be long possessed,
Where you intend an interest.
V.
And such a one as chance to view
Her lovely face, perhaps may stay,
Though you have stole my heart away;
If all your servants prove not true,
May steal a heart or two from you.
Diswasion from Presumption.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ LAdies, you that seem so nice,
^ and as cold in show as Ice,
^ and perhaps have held out thrice,
^ do not think but in a trice
^ one or other may entice,
^ and at last by some device
^ set your honors at a price.
You whose smooth and dainty skin,
Rosy lips, or cheeks, or chin,
All that gaze upon you win;
Yet insult not, sparks within,
Slowly burn ere flames begin,
And presumption still has bin
Held a most notorious sin.
The Careless Lovers Resolution.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ LET longing Lovers sit and pine,
^ and the forsaken Willow wear,
^ Love shall not blast this heart of mine,
^ with lingering hope or killing fear:
^ I Will never love till I enjoy,
^ or lose my time on her that is coy.
If Ladies call us to the field,
And all their Colors there display,
Alas! they needs must to us yield,
Since we are better armed than they;
It Is folly then to beg or whine
For us that are born Masculine.
Then Lovers learn your strength to know,
And you may overcome with ease,
Your enemy fights with a Bow
That cannot wound, unless you please;
And he that pines because she is coy,
Wants wit, or courage, women say.
Disdain.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ TAke heed fair Chloris, how you tame
^ (with your disdain) Amintor's flame.
^ A noble heart, when once despised,
^ swells unto such a height of pride,
^ 'twil rather burst than deign to be
^ a worshipper of cruelty.
II.
You may use common shepherds so,
My flames at last to storms will grow,
And blow such scorn upon thy pride,
Will blast all I have magnified:
You are not fair when Love you lack,
Ingratitude makes all things black.
III.
O do not for a flock of sheep,
A golden shower when as you sleep;
Or for the tales ambition tells,
Forsake the house where honor dwells.
In Damons palace you will never shine
So bright as in these arms of mine.
Loves Fruition.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ TEll me not I my time mispend,
^ it is time lost to reprove me:
^ Enjoy thou thine, I have my End,
^ so Chlo -- ris one -- ly love me.
Tell me not others flocks are full,
Mine poor, let them despise me
That more abound with Milk, and Wool,
So Chloris only prize me.
Try other easier ears with these
Unappertaining Stories;
He never feels the Worlds disease,
That cares not for her Glories.
For pity thou that wiser art,
Whose thoughts lies wide of mine;
Let me alone with my one heart,
And I Will never envy thine.
Nor blame whoever blames my wit,
That seek's no higher prize
Then in unenvied Shades to sit,
And sing of Chloris Eyes.
Loves Drollery.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ I Love thee for thy Fickleness,
^ and great Inconstancy;
^ for had thou been a constant Lass,
^ then thou had never loved me.
I love thee for thy Wantonness,
And for thy Drollerie;
For if thou had not loved to sport,
Then thou had never loved me.
I love thee for thy Uglynesse,
And for thy foolerie;
For if thou had been fair or wise,
Then thou had never loved me.
I love thee for thy poverty,
And for thy want of Coin;
For if thou had been worth a Groat,
Then thou had never been mine.
Then let me have thy heart a while,
And thou shall have my money;
I Will part with all the wealth I have,
To Enjoy a Lass so Bonny.
Disdain returned.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ HE that loves a To -- sie cheek,
^ or a Coral lip admires;
^ or from Star-like eyes does seek
^ fu -- el to maintain his fires,
^ as old Time makes these de -- cay,
^ so his flames must waste a -- way.
II.
But a smooth and steadfast mind,
Gentle thoughts, and calm desires,
Hearts with equal love combined,
Kindle never-dying fires:
Where these are not, I despise
Lovely Cheeks, or Lips or Eyes.
III.
Caelia, now no tears can win
My resolved heart to return;
I have searched thy soul within,
And find naught but pride and scorn.
I have learned those Arts, and now
Can disdain as much as thou.
^ Some God in my revenge con -- vey
^ that Love to her I cast a -- way.
Loves Content.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ DEar, leave thy home, and come with me,
^ that scorn the world for love of thee:
^ Here we will live within this Park,
^ a Court of joy and pleasures Ark.
To his Forsaken Mistress.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ I Do confess thou art smooth and fair,
^ and I might have gone near to love thee,
^ had I not found the sleightest prayer
^ that lip could move, had power to move thee.
^ But I can let thee now a -- lone,
^ as worthy to be loved by none.
II.
I do confess thou art sweet, yet find
Thee such an Unthrift of thy Sweets;
Thy favors are but like the wind,
Which kisseth every thing it meets:
And since thou can with more than one,
Thou Art worthy to be kissed by none.
III.
The morning Rose that untoutch'd stands,
Armed with her briars, how sweet she smells!
But plucked, and strained through ruder hands,
Her sweets no longer with her dwells;
But Sent and Beauty both are gone,
And Leaves fall from her one by one.
IV.
Such Fate e're long will thee betide,
When thou have handled been a while,
With fear Flowers to be thrown aside;
And I shall sigh when some will smile,
To see thy love to every one
Has brought thee to be loved by none.
To a Lady singing.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ WHile I list -- en to thy voice, Chloris, I feel my life de -- cay, that
powerful noise calls my fleeting soul away; O suppress that magic sound,
which destroys without a wound! Peace, peace, Chloris, peace, or singing dye,
that together thou and I to heaven may go; for all we know of what the blessed
do above, is that they sing, and that they love.

On a Bleeding Lover.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ A Lover once I did espy,
^ with bleeding heart and weeping eye;
^ he wept and cried, How great's his pain,
^ that lives in love, and loves in vain.
II.
Can there (says he) no cure be found,
But by the hand that gave the wound?
Then let me dye, which I Will endure,
Since she wants charity to cure.
III.
Yet let her one day feel the pain,
To wish she had cured, and wish in vain
For withered cheeks may chance recover
Some sparks of love, but not a Lover.
Two Songs in the Play of The Royal Slave.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ COme from the Dungeon to the Throne,
^ to be a King, and straight be none:
^ Reign then a while, that thou may be
^ fitter to fall by majesty:
^ So Beasts for sacrifice we feed,
^ first they are crowned, and then they bleed, they bleed.
Love and Music.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ COme my Sweet, whilst every Strain calls our Souls in -- to the Ear, where
the greedy listening fain would turn in -- to the sound they hear; lest in
desire to fill the quire, themselves they tie to harmo -- ny, let us kiss and
call them back a -- gain.

A Resolution in choice of a Mistress.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ Were thou yet fairer then thou art,
^ which lies not in the power of Art;
^ or had thou in thine Eyes more Darts,
^ then Cupids e -- ver shot at Hearts;
^ yet if they were not thrown at me,
^ I would not cast a Thought at thee.
II.
I Would rather marry a disease,
Then court the thing I cannot please:
She that would cherish my desires
Must court my flames with equal fires:
What pleasure is there in a Kiss
To him that doubts the Heart's not his?
III.
I love thee not 'cause thou art fair,
Softer than down, smoother than air;
Not for the Cupids that do lie
In either corner of thine Eye:
Would you then know what it might be?
It Is I love you 'cause you love me.
Inconstancy in Love.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ TO love thee without Flattery were a Sin,
^ since thou art all Inconstancy within;
^ thy Heart is governed only by thine Eyes,
^ the Newest object is thy Richest prize:
^ Love me then just as I love thee,
^ that is till a fairer I can see.
II.
My thoughts are now at liberty, and can
Love all that is fair, as you can all that is man;
I never will hereafter think it strange
To see thee please thy Appetite with change:
No! love me just as I love thee,
That Is till a fairer I can see.
III.
I hate this constant doting on a Face,
Content never dwelt a Week in any place;
Why then should you and I love one another
Longer then we can be content together?
Love me then just as I love thee,
That Is till a fairer I can see.
Discontent.
Dr. John Wilson.
^ I Prithee turn that Face away,
^ whose splendour but benights the day;
^ sad Eyes like mine, and wounded Hearts,
^ shun the bright rays which Beauty darts;
^ Unwelcome is the Sun that pries
^ into those Shades where sorrow lies:
^ Go shine on happy things, to me,
^ that blessing is a misery;
^ whom thy fierce Sun not warms but burns,
^ like that the Sooty Indian turns;
^ I Will serve the night, and there confined;
^ wish thee less fair or else more kind.
Loves Votary.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ BId me but live, and I will live,
^ thy Vo -- ta -- ry to be;
^ or bid me love, and I will give
^ a loving heart to thee.
A heart as soft, a heart as kind,
a heart as soundly free
As in the world thou can not find,
that heart I Will give to thee.
Bid me to weep, and I will weep,
while I have eyes to see,
Or having none, yet I will keep
a heart to weep for thee.
Bid that heart stay, and it shall stay,
and honor thy decree,
Or bid it languish quite away
and it shall do it for thee.
Thou art my love, my life my heart,
the very eye of me,
And have command of every part,
to live and dye for thee.
To Aurelia.
Dr. Colman.
^ BRight Aurelia, I do owe
^ all the woe I can know
^ to those glorious looks alone,
^ though you are unrelenting stone;
^ the quick lightning from your eyes,
^ did sa -- cri -- fice, my unwise,
^ my unwary harmless heart,
^ and now you glory in my smart.
How unjustly you do blame
That pure flame,
From you came.
Vexed with what your self may burn,
Your scorns to tinder did it turn.
The least spark now Love can call
That does fall
On the small
Scorcht remainder of my heart,
Will make it burn in every part.
Loves Flattery.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ LAdies fly from loves smooth tale,
^ oaths steept in tears do often prevail,
^ grief is infectious, and the air
^ inflamed with sighs will blast the fair;
^ then stop your ears when Lovers cry,
^ lest your selves weep, when no lost eye
^ shall with a sorrowing tear repay
^ that pity which you cast away.
To Chloris.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ COme Cloris leave thy wandering sheep,
^ thou shall more amorous creatures keep;
^ and be the only envied Dame
^ that moves upon this grassie frame:
^ for thou shall Herds of Cupids have,
^ and Love and I will be thy slave.
II.
Nymphs, Satyrs, and the Sylvian Fawns,
Shall leave the Woods and narrow Lawns
To wait on Cloris, and adore
Their Cytherea; now no more
The name of Cloris shall create
A servitude in every state.
III.
In yonder Myrtle grove we will dwell
With more content then tongue can tell,
Where hungry Moles shall not afright
Thy tender Lambs or thee by night:
There we the wanton thieves will play,
And steal each others hearts away.
Seeming Coyness.
Dr. Charles Colman.
^ AMbitious Love, farwell;
^ you are to troublesome a Guest
^ to affect what does excel;
^ and to be ever at a Feast;
^ is not the cheapest freest diet,
^ less in joy and less in quiet:
^ Be proud who list Fetters of Gold to wear,
^ I like no tedious ceremonious cheer.
II.
I Will take such as I find,
So it be good, and handsome dressed,
Pretty, looking freely, kind,
To a good appetite is best.
If your Usage do not please you,
Change is near you Change will ease you:
Tempest and Feasts the wisest disaffect,
Let it suffice you find no disrespect.
III.
Seek not the highest place,
The lowest commonly is most free
Less subject to disgrace,
Others eyes, or your jealousies.
Bold Freedom will improve your taste,
When awe imbitters a repast:
A doting fancy is a foolish Guest,
The freest welcome makes the sweetest Feast.
IV.
It is not Natures way,
She made Love no such busy thing,
She meant it a short lay,
A Commonweal without a King.
Her love on every edge does grow,
Her Fruits are best in Taste and Show;
Her Sweets extend unto the meanest Clown,
Often most fair, though in a Russet Gown.
Loves Bachinall.
^ LAy that sullen Garland by thee,
^ keep it for the Elysium shades;
^ take my wreath of lusty I -- vy,
^ not of that faint Myrtle made;
^ when I see thy soul descending
^ to that cold unfertile Plain
^ of sad fools the Lake attending,
^ thou shall wear this Crown a -- gain.
^ Now drink wine, and know the ods
^ 'twixt that Lethe, 'twixt that Lethe, 'twixt that Lethe, and the Gods.
Rouse thy dull and drowsy spirits,
Here Is the soul reviving streams,
The stupid Lovers brain inherits
Naught but vain and empty dreams.
Fie then on that cloudy forehead,
Open thou vainly crossed arms;
Thou may as well call back the buried
As raise Love by such like charms.
Think not thou these dismal trances,
Which our raptures can content,
The Lad that langhs, sings and dances,
Shall come soonest to his end.
Sacrifice a glass of Clarret
To each letter of her name;
Gods have often descended for it,
Mortals must do more the same.
Cho. Sadness may some pity move,
Mirth and courage, mirth and courage,
Mirth and courage conquers love.
If she comes not at that flood,
Sleep will come, sleep will come,
Sleep will come and that is as good.
Platonic Love.
Dr. Colman.
^ CHange Platonicks, change for shame,
^ get your selves a -- no -- there name.
^ This is but a thin disguise,
^ and betrayed to common eyes:
^ Dim and purblind though they be,
^ your Philo -- so -- phy they see
^ is but Lay Hypocrisy,
^ and a kind of He -- re -- sie.
II.
Plato never allowed a Kiss,
Nor the like fantastic bliss,
All the day sit and Ca Goll
With Sir Amorons La Fool;
Never dreamt of that delight
Which a Ball presents at night,
To apt you to what follows next,
Only you corrupt the Text.
III.
Yet must Plato justify
All your wanton vanity,
When indeed the truth to say,
It Is Opinion that does sway.
Is a mere Court-Frippery,
You act but yet most formerly
What your Sex was wont to do
Many hundred years ago.
Love Neglected.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ LIttle love serves my turn, it is so en -- fla -- ming, ra -- there then I
will burn I will leave ga -- ming; for when I think upon it, O! it is so painful,
'cause Ladies have a trick, to be disdainful. No more, no more, I must give
over; for Beauty is so sweet, it makes me pine, distracts my mind, and surfeit
when I see it. Forgive me Love, if I remove in -- to some other sphere, where I
may keep a flock of sheep, and know no o -- there care.

^ Beauty shall court it self, it is not worth speaking, I Will no more Amorous
pangs, no more heartbreaking: those that never felt the smart, let them go try
it, I have redeemed my heart now I de -- fie it, No more, no more, I must give
over; for Beauty is so sweet, it makes me pine, distracts my mind, and surfeit
when I see it. Forgive me Love, if I remove in -- to some other sphere, where I
may keep a flock of sheep, and know no o -- there care.

Lovers Wantonness.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ SEe, see, how carless men are grown
^ of Love and Loving in our days,
^ Every ones Heart is now his own;
^ his Eyes upon no object stays,
^ but baits a while and goes his ways.
II.
Shall Beauty that was wont to reign
Un-rivall'd in each noble breast,
Command by turns, or else in vain;
And by new fashioned minds deprest,
Become an Inn, and love a Guest.
III.
Sure they suppose her of Glass,
And let her first on purpose fall,
Then peice-meal would pick up this Mass,
That for one Beauty bow to all,
And change of Fetters, Freedom call.
IV.
Though lowly minded, I will stand
With such for place, and at no rate
Give Rebel Lovers the upper hand
That every day new Lords create;
I serve a Monarch, they a State.
Venus to her Adonis
Mr. William Laws.
^ COme Adonis, come away, what distaste could drive the hence, where so much
delight does reign, sotting even the soul of Sense? and though thou un -- kind
have proved, never Youth was so beloved: Then loved Adonis, come away, for
Venus brooks, for Venus brooks not this de -- lay, for Venus brooks not this
delay.

Loves Flattery.
Mr. William Laws.
^ I Can love for an hour when I Am at leisure,
^ he that loves half a day fools without measure:
^ Cupid then tell me what art had thy mother,
^ to make men love one face more than an -- other?
Some to be thought more wise daily endeavor
To make the World believe they can live for ever:
Ladies believe them not, they will but deceive you,
For when they have their ends then they will leave you.
Men cannot tire themselves on your sweet features,
They Will have variety of loving Creatures.
Too much of any thing sets them a cooling,
Though they can never do it, yet they will be fooling.
Inconstancy in Women.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ I Am confirmed a woman can,
^ love this, or that, or a -- ny man;
^ let her but an new object find,
^ and she is of another mind:
^ Then hang me Ladies at your door,
^ If e're I dote up -- on you more.
^ This day her love is melting hot,
^ to morrow swears she knows you not;
^ let her but an new object find,
^ and she is of another mind:
^ Then hang me Ladies at your door,
^ If e're I dote up -- on you more.
II.
Yet still I Will love the fair one, why?
For nothing but to please mine eye;
And so the fat and soft skinn'd Dame
I Will flatter, to appease my flame;
For her that is Musical I long,
When I am sad to sing a Song:
But hang me Ladies, etc.
III.
I Will give my fancy leave to range
Through every face to find out change:
The black, the brown, the fair shall be
But objects of variety:
I Will court you all to serve my turn,
But with such flames as shall not burn:
For hang me Ladies, etc.
A Lovers Legacy.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ FAin would I Chloris e're I die,
^ bequeath you such a Legacy,
^ as you might say when I am gone,
^ None has the like! My heart alone
^ were the best gift I could bestow,
^ but that is al -- rea -- die yours you know:
^ So that till you my Heart resign,
^ or fill with yours the place of mine;
^ and by that grace my store renew,
^ I shall have naught worth giving you,
^ whose Breast has all the wealth I have,
^ save a faint Carcass, and a Grave:
^ But had I as many Hearts as Hairs,
^ as many Loves as Love has Fears,
^ as many Lives as Years have Hours,
^ they should be all and only yours.
Loves Martyr.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ HOw long shall I a Martyr be
^ to Love and Woman's cru -- el -- ty?
^ Or why does sullen Fate confine
^ my heart to one that is not mine:
^ had I er'e loved as others do,
^ but only for an hour or two,
^ then there had store of reason bin
^ why I should suffer for my sin.
II.
But Love, thou know with what a flame
I have adored my Mistress name:
How I never offered other fires
But such as rose from chaste desires:
Nor have I ere profaned thy shrine
With an inconstant fickle mind;
Yet thou combining with my Fate,
Has forced my love and hor to hate.
III.
O Love! if her supremacy
Have not a greater power then thee,
For pity sake then once be kind,
And throw a dart to change her mind:
Thy deity we shall suspect,
If our reward must be neglect.
Then make her love, or let me be
Inspired with scorn as well as she.
Amintor for his Chloris absence.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ TEll me you wan -- dering spirits of the Air,
^ did you not see a Nymph more bright, more fair
^ than Beauties darling, or of parts more sweet
^ than stolen content? If such a one you meet,
^ wait on her hourly where so e're she flies,
^ and cry, and cry, Amintor for her absence dies.
II.
Go search the Valleys, pluck up every Rose,
You Will find a sent, a blush of her in those:
Fish, fish for Pearl, or Coral, there you will see
How oriental all her colors be.
Go call the Echoes to your aid, and cry,
Chloris, Chloris, for that is her name for whom I die.
III.
But stay a while, I have informed you ill,
Were she on earth she had been with me still:
Go fly to Heaven, examine every Sphere,
And try what Star has lately lighted there;
If any brighter than the Sun you see,
Fall down, fall down, and worship it, for that is she.
^ Chloris, Fall down, Chloris, fall down, etc.
Love in a Calm.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ HOw cool and temperate I am grown,
^ since I could call my heart my own?
^ Beauty and I now calmly play,
^ whilst others burn and melt a -- way:
^ not all those wanton hours I have spent,
^ can rob me of this new content.
II.
Loves mists are scattered from my sight,
Which flattered me with new delight,
And now I see it is but a face
That stole my heart out of its place:
Then Love forgive me, I Will no more
Thine Altars or thy Shrine adore.
III.
Farewell to all heartbreaking eyes,
Farewell each look that can surprise,
Farewell those curls and amorous spells,
Farewell each place where Cupid dwells;
And farewell each bewitching smile,
I must enjoy my self a while.
Loves Shepherdess.
^ IN faith I cannot keep my Sheep since first I grew to be in love: whilst my
poor Flock a wandering creep, and I to Fate a Shepherd am; Love, first in love,
in love, I first began.

Love without Additionals.
Mr. William Webb.
^ OF the kind boy I ask no red and white
^ to make up my delight,
^ no odd becoming graces,
^ black eyes, or lit -- tle know not what is in Faces;
^ make me but mad enough, give me good store of Love,
^ for her I court,
^ I ask no more; it is Love
^ in Love that makes the sport.
II.
There Is no such thing as that, we Beauty call,
It is mere couzenage all;
For though some long ago
Liked certain colors mingled so and so,
That does not tie me now from choosing new,
If I a fancy take
Too black and blew,
That fancy does it Beauty make.
III.
It Is not the meat, but it is the appetite
Makes eating a delight;
And if I like one dish
More than another, that a Phesant is:
What in our Matches, may in us be found,
So to the height, and nick
We up be bound,
No matter by what hand or trick.
A Frozen Heart made warm by Love.
Mr. William Webb.
^ GO, go, and bestride the Southern wind, fly, O forlorn! not look behind,
till thou the glazed Ocean have past and Climes unknown to man, laid on a
snow-rais'd mountain bear the bo -- some to the freezing air; and if those
colds be not so great to quench, but they thaw with thy heat her far more cold
disdain, apply thine own despair and will to dye; and when by these congealed
to stone, then will her heart and thine be one.

False Love reproved.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ BY all thy Glories willingly I go,
^ yet could have wished thee constant in thy love;
^ but since thou needs must prove
^ uncertain as is thy Beauty,
^ or as the Glass that shows it thee,
^ my hopes thus soon to o -- verthrow,
^ shows thee more fickle; but my flames by this
^ are easier quenched than his,
^ whom slattering smiles betray;
^ it is tyrannous delay
^ breeds all the harm,
^ and makes that sire consume,
^ which should but warm.
II.
Till time destroy those blossoms of thy youth,
Thou art our Idol-worship, at that rate,
But who can tell thy fate?
And say that when this Beauties done,
This Lovers Torch shall still burn on;
I could have served thee with such truth
Devoutest Pilgrims to their Saints do show,
Departed long ago;
And at this ebbing tide,
Have used thee as a Bride
Who Is only true
Whilst you are fair, he loves himself, not you.
Loves torrid Zone.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ NO, no, fair Heretic, it cannot be, but an ill love in me, and worse for
thee; for were it in my power to love thee now this hour, more than I did the
last, 'twould then so fall, I might not love at all: Love that can flow, and
can admit increase, admits as well an ebb, and may grow less.

II.
True love is still the same
The Torrid Zones,
And those more frigid ones
It must not know:
For love grown cold, or hot
Is lust and friendship, not
The think we have, for that is a flame would dye,
Held down, or up too high;
Then think I love, more than I can express,
And would know more, could I but love thee less.
To his Chloris at Parting.
Dr. John Wilson.
^ FAin would I Chloris whom my heart adores, longer a while between thine arms
remain; but lo, the jealous morn her To -- sie doors to spite me ope's, and
brings the day a -- gain. Farewell, farewell, Chloris, it is time I died, the
night de -- parts, yet still my woes abide.

II.
Hence saucy flearing Candle of the Skies,
Let us alone we, have no need of thee:
Our eyes are ever day, where Chloris eyes
Shine, that a pair of brighter Tapers be.
Farewell, farewell, etc.
III.
O night! whose sable veil was wont to be
More friend to Lovers, than the noisefull day:
Wherefore, O wherefore do thou fly from me,
And carry with thee all my joys away?
Farewell, farewell, etc.
Coyness in Love.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ WHat means this Strangeness now of late?
^ since Time does Truth approve:
^ this distance may consist with State;
^ it cannot stand with Love.
It Is either cunning or distrust,
That do such ways allow:
The first is base, the last injust;
Let neither blemish you.
If you intend to draw me on,
You over act your part:
And if it be to have me gone,
You need not half this Art.
Speak but a word, or do but cast
One Look that seems to frown,
I Will give you all the love that is past,
The rest shall be mine own.
And such a fair and equal way
On both fides none can blame,
Since every man is bound to play
The fairest of his Game.
Love possessed.
Mr. Warner.
^ I Wish no more thou should love me,
^ my joys are full in loving thee;
^ my heart's too narrow to contain
^ my bliss, if thou should love me a -- gain.
Thy scorn may wound me, but my fate
Leads me to love, and thee to hate;
Yer I must love while I have breath,
For not to love were worse than death.
Then shall I sne for scorn or grace,
A lingering life, or death embrace;
Since one of these I needs must try,
Love me but once and let me die.
Such mercy more thy same shall raise,
Than cruel life can yield thee praise;
It shall be counted who so dies,
No murder, but a sacrifice.
A Lovers Resolution.
Mr. Tho. Brewer.
^ TEll not I dye, or that I live by thee,
^ and as thou points my doom, so it must be:
^ Or that my life (did thou but leave to love,)
^ would like a long disease, as weary prove:
^ Since he whose mind is proof a -- against his fate,
^ makes himself happy at the worst estate.
II.
It Is vanity for a man to build his bliss
On the frail favor of a woman's kiss;
And most unmanly to enthrall his eye,
When Heaven and Nature gives it liberty:
Since Women's fancies with their fashions change,
To love for fashion to each face that is strange.
III.
I know the humor of your Sex is such
You never could value any one thing much;
For should thy bred with constant flames be sir'd,
'Twere more then I expected, although desired:
Then think me not so fond, although I love,
But as thou stear'st thy course, so mine shall move.
IV.
He that has wealth, and can that wealth for-goe,
Is his own man, not slave to any woe;
Thus armed with resolution, I am free,
Still o'recommer of my destiny:
Yet know I love, thou I can leave the state,
He best knows how to love, knows how to hate.
The Primrose.
^ ASk me why I send you here,
^ this first -- ling of the Infant year?
^ Ask me why I send to you,
^ this Primrose all be-pearl'd with dew?
^ I must whisper to your Ears,
^ the sweets of Love are washed with tears.
Ask me why this Rose does show
All yellow, green, and sickly too?
Ask me why the stalk is weak,
And yielding each way, yet not break?
I must tell you, These discover
What doubts and fears are in a Lover.
Cupid's Embassage.
^ GO little winged Archer and comey a flaming dart into her heart, then steal
away as soon as thou have set her all on sire, and lest her burning in her
chaste desire.

II.
Thus teach her what it is to love, that she
When that her eyes
Do tyrannize
May pity me;
And know the flame that has my heart possessed
By the distemper of her scorched breast.
III.
And when she burns if she appease my flame
With smiles which fly,
Often as her eye,
I Will do the same;
So may we love, and burn, but never expire,
While we add fuel to each others fire.
Coridon to his Phillis.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ COme lovely Phillis -- since it thy will is,
^ to crown thy Coridon with daffadilles.
^ Here I will hold thee, and thus enfold thee,
^ free from harms within these arms.
^ With many kisses, as sweet as this is,
^ I will repay to multiply thy blisses.
^ Here I will hold thee, and thus enfold thee,
^ free from harms within these arms.
Sweet, still be smiling, it is sweet beguiling
Of tedious hours and sorrows best exiling;
For if you lowre, the banks no power
Will have to bring forth any pleasant slower;
Your eyes not granting
Their rays enchanting,
Mine may rain, bur 'twere in vain.
Thine eyes may wonder that mine asunder
Do from the Sunshine draw thine to sit under;
Hold me unblam'd, to be enflamed,
Where not to be so, youth were rather shamed:
Since that the oldest
That thou beholdest
May feel fire of loves desire.
On Chloris attractive Beauty.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ CLoris, farewell, I now must go,
^ for if with thee I here do stay,
^ thine eyes prevail up -- on me so,
^ I shall grow blind and lose my way.
Fame of thy Beauty, and thy Youth
Amongst the rest me hither brought;
Finding this fame fall short of truth,
Made me stay longer than I thought.
For thou may say 'twas not thy fault
That thou did thus unconstant prove;
Thou weit by my example taught
To break thy oath, to mend thy love.
For I Am engaged by word and oath
A servant to another will;
Yet for thy love would forfeit both,
Could I be sure to keep it still.
No Chloris, no, I will return,
And raise thy story to that height,
That Strangers shall at distance burn,
And she distrust me Reprobate.
But what assurance can I take,
When thou sore knowing this abuse,
For some more worthy Lovers sake,
Moy'st leave me with so just excuse.
Then shall my love this doubt displace,
And gain such trust, that I may come
And banquet sometimes on thy face,
But make my constant meals at home.
Clora forsaken, thus complains.
Dr. John Wilson.
^ CHloris false love made Clora weep,
^ and by a river side her flock
^ which she was wont to keep,
^ neglecting thus she cried:
^ Is It not In -- ju -- stice, O ye Gods!
^ to kin -- dle my desire,
^ and to leave his at so much ods,
^ as there is no mutual fire.
^ Poor victo -- ry, to pierce a heart
^ that was a ten -- der one,
^ but cowardice to spare your dart
^ from his that was a stone.
As she thus mourned, the tears that fell
Down from her lovesick eyes,
Did in the water drop and swell,
And into bubbles rise.
Yet as Hessen multiply,
But in less form appears,
Thus do I languish from mine eye,
And grow new in my tears.
Wherein her bloubard face appears,
Now out alas, said she,
How do I melt away in tears
For him that loves not me.
Break not that Crystal, circles me
Sweet streams by your fair side,
My love perhaps may walking be,
And I may be espied.
And thus in little drawn and dressed
In sad tears attire,
May force such passions from his breast,
Shall equal my desire.
Reciprocal Love.
Dr. John Wilson.
^ I Love a Less, but cannot show it,
^ I keep a fire that burns with -- in,
^ raked up in em -- bers: Ah could she know it,
^ I might per -- haps be loved a -- gain:
^ For a true love may justly call
^ for friendship love reciprocal.
II.
Some gentle courteous wind betray me,
A sigh by wispering in her ear,
Or let some pitious shower convey me,
By dropping on her breast a tear,
Or two, or more; the hardest flint,
By often drops receives a dint.
III.
Shall I then vex my heart and rend it,
That is already too too weak;
No, no, they say, Lovers may send it,
By writing what they cannot speak:
Go then my Muse, and let this verse
Bring back my Life, or else my Hearse.
On Loves deceitful Charms.
Mr. Jeremy Savill.
^ I Will not trust thy tempting graces,
^ nor thy deceitful charms,
^ nor prisoner be to thy embraces,
^ or fet -- ter'd in thine arms:
^ No Celia, no, not all thy art
^ can wound or captivate my heart.
II.
I will not gaze upon thine eyes,
Nor wanton with thy hair,
Lest those should burn me by surprise,
Or these my soul ensnare:
Nor with those smiling dangers play,
Or fool my liberty away.
III.
Since then my weary heart is free,
And unconfined as thine;
If thou would mine should captive be,
Thou must thine own resign:
And Gratitude shall thus move more
Than Love or Beauty could before.
Beauty a fading Ornament.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ LEt not thy Beau -- ty make thee proud,
^ though Prin -- ces do adore thee,
^ since time and sickness were alow'd
^ to mow such flowers before thee.
II.
Nor be not shy to that degree
Thy friends may hardly know thee,
Not yet so coming, or so free,
That every fly may blow thee;
A state in every Princely brow,
As decent is required,
Much more in thine, to whom they bow
By Beauties lightnings fit'd.
III.
And yet a state so sweetly mixed
With an attractive mildness;
It may like Virtue sit betwixt
The extremes of pride and vileness.
Then every eye that sees thy face
Will in thy Beauty glory,
And every tongue that wags will grace
Thy virtue with a story.
Beauty in Eclipse.
Mr. William Laws.
^ TEll me no more her Eyes are like
^ to rising Suns, that wonder strike;
^ For if 'twere so, how could it be,
^ they could be thus eclipsed to me?
Tell me no more her Breasts do grow
Like rising Hills of melting Snow;
For if 'twere so, how could they lie
So near the Sunshine of her eye?
Tell me no more the restless Spheres
Compared to her voice, fright our ears;
For if 'twere so, how then could death
Dwell with such discord in her breath?
No, say her Eyes Portenders are
Of ruin, or some blazing star,
Else would I feel from that fair fire
Some heat to cherish my desire.
Say that her Breasts, though cold as Snow,
Are hard as Marble, when I woo;
Else they would soften and relent
With sighs inflamed, from me sent.
Say that although like to the Moon.
She heavenly fair, yet changed as soon;
Else she would constant once remain
Either to pity or disdain.
That so by one of them I might
Be kept alive, or murdered quite;
For it is no less cruel there to kill,
Where life does but increase the ill.
Cupid detected.
^ SIlly Heart forbear, those are murdering Eyes,
^ in the which I swear Cupid lur -- king lies:
^ See his Quiver, see his Bow; to see his Dart,
^ fly, O fly! thou foolish Heart.
Greedy Eyes, take heed, they are scorching Beams
Causing Hearts to bleed, and your Eyes spring streams:
Love lies watching with his Bow bent, and his Dart
For to wound both Eyes and Heart.
Think and gaze your fill, foolish Heart and Eyes,
Since you love your ill, and your good despise:
Cupid Shooting, Cupid Darting, and his Band
Mortal powers cannot withstand.
Loves Flattery.
Dr. Colman.
^ WHen Caelia I in -- tend to flatter you, and tell you lies to make you true,
I swear there is none so fair, there is none so fair, and you believe it too.

Often have I matched you with the Rose, and said
No twins so like has nature made,
But it is
Only in this, {vocal join}
You prick my hand and fade.
Often have I said there is no precious stone
But may be found in you alone;
Though I
No stone espy, {vocal join}
Unless your heart be one.
When I praise your skin I quote the wool
That Silkworms from their Entrails pull,
And show
That new fallen snow, {vocal join}
Is not more beautiful.
Yet grow not proud by such Hyperboles
Were you as excellent as these
Whilst I
Before you ly, {vocal join}
They might be had with ease.
Loves Theft.
Dr. Colman.
^ HOw am I changed from what I was be -- fore I saw those Eyes?
^ I had a heart, but now a -- las, that room is filled with sighs,
^ for she that robbed me, would not stay to let me ask her why
^ she stol't or beg, she would find some way this theft with hers t'supply.
Thus am I left to court my grief,
For when she is out of sight,
There can on earth be no relief,
Or ought that is true delight.
I Will therefore on some River side
Wander to breath my woe,
And ask those Nymphs how Hylas died
That I might do so too.
Power of Love.
Dr. John Wilson.
^ SInce love has in thine and mine eye
^ kindled a holy flame,
^ what pi -- ty 'twere to let it dye,
^ what sin to quench the same?
^ The stars that seem ex -- tinct by day,
^ disclose their flames at night,
^ and in a sable sense convey
^ their loves in beams of light.
II.
So when the jealous Eye and Ear
Are shut or turned aside,
Our Tongues, our Eyes, may talk sans fear
Of being heard or spied.
What though our Bodies cannot meet
Loves fuels more divine;
The fixed stars by their twinkling greet,
And yet they never join.
III.
False Meteors that do change their place,
Though they shine fair and bright;
Yet when they covet to embrace,
Fall down and lose their light.
Thus while we shall preserve from waste
The flame of our desire,
No vestall shall maintain more chaste,
Or more immortal fire.
IV.
If thou perceive thy flame decay,
Come light thine Eyes at mine;
And when I feel mine aste away
I Will take new fire from thine.
A Motive to Love.
^ FAith be no longer coy,
^ but let us enjoy
^ what is by the world confessed,
^ Women love best:
^ thy Beauty fresh as May
^ will soon decay,
^ besides within a year or two
^ I shall be old, and cannot do.
Do think that nature can
For every man,
Had she more, skill, provide
So fair a Bride?
Who ever had a Feast
For a single Guest?
No, without she did intend
To serve the Husband and his friend.
To be a little nice
Sets better price
On Virgins, and improves
Their Servants loves;
But on the riper years
It ill appears:
After a while you will find this true,
I need provoking more then you.
On Liberty.
^ HOw happy'rt thou and I that never knew how to love?
^ there is no such blessing here beneath, what e're there is above;
^ it is li -- berty, it is liberty, that e -- very wise man loves.
Out, out upon those Eyes, that think to murder me,
And he is an Ass believes her fair, that is not kind and free:
There Is nothing sweet, there is nothing sweet to man, but Liberty.
I Will tie my Heart to none, nor yet confine mine Eyes,
But I will play my Game so well, I Will never want a prize:
It Is liberty, it is liberty, has made me now thus wise.
Beauty and Love at ods.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ BEauty and Love once fell at ods,
^ and thus reviled each other:
^ Quoth Love, I am one of the gods,
^ and you wait on my mother;
^ thou have no power
^ ore man at all, but what I gave to thee;
^ nor art thou longer fair
^ or sweet, then men acknowledge me.
Away fond Boy, then Beauty said,
We see that thou art blind,
But men have knowing eyes, and can
My graces better find:
'Twas I begot thee, Mortals know,
And called thee Blind desire;
I made thy Arrows, and thy Bow,
And Wings to kindle fire.
Love here in anger flew away,
And straight to Vulcan prayed
That he would tip his shasts with scorn,
To punish this proud Maid:
So Beauty ever since has bin
But courted for an hour,
To love a day is now a sin
Against Cupid and his power.
Love admits no Delay.
Mr. Henry Laws.
^ COme, O come, I brook no stay,
^ she does not love that can delay;
^ see how the stealing Night
^ has blotted out the light,
^ and Tapers do supply the day.
To be Chaste is to be Old,
And that soolish Girl that is cold
Is fourscore at fifteen,
Desires do write us green;
And looser Flames our Youth unfold.
See the first Taper's almost gone,
Thy flame like that will straight be none,
And I as it expire,
Not able to hold fire;
She loses Time that lies alone.
Let us cherish then these powers
Whiles we yet may call them ours;
Then we best spend our Time,
When no Dull Zealous Chime,
But sprightfull kisses strike the hour.
The Anglers Song.
Mr. Henry Laws.
For 2 Voc. Treble and Bass.
^ Man's Life is but vain, for it is subject to pain and sorrow, and short as a
Bubble; It Is a Hodg Podg of business, and Money and Care, and Care and Money,
and trouble. But we will take no Care when the Weather proves Fair, nor will we
Vex now though it Rain; we will banish all Sorrow, and Sing till to morrow, and
Angle and Angle again.

On Attractive Beauty.
Mr. John Goodgroome.
^ Do see how unregarded now
^ that piece of Beauty passes?
^ There was a time when I did vow
^ to that alone, but mark the fate of Faces;
^ That Red and White works now no more on me,
^ than if it could not charm, or I not see.
II.
And yet the Face continues good,
And I have still desires;
Am still the self-same Flesh and Blood,
As apt to melt, and suffer for those fires:
Oh some kind power unriddle where it lies,
Whether my Heart be faulty or her Eyes.
III.
She every day her man does kill,
And I as often dye;
Neither her Power then, nor my Will
Can questioned be, what is the Mystery?
Sure Beauties Empires, like to greater States,
Have certain Periods set, and Hidden Fates.
Power of Love.
Mr. J. Goodgroome.
^ BRightest, since your pitying Eye
^ saves whom it once condemned to die,
^ whom lingering Time did long dismay,
^ you have relieved in this short day:
^ Propitious gods themselves can do no more;
^ slow to Destroy, but active to restore.
From your Fair, but absent Look,
Cold Death her Pale Artilory took;
Till Gentle Love that Dart suppressed,
And Lodged a Milder in your breast;
Like Famed Acchillis mystic spear, thus you
Both scatter Wounds, and scatter Balsame too.
The Jovial Beggar.
^ FRom Hunger and Cold who lives more free, and who so richly choathed as we?
Our Bellies are full, and our Flesh it is Warm, and against Pride our Rags is a
Charm: Enough is a Feast to Morrow, Let rich men take care, we feel no So^row.

A Protest against Love.
Mr. H. Laws.
^ NO, no, I never was in Love,
^ nor ever hope to be;
^ I have an Art protects my Heart
^ from that fond Lu -- na -- cie.
^ And yet I know that I have seen
^ a world of Taking Faces;
^ and spent much time in finding out
^ their several hidden Graces.
This Lady for her pretty Shape
I often have admired:
That for her Fancy and her Wit;
I sometimes have desired.
But yet I never was in Love,
Nor ever hope to be:
Unless some Stronger Influence
Do draw my heart to thee.
The Excellency of Wine.
Mr. H. Laws.
^ It Is Wine that inspires,
^ and quenches Love's fires,
^ teaches fools how to rule a State;
^ Maids never did approve it,
^ because those that love it,
^ despise and laugh at their hate.
The Drinkers of Beer,
Did never yet appear,
In matters of any Weight;
It Is he whose design,
Is quckn'd by Wine,
That raises things to their height.
We then should it prize,
For never black-Eyes
Made Wounds which this could not heal,
Who then does refuse
To drink of this Juice,
Is a Foe to the Commonweal.
An Italian Air.
^ VIctoria victoria victoria victori il miocore non Lagrimar piu non Lagrimar
piu e' s'colta d'amore laservi -- tu victoria victoria il miocore non Lagrimar
piu e scol -- ta damo -- re la servitu e' s'col -- tu d' amore la servitu:
(...) ^pioa tuoi danni fra stuoli disguardi Con -- ve -- ri Bugiar -- di di --
spo -- ve glin ganne le (...) forde gl' affanno non hanno piu luo -- co dil
Crudo su -- o feco espect lar -- do -- re.

An Italian Air for two Voices.
Cantus.
^ COn bell se g^lla de se cretezza le to -- ca se prende del bella bell -- la la
lingua se firma de li -- ber -- diti e -- de po -- ni -- ta Resto la donna que
bella che piache que ta -- ce e Jo -- ve del core sensa crezza da mo -- re che
piache che ta -- ce e Jo -- ve del co -- re sensa -- crezza da mo -- re.

Bassus.
^ COn bell se gella de se cretezza le to -- ca se prende del bella bell -- la la
lingua se firma de li -- ber -- diti e de po -- ni -- ta Resto la donna que
bella che piache que ta -- ce e Jo -- ve del core sensa crezza da mo -- re che
piache che ta -- ce e Jo -- ve del co -- re sensa -- crezza da mo -- re.

Here ends the AIRS for One or two Voices to the Theorbo-Lute, or Basse-Viol.
SECOND BOOK: CONTAINING DIALOGUES For TWO VOICES: To be Sung to the Theorboe
Lute or Basse-Viol.
A Dialogue betwixt Phillis and Clorillo.
A. 2. Voc. Cantus and Bassus.
Philis. ^ I Prithee keep my sheep for me:
^ Clorillo, will thou, tell?

Clorillo. ^ First, let me have a kiss of thee,
^ and I -- will keep them well.

Phillis. ^ If thou a while but to my little flock will look,
^ thou shall have this imbroidred skrip and silver hook.

Clorillo. ^ No other favor or reward I crave,
^ but one poor kiss.

Philis. ^ A kiss thou must not have.

Clorillo. ^ And why?

Phillis. ^ Such enticements Maids must fly:
^ this Garland thou shall have of Roses and of Lil -- lies.

Clorillo. ^ Nor Skrip, nor Hook, nor Garland sweetest Phillis, do I require,
^ to kiss thy fresh and To -- sie lip is only my desire.

Phillis. ^ Take then a kiss, and let me go,
^ till I return thy care upon my flocks bestow.

Chorus together.
^ Sweet sweet is that kiss that does with true and just desire
^ as much a -- another give, as to it self require.
^ Sweet sweet is that kiss that does with true and just desire
^ as much a -- another give, as to it self require.
A Dialogue between Silvia and Thirsis.
Dr. Charles Coleman.
For Bass and Treble.
Thirsis. ^ DEar Silvia, let thy Thirsis know
^ what it is that makes those tears overflow.
^ Are the Kids that used to play
^ and skip so nimbly gone astray?
^ Are Cloris flowers more fresh and green?
^ Or is some other Nymph made Queen?
^

Silvia. ^ Thirsis. do thou think that I can grieve for this, when thou art
by?

Thirsis. ^ What is it then?

Silvia. ^ My father bids that I no longer feed my Kids with thine but
Coridons, and wear none but his Garlands on my hair.

Thirsis ^ Why so? Why so my Silvia? Will he keep
^ thy flocks more safe when thou do sleep?
^ Will the Nimphs envy more thy praise,
^ when chanced with his round delays?

Sylvia. ^ No Thirsis, I my flocks must join
^ with his, 'cause they are more then thine.

Chorus.
^ Fathers cruel as the Rocks,
^ join not their children, but their flocks, their flocks,
^ and Hymen calls to light his torches there, and Hymen calls to light his
torches there,
^ where fortune, not affections equal are.
^ Fathers cruel as the rocks, cruel as the rocks,
^ join not their children, but their flocks, their flocks,
^ and Hymen calls, Hymen calls to light his torches there,
^ and Hymen calls, and Hymen calls to light his torches there,
^ where fortune, not affections equal are.
A Dialogue between a Shepherd and Lucinda.
Shepherd. ^ DId not you once Lucinda vow,
^ you would love none but me?

Lucinda. ^ I, but my mother tells me now
^ I must love wealth, not thee.

Shep. ^ It Is not my fault, my sheep are lean,
^ or that they are so few.

Luc. ^ Nor mine, I cannot love so mean,
^ so poor a thing as you.

Shep. ^ Cruel, cruel thy love is in thy power,
^ fortune is not in mine.

Luc. ^ But Shepherd, think how great my dower
^ is in respect of thine.

Shep. ^ Ah me! ah me!

Luc. ^ Ah me!

Shep. ^ Mock you my grief?

Luc. ^ I pit -- ty thy hard fate.

Shep. ^ Pity, for Love is poor releief, is poor relief, is poor relief,
^ I Would rather choose thy hate.

Luc. ^ But I must love thee.

Shep. ^ No.

Luc. ^ But I must love thee.

Shep. ^ No.

Luc. ^ Believe,

Shep. ^ No.

Luc. ^ Believe.

Shep. ^ No.

Luc. ^ I Will seal it with a kiss, and give thee no more cause to grieve
^ then what thou findst in this:
^ I Will give thee no more cause to grieve,
^ then what thou findst in this.

Chorus.
^ Be witness then, be witness then you powers above,
^ and by these ho -- ly bands
^ let it appear that truest love
^ grows not on wealth, grows not on wealth, grows not on wealth grows not on
wealth
^ nor lands.
^ Be witness then, be witness then you powers above,
^ and by these ho -- ly bands
^ let it appear that truest love
^ grows not on wealth, grows not on wealth, grows not on wealth, grows not on
wealth grows not on wealth
^ nor lands.
A Dialogue between Daphne and Strephon.
Mr. William Laws.
Strephon. ^ COme my Daphne, come away,
^ we do waste the cristal day.

Daphne. ^ It Is Strephon calls, what would my Love?

Strephon. ^ Come follow to the Myrtle Grove,
^ where Venus shall prepare new chaplets for thy hair.

Daphne. ^ Were I shut up within a tree,
^ I Would rend my bark to follow thee.

Strephon. ^ My Shepherdess make haste,
^ the minutes slide so fast.

Daphne. ^ In those cooler shades, will I
^ blind as Cupid kiss your Eye.

Strephon. ^ In thy bosom then I Will stray,
^ in such warm snow, who would not lose his way?

Chorus.
^ We Will laugh and leave this world behind,
^ and gods themselves that see,
^ shall envy thee and me,
^ but never find such joys when they embrace a Di -- e -- ty.
^ We Will laugh and leave this world behind,
^ and gods themselves that see,
^ shall envy thee and me,
^ but never find such joys when they embrace a Di -- e -- ty.
A Dialogue between Shepherd and Shepherdess.
Mr. William Caesar. alias Smegergill.
Shepherdess. ^ FOrbear fond Swain, I cannot love.

Shepherd. ^ I prithee fair one, tell me why thou art so cold?

Shepherdess. ^ You do but move to take away my liber -- ty.

Shepherd. ^ I Will keep thy sheep whilst thou shall play;
^ Delight shall make each Month a May.

Shepherdess. ^ Those pleasant are unthrifty hours.

Shepherd. ^ Thou shall have the choycest flowers, wax and Honey, milk and wool,
^ of ripest fruits thy belly full.

Shepherdess. ^ My flocks I Will keep by thine.

Shepherd. ^ Not so, but let them undistinguisht go.

Shepherdess. ^ I can afford no more.

Shepherd. ^ Ah cease! Love come so ar may yet increase.

Shepherdess ^ Each day I Will grant a kiss.

Shepherd. ^ Our blisses must not conclude, but spring from kisses.

Shepherhess. ^ Then Shepherd love thy fill.

Shepherd. ^ I shall, who knows how much loves not at all.

Chorus.
^ Then draw we both our flocks up hither,
^ that we may pitch, That we may pitch our folds together.
^ Amidst our chaste imbracements meet,
^ our selves as blame -- less as our sheep,
^ our selves as blame -- less as our sheep.
^ Then draw we both our flocks up hither,
^ That we may pitch, that we may pitch our folds together.
^ Amidst our chaste embraces meet,
^ Our selves as blameless as our sheep,
^ Our selves as blameless as our sheep.
A Dialogue betwixt an Nymph and a Shepherd.
Mr. Nich. Laneare
Nymph. ^ TEll me Shepherd do thou Love?

Shepherd. ^ Tell me Nymph why would thou know?

Nymph. ^ Thy wandering Flocks that without guide does Rove
^ thy blubbered Eyes, that still with tears does flow,
^ makes me to ask.

Shep. ^ I do.

Nymph. ^ Dear Shepherd tell me who?

Shep. ^ I Love a Nymph, from whose bright Eyes
^ Phoebe does her brightness borrow,
^ where Love did first my heart surprise,
^ where since has sat my sorrow.

Chorus together.
^ Love sits enthroned within the circle of bright Eyes.

^ Love sits enthroned within the circle of bright Eyes.

Nymph. ^ But tell me Shepherd, does her Virtues Beauty equal?

Shep. ^ As She in Beauty does all else excel,
^ so are her Virtues without parallel;

Nymph. ^ Does she disdain thee?

Shep. ^ No.

Nymph. ^ Why griev'st thou then?

Shep. ^ Because her love is only worthy of the gods, not men.

Chorus.
^ Loves chiefest joy is but a pleasing anguish,
^ who lives in Love, does dying live, and living languish.
^ Loves chiefest joy is but a pleasing anguish,
^ who lives in Love, does dying live, and living languish.
A Dialogue between Strephon and Phillis.
Mr. Nich. Laneare.
Phillis. ^ SHepherd in faith I cannot stay,
^ my wandering flocks call me away.

Strephon. ^ Phillis, I swear, since I have caught thee now,
^ upon thy rosy lips I Will pay my vow.

Phillis. ^ Who lives in love, may not by force constrain.

Strephon. ^ Where imprecation false oaths must obtain.

Phillis. ^ I prithee Strephon leave me.

Strephon. ^ Dear Phillis, leave to contemn me.

Phillis. ^ Nay, then I see, nay then I see, I must my self defend.

Strephon. ^ Vain is all defense and art.

Phillis. ^ Cruel, cruel, thou do of breath bereave me.

Chorus.
^ Since I have thee e're I part, I Will somother thee with kisses,
^ printing on thy lips, printing on thy lips a thousand such as this is.
^ Thus Strephon bold laid down his lovely Phillis.
^ And kissed her breathless, and kissed her breathless upon a bank of Lillies.
^ Since I have thee e're I part, I Will smother thee with kisses,
^ printing on thy lips, printing on thy lips a thousand, {vocal join} such as
this is.
^ Thus Strepon bold laid down his lovely Phillis.
^ And kissed her breathless, and kissed her breathless upon a bank of Lillies.
A Dialogue between Venus and Vulcan.
Mr. William Laws.
Venus. ^ VUlcan, Vulcan, O Vulcan, my Love!

Vulcan. ^ Who calls? Who names me here, amongst flames?

Venus. ^ Sweet, hear my plaint, give sorrow ease.

Vulcan. ^ Thy sacred power who dares displease?

Venus. ^ A -- las, forlorn Cupid! my wayward Son does scorn Loves just decree,
^ my awful hest and heavenly De -- i -- tie.

Vulcan. ^ Is he so bold? well, for thy sake, I that his Arrows heads
^ have used to make of piercing steel,
^ which Lo -- verse feel, will temper lead,
^ whose force is dull, and -- stroke is dead.
^ So that henceforth all men may blith^ly sing,
^ Cupid's no God, his Bow a -- Toy, his Shaft no fearful thing.

Chorus.
^ So that henceforth all men may blithe -- ly sing,
^ Cupid's no God, his Bow a -- Toy, his Shafts no -- fearful thing.
^ So that henceforth all men may blithe -- ly sing,
^ Cupid's no God, his Bow a -- Toy, his Shafts no fearful thing.
A Dialogue between Charon and Philomel.
Mr. William Laws.
Phil. ^ CHaron, O gentle Charon! let me woo thee with tears, and pity now to
come to me.

Char. ^ What voice so sweet and charming do I hear? Say what thou art?

Phil. ^ I prithee first draw near.

Char. ^ A sound I hear,
^ but nothing yet I see: Speak where thou art?

Phil. ^ O Charon, pit -- ty me!
^ I am a shade, and though no name I tell,
^ my mournful voice will say I Am Philomel.

Char. ^ What Is that to me? I waft, nor fish, nor fowl,
^ nor beast, Fond thing, but only humane souls.

Phil. ^ Alas for me!

Char. ^ Shame on thy warbling note,
^ that made me hoise my sail, and bring my boat,
^ but I Will return: what mischief brought thee hither?

Phil. ^ A deal of love, and much, much grief together.

Char. ^ What Is thy request?

Phil ^ That since she is now beneath
^ that fed my life, I follow her in death.

Char. ^ And's that all? I Am gone.

Phil. ^ For love I pray thee.

Char. ^ Talk not of love, all pray, but no souls pay me.

Phil. ^ I Will give thee sighs and tears.

Char. ^ Can tears pay scores
^ for patching sails, or mending boat, or oars?

Phil. ^ I Will beg a penny, or I Will sing so long,
^ till thou shall say I'ave paid thee in a Song.

Char. ^ Why, then being.

Chorus both together.
^ And all the while we make our sloathful passage over the Stygian Lake,
^ thou and I Will sing, thou and I Will sing, to make these dull shades merry;
^ who else with tears will doubtless drown our Fer -- ry.
^ And all the while we make our sloathful passage over the Stygian Lake,
^ thou and I Will sing, thou and I Will sing to make these dull shades merry;
^ who else with tears will doubt -- less drown our Fer -- ry.
A Dialogue between Thyrsis and Damon.
Mr. William Caesar, alias Smegergill.
Damon. ^ THyrsis, kind Swain, come near,
^ and lend a sigh, a tear,
^ to thy sad Friend; Forsaken Damon calls.

Thyrsis. ^ Poor Wight,
^ I come; But wherefore in this plight?
^ Thine eyes are red, thy griefs are swel -- ling:
^ Tell them, Sorrow's half cured by telling.

Damon. ^ Take then the cause of all my woes,
^ Phillis is gone.

Thyrsis. ^ Why, let her go,
^ it is but with other Nimphs and Swains,
^ to sport upon the Neigb'ring Plains;
^ she will come again, be it but to find
^ the Heart with thee she left behind.

Damon. ^ Alas, she is taken mine! Here Is free
^ as Air is gone un -- chain -- 'd by me,
^ though I with such devotion sought
^ her love, as to great Pan I ought,
^ whilst my pale look and scattered sheep
^ showed I, nor thoughts, nor flocks could keep.

Thirsis. ^ Chere up, and lightly by her set.

Damon. ^ He never loved that could forget.

Chorus.
^ Love is a Riddle, which he best unties,
^ whose reason's not betrayed by his eyes,
^ whose reason's not betray -- ed, betray -- ed by his eyes.
^ Love is a Riddle, which he best unties,
^ whose reason's not betrayed by his eyes,
^ whose reason's not betrayed, betrayed by his eyes.
A Glee to Bachus with Chorus for Three voices to be sung between every verse.
Dr. Charles Colman.
Chorus.
Cantus.
^ TO Bacchus we to Bacchus sing,
^ with wine and mirth we will conjure him, we will conjure him, with wine and mirth
we will conjure him.
Tenor.
^ TO Bacchus we to Bacchus sing,
^ with Wine and mirth with {vocal join} we will conjure we will conjure him, we will
conjure him, with wine and mirth we will conjure him.
Bassus.
^ TO Bacchus, to Bacchus, we to Bacchus sing,
^ with Wine and mirth we will conjure we will conjure him, we will conjure him, with
wine and mirth we will conjure him.
First verse.
^ BY his Mothers Eye,
^ and his Fathers Thigh,
^ by her God brought to light,
^ and his too glorious sight;
^ By Junoes deceit,
^ and by thy sad retreat,
^ appear, appear, appear, appear in Bottles here.
Chorus again.

Second verse.
^ BY Ariadnes wrongs,
^ and the false youths harms,
^ by the Rock in his breast,
^ and her tears fore oppressed,
^ By the Beauty she fled
^ and the Pleasures of a bed,
^ appear, appear, appear, appear in Bottles here.
Third verse.
^ BY this purple Wine
^ thus poured on the shrine;
^ and by this Beer glass
^ to the next kind Lass;
^ by a Girl twice nine,
^ that will claspe like a Vine,
^ that will claspe thee like a Vine,
^ appear, appear, appear, appear, in Bottles here.
Fourth verse.
^ BY the men thou'st won,
^ and the women undone;
^ By the friendship thou have made,
^ and the secrets betrayed;
^ By the power over sorrow,
^ thus charmed till to morrow.
^ appear, appear, appear, appear in Bottles Beer.
To Bacchus, etc.
A Glee to the Cook.
Dr. John Wilson
A. 3. Voc.
First Treble. ^ BRing out the cold Chine, the cold Chine to me,
^ and how I Will Charge him Come and see.

Bass alone. ^ Brawn Tusked Brawn, well sowst and fine,
^ with a precious Cup of Muscadine.

Chorus for three Voices.
^ How shall I sing?
^ How shall I sing?
^ How shall we look
^ in Honor in Honor of the Master Cook?
^ How shall I sing?
^ How shall I sing?
^ How shall we look
^ in Honor in Honor of the Master Cook?
^ How shall I sing?
^ How shall I sing?
^ How shall we look
^ in Honor in Honor of the Master Cook?
First Treble. ^ The Pig shall turn Round, and Answer me;
^ Can thou spare me a Sholder?

Second Treble. ^ A -- wy A -- wy.

First Treble. ^ The Duck, Goose, and Capon: Good fellows all three
^ shall dance thee an Antic, so shall the Turkey.
^ But O! the cold Chine, the cold Chine for me.

Second Treble. ^ With Brew -- is I Will 'noint thee from Head to the Heel,
^ shall make thee Run Nimbler then the new oyled Wheel.

Bass alone. ^ With Pye-crust we will make thee the Eighth Wiseman to be;
^ but O! the cold Chine, the cold Chine, but O! the cold Chine for me.

Chorus of three Voices again.
^ How shall, etc.

The Tinker.
Dr. John Wilson.
A 2 Voc.
Bass and Treble. ^ HE that a Tinker a Tinker a Tinker would be,
^ let him leave other Loves, and come listen to me:
^ Though he travel all the Day, he comes Home late at Night,
^ and Dallies, and Dallies with his Doxey, and Dreams of Delight.

Bass alone. ^ His Pot and his Tossed in the Morning he takes
^ and all the Day long good Music he makes:
^ He wanders the World to Wakes and to Fairs,
^ and casts his Cap, and casts his Cap at the Court and her Cares.

Treble. ^ When to the Town the Tinker does come,

Chorus.
^ O! how the wanton Wenches run.

^ O! how the wanton Wenches run.

Bass alone. ^ Some bring him basins, some bring him boles;
^ all Wenches pray him to stop up their holes.

Chorus.
^ Tink goes the Hammer, the Skillet and the Scummer. Come bring me the Copper
Kettle
^ for the Tinker, the Tinker, the Merry Merry Tinker, O! he is the Man of
Metle.
^ Tink goes the Hammer, the Skillet and the Scummer. Come bring me the Copper
Kettle
^ for the Tinker, the Tinker, the Merry Merry Tinker, O! he is the Man of
Metle, O! he is the Man of Metle.
A Glee.
Mr. Simon Ives.
A. 2. Voc.
Treble and Bass.
^ Fly Boy, Fly Boy to the Cellars bottom,
^ view well your Quills and Bung, Sir:
^ draw Wine to preserve the Lungs, Sir;
^ not Rascally Wine, to Rot um.
^ If the Quills run foul,
^ be a trusty Soul,
^ and Cane it;
^ for the Health is such,
^ an ill drop will much
^ an ill drop will much
^ profane it.
^ Fly Boy to the Cellars bottom,
^ view well your Quills and Bung, Sir:
^ draw Wine to preserve the Lungs, Sir;
^ not Rascally Wine, to Rot um.
^ If the Quills run foul,
^ be a trusty Soul,
^ and Cane it;
^ for the Health is such,
^ an ill drop will much
^ an ill drop will much
^ profane it.
Here Ends the Second Part of this Book; being Dialogues and Glees for two
Voices, to the Theorboe-Lute, or Bass-Viol.
THIRD BOOK. CONTAINING Short AIRS or BALADS for Three Voices: Which may be
sung either by a Voice alone, or by Two or Three Voices.
Mr. William Webb.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ I Wish no more thou should love me,
^ my joys are full in loving thee;
^ my Heart's too narrow to contain
^ my bliss, if thou should love again.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ I Wish no more thou should love me,
^ my joys are full in loving thee;
^ my Heart's too narrow to contain
^ my bliss, if thou should love again.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ I Wish no more thou should love me,
^ my joys are full in loving thee;
^ my Hearts too narrow to contain
^ my bliss, if thou should love again.
Mr. Nicholas Lanneare.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ THough I am young and cannot tell,
^ either what love or death is well;
^ and then again I have been told,
^ love wounds with heat, love wounds with heat, and death with cold
Yet I have heard they both bear darts,
And both do aim at humane hearts;
So that I fear they do but bring
Extremes to touch, and mean one thing.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ THough I am young, and cannot tell,
^ either what love or death is well,
^ and then again I have been told,
^ love wounds with heat, love wounds with heat, and death with cold.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ THough I am young, and cannot tell,
^ either what love or death is well;
^ and then again I have been told,
^ love wounds with heat, love wounds with heat, and death with cold.
Mr. Henry Laws.
Chloris taking the Air.
A. 3. Voc.
^ COme Chloris, hie we to the Bowr'
^ to sport us ere the day be done;
^ such is thy Power,
^ that every Flower
^ will open to thee as to the Sun.
II.
And if a Flower but chance to dye
With my sights blasts, or mine Eyes rain,
Thou can revive it with thine Eye,
And with thy breath mak't sweet again.
III.
The wanton Suckling and the Vine
Will strive for the honor, who first may
With their green Arms incircle thine,
To keep the burning Sun away.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ COme Chloris, hie we to the Bower
^ to sport us ere the day be done;
^ such is thy Power
^ that every Flower
^ will open to thee as to the Sun.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ COme Chloris, hie we to the Bower
^ to sport us ere the day be done;
^ such is thy Power,
^ that every Flower
^ will open to thee as to the Sun.
Dr. John Wilson.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ WHen Troy Town for ten years Wars
^ withstood the Greeks in manful wise,
^ yet did their Foes increase so fast,
^ that to resist none could suffice.
^ Waste lie those Walls that were so good,
^ and Corn now grows where Troy Town stood.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ WHen Troy Town for ten years Wars,
^ withstood the Greeks in manful wise,
^ yet did their Foes increase so fast,
^ that to resist none could suffice.
^ Waste lie those Walls that were so good,
^ and Corn now grows where Troy Town stood.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ When Troy Town for ten years Wars
^, withstood the Greeks in manful wise
^ yet did their Foes increase so fast,
^ that to resist none could suffice.
^ Waste lie those Walls that were so good,
^ and Corn now grow where Troy Town stood.
Dr. John Wilson.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ FRom the fair Lavi -- ni -- an Shore,
^ I your Markets come to store.
^ Such is the sacred hunger of Gold;
^ then come to my Pack,
^ while I cry what do you lack,
^ what do you buy, for here it is to be sold.
^ Muse not though so far I dwell,
^ and my Wares come here to sell.
^ Such is the sacred hunger of Gold;
^ then come to my Pack,
^ while I cry what do you lack,
^ what do you buy, for here it is to be sold.
I have Beauty, Honor, Grace,
Fortune, Favor, Time, and Place;
And what else thou would request,
Even the Thing thou likest best.
First let me have but a touch of thy Gold,
Then come to me Lad
Thou shall have what thy Dad
Never gave, for here it is to be sold.
Maddam, come see what you lack,
Here Is Complexion in my Pack;
White and Red you may have in this place,
To hide your old ill wrinkled Face;
First let me have but a touch of thy Gold,
Then thou shall seem
Like a Wench of Fisteen,
Although thou be threescore Years old.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ FRom the fair Lavinian Shore,
^ I your Markets come to store.
^ Such is the sacred hunger of gold,
^ then come to my Pack,
^ while I cry what do you lack,
^ what do you buy, for here it is to be sold.
^ Muse not though so far I dwell
^ and my wares come here to sell.
^ Such is the sacred hunger of gold,
^ then come to my Pack,
^ while I cry what do you lack,
^ what do you buy, for here it is to be sold.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ FRom the fair Lavinian shore,
^ I your Markets come to store.
^ Such is the sacred hunger of gold,
^ then come to my Pack,
^ while I cry what do you lack,
^ what do you buy, for here it is to be sold.
^ Muse not though so far I dwell,
^ and my wares come here to sell.
^ Such is the sacred hunger of gold,
^ then come to my Pack,
^ while I cry, What do you lack,
^ what do you buy? For here it is to be sold.
Dr. John Wilson.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ WHere the Be sucks there suck I,
^ in a Cowslips bell I lie,
^ there I cowch when Owls do cry,
^ on the Batts back I do fly
^ after Summer merrily.
^ Merrily merrily shall I live now
^ under the bloslom that hangs on the bow.
^ Merrily merrily shall I live now
^ under the blossom that hangs on the bow.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Where the Be sucks there suck I,
^ in a Cowslips bell I lie,
^ there I cowch when Owls do cry,
^ on the Batts back I do fly
^ after Summer merrily.
^ Merrily merrily shall I live now
^ under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
^ Merrily merrily shall I live now
^ under the blossom that hangs on the bow
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Where the Be sucks there suck I,
^ in a Cowslips bell I lie,
^ there I cowch when Owls do cry,
^ on the Batts back I do fly
^ after Summer merrily.
^ Merrily merrily shall I live now
^ under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
^ Merrily merrily shall I live now
^ under the blossom that hangs on the bough.
Dr. John Wilson.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ WHen Love with uncon -- fi -- ned wings
^ hovers within my Gates,
^ and my divine Althea brings
^ to whisper at my Grates.
^ When I lie tan -- gled in her Hair,
^ and fettered with her Eye,
^ the Birds that wanton in the Air
^ know no such liberty.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ WHen Love with unconfined wings
^ hovers within my Gates,
^ and my divine Althe -- a brings
^ to whisper at my Grates.
^ When I lie tangled in her Hair,
^ and fet -- ter'd with her Eye,
^ the Birds that wanton in the Air
^ know no such liberty.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ When Love with unconfined wings
^ hovers within my Gates,
^ and my divine Althea brings
^ to whisper at my Grates.
^ When I lie tangled in her Hair,
^ and fettter'd with her Eye,
^ the Birds that wanton in the Air
^ know no such liberty.
Dr. John Wilson.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ DO not fear to put thy feet
^ naked in the Ri -- ver sweet,
^ think not Neute, nor Leech, nor Toad
^ will bite thy foot when thou have trod;
^ nor let the waters, rising high,
^ nor let the waters, rising high,
^ as thou wad'st in make thee cry
^ and sob, but ever live with me,
^ and not a wave shall trouble thee.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ DO not fear to put thy feet
^ naked in the River sweet,
^ think not Neute, nor Leech nor Toad
^ will bite thy foot when thou have trod;
^ nor let the waters rising high,
^ nor let the waters, rising high,
^ as thou wad'st in make thee cry
^ and sob, but ever live with me,
^ and not a wave shall trouble thee.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ DO not fear to put thy feet
^ naked in the Ri -- ver sweet,
^ think not Neut, nor Leech, nor Toad
^ will bite thy foot when thou have trod;
^ nor let the waters rising high,
^ nor let the waters rising high,
^ as thou wad'st in make thee cry
^ and sob, but ever live with me,
^ and not a wave shall trouble thee.
Dr. John Wilson.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ IN the merry month of May,
^ on a morn by break of day,
^ forth I walked the Wood so wide,
^ when as May was in her pride;
^ There I spied all alone all alone
^ Philida and Co -- ri -- don.
Much ado there was, God wot,
He did love, but she could not;
He said his love was to woo,
She said none was false to you;
He said, he had loved her long,
She said, love should take no wrong.
Coridon would have kissed her then,
She said, Maids must kiss no Men,
Till they kiss for good and all;
Then she bad the Shepherd call
All the Gods to witness truth,
Never was loved so fair a youth.
Then with many a pretty Oath,
As Yea and Nay, and Faith and Troth;
Such as silly Shepherds use
When they would not love abuse;
Love which had been long deluded,
Was with kisses sweet concluded.
And Phillida with Garlands gay
Was Crowned the Lady May.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ IN the merry month of May,
^ on a morn by break of day,
^ forth I walked the Wood so wide,
^ when as May was in her pride;
^ there I spied all alone all alone
^ Phil -- ida and Coridon.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ IN the merry month of May,
^ on a morn by break of day,
^ forth I walked the Wood so wide,
^ when as May was in her pride;
^ there I spied all alone all alone
^ Phi -- li -- da and Co -- ri -- don.
Mr. William Laws.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ O My Clarissa! thou cruel Fair,
^ bright as the Morning, and soft as the Air;
^ Fresher than Flowers in May,
^ yet far more sweet than they;
^ Love is the subject of my prayer.
When first I saw thee, I felt a flame,
Which from thine Eyes like lightning came;
Sure it was Cupid's Dart,
It pierced quite through my heart;
Oh, could thy breast once feel the same!
Let not such Fortune my Love betide;
Oh, let your rocky breast be mollifi'd!
Send me not to my Grave
Unpittyed like a slave;
How can love such usage abide?
A wound so powerful would urge thy soul,
Spite of a froward heart, coyness control,
And make thy love as fixed
As is the heart thou prik'st,
Forcing thee with me to condole.
Sympathize with me a while in grief,
This passion quickly will find out relief;
Cupid will from his Bowers
Warm these chill hearts of ours,
And make his power rule there in chief.
Then would the God of Love equal be,
Giving me ease, as by wounding thee;
Then would you never scorn,
When like to me you burn;
At least not prove unkind to me.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ O My Clarissa! thou cruel Fair,
^ bright as the Morning, and soft as the Air:
^ Fresher than flowers in May,
^ yet far more sweet than they;
^ Love is the subject of my prayer.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ O My Clarissa! thou cruel Fair,
^ bright as the Morning, and soft as the Air:
^ Fresher than flowers in May,
^ yet far more sweet than they;
^ Love is the subject of my prayer.
Mr. William Laws.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ GAther your Rose buds while you may,
^ Old Time is still a flying;
^ And that same Flower that smiles to day,
^ to morrow will be dying.
The glorious Lamp of Heaven, the Sun,
The higher he is getting,
The sooner will his race be run,
And nearer he is to setting.
That Age is best that is the first,
While youth and blood are warmer;
Expect not the last and worst,
Time still succeeds the former.
Then be not coy, but use your time,
While you may go marry,
For having once but lost your prime,
You may for ever tarry.
Cantus Secundus.
A 3. Voc.
^ GAther your Rose buds while you may,
^ Old Time is still a flying;
^ And that same Flower that smiles to day,
^ to morrow will be dying.
Bassus.
A 3. Voc.
^ GAther your Rose buds while you may,
^ old Time is still a flying;
^ And the same Flower that smiles to day
^ to morrow will be dying.
Mr. Henry Laws.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ FEar not, dear Love, that I Will reveal
^ those hours of pleasure we two steal,
^ no Eye shall see, nor yet the Sun,
^ descry what thou and I have done.
No ear shall hear our Love, but we
As silent as the night will be,
The God of Love himself, (whose dart
Did first wound mine, and then thy heart.)
Shall never know that we can tell,
What sweets in stolen embraces dwell;
This only means may find it out,
If when I die, Physicians doubt.
What caused my death, and then to view
Of all their judgments which was true;
Rip up my heart, O then I sear
The world will see thy picture there.
Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ FEar not, dear Love, that I Will reveal
^ those hours of pleasure we two steal,
^ no Eye shall see, nor yet the Sun,
^ descry what thou and I have done.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ FEar not, dear Love, that I Will reveal
^ those hours of pleasure we two steal,
^ no Eye shall see, nor yet the Sun,
^ descry what thou and I have done.
Mr. William Tompkins.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ FIne young Folly, though you wear
^ that fair beauty, I did swear,
^ yet you never could reach my heart,
^ for we courtiers learn at school
^ only with your sex to fool,
^ y'r not worth our serious part.
When I sigh and kiss your hand,
Cross mine Arms, and wondering stand,
Holding fairly with your eye:
Then dilate on my desires,
Swear the Sun never shot such fires,
All is but a handsome lie.
Wherefore, Madam, wear no cloud,
Nor to check my flames grow proud;
For insooth I much do doubt,
It Is the powder in your hair,
Not your breath persumes the Air,
And your clothes that set you out.
When I eye your Curles or Lace,
Gentle soul, you think your face
Straight some murder does commit;
And your conscience does begin
To be scrup'lous of my sin,
When I court to show my wit.
Yet though truth has this confessed,
And I swear I love in jest,
Courteous soul, when next I court,
And protest an amorous flame
You I vow, I in earnest am,
Bedlam, this is pretty sport.
Cantus Secundus.
A 3. Voc.
^ FIne young Folly, though you wear
^ thar fair beauty, I did swear
^ yet you never, you never could reach my heart,
^ for we courtiers learn at school
^ only with your sex to fool,
^ y'r not worth our serious part.
Bassus.
A 3. Voc.
^ FIne young Folly, though you wear
^ that fair beauty, I did swear
^ yet you never you never could reach my heart,
^ for we courtiers learn at school
^ only with your sex to fool,
^ y'r not worth our serious part.
Mr. Henry Laws.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ SIng fair Clorinda, fair Clorinda sing, whilst you move those that attend
the throne, the throne above, to leave their holy business there; shall so much
harmony attend to think the spears were made in vain? Since here is a voice
quickens the sloth of natures age, it comforts growth, it comforts growth in
all her works, and can provoke a Lilly to out -- live an Oak, and can provoke
a Lilly, can provoke a Lilly to out -- live an Oak.

Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ SIng fair Clorin -- da, sing, sing, whilst you move those that attend the
throne above, to leave their holy business there, till each with his obedient
ear shall so much har -- mo -- ny at -- tain, to think the spears were made in
vain: Since here is a voice quickens the sloth of natures age, it comforts
growth, it comforts growth in all her works, and can provoke a Lil -- ly, and
can provoke a Lilly, and can provoke a Lilly, can provoke a Lilly, and can
provoke a Lilly to out -- live an Oak.

Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ SIng fair Clorinda, sing, sing, whilst you move those that attend the throne
above, to leave their ho -- ly business there, till each with his obedient ear
shall so much harmony at -- tain, to think the spears were made in vain: Since
here is a voice quickens the sloth of natures age, it comforts growth in all her
works, and can provoke a Lilly and can provoke a Lil -- ly, and can provoke a
Lil -- ly to out -- live an Oak.

Mr. John Cobb.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ SMiths are good Fellows, good Fellows, they Blow the Bellows, they Blow the
Bellows, they Blow the Bellows while the Iron's hot; though there gains be
small, Thy pot and my pot, come thy pot and my pot, come thy pot and my pot,
and thy pot their Hammers call. Hallow, Hallow, Hallow is the White Mare
Fallow, hold foot while I strike, stand fast, stand fast, stand fast with a
Winion: Thy pot and my pot, come thy pot, come my pot and thy pot sure it is but
opinion Ale hurts the sight, For continually con -- ti -- nu -- al -- ly, Thy
pot and my pot, come thy pot, come thy pot and my pot, come thy pot their
Hammers call.

Cantus Secundus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ SMiths are good Fellows, they blow the Bellows, they blow the Bellows, they
blow the Bellows, while the Irons hot; though their gains be small. Thy pot,
and my pot, come thy pot, and my pot, come thy pot, and my pot their Hammers
call. Hallow, hallow is the white Mare fallow, hold foot while I strike, stand
fast, stand fast, stand fast with a winion. Thy pot, and my pot, come thy pot,
and my pot, and thy pot come sure it is but opinion, but opinion, Ale hurts the
Sight for continually. Thy pot, and my pot, come thy pot, come thy pot, and my
pot, come thy pot, and my pot their Hammers call.

Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
SMiths are good Fellows, good Fellows, they blow the Bellows, they blow the
Bellows, they blow the Bellows, while the Irons hot; though their gain be
small. Thy pot, and my pot, come thy pot, come thy pot, and my pot their
Hammers call. Hallow, hallow, is the white Mare fallow, hold foot while I
strike, stand fast, stand fast, stand fast, stand fast with a winion. Thy pot,
and my pot, come thy pot come; sure it is but opinion, but opinion, Ale hurts
the Sight for continually, for con -- ti -- nu -- al -- ly. Thy pot, and my
pot, come thy pot, come my pot, and thy pot their Hammers call.

Mr. William Smegergill alias Caesar.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Music, Music, thou Queen of souls get up, get up, and string thy powerful
Lute and some sad, some sad Requium sing, til Cliffs requite thy Echo with a
groan, and the dull Rocks repeat the duller tone,

Altus alone. ^ Then on a sudden, etc.

Bassus alone. ^ The Oak her K^s, etc.

Verse alone. ^ Mirtles shall caper, lofty Cedars run, and call the courtly
palm to make up one:

Chorus.
^ Then in the midst of all their jolly strain,
^ then in the midst of all their jol -- ly strain,
Slow. ^ strike a sad note, strike a sad note, strike a sad note
^ and fix 'um Trees again.
Altus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Music, Music, thou Queen of Souls get up, get up and string thy powerful
Lute and some sad, some sad Requium sing, Echo, Echo, and the dull Rocks
repeat thy duller tone:

Verse alone. ^ Then on a sudden, with a nimble hand, run -- gently over the
Cords, and so command the Pine to dance:

Chorus.
^ Then in the midst of all their jol -- ly, jol -- ly, jol -- ly strain;
then in the midst of all their jol -- ly, jol -- ly strain,
Slow. ^ strike a sad note, strike a sad note, and fix 'um Trees again.
Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ Music, Music, thou Queen of Souls, get up get up and string thy powerful
Lute, and some sad some sad Requium sing, till Cliffs requite thy Echo with a
groan and the dull Rocks repeat thy duller tone:

Verse alone. ^ The Oak her roots forego, the Palm and aged Elm to foot it too:

Chorus.
^ Then in the midst of all their jol -- ly, jol -- ly strain,
^ then in the midst of all their jol -- ly, jol -- ly jol -- ly strain,
Slow. ^ strike a sad note, strike a sad note, and fix 'um Trees again.
Mr. Jenkins.
Cantus Primus.
A. 2. Voc.
^ SEe, see, see the bright Light shine, and day does rise; shot from my
Mistress Eyes like Beams divine; her Glory does appear and; view the purer
light, Stream from her Sight stream from her Sight, when she shines clearly
here: But vail her leads; Ah then you will find how night is hurled about the
silent world; and we left blind that darkness seems to prove, for ought we see
it is only She make night and day to move, Then shine fair Celia lest our
borrowed light; when your Sun sets, when your Sun sets, when your Sun sets,
perish, perish, perish in shades of Night.

Mr. Jenkins.
Bassus.
A. 2. Voc.
^ SEe, see the bright, bright Light shine, and day does rise; shot from my
Mistress Eyes, like Beams divine her Glories do appear; and view the purer
light Stream from her Sight, whilst she shines clearly here: But veil her
lids: Ah then you will find how Night is hurled about the silent World, and we
left blind; that Darkness seems to prove, for ought we see, it is only She makes
Night and Day to move. Then shine fair Caelia, lest our borrowed Light, when
your Sun sets, when your Sun sets, when your Sun sets; Perish, perish, perish
in Shades of Night.

Mr. Tho Brewer.
Cantus Primus.
A. 2. Voc.
^ TUrn Amarillis to thy Swain, turn Amaril -- lis to thy Swain, turn Amarillis
to thy Swain, thy Damon calls thee back again, thy Damon calls thee back again:
Here is a pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty, pretty Arbor by, where Apollo, where
Apollo, where Apollo, where Apollo, cannot cannot spy, where Apollo cannot spy.
Here let us sit, and whilst I play, sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe, sing to my
Pipe, sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe a Rounddelay; sing to my Pipe, sing to
my Pipe, sing to my Pipe a Rounddelay.

Mr. Tho. Brewer.
Bassus.
A. 2. Voc.
^ TUrn Amarillis to thy Swain, turn Amarillis, turn Amarillis, turn Amarillis
to thy Swain, thy Damon calls thee back again, thy Damon calls thee back again:
Here is a pretty, Arbor by, where Apollo, where Apollo, where Apollo, where
Apollo cannot spy: where Apollo cannot spy: There let us sit, and whilst I play,
sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe, sing to my
Pipe a Rounddelay; sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe, sing to my Pipe a
Rounddelay.

Reader. Here thou have this Song, for Two Voices; as it was fiirst Composed by
my Friend the Author, though of late Years, two Inward Parts have been added to
it. J. P.

Mr. Simon Ives.
Cantus Primus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ NOw we are met, let us merry, merry be for one half Hour, with mirth and
glee: To recreate our Spirits dull, let us laugh and sing our Bellyes full.

Tenor.
A. 3. Voc.
^ NNow we are met, let us merry, merry be for one half Hour with mirth and
glee: To recreate our Spirits dull, let us laugh and sing our Bellyes full.

Bassus.
A. 3. Voc.
^ NOw we are met, let us merry, merry be for one half Hour with mirth and glee:
To recreate our Spirits dull, let us lau -- gh and sing our Bellyes full.

In praise of MUSIC.
Music miraculous Rhethorick! that speak Sense
Without a Tongue, excellent Eloquence:
The love of thee in wild Beasts have been known,
And Birds have liked thy Notes above their own.
How easy might thy Errors be excused,
Were thou as much beloved, as thou art abused;
Yet although dull Souls thy Harmony disprove,
Mine shall be fixed in what the Angels love.
W. D. Knight.

FINIS.

