DAVID's Distress and Deliverance A SERMON ON 1 SAMUEL 30.6. Preached at
EDINBURGH March 22 nd. 1696.

By J: W: Minister of the Gospel.

Psalm: 42.11. Why art thou cast down O my Soul? And why art thou disquieted
within me? Hope thou in GOD: For I shall yet praise Him, who is the Health of
my Countenance, and my GOD.

Ecce par DEO Dignum, vir Bonus cum Mala Fortuna compositus, Seneca: EDINBURGH,
Printed by John Reid, at his Printing House in Bell's-Wynd, M DCX CVI.

To the S: C:
R: B:
THE Actings of the Spirit of GOD are Harmonious on every Believing Soul,
varying only according to the different Circumstances of the Respective
Persons, ours being Congenial at the time; I hope what affoorded me Solace, may
have the same Effect on any of you who endeavor to seek GOD in earnest, that
it may prove Successful for that Effect, next to the Honor of our Exalted LORD
and Master, is the earnest Prayer of His unworthy Servant, And

Your fellow Sufferer in the Kingdom and Patience of JESUS CHRIST, J: W:
Kirkwal, Febr: 5. 1696.
SERMON OF DAVID's Distress and Deliverance.
1 Samuel: 30.6. And David was greatly Distressed, for the People spoke of
Stonning him, because the Soul of all the People was grieved, every Man for his
Sons and for his Daughters; But David encouraged himself in the LORD his GOD.


THE preceding History shows the ground of these Words: That being plain, I
proceed to the Words themselves. In which, remark the State of a Religious Soul
under Distress, that in the midst of a Storm without, has Calm Weather within,
Observe 1 st. A Storm from all Corners, beating on the Divine Soul. 2 dly. The
Sedate calm and serene Temper thereof; I shall consider them as they ly.

First. Inward Distress, Arr: Mont: Et Angustia fuit David valde, Jun: and
Trem: Angustia esset Davidi valde. The troubles that lighted on the Bodies of
others fell on his Spirit; Outward Providence are no Straits, till they get
into the Heart, a total stoppage of the Passages about the Heart, causes Death,
a Coarctation from the Sense of imminent or present Evils thereof, Grief.

2 dly, Peoples Tongues, boiling causes Froath, when the Heart is in
bitterness, the Tongue will give vent, according to the Man's Disposition, in
Words, of Discontent or sinful Passion.

3 dly, When the Waves rise higher, bad Words. often end in worse Actions; if
not prevented by Providence or Grace: The stroke that was from GOD, is charged
on David: They see the Stone, and not the Hand therefore, would throw it back
at him, as the suspected person.

4 thly, The Ground of all, and that 1 st. Inward, their Soul was grieved, Arr:
Mont: Quod amartudine affecta esset omnis anima, Jun: and Trem: Erat enim
amarus animus populi, These troubles like sour Leaven, had fermented their
Hearts.

2 dly, Outward, for their Sons and Daughters, these are Men's greatest
Treasures, their Goods were also taken away; But this afflicts more, that the
Hope of surviving in their Posterity was gone.

2 dly, Under all this, consider the Calmness of David's Spirit, Tranquillus
Deus tranquillat omnia, says one, Sapientis animus est instar status mundi
supra lunam: semper illic serenum est, says Seneca, wherein notice 1 st. His
Frame, Arr: Mont: roboravit^, he strengthened himself: Jun: and Trem:
confirmavit, he confirmed himself, and that on a two fold Ground.

First, The Power, All Sufficiency and Soveraignity of GOD, Isa: 26.4. In the
LORD JEHOVAH is everlasting Strength. His Name is a strong Tower, Prove: 18.10.

2 dly, His Interest in Him, JEHOVAH denotes his Essence, Eli shaddai his Power
and All Sufficiency, but Domino Deo suo, denotes David's Propriety. There is
much Divinity in Pronownes, says Luther, The Name LORD has Thunder, but my
GOD Sweetness. GOD, even thy GOD, shall bless thee, Psalm: 67.6.

From the Words thus explained, many Doctrines might be deduced; But my design
is to insist on the Latter Part, which contains this Proposition.

Under straits, Outward or Inward, on the Soul, Body or Condition, the
Soveraignity, Power and All Sufficiency of GOD, and an Interest in Him, gives
encouragement and Comfort. In the prosecution of this, consider first, what
there is in GOD to Encourage, and this will discover that there is nothing in
other things, that is not in him.

The Encouragements from God are reduceable to these four Heads. First, His
Attributes, there is a Stock of Comfort, a Wellspring of Everlasting Delight,
a Fountain that cannot be drawn dry; His power is for His people, and against
their Enemies. The same Cloud is dark on the Egyptians side, light on the
Israelits: His Wisdom guides their Hearts and ways; And when humane policy,
mean arts, and contrivances prove like a foot out of Joint, this gives light
and direction. His goodness, that seems wrapped up in the Cloud, tho it shine not
on their outward conditions; Yet with its Rays Illustrates their Hearts: As
the Sun, when the Clouds enterpose betwixt its light and us, shines still
above. His Truth is more than the dim light of nature, or the Moonshine of
legal Ceremonies, or the faint conceits of men; (like an ignis fatuus or stella
micans) it shines on all, according to their cappacities, and its
Entertainment. His Holiness like niter or soap, tho it toss, yet it refines the
Soul: Yea his Justice, which of all the rest looks most terrible, brings them
to act by lower motives of fear, which better experience sublimats to hope,
till it end in the most manly and rational inducement of Obedience, Love. Thus
these his attributes, tho seeming to dim wit, to d^s^gree; Yet concur
Harmoniously to the Souls encouragement, first in duty, and then in comfort:
For the seeking encouragement in the latter without the former, is but putting
a surface over the the Wound, while it festers within.

Secondly, His providence look favorably on the gracious heart, that passage,
Isa. 26.21. Come My people, enter into thy Chambers, etc. Whether it be to be
understood of the attributes, or providence, or promises of GOD, is true of
all three, and by interpreters, is thought to be taken from the common practice
of men, who then there are dangers or storms abroad, betake to their Houses, or
to that, Exodus: 9.19, 20. Of not going out of their houses, Exodus: 12.22. Or to
relate to that of Rahab. Josh: Chap: 2. Even these dispensations, the soul is
ready to entertain such thoughts of, as Jacob, Gen: 42.36. All these things are
against me; Yet, as with him, all was concurring for the good of his family,
and the Church; So these Passages, whereof we judge ante quintum actum in the
end are found the best, yea needful. If Abraham can bear riches, he shall have
them. If to Lazarus Soul poverty be meetest, he must have it. A dunghill
exercises Jobs patience as the Bench had done his integrity and Charity: In
the one he wanted feet to guide him, except these of faith and patitience, in
the other he was feet to the lame, Let us never entertain bad thoughts of
providence, till we see the whole frame. That passage is more comprehensive
than ordinary Christians are aware of, Rom: 8.28. All things work together for
good, to them which love GOD. There are some have uttered an expression, which
must be cautiously said and explained, that their sins did them most good, and
their graces least, not in their own nature, but corruption or grace mingling,
sin became matter of Humiliation, their graces of elation of mind.

Thirdly, The promises of God, are a Wellspring of comfort, if infidelity did
not dam up, or divert its conduits. There is more to be seen be a Gracious
Heart in one promise, than a thousand volumns, where the Soul is convinced of
Divine veracity, and persuaded of the certainty of Divine revelation; And I am
persuaded, that supposing a God and providence, which none in their wits dare
deny; Yea in their secret thoughts must say, quid si? Supposing this, I say,
the certainty and fullness of them, suitable to all conditions, events and
circumstances, is encouraging: So that there is not any condition the Soul can
labor under, but it finds something in the word that meets it. It were a
transcibing Holy write, to give particular instances. I am persuaded none in
the least degree acquaint with Christianity can deny it, only herein lies our
error, that as we are ready to mistrust the promises when they are due, so also
to trust to them when they do not belong.

4 ly, Experiences from GOD's actings on the Soul in every Condition, are a
great ground of Encouragement; This extends not only to the Outward Course of
Providence, but especially to the Inward Actings on the Heart, for the
Infinitely Wise GOD discovers Himself unto us three ways.

First, In the Works of Nature, this vast Frame, all its Wheels are guided by
an Architect, that is Wise, Great, and Good, and he that guides well the
Universal Frame, will much more his peculiar Servants.

2 ly, Of Providence, there indeed, things, if we eye their outward Surface,
seem not to roll in so regular a Course, being biased by Men's corruptions;
Yet still without any confusion: Things may indeed seem to us to act
confusedly, but GOD is Orderly in all His Workings, and the ways Men takes to
build, He takes to demolish; For the same very Methods the Foolish World
attempt to ruin the Gracious Soul by, are the Ways the Wise GOD is using for
their Establishment. Joseph's selling into Egypt, was designed for his ruin,
and defeating his Prophetic dreams, while providence was making use of the same
to raise both the patient and Agents. Thirdly, The experiences of his goodness,
appear signally in acts of grace, his secret dealings on the Souls of men. I
shall instance only some of them suitable to the Text.

Experience 1. When he shuts one Fountain he opens another. David could have no
room in Judah, gets it among his very enemies in Zicklag; And when he wants
outward Ordinances, wants not also Divine Consolations: if his condition be
straightened outwardly, its enlarged inwardly. If Hagars Bottle be sp^nt, there is
supply at hand. If Canaan yield no Corn, Egypt must. If he take away the Staff
of Bread, and support without it, we want nothing. We are tied to the means, so
is not he. If he shut Ministers Mouths, he can open their hearts. If he
withdraw maintenance from Authority, before his Prophet want meat, a Raven it
self unclean to be eaten, shall fetch clean food.

Experience 2. GOD is not always against these whom men are: Victrix causa,
diis placuit; Sed victa Catoni: said the Po^t: Tho even among good men, their
corruptions may be striving against one another, GOD is often on the Sufferers
side. Saul indeed, 1 Samuel: 28.15. may have the Philistines present and GOD
absent; But here there is distress from men, and encouragement from and in GOD.
The band of men may be near JESUS to Crucify; but the Angel is as near to
Comfort him.

Experience 3. Outward straits end not there, but at length straiten the heart:
For troubles are not worthy of that name, till they reach the heart, Job.
34.29. If he gives quietness, who then can make trouble, and e contra. As is
the heart, such is the man, either Cloudy or comfortable. Crosses or comforts
either begin or end there. If GOD's presence be not with us, we move like
Pharaohs Chariots in the red Sea; but if the Oil of Joy anoint the Wheels, like
the Chariots of Aminadab, a willing People. Neh: 8.10.

Experience 4 th, The Fear and Love of GOD, casts out the fear of Men: David
eying the Ziklagites saw nothing but stonning; Eying GOD, Encouragement, Isa.
8.13, 14. The fear of Men espyes nothing but a Conspiracy, the Fear of GOD, a
Sanctuary, Perfect Love casts out fear of Suffering be Men. 1 John 4.18.
When there appears darkness overspreading the Hemisphere, in a Storm or
Eclipse, the Sun that is darkened is not set. JESUS can tell, John 19.11. Ye
had not had power over me if it had not been given you from Above.

Experience 5 th. Tho GOD permits to annoy; yet gives no power to destroy them:
The Ziklagites that threaten stones might as easily have thrown them, that
which reached to Jobs Children, substance and skin, might have reached his
life, but none in Heaven, earth or hell dare exceed their commission, Nero
burns the Christians, but he could not consume Christianity. Dioclesian erects
his Triumphs, Post deletum nomen Christianum; But they were then alive that saw
it wear the Imperial Diadem and purple. All the advantage Men obtain by
fighting against the Interest of CHRIST and Christians, is, that they get their
Grave in the Quarrel, which they digg with their own Hands. Let Winds bluster,
Tides rise, Enemies roar, Shelves threaten, and Self straiten, the Ship of the
Church, and of particular Beleivers also, Fluctuat, and nunquam mergitur. --

Experience 6 th, Before Deliverance, Straits urge most, the day before the
Dawning is darkest: Betwixt Malachie, the last of the Prophets (who according
to Bishop Usher's Annals, lived Anno M: 3589) and our Savior's appearing, Anno
M: 3984, were 395 years, not a Prophet sent in all this time, till the LORD of
all the Prophets appears. Remark David here immediately before his wearing the
Crown straightened, the next Chapter shows the death of Saul, and thereafter his
Solemn Investiture. The Israelites at Baalzephon, see how straightened, Exodus:
14.10. Et Seq: observe how it ends Chapter: 15. throughout. Eye the Psalms,
where many of them begins with Sadness, end with Comfort; Yea, the Text begins
with Distress, and ends with Encouragement. Thus it is also with private
Christians, as Experience will convince, when the Clouds are thickest, the Sky
darkest, the Soul overcasten, neither Sun nor Stars appearing for many days, a
Harbor appears for the distressed Soul.

For Improvement.
HEnce we may learn, first what it is, that obstructs our Comfort; It is true,
sometime indeed, and very often in melancholy persons, and unexperienced
Souls, either the dark and duskie fumes of melancholy thoughts, or mistakes
about the Nature of GOD, unwarrantable conceits about Decrees, or excess in
passionate expressions of sorrow, or mistaking the Nature of Faith and
Repentance, or doubts about their perseverance, or expecting perfection, where
GOD expects only Sincerity with the Merits of JESUS to make the Soul complete;
These often discourage, but it is as certain, that there are Spiritual
Derelictions for a time, when the Influences from Heaven are denied, and then
Tilling and Sowing are still Duties; tho fruitless. Else what means that Psalm:
30.6.7. Certainly David appears no Melancholian, for he is descrived rather by
a Sanguine Complexion, a Ruddie Man. That also evinces this, Isa: 49.14, 15. In
the 14 th. verse forgotten, in the other remembered, As that which is dearest.
It is true, that passage may be understood also, of temporal Dealings; But not
only, for the Scriptures are so full, that they include at once, a literal and
mystical Sense. As is evident in Citations in the New from the Old Testament,
and in the Life of JESUS, which is the perfect Pattern for the Christian, as to
Doctrine and Life, see Joh: 12.27. Now is my Soul troubled, and what shall I
say? If thus Clouds overcast a Soul that never offended, what may us, who
offend daily? In the Apostles ye see Instances of the same, by comparing Rom
7.24. with Chap: 8.1. in the one verse, Not only Death, but the very Body of
it, In the other, No Condemnation: Whether it be to be understood of the
Regenerat or unregenerat, in some Sense, it was true of himself, whether in a
primarie or secondarie Sense, it matters not; Yea, there is none that seek GOD
sincerely, and are acquaint with his Inward Deallings, but will find it, who
will sometimes be put to it to labor in the Fire, and work all night and day;
Yet catch nothing, and ly in the dark and deep dungeons, in the place of
Dragons: at another time, some that live near Him, have their Hearts so full of
Faith and Love, as to be forced to cry out, Hold LORD, I am but a Clay Vessel,
I can hold no more.

Secondly, Hence ye may see wherein solid Comfort and Encouragement in GOD does
consist, not in the light and trancient flashes of Devotion, heats in Prayer or
Praise, or Communicating, Rhetorical Flourishes in a Preacher; A Benign bodily
temper, warmed by some awakened providence, will cause that. There is indeed an
animal Religion, occasioned by an influx of the animal spirits, and sweetness
of the Nerval Liquor; But this is not that encouragement in GOD, tho often an
excellent preparative for it. But it consists in a mind divested of sense and
Earth, that expects from the Fountain the clear and Crystal Streams: For the
more there is of GOD, and the less of Earth in a comfort, the more it has of
delight, that is real: Whence it is. that Believers when outward things are
abstracted, as here they were with David, are enlarged within Psalm: 4.7. Habb:
3.17.18. There is no fear of want of Comfort to these that have the GOD of
Comfort. Te mihi Deo, quid deest, When he is present, all things yield delight,
when he is absent, they are but a burden, comforts without him are crosses,
Crosses with him are the sweetest comforts, for waters are clearest in the
Fountain.

Thirdly, This informs, why the wciked have no comfort in their distress, they
may have the dim Starlight of nature, or the variable Moonlight of sensible
things, which have some light, but little heat, and Divine condescendance
indulges them in these, for encouragement to duty, and Justice ther^by adds to
their reckoning; But when they retire unto GOD in trouble, they see nothing but
dimness and distress, Isa. 8.22. The very comfortable attributes of Love and
Mercy look asquint on them. What is Mercy to a soul that slights it? What is
Love to these that hate GOD and his ways? What is Holiness, but a pure light
to show their spots? Yea, what is Heaven but a place where these that Love GOD,
and are beloved of him, dwell? But what is all this to them, but the eying the
Kings Palace, while they are in the Dungeon? What are to them the promises of
the Word, but a sealed Fountain? Yea, their choicest comforts look terrible on
them, their meat feeds them only for the slaughter; But when distress comes,
see how the Poor thing shakes, as Nero, Nec Amicum habeo nec inimicum. Here
bone companions and pot friends may divert their thoughts a while; But when
that is gone, all is spent, still no encouragement in GOD. I proceed to grant
some directions proper from this Doctrine.

Direction 1. Fear GOD's frowns most, let Him be both your Dread and Trust;
They that fear Him need fear nothing else. 1 Pet: 3.13. What shall harm you if
ye be followers of that which is good? The fear of GOD casts out a slavish
servile fear of distrust, the cowardly fear of sufferings, the anxious fear of
troublesome doubts, the perplexing fear of our own weakness, but not a
reverential fear of GOD, and obediential of Superiors, in relative duties, nor
a due distrust of corrupt self, but these that in the due order, eye GOD most,
and men least, have most solid comfort. Psalm: 42.10. Reproaches are a sword in
his Flesh, the presence of GOD. V: 11. A cordial at the heart, Why art thou
cast down, O my Soul?

Direction 2. Eye GOD in straits, its by Him we must leap over these Walls, He
it is that gives to His beloved sleep and rest: Mean shifts, humane policy;
Yea, prudential methods may weather off a stroke and sinful tricks, or Arts
may divert it, as David's counterfeiting mad before Achish; But solid
encourragements is only from Him, that calms the Waves rage and peoples tumult.
When the Sun appears the beasts of the Field betakes unto their dens, the
Shaddows of the night are gone: so His Presence makes Humane fear dwindle unto
nothing. In doubts indeed the Soul will be ready to say, Psalm. 77.3. I
remembered GOD and was troubled; but when the cloud is over, then ye may hear
other Language, Psalm 94: 19: In the multitude of my thoughts within me
(perplexed like the branches of a tree, as the Original bears) thy comforts
delight my Soul.

Direction 3. Secure an Interest in His Power, All-sufficiencie and Covenant;
After troubles, that was comfortable to the Father of the Faithful, Gen: 15: 1:
I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward, a shield to shelter, a reward
to cheer; he had been under the power of the five Kings, chap: 14: they might
return, for their swords, here was a shield: He had refused to take of the
prey, for that, GOD is, valde magnum bonum, or nerces multa, Psalm: 84: 11: A
Sun for Calefaction, Vivification, Direction and Spiritual Motion, a shield for
Protection. But what signifies GODS All sufficiency without an Interest, its
that which secures the promise, Isa: 54* 10. Its a stable Covenant, but a
Covenant still, and that includes duties as well as privileges. Jehovah
Zebaoth can shelter his friends, and shatter his enemies, but what is that to
thee, if not thy GOD?

Direction 4. Endeavor steadfast walking with GOD here, in outward and inward
straites, see David's courage, at another time amidst splendid entertainements,
see what droupings, Psalm: 51.12. Restore unto me the joy of thy Salvation. Yet
in drouping fits, Psalm: 22.1. The Soul can utter my GOD, tho he add, forsaken.
Heats in duty are valuable only as they promove Holy walking, but if they be
used to supersede Christian walking, either in absolute or relative duties, its
like the Husband man that expects all from the influences of Heaven, and puts
his Hand in his Bosom. Let Antinomians talk as they will, Comfort, tho it be
not the Reward of Merit, yet it is of Labor, assisted by free Grace. The
Heart on GOD, and the Hand at Work, by a Circumspect walking, go on well. If
GOD indeed withdraw, we droup, but if we withdraw, He tells by Azariah, 2 Chronicles: 15.2. If ye be with Him, He is with you, but if ye forsake Him, He will
forsake you. Holy Walking, may have Clouds, but they will drop down, and will
have Comfort in the Work, more in the Reward.

For Conclusion, Let us be Strong in the LORD, and the Power of His Might; Let
Distresses come and go, Comforts and Encouragements, draw or withdraw; Yet our
GOD lives, and blessed be our Hope. If the LORD be our GOD, there will not
want Encouragement, If He shine we are Warm, if He withdraw, we Freeze. Let
Earth and hell threaten, Men and devils rage, Distresses and Doubts arise; In
the LORD JEHOVAH is everlasting Strength. Did we but know GOD, all these would
prove like the Waves dashing on a Marble Rock, that Washes, but does not batter
it.

O LORD. let the World frown, if Thou Favor: Let it storm, if Thou Strengthen:
Let the Ark of my Soul float on the rising waves of distress, if JESUS be
within, He will rebuke the storm, and speak Peace, Joy, and Comfort, Amen.

A POEM.
THE Sky looks thick and boistrous Storms appear:
Smart Hailstones dart down through the Atmo Sphere.
Fightings without, and Fears within are nigh,
Frowns from all Quarters sadly I espy.
Soul, Body, Goods, Relations, drop away:
A Gourd ordained for Night, waits not the Day.
Are all these gone? Does nothing yet remain,
A drouping Soul to cheer, in saddest Pain?
Cheer up my Soul, the Clouds begin to burst,
And scatter Fruiteful Showers to water Dust.
Look up, beyond the Azure Sky, and see
Love in the Looks of great Elshaddai's Eye.
Are Hosts combined? The GOD of Hosts has Power,
Does Wants oppress? Here is the Richest Store.
Do Dustie Mortals frown? His Sovereign Arm
Can thee secure, from Force, Fear, Fraud, and Harm.
But what is this to me? If not my GOD?
This, this does ease me of the heavy Load.
Come then, My GOD, command a Calm with me.
Smiles (more than Frowns) flow from that Beauteous Eye.
I Will get me up, beyond that Stormy Sky:
Eye, Feel, and Taste, yond Pleasures, Sweet as High.

