ANDRONICUS COMNENIUS: A Tragedy.

By JOHN WILSON.

Juvenal, Sat. 13. -- Fatebere tandem,
Nec surdum, nec Tiresiam, quenquam esse Deorum.
-- At last you will find,
That Heaven is neither deaf, nor blind.
LONDON, Printed for John Starkey, at the Mitre between the Middle Temple Gate
and Temple Bar in Fleetstreet. 1664.

To my Friend A. B.
IF ever you gave your self the divertisement of reading the Preface to my
Comedy of the Cheats, you may remember, I did as good as pro^est against
Apologies; and yet, the case happens to be such at present, that I find my self
(how unwilling soever) engaged to tread that path yet once again: To tell you
how long since this Tragedy was first written, or why it has not been since
acted, were but (in effect) to suspect your memory; It Is enough to me that you
know both, and I doubt not, will be ready to do me right as you see occasion:
-- I pass it, and according to our wonted freedom shall only speak a few words
to the thing -- A Story of the Eastern Empire, between the years 1179. and
1183; and such perhaps, as might not be thought altogether unparalel to what
our selves have seen, were not the one, but too fresh in our memories, and the
other, too far removed from our knowlodge -- And now me thinks I hear you
charging me with a Non been convenient, The Story of 3 or 4 years, cramped into
fewer hours! And why not? -- My design was a History, and if I have kept the
Connection, I may reason^bly presume I have observed enough -- Nay further, if
I have dealt with it, as Procrustes with his guests, lop'd some, or stretched
others, be pleased to consider, 'twas for the same reason, that I might the
better fit unto my own moddel: -- To be short, if I have once again made my
thoughts legible, and my self the subject of every man's opinion, how weak
soever, be pleased, to such cavils as you may chance to meet with, to oppose
this -- That notwithstanding I may have written some few Plays, yet the Stage
is the last thing I shall pretend to; And therefore, though possibly I could
wish, Ut placerent quas fecissem fabulas, yet I was never so much in love with
a full cry, as to believe, that all opened alike, or that the approbation of
one wise man, was not more worth, than the noise of a multitude: -- Let me not
seem immodest if I close all with that of Plautus

Virtute ambire oportet, non favitoribus;
Sat habet favitorum semper qui recte facit.
Farewell
Your etc. J. Wilson.
Jan. 15th. 1663.
THE PERSONS.
Alexius Comnenius A Youth, (the Son and Successor of Manuel Comnenius) Emperor
of Constantinople Anna His Wife, (a Daughter of France) afterward married by
Andronicus. Maria Caesarissa Half sister to Alexius, And Wife to Caesar, an
Italian Lord (only mentioned, but appears not.) Sebastus The Husband of Xene,
the Widow of Manuel; who by debauching the Emperor's Youth, had got the
management of Affairs. Andronicus Comnenius A Prince of the blood; banished by
Manuel; but being called home to counterpoise Sebastus, usurps upon Alexius;
murders him, and marries Anna. Manuel His Son. Conto Admiral of the Galleys.
All of them, together with Maria and Basilius a Bishop often mentioned, but
appears not, of the Conspiracy to bring in Andronicus. Constantinus Lords of
the best extraction. All of them, together with Maria and Basilius a Bishop
often mentioned, but appears not, of the Conspiracy to bring in Andronicus.
Ducas Lords of the best extraction. All of them, together with Maria and
Basilius a Bishop often mentioned, but appears not, of the Conspiracy to bring
in Andronicus. Lapardas Lords of the best extraction. All of them, together with
Maria and Basilius a Bishop often mentioned, but appears not, of the Conspiracy
to bring in Andronicus. Stephanus Captain of the Guard to Al^xius: And
afterward to Andronicus. All of them, together with Maria and Basilius a Bishop
often mentioned, but appears not, of the Conspiracy to bring in Andronicus.
Basilius President of the City. Both Confidents to Andronicus. All of them,
together with Maria and Basilius a Bishop often mentioned, but appears not, of
the Conspiracy to bring in Andronicus. Mamalus Secretary of State during the
time of Manuel; laid by by Sebastus. Philo Andronicus's Zany. Isaacius Angelus
A Gentleman of the blood, a far off, but living obscurely in a Monastery, not
taken notice of by Andronicus; but (the rest of the blood being destroyed) he
is in a Tumult set up against Andronicus, and carries the Empire.
Citizens. Guards. Servants. Fiddlers.
The Scene, CONSTANTINOPLE.

ANDRONICVS COMNENIVS A Tragedy.
ACT. I.
SCE. I.
Enter Lapardas. Ducas. Du. It Is strange! and were it not for that ready faith
I owe your Lordship, I had sooner taken
Another Article to my Creed: -- A Woman!
And yet so large a soul -- your Lordship's merry.

La. Troth no, she fixed me Ducas -- when I saw
How she first took the question; stated it;
Ran the whole matter; and where danger offered,
Past it with such a careless scorn -- Believe me
It made me wonder into what narrow crany
My soul had crept; --

Du. You Have such a knack at speeching;
You either find'um good, or make 'um so;
Rack me no longer (dearest Sir) let us have it:

La. And willingly -- we met -- you know the place;
Nor was the appearance small; And as in Councils,
There never was a fool (at least, that would
Be thought so) Every man let fly his bolt;
One offered this; Another, that; The point,
Was common danger; All agreed the thing,
But few, the way of helping it; that plague,
And mischief of great actions (Let Us do better)
Had so unhinged their souls; until Maria
Sum'd up their little all -- Told 'um, they had lost
The question; and 'twas not their wel-being,
But being, was the point; not what Greece should be,
But whose it was -- and when they threw in doubts;
That thou had seen her how she blew 'um off;
Snufft at their scruples -- and is this (quoth she)
The Lion in the way? Can danger baulk
Men once resolved? -- Be that Bugbear mine;
I dare encounter it, and act, what e're
You all dare think. --

Du. 'Twas a brave Virago;
A wonder of her Sex! A Phoenix sure!

La. I: you would have sworn it, had you heard, that world,
Of which, this is but an imperfect Globe;
A wrong side of the hangings. --

Du. But my Lord,
How was it relished? Did not their seats grow warm?

La. No -- But they all looked wistly one on the other,
As who would say, 'twas true enough, but yet
Some passages might have been well forborne:

Du. What was the issue? --


La. Why, -- they all shook hands,
And by a general vote, centered in this;
That men, and moneys must be raised, to break
The present faction; and themselves would do it:
Next, that Andronicus be invited home
To head the forces; which, Maria prayed
Might be her part of the work; which once agreed,
Sooner than thought they fell into their gears,
Each man subscribed his task, gave order straight
For her instructions, and have since dispatched her:

Du. But no account as yet? --


La. Not possible:
It Is scarce 2 months since she departed hence,
And we forbad all Packets; But, this night
She is expected: -- Good my Lord be there;
Your Proxy'll serve no longer; I have told 'um
Your Gout is over. --

Du. I shall my Lord: my fate
Runs hand in hand with yours: Enter Mamalus.
But see! who is coming yonder? I Am mistaken
Or it is Mamalus -- He was an honest Courtier,
And our true friend -- why should not he make one?

La. He is best able; All the affairs of Greece
Have past his hand, and with no ill success:

Du. Let Us try -- my Honor for his secrecy.


La. With all my heart: -- see -- he comes up to you.


Du. Mamalus! save you; -- It Is an age, or better,
Since we last met. --

Ma. The loss (my Lords) was mine:


La. But whence our friend? turned Courtier again?
How goes all there?

Ma. Troth I Have scarce seen the place,
Since my great Lord, and master, Manuel died;
I can nor fawn, nor truckle.

La. Pettish I warrant! -- I Am ashamed, Mamalus,
Is it a Courtiers part to show his teeth,
Before he bite? to breath a pityful revenge,
E're he have power to act -- No, -- great men's injuries,
Are best remedied, by not understanding 'um,
Or seeming t'ave forgot 'um, whereas otherwise,
You Are sure to be prevented with a greater;
Have a good heart: -- I not forbid thee strike,
But do it sure. --

Ma. Your Lordship's wide of the mark;
Yet since you name the Court, when were you there?

Du. Troth we come there, and that is all: we are grown,
Barely spectators; idle lookers on:
Sometimes perhaps, out of a Complement,
To countenance a buisness, or concur;
We Are called to Council too:

La. And what of that?
Matters of consequence, we must not know,
Nor is it out of love to us, but fear,
Of what may follow, that we have kept our heads.

Ma. And can you blame me then, that have no stake,
If I sit out, when you that have the greatest,
Have such ill carding? --

Du. Break his neck that packt 'um;
Come, -- join with us -- Shuffle, and cut again:

Ma. I am no Conjurer; your Lordship must
Speak plainer, e're I understand you right.

La. Give us thy hand, and word for secrecy.


Ma. You have 'um both. --


La. Then to be short, we are lost;
And so's the Empire -- Now to recover it,
Most of the Lords, and Officers of state,
Are joined, Nor want we Men, or Arms, or Money:
Andronicus the head, at least we hope so.

Ma. But why my Lords such have? Must a man Lop
A limb cause out of joint? knock out his brains,
To cure the Headache? -- what is to be done but once
Should be considered twice: -- Mutations
Are ever dangerous, even where the thing
Might have been good, and profitable at first;
It being impossible to provide against
Those inconveniences, we cannot foresee.

La. But there is no other way -- Has not Sebastus
Turned us quite Topsy Turvy? -- Disobliged;
The Nobles trampled under foot the Commons?

Ma. It Is granted: -- But, why this last remedy?
Bear it a little; -- Time, many work it off:
Come, come; Close with him: Blow the bladder stiff,
And it must crack: -- By pulling others down,
He has over built himself. --

Du. We Have often thought so,
But find it otherwise. --

Ma. Admitting yet,
You must be changing; how are you secure
He that comes next, shall not be worse? -- who (Pray)
Shall keep the Keepers? --

Du. We have ordered that.


Ma. But why Andronicus of all the world?


Du. Why? He Is a Soldier; and a Prince of the blood;
And valiant enough; --

Ma. So much the worse:
What were a virtue in another, in him,
May prove a crime: -- He is too near the Crown
Already; and this gives him the occasion,
Of grasping that, he has so long designed:
I dare not -- Nay, I must not join -- The wolf,
Shall never have my voice to make him Shepherd;
But yet, to show your Lordships I Will be secret,
I Will trust you with as much. -- You may remember;
My Master banished him; but why, I Will tell you.
He is a Prince of the most daring soul
Er'e dropped from Heaven; industrious, vigilant,
Kind, affable, magnificent: --
Yet all this good, Nay, all his lusts and passions
Are slaves to his Ambition: Take him there,
Nothing can hold him; Laws, Religion, All
Sacred, or civil, are no more then -- This.

Du. But we'll provide for that: We'll tie him up
Fast under hand, and seal, well-backt with Oaths.

Ma. Tie him with Oaths! -- Hah! -- You may sooner hold
An angry Lion, with a clew of thread,
Giants, with rotten towe. -- The old Emperor found it;
When having forgiven him so often, he still
Broke out a new; -- Swore, and forswore again:
Until necessity made him resolve,
To kill, or banish him: which last took place;
Pray Heaven 't 'as alterd him; -- However, let me
Remain your Lordships servant: --

Both. Friend you mean; -- farewell: Exit Mamalus.


La. It Is time that we went too:


Du. I wait your motion. Exeunt.


ACT. I.
SCE. II.
Enter Sebastus. Constantinus. Constable. Now good my Lord -- 'Has been an ancient
servant
Unto our Family -- It Is the least I can:
Pray let him have it. --

Seb. How was your Lordship saying?
I did not mind you well -- my head's so full: scratches

Con. Of The simples Aside come I beg but seldom; shall I send him to kiss your
hands?


Seb. Matters of State
Beat all things out; --

Con. No -- it is your oval Crown Aside
Lets nothing in. --

Seb. But good my Lord, what is it?
It must be somewhat more than in my power,
When you're denied. --

Con. Troth it is a very nothing.


Seb. Why then -- you have it -- is your Lordship pleased.


Con. Hah! -- yours is pleasant; -- it is a little odd thing.
The Major-domo to his Majesty's Bears.

Seb. Certain my Lord it is too mean a place,
And he might find much better -- what is it worth?

Con. not much above 2 hundred crowns a year,
Besides the blessing that attends an Office.

Seb. Stay! Major-Domo -- Let me see -- I doubt
Somewhat was done in it lately scratches Oh! I have't.
Alas my Lord it is gone; -- disposed in troth:
Now I Am so sorry:

Con. But to whom? -- or how?


Seb. Why -- I Am mistaken, or the Emperor gave it
To scratches an old servant of his Fathers: --

Con. Strange!
Eagles do seldom stoop so low: --

Seb. Then 'twas
My wife; -- and like enough it might be so.
But there are other things as good, or better,
And might be found if men were diligent.
Trust me I am so vexed, -- I Will tell my Wife
What a displeasure she has done your Lordship. Exit.

Con. Your Lordship's. -- Gone! disposed! -- my life this fellow
Would sell his soul, were any man so mad
To bid him money for it -- Was this a thing
To be believed? -- the Devil of such a servant,
Or Office, I yet ever heard, or dreamt;
But now I see, it is good to try ones friends,
E're a man needs 'em; -- And the same have I
The nature of this beast -- Now is he gone
To hunt a chapman; -- but the scent (beloved)
Will be cold, e're you light on one -- Dull Greece!
Where is thy soul? What magic? or what fate
Has dampt thy spirits? can thou live, yet be
Bull'd by this Urchin? Can thou breath, yet suffer
Such a slave ride thee? such a Tinsel bauble!
No -- know fond man, though Greece be fast asleep.
Her Genius wakes, nor shall thy formal nothing,
Brave it much longer; -- dirt thou art, and dirt
Shall be thy last, and sudden too; -- it is done,
The better half, what is once well begun. Exit.

ACT. I.
SCE. III.
Enter Philo solus with a Letter in his hand. PH. Hah! Hah! Hah! Hah! Hah! Hah!
To see this world!
Luck's all: It Is better to be fortunate,
Than be a rich Man's Son: -- Hear are boys scrambling;
One gets an Apple, the other a broken pate.
There Is good Luck, and bad Luck:
Yonder a knot of Rogues rebel -- the poor ones
Hang for Example; And the great ones are Scratches
Even what they please -- Good luck, and bad luck too.
It Is now two years since first my Master sent me
To manage his design within this City;
And what have I done there? -- Only deserved
For to hanged -- Many an honester man
Then both, has marched that way: -- But the luck's all:
See! Shows his letter I Have received intelligence from him
That what we have been hammering so long
Is just dropped into's mouth: It Is offered him:
Here is a kennel of such precious Curs,
They cannot rule, themselves; and now they Court
The Devil, to part stakes: I hope he will
Remember 'um in time: -- Troth they deserve it.
Well: I must to 'um: But to bring me there,
Find out Maria -- Now the wit of Woman!
-- I see they may be trusted with more secrets
Besides their husband's: Though in troth I judge,
It Was the best place to lodge one safe; wise men
Never look for it there: --
Enter Manuel in a disguise. -- But what have we got here?
A piece of Poetry in Prose! Hah! Hah!
A small Philosopher, but that he wears
A brawling -- I'ron: He walks as if he were
Measuring feet with the Antipodes,
Or treading out the Saxon Ordeal;
Sure it would speak -- I Will step aside, and see.

Man. Vain state of wretched man, that only knows
What yet he found too soon, his misery:
Where is that happiness Phisolophers
So much contend for? I have often met
The name, but never the thing: sure it is their Stone,
In other words; or having trod that path
So long, I must have reached my journeys end;
One would have thought, my birth (to say no more)
Had been enough t'ave given me title to it:
But now, I am convinced, it is but a dream,
An aerie fancy; Or if yet there be
More in it, it is negative; and to be happy,
Is only not to be miserable.
But what do I thus fondly to complain
In such a common case? Trace far and near
And all alike; no satisfaction.
Now I see Nature took a fall when young,
She has so limpt e're since: What Is all this world,
But several Purlieues of wild Beasts, that walk
On their hin' legs; wherein, not always strength,
But such as have the cleanliest conveyance,
Drive the dull-staring-heard before 'um?
What Is all that noise, and cry of public good,
But a conspiracy of the richer sort,
To grind the poor, and fence themselves with Laws,
To keep that safely, they have unjustly got?
What makes a Traitor, but a ruined cause?
Or Heretics, but being less in number?
Nay, what are even our greater ties become,
But Bawds to interest; and specious names,
To cover great men's wrongs? -- who then would live
That had but soul enough to die? or be
A Prisoner, when the keys of his own Prison,
Hang by his side, and may discharge himself?
And so will I ( draws) it is worthy of my blood,
Here sets the hilt to ground take your virtue back again who gave it,
And by your leave. -- Philo comes from behind the hangings, and trips his
Sword away.

Ph. And mine too if you please.


Man. Still more misfortune!
What art thou? 'Twas rude
To take that from me, which thou dare not give:

Man. rises and runs upon to others point. Ph. Stand off -- nay since you must
pursue your folly,
Hold -- there is your sword again -- draw
They fight, and close; in the close. Ph. knows him, throws away his sword, and
kneels. My honored Lord!
Now shall I bless, or curse my hand?

Man. Be gone,
And tempt thy fate no longer. --

Ph. My best Lord,
Yet hear me speak. --

Man. Rise and be sudden then.


Ph. I shall (rises) and since this combat of your passions
May've checked each other; give your reason time
To breath a while: consider what you're doing:
It is an injury to your self, and nature:
Nature preserves it self, and taught not this;
Nor promised any by Privation, Bliss.

Man. Injurious to my self? it cannot be:
I Am willing; injury supposes force:
Nor yet against nature: for then surely they
Whom no Religion awed (as having't not)
Had never used, at least affected it;
Then take your Argument, or tell me why
Nature yet left it in our power to dye?

Ph. She could not help it; to have made a man,
And yet denied him liberty of will,
Had been t'ave given him wings, and clipped 'um too.
Yet take it with its restriction, she never meant
Because you might, you should destroy your self;
If all should do the same, where were the world?

Man. What Is that to me? would the whole world lay here; claps his hand upon
his heart.
And I Would soon 'solve the question. --

Ph. Yet show me
Some late example of this kind; this humor
Has worm'd it self quite out of date. --

Man. Disuse, is a poor Argument -- Let Children fear
To sit alone, because their candle's out,
It is enough to me, there is yet left
This remedy, and triumph over Fortune:
Be gone. --

Ph. I must not; it is now worth your self
To dare to live; who ever sunk his ship
Because he feared a storm might do it for him?
Or killed himself to save his enemy pains?
Life is a warfare, and who quits the field
Without a lawful Passport, runs away.

Man. And so do thou; and quickly; -- or by this
Man. Shakes his sword at him. I shall too soon confute your Argument.

Ph. What will your noble Father say? --


Man. Ha! -- Father!
There Is magic in the word; 't'as chilled my blood
Into a Palsy -- Hence -- I dare not trust
My resolution, nor thy tattle, longer;

Ph. How will he bear 't I say, when he shall hear
His son thus sacrificed to his Return?

Man. Return! -- there is witchcraft in thy breath -- Begone;
And stagger me no longer with false hopes;

Ph. Credit me once, -- By all that is Great, or Good:
He Is now in Greece, nay, near this City too.

Man. Shall I believe thee? -- no -- it must not be;
Somewhat within me whispers, it is not so.
Yet say he were. -- He has believed me lost
These many years; and why should I now add
New sorrows to my self, or him; to see him
And yet want power to help him? --

Ph. Fear not that,
You have; I Will chalk you out the way: And if
You see him not e're many hours shall pass,
As glorious as the Sun broke through a cloud;
Then let that mischief you designed your self,
Fall headlong upon me.

Man. Well -- for a while^
I Will give thee hearing; -- Sheaths his Sword.
Take up that -- and help me
To put it on again -- so -- so -- It Is well.

Ph. takes up his gray peruwick, and helps him on (...) ai^. Exeunt. ACT. I.
SCE. IV.
Enter Constantinus, Stephanus, Basilius. BAs. 'Twas a good humor. --


Constable. Good! I Will undertake
You shall not think that thing, he shall not swallow.

Bas. It Is such a starcht intelligible Ass!


Ste. And may become a Fair a twelve month hence;


Constable. A dainty fine new-nothing! -- an odd Scheme.
Of knave, and fool: where yet, the fool's Ascendent,
And Lords the Horoscope; too much the fool,
to conceal handsomely the knave; and yet
Not knave enough, to act the cunning fool:
I shall forbear a farther Lecture on him,
I Am sure he will stink, e're I get half way through him.

Ste. I would he knew how well his friends thought of him: To them Conto,
Lapardas, Ducas.


Bas. See! here are more of 'um --


Constable. My Lords, all health: -- They salute each other.
What say you?
Shall we fall to our business?

Cont. When you please. They take their seats.


Constable. You know my Lords what we resolved on last;
Have you received any account as yet?
Is our Maria safe, or the work done?

Cont. She is returned this night, and sent me word
She would be here: But what is done I know not.

Ste. It Is a brave Lady: Troth I half despaired
TO have heard of her so soon: --

Cont. Pray Heaven it ben't
Too soon to all our Costs?
Your Lorships knows, he is ambitious. --

Constable. And who is not pray?
It is the spur of every generous soul;
And were not you the same, what make you here?

Du. But 't had been prudence t'ave secured our selves:


Constable. I hope there is no such need -- Here comes a Lady Enter Maria led by
Philo.
Will quickly end the difference -- Let Us go meet her;
They all rise and go to meet her. Exit Philo. Madam -- you're well returned --
and yet, not I,
But Greece, must speak it;

Omnes. Royal Maria welcome. They all kiss her hand.


Mar. My Lords and Gentlemen I thank you:
And am sufficienrly repaid my pains
In your acceptance; please you keep your seats,
And I Will acquaint you what I Have done.

Constable. Blessed Madam;
Our life, and death, hang on your lips; -- And yet,
Me thinks that face speaks a good Augury,

Mar. Then know my Lords --
I have dispatched your message, and here bring you
All you could ask, or think -- the Sea proved calm,
The willing winds smiled on the enterprise,
And left me not till I had reached Onaeum;
Where I soon found Andronicus (his fame
Needed no guides) But, in that blessed retirement,
That all those things which we call happiness,
Might have took copy from't, but still come short.
Not to amuse you longer, I presented
Your Letters, and he read 'um over; but when
He saw the business; troth he wept, and wished
It had been in his power to have complied;
But he was old, and had given over the world
To younger men, And his ambition now,
Was for a better: yet he sight, and wept,
And wept, and sight; and sight, and wept again:
And thus he kept me many days, yet still
I pressed him forward, told him, Greece was sunk,
Unless he buoyed it up; That the Court had
More factions, then Lords; the Commons pressed;
The Empire shattered; nothing could restore't,
But his last hand: beseecht him to forget
His banishment, and him that laid it on:
At length he paws'd, and pawsing, asked me how
It could be done; he was but one, and Arms,
Not lazy wishes, must accomplish it:
'On which I showed him all the whole design,
The persons names, what force we had already;
And what expected to be hired from thence;
Well, to be short, I did at last prevail,
And with his help, procured 5000 Foot,
Yet left him not, till I had seen all shipped,
And safe amidst our fleet, where he now rides,
Before the City, and resolves to land,
This very night, and sack her round e're morn:
It Is more than time my Lords that you were gone;
There Is one came with me has your Orders ready:

Conto. But what conditions has he signed. --


Mar. Much more she throws them a blank.
Than you desired -- he bid you write your own,
And he has sworn religiously to observe 'um.

Cont. What Is here! a blank? It Is what I thought; h'as To nothing, and nothing
he will perform: would I (sworn were fairly rid on it. --


La. So would I. --


Du. And I:


Lap. We Are fooled so prettily;


Cont. Or we may in time.


Cont. Lap. Ducas, rise, walk, and whisper. Bas. Did ever men confound a
business so?
My soul! we are lost -- we shall be all discovered:

Ste. I know not what their fear may do: 'twere best
To knock 'um in the head, and give it out
The Soldiers did it; if our business thrive,
We Are well enough; if not, we save our selves,
The dead can tell no tales. --

Bas. It Were not amiss:
What says my Lord? --

Constable. Lets hear 'um once again;
And royal Madam see what you can do.

Mar. Well my good Lords; What would you now be at?
Are you resolved as yet? --

Cont. Why -- we'll consider't; They offer to go out, Maria stops 'um.
And send you back our answer. --

Mar. How Is this? consider? -- Is It your fear, or Fate?
Blisters of Greatness, Whom the stupid Age
Dull as your selves, -- calls Lords? What prompts you this
Irresolution? You all confess,
The Empire flames, and your selves must burn with it;
And yet (forsooth) you first strein courtesy
Who shall begin, or which the way to quench it:
Nor is that block sooner removed, but that
You stumble on another, and then too
When one would think you had been all resolved;
You must be now secure! Call you this Lording?
I shame to hear't; And, but my sex forbids,
I should suspect your Mothers. -- Was It for this
My glorious Father made all Asia bow,
Confess his Empire, And had nature pleased,
Shook all the world -- At least, brought to'ther Eagle
Back to her nest again? Was it for this?
For this, I say, your famous Ansires spread
Their flying Banners, far as earth had shore,
Only to leave the empty fame to you;
Away -- Agree: Occasion calls you forth,
Show whose you are, and justify your Mothers:

Constable. It Is a brave mettled Amazon. -- Conto: Lap: Ducas walk up and down
biting their lips.


Ste. Y' faith
She nettles 'um: --

Mar. For shame my Lords, resolve
Time runs away; It Is execution
Makes counsels walk invisible, And like arrows,
Out run the eye, and hit the mark e're seen.
What is it you fear? If It be Andronicus,
You have his Honor, and his Oath engaged:
Or if Sebastus? fancy not to meet,
Augustus's Arts, not yet Tiberius's cunning;
No, no; he is nothing but a thick scul'd Stallion,
A very sot; And such a sniveling coward;
It Is favor to call him so: Then courage Lords;
Challenge your birthright; be no more tame fools,
Dull heavy beasts, so jaded from your spirits,
That Honor cannot spur you up; Come; Come;
Mind what you should: -- It Is now too late t'advise,
For Greece, at present, wants more hands, than eyes.

Conto. Why, I still meant it:


La. We'd as good be lost
In going through, as lose our heads for nothing.

Du. Nay i will do what you will: what you resolve
To do, do quickly. --

Mar. Now you speak like men. --
Come my Lords -- All Is well again -- And for any thing that remains, we shall
better order it within. Exeunt.

ACT. I.
SCE. V.
Enter Andronicus solus. THus far it is well, and I returned again,
To thank thee Greece; nor have thy wrongs been sown
On barren ground, but such as shall repay
The principal, with its forbearance too:
I am a Prince; who dares deny't; He breathes
His last, that answers no: He damns his soul
In that one negative: There Is but a step
'Twixt me, and the imperial Crown: -- Nor should
That coward wear't, that dares not venture for it:
Was this the reason, my blind Mistress, that
You struck at me? That thus you deal with all,
Fortune (like butchers) makes the fairest fall:
But stay -- I Am still upon my feet, and will
Keep up my chin in spite of her; if she
Will not assist, the world shall know I can
Do it without her help; nor shall she share,
A doit in the praise, when I arrived at top,
Thus -- grasp my wish; -- Yet say I were as flat
As she could lay me; at the lowest Ebb;
I would not yet give out; 'twere poor to fear,
Who is past hope, he should be past despair:
I Will run the hazard then, and if I fall,
What in me lies, I Will pluck all after me;
Nor leave behind me such a one that shall
So much as mutter't -- No -- my very name
Shall fright the world -- And make future times
Fondly attempt my History, but not reach it.
Who follow, tead where men have trod before;
Who is example, must be some thing more. Exit.
ACT. II.
SCE. I.
Alarums as at the Sack of a Town: Shouts within -- Enter Sebastus as in a
fright. SEb. Undon, undon: -- That ever Man should be
Lost e're he dreamed it -- Whither shall I run
To hide my self? Shout. -- Hark -- They Have won the City.

Enter Alexius and Anna. Alex. What sudden noise is this? --


Seb. I'cannot tell.


Anna Who should tell then? --


Seb, They say Andronicus
Has landed 30000 Horse and Foot.
And is now storming of the City.

Anna One would have thought you should have looked to this:


Seb. Who would imagine Banishment a place
To raise an Army? Or suspect the Fleet?

Alex. No doubt but he is well backed by some at home:


Anna. Too true I fear me:


Seb. Will It please your Majesty to get away,
E're't be too late? --

Alez. No -- I have done no wrong,
Unless to wear a Crown may be called such.

Seb. You will do well enough, who ever suffer. To Anna
Pray think on me:

Anna Yes -- I Will remember you,
And if my word will do it --

Seb. Do It without doubt.


Anna I Will have thee hanged: -- Thou coward -- Take thy Sword,
And if thou can not find a man, that loves thee
So well, as to dye by thy side; yet go,
And thrust thy self amid's thy thickest foes;
It may deceive the world; thy life's not worth
His pains, that takes it from thee. --

Alarm -- Shouts. Seb. Hark! again!
The Palace is beset -- I Have but one shift,
And if that fail me then good night to all.

Enter Andronicus as giving order to some within And. See that the Soldiers
make no outrages
Upon the Palace; there are Frankes enough
Within the City, and good pillage too:
Set your guards round; besure no great ones escape;
And if you take Sebastus, bore his eyes out;
But see -- The Emperor -- I must to him -- Heaven
Goes up to him, and kneels and kisseth his feet Preserve your Majesty, and
confound your foes.

Alex. Cousin you're well returned; and might have been
As welcome with fewer followers: however; rise:
Give me thy hand, and unto Heaven thy knee.

And Next that, unto my Prince: and do not think
He rises Deard Sovereign, that I intend you hurt
Although I knocked thus rudly; all my aim
Was to remove your wardship, and I Have don't.
And now you're free: free, as the air you breath:
Make the experiment; and if you doubt my faith,
Bid me return to banishment -- I Am gone:

An. I know not why, But I don't like his looks. Aside.


Alex. Cousin I thank you; and believe you too:
The Helm requires your help: -- I cannot trust it
Into a better hand -- But pray forget,
Those injuries, my Father put upon you:
I am no otherwise entitled to 'um,
Than as I am his Son. --

And. Had they been more,
I could have past 'um all, yet never canceled
That double tie of loyalty, and blood:
'Twas not his fault, but my unlucky fate,
To have my love misconstru'd; Not the burden
That greiv'd me, but the hand; not banishment,
But that 'twas caused by him -- However let
Revenge sleep with his ashes; I will pay
All mine in service to your Majesty;
And to that end have I embarked at present:

Alex. Pray let me see you often: -- Farewell:


Exeunt Alex. Anna An. All happiness attend your Majesty's.
Yes -- you shall see me; I, and feel me too
E're you're much elder -- Thou Have a double crime,
First that thou art Emperor; next, that Manuel gat thee;
Cursed Manuel! would thou liv'dst; I Would make the feel
The weight of my Revenge; I scorn to raze
Thy monument, or to ungrave thy dust;
I rather wish the rest of all my foes
Entombed as fairly -- But thy Son, thy Wife,
Thy friends, or whatsoever may prop either,
I will destroy -- And make this Boy to know,
They Are Children, trust a reconciled foe. Enter Philo.
How now! what news? have you disposed the Army
Into good quarters? Are the Lords well pleased?

Phil. Yes, as success can make 'um; and the People
Call you the public Father -- Scarce a house
Without its bon-fire: --

An. Then the ground-work's laid:
But prithee tell me (for I must acknowledge
Thy management) how gat you this odd rabble?
Their tempers are more different than their faces:
'Twould puzle the Devil to suit 'um into pairs.

Phil. Oh Sir! I Have t'ane more shapes than Proteus knew:
Been every thing, to every man; divided,
And subdivided 'um again: most men
Have their blind sides; But these, are blind on both.

An. But how did pick 'um out? --


Phil. He that will make
Ought of the husband must begin with th'wife:
I Have dealt 'twixt bark and tree, Turned Confessor,
And now and then held forth; Talked of ingoings,
And of outgoings, So thin and body less,
That I was forced t'assign six or seven marks,
To know it by, Twelve consequent effects,
Nineteen persuasions; Besides, ways to get it,
Innumerable. --

An. You are merry Philo!
I fain would give my self the loose -- Proceed.

Phil. And since your highness gives me leave, I shall
Set out my Cattle. --
I Have one (but he is a scabbed sheep) a Tailor;
And he is been studying these twenty years
A Querpo cut of Government: I told him
It Was special good, and must be well received:
Another, A Philosoper by fire,
And he has broke his brains to find the powder,
To cleanse Houses-of-office without stinking;
And him, I have possessed it is the first step
To the Philosophers stone; too great a thing
For any private man; however he
Should (as the first Inventor) have the Patent;
The Other a one-ey'd Cobbler; Him I humored
As a fit instrument to stitch a hole
Ith Common Wealth; when in a trice he threw
His wax to the Devil, and his Awl to's Dam:
The Other a Meal-man; And he was for sifting
The flower of pure doctrine, from the bran
Of superstition; which his neighbor Baker,
Like't well, and cried, he would leave the Leaven out:
There Is scarce a trade of which I have not one;
And to keep all together, I Have a small Levite;
He does so tew the Pope; That man of sin,
The Whore of Babylon; and when he takes a run
Against sense, and Antichrist, the Clock cannot stop him.

An. It Is such a rope of sand! However they have
Done their work well enough. --

Phil. And are apt matter
Ready disposed for what you would have 'um next.

And. But what was he that skuttled by my side
As I came in: He went as if his head
Would run away with his shoulders? --

Phil. Can you blame
A Bowl to wabble that has lost its bias?
He Is been an old State-martyr. --

And. I remember him;
He was a Scribler in the old Emperor's days.

Phil. And has done special service for your Highness;
Not that he loves you more than him, but hates
Whatever's uppermost. --

And. Then 'twere best hang him,
To please the people. --

Phil. You may do what you will,
It Is but a halter lost. --

And. But what was he
(Don't you remember him) that led the Van,
And stormed the Cittadell? I saw it all:
Thrice he came on, and thrice beat back again;
But (as a happy Omen to my cause)
Brought off the Emperial Eagle in his hand;
Rallied his men upon the spot again,
Mounted the walls afresh, and leapt among 'um:
And as you have seen a flock of sheep, when one
Breaks through the hedge, the rest straight follow him:
So here; his Soldiers, as ashamed to see
One single man give battle to the Empire,
Leapt after him, and (while you would say, what is this?)
Carried the place -- Can tell me what he was?

Phil. Yes, he is a Gentleman of noble blood;
And if your Highness please to ratify
What I have done, the Regiment is his.

And. With all my heart, and thank him too -- Where is he?


Phil. Here in the Palace Sir. --


And. Go fetch him to me.


Phil. I shall: -- Exit Philo.


And. This single soul is worth two Empires:
Just such another had my Manuel been,
But that he fell too soon: -- For all the rest,
How I could hate 'um? -- What Is the best of men?
That he must be beholding to such slaves:
But, it must be -- I have a greater work
For 'um to do; over their shoulders, I
Must climb the Emperial Throne; No matter how:
He that attempts a wickedness, must lay
Thorough a greater wickedness his way:
Sin, sin must hide; Thus Architects do roll
Stone, upon stone, and so cement the whole:
I have my Agents, that shall buz the people,
How fit it is Alexius youth should have
One that may help, and share in Government;
And whom more fit than I, whom every mouth
Terms the preserver of their liberty:
Nor shall they want rewards -- Tush, it is but lent;
I can as easy pluck it back, as squeeze
A sponge that is full: One need not far to find
A staff to beat a dog; nor circumstance,
To make him guilty, that is before foredoom'd;
Thus when they have done I Will throw the rod in the fire;
And break the ladder when it 'as raised me higher;
Enter Philo conducting Manuel. Now thou have brought me something -- How he
looks!
As he would shake the world -- you're welcome Sir:
I have sent for you, first to acknowledge, next,
To thank your valor: --

Man. 'Twas my duty Sir.


And Called what you will, I do assure you thus hugs him.
I cherish it -- And now, to let you know
How I can value virtue where I find it;
I ratify whatever Philo promised:
I Have a strange curdling in my blood; what ails me? aside

Man. I thank your Highness. --


Phil. So do I; you never
Could have bestowed it better. -- Philo plucks off Manuels disguise

And. Hah! what is this?
Some Devil has assumed my Manuel's shape,
To vex my soul -- But I shall conjure him, draws
And blow this thickened cloud to Air again. Man. kneels

Man. Your blessing Royal Sir -- forbear a while:
I am your Son, your Manuel; not slain
As was supposed. --

And. Stand up and let me feel thee: And. feels him
It Is flesh, and warm -- And now, I own thee too:
Welcome my Manuel to thy Father, welcome:
Let me embrace my Son -- Me thinks I Am young,
And have snatched forty years from time; my blood
Beats high, and strong again -- But prithee tell me;
Twenty at least have sworn they saw thee fall,
But (like thy self) oppressed, not overcome.

Man. How 'twas I fell I know not, but next day
A Country man searching to find his Son
Among the dead, found me (almost one wound)
But yet not breathless, and in charity
Conveyed me to his house, and used me so,
As he had known whom 'twas he entertained;
And that I am (next Heaven) I ow't to him.

And. Philo, take care 2000 Crowns be sent him;
And my faith too, to his next wish:
He was an honest man;

Phil. It shall be done my Lord. --


And. Come Manuel;
I Am but too happy now: -- Some little mischief
To turn this Tide; Lest swelling up, it tear
Its banks, and drown, what it but thought to cheer. Exeunt.

ACT. II.
SCE. II.
Enter Mamalus Solus. MAm. Unhappie Greece; or more unhappie me,
That live to see this day; How is thy sword
Turned on thy self? and thine old foe invited
Unto the Funeral of thy liberty?
Pray Heaven my Augury prove false; but yet
Me thinks I see a cloud hang over thy head,
And I Am afraid, will break too soon -- That State
Is past its Zenith, that never learns to do,
But by undoing; and that never sees order,
But where disorder shows it; some cursed star
Has fired the people, and our seditious Peers,
Bring fuel to it; if one should ask 'um now
What they would have? not one of um can tell;
But praise those times of old, they only heard of;
And damn the present; though they neither know,
What Is the disease, nor yet the remedy;
And now, Andronicus is the great Idol,
The Father of his Country, and what not?
A man may safer speak against Heaven, than him;
Him, whom last year they cursed, and ten to one
Will do it again before the next be past:
Nor will he lose his time, he knows they are clay,
And may be molded to what shape he pleases:
The people is a skittish beast, and must
Be smoothed, and stroak'd, till he get into the saddle:
He Is at it now; but if he once get there,
(Which Heaven forbid) they will find both switch and spur:
His age, has more of fire, than Phaethon's youth;
He knows no mean; but as his soul is large,
So is his courage; Think, and act, to him
Are the same things, only removed in time;
He Is not like others; He was born to rule
Within an empty sphere, for such he will make it;
And Christen that solitude, with the name of Peace;
Enter Conto leading Maria: Constantinus, Ducas, Lapardus. Other, they are like
t'ave none; -- But see! my friends
That brought him in; 'My life they rue it first.

Omnes. Mamalus! -- well met;


Mam. Your Lordships; servant. They salute.


Mar. And now my Lords will you believe me next?
Is not Andronicus the same I promised?

Constable. Yes troth he is; And praise can add as little
Unto him, as detraction take from him.

Conto But yet it does no hurt to talk a little;
One may observe, more than another does:
It did me good to see how he received us;
Managed the storm, and when that brush was over,
How he embraced us with the same even temper,
As though he had not been concerned at all:
Certain he must be wise; --

Map. His long experience
Must do it, if yet, it had not found him so.

Du. And for his Valor, ask the meanest Soldier,
And he will swear, it was his great example
Put courage in 'um all; and like the soul,
Did actuate the whole, and every part.

Conto Most strangely liberal -- Has given the Fleet
Ten thousand Crowns, besides what other presents
Has made to the Officers -- What pity it is
The Empire lost so brave a man so long;
Or since it has him now, age creeps upon him.

Mar The greater is his glory: Had he been young,
It had not been so much; though yet he has
Out stripped what ever I or heard, or read:
I Will vie his Autumn, with the pride of springs.

Constable. But hark you Gentlemen; you do'nt consider
How much work's yet to do -- The Council waits us:
Will It please your Highness walk? --

Mar. Lead on my Lord; Exeunt Constable. Conto. Maria.
The Duke, and I will follow.

Manent Lepardas du. Mamalus. Lap. Now my good friend
That are so costive of your faith! -- How think you?
Is not Andronicus a Gallant person?

Mam. You know I told it you, and only doubted
How long 'twas possible to keep him so;
Then are you safe, and only then, when it is not
Within his power, to hurt you if he would:
I hope you have tied him up by hand and seal,
Though you have done no more; --

Lap. It needed not;
We have his Honor, and his Oath engaged:

Mam. To what? --


Du. We Will tell you that, another time;


Mam. How willingly these Lords would cheat themselves! Aside


Lap. Me thought you said he was ambitious,
But I Will be sworn he is the humblest man,
I ever met with. --

Mam. And that may be pride
For ought we know -- Who was the prouder pray
Diogenes, that spurned at every thing,
Or Alexander, that sat out at nothing?
It Is dangerous; There is a rule in Ethics,
That pride, which rises from humility,
Is hardest cured; because the vice is grounded
Upon the virtue, and the sin, built on
That, that should be the cure. --

Lap. What should one talk
To make an infidel a Proselite:
Farewell. --

Du. -- Farewell. --


Mam. My noble Lords your servant.


Exeunt: by several ways ACT. II.
SCE. III.
Enter Andronicus, and Philo. ANd. But did they relish it? --


Phil. 'Twas not dislikt,
Nor much approved: But yet they drank your health,
And swore you were the best, and bravest Prince
That Greece e're bred; -- I only threw it out
As 'twere by chance, then caught it back again
To make 'um follow it; -- What in the Lump
Would fright, by piecemeal given, goes easy down.

And. It was discreetly managed; you must ply 'um,
For fear it cool. --

Phil. I warrant you it is don:
The women are all agogge; they would fain see
Another show; Besides, I Have promist'um,
One's husband shall be this, and to others that:
Let it ferment a while, 'twill do it self.

And. I like it well, leave me; and tell Basilius
And Stephanus, that I expect 'um hear; Exit Philo

An. What Is the best workman without tools? I think
I am fitted pretty well; The Fleet mine own,
In spite of Conto; and the fool dreams it not:
The City sure upon Basilius's score;
The guards on Stephanus account; The Army,
Upon my own: He that can lose this game,
(By my consent) should never play another:
And why should I suspect my fortune then?
Who courts her, loses her; she is a whore,
And must be ruffled; so will I; she never
Coy'd it to him, that boldly offered at her:
I Will forward then; But as men get up stairs;
Step, after Step; it is somewhat long, but sure;
He that will get thorough a crowd, he must
First wedge an elbow, then a shoulder in,
And press on still, till the whole body follow;
I must court every thing, submit to all;
Tie up my self; yet what of that? A Lion,
Is still a Lion, though his claws be pared?
They Will grow again; he that does otherwise,
Falls foul of that odd solecism of power, Enter to him Bas. and Steph.
To will the end, yet not the means endure.
Welcome my friends, for that, and nothing else
Must be the name hereafter: It Is we three
Must make a new Triumvirate, and share
Greece, and her glory; and throw in the world,
As over weight; -- What is it you may not have
As cheap, as ask? But give your selves the trouble
To wish, and it is your own -- Is it estate?
The Empire, and her wealth, lie at your feet;
Is it command? the Provinces are yours:
Is it revenge? mark out your head, and have it;
Would you a beauty? 'twill be offered you;
Wives, by their Husband; Daughters, by their Mothers:
And to complete all this, would you have honor?
I am your servant; only mind your selves;
What say' my noble friends? --

Ste. It Is sealed, and done:
Nor shall the fate, or fortune of the Empire
Stave it off longer. --

Bas. I have given my hand;
Nor would I pluck it back, to save my head;
Nay, though the Universe depended on it:

And. Spoke like your selves my friends hugs 'um Thus men resolve:
Nothing remains, but that we deal like friends;
That Is free, and plainly. -- Have you discoursed the thing
Unto your Cousin Basilius? what says he?

Bas. Yes; -- and 'twill do: -- But here is a Gentleman
Will scarce believed. --

And. And why my Stephanus?


Ste. Pox othese holy cheats -- He hum'd, and haw'd;
Told me a sleeveless story; could not tell
What God might suffer; and I know not what,
Of dispensations, and providence;
Pleaded his holy function; but at last,
Promised neutrality, and secrecy:

And. Oh! then he is sure enough. --


Bas. My life for yours,
Do you but make it Law, he will make it Gospel:

Ste. Nay, there is no doubt, he can: --


Bas. Trust me for him,
The thing is now a brewing; But great designs,
Are like great wheels, if once they move too fast,
It Is odds, they fire themselves; -- Besides, the people,
Must not be rid too hard; They travel best
When they play with the bit in their mouths; if once they get it
Between their teeth, 'Twill try your horsemanship:
A man must deal with them, as we break horses,
Show 'um the saddle first, then let 'um smel't;
Lay it in the manger, set it on their backs;
Your foot in the stirrup; let 'um feell your weight,
Once, and again; and as you find 'um coming,
Fall gently into the saddle; off again;
And use 'um thus but half a dozen times,
They Will take the rest themselves. --

And. He Is in the right;
And I had former thoughts, whether were best
For my design, the People, or the Nobles;
But have resolved upon the first: They Are won
With half the do, and easier kept; engage 'um
Though never so implicitly, they drive
Furiously on; They Are like a Conjurers Devil,
Find 'um but work enough, you need not fear 'um,
Without it, 'ware your self; -- Our first work then
Is to divide 'um, and to keep 'um so,
Till we be safe our selves; We must have parties,
And Antiparties; Factions, and Antifactions;
Until they break to nothing; then you will have 'um
Be glad of any thing: dis-tune a Viol,
And you may set it to what Tone you please.

Ste. But is it not requisite your Highness were
Of every of 'um? at least underhand;
One would not think what an endearment it is
When they believe that he that has the power,
Is theirs, and singly theirs; it girds 'um to you:

And. What says Basilius? --


Bas. Extremely good,
Nay, necessary; if the people are mad,
He Is madder far, that will not be mad with 'um;
What should a sober man in drunken company
But have his brains knocked out? --

Ste. Besides, by this
You Will raise a dust before the grand design;
It Is hard to see the bayt in troubled waters:

And. Now you're my friends I Am sure; I see you love me,
You Have advised so true and honestly: hugs 'um

Bas. On my Lord, and trust me for, the City:


Ste. And for the Guards, my self -- I Am sure I can
Form 'um to any thing; nor are they mine,
But to your Highness service. --

And. My best friends; Again.
Let Us heep this knot inviolable; And however
Our present actions may seem flat, and dull,
They Will credit us when they are seen at full.

ACT. II.
SCE. IV.
Enter Philo and 4 Citizens drunk. PHil. Troth we were merry -- Is not this
better then Small Beer and Homilies?


1. Cit. Yes -- but methinks
I cannot find my feet. --

2. Cit. Nor I my head,
But by the noise in it -- Now were I a Scholar
Would I confute Philosophy and prove
The world went round. --

3. Cit. Faith neighbor at this time
I could say somewhat to that point. --

4. Cit. If so,
It had been roasted to a coal e're now.

Phil. Or raw, or roasted, what is that to us?


1. Cit. I, let it round until the spit do crack:
Give me more drink knocks Sirrah, boy, rogue, more drink;

Enter drawer. Draw. Anon, Anon Sir:
Speak in the Mitre Christopher -- What lack you Gent?

2. Cit. Some drink you rogue -- some drink -- And do you here me?
The best in the Cellar -- We trouble you but seldom.

Draw. Please you to walk up Gentlemen?


3. Cit. No we'll take it here.


Draw. I wait upon you presently Gentlemen.


4. Cit. I Have drunk enough, but I Will be ruled: whoop Ambrose.
What all-a-mort. -- Claps him on the shoulder.

2. Cit. I am not satisfied,
But as a man would say -- how do you? -- and so forth.

Phil. Why what is the matter man? Art thou that Greek
That knockst men under board by scoars, and cry'st
Have y'any more that must be drunkify'd --
Enter Drawer and fills. Sit out your hand, or hang you -- here is this to you.

4. Cit. I know what troubles him; The Court is broke,
And most of 'um lie leiger in his book:

Phil. It Is not all lost; 'twill serve at last for wast paper;
If that be all, give him his drink -- filt up.

2. Cit. What was it --


Phil. Andronicus his health --


2. Cit. Away with it. Leaves some.


Phil. I must not bate you that --


4. Cit. Come drink it off
He Is a brave person --

2. Git. He Is a man indeed,
He paid me honestly -- Then down it goes,
If it were a mile to bottom -- Here Is to thee Greg:

3. Citt. With all my heart -- He! kept a Princely house: (One might have been
drunk in his Cellar with a good conscience -- it cost a man nothing.)


1. Citt. The most affable man
I never met; you could not speak to him
But he would be bare as soon as you. --

4. Citt. He owed me
Some moneys at his banishment -- I was paid
And without sending for it: not many Courtiers
Have such good memories. --

3. Citt. A few such men
Would make Tradesman live. -- Bless him say I.

Phil. So; it begins to work: Aside

Enter two others drunk and singing: Ta! La! La! La! La! La! Plague o'these
fools To them, a Fiddler
They Will put it off again. -- Aside

Fid. Please you have any music gentlement? -- A dainty fine, merry, new song
-- there is none but I and my boy -- Sirrah come forth! Where are you? -- I
have not lost you in the crowd? have I? --


Enter a tall well set fellow Phil. A pretty Child -- chopper.


1, 2, 3, Citt. I, I, Strike up; strike up They play


4, 5, 6. Citt. Scrape rogues, scrape. --


3. Citt. But shall not we have a song too?


Omnes I, I, I, I, I.


Fid. A merry drinking song and't like your worships?


Omnes I, I, I. That. That -- he sings -- Fill -- Fill up and

Fill: fill up the bowl;
And about let it trowl;
It Is a magical spell against sorrow,
It makes a man sing,
Hey! derry, derry, ding,
And never busy his brains with too morrow.
It Is the Beggar's ease,
And his charm against the fleas;
It recover's the man that did dwindle:
It makes a stiff Giant
Both active and pliant;
And a cripple turn round like a spindle.
It cares not a straw,
For the Justice, or his law;
It fears neither spies, nor reporters:
It makes all the house
Lie as snug as a mouse;
And a petticoate sleep without Porters.

1. Citt. How now Brother -- whence came you? --


6. Citt. Even from where it was -- or as a man may say,
The more the merryer -- we have been drinking
The best man's health in Europe. --

3. Citt. Then here is to you
The second best. --

6. Citt. Who Is that?


3. Citt. Andronicus.


6. Citt. It Was his I meant. --


5. Citt. We cannot hav't too often.


6. Citt. Come then, away with it. -- They drink round


Phil. Now Is my only time. Aside
What say you Gentlemen? you all confess
He is a Noble Person. --

Omnes As ever lived.


1. Citt. Wise.


3. Citt. Bounteous.


4. Citt. Valiant.


2. Citt. Every thing


5. Citt. And deserves every thing


6. Citt. And would he had every thing.


Phil. Why so; I see
You're understanding men; and may be trusted:
Look over this. -- He gives them u long roll.

4. Citt. Here are a thousand hands. --


Phil. Yes, ten at least:
I Am sure't'as cost my Lord and me 5 days Aside.
To scrible their ugly Fists:

2. Cit. Let Us see what is it?


1. Cit. Reads The humble Petition and Address of the Citizens and Inhabitants
of Constantinople -- Shows, etc. Hanged -- Give me a pen -- I had rather set
my hand to it unsight and unseen, than to trouble my head to read it over --
Subscribes.


4. Cit. Sure there can be no hurt in it; there are so many hands to it:


Ph. You may be sure of that --


3. Cit. What is it then?


Phil. Why -- you congratulate his safe return,
And pray him he would assist the Emperor;
Alas good Prince, he will have a heavy trouble often.

5. Cit. Assist: hum! That is as much as to say, Assist -- or so --


6. Cit. -- I, neighbor I, it is plain.


5. Cit. Not so plain as you make it neither -- Give me the pen -- I cannot
write; but I can make a G for John.


3. Cit. And I a K for Christopher:


6. Cit. I cannot read, but I can write -- when I have written it, any one may
read it. -- They all subscribe


9 others pass the Stage 2. Cit. Hoop holyday! What Is Hell broke loose? What
are you?


Tay. Tailors, so please you Sir.


2. Cit. Oh -- Tailors -- One man set his mark for you all:


Phil. They look like honest men -- Come Gentlemen;
Subscribe, subscribe -- They all subscribe.

Enter a seventh Citizen. 7. Cit. How now my Masters? Sheering of Hogs?
All cry, and no wool?
What Is the matter?

2. Cit. Subscribe, subscribe,


Phil. Nothing but set your hand to Petition:


7. Cit. For ought I know, it may be Treason twenty years hence -- Not I
beloved.


3. Cit. Not you, why not you? will you be wiser than the best of the Parish?


4. Cit. And City too -- will you?


2. Cit. Show him the President's hand there;


7. Citt. Oh ho -- I Am satisfied;


Phil. Come, come, subscribe: He subscribes.


2. Cit. But hark you, how shall we get this presented?


Phil. The President's an honest Gentleman,
And loves the City -- I hope he will do it:

2. Cit. Away -- Away -- Let Us to him,


Omnes I, I, I.


Fid. Please your Worships to remember the Music:


5. Cit. Music you rogue! I Would have made better upon a Gridiron.


1. Cit. Or I with a Key and Tongs.


2. Cit. Hang 'um, hang 'um, we have done with 'um:


Phil. There Sirrah: Gives him money.


Fid. I thank your Worship:


3. Cit. Hold, hold, let him do somewhat for his money before he goes -- Has he
subscribed?


4, 5, 6. Cit. No, no, no -- he has not yet; but he shall


Fid. What your Worships please -- Subscribes Is there any more?


4, 5, 6. Cit. No, no, no, enough, enough, good Mr. Scraper. Exeunt reeling.


ACT. III.
SCE. I.
Enter Andronicus Solus. IT hits -- And now my work's as good as done;
But I must cast more blinds, for fear it be
Too soon discovered -- One would not think how't takes,
That I have added fifty Friars, to pray
For the cursed soul of Manuel -- See his revenge
(Good Prince) the people cry -- 'Twas necessary:
Nothing established Caesar's statues more,
Than re-erecting those of conquered Pompey:
I must yet farther, be their Advocate
For liberty against restrictive Laws,
And make what ever's their concernment, mine;
Thus shall I steal the power, and the dull beast
Not dream it lost, until it feel where it is;
Then 'twill be time, and not till then, to hew
The Imperial Cedar, and stop the peoples mouths
With a few sticks, and chips, 'twill warm their hands,
When the other is forgot: the dog that fought
To save his Masters wallet, when he could not
Defend it longer, eat for company;
And so will they; If not, necessity
That has no law her self, shall coin one for it;
All things are lawful to their end; That war
Is just, that is necessary; and those Arms religious,
Where a man cannot well be safe without 'um;
Then shall I triumph, when I make the Empire
Shrink at my weight, and truckle under me;
Trample the world, and frighten fate, to feel
A thread so stuborn as to twist her Wheel: Enter Steph.
How fares my loved Stephanus?
Ste. As ever,
Your Highness's Vassal. --

And. Fie my friend, we are one;
How does our friend Basilius? --

Ste. He Is well;
And better employed: --

And. As how? --


Ste. He Is with his Cousin;
A cunning Sophister that always followed
The rising Sun -- He now begins to find
It may be lawful; Give him but your hand
He shall be Patriarch, my life, he brings
A Text to make it out. --

And. So, ply him there;
And put it to him what he thinks, if an oath
Of being true and faithful to Alexius,
Were set on foot -- 'twould be a handsome cloak:

Ste. But do more hurt than good; for if you add,
His Successors, as I believe you mean,
We shall be ripe too soon, and easy smoakt:

And. Why? I shall be his Successor, and then
The oath will reach to me. --

Ste. That will be nothing,
Nor stand you much in stead; suppose you were
Now Emperor, and 'twere now put about;
You Would find few boggle at it, but such, as could
Do you no hurt -- These Oaths are dangerous things,
They conceal enemies, and make no friends;
One will be true enough without it, the other
Will not regard it; he that is forced to take
An oath, straight makes a second, not to keep it:
You're only sure of him, whom by believing
To be what you would have him, you make so:

And. But yet the greater number will swallow it;
Oaths are the same to them, as rattles to children,
It makes the cheat pass easy -- slide as 'twere.

Ste. However, it is ticklish; some Cur or other
May find it out, and bark; and all the rest
Open for company; then we shall have
Nothing but jealousies, distrusts, and fears,
News upon news, Petition on Petition,
Laws, Liberties, Religion, all at stake,
And will be lost, unless these Geese (forsooth)
Cackle and save the Capitol. --

And. Honest Stephanus Hugs him.


Ste. Your actions will be Table-talk; disputed
In Barbers shops, and Bake-houses; each slip
Be made a fault, and every fault a crime;
Then shall your oath be brought upon the rack,
Whether 'twere lawfully imposed; or you,
Capable of receiving it; or if so,
How far it binds; No faith with Tyrants, says one,
With Robbers, another cries; and then how easy
'Twill be to make you one, or both, especially,
When they that give the sentence, make the case,
I leave it to your Highness. --

And. My best friend; Hugs him again.
But somewhat must be done to blind the people:

Ste. Keep 'um but moving, they will never mind you;
Do you but shake the Tree, they will pick the Fruit,
And busy enough; but lest (when all is gone)
They should look up to see who 'twas that did it;
You must provide your mask; and of this kind,
None better than Religion -- your Highness
Knows how to wear it to the best advantage;
It Is a rare servant, but a scurvy Master:

And. Then you think best to let alone the Oath,
At least not press it. --

Ste. Yes by any means:
You Will find an hundred safer ways.

And. We'll talk the rest within: these giddy fools
Are hunting out Basilius, and may chance
To light on me too soon: --

Ste. I wait your Highness. Exeunt.


ACT. III.
SCE. II.
Enter Philo and Citizens. PHil. How say you my Masters, who shall make the
Speech?
So many of us, and not one gifted brother?

2. Cit. Time was I could have done my part: The Prince (And no disparagement)
might have heard it too.


Phil. And never the wiser -- Aside.


3. Cit. Troth my Pump is dry:


Phil. This is your drinking -- I have often told you;


1. Cit. Have but a little patience, yonder is one
Will end the controversy; do but observe
How hard he wrings, and squeezes; somewhat's coming:

Phil. What? he with that Parenthesis about his mouth?
By no means Gentlemen, it is ominous:
What ever comes between't, may be left out.

4. Cit. I Am satisfied -- It Is but a good Speech lost:
Good Master Philo be that Office yours.

Omnes A Philo, A Philo, Philo, Philo.


Phil. I, now the matter's mended.


Omnes Give't him -- Give't him. They give him the petition


Phil. Well -- if I must -- what remedy?


Omnes He comes: Enter Basilius.


Phil. Save you most worthy Sir -- I am commanded
By the Inhabitants, and Citizens
Of this great City, to present you this,
And beg your favor and assistance in it. delivers the Roll

Basilius reads to himself. 1. Cit. Hang the rogue how he trowls it out;


2. Cit. His tongue runs on wheels.


Bas. In troth my Masters it is a noble thing;
And well advised: Nay and becoming men
That love their Country: But I Am half afraid
He Will not accept it; He Is so humble minded
You Will hardly draw him to it: However I Will try:

Omnes We thank your Honor.


1. Cit. I hope you will prevail.


2. Cit. I should be sorry else.


5. Cit. So should I that er'e I set my hand to it.


Enter Andronicus. Phil. Stand off -- He comes himself:
Long live your Highness.

Omnes Long live the Founder of our Liberty:


And. I thank you Gentlemen, But may I serve you?


Omnes Long live the public Father; Live Andronicus.


Bas. My Lord, these Gentlemen (both in their own
And friends behalf) have made me promise 'um
That I Would present you this delivers the Roll Nor must your Highness
Make me denial; Their request is short:
That you would be pleased to ease Alexius's years,
By bearing half the burden of the Crown:
Nor do I think you will disdain a part,
Though you deserve the whole -- And thus of old
The Roman Senate to Marcellus joined,
Delaying Fabius; Age, and Youth together:
A wholesome mixture, where the one brought eyes,
The other hands; This, action, He, advice:
Thus must the body of the Gretian state,
Be wisely tempered, lest we rue't too late;

And. What kind of voice is this I hear? my friends
Either forget, or know not what they ask;
Joint Emperor! -- were there no Treason in it,
I must not hearken to it; who would be clogged
With gieves, though made of gold; for such are Crowns,
Or stoop to take one up, that knew the weight often:
Crowns are thick set with cares; for every gem,
An hundred doubts, and troubles; nor are their ermin
More spotted than their fate; whilst privacy
Lies low ('it is true) but yet that low, is safe:
Thunder plows up the Hills, when Valleys escape;
And rives tall Cedars, when the Shrubs go free;
Sleep dwells in Cottages, not thrones; content,
In humble cells; whilst greatness is at odds
With every thing; nay, and its self to boot:
Let others grasp at all, and by great pains,
Aspire to greater: Let 'um vex the world,
They but disquiet themselves; he only lives,
That Is beneath envy, and above contempt:
Be it enough that I have served my Country
Thus long; That I have freed her from the Yoke,
Broke all her fetters: -- You have had my youth;
Let me enjoy my age: 'Twere too severe
To have had one, and yet deny me to'ther.

Phil. That was well hinted Master. Excellent fox! Aside


Omnes Andronicus, Andronicus, Long live Andronicus. 5. Cit. We Have brought our
selves into a dainty nooze.


1. Cit. Good Sir persuade him.


Bas. I must not leave your Highness so:
Whom can Greece think more worthy than your self?
Where should she pay most, but where most is owing?
Let me prevail, my Lord, this day shall be
Writ in a scarlet Text, since hence we date
The happiness, and new birth day of the state.

And. It Is strange my friends that you should preess me thus,
And put my modesty to a blush -- Can Greece so full
So far forget her self? Can Greece
Of able Statesmen) Greece o'reshoot her self?
Who has bewitched thee? with what spectacles
Did thou look on my merit? that thou have made
So fair a letter in so small a print?
Andronicus deserve a Crown! Alas!
Greece is mistook -- I have one foot in the Grave,
And can you think it sightly to behold
The other in a Throne -- No -- Graves, and Thrones,
Hold least proportion; -- You say you love me;
Shew't now -- and dazzle not those eyes again
Which I thought shut to vanity -- I am
Content, and what can Providence add more?
Not that I tell you this as I were lazy,
Or sullen, or refused to serve my Country;
Far be it from me; No; we were not born,
To live like Hedgehogs, rolled in our own down,
And turn out bristles to all the world besides:
Yet must we dye to our selves, and so let me,
Whose age may challenge a writ of ease; and crave
Leave of the world to let me mind my Grave.

Omnes. Andronicus, Andronicus, Long live Andronicus. Ph. It Is all in vain to
press him now -- we'll find
Some other time when he shall not deny us. Exeunt with a shout. Manet And.

And. What is this giddy multitude? This beast
Of many heads? This thing Vox populi?
It can do all; As much, or more than Fate,
Raise, and pull down; make, and annihilate;
Yet see! How easy it is to cast a gloss
Before those vulgar eyes, those leaden souls
Begotten in a dream; -- Ex traduce:
How natural is it for sire to climb?
And could they think a man; nay more, a Prince;
Born near a Crown, of such a frozen spirit
That Empire could not thaw? Come, come, I must
Play my Cards handsomely; and though I yield
(As who would not) make 'um believe it is
Through importunity, not my desire;
I Will slip the Vizard first, then let it hang,
Till it fall off, often self -- Thus while they woo,
I Will have my ends, and they beholding too. Exit.

ACT. III.
SCE. III.
Enter Conto, Lapardas, Ducas. COnt. Observed you not the tumult? I Have scarce
heard
A fuller cry, I wonder what it means?

La. Where has your Lordship been? nothing (but Treason)
Is more familiar -- It Is a Petition
To have Andronicus joint Emperor;

Du. And backed (they say) with 20 thousand hands;
Besides some great ones -- But to give him's due,
He has refused it; if he have not, I Will swear,
Mamalus was a witch --

Cont. Why, what of him?


Lap. His name slipped from me unawares; -- Good faith,
He guessed at this unluckily, long since;
But make no words often; it may do him wrong.

Cont. It Is spoken to a stone; yet troth I Am glad
He has denied it; say he should be honest?

Du. I cannot see his drifts; would he have took it,
He might have had it now, e're it took air;
And we in no condition to prevent it.

La. What say you if we went and waited on him?
Took notice of the thing, and thankt his virtue?

Cont. I like it well. --


Du. Then let us not delay it.


As they are going out they are met, and stopped by Maria, Constantinus, Mamalus.
Mar. My Lords! well met; but whither -- You are posting
Who shall be first to kiss the rising Sun?

L. No, no, there is nothing in it; Besides, you (Madam)
Know we have his Honor, and his Oath engaged.

Mar. Oh! w'hear you have -- And yet I Will scarce believe
(Though I have reason to suspect) he will break 'um.

Du. There is hope yet: he has refused the offer:


Mam. To make them hotter on it; (good Gentleman)
He Is modest, and may chance to want entreaty.

Constable. Perhaps the cry was faint, and weak, there wanted
More Curs to yelp, and Hounds to mouth it out:
It was some time before he joined with us,
But yet at last you saw --

Mam. I fear me, more
Than you will be fairly rid on -- Enemies
Are ten times easier kept out, than thrown out:

Mar. But had this rabble no head? He is too cunning
To trust a giddy multitude --

Constable. They say
It was the City President --

Cont. Most likely;
He Is one that would be great at any rate;

Constable. I, here is the hand, but where is the spring that moves it?


Mam. The cobweb does not cover the Spider so,
But I can see him work: This must be old
Basilius, I trace him by his Cousin;
They two, are hand and glove -- only, one acts,
What t'other's ashamed to own -- That holy men
Must (like the holy Language) be thus read backward.

Mar. But what would make him do it? I Am sure my Father
Preferred him well --

Mam. But can he make him Patriarch?
You Will say he is dead, and cannot; then blame him not
To strike up interest with him that may;
T'other's forgot -- Besides, ambitious men
When they stand still, fancy they are going back;
Thus much, he has already, only tells him
How much more's wanting; and what was a sum
In the desire, enjoyed, is but a cipher.

Mar. Prithee Mamalus -- Do not draw the Devil
More ugly than he is --

Mam. Nor you good Madam
Believe him fairer -- Don't we know the Tree
By 'ts Fruit? And judge of men, by Actions?
Not fair pretenses -- You forget our Proverb,
Remember to distrust -- This easy faith
Has done more mischief, than it e're did good.

La. Had we believed your words, this had never been;


Mam. As how my leaky Lord? -- These bored barrels:


Aside. La. Nay be not angry man; We are all friends;
And may be free -- We'll live and die together.

Mar. No heats among our selves good Gentlemen:


Andronicus from behind the hangings. And. Yonder they are in faith -- I Will
stumble on 'um;
Now for a neat disguise, and all is my own; A shout within

Mar. Hark! hark! What Is this? --


Mam. Even the old rout again;
This will be somewhat at last, or I Am mistaken.

Enter And. as angry, and speaking to some within. And. Plague of these fools,
and those that set 'um on;
What do they trouble me? Tell 'um I cannot,
Or if I could, I would not; Have they none
To bait but me? --

Mar. Save your good Majesty.


And. My friends, and all! -- Is this the thanks you give me?
This the reward I have? Who but a madman
Would serve his Country? Who would warm a snake
That knew its nature? For such it is to me;
Was It your design when first you called me home
To make me miserable, that made you happy?
Who courted you? Did I? No, Heaven knows
'Twas otherwise: If not; you Madam can
Be my Compurgatrix: Nor think it strange
I talk this rate; your ugly jealousy
(As closely as you carry't) is cause enough:
Nay I am right; I found it in your looks
Before this Lady spoke it -- Is It my crime
The people's mad? or must my innocence
Suffer, because they know not what they would?
You Will say perhaps I have been offered Empire,
But have I took it? That I might have been,
And am not; judge your selves, whether it speaks
My virtue more, or your ingratitude:
Would he that told the peoples heat, had told you
My frosty answer; That had done me right;
But now I see, good deeds are writ in Ice,
And the least groundless jealousy in Steel:
Let me remember once (but to forget it
Ever hereafter) I have served you truly,
Done my self injury to be kind to you,
And wrought my own disquiet, to lighten yours:
You know necessity first made me arm;
And (by what ever's good) there is nothing less
Shall make me keep it up; Then doubt not him
Whom you have tried -- Could you believe I would?
Certain you could not: --

La. My Lord I Am satisfied, and thank your Highness,
You took the pains to do it. --

Conto. The same am I:


Omnes. And all of us. -- Mam. skews his lip.


And. Then pray continue so,
Until you find me otherwise. --

Omnes. We shall.
Your Highness's -- Exeunt.

And. Madam, I Will wait on you;
But I must chide you first, you have been unkind;
Good faith you have -- Distrust a friend! Nay one,
You knew so long, and might so well command;
I have not deserved it: --

Mar. Good my Lord forgive me,
I loved my brother well; and was afraid,
What such a tumult might. --

And. Hang'um -- Do You think
I Would ruin, what you (the glory of your Sex)
Took so much pains to save --

Mar. Nay, good my Lord.


And. I Am yet too low -- Thou Have a brave noble soul,
And such as might redeem a perished world,
But that it is done already. --

Mar. Nay -- now -- my Lord!


And. I Have done -- But shall I never see the noble Caesar
Your Husband, here -- I Am sure the Empire wants him:

Mar. I would you could; but I Am afraid you will not,
His Ague has so shaken him in pieces:

And. I Am sorry for it -- (he nere was well together) Aside
He has my prayers, and wishes. --

Mar. Thank your Lordship. Exeunt.


ACT. III.
SCE. IV.
Enter Mannuel, Philo. MAn. But tell me Philo, prithee tell me how
Thou came in this great credit with my Father?

Phil. Oh Sir! I Have been his servant many years;
He bred me from a boy, to what you see;
Trust and employment can do mighty things:

Man. How gat'st th'in to that trust? --


Phil. As other men;
By seeming fool, yet such a one, as might be
Fit matter for the Knave; by bearing injuries,
And thanking 'um; at least dissembling,
Till I had power to act a safe revenge.

Man. Suppose that never came. --


Phil. Then I forgave 'um.


Man. I see thou have studied the point; Prithee teach me
Some of those little Arts. --

Phil. Call you 'um little?
As little as they are, they govern the world.

Man. It Is well it is ignorant how little governs it;
But on --

Phil. Since it is your pleasure, I shall -- Who would
Grow to an Oak, he must be first a Twig;
Supple, and pliant; bow with every wind;
He Is long a growing up, but sure to stand,
When the other shows his roots -- He must speak well
Of all in place; No matter what they are,
It is enough, they are there:
Nature never made so great a Beast, but somewhat
Might be said for it -- Is the subject dirty?
Wrapped in clean linen -- For example now:
Is he a downright fool? -- Call him good natured:
A Babbler, sociable: A Railer, witty:
If scoffing, pleasant: if malicious, subtle:
If vicious, affable: if foolhardy, daring:
If given to Ribaldry, A merry Gentleman:
All noise, a learned man: if he says nothing,
He thinks the more, and has a working brain:
If impudent, A handsome confidence:
They Are very near allied, and only differ
In The success: Is he thick skull'd and stupid?
A modest man, and has an excellent wit,
But an odd art of keeping 't to himself:
What though the Shop be thin? The Warehouse has't:
Has he the Statesmans tread? A wise man no doubt:
If we perceive a River run dark, and slow,
We straight pronounce it deep, and never examine
Whether the mud at bottom be the cause:
Is he all Apophthegm? A shrewd man;
What matter though he want a trifling circumstance
Of Sense and Pertinence; What Is that to us?
What hurt's in all this? do not we call
Our pretty Ladies, civil, obliging women?
And shall we be less modest to their husbands?

Man. How have I lived in the dark? I always called
A spade, a spade; But now I see, my Knave,'s
Your thriving man. --

Phil* Believe 'um what you please,
But treat 'um like honest men -- To Others so broad;
And what is your Lordship better when yo've don't?
They know it as well as you. --

Man. Thou Art a rare fellow;
Thou that have this, have more. --

Phil. Why troth -- not much;
He must swear every thing; and if need be,
Forswear't again; but still beware, it be
Done with a tenderness: He must own nothing*
Laid by; nor boggle at any thing, cried up;
And for his conscience, he must split the hair,
Twixt techy, and prostitute; The one
Flies in his face, the other makes him cheap;
Lasty; for his Religion (since it is necessary
He have a show at least) chuse't, as men, bells,
By the sound; or we, our Magistrates, by the poll.

Man. But does the world do this?


Phil. How think you Sir?
Do they eat, drink, or sleep? --

Man. Where ever I come
I find it damned: --

Phil. And reason good -- The people
May chance to smoke it else -- Who first discovered it,
Put teeth in the Sheeps mouths; you cannot fleece 'um
Now, but they will bite; -- no -- he must still decry it;
But to believe himself, not worth his while:

Man. And do not thou? what pity it is these parts
Should be thus lost in low, ignoble Arts?
Such little nothings -- Leave 'um -- I Will prefer thee.

Phil. Defend me from a lecture. Aside -- It Is no more
Than what my betters have done, and thrived by too.

Man. Yet let me beg thee leave it; what is got
By such base means, is but an empty blaze,
Crackles a while in talk, but quickly gone:
It Is not too late for to be virtuous yet;
What Is done already, may have rather been
The vice of thy employment, than thy nature.
What say thou man? --

Phil. I was never obstinate.


Man. Let me instruct thee then -- And yet heaven knows
How much I want my self, yet I may serve
To light a candle to thee, Could thou but see
What wertue were, thou would prevent my wish;
It Is a continual Spring, and Harvest both,
Bears fruits, and blossoms, sows and reaps at once,
So quick is the return, and certain too:
And as in equal temperatures, the Pulse
Beat true, and even; so here, she is still the same,
Not swollen with good things, nor cast down with bad;
Free, without cheapness; composed without formality;
Calm without dullness; active without weariness;
And in the want of every thing, is all:
How say thou Philo? Will thou have her, man?

Phil. No ready money Sir? -- Half one, half the other
Were somewhat like -- I hearken to your Lordship.

Man. Whose are the quiet sleeps, but the virtuous?
Who valiant, but they? (not brutish valor,
But) such as dare die in cold blood:
Who honorable but they? Honor without virtue,
Is what the people pleases, not our own:
Who are religious but they? Without it,
Religion's but a soul without a body,
A painted butterfly, a specious nothing;
Whilst joined they make a perfect harmony:
This is a virtuous man; Fear, neither drives him,
Nor favor draws aside; He values not
The curled wrinkles of a Tyrants brow;
He Is still serene; and tires, as well the wit,
As power of torture, and enjoys 'um too:
Such is his mans-estate; And when old age
Has seized the outworks, he is secure within;
And is so far from wishing youth again,
He Is only sorry that e're he was young:
Come -- I must make thee virtuous -- Follow me: Exit.

Phil. I cannot tell -- As he is going out Ph. speaks aside
But I half doubt my self:
One such a Lecture more -- And good night Master --
Farewell good honest Philo -- How it sounds! He startles
Had I puling gizard now, 'Twere done:
But -- soft, and fair goes far. -- Exit.

ACT. III.
SCE. V.
Enter And. Steph. Bas. -- (shouts within.) ANd. What would you have me do? --


Ste. Troth, play no longer;
(Pardon the language) They are all agog,
And may do mischief. --

Bas. If you slip this minute,
You may wait long enough, e're you get another;
If once they settle, all our labor's lost;
They Will understand themselves -- Besides, you're gone
Too far, to go no farther: --

And. You mistake me;
I am resolved upon it -- What before
Looked like ambition, Is but safety now;
I only stopped a while, as doubting, whether
'Twere fit t'accept it yet --

Ste. What said the Lords?


And. Most satisfied; only Mamalus's face
Spoke more, than his tongue durst. --

Bas. Puh, he is but one,
And may be made; at least, be taken off,
By (the old way) preferment, or his head:

Ste. But there are others, and not least concerned,
The sober party, that have stakes to lose;
(The age is too refined for men to walk
Invisible) They have not been dealt with yet.

Ste. It Is one of the greatest follies in the world,
For to believe the world wiser than it is;
Call me a Junto -- They shall do it for you;
You Will never want men, until you want Preferment.

And. That were to let 'um see, I needed 'um;
Put a sword in their hands, and make my self
Less than I am; them, more than they should.

Bas. How will y'avoid it? There is no other way
To fix, and settle; then you will plead consent;
Nor will it be difficult to bring'um to it:
The people are like sheep, it is better driving
A flock, than one. --

And. But say they should prove sullen?
Unravle my Title? --

Ste. You must venture that;
It Is easy turning 'um to grass again;
By all means let'um meet, though they do nothing,
But set the rates of Tripes, and Pudding-pies.

And. Well, be it so; And now my friend, you may
Rally your rabble-Regiment again:
Tell 'um -- I accept it. Exit Basilius.

Ste. I Will secure your Highness,
They shall not squabble for want of work; my self
Has cut out more than they will make up in have;
Nor shall their speed be more than we think good;
Whilst, though wisemen propose, fools must debate it:

Shout within. And. Now how I love my Genius hugs him Let Us keep here,
All will be well enough; And though I cannot
Make the deaf Adder hear, I Will be sure this,
To charm him so, he shall not dare to hiss. Exeunt.

Shouts within proclaiming Andronicus. ACT. IV.
SCE. I.
Enter Alexius, Andronicus. ALex. No longer Cousin now, but dearest brother,
You're welcome to a burden, and I Am glad
I Have got so good a Partner in the Throne:

And. Great Sir, I thank you, and (have been so used
To downright honesty) I believe you too:
It is enough to me, that I Am your servant,
The partner of your cares, and not your Throne;
Yet who'd be great, when at the best, it is but
A better sort of slavery, a handsome Gaol,
And (what the worst of Gaols is free from) envied?
Could you believe that in this little time
I should be struck at? and through your sides too?
What is my fault? if to have done 'um good
Be such, it is mine, if to have broke my rest,
That they might sleep secure, be crime, I Am guilty;

Alex. Alas I Am sorry for it; and cannot yet
Conjecture what you mean. --

And. Please you read this^ And. gives him a paper


Alex. How Is this?
Belgrade betrayed unto the King of Hungary!

And. It should have been; And had not I stalkt with'um,
It had been now too late to ask whose work 'twas.

Alex. What are the persons? They must be considerable.


And. And so they are;


Alex. But have you taken any?


And. Yes -- diverse -- And on one a Counsel of war
Has passed, and sentenced -- Please you sign the warrant;

Alex. Gi'me't, and lest relation may sway me,
I Will never enquire the name signs it Yet let me see it;
How now! what is this -- My Mother Empress! -- hold:
Make me a Nero! take away her life
That gave me mine! --

And. Have but a little patience,
And if I do n't convince you, of my honor
I Will give't you back again -- Consider it;
A Frontier, a whole Province in effect;
A little Kingdom; all the fate of Greece,
Attends its Fortune --

Alex. But we have it still.


And. What matter is it -- Then you believe no Treason,
Unless the Prince be killed:

Alex. But it is my Mother:


And. Justice respects no persons, Crowns, no kindred;
And Fathers of their Country, know no Mothers:

Alex. As if one could not be a Prince, unless
He put off man -- Come -- You are too severe;
She is my Mother -- Let a Cloister serve:

And. Severe -- Know I'um joint Emperor, and can
Do it my self; but that I would not rob you
The glory of the action; This will break
The neck of Treason, when the age shall see
Such signal Justice done upon a Mother.

Alex. That shall not I. --


And. Then let the Empire sink,
I Will never mind it more, nor break my sleep
To force an happiness on one that slights it:
Here -- take your Paper -- But lest it be said
You did once well, and straight repented it,
I thus dispose it -- Tears a wrong paper, and burns it.

Alex. It Is all one -- I thank you. Exit


And. It Is done; and your game's next: See! Here Is the warrant
It Was a wrong paper burnt: -- What excellent mortar
Blood makes! Rome batten'd in it, and from the ruins
Of Alba, and the slaughtered world, grew up
To what she was; and so must I the same?
It Is not enough that I Am got up my self
But I must beat down others; level all
That stand before, or near me; I Am not safe
While young Alexius lives, or (which is worse)
Has a friend left him; He has many, and great ones,
And might be worth my fear, could they but fix,
Or know their strength; But there are only two
Considerable, that is Constantinus, and Mamalus;
Honest, and able both -- For all the rest
Would all my friends were what they think themselves,
My enemies, what they are; yet as they are,
They made me what I am; and may again
Crush me to nothing, if I don't prevent 'um,
By giving the first blow, and putting't home:
Thus, thus it must; nor can I sleep secure,
Till they have slept their last, and fall together
Wrapped in one common fate; none ever rackt
A grave to find the man he feared, or hated;
The rest will follow; It Is but using well
The present time, and working on emergencys;
Things counsel men, and not men counsel things.
Enter Manuel. How now my Manuel -- Thus you see my pains
To make you happy. --

Man. Would your self were such.


And. Small time will do it -- Rome was not built at once.


Man. And better she would continued Cottage still,
Than built on rapine, or enlarged with blood;
The tears of Orphans, and the curse of Widows,
Rot not in the Air.

And. Away you fool -- The Fox
Fares best, when he is cursed; It Is a sure sign,
H'as done his work; -- But to be serious -- Tell me
Whither a man may not preserve himself?
Or whither all things that are tending to it,
May not be lawful, at least excuseable?

Man. Thereafter as they are -- Though this I Will grant you
Peace without safety, is a bare cessation,
No laying down of Arms. --

And. Thou Have hit the nail:
Come, you must help me; -- See this executed.
Gives Man. the warrant; Man. startles. What makes you startle? Let me have it
done;

Man. Don! -- Were I satisfied of the crime, which yet
The people say, was rather packt, than pro'vd;
There Is no such dearth of hangmen, that your Son
Need take the office. --

And. Stranger to my blood
And never true begot:
Have I for this run through so many hazards?
Ventured so far, to make a villain great
That never had a soul above a dunghill?
See it be done -- and quickly -- Or --

Man. I cannot;
And which is more I shall not -- Disobedience
Is virtue here: -- If you suspect my courage,
Try't yet again; -- Show me your Enemy,
And were he guarded with ten thousand Devils,
I Will through, and through, but I will reach his head,
Or lose my own -- But this -- Is such a thing
Honor, and conscience, Justice, all forbid it.

And. What are those private toys to me? Kings may Do what they list. --


Man. But can they do it by Law?


And. But law! you block head; Does not Justice sit
At Jupiters elbow? What cannot power do,
And justifi't when don? He that can nothing
But what is lawful, raigns by courtesy:
Besides, what use of Laws? Good Kings may live
Without 'um, bad ones will not much regard 'um;
Had Alexander squared his actions
By common Justice, he had never wept
The want of worlds; or had Rome given back
To every one their own -- How had she sat
(Like Aesop's Jay) stripped of her pilfer'd plumes,
And fairly martch't to her first Huts again:
Weigh Crowns by the balance and you will make fine work:
Preach laws to swordmen! -- Out -- This squemish slave
Exit Manuel; -- At another door enter Stephanus. Will be my ruin, and his own
in mine.
Welcome my better self! -- you must see this And. gives Stephanus the warrant
for Execution.
Dispatched, and quickly; If the people grumble
Produce your warrant; tel'um how hard I stood
To have preserved her, but I could not do it.
How says my Stephanus? -- Enter Philo.

Ste. I say -- it is don.


And. 'Twas my good Angel's voice; good luck attend it.
Now honest Philo! How goes your work on? Exit Steph.

Philo. As well as heart can wish; The Stag is lodged;
And my Hounds ready: --

And. But do know 'um well?
Have they been entered, flusht in blood before?
I hate the fearful hands. --

Phil. Never doubt 'um Sir,
There Is not a man among 'um but has been
Kicked out of all the Sanctuaries in Europe:
Who ever speaks of young Alexius next,
Shall only say, -- He was:

And. 'Twas bravely said:
Come -- We have more to do. Exeunt.

ACT. IV.
SCE. II.
Enter Cont. Lap. Du. Constable. Mam. COnt. We have done well my Lords, we have made
a rod
To whip our selves -- Right Aesop's frogs in faith,
We must be changing -- Nay it is well enough.

La. For why my Lord -- I Am sure my thoughts were clear,
As spotless crystal? could I conceive one drop
Of blood within me traiterous, it should out,
Though 'twere that next my heart:

Du. The same were mine:
I only meant to use him as a purge
To carry ill humors, not our spirits off:

Constable. A fit comparison -- We Are purged indeed;
The remedy proves worse than the disease:

Mam. I, you o'reshot the mark -- E're he came in
He was your Creature, but your Master now:

Constable. Where is this perjured Villain? -- Sure he believes
The bottomless bag -- That Lovers, and Traitors Oaths
Are lodged together shouts The Devil's in this Rout,
More shouting yet. --

La. And more is like to be;
It Is thought when fuel fails, they will pluck down houses
To keep the bon-fires up -- Did not your Lordship
See the installment? --

Constable. No, but I have heard
'Twas very splendid. --

Cont. Yes, as Art could make it:


Mam. So't should; The trappings of the Presidents horse,
Is more than half in the Government of the City:

Constable. But have you seen no public Acts of late?
The vizard is half off -- The names transposed
Andronicus first, and then Alexius:

Mam. And reason good; should not the figure stand
Before the cipher? -- Caesar, and Bibulus;
One does all, the other drinks all.

La. Could he yet stop,
There might be hopes. --

Mam. Small hopes -- Ambition
Is never so high but she still thinks to mount:
That station which lately seemed the top,
Is but a step to her now, and what before
Was even beyond her wish, being once in power,
Seems low, and cheap -- If I mistake it not,
The Emperor yet lives; and though he is
But the bare shadow of a swelling name,
Can you believe Andronicus will brook
An equal in authority? -- Is Andronicus
No better known? -- Well my good Lords what say you?
Please you to give me leave and I Will propose,
A short expedient. --

Omnes^ With all our hearts.


Mam. And you engage however you dislike it
Not to discourse't abroad? --

Omnes. Upon our Honors. --


Mam. Then thus -- He Is yet unsettled; Heavy bodies
Once moved, retain a trembling e're they fix:
So here -- The Empire's in a strange confusion,
And it is his interest to keep it so;
Now what I offer, is this; That every one
Pick out his Faction, and oblige it to him;
Get but so far into 'um, as to please um,
You have 'm sure enough; the power to raise 'um,
Follows of course; Then shall we fall upon him
E're he have time to think; And break his neck,
By the same hand that set it. --

Constable. I like it well,
But cannot judge it safe to trust a tumult,
Unless we had a body to make a stand?

Mam. Nor will we want it; we'll but use the people
As a forelorn: And for the rest, what think you
Of Stephanus? I Will pawn my head I make him.

Constable. Impossible -- He was the chiefest person
Set the other up. --

Mam. But what has he done for him?
He Is but the same he was; and, which makes for us,
Has equals, if not superiors in savor;
I know his spirit can never brook it long;
Do you but give the world, I Will run the hazard:

Constable. How say ye my Lords?


Omnes. Worthy Mamalus,
You have our hearts, and thanks, and wishes to it:

Enter Maria as in have. Constable. See! here is more news, I do not like the have.


Mar. Help, help my Lords the Emperor and's Mother,


Omnes. What of them? --


Mar. Oh! dead, dead, dead -- murdered:
That ever earth should bear so cursed a Traitor,
Such a false, treacherous, perfidious slave;
And which is worse than all; The people cry,
A judgment on him for his Mothers death?

Constable. How! What Is all this? good Madam divide your grief,
And let us bear a part. --

Mar. I know not what it is.
Reports are various -- But they say, he signed
A warrant for his Mothers execution,
For a supposed betraying of Belgrade;
And since has broke his neck by a fall from's horse,
As he was hunting -- There are others again
Say he was bow-string'd -- Oh this cursed string,
That murders more, than e're the bow killed fairly:
That I could see him yet; --
Then thus I throw off woman; and bury my tears
In my revenge -- Come Lords -- Let't never be said
There Is nothing left us of our former greatness
But fame, and ruin -- Let it never be spoke
Greece is grown barbarous, and the merry Greek
Has drowned the valiant. --

Constable. Most excellent Madam!


Mar. Come, let us forgive (our selves I mean) that crime
Of ignorance, and well-meaning; We that were
The stairs that helped him up, our backs, the steps
By which he climbed, How are we trampled on?
Come, come my Lords -- It Is time we look about us,
And ward the threatening blow -- Let Us but agree
And our work's done; The Tortoise is secure
Within her shell, if any part lie out,
It dangers all the rest: -- What says Mamalus?

Mam. What? But that he ows
Himself, and his, unto your Highness courage;
We had half drove the nail e're you came in,
But now it is rivited: There remains nothing,
But that we thank your Highness, and keep to it:

Constable. Well moved -- Let Us on: --


Mar. Do -- And you will find the Lion
Is not so terrible as the Painter makes him:

La. Du. Agreed, agreed -- Let Us on --


Mar. Bravely resolved;
Stars have their strongest influence in conjunction:

A clap or two of thunder Constable. Hark! -- Hark! -- The voice of Heaven -- 'Tas
answered us,
And sealed the enterprise -- And when I fail it,
Let Heaven strike me, as I this earth. --

Enter Philo with a guard. Ph. Stand -- Treason -- Seize 'um.


Mar. Seize me! for what?


Phil. Oh! your Highness?
The Emperor will discharge you presently.

Constable. Unhand me villlain -- Take that --


Constantinus knocks one of the guard down; after a short skuffle all seized.
Phil. So -- So -- Away with 'um.


Exeunt. ACT. IV.
SCE. III.
Enter Andronicus solus. NOw I can say I live, and not till now:
I Have elbow room enough, And space to breath;
I can look round me too; There Is not a tree
That stopped my prospect, but I Have levelled it,
At least am fairly onward; Not a mote
Hung in my light, but I have swept it down:
Now could the subtilest, overgrown Devil
(Whom age had rendered all experiment)
Done it more cleverly? -- These foolish Lords
(Like Aesop's trees) have lent the Ax an helve
To hew themselves in pieces; And the people,
Kindled a fire, that shall burn 'um up.
And let it burn -- This is my time to fix,
And arm my self against the worst; -- The ascent
To thrones, is slippery, the top shaking;
The fall a Precipice: Men go not down
By the same stairs they climbed -- Yet what of that?
This must defend me hands his sword Caesar often sheathed it,
But never laid it by --
Enter Anna. But see! -- the Empress!
'Twere a good humor now for me that killed
The Husband, to make love unto the Widow;
For once, I Will venture: he kneels Hail renowned Empress:
Anna. What would this plague, and mischief of our House?
What means he? --

And. Duty, Royal Madam, and leave
To drop a tear into this Ocean -- Rises
Alas good Emperor! -- Who can be happy,
When careless Fate shall spin a thread so fine,
Only to snap't in two again? -- Blessed youth!
Had Virtue, Innocence, and all those Graces
That build a Prince, and make him more beloved,
Than feared, don any thing -- Thou Had been here still:
Or could that early Majesty, or Courage
Beyond thy years, prevailed -- Thou Had not died yet;
But see our misery -- That nothing can
Be happy long, but Heaven must envy it:
He was two good to live. --

Anna. Would thou would been so,
I had not lost him then: -- Damned, cursed man!
How durst thou vent these lies, when thou art he
That did contrive his murder, and his blood,
Yet wreaks upon thee. --

And. Wrong not my innocence:
By all the virtues of your sex, it is false:

Anna. Thou lie. --


And. I do not, 'twas a fall from's horse:
By this it was Kisses her hand She spits at him

Anna P'th -- I touch the hand
That is besprinkled with my Husbands blood!
The day shall sooner set in the East; The West
Shall be Sunrising; e're I admit the hand
That took away my Husband, Kindred, Empire,
Nay, all -- But (what is more dear than all) thy hate;
Which, to my sorrow, is the common case,
Of all with me; but shall continue fresh
And green, when thy ill gotten Bays shall wither,
And thy perfidious Conquests be forgot.

And. Call not my Duty Conquest: If you knew
With how much trembling I returned again,
You would have pitty'd me, at least have judged
More favorably -- I must change my Key. Aside
But yet admit it conquest -- He that did
That, can do more -- If still eternal hate
Lodges in mortal breasts, nor will it be
Reclaimed, though overcome, -- Let Conquerors
Keep what is their own, the conquered obey.

Anna. 'Twas thy Ambition first began it all:


And. Say 'twere -- It Is not the justice of the Cause,
But how it ends, is looked upon -- Success
Was always Sainted --

Anna. Yes, in the Devils Calendar.


And. Come, come, forget. And since I Have sheathed my Sword,
Lay by your rancor --

Anna. Would my eyes were Basilisks,
That I might look thee dead --

And. They Have don't already;
And no less power than that, that gave the wound,
Can make the Cure --

Anna. Then die perfidious Traitor.


And. Yet e're I do it -- Let me like dying men
Make my Confession -- 'Twas I commanded
Your Husbands death, nor can I quit my self
Of any thing that you have charged me with:
Excuse't I must, and shall; or bring you in
As accessory --

Anna. Me! What means he, trow?


And. I love you, Royal Madam! and with that zeal,
That to express it -- were to imagine
'Tere comprehensible -- And make it nothing.
Were there ten thousand mischiefs more; each mischief
Clogged with another million, I would through;
Value no hazard, laugh at blood and ruin,
Till I had placed me on that even ground,
Might challenge your love -- Now Madam you have the Cause,
Be merciful to me, or just to your self:

Anna. What call you justice then? --


And. Either absolve me, or condemn your self:


Anna. Was I the cause?


And. Your beauty was.


Anna. Would it had been blasted
Beyond the power of Art. --

And. Be not so cruel,
Consider who it is loves you; and what he did
Was for that love: The Emperor is dead;
And it is as easy to call back the day
That Is past, as him; A living mouse is better
Than a dead Lion, I am Emperor still:

Anna. But how? or by what means? --


And. What matter's that?
It is enough I am; -- Here -- Take that Love
Which all the world would court -- Nor think me old
Although 't'as snow'd upon my head -- Your beauty,
Can raise new spirits, and my power shall fix 'um:

Anna. Let me alone I hate thee. --


And. But I love you:
Accept it yet, and keep that power and greatness
You ever had -- Nay I will double it:
I Will make your self (and only you) the channel
To pass my favors through: The Empire shall
Be blessed, or blasted by your influence;
And the less world, shall set its looks by yours.

Anna. Would it had never seen thine. --


And. Some Angel help me: draws his Sword
Here gives it her And I tell thee once again, I killed
Alexius: And to enjoy thee too;
Revenge his death at least -- And since I cannot
Live with thy love, let me die thy Martyr:

Anna. I take thee at thy word -- Repent -- And die.


She offers. And. Repent! -- The phrase of ignorance -- That were
To doubt the Action, in its Cause, your beauty:
'Twas I, -- Why doubt you? strike -- strange! that you will neither
Revenge, nor yet forgive. --

Anna. A way dissembler. She throws the Sword at him
Thou art not ripe for vengeance -- Nor shall
My hand anticipate thy fate -- No -- Live;
To let thee see how much I hate thee -- Live;
Only to fall more infamous: -- Exit Anna.

And. What Is here?
Love tricks? -- 'My life she comes at the other pluck:

ACT. IV.
SCE. IV.
Enter Stephanus solus. STe. And must I still live this unmanly life?
Still brook a Rival? No -- In Princes favors
There is no middle 'twixt the top, and bottom;
Their minds are large, but various, and cloyed
Sooner than others, easily o'relooking,
Their first election -- Sure the Emperor loves me;
I never wronged him in my thought -- He does;
I Will never dispute it further -- But what is it
Unless I could engross him -- There Is Basilius
Keeps even pace in's favor, and may in time
Get the start of me, if I don't prevent him:
No more -- He falls -- It Is here, as it is in prospects,
When others come on, we think our selves go back.
Enter Philo as going hastily over the Stage. Whither so hasty man?

Phil. I cannot stay, as he goes out he drops a Letter.
I Will wait upon you presently again.

Ste. takes it up. Ste. How now! more work! it is the Emperors hand;
To Tripsicus!'s heart -- A promooting Rogue!
And can you stoop so low -- Then I see any thing
Will serve your turn -- This Letter may beget
Right understanding 'twixt us -- Well -- I Will read it.
He reads, Pray mind what I hinted you last -- Affairs run high at present, but
I shall wether'um, (Ste. Good! Good! Good!) -- 9, 41, and 85 meet at night --
200 will tell you where it is -- Things are not yet ripe enough to own you
publicly -- (Ste. Better, and better) -- You know your work -- either bring
the Account your self or send it by 90. -- I had rather the latter.

Your beloved friend A.



A. -- That Is Andronicus -- I Am sure the hand
Is all his own -- Super-excellent!
In Faith! in faith! and does the wind blow there!

Philo returns in have. Phil. Dropped I no Letter Sir?


Ste. You best know that
Your self: What letter? or to whom directed?
Sure Philo you're in love, you're grown forgetful:
You know you stopped not here -- Come, tell me true;
'Twas from your Mis' -- And you're afraid another
May take the Scent -- Peuh! he will but squeeze thy Orange,
And thou may have't again: --

Phil. In troth I Am serious,
And if it be n't within, am lost forever. Exit Philo

Ste. My pocket, thad'st hit right -- Now for a trick
To kill two birds with one stone -- Make me
A property! An idle stale! -- I have't,
To see how luckily things hit -- Andronicus
Finding the City troublesome, as resenting
Alexius murder, makes it his endeavor
To fetch off Constantinus to his party;
Perhaps to destroy me too -- Not unlikely:
But I shall miss my aim, or I cross-bite him:
It Is thus -- I smoked the business, and judging it a fit opportunity to ruin
Basilius; went privately to Constantinus, and struck up a friendship with him,
and as a first Act of it, bad him have a care of Basilius, whose civil usage
had no other respect, than to betray him to the loss of his head, which (to my
knowledge as I told him) Andronicus had plotted, and would inevitably take
effect, unless he could turn the mischief upon the other, by making his escape --
Whereupon (by my advice) he has posest Basilius of a seeming repentance, for
his former obstinacy, and that he is both able, and willing to recover it, by
the discovery of a new plot; -- The thing takes -- Andronicus has sent for him
(I wonder he is not come yet) But if he does not give them the go-by, I Will lose
my head -- If he does -- The work is done -- Basilius destroyed -- and
consequently Andronicus disarmed of the City, by the falling of the power into
my hands.

Now how I hug my self,
Who cannot make his Port with a fore-wind,
Must use a side-wind -- Craft, where strength does fail,
And piece the Lion with the Fox's tail. Exit.

ACT. IV.
SCE. V.
Enter Andronicus solus. ANd. And am I Emperor? And do my foes
Still live? -- Or must I that have dared so far
Faulter at last, for fear the multitude
May be displeased? -- Can wounded greatness sleep,
Or joy it self, when it beholds a Sword
Hang over its head? -- No -- Let me be safe
Though the world tumble, -- Slow, and fearful Counsels,
Which narrow hearted fools call caution, Enter Philo
Never made Rome what she was; -- Who waits within?
What? Has Maria's Doctor done his work?

Ph. As pat as wish -- She Is dead -- And so's her Husband:


And. Here -- see these Warrants executed; -- For Constantinus let him alone
till you hear further from me:


Ph. It Is done: --


And. I like a man goes merrily on;
Are they not right? -- Philo peruses them

Ph. Yes, yes, -- But if they were not
I Would make 'um serve aside send me good luck -- I Have dabled
So long in blood, that ten to one he serves me
As our Musicians, when the Musick's done,
Hang up the Instrument -- But I am in,
And must wade through, or sink: Exit Philo.

And. So much for them -- Now for an After-game:
But that, lies nearer home -- Here are a brace
Of Rogues, my Lords in mischief, That Is Basilius,
And Stephanus, whom I kept hitherto
For a reserve, and thought t'ave sacrificed 'um
Unto a popular fury -- But they are grown
Too cunning, and have stolen the people from me:
Had they no other crime, this were enough;
Who puts off's Hat unto the people, forfeits
His head to's Prince -- Nor will it be difficult
To compass theirs -- They Are jealous one of the other;
I must foment it, and by setting poison
To work against poison, rid my self of both:
I Have instruments enough to fill their room
Less cunning, and more tractable: -- My friends Enter Bas. Ste.
Most welcome! -- What Is the news?

Bas. Little but that
The City's hushed again:

And. I thank your care:
What would the Buzards have?

Bas. They know not what:
One's for a single person -- Another for two;
A third for neither -- A fourth for liberty;
Oh! what a gallant thing this Sparta vas!
But what that was, the Devil a bit they know:
It Is hardly credible -- There Is not a Tap-house,
But's a new Polity -- A small free State;
And there they sit in judgment, and give sentence,
E're they agree the Case: --

And. What would y'advise me?


Ste. Let 'um alone -- When the dull beast is weary
'Twill fall asleep -- If not -- 'Grant 'um some toy
You meant t'ave don your self -- It Is the same thing
As you had given 'um all; They Will be as little
Contented if you had; -- They are not capable
Of having all or nothing granted 'um:
They neither brook a downright slavery,
Nor may be trusted with full liberty;
And for the rest -- carry and even hand,
You need not fear 'um: Wind your stings too high,
They crack, and let 'um down too low, they jarr:

And. My worthy friends -- But is it not possible
To find the hands that sets the wheel a going?
I Am sure the multitude are sotts, and carry
Their brains in other men's heads: --

Ste. I Have heard of some;
But pitiful fellows: --

And. As though a Rogue
Might not bring in the Plague! -- Have they no money?

Ste. I hope in a short time to give you a Catalogue.


And. It Is but ill playing with these tools; -- I thank you:
And now i will tell you news -- could you believe
That Constantinu^ should have tackt about?

Ste. Nor shall I easily; -- the sky may fall,
But yet I wish, my head never ache till 't do.

And. O -- you are too severe; -- what says Basilius?


Bas. Troth I believe he will -- and had you heard
Half our discourse, you must have judged the same:
I never met with larger promises.

And. I bad you bring him to me -- have you don't?


Bas. I have -- And left him with a Guard without


And. Go fetch! him in: -- Exit Basilius.


Ste. And he shall fool you both; All this aside.
Things jump as right as wish -- And his escape
Must hit -- Pray Heaven he don't mistake the door.

Bas. returns with Constan. and a Guard -- Ste. ponits to the door. And. How
now my Lord -- Basilius has told me
You Would somewhat to offer me --

Constable. I heard you were
Willing to speak with me. --

And. How! -- What Is all this? Constantinus makes his escape by a door; and
claps it after him. -- Ste. and Bas. pursue: -- Excursions of Guards -- after
some time they force the door.


Bas. Why he told me. --


Constable. Nay if you cannot agree
I had as good be gone. --

Ste. Hold -- stop the Traitor.


And. Where leads this door?


1. Gua. Unto the water Sir.


And. Nay then he is gone: -- Order a Galley straight
To give him chase -- Disperse -- stop every passage,
A 1000 Crowns to him that brings his head:
There must be more in this, then barely chance:
'Twas a bold Rogue that did it. -- Ste. returns in a fury with his sword drawn
Enter Guard.

Ste. Nothing but Locks
And Bolts? -- Sir you're betrayed. --

And. Did you recover him?


2. Gua. No he got boat e're we could reach the stairs.


And. But whither went he?


2 Gua. 'Twas so thick a fogg
And the boat so well manned, we quickly lost her.

And. Death! and the Furys! -- Am I then betrayed?
And my self made the Instrument? -- Where Is Basilius?

2 Gua. We left him fitting out a Gally.


And. Hence. --


Ste. Let me beseech your Majesty -- Be n't troubled;
Now you shall see I love you -- If it be
A thing of chance, you will hear no further often;
If otherwise -- and he designs a rising;
The City is the Scene -- I Will get before him
And raise the Guards -- And if your Majesty
Thought it convenient, could seize the heads
Of the left mutiny -- But then -- Basilius. --

And. And what of him? --


Ste. May chance to take it ill;
There Is some of 'um are his relations:

And. But are you sure to seize 'um.


Ste. Do I live?


And. And you dare act as high, as I dare trust you?


Ste. Dare Sir! -- How think you? -- Dare I eat or drink
For fear of choking? --

And. I am satisfied:
Seize him and all; -- It Is not our ancient friend,
But our new enemy: --

Ste. It may be dangerous;
He is so popular.

And. Then knock out's brains;
Such as would own his cause when living, will
Shift for themselves when once they see him dead.

Ste. Please you to leav't to me? -- It Is time 'twere don.


And. Do what thou will it; Exit Ste. -- And good luck follow thee:
Tell me of middle ways! An even hand!
Who ever got a Crown by evil Arts,
And managed it by good? -- That waking men
Should dream themselves away! -- Empire's preserved
By the same way 'twas got; -- I stand too near
A precipice to think of stopping now:
No, I must on; -- What i have all ready don,
Is but the Antimask to what I Will do;
When safety comes in Question, there is no difference
Twixt just, or unjust; pitiful, or cruel;
I Will break what-will not bow; possess their hearts,
Or force 'um open: -- They that will not love,
Shall, at least, fear my power -- It Is decreed
And this great beast, must either bow, or bleed. Exit.

ACT. V.
SCE. I.
Enter Stephanus Constantinus. STe. Thus far, my Lord, you're safe; -- but one
pluck more,
And you may write secure: --

Constable. Nay, that I am,
Is yours; -- and singly yours: -- but passing what
I cannot name too often; -- let us consider
What must be done: -- 'twere better dye at once,
Than be thus sawed in pieces; -- Our wounds are
So far from being healed, they are hardly closed;
Nay (like sick men) we have rather lighted on
A new Physician, than a remedy.

Ste. It Is but too true, my Lord; -- But it is too late
To spend our selves in womanish complaints;
It Is more than time 'twere don. --

Constable. But who shall do it?
You know our friends are gone; or what is as bad
(By having lost their eyes) unserviceable.

Ste. It Is our advantage: -- What we want in numbers,
Will be supplied in secrecy; Great designs
(Like wounds) if they take air corrupt; -- Besides,
These frequent slaughters make our game; They have
Lost their authority, and rendered him
As cheap, as funerals, a Physician.
And what is greater than all these -- the City
Has never a head.

Constable. No? -- where is Basilius?


Ste. He Is gone the way of those that oblige Tyrants
Beyond requital; -- He Is strangled:
And now is our time to strike; -- Your Lordship has
Good interest among the Citizens;
And they are just ripe for mischief -- I have Agents
Now raising 'um to your hand, and shall be ready
To back you with the Guards; make but a stand,
And all is our own; -- Isacius Angelus
Is of the blood, and we'll proclaim him Emperor.

Constable. But he is given up to privacy; -- Andronicus
Well knew't, that sufferd him to live so long.

Ste. I thought as much my self; ere I went to him;
But now, he is so sensible of 's danger,
He catches at any thing -- This is our nick;
For (I Am to tell you news) the Empress
Has, (notwithstanding all her brave resolves,)
Given up to Andronicus -- Poor Lady!
It will concern us to be quick -- This action,
Will rivet all, unless we crush him now;
Now -- while it is hott, -- Come my Lord -- Exeunt.

ACT V.
SCE. II.
Enter Andronicus Solus. ANd. Mischief of greatness! That has all to fear,
Yet knows not whom to trust; What disperate Rocks
Must it run foul of! when to trust all, or none
Is equally an error, and both fatal:
How am I fooled! -- And by some bosom slave;
But let it pass -- It Is time must work it out:
I have enough at present to footh the people;
Some crafty Devil has buz'd them in the head
With prophecies (the fond belief of fools,
But now and then the talk of wiser men)
Nothing but murmurs, news, seditious libels,
(The common weapons of unmanly spirits)
It must not be dally'd with; -- These hollow blasts,
Bode no fair weather; These imperfect motions,
Show somewhat's out of frame. Enter Stephanus.

Ste. Safety to Caesar;
The Omen, to his enemies; --

And. What is it
Can need that preface? -- Speak --

Ste. A fearful comet
Sweeps the air; --

And. Heaven, has don us right at last,
And graced or triumphs with its bonfires too;
If otherwise; and there be danger in it,
'T 'as told its errand, and betrayed its end:
These toys, astonish more, than signify.

Ste. Nor is this all; -- Men talk, as if an earthquake
Had over thrown some houses. --

And. 'T'as yet left
The Palace standing; -- Have you more? --

Ste. The Statue
Of your St. Paul, drops tears. --

And. Mere change of weather;
Unless perhaps the general acclamations
May 've pierced its marble with a feeling sense
Of what we are -- Tears are the effect of joy,
As well as mourning; -- But I thought my Stephanus,
Had had more wit, then to regard these fooleries;
They Are natural; and ignorance of cause,
Must make 'um miracles; -- He that regards
The crowing of a Hen; A Fox with young,
Hare, Cat or Weesel, crossing his way; A Snake
Dropped from the Tile; A black Dog at his door,
A left hand Mag-pie, or a right hand Thunder;
Must never sleep -- The very Peasant, now,
Can half look through 'um -- And shall Empire fear 'um!

Ste. Now how it joys my Soul to see your Majesty
Thus your self still; And to confirm you so;
Let me once say, be safe; -- I Have charmed the City
Into obedience; nor is there left
A head, or hand, that dare appear against you:
But though the flame be quenched, there may perhaps
Some brands lie smoking; -- To prevent the worst,
'Twere fit the Guards kept there; -- Besides, it is good
To show the Dog his whip. --

And. My other self; He embraces him:
Keep up thy wonted courage, and make the Empire
Confess, thou sav'dst it: -- If you can look so low,
You Will find a nest of Slaves, that (like ill spirits)
Foretell the storm, themselves intend to move;
Let not a Mothers Son escape; These Villains
Are grown State-Mountebanks; Nothing can pass,
But they must raise some Observation,
Or use upon it -- And the dull Beast conceives,
According to the color of those rods,
They cast before 'um -- Stephanus conceives me.

Ste. I do -- And shall not sleep 'till I have given you
Some fair account. Exit Stephanus.

And. Farewell my worthy friend:
So -- He stands single now -- He Will fall the easier:
He Is grown too stubborn for me; I dare n't displease him
For fear he take a pett, and set up another,
Perhaps himself; -- But I shall check him there;
He Is only safe, that has naught left to fear. Exit.

ACT. V.
SCE. III.
Enter a Rabble of Citizens. 1. Cit. Come neighbor, come -- It is not to be
endured.


2. Cit. No Troth is it not -- 'Twould make a Man a whore, to consider it
seriously.

7. Cit. I told you this before -- You might have harken'd to a fool.


3. Cit. I neighbor, would you had:


5. Cit. Hang would -- Lets be doing:


6. Cit. I but what neighbor? What?


4. Cit. Any thing -- Any thing -- I am for any thing:


Omnes. Liberty -- Liberty -- Liberty -- A Hollow.


1. Cit. Why should this Andronicus Lord it over us any longer?


2. Cit. He is a very Tyrant, that is certain.


5. Cit. Troth all I got by his Government, is, that where
I had a little money before, now I have none at all.

6. Cit. Nor I neither -- The Devil might have danced in my pockit this
twelvemonth, and not broke his shins against one single cross: -- Call you me
this assisting?


5. Cit. It seems Neighbor it is not altogether so plain as you made it:


1. Cit. What say you Gentlemen: -- There Is Isacius Angelus -- And as I have
heard say, has as good a Title to the Crown as another Man.


2. Cit. Constantinus appointed us to have met him her -- 'O my word they say
he is a pretty Gentelman;


4. Cit. I wonder they should stay so long.


6. Cit. Tell me of none of your pretty Gentelmen; -- Im for Liberty.


Omnes. Liberty -- Liberty -- Liberty: A Hollow


1. Cit. But hark you neighbors -- We must have some Government.


2. Cit. Time enough to think of that hereafter; -- Let Us destroy this first.


3. Cit. What think you of Aristotocracy?


4. Cit. No, no, no -- Oligasky for my money.


5. Cit. By your favor neighbor, I should think Demococracy.


6. Cit. And with your favor too; why not Anarchy?


2. Cit. Any thing, any thing, but what we are:


Omnes. Liberty -- Liberty -- Liberty -- A Hollow


Enter Philo Ph. Save you Gent. -- What Is the business? -- It Is not Midsomer
Moon I hope?


3. Cit. Suppose it be -- What then?


Ph. Nothing good Gent. -- But if it be, I hope it will not last all the year.


2. Cit. Then we shall have another in's room -- But what is that to you?


Ph. Pray Gent. -- you need not be so stout -- I could tell you news deserved a
better face.


Omnes. What Is that? what is that?


Ph. The Emperor has thought upon a device, that no Freeman of Constantinople,
shall ever want money, unless it be his own fault;


5. Cit. That would do well.


6. Cit. Yes of my conscience neighbor would it:


Omnes. But how? But how?


Ph. Do but acquiesce a while, and you will quickly see; -- whereas if you
disturb him in it, you spoil all; and perhaps may repent it when it is too late:


2. Cit. Acquiesce -- That Is the word -- Huh!


5. Cit. I neighbor I: Acquiesce:


3. Cit. Troth he speaks reason:


4. Cit. Marry does he:


5. Cit. Our City Orator's but an Ass to him:


Ph. What say you then Gentlemen?


2. Cit. For my part (now) I Will live and die with him.


3. Cit. And so will I -- We may do worse:


Ph. Yes -- I dare trust 'um for the first aside But what is the matter? -- Has
so good an Emperor but two friends among you all? -- Throw up your caps, and
away with it:


Omnes. One and all -- One and all -- Long live Andronicus.


Ph. He is beholding to you -- And I Will let him know as much: -- Farewell good
Gent. -- 'Twas a fare escape. aside


Exit Philo. Omnes. Farewell, Farewell -- Long live Andronicus. Hallow.


1. Cit. Come neighbors, come: -- We had as good be quiet -- There will be
faults while there are men.


3. Cit. I, I, -- Let Us home -- Let Us home: -- It Is good sleeping in a whole
skin:


As they are going off, Enter Isa. Constable. Constable. Now Gent. I see you're men of
your words:
It Is but an easy risk, and all is our own.
Can you remember your old Emperor,
Or his late murdered Son; and not acknowledge
The Heir -- Th'undoubted Heir? --

1. Cit. I neighbor I: -- 'Twas this we came about.


2. Cit. Where Is that Rogue Philo? knock out's brains.


Omnes. I, I, I, Where is he? -- Where is he?


3. Cit. We cannot for shame now, but proclaim him Emperor.


6. Cit. Oh by any means:


Omnes. Long live Isacius Emperor of Greece!


Isa: It was so far (my friends and Country men)
From my desires, t'ave lived to see this day,
'Twas never in my thoughts -- My privacy
Was all the Empire I or wished, or dreamed:
But since your joint unanimous consent
Has firm'd that Title, which my birthright gave me;
I cannot but I must acknowledge it:

3. Cit. What Is that he says -- Long live Isacius?


Omnes. Long live the Emperor?


4. Cit. Peace, hear him speak.


Isa. It Is not my business here to rip old sores,
Or to keep open those wounds; which let alone,
Would close themselves: -- Yet since the readi'st way
To what we should be, is to know what we are;
Let me once ask you -- What do you call this place?
Greece, or her ruins? -- You had once an Emperor,
A good one too, I mean Alexius:
I will not say who murdered him -- He had
A sister -- I do not say she was poisoned:
You had good Laws: -- Andronicus made more,
I would he had kept either: -- I forbear
Conto, Mamalus, Caesar, Basilius,
Lapardas, Ducas, and a 1000 more,
Some murdered, others, their eyes bored out -- My way
Is not to speak against such as are absent:

Omnes. Yes -- Yes -- Yes -- Pray on: -- Long live Isacius!


6. Cit. Peace, hear him speak:


Isa. Which of you all durst shake his head, and not
Believe it loose, and might fall off? -- What though
You escaped when others fell, you were but kept
To close his stomach, and be last eat up.
Yet let me give Andronicus his due;
He brought the City once again within
Her Walls, whose Suburbs (like the Spleen) had swollen
To the consumption of the rest of the body;
I would he would left Inhabitants enough,
To people that little remained -- He built a Chapel,
I would the Devil had not set up the Cross;
An Aquaduct, I would the kennels had run
No other color: -- One or two good Actions
To blanch and varnish over a deal of ill,
Is but the Music to a Tragedy:
But I forget my self: -- I never loved
To rake in Dunghils -- I only wish their Author
Had his desert -- Not that I bid you lay
Violent hands upon him -- Justice will do
Enough, but give her leave -- And so I shall not
Detain you longer; Only let me beg you
If you meet Manuel, to preserve him safe,
His only crime is, that Andronicus gat him:

7. Cit. I, Here Is one spoke like an Emperor.


Omnes. Long Live Isacius.


3. Cit. Come we lose time -- Andronicus my chance to give us the slip.


5. Cit. But if we take him, we'll give it him.


Omnes. Follow -- Follow -- Follow -- Whoop! Exeunt.


ACT. V.
SCE. IV.
Enter Andronicus. Stephanus. ANd. But did he land again? --


Ste. I Am certain often:
I mist him narrowly -- Perhaps he may
Have taken Sanctuary.

And. What? -- Harbor Traitors?
Demand him straight; -- If they refuse a search
Force all the doors: Shout within-What means that hollow?
Some Devil's aboard -- Prithee go see what it is: Exit Ste.
Norhing but mischief still? No day shine clear
Without a cloud? -- Ill, follows ill (like waves)
One is no sooner past, but to'ther roules:
Within there! Enter Philo.
Call me a Lutenist, and let him sing
The song my Music sang me last -- Make have: Exit Ph.
My head's disquieted; -- An old Wizard Saw
Swims in my brains: -- 'Twas told me once, I should
Live to be Emperor, and that I. S.
Should be my Successor -- No Delphian Devil
Was ever more obscure: -- I. S. -- Isaurus:
But I Have an eye on him; -- Whoer' he be
The Devil was right, if not, 'twas our mistake:
But say -- I. S. -- Whom Heaven intends to ruin
It first infatuates -- There Is Isacius,
Whom hitherto I Have rather scorned, than feared,
Appears like something now: -- He must not live:
In vain we fell a Tree, if yet we leave
Quick roots behind: -- But what is the matter?
What makes the day post backward to the East?
Whence this unwonted night? These stars at Noon?
Out with that dunghill stuff: See how it waves,
And darts at me -- But I Will fetch it down.
Where be the Sons of Titan? Let 'um come;
I Will be their Captain: With this Arm, I Will pluck
Rocks from their standing; Trees, with roots and all;
Whole Mountains with their Centaurs, and erect
A scaling Ladder made of heaped Hills
Whose top shall touch the clouds -- The world shall see
Ossa, once more on Pelion; A third,
Shall be Olympus, whose advanced chin,
Shall knock the Heavens, if not, I Will throw it in:
He staggers, and falls into a chair. Enter a Lute: -- A Song. Some have called
life a Stage Play that includes,
Nothing but Scenes, and Interludes;
Others, a month of April, where two hours
Scarce pass without as many shours;
Others again, a miscelane of years,
Or Chequer-work of hopes, and fears:
But I Am confirmed they were ordained by Fate,
As Hieroglyphics of a Princes State:
One while his Genius is so kind, He Would swear
He Is in an Empyrean sphere;
So cursed again by fits, The frozen Zone
Is habitabler ten to one:
Strange kind of life! to have ones hopes be brought
To somewhat, and straight dashed to naught;
When raised upon the Pinnacle, It Is all
To think, not whither, but from whence we fall.
Since then our dappled Fate is such, who can
Call himself blessed, and yet be man:
Even Crowns their Crosses have; Nor Caesar shall
Write happy, till his Funeral:
More are our clouds, than Suns; Our care, and pain
Weigh down our bliss -- Who Is happy then?
He, and He only, whom the womb does smother,
And sends him packing from one Grave, to the other.
Ha! -- what was that? -- Me thought I heard a voice,
And music -- How 't'as fixed me? -- Plato sure
Was in the right; Our souls are Harmony:
I am my self again -- What should I fear?
Who flies to shun his Fate, runs headlong on it:
Heaven helps the valiant, and never descended,
To save that Coward, durst not save himself:
Since then the Empire knows not when it is well,
I Will make it sensible what power can do;
I Am but Defendant, they provoke me to it:
Nor can the world my blackest action blame;
Necessity, has neither sin, nor shame;
Mischief is never safe, but Heap, on heap,
One must back the other -- They that stumble leap. Exit.

ACT. V.
SCE. V.
Enter Citizens and Rabble. OMnes. Hollow.


1. Cit. Where is this Traitor that murdered the Emperor?


2. Cit. Would I could light on him -- I Would have a leg, or an arm of him -- He
hanged my Brother.


3. Cit. If every one he has wronged have but a little, I am sure a joint will
not fall to your share.


4. Cit. Come -- Come -- There will be enough for us all -- Would we had him,
though I were bound to give you mine:


5. Cit. What had we best do neighbors?


3. Cit. Smoke the Fox out of his hole:


2. Set fire on the Palace:


4. Cit. By no means Gent. -- 'Twill destroy a deal of good pillage -- That has
done no hurt:


6. Cit. No -- No -- No -- Destroy all: -- You Will never be rid of the Wolves,
till you cut down the woods.


1. Cit. We had better sell 'um, and share the money:


6. Cit. 'Twill be too long a doing, and others may get in:


Enter Philo^ 1. Cit. See Neighbors! see! Who comes here?


2. Cit. Even the very Rogue that first betrayed us.


3. Cit. Down with him:


4. Cit. Stand:


5. Cit. Knock him down first.


Ph. Good Gentelmen -- But hear me --


3. Cit. No -- No -- No -- Hear him? -- That were a trick indeed: They Knock
him down.


2. Cit. So farewell him -- I have a boy at home will cry for him I Am sure often.


5. Cit. Upon my conscience Neighbor, but my Wife will do the same.


6. Cit. Hang him -- Hang him -- We lose time: --
Lets about our work. -- Hollow. Exeunt.

ACT V.
SCE. VI.
Enter Andronicus with his Sword drawn and a Servant. ANd. Ha! Philo dead!
These Devils are every where
Thou shall not fall alone -- What was you saying?

Ser. Another Rout has seized St. Sophy's Temple.


And. Who heads 'um? --


Ser. Constantinus; Who has taken
Isacius Angelus, and proclaimed him Emperor:
And to them Stephanus, with all his Guards,
Is since revolted.

And. Then, Farewell my hopes;
But I am still Andronicus: -- Leave me:
Exit servant. And is your Anger such, ye Powers? And can
What Is least above stoop to contest with Man?
Did ye of brittle clay his Fabric rear
Only to dash't in pieces? ^ad ye him bear
His Maker's Image in his brow, to show
Ye reigned above, he, a small Jove below?
Only to show him happiness; And yet,
Straight snatch it from him, or ^umble him, from it;
Had I submitted to a general fate,
It had been nothing -- Had I seen my State,
And Empire sunk before me, I had gone
Contentedly -- But to fall alone,
Thus tamely lost -- What boot's it to complain?
Give me one Battle -- Heaven! -- Be Heaven again;
One Battle -- And let me perish. --

Enter 3 or 4 of the rabble. 1. Cit. Here he is: -- Follow -- Follow -- Follow
--


And. Villians.


2. Cit. Stand. He kills 2 or 3 -- The nest run --


And. Lie thou By another door Enter Servant.


Ser. I Am sorry I came so late: -- Please you great Sir
Retire a while, until the storm be past:
Your name's too great in Arms to have it called
A cowardly flight: -- Then fall not out of season;
Reserve your self for better times -- I have
A Gally waits your Majesty:

And. Now Heaven reward thy honesty -- Lead on:
-- I know the worst;
Foolish despair, is but occasion lost. Exeunt.

ACT V.
SCE. VII.
Enter Constantinus. Isacius and Citizens. COn. Not find him yet! -- I warrant
you we have him:
Stop all the passages, and desire Stephanus
To draw down with his Guards. --

6. Cit. All but that last,
Is done already: -- I Will about it straight. Exit.

Constable. How! -- Philo slain! -- He never did his Master
A truer service.

7. Cit. And my good neighbors, Ambrose and Gregory; -- Alack, Alas! --
Nothing certain in this life -- To day a Man, tomorrow a Cuckold, the next day
dead:


3. Cit. Come -- Come -- Let Us carry them off -- But for that Rogue -- Let him
even lie -- He was a pestilent villain:


4. Cit. Are you sure he is dead? -- Does not the Rogue counterfeit?


5. Cit. 'Twill do no hurt to see;


3. Cit. For the more certainty -- stabs him again
It Is good to be sure.

5. Cit. Well done neighbor -- You're in my mind; --
I scarcely believe a man dead, as long as his head's upon his shoulders.
Exeunt.

ACT. V.
SCE. VIII.
Enter Manuel solus. MAn. 'T would be some comfort yet I could but hear
My Father 'scap'd their hands -- I Am half afraid
He scorned to step aside; -- Ha! -- What Is here?
Alas poor Philo! -- Dead! -- Now I perceive
Thou had some honesty, thou lov'dst thy Master;
'Twas more than I expected -- What Is this world,
And all its greatness? -- It has raised up some,
But ruined more; And even those whom't has
Most raised, 't'as ruined most; -- What Is all this toil,
And blind pursuit? But like our childrens following
A Butterfly; sometimes they cannot reach it,
Sometimes, o'rerun it; sometimes, think they hav't;
But it slips through their fingers; And at last,
When after all their offers, turns, and falls,
They Have taken it, What is it? (Alas poor fools!)
Nothing but painted wings: -- It Is not my late
Experience taught me this, I ever found it:
Who could imagine to have seen my Father,
So late the peoples darling; now, their hate?
But yesterday, an Empire at his beck;
Now, scarce a hole to put his head: -- 'Twas Heaven,
And I submit: -- But yet, it lessens not
Their crime, that were the cause: -- There Is Stephanus,
False Stephanus, a Traitor to both Masters;
Were he my Enemy, 't had n't troubled me; Enter
Nay -- I Would forgiven him -- But my friend: -- It Is hard: Steph.
See! -- Here he comes; -- Now Heaven forgive me:
I had a Father, till his treacherous Faith
Bereaved me of him; -- Father -- Me thinks the word,
Prompts me to something: --

Ste. My good Lord! -- Be safe;
Safe, as your Virtue merits: --

Man. What have thou
To do with, virtue? -- I never suspected her,
Until I found her in thy mouth: -- There --

He strikes off Steph.'s hat. Ste. Ha! -- Has your folly made you desperate?
Now would thy Father, and his daring soul,
Perched on thy point: -- They draw.

Man. The justice of my cause
May be enough to do thy work; -- My Sword
In a child's hand, informed by that, with ease
Would reach thy treacherous heart: -- Words trifle time,
Defend your self: --

They fight, and after some small time enter Constantinus. Constable. Hold --
Stephanus -- Hold -- Nay good my Lord
Let me entreat you: -- Stephanus falls.

Ste. How am I lost in sight of land? and all
My towering hopes sunk with me -- Heaven is just;
I would -- But cannot: -- Dies.

Man. So may all treachery succeed -- And if
T'ave been my own Justicier be a Crime;
Forgive me -- I had no other way -- His Treason,
Had lost its name, and in the worlds Ethics,
Had past for Virtue else; --

Constable. Alas my Lord;
'Twas an unfortunate action -- But since
It Is done -- Preserve your self -- Pray, good my Lord,
Withdraw a while; nor let your virtue fall
A prey, unto the rabble; --

Man. I always scorned 'um,
And shall not now, by showing of my back,
Make 'um believe, I fear 'um: --

Constable. What Is your courage
Against their numbers? -- Good my Lord withdraw;
Venture not Gold, to Dirt -- Pray give me leave,
calls a servant. Come hither -- Attend my Lord, and see him safe
Within my doors -- I Will wait on you presently: Enter

Serve. My Lord -- Andronicus -- another.


Constable. Well -- What of him?


Serve. Had put to Sea, and was now well nigh reached
The other shore -- When of a sudden, The winds,
And seas as conscious whom they wasted over,
Checked his full speed, and beat him back again;
Yet he put out a second, and third time;
But all in vain -- The face of Heaven was sullied,
The winds broke loose, and club'd into a storm;
Till the poor Gally (having lost her Rudder,
Her Oars unserviceable, and her Masts,
Spent by the board) came rolling on the back
Of an impetuous wave, and drove on shore;
Where he soon met a storm indeed -- The people
Having by this time utterly defaced
Whatever bore his name, or memory;
Fell foul of him -- Or rather He, of them;
Had you but seen the hubbub! -- One twicks his beard;
Another, beats out an Eye; A third, a Tooth;
A forth cuts off a Hand; -- No cruelty
He ever commanded, but was there again
Epitomis'd on himself; And when at last,
Their tired invention could inflict no longer;
Laden with dirt, and obloquies, and crowned
With Garlic, they set him on a scabbed Camel,
And in that odd procession, led him to
The common Gallows, where they hang up that little,
They Would left of him; -- So fell Andronicus.

Constable. May the same Fate ever attend Rebellion,
And usurpation; -- And let the world,
Hence learn, on what a ticklish point they stand,
Whose unjust actions; and borrowed greatness,
(How speciously soever colored over)
Have no foundation, but what is built upon
The peoples favor; -- The uncertain people,
Constant to nothing, but inconstancy;
Prove to affect, but without judgment still;
Hot headed -- Envious -- Suspicious,
Yet credulous; -- Frame whimsies to themselves,
And after fear 'um; -- Now set up one, then the other;
But deal with all, as Children with their Dirt-pies,
First raise, then pash 'um out: Enter Isacius.

Isa. My Lord, you hear the news of Andronicus?


Constable. Yes; -- And may Treason never prosper better;


Isa. But I admire we hear nothing of Manuel.


Constable. He Is safe; -- And now, an object of your mercy.


Isa. For why my Lord? Is virtue grown a Crime:


Constable. Behold He shows him Steph. I Will let you know the rest within;
But must assure your Majesty at present,
'Twas fairly don. --

Isa. Shall my first letters then
Be writ in blood! -- However -- I pardon him.
It is enough to me, he durst be virtuous,
When Caesar (and that Caesar, his Father too)
Was otherwise: -- Bid him from me be safe.

Constable. I thank your Majesty: --


Isa. But now my Lord,
I must desire you look into the City;
The people (like the Sea) keep rouling still,
Although the winds that raised 'um first be laid:
If they continue longer, there'll be nothing
Left 'um to spoil; and then perhaps they may
Consider, and repent. --

Constable. I Will straight about it:
They have been up too long: -- 'Twere to be wished
This Beast the people, either never knew
Their strength, or always knew, to use it right.

Isa. You may go farther, and as you see cause
Proclaim a general pardon; The more I spare,
The more are left me to adorn my Trophy:
Promise 'um better days, and let 'um know
That though we are not in Plato's Common wealth,
To have what e'r's amiss at once remedied;
Yet the first stone is laid; And I despair not,
A hopeful superstructure -- Rest, and time,
Will make our troubled waters clear again;
For what remains, a gentle hand will do it:
Harsh, cruel Empires (like acute diseases)
Are rather sharp, than lasting; -- That must dure,
Where subjects, not their Prince, but for him, fear.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

