A SERMON ON THE MARTYRDOM OF King CHARLES I. Preached January 30 1681.

WITH A RELATION OF Some Rebellious Practices and Principles of FANATICS.

By Thomas Wilson, Rector of Arrow in Warwickshire.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Walter Davis in Amen-Corner. 1682.

A SERMON ON THE MARTYRDOM OF King Charles I. PREACHED January 30. 1681.
Romans XIII. 1. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers.
1. (...), the higher [supreme, or super-eminent] powers, it is manifest, are
Rulers: for that the Apostle giving the reason why the Christians must be
subject to them, calls them so; saying, For Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil, V. 3. And that which he adds agrees only to a person
endued with power or authority, and not at all to power or authority in the
abstract, The power is the Minister of God to thee for good, and bears not the
sword in vain, and is a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil, V.
4. And thus we find powers signify in other places of Scripture: as Luke 12.
11. They shall bring you unto the Magistrates and Powers. Tit. 3. 1. Put them
in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey Magistrates See 2
Pet. 2. 10. with Exodus 22. 28.
So that to acknowledge authority, whilst we war against our Rulers (which is
Resisting) is not sufficient to excuse us.

And the Rulers which the Apostle speaks of, are the Civil: those (as you see)
that bear the Sword, and execute wrath, i. e. corporal punishment, which agrees
not to the Ecclesiastical.

Wherefore they are particularly those Magistrates which ruled over the Romans
at this time: Caesar, who was the head and chief; and the several Officers that
were under him and appointed by him. And thus St. Peter giving the same Command
to the Christian Jews that were scattered in several parts of the Roman Empire
( Caesar's Dominion) expresses it, in his 1 Epist. 2. 13, 14. saying, Submit
your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake; whether it be to the
King, as supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.

This Commandment to the Christians under the Roman Government does extend and
belong to all other Christians even to the end of the world, under what sort of
Government soever they are, whether Monarchy, Aristocracy or Democracy: viz. to
be subject to the supreme Civil Power, and to all that by that Power are put in
Authority. For the reason of the Commandment is perpetual, which the Apostle
gives, namely, that Rulers are God's Ordinance, God's Ministers for good to
them that do good, and for wrath to them that do evil.

2. Let us see what the Commandment does mean, Be subject. A Commandment it is,
even as it is a Commandment for Servants to obey their Masters, and Children
their Parents, and for Wives to be subject to their Husbands: and not a counsel
or advnce, as if it might be done when we see it convenient, and omitted at our
pleasure according to our discretion without any sin against God. For the
Apostle tells us v. 5. that we must Needs be subject, and that not only for
wrath, but also for Conscience Sake: And again, that they that resist the
power, resist the Ordinance of God, and that for so doing they shall receive to
themselves Damnation, v. 2.

Now this Commandment does mean, that we must obey the Powers. So we have heard
St. Paul himself explaining it, Tit. 3. 1. Put them in mind to be subject to
Principalities and Powers, to Obey Magistrates. When the thing is lawful which
they command, it must he done. Upon which account tribute, which they enjoin,
must be paid them: this being in no wise contrary to any of God's Laws;
insomuch that sometimes we may pay it even to Usurpers. And therefore as the
Christians at Rome did now pay it, so the Apostle commands them to continue in
the same duty: v. 6, 7. For this cause pay ye tribute. -- Render to all their
dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom custom. And he reckons it
Rulers due, for that they are Verse. 6.
God's Ministers, attending continually upon his service, government and the
ministration of Justice. Upon which account also we are to fear and honor
them: as he also commands in the same place, Render fear to whom fear is due,
honor to whom honor. For neither is this in any wise contrary to the Law of
God.

But then if the thing which they command be sinful, we must refuse it. As the
Apostles themselves have taught us by their own examples: Act. 4. 19. and 5. 29.
who being commanded by the Rulers of the Jews to teach no more in the name of
Jesus, refused to obey that command, telling them, that they ought to obey God
rather than men, and appealing unto them whether this was not right. So when
Saul commanded his footmen to slay the innocent Priests, 1 Samuel 22. 17.
they refused to do it, because it was wicked. And when Nebuchadnezzar
commanded that all should worship the Golden Image which he had set up,
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego told him, Dan. 3. 18.
they would not serve his Gods, nor worship the Image. And when Darius with his
Presidents, Governors, Princes, Counselors and Captains had made a Royal
Statute, that no one should ask any petition of any God or Man, save of
Himself, for thirty days, C. 6. 10.
Daniel notwithstanding prayed to the Lord as he was wont to do.

But though the sinful thing may not be done, yet the Rulers must not be
resisted, otherwise than by prayers and tears, entreaty and persuasion,
reasoning and discourse, reproof and admonition: Arms must not be taken up
against them, and war waged with them upon this account; but their penalties
must be submitted to, and their injuries born with patience, peace and
meekness. And thus are they indeed obeyed, by submitting to them; thus
subjection is paid them, by yielding to their power and authority. As wives are
subject to their husbands, children and servants obey, the one their parents,
the other their masters, in all things ( Col. 3. 18, 20, 22.
as it is commanded them) when what is lawful they do at their command, and
refusing what is unlawful, they patiently submit to their pleasure; and though
they punish them for their refufal, do not resist with blows, and cast off
their yoke by force. And thus to be subject, so as not to resist, is the
meaning of our Text. For it immediately follows thus, Whosoever resists the
Power, resists the Ordinance of God: and they that resist, etc.

3. We must next consider the Extent and latitude of the Commandment, Let every
soul be subject. As the Jews say every soul, so we say every body: and the
meaning both of them and us is every man. Forasmuch then as every man is to be
subject to the Higher Powers, it is undenialbe that no one of what rank and
quality soever is exempt from their jurisdiction: no Christian (for to such the
Apostle writes) not the greatest Saint, not the eminentest Doctor, not the
Apostles themselves; who as they gave the Precept to others, so most certainly
held themselves bound to perform the same. And what can be more manifest than
that one as well as other, Clergy as well as people, living in the same
Kingdom, are Subjects of the same Secular Powers there? and being Subjects,
must be Subject to them? St. Peter has determined the case, 1 Pet. 2. 13, 14.
when he reckons the King Supreme Governor: and St. Paul also, Verse. 4.
who here calls Rulers that bear the Sword, the Higher Powers. These he
requires every soul to be subject to: of these he speaks again so universally,
Whosoever resists, etc. Be he then Priest or Pastor, Cardinal or Kirk-man,
Legate or Pope that does so, he offends, and incurreth the punishment
threatened, They shall receive to themselves damnation.

Having thus given you an exact account of the Apostle's injunction, God's
Commandment by his Servant: The first thing which I shall consider is,

1. Whether the Apostle means we should be subject to evil Powers, and not
resist such by force of arms. Here the Seditious and Rebellious always take
shelter, saying, The Rulers oppress, persecute, govern illegally, command what
God forbids, and forbid what God commands. Nos non imperium, nec divitias
pe^imus, sed libertatem. Libertas and speciosa nomina praetexuntur; nec
quisquam alienum servitium and dominationem sibi concubivit, ut non eadem ista
vocabula usurparet.
This they pretend whether it be so or not. This they will say, and feign as
much abuse and tyranny, and contrive their story as plausible and seemingly
true as their wit can devise: for that otherwise they would be utterly
condemned of all men for raising War, which is so great a plague to a Nation,
and for resisting honest and good Rulers, which is gross profaneness; neither
would they have any hope of gaining the people unto their assistance, nor of
obtaining their design, which is spoil and rapine, riches and honor, dominion
and greatness, and perhaps revenge of some petty injuries. It ought to be
considered very carefully, whether this which they pretend be true; for
oftentimes it is but fiction and a lie, as their professions also of
Reformation are often mere hypocrisy. They groan when they feel no burden, and
report -- Quoties vis fallere plebem, Finge Deum.
strange things, which no one sees, nor knows, nor themselves believe, because
they would rebel: and from the same lust they can call those Papists, whom they
know the Pope for not being Papists damns for Heretics: can preach the danger
of thousands of souls eternal destruction by the prevailing of the Roman
Religion, and yet believe all that perish would have perished, though the same
had not prevailed: can preach the Parliament Supreme to justify their War
against their King, and yet when the play is ended, and Law may judge, would
not for all they are worth want the King's Pardon. Our late Sovereign was
accused of being Popishly affected, and of ruling tyrannically, illegally,
arbitrarily: who yet was such a Papist as to require of his Subjects the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, which is the absolute renouncing of the Pope's
authority; and such a Papist again as to worship God according to the Church of
England, whose Liturgy, Articles, Homilies, Canons speak all positively and
fully against Popery: who was such a Tyrant, illegal and arbitrary Governor as
to rule by the Laws, to fear to act in any particular contrary to them (taking
advice therefore of the Judges) and to make conscience of oppressing, and to
suffer every one to enjoy his own. But such Defenders of our Laws, Liberties
and Properties were the Grandees his enemies, as to bring us into a liberty of
paying grievous Taxes 18 years together, to sequester Loyalists estates, to
make Laws, and impose Oaths and Covenants, to raise Armies, and to seize Forts,
Ports and Navy, to usurp and command the Militia, to make War and Peace with
foreign Nations, to coin Money, to alter the Service and Government of the
Church, to sequester the King's Revenues, to try him for his life, and to cut
off his head, all by arbitrary, their sole power, without His authority and
assent, and contrary to his Command, contrary to our established Laws and
Government See Prynne's Collect. of Fundament. Rights. P. 52. to 62. Dr.
Langbain's Review of the Covenant. p. 50. to 55. p. 80. to 84. p. 88, etc.
Fowlis Hist. Presb. l. 2. c. 1. l. 3 c. 3.
.

But be the pretense true, this however I shall show does not warrant Subjects
to wage War against their Rulers. For as the Apostle speaks of Powers without
restriction, whether good or bad: so the Command, Be subject to them, Resist
them not, admits not of any, any more than these the like Commands, Ephesians. 5. and
6. Col. 3.
Wives, be subject to your Husbands in every thing: Children, obey your Parents
in all things: Servants, obey in all things your Masters. And will any one say
the Apostle means only good Husbands, Parents, Masters, and not at all the bad?
Go to then, ye Servants, Wives, Children, and with authority beat your froward
Masters, Husbands, Parents. But if this should be our Rebels case, I suppose
they would judge the treatment undecent and profane; and though they have
deserved it for their frowardness, and may thank themselves for what they
suffer, yet will say, these Servants, Wives, Children have fallen from the
honor, fear and reverence, subjection and obedience which they owe them. St.
Paul says, Ephesians. 5. 23, 24.
The husband is the head of the wife: therefore let the wives be subject. And
are not evil husbands heads? Let the King's enemies judge. But St. Peter says
expressly, 1 Pet. 3. 1.
Ye wives, be in subjection to your husbands, that if any obey not the word,
they also may without the word be won by the conversation of the wives. These
that obeyed not the word, these that were Heathens, were bad husbands enough.
Likewise C. 2. 18.
Servants, says he, be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to the
good and gentle, but also to the froward. And such froward ones he means that
afflict them for their conscience toward God, and for well-doing: as by the
following words appears, For this is thank-worthy if a man for conscience
toward God, endure grief, suffering wrongfully. If when ye do well, and suffer
for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. From whence also it
is manifest, that he requires these innocent abused persons to be so subject as
not to resist violence with violence, but only patiently and peaceably to take
the wrong; like our Savior, whose example he there propounds, V. 21. 23.
Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not.
And as Children, Wives and Servants ought to behave themselves thus
submissively to their rigid and unrighteous Parents, Husbands and Masters: so
ought Subjects to behave themselves, no one can doubt, after the same manner to
their alike evil Rulers Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 20.. 29. At mutuas (inquis)
subditis suis vices debent praefecti. Verum si ex eo statuis, nonnisi justis
imperiis rependenda obsequia, insulsus es rationator. Nam Parents liberos
morositate sua ultra modum fatigent; Mariti suas uxores contumeliosifsime
accipiant: an minus tamen and Parentibus liberi, and Conjugibus mulieres
obsequentes erunt? At improbis quoque and inofficiosis subjiciuntur.
.

To make this matter yet more clear, let us consider whether the present Powers
were not evil; for these does St. Paul more particularly mean: for to whom
should he command the Christians at Rome to be subject, but to the Rulers
there? or to whom could they at present pay subjection, but to them? His words
moreover plainly show, Verse. 6, 7.
that they are those to whom they now paid tribute. And St. Peter delivering
the same Precept, expressly names the King and Governors sent out by him. Now
these were Heathens (the Government not coming into Christian hands till
Constantine's time, which was 250 years after:) and they were Idolaters and
Maintainers of that abomination, and Persecutors of the Christians: Of whose
sufferings we read in these very Epistles. Romans 12. 12, 14. Be patient in
tribulation: bless them that persecutc you. 1 Pet. 1. 6. Ye are in heaviness
through manifold temptations. C. 4. 12. Think it not strange concerning the
fiery trial which is to try you. C. 5. 9. Know that the same afflictions are
accomplished in your brethren that are in the world. And so we read they
suffered 1 Cor. 1. 6, 7.
at Corinth, Phil. 1. 29, 30.
at Philippi, 2 Th. 1. 4.
at Thessalonica, Heb. 10. 32, 33, 34.
at Jerusalem and in all Judea. To whom it must needs be said the same
Commandment of subjection belonged, as well as to their brethren and
fellow sufferers at Rome, and in Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia and Bithynia.
Thus suffered the Romans 8. 35, 36. 1 Cor. 4. 9, etc. 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9. and 6. 4.
4, 5. and 11. 23.
Apostles themselves, and knew that as the Christians were already, 1 Pet. 4.
17. 2 Timothy 3. 1, 12. Mat. 10. 34, 35. and 24. 9.
so they Act. 4. and 5, and 7, and 8, 9, and 12.
would be afterward persecuted by Rulers, when they gave this Commandment of
non-resistence.

But some may object, that St. Paul says v. 4. Rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil: and therefore means, that the Christians should be
subject to, and not resist such only as rule well and fulfill their office.
Ans. I have clearly showed that he means the present Rulers, and that these
were idolaters and injurious: and therefore this cannot be his meaning. But
this he says, Rulers are ordained of God for good, and generally they so act;
though there be several defects and corruptions: (for what Laws of any Kingdom
are all perfect? or what Administration of them is without fault?) In every
Nation we find they suppress Sedition, and conserve Peace; punish Murderers,
Thieves, Adulterers, Perjured persons; end Controversies, and distribute
Justice betwixt man and man. Wherefore since they are ordained of God, and
ordained for good, and good they do in the world, for the authority which God
has given them, and for the benefit which the world receives by them, Let
every soul of you be subject to them, let none of you resist them, even the
present Powers, idolaters and your enemies. Calvin, Comment. in locum. A vero
officio Magistratus tametsi non yaro degenerant qui principatum tenent,
nihilominus deferenda est illis obedientia quae Principibus debetur. -- Hic
docet in quem finem instituti sint a Domino Magistratus -- Quanquam ne sic
quidem unquam abutuntur sua potestate Principes, bon^s innocentesque vexando,
ut non in sua tyrannide speciem aliquam justae dominationis retineant: nulla
ergo tyrannis esse potest, quae non aliqua ex part subsidio sit ad tuendom
hominum societatem.
This is plainly the Apostle's mind; and not that they might take up arms
against Caesar and the Officers under him, because they were evil. St. Peter
speaks it most clearly, Submit your selves to the King, and to the Governors
sent out by him for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them
that do well. Was it for the punishment of evil doers, when they were sometime
sent forth to punish Christians for their Christianity, for not worshipping
their false gods and observing their impious superstitions? And was it for the
praise of them that did well, when they were sent forth to encourage and defend
Idolaters in their Idolatry? Besides there were several other evils which
according to their received authority they were to promote and execute; for who
dare say Heathens Laws and Commands were all good and just? But yet good they
did, and not a little by their Government, as their Constitutions and
Ministrations witness: and therefore the Apostles say, Be subject to them. For
I may add, that if they were not to be subject to such that were to some good
works a terror, and to some evil not a terror; to such that were injurious to
them, and even to their Heathen subjects also, in some things, and that both
civil and religious; they were then to be subject to none at present, there
being at present none without these faults: and so the Commandment would
signify at present just nothing to them: which is monstrous.

And now we must not forget, that this Command is not delivered unto Heathens,
who if by resisting they should conquer, would yet still maintain their
Idolatry, and persecute Christians: but to Christians, who if they should get
the supreme Power into their hands, would make a glorious reformation,
establishing in the Empire by Sanction of Law the Gospel of Christ in the room
of Ethnicism. For the effecting of which great good they must not rebel:
according to the general doctrine, Romans 3. 8.
We must not do evil that good may come.

And this is the sense of the Primitive Church: this was their Practice, and
this was their Doctrine also. As Tertullian ( who lived but 150 years after)
witnesses: who writing unto the Roman Heathen Magistrates, tells them in the
name of all his brethren, that though they unjustly and most grievously
persecuted them for that their Piety and Religion alone, and no evil, yet they
would not take up arms against them, though they were able to do it, for their
Religion forbad them. Whose words are these, Apol. c. 12, etc. Crucibus and
stipitibus, etc.
Ye kill the Christians on crosses and stakes, ye tear their sides with hooks;
we are thrown to the beasts, we are burned in the fire, we are condemned to the
Mines, we are banished into Islands. -- We always pray for all Emperors, that
God would give them a long life, a secure Empire, a safe house, valiant Armies,
a loyal Senate, faithful People, a quiet World, and whatsoever any man or
Caesar himself can desire. -- Ib. c. 33. Nos judicium Dei suspicimus in
Imperatoribus, qui gentibus illos praefecit. Id in iis scimus esse, quod Deus
voluit: ideoque and salvum volumus esse quod Deus voluit. Sed quid ego amplius
de religione atque pietate Christiana in Imperatorem? quem necesse est
suspiciamus, ut eum quem Dominus Noster elegit: ut merito dixerim, Noster est
magis Caesar, ut a Nostro Deo constitutus: itaque ut meo plus ego illi operor
in salutem.
In Emperors we adore the Counsel of God, who has set them over the Nations.
We know that to be in them which God wills: and therefore what God wills, we
pray the same may be safe and prosperous. -- But why speak I any more of the
Piety and Religion of Christians to the Emperor, whom we must needs honor, as
one that our Lord has chosen? so that I may justly say, Caesar is rather Ours,
as being constituted by our God; and therefore being mine, I do the more for
his welfare. -- Ib. c. 36, 37.
We are the same to Emperors as to our neighbors; for to wish, to do, to
speak to think ill of any one whoever, is alike forbidden us. What we may not
do against the Emperor, neither may we do against any one; and what we may
do to no one, much rather perhaps may we not do to Him -- qui per Deum tantus
est.
who is so Great by God. If we are commanded to love our enemies, who then
remains for us to hate? If when we are hurt, we are forbidden to repay the
like, whom then can we hurt? Absit ut igni humano vindicetur Divina Secta. Si
hosts exertos agere vellemus, deesset nobis vis numerorum and copiarum? --
Vestra omnia implevimus, urbes, insulas, castella, municipia, conciliabula,
castra ipsa, tribus, decurias, Palatium, Senatum, forum. Cui bello non idonei,
non prompti fuissemus, etiam impares copiis, qui tam libenter trucidamur? Si
non apud istam disciplinam magis occidi liceret quam occidere. -- Nunc
pauciores hosts habetis prae multitudine Christianorum, pene omnium civium,
pene omnes cives Christianos habendo.
God forbid we should avenge our selves by private fire. If we would show our
selves open enemies, should we want number and forces? We have filled all your
places, your Cities, Islands, Castles, Corporations, Consistories, your very
Camps, Tribes, Decuries, the Palace, the Senate, the Common Court. What war
should we not be fit for and very forward unto, yes though uncqual in forces,
who so freely part with our lives, if our Religion did not require us rather to
be killed than to kill? -- Now your enemies are the fewer for the multitude of
Christians, as such now are almost all your Citizens. And writing to Scapula an
Heathen President in Africa, he says the same, C. 2. Cum omni saevitia vestra
concertamus. -- Circa Majestatem Imperatoris infamamur, tamen nunquam
Albiniani, nec Nigriani, nec Cassiani inveniri potuerunt Christiani. --
Christianus nullius est hostis, nedum Imperatoris, quem sciens a Deo suo
constitui, necesse est ut and ipsum diligat, and revereatur, and honoret, and
salvum velit, cum toto Romano Imperio, quousque seculum stabit. -- Colimus ergo
and Imperatorem sic, quomodo and nobis licet, and ipsi expedit, ut hominem a
Deo secundum, and quicquid est a Deo constitutum, and solo Deo minorem. -- Ex
disciplina patientiae divinae agere nos satis manifestum esse vobis potest, cum
tanta hominum multitudo, pars pene major cujusque civitatis, in silentio and
modestia agimus. -- Absit ut ultionem a nobis aliquam machinemur, quam a Deo
expectamus -- Nulli malum pro malo reddimus.
You persecute us with all your rage. -- We are defamed as to the Majesty of
the Emperor, and yet never were the Christians Rebels, as several of your own
Religion have been, Albinus, Niger, Cassius. -- A Christian is no man's enemy,
much less the Emperor's, whom, as knowing him to be constituted of God, he must
necessarly love, reverence, honor and wish well, with the whole Roman Empire,
so long as the world shall endure. We therefore do worship the Emperor so as is
lawful for us and fit for him, as a man next to God, and that what he is, has
obtained of God, and that is inferior to none but God. -- It cannot but be
manifest to you that we live according to the discipline of divine patience,
whilst being so great a multitude of men, almost the greater part of every
City, we behave our selves with peace and submission. -- God forbid that we
should contrive to avenge our selves of you, who expect God will punish you. --
We render to no man evil for evil.

After the same manner does St. Cyprian (who lived about 50 years after
Tertullian) write to Demetrian, an Heathen Proconsul likewise in Africa, and a
Persecutor of the Christians: saying, Men harmless, just, dear to God thou
deprivest of house and pa^rimony, shuttest up in prison, punishest with beasts,
sword, fire. -- Not content with the usual, thy ingenious cruelty invents new
torments. -- Nemo nostrum quando apprehenditur, reluctatur; nec se adversus
injustam violentiam vestram, quamvis nimius and copiosus sit noster populus,
ulciscitur. -- Odisse non licet nobis, and sic Deo plus placemus, dum nullam
pro injuria vicem reddimus.
No one of us when he is apprehended, resits, nor avengeth himself of your
unjust violence, though our people are numerous and able to do it. -- We may
not hate; and thus we please God the more, whilst we retaliate no injury.

But Mr. Calvin's judgment may be of more account with some. Let us therefore
hear what he says in this matter. Instit. l. 4. c. 20.. 24, 25. Principum alii
jura omnia, privilegia, diplomata, venalia prostituunt: alii plevecualm, etc.
Verum si in Dei verbum respicimus, non eorum modo Principum subditi sumus, qui,
qua debent fide, munere suo erga nos defunguntur: sed omnium qui quoquo modo
rerum potiuntur, etiamsi nihil minus praestent quam quod ex officio erat
Principum. -- In homine deterrimo honoreque omni indignissimo, penes quem modo
sit publica potestas, praeclara illa and divina potestas residet, quam Dominus
justitiae and judicii sui Ministris verbo suc detulit: proinde a subditis eadem
in reverentia and dignatione habendus, quantum ad publicam obedientiam attinet,
qua optimum Regem, si daretur, habituri essen.. 26. Hoc jus erit regis, etc.
Certe non id jure facturi erant Reges, etc. sed jus in populum vocabatur, cui
parere ipsi necesse esset, nec obsistere liceret.. 27. Hoc si nobis assidue
observetur eodem Decreto constitui etiam nequissimos Reges quo Regum authoritas
statuitur, nunquam in animum nobis seditiosae illae cogitationes venient,
tractandum esse pro meritis Regem, nec aequum esse ut subditos ei praestemus
qui vicissim Regem nobis non praestet.. 29. Hunc reverentiae affectum debemus
ad extremum Praesectis nostris omnibus, quales tandem cunque sint. Quod saepius
ideo repeto, ut discamus non homines ipsos excutere, sed satis habeamus, quod
eam, voluntate Domini, personam sustineant cui inviolabilem majestatem
impressit ipse and insculpsit. -- Si a saevo principe crudeliter torquemur,
etc. Subeat primum delictorum nostrorum recordatio, quae talibus haud dubie
Domini flagellis castigantur: indo humilitas impatientiam nostram fraenabit..
31. Nobis nullum aliud quam parendi and patiendi datum est mandatum. De
privatis hominibus semper loquor. Nam siqui nunc sint populates Magistratus ad
Moderandum Regum libidinem constituti, adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiae
pro officio intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus impotenter grassantibus
conniveant, eorum dissimulationem nefaria perfidia non carere affirmem.
Some Princes violate all Laws and Privileges, miserably oppress the people,
kill the innocent, etc. Yet the word of God teaches us to be subject to these.
-- In the worst and most unworthy King that Divine Authority resides, which God
in his word has given to righteous Magistrates: and therefore the Subjects are
to have the same Reverence for him (as far as belongs unto public Obedience)
as for the best King. -- 1 Samuel 8. 11.
This shall be the Right of the King that shall reign over you: He shall take
your Sons, etc. Certainly this they could not do by Right of God's Law, which
commands Kings to rule better: but it is called a Right over the People, which
they should necessarily obey, and which it should not be lawful for them to
resist. -- If we did always remember, that the worst Kings are appointed by the
same Decree that the Authority of Kings is ordained, these seditious thoughts
would never rise in us, that Kings are to be treated according to their
deserts, and we are not bound to perform the auty of Subjects to them who
perform not the duty of Kings unto us. -- This affection of reverence we owe to
all our Rulers, whether good or bad, until death. We are not to consider the
men: it is enough for us, that by the will of God they are Magistrates, on whom
God has impressed an Inviolable Majesty. -- If a cruel Prince torment us, if a
covetous rob us, if an impious persecute us for our piety, let us then remember
our sins, which without doubt God thus punishes: and so our humility will curb
our impatience. -- We are commanded only to obey and suffer. Thus he condemns
all private men's rising against their Governors, though they be most
tyrannical: And only adds, that if any Popular Magistrates are coastituted by
the Laws of a Kingdom for the restraining of the King's licentiousness, they
ought according to their office to curb him when he grows extravagant and
tyrannical. So that where there are no such Magistrates, and yet where there
are, when those Magistrates consent with the King in his licentiousness and
tyranny, there (according to Mr. Calvin) no forceable resistance ought to be
made by the Subjects. And as for our selves, See the Statutes, afterward
cited, p. 34, 35.
our King is exempt from punishment, nor may our Parliament levy War against
him in any case, only his ill Advisers and the Executioners of his oppression
are punishable; who may be called to account by our Parliament, Stat. 16. Car.
2. c. 1.
which is to convene once in three years, and oftener if need be.

But some not content with all this, will still say, Must we be abused, and not
right our selves? Must God and Religion suffer, and we sit with our hands in
our pockets?

And I say, would ye be sighting? How ill does it become a Christian to be a
man of fury and revenge, of blood and war? If for conscience sake and
well-doing ye suffer, and take it patiently, happy are ye: this is your glory,
and great is your reward in heaven. But if ye rebel, what do ye more than
others? where is your patience? where is your glory? where is your reward? and
what indeed is your Religion? Let God alone to Sanguis Martyrum semen
Ecclesiae. -- Trucidabantur, and multiplicabantur.
maintain his own cause in his own way: who will certainly do it without
seditious insurrections, by a spirit of patience, meekness, justice and
righteousness, in spite of the proudest and greatest that war against him: will
defend his truth, and exalt his Church, and bring down wicked powers, or turn
their hearts, whilst his holy servants, notwithstanding their afflictions,
continue in their duty to Him and Men, making their humble and ardent prayers
to him, and trusting in his Power, Goodness and Promise. For thus is it
written, Psalm. 34. 15, etc.
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto their
cry. The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the
remembrance of them from the earth. The righteous cry, and the Lord hears,
and delivers them out of all their troubles. -- Evil shall slay the wicked,
and they that hate the righteous, shall be desolate. Psalm. 37.
Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be. -- The transgressors shall be
destroyed. Luke 18. 7.
Shall not God avenge his own elect, which cry day and night to him, though he
bear long with them? I tell you that he will avenge them speedily.

And I would have all those that are so prone to arms for the casting down of
wicked Powers, and pretend such zeal for God and Religion, ask themselves in
sincerity, whether their hearts be right, and their lives honest: whether they
be humble, patient, content: whether they design no secular advantage, no
wealth, no dominion, no honor or popular fame to themselves, but purely the
advancement of piety and the glory of God: whether they are not criminal, and
as much as their Rulers. For I am much mistaken if there be not such Zealots,
and more than a few, that are in excess revengcfull, ambitious, censorious,
liars, defamers, lovers of this world and of carnal pleasures, drunkards and
adulterers: may I not say, almost Atheists? And let them calmly consider again,
Whether their Remedy be not worse than the Disease, War worse than an ill
Prince. For now the very Devil seems to be broken loose from his Chains, and
freely to domineer in the Land: Hatred rages in the breasts of men, and lies
are daily coined to serve the Cause: the Father fights against the Son, and one
neighbor reviles and betrays another: honest Matrons and chaste Virgins are
ravished, Cities and Noble buildings turned into ashes, many plundered of their
Goods in an hour, which with long labor and much care they had honestly
gotten, and many deprived of the ancient inheritance of their Family: grievous
taxes are imposed, and must be born, and a company of lewd and idle fellows
maintained: Nobles are despised and affronted; the Loyal maligned, menaced, and
vilely treated; the peaceable horribly affrighted with sad rumors and the rude
behavior of Ruffian Soldiers: and finally, hundreds and thousands are slain
suddenly in the battles, and such as need a longer time for repentance and
amendment, the most profane and profligate, who of all are most unfit to die.
These sad things we have seen in the time of Rebellion: and in the same case we
must expect the same again. Vestigia terrent.
And I pray you tell me faithfully, Whether all these evils be not worse than
what our Malcontents complain of, Prelacy and Liturgy I may name, the common
grievances: whether not more grievous than See The Directory. -- Non tanti est
Civilia bella moveri.
a Bishop and our Service Book, a Surplice, Holy Days, baptizing in Fonts and
where now they stand, the Sign of the Cross, Godfathers, Marrying with a Ring,
Reading before the Corpse, Kneeling at the Lord's Supper. I do not appeal to
anger and malice, ambition and avarice, presumption and self-will (which lurk
in nature, and which I know will give perverse judgment:) but to piety and the
fear of God begotten in your hearts by his Holy Spirit. Not this, but something
else sure it was, that spoke by the Preacher's lips in our late Troubles these
strange words, Ienkins's Sermon before the Commons, Sept. 24. 1656. p. 23.
The removal of the impositions of Prelatical innovations, Altar-genuflexions,
and Cringings and Crossings, and all that Popish trash and trumpery,
countervails for the Blood and Treasure shed and spent in these late
Distractions. Well, let them not strain at a Gnat, and swallow a Camel; refuse
our Liturgy, and raise War against their King: like the Pharisees, that would
not eat with unwasht hands, nor with uncircumcised Gentiles, Publicans and
Sinners, nor touch them, lest they should be defiled; and that condemned our
Savior for healing, and his Disciples for plucking the ears of corn on the
Sabbath Day: and yet were full of excess and pride, and devoured Widows houses,
and killed the Prophets, and the Holy Jesus.

Whether the froward minds of men will accept it or not, I cannot but prescribe
Subjects a better remedy against injurious Governors than War and Rebellion:
and that is, what before was mentioned, patient suffering, an holy life,
fervent prayer, trust in God. For God will either here deliver his people out
of their troubles, whilst they fret not themselves in any wise to do evil; or
if he suffer them to continue in them and die by them, will abundantly
recompense them in the other world. This was the mind of Shadrach, Meshach and
Abednego: Dan. 3. 17. 18.
Our God (say they) whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the burning fiery
furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O King: but if not, we will
not serve thy Gods. And what was the event? V. 27, etc.
God did preserve them in the midst of the fire, and moreover so changed the
King's heart, that the King promoted them in the Province of Babylon, and also
made a decree, that whosoever should speak any thing against their God, should
be cut in pieces, and their houses be made a dunghill. This mind was in David: 1 Samuel 26 9, 10, 11.
Who ( says he) can stretch forth his hand against the Lord's Anointed and be
guiltless? The Lord forbid that I should do it. The Lord shall smite him, or
his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into the battle and perish. And
it came to pass, 1 Samuel 31. 4.
that Saul in his fight with the Philistines, being wounded, took a sword and
fell upon it, and so perished. And thus David was freed of his Persecutor, 2 Samuel 2. 1. 4.
and was presently after anointed King. And this same mind was also in Christ
Jesus: 1 Pet. 2. 23
Who when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he suffered, threatened not:
but committed himself to him that judges righteously. And God likewise pleaded
his cause: who, though he suffered him to fall by the hand of his enemies, Ephesians.
1. 20 21.
yet raised him from the grave, and set him at his own right hand in the
heavenly places, and gave him to be head over all things. And if we 1 Timothy 2.
12.
suffer with him, we are assured that we shall also reign with him; and if we
lay down our life for him, that we shall receive it again with Ioh. 12. 25
advantage, eternal life. And Matthew. 5. 10, etc. 2 Pet. 4. 13 etc. 2 Cor 4.8,
17.
when we are persecuted, reviled and hated for righteousness sake, we are
pronounced blessed and happy, and are bid to rejoice, to leap for joy and to be
exceeding glad, and to glorify God on this behalf; for that the Spirit of
Glory and of God rests upon us, and the Kingdom of Heaven is ours, and our
reward there is great, an exceeding eternal weight of glory. If this will not
satisfy us, but we will take the Sword, Matthew. 26 52.
is it not just that we perish by the Sword? We are commanded to take up the
Cross and follow Christ, to endure afflictions, to be patient in tribulation,
and not avenge our selves. And after all this have we learned Christ no better
than to fight, and that against our Rulers, rather than suffer for well-doing?
to embroil a Nation in bloody War, rather than for the Kingdom of God bear
imprisonment and loss of goods? to take away the lives of thousands, rather
than quietly lay down our own for the Gospel? What glory, what joy is it, to be
crucified for Treason? What Martyrdom this? Christ suffering and dying under
Pontius Pilate without resistance, and Christians warring and rebelling against
their evil Governors, what a contradiction!

This Doctrine of quiet and submissive patience and nonresistance cannot be
interpreted a defense of Rulers oppression, unless by perverse malice; nor an
encouragement of them to this wickedness, any more than the Gospel, which (as
we have seen) commands it, and the Primitive Fathers, who (as we have also
seen) taught it. Nor can any think I have now spoken this, as if I judged our
Prince oppresses, or feared he will; unless he think me so extravagant as to
judge, that to rule only by our established Laws is to oppress: which we all
see he does, and which he has assured us, since his Coronation Oath (which
obliges to the same,) by his Royal word, Declar. 1681. p. 6. ^ 9.
that in all things he ever will. And whilst thus he governs, even I. Milton,
our late good King's heavy friend, affirms, Tenure of Kings, p. 33.
That the Subject, if he hold the thing to be unlawful which by Law is
commanded, ought not to resist, but to submit to the penalty which the Law
imposes: and in this case to rise against the King, is to renounce Allegiance
to him, and is an actual and total deposing of him. No, the design is to
prevent the horrid sin of Rebellion, and the multifarious mischiefs of a Civil
War. Whether our King be more prone to oppression, or his people to rebellion,
let the present state of affairs witness, let the Malcontents speak, if from
their hearts they will speak. When He proves a Tyrant, I dare say, Resist; as
being confident his Nature is so gentle, and his Wisdom so great, that he
never will rule so barbarously, and give such provocation to the factious
multitude, so expose himself to War, and so hazard his Crown and Life. But then
by a Tyrant, I mean not one that is called so by enemies, or by the ignorant,
by an ambitious and discontented, a wanton and seditious company, or by a whole
Nation of such men; (as remembering our late Sovereign was so slandred, whose
Tyranny was Law and Clemency, as his imputed Popery was true Protestantism, and
his suspected vice Piety:) Nor yet mean I one that once or twice acts
illegally: but ( Ten. of Kings, p. 19. A Tyrant is he who regarding neither Law
nor the Common good, reigns only for himself and his faction. The Author de
Iure Magistr. p. 440. Tyrannidis individuus comes est obsirmata malignit as,
quae ad statum publicum legesque evertendas totis viribus enititur. Buchanan,
de Iure Regni, p. 35. Tyrannus, qui gregem sibi commissum existimat non ad
custodiam, sed ad quaestum.
as enemies themselves have defined) one who rules either wholly or in great
part contrary to the Laws, and continually oppresses grievously, nor will be
persuaded from his frowardness, injustice and cruelty.

And they that rule thus inhumanly, cannot but expect (as the world now is)
mutiny, opposition and rebellion: For as Christianity has not made Governors,
which are but few, what they should be: so neither Subjects especially, which
are numerous. And sin besides provokes God to punish: who suffering the
rebellious Wisd. 6. 3. Because bei^^ Ministers o^ his Kingdom ye have no^
judged arigh^ -- horribly sha^^ he come up you. -- Migh^^ men shall b^ mightily
to^^mented, etc
to act according to the evil of their heart, uses them as scourges for the
chastisement of Rulers offenses. And if they do receive violence for violence,
rebellion for tyranny, they may thank themselves, and cannot but acknowledge
they have deserved it; themselves they must blame for their ungodly oppression,
as well as their Subjects for their ungodly opposition. But there is somewhat
more for them to fear than the wrath of unruly men, the wrath of the Holy and
Almighty God: who hates iniquity in all, and will in the last day judge without
respect of persons, rendering to every one according to his deeds, tribulation
and anguish to all that work evil, both Kings and Subjects. And worse is it
(who can say how much worse?) to be deprived by the Divine Justice of the
Kingdom of Heaven and Eternal life, and to be carried by Devils into the
Infernal prisons, and there tormented for ever in fire and brimstone, than to
be imprisoned by seditious men in a Castle or Common Gaol, and there mocked and
contemned, and to be deprived of an earthly Kingdom and temporal life. And as
the one for resisting shall receive to themselves damnation, so shall the other
for oppressing receive the same, without repentance; and repentance there is
none without amendment.

I may here recite what St. Cyprian said to the forementioned Demetrianus, the
evil Africa Governor, and to the rest of the vicious and cruel Heathens under
him, who complained of the Christians as the cause Of all the miseries that
befell them. Ad De metr.
Inter ipsa adversa, etc. In the midst of the adversities, in which the
straightened soul can scarce breathe, ye yet find liberty enough to be wicked, and
in so great dangers judge of others, but not of your selves. Ye are angry that
God is angry, as if ye deserved good by doing evil, as if all the miseries that
befall you, were not less and lighter than your impieties. Thou who judge
others, be judge sometimes of thy self; view the recesses of thy conscience,
and who art clearly seen of all, see thy self. -- Do thou wonder that the
anger of God increases, for the punishment of men, when that increases daily
which is punished? -- The truth is this which the Prophet delivers, that God
can restrain adversities, but the crimes of sinners are the-cause that he does
not help. Is God's hand ( says he) weak, that he cannot save? or is his ear
heavy, that he cannot hear? But your sins separate betwixt you and God: and
because of your iniquities he turns his face from you, and will not pity. --
As if it were a light thing, that your life is defiled with variety of raging
vices, with the iniquity of lamentable crimes, with all bloody rapines, that
true Religion is subverted by false superstitions, that God is not sought nor
feared at all: ye worry the servants of God with unjust persecutions. -- ot by
us, but for us do all those things happen which descend from the divine
indignation. -- In the terrible day of judgment will the wicked say, What does
our pomp and the glory of our riches profit us? all those things are gone as a
shadow. Then repentance, sorrow, weeping, praying will be fruitless and avail
nothing. Provide therefore for your welfare whilst ye may. -- Believe [
convert] and live, and you who for a time make us sad, rejoice with us for ever.

Thus may Prince and People be happy, if they will be holy, doing their duty
each to other, and both to God. But when sin abounds, judgment breaks forth
like a whirlwind, we know not how: and that, if it reforms us not in this
life, in the other changes upon us into eternal burnings.

2. Let us now see the Black Deed of the day. Which being worse than fighting
against evil Powers, the killing of a good and pious Prince, a just and legal
Ruler, swells the guilt into a monstrous bigness. Our Sovereign, after a long
rebellious War, falls into his enemies hands: Elenchus ^ Angl. gl. p. 243,
Who erect a new Tribunal of abject Subjects against Him, which they call the
High Court of Justice: the greatest part whereof were Commanders of the Army,
who before had conspired his destruction, and such Members of the House of
Commons as were his most heavy friends; the rest were of the dregs of the City
of London or the Neighborhood. Among these, one or two were Shoe-makers, some
Ale-brewers, Goldsmiths, and other Mechanics; Cast-off Lawyers, Spend-thrifts,
Bankrupts, Whore-masters many. Out of the number of these Judges were expunged
all the Lords [of the Upper House] for that they rejected the Vote for trying
the King; and the Judges of the Kingdom likewise, for that being asked their
opinions privately about this matter, they answered, That it was against the
received Laws and Customs of England that the King should be brought to Trial.
They now appoint a President to this Court, one Bradshaw, a fogging fellow, of
obscure birth, and of effronted impudence See also England's Black Tribunal.
Before these Judges the King is brought, and is charged in the name of the
People with Tyranny and Treason: and by this authority of the people of England
the President tells him he is called to account, as being by their Election
admitted King. The King replies, That the Kingdom descended to him in no wise
Elective, but had been hereditary for above a thousand years: That there
appeared none of the Lords, who ought to the constituting of a Parliament to be
there That yet neither both the Houses had any authority to call the King to
account, much less some certain Judges masked with the authority of the Lower
House, and that proculcated: That the Laws of England enjoin all accusations to
be made in the King's name: nor do they indulge any power of judging even the
most abject Subject to the Lower (or Commons) House. The President, who ever
and anon interrupted Him, tells Him, That the Court was not to hear any reasons
that detracted from their power. But what or where, says the King, is that
Court in which no place is left for reason? You shall find, answers the
President, that this very Court is such an one: and growing angry, commands the
Prisoner to be taken away. Who being Ian. 27. 1648.
brought the fourth time, the President commands the Sentence to be read under
this form, Whereas Charles Stuart being accused by the People of Tyranny,
Treason, Murders and Mis-government, and has not answered for himself, be
therefore the said Charles Stuart adjudged to death by the severing of his head
from his body. He is now hurried away by the Soldiers, who triumphing and
mocking, cry out, Justice, Justice. They spit upon his Clothes; which he wiping
off, said, Christ suffered more for me. See also History of Independ.
One (as among other standers-by, a Colonel, one of the King's Judges related,
not without commendation of the Soldier's hardiness) defiles his venerable Face
2 part. p. 92. And View of Late Troubles, p. 370.
with Spittle. They whiff Tobacco in his face, the smell of which they knew was
offensive to him. Such as bowed or put off their Hats, they bastinadoe. They
intrude themselves into his Closet; deny him the use of his Chaplains, all but
one; keep a loud laughing at him as he was at Divine Service after the manner
of the Church of England; and whilst he was preparing for his last, busy him
with scoffs and whimsie questions. Certain Soldiers the day before his death
offer him propositions, promising to gratify him with his Life and Regal
Authority, if he would subscribe them. Which having read, he rejects, saying, I
will rather undergo a thousand deaths, than so prostitute my Honor and my
Peoples Liberties. The Scaffold is erected before his Banqueting House, where
he was wont to ascend the Throne. Whither being Ian. 30. 1648.
come, about an hours space he was at prayer: and then ascends the Scaffold,
where the Executioners in Vizards encounter Him, and the Block and Ax present
themselves. All mine enemies, says He, I pardon from my very heart, and
earnestly beseech God to grant them sound repentance, and remit this great sin.
I die, adds He, in the Christian faith, according to the profession of the
Church of England, as the same was left me by my Father of blessed Memory.
Having given advice for the welfare of the Kingdom, he prays, and stoops to the
Block, and so the Vizarded Executioner cut off His Head.

And now, my Brethren, I question not but ye will conclude with me, that these
men have acted as if they had never read the Apostle's Injunction in our Text;
and if they had not been quite overrun with malignity of nature, and moved by
a more than ordinary impulse of the Devil, they could not have perpetrated this
monstrous villainy. O my soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their
assembly be not thou united: who in their presumption and self-will slew their
King, the Lord's Anointed. May this one act suffice them (which truly is
wickedness enough for an age) as having hereby made themselves famous enough
for impious boldness, and run themselves far enough toward perdition. Now they
have done so much, may they for ever hereafter cease their insurrections, as
taught by sad experience how far in the nasty chambers and abominable mysteries
of darkness, unto what horrid and hellish villainy, the Devil leads the
Rebellious. Let the Memorial of this day be a perpetual shame and curb to all
Seditious spirits. Amen.

Nor can the Raisers and Prosecutors of the War wash their hands clear from
this Blood, though some of them exclaimed against the hellish Deed. For they
hunted the King into the snare wherein he was taken and perished; they brought
him to the Block whereon their fellow Soldiers cut off his Head; See Love's
Engl. Distemp. p. 32. Prynne's Pop. Favorite. Epist. p. 3. etc. p. 39. His
Power of Parliam. p. 186, etc. 2 Part. p. 33, etc. Commons Petit. and Remon.
15. December. 1641. Regal Tyranny. p. 50. to 58. Declarat. showing the Reasons
for no more Address. Fowlis's Hist. of Presb. l. 2. c. 2. and l. 3. c. 1. and
2. and 5. p. 230.
they accused and arraigned him for an illegal and arbitrary Governor, a
Violator of his Oaths and Promises, a Grand Delinquent, an Fnemy to the State,
a Rebel to the Law, a Traitor against the Parliament, for Popish, a Tyrant, a
Most Bloody man; and the others Executed him as such. The Presbyterians ( says
Tenure of Kings, p. 32, etc.
John Milton, the defender of the Regicides) have for these seven years Deposed
the King, not only by depriving him of his authority, but by conferring it upon
others. If then the Oaths of Subjection broken, new Supermacy obeyed, new Oaths
and Covenants taken, have in plain terms unkinged the King; much more then has
the seven years War, not Deposed him only, but Outlawed him, and defied him as
an Alien, a Rebel to Law, an Enemy to the State. -- Have they not levied all
the Wars against him? etc. They certainly who by deposing him have long since
taken from him the life of a King, his Office and Dignity, they in the truest
sense may be said to have killed the King, not only by deposing, and waging War
against him, which set him in the farthest opposite point from any vital
function of a King, but by their holding him in Prison, vanquished and yielded
into their absolute and despotick power, which brought him to the lowest
degradement and incapacity of a Regal name.

But when the late mischievous War and the horrid Regicide ought to have
frighted all from attempting such things any more, yet ungodly men (by a better
name they call themselves, but most unjustly) have often endeavored to act the
same again. Which I shall now show: viz.

3. The Rebellious Practices of some of our Fanatics since the Restoration of
our present King. As soon almost as He was settled in his Throne (at Christmas
1661, as I remember) rose up Venner and his company of Fifth-Monarchy men in
London, acted with strong delusion, expecting Christ Jesus to come down from
Heaven in person to them in St. Paul's Churchyard for their assistance in
destroying the present Powers.

Narrative of the Trial and Condemnation of T. Tongue, etc. at the Old Bailey,
London, Dec. 11. 1662.
In the next year 1662 was a Conspiracy among several sorts of our Sectaries,
to levy War against the King, and to surprise and kill Him, with the Duke of
York, the Duke of Albemarle, Sir Richard Brown, and to give no quarter to any
that opposed them; to put an end to Kings, Princes, Dukes, that they might have
a free State, and be troubled no more with any such kind of men, nor with
Lawn-sleeves and Surcingles. For this end they had provided store of Arms, and
had laid them up in several places, and had disposed a good number of them to
their Friends. The time appointed for the Insurrection was Alhallows Eve: and
to color the business they pretended that they had received a Letter from a
Correspondent of the Papists, that the Papists at that time intended to make
use of their Army [meaning the King's Guards at White-hall] for the Massacring
of all Protestants in the City. Which news they dispersed in N. B.
and about London by a Letter of their own to their Friends: wherein they
invited them to do what Piety to God, Loyalty to their King, Love to their
Country, and Self-preservation should direct them: Calling the eternal God to
witness that this was no trepan nor trick, but a sober truth. They had framed a
Declaration to justify their proceedings, viz. against Popery and Monopolies,
Bishops and Common Prayer, for Liberty of Conscience and a free Commonwealth.
They were discovered by some of the Party, and several of them were
apprehended, tried and condemned at Iustice-Hall in the Old Bailey, London, the
same year, Dec. 11. Some acknowledged themselves wholly guilty, others so far
guilty as that they heard this villainy discoursed of, and did not reveal it:
only Tho. Tongue in his Dying Speech said, That he had sometimes been in some
men's company where he had heard them contriving the business for which he was
condemned to die; and that that which led him to join with them, was this, That
he had sometimes been in the Army, and looked upon this cause to be good.

After the Discovery of the Plot in 1662, the same sort of factious Dissenters
laid a Plot the very next year ( viz. 1663.) in the Bishopric of Durham, to
this purpose.

First, To reconcile all their Brethren of different persuasions. History of
Plots by Oliver Fowlis, in Quarto. Printed A. D. 1664.
Secondly, Upon an Oath of Secrecy, to send Agitatours all over England with
propositions most comprehensive of all Interests, who met at one Ouldred's
house (the Devil of Dewshury, as they called him) and afterward at Stank-house
in that County, from whence Maisden and Palmer are sent Agitatours to London to
the Secret Committee there, whence they bring a resolution to rise October the
12th, with assurance that the Insurrection should be general. Thirdly, To
attempt White Hall, upon some Shewnight, to secure New Castle for a passage to
Scotland, and Boston in Lincolnshire for Correspondence with Foreign Parts,
for Succors and Ammunition. Fourthly, To lay hold upon the Gentry. Fifthly, To
oppose Subsidies and Chimny-money, to restore the Long Parliament, to establish
a Gospel-Magistracy and Ministry, and to check the Clergy, Gentry and Lawyers.
Sixthly, They preached over all the Nation in order to a general rising,
calling it, following the Lamb, and inferring from that expression the
lawfulness of the design, so it were carried on for the love of the Cause, and
for no By-ends. Seventhly, They were to Garrison Gloucester, Nottingham, etc.
and to this purpose had several meetings at Leeds and the Spaw. Eighthly, They
had a Secret Committee for two years before in London about the Plot, who had
Listed Eighteen Thousands. Ninthly, They drew a Declaration to unite the
Sectaries against the Government. Tenthly, They were to begin in Ireland.
Eleventhly, To seize the Lord Falconbridge and the Lord Fairfax's Horses and
Arms, with the rest of the Gentries and Clergies. This Plot was discovered by
some concerned in it, and Thirty Executed for it.

Now though the discovery of this Plot and Execution of so many of the hottest
of them, dashed their hopes at present, and God's severe hand upon the Nation
in the year -- 65 a little checked their Ambition, and so one plague served to
stop another; yet no sooner was that over, but they are all at work again as
eagerly as ever. The Gazette, published April the 30th, 1666, has these words:

At the Sessions in the Old Bailey, John Rathbone, an old Army-Colonel, Bedlow's
Narrative of Fires, p. 14
William Saunders, Henry Tucker, Thomas Flint, Thomas Evans, John Miles,
William Westcoat and John Cole, (formerly Officers or Soldiers in the late
rebellion) were Indicted for conspiring the Death of the King, and the
overthrow of the Government, having laid their plot and contrivance for the
surprizal of the Tower, the killing of his Grace the Lord General, Sir John
Robinson, Lieutenant of his Majesty's Tower of London, and Sir Richard Brown,
and then to have declared for an equal division of Lands, etc. The better to
effect this Hellish design, the City was to have been Fired, and the
Portcullices to have been let down, to keep out all assistance, the Horseguard
to have been surpised in the Inns, where they were Quartered, several Ostlers
having been gained to that purpose; the Tower was accordingly viewed, and its
surprise ordered by Boats over the Moat, and from thence to scale the Wall; one
Alexander, who is not yet taken, had likewise distributed Sums of money to
these Conspirators; and for carrying on the design the more effectually, they
were told of a great Council of the great ones that sat frequently in London,
from whom Issued all Orders, which Council received their directions from
another in Holland, which sat with the States, and the 3d of September was
pitched on for the attempt, as being found by Lily's Almanac, and a Scheme
erected for that purpose to be a lucky day; a Planet then ruling, which
prognosticated the downfall of Monarchy; the Evidence against these persons was
very full and clear, and they accordingly found guilty of High Treason.

In the same year (viz. 1666) a company of Pre: byterian Scots ( Nine hundred
says their own Napthtali, P. 137. to 141. printed 1667.
friend) rose up in arms, and renewed the Solemn League and Covenant: Which in
their fight with the King's Forces, under Lieutenant General Dalzel at
Pentlandhills, were routed. Their Plea and Justification of themselves for this
fact (the bare relation whereof is sufficient condemnation) I shall give you in
the words of some of them that were arraigned, condemned and executed for the
same, delivered in their last Writings and Speeches, and recorded by their
great Advocate in his Book entitled Napthtali. Thus Ten of them jointly
testify and subscribe, P. 216.
We suffer for renewing the Covenant, and in pursuance thereof, for preserving
our selves by Arms against the Usurpation of the Prelates. One of these ten,
John Shields, declares singly thus, P. 227.
I suffer not for any Rebellion against his Majetie's lawful authority, but
for renewing of the Covenant, and for following the Ends thereof, as to the
suppressing of Abjured Prelates and intruders upon the Lords flock, and the
Restoring of the house of God by Presbyteries. And another of the ten thus, P.
228.
I designed no rebellion against lawful authority, but the suppressing of
Prelacy and Profanity, and the advancing of holiness. I did intend the
restoring of our good Ministers; and thought it my duty to appear in helping
the Lord against the Mighty^. Thus Mr. M. Kaile, P. 241.
As soon as I heard of a party up in arms, I was moved to go along with them,
being Bound by the Covenant against indifferency and neutrality in this matter,
and to esteem every injury done to any engaged in this Covenant upon the
account of it, as done to my self: very conscience of duty urged me to this.

Ravitlac Redivivus, p. 14, etc.
In the year 1668 July, Mr. James Mitchel ( one of these Pentland-hill Rebels,
and a Presbyterian Conventicle-Preacher) discharged a Pistol laden with three
Bullets at the Archbishop of St. Andrews, but missed him, and escaped then
taking. But returning in the year 1673, was taken, and kept Prisoner till 1676;
when in December he was brought to his trial, and there the Bishop of Galloway
and the Lord Halton deposed, that having asked him, what moved him to make such
a bloody attempt, he answered That he did it because the Archbishop was an
enemy to the people of God. In his Speech which was found in his pocket at his
Execution at Edinburgh, (Ian. 18. 1676/7) and whereof he had transcribed
several Copies, he thus justifies himself, I am brought here that I may be a
witness for Gods despised truth and interest, who am called to seal the same
with my blood. I bless my God that he has thought me so much worthy to lay
down my life in testimony of the Cause of Christ. In a Letter to a Friend thus
he writes, As to Rebellion and Treason (as they term it) I answered to my Lord
Chancellor, That it was no Rebellion, but a Duty which every one was bound to
have performed in joining with that Party: As to the Archbishop of St. Andrews,
I looked upon him to be the main instigator of all the oppression and bloodshed
of my brethren. -- I prosecuted the Ends of the Covenant, which was and is (in
that part) the Overthrow of Prelates and Prelacy. These Murdering Prelates
ought to be killed by the avenger of blood when he meets them. And in another
Speech he has these words, Happy shall he be that takes this Prelatical
brood, and dasheth them against the stones. And yet as bad as this man was, the
Fanatics owned, justified, honored him. His Majesty's Advocate, who pursued
him, receiving a threatening Letter, and the common talk of the Town was, that
Mr. James Mitchel's blood should be revenged upon the whole order. From the
West a private Message was sent to the Archbishop, to assure him, that if Mr.
James were hanged, another should not fail to execute his design. And you shall
next see, that they were as good as their word.

Narrative of the Murder of th Archbishop of St. Andrews: Extracted out of
the Register's of th Privy Council. Bound up with Th Spirit of Popery.
In the year 1679, May 3. the Archbishop of St. Andrews, as he was riding in
his Coach from Kennoway to his House, was assaulted betwixt a 11 and 12 a clock
in the forenoon by 11 or 12 of these ill-principled men: who wounded the
Postilion in the face with a Sword, and stopped the Coach, and fired a Pistol
at the Archbishop: but that missing him, they called to him by the name of
Dog, Villain, Betrayer of Christ and his Church, etc. and bad him come out of
his Coach to receive what he deserved for his wickedness against the Kirk of
Scotland. Upon this his Daughter got out of the Coach, and fell on her knees,
begging her Father's life: but they regarded neither prayers nor tears, threw
her down several times, trampled on her, and wounded her. The Archbishop came
out of the Coach, and seeing he must die, kneeled down to one of them, and
said, Since you are resolved I must die, spare the life of my child here; and
for this, Sir, give me your hand. And thereupon stretching his hand toward the
cruel man, he had for a return a very great blow with a Shable, which almost
cut off his hand; and the Villain re-doubling his stroke, gave him another
great wound upon the left eye. This stroke knocked him down: but getting upon
his knees again, he said, Gentlemen, it is now enough, you have done your work;
and holding up his hands (as well as he could) to heaven, he fervently cried
out, Lord Jesus; have mercy on my soul, and receive my spirit. Whilst he was in
this posture of devotion, they wounded him in his hands and other parts of his
body, till in a kind of composure he laid down his head upon his arm, saying,
God forgive you, and I forgive you all. After this they gave him no less than
sixteen wounds on his head, insomuch that it seemed to be all one wound. And
pieces of his scattered skull and brains were some days after found on the
ground. Having thus hacked and cleft his head, some of them as they were going
away thought they heard him groan, which made them go back, and to make sure
work, stir up his brains in the skull with the points of their Swords. Thus he
died. Ib. p. 63.
It was made apparent upon the examining of the Inhabitants of Magus upon Oath,
that these bloody Assassines, and many others which were strongly presumed to
have been Abettors and Contrivers of this Murder, were notorious Fanatics,
frequenters of Field-Conventicles, and followers of Mr. Welsh and other
intercommuned and rebellious Preachers. P. 65.
Five of the Complotters and Abettors of this horrid Murder chose to die, and
to be hung up in Chains upon the place, rather than confess the sinfulness of
the action. The Fanatical party foretold it in several places: and he who
commanded the Foot for Mr. Welsh upon Reuparlaw, the famous Field-Conventicle,
owned that their Friends thanked God for the Archbishop's death. Which neither
they nor their Abettors will call Murder, when they have occasion to speak
thereof.

Ib. p. 63.
Immediately after the Archbishop's death, the same month and year ( May 29.
1679.) this sort of men (the Scotch Presbyterian Covenanters and
Field-Conventiclers) brake sorth into another insurrection and rebellion, See
The King's Proclam. Edenburg. Nov. 22. 1680.
for the promoting, as they declared, the Ends of the Covenant; Loyalties
Summons, p. 23, etc.
increasing unto the number of fourteen or fifteen thousand. Who were
overthrown by the King's Forces under the Conduct of the Duke of Monmouth at
Bothwell-Bridge. Spirit of Popery, p. 8.
They teach, That the King has no right to govern, because he has revolted
from the Solemn League and Covenant and damn the Act of Parliament for an
Anniversary-day of Thanksgiving, May 29. for his Majesty's Restoration, and
burn it publicly at the Cross of Rugland on the same 29 of May, together with
the Act of Supremacy. Ib. p. 43, 46.
Mr. John King, a Presbyterian Preacher to these Rebels (who was executed of
High Treason and Rebellion Aug. 4. 1679.) in his Last Speech says, I bear
witness against all Oaths and Bonds contrary to our Covenant and Engagements,
especially that Oath of Supremacy. -- I bear my testimony against that horrid
violation done to our Lord Jesus Christ in spoiling him of his Crown and
Scepter through that woeful Supremacy so much applauded to. The same says Mr.
John Kid, another of the same Preachers, in his Last Speech, Ib. p. 7, 9, 15.
Supremacy is destructive down-rightly to the sworn Covenants. -- I am pressed
in conscience to bear my testimony against, and abhorrence of every Usurpation
that is made against Christ's Crown and Kingdom, original upon, and derivative
from that which they call the Supremacy. The same says the Author of Napthtali,
p. 89, 90, 95, 123. And I believe, See Fowlis's Hist. of Presb. 1. 3. c. 3.
Many of our Dissenters, if they were tried, as well as Papists, will not take
the Oath of Supremacy. And to deny the King's Supremacy over all persons and in
all causes, Ecclesiastic as well as Temporal, is known of all to be Popery.

And yet more of this wickedness proceeding from the same sort of men you shall
hear, and that from their own Confessions. Account of the Examinat. and
Confess. of several Conspirators in Scotland: together with the Proclamat.
issued upon that occasion by the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council of that
Kingdom: published by Authority, p. 3, 4.
James Skene being examined at Edenburg Nov. 13. 1680. in the presence of the
Lords of the Privy Council, Whether he was with the Rebels at Bothwell-bridge,
answers, That he thinks those persons were not Rebels, for that they were in
defense of Gods cause, which he had honorably engaged them to. He owns and
justifies the burning of the King's Acts of Parliament at Rutherglen, because
they were against the Covenant: Declares, that he owns the Excommunication
against the King used by Cargil, and thinks the reasons of it just: that he
thinks the Killing of the Archbishop of St. Andrews was no Murder, and that
the Actors thereof were upon their duty: that he thinks there is a declared war
betwixt those who serve the Lord, and those who serve the King against the
Covenant, and that it is lawful to kill them in defense of the Gospel: that he
thinks, the King being excommunicated, and there being now a lawful war
declared against him upon the account of the breach of the Covenant, it is
lawful to kill him, and to kill him, if he were passing along in his Coach, as
the Archbishop of St. Andrews was, and to kill all that were in opposition to
the Covenant. And all this he signed by writing his name, James Skene. And
Archibald Steward being at the same time examined, declares Ib. p. 5, 6.
That he was present at the Excommunication of the King at the Conventicle at
Torwood, and was there in Arms, and that he was justly excommunicated, and that
he disowns His Authority, and thinks he is not obliged to obey him, because he
has broken the Covenant: that he thinks it was lawful to kill the Archbishop
of St. Andrews, because he had betrayed the Kirk, and that he owns the
Proclamation against the King at Sanchar, and the burning of the King's Acts of
Parliament at Rutherglen as a duty, and owns and justifies Cargil's Covenant:
Signed thus, Archibald Steward. P. 7, 9.
And Nov. 15. in the presence of the Committee of Council he confesses, that in
general they had a mind to kill any that should oppose them, and that they had
a design to kill Tho. Kennoway in the Guard, because he had taken several of
their party, and Mr. John Park, Minister of Garrin, and Mr. James Hamilton,
Minister of Borrowstonness, because they had been instrumental to discover Mr.
Donald Cargil at Queens-Ferry; and that if they could have gotten any of the
Bishops or Judges in their hands, they would have killed them. And Nov. 16. he
declares that Mr. Donald Cargil in his Preachings advised them to these
designs. P. 10.
And John Potter being examined Nov. 17. declares, he own and justifies the
Declaration in Sanchar, and that he owns not the King for King, and thinks he
owes no Obedience to Him. These three, Skene, Steward, Potter, were executed at
Edenburg, Dec. 1. 1680.
All the former particulars are again expressly mentioned in the King's
Proclamation issued forth upon this occasion, Nov. 22. 1680. Some of which I
shall again relate from thence for further satisfaction to all. P. 15, etc.
A treasonable Covenant was found with Mr. Donald Cargil, one of their
seditious Preachers, on the 3d day of June last: wherein they declare Us an
Usurper and the Devils Vicegerent. -- And the 22d of June last, they affixed to
the Market-Cross and other places of our Burgh of Sanchar, their treasonable
Declaration, wherein they disown Us to be their King, calling themselves the
Representatives of the true Presbyterian and Covenanted people of Scotland, and
declaring an open War against Us, and all our Loyal Subjects. And a most
treasonable Bond was found among the Papers of Richard Cameron: wherein they
declare themselves loosed from their Allegiance to Us; which Bond was signed by
Thomas Douglas, pretended Minister of the Gospel, John Vallence, etc. And in
October last they sacrilegiously excommunicated Us by Donald Cargil at a
numerous Field-Conventicle at Torwood in Sterling-shire. -- And by this Mock
Excommunication, and the foresaid Declaration of War at Sanchar, they endeavor
to justify the lawfulness of killing Us, and our faithful Ministers and
Subjects. The Originals of all which Papers herein mentioned do lie in the
hands of the Clerks of our Privy Council. Moreover, the Reality of this horrid
Plot is further evident by the free confession of James Skene, Archibald
Steward. and John Potter: who in the face of our Privy Council have avowed and
declared their owning of, and adherence to the aforesaid treasonable Covenant,
Declaration and Excommunication: and with bare faces assert the lawfulness of
killing Us their Sovereign, our only Brother, our Ministers, Bishops and
Judges; and that it is their Duty to kill Us and them according as they shall
have power and opportunity.

All this is surely sufficient to convince every good Christian Calvin, whose
Disciples they pretend to be, condemns them: who condemns all private men's
taking Arms even against Tyrannical Princes: as we have seen before.
of the wickedness of these men. And upon this sad narration I appeal to all
sincerely pious, Whether the King, or these Rebels; and whether the Archbishop
of St. Andrews, or his Assassinates and their Abettors, be the worse men:
Whether these Scotch Fanatics be not a seditious and bloody sort of people:
Whether we are not in danger of private Murders and public War by them:
Whether our Episcopacy and Liturgy, or their Murders and Rebellions, be the
true Popery: Whether their doctrine, that the King having revolted from the
Covenant, and the Jesuits, that the King being an Heretic, may be
excommunicated, and has no right to govern, and may lawfully be refisted by
his Subjects with force of arms, be deprived of his dominion, and be killed; be
not the same: Whether these men, when they are punished for their Murders and
Rebellions, suffer persecution for righteousness sake: Whether they are not
sadly deluded, Saepius olim Relligio peperit scelerosa atque impia facta.
and whether they do not grossly profane Gods Name in pretending his authority
for the said Villainies: Whether all ought not to turn from these pernicious
Preachers.

Many are apt in excuse of these sinners to say, they were Papists in disguise,
crept in among them, that did the evils, or these at least stirred them up to
them. Whereas nothing is plainer, than that the chief Actors were eminent and
well known Presbyterian Preachers and Covenanters; and the other numerous
companies that rose in arms with these, can no more be thought Papists, than
the Armies which fought against our late King, or that multitude that conspired
his death. And if Popish Priests did stir them up to the wickednesses (as
indeed they are always busy in machinating mischief against our Government
that is the Bulwark against their Popery) how silly then are they, and how
evily disposed (who yet pretend great knowledge and sanctity) to learn of these
Teachers, and practice their hellish counsels? And it is acknowledged then that
this is a Popish work. And what excuse to obey Pope or Devil? for says St.
Peter, blaming Ananias for the sin, as his own act and deed, though tempted,
Act. 5. 3, 4.
why has Satan filled thine heart to lie to the Holy Ghost? why have thou
conceived this thing in thine heart? Come, excuse them not because they are
Protestants, but (as is just) let them that act like Papists, fall with
Papists. Confessed it must be (if we are impartial) that many among our selves
are stark naught. For hear again,

4. The Principles of certain of our Fanatics: which are as pernicious and
rebellious as the foresaid Practices. That such were the Principles of the
foresaid men, their Deeds and Confessions manifest. I shall now recite only a
few words of some others, and that out of their own Books where I read them.

Knox, History of Reform. L. 2. p. 190. Whilst virtue is contemned, and vice
extolled ( say the Lords of Scotland) while we are unjustly persecuted, what
godly man can be offended, that we shall seek reformation of these enormities
by force of arms, seeing that otherwise it is denied us? We are assured, that
neither God, nor nature, nor any just law forbids us. P. 313. If Princes (
says John Knox) do exceed their bounds, there is no doubt but they may be
resisted even by power. P. 387. What ye may and ought to do by God's express
commandment, that I can tell. The Idolater ought to die the death by the people
of God. -- A commandment is given, Deuteronomy. 13.
that if it be heard that Idolatry is committed in any one City, Inquisition
shall be taken: and if it be found true, that then the whole body of the people
arise and destroy that city, sparing in it neither man, woman nor child. --
What Gods word commands to be punished in the people, is not to be absolved in
the King. P. 389, 390. Gods law pronounces death to Idolaters without exception
of persons. -- I affirm that the fact of Iehu in destroying the house of his
Master Ahab for Idolatry committed by him, is to be imitated of all those that
prefer the true honor of the true worship of God to the affections of the
flesh and wicked Princes. His Appel. p. 23. The punishment of Idolatry [ Deuteronomy.
13.] does not appertain to Kings only, but also to the whole people, yea to
every member of the same. P. 22. And the Gentiles embracing Christ, are bound
to the same covenant [viz. that in Duet. 13.] -- And if any man go about to set
up Idolatry, after that the verity has been received and approved, then not
only the Magistrates, but also the people are bound by that Oath which they
have made to God, to revenge to the utmost of their power the injury done
against his Majesty. P. 25. I say, Unto such a number as do boldly profess
God's Religion, it is lawful to punish the Idolaters with death, if by any
means God give them power Here is both Rebellion and Judaism in high degree:
that all Christians may and ought to kill all, Strangers, their Husbands,
Wives, Fathers, Children, their King and all his issue, when these are
Idolaters, or which is the same, Papists. And why not as well Adulterers, who
by the same Iudaic Law were likewise to be put to death? Here is the Statute de
Haereticis comburendis revived. Luke 9. 55. Ye know not what manner of spirit
ye are of. 1 Cor. 7. 12. If any Brother has a Wife that Believes not, let him
not put her away: Especially then may he not kill her, because she is an
Unbeliever, an Heathen, an Idolater.
The Author of the Preface to the said History, p. 44. The Chimera of Passive
Obedience is the invention of Court-parasites, a non ens.

Milton, Contra Salmas. Def. Reg. ( printed 1652.) c. 3. p. 64. Romans 13. Omnis
anima, etc. Non tali, etc. Subjection is not commanded, Romans 13. to a
Magistrate that is not a terror to evil works, neither are we forbidden to
resist such an one Just so says the Papist Suarez, Adv. Sect. Ang. 1. 6. c. 6..
24. Paulus his verbis, Omnis anima, etc. Romans 13. nunquam addidit, etiam
Potestatibus Excommunicatis vel deprivatis a Papa omnes subditi sint: When St.
Paul said, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; he did not add, let
all be subject to Powers whom the Pope has Excommunicated or Deprived. And so
Pope Nicolas 1. expounds 1 Pet. 2. 13. perverting the words: Regi quasi
praecellenti ( virtutibus scilicet, non vitiis) subditi estote: Be subject to
the King, as excelling, to wit, in virtues, not in vices: I Epist. 4. Append.
p. 624. insinuating, that only to a virtuous King we are to be subject.
P. 70. Tulerunt Christiani, etc. The Christians suffered Princes of another
Religion, it is true: but they were private men, This is just Bellarmine's
doctrine, De Romans Pontif. 1. 5. c. 7. Quod Christiani olim non deposuerunt
Neronem, etc. id fuit quia deerant vires temporales Christianis, nam alioqui
jure potuerant id facere: The reason why Christians did not depose Nero,
Dioclesian, Julian, was because they wanted temporal power, for they might
lawfully have done it. And Bannes, another Popish Doctor, says, Excusandos esse
Anglicanos Fideles, etc. The English Catholics are to be excused for not
waging war against their Rulers, and freeing themselves from their power:
because they have not strenght enough, and it would be dangerous to them: In 2.
2. Thom. 9, 12. art. 2.
and far inferior in strength. The same Author, Tenure of Kings ( printed
1649.) P. 14. The people may as often as they shall judge it for the best, depose
the King, though no Tyrant The like, but somewhat better, says Bellarmine, De
Romans Pont. 1. 5. c. 6. Papa potest mutare Regna, and uni auferre, atque alteri
confer, si id necessarium sit ad animarum salutem: The Pope may take the
Kingdom from one, and give it to another, if that be necessary to the salvation
of souls. And Pope Zachary deposed the King of the Franks, Non tam pro suis
iniquitatibus, quam pro eo quod tantae potestati erat inutilis, Not so much for
his iniquities, as that he was unfit for so great power: As Pope Greg. 7. tells
us Decret. 2 Part. Cause. 15. 9. 6.


John Goodwin, Anticavalierism: ( printed 1643.) p. 23. The glory of Martyrdom
does not consist in suffering wicked men [ Rulers] to destroy us, when God puts
an opportunity into our hand to defend our selves; but when it comes to a
necessity of suffering, in not baulking with Christ. The same Author, Defense
of the sentence passed upon the late King by the High Court of Justice. P. 11.
Reason gives the superiority of Power to the People, or Parliament, and not to
the King. -- The people have the precedence in honor before the King. P. 12.
When they find that the charge of maintaining Kingly Government has been, and
if continued, is like to be over-burdensome to the State, conceiving upon good
ground withal that another form of government will accommodate the interest of
the State upon equal or better terms with less expense, a People or State
formerly governed by Kings may very lawfully turn these servants of theirs out
of their doors Right Popish Doctrine: Bellarm. de Laic. 1. 3. c. 6. Si causa
legitima adsit, potest multitudo mutare Regnum in Aristocratiam aut
Democratiam. And Recogn. de Laic. Navarrus non dubitat affirmare nunquam
populum it a potestatem suam in Regem transfer, quin illam sibi in habitu
retineat, ut in certis casibus etiam actu recipere possit. [ Let the Pope then
be content to be deprived by Kings and People of what by them was given him.]
P. 39. The people have a just and legal power in their Representative (which
is the House of Commons) without the Lords to act and do what soever they
rightly judge conducible to their wealth and safety. P. 59. Nor does any
promise of Allegiance, Obedience, or subjection unto a King and his Successors
or Posterity, though confirmed by an Oath, bind any longer or otherwise, either
before God or men, than whilst and as this King or his Successors shall
continue in the same deportment of themselves in the discharge of their trust
and administration of their power, whereby they commended themselves unto us at
the time when we swore such Allegiance unto them, and in consideration and
expectation whereof the same was sworn by us. This is pure Iesuitical Popery:
the Jesuits and Iesuitical Popes teaching, that Subjects are not bound to keep
those Oaths of Allegiance and Obedience which they made to their King whilst he
was a Catholic when he turns Heretic. Azor. Hist. Mor. p. 1. 1. 8. c. 13.
Absolutos se noverint a debito fidelitatis, and totius obsequii, quicunque
lapsis manifesto in haeresin tenebantur astricti. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. 1. 3.
c. 7. Si Princeps aliquis ex Christiano fiat haereticus, poterat Pastor
ecclesiae eum privare dominio in populos.
P. 60. The observation of the Oath of Allegiance by the Parliament would have
been as sinful to them, as the observation of Herod's Oath was to him, who
killed John the Baptist because he had so sworn. P. 90, 95. There never was for
matter of guilt and death-deserving crimes a sentence more just and righteous
awarded in any Court of Judicature in any age throughout the whole world, than
that which passed in the High Court of Justice against the late King.

Rutherford, Lex, Rex: ( printed 1644.) p. 371. Obj. Tertullian says, That the
Christians might for strength and number have defended themselves against their
Persecutors, but thought it unlawful. Ans. I ingenicusly confess Tertullian
was in that Error. P. 261. Obligation to suffer of wicked men falls under no
commandment of God, except in our Savior. P. 319. Passive obedience is no
where commanded, but only the Manner of suffering. P. 334. Though the King be
present as an unjust invader in War against his innocent Subjects, he is absent
as a King: and therefore the innocent may defend themselves. -- The King as
offering unjust violence to his innocent Subjects, is not King Much like this
says the Pope, Non permitto tibi (inquit Papa) ut Regi non pareas (quod esset
contra ius divinum:) sed facio ut ille qui tibi Rex erat, non sit tibi deinceps
Rex: I permit thee not, says the Pope, that thou obey not the King (which would
be contrary to the divine Command:) but I make him that was thy King, to be no
King to thee: Bellarm. in Barcl. c. 3.
. 377. The Sovereign power of the Parliament is perfect without the King for
all Parliament ary Acts. -- It is false, that to an Act of Parliamentary
Supremacy the consent of the King is required. -- More false is it, that the
King has a Negative voice in Parliament. P. 68. Kings go not as heritage from
father to son.

Baxter, Commonwealth: ( printed 1659.) p. 420. to 425. How good a friend Mr.
Baxter has been to our late and our present King, let the Reader judge by all
these his words, and by his deeds: and then conclude how little he deserves his
Prince's favor: who yet can plead for it for himself and his tribe, and take
it ill if it be denied them. Ib. p. 485, 486. I spoke much (says he) to blow
the coals. -- I encouraged many thousands to that War.
Though a Nation wrong their King, yet may he not lawfully war against the
public good on that account, nor any help him in such a war, -- A war raised
against the body of a Nation, is by them to be construed to be against the
common good. No war therefore against the body of a Nation by Prince or People,
can be lawful. -- He that puts himself into a garb of hostility, is nor to be
trusted to for mercy, but when there is no other remedy. -- If Princes injury [
from the people] be too great to be born, they may lay down their Crowns at
pleasure, -- If the Nation injuriously deprive themselves of a Worthy Prince,
the hurt will be their own: but if it be necessarily to their welfare, it is no
injury to him. -- Though some injury to the King be the occasion of the War, it
is the duty of all the people to defend the Commonwealth against him, so as
that they protest against that injury. They resist no true authority in
resisting him that warreth against the Commonwealth. P. 480. It cannot be a
just War that is made against the Parliament by the King. -- If I had known the
Parliament had been the beginners, and in most fault, yet the ruin of our
Representatives is a punishment greater than Any fault of theirs against a King
can from him deserve: and their faults cannot disoblige me from defending the
Commonwealth. P. 484. I am bound to submit to the present Government [ in the
year 1659.] as set over us by God, and to obey for conscience sake, and to
behave my self as a Loyal Subject toward them. P. 486. If such a War [
speaking of our late Civil War] could not be prevented, I must take the same
side as then I did. And my judgment tells me, that if I should do otherwise, I
should be guilty of Treason or disloyalty against the Sovereign Power of the
land, and of perfidiousness to the Commonwealth. P. 488. If I had taken up
Arms against the Parliament in that War, my conscience tells me I had been a
Traitor, and guilty of resisting the Highest Powers Mr. Baxter, when at his
Ordination he took the Oath of Supremacy ( which is Law) thus swore, I do
declare in my Conscience, that the King's Highness is the Sea also Artic. of ou
Church, 37 And Can. and 36 and 55
Only supreme Governor of this Realm and of all other his Dominions, as well
in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or Causes as Temporal: -- And do
promise from henceforth I shall bear true Allegiance to the King's Highness,
his Heirs and Lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all
Jurisdictions, privileges, praeeminences and authorities granted or belonging
to the King's Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of this Realm. Whether Mr. Baxter has been true to his Oath,
let his words and deeds testify. In this Oath, ( Popish Pri^^ciples, p.4^
says our present Bishop of Lincoln) We swear that the King is the Only Supreme
Governor: Supreme, and so none above him: and Only Supreme, and so none
coordinate or equal to him. So that by our known Laws our King is Solo Deo
minor, invested with such a Supremacy as excludes both Pope and People and all
the World, God Almighty only excepted, from having any power, jurisdiction or
authority over him. [ See his Proofs from the Laws p. 5. to 8.] I add, Stat. 13
Car. 2. c. 1. It is enacted, that if any person shall maliciously and advisedly
affirm, that both or either Houses of Parliament have a Legislative power
without the King, he shall incur the penalty of a Fremunire mentioned in the
Stat. of 16 Rich. 2. And it is also there declared, that all Ordinances of both
or either Houses of Parliament for imposing of Oaths, Covenants or Engagements,
Levying of Taxes, or Raising of Forces and Arms, to which the Royal Assent
either in Person or by Commission was not expressly had or given, were in the
very first creation and making, and still are, and so shall be taken to be null
and void to all intents and purposes whatsoever. And Stat. 13. Car. 2. c. 6.
and Stat. 14. c. 3. it is declared, that within all his Majesty's Realms and
Dominions the sole Supreme Government, Command and Disposition of the Militia,
and of all Forees by Sea and Land, and of all Forts and Places of strength is
and ever was the undoubted Right of his Majesty, and his Royal Predecessors,
Kings and Queens of England, and that both or either Houses of Parliament
cannot nor ought to pretend to the same, nor can nor lawfully may raise or levy
any War, Offensive or Defensive, against his Majesty, his Heirs or lawful
Successors. And Stat. 13. Car. 2. c. 1. and Stat. 14. c. 4. it is declared,
that it is not lawful upon Any pretense whatsoever to take Arms against the
King: and that the position of taking Arms by His Authority against His Person,
or against those that are Commissionated by Him, is Traiterous. And long
before, 25. Edw. 3. Stat. 5. c. 2. it is declared High Treason to levy War
against the King, or to adhere to his enemies within the Realm, giving them aid
or comfort.
.

Eutactus Philodemius, Origin of Civil Power ( printed 1649.) p. 32. There is
no reason why an office of so great trust as the government of a Kingdom should
be Hereditary, in respect of the miserable effects that must ensue.

Regal Tyranny: ( Printed 1647.) p. 38. Though the King be the Supreme Officer
(which is all and the most he is) yet he is not the Supreme Power; for the
absolute supreme power is the people in general, made up of every individual;
and the legal and formal supreme power is only their Commissioners, their
Collective or Representative body chosen by them, and assembled in Parliament.
P. 43. The House of Lords are mere Usurpers and Incroachers, and were never
entrusted by the People with any Legislative power; who merely sit by the
King's Prerogative, which is a mere shadow, and in truth nothing at all, there
being no Law-making power in Himself, but merely and only at the most a
Law-executing power; who by his Coronation Oath is bound to pass and assent to
All such Laws as his People or Commons shall choose. P. 57. It is scarce
possible to commit that act of Tyranny that Charles Stuart is not guilty of:
and therefore de jure he has absolved all his people from their Allegiance and
Obedience to him. P. 61. It is lawful in the sight of God as well as man for a
people to withdraw their Obedience to that Magistrate, or King, that refuses
to govern them by legal justice; but oppresses them contrary to the end of the
trust reposed in him. P. 85. Only the legal Commissioners of the people,
commonly called the Commons of England have an original and true power to erect
judicatures, and not the King, who is not to give a law unto his people, but
his people unto him. P. 92. Our House of Peers are no legal Judicature at all,
nor have any true Legislative or Law-making power at all in them, having never
in the least derived it from the people, the true Legislators and Fountain of
power, from whom only and alone must be fetched all derivative power that can
be esteemed just. -- Up with the pretended power of the Lords by the roots, and
let them sit no longer as they do, unless they will put themselves upon the
power of their Country, to be freely thereby chosen as their Commissioners to
sit in Parliament: for in right all their actions now are unbinding and invalid.

I have now satisfied my design in producing these Principles, which are
apparently Seditious and Rebellious, and Pernicious to our Government: and the
iniquity of them is therefore as apparent. Let all that love Truth and
Righteousness, Peace and Loyalty, pray they may never spread, and we may never
feel their sad effects.

Almighty God! so rule the heart of our Sovereign Lord and Supreme Governor
King Charles, that He knowing whose Minister he is, may above all things seek
thy honor and glory: And grant that all his Subjects, duly considering whose
Authority he has, may faithfully serve, honor, and humbly obey him, in thee,
and for thee, according to thy blessed word and ordinance, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Amen.
FINIS.

