DAVID'S ZEAL FOR ZION.

A SERMON Preached before sundry of the Honorable House of Commons:

At St. Margarets at Westminster, April 4. By THO: WILSON Preacher of the Word
at Otham in KENT.

LONDON, Printed for John Bartlet, and are to be sold at the Gilt Cup near S.
Austins Gate, in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, Sir EDWARD DERING, of Sarendon-Dering, in the County
of Kent, Knight and Baronet.
SIR,
IT is Bernards Bern. Ep. 91.
saying, Nemo esse bonus plusquam oporter potest; There is not a man alive can
be better then he should be; and it is without doubt he is not good, who would
not be better: Ubi incipis nolle fieri melior, ibi etiam desinis esse bonus;
adding they be professedly the children of the lukewarm, who say, We will be
no better then our Fathers: Nolumus esse meliores quam patres nostri; whereas
men are in Religion not to be stinted by any Antiquity, but what is divine from
God the Ancient of days. The children of light be proficients, they reach
forward, their spark comes to be a coal, their coal a most vehement flame;
God has kindled in your breast an ardent love to the house of God, your zeal
provokes many, your zeal makes many a glad heart, your zeal honors God, who
has put honor upon you: For them that honor him, he will honor. Your
present employment in the honorable House of Commons in Parliament, calls for
zeal: It is a fire, 1. Active, to set all on work, the hand, the tongue, the
head, the heart. 2. Quick, speedy; it is an utter enemy of delays in its work.
3. Vehement; it bestows the top of affection, and strength of intentions on
what it loves. 4. Aspiring; it is the highest element, mounts up nearer heaven,
nearer the Lord. Anciently, they who published Books were wont to honor
Personages with the patronage of that, which they found them to be lovers or
professors of; To whom then may this present word of zeal (which once you
heard with patience) be Dedicated more properly, then unto you? Whose abilities
in conjunction with zeal, graced with magnanimity, and modesty, render you
amiable to all that know you, and honorable in minds that hear of you. I
humbly pray your acceptance of this my memorizing your zeal for Zion; You
read not here swelling words of vanity, my study was to be not plausible but
profitable; Nos autem qui rerum magis quam verborum amatores, utilia potius
quam plausibilia sectamur: Salvian. praef. in lib. de Gubern.
This I present you withal, to deliver my self from suspicion and imputation
of an unthankful mind toward you, who countenanced me with a in your first
speech in Parliament, when I was pursued by a Pu^sevant from the Archbishop of
Cant. for not reading the prayer against Scots, etc.
mention too honorable for me, when I was in contempt; who testify my respect
to you much honored of good men for well-doing: Others zeal would have
consumed me, but that your zeal Ps. 119. 139.
consumed you; for I have seen God in you, yet I have a greater bond of deeper
acknowledgement of your zeal, then your many favors to me-ward amount unto,
which is the faithful discharge of that place the Country has most worthily
put upon you, and entrusted you withal; wherein your forwardness for the good
of the Church (the welfare whereof is above my chief joy) has been to my
comfort, has warmed many a heart, and has occasioned thanksgiving by many
unto God. The fruit of true wisdom is credit and confidence, Eccl. 8. 1. A
man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the boldness of his face shall be
changed, as faultlesse and fearlesse. Adorn your personal sufficiencies with
the true fear of God, a wise man's treasure, a zealous forwardness for Gods
glory, goodness, and good causes, whereby your public employment may be
blessed: Keep good conscience, the dearest jewel your heart can have in it;
Hold a constant countermotion to the course of the world; mind the life of
grace as that which far excels all ornaments of nature, art, or policy, that
it animates and ennobles them. What you do for God, do it by his Word, all
Laws are to be rectified by Gods Law, men must set their Watch by the Dyall,
and the Dyall by the Sun. This way the more you labor, the more rest will you
find. Thus with my unfeigned prayers to the God of all grace, 1 Thessalonians. 3. 13.
That he may establish your heart unblamable in holiness, and guiding you by
his counsel, may after receive you to glory.

Otham, in Kent. Your Worships Petitioner to the Throne of Grace, THO: WILSON.

DAVID'S ZEAL FOR ZION: A SERMON, Preached at WESTMINSTER, April 4. 1641.
PSALM. LXIX. IX. The zeal of thy house has eaten me up.
THis Book of Praises and spiritual Songs was penned by diverse men: This is
evident by the various arguments in it; It is the breviary of the Bible, the
anatomy of conscience, the art of prayer.

This Psalm, inspired of God, was writ by David's royal pen, who was both the
father and figure of Christ. Communis est Psalmus (...)Davidis. (...) Christi.
(...) Ecclesiae. Iun. Paral. in loc.
It is not purely proper to either Christ or David, but common both to David
and Christ, with his Church. To David typically, to Christ truly, to the Church
prophetically.

The Psalm contains A Petition. A Reason.

I. A Petition, most humbly requesting God, 1 By supplication, to be delivered
from manifold troubles, called waters: Save me O God, Verse. 1. 2. By
imprecation, with pureness of spirit, against persecutors, Let their table
become a snare, etc. Verse 22.
II. A reason of his request, mentioned in many verses. One ground of it was,
the nature of his cause; his cause was good, he suffered for his love to God.
For, The Zeal of thy house has eaten me up, Verse 9.

The zeal. Zelus est affectus mixtus ex amore, dolor.
Zeal comes (...), to be fervent, as hot as fire: it is not any single
affection, but the earnestness and increase of all the affections, liking or
disliking, as love and hatred, grief and joy, desires, delights, fears, and
anger, boiled to the highest degree, and to the hottest temper and intention.


1 It is set against evil, as sin and sinners, with all that which opposes
Gods will and glory, with kindled anger and indignation. 2 It is carried
toward goods, as Gods Word and Glory, Name and Worship (and not our own ends)
with all eagerness. Zelus est impetus mentis erga gloriam Dei and cultum
divinum.

Of thy house. Gods house, not his own house, or his own name and honor: he
was moved not so much with his own injuries and contumelies, more private; as
with that which was more public.

1 He had indignation for the Church corrupted, the worship of God polluted,
his law violated, and the things of God unworthily handled. 2 He had a studious
care and ardent love to have the true religion taught and professed, the right
worship of God established and preserved holy and pure from superstition,
error and corruption in worship and worshippers, that they may be Saints, and
not profane.
Me, may be meant properly and simply both of David and Christ.

Eaten up. (...)ab (...)comedit, consumpsit.
Consumed or devoured, as the fire fully burnt up the fat of some sacrifices
(as their peace offerings) it was wholly the Lords: so the zeal of Gods house
burnt up David, he was fully for it.

The words show a pious man's study: He is zealous, 1 In the object, and matter
of it, Gods house. 2 In the effect, and nature of it, it eats him up.


A man thoroughly religious is truly zealous for Gods Church. Doctrine.
Witness David a figure of Christ, and Christ the Son of David, of whom it
is written, and the Disciples remembered it was written, The zeal Zeal consists
of thy house has eaten me up, John 2. 17.

1 In removing what is prejudicial to Gods glory.
Zealous in removing, (according as God has called and enabled every man) in
purging out and opposing with depth of detestation, what is corrupt, and
contrary to Gods will, and prejudicial to his glory, revenging his dishonor:
Thus Jesus found in the temple those that sold oxen, and sheep, and doves, and
the changers of money sitting, and when he had made a scourge of small cords,
he drove them all out of the temple, and the sheep, and the oxen, and powered
out the changers money, and overthrew the tables, and said unto them that sold
doves, Take these things hence, make not my fathers house an house of
merchandise, John 2. 14, 15, 16. A most heroical act of Christ; beholding the
Temple most corrupt, Verse 14. He swept the house, Verse 15. moved with the
great care and zeal of his fathers house, Verse 16.

1 Persons, vicious ministers or members.
Persons to be removed, as enemies to Christ, men of false callings, not
warranted of God, pretending divine right, which cannot be demonstrated out of
his Word: Men to be dealt withal as polluted priests; these sought their
register among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found,
therefore were they as polluted, put from the priesthood, Ezra 2. 62. Let them
be dealt withal as God would have it, For the wickedness of their doings, I
will drive them out of my house, Hosea 9. 15. Idolatrous priests were no more
to minister in the Priests office. Men that once prosessed themselves for God,
who fell to idols, and by their example and counsel caused others to fall to
sin, should bear their shame, their sin, but never come near God in their
office any more, as it is recorded in the Prophet, because they (the Levites
gone away far from God) ministered unto them, before their idols, and (as
stumbling-blockes) caused the house of Israel to fall into iniquity, therefore
have I lift up my hand against them, says the Lord God, and they shall bear
their iniquity, and they shall not come near unto me, to do the office of a
Priest unto me, nor come near unto any of my holy things in the most holy
place: but they shall bear their shame and their abominations which they have
committed, Ezekiel 44. 12, 13. After this manner did renowned Nehemiah,
cleansed the chambers, and chased out the wicked corrupters, who relates it
thus: I understood of the evil that Eliashib did for Tobiah, in preparing him
a chamber in the Courts of the house of God, Nehemiah 13. 7. And it grieved me
sore, therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the
chamber, Verse 8. Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers, Verse 9.
And one of the sons of Iojada, the son of Eliashib the High Priest, was
son in law to Sanballat the Horonite, therefore I chased him from me, Verse
28.

It is to be provided, that holy things may be kept from profanation; Give not
that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swine, lest
they trample them under feet, and turn again and rent you, Matthew. 7. 6. Aim
at conformity with that new Jerusalem, on earth, into which there shall in no
wise enter any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination, or
makes a lie, Revel. 21. 27. Men are to be without, that be not fit for a
congregation of the Lords people, but the blemish of our Church. For without
are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves
and makes a lie, Verse. 22.

2 Doctrines erroneous and unsound.
Doctrines to be opposed, unsound and corrupt doctrines be hateful and to be
hated. This was good in languishing Ephesus, she hated poysonfull doctrines:
Christ says, This thou have, thou hate the deeds of the Nicolaitans, which I
also hate, Revel. 2. 6. Thou have tried them which say they are Apostles, and
are not, and have found them liers, in regard of their errors and false
doctrine, Verse. 2. Doctrines that oppose Gods free grace, as if it were no
grace, Romans 11. 6. which exalt man's free will, as if God did not work the
will, Phil. 2. 13. which teach the apostasy of Saints, Who are kept by the
power of God through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. and others like vented
and printed, are not to be permitted: Thyatira was checked for such a
permission. Christ will have no such toleration. I (says he) have a few
things against thee, because thou suffer that woman Iezabel, which calls
her self a prophetess, to teach and to seduce my servants, to commit
fornication, and to eat things sacrificed to idols, Revel. 2. 20. (...),
praete. doctrinam, Trem, interpr.
Christians are to avoid what is contrary to, or besides the doctrine of
Christ, as very offensive, and the cause of divisions and offenses. The Doctor
of the Gentiles told the Romans, how to mark them which cause divisions and
offenses, contrary to the doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them, Romans
16. 17.

3 Worship corrupt and idolatrous.
Worship to be purged out: What is false, superstitious, idolatrous, spiritual
adulteries, adoration of creatures, Altars, worshipping wood, images, and
names, the images of things, invocation of Saints, praying about and for the
dead, and all other appearances and practices of evil. Gods jealousy is
against image-making, or any likeness to adore, bow to, or serve. Thou shall
not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in
heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under
the earth; thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve them: for I
the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon
the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that hate me, Exodus
20. 45. An Idolater,
Where is forbid, 1 Material, is the artificer.
To make an image for religious worship: 2 Formal, he that worships the idol.
To worship it. In all idolatry the devil is worshipped. The things which the
Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to devils, and not to God, 1 Cor. 10. 20.
Should not all fellowship with devils be detested and renounced? I would not
that ye should have fellowship with devils. To worship before a thing with
reference to a thing, is to worship that thing. (...).
To worship before me, Luke 4. 7. is to worship me, Matthew. 4. 9. The children
are to plead with their mother, to put away her idolatries; and it is no more
than duty to do it. Plead with your mother, plead, she only is faulty, for she
is not my wife, neither am I her husband: Let her therefore put away her
whoredoms out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts, Hos.
2. 2.

1 In the substance of worship.
In the substance of worship, it is false and corrupt, by mingling men's
traditions and inventions, with Christ's commands and institutions, which is a
vain worship: In vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrine the
commandments of men, Matthew. 15. 9. To frustrate Gods law, and put it by, by
this means. For laying aside the commandment of God, ye hold the tradition of
men, as the washing of pots and cups, and many other such like things ye do,
Mat. 7. 8. Full well ye reject the commandment of God, that ye may keep your
own tradition, Verse 9.

It is thus when men by constitutions make their inventions as thresholds,
without which you cannot enter into a house, into the Church, to any office or
ordinance, or as posts which uphold a house, without which the Church will fall
and go down. They have defiled my holy name, says the Lord, in their setting
of their thresholds by my thresholds, and their posts by my posts, Ezekiel. 43. 8.

2 In the circumstance of worship.
In the external form and circumstance, many superstitions be to be cast out,
injunctions not of God, not good, after the doctrines and commandments of men,
Col. 2. 22. to which a Christian redeemed by Christ has no reason to be
subject, if ye be (...) with Christ from the rudiments of the world, Why as
though living in the world are ye subject to ordinances? Coloss. 2. verse. 20.
Many additions, gestures, now standing, now kneeling, are not necessary, but
cumbersome, not to be tolerated any more than diminutions, or mutations, and
alterations in Gods worship, Whatsoever I command you, observe to do it, thou
shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it, Deuteronom. Chap. 12. Verse. 32.
Gods Word is perfect, to teach us what to know, and what to do, and lackes not
a jot, nor a tittle, Matthew. Chap. 5. Verse. 18. The least commands to an iota,
or a tittle, are to be religiously observed, and the least additions by the
same reason are to be rejected, Mat. Chap. 5. Verse. 19. Away with all imagery,
which provokes God to be gone from his Sanctuary. Let every image of jealousy
be scene as an abomination. and cast out as a provocation, Ezekiel. Chap. 8. Verse.
5, 6. That as we justly abhor the Romish harlet, let us not wear her
favor, but deface and detest all her trumpery, as the Lords Prophet told the
people of the Lord, Ye shall defile the covering of thy graven images of
silver, and the ornaments of thy molten images of gold; thou shall cast them
away as a menstruous cloth, thou shall say unto it, Get thee hence, Isa. Chap.
30. Verse. 22. Thus the thoroughly religious is to be truly zealous in Gods
Church, to remove, purge out, and oppose vicious persons, erroneous doctrines,
superstitious worship.

2 2 In promoting Gods glory.
Zealous in promoting Gods glory with intension of affection, and fervency in
all good services for the house of the Lord, to establish all in it aright:
This was in an eminent manner and measure in Nehemiah, whom the zeal of Gods
house did eat upon. Remember me O my God concerning this, and wipe not out my
good deeds or kindnesses that I have done for the house of my God, and for the
offices thereof, Nehem. 13. 14.

1 In persons.
In persons who are to be in the house of God.

1 Ministers qualified.
Ministers to be countenanced and continued to labor in word and doctrine, to
stand and minister before the Lord. When good Hezekiah beheld how the fathers
before him had shut up the doors of the porch, he opened the doors of the
house of the Lord: they had put out the lamps, he brought in the Priests, that
religion might be restored, hear him telling his purpose of heart, Now it is
in my heart to make a covenant with the Lord God of Israel, that his fierce
wrath may turn away from us, 2 Chronicles. 29. 10. He animateth the Priests, my
sons, be not now negligent, for the Lord has chosen you to stand before him,
to serve him, and that you should minister unto him and burn incense, Verse
10. These must be sent, have a good call: How shall they preach except they be
sent? Romans 10. 15. Well qualified persons, apt to teach the Word of God with
prudence and utterance, 1 Timothy 3. 2. Able, well furnished with necessary
abilities to instruct others, 2 Timothy 2. 2. Virtuous in conversation, showing
themselves patterns of good works, Titus 2. 7. Lovers of good men, sober,
just, holy, temperate, 1. 8.

2 Members sanctified.
Members, to be men sanctisied to perform duties, and to partake of what is
holy: Men should be sanctified, and that sufficiently; for they could not keep
the Passover, because they had not sanctified themselves sufficiently, 2 Chronicles. 30. 3. Men upon whom is writ, Holiness to the Lord, Zechar. 14. 20. But
the Ganaanite is to be no more in the house of the Lord, Verse 21. Without
shall be the uncircumcised and the unclean. God is in the assembly of his
Saints, Psalm. 89. 7. God promises to dwell in Zion, his holy mountain, then
shall Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no stranger pass through her any
more, Joel 3. 17. It is sure, men that are to be members, are to profess
holiness: and it is as true, they should be as they profess, Saints be
calling, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Gods way is called a way of holiness, the unclean shall
not pass over it, Isay 35. 8.

2 In doctrines.
In doctrines, zeal contends for truth, and strives for the faith of the
Gospel, Jude v. 3. It was needful to exhort you, that you should earnestly
contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the Saints. Paul's care was,
that the truth of the Gospel might abide with the Church, Gal. 2. 5. and would
not give place to them (the false brethron, Verse 4.) no not for an hour.
Constantia in doctrina, seu in veritate, hic est balthcus ille, Zanch. in loc.
It is truth is the ornament of man's speech and profession. Truth beautifieth
men's dealings; and is not truth the glory of religion? It is a girdle, Ephesians.
6. 14.

In worship. 3 In worship.
The zeal of Elias is as needful as not able, who was jealous for the Lord of
hosts, to behold what was done in Israel, 1 King. 19. 10. (...) was in the
worship, nor peace to the worshippers of God.

I. In the substance 1 In the substance, three things instanced in.
and inward form, that all Gods worship be in spiritual means and true
manner, with all purity; They that worship God, must worship him in spirit and
truth, John 4. 24.

1 Preaching the Word of life and salvation. It is the way of Gods good
pleasure to save men, albeit wittals call it foolishness, 1 Corinthians. 1. 21. It
is Christ's institution, established by his commission, Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark Chap. 16. Verse 15. 2
Reading the Scriptures, not omitting them for Apocryphals. Is not that order
with some disgrace to Gods Spirit, which excepts certain Books and Chapters
which be least edifying, and might best be spared, and therefore be left
unread? It was not so of old, when Moses had in every city them that preach
him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day, Acts 15. Verse. 21. 3
Prayer in the Holy Ghost, as the Church is charged to pray, Jude Verse. 20.
customary forms of prayer removed, would cause an unworthy, unable and dumb
Ministry to fall to the earth; and continued, bring most of men to rest in
the iniquity of the last and perilous times, a powerless form of godliness
to be shunned, 2 Timothy 3.1, 5. Christ who commends prayer according to the will
of God, condemns vain repetition in prayer, Matthew. 6. 7. Gods house is a
house of prayer, but not for chopping and changing, Mat. 21. 12, 13. Men for
the Ministry should be as studious in praying as preaching, and give
themselves to prayer, and to the Ministry of the Word, they had not the heart
of them who rest in a prayer given to them, Acts Chap. 6. Verse. 4.
II. In the circumstance 2 In the circumstance.
and external form: Let all things be done decently and in order, not
intending the inventing of any new thing, but the performing of what Christ
instituted, in a manner come by, and consentaneous to the dignity of holy
ordinances of the Lord, 1 Corinthians. 14. 40. And that is in that general rule,
that all be done for time, place and persons, as is most to edification, Verse
26. Thus the man thoroughly religious will be truly zealous for the Church of
God, in promoting in it persons, materials for it, Ministers qualified, members
sanctified, doctrines true and wholesome, worship pure and spiritual, which
believed as truth, will help us both by Information, and Exhortation.

I Zeal in and for true religion is a praiseworthy thing. Inform.
1 Zeal is commendable.
Was David zealous? it may then become a royal spirit. Was Christ our Savior
zealous? it may become an heroical spirit. Albeit zeal is out of grace with
most men, who sit still, and love to be at quiet rest; yet it is no disgrace to
any generous spirit that is regenerate, to have the zeal of Gods house to eat
him up. It is a slander to call it folly: Was not zealous David wiser than his
teachers, than his enemies, than the aged? Lukewarm men call it fury; Gods
Spirit names it a live-coale, that has a most vehement flame. Why bears zeal
the imputation of indiscretion, rashness, puritanisme or headiness? Was it
David's rashness? It was fervency in religion. Was Christ indiscreet? The
wisdom of his Father. Festus called Paul mad, with a loud voice, Acts 26. 24.
when he spoke but words of truth and soberness, verse 25. Christ's kinsmen
thought he was beside himself, Mar. 3. 21. Was the judgment of such solid men
any disparagement to our Saviors zeal? Nay, it is a commendation to root out
evil from, and to establish good in the house of God, is a good thing, Gal. 4.
18.

2 Zeal is not only in and for things civil.
All a man's care, who is religious indeed, is not to be for civil affairs,
immunities and societies, (things in their order and measure to be minded)
David was zealous for Gods house; for Zion, as well as Jerusalem; for religion,
as well as righteousness. Men's spirits must be more stirred in them for the
Church of Chirst, his house, than their own houses. As many men's industry and
activenesse is for great buildings, great matches, great housekeeping, and
their own famous names, their inward thought is that their houses shall
continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations, Psalm. 49. 11.
but while they run every man to his own house, the house of God lies wast,
Hag. 1. 9. A pious man's greatest care is, that (whatever become of him and his
liberty, credit, or creature comforts) vile persons that speak villainy, may
have their mouths stopped, the vain and profane persons that pollute the
ordinances may be censured, the doctrines of devils may be condemned, the
worship idolatrous and corrupt, may be no more in the house of the Lord, but be
removed and cast out, that Pastors after Gods own heart may be established to
feed the Lords flock, that they that fear the Lord, may dwell in his house,
that the truth of doctrine may be continued and confirmed among us, that the
purity of discipline (a sacred way of promoting the Gospel, without which all
Christ's Kingdom and Gospel is not received) very necessary to the condition
of the Church, Christ's care was not to be great in this world, but for the
truth, his fathers house, will, and glory.
may be introduced, that the instituted worship of God may be continued in his
Church, in a holy and spiritual manner, without worthless and witless
innovations, and wicked inventions of men of corrupt minds, destitute of the
truth, that a man may say as David, The zeal of thy house has eaten me up:
thus those victorious martyrs were willing to lay down, as not loving their
lives, for the word, the truth which they held and believed, Rev. 12. 11.

3 Men thoroughly religious, being truly zealous, we learn, It is irreligious
Lukewarmnesse is irreligious,
to be lukewarm, neuters, time-servers, indifferent men, for all companies
and religions, middle-men between truth and error, between Christ and
Antichrist, between holiness and profaneness, untrue in religion, without
love or zeal to God, as was the lukewarm Angel of Laodicea. Mixed worship is
under a commination, God will stretch out his hand upon them that swear by the
Lord, and that swear by Malcham, Zeph. 1. 5. God abhorres mixtures now as much
as then. It is a defilement to sow a vineyard with diverse seeds, doctrines of
Christ, and traditions of men. Saints and believers not mixed with scandalous
infidels and idolaters, Deuteronomy. 22. 9. But the pure worship kept from
superstitions: Men may not be linsey-woolsey professors, not plow with an Ox
and an Ass; those in the Lords plow must not be mixed of the clean and
unclean, laborers and loyterers, of the servants of Christ and Antichrist,
Verse 10, 11. Men may not be keycold Gallioes in religion, a deputy that would
not meddle in such matters, and cared for none of those things, Acts 18. 12, 17.

This indifferency brings great judgments, if men repent not, it unchurches a
people, a Church by it may prove no Church, it removes the candlestick, and
sets Mahomet where the candlestick stood, Rev. 2. 5. Yea God abhorres
lukewarmenesse as most loathsome, he will spue them out of his mouth, as
Laodicea, as the Historians testify, was swallowed up in an earthquake, we
were near going in 88. near a blow by the Powder Treason: and how nigh was our
trouble these two last years? 1639, 1640.
and Gods hand lift up, as if there were with us but a sport, as once Abners
men and Ioabs, to play Scots and English. Ely his remissness in dealing with
his sons (an impure pair of Priests) ruined his house, 1 Samuel 2. Verse. 23,
29, 31. God is not pleased with neuters, neither shall the lukewarm dwell in
his presence.

4 Viciousness of men's spirits.
In that a man thoroughly religious is truly zealous for Gods Church, Learn the
viciousness of men's spirits, and the naughtiness of diverse sorts.

1 Who blame zeal in good and for good, 1 Who blame zeal, miscalling it.
as a thing disgraceful and sinful. The devil and his imps never wanted
names, to discover and deliver their spite and spirit against zeal, alas what
has zeal done!

1 It is sedition, an enemy to government, as inconsistent with royal laws,
cries Haman, a fit accuser (whose word is no slander) but an unjust judge in
this point. Haman said unto King Ahashuerus, There is a certain people
scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people, in all the provinces of thy
kingdom, and their laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the
Kings laws: Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them, Esther
Chap. 3. Verse 8. Zeal in piety is said to trouble the country, whereas
iniquity and luke-warmnesse ruins all; as Ahab sinned, and Elias is blamed:
Well did Elias retort it to him, Not I, but thou have troubled Israel, 1 King.
Chap. 18. Verse. 17, 18. 2 It is singularity and odnesse: but till a man seem
odd to the world, he is never right in religion and righteousness, in piety
and sincerity: A man must do more than others,(...)Mat. 5. 47. It was well for
Noah, that he was a singular man in a sober and sincere singularity, when the
flood swept away the world of the ungodly: and is it now proved bad to excel
in following holiness, and approving things that are excellent? Or is it only
the safe way to do as most do, and perish in the broad way, and not rather to
go in the narrow way to life, which few find? Matthew. 7. 13, 14. 3 It is
heresy, to receive and follow the truth of Gods fiery Law and everlasting
Gospel, in the days of Paul they called it heresy; to preach the faith, to
defend the faith, to keep the truth, is by men of an antichristian spirit
called heresy; and men that keep the commands of God, and the faith of Jesus,
condemned as heretical, Acts 24. 14. 4 It is schism to depart from the
unhallowed, crooked, cursed ways of unblest men. If men for peace of
conscience, and desire to please, and not offend God, would make Gods law, and
not men's lusts, their rule, and so to walk humbly with God, walk not in the
ways of men, and save themselves from the untoward generation, they are
presently accused of pestilent schism, the devils scarcrow to keep men from
zeal in religion, and forwardness in godliness, Acts 28. 22.
2 Who are zealous against Gods house six ways.
Who are zealous against the zealous, and the house of God, as men set on fire
of hell: It was once Paul's sin and misery, concerning zeal, persecuting the
Church, Phil. 3. 6. As the serpents mouth has a flood (aspersions, reproaches,
accusations, edicts, and orders) to cast after the woman (the Church of Christ)
Rev. 12. 15. Satan has still instruments full of fire and fury against the
house of the Lord.

1 Quenching all Zeal in preaching Christ, (...)
as the High Priest and his accomplices, filled with zeal and indignation, put
the blessed Apostles in the common goal for preaching, Acts 5. 17, 18. being
as fraid of it as they are of fire, one spark they think would set all in a
flame, Verse. 24. There be men who put preaching of Christ, and teaching of the
people among their grievances: They were grieved that they taught the people,
Acts 4. 2. crying out of such as unsufferable, as they to Paul, Away with such
a fellow from the earth, it is not fit (most able judges) that he should live,
Acts 22. 22. Forbidding men to preach in Christ's name, and Christ's words, as
the very enemies of men's salvation, 1 These. 2. 16. they would have us blind,
and muzzle our mouths: except they may be soothed and smoothed, men must be
turned out of their places, as hindrances in their way, Ministers must turn
out of the path, Gods way cast up, and our way to walk in, and may not preach
sincere sanctification and mortification, but Constitutions and Canons. Thus
they did to the Prophets before us, They say to the Seers see not, and to the
Prophets, prophecy not unto us right things; speak unto us smooth things,
prophecy deceits, get you out of the way, turn aside out of the path, Cause
the holy one of Israel to cease from before us, Isa. 30. 10, 11. How many have
been made to forsake their allegiance and fealty to Christ our King, and break
their vows of obedience to him, they gave the Nazarites wine to drink, and
commanded the Prophets, saying, Prophecy not, Amos 2. 12. 2 Censuring hearing
of Gods Word, as the great transgression in people, who are to hear it as they
would be saved, as it is read, The next Sabbath day came almost all the city
together to hear the Word of God, but when the Jews saw the multitude, they
were filled with envy, Acts 13. 44, 45. Men are eaten up with envy at hearers
of Sermons, who wait on the Word of the Lord, albeit men that reject his
commands be vexed by God, yet they who hear his commands be vexed by men, as
if they were no ordinary malefactors. 3 Crying down all prayer, unless given
to men, and prescribed by a powerless, prayerlesse Canon and Order, which a
gracious heart finds empty and heartlesse; as once that decree, Whosoever shall
ask a petition of any God or man, for thirty days, save of thee O King, he
shall be cast into the den of Lions, Dan. 6. 7. O men greatly in love with
prayer! An order a godly man had rather lose his life (as well as liberty) than
follow: Daniel he kneeled upon his knees three times a day, and prayed and gave
thanks before his God, as he did before time, Dan. 6. 10. Men of Atheistical
spirits have twitted conceived prayer as extemporary, and scornfully called it
prayer by the spirit. 4 Throwing down the things of God, as in elder time was
complained of by Elias, They have thrown down thine altars, 1 King. 19. 10.
1 Rejecting Christ's doctrine, men cannot away with it, the second commandment
is cast out by vain superstitions, and the fourth commandment is violated by
profane sports, of whom it is true the Prophet speaks, They have rejected the
Word of the Lord, Ier. 8. 9. 2 Despising Christ's discipline, whereby scandals
might be prevented or removed, that men might set up their own dominion, that
they may be Lords in the Church over Gods heritage, whereas his government is
not by any man or men at their pleasure to be taken away, diminished or
changed; they refuse his government, saying, We will not have this man to
reign over us, Luke 19. 14. 5 Disdaining Gods glory, by small ones judged
silly ones, they (the chief Priests) saw the children crying, Hosanna to the
son of David, they were sore displeased, though it was according to
Scripture, and for Gods praise, by babes, Mat. 21. 15, 16. The multitude, which
then was no multitude, acknowledged Christ whom they dishonored, Mat. 21. 9.
How many have a flouting spirit, when young ones or mean ones have Christ's Word
dwell richly in them: as many worthies of the Lord wandered in sheep skins and
goat skins, men here afflicted and destitute. 6 Conspiring to hinder
reformation of the house of the Lord. If any good be undertaken for religion,
for holiness, pure worship, or Christ's government in his house, with what
opposition is it contraried? Men are, as of old, full of wrath, indignation,
and mockery, as Sanballat and others conspired against Jerusalem, to hinder the
building of the wall, and the stopping of the breaches, Nehem. 4. v. 1, 2, 3,
7, 8. These men are zealously affected, but not well, as Gal. 4. 17. And shall
be ashamed for their envy at the people, Isay 26.11.
3 Who are zealous for traditions.
Who are not ashamed of zeal for traditions, ceremonies, superstitions,
unnecessary, burdensome, which have proved of no use to edify the Church, but
as nets, snares, and bands, to entangle and cumber the children of God in their
fathers house and service. Paul was once zealous exceedingly for the traditions
of his fathers, Gal. 1. 14. How many have placed the beauty of holiness, and
the glory of religion, in things devised by men, which can be no mean to
sanctify the worshippers? How forward have many been to contribute their best
assistance unto forbidden vanity? as they to idolatry: The children gather
wood, the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead their dough, to make
cakes to the Queen of heaven, and to power out drink offerings unto other
gods, Ier. 7. 18. Encouraging their fellows in and to idolatry, as those of
old animated one another, They helped every one his neighbor, and every one
said to his brother, Be of good courage: so the Carpenter encouraged the
Goldsmiths, and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote with the
anvill. Thus superstitions have been set up, Isay 41. 67. Some with their
tongues, loud in Pulpits; some with their pens, allowed in Presses; others with
their commands, forcible in their Courts; and not a few forward and obsequious,
have set to their hand, and all for superstitious vanities: Few places be so
happy, as to be without some zealots in these things, under well-liked names of
decency and order, to win credit to vile inventions; Whereas in religion we
must inquire, who, how good and great he is that requires it, and appoints it:
not as the devil turns it, into what, and of what quality, and how great and
decent the thing enjoined is, that we may know what to say, when God examines
our service, Who required this at your hand? Isa. 1. 12.

Receive the words of exhortation, 2 Exhort.
all that be thoroughly religious, to be truly zealous; Rest not in knowledge,
and good principles, but be heated with good affection, as well as taught; With
good light have good fire, have grace with your knowledge, and zeal with
religion; witty heads, and zealous hearts, as we are commanded, Be zealous,
Revel. 3. 19.

1 The persons to be zealous. 2 The properties of this zeal. 3 The means for
this zeal. 4 The motives to this zeal.
1 The persons to be zealous, the word is spoken to a mixed assembly, and is fit
for all: I would have none here sent away without fire.

1 People must be zealous. 2 Preachers 3 Magistrates

1 The people are to feed zeal: 1 People to be zealous in six things.
Zeal is good among them; It is good to be zealously affected, Gal. 4. 18.

1 In taking the kingdom of heaven by violence, as Israel took Canaan, by a
holy violence offered to the dullness of heart, and by withstanding spiritual
sloth, removing all impediments in the way, crowding in as in a great
concourse, pressing in and unto means of grace in their day, as a matter of
life, The kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by
force: Duty requires it, necessity urges it, it is for a kingdom, neglect it
not, Matthew. 11. 12. 2 In serving the Lord, doing his work with fervency, that
the hearts of men should burn within them, not be cold or lukewarm, but
fervent in spirit, in spirit serving the Lord, having a holy fire kindled on
the hearth, in the heart, Romans 12. 11. 3 In loving the house of God, minding
means of grace, and performing holy duties with spiritual affection,
delighted in God, and united to God, in whose house we find such satisfaction
and contentment, as David's zeal was, Lord I have loved the habitation of thy
house, and the place where thine honor dwells; his longings were after it,
to dwell in it, Psalm. 26. 8. 4 In exciting others with all earnestness and
importunity to seek the Lord, Call on your friends, kinsmen, neighbors, call
thy husband, thy child, thy servant, be enlarged in desire after men to seek
and serve the Lord, be not unnatural, uncivil, to mind goodness alone, but
be spiritual, have bowels of compassion to thy brother, to thy friend that
thou love as thy own soul, that they may have communion with God, and
comfort in the Lord, and access to the Lord, as well as thy self, as it is in
the Prophet, The inhabitants of one city shall go to another saying, Let us go
speedily to pray before the Lord, and to seek the Lord of hosts, I will go
also, Zechar. 8. 21. 5 In grieving for men's neglect of Gods Law, and the
dishonor that is done to God by disobedience. I beheld the transgressors and
was grieved, because they keep not thy word, Psalm. 119. 158. Rivers of waters
run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy laws: My zeal has even
consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 119. ver. 139. Thus Lot a just and an honest man was vexed passively by
sinners; and actively, voluntarily for sinners. Just Let was vexed with the
filthy conversation of the wicked: for that righteous man dwelling among them
(of Sodom and Gomorrha) in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from
day to day, with their unlawful deeds, 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. 6 In distributing
cheerfully to it, for the maintenance of the service of God, that God may be
honored with men's substance, as they for the tabernacle, they came every one
whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing, and
they brought the Lords offering to the work of the tabernacle of the
congregation, and for all his service, Exodus 35. 21. they were so forward in
erecting it, till an order was made for their restraint; so the people by Moses
command were restrained, for the stuff they had was sufficient, and too much
for it, Exodus 36. 6, 7. Ministering too, to the necessities of the Saints, as
Christ's members, in which the Corinthians were forward, and of exemplary zeal,
2 Corinthians. 9. 1, 2. the Apostle commended their zeal, which provoked very
many.
2 Preachers to be zealous in four^ things.
Preachers be to be zealous, not lukewarm, not cold, but as men touched with
a live coal from the altar, that the word of life die not in their mouths,
albeit Zeal and the power of the Ministry is not in words, nor a loud voice.
Thus was Isaiah touched by the Seraphim, Isay 6. 6, 7. Thus Jeremy found the
Word of the Lord as a fire, not to be kept in, Ier. 20. 9.

1 In preaching the word of God, constantly without looking back, and
diligently without weariness and sloth, out of love to the Church, to be as
bellows to stir up the fire in others, to promote grace in them, to warm a
cold, and thaw a frozen people. This is Apollos his praise, who being fervent
in the spirit, he spoke and taught diligently the things of the Lord, Act. 18.
25. (...)
2 In praying for the Church, for Gods blessing on their people, that they may
be settled in the truth, and confirmed in the will of God. Preachers are to lift
up a prayer for the Church by the help of Gods spirit. King Hezekiah sent to
the Prophet Isaiah, Not to read out a prayer, but to lift up a prayer for the
remnant that is left, 2 King. 19. 4. This zeal in praying is not in being (as
a boy) bound up in a book, nor as a child tied to a form: Paul gives record
to the Minister of Colosse, that he had a great zeal, laboring or striving
fervently for the Colossians in prayer, this zeal in prayer is Epaphras his
praise, Col. 4. 12, 13. 3 In hating evil with indignation, a blessed passion
against corruption.
1 In doctrine, to abhor lies, falsities, vanities, this was in the Ephesian
Angel, who could not bear with them which are evil, which upon trial were
found not Apostles, but Apostates, deceivers, liers, Rev. 2. 2. 2 In Worship,
our spirit should rise against all idolatries, superstitions, vain inventions,
that no man may defile the temple of God. Thus Paul his spirit was stirred
within him, when he saw the city wholly given to idolatry, Acts 17. 16. 3 In
practice, draw out the sword of Gods spirit against all iniquity; discover how
God does dislike all lewdness, in any of their hearers. Albeit men be great
and bold sinners, tell them what is not lawful for them, by a divine law:
Learn of the Baptist, who would venture the liberty of his person, rather than
neglect the freedom of his Ministry, and the delivering of the law of
liberty, freely and indifferently removing sin in all estates; He would rather
lose his head than hold his tongue before hypocritical Herod, Mat. 14. 4. 4 In
suffering for the Church, to confirm it in the truth. Herein was Paul's zeal,
who says, If I be offered upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I joy
and rejoice with you all, Phil. 2. 17. Preachers are to let liberties and lives
go for the good of the Church. I am ready (says the Apostle) not to be bound
only, but also to die for the name of the Lord Jesus, Acts 21. 13. Yea we
should not only undergo the cross, abide the prison, but sometimes desire
the deferring of our glory for the furtherance of the Church in grace, as it is
evident in that great strait Paul was in, to depart and be with Christ was
better for him, to live and abide in the flesh, was better for them, Phil. 1.
23, 24.
3 Magistrates to be zealous in three things
Magistrates Gods Ministers, the Ministers of State, be ye zealous, Feed you
this holy fire: as David's zeal eat him up, so let zeal of Gods house begin to
eat upon you, The helpful friends of afflicted Zion.

1 In casting out the filth in Gods house, take away the wicked, that it may
not be a den of thieves, stir up your spirits against them that are as the
Cretians were, always liers, evil beasts, slow bellies. Let Priests be held as
pestilent, let Jesuits be as Iebusites, reckon false Apostles as withered
Apostates. Mind ye with all heedfulnesse that of our Savior, Every plant which
my heavenly father has not planted, shall be rooted up, Mat. 15. 13. (...)
Christ intends not topping or lopping of such trees, he dislikes the root: It
is not any cutting or cropping will be the cure, it is the plucking up he
intends: when your wisdom discovers to you out of Gods Word by divine light,
What God your father, and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ planted not, up
with that as ill weeds by the root, should you shave them with a razor, they
would grow again. O think it not enough to clip their wings, when Christ is
against the being of such a body. Let your zeal be kindled in your breasts
against them who have lift up their face against Gods law, and by this made
themselves contemptible and base before all the people; against idolaters, that
by their falls have caused many to stumble. Gird on your sword against cursed
swearers, profane Sabbathbreakers, the impure persons, and those belly-gods,
drunkards, and other of that infamous nature, that are a sin and a shame among
us. Let David be your pattern in your work for the Church, I will early
destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off all wicked doers from
the city of the Lord, Psalm. 101. 8. where he intended diligence, constancy, and
impartiality. Let your hearts be encouraged, as that princely spirit of
Iehoshaphat, His heart was lift up in the ways of the Lord, and he took away
the high places and groves out of Judah, 2 Chro. 17. 6. Be ye baptized with our
Saviors spirit, when you meet with doctrines not after godliness, and worship
not after God, Say by authority, take these things hence, 10. 2. 16. 2 In
building God a house, that the Lord God may dwell among us, in zeal prepare him
an habitation, Exo. 15. 2. Baruch the son of Zabbai is renowned, who repaired
the wall of Jerusalem, earnestly he was set on fire, yea he fired himself,
burst out into heat, as angry with himself and others, so slothful in the
Lords work, Nehem. 3. 20. Accendit se. Trem.
Be ye of an high spirit, bold in promoting the things of Gods house, that all
your best abilities and deepest projects may be with all stirring of heart,
subservient to Gods Church, and subordinate to his glory. Let the love of
Christ be so warm in your hearts, that whatsoever you perceive is wanting in
the ministry, in our assemblies, in doctrine, in discipline, or any part of
the worship of your God, it may be repaired according to the law of the Lord,
and the counsel of the most High, who will save Zion, and has his
instruments, his sanctified ones, that ye may be called the repairers of the
breach, the restorers of the paths to dwell in, Isa. 58. 12. 3 In defending the
innocent, countenancing welldoers, you are for the praise of them that do well;
disgrace your flatterers and their slanderers, plead ye the cause of Jeremy,
charged with revolt; the cause of Paul, accused of great and grievous things
which cannot be proved; remember ye Christ's case, when he in his is called
seditious. Men run under your protection who had no comforter, You are the
shields of the earth, let the cause of the poor come before you, and let the
needy that has no helper dwell safe by you. You are governors for the
protection of well-doers, 1 Pet. 2. 14. Let it be free for men whose heart is
to their work, the work of the Lord, in preaching, praying, and in all the
offices of the house of the Lord, to serve the Lord in the liberty of Christ,
without fear or snare. Say of all such as Cyrus, The God of heaven be with
them, Ezra 1. 3. that they may without hindrance pray for the life of the King
and his sons, and those be cut off that trouble them, as was Darius his
decree, that they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto the God of heaven,
and pray for the life of the King and his sons; Also I make a decree, that
whosoever shall alter this word, let timber be pulled down from his house, and
being set up, let him be hanged thereon, and let his house be made a dunghill
for this, and the God that has caused his name to dwell there, destroy all
kings and people that shall put to their hand to alter and to destroy this
house of God which is at Jerusalem, Ezra 6. 10, 11, 12.
The properties 2 The properties of zeal 6.
of this zeal, showing in part the manner and nature of it.

1 It is personal, David says, My zeal has eaten up me, a man should be
himself a good instance for zeal, not thinking it enough others to work and he
be idle, others to study, stand up and speak, and he to sleep, sit still and
say nothing for the house of God. Let a man be exemplary in himself, in his
family, his children, his servants, his followers, that as they say of love,
they may say of zeal, your zeal begins at home. Let there be admonition and
instruction in the words of the Lord, let there be discipline and orderly
walking: This was David's zeal, hear him; I will set no wicked thing before
mine eyes. I hate the work of them that turn aside, it shall not cleave to me,
a froward heart shall depart from me, I will not know a wicked person, Psalm.
101. 3. 4. Let every man be a burnt offering unto the Lord, let zeal eat up
all corrupt affections in us, consume our sins, and inflame our hearts toward
him, Romans 12. 1. 2 It is celestial, it is fire from heaven, it is not from the
earth; it is divine, from Gods Spirit, not from angered nature, or hellish
metal set on fire of hell: but it is a supernatural work to have such raised
affection and fervent mind for the house of the Lord, it is the Holy Ghost
baptizeth with this fire, Mat. 3. 11. Men's persons and actions will not relish
till they be salted with the fire of heavenly doctrine, Every one shall be
salted with fire, Mar. 9. 49. 3 It is regular, guided by rule, zeal is bold,
but not blind, it is not rash or indiscreet, but wisely discerning things that
differ. There is great odds, between sins and sins, sinners and sinners,
one error and another, one time and another, Zeal graceth knowledge, and
knowledge guides zeal, men fervent in spirit had need be prudent and wise in
heart: It is Gods Word is zeales rule, according unto that, cast out every
evil in the temple, and by that make every pin for thetabernacle. Thus Moses
was admonished, Heb. 8. 5. This Judah missed, Romans 10. 2. 4 It is impartial, a
zeal that lays aside all partial affection, or respect of persons, great or
small, King or people, kinsman or countryman, it will do right to all,
without doing a friend a pleasure, or a foe a spite: Asa did a little to his
mother, but very lamely; he removed her from being Queen, because she had made
an idol in a grove, 2 Chronicles. 15. 16. He did not as was covenanted, that
whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death,
whether small or great, whether man or woman, v. 13. Mind how Levi, impartial
in zeal, recovered his honor, is renowned, and has a blessing on him, who
said unto his father, and to his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he
acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own children; for they have observed thy
word, and kept thy covenant, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. 5 It is superlative in power, it
overcomes great discouragements, as Calebs spirit, not afraid of Giants the
children of Anak, he fully followed the Lord, labored to still the tumultuous,
and stay the faint-hearted people; for he had another spirit with him, Number. 14.
24. Moses was a man whose mind was elevated in the Church-cause above honor,
he refused it, Heb. 11. 24. above pleasure, which he chose not, v. 25. above
riches and treasures, which he esteemed not, v. 26. above favors or fears of
mortal man, he saw the invisible God, v. 27. It is resolute in holy
undertakings, walks in ways of good conscience with lion-like courage, it
spares no Agag, as Saul did, but hewes him in pieces, as Samuel did, 1 Samuel 15.
33. It will not be overpowered with wealth, worship, learning or greatness;
jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are coals of fire, which
has a most vehement flame, many waters cannot quench love, neither can the
floods drown it: if a man would give all the substance of his house for love,
it would utterly be contemned; neither waters of adversity and fear of
punishment, nor favors of the world, and hopes of preferment can stop zeales
mouth, it cannot be quenched, it will not be bribed, Cant. 8. 6, 7. 6 It is
constant, zeal is a fire should never go out, but from a spark increases to a
most vehement flame, it forgets those things which are behind, and reaches
forth unto those things which are before, it presses forward, is not
declining, You that began well, spoke well, wrought well, draw not back, grow
not weary, decay not in zeal: as it is good to be righteous still and holy
still, so it is good to be always zealous, till the sons of Levi be purified,
and the ungodly be no more, till errors be abandoned or buried, and
superstitions abolished, till truth be established, Christ's government erected,
til all the work about the house of the Lord be finished, in every speech, in
every project, in every days work let zeal be in you, Gal. 4. 18.
3 Means to be zealous.
The means for this Zeal, to maintain this heavenly sire, so necessary in all
the services of the Sanctuary.

1 Avoid four things.
Avoid as quench-coales, 1 Vanity of speculation, shun vain janglings and
contentions, which edify not in faith and obedience; Paul would have men
charged before the Lord, that they strive not about words to no profit, but to
the subverting of the hearers, 2 Timothy 2. 14. and to avoid foolish and unlearned
questions, v. 23. It is ill spent time and zeal that is spent this way. These
evaporations hinder the inward zeal and warmth of heart in the truth after
godliness. 2 Vain companions, to be familiar with cold or lukewarm men,
chils men. Vain society decayed the love of Manna; it was the mixed multitude
in Israel, which was not of Israel, who fell a lusting, that brought Israel to
lament after the Egyptians flesh, Cucumbers, Melons, Leeks, Onions, and
Garlic, but Manna was looked on as course fare, Numb. 11. 4, 5, 6. Who can be
zealous for truth and familiar with the erroneous; for pure worship, and yet go
hand in hand with the superstitious? What got Peter in the high Priests hall?
More inward cold and cowardlinesse, than outward warmth by the fire, because
where iniquity does abound, love of many will wax cold, Mat. 24. 12. 3
Spiritual satiety, when men have fullness, all is well with them, poor
preaching, seldom preaching, no preaching contents them. Superstitions and
inventions of men go down with them, as comely and decent things, that when
some cry for the Word of God, and the ways and laws of Christ (unknown to
them) they wonder what they lack, what they would have, what they mean,
darkness and error be not distinct, with them, from light and truth; this
conceit of all being well, brought Laodicea to be lukewarm; Thou say, I
have need of nothing, and know not that thou art poor, Rev. 3. 17. 4
Carnal policy, fears carnal, and sinful sloth in men, hinders their
activenesse, when men have it in their hands to cast out all evil in the house
of the Lord, and remove wickedness from the city of our God, that the
Canaanite shall no more dwell there, then policy overcomes piety, and sloth
decays men's might, as in Israel it came to pass, when Israel was strong, that
they put the Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them out, Iud. 1.
v. 28. which brought them under the oppressions of Iabin King of Canaan twenty
years, Judge. 4. 2, 3. Wherefore whosoever desires to be truly zealous, shun
vain speculations and vain companions, beware of spiritual satiety, and
carnal policy, the enemies of zeal.


II. Provide and mind what zeal needs to keep in this holy fire, in the
coldest times, provide for your firing.

1 Gods Spirit works this warmth of affection in the heart: By this Spirit
Christ comes to be refiners fire, where he makes any zealous, he gives them his
Spirit, which baptizeth with fire of pious affection; nature does not bring it
forth, it is from above, by the Holy Ghost is this fire, Mat. 3. 11. 2 The Word
of God lively taught is a fire to heat men's hearts, Ier. 23. 29. Is not my word
a fire? It is fire in the mouth of Gods messengers. Men that need heat, must
mind this, to preserve and increase zeal: Great care must be had to enjoy
Preachers, whose lips are touched with a coal taken from Gods Altar, Isa. 6.
67. They who preach the Word of God remissely and coldly, as they be cold, they
leave their hearers cold; cold preaching makes cold people. Men under such
luke-warmnesse in Preachers, are daily more cold, and come to be hardened by a
spiritual frost, and zeal perishes, and where vision fails, the people are
made naked, cold, lame, and benumbed, Pro. 29. 18. 3 Zealous company is a live
coal to set others on fire, one will warm another. I only take in the
Preachers phrase, If two lie together, then they have heat, but how can one be
warm alone? Eccl. 4. 11. When some want fire, they fetch then a coal at their
neighbors: Godly men provoke on another to love and good works, Heb. 10. 24.
and do sharpen one another. (...)
Iron sharpeneth iron, so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend, Pro.
27. 17. 4 Prayer to God whose Spirit is fire, power out your hearts to the God
of heaven for this zeal, as Iabez, 1 Chro. 4. 10. O that thou would bless
me indeed, and enlarge my coast: -- and God granted him his request, Put up one
petition for zeal, for this fire to be kindled on thy haith, in thee, that the
breadth of thy spirit may not be straightened, by any coldness or freezing, the duty
is, quench not the spirit, 1 These. 5. 19. the mean is, pray without ceasing,
verse. 17.
4 Motives to zeal:
The motives to zeal, to excite men to be zealous,

1 In regard of God, four motives.
In regard of God, 1 God commands it, he requires it, we may not deny it, he
will have it, under pain of disobedience to the highest Majesty, we may not
neglect it, his command is the argument of conscience, Be zealous, Rev. 3. 19.
should ye not obey him? will ye reject his Word? It is God, it is God calls on
you for zeal for his house, it is he says, the mind according to my mind must
be as I command, zealous. 2 God is zealous, a jealous God against spiritual
fornication, 1 in general, all sin a going a whoring from him; 2 in special,
idolatry, superstition, this is hateful to him, Exodus 20. 5. I am a jealous
God, he will not spare in the day of vengeance, when the time of recompense is
come: he regards not broken wedlock; Which my covenant they continued not in,
and I regarded them not, says the Lord, Heb. 8. 9. Your Zeal in taking away
and defacing every whorish thing, every provocation, may prevent Gods
jealousy, that it burn not like fire, that none can quench it: weigh it in
your hearts, and the Lord stir your spirits within you, that we may find such
a fruit of your zeal, that we feel not his fury. 3 God ardently loves Zion,
his Church, and the welfare of it: Thus says the Lord of hosts, I was jealous
for Zion with great jealousy, and I was jealous for her with great fury, Zech.
8. 2. When you hear God is zealous, may not you be zealous? Will not you be
zealous? God is with you in this work of Zion, he is engaged for his sons
throne, and will establish it, he has set the government upon his shoulder, he
has promised all shall be ordered with justice and judgment, and his zeal will
perform it, Isay 9, 67. are you to mind and mend the Ministry? he is with
you. Are you zealous for the truth of the Gospel? so is he. Are you fervent
that God may be worshipped according to his own heart? he is more abundant. May
it not embolden any man when it may be truly said to him, in his way, in his
work for Zion, The Lord is with thee thou valiant man, Go on in your might,
that you may save our Israel, and build up Zion. 4 God promises most familiar
communion with the zealous, which should persuade to this zeal, he who
stomachs the lukewarm, loves the zealous, and says, he will come in to him,
and sup with him, and he with Christ. Christ suppes with us, in cheering and
delighting himself with his own graces, and gifts of his Spirit bestowed on
us, as one that eats sweet and pleasant meat. We sup with Christ, when we
communicate in all the cates and spiritual delicates of Christ, as they that
sup together, partake in bodily food. Would you meet with Christ in his
ordinances, or be welcomed by him in his house? Be zealous, lose not such a
presence by our luke-warmnesse, and such communion for lack of zeal, Rev. 3.
20.


2 In regard of the Church three motives.
In regard of the Church. 1 Mind four things.


1 The wall of the vineyard is down, the hedge is full of gaps, any beast or
Boar may get in, it is eaten up, it is trodden down, it is laid wast in many
places, overspread with woods, it wants rain has clouds without rain, the
hedge, corporal help, without good Laws, good Magistrates; the wall, a
spiritual defense, inward, as godly Ministers, true discipline, clouds without
rain over it, Ministers which make a fair show, and yet are wels without
water, only barren, without goodness in their Ministry, no refreshing to the
vineyard, Isa. 5. 56. does it not pertain to you, Men sought out among men to
make up the hedge, and to stand in the gap? it is fallen into the hands of ill
husbandmen, they have made it desolate; the Churches strength is small, it is
brought very low, to it which is afflicted pity should be showed from its
friends, that Zion may be raised off the ground, out of dust. 2 It is very
corrupt in many things, in persons vicious, the wicked walk on every side, and
the vilest men are exalted, promoted. In doctrines, how many speak strange
things, perverse things, contrary to the doctrine of Christ! In discipline how
many eat the sins of the people, and grow fat by the virtues of the people,
that Gods house is for such merchandise in corrupt courts made a den of
thieves, Matthew. 21. 12, 13. In the worship of God, men in most places have set
up calves, as once in Moses absence Israel did, Exodus 32. 4. and all, while men
slept, and wanted zeal, while you see these things, Let your anger with Moses
wax hot, verse. 19. down with all calves, burn them in the fire, grind them
to powder, to be utterly abolished, verse. 20. 3 It is the house of God, David
says, thy house. It is the spouse of Christ married to Christ for ever. Whose
bowels yern not to see Christ's spouse in the dust! O for Zion sake (the Zion of
the holy one of Israel) hold not your peace. David tells us his love to
Jerusalem, because of the house of the Lord our God, Psa. 122. 9. what you do
for his house, you do for him, to him. It is storied as a worthy act of a
religious heart, in Terentius, a captain under the Emperor Valens, who having
done some special service, for which the Emperor thought him worthy of a
recompense, and being thereupon willed by him, to demand what he would,
presented this petition, That the true Christians might have the liberty of a
Church by themselves, wherein to worship God apart from the Arrians, whose
heresy had then spread it self exceedingly. The Emperor reading his
supplication, was much displeased, tare it in pieces, and threw it away.
Terentius modestly gathered up the pieces again, professing to him, that if he
could not be heard in Gods cause, he would make no suit for his own profit.
Show you your sincere and faithful respect to the good and prosperous estate
of Gods Church, above all personal concernments: be not put off with worldly
profits, peace, and civil rights and liberties, you have more transcendent
matters, the good of souls, the liberty of consciences, the means of grace,
the worship of God, the kingdom of Christ, the house of the Lord, about this
let your zeal have a most vehement flame.
3 In regard of men, three motives.
In regard of men, many things may kindle zeal.

1 Good men zealous.
Good men's examples, they be all zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. and may you
be cold? pious men all pray for it, as if it were a time of mercy for Zion,
they take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof, Psalm. 102. 13,
14. and shall it not come into your minds? the martyrs of renowned zeal loved
not their lives for the truth of Gods word which they did so affect, Revel. 12.
11. and may not men's hearts now be fired for it? Moses was a meek man in his
own case, but no Sheep in Gods cause, he was angry and very hot against wicked
doers, Exodus 32. 19. shall men now be pleased with the wicked? Nehemiah was
sad for it, Nehem. 2. 3. Why should not my countenance be sad? he fasted, wept,
prayed, 1. 4. shall men now not lay it to heart? Phineas was zealous for God
for his good in the matter of Zimri and Cozbi, Numb. 25. 11. and is it a time
to be lukewarm when there be many Zimries and Cozbies? Paul was jealous for
the Church, 2 Cor. 11. 2. Shall these be the days to bring forth careless
ones? Godly men to remember Zion, wept for its sad condition, Psalm. 137. 1. we
should as they never be comforted, but with its comforts and welfare; If I
forget thee o Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning, if I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I prefer not
Jerusalem above my chief joy, verse 5, 6.

2 Bad men Zelots in two things.
Bad men are great Zelots.

1. To make many Proselytes, to promote Antichrists power, how do they
consult, plot, practice, yea compass sea and land to make one Proselyte? Mat.
23. 15. Can they thus employ their hearts, heads and hands for that kingdom, a
kingdom of darkness? and who shall not, will not be quickened for Christ's
Kingdom, and his house? 2. To bring down the house of God, perverting the
Scriptures, corrupting the worship of God, suspending the servants of Christ,
ensnaring the Saints of God, Who say of the name of Christ, Down to it, down
to it even to the ground, but of the Church of Christ, Down with it, down with
it even to the ground; old Edoms race Psalm. 137. 7. Shall the lewd be thus
against it, and shall not any man that has any spirit within him be moved for
Zion? is their work better? is their lord better? is their wages better? your
work, your cause, your conscience may more hearten you.
3 Men's conditions.
Men's conditions minded would quicken zeal.

1 Under burdens.
The present condition of many under men's burdens, impositions, oppressions,
fears, shares on every side, as Moses went out to his brethren and looked on
their burdens, and spied an Egyptian smiting an Hebrew, his zeal was kindled
to endevor his brethrens liberty, Exodus 2. 11, 12. You have heard our cries,
seen our burdens, know our sorrows, you need not go out to know this, the
other day you were interest in this; the City cries to you, the Country
complains, the Preachers be pleading before you, the people praying to you as
a way of mercy, help, help, help us; our consciences, our peoples consciences
be heavied, be endangered, o pass not by us, o let it not be as nothing to
you, that the blessing of them that are ready to perish may come upon you,
deliver the poor that cries, and him that has none to help, that you may
make our sad hearts sing for joy.

2 Under Satan.
Under Satan's power many are, you would be clad with zeal to consider (as it
deserves your deepest thoughts) how poor people, who for their outward being
live under a gracious Prince, are for their souls in spiritual vassalage
under the Prince of darkness, Ephesians. 6. 12. the ruler of the darkness of this
world: how many perish in darkness as a blind people served by a blinking
guide, where the people perish for lack of knowledge? Hosea 4. 6. O how many
places and people in this famous Island are yet in the shadow of death! who are
not under the joyful sound of Gods word, who yet feel no want of the Word of
life, fear no misery; o their security! unless God by his providence send it
to them, they complain not to you, o do not (I beseech you) exspect that of
them, it is out of their blindness, deadness, and (as it is in all such men)
a natural carelessness in them; o that I might in all humility commend their
Petition to you this day, o let this come into your mind, put on zeal and
they shall be relieved, It is a death to have the glory depart where it has
been, 1 Samuel 4. 22. With what thoughts can ye take up their case where the
glory never was?

2 The future condition of men.
The future condition of our posterity should at this kindle zeal in men; o
let us not leave children after us to inherit our follies, lies and vanities,
let your zeal in reforming the house of God according to the word of God,
prevent their repenting of our corruptions: will it be a credit to this present
age to have the next generation come to God with grieved hearts, and to clear
themselves of our abominations say, surely, Our Fathers inherited lies,
vanities, and things wherein there is no profit? Jer. 16. 19. Surely
Reformation will be, for the present should be, put it not off for after times
to do it, do your utmost that no Canaanite may be left, no leaven uncast out
or cursed, no superstitions be left to posterity, but the word of God as an
heritage for ever.

4 In regard of special men, 4. Motives.
In regard of particular choice men who fear the Lord and hear his word this
day, to inflame your zeal, mind:

1 Their place.
Your place and calling speaks to you; Is it not of God that you are sent
hither? Is it not for Zion that you are employed here? Had you not your
Countries, Counties hearts, voices, hands to do worthily in Zion? mind what
Mordecai said to Queen Esther 4. 14. Who knows, whether thou art come to the
kingdom for such a time as this? May not I with little change say, Who knows
whether ye be come to the Parliament, for such a time as this? We hope for such
a time as this ( when was there such a time) for such a thing as this, when was
there such a cause, such a call, calls for zeal.

2 Their peace.
Your peace and prosperity is in the welfare of Gods house, you have a share in
that ship, in the peace thereof shall you have peace; it is said of Jerusalem,
they shall prosper that love it, Psalm. 122. 6. will not the beauty of the
assemblies, a godly Ministry, a pure Discipline, a spiritual worship bring in
unto you much peace, and comfort, but if truth be suppressed, godliness
oppressed, the Ministry corrupt, the worship of God polluted, what will become
of yourselves, your souls, your families? No peace if you stir not this day,
you and yours may perish for it, Esther 4. 14.

3 Their honor.
Your honor is in marching valiantly on for Gods house; Barucks slownesse made
the journey that he took, not to be for his honor, Judge. 4. 8, 9. what honor
will this coming to Parliament be to a man that spoke nothing, or did nothing
for those poor people, the children of God, who gave their voices in hope of
help in the Church, in Religion? how can ye look upon them in your return
into your Countries, when you have made their eyes to fail, their hearts to
bleed, their condition in spiritual things as heavy andhelpless? but what love
will be to you and honor put upon you, when you behave your selves worthily as
saviors come up on Mount Zion?

4 Their happiness.
Your happiness shall be great in pleading thoroughly for Zion, and against
Babylon, as it is prophesied, O daughter of Babylon who art to be destroyed,
happy shall he be that rewards thee as thou have served us, Psalm. 137. 8.
happy in your selves, happy in your families, happy in your credit, happy in
your Country, happy in your souls, happy in your bodies. Wherefore (that I may
not be farther tedious to anies patience) let Zion come into our minds, and as
Ioab animated Abishai, 2 Samuel 10. 12. be of good courage and let us play the
men for our people, and for the City of our God, and the Lord do that which
seems him good; so strengthen your hands for this good work, Nehem. 2. 18.
take heed what ye do, for it is for the house of the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. Let
the fear of the Lord be upon you, v. 7. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall
be with the good, v. 11.

FINIS.
Die Iovis, 20. Maii 1641.

At a Committee of the Commons House of Parliament, for licencing of Books,

It is ordered that this Sermon of M. WILSONS be published in Print:

Sir Edward Dering, Knight and Baronet.


