A Medical-Philosophical Discourse OF FERMENTATION OR, Of the Intestine Motion
of PARTICLES IN EVERY BODY.

BY Dr. THOMAS WILLIS of Christ-Church in Oxford, and Sidley Professor of
Natural Philosophy in that Famous University.

Translated into English by S. P.

LONDON: Printed for T. Dring, C. Harper, J. Leigh, and S. Martin. MDCLXXXI.

TO THE Most Reverend Father in Christ And the Right Honorable HIS GRACE,
GILBERT: By Divine Providence Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate and
Metropolitan of all England, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy-Councellors.
Most Holy Prelate,
THE Eagle will not acknowledge his suspected Chicken, by one only sign, for it
is not enough that it can look against the light, unless it be able also to
behold the Sun's Beams without winking: and indeed although this our hasty issue,
whether by the help of its own blindness, or of that doubtful light in which it
lived, has been able to come abroad, yet it has not sufficiently given marks
of its true race, until it might delight its Eye with your brightness as at the
Sun's Beams.

These Meditations or Discourses tho several times published, now therefore at
length boast, that they are able to show themselves to the light first, with
your Sacred name in the front, it is then but reason, that the same Mecaenas,
who has brought me forth into the open light, from my own darkness, and from
the filthiness, and soot in which I was involved, being condemned among the
metals; should think not it any detraction, to lend to my Works Ornament, and
Splendour, as well as to the Author and Publisher.

It was by your means (most Noble Prelate) that I obtained the Votes in this
Famous University for the place of Sidly Professor, for how small soever my
Merits might seem, they were helped by the greatness and weight of your opinion.

I am exceeding conscious to my self, how unfit, being destitute of all help, I
came to that Province, both for the Dignity of the Place, of the University,
and of my Mecaenas, yet I believe nothing is to be dispair'd of, under so great
Auspicies. I would therefore, if there be any thing, at any time, more happily
thought of, in the scrutiny of Nature; and brought forth by me, that it be not
referred to my Ingenuity, or (which I might perhaps more truly deserve) my
Industry, but to the Influences of my Patron: For to him only he Dedicates and
Consecrates himself and all his, who is

Your Graces most humble And for ever obliged Servant, T. W.

THE PREFACE.
THE same thing happens to me, about to speak of Fermentation, that once did to
a Famous Historian, when he wrote his Commentary of the Roman Empire, to wit,
whilst he endeavored to draw forth, as it were in a little Table, the affairs
only of that Nation, he was necessitated not only to recount the Actions of one
people, but of all mankind: in like manner, whilst I did meditate on a few
things only concerning the energy, and the means of the working of Ferments, I
have brought into this Tract, as it were swelled up with a certain Ferment, the
whole Provision, and Dowry of all Nature. Entering upon this Disquisition, I
thought I had been tied only to the Bakers Oven, and Brewers Furnace, being
condemned to the Mill, not to have proceeded beyond their limits, unless by
chance, or with leave; but after that I had begun to look more deeply into the
matter, I perceived I had gotten a far more large Province: Because it plainly
appeared, besides these of Art, very many Works of Nature, to be not only like,
but themselves the effects of Fermentation: For when, for the solving of the
Phoenomenas, which are met with about the swelling up of the mealy Mass, and
the working of Wine, and of other Liquors, I had Composed diverse Arguments,
Reasons, and Hypotheses, I found at length, those first begotten Particles, by
whose Orgasm or Heat, those vulgar preparations do Ferment, to beget the Causes
of motions, and alterations, in whatever things they are mixed with besides;
wherefore, I may be pardoned, if I have strayed far from our proposition, and
have seemed to any one, to have heaped together here, too plentiful an Harvest
of Matter, because I was wholly led by the same third of Ratiocination, and the
most conjunct Affinity of things, to these various and diverse Concretes. If
any one shall object, that I prostitute the unusual Notions, and almost only
heard of, in the Shops of the Chemists, unhandsomly among the works of ordinary
people, I say, these Principles, which being brought indeed to perform the self
moving motions of Natural things, also more easily to represent them to the
vulgar capacity, and lay them not only before their Eyes, but even into their
very Hands; what of these kind of substances, I call Particles, men tho rude
and unskilful, may perceive even by the help of their senses to be in the
things: besides the names of Sulphur, Salt, and Spirit, and the rest, are more
familiarly known, than Matter, and Form, or the four Principles of the
Peripateticks. As to our method, and manner of Philosophizing, no man can blame
me, if I should not here describe all things according to Rule, and Analytick
Patterns; because in this Work, it chances for me to wander, without a Guide,
or Companion, in solitary places, and as it were in a solitude trodden by no
footsteps, where I not only make a Journey, but my way also: therefore, when
ever I deviate, I cannot be said to err, among right Judges of our endeavors,
who have no Path in which I should Walk, nor could find a Track, which I might
fear to miss.

ON THE AUTHORS Medical-Philosophical Discourses.
THE intricate and hidden cause of things,
Both Peace and Strife by what means Nature brings,
What various motions Bodies do inspire;
What mixes with the Waters quenchless Fire?
What Bonds the Elements together tie,
Before this happyer Age unfolded lie:
Things hid to former Ages, and unknown,
The Secrets of the world to all are shown.
Metals dug from the Bowels of the Earth,
Tho they from Phoebus boast their Heavenly birth,
We without light, dark and obscure behold,
And Splendor's found only in burnisht Gold.
Iron unknown lay hidden without light,
By Slaves wrought from the Mine grows dazeling bright.
This to whole Troops confusion does afford,
Wit, which first framed, stoops to, the Victor Sword.
We thus of old did Nature search in vain,
Our Arts did only in the outward bark remain,
But now we her hid mysteries unfold,
And the great secrets of the world behold.
Better than us, herself can hardly tell,
What Love does far within high Mountains dwell.
What flame first gives the Marble Quarry birth;
To Metals forms blind Rudiments of Earth,
And the hard child does to perfection bring:
Why Earth shows her rich Treasures in the Spring;
And shines, made brave with her own Native flowers.
What gentle gales, and what sweet moistning showers,
Do on the pregnant Goddess Seed bestow;
Whilst Heavenly Iris mounts the Cloudy Bow.
Why Ceres swells with watery Nymphs embrace,
What Strife, what Wars spring from hot Bacchus race:
What Vulcan does the Aetnean Furnace blow;
What does soft fires through all Bodies throw.
What Spirit nimbly moves the human frame:
Whence Milky juice here, there a Purple stream,
Watering the Body: whence the Crimson flood;
And the quick Circulation of the blood.
What hidden fires in veins and intrals burn,
Which do the boiling Blood to Fevers turn.
What mixes freezing cold with parching heat,
And makes the different Zones together meet.
Whence comes the Pestilence with Stygian breath,
Riding on blasting Winds, and armed with death.
What Prophesying Humor through the Reins does pass,
What color, and what odor in the Glass?
All things lie open now: He did not know
So much, to whom Prometheus did bestow
His stolen fires: We now every part
Of the whole Earth compass about with Art.
He Is happy who Causes of things can show;
Sacred to Nature and to Phoebus too;
About his Temples Delphic Laurels spread,
And flames of lightning never shall blast his head.
Whom Hermes does with Sacred Arts imbue,
Whose Labors, Learning out of Darkness drew,
May all is days happy be, may he shine bright,
And may he still enjoy Celestial light:
May no Disease infect with poisonous breath,
Him, who gains Health from Sickness, Life from Death.
OF FERMENTATION, OR THE Inorganical Motion OF NATURAL BODIES.
CHAP. I. Of the Principles of Natural things.
THere is nothing more rarely to be met with, in the Vulgar Philosophy, where
Natural things are unfolded, with the vain figments of Forms and Qualities,
than the word Fermentation: but among the more sound (especially of later
years) who respect the Matter and Motion chiefly in Bodies, nothing is almost
more usual. But Fermentation has its name from Fervescency, as Ferment from
Ferviment or growing hot. The word is well known in making of Bread, and in the
purgings of new Wine, Beer, and other potable Liquors: thence it is also
applied to other things, which are wont to swell or grow turgid, after the same
manner: that at length it signifies, whatsoever Effervency or Turgency, that is
raised up in a Natural Body, by particles of that Body variously agitated.

Bodies of a diverse Consistency and Habitude, are apt to a Fermenting, viz.
either Thin or Thick, Liquid or Solid, Animate or Inanimate, Natural or
Artificial; in all which is found an Heterogeneity of parts or particles, to
wit, there are in them some substances light, and always endeavoring to fly
away: and also there are others thick, earthy, and more fixed, which entangle
the subtle Particles, and detein them in their Embraces, whilst they endeavor
to fly away; from the strivings, and wrestlings of these two twins, in one
Womb, the motion of Fermentation chiefly proceeds; but on the contrary, what
things do not Ferment, for the most part consist of like Particles, and are of
the same Figure and Conformation, which indeed consociat among themselves,
without any Tumult or Turgescency, lie quiet, and enjoy a deep peace. If Must,
or new Wine, or new Ale or Beer, be closely Bottl'd up, or put into Vessels of
small vent, they will grow so very hot, that often the Vessels are in danger of
breaking. But if the same Liquors, being Distilled by themselves, and then what
is separated shut up, from thence no motion or heat will follow. Wherefore,
Distilled Waters, hot Spirits, Oils, fixed Salts of Herbs, and very many other
more simple preparations of the Chemists, remain a long while without any
alteration or Fermentation, Perhaps some of the Particles do evaporate, but the
rest do not tumultuate. In the mean time the juice and blood of Vegetables or
Animals, as also all Liquors Concreted, and compounded of may things quickly
Ferment, and from thence enter into diverse turns of changes. The Spirit of Wine
being closely shut up in a Phial shows no sign of growing hot, but if but a
little Oil of Turpentine be added to this Spirit, the Particles of the Liquor
will so leap forth, that I have seen it break a Glass Hermetically Sealed. All
Distilled Waters of Herbs, so they be kept simply in a Glass, will remain
incorrupt a long time, but if you add to the same Sugar or Syrrup, it presently
grows sour and is corrupted: Wherefore, that the Fermentation of Bodies may be
rightly unfolded, we must inquire, what those Particles or Substances are, and
of what Nature of which mixed things are Compounded, and from those being put
together, and mutual strivings, motions for the most part naturally proceed.

Although there be many and diverse Opinions of Philosophers concerning the
beginnings of Natural things, yet there are three chiefly deserve our Assent,
and Faith, before the rest. That famous fourfold Chariot of the Peripateticks
obtains the chief place, which emulous of the four wheeled Coach of the Sun, is
hurried by a quick passage, through the fictitious Heaven of the first Matter,
and measures that vast and empty thing, with a perpetual reciprocation. For
they say, all things are Constituted out of Water, Air, Fire, and Earth; and
that out of the diverse transposition of these, Generation and Corruption, as
also the changes of all alterations whatsoever, do arise. In the second place,
and next, stands the Opinion of Democritus and Epicurus, which lately also has
been revived in our Age, this affirms all Natural effects to depend upon the
Conflux of Atoms diversely figured, so that in all Bodies, there be Particles
Round, Sharp, Foursquare, Cylindrical, Checkered or Streaked, or of some other
Figure; and from the diverse changes of these, the Subject is of this or that
Figure, Work, or Efficacy. The third Opinion of the Origination of Natural
Things, is introduced by Chemistry, which, when by an Analysis made by Fire, it
resolves all Bodies into Particles of Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water, and Earth,
affirms by the best right, that the same do consist of these. Because this
Hypothesis determinates Bodies into sensible parts, and cutts open things as it
were to the life, it pleases us before the rest.

As to the four Elements, and first Qualities from thence deduced, I must
confess that this Opinion does something help for the unfolding the Phenomenon
of Nature, but after so dark a manner, and without any peculiar respect to the
more secret recesses of Nature, it salves the appearances of things, that it is
almost the same thing, to say an House consists of Wood and Stone, as a Body of
four Elements. The other Opinion, which is only a piece of the Epicurean
Philosophy, forasmuch as it undertakes Mechanically the unfolding of things,
and accommodates Nature with Working Tools, as it were in the hand of an
Artificer, and without running to Occult Qualities, Sympathy, and other refuges
of ignorance, does happily and very ingeniously disintangle some difficult
Knots of the Sciences, and dark Riddles, certainly it deserves no light praise:
but because it rather supposes, than demonstrates it Principles, and teaches of
what Figure those Elements of Bodies may be, not what they have been, and also
induces Notions extremly subtle, and remote from the sense, and which do not
sufficiently Quadrate with the Phenomenon of Nature, when we descend to
particulars, it pleases me to give my sentence for the third Opinion
beforementioned, which is of the Chemists, and chiefly to insist upon this in
the following Tract, to wit, affirming all Bodies to consist of Spirit,
Sulphur, Salt, Water, and Earth, and from the diverse motion, and proportion of
these, in mixed things, the beginnings and endings of things, and chiefly the
reasons, and varieties of Fermentation, are to be sought. If any one shall
object, That the Atomical, and our Spagyric Principles, are altogether
subordinate, to wit, that these, tho at the last sensible, are resolved into
those, only to be signified by Conception; I shall not much gainsay him, so it
shows that those Conceptions are real. I being dull and purblind, leave the more
accurate to quick sights, being content to be so wise as to perform the
business of the outward Sense with Reason: for I profess, it pleases not me, to
devise or dream Philosophy. But that our Work may more rightly proceed, it will
be necessary, to speak first a few things of these kind of Principles in
general, and of their Affections.

I mean by the name of Principles, not simple and wholly uncompounded Entities,
but such kind of Substances only, into which Physical things are resolved, as
it were into parts, lastly sensible. By the intestine motion, and combination
of these, Bodies are begot, and increase: by the mutual departure and
dissolution of these one from another, they are altered, and perish. In the
mean time, what Particles are gathered together in the subjects, or depart away
from them, will appear under the form of Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, or of one of
the rest.

CHAP. II. A description of the Principles of Chemists, and the Properties and
Affections of them.
1. SPirits are Substances highly subtle, and Aetherial Particles of a more
Divine Breathing, which our Parent Nature has hid in this Sublunary World, as
it were the Instruments of Life and Soul, of Motion and Sense, of every thing;
whilst they of their own Nature are always enlarged, and endeavoring to fly
away, lest they should too soon leave their subjects, they are bound sometimes
with more thick Particles, that by entering into them, and by subtilizing them,
and variously unfolding them, they dispose the substance to maturity, as is to
be observed in the Vegetation, and Fermentation of Bodies; sometimes being
restrained within some spaces, to wit, the Vessels or Bowel of living
Creatures, they are compelled more often to repeat the same measures of their
motions for the performing the works of Life, Sense and Motion. From the motion
of these proceed the animation of Bodies, the growth of Plants, and the
ripening of Fruits, Liquors, and other preparations; they determinate the Form
and Figure of every thing, prefixed as it were by Divine designation: they
conserve the bonds of the mixture by their presence; and open them, by their
departure, at their pleasure: they bridle the irregularities of Sulphur and
Salt. The perfection and state of every thing consists in the plenty and
exaltation of Spirits, and the fall and declination, in their want and defect.

As to the Subjects in which the Spirits are: Minerals because they are of a
more fixed nature, wanting Motion and Vegetation, are almost without Spirits,
or at least are contented with a few. For the birth and growth of Vegetables,
they are required in a more moderate quantity. In the Constitution of a living
Creature, where there is greater Use of Spirits, for Sense and Motion, a far
more plentiful quantity is found. In the works of Art, and chiefly in those
which ascend to perfection, by Digestion and Fermentation, there are found to
be a sufficiently great proportion of Spirits: but in all subjects whatsoever,
whilst the immersed Spirits are mingled with the other Principles, their
condition or state comes under a threefold consideration: for they are either
depressed and scattered, and so involved with more thick Particles, that they
are very little seen, or show forth their powers, as in things undigested,
crude and unripe, may be perceived, in which the Spirits can hardly extricate
themselves into motion, and from which they can hardly be drawn by
Distillation. Or secondly, the Spirits flying forth from the thick substance of
the rest, are full of vigor, shake and rightly dispose the more gross
Particles, subtilize the thick, digest the crude, and bring things to the steme
or height of maturity and perfection: or lastly, Spirits having obtained the
height of things, do luxuriate and make excursions out of the Body: hence those
that remain, are by degrees lessened of their plenty and strength, until being
less in power than the Particles of the Salts and Sulphur, they are put under
their yoke, and by little and little are destroyed and driven away out of the
Subject; on this threefold state depends the beginnings or rudiments, the
maturity and exaltation, and the defect and end of things.

It is observed, when the Spiritous Latex is drawn forth of any Liquor by
Distillation, that the vapor or steam is not elevated into dew, that is, come
together in little drops or dew, every where poured forth, as it is wont to do
in watery things; but it is divided into streaks, and many little rivulets, and
renders the Alembic marked in every part, with straight lines, only not
meridional, leading from the Center of the top, to the brim of the
Circumference. The cause of which seems to be this, to wit, since that the
spirituous substance is very subtle, it is not easily Collected into Liquor;
neither is it fixed every where about the sides of the Vessel, in its ascent,
as watery Liquors; but always stretches further, and unless when it comes to
the top it self of the little head, does in no wise stay, but there the
spirituous breath, being restrained as it were in a punct, and being brought
backward, it begins to gather into dew: wherefore, from that top, as it were
the Fountain, the Spirits flowing forth on every side by streams, descend in
streaks toward the mouth or brim of the Alembic. And when those lines wholly
disappear, it is a sign, that the spirituous substance is quite stilled forth,
and that the watery breath only ascends.

2, Sulphur is a Principle of a little thicker consistency than Spirit, after
that, the most active: for when the Spirits first break forth from the loosned
substance of the mixture, presently the Sulphurous Particles endeavor to
follow. The Temperament of every thing, as to Heat, Consistency, and amiable
frame or contexture, depends chiefly on Sulphur; from hence also for the most
part arise, variety of Colors and Odors, the faimess and deformity of the
Body, also the diversity of tastes. In the Bosom of this the Spirits
immediately in which as in a Copula, they are united, by the more hard embraces
of the rest. The substance of Sulphur, though less subtle, is yet of more
firceness and unruliness than the Spirits are, for this unless it be
restrained, by the embrace of the others, as it were in bonds, and its
Particles be detained one from another by the interjection or coming between of
the rest, not only leaves the subject, but destroys it self, with too impetuous
an eruption. Indeed the little bodies of this being gently moved, do cause
digestion, and maturation, sweetness, and many perfective qualities in things:
being a little more strongly moved, they induce heat, and an excess of
qualities, inordinations, and chiefly a stinking savor: but being more
impetuously moved or stirred up, they bring in the dissolution of Bodies, yea a
flame and Burning.

The substance of Sulphur is never seen sincere, yea it consists not of it self
from others, but vanishes away into Air: its Particles being concreted and
chained together, with Salt and Earth, are fixed as it were immovable, as is
seen in Metals and some Stones: or being Diluted with Spirit and Water, and
tempered together with the rest, exist in motion, by which means (as was before
said of Spirit) they are in a threefold state, within the substance of the
mixture: for either first of all its little bodies being involved with Salt and
Earth, or too much drenched with a watery humidity, are obscured, so that they
exercise but little of virtue, from whence the humid and cold temper of things
exists, their qualities are Obtuse, Dull, and of small virtue or force, and the
Bodies less apt to be inflamed, as is discerned in unripe Fruit, raw Juices and
green Wood. Or secondly, The Particles of Sulphur begin to shine forth with
Spirit, to be more thickly heaped or rolled together, and to appear eminent
above the rest of the Principles. And so by its motion, they evaporate the
superfluous moisture, digest Crudities, and induce a warm temper in things,
active qualities, a lively force and maturation, or ripeness: which kind of
exaltation of Sulphur may be observed in Wine and Liquors long Fermented, in
ripe Fruits, in the Youth and florid Constitution of living Creatures. Or
thirdly, The Sulphurous Partickles being gathered into vigor, grow too hot,
loose the bonds of mixture, and desire to fly away; and from their diverse
manner of departure and separation, the dissolution of Bodies variously
happens: For either they evaporate with Water and Spirit, by degrees, and
without tumult, and leave their subjects lean and dry, which, when the Sulphur
is wholly gone, fall into Ashes: Or secondly, in Bodis which abound with Sulphur,
when the mixture is loosned, and the Spirits begin to fly away, the remaining
Particles of Sulphur are wont to be very much moved, and to grow exceeding hot;
and being shut up in a thick substance, are gathered together more nearly, (as
in Dung and Hay growing hot) and conceive heat, and sometimes Burning: breaking
forth after this manner, by heaps, and impetuously, they breath out a stinking
smell, and bring on a rottenness to the subject. There is a third manner of
eruption, whereby the Sulphurous Particles go forth of Bodies, when they
withdraw themselves, as it were with violence, and being gathered together,
break forth into fire and flame: whereby indeed becoming unbridled and untamed,
they break all bars or lets, and wholly destroy the substance or frame of the
Subject: By this means, by their own and proper effervescency they procure a
Burning, as when they being laid up wet, or the wheels of Carts, or Axeltree,
made hot by motion do fire, or because Sulphur is inkindled by Sulphur: for
its Particles being impetuously moved, shake or move all that is near them, and
carry them into the like motion of Conflagration, as shall be more fully shown
hererfter, when we shall discourse concerning the nature of fire.

3. Salt is of a little more fixed nature, than either Spirit of Sulphur, nor
so apt to fly away; but bestows a Compaction and Solidity on things, and also
weight and duration, It retards the dissolution of Bodies, and promotes
Congelations and Coagulations, and very much resists Putrefaction, Corruption,
and Inflammation; to wit, forasmuch as it fixes the too volatile Sulphur and
Spirit, and detains them in a Body: wherefore ponderous Woods, Stones, Metals,
and what abound in Salt, are hardly enkindled, and remain a long while free
from Corruption. Not only the duration of the individual, but also the
propagation of the Species, depends very much upon the Principle of Salt,
because the fertility of the Earth, the growth of Plants, and especially the
frequent faetation, and bringing forth of young, in living Creatures, takes
their Original from the Saltish Seed: hence it is, that Venus is said to arise
from the Sea, and Lust is called Salacity. For Salt having obtained a flux,
gathers together, and stirs up into motion, the idle, or too much disjoined
little Bodies of Spirit or Sulphur, and excellently keeps them together with
itself, for the producing the first groundwork of things.

Salt within the frame of the mixture, is either altogether fixed, when its
Particles being almost destitute of Spirit and Water, but bound together with
Earth, or Sulphur, or both of them, grow into Stones, Metals, of Minerals of
another kind; which fixity in Nature is imitated in making Glass, and Earthen
Ware: or Salt is loosned from its fixedness, to wit, when its Particles being
mixed with the other Principles, and chiefly with Spirit and Sulphur, and
Diluted with Water do unfold themselves, and being diffused through the
mixture, do Ferment with the rest: whilst the little Bodies of the Salt are
after this manner put into motion, there is observed of them a threefold State
or Condition, to wit, of Fusion, Volatilisation, and Fluxation.

I call the State of Fusion, when the little Bodies of the Salt being Commixed
with the rest, begin as to their smallest parts to be dissolved, and diffused,
and explicated here and there, through the whole substance of the mixture, as
may be observed in the Germination of Plants, in the first Conceptions of
living Creatures, and in the beginnings of Fermentations; hence Spring only a
rude and indigested formation of things, an ungrateful savor, and for the most
part bitter of biting.

From these first Rudiments of Motions, the Saline Particles ascend by little
and little, to Vigor and Volatilisation, together with Spirit and Sulphur: to
wit, whereby they run through the whole substance of the Body, and variously
move its matter, and dispose it toward maturity. Some little Bodies sharpen,
and stir up into Motion, others Fix, Establish, and Congeal into a stony
hardness. If there be plenty of Spirits and Sulphur, the Particles of Salt, as
their handmaids, go about to unite, and associate themselves intimately with
them, that they are not only snatched together with them, through all the
recesses of the mixture, but (the subject being exposed to Distillation) Salt
also ascends in the Alembic, even as the Spirit. From the Volatilisation of
Salt, Beauty, and Fairness, and savor chiefly sweet, happen in things, as in
the florid blood of living Creatures, in ripe Fruits, as also in Sugar, Milk,
and Honey, we know by experience.

I mean the Fluxation of Salt, when the saline Particles, which being first
gathered together, with Earth, or Sulphur, of associated with Spirit, and so
remain separated one from another, afterward the bond of the mixtion being
loosened, they become wholly free, and unloosened from the yoke of the rest: for
so they flow together, explicate themselves through the whole frame of the
subject, and whilst Spirit and Sulphur for the most part fly away, these
exercise a dominion over the remainder, and induce a soureness into the whole
mixture: by reason of this Fluxation of Salt, Wine, Milk, Blood, and Eateable
Things, at first grateful and sweet, grow ingratefully sour when they begin to
Corrupt; and for this Reason, all Salts whatsoever, having gotten a Flux, by a
violent Distillation by Fire (that is, being driven from the Combination of
Earth) grow sour, than if the same sour Liquor, be put upon the insipid dead
Head, the Whole lastly becomes salted.

Salt being deprived of the Company of the rest, (except the Earth) becomes at
last fixed, as is observed in Sea Salt, or the incineration made of Herbs,
whose Particles so cleave together, that they cannot be pulled asunder by the
strongest Fire. When Vegetables are Distilled, some Saline Particles, though
but few, made fit for Fusion, ascend with the rest; and from thence some
Distilled Waters retain a genuine savor of the mixture: The parts of living
Creatures being exposed to Distillation, yield a Volatile Salt: when Minerals,
or ponderous Woods full of Salt, are brought under by Chemistry, the Distilled
Liquor is like to Salt that has gotten a Flux, and is very sour.

Spirit and Sulphur easily unlock the substance of the mixture, and make way
for themselves; but Salt cannot, unless it be snatched forth of doors together
with the Spirit it self. As Spirit and Sulphur being outwardly applied, in
dissolving or burning a Body, open as it were the doors for their Companions
shut within, so also, Salt Liquors Distilled, do the same thing. For Stygian
Waters strongly Corrode Metals, and are seen like a flame put to them, to burn
and consume the same.

Salt resists Inflammation, for that it detains the Sulphurous Particles in
its Bosom, and hinders them from breaking forth. But excepting that Sal Nitre
increases the burning of Sulphur, which indeed happens by accident, because
that Salt, as it were an Hermaphrodite, grows very turgid with Sulphurous
Particles also, combined in the mixture; wherefore, when the Salt is melted by
other fired Sulphur, the shut up Sulphur, breaks forth with violence, and (like
a blast from a B^llows) shakes the inkindled fire round about, and drives more
impetuously the subject into a Body: In the mean time, if your put the flame to
Nitre, it will not be inkindled at all; but being put to a Sulphurous Body, it
promotes its enkindling; but the other Salts, less turgid with Sulphurous
Particles, or rather destitute of them, being mixed with Sulphur, hinder its
inkindling, and sometimes put it out.

So much for the Active Principles, which effect, as it were, the first
groundwork of Bodies: those which follow, chiefly bestow on them Consistency
and Substance. For from hence exist either Liquids or Solids, Small things or
Great. For Water and Earth, fill the little spaces that are empty, through the
Combination of the rest, with their coming between, and amplify and enlarge
the lineaments of he Body, otherwise too short and contracted.

4. Water is the chiefest Vehicle of Spirit and Sulphur, by whose intervention
they consociate one with another, and with Salt; for the other Principles,
being dissolved by a watery humor, or at least diluted, continue in motion,
without which they grow stiff, as congealed things.

When Water is wanting, the active Principles meet together too strictly, and
mutually rub against, and consume themselves; and when for this reason, the
suppliment of food is cut off, the Body grows withered. If humidity abounds too
much, these Elements are estranged or dissociated too much one from the other,
wherefore the subject becomes sluggish and slow, and of less efficacy, and
unapt for motion. Besides, Bodies too moist, are liable very much to rottenness
and Corruption; because from too much Humidity the Combination of Spirit, and
Sulphur, and Salt, is too loosely effected; that they do not mutually embrace
one another, nor are retained with their embracement, in the subject. Indeed
Water abounding easily evaporates, and then the frame of the mixture being
loosened, and the doors set open, Spirit and Sulphur easily break forth, the
way being made, and leave the subject, as it were vapid, or made sharp with
Salt: for from hence, the infusions of Vegitables, Decoctions, Juices of Herbs,
and all Liquid preparations, if the quantity of Water be greater than the rest
of the Principles, and improportionate, quickly Corrupt.

Water is most easily drawn forth out of every thing by Distillation, for when
Spirit and Sulphur are often entangled with nets of Salt or Earth, they hardly
let gotheir embraces, and are not obedient but to a more intense heat, and
often times require a previous Putrefaction. Water most easily, and often with
no labor, is driven out of every Body. But most often it snatches in its
flying away, some more loose Particles of Spirit and Sulphur, and carries them
with itself, forth of doors.

5. As the interjection of Water in Liquids, so of Earth in Solids, fills the
empty little Spaces and Vacuities, left by the other Principles. For these,
hinder the active Principles from a too straight embrace, whereby they should
rub against themselves, and cleave one to another; also by its thickness, it
retains too Volatile things: besides, it inlarges the due substance, and
magnitude in Bodies.

The more that Earth abounds in any thing, it is so much the less active, but
of longer duration: hence Minerals endure a long while, then next the greater
Trees; in the mean time Animals, and the more slender Plants, are but of short
age.

In Distillations, Earth ascends the Alembic, almost not at all, or but in a
very little quantity: for the most part it is left, with a portion of Salt, for
a Caput Mortuum or Dead Head; therefore it is called Terra Dammata, or damned
Earth: because, when the other Principles are freed, the Prison being as it
were broken, this is still detained: besides, Earth being deprived of the
Company of the rest, is of no Use, nor capable of change, or exaltation.

Thus much for the Elements or Principles of Natural things, considered apart,
and by themselves. It follows, that some of their Affinities and Conjugations
be unfolded: because these very strictly cohere with those, and very hardly or
not at all are joined with others. Out of the mutual Combination of some, and
disagreement of others, various Affections arise, the knowledge of which gives
no little Light to the Doctrine of Fermentation.

There is a certain Kindred and Similitude of parts, between Spirit and
Sulphur, which are agil or light, and easily to be dissipated in both;
wherefore, Spirit being driven forth of the Body, draws abundantly with it
Sulphurous Particles, as is discerned in Spirituous Liquors Distilled out of
any thing; to some of which if you mingle Water, the Liquor appears as it were
troubled with precipitated Sulphur, but the Spirit without the Sulphur is
undiscernably mixed with the Water, which however by reason of is Volatility,
may be also easily drawn away and separated by Distillation.

Although Spirit and Sulphur are Principles very resembling, and (because of a
ready motion) either are inflameable, yet they are not one and the same, as is
asserted by some: For Sulphur Copiously subsists in Bodies almost destitute of
Spirit, to wit, in common Sulphur, Antimony, and other Minerals; in which its
Particles are very fixed, and of their own nature almost immovable, which is
very far from the Nature of Spirits: For they abounding in any mixture, never
lie idle, and always in motion, bring various alterations to the Subject where
they dwell; then if they abound in strength, they easily and without tumult
carry themselves forth of doors of their own accord. But Sulphur, although it
abound, does not easily evaporate, but has need of a strong heat, or an actual
fire, that may make a way for it; and lastly, it breaks forth, not without a
stink or burning: yea, if you endeavor to Distill Oily and Fat things, although
very Sulphurous, with a moderate Fire, they are wont to yield a Liquor only
Waterish, and not inflameable; but if we provoke generous Wine, which swells
with Spirit, by the gentle heat of a Bath, a most burning Water will Still
forth, and apt wholly to be inflamed.

Spirit is not presently joined with Salt: For Sugar and Salts are scarcely
dissolved, by the rectified Spirit of Wine, but are after a manner associated
by a long digestion and circulation; as is perceived in the Volatile Salt of
Animals, of Tincture drawn forth from the Salts of Herbs, or of Minerals, by
the Spirit of Wine. If that Spirits excel in plenty, and virtue, they assume to
themselves, and Volatilise the Saline Particles. And therefore the Salt
contained in the Juice or Blood of Animals, being associated with Spirit is
volatilised: also the Spirit of Wine, being Distilled by many Cohalations, with
the fixed Salt of Herbs, renders it Volatile, and makes it pass through the
Alembic; but if the power of the Salt be greater, it tames the Spirit and fixes
it. Hence the blood, being become Salt, by means of an ill diet, becomes less
Spirituous. Fixed Salts, and the Oil of Vitriol fix the Spirits, grown too
volatile, and unbridled; and Coagulate the Spirit of Wine it self.

But Sulphur is a more fit subject of the Spirit, by the coming between of
which it easily is united with Salt and the other Principles; and as Spirit
best agrees with Sulphur and Water, so Sulphur intimately cleaves to Earth and
Salt.

As to Sulphur, besides its affinity with Spirit, it has a great relation with
Salt it self, to the volatilisation of which it does not a little help:
wherefore in Bodies which abound with a volatile Salt, there is found plenty of
Sulphur, as in Amber, Soot, Horns and Bones, as also in the excrements of
living Creatures; where Salt and Sulphur are in motion, and evaporate from the
subject, a very stinking smell is sent forth; for Sulphur being sharpened with
Salt, pricks more strongly the sensory, and strikes it with its sharpness; in
the mean time, Sulphur exhaling with Spirit, both pleases the sense, and
excites a very pleasant Smell.

Sulphur is as it were distracted between Spirit and Salt, and adheres at once
to both parties. In the Distillation of Amber, Turpentine, Hartshorn, and the
like, a certain lesser part of Sulphur, being united to Spirit, first ascends,
and causes a Yellow Oil, or clear Liquor of a grateful smell: the other part of
Sulphur, being joined to the Salt, is driven forth in the second place, and is
Distilied with a most stinking smell, in the form of a red or black Oil: In
like manner, in the Circulation of the blood, a pure and delicate portion of
Sulphur, being mixed with the Spirit, supplies both the Animal and Vital Spirit
with matter; the other more thick part, being Boiled and Roasted with Salt, is
laid up in the Choledock Vessels (or belonging to Choler) as it were a certain
excrement separated from the blood. As Spirit does not easily Cohere with Salt,
so Sulphur does not with Water: wherefore Fat and Oily things, as also Gumms
and Sulphurous Resines, either swim upon the Water, or sink down to its
bottom. But Sulphurous things, Salt coming between, are commixed with a Watery
Liquor, as we see Oils imbued with Sugar or Salt, to be dissolved in common
Water, which otherwise would flow separate.

Sulphur is not so tractable in Distillation, as Spirit, Water, or Salt: for
the Particles of this, being very Viscous, stick together among themselves, and
also to others, that they cannot easily be pulled from their embrace. Hence
among Sulphurous things, there are some, which are not forced, but by a strong
and burning heat, into a stinking Oil, and very empyreumatick, or smellin go
Fire: but others, more pertinaciously cleaving together, are not to be loosened
by Distillation, but are only broken into integral parts; and so ascend under
the form of a dry Breath, as common Sulphur, Benzoin, Camphor, and the like.

Salt, besides its affinity with Sulphur, is also most strictly united with
Earth; wherefore Stones, and the more hard Minerals, consist chiefly of Salt
and Earth. The Acid Spirits of Minerals, (which are only Salts resolved into
Liquor by Distillation) if at last they be poured on the Caput Mortuum, Cohere
with a strict embrace to it, that there will be need of a most strong Fire, to
drive them forth again. Also in Glass, the union of Salt and Earth is so
strictly made, that it will not suffer a Divorce by any means. Salt also is
most easily dissolved in Water; and it melts of its own accord, in a moist Air:
and these are as easily separated one from another.

By reason of these Combinations, these Principles have got various
Appellations, and not Congruous in their own Nature to themselves. For Sulphur,
for as much as it is Associated with Spirit, is called pure and sweet; when
with Salt, impure and stinking, for as much as with Salt and Earth, it is
called thick and Earthly; when the Spirit assumes to it self Sulphurous
Particles in a moderate quantity, it is seen to be sweet; when saline, sharp;
when both, bitter. Salt has a diverse disposition, and is known by many names,
by reason of its various mixture with the other Elements, and chiefly with
Earth: for besides the Titles of Fluid, Fixed, Volatile, for this reason it is
termed Marine, Aluminous, Nitrous, Vitriolick, Armoniack, or of some other
kind. By some, these kind of Conjugations are esteemed, but wrongfully, as so
many diverse Principles, when they are but more simple mixtures, by the coming
together of the first Elements, and being loosened by Distillation they openly
show their Race, from whence they are. For all Salts whatsoever being driven
into a Flux by the Fire, show Liquors very near of Kin one to another, to wit,
Acetous: by the like means Spirit and Sulphur are compelled to put off their
Masks, and to resume the Native Species common to each.

And so much for the Principles of Natural Things, and of their Affections and
conjunctions. It is abundantly manifest, that these kind of Substances are in
every Body, (besides the Analyzes of Bodies Chymically instituted) also from
the Mutations, and effects of Things, which happen of their own Nature. When
Must is Ripened into Wine, is not Spirit, a Sulphurous part, also Salt, and
Earth Conspicuous to our Taste and Eyes, besides the watery Liquor? Also the
Juice of every Plant being exalted by Digestion, exhibits the same sincere, and
as it were distinct: what is greater, things subject to the Flame, when they
seem to be burnt, and reduced almost to nothing, they go into these kind of
Particles; besides the Salt remaining in the Ashes, the Smoke and Flame grow
together into Soot, as it were a Meteor, in which are comprehended together,
Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water, and Earth, as it were in a certain compendium of
the mixture. For the active Principles abound in Soot more than in any other
inanimate Body.

But because with some there has spread a certain suspicion, that those our
Princlciples, chiefly the Saline and Sulphurous, are to be produced for the
most part by Fire, and are no ways to be found in mixed things, unless after the
coming between of that: I will witness to you in some instances, that the thing
is plainly otherwise. Concerning the first, It is commonly known, that the
Ashes of every Plant, being once Elixivated, or made into a Lie, if it be
afterward Calcined, will not yield any thing of Salt; besides if Concretes
being Distilled, Exhale or Breath forth a very sharp or acid Liquor, their Calx
is not saltish; and on the contrary when the Salt being Volatilized or brought
to a Flux, ascends the Alembic, you shall seek for it in vain in the dead head.
To prove the existency of the Sulphurous Principle in Vegetables, take
Guaiacum, or a piece of any other ponderous Wood, and being put into a Glass
Retort, draw it forth by degrees; it shall exhibit, together with an Acid
Liquor (which water is saltish) in great quantity, a blackish Oil (which part
of it is Sulphurous.) It appears from hence that this was in the Body before
the Distilling, and in no wise produced by its Operation, because if you
proceed after another manner, that the Sulphur may be taken out of the Concrete
before Distillation, the Liquor that comes forth will be almost wholly deprived
of its Oyliness: Wherefore, if you pour Spirit of Wine to those Chips of Wood,
it will Extract in a great quantity, by this Menstruum, a pure Resine, which is
the Sulphurous part if self: then if you Distill (as before) in a Retort, the
remaining Chips being washed in common Water and dried, you will have a very
little Oil only. What is more to be admired, and confirms also more fully the
truth of this kind of Origination, some Bodies, which being almost destitute of
Spirit and Sulphur (because chiefly Volatile) consist chiefly of Salt, Earth
and Water, are separated into these Elements by Distillation: the same mixture
in number, and wholly known by the same accidents, is restored to them, being
mingled together again; for example, if you Distill Vitriol in a Reverberating
Furnace, you shall have a Phlegm almost insipid, or a Watery part, then a
Liquor very sour, or a Salt having gotten a Flux, and in the bottom, a Red
Earth, and finely Purpled: this being rightly performed, if the two Distilled
Liquors be poured to the dead head, you shall have the same Vitriol, as you had
before, and again revived, in the same Color, taste, yea and almost in weight.
In like manner you may procced, with the same success, with Nitre, Sea Salt,
Salt of Tartar, and perhaps with Alum and other Minerals: So that those
Concretes, which consist of fixed, and stable Elements, may like a Mechanic
Engine be pulled into pieces, and presently without hurting the Machine, be
restored or made whole. But there is enough spoken concerning the Principles of
Natural Bodies. These being thus premised, we will proceed to the thing
proposed in the beginning, to wit, the Doctrine of Fermentation.

CHAP. III. What Fermentation is: Its Division as to the Subjects, and first of
Minerals.
FErmentation is an intestine motion of Particles, or the principles of every
Body, either tending to the perfection of the same Body, or because of its
change into another. For the Elementary Particles being stirred up into motion,
either of their own accord or Nature, or occasionally, do wonderful more
themselves, and are moved; do lay hold of and obvolve one another: the fubtil
and more active, unfold themselves on every side, and endeavor to fly away;
which notwithstanding being entangled, by others more thick, are detained in
their flying away. Again, the more thick themselves, are very much brought
under, by the endeavor and Expansion of the more Subtle, and are attenuated,
until each of them being brought to their height and exaltations, they either
frame the due perfection in the subject, or complete the alterations and
mutations designed by Nature.

Fermentation is an action or motion merely Natural, and what does perform it,
are only Particles Naturally implanted in the Concrete; yet as to the subjects
in which they are found, it is wont to be variously distinguished. And either
things of Nature are said to ferment in a threefold Family, of Minerals,
Vegetables and Animals; or the Works of Art, to wit, when Actives are applied
to Passives by an outward Agent. Though the Term and consideration of
Fermentation, are chiefly due to Artificial things, and things made by Hand,
yet it will not be from the puropse, to speak first something of Natural Things,
that a Comparison being made of either, the Truth of our Hypothesis, and the
certainty of the Principles may be confirmed. But this only lightly and by the
way, in this place I shall pass over, because their more full handling belongs
to Physiology, or the Doscourse of Natural or Physical Things.

In the first place, as to Minerals, although in the Bowels of the Earth, the
Fermentation is less conspicuous than in the Supersicies, yet it easily appears
that the Elementary Particles, or the Fermentative Principles, are included in
the depth of the Earth, as in a certain pregnant Womb: which there constitute
Concretes, and things gathered together, by strict Embraces, the Productions of
Minerals; but being loosned, and moved in the Bosom of the Earth, or exhaled
upwards, cause the appearances of Meteors.

First, The Generation of the more hard Minerals, induces rather Congelation
than Fermentation; because indeed these Principles, growing together in every
Subject, are so fixed, and as it were bound together in Bonds, that they are
not able any ways to move themselves, or to depart one from another. This kind
of Fixation chiefly depends on the plenty and greater proportion of Salt and
Earth, (sometimes with an addition of Sulphur) than there is of Spirit or Water,
To wit, Salt and Earth, being most smally broken, and resolved even into a
Vapor, lay hold of one another, and stiffen into a hard matter, and at last
not to be loosned; almost after the same manner as making of Glass, and the
burning of Bricks and Earthen Ware, are performed. For Glass consists of Salt
and Earth, which when being broken into most small bits by a very intense Fire,
they suffer a Flux, they mutually lay hold of one another, and so strictly and
intimately come together, that they arenever to be parted. Glass is more
fragil, or easy to be broken, than Earthen Pots, or Minerals, because it has a
greater plenty of Salt, than of Earth, which is more plentiful in Earthen Ware,
and in Minerals: To some of which, also happens a modicum of Sulphur, and for
that reason they are more tenacious and ductil; as is to be observed in Metals,
when in the mean time stones, and what contain little of Sulphur, are fragil,
and apt by every stroke, to fly to pieces. In Vitrification there is need of a
violent Fire, for the fusion of the Salt and the Earth, (whose Particles, as is
commonly said, are the Pestles of the Chemists) but within the Bowels of the
Earth, there is not required such a fusion by Fire, for the Concretion of
Minerals, because Salt and Sulphur exist, being naturally resolved into most
simple Particles; which, when they lay hold on the Earth, easily stiffen into
Metal, or into a stony hardness. There are some Fountains found out, which, for
that they folw with a Primitive Salt, and resolved into small Particles, what
every Bodies are immersed therein, they cause them presently to become stony.
We have read also, of Men changed into Stones, yea a whole City to have been
stiffned into a stony substance, by the Air, or by some Vapor brought forth of
the Earth: The Faith of which thing is left to the Authors.

Meteors are made out of the same Principles by which Minerals are made, and
conceived almost in the same Womb: but loosned from Concretion wandering here
and there, and diversely fluctuating: or which being included in Subterraneous
Vaults, and there moved, produce diverse Springings up of Fountains, or
ebullitions of hot Vapors; or exhaling from the Dens of the Earth, and being
mixed with Airy little Bodies, they cause within the Region of the Atmo-Sphear,
as it were a diverse fashioned Landscape, of Clouds, Winds, and the appearances
of other things, in the Superficies of the Earth, or on high: in either there
are highly active Principles, chiefly Salt and Sulphur. Spirits are either
deficient in Meteors, even as in Minerals, or are found only in a very small
quantity or proportion: to wit, they are almost wholly excluded from these, by
reason of the strict frame of the Subject, which does not easily yield space,
and passage for their motion; also they abstain from those ( viz. Meteors) by
reason of the lax, and wholly loose structure of Matter, from whence they, who
are mighty in swiftness, easily break forth, and desire to fly away.

Within the Bosom of the Earth, the Saline Particles being loosned, even into
a Vapor, and then kneaded with an Earthy Matter or the moistning of Waters,
they cause Eruptions of Fountains, and Acidulous or Spaw Waters, which resemble
the disposition of Vitriol, Alum, Nitre, sometimes of Iron or Copper. Also the
Sulphurous little Bodies being loosned, and gathered together, inkindle an
Heat, and sometimes Subterraneous Fires; by whose Breaths the Dens and Caverns
being made Hot, like an Hot-House, whilst the Watery humors pass through them,
they from thence conceive their Heat, and supply the Springs of Hot Fountains
for Bathes.

In like manner, in this visible and Etherial world, Vapors both Sulphurous
and Saline, and of a diverse Kind and Nature, perpetually breath forth, and are
diffused through the whole Region of Air. From hence the diversity of winds,
the vicissitudes of Cold and Heat, Rain, Snow, Hail, Dew, and Hoar Frost, and
what are of this Nature, have their Origin. Concerning the particular
instances of these, the famous Gassendus may be consulted, who in his Epicurean
Philosophy, most aptly deduces the Phenomenon, almost of all Meteors, and the
reasons of them, from the Exhalations of Sulphur, and Salts, either Nitrous,
Vitriolick, Aluminous or Armoniack.

CHAP. IV. Of Fermentation for as much as is observed in Vegetables.
IN Vegetable, Fermentation is yet more plainly discerned: for whilst they Bud
forth, Grow, Flower, hear Fruit, Ripen, Decline and Dye, we may observe the
diverse motions of Particles or Principles, their various Habits and Tempers. I
intend not here to describe the several ways and proceedings of these. It will
be sufficient, for the undolding the Doctrine of Fermentation, to take notice
of some chief instances, concerning this Subject.

If is manifest, by daily Experience, that all Plants whatsoever, exposed to a
Spagyrical or Chemical Operation, may with little labor, be resolved into the
aforesaid five-fold Elements; But in some there is found a greater plenty of
Salt, in others of Sulphur; in some Spirits abound: Water, and Earth, are in
most proportionated, according to the Bulk and magnitude of the thing. Plants
in which Salt abounds, with a mean of Sulphur, and a little quantity of
Spirits, are for the most part of long Age, somewhat big, or flourish all the
Winter, or tho their Leaves fall, they keep a Nutricious Juice under the Bark.
Of which sort are the Oak, Ash, Elm, Box-Tree, and all ponderous Woods and
Shrubs.

In some Sulphur abounds, wiht a little Salt and Spirit, as are the Pine, the
FirrTree, Cyprus Tree, Juniper, Ivy, Olive, Cedar, and Myrtle Trees, and all
resinous Plants; which, for the most part have a sweet smell, and are
perpetually Green, by reason the juice, wherewith they are nourished, is
viscous, and not easily to be dissipated. In others, besides plenty of Salt,
and Sulphur, Spirits also are found, in a greater proportion, as are
Fruit-bearing Trees, and especially the Vine, from whose Fruit the Juice being
wrung out, and purified by Fermentation, grows very big with Spirit. Of this
rank are Plants for the most part Medicinal, also such as produce Curious, and
Odoriferous Flowers, But in some Water and Earth luxuriat in too great a
quantity above the other Elements, as in cold Plants, and such as grow in too
rank a Soil.

The Germination of Plants happens after this manner, either it is made out of
the Seed, Root, Trunk, or of its own Nature, from the naked matrix of the
Earth. First, the Spirit being shut up within, by the Ambient Heat and Moisture
loosening the frame of the mixture, being loosned, it presently endeavors to
fly away: But being held back in its flight, by the more thick Particles of the
rest, stretches forth more largely its Den, and together with the other
Principles, with which it is bound, thrusts forth on every side, into length
and breadth: even as a little bundle of Silk, being contracted into wrincles
and folds, is opened here and there: In the mean time, the little Spaces left
by the enlargement of the Spirit, and as it were made hollow, are filled up by
the next Matter, driven even into the Vacuities. And after this manner the
Architect Spirit, with his Ministers, Salt and Sulphur, still stretching forth
it self, like a Snail, frames for it self an Houfe, whose Inhabitant it is, and
by dilating it self, stretches forth that, until at last it has wrought the
Plant into the due Bulk and Figure designed by Nature.

You may take notice, that the times of the year, for the Budding, Flowring,
Ripening, and decaying of Vegetables, are of great Efficacy and Virtue: All the
Winter, the Womb of the Earth, as it were shut up, is almost barren: for the
Spirituous Particles, which are wont to actuate the rest, and as it were to
lead the dance of Natural Motions, are either chased away by the Winters Cold,
or being Congealed in their Subjects, are fixed: Wherefore at this time
Germination and Vegetation are very rare, unless that some irregular Plants,
which are composed of plenty of Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, dare to break forth.
But in the Spring, when the bowels of the Earth begin to be a little warm, by
the Vicinity of the Sun, presently they are impregnated with a wonderful
Fecundity, and produce the effects of their Seminality. Not only the
Superficies of the Earth, but also the Water and Air, every where, grow big
with Spirituous Particles; which as it were raise up from the Dead, the little
Bodies of Salt, and Sulphur, and bring them into Motion: Therefore, besides
that the Plants Bud, the Juice and Blood of living Creatures is quicker and
more apt to abound. At this time the Birds and Fishes build their Nests, and
bring forth Eggs: also we may perceive in our selves the Blood to flow high in
the Vessels, and usually to Ferment too much. For all things are then full of
this Aetherial Substance, and the whole Bulk of Nature, as it were inspired by
a lively Fermentation, is abundantly fruitful of Motions and Generations. Yea,
these our Principles, at first separated and dispersed one from another, led as
it were by an Appetite of Copulation, enter into mutual Marriages, and being
Married together, almost with infinite Embraces, cause a most ample Seeding, and
Germination of the Herby State.

At the beginning of the Summer, (and perhaps in some sooner in some later)
when sufficient time has been granted for the Stature and Magnitude of every
Plant, and that it is now come to the highth of increase; it behooves Nature to
perfect her Work, and to cook and ripen the Substance, as yet rude and
undigested: Wherefore the active Principles leisurely extricate themselves from
the more thick, and creep forward toward the top, there being placed with a
mutual increase, they are formed into Flowers and Blossoms, from which at
length (for that they are of a soft and light texture) Spirit and Sulphur
easily evaporate, and the frame of the mixture quickly decays. But Nature
careful of the perpetuating every thing, when it cannot keep for ever the
individuum, is so provident, that the Species may not wholly perish: Wherefore
she institutes new and more firm and lasting Combinations of Spirit, Salt and
Sulphur. For she selects from the whole Substance of the Plant, the more noble
and highly active Particles, and these being gathered together, with a little
Earth and Water, she forms in the Seed, as it were the quintessences of every
Plant; in the mean time the Trunk, Leaves, Stalks, and the other Members of the
Plant; being almost quite deprived of the active Principles, are much
depauperated, and are of less Efficacy and Virtue.

About Autumn, after the Seeds are framed, (as it were pledges left in memory
of the Plant) the Particles of Spirits, Salt and Sulphur, which remain, being
now placed in their Strength or Exaltation, endeavor a Dissolution, and
Departing one from another. And first of all, the Spirits evaporate by degrees
with the Watery humor, through the Doors fet open by the Summer Sun, with
which the more pure parts of the Sulphur, make also their Journey: in the mean
time the Salt being fixed with the Earth, and more thick Sulphur, is left
behind: Wherefore in most the Leaves fall at this time, and in those of a
tender and light Constitution, the Principles are wholly dissipated, and the
Trunk and Stalk, together with the Root, wholly die. In some, after the falling
of the Seed, with the Leaves, the Stalks wither; in the mean time the
Principles, which may renew the Plant in the next Spring, are preserved in the
Root.

Also Winter coming on, the face of things is wholly changed; and the Elements,
which in the Spring did affect to be Joined and to Marry one with another, seek
nothing more than Divorces. The Spirits fly away from very many things, and
wander in the Air; in the mean time the Particles of Salt and Sulphur lie as it
were benumbed and asleep. Not only the Bodies of Vegetables, but of very many
Animals, are left as it were dead all the Winter, till they are raised again to
life by the Spirit, returning with the Vernal Sun, and as it were animated
anew. But this little Branch being made concerning the Vegetation of Plants, it
is now fit that we proceed on our Journey to Fermentation, by the Rule of our
before established Method, to what is to be observed, concerning the parts, and
humors of Living Creatures.

CHAP. V. Of things to be Observed of Fermentation about Animals.
IT is so certain that the Bodies of Animals, consist of the aforesaid
Principles, that it wants no proof. For they so plentifully swell up, with
Spirit, Salt and Sulphur, that their Particles are obvious to the sense:
Wherefore th^^ are moved with a more swift motion, and more excellent senses of
Life, and Functions of Heat, in the Sujects, in which they are implanted, are
enlarged. It would be too much labor, and tedious, here to describe, the
several manners and processes of Fermentations. The first beginnings of Life
proceed from the Spirit Fermenting in the Heart, as it were in a certain little
punct. The motion of this, is not as in Vegetables, slow and insensible, and
only to be known by their increasing; but presently becoming rapid, is
conspicuous to the Eyes: because the Spirit leaping from the Punct, as from a
Prison, being stirred, and having obtained the Vehicle of Blood, swiftly runs
forth; and leaping forth, it cannot wholly fly away, it makes hollow spaces for
it self in the thick substance, in which it is included, for its excursion,
being compelled some other way backward. Lastly being returned to the Heart, it
Ferments the more, wherefore it stretches forth further the spaces of its
Excursion, and so easily makes an hollow way for its return back; and after
this manner, for the carrying about the Blood, Arteries and Veins, as Channels
and Rivulets are framed through all the parts of the Body: and on such a
Vicissitude of Motion, or Reciprocation, depends the life of living Creatures,
which, that Nature might preserve a long while, she placed the Ferment in the
Heart, by whose instinct, or endeavor, the Blood grows impetuously Hot, and as
it were inkindled into a Flame by its Deflagration, diffuses the effluvia of
its Heat round about on every side: for by the Fermentation, or Accension which
the Blood suffers in the Bosom of the Heart, very many Particles of Spirit,
Salt and Sulphur, endeavor to break forth from its loosened frame: by which
being much rarefied, and like Water boiling over a Fite, the moved and boiling
Blood is carried through the Vessels, not without great Tumult and Turgescency.
We would speak more in this place, both of the Natural Fermentation of the
Blood, and the Feverish, but that we reserve this Consideration for a peculiar
Tract, where we Treat of Fevers.

Besides this Ferment constituted in the Chimny of the Heart, upon which the
motion and heat of the Blood very much depends, there are others laid up every
where in the Bowels, of a diverse disposition, by the help of which, both the
Chyle (which is the Rudiment or Beginning of the Blood) and the Animal Spirits,
its Quintessence, are truly framed. There are others also which serve for the
perfecting the Blood, transmuting it into other Liquors, and freeing it from
Excrementitious Matter: It will be too far from our proposed method, to wander,
to insist upon each of these, and to reap another Harvest: Wherefore I will
only add in this place, some select instances, which may illustrate the
Doctrine of Fermentation.

It is commonly received, that the Concoction of the Chyle, in the Ventricle,
is made by the means of a certain Acid Ferment: That such a thing is the Acid
belching in a full Stomach, and the want of it in the loss of Stomach, in
Feverish and Dysenterical people do testify, etc. and its restitution a sign
of Health: to which may be added this Observationn; Chalybeat Medicines being
taken at the Mouth, a little after excite a Sulfureous savor in the Throat, as
if hard roasted Eggs had been eaten: which seems wholly to be made by the Acid
Ferment of the Ventricle, gnawing the Iron, even as Spirit of Vitriol, being
sprinkled upon the fileings of Steel, excites such a stinking and Sulphurous
Odor. Some say this Ferment is breathed into the Stomach from the Spleen, but
by what means that may be done does not yet appear by Anatomical Observation.
It seems not improbable that this Ferment is implanted in the Ventricle, that
it is only made by some remains of the perfected Chyle, which fixed in the
folds of the Ventricle. and there growing sour, puts on the Nature of Ferment;
even as a portion of Dough being fermented or levened, and and kept to a
sowrness, becomes a convenient Ferment or Leven, for the making of Bread. In
like manner this kind of Acid humor being prepared from the Aliments, and long
carried in the Ventricle, promotes the Concoction, and subaction or subduing of
the Food. For Acid things, which are full of Salt, carried out to a Flux,
excellently conduce both to the Fermenting and Dissolving of Bodies: Wherefore
by the action of this, Salt and Sulphur, with which eatable things very much
abound, are broken in the Ventricle, and are reduced into very small parts. The
Chyle being after this manner Fermented, acquires a Milky color, by reason
that the Sulphurous Particles are dissolved together with the Saline, and
mixed with the Acid Ferment. For if you pour an Acetous humor to any Liquor
impregnated with Sulphur and volatile Salt, it presently grows white like Milk;
as may be discerned in the preparing the Milk of Sulphur, or the Resinous
extracts of Vegetables. Yea, the Spirits of Hearts Horn, or Soot, being very
full of Volatile Salt, if they be poured to any Acid Liquor, or simple Water,
acquire a Milky color.

Concerning this Ferment hid in the folds of the Ventricle, it is observed that
it is after various manners, and changes the Aliments by a diverse means: for
tho in a sound Constitution it is indifferently Acid, and chiefly owes its
force and energie to the Salt being brought to a Flux; yet it often declines
from this laudable condition, and conteins in it self either too much of
sowrness, or less than it ought to have: In the former Case, where the Salt
has got too sour a Dominion, all things taken in, (the Saline Particles being
carried forth to a Flux, and the rest unduly brought under) presently grow
sour: as most often happens in Hypochondriack Distempers: on the other side,
where the Volatile Principles obtain the first place, (Fermentation being too
hastily made) the Sulphurous parts of the Chyle are suddenly, and as it were
forceably exalted, and the unconcocted of the Saline, pass into Choler: which
ordinarily happens to those abounding with bitter Choler. They therefore who
have the Ventricle affected after this latter manner, Sweet and Fat meats being
eaten, they are troubled with a bitter and bilious Taste: Again, they who
suffer the contrary disposition, although they eat the most simple Food, send
forth plentifully Acid and Stinking belchings: and indeed this seems to come to
pass even after the same manner, as when a little too much Yest is put to the
Batch of Dough, it becomes bitter; or when too great a Portion of sour Ferment,
or Leven is put to the same Dough, the Bread from thence contracts a mighty
sowrness.

As the Blood in the Heart, and appending Vessels, the Chyle in the Ventricle,
so the Animal Spirit is wrought in the Brain, whose Original and Motions are
very much in the dark. Neither does it plainly appear, as to the Animal Spirit,
by what workman it is prepared, nor by what Channels it is carried, at a
distance, quicker than the twinkling of an Eye. But it seems to me that the
Brain with Scull over it, and the appending Nerves, represent the little Head
or Glassie Alembic, with a Sponge laid upon it, as we use to do for the highly
rectifying of the Spirit of Wine: for truly the Blood when Rarefied by Heat, is
carried from the Chimny of the Heart, to the Head, even as the Spirit of Wine
boiling in the Cucurbit, and being resolved into Vapor, is elevated into the
Alembick; where the Sponge covering all the opening of the Hole, only transmits
or suffers to pass through the more penetrating and very subtle Spirits, and
carries them to the snout of the Alembick: in the mean time, the more thick
Particles, are stayed, and hindered from passing. Not unlike this manner, the
blood being delated into the Head, its spirituous, volatile, and subtle
Particles, being restrained within by the Skull, and its menyuges, as by an
Alembick, are drunk up by the spungy substance of the Brain, and there being
made more noble or excellent, are derived into the Nerves, as so many snouts
hanging to it. In the mean time the more crass or thick Particles of the blood,
being hindered from entering, are carried back by Circulation: But the highly
agil and subtle Spirits enter the smallest and scarcely at all open pores of
the Brain and Nerves, and run through them with a wonderful swiftness: For
there is need only of such Receptacles and Channels, for the Animal Spirit, in
which there are none, or at least very small cavities or holes; otherwise the
blood or excrementitious humors, their Followers and Companions would not be
excluded. Also, besides, if these Spirits should run about through too open and
loose spaces, being easily dissipated, they would fly away: wherefore, when
there is need of a Pipe for the transmitting of blood, or serous water, the
Spirit of Wine runs rapidly through the secret passages of the Instrument or
Leather. Neither does the more strict frame of the Brain and Nerves serve only
for the straining of the subtle from the thick, and the pure from the impure;
but also that spirituous and most subtle Liquor, being as it were distilled
from the blood, gets yet a farther perfection in the Brain; for there being
inspired by a certain Ferment, whereby it is yet more volatilised, it is made
more fit for the performing the offices of motion and sense. Because the
substance of the Brain is exceeding full of a Volatile Salt, which is of great
Virtue for the sharpning and subtilising the Spirits; therefore the Spirits of
Hearts Horn, or of Soot, are far more penetrating than Spirits of Wine.

The Seminal Vessels and Genital Parts, do so swell up with Fermentative
Particles, that there is nothing more: here Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, being
together compacted, and highly exalted, seem in the Seed to be reduced as it
were into a most noble Elixir. These kind of active Principles do not only
Ferment in the Womb, for the forming of the Child or Young ones, but also as it
were with a living Ferment, they inspire through all the Body, the whole Mass
of blood, that it may be more Volatile, and more sharply Hot: wherefore in
women who have the Ferment of the Womb in good order, their Face is furnished
with a curious and flourishing color, their heat is more lively and copious;
moreover, the Mass of Blood growing too rank, there is need of emptying it
every Month by the Flux of their Courses; but when this Fermentation from the
Womb is wanting, both Virgins and Women become Pale, and as it were without
blood, short winded, and unfit for any motion. Also in men, from the Seminal
Ferment, happen abundance of heat, great strength, a sounding Voice, and a
manly eruption of Beard and Hair; by reason of the defect of this, men grow
womanish, to wit, a small Voice, weak Heat, and want of Beard are caused.

Since we Treat of Ferments, which are found in the Animal Body, we may here
opportunely inquire, what is the use of the Spleen: concerning which all good
things are said by some; that it is as it were another Liver, and serves for
the making of blood, for the Viscera of the lower Belly: It is by others
reputed to be of a most vile use; that it is only the Sink or Jakes, into which
the Feculencies of the blood are cast. By reason of its structure, we make this
sort of conjecture; because the Arteries, do carry the blood to this, and the
Veins bring it away, neither any other thing is carried in, or conveyed out,
and for that its substance is filled with black, and stagnating blood, it seems
that it is as it were a storehouse for the receiving of the earthy and muddy
part of the blood: which afterward, being exalted into the Nature of a
Ferment, is carried back to the blood for the heating of it: Wherefore, while
the blood being carried by the Arteries enters the Spleen, something is drawn
from it, to wit, the muddy and terrestrial Particles, which are as it were the
dregs, and Caput Mortuum of the blood; that by this means the whole Mass of the
Blood, might be freed from the Melancholic or Atrabilous Juice; which is
separated in the Spleen, even as the yellow Bile or Choler, is in the Liver:
wherefore, for the most part the Spleen is of a black or bluish color, by
reason of the Feculencies or dregs there laid up. But as this Juice deposited
in the Milt or Spleen, is not altogether unprofitable, but by reason of the
plenty of fixed Salt, is of a very Fermenting Nature; it is not presently, as
the Choler, cast into the sink, but is farther Cooked in the Spleen, and being
exalted goes into a Ferment; which being lastly committed to the blood promotes
its motion and Volatilisation: Wherefore, as something is drawn from the blood,
entering the Spleen by the Arteries, to wit, the Crude Juice of Melancholy; so
something is continually added to the same, flowing back through the Veins, to
wit, the same Juice concocted and exalted into the Nature of a Ferment: Even as
Chemists, in Distilling, that the Liquor may be made better, separate the
Subtle and Spirituous parts, from the Caput Mortuum, and then pour them on it
again; and this work they so often repeat, till the Caput Mortuum or dead Head,
is by frequent Distillation Volatized, and the Liquor rightly exalted, even in
all its Particles. That this is the use of the Spleen, it is a sign, for that
this inward being ill affected, the blood either ferments too much, as in the
Scorbutic and Hypochondriack Distempers; or if the Spleen be obstructed, or
beset with a Scirrhous Tumor, the blood is destitute of fit Fermentation, and
causes the Dropsy, Cachexie or evil disposition of the Body, or the Tympany.

As we assert, the Earth and muddy part of the blood, which consists chiefly of
Earth and fixed Salt, being separated in the Spleen, to pass there into a
Ferment; so it seems not improbable, that also the Adust, or as it were the
fiery part of the blood, to wit, the Yellow Bile, which consists chiefly of
Salt and Sulphur, being separated in the Liver, and from thence transmitted to
the intestines, serves for some use of Fermentation. For this being mixed with
the Chyme or Juice, fallen from the Ventricle to the intestines, makes it there
to grow hot and to swell up; whereby both the Elementary Particles are more
overcome, and by reason of the Rarification or swelling up, the purer part is
wrung forth into the Milky Vessels, for the Nutritious Juice.

We are not only born and nourished by the means of Ferments: but we also die:
Every Disease acts its Tragedies by the strength of some Ferment. For either
the Sulphurous and Spirituous part of the blood, being too much carried forth,
boils up immoderately in the Vessels, like Wine growing hot, and from thence
Fevers of a diverse kind and nature are inkindled: or sometimes the Saline part
of the blood, being too much carried froth, suffers a Flux; and from thence it
being made acid, austere, and sometimes sharp, is apt for various Coagulations:
from which the Scurvy, Dropsy, Stone, Leprosy, and very many Chronical
Diseases arise.

Yea we also endeavor the Cure of Diseases by the help of Fermentation: For to
the preserving or recovering the Health of man, the business of a Physician and
a Vintner, is almost the same: the blood and humors even as Wine, ought to be
kept in an equal temper and motion of Fermentation: wherefore when the blood
grows too hot, even as Wine, it is usual to empty some out of the Vessels, and
to allay its Fervor with temperat things. If any extraneous or heterogeneous
thing, is mixed with it, unless growing hot of its own accord, it drives it
forth of doors; Purging, Vomiting, and Sweating Medicines, by shaking and
fusing the blood and humors, promote its seclusion: when that the blood is
depauperated, and grows less hot than it should do, Cardiacks, Digestives, and
especially Chalybeats or steeled Medicines restore its vigor and Fermenttation:
no otherwise than Wines growing sour or degenerating into a deadness or want of
strength, are mixed with more rich Lees, whereby they may Purge or grow turgid
anew. I could easily unfold the Curatory intentions, as also the effects and
operations of every Medicine, according to the Doctrine of Fermentation; but I
design aparticular meditation for this thing: for the perfecing of which
serious work, God willing, I have determined to add to the business of
Medicine, as I hope, something not unprofitable.

Having thus far wandered in the spacious field of Nature, we have beheld all
things full of Fermentation; not only in the distinct Provinces of Minerals,
Vegetables and Animals, do we discern the motions and effects of this, but also
the whole Sublunary world, seems as if one and the same substance were planted,
and very pregnant through the whole with Fementative Particles; which in every
Region and Corner of it, as little Emmits in a Molehill, are busied in
perpetual motion and agitation; they fly about here and there; sometimes
upwards, sometimes downward they are hurried, they variously meet one another,
associate themselves, and again depart asunder; with a continual Vicissitude
they enter into diverse Marriages, and suffer Divorces, on which the beginnings,
the death, and transmutations of thins, depend. These little Bodies do not only
very much abound in the bosom of the Earth, or in the midst of the waters, but
they are especially diffused through the whole Atmosphear of the Air in thick
heaps. It is sufficient that I have noted in this place, some examples in a
word: I have not determined a more full speculation of them here. It is time
that we proceed from Physical things, to the works of Art.

CHAP. VI. Of Fermentation, as it is performed in Artificial things.
IN the works of Art, so various and manifold provision of Fermentation is
perceived, that it is altogether impossible to enumerate their several Species;
or to reduce the diverse instances of this to certain Classes or Heads of
distribution. Making use of the third of the following method, we will subjoyn
some examples, (which have happened to our observation) by whose rule, many
others may be laid open.

Concerning Fermentation, which is made in the Subjects, made by hand, or human
industry, these three things are chiefly to be considered.

First, of what Nature and Composition Bodies are, that are most fit for
Fermentation, and which are less convenient for it.

Secondly, What things are requisite about Fermentation, to wit, what are wont
to promote, or also to hinder its motion in every Subject.

Thirdly, How manifold the motion of Fermentation is, and the end of it; also
what are the effects and alterations which follow it.

As to the first, That all Bodies, (when tending to perfection) may truly
Ferment, they are required,

In the first place, That there be some parts loose and disjoined; otherwise
the Fermentative Particles will not be stretched forth, or move from place to
place: Wherefore in the more hard compacted things, or in viscous things, or
too much boiled, or evaporated too a spissitude or dryness, Fermentation does
not succeed. What are Liquid, as Wine, Beer, the Juices of Fruits and Herbs,
easily and quickly swell up; next to these what are soft, tho they are of a
thicker Consistency, as Bread, and most Eatable things, and Medicinal
Compositions.

Secondly, It is required that there be an Heterogeneity of parts, or a
confusion of all the Principles together; to wit, that some Particles do oppose
othess, and stir them into motion. For the more simple Bodies, in which one, or
at most two Elementsonly are strong, with a very small proportion of the rest,
are unapt to Ferment: because like Particles, or Symbolical Elements, lie
benumed and quiet. But between the unlike, therearises presently a strife for
domination, and some provoke others into motion.

Thirdly, There is a third condition, that there be neither too much Crudity,
nor Maturity of parts, in the body Fermenting. In the Former, the active and
subtle particles, are not easily extricated from the more thick, nor are
brought into motion: as it appears in Juices, which are pressed forth from
unripe Fruit; also in Beer which is made of Barley or Malt, not come forth or
germinated. In the latter the Particles being made too volatile, are not
contained in the bond of the mixture, but presently evaporate, and dispose
their Subjects to Putrefaction. Wherefore, Juice expressed from Summer Fruits,
or others too ripe, will not easily pass into Wine, but it will quickly
corrupt. And for this reason, extravasated blood, milk, and urine, do not
Ferment, but quickly putrify.

As to the second thing proposed, there are many ways by which Fermentation is
either promoted or hindered. The first and chiefest, is the adding of a certain
Ferment to the body Fermenting; the Particles of which, when being first placed
in vigor and motion, may raise up the others, idle and sluggish, in the
to-be-fermented Mass, and may drive them into motion. But there is a twofold
Ferment; either absolute, which is the same kind of Body, in which the active
Particles, being altogether placed in their vigor, are notably in motion, and
so whilst they are committed to the Subject in Fermenting, snatch with them
into motion other Particles there of the every kind before sluggish: by this
means Barm or Yest, beaten Eggs, and such like, stir up a Fermentation almost
in every thing. Or the Ferment is respective, to wit, which consists of
Particles, very much of one kind, which meeting other of another kind, in the
Mass to be Fermented, grow hot with them, and so produce in the mixtnre a
turgency or rising up of all the parts together. After this manner Saline
Particles having gotten a Flux, grow very hot, with other Salines, either fixed
or alchalisater; as appears when acetous Liquors are poured on Corrals, Hearts
Horn, shells of Fishes; also when the Spirit of Vitriol, and the Salt of
Tartar, are put together, a great ebullition is excited.

There are some accidents and external circumstances, which variously conduce,
either to the provoking or hindering the motion of Fermentatio; of which sort,
are chiefly the condition of the Ambient Air, the placing or laying up of te
body Fermenting, and the means of conserving it.

The Southern Air (in which hot and humid Particles every where abound, which
also entering easily any Bodies, obtain the force and place of a Ferment)
impresses a notable motion of Fermentation in very many things: Wherefore in
drinkable Liquors, it does not only raise up at first, the force of
effervescency or growing hot, but also for a long while afterinduces new
swellings up in them being Fermented. On the contrary, the Cold and Northern
Air, binds up, and very much fastens Bodies; and in very many things hinders
them fusions, and flowings of the Elements, and oftentimes, either hinders
Fermentation from being stirred up, or restrains it being begun. Also the hot
Summer Air, because it too much moves the active Principles, drives away the
Spirits and subtle parts, exalts the Sline, and Sulphurous into a Flux, and
so perverts their equal motion; and either the Sulphur or Salt being too much
carried forth, it easily brings to Bodies a rancidness or putrefaction, or a
mouldiness; which nothing favors the business of Fermentation.

It is a vulgar opinion, that some select times of the year, to wit, those in
which the Vegetables of every Kind flower, cause anew the motion of
Fermentation in the Juices, and other things prepared of them, after they had
Fermented a long time before; so that Beer, when the Barley, and Wines in the
time that the Vine, flowers, conceive risings up, or new Fermentations: they
say also, that Bread and Flour, when the Wheat is in Flower, is want to become
sooner musty and moldy: also that spots or stains of the Juices of Fruits, as
the Mulberry, Blackberry, Rasberry, and such like, being in Clothes, are wont
to be gotten forth again, at that time when those Fruits are Ripe. Concerning
these things, I ingenuously confess, that I have not made trial of them, by my
own proper observation; so as to dare to affirm it for truth in every part: I
will therefore lightly pass them over, for it would both grieve and shame me
(lest I should relate false things) to Philosophize concerning doubtful things.

Concerning the laying up of the Fermenting Body, these things are chiefly to
be observed. When things first being to Ferment, that they are not to be shut
up in too close Vessels, neither while the Liquors are hot, are they to be put
into Bottles or Casks. For the Particles, at first boiling up, and as it were
rarefied, desire a very large space: wherefore the Fermentation of Wine or
Beer, is begun in open large Vessels: but when they grow less hot, those kind
of Liquors, lest the Particles being set and moved into motion, too much,
should fly away from the Subject, they are kept best, either in a cold Cellar,
or close Vessels. In the preparation of Vinegar, we boserve the contrary, to
wit, it is wont to be placed in a hot place near the Chimney or Oven, or
exposed to the Suns beams: to the end that the vinous Spirit being depressed,
the Saline part might be exalted into a Flux, and so might give a sharpness to
the Liquor. There is another observation, that Liquors do Ferment better in
wooden Vessels, than in Glass, or Stone: For by long infusion, some Saline
little Bodies are got froth of the Wood, especially the Oaken, which promote
Fermentation.

As to the third thing proposed, concernign this thing; although to speak
properly, the motion of Fermentation, is only a carrying forth of the
Principles confused together, from a state of Crudity toward maturity; and the
end of it, is a tendency to the perfection of every thing: yet use or custom
has obtained, that this word is attributed to very many other motions of
Natural things, and includes other ends, and effects, far different. Therefore
when the Fermentative Particles in any Body, are greatly in motion, the
alterations which follow thereupon, may be in some respect referred to these
three Classes.

First, it either respects the exaltation, and perfection of the parts of the
same Body; or the resolution, and corruption of them.

Secondly, Or the dissolution of the parts of another Body is intended; or the
praecipitation of those loosened.

Thirdly, By the motion and action of these kind of Principles, a coagulation,
and also a congelation, now of the same Parts, now of different Bodies, are
induced. It remains, that we briefly run through every one of thse Species of
Natural Motions, and ways or manners of Fermentation.

CHAP. VII. Of Fermentation, as it is seen in the exaltation of Bodies, and
tendency to Perfection.
THE Exaltaion of the parts, is perceived best in Works, or in all things
appointed for human use, forasmuch as they get a greater perfection and vigor,
by Fermentation; as, chiefly Aliments and Medicines do: in many of these, we
endeavor to carry forth the Spirituous Particles above the rest; and so to
procure in the mixture, a grateful sweet taste, and other agreeable qualities;
as we may observe in Bread, Beer, Wine, Cider, and many others: But in some, we
strive to exalt the Saline part, the Spirit being somawhat depressed; as in
Vinegar, Mead, Broths, also in Sauce, Pickle, or in Preserved things, which
are made of Salt and sharp Liquors. We rarely on purpose carry forth the
Sulphurous part above the rest, for from thence a stinking smell, and
ungrateful rammishness, are wont to happen to eatable thinds. Among foods set
apart for man's use, Bread, Beer, Wine, and Cider, have the first place; which
own mostly, whatever they have of virtue, or strength, to Fermentation.

Concerning the making of Bread, these things are chiefly to be observed: the
Meal of Wheat, or Barley, or of any other Grain, being kneaded with
common-water, is reduced to a mass, to be afterward baked in an Oven. If there
be nothing else added to this, it becomes forthwith heavy, and ponderous like
Clay, clammy, and of an ungrateful taste, and of difficult digestion: but if in
the kneading it, there be added a Ferment, the Mass presently grows hot, the
bulk swells, and afterward being baked, it is made light, spongy, of good
digestion and grateful to the taste. If you desire to know the reason of the
difference, it is this. The meat of the Grain is imbued with a moderate
proportion of Spirits, also of Salt, and Sulphur; but the Particles of these,
are overwhelmed in the Mass, with a viscous humidity, being kneaded with water;
so that they move not themselves mutually, nor are in motion: wherefore in the
baking, some superfluoous humidity evaporates; what remains is cleaving,
viscous, and becomes pressed close like Clay, and ponderous. But when a Ferment
is mingled with the Mealy Mass, the active Particles of the Ferment being
first-stir'd up into motion, take hold of their Companions in the Mealy Mass,
and carry them with them into motin. By this means, whilst some move others,
they shortly are all stirred up into Fermentation; tumultuating here and there,
they compass and run through the whole Past or DCough, they subtitise and
attenuated the clammy and terrene parts, and they lift up the mass, with the
motion, and make it hollow, with little holes; which yet in the mean time, lest
it become too spungy, and whereby the parts made hollow, and attenuated might
more exactly be mixed, it is wrought with long kneading, then afterward,
before the Fermentation ceases, and before the hollowed parts sink close down,
it is baked in the Oven. In the baking, the superfluous moisture evaporates,
and moreover, very many Particles of Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, fly away;
wherefore, the mass becomes lighter, and less ponderous, in the mean time,
those which remain in the Bread, being much exalted, and brought to maturity,
cause in it a laudable consistency, with a grateful smell, and taste.

The Ferment commonly used, is a portion of the Mealy Mass, and unbaked, which
is kept, being imbued with Salt, to a sowtness (it is called in French Levain,
because it lifts up the Mass) or the flowring of Beer, or Ale, called Yest or
Barm; or for want of these the lees or dregs of Beer, or beaten Eggs, are made
use of. In the mealy Ferment, the Saline Particles having gotten a Flux, do
chiefly predominate; as also in the faeces of Beer: wherefore the Bread
Fermented by these, is made harsh and somewhat sour: In the mean time, Yest
being very big with Spirit, Ferments the Bread more potently, and brings to the
Mass lightness, and a very grateful sweetness. Beaten Eggs abound with Spirit
and a Volatile Salt, and do yet more cause the Bread to Ferment, and render it
more Spongy: without doubt there may be other kinds of Ferments used; for
whatever are big and turgid with Spirit, or abound with Salt carried out to a
Flux, seem to be fit enough for this use.

Sometimes the mealy Mass is kneaded with Sulphurous matter, as Butter, Sewet,
Fat, or such like, which being baked in an Oven, while it is hot, it is seen to
be light and spongy, (to wit while the Sulphurous Particles, are kept in
motion by the heat contracted in the Oven) afterward, when this Mass grows
cold, it becomes heavy, weighty, and very close: to wit, the ascititious heat
being exhaled, the Sulphurous Particles, before carried forth, at length sink
down; and when the Particles of the rest, not being excited into motion, the
Mass therefore becomes as it were Infermentated: For in these kind of Subjects
the Sulphurous Particles, because they are very viscous, hinder the motion of
the rest, nor can they themselves persist in motion, longer than they are
forced, by the actual heat.

Bread is sometimes made of the flower of Wheat, or Barley, that is Germinated or
Maulted, which without any Ferment added to it, becomes so exceeding hot, that
it cannot be contained in a compacted mass, but that in the baking it spreads
abroad: the reason of which is, in such Flower, by the Maulting it, the active
Principles are before placed in their vigor, and exaltation; wherefore in the
kneaded Mass, when they are urged, by the heat of the Oven, they run forth
inordinately, and force the more thick parts, hindering them, and as it were
fling them down headlong. We have said enough of making Bread; we will now
pass to Beer.

Beer is made of Malt or Barley, germinated and dried, which is performed after
this manner: First, the Barley is put into common water for three days, that it
may intumifie or swell, then (the water being let out from it) it is flung in a
heap upon a dry floor, moving it twice or thrice a day, lest it grow too hot,
until it begins to germinate, or bud forth, or put out little shoots of Roots.
Afterward, by frequent casting it about, it is hindered from germinating or
springing forth any farther, and lastly, being laid upon a Kiln, it is made
dry by rosting it; by this means, it yields a meat wonderfully sweet.

The reason of this kind of process is this; the Barley is permitted to spring
forth, that its active Principles might be brought or set into their strength,
or exaltation: for when it germinates, the Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, at first
asleep, and sluggish, do swell up or grow big together, and their sluggishness
being cast off, they are prepared to exercise their powers. The other
preparations, hinder the Barley from germinating further, lest that its
Principles being very much loosned, should exhale too much, and fly away from
the Subject. The Meal of the Barley thus prepared grows sweet, because the
active Principles are set in exaltation like Fruit brought to a maturity:
wherefore also the Liquor impregnated with this Meal, grows very turgid or big
with Spirituous and Fermentative Particles; when the simple decoction of Barley,
scarce Ferments at all, nor is kept long, but that it becomes musty, and
insipid.

But Beer is made after this manner; upon the Meal of the Barley, prepared as
above said, boiled water is poured, and is suffered to be macerated, or mashed,
for some hours, that it may be sufficiently impregnated with the active
Particles of the germinating Barley, now placed in their vigor: This Liquor
being satisfied or filled, is drawn off clear from its settling, and is lastly
boiled, that it might get a something more thick consistency, and be able to be
kept the longer: Then, when it is somewhat cold, it is Fermented, a Ferment, or
the flowring of Beer or Yest, being put thereto, and so tuned up in a Barrel.
Concerning its Fermentation, these things are especial worthy of observation.

If it macerate with, or stand too long on, the Maulted Meal, the Liquor
becomes thich and clammy; and afterward will hardly Ferment or Work at all:
the reason of this is, because the active Principles, in this work, are of a
prompt motion, and move together with them, the earthy Particles; with which,
if by a long stay, the passages and pores of the Liquor are filled; being too
full, they are wholly obstructed, and as the contents in the Stomach, stuffed
to a furfeit, scarcely Ferment at all.

If too hot, or too cold, the Liquor be put into the Barrel; as in the great
heat of the Summer, or the cold in the Winter, Fermentation does not rightly
succeed: for by too much heat, the Particles are dissipated one from another,
that they cannot, mutually take hold of one another, and so work; by too much
cold, they are bound up and fixed, that they scarce enter into motion, neither
perform it strongly.

When the Liquor of the Beer Ferments in the Vat, the active Principles do on
every side explicate themselves, they precipitate in the bottom the more thick,
and Earthy, being partly driven as it were into flight, and partly sticking to
them, they lead them as it were Captive to the top, and there make hollow
bubbles continually growing up, and bring them as it were to servitude. After a
due Fermentation, the whole space of the Liquor is rendered clear and without
dregs, in which the Spirits with a little Salt and Sulphur, do abound; in the
mean time, in the settlement or dregs, a little of Spirit and Sulphur, with a
greater plenty of Salt and Earth remains. So long as these shall be in their
places the Liquor will be clear, sweet, and Spirituous, but if long kept, or
not shut up closely in a Barrel, great part of the Spirits will fly away: in
the mean time, by the defect of these, the Saline Particles being exalted, and
having gotten a Flux, impregnate the whole Liquor, and make it sour; for when
Beer, as also Wine, goes into Vinegar, it does not happen because they are
wholly deprived of Spirits, (for so they would degenerate into a tastless
thing) but because the Tartareous or Saline parts, are carried forth to a Flux,
and infect the Liquor with their sharpness; in the mean time, the Spirits being
less in power, are depressed, that they cannot resist them. Very hot weather,
Thunder, the noise of great Guns, or the tunning it in the open Air, suddenly
makes Beer grow sour, for by these means the Spirits being disturbed in their
equal motion, are dissipated; and in the mean time, the Saline or Tartarous
parts, being before separated, and depressed, are moved, and carried forth into
a Flux.

Indeed it plainly appears that the Spirituous parts in Vinegar, are not wholly
destroyed, but suppressed only whilst the Saline are placed in a Flux; because
from Vinegar, may be Distilled, a Liquor exceeding hot and burning, like the
Spirit of Wine, after this manner: With the Distilled Vinegar, a Salt is
extracted from Minium, or Lead Calcined, of which you have plenty, and shall
distill it in a Retort, the Vinous and burning Spirit is driven into the
Receiver; the reason of which is, because when the Saline Particles of the
Vinegar are united with the Salt of the Lead, the Vinous Spirits yet remaining
are then freed; and having obtained their own right, they are urged from their
lurking places by the heat of the Fire: but those Spirits are not produced from
the Lead, because if you give thereto a more vehement Fire, the Salt of the
Lead, will be melted into a Metal.

But we will return to Beer, from whence we have digressed; to which, how great
a perfection happens, by Fermentation, appears by this experiment. If you take
Beer new made, not yet purged by Fermentation, and place it to be Distilled in
a Bladder or Cucurbit; only a vapid or tastless water ascends, without any
Spirits, and strength at all: but if you proceed after the same manner with
Beer truly Fermented, you will have a hot water, and highly Spirituous. And
this takes away the objection of some, who say that water being even
impregnated with the Meal of Malt, should not be any more boiled, lest the
Spirits should exhale; because the Spirits, before Fermentation, are so
obvolved with the more thick Particles of the rest, that they cannot break
forth from the Concrete.

The more the Beer is impregnated by the Malt, the stronger it is, keeps the
longer without sowring; which is helped if Hops be boiled therein, from which at
first it grows bitter, but afterward recovers a grateful sweetness; the reason
of this is because the pores of Liquor, which are empty of the Particles of the
Meal, when they are possessed by those of the Hops, the consistency is made
more compact, and is more full of Fermentative Particles; wherefore there is
not quickly given any room for the Flux of the Salt. But that the Liquor being
at first bitter, afterward grows sweet, happens for this reason; because the
Spirituous and Sulphurous parts, supplied by the Meal of the Malt, come not
so soon to maturity, because of the others mixed with them from the hops being
boiled therein: but when this happens, that they grow to maturity, they easily
excel all the others, and impart a sweetness to the whole. Not only Hops being
boiled in Beer, keep it long from sowring, but also many other bitter, or sharp
things, do the same: for these, forasmuch as they exceed in a Volatile Salt,
hinder the flowings of others Salt; wherefore, some are wont to put into the
Barrel, a piece of Sassafrass Wood, the tops of Wormwood, Broom, the FirrTree,
the rinds of Oringes, also Spices in a small quantity; by which means, the
Drink, tho of a smaller substance, is kept a long while from sowring. Thus much
concerning the preparation of Beer, on the consideration of which, (as also of
Bread) we have stayed long, because the word Fermentation is chiefly due to
these. Let us pass next to Wines. Excepting the Blood of Animals, there are no
Liquors that grow hot, like Wines; there is found in none a greater plenty of
Spirits, Salt, and Sulphur, or a more remarkable turgescency, or swelling up.
The Fermentation of Wines, and the handling of them Fermenting, are wont to be
taught among the Vintners or WineCoopers, as a secret only to their
Apprentices, or the Adepti of their Art. Among them there is delivered a
certain Physical Science, or Method of Medicine, by which means, the impurities
of Wines are purged forth, their heats attempered, or also their defect, or
sickness may be healed. There are many ways to be used, besides that of
sophisticating, as a secret, by which depauperated and tastless Wines are sold
for sound and rich. But as to our proposition, that the Doctrine of
Fermentation might be illustrated, these three things ought chiefly to be
considered, concerning Wines: First, Their desaecation or cleaning, and their
going into parts. Secondly, Their immoderate effervescency or growing hot, from
what causes it is wont to be stirred up, and by what means to be suppressed.
Thirdly, The declination of them, when they grow worse: and by what remedies
they are kept that they do not quickly pass into a tastlesness or Vinegar.

1. As to First, That Fermentation may beging in the Must, there is not (as in
Beer) required, the putting to any Ferment, for the Juice being expressed from
the Grapes, does so greatly swell up with active Particles or Principles, that
it presently of its own accord, grows remarkably hot: but it is a usual thing
in some regions, when the Grapes are trod, to besprinkle them with Quick Lime,
by the provoking of which, as a Ferment, the Liquor pressed forth, grows more
fervent, and is sooner purged. The Must or new Wine, is at first put into open
Tubs, for that they cannot be contained in close Vessels, for their great heat
or working, which so boyls up, that water over a Fire grows not more hot: when
the Wine is a little cooler it is put into more close Vessels, in which it is
further purged by Fermenting. In the purifying, the Spirituous and Subtle
Particles greatly shake the more thick dregs, and dismiss them from themselves
on every side, that the Mass of the Vinous Liquor, being made free from the
mixture of the dregs, is rendered clear and without dregs. The Faeces or Lees of
the Wine consist of Salt and Sulphur, with a little Spirit and plenty of Earth;
which whilst the Wines grow hot, being separated by degrees, either by
Coagulating themselves mutually, are affixed to the sides of the Vessels under
the Species of Tartar, or like Lees or Mother, settle to the bottom. In the
mean time the Liquor swimming over them, is very clear and exceeding Spirituous.

Sometimes the defecation or clearing of Wines is hardly brought about, as a
Vinous Liquor is not easily freed from the mixture of Tartar: wherefore
Vintners are wont to put to the Wines some Bodies that either clear them, or
precipitate them, so as the Earthy matter swimming in them, may sooner settle
to the bottom: The things which so clarify Wines are of two sorts: for they
have either viscous parts, as Clew, the Whites of Eggs and such like, which
stick close to the faeculencies of the Wine with laying fast hold on them, and
carry them with themselves toward the bottom: Or else they abound in a
precipitatory strength, which while they enter into the pores of the Liquor,
thrust forth the more thick Particles from thence, and strike them down to the
bottom; as are the dust of Alabaster, Calcined Flints, and such like.

2. Wines tho at first they were well cleared, yet afterward they conceive
immoderate effervescencies, so that the Tartar, being stirred up from the
bottom, it at length mingled with them; also the Spirits being loosened, now
the Sulphurous Particles, now the Saline being too much carried forth, render
the Wines unsavory, clammy or sour. We will consider these things, from what
Causes they come to be so, and by what means they are Cured.

Wines very often contract heats, when they are full of Tartar or too rich
Lees: For Tartar or Lees, tho separated from the Liquor of the Wine, and
depressed to the bottom of the Vessel, yet for that they consist of plenty of
Salt and Sulphur, they still send from themselves Fermentative Particles, by
the inspiration of which the Wine is kept in an equal motion of Fermentation:
and as the Wines are leasurely ripened, so the Salt and Sulphur which lurk in
the Tartar, are by little and little exalted; until at length, being carried
forth to a Flox, they infect the Vinous Liquor, with a troubled feces or dregs,
and compel it to grow immoderately hot, andn to boil up. Against these too
great heats of Wines, there is necessity, that they be presently drawn off or
racked, from this too rich Lees, and put into another Vessel, or else it comes
to pass, by reason of its too great disturbance, the Sulphur being very much
exalted, that they become unsavory and ropy; or the Spirit being lost, and the
Salt carried forth to a Flux, they contract a fowrness, and turn to Vinegar.

Neither does Wine grow more hot than it should do, only from Tartar, or too
rich Lees, but by too great agitation, immoderate heat, or by an extraneous or
strange Body put to it, and not miscible, or that cannot mingle with it: for by
these and other ways, the Sulphurous part of the Wine grows hot, and from
thence conceives ceives a fervor, and undue boiling up; for the settling of
which, besides the racking or drawing it off, from one Vessel into another,
they use to pour plenty of Milk, into the Pipe or Barrel, by whose mixture the
heats and tumults of the Wines are presently appeased; but as by this means the
Spirits of the Wine are very much overcome, it cannot keep long, but soon after
degenerates to Vinegar or without taste; therefore the Vintners are necessitated
to sell presently the Wines mended by this Artifice, and very suddenly to draw
them off.

These kind of heats of Wines, tho they be timely appeased, before they wholly
spoil the Wines, yet they leave some viciousness, by which the Vinous Liquor is
altered from its due color and consistency, and is mande less grateful to the
Palate: for Wines made hot, oftentimes become of a more deep color, viz. they
degenerate from a watery and clear color, to a Citron or Red, and give to the
taste a rankness; all which indeed proceed, from the Sulphur being too much
carried forth and exalted: For these kind of distempers of Wines, they proceed
after this manner; for the mending the color, oftentimes simple Milk, or
boiled with Glue or fine Flour, is poured into the Hogshead or Pipe; for these
procure a certain separation of the exalted Sulphur, and with its whiteness
give clearness, or restore the color to a brightness. Mucilaginous, clammy, or
ropy Wines, are amended by the infusion of burnt Alum, quick Lime, Gypsum or
Plaster of Walls, Salt and the like; for these cause a new Fermentation, that
the more thick Particles are thrust forth from the rest, and precipitated
toward the bottom. The unsavouryness is helped by the same means.

3. As to the third proposition; Wines are depauperated or made poor, when by a
long effervescency the Spirit and more pure Sulphur, being exhaled, the Saline
Particles begin to be exalted: in this case their languishing strength is
sustained with certain remedies, as it were Cordials.

As the Spirit and Sulphur being too much carried forth, and exalted, is cured
by the drawing off the Wines from the rich Lees: So the same being depressed,
the remedy is that they be put to a more rich Tartar or Lees: wherefore the
Vintners, are wont to pour the depauperated Wines, destitute of plenty of
Spirits and Sulphur, and which begin to grow sour, by reason of the Salts being
carried forth to sound and fresh Lees or Tartar; that they might as it were
anew inspired with Spirit and Sulphur, ferment and recover new strength and
vigor, besides they make Syrups of generous and rich Wines, with Sugar and
Spices, which they pour among the stale and deadish Wines. Further. for Wines
turning to Vinegar, they are said to administer profitably, some other
remedies. Gratarolus praises with many more, Lard and Swines flesh salted,
wrapped in Linen, and put into the Cask: and truly it is probable that the
Sulphurous odor of this does restrain the Flux of the sowring Salt; for this
end the same Author commends Leek-Seed, Pine-Nuts, blanched Wheat, boiled Wine,
Ashes, the shavings of Willow, and many others, for the Salt readily acts on
these kind of Subjects, and spends its force; even as Virgins sick of the
Greensickness, desire greedily to eat such like absurd things, that may
satissie the extraneous, and for the most part sowrish Ferment of the
Ventricle, but very hurtful to themselves. There remains another kind of Cure,
whereby small Wines almost corrupted, and growing vapid or smachless, recover
new vigor for a time, to wit, a portion of Rhenish Wine, or others, very
Fermentable, is laid up, and hindered from Fermenting, from whence it is made a
perpetual Must (commonly called Stum) if a little of this Liquor be poured into
a Cask of stale Wine, and jogged together, it gives a fresh, and new
Fermentation to the whole: so that that Wine will froth and boil, and shut in a
Glass will leap forth; but the drink mended by this Artifice, is accounted very
unwholsom, for that it is apt to stir up an immoderate Fermentation in our
blood: wherefore it is prohibited by Edict, that the Wine-Coopers or Vintners
make not use of this kind of Sophistication.

It is usual thing also, to stop up close, in Stone or Glass Bottles, for a
time, small Wines, and new Ale or Beer, which being afterward opened, the
Liquor ferments so impetuously, that being almost all rarefied into froth, it
flies forth of the Bottles: which besides contracts such an acrimony or sharp
cutting, that it can scarce be swallowed: The reason of which (as it seems) is
this: The turgency or swelling up, and the notable acetosity, sharpness, or
quickness of thse kind of Liquors, proceeds chiefly from the Salt being
exalted, and having gotten a Flux; for when as the Liquor, being full of much
Tartar and little Spirit, is shut up close in a Vessel, all the Particles
together are forced to be fermented, and when they cannot be separated, and fly
away from one another, they do the more trouble one another, and break
themselves into small bits; that by this means the bond of the mixture may be
wholly broken; but the little bodies loosened one from another, and as it were
freed by reason of the closeness of the Vessel, are forced together: wherefore
when the Vessel is opened, all the Particles at once being ready for flight,
like Air suddenly rarefied, break forth with noise and tumult; and because the
Saline parts having gotten a Flux, by reason of the plenty of Tartar, are
stronger than the Spirit and Sulphur, from thence the notable cutting sharpness
is caused in the Liquor.

Cider comes next to the Nature of Wine, to wit, of the smaller sort, which
kind of Liquor, is only the Juice pressed from Apples, and brought to maturity
by Fermentation: concerning this kind of Drink, it is worth observation, that
if it be made of Summer Fruit, or too much ripened, it will not keep in
strength, but presently degenerates into a deadness: but if it be prepared of
very unripe, and sour Apples, it contracts a bitterness, for that the Spirits
do not sufficiently arise in this, but give place to the Salt, having first
gotten a Flux: but in the other, they are not long enough retained, but wholly
fly away, before the mass of the Liquor attains to full Fermentation: but there
are Fruits and Apples, exceeding fit for this business, which being endued with
a more firm consistency, are not quickly corrupted, neither do they attain
their perfect maturity or softness, but of a long time: The Juice of these
wrung forth, and put into a Cask, does not grow hot, as Beer, with a great
frothy head, but after the manner of Wines, with a noise, like a Pot boiling
over the Fire: whilst Fermenting after this manner, it is made clear, the more
light recrements, are carried upwards, and remain in the Superficies, as the
flowering: but the more thick parts and Tartarous settle plentifully in the
botteom; but the more solid Crust, or Cogulated Tartar, is not fixed to the
sides of the Vessel: which is a sign Cider is a more wholesome Drink, nor so
infestous to the nervous stock, because it abounds less with a sharp Salt than
small Wines. The Liquor swimming over these Faeces or Lees settling in the
bottom, enjoys it as it were its food, and is kept by its inspiration in
strength; from which if it chance to be drawn forth, it quickly grows sour: for
indeed this kind of Drink, is in great danger to be destroyed by the Flux, or
sowmess of the Salt: against this il, to preserve it, some are wont to cast
into the Caks Mustard Seed bruised, or Mustard Balls, for that the Volatile
Salt of this hinders the Flux of the acetous Salt, so that the Liquot thereby
presently grows clear, and keeps the longer: another kind of remedy against the
sowrness of Cider, is, that as soon as it begins to grow sour, it be drawn off
from its Lees, and kept in close stopped Bottles, with a little Sugar; for by
this means it ferments anew, and because, together with the Flux of the Salt,
the Spirits being carried forth, are detained from flight, a very grateful
sharpness is caused to the whole Liquor. Also, almost by the same preparation,
and the like process of Fermentation, a potalbe Liquor is made out of Pears,
which is however above measure sweet, and if plentifully drunk, renders the
Belly loose, as if they had taken Physic.

So much for Fermenting Liquors, whose virtue consists in the Spirit being
carried forth, and obtaining the height of perfection: there remains other
preparations, whose vigor is placed in the Saline part being exalted, and
having gotten a Flux; among these, Vinegar is of chiefest note, the way of
making of which, being wholly unlike the aforementioned, requires a method of
Fermentation, very different from those before described: for example, small
Wines, or more generous or strong Beer, being put up into the Cask, are exposed
in the Summer time, for a long while to the Suns Beams, or else in the Winter,
they are kept near a Stove in some hot place; after this manner, whilst some
Spirits evaporate, the rest being put under the yoke, the Saline parts are
exalted and infect the whole Mass of the Liquor with their sharpness: but not
only Wines long kept, or Stale Beer, out of which the Spirits of their own
accord, begin to go away, but fresh Must, or new Beer, pass after this manner
into Vinegar; for the Country-women are wont to place without doors all the
Summer, strong Ale, and hghly impregnated with Malt, in a Cask, by which means
they make an exceeding biting and most penetrating Vinegar.

Yea after the same manner almost, our kind of Hydromels, Honnied Drink, or
Mead are wont to be prepared: to wit, they boil sixteen parts of Water with
one part of Honey, to the consumption of a third part, adding then some Spices,
togegether with a sharp Ferment, they place the Cask and Liquor for many days
in the Sun, and after wards in a Wine-Cellar. It seems the Sunning of it is
used, that thereby the Saline parts being brought toward a Flux, might somewhat
restrain the nauseous sweetness of the Honey: and by that means the sweet being
tempered with sharpness, a most pleasing taste is afforded to this Drink.

By reason of the sharpness arising from the Flux of the Salt, also very many
eatable things are wont to be prepared after various manners; hence the flesh
of living Creatures, and especially of Fishes when they swell with too much
Sulphur, are pickled with Salt Brine or sharp Liquors, that the Salt being
brought forth, they may become more grateful to the Stomach. It would be a
tedious brsiness to insist here on particulars; but I will in this place
describe a certain noted kind of Oaten Broth, Crewel, or Flumery, which
profitably nourishes Feverish, also Consumptive and Hectic people.

This kind of Drink, that it many become gratefully sowrish, the Meal of Oats
is put into common water for about three days, till it acquire a somewhat sour
taste: then, this infusion is placed upon the fire, and with a Ladle is stirred
about until it boyls, and when it rises up ready to flow over the Vessel, it
must then be poured forth into a platter, and presently cooled; it will appear
like Gelly, and may be cut into bits; which if heated soon melts. In this
preparation may be observed, that by a long infusion of the Grain, the Saline
parts being brought forth, do get a Flux; then these so impregnate the Liquor
that the more thick Particles being by the heat brought into its pores and
passages, they are so strictly shut up, that they cannot easily sink down, but
that the whole mixture becomes like Gelly.

It would also be too great labor to heap together here, the various Condites
and kinds of Pickles, for it would be to describe under that rank the whole Art
of Cooking and Diet. For in both the only aim is, that for healths sake and for
pleasure, the active Particles in our food. may be placed in their vigor and
exaltation; for so they greatly please the Palate, and by a more easy
digestion go into nourishment: for this reason, not only Drinks, and
Consections of Corn, and Herbs of a diverse nature and kind are thought on; but
also we variously prepare flesh, both boiled and roasted, and add to them
sauces, that the Particles, now the Spiritous, now the Saline, being carried
forth to a Flux, might please the taste, with a certain sharpness. Those which
are of a more fixed nature, are brought to exaltation, by Sauces made of Sugar,
Salt, or Pepper. They are wont to keep some flesh almost to putrefaction, that
by that means, the active Particles being place din their strength and motion,
may become of a more grateful taste. Here might be in terwoven, a long discourse
concerning Medicinal Compositions, but because this subject, deserves a
peculiar consideration, I will say nothing more of it here. Let us next see by
what motion of Fermentation and Habitude of Principles, Natural Bodies tend
toward dissolution; or what is the progress of every thing to Putrefaction and
Corruption.

CHAP. VIII. Of the motion of Fermentation, which is observed in the Death,
also in the Putrefaction and Corruption of Bodies.
NAtural Bodies in which Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, are found in but a mean
quantity, do not stay long in the same state: for these active Principles are
employed perpetually in motion: As soon as they come together, they tend from
Crudity and Confusion toward Perfection, for the fake of which, when they have
reached the height, they are able to come to, they are not quiet in this point;
but from thence they make have toward the dissolution of that thing. Those
which are more volatile do first of all break forth from the loosened bond of
the mixture; then the rest separate into parts, until the form of the mixture
wholly perishes: The Spirit being carried forth to the top, flies away first
with the water, and the more pure Sulphur, and by its expiration, diffuses a
very grateful odor; afterward the more thick Sulphur, with the Salt, being
loosened from the band wherewith they were tied, and having gotten a Flux, by
degrees evaporate, and together disperse a very stinking smell: together with
these, the water parts flow forth, and the frame of the subject breaks, or
falls down into Earth or a Caput Mortuum.

This kind of process may be observed both in natural things, and also in
Subjects prepared by Art: Concerning Natural things, the disjunction of the
Elements, and their separation into parts, may be seen both in the death of
living Bodies, or the extinction of life and vegetation; and also in the
corruption of them being dead, and in their reduction to a rottenness.

As in Vegetables, the growth and maturity depend on the combination and mutual
cleaving together of the Principles, so the decay and death depend on their
going asunder, and separation, in Plants and Fruits; being by degrees cxalted
from a crude and sour Juice by Spirit and Sulphur, they come to maturity; to
which a sweet taste and smell, and a pleasant color happen: then presently the
same matter, the Spirit and Sulphur, and the rest of the Elements leisurely
flying away from the subject, is soon reduced to a filthiness and rottenness:
If after the subtle and more pure Particles of Spirits and Sulphur are flown
away, there still remain plenty of Earth and Salt, with some Sulphur, the
matter does not putrify, but grows dry with an hoariness: but if the thick
Salt and Sulphur, having gotten a Flux, break forth from the Subject, together
with the rest, the bond of the mixture being loosened, presently the external
humidity, possesses the spaces left by these, and the Body is resolved into
rottenness.

Also all Animals whatsoever, have set bounds of their growth and duration: For
they ascend from their beginning, by slow increase, to motion and sen ation;
then to the strength and exaltation of Nature: in which point they stay not,
but from thence, by equal steps, make have toward their fall.

If the cause of this kind of limitation be required, we say that Mother Mature
has placed in the primigenious seed of every thing, such a stock of Spirit,
Salt and Sulphur, which might suffice for the producing the utmost thrids or
lineaments of Bodies: so that the growth and ascent of the thing, to its height
or acme is only an evolution, or unrowling of that radical matter, and
protension or stretching it self forth into a greater dimension; in the mean
time the little spaces and vacuities, which are made by the protraction of this
matter, are filled up by the active Particles, supplied by Nutrition, which
also by a continual series of motion are ripened, exhaled, and give place to
others succeeding. As soon as this seminal matter is unfolded and exalted to
the height, that it cannot be moved, or expanded further, the matter is then
brought to the state of its perfection: from thence some Particles of this
Radical substance, together with the secondary supplied from the Nourishment,
begin to evaporate; and others daily, and then others, being after this manner
consumed, both the solid parts, by degrees decrease in their substance, as also
the Nutritious Juice and Blood, even decline for the worse, till by a long
wasting, the props of the Body, are made dry or withered, and the blood so
depauperated, that it will not suffice for sustenance to the vitalfire: just as
it may be perceived in a Lamp, if the Oil being continually consumed, in its
place be put water, the Liquor is rendered poor, and diluted, that it is not
able any longer, to cherish at all the flame of the wick.

When the Life of animals perishes, (either it expires after the aforesaid
manner leisurely, and like a Candle or Lamp is extinguished, the Oil or Tallow
being consumed; or it is choked by a hasty death, being snatched away by Fate,
or the violence of a Disease) presently the Spirits, with Salt and Sulphur,
flowing together in the blood; and also planted in every part, cease from their
regular motion, and are moved into confusion: then they partly exhale from the
pores, with the vanishing heat, and partly being shut up within in the
Cavities, inordinately Ferment, with the remaining Particles, and make a
swelling up of the inwards, and of the whole Body. But afterward the frame of
the solid parts being by degrees loosened, and the Sulphurous Particles,
together with the Saline, having gotten a Flux, begin to evaporate; from thence
a strong stink and corruption arise. The active Principles, breaking forth by
heaps, do often mutually take hold of one another, and being combined in the
superficies of the Carcass, produce Worms: at length when they are wholly
exhaled from the Subject, what remains salls into dust.

It is a usual thing for Worms to be generated in Vinegar when it is corrupted
and lost its strength, which being exceeding small; and somewhat long and smooth
like Eels, swim in the Liquor, and may by the help of Glass be exposed to our
Eyes; these being seen, it is commonly said, that the sharpness and pricking
of the Vinegar proceeds from these little Creatures, which is a vain thought
that deserves not a refutation; for they are only to be found in dead Vinegar;
and I pray from whence have they their teeth sufficient for the gnawing of
Iron? But the whole corrosive force of Vinegar is more truly referred to the
Salf having gotten a Flux: in the mean time those little Creatures seem to be
begotten by this means; it is sufficiently known, that when very many Subjects
are brought to putrefaction, the active Principles being thrust out of doors,
yet still affecting their old dwelling, remain somwhere about the
neighborhood, and being joined together, do often produce living Bodies;
wherefore, when moist things putrify, most often little Worms grow on their
Superficies; but in Vinegar the business is a little different, to wit, because
the Elementary paritcles are more fixed, therefore when the mixture of the
Liquor is wholly dissolved, the active Principles, although loosened, yet
breaking very hardly and difficultly from the substance, meet together in the
bowels of the Subject, and there mutually cherishing one another, cause those
little Creatures in the midst of the waters.

Also the Bodies of living Creatures, being prepared for our Food, are disposed
toward putrefaction, if they are put up for some days, till the active
Particles are loosened, and begin to be in motion, tending to exhalation;
wherefore both the Flesh becomes more flaccid, and in eating more tender and
soft: and if they are kept longer, till the Saline and Sulphurous parts being
carried forth into a Flux, do break out, presently a stinking smell and
putrefaction is induced.

There are many ways whereby flesh is wont to be kept from putrefaction; the
chief of which are, that it be pickled with Salt or Spices. Things are kept a
long time incorrupt and very grateful to the taste, with Salt: Dead Carkases are
imbued with Spices, that they may remain a long while in their Sepulchers. As
to the first, Brine or salt Pickle hinders the eruption of the Sulphur, and
fixes it in the Subject by its embracement, and retains it. Spices, as they
consist of very active Principles, stir up a new Ferment in the Subject, the
dead Carcass; and the implanted Elements of this, join into the society of
their motion, and retain many of their Particles flying away, yet longer in the
body: As Salt and Spices are made use of for the preserving long flesh, and
Sulphurous things, (which also preserve all other things from Putrefaction) so
Vegetables, and their Flowers and Fruits are better conserved with Sugar: for
this by cherishing the active Particles of the Subject, restrains them within,
and besides, renders the Confections, of a very grateful taste.

Minerals, chiefly the solid and hard, because they are endued with plenty of
Salt and Earth, with little of Sulphur, and with a less quantity of Spirits,
therefore they rarely, or not at all conceive Putrefaction: there is the same
reason for resionous things, which tho they abound in Sulphur, with Salt and
Earth, yet because there is but a small portion of Water and Spirits, therefore
their frame is not easily loosened, neither are they obnoxious to Putrefaction.
Among Minerals, Common-water only, falls under this rank: for this, if it stand
still, or is kept long in a Vessel, its Salt and Sulphur, though but in a
little quantity, having gotten a Flux, begin to evaporate, and together to
induce Putrefaction: but so long as water is in motion, these particles are
still involved with others, and so by their mutual embrace, are detained from
evaporation.

Artificial things and preparations, are no less subject to Putrefacton than
Natural things; for Bread, and all manner of Eatable things or Food, Wine,
Beer, and other Drinkable Liquors, also Medicinal Confections, being long kept,
first lose their strength and vigor, and then afterward are Corrupted:
concerning which, we may observe these following things.

The more the things are Compounded, and have all the principles conjoined
together, the sooner, and the easier, do they enter into Putrefaction;
wherefore Eatable things, prepared of Flesh, Broths, Decoctions of Herbs, also
many Medicines made after the Calenical way, are wont) unless preserved with
very much Salt or Sugar) to be Corrupted in a short time: In the mean time,
Distillations, and Chemical Preparations, which consist of Homogeneous, or not
much different Particles, are kept sound a long while.

In Compounded things, if there be too great quantity of water, things sooner
putrefie, for so the frame of the mixture is too loose; so that the fixed
Principles cannot take hold of the Volatile, or keep them back from flight: but
those in which Spirits abound with moderate Salt and Sulphur, if they are kept
in a close Vessel, that they may evaporate but little, continue a long time, as
may be perceived by strong or generous Wine. The next to these, are those
things which are preserved with Honey or Sugar, or in which the Saline Particles
are in in great plenty be Nature.

Many of these, whilst they are corrupted, are either made Moldy or Rank, or
they grow sour, or degenerate into a vapidness, or without taste: things are
made Moldy, when the subtle Particles in the exhaling, are detained by the more
thick, and cleaving together by their mutual embrace on the Superficies of the
body, grow into a soft Down or Hoariness, even as Moss is brought forth by
Stones or Wood exposed to moisture.

Rankness or unsavory Taste, happens chiefly in Sulphurous things, for Oily and
Fat things, by Heat or Age, become Musty or Unsavory, to wit, when the Spirit
being very much exhaled, the Sulphurous Particles are two much exalted, and
begin to evaporate.

Sharpness or Acidity is induced from the Salt, being to much carried forth and
loosened, for when the Spirit is depressed, or exhaled, the Salt being fused,
conceives a Flux, and so brings in a Sowrness: hence Wine, Beer, Cydar, also
Milk, very many Eatable things, and the Juices of Herbs, when they are long
kept, or if they are moved by too immoderate heat of the Air, or shaking, do
easily grow Sour.

Liquid things, degenerate into a vapidness or tastlesness, when the active
Principles, are for the most part gone forth, and nothing eminent besides Water
and Earth, or of the subtle parts, is left in the Subject.

That I may contract what is aforesaid; the corruption of every thing, is only
the separation and departure of themselves from one another into parts of the
principles before combined, (the bond of the mixture being loosened) which
motion, by reason of the diverse disposition of their breaking forth, (either
with or without a stink) ends in Putrefaction or Rottenness.

Where Spirits abound, and that there is also plenty of Sulphur and Salt, and
the Particles being loosened from their bonds, break forth in heaps; the
mixture putrefies with a stink; also if it consist of a thick substance, so
that all the parts are not rightly ventilated, it conceives a heat from the
Putrefaction: in such a Corruption, the stink proceeds from the exhalation of
the sharp pointed Sulphur, or made pricking with the Salt: Putrefaction
follows, for that the external humidity, enters into the place of the Particles
flying away: But the heat is produced by the Sulphurous Particles being moved
together in heaps, and being shut up within the Subject, that they gather
together, and being united act more strongly. But if there be ing the Subject a
lesser proportion of Salt and Sulphur, so that when the mixture is loosened,
the Particles are moved more slowly, and evaporate leisurely; the Body grows
dry, and is reduced to a wasting, without any ill smell, Putrefaction or Heat.

It will not be from the purpose to inquire in this place, from whence some
empty Vessels, and more moist bodies, by lying long, conceive a certain stink
without Putrefaction; also other things being put into them, or lying near
them, are wont to partake of their Evil; for which affection, a proper Latin
word is not easily to be met with; in our Idiom it is called Mustiness, and in
some sort seems to be designed by the word Mucor, unless that (...) or Mucor,
points at Bodies infected with a certain Down or Hoariness, (which we call
Moldiness) which here never happens. The consideration of this matter is not
improperly referred to the Doctrine of Fermentation, for this Tincture or
Impression of a stink, unfolds it self far abroad, as if it were a certain
Ferment, that the Vessel but lightly imbued with it, infects whatever Liquors
are put into it, and infusions of them, even new and often iterated; we may
observe a twofold effect of this thing: For sometimes the Vessels being almost
empty, at first vitiated, afterward infect most Liquors, which they by chance
receive, with a musty odor: sometimes more moist compacted, and solid things,
being kept long, somewhat close in a Cellar, contract this vice of their own
accord; when in the mean time the contagion is not perceived to be in the place
where they were kept; which things either may become musty, not because they
are corrupted, for in most Spirit, Salt, and Sulphur, being yet contained, in
the bond of mixture, the frame of the matter is kept whole, but the vice only
consists in this, that from the Subjects after this manner disposed, effuvia's
as it were aculeated or sharpened fall off, and therefore become ungrateful to
our smell and taste.

First, that any Vessel may conceive a mustiness, there seems to be required in
the first place, that is in ward hollowness be large, and its mouth narrow; th
wit, whereby a passage may lie open to the outward Air, and rest may be granted
to it being entered in: for Juggs with broad mouths, also Bottles close shut, do
not easily get this fault. Secondly, that besides the more ample inward
hollowness, the sides of the Vessel be endued with pores, and very small
passages; for in these kind of little spaces besmeared with humor, the Air
being strictly shut up, remains more quiet, and is apt to stagnate: Wherefore
Glass Bottles are not so apt to suffer this evil as Wooden, or Stone Bottles.
Thirdly, that some moisture, tho very little, stick about the sides of the
Vessel, or in its bottom, whereby the Air being entered may be entangled: for if
the Bottles be hung up, with their mouth downwards, that all moisture may drein
out, they will never be musty.

In the second place: when Bodies, without any contagion of a Vessel, contract
a mustiness or moldiness of their own accord, we may observe, first, that they
are of that kind, which consist of Heterogeneous Particles, that is, a mixture
of all the Elements together; because the parts of Vegetables and Animals, and
preparations of them, easily receive this evil; Minerals for the most part
remain free from it: Secondly, that there be plenty of humidity in the
concrete, for the more dry continue a long while without any hurt: Thirdly,
that the Bodies be either kept in a heap unmoved for a long time, or else in
some close Cupbord, or Cellar, without Air; for so Wheat or Grain, in a heap,
unless it be often moved, as also all Eatable things, being put up in a close
place quickly grow musty.

According to these positions we conjecture, that mustiness is made an
affection to a moist inanimate Body, from the ambient Air, being admitted
within its pores, and being got in there stagnating, whereby the Elementary
Particles of that mixture, being combined together with those sent in by the
Air, are exalted into the Nature of a Ferment; that they diffuse themselves on
every side with wonderful activity, and their effuvia's, as it were sharpened,
ungratefully strike against the sensories of the taste and smell. When
therefore, some Subject becomes primarily musty, a certain portion of the Air
placed near, and hindered from ventilation, enters into its pores and passages,
and there being entangled with a tenacious matter, is wholly shut up within the
substance of that Concrete. From the mixture of the shut-up Air, the implanted
little Bodies of the matter, especially the Sulphurous and Saline, acquire new
heads; that afterward, when they are exactly to be mixed with no other Body,
yet very greatly Fermentative, tho intermingled with any other thing, retain
their own Nature, and being diffused through the large substance of the matter,
infect the whole; to wit, they dispose by that means, the Particles of that new
matter, that they being armed with sharp points, bring in like manner a trouble
to our senses: But in the mean time, from the mustiness, whether primarily
arisen, or received by Contagion, the mixture of the thing is not dissolved,
nor the Principles dissipated; yea those things which are wholly tastless, do
scarce at any time become musty: the musty smell depends chiefly on the active
Principles, disposed by a peculiar rite, by the involved Air and their
effluvia's; wherefore if they almost wholly fly away from any Subject, that is
rendered almost incapable of this affection.

There may be observed a certain likeness between mustiness and an Empyreuma,
or taste of fire or burnt-too, for as in this, the Particles of the fire being
entangled, and included by a tenacious matter, by their long ftaly there,
pervert the implanted little Bodies of Salt and Sulphur, from wherece their
effluvia's, strike our Senses with an ungrateful sharpness; moreover, being
mingled with other things, they affix to them, the disposition of their
pravity; so in mustines, the Particles of the Air, being obvolved with a
viscous matter, and stagnating, they change by their presence the Saline and
Sulphurous little Bodies, from their due temper, whereby they being as it were
gifted with sharp preckings, do strike bitterly our sensories, and being
exceeding Fermentative, diffuse their Odor to others: the alteration being
either way contracted, can scarce be blotted out, by any mixture with other
things, or emendation by Art: The chief means of helping of either, is by
placing it in a reciprocal trajection, viz. Empyreumatical things, or tasting
of the fire, are to be a long while exposed to a more moist Air, whereby the
Particles of the Fire may exhale: and musty things are to be held to the Fire,
or put to such things which may sweeten their Nature, to wit, quick Lime,
Sulphur, or Srygian waters, by which the parts of the included Air are driven
away, and so the remaining little Bodies of the mixture are wont to recover
their pristine state; wherefore, if musty Liquors are distilled, the water
falling into the Receiver, will be deprived of that stink: But the smatch of
Fire or Empyreuma, is not so easily mended by this Artifice.

So much for Fermentation, and the motion of the Principles, for as much as
within the Confines of the same Subject, they dispose it, either to maturity
and perfection, or to wards dissolution and corruption. It now follows to treat
of the motion of the same kind of Particles and Principles, for as much as some
of one Body do act on others of another Body, and by dissolving the mixture, do
wholly draw them forth, and send them outward, or by precipitating it cause
them to go into parts.

CHAP. IX. Of the motion of Fermentation, as much as is to be observed in the
Dissolution of Bodies.
FOR the Solution of Bodies, there are two great solvencies, or Menstrua, which
exist from Nature, to wit, Water and Fire: Fire, if it be next and immediately
applied, destroys most Bodies, drives away the Princlples one from another, and
as it were dissipates them into Air, Earth only, with a little Salt, being left
behind; if it be mediately applied, it brings awsy some Particles, so that in
the mean time others remain: After which manner it serves chiefly for
Distillations, and Chemical Operations, and is also used in the Preparation of
necessaries for our Food, both about the Boiling and Rosting of Meats. Water
does not so readily destroy Bodies, but it draws forth some parts from the
Subjects, and receives them into its own Bosom, and firmly retains them for
various uses: But as it does not easily penetrate every Body, but leaves almost
untouched those which are of a more fixed Nature, various ways are thought of,
whereby the Menstruum of water is made sharper, and is rendered fit for the
dissolving of any Bodies whatsoever. For by means of the Bodies, which it ought
to dissolve, and of the parts which it ought to receive in it slef, it is armed
as it were with some Weapons; with which it is able to unlock any Subject, and
to possess now these, now those Particles. The Menstruum of water is sharpened
with Spirit, Salt, or Sulphur: to wit, either with each of these, or with more
of them joined together; we will first speak of the watery Menstruum, with the
various sharpning of it, and afterward of the fiery dissolvent.

Common water most casily dissolves the more simple Bodies, except sulphur; and
hides their Particles, in its pores and passages; it readily receives Salts of
every kind, and easily imbibes Spirits; it loosens the frame of Earth, and
cherishes its more theder little bodies, in its embrace; but it is hardly mixed
with Fat, and Oily things, and receives not their Particles, but by the coming
between of others, but drives them forth to its Superficies, as not miscible,
or thrusts them down to the bottom.

Water in some measure enters the more compounded Bodies, whose frame is
somewhat loose; and then receives into its bosom, some not simple Particles, but
resembling the nature of the whole mixture: hence most Vegetables, also parts
of living creatures, and some Minerals, being put into common water, do
impregnate it with a certain virtue; and from most Metals, by a long
maceration, it takes away some strength, though but small. Some Bodies are
dissolved by water, which yet a Sulphurous or Spirituous Menstrua leave almost
untouched; as the Gums Tragacanth, Arabic, etc. also Salts and Sugar.

The first and most common way of sharpning, whereby simple water may more
easily enter the Bodies to be dissolved, is, that it be furnished with fiery
Particles, or darts of adventitious heat; for so it is driven more deeply with
a certain force, into Bodies, and destroys some thrids, as it were the smallest
mites, in their most inward recesses. Wherefore we are wont to boil for a long
while, the matter to be dissolved in water, or at least to infuse it in warm
water, by which means, the more tenuious, and certain subtle Particles, which
resemble the nature of the Subject, are easily drawn forth, and impregnate the
water, with the virtue of the whole mixture.

So much for the simple, or natural Menstruum of water, to wit, for as much as
its activity is wont sometimes to be promoted, by fire or ascititious heat. But
this cannot be so simple, but that it contains in it self some Particles of
another kind; as many be gathered from its easy Putrefaction; for oftentimes
it is impregnated with Spirituous, Sulphurous, or Saline breathings,
contracted from the Air or Earth, that for the drawing forth the tinctures of
very many things, sometimes it excels an Artificial Menstruum; for that
Acidulous or Spawish waters, Mineral waters, Rain water, and May Dew, are of
frequent use among Chymicks, for the remarkable faculty of dissolving, with
which they are strong. Besides, it is a vulgar observation, that some waters
most easily dissolvs Soap, and being thoroughly mixed with the same, causes in
the liquor a great spume or froth; such, if they be rubbed between the fingers,
feel soft and gentle; but other waters, which being handled with the hands, are
more harsh, refuse the mixture both of Soap and Oil, and so are accounted
unprofitable for the washing of Clothes: these sort of waters, if they should
be evaporated in a Glass, oftentimes affix a Crust to its bottom and sides;
because they are impregnated, more than they ought, with Saline Particles, with
which, when the Saline parts residing in the Soap combine, the Sulphurous are
carried away, and they being excluded the pores, are thrust forth as not
miscible, to the top of the Liquor. When Flesh is boiled in these waters, it
grows very red; which tincture indeed being thence contracted, is a sign, that
those waters are somewhat imbued with Vitriol, or some other kind of Salt. But
we will pass to Artificial Menstruas, in which the watery Liquor is furnished
with Spirit, Salt, or Sulphur, being gathered apart, or many of them together.

The Spirituous Menstruum of water is made, when from a Body swelling with
Spirits, a clear and limpid water is distilled; as from Wine, or strong Beer,
or other Bodies truly Fermented, and brought to exaltation: The kind of
dissolvent is hardly to be had so sincere, but it is mixed with the Particles
of more pure Sulphur, and sometimes of a volatile Salt. The former kind of
Liquor is called Spirit of Wine, which being subtle, and very penetrating,
easily enters the Bodies, and parts of Vegetables, and also of living
Creatures, but hardly Minerals, or not at all: it extracts from many things,
not any Particles, or resembling the Nature of the whole mixture, (as common
water) but chiefly Spirituous, and Sulphurous, the rest being almost
untouched; wherefore, it is wont to be used for the resinous magisteria of
Vegetables, (which it draws fofth almost sincere or without mixture, under the
form of Cum or Resine) in the mean time, it is not so fit as common water, for
the extracts of Plants, which are not so endued with Sulphur: from Sulphurous
things, as Benzoin, Sulphur, Olibanum, Styrax, Amber, and the like, it draws
forth excelent Tinctures: It dissolves the fixed Salts of Herbs, also of Pearls
and Coral, before prepared with Vinegar, by a long digestion, and receives
their Tinctures into it self: it leaves Sugar, and Gums, being dissolvable in
water, almost untouched. But there is another Spirituous Menstruum, that is
sharpened with a volatile Salt, such is the Liquor which is distilled out of
blood, Hartshorn or Soot; it is far stronger than the former, and cuts most
Bodies, except Metals, into parts, and oftimes destroys the forms of the whole
mixture: yea it most excellently dissolves secondarily, the most fixed Metal,
to wit, Gold, being first reduced into a Calx, by its proper Menstruum, and
reduces it into a Tincture, or potable Liquor.

They are accounted Sulphurous Menstrua, which are brought forth of
Sulphurous Bodies, under the form of an Oil: these are prepared, either by
distillation, such as are chiefly the Oil of Turpentine, Juniper, and the like;
or by expression, such as are wrung forth of Olives, Almonds, and other Fruits,
or Seeds of Vegetables. Things distilled are of more efficacy, than
preparations by expression; either of them draw forth some Particles, from
Vegetables, or Animals; by the virtues of which, these Oils being impregnated,
they are made fit for Medicinal use. Yea they are conveniently enough made use
of, for the extracting of the Sulphurous Particles of Minerals, which sometimes
they draw forth sincere or unmixt: But if Oil of Turpentine, or Lin-seed Oil,
draws forth by dissolving, the combustible part of common Sulphur, in the mean
time, the remaining Saline parts, and untouched by the Menstruum, grow into
Crystals; as is obvious to every one, in the preparing the Balsam of Sulphur.

Mineral Bodies, in which the bond of Concretion chiefly depends upon Sulphur,
as are the Fire-Stone, Antimony, common Brimstone, and the like, are in some
sort dissolved by a Sulphurous Menstruum, which draws forth of the Body,
Particles of the same kind, the Saline being almost untouched: wherefore Oil of
Turpentine, Linseed, etc. draw forth a Tincture from these; in the mean time,
Saline Menstrua such as are distilled Vinegar, or Stygian waters, profit little
for the dissolving their Bodies: but that these, unless before Calcined, hardly
are touched. But on the contrary, where the frame of the mixture consists of a
Saline bond, such as are Iron, Copper and the lik, Saline Menstrua, as Aqua
fortis, Spirit of Vitriol, Salt, etc. receive in the dissolving, the Particles
of the same Nature into themselves, the Sulphurous being almost untouched.
This plainly appears, in the solutions of Metals, but chiefly and remarkably in
Camphire, which Stygian waters reduce into a Liquor, in form of an Oil,
swimming on the Menstruum; to wit they dissolve its frame, and receive some
Saline parts, on which the Concretion depends, into themselves; in the mean
time the Sulphurous being untouched, they are gathered together apart, on the
Superficies of the Liquor. There is something to be wondered at concerning
Antimony: to wit, that its Concretion being very irregular, that Mineral
becomes exceeding unlike, not only to other mixtures, but also to it self; for
it is very lax, nevertheless much compacted; it lies open to the least
injuries, yet is almost impervious to the greatest, so that it may equally
number its losses, with its Victories: some of its Particles lie so loose, that
they are brought away by any Oily Menstruum, or by a common lixivium or Lie:
others in the mean while do so pertinaciously stick together, that Aqua Fortis
cannot touch them, only Aqua Regia being poured upon it can know it; which so
strongly resists it, that the fume raised up from thence, presently obscures
the whole Room wherefore there seem to be in this, parts wholly of a different
Nature, some imperfectly mixed, viz. Earthy and Sulphurous, which are easily
loosned by a fit solvent; in the mean time others wholly Metallic, perfectly
mixed, coming near in some sort to the Nature of Gold it self; which therefore
are only to be dissolved, by a fit Menstruum of Salt.

The Saline Menstrua are of diverse kinds and natures, viz. of Vegetables,
Animals, or Minerals. Among Vegetables are eminent, the sour juices of Fruits
and Herbs, Counterfeit Vinegars, acid Liquors distilled out of ponderous Woods,
as Guaiacum, the Oak, and Box; in all which, the Saline Particles having gotten
a Flux, either by Art or by Nature, give a notable sowrness: or the Vegetable
Menstruum consists of Salts of Tartar, or made by the cineration of Herbs, and
dissolved, which by the Fire are very much whetted, and acquire an acritude; in
these the Saline Particles are fixed, and in a condition opposite to a Flux. To
the rank of Animals I refer the Spirit of Urine, Hartshorn, etc. which
although they are impregnated with Spirits, yet the take their chief forces
from a Volatile Salt. But the strongest Saline Menstrua, are drawn forth of
Minerals, such are acetous Liquors, which are most strongly forced by fire, out
of the Salts of Nitre, Sea Salt, Alumn, Chalcarth or Vitriol, and such like.

Those which are drawn out of Vegetables, as Vinegars, and acid Liquors do best
of all dissolve Corals, Pearls, Shells, and Shelly substances: because in these
there is great plenty of Alcalizat Salt, with which the fluid Salt, which
abounds in those kind of acetous Menstrua's, desires to be most strictly
united; wherefore they being applied to the body to be dissolved, enter its
pores and passages, loosen the Complications of the Particles of the Alcalizat
Salt, and snatch them into their own Embrace. Even after the same manner, the
fluid Salt in a Vegetable Menstruum, approaches the Volatile Salt in the Horns
of Animals.

These kind of Menstrua's do corrode some Metals toward the Superficies; but
do not so potently unlock their bodies by diffolving, as Stygian waters, some
Sulphurous subjects, being before loosened by Calcination, do enter aptly
enough, and from thence carry forth Saline Particles. Wherefore, for the Salt
of Tinn, Lead, Antimony, Soot, and others, being first reduced into a Calx, we
use distilled Vinegar.

The Salts of Tartar, and the fixed Salts of Herbs, although they serve for
praecipitation, rather than dissolution, yet because they consist of sharp, and
very penetrating Particles, they are of egregious use: For watery Menstrua's are
chiefly sharpened with these, for the extracting of the Tinctures of Vegetables.
And although bodies which abound with an alcalizat Salt, as Pearls, Coralls, etc.
are left wholly untouched by reason of the Homogeneity or agreeableness of the
parts in either; and that also, they but little gnaw, only on the Superficies,
being put upon Metals, and grow together with their Salt, and Sulphur into
rust; yet Sulphurous bodies they readily enter, so they be loosened by the
fire, and unlock and pull assunder their joyntings or complexions; wherefore,
for the making of the Milk or Magisterium of Sulphur, the Salt of Tartar most
excellently conduces.

Saline Menstrua's are most strong, which are forced by distillation out of
Minerals, to wit, out of Vitriol, Niter, Sea Salt, Alumn, Arsenick; Acetous
Liquors are distilled either from these single, or from many of them mixed
together; which as they are of the highest sharpness, like to fire, readily
enter most bodies, but chiefly Metallic bodies, and such as consist of a Saline
bond, and dissolve them easily into most small parts. These Liquors are only
Saline Particles, which being driven by the force of heat, from the embrace of
their Earth, having gotten by that means a Flux, are converted into water: as
actual fire chiefly assaults Sulphurous bodies, and by destroying the body
draws to it self the Consimilary parts; Stygian waters (which are also called
potential fire) easily pull assunder bodies, which very much abound with Salt,
as Metals; and break them, inviolable by fire, into most minute parts.

Concerning the Solutions of Minerals, we may observe, that their frame is not
easily destroyed, or loosened into parts, as other Concretes of Nature; but for
this, most stong Menstrua's, and those chiefly Acetous, distilled from Salts,
are required; the reason of which is, for that the Concretion of Minerals,
depends mostly upon great plenty of Salt, binding the rest of the Particles, as
with a bond; wherefore their substance is more solid, more hard, and compact,
and only gives place to a Saline Menstruum. When any Mineral, or Metal is
dissolved, the fluid Particles of the Salt, in the Menstruum, most easily enter
the most strict Complications, of the fixed Salt in the mixture, and impervious
to any other solvent, loosen them from their binding, and snatch them into
their Embraces: after this manner, the Particles of the Salts being united, and
dilated by the Liquor, are hidden in the pores and passages of the Menstruum;
and together with these, stick, and are also supped up, by the Menstruum, the
more pure and minutely divided bodies of Earth or Sulphur, which were in the
mixture; in the mean time, the more thick, and more stufed with Earthiness, are
praecipitated to the bottom of the dissolving Liquor: wherefore Gold and Silver
are wholly devoured by the Menstruum; but Iron, Lead, etc. and also Metallic
recrements, send forth from themselves, in the dissolving, Heterogeneous
Particles, as so many offscourings: when Minerals are broke into parts by this
means, the divided Particles, and most minutely broken, (so long as they
equally cohaere with the Partiof the fluid Salt, which are in the Menstruum)
being dispersed through the Liquor of the Menstruum, and hidden in its pores
and passages, are supped up, and rendered invisible. Yea also, the humor of the
Menstruum being taken away, the remaining Calx, which consists of the Particles
of a mixed, and fluid Salt, combined together, is dissolved in any other Liquor:
but if after a Metallic solution, the fluid Salt be drawn off, from the
Particles of the thing soluted, or by Calcination, it neither poyses any Liquor
it is put to, with a new adjection of fixed Salt, nor do the little bodies of
the thing soluted fall through the pores of the Menstruum, nor are they lastly
supped up, by any Liquor added to them.

But that among Metals, some are corraded by any acetous Liquor; in the mean
time others, as Silver and Gold, require a peculiar solvent, as it were to be
unlocked by an appropriat Key: and what is more wonderful, common Aqua fortis,
which eats Silver, leaves Gold altogether untouched: Gold, and has no power
upon Silver: The reason of those may be thus understood: Gold and Silver are
more compact Metals, very much cleansed from earthy matter; wherefore they are
not broken into parts by any solvent, but only by those kind of Menstruas,
which consist of a Salt homogeneous or agreeable with them. But as the frame or
substance of Silver depends upon a Vitriolic Salt, and that of Gold, on an
Ammoniac Salt (or of a more perfect kind, to wit, such as is wont to be most
strictly complicated with Sulphur) hence Aqua fortis, so long as it is strong
with a Vitriolic Virtue, combines with the Salt of the Silver, and therefore
unlocks its frame or substance, but does not loosen the concretion of Gold,
which depends upon an Heterogeneous bond: If that to this Menstruum, Sal
Ammoniac be added, the power of the Vitriolic Salt is blotted forth, and the
Saline darts of the solvent are made fit only for the Gold, the Silver being
untouched.

When Minerals are corroded by acetous Menstrua's, we are not therefore to
think, the same always to be resolved into Elementary parts: that the Salt and
Sulphur of them, may be had sincere or unmixt, by this means (although some boast,
that they are easily able to show such Analyzes of Metals) for that it appears
to our observation, and frequent experience, that many of these are of so
compact and solid a Concretion, that they cannot be broken, but into integral
parts: as for example, Gold and Quicksilver, after what manner almost soever
handled, when they are reduced into manifold Calxes, will at last by a strong
fire acquire their proper forms: viz. the Saline Particles of the Menstruum,
loosen the bond of Concretion, whereby the most minute integral parts of the
mixture stick one to another; but the same solvent, is not able in all things,
to break assunder the Copula of the first mixture, whereby the Elements are
mutually bound together: so that for the most part Metallic Calxes, are only
little bodies of the Concrete, broken into most small little Globes, being
involved by the Saline Particles of the Menstruum: Wherefore, fire being
applied, those corrosive Salts being pulled away from their Embrace, are wholly
driven away; then the Metallic little bits, or dust, as so many little
particular Globes being fused, by the intense heat, coming together into one
Mass by melting, resume the Species of the Metal: wherefore, they who commonly
affirm, that the Salts of Minerals for the most part, are only the Saline
Particles of the solvent, conjoined with the Metal, reduced as it were into
fine flower, without doubt speak truth in the preparations of Sol and Mercury,
or of Gold and Quicksilver; also the Salt or Sugar of Saturn or Lead, is
nothing else: But that sweetness comes only from the Vinegar; for if in the
distillation (...) Vinegar, the joining of the Vessels are closed with Clay,
and Salt, Chaulk and Horse-Dung, on the Superficies of this, grows together a
most white Salt, wonderfully sweet, in every thing like to that Sugar: but from
some, viz. from Iron, Copper, and Silver, are prepared fictitious Vitriols,
which are for the most part Saline: For that the same, by distillation, amy be
forced into acetous Liquors, as the Metallic recrements.

Besides the solvence hitherto recited (which, by means of the Particles, which
are strong in them, act upon a peculiar and determinate matter) I know that
Chemists do boast wonderful things, of a certain universal Menstruum, by whose
inspiration every body what ever, may be easily reduced to its Principles, or
first Elements: And tho Helmont have bragged, that he had attained to this
Secret by his own Labor, and now daily the Adepti of Chemistry, do aspire to
this end; yet the hopes and endeavors of most, have failed them in this work,
even as in the Philosophers Stone. There are also some other famous Menstrua's,
viz. The Aqua vitae Tartarisated of Quercitan, and his Philosophic Vinegar,
which are of noted use in the preparing of Medicines; but since I know nothing,
or any strange thing they have done, in the dissolution of Bodies, we will pass
them over.

So much concerning solvent Menstrua: about bodies to be dissolved, a certain
provision should be instituted, whereby indeed their complections may more
easily be unlocked, and cut into most minute parts: Wherefore the Concrete is
now pounded into powder, now cut into little bits, that the way might lie open
for the solvent, to its most inward recesses. If that the frame of the subject
be harder, and more strict, that it will not give place, but of a long time, to
the Menstruum, before the disslolution is begun, there ought to be administered
some aperitives, or openers, whereby the concretion may be first loosened, and
somewhat opened: wherefore, the tincture of Steel, is more easily extracted, if
its filings be sprinkled with the juice of Limons, or the Spirit of Vitriol: in
like manner Hartshorn, or the shavings of Ivory are handled when we would have
the decoctions of them quickly made: when formerly I have been very solicitous
about this thing, viz. that I might render the more hard bodies easily soluble,
in any Menstruum, and that I had especially tried many things about Iron; after
several experiments, at length by a certain chance, and almost thinking of
something else, I found out a preparation, whereby without any Corrosive, or
Acid Liquor, by the mediation only of a gentle heat, the body of Iron is
opened, that being reduced into powder, gives immediately a tincture, to any
Liquor, that neither Salts themselves, are sooner dissolved in common water: By
this means, I am wont to prepare suddenly, in great quantity, Mineral waters,
which exactly resemble our Tunbridg Spaws; and to render Wine, Beer, Milk, or
Whey, with no trouble Chalybeated. By this means, Syrrops, Tinctures, Extracts,
or Magisteria our of Steel, are most easily to be had. Moreover, plainly by the
same Artifice, Corals, Pearls, Eyes, and Claws of Crabs, and all shelly things,
are prepared, that their powders presently impart to any Menstruum, a tincture,
or the virtues of the whole Concrete. And in this preparation, no strange
quality is introduced to the Subject, nor its own proper quality lost.

When I had by this means, learnt to unlock all Bodies whatsoever, consisting
of a Saline bond, presently from the Analogy of this, was made known the means
of unlocking Subjects, whose Concretion is wholly Sulphurous: for I am wont so
to prepare common Sulphur, that its powder immediately impregnates any Liquor,
with the tincture and virtue of Sulphur. The Spirit of Wine, suddenly contracts
a deep color, and very red, that being put into it. Common water by the
infusion, or decoction of the same Powder, is rendered clearly Sulphurous, and
gilds Silver, and by this means, from that Tincture, a praecipitation being
made of White Wine, or Vinegar, the Milk of Sulphur is easily prepared, in
great quantity. Out of Sulphurated Wine by this infusion, I make a Syrrop, than
which there is scarce found a more excellent remedy, in the distempers of the
Thorax. By this means, Tinctures, Extracts, Magistries, are prepared from
Sulphur, with no labor, and without any smatch of the fire. By the same way
preparations from Amber, Benzoin, and other Sulphurous things, easily
dissolvable in any Menstruum, are composed. But enough and too much of this: we
will now pass to the other great dissolvent of Nature.

CHAP. X. Of the Nature of Fire: and by the way of Heat, and Light.
WE may almost pronounce the same thing of Fire, what the Philosophers of old
did of the first Matter, to wit, that it was potentially every where, and in
all things; but in none, in act. For among these sublunaries, Fire has got no
existence of its own Nature, or certain means of duration: It is produced
almost in every Subject, but is retained long in none, but it suddenly
vanishes, and expires: yea unless some external accidents, oftentimes should
concur for its production, I think it had not at all been in the world. Some
have dreamed, that its Sphere is situate under the Moon: but this was
introduced only, for the making the Hypothesis of the four Elements: for such a
thing seems consonant neither to Sense, nor Reason. That we may rightly search
out the Nature of Fire, we must seek in what Bodies it is chiefly to be found,
and how they are disposed; and then we may proceed to the unfolding its essence.

The Subjects most convenient both for the producing, and the maintaining of
Fire, are of that kind, in which there are very many Particles of Sulphur, and
but only a moderate portion of Water, Salt, and Earth: for these do hinder its
inkindlings, and being plentifully poured on it, extinguish it being inkindled:
Wherefore Bituminous, Fat, and Oily things, quickly take flame: so also Chips,
Straw, light and dry Wood: in the mean time, Metals, Minerals, the glebe of the
Earth, Dung, wet Straw, and green Wood, are hardly, or not at all to
beinkindled.

Secondly, we observe, that all the time Fire continues in the Subject,
Sulphurous Particles fly away in heaps, and from the departure of these, the
substance of the burning body is by degrees destroyed; in the mean time, very
much of Salt and Earth, remains in the form of Ashes, after the burning.

There is a third observation, that when the Sulphurous Particles are wholly,
or for the most part flown out of any Subject, the burning wholly ceases, and
the form of fire is quite destroyed; nor can it be renewed in the remaining
matter, wanting of Sulphur.

Fourthly, we will note, that sometimes some Bodies conceive a burning without
the advention of another fire, only by their own effervency, and by the
intestine motion of the implanted Particles, and of their own accord are
reduced into Ashes; as when wet Hay is laid up close, it first grows hot, then
afterward breaks forth into smoke and flame; or the Wheels and Axeltrees of
Carts or Wains, being heated by too great agitation, are inkindled.

According to these positions, we may affirm, that the form of fire, wholly
depends upon Sulphurous Particles, heaped up in any Subject, and breaking
forth from it in heaps: and that fire is no other thing, than the motion and
eruption, of these kind of Particles, impetuously stirred up. For Sulphur is of
an exceeding fierce and untamed Nature, whose little bodies, when (the yoke of
the mixture being shook off) they begin to be thickly heaped together, diffuse
themselves on every side like a torrent, break whatsoever obstacles are in the
Subject, destroy whatever comes in opposition, or fling it down headlong. Nor
do the only unlock their proper Subjects, but also lay open the gates and doors
of any other Subject near, that they can reach to, and there incite to the like
fury, all the consimilary Particles of Sulphur, and provoke them to an
eruption: wherefore fire every where inkindles fire.

The Sulphurous Particles, while they, heaped together within the confines of
their Subject, or on its Superficies, are agitated with a rapid motion, but are
detained by the Embrace of other little Bodies, from a more free eruption, and
more aggregated, constitute the form of fire; as is to be seen in burning
Coals, or in glowing Iron; but when these sort of Particles fly away by heaps,
from the same Subject, and bound together, they produce flame, which is only an
heap, or rather a torrent, of the Particles of Sulphur flowing together, and
conjunctly flying away: if Watery, Earthy, and Saline Particles, are commixt
with the Sulphurous breaking away, and are able to disjoyn and separate them,
only smoke is excited; which afterward, the Sulphurous little Bodies more
plentifully breathing forth themselves, and getting together, breaks forth into
flame.

The inkindling of Fire happens very many ways. The first and most simple is,
when from hard bodies struck one against another, but oftenest from a Flint
struck against Steel, sparks of fire break forth; which being received in
Tinder, made of a Linen Cloth burnt to blackness, dilate themselves, and then
a Match or Sulphurated thing being applied, they cause the inkindling of a
flame. Secondly, a fire often happens in dry Wood, and dry things, when by the
too great attrition of the parts, and agaitation, being made hot, they conceive
an inkindling of their own accord. And thirdly, when Bodies abounding with
Sulphur, as Hay, or Flax laid up wet, (of which mention was before made) grow
hot of their own accord, and afterward are inkindled. The fourth way, is the
most usual, of introducing fire into any Subject, that it may be inkindled by
another fire. We will a little more consider the several processes of these.

1. Hard Bodies struck one against another, shake forth little sparks of fire:
as a Flint with Iron, or with a Flint; Indian Canes, the Fire Stone, and many
other things. The reason of this is, because the Particles of Sulphur, which
reside in the Superficies of a hard Body, if they are smitten by another hard
Body, are not able to go back inward, (because in hard things there is not
afforded any cession of the parts, from place to place) nor can the smitten
Particles of Sulphur evaporate by degrees; but that by reason of the vehemence
of the stroke, they are necessitated to break forth in heaps: Wherefore, when
by this means, many of them are moved together, and are aggregated, they
exhibit the apparition of fire, The sparks being received into the half-burnt
Linen or Tinder, are dilated into a greater fire, for that the Sulphurous
Particles, in such a Subject are eminent, and are brought as it were to the
very top it self of eruption or breaking forth, wherefore by the least spark
being moved or stirred up, a way being made they fly away.

The very same reason is for Wood being made hot, and afterward fired, by too
great attrition; by which means, the Axeltrees and Wheels of Chariots, or of
Mills, are frequently fired: for the Sulphurous Particles, being by this means
very much moved, are more thickly heaped together; and when, having as it were
made an Army, they are able to remove, or strike away the rest, they presently
break forth in Troops, and by their going away cause a burning.

In Hay or Dung laid up wet, the Particles of Sulphur very much abound; which
having gotten the watery Latex for a Vehicle, run themselves into motion: but
when for want of Ventilation, they cannot by little and little exhale, being
straightened within, and so brought into their exaltation, they are able to join
more one to another, and mutually to incite themselves: then afterward, being
very much heaped together, they unfold themselves more largely, and begin to
break the Dens of the Subject, and so produce a burning. For it is to be
observed in any Subject, when the Particles of Sulphur, being more slowly
moved, fly away by degrees, neither heat, nor fire, but only a dryness, and
leanness, succeed. But if they are more rapidly moved, than that they may be
able to exhale leisurely, a heat is stirred up in the Subject: then if yet they
are agitated more vehemently, and impetuously, and being more thickly
agglomerated or heaped together, they break forth in heaps, a deflagration or
flame follows the heat.

Fire being inkindled in any Subject, enters and inkindles, whatever
Sulphurous thing is next it. For as Saline Menstrua, viz. Stygian waters,
assault Metals, stuffed with Mineral Salt, and loosen their Saline Particles,
as being of kin, from the mixture; so also the Sulphurous Particles, being
inkindled, break whatever Sulphurous Particles are next them, and stir them up
into the like motion of burning, with themselves.

Thus much concerning the nature and production of Fire: it remains that we
next inquire into the effects of Fire, and also concerning its virtue and
efficacy; to wit, what kind of Bodies it dissolves, and by what means; and also
for what uses it serves for. The chief effects of Fire are Heat and Light;
either of them are excited by emanations, or Effluvia, sent from an inkindled
Body; but after a far different manner: for truly, heat is most often produced
at a distance, without light; also light, without any sensible heat.

Heat, forasmuch as it belongs to the sense of the touch, is conceived, when a
certain passion is induced in the skin, or any other Organ of the touch,
whereby the little Fibers and Nervous parts are drawn asunder, moved into light
Spasms or Convulsions, and sometimes (if the stroke be vehement) suffer a
solution of the union. This is wont to be done, either by the bringing near of
Fire, or of another Body made hot by Fire, or by some other means. For from
either, the Sulphurous or warming Particles being excited, into a more rapid
motion, and breaking forth by heaps spread abroad, which, as so many little
darts, being thrust into our skin, or other Sensory of the touch, either by
tickling gently, they bring to it a pleasing sense of heat; or by striking it
more grievously, the troublesome sense of burning or scorching.

For the effect of heat, Fire is applied to Bodies, eith immediately, and so
either for the sake of Burning, Rosting or Boiling; or mediatly, viz. by the
interjection of another Body. Bituminous things, Coals, and other things dug
out of the Earth, also Vegetables and chiefly their Leaves, and Woods, are
burnt, for heat, necessary for human uses, and for the producing, and
conserving it. Stones are burnt for Lime; Vegetables for the preparing of
Salts. The flesh of Animals is wont to be Roasted, and the Fruits of Vegetables;
whereby they may become better food for men. For by Roasting, the superfluous
humidity is evaporated, and the Sulphurous parts being stirred by the
neighboring heat, are placed in their vigor and exaltation, by which means,
they afford a more grateful food to the Palate, and of better digestion to the
Stomach. By fire Metals are fused or melted, and most Minerals, whereby they
are either very much purified, or they are better formed into various figuresby
Smiths. Metals, and very many Minerals, also Salts, although they are not
inflamed, and take a firing (because they abound with less Sulphur, than Salt)
yet by a violent fire, they glow, and suffer a fusion; for that the Sulphurous
Particles of the Fire, enter the Saline little Bodies, tho most compact, and
dissociate them for the time; which however pulled one from another, presently
the fire being exhaled, come again together, and are strictly united.

Secondly, when fire is mediatly administered, the Particles of the soluted
Sulphur, and heaped together into fire, are dissociated, as when a cloud is
dispersed into most little drops of Rain: wherefore they lay aside the form of
fire; but tho dispersed, they easily pass through any impediment, and induce a
sufficient strong heat to every Subject. By this means, fire is accommodated to
very many uses, the chief of which, and the more accustomed, are, elixation or
boiling, digestion, and distillation.

In Boiling, the Particles of heat do pass into a watery Menstruum, and being
united with its Particles, insinuate themselves deeply into the thing to be
boiled: whose superfluous humidities they carry away, digest the crudities, and
carry them into a state of maturity. Boiling is instituted, either that the
Liquor might be impregnated with the strength of the thing to be Boiled, or
that the thing to be Boiled might be made tender, by the Liquor entering into
it, and its Particles exalted: for Meats and all Eatable things, are rendered
more grateful to the Palate by Boiling, even as well as by Rosting.

Digestion is very much used in Medicines, that their more slow Particles, may
be carried to a greater activity; and sometimes, that they being too fierce
might be fixed, and rendered more mild.

The most noble use of heat, or of mediat fire, is had in distillations; for
the Particles of heat, do pull away some Particles of the Subject from others,
(as it were by a Spagyric Anatomy) they resolve all Bodies, into their parts
and principles. But the consideration of this thing, is too laborious and hard,
to be inserted into this Tract.

As heat respects the Sensory of the Touch, so Light that of the Sight, and
affects it so after a proper and peculiar manner, that nothing at all is
discerned, besides the rays of light, direct, or reflected: for the various
appearances of Colors, and the diverse proportions of Bodies, and whatsoever we
see with our Eyes, is only light; to wit, either proceeding directly, or strait
from a lucid Body, or retorted from another Body, to the Eye, and so formed
into various figures and colors. The consideration of Light, contains in it
self, very many stupendous things, and is of deep speculation; which are not
however proper for this place: It will suffice to take notice here, of a sew
things, concerning its Original, Motion, and Perceptibility.

Light is wont to be distinguished, either that it is Etherial, which flows
from the Sun and Stars; or Elementary, which only proceeds from a fired Body,
enkindled into a flame. It seems, that either is only flame enkindled in a
greater dimension, and dilated into a most thin composition: for it appears to
the sense, that from Sulphurous things being inflamed, (as for example) from a
burning Candle, most thin Effluvia's. or most small divided little Bodies
perpetually do spring; which being diffused into an Orb, and stretched forth
into right Lines, as it were from the Center to the Circumference, are still
expanded on every side, in a great heap, and fill all the space within the
Sphere of its activity, with a luminous ray. The Particles of the flame, which
first fall away or depart from a lucid Body, are still driven forward by those
following behind; and so these also by others; and so by a continued Series of
Particles of the flames still succeeding, the beams of light are formed, and
are thickly or closly directed into all parts.

The motion of these is exceeding swift; like streams of water, breaking forth
with a force, they pass through the medium in the twinkling of a Eye, and, as
those waters, if the motion be cut off near the Spring, most swiftly vanish.
When the Rays of light come directly from a Luminous Body, they constitute a
medium, only clear or lucid, without the appearance of any color or image:
when the same Rays meet with a solid Body, they do not pass rightly through it,
but being either broken off, they are drowned or lost, or else they are
reflected and leap back or rebound, as when a Ball being cast against a Wall,
with a continued motion is struck back, upon other parts, according to the
Angles of what stopped it. The Rays of light, reflected from other Bodies,
being fallen into the Eye, represent the Images of visible things, and the
varieties of colors. For as the superficies of visible Bodies are rough, and
endued with little pores, and innumerable eminences, or risings up, hence the
Rays of light, being most thickly impacted in them, and reflected from every
part, according to all the ways of inclinations, and directions, as for as they
go, do meet together round about, into very many tops of Cones, in which the
beams proceeding from the whole object, as from a base, represent the image or
similitude of the whole; and in these kind of images, the medium is every where
planted, that wherever the Eye is placed, it beholds the image of the same
thing, though not wholly after the same manner. But forasmuch, as the beams of
the same light, being impacted in every Body, and variously refracted and
distorted, about its rough and unequal superficies, from thence reflected as it
were with turnings and windings into the Eye, they cause the diverse Phenomenon
or appearances of colors, to appear. For colous, and images of things, do not
exist in their own nature, but as it were spectrums, only from another place,
change their apparitions by the Rays of light. When dark night brings thick
darkness to this inferior world, things are not perceived but by the Touch, and
lose all their appearances: when the Sun revisits the Hemisphere, he brings
forth a new Creation of things; and the whole Atmosphere is filled at once,
with a sudden and manifold progeny, to wit, with infinite images of Bodies, and
appearances of colors.

Therefore Light does not only illustrate the medium, that sight may be made,
as some would have it; but it also creates the very objects of sight, and
introduces them into the Penetralia or inward parts of the Eye, yea to the most
inward recesses of the Brain. This does the same Office for the Eye, as the
Intellect does for the Soul, to wit, it forms the Ideas or Images of Bodies,
and renders them perceptible by the visive faculty. Light only is able to
penetrate the Coats and Humors of the Eye, to move the little Fibers of the
Optic Nerve, and to stir them up into an act of senfation. Because the Images
of things, being forged by the Rays of light, variously reflected, and meeting
together on the tops of the Cones, are stayed within the Pupil, or dark spot of
the Eye; they seem as objects in a close Chamber, admitted by a small hole, to
be represented to the lefe: and the Concave or Unequal Glasses, whereby the
parallel beams are broken, or the inverse reduced or brought back, do
egregiously supply the humors placed in the Eye, beyond the industry of human
Art; by the help of which, the image of every object is painted, near the thin
skin of the Eye, in its just figure and proportion: and then, from the motion,
which this Image impresses on the little Fibers of the Optic Nerve, the act of
sight is performed in the Brain. Thus much for Heat and Light, the Speculation
of which, tho it may seem to be altogether besides the Doctrine of
Fermentation, yet forasmuch as by the motion of these kind of Sulphurous
Particles, many other Physical Operations also performed, a brief mention of
them ought not to have been overpass'd in this place. But before we shall lay
aside quite the consideration of Fire, it will be here worth our while to
inquire concerning some Subjects, as it were irregular, to wit, in which fire
shows admirable virtues, and beyond its common manner: of this sort, are among
Simples common Sulphur, and Sal Nitre; among Compounds, Gunpowder, and Aurum
Fulminans.

Concerning common Sulphur we may observe, that it quickly catches fire, heat
it immediately breaks forth into flame such (as nothing besides) that by its
deflagration it puts out the Kitchen fire, that it sends forth a blueish flame,
and whitens all objects with its Smoke or Soot. If you behold the matter of
this Subject, or the parts of which the mixture is composed, its Spagyrical
Analysis will exhibit, great plenty of pure Sulphur, a moderate quantity of
Vitriolic Salt, a little of Spirit, Water and Earth. For when common Sulphur is
dissolved, by the Spirit of Turpentine, the Sulphurous part impregnates the
Menstruum, with a very deep Tincture, and the Saline grows into Crystals: or
when it is fired under a Bell, the Sulphur wholly burns, in the mean time the
Salt being resolved, and having taken a Flux, is fixed about the sides of the
Vessel, and so exhibits a Liquor, most like the Spirit of Vitriol, or rather
the very same. To which add, if you mingle the Oil of Vitriol, and Antimony
together, and distill it in a Retort, a Yellow Sulphur, just like the common,
will be Sublimed in the neck of the Retort.

I say therefore, because there are very many Particles of Sulphur in this
Concrete, and that they lie loose and unbound in the mixture, (to wit, neither
divided and separated by the coming between of Earth, or Water, nor much bound
together by Salt) therefore they are of a most prompt motion: wherefore by the
least spark of fire, they break forth from the loose frame; and because very
many run forth adoors together, therefore not a naked fire, as in every
Combustible thing besides, but first of all and immediately a flame is
inkindled. Its flame becomes blueish, because it is almost pure Sulphur that
burns, not mixed with the Particles of Water and Earth, as it is in Wood or
Straw. The very same thing happens to Spirit of Wine being inflamed. It
extinguishes the Kitchen fire by reason of the little Bodies of Vitriolic Salt
left behind; and the same being eventilated with the flame and fume of Sulphur,
gives a white color to things; the like to which, the Effluvia's, exhaled from
the Spirit of Vitriol, or Stygian Waters, do effect.

Concerning Sal Nitre, we will take notice, that it is not to be inkindled at
all by it self; but to be melted by an intense fire: but being mixed with any
Sulphurous things, it breaks forth into a flame, with a certain force and
explosion: For being added to common Sulphur, Antimony, or Tartar, it burns
with a thundering noise; also if you put into melted Nitre, a burning Cole, or
Wood, the flame is exploded round about, with a wind, so that the matter put in
is flung up and down here and there, and often times flung clear out of the
Vessel: by this kind of deflagration, what is Nitrous is consumed, the fixed
Salt (which is Tartar) remains. When Nitre is distilled, Sand or Brick dust, is
mixed with it in a double quantity at least; otherwise the Nitre melting is not
at all loosened into a vapor. In the distilling the vapor sent forth is very
red; so that the Receptacle shines with a splendour, as if a flame were shut up
within it: a sharp corrosive Liquor is stilled forth, which dissolves most
Metals; also Gold.

These things being truly weighed, it seems that this mixture consists chiefly
of abundance of Salt, and a little Sulphur, but these not fixed and idle, but
either exalted, and ready for motion, and not without a certain resistance
bound together: to wit, the Sulphurous little Bodies, being rouled about by
the Saline, and as it were strictly pressed, still endeavor to get forth; but
being strictly bound within, they are not able to rise forth by their own
strength, or endeavor: but as soon as, by the mixture and inkindling of
another Sulphurous Body, the Particles of the Salt are disjoined, and their
Prisons unlocked, presently the included little Bodies of Sulphur, as it were
breaking Prison, fling themselves forth with violence, remove every Obstacle,
and strike the Air violently with a sudden eruption.

The reason why fire does not inkindle Nitre, being enclosed in a Vessel, but
only melts it, when in the mean time, any Sulphurous matter being fired, makes
it to flame forth with a noise, is, because the little Bodies, which fall away
from the fire, enter the Nitre, make it a little loose, and dissociate the
concretion of the Salt, but not so loosen it, that a way may be made for the
included Sulphur: but by the addition of Sulphurous things, the Saline
compaction is more dissolved, and is so far unlocked, that the Particles of the
enclosed Sulphur fly away all together, and being freed from their
straightness, do hugely stretch themselves abroad, and seek greedily an immense
space.

That there is plenty of Sulphur in Nitre, besides its deflagration, the
Genesis of it sufficiently testifies; for it is beget chiefly in places, where
the Sulphurous Excrements of Animals abound. The use of it in agriculture
argues the same thing, because the fertility of the Earth depends very much
upon it: And to this also, the flaming color, shining in the distilling may
persuade.

From these premises, it will not be difficult, to unfold the nature of
Gunpowder, used in Warlike Instruments. For the sudden firing, and vehement
explosion of it arise, for that those very many, and almost infinite Particles
of Sulphur, which constitute that fire-dilating Body, being fired, fly away
together in a moment; all which breaking forth at once, a force being made, and
desiring a most free and ample space, for their expansion, violently move the
Air, and all obstacles, and so are exploded or thrust forth with a noise. There
is in this mixture, common Sulphur put, because its Particles are loose, and
ready for motion, and therefore apt to move a quick inkindling: there is added
Charcoal dust, because in that also, the little Sulphurous Bodies (as is seen
in Tinder, that is made of half burnt Linen) are brought to the very top of
eruption; and therefore these presently conceive an inkindling, and both these
being fired, and opposed to the Nitre, they quickly loosen its frame, and send
forth the Sulphurous Particles enclosed in it; which indeed break forth from
their impediments with a force, and as the blast of a Bellows, increase the
strength of the whole in firing. The Charcoal dust is added in a moderate
quantity; though it abounds with Terrestrial matter, yet by reason of the
Sulphur being carries forth in it, it accelerates the deflagration of this
mixture: For the Coal and Nitre being beaten together, is sooner fired, and
with a greater explosion, than Nitre and Sulphur: But if the Coals be added to
this Composition, (as they are wont to make it for Cannon and great Guns) in a
greater quantity than it ought, and improportionate to the Nitre, the immediate
firing is somewhat retarded, by reason of the interjection of the Earthy matter;
and it happens, that the Sulphurous little Bodies therein, apt to be too
hastily inkindled, are a little disjoined, and so the substance of the infused
powder, takes fire successively, and by parts, and not all at once.

The reason of Aurum Fulminans does not so manifestly appear: but it seems
wonderful, that the Calx of a Metal, otherways inviolable by fire, should be
brough into a powder, one grane of which, if it be but lightly heated by fire,
is exploded with so great a force, and yields such a noise, that is an hundred
fold beyond Gunpowder. I know many deduce the cause of this, as in Gunpowder,
from a Nitrous-Sulphureous mixture: For they suppose the Nitre drawn forth from
the solvent Menstruum, to join together with the Sulphur of thE Metal, and so
the powder from thence prepared, to get that fulminating force. But in truth,
if this matter be better thought on, it will appear far otherways; because this
golden thundering powder, is not at all inkindled, as preparations of Nitre with
Sulphur: for if fire be put to it, it goes off only successively, by grains,
nor as in Gunpowder, does the whole fulminate at once; but being put into an
Iron, Silver, or other convenient Vessel, and for some time heated, by a sudden
fire, at length all the Particles being stirred together into motion, it is
exploded with a mightly noise; but yet being explosed, it yields neither flame
nor sparks neither is the Gold lost. For if this powder fulminates in an open
Vessel; whatsoever is of the Gold, remains after the thundering, in the form of
a purple powder; and may be gathered up. That the genuine cause of this may be
extricated, there are some things to be observed, concerning its preparations,
which will give no small light.

For the making of this powder, it is altogether requisite, that a solution of
Gold be made with a Menstruum, impregnated with Sal Armoniack, or at least
Analogical to it: for I have tried it in vain with the Spirit of Nitre, Salt,
with the Bezoartic Spirit, and some others. Then next it is requisite, that the
Calx be precipitated with Oil of Tartar; for if the same be brought into a
powder, with Silver or Mercury being cast in, it loses its thundering force.
Also, if the Liquor of the Tartar, be too precipitately poured in, that with
the great heat, a repercussion of the thing soluted be made, it often loses its
fulminating virtue: but a precipitation being leisurely made, the powder
settling in the bottom is washed away, by the often pouring on of warm water,
which, though it be most often washed and dried, far exceeds the weight of the
dissolved Gold.

According to these positions, in seems most likely, that whilst the Gold is
dissolved by an appropriate Menstruum for this business, some little Bodies of
Sal Armoniack, (or some other resembling it) being greatly akin to the Gold, do
most strictly cohere with its Particles; which then by the Salt of Tartar
leisurely in the precipitating infused, are more fixed, and more strictly tied
fast together: and then the explosion of this powder, or Solary Calx, is
nothing else than a violent eruption of those kind of Salts, from the Cohesion
or Embrace of the Gold. For when the powder prepared after this manner; is
brought to the fire, or is otherways made hot: the heat causes the
Sal-Armoniack Particles, or others of the same nature affixed to the Solar, to
dissociate; which notwithstanding, (when they hardly depart one from another)
are not pulled asunder, but by a strong and continued heat: yet afterward
being pulled asunder with a certain force, by reason of the sudden and violent
breaking off, they strike the Air impetuously, and so cause a most strong
noise, for their bulk. But in the mean time, if the explosion be made under a
Silver Spoon, you will see a separation made of either Particles, here the
Solar of a Purple color, there the Saline of an Ash color. But that this
powder does not make a noise, unless it be leisurely precipitated with the Oil
of Tartar, it is because some Particles of the Salt of Tartar, being before
bound together with the Sal-Armoniac Particles, do couple together, by which
means all are more strongly combined: For the Salt of Tartar being pounded with
the mixture of Nitre and Sulphur fixes their Particles for a time; that this
Composition is not presently inkindled by heat; but afterward is exploded with
a strong noise. And powder prepared after this manner seems to imitate the
Nature of Aurum Fulminans: and it is probable that from other Minerals
dissolved and precipitated by reason of the strict Cohesions of the Salt with
the Metallic matter, and their violent abruptions, thundering Calxes may be
prepared. That truly the preparation of this chiefly depends on the Combination
of the Salts, it appears, because, if in the Precipitating (as I have known it
sometimes to have happened) the Oil of Tartar, being too hastily infused, the
Complexion of the Salts is dissolved with the Metallic matter, the powder falls
in small quantity to the bottom, and of a very Purple color, whose grains are
fragments of almost most pure Gold, and therefore they do not fulminate at all:
afterward in that precipitated Liquor, very many slender Crystals grow
together, which are indeed the Salts, having suffered a Divorce from the Metal.
Besides, That the Salt of Tartar, trings something to the preparation of this
powder, it is a sign, because those things which take away the fulminating
force from this, are of the same Nature, which chiefly work upon the Salt of
Tartar; as a beating it together with common Sulphur, Spirit of Salt, Oil of
Vitriol, or of Sulphur: for these grow hot, and greedily desire to be joined
with the Salt of Tartar, and so they call it away from the Embraces of the
Gold; by which means the Combination of the Salts, with the Particles of the
Gold, is loosned, and therefore loses its Gun-like force. What is commonly
said, that this powder will be presently inkindled, or exploded, by a most
light heat, or by shaking it in an Iron Ladle, is nothing true, as appears to
me, for I have often tried it. Nor is it more worthy of belief, what is said,
that this only forces downwards, and breaks the thickest hollow Pipes with its
force; in the mean time, that it does not move or shake any thing laid over it,
because long since I made trial after this manner; two grains of this being
laid in a Silver Spoon, I covered with a Doller, then a Candle being held under
the Spoon, upon the explosion of the powder, there followed a great noise, and
there was a little hollow made in the bottom of the Spoon, almost through, and
the piece of money was carried up with a force to the Cieling, wherefore, when
this Aurum Fulminans is explosed, its force is diffused round.

Although vehement heat, and incited, and also the emission of Smoke and Soot,
depends for the most part upon fire; yet sometimes we perceive it to be produced
in some subjects, and that in a very high degree, without its being actually
inkindled. A most known instance of which thing is, quick Lime sprinkled with
water: which also Stygian waters show, being mingled with Iron, the Butter of
Antimony, and with the Salts of the stagma of Vegetables. The learned men,
Gunter, Conringius, Hogelandus, and almost all that have touched on the
Doctrine of Fermentation, have delivered the effects of this Nature, as
especial examples of Fermentations, wherefore it will be worth our labor, to
inquire something concerning each of them: but on this condition (which I also
have observed in other disquisitions) that I willingly let alone the opinion of
others; for a Traveller had rather drink at the Fountains themselves: I will
then as briefly and succinctly as I can dispatch the business.

Quicklime is made of the Lime Stone, also of many others (excepting only such
which consist of a reddish and as it were sandy grain) being Calcined in a
close Furnace, for many days, with a reverberating fire: by this means, the
frame of the mixture is loosned, that it goes into a friable matter, or that
may be crumbled, which by reason of the high astriction or binding Nature, in
which it excels, serves most excellently for the making of Cements for Walls:
This Calx or Lime being taken from the Furnace, reteins still the form of
Stone, and seems cold to the touch, but water being poured thereon, it swells
up, and grows wonderfully hot, sending forth smoke, that it burns all Bodies
that are put into it, besides it falls of it self into a white dust: To which
Particles this motion and heat ought to be ascribed, viz. whether to those
implanted in the Lime stone, or to the others acquired by the fire, does not
easily appear: but that we may loose this knot, if we can, I have instituted
this Analysis of quick Lime. I put about half a pound of it into a large
Cucurbit, then water being poured thereon, I fitted the little Head with a
capacious Receiver, by and by, within five minutes of an hour, the matter began
to swell, and to grow very hot; then a smoke, and a breath being raised, all
the Vessels became so hot, that I could scarce touch them with my hands. A
clear water Distilled forth into the Receiver, about six Ounces, which was not
sharp, but of a Styptic or Astringent sweetish taste; the remaining powder in
the Cucurbit, I boiled with common water, and the Lie thereof made, I
endeavored to boil away with a gentle Fire; while it did evaporate, there
gathered together on the Superfices of the Liquor, a white and crusty little
skin, also of a sweetish taste, and the same being taken away, presently a new
one succeeded; the humor being at last wholly exhaled, there remained in the
bottom nothing that was sharp or salt.

We may Collect from this, that this heat does not proceed from the implanted
Principles of the Lime stone, viz. either Saline or Sulphurous however moved
within themselves: for only a sweetish Salt was to be found in it, which was
also Volatile; and it is a sign that there is not much Sulphur in the
Limestone, because by a long Calcination, the form of the mixture is not quite
destroyed, nor its substance wholly broken: wherefore, it is very likely, that
whilst these stones are burnt in the Furnace, some Particles of Fire do
strictly cleave to the Saline, and so reside in that mixture, as it were
strangers; which whilst they lie a sleep, and continue idle, and being
separated one from another, by the coming between of Earth, although they are
very many, do not raise up heat; For all heat depends upon motion: but when
water is poured to it, those fiery Particles, being thrust out of their Cells,
flow together, and fly aways by heaps from that Inn; so breaking forth by
Troops, they cause a very intense heat, and because diluted with water, only a
smoke, and not an actual Fire.

It is a sign that little Bodies of fire, or fiery Particles, do stick a long
while in matters Calcined, because Iron Instruments, according as those
Particles are driven forth of their pores, more or less, leisurely or by heaps,
become soft or hard; tough or brittle: morover it is observed, that bricks or
fresh Earthen Vessels being dipped in water, cause a certain hissing; also
Tobacco Pipes, if one end be put into water, and the other brought near to the
Ear, yield a certain sharp noise and rumbling: add to these, that fixed Salts
being Calcined, or having suffered a Flux by the Fire, become far sharper; also
Stygian waters, by reason of those kind of little Bodies involved therein,
which afterward leisurely evaporate, perpetually send forth sharp fumes: and
when these are poured upon Saline Calxes, not only an Ebullition is raised, by
reason of the disagreeing Particles of the Salts, which strike one another
mutually, whereby they might be more strictly combined; but besides, heat and
smoke succeed, which for the most part arise from the fiery Particles being
shuck out of their Dens. But it is not easy to give a reason why quick Lime,
and no other Concretes, retain so copiously those kind of fiery Particles, and
yield a strong heat, water being poured on them.

It Is plain enough that when the Sulphurous Effluviums of Fire, (forasmuch as
they are most penetrating) enter all Bodies whatsoever, brought near, affect
them affer diverse manners: those which are more lax, and stuffed with active
Principles, are destroyed wholly by burning, and because their substance
decays, the fiery Particles, as Soldiers in a City spoiled by themselves, do
not continue long in the ruined place, but go farther, and move their Tents:
but where the Concretion of the Subject is very compact, and that its Elements
cannot be so pulled in pieces by the fire, that they rather grow stiff, as is
seen in Metals, Glass, Bricks, and other things made hard, either by boiling,
or fusion; the fiery Particles entered in, being received in an incommodious
Inn, presently go forth again; and therefore few are wont to stay in mixed
things of this kind, or in things fused, or Calcined: but if fire be so applied
to the more hard Concretes, of which sort are most stones, and shelly
Concretes, that the bond of the mixture be unlocked, some parts, viz. the
Watery and Sulphurous are driven away, and so some spaces are made hollow,
very fit for the receiving any stranger; in the mean time, that the frame of
the matter be not wholly destroyed, but that it may continue its compacted and
stony form, which flows not away together with its Particles, and ever
threatens its ruin; in such a Subject, chiefly the Particles of fire,
possessing the spaces of the parts flown away, copiously remain; and there
cleaving close to the Saline little Bodies, being detained one from another, by
the coming between of the earthy, lie quiet; which notwithstanding afterward,
being violently driven from those Inns, are able to produce by their eruption,
an intense, and almost fiery heat: in the mean time those Saline little Bodies,
are so loosned, by the long familiarity of the fiery, and by the embrace of one
another, and of the strangers, that they become Volatile, and being diluted
with water, for the greatest part evaporate with it; and the remaining Salt,
because also Volatile, and having suffered almost a divorce from all the rest
of the Principles, is both sweetish, and becomes desirous of Conjunction, and
astringent; and therefore also is of excellent use for plastring of Walls.

But that Stygian waters, being poured upon the Stagmas of fixed Salts, produce
heat, and the same mixed with Iron, or the Butter of Antimony, stir up a mighty
ardor, with a blacking smoke, the reason seems plain. As to the Stygian waters
and fixed Salts, it may be said that both these Concretes are only Salts,
having got diverse states by the fire, and so either being very much stuffed
with fiery Particles (which are the most minute atoms of Sulphur:) But they
being confused together, do forthwith rush into mutual embraces, and because
the Particles of either, are made unlike, therefore, whereby they may be more
strictly united, there is made a great attrition of parts, and together an
excussion of the fiery Particles, from whence the great ebullition, with a heat
is excited: when the same Menstrua, are poured on Iron, or the Ice of Antimo,
the Salts of either come together, and shake forth the fiery Particles, and
also the Sulphurous Particles, before implanted in either Subject; which
flying away in heaps, cause a smoke with a heat, but not a flame.

CHAP. XI. Of the motion of Fermentation, as it is to be observed, in the
Precipitation of Bodies.
WE have hitherto treated of the Solutions of Bodies; it remains now that we
speak of Precipitation, this is performed only in Liquids, which, when as they
are stuffed with Heterogeneous Particles, are compelled by a matter
Precipitating those Particles, to separate one from another, and to obtain for
their substance, diverse places and conditions: wherefore, since in this
operation, there is an agitation and motion of parts, its consideration ought
to be referred to the Doctrine of Fermentation.

Precipitation is performed, either in Natural things, as thiefly in Milk,
Blood, Urine, and perhaps in some others; or in Artificial things, which are of
a diverse Kind and Nature: but they may be described and ranked in a certain
order, according as the Liquor to be Precipitated, or Precipitating, is either
Spirituous, Sulphurous, Watery, or Saline: besides, according as the Particles
separated from the rest, are either Elementary, ( viz. either Sulphurous,
Earthy, or Saline) or Integral, which participate of the Nature of the whole
mixture, and are only very small portions of

There are two common and known ways of Precipitation, whereby is made from
Milk, both Cheese, and Butter: As to the first, if any sharp thing be poured
into warm Milk, the thicker and Chcesie parts, presently separate from the
serous and thinner, and are gathered together into a thick substance. The
reason of which consisits in this: Milk has a somewhat thick consistence, and
its pores and passages are very much beset, with the thicker (to wit the
Cheesie) contents; wherefore when something more subtle and penetrating, (as is
Rennet) passes through the Liquor, it easily thrusts forth the more thick
Particles, with which the pores were possessed; which then mutually Embrace one
another, and are separated apart from the thin, and Eheyie Liquor. When Milk
is kept long to a sourness, it is Precipitated after the same manner, without
Rennet, by warming it over the fire. For in stale Milk its Saline parts get a
Flux, then being stirred up by the fire, supply by their own soumess the turn
of Rennet, yea it is not improbable that the fluid Salt in the Rennet provokes
the Saline Particles of the Milk, into a Flux, and that for this reason chiefly
its Coagulation succeeds: for that the Saline parts having gotten of their own
accord a Flux, so bind the pores of the Liquor, that the more thick Contents
are willingly exterminated from them: wherefore we do say, for that reason, the
same thing happens, when a Flux of the same Salt is caused by some thing else
put into it. But that the Coagulation of Milk happens, not only by reason of
the passages and pores being possessed by a strange Body, the sign is; because
the Salt of Tartar, tho exceeding Precipitatory, effects nothing, of this, and
this effect is excited almost only by sour things. Sugar hinders the
Precipitation of Milk, and many other Liquors, because it restrains the Flux of
the Acetous Salt, and as it is easily Soluble, and its Particles are soft and
blunt, they extrude not the former Contents implanted in the Liquor, but fill
all vacuities, that afterward there is no space whereby another Precipitating
Liquor may unfold it self, and break into another quarters.

But Country people are wont to make Butter of the Flowers or Cream of Milk,
kept for the most part to a sourness, only by shaking or Churning it. The
reason of which (as it seems to me) is this: in Cream there is great plenty of
Sulphur, with which also a mean portion of Salt and Earth is mixed, as may be
conjectured, both by the sourness of the Liquor remaining of the Butter, or the
Butter-Milk, and by its thicker consistency. In this mixture, the parts both
Saline and Sulphurous are in motion, and a Flux: but as the Liquor is thicker
they cannot presently fly away: wherefore it remains, that if the bond of the
mixture be further loosned, they will separate into parts, and that first the
Sulphurous Particles, which exceed the others in power, are Congregated
together with a mutual embrace; wherefore these two things, the Churning of the
Cream performs, viz. it brings the Sulphurous parts by their often obvolution
together, whereby they do the better entangle themselves, and muturally ensnare
one another; besides it breaks their mixture with the rest. For this reason, in
the Winter time, (when Cream is thinner, and abounds less with Sulphur) Butter
is hardly made. Besides the admixtion of Salt or Sugar wholly hinders its
making; because by the coming between of those little Bodies, the Sulphurous
parts are hindered, from a mutual adhesion.

The chief Precipitation of the blood, which is performed within a living Body,
is made in the Reins; where, not without the strength of a certain Coagulum or
Rennet, the serus matter is separated from the rest of the blood; just as Whey
from Milk: For which reason Diuretical things are of the same Nature, as those
which bring a Coagulation to Milk; and therefore, because they more Precipitate
the blood by susing it, they cause a large profusion of urine. The blood being
sent forth of the Vessels, separates into various substances, by its own
disposition: whilst it is warm, it is variously Precipitated, by some Liquors
poured to it, (in like manner Urine) not without a pleasant Spectacle. If you
pour upon warm blood the spirit of Wine, Hearts Horn, Soot, Vitriol, or other
Liquors, chiefly Spirituous or Saline, a wonderful Ebullition and heat is
stirred up; whence we may conjecture after what manner it grows turgid, in
Fevers. But before the rest. the Salt of Tartar, and a Solution of Alum,
procure both in Blood and in Urin, a great perturbation of the Liquor, and
falling down of the parts: for these disturb all the Contents in the pores and
paffages of the Liquor, and by their astriction, very much lock them up for a
long time.

Precipitation in Artificial things is of greater note and use: for this for
the most part floolws Dissolutions, and succeeds them as it were by a certain
right of Order; becaust this takes out to their Jaws, and as it were lays by,
the prey, which all Menstrua take by dissolving. According to the diversity of
the Menstruum, and of the Body dissolved, Precipitation also variously happens:
but in some Subjects there are two chief remarkable things, concerning the
manner of Precipitation, to wit, the soluted Particles, immersed in the pores
and passages of the Menstruum, are wont to fall out of them; either by reason
of the narrowness of the containing space, or else by reason of the Contents
being increased in weight and bigness: for in some the pores of the Solvent,
being either leisurely bound up, or beset with a strange Body, shut forth from
their Cells, the little Bodies of the thing soluted, and send them to the
bottom; as may be observed in Sulphurous Solutions, or such as are made of the
whole mixture of integral parts, in a thin Liquor; which are disturbed, and lay
away their Contents by external cold, simple water, or at least by any Acid
infusion. After this manner resinous Tinctures, also of Sulphur, Olibanum,
Benzoin, and the infusions and decoctions of Vegetables, also Urin, Milk, and
Blood, are wont to be Precipitated: but in several others, besides that the
pores, and passages of the Menstruum, are either leisurely drawn together, or
possessed by a new guest, also something new grows to the Particles of the thing
soluted from the Precipitating matter, whereby being increased in weight and
bulk, they can be no longer sustained; but that they are necessitated to sink
to the bottom. This is chiefly seen in the Saline Solutions of Minerals, which
are only Precipitated by the Salts; whose Particles presently cleave to the
little Bodies of the thing soluted, and increase their substance, that
presently they descend to the bottom by their own weight: For in Saline
solutions, the little Bodies of the thing soluted, are strictly bound together
by the fluid Menstruum, with the Saline Particles; and the Particles run
hastily and are heaped together into the Embraces of the same fluid Salt, from
the Precipitating infusion of the fixed Salt: wherefore, when these three, (to
wit, the little Bodies of either Salt, and of the soluted matter) do cohere
together, they constitute greater grains than can be eontained in the narrow
spaces of the Menstruum, and therefore being thrust out, they fall down toward
the bottom: That this does truly happen after this manner, the great affinity,
both of the fluid and fixed Salt, is a sign; that the Particles of both being
placed near or mixed together, are presently combined in one: also, because
many solutions of Minerals, are presently Precipitated by a fixed Salt, but not
by Vitriol or Alum being put in, which do much more bind, and stop up the pores
of the Liquor. Thirdly, it appears clearly even to sense, because that the
matter put for a Precipitate, far exceeds the thing soluted in bulk and weight,
and is impregnated by the fixed Salt adhering to it, But these being thus
disposed, we will descend to the particular cases of Percipitations, forasmuch
as Precipitation is made manifold, to wit, according to the diversity of the
Menstruum, of the soluted matter, and the Precipitating infusion.

Simple water, though it do not well sustain the Particles of the mixture which
it receives into it self by infusion, or Cohesion, yet hardly sends them away
by Precipitation. For the pores of this Menstruum are too open and loose,
wherefore the Precipitating matter, does not easily strike the little Bodies of
the thing soluted: in the mean time, by reason of the more loose frame of the
Menstruum, some parts of the soluted Body sink down; others of their own accord
evaporate, from whence that Liquor does not long keep the Virtues or Tincture,
with which they are impregnated by another. As some more thick parts and
Terrestrial may be thrust down to the bottom, or otherways separated, we put in
the Juice of Limons, or some acid thing, or boil in it the whites of Eggs, to
wit, that whatsoever is thick might cleave to their viscous substance.

Spirituous and Sulphurous Menstrua, being impregnated with the Sulphurous
Particles of the thing soluted, easily lay by their burden; for they are
Precipitated by common, or any Distilled water; as is seen in Sulphurous and
Resinous Tinctures of Sulphur, Scammony, Benzoin, Frankincense, and others of
that kind prepared by the Spirit of Wine, or Oylof Turpentine, which presently
grow Milky, by Water or Phlegm being infused. For in these sort of solutions,
the pores are wholly possessed, that they admit nothing besides the thing
soluted, and besides, both the Liquor, and soluted Matter are so thin, that
they easily give place to any thing else being infused.

When Menstruas of this kind are filled with Saline Particles, as we may
observe in the Tinctures of the Salt of Corrals, of Tartar and such like,
Precipitation does not presently succeed from common water, but from an Acid
Liquor, as the Spirit of Vitriol, Salt, etc.

Saline Menstruas impregnated by the solutions of Stones or Metals, are most
easily Precipitated by Saline Particles, and scarce by others. The chief
Precipitatory Liquor, is the Salt of Tartar, or of Herbs burnt to Ashes,
deliquated or melted; for this strikes back the Particles of every soluted
thing whatsoever, and sends them headlong to the bottom; to wit, forasmuch, as
it passes through every where, the little spaces of the solvent, and sticking
to the Contents, increases them in bulk, that they more easily fall out of the
pores of the Menstruum, bound also together with their own weight.

What fluid Salt (as Vinegar, Stygian waters, etc.) dissolves, the same a fixed
Salt precipitates; and on the contrary: because Salt of Tartar being melted,
most excellently penetrates common Sulphur, and receives the Tincture; which
then is precipitated by a fluid Salt, viz. by the Spirit of Vitriol, and the
like: which indeed does not happen, by reason of the disagreeing Particles of
the Salts, and mutually opposing one another; but for that the same are greatly
of kin, and rush into mutual Embraces: for from hence, the little grains of the
thing soluted, by reason of the cohering of both the Salts together, being
increased in bulk and weight, are more readily thrust out of the little spaces
of the Menstruum, and descend to the bottom. We will in this place, more
sparingly insist upon instances of this nature, because the more full handling
of them belongs to the Chemical Work.

Precipitation is not only observed in the separation of a more thick matter,
from a serous latex, and in the settling of the disturbed parts toward the
bottom; but sometimes the Particles shut up within the pores and passages of the
Liquor, are so small and subtle, that being Precipitated, they are not
discerned by the sight, neither do they quickly descend to the bottom; but from
their situation and position, being variously changed, the color, and
consistency of the Liquor, are diversely altered. I was wont in times past, to
sport with the solutions of Vegetables and Minerals, which being made by
themselves, were clear like Spring water, and appeared bright, being commixed,
showed now a Black color, now a Milky, Red, Green, Blue, or some other kind.
The solution of Saturn, (or Lead) being made with distilled Vinegar, appears
bright like common water, if you add to this Oil of Tartar, like clear water,
the mixture straight grows White like Milk. If Antimony calcined with Nitre, be
boiled in Spring water, the straining seems clear, and almost without smell,
which yet being dashed by any Acid thing. presently acquires a deep yellow
color, with a most wicked stink. Common water being imbued by an infusion of
Mercury Sublimate, is presently tinged with yellowness, by Oil of Tartar
dropped into it. Quicksilver and Sal Armoniack, being beaten together, and
Sublimated in a Matrace by the heat of Sand, go into a white powder, this being
soluted by melting shows like to clear Spring water, which yet being smeared
upon Brass or Copper, appears like Silver; and being lightly rubbed on brazen
Vessels, renders them as if they were perfectly silvered. A solution of
Calcined Tin, being put to melted Salt of Tartar becomes bluish. A clear
infusion of Galls, being mixed with a solution of Vitriol, makes Ink; if you add
to this Spirit of Vitriol, or Stygian water, the black Liquor is by and by made
clear like Spirit of Vitriol, or Stygian water, the black Liquor is by and by
made clear like Spring water; and this Oil of Tartar reduces again to Ink. And
what is more wonderful, if you write on Paper with the clear infusion of
Vitriol, and frame any Letters; what you so write presently vanishes, nor is
there any marks of the Characters left: but if you smear over the Paper with an
infusion of Galls, presently the Letters may be read, as if wrote with Ink;
which yet, with a Pen run over, dipped in Spirit of Vitriol, you may put quite
out at once wetting, and then again reder them, with wetting them with another
Liquor of Tartar. The Sky-colour Tincture of Violets, being dashed with Oil of
Vitriol, becomes of a Purple color: to which, if you add some drops of the
Spirit of Hearts Horn, that Purple color is changed into Green. Brasil Wood,
being infused in common water, leaves a very pleasant Tincture, like to Claret
Wine; if you pour to this a little distilled Vinegar, the Liquor appears clear
like White Wine: a few drops of Oil of Tartar reduces it to a deep Purple
color: then if the Spirit of Vitriol be poured in, it becomes of a pale
yellow, like to Sack; if you add the Salt of Lead, being soluted by
deliquation, the mixture grows presently Milky: by this means you may imitate
that famous Water-drinker, who having swallowed down a great deal of Spring
water, was wont to vomit forth into Glasses placed before him, diversely
colored Liquors, resembling the ideas of diverse kinds of Wines: for Glasses
being medicated with the aforesaid Tinctures, (so lightly that they may not be
perceived by the standers by) will not only cause the water poured into them,
to imitate every Wine, but will exhibit the very Proteus himself of the Poets,
changed into waters, and from thence putting on all colors, and infinite forms.

If a Reason of these kind of appearances be asked, it ought to be sought in
the minute Particles, contained within the pores of every Liquor; which as to
their site and position, being diversely altered, by another Liquor infused,
transmit variously the Rays of Light, many ways break or reflect them, and so
make diverse appearances of colors. For when the Rays of Light pass through
almost in right Lines, they make a clear color like Spring water; but if in
their passage, they be a little broken, the Liquor grows yellowish; but being
more refracted, they cause a red color; if they are bowed back, so as to be
drained, or that they cannot show themselves, a dark or black color arises;
but if they are again reflected, to the outmost Superficies of the Liquor, they
create the image of Whiteness: after this manner we might variously
Philosophise about other colors, and their appearances, the diversity of
which, and sudden alterations in Liquids, depend chiefly on Precipitation:
because, as the Particles contained in the Liquor, are driven sometimes more
near by another infusion that they clasp themselves together; sometimes are
ordered into other series of positions, the diverse representation of colors
is made. For Liquor being impregnated with little Bodies or Atoms, or this
Nature, most minutely broken, seems as an Army of Soldiers placed in their
Ranks, who now draw into close Order, now open their Files and Ranks, now turn
to the left, now to the right hand, as is diversely shown in the exercising of
Tacticks, or the Art Military. When two clear Liquors being mixed together
shall make Ink, it is because the Particles contained in either, approach near
one another, and as it were placed in their close Orders hinder the passage of
the beams of light: when afterward, this Ink is made clear by another Liquor
poured in, it is because the new Bodies of the thing put in, disperse abroad
the former close joined Particles, and drive them as it were into their open
Orders.

CHAP. XII. Of the motion of Fermentation, as it is to be observed in the
Coagulation, and the Congelation of Bodies.
OOagulation and Congelation of Natural Bodies, no less than their Solution,
depend only on these our Principles. The improportionate mixture of these, and
the exaltation, and powerfulness of some above others, are the cause of either.
Sprit and Sulphur being loosned from the bond, do not only pull assunder the
proper Subjects, but the set upon whatever is next them; and where they are
mighty in number and strength, they affect nothing more than divorces and
separations from the rest of the Principles, and suffer no delay: but on the
contrary, Salts love to be united to the rest, and to be made into hard and
solid substances; and being destitute of the Company of the rest, presently to
enter into new Friendships, and desire only not to be joined to any opposite.
If at any time they are more impetuously moved, either by their own
disposition, or being soluted, they destroy the substance of others, this thing
seems to be done for this end, destinated as it were by Nature, that they might
find out Subjects agreeable to themselves, and having through War obtained
Peace, they might at length be more strictly united to them: wherefore when
Saline Menstruums corrode Stones or Metals, they are Coagulated with their
Particles, and grow together into diversely figured Crystals.

When we here treat of Coagulation, we do not take this word after the usual
manner: to wit, as it is wont to be vulgarly usurped, when Milk is become
congealed, that is, departs from its simple and equal Liquor into Heterogeneous
substances, viz. Cheese, or Curds and Whey, or thick and thin; in like manner,
when blood or other humors go into parts after that manner, they are said to be
coagulated: also, we have elsewhere given this sense, to this word, tho to
speak properly, these sort of motions ought rather to be referred to
Precipitation than to Coagulation. But here we would have to be understood, by
the term Coagulation, an alteration in Bodies of the same kind, as when things
at first tender and soft, grow hard, into a stiff, and as it were stony matter:
or any thing is said to coagulate, when Saline little Bodies being dispersed
abroad in any Subject, begin to be congregated and joined together, and from
thence united, either among themselves or with Earth, produce out of a soft and
fluid substance, a hard and compacted. This may be perceived in the shells
clearly stony, of Fruits and Seed; in Bones and Horns of living Creatures, in
Shells and Shelly scurffs of Fishes; all which indeed very much abound with an
Alcali Salt, or the same Volatilized. Among Handicrafts, or preparations from
human Industry, the Crystalisation, Vitrification of Salts, or making of Glass,
also the baking of Pots and Earthen ware, ought to be referred to Coagulation.

But it is properly called Congelation, when the Saline Particles, coming from
elsewhere, strictkly bind together the Subjects on which they fall, fix the
Particles variously moved within the substance of the mixture, and gather them
together, that by that means the whole becomes stiff, and as it were stony. We
may behold these kind of effects in Ice and Frost, by which soft Mud, or fluid
Springs of waters grow stiff, into a very Marble substance. Also the same is
manifestly beheld, among the Operations of Art, in the confusions of some
Salts, and mutual Concretion in Sublimating; by which means, they go into a
substance, now like to Ice, now to Snow. To which may be added the Artificial
turning of water to Ice, which is performed by the mixture of Salt and Snow;
but the instances which we have remarked in either of these, about the Works of
Art, we will in this place briefly run through, and a little consider the
reasons of them, and the ways of being done.

The Crystalisation of Salts, is procured after this manner; Salts of every
kind are thoroughly dissolved in common water, and their Particles being
dispersed through the whole mass of the Liquor, wholly disappear; afterward,
if this liquor be somewhat evaporated, that its passages and pores be something
bound together, the little Bodies of the Salt close one with another, and
mutually take hold of themselves, and join together, the outward cold binding
them, and are figured in the midst of the water, into Crystals proper to their
Nature. By this means Sal Nitre into Pyramids, Sea Salt into Cubes, Alum into
eight cornered Figures, Sal Armoniack into six cornered, and other Salts are
formed into other Figures of their own accord, after a constant manner.

If the Reason of this be sought after, we say that these kind of Salts are not
simple Elements, but Bodies made up of abundance of Salt, with the other
Elements mixed with them in small quantity; which even as other Natural
Concretes, are allotted by the first Creator, peculiar manners of figurations,
according to the surpassing strength of Salt and Spirit, and commixion with the
rest. For in determining the Figures of Natural Bodies, Spirit and Salt are as
the Rule and Compass in describing Mathematical Figures: Spirit, as the
moveable Foot of the Compass, or as a Pensil in the hand of an Artist,
variously excurs and draws here and there diverse fashioned lineaments. But
salt (as the applied Rule) moderates the excursions of the other, and
determinates them, and restrains them within the confines designed by Nature:
when the Spirit is more powerful than the Salt, there happens a greater variety
in the Figuration of things, as in Vegetables and Animals; because the Spirit
running forth more largely, forms very many Marks of its Pourtracture, and
describes Bodies not in right Lines, but intorted, and very much variegated.
Where the Salt Lords it over the Spirit, as in Mineral Concretes, and chiefly
Saline; Bodies grow together in less adorned Figures, and are accounted the
first and more simple, and of that sort, as the Mathematical descriptions in
right Lines or Circles. For those Salts, are as it were second Elements; and
from the implanting of them in Bodies, the proper and native Figures of things,
very much depend; and therefore they themselves are primitively imbued by
Nature with a certain Elementary Configuration, (so that according to Plato,
God in truth exercises Geometry) and the first regular Figures are formed in
the more simple, that things compounded of them, might arise furnished with all
manner of variety of figures.

The fixed Salts of Herbs being prepared by Calcination, because they are
almost destitute of the Fellowship of Spirits, do scarce go at all into
Crystals, nor are they coagulated, but by a long evaporation. Sea Salt
containing a very little Spirit, with great Labor goes into Cubes. Next to
this Alum, guifted with a little more Spirit, is more easily coagulated, and
grows into more elaborate Figures, viz. eight cornered Sal Nitre, swelling with
spirit, is most easily coagulated, and is framed into a more perfect Figure,
viz. Pyramidical; which consists of both Spherical, and Right Lines. But
Volatile Salt, (such as is distilled out of Urine, Blood, and the Horns of
living Creatures) being associated with a plentiful Spirit, is drawn into
Concretes, very much varying, which imitate now the Horns of Staggs. now the
Figures of Plants. Out of Mercury, with Salt, or the Calx of Silver, by an
Amalgama, in the midst of the waters a Silver Tree is formed, with Stock, Trunk
and Branches, painted to the Life. It is a usual thing in the Winter time, for
the Air, impregnated with Saline Vapors, and fallen on the Glass Windows, to be
condensed into most fair Firgures of Trees and Woods. So much for the
Crystallisation of Salts: The other Species of Coagulation, is Vitrification,
of which we will speak next.

Vitrification (which is also said to be the last mutation of Bodies, of which
Nature is capable, and from which there is no going back) depends upon a fused
Salt, and united to an Earthy matter, even to its smallest Particle: for when
either matter is fused, by a most vehement fire, and divided in its smallest
parts, the Bodies of either, being put into a Flux, are by so strict a marriage
joined together, that afterward they are never to be pulled assunder.

There are many ways, and diverse provisions of Vitrification, to wit, of Sal
Alcali, with Sand or a sandy matter fused together by a violent fire, common
Glass is made; which is transparent, both by reason of the abundance of Salt,
and of the clearness of the Sand; for if you behold the little Sands of which
Glass is made, with a Microscope, each of their little Globes appear, (as they
were Glassie Gems) clear and shining. Wherefore Salt promotes; the fusion of
that clear matter by fire, and then is admitted into its most strict embraces
being fused.

Besides Glasses of diverse Colors and Consistences are made of Minium, the
Calx of Tinn, Antimony, and some other Minerals, (when the Sulphurous part
does first fly away) fused, now by themselves, now with Flint or Sandy matter.
The reason of all which consists in this; that Salt and Earth, being most
smally broken by a violent fusion of fire, and being divided as to their least
Particles, catch hold of one another, and so are bound together, by the most
strict bond of the mixture. The Coalition or Coupling of these, is never to be
dissolved, because there is wanting within in the mixture, other Principles,
which might unlock the frame of the Subject: yea Salt and Earth, being joined
by the mediating fire, do so intimately cohere, that they affect not divorces
of themselves, nor suffer them from another.

The baking of Earthen Pots and Bricks, is of kin to Vitrification (or making
of Glass) whereby moist and soft Clay is stifned into a very stony hardness:
But in these, there is greater plenty of Earth, and less of Salt; wherefore
they are less brittle, and not transparent. Concerning these we say, that by
the fire mediating, and as it were handying the smallest, broken, and divided
Particles of Salt, are married to every Particle of the Earthy matter, and with
them grow hard, into as it were a stony substance, and that not easily to be
resolved. Also in these kind of matters, prepared by human Industry, we imitate
indeed, with an excellent Artifice, the Concretions of Bones and Stones, made
by Nature in diverse Families of Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals.

As to what respects Congelation; Salts of a diverse kind, do often meet
together, and grow stiff, into as it were a new substance: But this happens
many ways. Of these, some Salts being mixed together, presently grow together
into Crystals: for the Acid Spirits of Minerals being added to the Salts of
Tartar, or those made of the incineration of Vegetables turn into a white
Coagulum like Snow, and with a spumeous or frothy Heat: The reason of which is,
that the Particles of the Salt, having gotten a Flux, take hold of other Salts
in the Spirit, Alcalisate by melting; but by reason of the first Particles of
either, being made unlike, there arises a strife; then form the same
consociated in one, that white settlement is made.

Not unlike the same manner, these Acetous Spirits, to wit, of Vitriol, Nitre,
Salt, and others being mixed with Metals, while they corrode them, are
Crystallised together with their Saline Particles: so the Spirits of Vitriol,
Nitre, also Stygian waters, (which are only Salts having gotten a Flux) are
formed into most elegant Crystals, in the dissolving of Silver, Iron, Copper,
and other things. For Salts, even as Sulphur, being loosned from the mixture,
dissolve other mixtures, and greedily desire to be united with the Homogeneous
Particles of the same Subject.

There is another manner of Congelation, when Salts being mixed with some other
matter, are elevated by Sublimation out of their Subjects, and then congeal the
Particles of that new matter, which they carry away with them, and grow
together with them (like a Meteor) on high: after this manner the Salts of
Vitriol, Nitre and Sea Salt, being sublimated with Mercury, are congealed as it
were into a snowy substance: The same being sublimed with Antimony, go into a
matter like Ice. After this manner the Natural Congelations, by which some
Minerals, and chiefly Vitriols and Sulphurs, are begot in the Bowels of the
Earth, may be imitated. For of Iron and Copper are prepared factitious
Vitriols, which are very like the Natural: Of Antimony Sulphur is made, which
answers to an hair our common Sulphur in taking fire, color and smell: for
example pour Oil of Vitriol, to the height of a fingers breadth, upon
pulverised Antimony; and let it be distilled in a Retort in a Sand Furnace, a
yellow Sulphur will be sublimed in the Neck of the Retort, that cannot be
discerned from the common Sulphur: which is a sign that the Concretion of
Sulphur is made in the Earth, when some Sulphurous Mineral is corroded by the
Salt of Vitriol, whose Sulphurous parts are congealed by the same Salt. This
also is an Argument, that Oil of Sulphur, which is separated, by inkindling
under a Bell from the Sulphurous matter, is nothing else but Vitriolic Salt,
nor does any thing differ from Oil of Vitriol.

Artificial Congelation concludes instances and examples of Congelations: to
wit, whereby common water, or any Liquors being put over the fire, or in an Hot
House, are suddenly congealed into Ice: it is a common way, and vulgarly known,
Salt being mixed with Snow and Ice, and agitated or shaken in a Vessel put into
water, suddenly the water about the sides of the Vessel will be frozen. This
will be done if you make trial of it, either with common Salt, or Sea Salt,
Nitre, or also with Vitriol, Alum, Sal Ammoniac, or Mercury Sublimate: For Salt
of every kind, being put to Snow or Ice, loosens their mixtures, and sends away
the Nitrous and Congelative Particles from the Subjects; which presently being
immersed in the neighboring water, Congeal it, as if they were freshly blown
from the North.

What is more admirable; let a dish with Snow be placed over hot Coals, and in
the middle of the Snow put a Glass full of water: as the Snow is melted by
degrees by the fire, the water shall be frozen: for the Nitrous Particles,
being driven away by the heat, by their departure, they are dashed against the
neighboring water and congeal it.

And thus much for FERMENTATION in general, and briefly of its various parts;
it had been almost an infinite Labor, and from our purpose, to heap up
instances in so diffuse a thing. Those hitherto brought, however chosen out of
Natural Philosophy, were fit to wait upon the following Medical dissertation,
that we may more happily know the Original, Progress, and State, as also the
Remedies and Cure of Motions, and Mutations, in Causes, which variously happen
to all kind of Bodies, and somewhat respecting the Tumults, which from thence
are begot in the human Body, from the blood being irritated, and the rest of
the humors; to which exercise, God willing, we will now proceed.

FINIS.
THE PREFACE.
To the Friendly Reader,
TO Institute in this Age a new Doctrine of Fevers, may perhaps seem the same
thing, as if any one should go about to describe the midst of our Country, for
a Land before unknown. For what respect the Diagnosis of this Disease, seem to
be firmly Established already, by the Precepts and Practice of the Ancients and
Moderns; yea by long Experience, they are so generally in the mouth, and known
of all men, that nothing can be more. However I deserve pardon, if I a little
receed from the Vulgar Opinion concerning Fevers, as a way mightily worn out;
and go in a less trodden Path; because I am not the first, or only man that
directs his course against the received Opinion, as against a Stream. For in
truth, in the Medical Art, (and that deservedly) those things have not pleased
the men of our Age, which did those of the former: because the Ancients relying
on a false Position concerning the motion of the Blood; proceeding as it were
through slippery and moist places, often fell foully and dangerously: wherefore
it is no wonder, if those who come after should take care for the thorough
instauration of Physic, and for the Re-Edifying the Building, (as they say)
even from the ground, the Ancient Props being fallen down, on that which our
most Famous Harvy has laid, the Circulation of the Blood, as a new Foundation
in Medicine. But in this Work, Learned men of other Countries, but chiefly of
our own, have happily labored, not only in removing the Rubbish of the former
Building, but for the supplying this plentifully with Stone, Planks, and other
matter. In times past, among the Ancients, as the distribution and Natural
motion, of the Nutritious humor, of the Blood and Nervous juice; so the
Feverish heats, and preternatural motions of them, were wholly hidden and lay
in the dark: but now new Lights have shined forth, and it is granted us to know
the Causes of things before hidden, it does not become prudent men, and
professing Philosophy, even to shut their Eyes and remain blind in the Light it
self; but especially about a Disease by which the third part of Mortals have
still fallen to this day, to be rather willing to Err with the Ancients, than
to understand the Truth with the Moderns, or to believe what is more likely,
argues a mind guilty of notable stubbornness. When therefore the Puretology or
Fever Tracts of former Medicine, had no firm and stable Basis, and that it is
easy to show that it was built upon very many, and plainly false Errors, what
should hinder, but that we having gotten more certain Principles, should
endeavor to erect a better Science concerning Fevers? Truly I think it would
hardly be, although the pleas of the Ancients, should be yet openly maintained in
the Schools, but that many Physicians, who have a mind to look within the Bark,
would frame new Hypotheses to themselves from their own Ratiocination, by which
they might more exactly quadrate the Phenomenon of Fevers, than by that of the
Ancients. But it may be objected, that Fevers have been happily cured by the
same Remedies, and the like method of Curing, from the times of Hippocrates and
Galen, even to our days; and therefore it may seem a rash Work and little safe,
that we should endeavor new things, after having had the Experience of so many
Ages, especially since it is about the human Body. To this it will be easy to
answer, that Medicine was at first Empirical, and Remedies were not invented by
general Precepts, or by Rule, but by the frequent trial of several things: And
if led by the Example of Hippocrates, his Followers had only polished his
Observations and Experiments, without doubt the Medicinal Art had grown up
better, more handsomely, and with greater benefit to the Sick. But that the
Light, clearly inkindled by the Ancients, did so suddenly shut up, and darkened
the Eyes of Posterity, it was, the preposterous study of those, who too bastily
framed, almost out of their own Brain, Physic into a general Method, after the
manner of some Speculative Science: for by this means, before they had laid a
firm Foundation, a sufficiently specious, and deceitful Pile of unstable
Doctrine, was erected. That therefore in the Cure of Fevers, some Indications
being more anciently received, remain yet confirmed, and are to be perpetually
observed, is to be ascribed wholly to Experience, the first Mistress of this
Art, and not to the Precepts of Scholars. And from hence, I hope for my self,
to have gotten a defense sufficient enough; for if the Opinions wholly
erroneous of the Ancients, had not hindered, but that the practice of Medicine,
at first instituted by a certain induction of observations; had proceeded
commodiously enough; the Theory being joined with Truth, would have brought
much less hurt to the Sick; or have less carried away those exercising
Medicine, quite contrary from that Path, which Antiquity had left commended to
us. In the mean time, it is not to be dissembled, that naked Experience, without
the helps of Method and Reason avails little, yea very often does much hurt;
for neither are the same Diseases, every where to be driven away by the same
Remedies. But he seems to have hit the mark, who joins both together, that
Reason may not pervert Experiments, and Nature it self, not that this may
remove Reason from its place. Although that I know well enough, I have not
obtained it, yet I will freely profess, that I have aimed at this Mark; and
perhaps I may have deserved some praise, even in failing in these sort of
Adventures; for after I had not found in Books, what might satisfy a mind
desirous of Truth, I resolved with my self, to search into living and breathing
Examples: and therefore sitting oftentimes by the Sick, I was wont carefully to
search out their Cases, to weigh all the symptoms, and to put them, with exact
Diaries of the Diseases, into writing; then diligently to meditate on these,
and to compare some with others; and then began to adapt general Notions from
particular Events: and when by this means, for a long time, observing the
Accidents and Courses of Fevers, I had busied my self, for the finding out
forms of Reasons for their Cure, at length a new Pathology of this Disease was
conceived in my mind; which afterward, by the frequent increasing Concourse of
Observations, as it were the Juice and Blood, was formed by degrees into a
Child, such as it now appears. But the Infant, which I had ordered to be kept
closely, in our private house, being remarkable for Paradoxes, as it were a
monstrous shape, the importune diligence of Friends has taken care to bring
abroad being gotten forth of my hands, and to be publicly beheld. What
therefore is there said concerning Fevers, besides the common manner, I would
not have any one esteem it brought forth by me, as from a Doctor in the Chair:
doubting, I bring these thoughts into Public, and submit them to the
Examination and Emendation of the more Learned. That others before me have not
spoken all things truly concerning this thing, shall be an Argument that I may
Err, yea (if you please) that I have Erred: however, if I should have rightly
traced forth any marks, in this, at least new search of Truth; and shall have
incited others (who are far better able) by this occasion, to the full
finishing of it; it will not repent me altogether of this, tho rash beginning.

OF FEVERS.
CHAP. I. The Anatomy of the Blood; and its Resolution into five Principles: A
comparing it with Wine and Milk.
THE Doctrine of Fermentation being explicated, it remains that we handle the
chief Instance or Example of it, to wit Fevers. For it seems that a Fever is
only a Fermentation, or immoderate Heat, brought into the blood and humors. Its
name is derived from Februo (or Purgament, which also is derived from Ferveo to
be Hot) which word indeed is commodiously put to every Fever, for that the
blood in this Disease grows hot, and besides, by its fervor, as working must,
it is Purged from its filthinesses. But that this Fermentation or Feverish
effervescency, may be rightly explicated, these three things are to be
considered. First, What the Fermenting Liquor is; whether only blood, or any
humors besides. Secondly, In what Principles in the mixture, and in what
proportion of them, this Liquor consists. Thirdly and lastly, By what motion
and turgescency of those parts, or Particles, of which the blood is made, the
Feverish effervescency is stirred up. These being thus premised, the Doctrine
of Fevers shall be delivered, not from the Opinions of others, but acccording
to the comparisons of Reasons, picked (tho from ours, yet) from diligent and
frequent observation, and confirmed by certain Experiments; all which however,
I willingly submit to the judgment of the more skilful.

It plainly appears, even to the sense, that the Blood does hugely boil up and
rage in a Fever, for every one (tho rude and unskilful) being in a Fever,
complains of the blood being distempered, and of the same growing hot in the
Vessels, and as it were put into a fury. Also, besides the blood raging in the
Veins and Arteries, it may be lawfully suspected, that that juice with which
the Brain and Nervous parts are watered, is wont oftentimes to be in fault; for
when this Liquor is seen to be carried back from the blood, into the Nervous
stock by a constant motion, and certain Circulation, and from thence through
the Lymphatick Vessels, into the Bosom of the blood, it is probable, if by
reason of a taint contracted from the blood, that humor be depraved in its
disposition, or is perverted from its equal motion, that from thence, the
Rigor, and Pain, Convulsion, Dilerium, Frenzy, and many more symptoms of the
Nervous kind, usual in Fevers, do arise.

After the Blood and Nervous Liquor, two other humors, for that being apt to
grow hot, fall into our consideration, viz. The Chyme or nourishing Juice,
continually coming to the Mass of Blood, and the serous Latex, perpetually
departing from the same, which tho they be the first and last Liquors separated
from the Blood, and distinct from it, yet being confused with it, they ought to
be esteemed as its associate parts, or complements: For the nourishable Juice
being fresh brought, is accounted the Crude part of the blood, and to be
assimilated; and the Serum, its stale part, and to be carried away. And after
this manner, so long as either are Circulated with the blood it self, in the
Vessels they participate of the heats of the first begotten blood, and
oftentimes occasionally begin them, or increase them being begun: but by what
means these things come to be done, is declared hereafter in their proper
places. As to the rest of humors, which are only the recrements of the
Nutritious juice, or the blood, when they are included, either in their proper
Receptacles, or constrained in the narrow spaces, in the Viscera, neither wash
the several parts of the Body with a continual lustration, as the blood or
Nervous Liquor, or the other humors but now recited, are to be exempted from
this rank; sometimes perhaps they may be the occasional cause that the blood
does conceive an undue Effervescency, or that it persists in it longer; but it
is only the blood, (with the Nervous Liquor, the alible juice, and Serum
associates) which boiling up above measure, with its heat, and stirred up with
a rage through the Vessels, diffuses the preternatural heat, and induces the
formal reason of the Fever: but how this comes to be done, is not to be known
plainly, but by a more near beholding the Nature of Blood, and as it were an
Anatomy made of its Liquor.

There are in the Blood (as in all Fermentative Liquors) Heterogeneous
Particles which as they are of a diverse Figure and Energy, remain a long while
in the mixture, by their mutual opposing one another and subaction, the motion
of Fermentation is continually conserved; as is perceived in Wine, Beer, and
other Liquors: then, if the mixtion of the Liquor be somewhat unlocked by the
adding of Ferments, the Native Particles being freed from their bonds, do yet
more swell up and induce Fermentation, with a more rapid motion and heat: which
is seen in a familiar Experiment of the Chemists, viz. when fluid Salts are
mixed with Saline Liquors of another kind; from thence a great heat and
ebullition are stirred up. Wherefore we ought to inquire concerning the Blood,
of what Particles it consists, that it should be fit to Ferment, (as Wine,
Beer, and other Liquors) of its own Nature: then by the help of what kind of
Ferments, both its Natural and Feverish heats are performed, with warmth, and
a more quick motion.

The Mass of the Blood by the opinion of the Ancients, was thought to consist
of four humors, to wit, Blood, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy: and it was
affirmed, that according to the eminency of this, or that humor, diverse
temperaments are formed; and that by reason of their fervors or exorbitances,
almost all Diseases do arise. This Opinion, tho it flourished from the time of
Galen, in the Schools of Physicians, yet in our Age, in which the Circular
motion of the Blood, and other affections of it were made known, before not
understood, it began to be a little suspected; nor to be so generally made use
of, for the solving the Phaenomenas of Diseases: because these sort of humors
do not constitute the blood, but what are so called (except the Blood) are only
the recrements of the blood, which ought continually to be separated from it:
For in truth the Blood is an only humor; not one thing about the Viscera, and
another in the habit of the Body; nor is it moved at one time by Phlegm, and
another time with Choler, or Melancholy, (as is commonly asserted) but the
Liquor growing hot in the Vessels, is only Blood, and wheresoever it is carried
through all the parts of the Body, it is still the same, and like it self. But
because by reason of the abundance of the implanted heat in some, and because
of the smalness of it in others, the Coction of the Aliment is now quicker, now
slower performed in the Bowels, and in the Vessels; therefore the temper of the
Blood (tho but one, and always the same Liquor) becomes diverse: and according
to the various disposition of this, it may be said that men are Choleric;
Melancholic, or of another temperament. Besides, because whilst the Blood is
made in its Circulation in the Vessels, some parts continually grow Old, and
others are supplied anew, hence from Crudity, or too much Coction, there is a
necessity that what is excrementitious should be heaped together: which
notwithstanding by its effervescency, (as by the working or depuration of Wines
it comes to pass) it is separated from its Mass, viz. the watery humor, fixed in
the Bowels, or solid parts, is it which is called Phlegm: some Relics of
adust Salt and Sulphur, being separated in the Liver, and received by the
Choleduct Vessels are called Choler; the Earthy feculences being laid up in the
Spleen, are termed Melancholy. In the mean time, the Blood if rightly purified
ought to want Choler, Phlegm and Melancholy: even as when some Wines, or Beer
are purified, the more light Particles are carried upwards, which constitute
its Flowers or Head; and the dregs are pressed down to the bottom, which grow
together into Feces or Tartar: yet none can truly say it, Wine or Beer is
composed of Froth, Tartar, and a Vinous Liquor, But as these humors, commonly
so called, are made out of the other Principles, viz. Choler out of Salt and
Sulphur, with an admixtion of Spirit and Water; and Melancholy, out of the
same, with an addition of Earth; and as the blood is immediately forged out of
these kind of Principles, and is wont to be resolved sensibly into the same, I
thought best, the common acception of humors being laid aside, to bring into
use these celebrated Principles of the Chemists, for the unfolding the Nature
of the Blood and its affections. There are therefore in the blood as in all
Liquors, apt to be Fermented, very much of Water and Spirit, a mean of Salt and
Sulphur, and a little of Earth. The blood being loosned by putrefaction,
exhibits the same separated and distinct. Also in the blood contained in the
Vessels, or being fresh let out from them, we may discover their energies and
effects: besides when in the Food, whereby we are fed, by the juice of which
the Liquor of the blood is made, these same are implanted, no man will go about
to deny that the blood also is made from them: wherefore I will briefly run
through these, and endeavor to show by what means the Consistency, the
Properties, and the Affections of the Blood are made by them.

1. Spirits (which readily obtain the chief place) are a subtle, and greatly
volatile portion of the blood. Their Particles, always expansed, and
endeavoring to fly away do move about the more thick little Bodies of the
rest, wherewith they are involved, and continually detein them in the motion of
Fermentation. The Liquor of the blood, continually boils up with their
effervescency or growing hot, and equal expansion in the Vessels, and the rest
of the Principles are contained in an orderly motion, and within the bond of
the exact mixture; if any Heterogeneous thing, or unagreable to the mixture, be
poured into the bloody Mass, presently the Spirits being disturbed in their
motion rage, shake the blood, and force it to grow hugely hot, until what is
extraneous, and not missible, is either subdued, and reduced, or cast out of
doors. By the irradiation, or rather the irrigation or watering of these, the
Bodies of the Nerves are inflated, the Functions of the Viscera, and also the
Offices of motion, and sensation are performed: from the want of Spirits, also
from their motion being depraved or hindered, arise great vices of the Natural
economy or Government. The more quick motion and effervescency of these in the
blood, (above what is in Wine) chiefly depends upon the Ferment of the Heart;
because, whilst the blood passes through the Bosom of the Heart, its mixture is
very much loosned, so that the Spirits, together with the Sulphurous
Particles, being somewhat loosned, and as it were inkindled into a flame, leap
forth, and are much expanded, and from thence they impart by their
deflagration, a heat to the whole. By reason of this kind of expansion, and
suffusion of heat, there is made a continual expense of Spirits, which being
rarefied, as it were inkindled, continually fly away, and are evaporated forth
a doors: and as long as we live there is made a continual reparation of these
by aliments, chiefly the most delicate; which contain in themselves very much
of Spirit and swelling matter: from which juice being drawn by digestion, and
collated to the blood, is assimilated to it and fills up its defects. When the
Blood of Animals is distilled, the Spirits (like Aqua Vitae) ascend of a limpid
color, they are made very sharp and pricking by the adhesion of the Salt; yet
they are not so easily drawn off as the Spirits of Wine, but that there is need
of a more intense fire to force them, because they are hardly driven from the
fellowship of the thicker parts, with which they are involved.

2. That there is plenty of Sulphur in the blood, it is plainly seen, because
we are chiefly fed with Fat and Sulphurous Aliments, also the Nutriment from
the blood, carried to the solid parts, goes into Sulphur and Fatness. It is
most likely, from the dissolution of this, that the red Tincture of the Blood
does arise: for Sulphurous Bodies, before any others, impart to the solvent
Menstruum, a color highly full of redness; and when by reason of too great
Crudity, the Sulphur is less dissolved, the blood becomes watery and pale, that
it will scarce dye a Linen ragg red. The Mass of blood being impregnated with
Sulphur, and together with Spirits, it becomes very Fermentable: which however,
whilst it enters the Ventricles of the Heart, there suffers a greater
effervescency, or rather accension; and on the Particles chiefly Sulphurous,
being inflamed; and thence diffused through the whole, the lively and vital
heat in us depends. When the Sulphurous part is carried forth, and does too
much luxuriate in the blood, it perverts its disposition from its due state,
that therefore the blood being either depraved, or made more bilous or
Choleric, does not rightly Cook the nourishing juice; or being inkindled
throughout, it conceives heats and ardours such as arise in a continual Fever.
For the Sulphur being too much exalted; and swelling more than it ought, stirs
up great heats in the blood: and they whose-blood is more plentifully
impregnated with Sulphur, are most obnoxious to Fevers. By reason of the
Particles of this being incocted with the Nutritious juice, and from thence
carried to the solid parts, fatness, softness and tenderness, come to out Body.
From the Flesh or Blood putrefying, by reason of the abundahce of evaporated
Sulphur, a most evil stink breaths forth: In the distillation of Blood, Sulphur
ascends under the form of a blackish Oil, which also by reason of the
Empyreuma, stinks most wickedly.

3. That Salt is in the blood, is evinced by the Salt; which, tho fixed, is
drawn forth, by being eaten, from Vegetables, and from other eatable things, at
first less volatile, afterward by the most excellent digestion of Nature, and
Circulation, is highly volatilised; that it passes through, not only without a
remaining Caput Mortuum, all the members and parts of our Body, but also the
blood being exposed to distillation, ascends the alembic, and leaves the dead
Head as insipid earth: If at any time the Saline Particles are not rightly
exalted in the Blood, by reason of ill digestion, but remain crude, and for the
most part fixed, from thence the blood becomes thick and unfit for Circulation,
so that obstructions are begot in the bowels and solid parts, and serous
Crudities are every where heaped together: But if the Salt be too much carried
forth, and suffers a Flux, the Spirit being depressed, or deficient, a sour and
bitter disposition is given to the blood, such as is observed in Scorbutical
people, and those sick of a Quartan Fever. Also from the Salt, for this reason
being variously coagulated, the Stone, King-Evil, Gout, Leprosy, and very many
other Chronical Diseases arise. But when Coction being rightly performed in the
bowels and Vessels, the Salt is duly exalted, and being associated with the
Spirit, is volatilised, then by reason of its mixture, the Liquor of the blood
more equally ferments; also is defended from Putrefaction, Stagnation and
Coagulation: Also the Saline Particles, bridle the fiercenesses of the Spirits,
and especially of Sulphur; wherefore, those who have their blood well filled
with a Volatile Salt, are less obnoxious to Fevers: also hence those who often
are let blood, are more apt to Fevers.

4. Besides, There are in the blood (as it is a thick humor, and has a gross
consistence) many Earthy Particles: from hence also, its too great
Volatilisation is as it were supported, and its too hasty accension hindered:
even as Charcoal-dust, is added oftentimes to Gunpowder in a greater
proportion, that all its parts may not take fire at once, and too soon.
Further, from the Terrestrial Particles of the blood and Nutritious Juice, the
bulk and increase of the Body proceeds. Lastly from the distillation of the
Blood, a light and friable Caput Mortuum, is left in great plenty.

5. Upon the watery part of the blood depends its fluidness; for from hence its
stagnation is hindered, and the blood is circulated in the Vessels, without
growing thick or stiff: also its too great conflagration, and adustion is
restrained, and its heat attempered. When blood is distilled a clear and
insipid water is drawn off, at least in a double proportion to the rest; for
from hence the matter of Urine, Sweat, and every humid Excrement, for the most
part proceeds.

What things were but now asserted, concerning the Principles of the blood, and
the affections to be deduced thence, will better appear, if we consider
consider a little the blood according to its sensible parts, and shall comkpare
it with other Liquors which are in daily use among us. Those sort of Liquors,
which have a very great Analogy with the blood, are v.z. Rich Wine and Milk. As
to the reasons of Fermentation and growing Hot, it is most fitly compared to
Wine, as to its consistency, coagulation, and departure of the paits one from
another, it is likened to Milk.

In the first place therefore, it is observed of Wine, that so long as it is
shut up in the Vessel or Pipe, its subtle and spirituous Particles, do
perpetually agitate, or very much shake others more thick, break them, and
render them fit for an exact mixtion; what is heterogeneous, and unfit for
subaction or mingling, is separated by its growing hot: In the mean time the
purified Liquor greatly fermenting is in perpetual motion, whereby all the
parts (as Atoms variously moved up and down, in a beam or streak of light) do
stretch themselves forth onevery-side, and contend with a constant rolling
about, from top to bottom, and from thence to the top again. By the attrition
and refraction of the Particles very many Effluvia of Atoms, go away from the
Liquor, which if the Vessel being closely shut, they are kept within; the
Liquor grows too excessively hot, and oftentimes causes the containing Vessel
to burst in picecs. Blood, much after the same manner being shut up within the
Veins and the Arteries, is urged with a constant Circulation: The Vital Spirit
makes subtle, breaks, and exactly molds the more thick Particles; what is
heterogeneous, and not mixable, it expels forth of doors; in the mean time by
the refraction and kneading of the parts, Effluvia of heat do constantly stream
forth, and evaporate through the pores; which being shut in, if transpiration
be hindered, presently by reason of the too great boiling of the blood a Fever
is inkindled.

Secondly, we will observe concerning Wines, that they grow turgid, or swell
up, if any extraneous thing, and of a Fermentative Nature, be poured to them;
yea sometimes, that they are moved more than ordinary of their own accord. For,
when by a long digestion, the Sulphurous part of the Wine is too much exalted,
it conceives a greater heat than it ought, and (unless presently appeased)
perverts the disposition of the whole Liquor, with its swelling up. It seems to
be for the very like reason, that the Feverish heat which is wont to be
introduced by reason of the same Causes, is stirred up in the blood, as shall
be shown in the next Chapter, where we treat of the Motion and Heat of the
blood.

The third Observation, or comparing of the Blood with Wine, shall be of this
sort: Wines (as also many other Liquors, as for example, Beer, or Sider) have
their times of crudity, matruation, and defection. For when they are first
made, the Spirituous parts are so obvolved by the others more thick, that they
show themselves but little, and put forth almost nothing of strength or virtue:
and as the other Particles, are not yet subtilised, nor truly concocted, the
whole Liquor remains crude, and of an ungrateful taste, and if put to
distillation, not any Spirit ascends. From this state it comes by degrees to
perfection, and when the Spirits being extricated from their intanglements,
obtain their own right, and have subtilized and exalted the more thick
Particles of the rest, the whole mass of the Liquor becomes Clear, Spirituous,
Sweet and Balsamic. Lastly, when by a long Fermentation, the Spirits are
consumed, and begin at length to fail, the state of defection is induced,
whereby Wines, and other Liquors, either pass into a tastlesness, or at last
the Salt and the Sulphur being too much exalted, are made sowt or unsavory. In
like manner the blood also, while it is Circulated in the Vessels, may be
considered according to this kind of threefold disposition: First, in the
making or crudity, which has relation to the Chyme new made in the Viscera, and
freshly poured to the blood; the Particles of which, like to unripe Fruit, are
crude and undigested. Secondly, In the persect state or maturation, which
belongs to the blood being sufficiently wrought, and made Volatile, according
to all its Particles after it is inspired by Ferments, and its inkindling in
the heart exalted. Thirdly, in its defection, which respects the blood; after
it has burned forth, and its Spirituous parts are very much flown away, and
the rest growing old and poor, have need to be removed; and so they are either
the Relics of Salt, which are with the Serum strained forth continually by
the Urine; or they are Particles of Salt and Sulphur, boiled and baked
together, which are strained forth by the virtue of the Liver into the
choleduct Vessels: or lastly, they are dregs and earthy recrements of the blood
it self, which are carried into the Spleen, and there (as it were a Caput
Mortuum, exalted by a new digestion) go into a Ferment, at length to be
transmitted to the blood. Whilst after this manner, the generation of the
blood, and its due maturation are truly dispatched, it is pleasingly circulated
within the Vessels, neither wanting in motion or heat nor inordinately troubled
with them. But if either the supplement of the nourishing Juice, be not made
agreeable with the rest of the blood, nor assimilated with it, but that either
by reason of the defect of Concoction, it is washed into a very crude humor, or
because of its excess, it is roasted into a burnt matter; or if the blood
growing old, does not lay aside what it casts off, and give way to a new
Nutritious humor; I say, by reason of these kind of Vices, concerning
Sanguification, or the making of blood, the blood is variously perverted from
its due temper and equal motion, and now becomes Watery and Cold; now Sharp of
Salt; now Acid, Austere, or by some other way degenerate, and sometimes
obnoxious to stagnations, and somimes also to immoderate heats.

We may observe these kind of degrees of crudity, coction, and defection, in
the blood, both of the sound and of the sick: in healthful persons after a more
plentiful repast, Surfeit, or hard drinking, when too much of Serum or of
Juice, is poured to the blood, its whole mass being too much diluted with a
crude humor, becomes more watery and less spirituous; wherefore men are
rendered sluggish, and unfit for motion or exercise. In sick persons the
Phlegmatic Constitution of the Body, induces such a crudity of the bloody mass,
as is discerned in the White Dropsy, the Dropsy, Pica or longing Disease, and
the Chlorosis or Green Sickness. Also the state of this kind of crudity, comes
in an intermieting Fever, and in truth is the cause of the Feverish
accession, viz. by reason of the dyscrasie of the blood; the nourishing Juice
being heaped up, is not assimilated to it, but for the most part goes into a
crude, or otherwise degenerate matter; with which, when the mass of the blood
is filled to a plenitude, swelling up it brings on the fit.

The state of Maturation, Concoction being finished, happens in healthful
persons, some hours after Eating, especially in the morning, to wit, when the
supplement of the Chyme, is spiritualised, and as it were enkindled in the
whole, by reiterated Circulations: for then men are made more nimble and
lively, and more ready for studies, or any business.

The state of Defection, is in the blood of sound men after fasting long, hard
labor, and want of Food, for then the Vital Spirit being very much evaporated,
the mass of the blood begins to become as it were lifeless, wherefore they
presently languish, and are made weak. Moreover, the blood by a too long
Coction is burned, and grows bilous, from whence those accustomed to want Food,
or fasting, for the most part become sad and melancholic. Some Diseases
habitually induce such a disposition of the blood; such are the Scruvy, the
Yellow Jaundies, the Cachexia (or evil state of the Body when the nourishing
Juice turns to ill humors) long Fevers, and most Chronical Diseases, in
which, the whole mass of blood, passes from from a Spirituous, into either a
sour, sharp, or austere Nature.

So much for the comparing of Blood with rich Wine; what follows, being a
similitude of it with Milk, consists in the diversity of the parts, and their
settling apart, which is chiefly seen in its being let forth from the Veins, and
grown cold in the dish. For when the heat and vital Spirit, which conserve all
things in the mixture, are flown away, the remaining parts, depart from one
another of themselves, and a separation of the thin from the thick, and of the
Serum from the Fibrous blood is made. This sort of separation of the parts,
succeeds almost after the same manner, as in the coagulation of Milk. There are
in Milk, Buttery, Cheesie parts, and Whey. The like is in Blood, so long as it
does not much recede from its Natural temper: for it is good, when, being let
forth of the Veins, it grows cold in the Porringer, its parts do settle after
the same manner; to wit, the more pure portion, and Sulphurous (like Cream)
comes together on the Superficies, which in healthful people, looks brightly
red, and this answers to the flowring, or head of the Milk: under this lies a
Purple thick substance, which cosists of little Thrids and Fibers joined
together, and as it were concreted into a clotty substance or parenchyma, such
as the Liver: For the heat being consumed, and the bond of the mixture losened,
the Fibrous parts lay hold on one another, and by their weight, settle into a
more thick Coagulum, which answers to the Cheesie part of the Milk: In the mean
time, the Serous or Wheyey parts, being thrust forth from the rest, get their
own Nature, and constitute a clear Liquor, like water; which as it is thiner,
ascends to the top, and swims upon the rest. Further, as the Whey of Milk is
wont to be further coagulated, and does yet contain in it self some parts both
Buttery and Cheesie, so this Liquor swiming on the blood, if it be exposed
either to the fire, grows thick, like the White of an Egg a little roasted, or
if an Acid Liquor be poured to it, will be precipitated into a white Coagulum.
This being seen, some have thought this watery Latex, to be the nourishing
juice, which imparts nourishment to the whole Body, from the mass of the blood,
in the time of its Circulation, and that the rest of the blood, is only the
Vehicle of Heat and Spirits, and serves for no other use. But to me it seems
more likely, that in this watery Liquor is contained the nourishing juice,
which is employed on the Nerves, and the commonly termed Spermatic parts, for
nourishment is supplied to the Musculous stock, form the Fibrous blood of the
Parenchyma, or the Liver, Lights, and Milt. After this manner, blood being not
much vitiated, goes into parts like Milk; but if it be exceedingly depraved,
when it settles, diagram of the brain Figura IId2.

de medio s vid page: 414

diagram of the brain Figura Ia.

de medio T vid page: ^^

it shows a far different disposition, and as to its single Contents, is
allotted into various appearances; for the Cream growing together on the top,
is seen to be sometimes white, sometimes green, now yellow, or of livid or lead
color: also it becomes not tender, but very viscous or clammy, that like a
Membrane, it can scarce be pulled in pieces. When the blood long growing hot
with a Feverish distemper, is let forth from the cut Vein, in its Superficies,
instead of a Scarlet Cream, there grows together often a white skin, or of some
other color: the reason of which is, because the blood is thoroughly roasted, by
too great Ebullition, and its more pure portion, as it were by a certain
elixation, is boiled forth from a red and tender substance, to a white and
tough; but if in the mean time the bloody mass be not sufficiently purged from
the adust recrements of Salt and Sulphur, the color of this little skin
becomes yellow or livid, and therefore the water swimming over it, is often
tinged by the same means. Further, the Purple Crassament or thick substance, is
also various: viz. sometimes it is of a blackish color, when the blood is
scorched too much, by a long effervesency. When the Fibers are vitiated, as in
the Liver, they grow not together, but the Liquor like Beasting Milk, remains
somewhat thick, and yet fluid; which indeed argues a great corruption of the
blood; as uses to happen, in a putrid Fever, a very great Cachexy, sometimes
the watery Latex is wanting, as in Hectical people, and in too great a
Diaphoresis. Sometimes it superabounds, as in Dropical people, neither will the
whole go into a white Coagulum, by heat: In some Cachectical people, the blood
being made more watery, appears like watered flesh. I knew one, endued with a
vicious habit of body, that was wont to have blood of a whitish color, and
like to Milk when it was let forth, and afterward, when he grew better by
Chalybiat Medicines, his blood was moderately red: but concerning the settling
of the blood and its appearances, there is enough. But as blood being emitted
from the Vessels by its coagulation and departure of the parts one from
another, imitates the various substances of congealed Milk, so sometimes being
shut within the Veins and Arteries, like same fused by a Coagulum, enters
altogether into the like mutation from Morbific causes; by reason of which
change, being hindered in its Circulation, or somwhere congealed and fixed
according to its portions, it produces many distempers: for it seems, that from
hence the Pleurisy, the Squinancy, the Inflammation of the Lungs, the
Dysentery, take their Original, and to this Cause the Pestilent diseases, ow
chiefly their deadliness, as shall be said hereafter in its place.

It is sufficient that we have hitherto drawn a parallel of the blood, from
which comparison with Wine and Milk, may be gathered what sort of Particles and
Substances, it comprehends in it self, viz. Spirituous, and very agil or
nimble, (such as generous or rich Wine has) for the heat and motion; and
besides soft and tender (such as are in Milk) for the nourishment of the Body.
Yea also, this Analogy of it with Wine and Milk, is yet further confirmed by
the use of them in our diet, out of which the blood is generated; forasmuch as
Milk is the best and most simple Aliment, and with it Infants, and Children,
who have need of a plentiful provision of blood are nourished chiefly: But Wine
copiously begets vital Spirits before all other things, and being weak and
fallen, excellently restores them, wherefore it is wont to be esteemed instead
of Nectar for old men, or those of ripe years.

The Nature and Analysis of the blood flowing within the Vessels, being opened
after this manner, the Nutritious Juice deswrves yet our consideration, being
supplied from the blood, and separated out of the mass of blood, for the
nourishment of the solid parts, and cleaving to them (whereby it may be the
better assimilated) like Dew. For the Nerves, Tendons, and the rest of the
solid parts of the whole Body, are washed with a certain alible juice. The
Vital Spirits, having obtained the Nervous Bodies for a Vehicle of this, blow
them forth at length, and expeditiously execute the actions of Sense: also that
humor coming upon the solid parts, and assimulated with them, inlarges their
bulk and growth. This is not a place to inquire after the Origin, Birth, and
manner of the dispensation of this: If shall suffice only, that we have noted,
that it is supplied from the mass of blood, and (as it is rendered highly
probable by the most Learned Doctor Glisson, and Doctor Wharton,) after it has
past through the Nervous part by a certain Circulation, what remains, being now
made as it were poor, and lifeless, is sent back by the Lymphatic Vessels, to
the blood. Whilst this Juice, being little cocted, or purged from dregs, is
sent from the depraved blood, to the Nervous parts, it is wont variously to
irritate them into Cramps and Convulsive Motions; also, no few Symptoms in
Fevers, arise by reason of the depravation, and irregular Motion of this
Juice, as shall be more largely laid open in another place.

CHAP. II. Of the Motion and Heats of the Blood.
SO much for the anatomy of the Blood, as to its primary Elements and
Constitutive parts, into which it is sensibly wont to be resolved; also as to
its Affections, which appear clearly, by the comparing it with Wine and Milk:
it remains for us next to enquire concerning the motion of the Blood, both
Natural, ( viz. by the help of what Ferment, and by what swelling up of parts,
it is Circulated in a perpetual motion through the Vessels) and preternatural,
viz. for what Causes, and what fury of parts, when it boils up above measure in
the Vessels, and conceives Feverish Effervescences. These being rightly
unfolded and premised, we will enter upon the Doctrine of Fevers.

Concerning the Natural Motion of the Blood, we shall not here enquire of its
Circulation, viz, by what Structure of the Heart and Vessels, it is wheeled
about after a constant manner, as it were in a water Engine; but of its
Fermentation, viz. by what mixtion of parts, and mutual action of them together
among themselves (like Wine fermenting in the Ton) it continually boils up. And
this kind of motion, (as it were truly an intestine war of the blood) depends
both on the Heterogenety of the parts of the blood it self, and on the various
Ferments, which are breathed into the mass of the blood from the Bowels.

As to the first: those things which have altogether like Particles do not
ferment, wherefore, neither distilled waters, Chemical Oils, Spirits of Wine,
or other simple Liquors are moved, as has been already observed: but I have
said, that Blood, according to the Nature things quickly irritable, does
consist of a proportionate mixture of the Elements; in which Spirits, for that
they are very nimble, continually strive to expand themselves and to fly away:
but being entangled by the more thick Particles of the rest, they are detained
in their flight. And being detained after this manner, they toss about, break
to pieces, and very much subtilise the more thick little Bodies, by which they
are hindered; they volatilise the Salt, otherwise fixed; by a most minute
kneading, and by the adhesion of it, they perfectly dissolve the Sulphur,
compacted in it self, and not miscible with the rest, and boil it in the Serum.
They break the Earth, even to its smallest parts, and mingle it with the rest.
But in the mean time, by the striking and molding the Salt and the Sulphur,
Effluvia's of heat plentifully proceed, which being mixed with the rest, and on
every side diffused, increase the motion of the Fermentation. And after this
manner all being most minutely broken and diluted with watery Particles, they
constitute the Liquor of the Blood: which, whilst in the Vessels, as Wine shut
up in a Pipe, continually ferments, and, according to all its Particles is in
perpetual motion.

But the Fermentation of Wine, and of Blood, differs in this: that in Wine
there is no wasting of the old parts, and a coming again of new; but the Liquor
being shut up in the Vessel, remains still the same: but 'its otherwise in
Blood, in which some parts are continually destroyed, and in their place others
are always generated anew. In Wine, the times of crudity, maturation, and
defection, are distinct, and are successively performed in the whole; In Blood,
that threefold state is celebrated at the same time (...) parts: Fermentation
being once begun in Wine, is continued even to the end, but In Blood, because
it is washed still with crude Juices, it ought still to be renewed; by which
means, the Nutritious Particles, not of kin, are assimilated to the rest of the
Latex; wherefore, for this work, besides the Fermentation once begun in the
blood, there is need of some Ferments, which may continue the same, otherwise
about to leave off.

That Ferments are required for the making of Blood, this is an Argument; that
when they are wanting by Nature, they are with good success supplied by the
work of Art: for fixed Salts, Alcaly Salt, Extracts, Digestives, Openers, and
especially Chalybeate Remedies, help for this reason, that, as it were by a
certain Ferment, they restore anew, the weak, or almost extinct Ebullition or
Boiling of the Blood.

As to what respects the Natural Ferments, very many may certainly be formed,
and in diverse parts, or hid in the Bowels: for any humor, in which the
Particles of Salt, Sulphur or Spirit, being much exalted, are contained, puts
on the Nature of a Ferment: after this manner, the flowring or dregs of Beer or
new Wine, being kneaded with Meal, and the mass kept to a sowrness, come under
this rank, by which new Beer, and the like Liquors, as also the mass of Bread,
are most excellently Fermented. In like manner in the Ventricle, a sowrish
humor participating of exalted Salt, there helps concoction: and in the
Spleen, the feculencies of the Blood from Salt and Earth being exalted, go into
a Ferment.

How much vigor comes to the Blood from the Womb and Genital parts appears from
hence, because by the privation, or evil disposition of them, follow, in Maids
the Green sickness, in men, barrenness or loss of virility, want of Beard, and
a shrill voice. But the chief Ferment, that serves for sanguification, is
established in the Heart; for this is the chief fireplace, in which the cruder
Particles of the Chyme, are as it were inkindled, and acquire a volatileness:
which thing may be confirmed by many reasons, but especially by its effects,
which we suffer in the precordia, as often as the Blood ferments more or less
than it ought to do: for when it is too much inkindled in the Heart, it is
agitated impetuously, as it were by fires put under it; the signs of whose
immoderate Ebullition are, a deep pulse and vehement, then almost an
intolerable heat in the Precordia, with a vehement thirst; on the other side,
when the Fermentation of the blood is lessened in the Heart, we are affected
with an anhelous, and difficult respiration upon any motion; as may be
perceived in the Dropsy, Cachexia, and Yellow Jaundice: the reason of which
is, not because the Lungs are stuffed, or filled full of a tough or clammy
matter; but because the blood does not rightly ferment, in that Repository of
Fermentation; wherefore, being fallen into its Bosom, it is not presently
Rarefied; nor does it soon leap forth into the Lungs, but being apt to
stagnate, and remain there, causes an oppression of the Heart it self; for the
helping of which, frequent breathing is made, that the blood being let forth
into the Lungs, succor might be brought to it: but if by motion or exercise,
the blood be more provoked into its Ventricle, than can be derived by
respiration, or the pulse, into the Pneumonic Vessels, there is danger of
choking. The like happens in those that are dying: when the pulse is very
small, and the blood being heaped up in the Heart for want of Fermentation,
begins to stagnate and to clodder, we then breath deeply, with a noise and
elevation of the breast; to wit, the blood with the ultimate endeavor of
Nature, and the whole force of the Lungs, as long as it is able to be done, is
emptied forth into the Lungs, lest residing in the Heart, it should wholly
choke it.

Therefore, Motion and Heat, in the Blood, depend chiefly on two things, viz.
partly on its own proper disposition and constitution, by which, it being
forged very greatly with active Principles of Spirits, Salt, and Sulphur, of
its own accord swells up, or grows turgid in the Vessels, even as Wine in the
Ton: and partly on the Ferment implanted in the Heart, which very much rarifies
the Liquor passing through its Bosom, and makes it to leap forth with a frothy
heat: that the blood, which is quietly instilled to the Heart through the
Veins, running gently like a River, from thence leaping forth through the
Arteries, (like a Torrent) with noise and rage, might be carried forward, to
all the parts of the whole Body. By what means this is done, though it is not
easy to explicate Mechanically, yet the manner, and some not improbable reason
of this thing are delivered by most Learned men, Ent, Carts, and other. They
suppose indeed, as it were a fire to be set in the Chimny of the Heart, which
presently inkindles the blood infused through the Veins, (even as a flame put
to Wine burns it) which being so inkindled, by its deflagration (like
lightning) passes most swiftly through the Arteries: so that heat, a most rapid
motion, and Effluvia sent by Perspiration, are wont to proceed from the
accension of the blood in the Heart only. Hogelandus affirms, that there is a
Ferment hid in the Bosom of the Heart, that compels the Liquor of the blood to
boil up, and to grow hot, with heat, and a plentiful emission of Soot, just
like Spirit of Nitre, when it is poured on the Butter of Antimony: so that the
blood flowing in gently through the Veins, being forthwith Rarefied into spume
and vapor by the serment of the Heart, runs very impetuously through the
passages of the Arteries. It Is almost the same thing, whether it be said to be
done, either by this, or by that way: for the alteration which the blood
receives in the Heart, may be equally deduced from a flame, or a Nitrous
Sulphurous ferment, there supposed to be placed. Because, whilst the blood
slides into the Ventricles of the Heart, presently the frame of the Liquor is
loosned, and the active Particles, especially the Spirituous and Sulphurous,
the bond of the mixture being broke, do leap forth from the rest, and strive to
expand themselves on every side; but being kept in by the Vessels, and being
forced together with the remaining Liquor, through the open passages of the
Arteries, they rush with violence, and swelling up by the way they can find,
and by that means, diffuse Effluvia of heat, through the whole body: there is
little difference, whether this expansion of the Particles of the blood, and
exertion into the liberty of motion, be said to be done by Accension, or by
Fermentation, forasmuch as by either way, the frame of the blood may be so
unlocked, that from thence the Particles of Spirit, Salt, and especially of
Sulphur, being incited into motion, (as it were by an inkindled fire) may
impart heat to the whole Body.

But this Rarefaction, or Accension of the blood in the Heart, very much
depends upon the disposition and constitution of the blood it self: for if its
Liquor be rightly cocted, being made volatile, and (like rich Wine) brought to
maturity, it then Ferments there after its due manner, whereby the soluted
Particles of the Spirits and Sulphur, diffuse an equal, and moderate heat to
all parts. But if the blood, by reason of an ill manner of feeding, and want of
Concoction, be crude and watery, then it is less inkindled in the Heart, and
from thence follow a frigid intemperance of the whole, difficult breathing and
wheesing, with a weak pulse, and languishing; as in Cachectical people, those
distempered with the Green Sickness, and such as are about to die, may be
perceived: but if the blood becomes too luxuriant, and apt to grow turgid, by
reason of plenty of Sulphur being carried forth, or of its Effluvia being
restrained, or of eating hot things; either its Accension or Fermentation in
the Heart, is very much in creased, so that from thence a Feverish heat, and
greater effervescencies than usual, are stirred up in the whole. This various
Fermentation of the blood in the Heart, according to the various temper of the
same, may be illustrated by the example of Wine: fresh Must, that is yet crude,
though it be boiled, or put on the fire, will not burn; but this being purified
and brought to maturity, is easily inkindled, but sends forth a small flame,
and quickly out. The same at first growing hot, or otherwise warmed, if
inkindled, is greatly inflamed, and for the most part is consumed by its
burning.

Whilst the Blood, after this manner being rarefied, or inkindled in the Heart,
and from thence growing hot, through the passages of the Vessels, is resolved
into minute parts, some little bodies depart from its loosned frame, which
refuse at last to be united, and fitted with the rest of the Liquor: but these
are of a twofold Nature; either thin, which like smoke form the burning fire,
or Effluvia from a Fermenting Liquor, do evaporate from the Liquor of the
Blood, by a constant Diaphoresis, through the breathing holes of the Body; or
more thick, which like ashes left after burning or the settling dregs after
Fermentation, ought to be soon strained from the mass of Blood, and to be
carried forth of doors: for otherwise, by their confusion, they produce notable
perturbations in the Blood. Whereby the Blood growing more hot, is dissolved in
the Heart, therefore these recrements, both Fuliginous and Earthy, are more
plentifully heaped together; and when by reason of too great congestion, they
cannot be presently subdued and secluded from the mass of Blood, they bring
forth a swelling up of the Blood and Feverish Heats.

Concerning the Motion, Heat, and Natural Fermentation of the Blood, in the
equal tenor of which, the means of our Health consists, what has hitherto been
spoken, shall suffice. We will treat a little more largely of the
preternatural, or too great effervescency, on which the types, and Paroxysms of
Fevers depend: I call that too much, or Preternatural Fermentation, when the
Blood, (like a Pot boiling over the fire) grows hot above measure, and being
rarefied with a swelling spume, distends the Vessels, excites a more quick
pulse, and like a Sulphurous Liquor having taken fire, diffuses a burning heat
on every sied.

This kind of motion or Fermentation of the Blood, will be best of all
illustrated by an example of Wines growing hot. For Wines, besides the gentle
and equal Fermentation, by which they are at first purified, at some times do
so remarkably grow hot, and boil up, that they fly out of the mouth of the
Vessel, and if they are closely stopped up, cause it to burst in pieces. After
this manner, as if struck with fury, unless they are immediately drawn away
from the Tartar; or their Lees into another Vessel, they will not cease from
growing hot, until the Spirit being very much loosned, and the Sulphur or Salt
too much exalted, they are either made unsavory, or degenerate into a sowrness.

Such an Effervescency in wont to be stirred up for two causes chiefly: First,
When any extraneous thing, and not miscible, is poured into the Ton, (so some
drops of Tallow, or Fat, being dropped into the Cask, will produce this motion)
or secondly, when Wines being enriched with too rich a Lee or Tartar (by reason
of the Sulphurous parts being above measure exalted) conceive heats of their
own accord, and exceedingly boil up. For in whatsoever substance Sulphur
abounds, and its Particles being loosned from the mixture, consociate together,
and are bound close in one, there such immoderate heats are procured.

After a like (tho not wholly the same) manner, whereby Wines grow hot, the
boiling up of the Blood is induced, to wit, either what is foreign, and not akin
to the Blood, is mixed with it, that when it is not assimilated, is wont to
cause a Perturbation, and growing hot, until that Heterogeneous thing, is
either subdued or cast forth of doors; and the Particles of the Blood being
confused and troubled, are at last shaken forth, and that they get again their
former place and position in the mixture. Or, Secondly, the Blood grows hot
above measure, because some Principle, or its constitutive Element, ( viz.
Spirit or Sulphur) is carried forth beyond its Natural temper, and becomes
enraged; whereby indeed the Particles of this or that, being not agreeable to
the rest, are loosned from the mixture; being loosned, they become more violent
than they ought, shake much the Liquor of the Blood, and bring forth a heat,
which is not allayed, till the Blood being as it were inflamed, burns forth
with the long fire of a Fever. By either way, whether the Blood grows hot in
the Vessels, by reason of the pouring in of a thing not miscible, or by reason
of the rage of the Spirit, or Sulphur being carried forth, because from thence
its frame is more loosned, therefore it is more inkindled in the Heart; and the
active Particles first loosned from the Ferment there implanted, do grow
exceeding hot, leap forth from the mixture, and disperse on every side by their
motion, a strong heat, and as it were fiery: but yet with this difference, that
the Effervency, which depends upon the mingling of some extraneous thing with
the Blood, is for the most part short, or renewed, which, when what was
Heterogeneous is separated or subdued, is quieted of its own accord, and the
shaken parts of the Blood, and put out of order, casily return to their Natural
site and disposition. But the Ebullition which arises from the inordination of
the Spirit or Sulphur being enraged, is continual; to wit, here the whole mass
of the Blood is so loosned, and dissolved from the strict bond of the mixture,
that as an Olly Liquor having taken fire, it ceases not to grow hot, or to be
inflamed, till the Particles of Spirit, or Sulphur, or the Combustible matter,
be for the most part burnt out.

There remains yet a third manner of Preternatural Fervency, whereby the Blood
is subject to alteration, which happens not to Wine, but most often to Milk;
viz. when at any time, from a Morbific cause, a coagulation of its Liquor is
induced, so that its substance is poured forth, and goes into parts, and there
is a separation made of the thick and earthy from the thin; by which means the
Blood is not fitly circulated in the Vessels, but that its congealed portions,
being apt to be fixed in the extreme parts, or to stand still in the Heart, do
interrupt the equal motion, or grievously hinder it: For the sake of the
restoring of which Effervency, greater are wont to be stirred up in the Blood,
to wit, such as happen ordinarily in a Plurisie, the Plague, Smallpox, or the
Venereal Disease.

CHAP. III. Of Intermitting Fevers or Agues.
BY the Premises which we have spoken of already, concerning the Anatomy,
Motion, and Heats of the Blood, there now lies open an easy passage to the
handling of Fevers. The Notions which are commonly set forth, concerning a
Fever, out of the force and Etymology of the word, I here purposely omit: It
may be described after this manner, that it is, An inordinate motion of the
Blood, and a too great Heat of it, with burning and thirst, and other Symptoms
besides, whereby the Natural economy or Government, is variously disturbed. As
we have remarked already, conceming the growing hot of the Blood, so now we do
of a Fever, that indeed, its accession is either short, and by fits, which is
therefore termed Intermitting; or else great, and long protracted, which is
called a continual Fever. We will first speak of the Intermitting Fever.

Tho an Intermitting Fever, in our Popular Idiom, is known by a proper Name,
and is distinguished contrary to a Fever commonly taken, yet because it has
too great Effervency of the Blood joined to it, it is to be called a Fever. It
is peculiar to this, from a continual Fever, that it has certain remissions,
or times of intermission; that every fit begins with cold or shaking, for the
most part, and ends in Sweat; that the accessions or coming of the fits, return
at set Periods, and certain intervals of times, that a Clock is not more exact.
Wherefore, we will first discourse concerning this Fever in general, what fort
of heat of the Blood it is which continues its fit, and from whence it is
raised up. Secondly, Wherefore the fit appears equally with cold and shaking,
as with sweat following. Thirdly, What may be the cause of the Inmission, as
also of its certain set Periods. Fourthly and Lastly, Are added some
irregularities of Intermitting Fevers, as when now cold, now heat or sweat is
wanting; or when the Periods are wandering and uncertain, when the Remission or
space of Intermission, is not equal, but now comes sooner, now later, and
sometimes redoubled: and I will endeavor to show the reasons of these: and of
other Phenomena or appearances, which variously happen in this Distemper. These
being laid open, we will go on to unfold in the next Chapter, the division of
an Intermitting Fever, and the kinds of it.

As to the first: The Effervency of the Bolld in an Intermitting Fever, (or
Ague) for the time of the fit, is as violent and strong as in a continual
Fever: wherefore, it is concluded, that the parts of the Blood, among
themselves, or some Heterogeneous thing being mixed with it, do strive
together, and Ferment above measure. But there is required, that they may
Ferment, or too greatly boil up among themselves, that some Principle, as
chiefly Spirit or Sulphur, being too much exalted and enraged, do appear above
the rest; which, when it cannot be yoaked with them, brings in a continual
strife and heat: but from this cause, a continual Fever draws its rise,
because such an Ebullition of the Blood, being once begun, is not suddenly
allayed, and when it is appeased, it does not afterward presently return.
Wherefore for an Intermitting Fever, it is to be supposed, that some
Heterogeneous thing is mingled with the Blood, whose Particles, when they are
not assimilated, make so long an Ebullition of the same, till either being
kneaded, they are rendered miscible, or being subtilised, are shut forth of
doors. Wherefore, such a matter being brought under, or shut forth of doors,
the fit ceases, and when this matter springs again, it stirs up a new
Ebullition, and so a new fit is brought on.

Concerning this Matter, which being mixed with the Blood, induces the
periodical Heats, and the other Symptoms of an Intermitting Fever, it is very
ambiguously, and diversely disputed among Physicians, where it is generated, in
what seat or place it lodges, and by what means it so exactly observes, the
times of its Motion, and Ebullition. But it would be a work of too much labor
and tediousness, to recount here all the Arguments, of the Ancients, and
Moderns, to reduce them into order and to weigh their reasons; Wherefore,
doubting, I propose what has come into my mind, when I thought deeply of the
matter, and submit to the judgment of others.

Of necessity there is something, which brings in the Heat of the Blood exactly
periodical, that is generated in our Body at the several periods, or accessions
of the Fever, always in a set measure, and equal proportion, and is
communicated to the mass of Blood; with which when the Blood is filled to a
plenitade, it forthwith grows turgid, and conceives an heat: But this is
supposed to be either an Excrementitious humor, stiding down into some Mines,
which by degrees, and at a set time, being brought to an increase, and moved,
Ferments with the Blood: or it is the nutritious Juice, supplied from the
matter of Food, and delated in weight and measure, which, when it is not
assimilated, by neason of a desect in sanguification, being heaped up to a
fullness, for its own expulsion, induces a turgency in the Blood. The reason of
Intermitting Fevers, is commonly explicated by the former way, and the causes
of the Intermission, and set times of approach, are fetched from the nature of
the Humor, and the seat, or place where it is cherished. The Nest, or Mine of
this Disease, almost by an unanimous consent, is fixed on the first shop of the
Body, and from hence the reason of the Intermission is fetched, and the
continual difference of an Intermitting Fever: but they affirm the matter to
be Choler, Phlegm, and Melancholy; and as these humors are said to putrify
slower, or sooner, so the Feverish courses, are said to be absolved, in the
space of the one or more days. But this Opinion, after the Circulation of the
Blood has been made plainly known to all, is deservedly rejected. For when the
Blood never stagnates in the Vessels, but washes every place with a perpetual
motion, and continually carries away their filth, it is implssible that the
Mine of this Disease should subsist in the Mesaraick Veins, where it is
commonly asserted to be: as to what belongs to the cavities or dens, for the
heaping up of the humors in the Viscera, It ueither appears, by what means such
should be formed without a Tumor or Imposthume; nor by what instinct, such
humors, shut up in their Nest, do increase, are consumed, and lastly spring
forth again, at so exact intervals of times. Besides, what is affirmed
concerning Bile, Phlegm, and Melancholy, and of their periodical motions, we
hold wholly suspected; because these sort of humors, are not afforded sincere,
such as are described in the Schools: but the Blood, having gotten a various
disposition, now being hotter, now colder, its nature imitates the qualities of
such humors; or in its Circulating, it lays aside its Recrements, which being
deposited in little Chests or Vessels, are falsely believed to be Morbific, and
Preternatural humors. Wherefore, as the nutritious Juice, is the only humor
wherewith the mass of Blood is daily refreshed, and its supplements are made
still in measure, and proportion, without doubt, the periodical heats of the
Blood, are to be drawn from the accession and commixtion of this.

I have already remarked concerning the Particles of the Blood, a triple state
of crudity, maturation, and defection: to wit, the nourishing Juice, supplied
from the daily Food, comes crude, is mixed with the Blood, and being for some
time Circulated, is assimilated to is, and is ripened into a perfect humor:
afterward growing stale, it goes into parts and is laid aside. Whilst after
this equal manner, the Blood is continually restored, and its losses repaired,
it very quietly Ferments, without any trouble, or immoderate heat, and is
circulated within the Vessels; but if the supplement of the nourishing Juice,
is not (as before) ripened, nor goes into Blood, by a perfect digestion, its
Particles being confused with the Blood, remain as it were some Heterogeneous
thing, and not exactly akin, in the mass of Blood; with which, when it is
filled to a plenitude, the Blood forthwith grows troubled, and conceives a
Feverish heat, whereby the fresh supply of this depraved Juice, is either
overcome or cast forth of doors. I say therefore, from the first instant, in
which the nourishing Juice is not assimilated with the Blood, its Particles,
tho mixed with it, are as yet Circulated with it, without any great tumult or
perturbation, and so afterward till the mass of the Blood is filled with them
to a turgency: but then it quickly boils up, and conceives a heat: almost after
the same manner, as new Beer put into Bottles, which, if they are closely
stopped, that nothing may evaporate, is at first contained in those Vessels,
without heat or force; afterward when the Effluvia being still restrained, the
mass of the Liquor swells up, notably Ferments, and by reason of the force of
Fermentation, oftentimes makes the Bottles fly in pieces: also this happens at
a set time, and in the space of so many hours, as in an Intermitting Fever,
the Liquor arises to its height of turgescency.

There yet remains a difficulty, for what cause the nutritious Juice, being
consused with the Blood, is not assimilated, but degenerates into an
heterogeneous, and Fermentative matter: I suppose this to be done, for the most
part, not by the default of the Aliments, nor yet of the Bowels, but by the
vice of the Blood it self. For the Blood, even as Wine, sometimes passes from
its native and genuine disposition, into an acid, sour, or austere disposition;
and because the Blood makes Blood, it comes to pass, that when it is departed
from its due temper, it easily perverts the provision of the nutritious Juice,
by which it should be repaired. What that disposition of the Blood is, and by
what means contracted, shall be told hereafter, when we speak of the kinds of
Intermitting Fevers, and of their evident, and Procatarctick causes. The Heat,
or Effervescency therefore of the Blood, which constitutes the fit of an
Intermitting Fever, depends only upon the assimilation of the nourishing Juice
being hindered; the Particles of this being commixed with the Blood, are not
(as before) ripened, nor are made into perfect Blood; but by the mixture of
these, the mass of Blood (as it were new drink) is imbued with little Bodies
greatly Fermentative; when the which are more thickly heaped together, and the
Blood is filled with them to a swelling up, it presently grows hot, and a
mighty agitation, and strife of the Particles is made, by which, they break,
and subtilise one another, till at length the vital Spirit getting the
dominion, and the rest being brought under, what is extraneous is thrust forth
of doors, from the company of which, the Blood being freed, the remission, and
intermission of the aguish fit follows; but afterward from a new supply of
this Juice, a new fit is brought on.

Secondly, As to the shaking, or cold preceding the heat, in this Distemper, I
say, when the Particles of the nourishing Juice, do proceed from a state of
crudity, toward maturity, but do not attain it, they contract a notable
sowrishness, with which they greatly prick, and haule the nervous parts, and
cause the sense of cold: even as new Beer, which being stopped close in
Bottles, passes from a sweet into an acid and nitrous taste, that for the
cuttingness and cold, can scarce be swallowed. When therefore, the Particles of
this sort of crude Juice, being endued with a Nitrous sowrness, do fill the
mass of the Blood to a fullness, or to a swelling up, and when they being more
thickly heaped together, begin to enter into a Flux, they first of all strike
down the Vital Spirits, with their sharpness, and somewhat overthrow their heat;
wherefore the Blood Becomes colder, and is more slowly circulated: yea, and by
reason of the defect of heat, the sense of cold is perceived in the whole Body,
and a pulse very rare exists. Moreover, when the nervous and solid parts, are
watered with this sort of acetous Juice, for their last nourishment, by the
Flux of this, which happens together with the turgescency of the Blood, these
sensible parts are pulled, and irritated into Tremblings and Convulsions. And
this without doubt is the true and genuine cause of the cold and shaking, which
are excited in a fit of the intermitting Fever; to wit, the Flux, and swelling
up of the nourishing Juice, degenerated into a Nitrous matter, with which the
Spirits and heat being suffused, are blunted, and the Nervous Bodies being
provoked, are moved into tremblings. But afterward, when these Nitrous
Particles being thrust forth, from some part, into the Superficies of the Body,
the Blood is somewhat freed from their weight and oppression, the Vital Spirits
recollect themselves, and begin to shine forth; but from thence a most intense
heat succeeds, because, both the mass of Blood, by reason of the growing hot
with the Feverish matter, being loosened, and also its mixture being laxed,
the Sulphureour Particles are more plentifully inkindled in the Heart; and
because (the pores of the skin, being possessed by the same matter, thrust
forth toward the circumference of the Body) the vaporous Effluvia are
restrained within, which do more shake, and make hot the Blood, that heat
persists still in the Blood, until that Fermentative matter being wholly burnt
out, and together with the adust recrements, remaining after the burning, being
fully brought under, and subtilised, and involved with the Serum, insensibly
evaporates by sweat, or transpiration.

Thirdly, These things being premised, it will not be hard to show the reasons
and causes of the intermission, as also of the set periods, viz. the
intermission follows, because all the Morbific matter is dispersed in one fit,
and so till new be substituted, there is a necessity that a remission follow.
But new matter begins to be begot, of which the last fit failed, to wit, the
mass of Blood being but now emptied, receives the nourishing Juice, and
perverts it (as before) by reason of its defect of due making of Blood, and of
Concoction, into a Fermentative matter; but its little plenty, stirs up little
or no trouble, or Fermentation; but when the Blood is filled to a swelling up,
it presently ferments, and is in Flux, even as when new Beer, or new Wine, shut
up a long while in a Vessel, at length, at a certain time, boils up, and leapes
forth at the mouth of the Vessel.

But that the Fits, or Accessions, do for the most part come again, at set
intervals of times, and that so certainly, that a Clock is not more exact; the
reason is, because the nourishable Juice, is for the most part supplied from
the Viscera, to the Blood flowing in the Vessels, in an equal measure and
manner; for tho we do not daily take exactly, so much meat and drink in weight
and dimension, yet, because we for the most part eat at set hours, for the
satisfying the Appetite, from the things eaten, and the mass of the Chyme
heaped up in the Bowels, an equal portion of the nutritious Juice is conveyed
to the Blood through the Milky Vessels: wherefore, if at such hours, so much of
the nutritious humor is poured into the Blood, which increasing to a fullness,
and swelling up, it brings on the fit that day: certainly, this being finished;
in the space of the same time, sufficient matter is laid up, for the following
fit: But if errors in feeding be committed, and that the sick indulging their
Appetite, eat more plentifully or inordinately, the approach of the fit
anticipates the wonted hour, by reason of the Bloods being filled sooner with
the Feverish matter; if that the sick are abstemious, and more sparingly take
their Food, the intermission is drawn out longer.

If it be yet asked. wherefore the periods of intermitting Fevers, be not of
one kind, and of the same distance, but that some repeat or come again daily,
others on the third or fourth day? The cause is the diverse constitution of the
Blood, to wit, whereby it is perverted from its due temper, now into a sourish,
now into an acid or sharp, or into an austere or harsh disposition. By reason
of the diverse evil constitution of this, the alible Juice, being fresh
carried, departs more or less from maturation, and is perverted into matter,
apt sooner or later to ferment. When the Blood has acquired a sour, hot, and
bilous disposition, I suppose that some part of the nourishing Juice is ripened
into perfect humor, and is assimilated with the Blood, and so goes into Food,
to be carried to the solid parts, and is affixed to them; but the other part of
it, from the Blood being too much cocted, and depraved, is changed into a
Feverish matter, and supposing, that half of the nutritious Juice is after
this manner perverted, in double the time, in which it is said to have a full
Concoction in our Body, (that is after eight and forty hours) this kind of
Fermentative matter, rises to a plenitude, and turgescency, and then induces
the fit of a Tertian Fever. If that, by reason of the austere, and pontic
nature of the degenerated Blood, (in which a fixed Salt, with an Earthy Faces
is exalted too much) and therefore apt to ferment more slowly, only a third
part of the nutritious Juice is corrupted, then in three times the space of the
aforesaid time, the fit is induced; that is, after seventy two hours, in which,
the period of a Quartan, is wont to be concluded. But, if by reason of a
greater infection of the Blood, almost the whole supplement of the nutriticus
Juice is perverted into a Feverish matter; then in the space of that time, in
which the plenary coction ought to be absolved in the Vessels and habit of the
Body, (that is after twenty four hours) this matter arises up to the motion of
turgescency, and brings on the Quotidian fit. And hence it comes to pass, that
in a Quartan Fever, strength and courage do not presently fail, whilst in a
Tertian, the sick are wont to become more weak; but in a Quotidian Fever, they
are sooner brought into languishing, and greatest weakness: to wit, in each, as
more or less of the nutritious Juice goes into the Food of the Disease, so much
also is drawn away, from the strength and firmness of the Body. But more fully
of these, when we treat of the several kinds of Intermitting Fevers, and the
Causes of them.

Against the equal Circuits of these Fevers, it is argued: that for the most
part, the fits do anticipate the set time of the day, by the space of some
hours, and sometimes also come after it. But in truth, this objection is taken
away, if the times of intermission be computed, not by days, but by hours; for
so the intervals which but now seemed to be now sooner, now longer protracted,
will appear for the most part equal, by this Rule; forasmuch as in respect of
the day, it is said a Tertian Fever, sometimes prevents the wonted time of its
accession, two, three, or more hours, or comes after it; in the mean time,
every circuit exactly repeats or comes again, every time, after so many hours.
Wherefore the chief differences of Intermitting Fevers, consist in this only,
that the time of the accession in one Fever, comes more swiftly, and in
another more slowly, viz. now at twenty four hours distance, now at thirty
four, now at seventy or the like.

From what has been said, (unless I am deceived) it clearly appears, what the
Effervescency of the Blood is, which constitutes the fit of an Intermitting
Fever, from whence the forerunners of cold and shaking, and lastly, what may
be the reason of the intermission, and of the set periods. But that these, and
many other appearances of this distemper, depend upon the evil disposition of
the Blood, and because of the depravation of the nutritious Juice, and not from
humor, lurking in some mine, will yet more manifestly appear, from the
collation of the signs and symptoms, which are to be met with, worthy of note,
in this distemper: then secondly, from the Procatartic, or more remote causes
being truly weighed, which are wont to induce this distemper: and thirdly, and
lastly, from the ways of the Crisis, and Cures, by which this Disease, either
ceases of its own accord, or is driven away, by the help of Medicines.

First, Among the Signs, the Pulse and Urine, deserve the chief consideration:
The Pulse, the cold fit coming on, is very rare, and low, which clearly argues,
the Heat, and Vital Spirits in the Blood, to be as it were overwhelmed, by some
crude matter, not easily combustible, just as a fire inkindled on the Hearth,
and then covered with green wood, glows very slowly, and flames forth little,
which afterward, the crude humor being blown away, breaks forth into an open
and very strong flame: so also, the Blood, the crude matter, which is in Flux,
being something overcome, or dispersed, is very much inkindled; and what remains
in the Blood is burnt up, when fermenting with the Particles of it, and induces
a most violent heat, with thirst; wherefore the Blood growing impetuously hot,
is urged with a vehement, and most swift Pulse: otherwise, it being too much
heaped together in the Heart might cause the danger of choking.

As to the Urine; that is imbued (especially in a Tertian Fever) with a deep
color, and as it were inflamed, also when the Contents are wanting; which
seems to denote a scorching of the Blood, and too adust temper: moreover, in
this Distemper, different from others, the Urine, for the most part is ill,
when the Patient is pretty well, and on the contrary; forasmuch as all the time
of the intermission, it is at a great distance from its natural state, it
becomes filled with a red color, and thick, being exposed to the cold, and
lays down a plentiful sediment, like to Bole-Armoniack; which is of necessity
to be so done, because in the whole interval of the remission, the Feverish
matter is circulated with the Blood, and there rises to maturity, with a secret
increase. But in the middle of the fit, when the heat, and burning are at the
greatest, the Urine is laudable, and comes more near to the natural, viz. the
Fermentative matter, being sent to the Circumference of the Body.

The symptoms preceding the fit, confirm the same thing; for many hours before
the fit begins, a perturbation of the humors, and blood, is perceived; an
Headache, Vertigo, sparkling of the Eyes, unquiet Sleep, etc. which plainly
show, the Blood first infected with the Fermenting matter, and the assault of
the fit to be only so long deferred, until the mass of the Blood is filled to a
swelling up, with the same kind of matter: The forerunners of the approach of
the fit are, now a paleness at the ends of the Fingers, or Toes, or in the
Nails, sometimes a Convulsion, or numness; now a coldness, and pain in the Loins
and Thighs, and sometimes a shivering and trembling invade the whole Body, which
clearly show, the Blood in the Arteries and Veins, and also the thin Liquor in
the Nervous parts, first to conceive the motion of Fermentation, and this
Effervescency, not to be excited from any other fireplace, or mine. If it be
objected, that the sick are most often infested with Vomiting, about the time
of the fit; from whence it may seem to be concluded, that the chiefest hurtful
matter is established in the Ventricle, and in the first passages, especially,
when this distemper is chiefly cured, by the timely taking of a Vomit; I
confess, very great Vomitings are sometimes stirred up, in the fit of an
intermitting Fever; but this more often happens, because in the Feverish
shivering, the membranes of the whole Body are pulled; wherefore the Ventricle
also, as it is a very Nervous part, is distempered with a Convulsion, and
having from thence contracted a Spasm, casts forth upwards whatsoever lurks in
its bosom. Besides, if that the Choler-bearing Vessels, swell up with Bile or
Choler, by the same Convulsion also of the Viscera, the Bile is pressed forth
into the Duodenum by the Galish passage, and is emptied into the Ventricle, and
there, by its fierceness, provokes yet to more cruel Vomiting, wherefore for
the most part, the vomiting which is excited for this reason, follows the
shaking only. But that the Choler was not in the Stomach before the fit
troubled it, but only pressed forth from the Choleduct passage, by the Spasm
and Convulsive motions of the Viscera, and poured forth into the Ventricle,
appears from hence, because if a Vomit be given in the midst of the interval,
between the two fits, little or nothing of bilous matter will be drawn forth;
besides, this bitter humor is of that fierceness, that it cannot be long
contained in the Ventricle, but presently it will procure the pain of the
Heart, and Vomiting. Besides this sort of Vomiting, excited in the shaking fit,
sometimes a Vomiting is provoked in the midst of the burning fit, or in the
sweat, the cause of which is, the redundancy of the bilish humor in the Blood;
of which if there be greater plenty, than what diluted with Serum may be sent
forth by Sweat, a great part of it, whilst the Blood is circulated about the
crevises of the Liver, is laid aside in the Choleduct Vessels; which, when
being filled to a distention, exonerate themselves, and send away the Choler to
the Intestines and Ventricle, and there a Convulsion being presently stirred
up, sometimes Vomiting is provoked, and sometimes the Belly becomes loose, and
the Stools liquid. In this Year 1657. I observed very many affected after this
manner, for when after an hot and dry Summer, about the middle of Autumn, an
Intermitting Fever generally raged, the sick were wont suddenly to grow very
ill, in the middle of their hot fit, and sometimes also in their sweating, and
the Sweat being struck in, to be taken with Swooning; but shortly after, when a
Choleric Vomiting followed, they were eased.

Not only the signs and symptoms, but the Procatartic or more remote Causes of
this Disease, clearly indicate, that it takes its rise from the temper of the
Blood being changed: because Intermitting Fevers, are most frequent in the
season, and places, in which the Blood receives the greatest alteration from
the Air, viz. either in the Spring, when the vernal heat shutting out the
Winters cold, causes the Blood, before benumed, and apt to be more slowly
moved, to begin to flourish, and luxuriate in the Vessels, and from thence, to
get a bilous and hot temper: or in the Autumn, when the Blood being torrified,
or roasted by the Summers heat, and therefore its Spirits very much depressed,
and Salt and Sulphur exalted, acquires now a sharp and Choleric, now a binding
and austere disposition: wherefore, at this season, Fevers, now Tertian, now
Quartan, are frequent; besides, in some places, there is that constitution of
the Heaven, that on all men whatsoever, there comes either a Tertian or (more
frequently) a Quartan Fever; although in the first offices, where the Mine of
the Disease is commonly believed to be lodged, there be no congestion of
humors, by reason of an ill manner of living, or sickly disposition. Yea, they
most easily fall into this Disease, who have their inwards firm and strong, and
who abound with a lively heat: on the contrary, those who by reason of a weak
Concoction, heap up Crudities in the first passages continually, that they are
prone to the Dropsy, or Cachexia, remain free, for the most part, from this
Distemper; to wit, the Blood being made more watery, (like Wine degenerated
into a tastless substance) is altogether unapt to be fermented.

No less, does the Cure of Intermitting Fevers seem to prove this our
Assertion, whether it be Natural and Critical, or Artificial, and performed by
the help of Medicines. As to the first, Intermitting Fevers are wont to be
terminated, after a twofold manner. The first is, when from the fits
themselves, the temper of the Blood is altered, and often times is reduced into
its Natural disposition. For when in every coming of the fit, very much of
Sulphur, and adust Salt is burnt out, and exhaled by Sweat, the Liquor of the
Blood, by that means, becomes more temperate, and less torrid: wherefore,
oftentimes this Disease is cured, at six or seven periods, and of its own
accord ceases: but if it be longer protracted, and that the Blood being somewhat
changed, from the sharp and bilous temper, or disposition, is not restored to
its Natural temper, sometimes it degenerates into an Acid, Watery, and also
Pontic or saltish temper, from whence a long Tertian Fever passes into a
Quotidian, or a Quartan; also oftentimes, because the Blood is greatly
depraved, by the long continuance of this Fever, the Jaundies, or the Scurvy,
or the Cachexia follow. The other manner, whereby this Disea^^ is terminated,
is, when the change of the Air, or the Country, brings a notable alteration of
the Blood: for so Fevers begun at the times of the Equinoxes, are ended about
the time of the Solstices; also the sick, traveling into another Region, often
grow well.

As to the cure of it, by the Institutions of the Medicines, it uses to be done
two ways, viz. Empirically, and Dogmatically; and in this Disease, Empirical
remedies, sought from Quack-salvers, and old Women, are more esteemed, and
oftentimes do more than the prescriptions of Physicians, administered after the
exact method of cureing.

Empirical Remedies, which are said to cure Intermitting Fevers or Agues, are
of that sort, which drive away the approaching Fit, without any Evacuation: and
are either taken inwardly, or are outwardly applied, where the Pulses chiefly
beat, viz. For the most part, they are bound either to the region of the heart,
or to the handwrists, or to the soles of the feet; these sometimes are so
commonly known to help, that some have warranted the sudden cure of this
Disease, by these Remedies, under the pain of some Forfeiture: Wherefore it is
worth our inquiry, how these operate, and by what way or means they stop the
Feverish accessions. It is clear, First, that those which are outwardly
applied, do immediately impart force, and action to the Blood, and Spirits; and
when they drive away the Fit, by preventing, without the Evacuation of humor,
or any matter of necessity, the reason of this effect consists only in this,
that by the use of these sort of Medicines, the turgescency or swelling up of
the Blood, with the Feverish matter, and Fermentation are stopped; to wit, from
the Medicine tied about the Body, certain little Bodies, or Effluvia are
communicated to the Blood, which do very much fix, and bind together the
particles of it, or also, as it were precipitate them, by fusing and shaking
them; and by either way, the spontaneous growing hot of the Blood, is hindered:
as when cold water is put into a boiling Pot, or as when Vinegar, or Alum is
flung into new and working Beer, presently Fermentation ceases, and the Liquor
acquires a new taste, and consistency, whereby it becomes fit to be drunk, as if
it had been kept to ripen a long time. But that these Ague-stoppers do work
after this manner, it is plainly seen, because those which are of principal
note, do excel in a Styptic, and binding force, or else with a precipitating
virtue; hence Sea Salt, Nitre, Sal-gemmae, the Juice of Plantan,
Shepherds-burse, any binding Herbs pounded with Vinegar, and the like, bound to
the wrists; the root of Yarrow, Tormentile, also Campher hung about the neck,
are said to take away this Disease: yea, those also which are taken inwardly,
are of the same rank; The Juice of Plantan, Red-rose water, Alum, for that they
fix, and constrain the Blood, a decoction of Piper, Sal Ammoniac, or of
Wormwood, Spirit of Vitrial, also a-sudden passion of anger, or fear, forasmuch
as they precipitate the Blood, by fusing and shaking it, do oftentimes hinder
the Agues approach: even as the Concussion, and shaking much, any Liquour, or
the infusion of astringent things into it, hinder its spontaneous Effervescency
and rage. It is usual with some Empiricks, for the cure of Agues, to tie a
little knot in a Linen rag, or a piece of Paper roled up, so strickly to the
wrists, pressing hard upon the beating of the Pulse, that the circulation of
the Blood is somewhat hindered, and by this means, the Aguish fit coming on, is
driven away. Very many by this way, I have none to be most certainly cured of a
tedious sickness; the reason of which seems to be, that whilst the Blood is
hindered from its motion in any part, it grows more tumuluous in the other
parts; and so, by this perturbation, stirred up in the whole Blood, the
spontaneous Effervescency of the Liquor, being about to follow, is hindered. But
that the Fit, by this, or any other means, being once hindered, does not
afterward easily return, the reason is; Because, if this Feverish, and
depraved matter, be contained longer in the Blood, it is afterward cocted, and
in some measure ripened: and therefore the Blood does not (as before)
altogether pervert, either this, or the provision coming to it anew, but begins
to digest and assimilate it: besides, when the Fit is once stopped, its custom
is broke, by the instinct of which alone, Nature oftentimes repeats those her
Errors: for, as when it has once made a fault, it is wont more readily to do
ill after the same way; so when it once omits its fault, it more easily
accustoms it self to do better.

The dogmatieal cure, is instituted for the most part, by Vomitory and Purging
Medicines, also with the letting of Blood; with which the sick are miserably
tormented, and the Disease seldom profligated or driven away; that deservedly,
this Distemper is called the shame of Physicians; but Tertian Fevers are
sometimes carried away by a Vomit given just before the coming of the Fit,
which indeed happens (as I think) for the reason before mentioned. For I have
said, That the cause of a Tertian Fever, is an evil disposition of the Blood,
whereby it passes into a sour and bilous Nature; and therefore it does not
rightly assimilate the nutritious Juice brought to it, but changes it into a
Fermentative matter; wherefore, if the Bile or Choler be copiously drawn forth
of the Blood, that Choleric and hot intemperance is very much taken away, and
that Fermentative power ceases of it self, But Emetick Medicines do chiefly
perform this, for if they operate strongly, a Convulsion is not only brought to
the bottom of the Ventricle, but also the Duodenum, with an inverse motion, is
drawn together toward the Pylorus, and the Cholerby a continual thrusting
forward, being squees'd forth from the Choleduct passage, is poured into the
Ventricle, which is presently cast out by Vomit; which being copiously
performed, the galish bladder is almost emptied, and after that, it becomes a
receptacle, that draws forth, and separates the bilous humor, or the particles
of adust Sulphur and Salt plentifully poured into the Blood; the next Fit
sometimes is by this means prevented, not because the mine of the Disease is
extirpated by Vomit, but because an Evacuation and motion is excited, contrary
to the Feverish motion, and for that reason, the spontaneous Effervescency of
the Blood is prevented. Also by this means, sometimes the Disease is taken away
after the Fit, because this way, the Blood is fully cleared from the bilous
humor. It is worthy observation, that in a Quartan Fever, Vomits profit
nothing, and seldom in a Tertian, unless administered presently at the
beginning, whilst the Feverish disposition is yet light, and not fully
confirmed.

Concerning Intermitting Fevers in general, there yet remain some Irregulars
of them, to be explicated, which vary from the wonted manner: for unless these
unusual appearances be solved, this our Hypothesis will seem to be defective,
and to halt in one part. First therefore, they are wont sometimes to lack the
cold or shaking fit. This Intermitting Fever is frequent in Autumn, whose fits
are wont to exercise the sick, only with heat, and that most Violent, and in
many they come with great Vomiting, but no Sweat or Cold; then after four or
five periods, upon the coming on of the fit, the sick are wont to be chil, and
presently after to quake, and in the declination to sweat: The reason of this
was, because, from the very hot Summer, the Constitution of the Blood was
become sharp, and very much burnt: Wherefore, the Particles of the crude Juice,
being commixed with it, were presently terrified or made hot, and scorched;
that they did not at first, (like new Beer) grow hot with an Acrimony, and then
afterward blaze forth; but a turgescency being stirred up, (like dry wood laid
upon a fire) presently the whole took fire, and broke forth into flames; but
afterward, the Liquor of the Blood being fired by several fits, became less
torrid, that the depraved Alible Juice was not presently torrified, but passed
into a Nitrous matter, and fermenting with a sharpness, which at first swelling
up, induced the sense of cold to the whole Body. When the cold fit was begun,
for the most part Sweat concluded it: which indeed happened, because the Blood
being made more watery, is more easily resolved into vapor, with the Feverish
matter, even as a watery Liquor is more easily drawn forth by distillation,
than what is Oily, or of a more thick consistency.

It often happens, in the declination of this Disease, when the fits begin to
lessen, that the sense of cold and shaking, by little and little are
diminished, and at length vanish, and the fit only troubles the sick, with a
light burning: The reason of which is, because at this time, the Blood being
somewhat restored, toward its natural state, begins to concoct and ripen the
crude juice; so that a great part of it is assimilated: but some Excrements,
being heaped together in the Blood, bring forth as yet a light burning: but
when the Feverish Particles, do not participate of the Nitrous Acrimony, the
Fermentation of the Blood is induced without any shivering, by which, what was
extraneous burns forth, is either subdued, or carried forth of doors. Sometimes
also, in the declination of this Disease, the fits appear without any burning,
only with a light cold: The reason of which is, because the Morbific matter,
being rather Nitrous, than Sulphurous, when it is in Flux, does somewhat blunt
the Natural Heat; and by that means is dissipated, and vanishes, without any
great deflagration.

There is yet a great doubt concerning the intervals of the periods, which
sometimes seem to be double in the same Fever, that the first Accession answers
to the third, and either perhaps comes in the morning; and again the second to
the fourth, and both happen in the Evening; and so forward: wherefore, the
Fever bearing this figure, is wont to be named a double Tertian, or Quartan,
of which it does not easily appear, how they should be done, if the fits depend
upon the evil disposition of the Blood, and from thence on a Congestion to a
Turgescency of the depraved Nourishing Juice: for which cause, they commonly
affirm, that this double figure is stirred up, or draws its original from a
double Nest, or Mine; but to me it seems most likely, that in this case,
sometimes it happens for the Fever to be simple, and of one kind, also its
types or figures to be alike, and all congruous one to another, but the error
to arise, because the interstitia of the periods, are not computed by hours,
but days: For when as, the beginnings of the fits are distant one from another,
not exactly twenty four hours, but either sixteen, or thirty hours, in a
Quotidian; and in a Tertian, not forty eight, but forty, or fifty six, more or
less, or thereabouts; it comes to pass, that every other fits, happen before,
and the others after Noon. To which also may be added, that the different
manner of eating, which the sick use, very often produces great inequalities of
figures: that sometimes the fit is redoubled twice in a day, as I have often
observed in Cachectical men, or full of ill humors, and living disorderly: but
it does not seldom happen, that Intermitting Fevers, repeat fits, which do
neither observe the same distance, nor bear altogether the figure of the same
mode. I have many times observed in a Quartan Fever, that besides the set
comings or Accessions, returning on the fourth day, about the same hour; some
wandering and uncertain fits, did infest the sick; that sometimes on the day
preceding, the wonted fit, sometimes on that following it, another fit (tho
lighter) was excited anew, with shivering, Heat, and Sweat, exactly like the
figure of an Intermitting Fever; and nevertheless, the primary Accession
returned at its accustomed time. This for the most part, is wont to happen,
either from diet evilly instituted, chiefly from surfeit, and drinking of Wine;
or else from Medicines wrongfully administered: The reason of which (unless I am
deceived) consists in this. The mass of Blood, being wont to be filled to a
swelling up, with the Fermentative matter, at a set time, often, by reason of
some errors in eating and drinking, heaps up more matter, than can be easily
dissipated in one fit; and when it unequally Cooks the same Fermentative
matter, it often happens, that it first shakes off its superfluous, or more
thin part, as it were by a certain skirmish, in a more light fit, but dispels
the more thick, (after the primary Accession) as yet remaining in the Blood, by
a Feverish Fermentation arising anew. And when the fits, in an Intermitting
Fever, redouble after this manner, either become more remiss, for that the
same matter in either, is only divided; and eventilated by two accessions.
Besides, when this Fermentative matter, or Nutritious Juice, depraved in its
circulation, is continued, partly in the Arteries and Veins, with the Blood,
and partly in the Nervous stock, and solid parts, it may happen, that both
humors do not ferment at once, but a great part of one may be dispersed in one
fit, and then a great part of the other, in another fit.

CHAP. IV. Of the kinds of Intermitting Fevers, and first of a Tertian.
WE shall easily accommodate to our Hypothesis, delivered in the former
Chapter, concerning the nature and beginning of Intermitting Fevers, all the
Phenomenon which belong to it, and the reasons of them. But as those which are
of this sort, do not observe the same space of Intermission, or of return, and
their figures, as to the appearances of their signs and symptoms, do not
altogether happen after the same manner; therefore according to the diversities
of these, and especially from the distance of the fits, the various species and
differences of Intermitting Fevers, are assigned. The chiefest division of
them is, into Tertian, Quotidian, and Quartan: We shall here remark the chief
things worthy of note concerning each of them.

It is called a Tertian Fever, not which is accomplished at the distance of
three days; but inclusively from the day in which one Fit begins, from thence
the other returns on the third. In the mean time, if the Fits be sometimes
longer, viz. protracted almost to twenty four hours, and the Remissions
anticipated also by their accessions, or comings of the Fits, the space is
oftentimes less by a night and a day. This Disease is commonly distinguished
into exquisite and spurious; The exquisite or exact Tertian Fever is, which
begins with a vehement shaking, to which succeeds a sharp and biting heat,
which goes off in sweat, and its Fit is finished in twelve hours, and that the
perfect intermission follows; In the spurious or bastard Tertian, the cold and
heat are more remiss, but the Fit is often extended beyond twelve hours, yea
often to eighteen or twenty. These differ as to the various disposition of the
Blood, which is in the former more torrid and sharp; therefore perverts the
alible Juice from Crudity, toward an adustion, wherefore a more vehement
Effervescency is stirred up; but as the matter more equally burns forth, it is
sooner finished. In the latter, besides the adustion, the Blood abounds with
too much serous humidity, wherefore, the nourishing Juice degenerates into a
Crude matter, and therefore less apt to be overcome, and to burn sorth;
wherefore, its Fit is gentler, and more unequal, but is not finished but in a
longer space.

The Essence therefore of a Tertian Fever consists in this; That the Blood
(like Beer brewed with too high dried Malt) being too sharp, and torrid, does
not rightly subdue, and ripen the alible Juice, which is taken in from crude
things eaten, but very much perverts it into a nitrous-sulphurous matter; with
which, when the mass of Blood is filled to a swelling up, like new Beer stopped
up in Bottles, it conceives an heat: From the flux of this nitrous matter,
which blunts the heat, and vital spirits, and pulls the nervous parts, first
the cold, with shaking is excited; then the vital spirit geting strength again,
this matter growing hot in the Blood, begins to be subdued, and inkindled in
the heart; from whose deflagration, an intense heat is diffused thorough the
whole body; then its relics being separated, and involved with serum, are
sent away by sweat.

This torrid Constitution of the Blood, consists in this, That it is impregnated
more than it ought, with particles of Sulphur and Salt; wherefore, the
Procatartick causes, which dispose to this Disease, are an hot and bilous
temperament, a youthful age, hot diet, as an immoderate use of Wine and spiced
Meats, but especially in the Spring and autumnal seasons of the year, when the
Blood (as all vegetables) is apt to flower, and to ferment of its own accord.
By reason of these occasions, the liquor of the Blood, is want to be thoroughly
roasted, and to be changed into a choleric temper: and when it departs from
its natural Disposition so much, that it perverts the nutritious Juice, into a
matter plainly Fermentative, the beginning of this Fever is induced; which
sometimes happens from this intemperance being leasurely increased and brought
to the height; but more frequently, an evident cause raises up this disposition
into act, and we ascribe the origin of this Disease to some notable Accident.
Wherefore, lying on the Ground, or taking cold after sweating, or transpiration
being any ways hindered; also a Surfit, or a perturbation of the Stomach, from
any thing inordinately eaten; and lastly, What things soever stir up an
immoderate heat in the Blood, bring the lurking disposition of this Disease
into act: for that, from every such occasion, the nutritious Juice, being
heaped in the Blood, and somewhat depraved, conceives a Flux, and departing
from the rest of the Blood, ferments with a nitrous sharpness, then being
inkindled and shaken by the Spirit, and vital heat, it induces the Fit, with a
very strong burning.

A Tertian Fever, is wont to be more frequent in the Spring, at which time,
the Blood is livelier and richer, and therefore more fitted for this kind of
Feverish distemper. If this Fever being taken, be ended within a moderate
time, it is commonly said to be a Medicine, rather than a Disease; which is
partly true, because, by this means, the impurities of the Blood burn out, the
obstructions of the Viscera are discharged, and in truth the whole body is
ventilated, so that it is wholly freed from every Excrementitious matter, and
the seminary of growing Diseases. But if this Disease be long protracted, it
becomes the cause of many Sicknesses, and of a long want of Health. For from
hence the mass of the Blood is very much deprived of the vital Spirit, and
(like Wine too much fermented) in a manner grows lifeless: wherefore the
Jaundice, Scurvy, or Cachexia, follow this Fever, being long er'e it be cured
For by its frequent Fits, the vital Spirit very much evaporates, and because it
is but little restored by things eaten, the Blood therefore becomes weaker, and
almost without life: In the mean time, the particles of Salt, and Sulphur, are
carried forth more, and exalted; from whence, the Blood is made shap, and salt,
and so more unfit for Circulation and Transpiration.

Moreover, This Disease being long protracted, oftentimes changes its Figure,
and from a Tertian Fever, becomes either a Quotidian, or sometimes a Quartan:
then sometimes from either, it returns into a Tertian. The reason of this is,
the disposition of the Blood being variously changed: which at first being
sharp, and bilous, had perverted the nutritious Juice, by that means, that it
arise to a fullness of swelling up on the third day; afterward, by the frequent
Deflagration, becoming less sharp, or in truth more waterish, it grows far
weaker as to its Constitution, so that it does very little, or not at all
assimulate the nourishable humor, and ripen it, and by that means, the increase
of the Fermentative matter is made sooner, and the Fits return daily: or else,
the Blood from a sharp and bilous intemperance, (the constitution of the
Heaven, or the year, bringing on this alteration) is changed into an austere,
or saltish, and therefore more slowly perverts the nourishing Juice, and the
increase of the Feverish matter, gathering together more flowly, it does not
conceive the Fits till on the fourth day: but if either, by the means of
Physic or Diet, the temper of the Blood is reduced from either Dyscrasie,
toward a bilous, the periods also are altered, and they resume the figure of a
Tertian.

Certain symptoms are wont to come upon a Tertian Fever, which are commonly
esteemed for the Crises of this Disease; and in truth sometimes, these
appearing, the Distemper either clearly ceases, or begins to abate of its
wonted fierceness. But these kind of signs, are chiefly these three viz. The
Erysipelas, or an Eruption of pimples in the Lips, the yellow Jaundice, and an
Inflammation, or swelling suddenly excited, in this or that part of the body:
very often there happens after three or four Fits to the Sick, little ulcers,
with a crusty scab, to break forth about the Lips, and although there be no coming
away of any matter, in all the body beside, yet from hence they presage, that
the Fever is about to depart, which sometimes the event proves true. But
indeed sometimes, I have observed, that the hoped for effect has not succeeded,
but that the Fever pertinaciously, and for a long while has afflicted them,
when their Lips have been broken out. But as to what respects this Symptom, it
seems to arise, for that the Blood having got a more free Diaphoresis, it not
only thrusts forth adoors, the more thin, and smokie recrements, but also the
more thick; and when the same, in other parts more easily exhale through the
more open Pores, they stick in their passage about the Lips, by reason of the
skin being more strictly bound together; and because the vaporous matter,
abounds in particles of adust Salt, and Sulphur, being fixed in the skin, it
there hinders Circulation, and therefore induces Pustles, and little Ulcers;
perhaps the more hot breath, which is breathed forth from the mouth, and
nostrils, may contribute something to this Distemper, forasmuch as it scorches,
and burns the Blood, and Juices flowing thither: wherefore, it may be said,
That this eruption of Pustles, denotes only a more full Diaphoresis in the
whole, by which, the more thick, as well as the thin recrements of the adust
Blood, evaporate forth of doors. For I have known in some, from a Tertian
Fever, little welks like the small Pox to break out in their whole body, that
if by this more plentiful Ventilation, as it were a purging, the Blood be so
freed, that it recovers its pristine disposition, the Fever is cured: But if
(as sometimes it happens) some recrements, tho more thick, break forth, yet
others stay within, and still cherish the Feverish disposition, those little
Ulcers, argue only a greater taint of the Blood, and pertinacy of the Disease,
therefore it may be observed, when that scabs break out in the lips, if the
Fever does not presently abate, that it will be more grievous, and tedious for
the future.

Sometimes the yellow Jaundice comes upon a Tertian Fever, and cures it;
(which Hippocrates has also taken notice of) the reason of which is, because,
when the Blood has got a sharp or bilous disposition; that therefore it had
perverted the alible Juice, and from thence had heaped together excrementitious
matter, it is oftentimes freed by that Dyscrasie, when by a sudden Secretion,
the recrements of adust Salt and Sulphur, are more plentiful purged forth. This
the Choleduct vessels being irritated by Physic, or of their own accord, and
so pouring out plentifully the Bile, from the Blood, do often perform: because
Vomiting, Purging, and especially a Diarrhea or L ask, very much conduce to the
cure of this Disease, yea sometimes, the Blood it self, putting forth of its
own accord, thrusts forth the bilous recrements, as its off-scourings, and in
the circulating puts them forth in the skin, and so inducing the yellow
Jaundice, cures this Fever.

When an Inflammation, (as sometimes it is wont) comes upon this Distemper, the
Ague is commonly said to fall down into the part distempered with the Tumor.
But that by such a breaking forth, this Disease is cured, it is no wonder;
because the Blood by this means continually lays aside out of his bosom, the
provision of the degenerate nutritious Juice, and transfers it to the
distempered part; and therefore, the degenerate and fermentative matter in the
mass of Blood, does not easily arise to a fullness of swelling up: wherefore,
the Belly being perpetually loose, has by degrees helped some, for that the
Blood by this means, readily casts forth its burden, now growing low, and not
having a more full increase yielded to it: sometimes also, a Deaf;ness suddenly
arising, the Tertian Fever has presently ceased, to wit, by reason of a
continual translation of the Feverish matter, from the bosom of the Blood,
into the head.

If that the Tertian Fever, within a short time, neither by the free accord of
Nature, declines by degrees, that it does clearly cease within seven or ten
periods, nor is cured by any of the aforesaid means, nor is removed by the help
of Medicine, but that after ten or twelve Fits, the sick are still grievously
afflicted, it will be a very hard task to cure it: because the Blood, from the
continual heaping of the Feverish matter, and by the frequent burnings,
becomes at length so depraved, that it concocts nothing truly for the
nourishment of the Body, and for the sustaining its strength; neither is it
able to shake thoroughly out of its bosom, the impurities and excrements, whereby
the Disease may make a Crisis or separation, but in truth, the same growing in
strength every day, the Blood, besides its Dyscrasie or evil disposition,
begins to be hurt somewhat in its mixture; wherefore, more frequent Fits infest
them, nor does a perfect Remission come between, but that the sick being very
weak and languishing, are almost continually Feverish, with thirst and heat:
when it is come to this pass, unless they are succored by remedies from Art,
or that the change of the Place, and Air, bring timely help, this Disease often
ends in death.

As to its cure: the method of healing is commonly directed to this one scope,
to wit, that the mine of the Disease may be extirpated, and that the Feverish
matter may be eradicated out of our Body, without any cherisher remaining, or
fear of relapsing; wherefore, Vomits, and Purges are diligently Instituted,
which when profiting nothing to the cure, but that the Patients strength is
very much broken, the sick are lest by the Physicians, and the business is
wholly committed to Nature. The Intentions (as it seems to me) ought to be of
this sort: First, a restitution of the Blood, to its natural Temper. Secondly,
a prevention of the depravation of the nourishing Juice, as much as may be.
Thirdly, an Inhibition of the Feverish Fermentation, that the Fit may not be
excited. And these Indications take place, not only in a Tertian Fever, but in
any other intermitting Fever besides: which yet are to be performed, not by
the same ways and remedies, but by several, according to the diversity of the
Disease, of the condition of the sick, and of the symptoms chiefly urging.
However in the curing of this Disease, there is more to be attributed to
Nature, and to a good order of Diet, or way of Living, than to Physic.

1. Concerning the first Intention, to wit, that the Blood may be reduced to
its natural Temper, Vomits, letting of Blood, and Purging are of great use:
especially, if they be celebrated in the beginning of the Disease. Vomitories
help, both for that they Purge the Ventricle, that the first Concoction may be
better performed, and by that means the nourishing Chyme may be more purely
supplied, for matter of the Blood; but chiefly, for that by plentifully
pressing forth the Bile, form the Choleduct passage, they empty the Galish bag,
as by that means, the Bile is poured forth more full from the mass of Blood;
and so the Blood is purified, from the recrements of adust Salt and Sulphur.
The opening of a Vein, cools and ventilates the Blood, as by that means, it is
less torrified, or scorched, and is circulated more freely in the Vessels,
without danger of burning. Also Purging, plentifully draws forth, and by
provoking expresses, or squeeses out, the Bile, from the galish Vessels, and
consequently from the mass of Blood. For this end, (to wit, the reduction of
the Blood) Digestives bring help, the more temperate Vinegars, or Acetous
things, forasmuch as they fuse, and alter the Blood, and do attemper its
fervor. Sometimes also, the change of the Soil, and Air, notably amends the evil
constitution of the Blood, before all other Remedies whatsoever.

The second Intention, is excellently performed, by Diet, and an exact manner
of living; which in this Disease ought to be slender and sparing: wherefore it
is commonly said, Starving is the best Remedy for this Disease: and it appears
by common experience, that by a more spare eating, the coming of the Ague fit,
is very often prolonged, beyond its wonted Custom. There are especially two
things to be observed, concerning Eating and Drinking: The first, that the food
be slender, that nothing Sulphurous or Spirituous be given, for so the
Conflagration of the Blood will be lessened; then secondly, that the Fit
approaching, or urging, nothing of Aliment be taken, wherefore, in fasting the
Fit is lighter, and sooner finished.

As to the third thing proposed; the Inhibition of the Feverish Fit, is
instituted by Remedies, which stay the Fermentation of the Blood. But tho this
Remedy seems Empirical, and unmethodical, and very failable to Physicians, yet
I have found these Fevers to be very often cured by this means, when Medicines
have profited nothing: What they are, and by what means, without the suspicion
of Witchcraft, they afford help, for the curing this Disease, is before noted.
We shall here only advertise you, that the use of these is most profitable
after Physic, and opening a Vein, if there be need of it; and unless these be
reghtly performed beforehand, those other rarely stop the Fit. But Vomiting,
Purging, and breathing a Vein, unless they be presently celebrated after the
beginning, yield little help, yea, more often are wont to hinder: For whilst
the Blood is strong in vital spirit, its evil disposition, may with easy
labor be corrected, or amended: wherefore, if the Bile, about the beginning,
be copiously drawn forth, or the Blood eventilated, it is reduced to its
natural Complexion; but afterward, in the progress of this Disease (the Spirit
being now very much exhausted, and the Salt and Sulphur too much exalted) if
these kind of Evacuations be administered, they do more debilitate the
disposition of the Blood: and therefore it is clear by observation, that the
Tertian Fever, is rarely or never cured, by these Remedies late administered,
and often passes into a Quotidian. I my self have known some, in the Spring
time, being strong in very good health, from a more strong Emetick taken for
prevention sake, causing a violence by the Evacuation, to have presently fallen
into a Tertian Fever; and others, for some time cured of this Fever, when
they had taken a strong Purge, for the carrying away of the remains of the
Feverish matter, upon it to have fallen into a Relapse. It may be readily
said, that the mine of the Disease, being before at quiet, was stirred up, and
brought into Act, after this manner by the Medicine: But if you consider this
thing rightly, it may rather be said, that from the strong Medicine, the
disposition of the Blood was very much hurt, and when at first it was prone to
a bilous Dyscrasie, that it hardly did assimilate the alible Juice, from this
evident cause, it forthwith degenerated, that it wholly perverted the Nutriment,
into a Fermentative matter, and so conceived the Feverish disposition. It is a
common opinion, that a Tertian Fever can scarce be cured, without a Vomit,
wherefore some Medicasters, are wont under the pretext of the necessity, to
give to all whatsoever, laboring with this Disease (tho languishing and weak)
and Emetick Medicine not without great danger of life: and those whom they
judge wholly unfit for such a Medicine, they leave as not easily cureable to
Nature. But (as I have often found the contrary by experience) this sort of
practice is evilly instituted; yea, I rather judge, for the cureing of a
Tertian Fever that Vomits are rarely or never to be required, unless in a
strong Body, and very easily prone to Vomiting, and when the Ventricle happens
to be burdened, with excrementitious matter, but instead of it, that a gentle
Purge, by which the load of the humors may be pleasantly brought away may be of
better use: because, a Purge in this case, does the same thing as a Vomit, to
wit, it evacuates the choleduct Vessels, that the Bile, being plentifully
exhausted from the Blood, the Feverish Dyscrasie is mended. But when the
galish humor, being emptied forth into the Ventricle, is cast out upwards, from
thence there is great hurt brought to the stomach, and a mighty perturbation
excited in the whole Body: But if that humor be enticed downwards by a gentle
Purge, it is sent forth of doors, without any trouble. Then, if to a gentle
Purge, once or twice repeated, be added a very slender diet, without flesh it
often answers the preservatory Indication, that there needs no other Remedies,
for the taking away the cause of this Disease; but that these being rightly
performed, shall render beneficial those things, which being either inwardly
taken, or outwardly applied, stop the Feverish accession. By this sort of
plain and easy institution of Medicine, viz. A Purge of the infusion of Senna,
and Rhubarb, a slender diet, and a Febrifuge or Ague-resisting Topic, laid
either to the wrists, or the breast, I have known very often, and in very short
time, Tertian Fevers cured, without the use of any other destroying Physic:
yea, a thin diet only, with Amulets timely administered, has very happily cured
Big-bellied women, and also very weak old men, whose strength could not bear
Purging. I have so often made trial of this method, with good success, that I
doubt not, but that a Tertian Fever, may as easily be cured, as any other
Disease, if it be at the beginning handled after this manner, viz. before the
temper of the Blood be more hurt, by an evil manner of Diet, or by Medicine
untowardly administered. For the truth of this thing, I will relate this
following History.

A certain noble young man, endued with a bilous Temper, had caught an
intermitting Tertian Fever; upon the approach of the Fit, he Vomited forth
much yellow and greenish Choler, then he was troubled most grievously, for many
hours, with a great pain of the Heart, and most strong Heat and Thirst. On the
day of the intermission there was taken from this person, with whom I was by
chance, by my prescription, eight ounces of Blood, and in the afternoon was
given an Emollient Glyster, he also used a most slender Diet, ( viz. only made
of Barley) He took every night going to sleep, this Opiate, viz. Conserve of
Roses vitriolated half a dram, of Diascordium a scruple, also every morning of
the Salt of Wormwood a scruple, in a spoonful of the Juice of Orange: but when
these did not succeed (for the Fit returned somewhat more remiss, but with cruel
Vomiting, as at first) besides, for that this sick person, extremely abhorred a
Vomitory Medicine, (because not long before this, from a very gentle Emetick,
he had Vomited almost thirty times, until being distempered with the Cramp, and
Convulsions, he was brought into great weakness, whit hazard of his life)
therefore, the day following the aforesaid Fit, I gave him a Potion of an
infusion of Senna, Rhubarb, and yellow Sanders, with Salt of Wormwood, in
Springwater, by which he was Purged ten times, with ease: In the morning after,
and three hours before he expected the Fit, I put to his wrists an
Ague-resisting Medicine, and took from him six ounces of Blood, by which means,
he mist his Feverish Fit, and then being again Purged after the same manner,
became perfectly well.

If that the Tertian Fever, by reason of the evil Constitution of the sick, or
because of errors in Diet, or committed by Physic, has more deeply rooted it
self, that after a long sickness, the Fits still grow worse, and the sick
extremely languish, with want of Strength, Thirst, and almost continual Heat,
want of Appetite, wakeings, weak Pulse, high colored Urine, and very full of
Contents, the Curatory method ought to be a little otherways instituted; In
this case, first it is to be endeavored, that the Dyscrasie of the Blood, may
be taken away; wherefore, the sick are to be fed, with slender Aliments only,
as Barley broth, or Grewel, with opening Roots boiled in it, (flesh-broth being
wholly laid aside) the Belly is to be kept loose, (if need be) with the use of
Emollient Clysters; besides (Purges being omitted) only digestive Medicines,
which fuse the Blood, and bring away gently the serous Impurities by Urine,
also comforting Remedies, which corroborate the Viscera, and cherish the
Spirits, are chiefly to be insisted on. To this end, Apozems are fitly to be
prepared, of Herbs, and Roots gently Diuretic, also Opiats help very much, of
temperate Conserves, with Sal Nitre, or the fixed Salt of Herbs, with shelly
powders, and the Spirit of Vitriol mixed together. When the disposition of the
Blood is somewhat mended, that the Urine is clearer, and less colored, also
sleep quieter, with a remission of thirst, and heat following; then may be
profitably administered, Remedies to stop the Feverish fit: wherefore
Ague-resisting Amulets may be applied to the Wrists or to the Soles of the
Feet; also the powder of Peruvian Bark, or of something instead of it; or also
of the Barks of the Ash-Tree, Tamarisk, or Gentian, with Salts mixed with them,
and drunk in White Wind: after the comings of the fits are taken away, and the
sick being to get strength, and desire Food, and in some measure to digest it,
gentle Purges may be of use: but let the sick still abstain, from a more
plentiful Diet, or participating of Flesh, and they will shortly after recover
perfect Health without any violent Purge or Phlebotomy.

CHAP. V. Of the Quotidian Intermitting Fever.
BEcause of its affinity to the Tertian Fever, and likeness of fits, the
Quotidian (or daily) Fever comes next, viz. whose Accession is wont to return
every day. It is the opinion of some, that this sort of Fever, is only a
double Tertian, and does arise from a dispersed matter, having gotten a twofold
Nest; to which I cannot assent, and I suppose its beginning is to be attributed,
to a peculiar Dyscrasie of the Blood. In this the symptoms of cold and heat,
are more remiss, but its is longer continued, and oftentimes it is wont to last
eighteen or twenty hours: This Fever for the most part follows a Tertian, for
when the Vital Spirit is very much flown away, by the frequent deflagration of
the Blood, and (the Feverish disposition still remaining) the Blood is made
weaker, it does not concoct the nourishing Juice, or ripen it, but perverts
almost the whole into a Fermentative matter; wherefore it comes sooner to its
increase, and is gathered together to a plenitude of swelling up, within double
the time, than at first. But because the congested matter, participates equally
of crudity, and adustion, therefore the heat of the burning is lesser, and more
unequal, and (like green wood laid on the fire) slowly burns; for which reason
the fit endures longer.

Sometimes it happens, that a Quotidian Fever, does arise without a Tertian
going before, viz. when a Feverish disposition, falls upon a Cacochymic Body,
or full of evil humors, and stuffed with depraved Juices; for then the Blood,
being poor in Spirits, perrverts in a greater measure the nutritious Juice, and
in a shorter time, gatheres to a fullness of swelling up: But that which begins
an every days Ague, oftentimes changes its figure, and becomes a Tertian; just
as a Tertian, often goes into a Quotidian, because between these Fevers, and
their causes, there is a great vicinity; and the constitution of the Blood
being a little chaged, it makes a transition from one to another. A Quotidian
Intermitting Fever, is not so easily cured as a Tertian: For whether it comes
at first simple, or follows upon another Intermitting Fever, it is still
excited from a stronger cause, and argues a greater dyscrasie of the Blood,
which will not presently give way to Remedies. But also, if this Fever be of
long continuance, or comes upon another Chronical Disease, it has most often
adjoined to it, besides the taint of the Blood, the infirmities of the inwards:
to wit, the Blood being spoiled, easily affixeth its impurities, by degrees
heaped up, on the Viscera, whilst it passes through their Meanders: from hence
it is, that in a Quotidian Fever, the weight of the Ventricle, an extension of
the Hypochondria, Obstructions, or Tumors, now of the Liver, now of the Spleen,
or Mesentery, are joined together; but these kind of distempers, are not the
cause of the Fever, (as is commonly believed) but only its product. Wherefore,
in this Fever, besides the simple method of Cure, which is shown in the
Tertian, many other intentions or coindications, come under consideration: to
wit, that the Ventricle be cleansed from its load of humors, the stuffings of
the Inwards freed, Infirmities corroborated; and that together with these, the
Dyscrasie of the Blood may be mended, and the Accessions of the Fever may be
restrained, must by all means be endeavored; from whence, by reason of these
kind of various intentions, we come to the Cure by a longer way: In this case,
Vomits (if strength will bear them) are of benefit before all other Medicines:
also Purges, whereby the assiduous supply of Excrementitious matter, may be
drawn forth, are often to be repeated: Besides these, digestive Remedies,
openers of Obstructions, such as restore the Ferment of the Viscera, and Blood,
and correct their evil dispositions, are frequently to be administered.
Wherefore, the fixed Salts of Herbs, and their Extracts, Acid Spirits of
Minerals, and sometimes preparations of Steel, do very much help: concerning
these main things, the task will be hard, when by reason of the manifold evil,
many things are to be done together, yet by reason of the assiduity of the
Feverish fit, there is leisure for the sick to use few only. In Distempers so
complicated, tho the reason of the method requires, the impediments to be first
removed, and then to Cure the Disease, yet I have known, this kind of Fever,
beset with many other distempers, in a Body full of humors, often Cured,
without method, and by an Empirical way; viz. after a light provision of the
whole, Agueresisting Remedies being outwardly applied, have at first stoopped
the Feverish fit, that then there was time, for the Curing the other
distempers, and more happy occasions of healing were granted. I lately visited
a Noble Lady, who being long endued with a Cachectical habit of Body, a month
after her lying in, being weak and languishing, was taken with a quotidian
Intermitting Fever; after six or seven fits of it, her strength was so much
cast down, that she could scarce rise out of, or sit up in her Bed; nor able to
take never so little Food, tho very slender, but upon it, most grievous
molestations were raised up, in her stomach; besides, the Region of her
Ventricle, and left Hypochondrium, was wholly beset, with a hard shining tumor,
and cruelly painful: by reason of her strength being mightily cast down, there
was no place left for Evacuation, but the use of Clysters; also her Stomach,
being very weak, loathed all other Remedies, unless very grateful, and only in
a very small quantity. In this difficult case, circumscribed between narrow
limits of Curing, I counseled these few things, to wit, that twice in a day,
she should take this mixture, viz. The magisterial water of Earthworms two
Ounces, of Elixer Proprietatis twelve drops. Moreover, I ordered to be applied
to her Ventricle, a Fomentation, of the Leaves of Sea-Wormwood, Centaury,
Southernwood, with the Roots of Gentian, boiled in White Wind, in an open
Vessel: also, that after the Fomentation, a Cake of Tosted-Bread, and dipped in
the same Liquor, should be worn upon her Stomach; besides, Ague-resisting
Medicines were ordered for her wrists; and with these Remedies only, she mist
her Ague fit, on the third day, and remained free from it afterward; then, by
the use of Chalybeat Remedies, she became perfectly well, within a short time.

CHAP. VI. Of a Quartan Fever.
IN a Quartan Fever, the period is longer than in the rest; to wit, which is
extended to the fourth day inclusively; also its continuance uses to be longer,
and its cure harder: because this Disease is protracted for many months, yea,
oftentimes for years, and seldom, or scarce at all, is cured by Medicines.

The Fit, for the most part, begins with cold, and shaking, to which a very
troublesome heat succeeds, but more remiss than in a Tertian: Sweat for the
most part concludes the Fit. At the first coming of the Disease, the Fits are
more grievous, and very infestous, and keep the sick in their Beds; yea, they
make them lose their strength, and vigor of Body: But afterward, the trouble
is more easily born, so that the Fits are suffered out of Bed, and sometimes in
a Journey, or being about any business. If it continue long, it induces the
Scurvy, or Hypochondriac distemper, and involves men in an unhealthful
condition.

The causes which dispose to this Disease, are first, the constitution of the
Soil and Air, because this Distemper is proper to the fall of the Leaf, or
Autumn, that you rarely find this Fever to begin, but about that time: also in
some places, especially about the Seacoasts, this uses to be general, or
common to the Region, and to come upon those living there, or Strangers coming
thither from elsewhere. A declining age, which is past its acme or height, also
a melancholic Temper, and which, by reason of an ill manner of living, is
obnoxious to the Hypochondriac Distemper, cause this: besides, long Fevers of
another kind, and Chronical Diseases, often pass into a Quartan Fever.

According to these positions, and rightly weighed, it may be said, that a
Quartan Fever, even as the other intermitting Fevers, depends upon a vicious
disposition of the Blood; to wit, because the nutritious Juice, being by
degrees delated into the Vessels, is perverted into a Fermentative matter; and
the effervescency of this, heaped up even to a fullness of swelling over,
constitutes the Fit of the Quartan Fever. But as in this Fever, there are
some things, which are peculiar from the rest, we will inquire, what kind of
Dyscrasie of the Blood it is in this Disease, distinct from the others, and by
what means it excites, the very remarkable Symptoms.

The opinion, which is commonly had concerning this thing, is very far from
truth: almost by the consent of all, the Essence and beginning of a Quartan
Fever, is ascribed to a melancholic humout, heaped up somwhere in the first
passages, and there periodically Putrefying. Instead of this, we affirm, that
in this Disease, the Liquor of the Blood, does pass from a sweet, spirituous,
and balsamic, into an acid, and somewhat austere Nature, like Wine growing
sour: to wit, there is too great a want of Spirits, and the Terrestrial, or
Tartareous part of the Blood, (which consists chiefly of Salt, and Earth) is
too much exalted, and being carried forth into a Flux, induces the sourness of
the mass of Blood. Even as Beer, being disturbed by Thunder, and infected with
a troubled lee or dregs, grows sour. The Blood, after this manner degenerated,
from its native disposition, does not rightly dress the alible Juice, and
assimilate it to it self, but perverts it into an extraneous matter; with
which, when it is satisfied to a fullness, in the vessels, and the nervous parts
are watered by the Juice, from thence arising, a Flux of this matter, and as it
were a spontaneous effervency follows, by which indeed, the Feverish Fit is
induced, with shivering and heat, as is wont to be in a Tertian.

In a Quartan Fever, the periods have longer intervals, because, when the
Dyscrasie of the Blood is become sourish, and therefore less violent and hot,
it perverts the alible Juice without strife, or tumult: wherefore, it
assimilates some of it, and the depravation of the rest, does not so far recede
from its natural state, as in a Tertian, and from hence, its congestion to a
plenitude, is made longer, and almost in another half of that time, in which a
Tertian rises up to a Turgescency: And therefore, those taken with this Fever,
are indifferently well, and are strong; which is a sign, that the nutritious
Juice is less depraved; also, the Fits are made without cruel burning, because
the nutritious humor, is perverted into a fermentative matter, without great
adustion.

But why this Disease is so hard to be cured, and so pertinaciously infests the
sick, the cause is, the melancholic constitution of the Blood, which is not
easily to be taken away, and yields almost to no Remedies. The choleric
disposition of the Blood, is mended by the frequent Deflagration, and ceases
often of its own accord, even as too rich Wines are depressed, by their own
growing hot, and are wont to be reduced into their due state: but this
melancholic Dyscrasie of the Blood, in which, with a want and defect of
Spirits, Salt and Earth are too much exalted, (as when Wines grow sour) is most
hard to be restored, and is almost of the same labor and difficulty, as to put
again life, and a vinous Spirit, into Vinegar: For that the Blood, depraved
after this manner, may be restored, it will be needful, that its whole mass
should be volatilised and as it were made Spiritual anew: wherefore, in this
case, evacuations profit not a jot, yea, by more depauperating the Blood,
oftentimes the strength is cast down, beyond help: but they had need to exalt,
and make volatile what is fixed, and to promote a Transpiration, or
Spiritualisation, in the whole mass of Blood: From hence it is, that in this
Disease, the change of the Air and Region, most often brings help, before all
other Remedies: For the Spring following, oftentimes takes away those Quartan
Fevers, that had arisen the Autumn before: which without doubt happens,
because the changed condition of the Air, is wont to alter for the better, the
evil disposition of the Blood: also for the same reason, the change of the
place, most often cures this Distemper, inexpugnable to all Physic.

If it be demanded, wherefore this Disease chiefly begins in the Autumn; and
rarely in the Spring, or Summer time; I say, the Autumnal time does most fitly
produce this kind of Feverish disposition of the Blood, for when very much of
the Spirit, and Sulphur, has flown away by the Summers heat, and that what is
left begins to be bound up by the cold; the Liquor of the Blood, (as Wine
growing sour by too much heat) easily degenerates into a saltish, and acidulous
or sharp Nature: This also, the Sea air, by infecting the Blood and Spirits,
with saline Vapors falling on them, easily procures: yea, also the affinity of
this Disease, with the Scurvy, and Hypochondriac distemper, plainly shows, the
evil disposition of the Blood to be in fault, whereby it becomes salt, and
earthy, with the want of Spirit.

Concerning Quartan Fevers, the last year was so abundantly fruitful of
observations, that many might collect by ocular Inspection, whatever belong to
this Disease; for when the most hot Summer was past, about the end of it, an
Epidemical Fever (of which in another place you shall have a description)
followed; then the Autumn coming on, when that Disease had ceased, a Quartan
Fever began very much to rage; that in very many places, the fourth part of
the people was taken with it: neither did it only infest old men, splenitick
and melancholic men, but of every age and temper, also Infants, Children, and
young men ordinarily: which was clearly a sign, that this Distemper had drawn
its rise, not from a melancholic humor, heaped up, by the default of the
Spleen, but from the Dyscrasie of the Blood, brought in, through the
intemperance of the year: for the mass of the Blood, after too great heats,
even as Wines after immoderate effervescencies, was made fit to grow somewhat
sour, or to get an austere disposition, and so also prone to this sort of
Fever, as is already showed.

If the Remedies, which for the Curing of this, have been made trial of, both
by Physicians and Empericks, were collected together, their description would
swell into a great Volumn; but although there is instituted, a manifold provision
of Medicine, against this evil, yet very few are cured in the Autumn. In some,
about the beginning of their sickness, before the Disease has taken too deep
root, a Vomit has brought help; but in most, all manner of Cathartics, tho an
hundred times repeated, have profited nothing. In whom the evil had deeply
implanted it self, the sick received no help, from the most studied Medicines
made use of all the Autumn. But when at this time, I perceived the ordinary
method of Medicine, was administered in vain, I proposed to a Noble Virgin,
requiring a sudden Cure, by any means, to be performed, that if she would
endure a Flux at the Mouth, for some days, from a Mineral Medicine, by that
means, it might be hoped, that the Disease would be profligated. When she had
readily assented to this, I gave her a gentle, and very safe Medicine, by which
a light spitting only was provoked, and that finished within twelve days: As
soon as the Salivation began, she mist her fits, but at those times they were
wont to come she felt a perturbation in her whole Body, with an oppression of
the Heart, and dread of swooning, but after the spitting was finished, she
appeared very well; and when again after two months space, she was troubled
with some light fits of this Disease, from an Emetick powder, twice or thrice
taken, she was wholly cured without relapsing.

After the winter Solstice, this Disease began to rage less, and to cease in
some of its own accord, and in many others, to be easily expunged by the use of
Physic: because at this time, the Dyscrasie of the Blood, contracted by the
Summers heat, is wont to be blotted out leisurely, by reason of the cold of the
Winter, and the mass of Blood growing old, as it were to put off its old
spoils, and to be reduced toward its natural State. But those, who were of a
melancholic temper, or had their viscera, and especially the Spleen, evilly
affected, or that used an ill manner of Diet, received no change at this
Tropic, but to the next period of the year, viz. to the vernal Equinox, or the
Spring, kept the Disease; and then in most, the Blood being either restored of
it self, or its intemperance more easily mended by the use of Remedies, this
Distemper was seen to be overcome: But in the mean time, many old men, and such
as were full of evil humors, or otherways unhealthy, ordinarily dyed, in all
that space of time, of this Disease; also some lived, who could not shake off
its yoke, tho the Summer Solstice were past. But although very many had labored
with this Fever, as it were Epidemical, almost through the whole year, yet none
(that I know) contracted it first in the Spring, and very few grew well of it
during the Autumn, that in truth, I do not doubt, the Dyscrasie of the Blood,
to be the cause of this, and the cure to consist in the change of it.

The Remedies, which most often brought help, (as appeared at least to our
observation) were of this sort, which did restrain the Feverish Fit: for the
evils of the disposition of this sort, which did restrain the Feverish Fit:
for the evils of the changed, if now the habitual custom of the Fits were
broken off, Nature recollected her self, and easily recovered the pristine
state of health, by her own endeavor. And this kind of intention, (to wit, the
inhibition of the Fits) tho sometimes performed by Vomits, given a little before
the coming of the Fit, (for these did not rarely stop the Feverish motion of
the Blood, by raising up another motion contrary to this) yet this Indication
is far more certainly, and indeed happily effected, by the use of those kind of
Medicines, which do not altogether, evacuate from the Viscera, but induce,
either a certain fixation to the Blood, or a precipitation of the Feverish
matter, for a time. Wherefore, those whom I undertook to cure, in the Spring,
and afterward; I handled (and in most with good success) with this method; a
provision being made of the whole, sometimes with an Emetic Medicine, sometimes
with a Solutive; I was wont three hours before the Fit, to lay a peculiar
Ague-Medicine to the wrists, and together, to give them to drink in Sack, an
Ague-resisting powder, and to order the sick to be kept in Bed in a gentle
sweat: It seldom happened, but at the first, or second time, the Feverish Fit,
was by this means restrained, and then, by the same Remedy, sometimes
reiterated, the Disease at last wholly ceased. To this kind of practice,
(besides our experience) the use of the powder, of a certain Bark, brought of
late from the Indies, seems to give some Faith, and approbation; which is said,
most certainly to cure this Disease; but the virtue, or operation of this,
without any evacuation, consists in this only, that it hinders the coming of
the Feverish Fits.

Concerning this Peruvian Bark, because of late it has begun to be in use,
there are some things to be said, which offer themselves to common observation.
The common manner of exhibiting this is, that two drams of it beaten to powder,
be infused in Sack, or Whitewine, in an open Glass, for two hours, and then
upon the coming of the Fit, the Patient being put to Bed, that the liquor and
powder be drunk up. This potion often takes away the approaching Fit, yet
oftentimes tho taken after the wonted manner, it prevents the next, however,
either in the first, second, or third period, the Fit is inhibited, and the
Disease seems to be cured, it is often wont to return, within twenty or thirty
days; then this powder being again exhibited, the Disease is for a time
deferred about the same space, and by this means, I have known many sick of a
Quartan, to have suffered some few Fits only, a whole Autumn, and Winter, and
so to have detained the enemy in his precincts, till the Spring coming on, the
disposition of the Blood is altered, for the better, by the help of the time of
year, and of other Physic, and so this distemper vanishes by degrees. Those
who by this means, have procured these frequent truces of the Quartan, have
lived cheerful, lively, and ready for any business, when otherwise, being weak,
and pale, they were brought into languishment, and a vicious habit of Body:
scarce one of an hundred, has tried this Medicine in vain, yea, if but half,
or a lesser quantity, viz. the weight of but one dram, taken, it very often
takes away the Fits, and suspends the same, a shorter space only; neither is it
any matter, whether it be taken in strong, or small Wine, unless with the
respect, to the disposition of the sick: because in a more hot temper, it may
be profitably taken in distilled Water, or Whey; also, a clear infusion of it,
the more thick substance being cast away, produces the like effect, but of
shorter durance: I have taken care to reduce this powder into Pills, with the
mucilage of Tragacanth, with a little cost to the sick, to be given to some;
after what manner soever it is taken, unless, to those loathing and abhorring
every Medicine, it causes no manifest evacuation, and takes away the Fit,
almost from all; neither is it only in a Quartan Fever, but in the other kinds
of intermitting Fevers, to wit, in every one where there is any remission
coming between, given with good success. It is commonly ordered, that a gentle
Purge should be taken before this, but in some who are very weak, and keep
their Beds, this powder being taken carefully, without any previous Medicine,
has procured laudable effects. In the mean time, I will ingeniously confess,
that I have not seen an intermitting Fever quite cured, by this Bark, once
taken: nay, rather the Fits not only of a Quartan, but of a Tertian, and
Quotidian Fever, wholly overcome easily by other Remedies, seeming to be
driven away by this powder, have constantly returned after a short time. For
this Reason, they who suppress intermitting Fevers, otherways easily curable,
no necessity urging them, by this Medicine, for a little while, only seem to
institute a deceitful Medicine, and do no more than those, who skin over a
rotten ulcer, which will shortly break out again; in truth, in some cases, the
use of this will be requisite, viz. when by thy too great assiduity of the
Fits, the spirits of the sick are cast down, truces are by this means procured,
by which Nature may recollect her self, and afterward may be more able to
fight against this potent Enemy: also, that a Quartan Fever, during the Autumn
and Winter, may pass over with little trouble, this Bark is profitably
administered: But those, who expect a longer resting time, from the assaults of
this Fever, are bid to take this powder in greater quantity, and more often,
to wit, that they should take two drams, three several times one after another,
whether the Fits return or no; by this means, they remain longer free, yet they
retain within, the Enemy still, tho asleep.

If it be demanded, concerning the Nature of this Bark, and the virtue in
suppressing the fits of Intermitting Fevers, it is not to be dissembled, that
it is very difficult to explicate the causes of these kind of effects, and the
manner of working; because, there is not found as yet in any Subject, besides,
the like efficacy; but from a singular experiment, a general Reason is not to
be rightly fitted: however, from the appearances diligently Collated, we will
deduce some Theses in order, which may make at least some steps toward, if not
obtain the verity of this thing.

It is to be noted therefore, in the first place, that this Medicine, being
inwardly taken, especially exercises its force and energy on the mass of
Blood; because, it does not at all irritate the Viscera, neither causes in them
any excretion, or trouble; besides, whilst it communicates its virtue to the
Blood, it does not at all put forth Antifeaverish property; wherefore, not
always the next following fit, but the second, or the third, is prevented, by
the same being taken: and for this reason, that it may sooner affect the Blood,
it is a usual thing, to drink the Liquor, very much impregnated with the same
powder, for so its Particles are more easily conveyed into the mass of Blood.
Secondly, the virtue of this Bark, being impressed on the Blood, stays in it
for some time, and that either shorter or longer, according as either a greater
or lesser portion of the Medicine was taken inwardly; for the Particles of
this, being confused with the Blood, are a long while circulated with it, and
by how much the longer they stay, by so much the more they affect its mass, and
produce a longer effect: for though Aliments, and some other things taken in,
for that they are presently overcome by the native heat, put off whatever they
have of virtue, within some few hours, this being then assimilated or sent
forth adoors, they cease to operate: yet some Medicines being taken inwardly,
because they are not easily tamed, nor cast forth of doors presently, by an
irritation stirred up, they remain for many days very active, and hold a long
time the Juices, and the Blood, in this or that manner of Fermentation, this
may be observed of some Medicines, also of Poisons, and Counterpoysons, the
once or twice taking of which, for some days, is wont to affect our Bodies for
a longer time; for it is an usual thing with Cathartic Medicines, when they work
little by Vomit, or Stool, to break forth after many weeks outwardly, in
Pustles and Wealks: yea, if Death be avoided, from the drinking of Poison,
every body knows, that the virulency will lie hid, a long time in the Blood and
Juices. In like manner also, this powder, and perhaps very many other things
inwardly taken, although they seem asleep, yet continue to act, on the Spirits and
Humors.

Thirdly, although this Medicine acts immediately on the Blood and Humors, yet it
takes not wholly away, the Feverish Dyscrasie, implanted in them: for, as soon
as its force is consumed, and all its Particles are flown away, from the
mixture of the Blood, the Distemper being only suppressed for a time, at length
rises up, and repeats its fits after its wonted manner, but forasmuch as
Nature, by the space of this cessation, becomes stronger, therefore, after the
Relaps, the fits (not as before) but on the third or fourth day, according to
the first figure of the Disease, are wont to return.

Fourthly, It is remarked, that this Remedy, does not stop the Feverish
accessions, as the ordinary Ague-resisters or Febrifuges, by fixing, or also by
fusing the Blood; for then the next fit always, and not the second, or third
following after, is prevented.

According to which positions, that we may instead of a Corollary, subjoin some
things concerning the manner it self of working, whereby this Medicine seems to
act; we say, it is most likely, that when the Particles, proceeding from the
same being taken, are thoroughly mixed with the Blood, they compel it into a
certain new Fermentation, by which, whilst the Particles of the Blood are
continually agitated, they are wholly hindered, that they cannot heap up any
Excrementitious matter, or enter into Feverish turgescencies; for, as after
the biting of a mad dog, or stinging of any venomous Creatures, the Blood it
self, and nervous Juice, are a long while impoysoned, yet lest they should
conceive presently great irregularities, Counterpoysons being taken, do hinder
their Liquors, by retaining them in another Fermentation; the use of which, if
so long continued, whilst the virulent little Bodies are quite flown away, no
horrid symptom is to be feared, from that evil being contracted; but if the
strength of the Remedy, being too sparingly given, be first consumed, forth
with the Venom repullulates, and the old Poison, thought to have been exploded,
is at length brought into act: by the same way, when the Blood, having gotten a
vicious disposition, perverts the Alible Juice, and whereby it might more
rightly expel it, heaped together to a fullness, conceives Feverish swellings
up; this Peruvian Bark being beaten, and administered, by the Commerce of its
Particles, so agitates the Blood, tho distempered with an evil disposition,
with a new excited Fermentation, and alters it, that it in some measure
concocts the nourishable Juice, and continually evaporates its Recrements, that
they are not heaped together as before, into the matter of a fit: But, when the
Particles of this Remedy, are wholly flown away, from the company of the Blood,
and the whole virtue consumed, the evil disposition of the Blood, before
contrancted, at length rises up, and so the Feverish fits return, after their
wonted manner. Sometimes perhaps it happens, that whilst the Feverish fits are
suppressed, by the use of this powder, by reason of the season of the year
being changed, or by the help of another Remedy, or by the endeavor of Nature
it self, that Dyscrasie of the Blood may be mended, by degrees, and so the
Fever may at length vanish, of its own accord. This I have known to happen,
but very rarely, because almost with the same certainty, by which you expect
the Feverish fits to be suppressed, by that powder, you may afterward look
for their return.

As to what appertains to the sensible qualities, with which this Bark is
noted, it appears to abound with bitterness, and a certain stipticity, that it
seems to the taste, to have the likeness of Savor, which is in most
Conterpoysons, as the Root of Gentian, Serpentary, Contrayerva, etc. for what
are bitter in act, are strong in excellent virtue, for the suppressing the
force of preternatural Ferments; yea, the Root of Gentian, which is likest to
this Bark, was in times past of famous use, for the Curing of Quartan Fevers.
But now, although this Peruvian powder, be the only Alexiterion or Counter-poyson,
as yet found out against a Quartan Fever, to wit, that inhibits (tho only for
a time) its fits, and of other Intermitting Fevers, yet it is not to be
doubted; but that there are in the world, other Medicines extant, which are as
good Ague resisters; and it is hoped, that led by the example of this new
invention, we may be excited, to the finding out the virtues of Herbs, almost
as yet unknown: so, whilst we shall insist on the trial of several, and the
Empirical be joined to the Rational Medicine, without doubt the Cures of the
Quartan Ague, and of other invincible Diseases, may more happily be
accomplished; which therefore I promise more willingly to this Age, or at least
to the next, when being led by the Analogy of this Book, I have found out a
Medicine, for the profligating of Fevers, of use not contemptible, it not
being long since variously tried, which also I am wont to give to the poorer
sort, instead of something else, with good success.

CHAP. VII. Of continual Fevers.
A Continual Fever is that, whose fit is continued for many days, without
intermission: It has its times of remission, and of more fierceness, but never
of intermission; the burning is now more remiss, now more intense, but still
the sick are in a Fever, until by the temperament, or insensible growing well,
the Disease is wholly Cured. Concerning this, it behooves us to inquire, what
Effervescency of the Blood it is, which causes a continual Fever; then, by
what ways, and from what causes, it is wont to be excited: also, how it differs
from that, which is in Intermitting Fevers. And these being performed, we will
descend to the Species of Continual Fevers.

There are many ways, by which the Blood growing hot, induces a continual
Feavear, the chief of which may be reduced to these Heads: The first way is,
when the more spirituous, and subtle Portion of the Blood, becomes too hot, and
is distempered, with a certain burning, which therefore agitates the other
parts of the Blood, and incites it into a certain rage, so that the Sulphur, or
the Oily part of the Blood, is more dissolved, and more inkindled in the Heart,
also, for that cause, there is among all the Particles of the Blood, a certain
syncrisis, contrariety, or perturbation, by which in truth, being confused, and
put out of order, they are not able quickly to be extricated, and reduced into
their former posture, wherefore, a heat and burning more than is wont to be, is
stirred up in the whole Body: but when the Spirits are only in fault, their
heat and disorder, are wont within a short space, to be allaied of their own
accord, therefore, this Fever is often terminated within a day, and is rarely
continued beyond three: and therefore, is called an Ephemera, or a Fever of a
day, or Synochus of more dayr,

2. The second manner, or degree of growing hot, is when the Sulphurous or
Oily part of the Blood, being too much heated, conceives a Fervor: for then, it
both grows immoderately hot in the Vessels, and being very much inkindled in
the Heart, produces by its deflagration, a very strong heat in the whole Body.
Indeed the Blood, as to its temper, mostly depends on the condition of the
Sulphur; when by reason of crudity, the Sulphur is less dissolved, the Blood is
made watery and cold, and is moved slowly in the Vessels: but if the
Sulphurous, or Oily part of the Blood, grows hot, beyond its Natural
disposition, presently it becomes fierce, and improportionate with the rest, so
that, almost the whole being acted, as it were into a flame, by the Ferment of
the Heart, compels the mass of Blood to grow immoderately hot, and to boil up.
For as when Wines, endued with a rich Lee, are stirred up into an heat, by the
too rancid Sulphur; or as Hay, laid up too wet, by reason of the want of
Ventilation, conceives of its own accord a burning, the Particles of the
Sulphur being loosned from the mixture; in like manner, when the Blood is not
rightly ventilated, but being restrained from Evacuation, by reason of the
admixtion of some hot thing, or a more plentiful sanguification; or for some
other cause, the Particles of the Sulphur begin to be thickly gathered
together; presently, all its Liquor, immoderately boils up, by the Sulphurs
being loosned, and inflamed in the Heart, and this kind of Fever is induced,
which is called a putrid Synochus; notwithstanding which appellation, tho of
many rejected, for that the Blood so long as it is in motion, does not
putrify; yet forasmuch, as in this Fever, the mixture of the Blood, is
somewhat loosned, by the Sulphur being too much exalted, and the mass of its
Liquor being changed, from its Natural disposition, tends toward putrefaction,
therefore, the term of a putrid Fever, as has been anciently used, may be
still, with good reason, retained.

3. The third degree of growing hot, (and which constitutes a distinct kind of
continual Fever) is excited, from a certain malignant, and invenomed Ferment,
by which, when the mass of the Blood is imbued, and the Spirits, and the
Sulphurous part together, conceive an heat, and their burning is not sooner
appeased, than that either that malignant matter be consumed, and cast forth of
doors, or else a certain coagulation, and as it were putrefaction, of the
Blood, from its corruptive venom is induced, by which, both circulation is
hindered, and the Vital Spirit extinguished. This malignity is wont to arise,
either from a certain contagion received from without, or from some infection
begotten within us; according to these ways the malignant Fever, Smallpox,
Measels, and also the Plague, draw their beginnings, and by their contagion,
far and near set upon many.

There are therefore three degrees, or manners of growing hot, by which, the
kinds of continual Fevers are determined. From the subtle portion of the Blood
made hot, or the Ebullition of the Spirits, the Ephemera arises, as also the
Synochus of one or more days; by the Sulphurous, or Oily part of the Blood,
being too hot and inkindled, the putrid Fever is stirred up, then thirdly,
upon an invenomed taint, infecting the Blood, and congealing its Liquor,
malignant Fevers depend. In every one of these, by the depravation, or rather
corruption of the Alible Juice, fresh carried into the Blood, the various fits,
inequalities, and critical motions arise. But before I enter upon the several
kinds of a continued Fever, it is requisite for me, to consider, how the
growing hot of the Blood, in a continual Fever, differs from that other, which
constitutes Intermitting Fevers.

I say therefore, that the growing hot of the Blood, in an Intermitting Fever,
depends only, upon the commixtion of a certain Fermentative matter, and not
rightly miscible, with the Blood, and on its growing up, to a fullness of
boiling over. Because of this heat, with the Blood in the Vessels, and of the
deflagration in the Heart, the fit is induced; because of its growing cool, the
intermission follows, that in the coming between of the fits, neither the
Spirits, nor Sulphur, become outrageous, but the bond of the mixture being kept
whole, the Liquor is circulated in the Vessels, equally, and without trouble:
on the contrary, in a continual Fever, the disorders of the Spirits, and of
Sulphur, of either, or both together, by their proper Ebullition, also without
the mixture of any other, stir up the Ebullition of the Blood; wherefore, there
are required, for an intermission, besides the difflation or colling of the
Excrementitious matter, a deflagration of the inkindled Blood, and a reduction
of it to its due Temper.

The Constitution of the Blood in a continual Fever, is of the same sort as of
Wines, when they grow hot upon too rich a Lee; to wit, are mighty in Spirit,
and grow turgid with exalted Sulphur, and therefore they conceive a Fervor, and
greatly boil up, of their own accord, without the mixture of any other thing.
In an Intermitting Fever, the Blood is moved after that manner, as Wines, when
they conceive an heat, because of something poured to them, that is not miscible
with them: Moreover, in this Fever, the disposition of the Blood is of that
sort, as of Wines, when in their decay and declination, they become ropy,
unsavory, or acid, to wit, in which the Spirit is depressed, that in the mean
time, either Salt, or Sulphur, or both together, appear above the rest, and
infect the whole Liquor with their disorder. An Intermitting Fever, for the
most part, is free from danger, because the constitutive parts of the Blood,
although they should somewhat change their disposition, however, keep the bond of
mixture, and whilst they are in power, are circulated equally in the Vessels,
yea they pervert the nutritious Juice, into a matter, not altogether besides
Nature, but rather infesting, with its fullness and turgescency. In a continual
Fever, besides the intemperance, the mixture of the Blood, and constitution of
the Liquor, are somewhat loosned, and its corruption easily follows; wherefore
this Disease often ends in death: further, the nourishing Juice is depraved,
into a matter wholly vicious, and altogether infestous to Nature.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Ephemera or Fever for a Day.
I Have said, the least degree of heat, which induces a continual Fever, is
placed in the subtle, and Spirituous part of the Blood, being too much agitated
and heated; for this, like the Spirit of Wine, boils up on every light
occasion, and conceives a fervor, by a too great motion of the Body, or
perturbation of mind, by the ambient heat as of the Sun or vapors, by hot
things taken inwardly, as the drinking of Wine, and the eating of peppered
meats, and being irritated by such like. For the Spirits of the Blood, easily
take fire, and being impetuously moved, are not presently appeased, but they
move thoroughly other Particles of the Blood, variously confound, and snatch
them, into a rapid and disorderly motion; also from this motion of the Spirits,
the Sulphur, or Oily part of the Blood, is more boiled forth, somewhat more
dissolved, and something more fully inkindled in the Heart, by which means, an
intense heat is raised up, in the whole Body. But forasmuch, as Sulphur is
inkindled, and inflamed only by small parts, and not in the whole, that fervor
of the Spirits is quickly appeased, and ceases: wherefore, the Fever which is
excited by this means, for the most part is terminated, within twenty four
hours, and therefore is called an Ephemera, or a Fever of a day. If that by
reason of a greater heat of the Spirituous Blood, it is prolonged further, it
rarely exceeds three days, and is called an Ephemera of more days, or a
Synochus not putrid: but if it should happen to be lengthned beyond this time,
this Fever easily passes into a putrid, viz. from the daily Ebullition of the
Spirituous Blood, the more thick Particles of the Sulphur, at length begin to
take fire, and involve the whole mass of Blood, in its Effervescency: even as
the Spirit of Turpentine, being shut up in a Cucurbit, and being put into a
Sand Furnace, if it be forced with a moderate heat, boils up gently, as the
Blood in a Fever of day; but if the heat be made more strong; the Liquor grows
impetuously hot, till it breaks forth into a flame, to which the inflammation of
the Blood, in a putrid Fever, may be very aptly compared.

The Days Fever, and Synochus simple, rarely begin without an evident cause:
Besides what has been but now said, immoderate Labor, Watchings, a sudden
passion of the mind, a constriction of the pores, a Surfeit, also a Bubo or
inflamed Sore, a Wound, the coming down of the Milk in Childbearing Women, are
wont to induce them; The procatartic Causes, which dispose to this, are an hot
temper of Body, an active habit, a sedentary life, and disuse of exercise.

The chief beginnings of this Disease, depend upon the presence of the evident
cause: for either, little Bodies of extraneous heat, being confused with the
Blood, like water boiling over the fire, make it to boil up; or this Fever is
induced, by motion, or by reason of transpiration being stopped; even as Wines
made hot by motion, or when too closely stopped in the Ton, are put into a
Fervor: but what way soever an inflammation is first excited, presently the
Spirits become enraged, and being moved hither and thither, compel the Blood to
boil up, and to be enlarged into a greater space, with a spumous rarefaction:
wherefore, the Vessels are distended, and the membranous parts hauled, hence
follow pain, chiefly in the Head and Loins, a spontaneous weariness, and as it
were an inflation of the whole Body. If that, with the Spirit of the Blood, a
certain Sulphurous part, be also in some measure inkindled, a sharp heat is
diffused through the whole, the Pulse is vehement and quick, the Urine red,
also thirst, watchings, and many other symptoms infest, the reasons of which
are added hereafter.

Concerning the Solution, or Crisis of the Ephemeran Fever, and of the not
putrid Synochus, three things are chiefly requisite: viz. a removing of the
evident cause, secondly a separation, and a scattering of the depraved, or
excrementitious matter, from the mass of Blood: Thirdly, a quieting of the
parts of the Blood, and a restitution of them, to their natural and equal
motion and site. According as these succeed, now more suddenly, now more
slowly, and difficully, this Disease is finished in a shorter, or longer time.

1. The evident cause, which for the most part is extrinsick, is easily
removed, and the sick are wont, presently to avoid the presence, or assiduity
of that thing, and do perceive a sense of any thing that is hurtful; none
taking a Fever from Wine, will still indulge the drinking of it, as soon as
any one grows more than usually hot, in a Bath, or the heat of the Sun, it is a
trouble to them to stay longer.

2. As to the Excrementitious matter, which ought to be scattered, and
separated from the Blood: this is either brought from without, as when the
Blood is infected by surfeit, drinking of Wine, sitting in the Sun, or from a
too hot Bath, with Effluvia, or little dry, and Fermentative Bodies; or this
matter is begotten within, as when its Liquor is stuffed with recrements, or
adust Particles, from the deflagraton of the Blood. Either of these matters,
ought to be searated from the Blood, to be dispersed, and either by sweat, or
insensible breathing forth, to be thrust out of doors, before the Fever be
appeased; wherefore, when as the pores are bound up, and transpiration hindered,
the Ephemeran Fever is longer protracted, and sometimes passes, from a simple
Synochus, into a putrid.

3. The evident cause being removed, and this degenerate matter dispersed,
there is required for the remission, a quieting, and reducing into order, the
parts of the Blood; for diverse Particles of the Blood, being after this manner
confused; and by reason of the Feverish heat, carried up and down, they do not
presently get again the former order of situation and position; but it is
needful, that they be by degrees extricated, and by little and little restored,
to a just mixture.

Although this Disease, after the removing of the evident cause, for the most
part ceases of its own accord, within a while, yet some Medicinal Remedies may
be administered, with good success, especially, when there is danger, lest the
Ephemeran Fever, should pass into a putrid, The chief intentions should be, to
suppress the fervor of the Blood, and to procure a more free transpiration; to
the which conduce, first a breathing of a Vein, a slender diet, or rather
abstinency, cooling drinks, and a bringing away the filth of the Belly, by
Clysters: Sleep, and Rest, greatly help, above all the rest; which, if wanting
should be procured in time, by Opiats, and Anodynes.

Verily, although the Histories, and Observations of those, distempered with an
Ephemeran Fever, contain in themselves nothing very rare; yet I shall subjoin
an example or two, in this place, whereby the delineation or type of this
Disease, may be illustrated.

A certain young Gentleman, about twenty years of Age, endued with a strong
habit of Body, by the immoderate drinking of strong Wine, fell into a Feverish
distemper, with thirst, heat, and with a great burning of his Precordia; being
let Blood, he drank a great quantity of fair water, and upon it presently a
plentiful sweat following, he grew shortly well: In this case, the more thin
portion of the Blood, being heated by the Spirits of the Wine, fell into a
rage, caused the whole mass of Blood to be shaken, and its frame to be loosned,
more than it was wont; and for that reason, that happened to be more dissolved, by
the Ferment of the Heart, and to be as it were inkindled by the active
Particles, loosned from the mixture; until the Vessels being emptied by
Phlebotomy, the raging Blood was cooled, and by the drinking of the water, its
fervor was attempered; then the hot Effluvia, being involved, together with the
adust matter, with a copious Serum, and sent away by Sweat, the Blood at length
recovered its due temper. Moreover, an ingenious young man, of a sedentary
life, and also very much addicted to the Study of Learning, when he had for
sometime exercised himself, beyond his strength, in the hot Sunshine, he began
to complain of the pain of his head, a want of Appetite, a heat of his
Precordia, and of a Feverish distemper all over; to whom, (for that he was
wholly averse to Physic) I ordered an abstinence from all things whatsoever,
unless from Small-Beer, and Grewel; on the second day, and so more on the
third, the symptoms remitted, by little and little, on the fourth, he went home
freed from the Fever, without any Medicine.

CHAP. IX. Of a Putrid Fever.
SO much for a Continual Fever, which is rasied from the most simple heating
of the Blood, or its lowest degree of inordinate heat; that which depends on a
greater degree of heat follows, viz. when the Oily or Sulphurous part of the
Blood, being too much heated, swells up above measure, and as it were forced
into a flame; and therefore from the similitude, by which humid things
putrefying, conceive an heat, this kind of Ebullition of the Blood, because it
induces an immoderate heat, is called a putrid Fever: which name ought to be
retained without injury, because that in this Fever, the Synthesis of the
Blood, (as is wont to happen in putrefying Liquors) is very much unlocked. When
the Spirits only grow enraged, (as in an Ephemera) the frame of the Blood is
somewhat set open, and loosened, that it is more dissolved, by the Ferment of
the Heart, than is wont, and more Particles than naturally use to do, leap
forth, and diffuse a more intense heat; but yet the mixture of the Liquor, as
to its chief parts, is conserved. But when the Sulphurous matter taking fire,
grows hot above measure, the bond of the mixture, for the greatest part, is
loosed, that its Principles are almost wholly drawn away, by the Ferment of the
Heart, and the active Particles, being loosned from the mixture, break forth as
it were into a flame. Wherefore, the Liquor of the Blood being after this
manner rarefied, in the Heart, and as it were inkindled, is from thence
carried, through the Vessels, with a most rapid motion, and disperses very many
Effluvia of heat, from its deflagration. Hence, the whole mass of Blood, (like
water put over the fire) continually boiling, distends the Vessels, pulls the
Brain and Nervous parts, raises up Convulsions, and pains in them, very much
destroys the Vital Spirits with its heat, wastes the Ferments of the Bowels,
hinders the Offices of concoction, and dispensation, often depraves the
nourishing Juice, destinated for the Nervous stock, that from thence exceeding
great disorders of the Animal Spirits follow; yea almost perverts the whole
economy of Nature.

The course of this Disease shows it self after this manner; It rarely begins
without a procatartic cause, or previous disposition: to wit, the Sulphurous
or oily part of the Blood, is first too much carried forth, and exalted beyond
its due tenor, which afterward, either of its own accord, (like Hay not
eventilated) begins to grow hot, or by the coming of an evident cause, it is
forced into a preternatural heat. But when it grows turgid in the first place,
by reason of the admixtion of a crude Juice with the Blood, now a shivering,
now heat infests, which show themselves unequally, like fire, which is covered
with green wood, sends forth now smoke, now flame: But at length, the fire
glowing more largely, as here the victor fire spreads it self abroad, so there
(sooner than said) the whole mass of Blood is inflamed, and is urged at once
with heat, and a most swift motion: Nor is this immoderate heat of the Blood
appeased, before its active particles being loosned from the mixture, and then
successively inkindled in the Heart, are wholly burned out, which does not
happen, but in the space of many days. And then at length this Fever ceases,
when the remaining Liquor of the Blood, the Spirit and Sulphur being very much
consumed, being made lifeless and poor, is fit only for a weak and small
fermentation. From this kind of deflagration of the Blood, and also of the
alible Juice, (by the same fire burnt out) the recrements, or little Bodies of
torrified matter, are heaped up in the Blood; which yet do more promote its
fervor, and ebullition, and for a time, increase the Feverish distemper. After
the Blood has very much burned forth, and these kind of little Bodies, are
gathered together to a fullness of swelling up, the vital Spirit endeavors a
soparation, and tries to concoct, and to overcome, (what it may) these adust
recrements, and then, having put a great many of them into a swelling up, a
Flux being risen, strives to shut them wholly out. And indeed, in the
subaction, and seclusion of this matter, chiefly consists the event of this
Disease; for if the vital Spirit being strong, the Bloody humor (when it has
sufficiently burned forth, and shall be freed from these adust particles)
should recover its pristine tenor, whereby it is made fit for motion, and a due
fermentation in the Heart, the sick tends toward health; but if, by a long
deflagration, and an inextricable confusion of the morbific matter, the liquor
of the Blood, being wanting of Spirits, and more pure Sulphur, or those same
(by the impure mixture growing ill) being as it were put under the yoke; is
rendered so lifeless, that it is not any longer rarefied, by the ferment of the
Heart, or inkindled; by degrees, its heat, and motion, together with Life it
self decays.

The procatartick causes, which dispose to this Disease, are, an hot and humid
Temper, an active habit of Body, a youthful Age, the Spring time, or Summer
season, a high and rich Diet, besides the often drinking of rich Wines, a
sedentary and idle life, a Body full of gross humors, and suffed with vicious
Juices; but above all the rest, it appears by observation, that the frequent
letting of Blood, renders men more apt to Fevers; wherefore it is commonly
said, from whom Blood is once drawn, that unless they do the same every year,
they are prone to a Fever. The reason of this is, (unless I am deceived) by
the frequent letting of Blood, the Sulphur is more copiously gathered together,
in the mass of Blood; in the mean time, the Salt (which should bridle it, and
hinder it from raging) by this means is drawn away; for the Blood, the older it
grows, becomes so much the more Salt, the Salt of all the Elements not
evaporating. But by how much the more the Blood abounds in Salt, by so much the
less it aboungs in Sulphur; for Salt eats and consumes the Sulphur, and makes
it evaporate: wherefre, they who are lean, and abound with a Salt Blood, are
less prone to Fevers. But when, by the letting of Blood, the ancient Blood is
drawn forth, in its stead another more rich, and more impregnated with Sulphur,
is substituted; so that it becomes less Salt, and more Sulphurous. Hence it is,
that those who often let Blood, are not only prone to Fevers, but also wont to
grow fat, because of the Bloods being more impregnated with Sulphurous Juice.

The evident causes, which deduce the latent disposition of this Fever into
act, are of the same sort, which procure an Ephemeran Fever, and simple
Synochus; in this rank chiefly come, Transpiration being hindered, and
Surfeiting. By reason of the effluvia being restrained, the mass of the Blood
being increased in bulk grows turgid, and conceives Fervor, as it were from a
certain ferment, inspired anew, and curelly boyls up; from thence, presently
the pores are more obstructed, by the infartion of the effluvia, and the frame
of the Liquor being loosned, the particles of the Sulphur, exuberating in the
Blood, leap forth from the mixture, and are inflamed by the ferment of the
heart, as it were by fire put to them, and so they enkindle a very intense
Fever. But from a Surfeit, both an immoderate fermentation is induced in the
Blood, and also a nitrous Sulphurous matter, apt for adustion, and an
inkindling is conveyed, as it were food, to the burning Blood.

In this Fever, four times or seasons are to be observed, in which, as it were
so many posts, or spaces, its course is performed: These are then, The
Beginning, the Augmentation, the Height, and Declination. These are wont to be
finished in some sooner, in others more slowly, or in a longer time. The
beginning ought to be computed, from the time the Blood begins to be made hot,
and its Sulphur to conceive a burning, until the ardors, and burnings are
diffused, through the whole mass of Blood. The Increase or Augmentation, is from
the time, that the Blood being made hot, and inkindled through the whole, burns
forth for some time, and its mass is aggravated with the Recrements; or burnt
Particles, which increase the fermentation. The state, or standing of the
Disease, is when (after the Blood has sufficiently burned forth, and its
burning now remits) the long vexed Blood, like a noble wrestler, when his
adversary is a little yielding, recollecting all his strength, endeavors a
bringing under, and a separation of that adust matter, with which it is filled
to a plenitude, and also, a Crisis or separation being once or oftener
attempted, an expulsion of it forth of doors. The Declination succeeds after
the Crisis or secretion, in which the Blood grows less hot, with a languishing
fire, and either, (the vital Spirit being as yet strong) overcomes what is left
of that adust and extraneous matter, and by degrees puts it forth, until it is
restored to its former vigor; or, whilst the same Spirit is too much
depressed, the liquor of the Blood, is still stuffed with adust recrements, and
therefore becomes troubled and depauperated, that it neither assimilates the
nourishing Juice, nor is made fit for an accension in the heart, for the
sustaining the lamp of Life.

1. When therefore any one is taken with a putrid Fever, the first assault is
for the most part accompanied with a shivering or horror: for when the Blood
begins to grow hot, there is a flux made, and a swelling up of the crude Juice,
freshly gathered together in the Vessels, even as in the fit of an intermitting
Fever, heat, and sometimes sweat follow, upon the shivering, by which, the
matter of that crude Juice is inkindled, and dispersed: afterward, a certain
remission of the heat follows, but yet from the fire still glowing in the
Blood, a lassitude, and perturbation with thirst, and waking, continually
infest: A pain arises in the Head, or Loins, partly from the ebullition of the
Blood, and partly from the motion of the nervous Juice being hindered; also a
nauseousness, or a vorniting offends the Stomach, because the Bile, flowing out
of the Choleduct Vessels, is poured into it, and a Convulsion from Vapors, and
from the sharp Juice brought through the Arteries, is excited in the Stomach. In
the mean time, although the heat be more increased, and inequal, it is not yet
strong, because the Blood as yet abounding with crude Juices, is only inkindled
by parts: and therefore burns out a little, and then ceases, and at last
returns; like a flame that is made by wet, and moist straw. In this condition
for some days, the Disease remains, the Urine is more red than usual, by reason
of the Salt, and Sulphur being more dissolved, and infected with the serum; It
still retains its Hypostasis or substance, because the Coction and assimilation
are not altogether depraved; it appears greater than ordinary, in its sediment,
which is yet easily separated, and falls to the bottom of its own accord. At
this time, they may let Blood, and administer Physic by Vomit, or Purge, so it
be done without any great perturbation of the Blood: it often happens, from
these kinds of evacuations, timely performed, that a greater increase of the
Disease is prevented, and the Fever as it were killed in the shell. The limits
of this stadium or space, are variously determined, according to the temper of
the sick, and other accidents of the Disease; sometimes, the first rudiments of
this Fever, are laid in a day or two; sometimes the beginning of the Disease is
extended to more; if in a corpulent Body full of Spirit, Juice, and hot Blood,
or it happen in a youthful Age, and very hot season, if the disposition to a
Fever be potent, and the evident cause coming thereupon be strong, the
Feverish heat, being once begun, quickly invades all the Blood, and on the
second or third day, having rooted it self, the Disease arises to its increase;
but if the Feverish indisposition, be begun in a less hot Body, a Phlegmatic
temper, or a melancholy, and in old age, or a cold season, the entrance is
longer, and scarce exceeds the limits of this first stadium or space, before
the sixth, or seventh day.

2. The increase of this Disease, is computed from what time, the burning of
the Fever has possessed the whole mass of Blood: that is, the Sulphur, or the
oily part of the Blood, having been long heated, and growing fervent in parts,
at length, like Hay laid up wet, breaks forth, after a long heating, all at
once into a flame; the Blood at this time cruelly boils up, and very much
inkindled in the Heart, by its deflagration, diffuses as it were a fiery heat
through the whole Body, and especially in the precordia; hence the sick complain
of intolerable thirst, besides a pain of the head, pertinacious wakings, and
oftentimes a delirium, Frenzy, and Convulsive motions infest: all food
whatsoever is loathsome, either it is cast up again by Vomit, or if retained,
being baked by too much heat, it goes into a Feverish matter; besides, there
happens a bitterness of the mouth, an ungrateful savor, a scurfiness of the
Tongue, a vehement and quick Pulse, an Urine highly red, and for the most part
troubled, full of Contents, without Hypostasis or laudable sediment; when the
Blood is at this time almost wholly inkindled by its deflagration, it begets
great plenty of adust matter, (as it were ashes remaining after a Fire) with
which the serum being very much stuffed, renders the Urine thick, and big with
Contents: Also the Blood, being filled with a load of this, to a rising up, is
irritated into Critical motions, by which this Feverish matter, (if it may be
done) being brought under, and separated, is shut out of doors; and indeed,
this state of the Fever induces that, in which a Judgment is discerned,
between Nature and the Disease, the strife being as it were brought to an
aequilibrium; and therefore the evacuation, which follows from thence, is
called the Crisis.

The state therefore, or height of a putrid Fever, is that time of the
Disease, in which Nature endeavors a Crisis, or an expulsion of the adust
matter, remaining after the deflagration of the Blood. To this is required, in
the first place, that the Blood has now for the most part burned forth;
because in the midst of its burning, Nature is not at leisure for a Crisis, nor
is it ever prosperously endeavored, nor in truth procured by Art with good
Success. Secondly, that the spirit of the Blood, does first, by some means
subdue this adust matter, or Caput mortuum, separate it from the profitable,
and render a period to the expulsion, for otherways, tho a copious evacuation
happens, Nature will never be free from her burden. Thirdly, that this matter,
be gathered together in such a quantity, that by its turgency, it may irritate
Nature to a Critical expulsion. If these rightly concur, a perfect Crisis of
the Disease, for the most part succeeds, in which, even as in the Fits of
intermitting Fevers, a Flux being arisen, whatsoever extraneous and
heterogeneous thing, is contained in the bosom of the Blood, is exagitated,
then being separated, and involved with serum, it is thrust forth of doors;
when any thing of these is wanting, the Crisis, for the most part, is in vain,
and not to be trusted, and rarely cures the Disease. For if in the midst of the
burning, before the Blood has sufficiently burned forth, an evacuation
happens, by Sweat, a Lask, Bleeding, or any other way, the adust matter is not
all separated, or else, if for the present, it be drawn away for the greatest
part, the Blood more largely flaming out, presently substitutes new, and will
renew the Fever again, that seemed to be vanquished: If that this matter, not
being yet overcome, nor brought to a fullness of rising up, be irritated to an
expulsion by Nature, an imperfect, and partial Crisis only follows; and when
the first endeavor of excretion shall be in vain, rarely a perfect, and
curatory succeeds after that one time.

The Crisis in a continual Fever, is almost the same thing, as the Fit of the
intermitting Fevers. For as in this, when the mass of Blood, is filled to a
fullness of swelling up, with the particles of depraved alible Juice, and fitted
for maturation, there are made a Flux, secretion, and expulsion out of doors of
that matter: so in a continual Fever, from the deflagration of the Blood, and
alible Juice, very many little Bodies of adust matter are gathered together,
with which, when the Blood is aggravated, and is at leisure, a little from the
burning, it overcomes them, by little and little separates them, and then a
Flux being raised up, endeavors to cast them out of doors: wherefore, as the
Fits of intermitting Fevers come not but at a set time, and after so many
hours, so also the Critical motions, happen from the fourth day to the fourth,
or perhaps from the seventh day to the seventh, for in this kind of space, the
Blood being inkindled burns forth, and with its burning makes an heap of adust
matter, as it were ashes, which being troublesome to Nature by their irritation,
induces Critical motions.

Therefore, what some affirm is not true, That the Crises depend altogether on
the influences of the Moon, and Stars, and follow their Aspects, Quadrations,
Oppositions, or Conjunctions: because the Critical evacuations are only
determined, by the gathering together, and the swelling up, of the adust
matter. For, as soon as the Blood is at leisure, from the deflagration, and
being filled with the particle of that adust matter, is able in some measure to
overcome, and separate them, presently a Flux, or swelling up being risen, it
endeavors to thrust them forth by any way; which, for that they are easily to
be separated from the Blood, and the breathing places of the skin are
sufficiently open, being involved with serum, are sent away with sweat. And
this is the best way of the Crisis, which if it rightly succeeds, very often,
wholly, and at one time, perfectly cures the Disease without danger of relapse:
To this next, follows the Crisis, which which is endeavored by the Hemorrhage
or bleeding at nose; for this matter, as it were the flowring, being moved with
the Blood, (if it be not cast forth by sweat, by reason of a less free
transpiration) is transferred from the heart, into some remote part, and
frequently is cast into the head, by the impetuons rapture of the Blood; where,
if a passage be open, from the private holes opening into the nostrils, the
morbific matter, leaps forth of doors, with a portion of the Blood. But
otherways being oftentimes fixed in the Brain, brings a frenzy, delirium, or
other grievous, and tedious Diseases of the head; yea, it is to be observed, that
almost in all continual Fevers whatsoever, when they are hardly or imperfectly
cured, so that the Blood is infected, for a long time with the Feverish matter
or adust recrements, that from thence, the nervous Juice (as it seems)
contracting an infection, pertinacious distempers, to wit, watchings, also
Deliriums, Tremblings, Convulsive motions, and long adhering weakness of the
nervous parts follow. Also, there are other ways of Crisis, by which Nature
endeavors, not at once and wholly, but by little and little, and by parts, to
expel the Feverish matter; now by Urine, now by Vomit, or Stool, now by
breakings forth, and buboes, or biles; by what way soever, that it may be done
with a good event, it is required, that the deflagration of the Blood be past,
and that the adust matter be concocted, and rendered fit to be separated.

The state or standing of the Disease, is therefore not one, and simple, nor
always happens after the same manner, but with a various difference of
symptoms, and tending to far different events. But by a prudent Physician, a
Prognostication is expedient to be given, in what space of time, the Disease
will come to its height or standing, and what end it will have.

If the Fever be vehement from the beginning, and suddenly invades the whole
mass of Blood with a burning; if it urges constantly, and equally without any
remission, with a ferocity of symptoms; for the most part, the Blood will so
much burn forth, in the space of four days, that the adust matter, will arise
to a fullness of swelling up, for the making a Crisis. But if its beginnings are
more slow, and the accension of the Blood often interrupted, the Fever will
come to its acme or height, about the seventh day. If it should begin yet more
remiss, the standing of the Disease is wont to be drawn out, to the Eleventh or
Fourteenth day. In the mean time it is to be noted, that as the Fits of
intermitting Fevers return at set times, so the Critical motions in continual
Fevers, (but for the most part they observe the fourth day:) for although the
Crisis may be perfectly prorogued to the fourteenth, seventeenth, or perhaps
the twentieth day, because all things, requisite to the full curing of the
Disease, do not sooner concur; yet in the time betwixt, more light motions
happen, by which the Feverish matter arising leisurely, to an increase, is a
little emptied, and as it were cut off by parts, until Nature may be able to
enter upon its more full discussion; but when the great provision of the adust
matter, in the burning Blood, is heaped up in the Vessels, Nature, unless
otherways disturbed, on every fourth day, being tired with the plenty of
matter, trys to shake off part of its burden by a certain swelling up:
wherefore, for the most part, the Critical motions happen on the fourth,
seventh, eleventh, and fourteenth days, not by the direction of the Planets,
but by reason of the necessity of Nature.

As to the event, whether the Crisis shall be good or not, certain
foreknowledges are taken, from the strength of the sick, the Pulse, Urine, and
other signs, and concourse of symptoms: If the sick appear with some strength,
the fire of the Fever urging, has a strong and equal Pulse, if the Urine be
of a moderate consistency with some sediment, with a separation of the
Contents, and easily falling to the bottom, if the Disease shall make its
progress, without great Vomiting, Watchings, Frenzy, Convulsive motions, and
suspicion of malignity, the standing will be laudable, and to be expected with
a good Crisis: if the contrary to these happen, viz. that presently strength is
cast down, and that the sick is obnoxious to frequent Swoonings, Convulsions, a
delirium, with a weak intermitting or unequal Pulse, if pertinacious watchings,
intolerable thirst, and Vomiting continually infest; if the Urine be thick and
troubled, without sediment, or sinking down of the parts, if, the burning yet
troubling, Nature is provoked to critical evacuations, a very dangerous state
of the Disease is imminent, nor may there be hoped for any thing of good from
the Crisis.

Concerning the Crisis of a Putrid Fever, we will here subjoyn a particular
Prognostication, in which, though the things, which from the beginning did
appear, might promise a most desired event, a very deadly one is imminent; I
have often observed, in a Putrid Fever, which begins slowly, and with a small
burning, if the Urine be red, and when rendered presently troubled, and thick,
which is not precipitated, neither by the cold, nor of its own accord, puts
down a sediment, and if at the same time, the sick lie for many days without
sleep, tho quiet, and that they toss not themselves up and down, their
condition is in danger: and the suspicion will be more, if in the mean time,
they are neither troubled with a strong Fever, nor infested with thirst, or
with a very troublesome heat; because those distempered after this manner, are
incident for the most part, about the state of the Disease, to a delirium,
Convulsive motions, and oftentimes fall into madness, from which they are
quickly cast into death; an when these symptoms arise, the Urine is altered,
from a thick and red, into a thin and more pale Urine. It seems in this case,
the mass of Blood, beink taken with the Fever, not to grow turgid, so with
Sulphur exalted to the height, as Wines or Beer are wont in their
Effervescencies; but (the Salt, and the terrestrial Lee or Dregs, being stirred
together with the Sulphur) to be affected after the same way, as Wines and
Beer, being suddenly disturbed with Thunder, and growing sour; wherefore, although
the Blood does not presently conceive an immoderate heat from the Fever, yet
its disposition being changed, it wholly depraves the Juice destinated to the
Brain, and Nervous parts, and therefore, about the beginning of the Fever,
pertinacious watchings happen, then the state growing urgent, the economy of
the whole Nervous stock is perverted. Melancholic persons are most obnoxious to
these sort of Fevers, in whom the unruliness of the Sulphur, are a little
restrained, by the Salt, and Earthy dregs being stirred up with it,
notwithstanding which, all being leisurely carried forth, break forth
afterward, with a greater slaughter.

When the Disease shall come to the standing, either the business is done at
one conflict, and from thence with a manifest declination, there is made a
translation to life, or death, or there are made frequent skirmishes, between
Nature and the Disease, and critical motions are often attempted, before the
victory is yielded to either party.

1. As to the first, If after the Blood has sufficiently burned forth, with a
good precursion of signs and symptoms, and its burning has remitted, the adust
matter being equally brought under, and subtilated, arises from a full
increase, to the motion of boiling up; and Nature being free from any
impediment or depression, is strong with able strength enough, for the
decertation or strife, the Feverish matter, for the most part, is exterminated
at one motion of its flowring or putting forth, and the Blood being freed from
its fellowship and infection, soon recovers its former vigor.

2. But if Nature is stirred up, to a critical motion, before the Blood has
perfectly burnt forth, or that adust matter is prepared for excretion, although,
as to the rest, things are in a moderate condition; yet from hence, but an
imperfect Crisis follows, by which indeed, something of the lead or burden,
with which the Blood is oppressed, is drawn away; notwithstanding presently
another springs up afresh, in its place, and then at set times, (perhaps in
four, or seven days space) like the fits of intermitting Fevers, the critical
motions are repeated, the second, and perhaps the third time, before the strife
being ended, the matter openly inclines to this, or that party.

3. But when, with the preceding evil appearance, of signs and symptoms, the
burning of the Blood yet urging, the critical motion is provoked, without any
coction of the Feverish matter, sometimes Nature is overthrown at the first
conflict, nor does she recollect herself, but yielding her powers overcome by
the Disease, is precipitated into death. Nor is the business much better, when
the Crisis is at first imperfect, and in vain, celebrated, without any ease to
the sick, and from thence, the next to this succeeds worse, and then in
another, and perhaps another conflict, the Disease prevails, until the strength
being wholly broken, and cast down, there is a plain end of life.

Thus much concerning the state and Crisis of the Disease, on whose good or
improsperous success, the event of the Disease depends; the declination of the
Fever, takes its period of this, of which we must speak next.

4 Although the Declining of the Fever, for the most part, is taken in the better
part, that it denotes the condition of the sick growing well of the Disease, in
which the Blood being almost freed from its Effervency, recovers leisurly,
strength and spirits, that were lost, and expels what extraneous thing is left
remaining in its bosom; yet, in a genuine enough signification, it may be used
for that state, when from an ill Crisis, or in vain, the Blood being
depauperated, and infected with an extraneous and Feverish mixture, still
declines for the worse, until at length (like Wine changed into a lifelessness)
being made wholly unable for circulation, and accension in the Heart, it calls
on death. Therefore, in this place, the name of declination signifies the
condition of the sick, and of the Disease, which follows the standing, whether
it tends to life, or to death; whether the Fever, or life it self of the sick,
at this time, declines.

As to the times of declination, it will be worth our labor to inquire, what
the temper of the Blood may be, and what turns of alterations it has undergone,
as often as from a good, or bad Crisis, there has been made a progress of the
Disease, toward Health, or Death. To wit, first, what the disposition, or
condition of the Blood and Spirits may be, from a good Crisis, and with what
alterations, its spoiled Liquor recovers its former vigor. Secondly, what their
temper is, from an evil Crisis, and by what degrees it still tends to worse;
and lastly, how they are, when from a doubtful state, and long weakness, the
sick hardly get up at length, and recover their health.

The vice, or depauperation, which the Blood has contracted from the Feverish
heat, consists in this: The Spirit very much evaporates, and is lost: the
Sulphurous part is too much scorched, and is much wasted by the deflagration,
and from its burning, the adust matter (as it were the Caput Mortuum) is left,
with the Particles of which, the mass of Blood is aggravated, and debilitated;
in the mean time, the Saline and earthy parts, are too much exalted, even as is
wont to come to pass in Wine, or Beer, by the use of too much Ferment. The
Blood, by these ways being spoiled, evilly assimilates the provision of the
Nutritious Juice, yea also, by reason of the roasting of the Sulphur in the
Heart, or defect of it, not rightly Fermenting, or inflamed, it untowardly
dispenses the Vital Spirit, in the mean time, from the adust matter, and Salt
too much exalted, it grows more fervent than it should, and more wastes it self.

1. From a good Crisis, the Spirit, tho made weaker, yet gets the upper hand,
wherefore, what is left of the Feverish matter, it by degrees overcomes, and
expels; and concocts, and affimilates (so what is brought be thin or slender)
the Nutritious Juice: from thence, the mass of Blood is amended anew, with
Spirit and Sulphur; and the Blood which now being Salt and sharp, did
continually grow hot, acquires at length a Sweet and Balsamic Nature, and being
quickened with a lively motion and heat, rightly performs the offices of life
and sense.

2. From a bad Crisis, the business is otherways, the Liquor of the Blood (like
Wine too much Fermented) degenerates, almost into a vappidness or lifelessness;
its Spirit is greatly deminished; the Relics which remain, are intricated,
and as it were overwhelmed, with the Particles of adust matter, from whence
there is yet a continual growing hot remaining in the Blood, yet without
concoction, or assimilation, of the Abible Juice, or separation of the
profitable, from the unprofitable: The benign Sulphur, and the Food of the
Vital flame, is much consumed, so that the Blood is less inkindled in the
Heart, than it ought to be; in the mean time; from the adust recrements, and
also the Salt, and Earth being too much carried forth, it perpetually burns in
the Vessels, with thirst and heat. And because it is daily depauperated, the
Spirit and benign Sulphur being wasted, and more infected, with the Salt, and
Earthy dregs being too much exalted, its Liquor in a short time becomes
tastless, and is made unfit for circulation, and for the inkindling in the
Heart, for the sustaining the Vital fire: wherefore there is a necessity that
life be lost, even as the flame of a Lamp is extinguished, when instead of the
wasted Oil, a Salt and Muddy Liquor only supplies it.

3. From an imperfect and doubtful Crisis, when the sick being weakened by a
long imbecility, become not well, but of a long time, the business is after
this manner. The Spirituous and Sulphurous parts of the Blood, are very much
consumed, by the slow deflagration; the remaining Liquor, being not Purged from
the adust recrements and feculencies, is rendered very impure; but when there is
yet remaining, something of Oil for the Vital Lamp, nor Spirits are altogether
wanting, for the subduing the Feverish matter, the Blood is still circulated,
and (tho but smally) is inkindled in the Heart: yea, and by little and little
the Spirits recollect themselves, set upon the matter remaining of the Fever,
and what they are able, begin to overcome it: then by a pertinacious assiduity,
or coction, like a flame, wavering and half extinct, among green wood, at
length rise up victorious, and restore anew, both with heat and motion,
leisurely renewed, a quick and lively Fermentation, in the Heart.

So much in general of the Fever called Putrid: it remains, before we descend
to the kinds, and particular Cases of it, that I recount the symptoms, and
signs chiefly notable, in the course of this Fever, and subjoyn the reasons,
and causes of them, and their manner of being done.

CHAP. X. Of the Symptoms, and Signs chiefly to be noted, in a Putrid Fever.
THE Symptoms, coming upon a Putrid Fever, although they argue, the economy of
the whole Body, to be for the most part depraved, and the disposition, and
functions of some part, or Member hurt; yet, the accidents, which a Physician
ought chiefly to consider, about the Diagnosis of this Disease, and its
Prognosis to be rightly instituted, may be referred to three casses or common
places; to wit, they have respect to the Viscera of Concoction, viz. the
Ventricle, and Intestines, with their Appendixes: Or secondly, to the humors,
flowing in the Vessels, viz. the Blood in the Arteries and Veins, and the thin
Liquor in the Nervous parts, together with the chief springs of either, viz.
the Heart, and Brain; or lastly, these symptoms respect the habit of the Body,
with the various constitution of the pores, and the extension or emarceration
of the solid parts. They, who would exactly observe, the course of this
Disease, and would fitly draw out Curatory intentions, may take notice of these
three heads of symptoms, and carefully consider, what alterations may happen in
these, as it were distinct Regions, according to the different times of the
Fever.

1. Troubles, and disorders, such as nauseousness, vomiting, want of Appetite,
indigestion, a looseness, a scurfiness of the Mouth and Tongue, a bitter
savor, are wont to infest about the Ventricle, and first passages, in the
whole course of this Fever. These, for the most part, are attributed to the
humors, first heaped together in the Stomach, and there putrefying: But
besides, that the recrements of the Chyle, being thoroughly roasted, by too much
heat, degenerate into an hurtful matter, very often, these kind of accidents
happen, for that the Purgings, and the filth of the Blood, and Nervous Juice,
whilst they grow hot, are carried inward, and being deposited in the membranes
of the Viscera, provoke Convulsions, and also make a filthy heap of vicious,
and very infestous humor. I have often observed, that about the beginning of
the Fever, the Blood growing hot, laid aside its recrements even inwardly,
with a benefit to the sick, where, although great molestations did arise about the
first passages, yet the burning was therefore more mild, the Pulse moderate,
and the Urine laudable, and these being after this manner in a Fever, quickly
grew well, with a slender diet, and the use of gentle evacuations. But if in
this case I should administer a vehement Cathartic, for the extirpating the
humors, that Natural Purging of the Blood being hindered, presently the Fever
became strong, with a red Urine, and troubled, a deep Pulse, Watchings, and
other horrid symptoms: also, oftentimes after the state of the Disease, by this
kind of interior Lustration or Purging, the adust matter, and excrementitious,
is separated from the Blood. Hence, sometimes a Lask, sometimes a scurfie
covering of the Mouth and Throat, follow: Wherefore, there is need of caution,
about the accidents which happen in the first passages, lest that whilst we
oppose them, we should pervert the motion of Nature; and lest whilst we
fortify these parts, against the course of the Morbific matter, we untowardly
keep the same shut up, in the mass of Blood.

The Symptom chiefly to be considered, about the Bloody mass, are, an heat
diffused through the whole, a burning of the Praecordia, thirst, a disorder of
the Pulse, a red ruin, a spontaneous wearisomness, a loss of all strength, out
of which rightly considered, these things following may be known, viz. what the
manner of the heat is, or with what tenor the burning Blood flames forth; what
times of remission, or of increase, its Effervescency observes, in the
deflagration; whether it retains its Crasis, or mixture whole; for the burning
of it, and circulation of it inkindled, what strength of the Heart will
suffice, and what space the Vessels may require; so long as the Blood burns,
what plenty of adust recrements it may heap up, by what means it may overcome,
separate, or at lest endeavor to separate the same, and lastly, what way of a
Crisis it endeavors, and with what success.

The accidents, which have a respect to the thin Liquor, with the Brain, and
Nervous Appendix, are, disorders concerning sleep and waking, a debility of the
whole Body, a trembling, shivering, pains, Convulsive motions, Cramps of the
Viscera, Stupifaction, Frenzy; and the observation of which suggests, what
the temper, and constitution of that thin Liquor may be; by what means it
waters, and influtes the Nervous parts, and performs its circutes through them;
how the Animal Spirits execute the functions of the Viscera; what the state of
the Brain may be, whether it remain free from the incursion of the Feverish
matter, or whether it be not in danger of being overwhelmed, by reason of its
critical metastasis or translation.

Concerning the habit of the body may be observed, what may be the reason of
sweating, and the manner of it; whether only by vaporous Effluvia? or by
sweats? or also by little wealks! whether the flesh falls away on the sudden
from its wonted bulk? Or whether it retains it self a long while? What the
color of the Face is! And the vigor or habit of the Eyes? from these well laid
together, the course of the Fever may be best of all measured; at what time it
will come to its hight or standing? Whether Nature will prevail over the
Disease or not; with what manner of separation, and with what success she will
endeavor the expulsion of the Feverish matter; also by these signs may be
learned, by what degrees the Blood growing hot, and often congealed, does tend
toward Putrefaction, or Corruption; whether it does any thing concoct the
alible Juice poured to it; or whether or not it presently casts forth of doors,
all its provision by sweat, as often happens in the declination of this Disease.

By these symptoms and signs, a yet more plentiful Indication may be had, if
first it be known, upon what causes the several species of them depend; and by
what provision, they are wont to be raised up in our Body: wherefore I have
thought it worth our labor to recount particularly the chief of these; and to
explicate the reasons of them, and their ways of working. But the symptoms,
chiefly to be observed in a putrid Synochus, or continual servor without
intermissions, are, an heat in the whole Body, a spontaneous weariness, a
burning of the Precordia, intolerable thirst, an ardor, and scurfiness of the
Tongue, or Jaws, a pain of the head and loins, pertinacious watchings,
Frenzy, Convulsive motions, a Syncope, Heart-burning, Vomiting, Nauseousness,
want of Appetite, a Looseness, a Flux, with which, not all at once, now with
these, now with those, this Disease is wont to be beset.

1. Heat, which is felt sharp and biteing, in the whole Body, depends upon the
too great effervency of the Blood, and the accension of it in the Heart: For
the Sulphurous or oily part of the Blood, being exalted, and taking an heat,
is inkindled in the heart, in a double proportion, more than it was wont;
wherefore, it copiously diffuses, by its deflagration, effluvia of heat through
the whole Body. When the Sulphur is less dissolved, and inkindled in the heart,
as in the green sickness, or the white dropsical Disease, etc. Heat is wanting
in the whole: but in a Fever, when te Sulphur too much burns forth, Heat
superabounds. For heat, depends not only upon the actual inflammation of the
Sulphur, or the firing of it, but an intense heat is excited without fire, in
many mixtures, where the particles of Sulphur are dissolved by corrosion, or
are more thickly heaped together for want of ventilation; wherefore, when Iron
is corroded by any acid mineral Spirit, or when Spirit of Nitre is poured on
the butter of Antimony, a mighty heat with a fume is produced; in like manner
when Dung, or Hay laid up wet, are kept from ventilation, grow highly hot: it
is the same reason, why the Blood burns above measure in Fevers, to wit, the
particles of the Sulphur, being too much exalted and made hot, are more thickly
heaped together in the Vessels, and are more dissolved, and as it were
inkindled by the ferment of the Heart; wherefore, they every way diffuse heat,
being loosned in the bond of the mixture, and every where stretched forth or
expansed.

2. A spontaneous weariness or lassitude, is felt in the whole Body: to wit, by
reason of the Vessels being distented with the boiling Blood, also the
musculous flesh is very much stuffed with Blood, and a copious breath, that it
is made less fit for motion, as they who are sick of an Anasarca, have their
limbs very unwealdy by reason of the abundance of serous humor: besides, in
Fevers, by reason of the inflammation of the Blood, the Juice, which is sent
for a supply to the nervous stock, departs from its due temper, that it becomes
little fit, for the actuating the Body.

3. The burning of the Praecordia is made, by reason of the Blood being more
copiously enkindled in the Chimny of the Heart, which from thence boiles forth
into the Lungs, with great ardency; wherefore, by how much the nearer this
Region is to that fire place of heat, it is pierced therefore with the greater
burning.

4. An almost unquenchable Thirst is caused, both from the glowing heat in the
Praecordia, also by reason of the sharp and hot particles of the Feverish
matter, affixed to the ventricle, in the circulating of the Blood; which
indeed, desire to be washed, even as salted and spiced meats, being plentifully
eaten, or also strong, or sour things, rouled in the mouth, or throat; for this
kind of distemper, calls for a more free swallowing down of Drink, as a member
too much heated the pouring on of cold water.

5. The ardor, and scurfiness of the Tongue, and Jaws, as also oftentimes an
accretion of a certain white, or yellow, or black filth, happen without doubt,
because of the heat, and soot, exhaled frmm the Ventricle, and Lungs, burning
with heat: but the Tongue grows white, as often as that humidity, (with which
it is naturally much imbued) is dried up, and parched, and so the exterior skin
of the Tongue, is as it were roasted, by the burning heat, from hence also it
becomes scurfie; which is also seen in healthful people, when it happens, that
the Tongue is scorched by broth, or any other very hot suppings; in like
manner, as when the Tongues of Animals are boiled, for the use of the Table,
their skin becomes white and sharp or rugged. For whether the spittle is drawn
from the maxillary glandulas, (as the doctrine of the most ingenious Wharton
has first made known) or any other humor from the glandulas of the Jaws, or
elsewhere; yet because, by the reason of the heat, and dryness, it grows too
thick, and becomes clammy, also then the outward skin of the Tongue grows
nevertheless white; but also it is covered with a certain filthy glue, to wit,
because that humor, by reason of its thickness, may smear the Tongue, but
cannot wet, or moisten it: but if it happens, that the Tongue is inwardly
suffused, with a bilous humor, or outwardly tinged (as comes to pass by the use
of Choler-abounding Vomits) then its hairy nap, being spongy, imbibing the
yellow poison, exhibits also the like color. If that lastly, the heat be so
strong, that it burns the Blood, and inkindles a fire, more ardent than usual,
it follows, that from the fire place of the Heart, the breathing places through
the Lungs, scarcely sufficing for the ventilating so great fire, soot or smoke
is raised up, which being smitten to the furnace of the Pallat, strikes against
the Tongue, as it were in a reverberatory, and infects it with blackness. But
this same kind of blackness, (ans as other filthinesses of the Tongue) is most
conspicuous in its middle parts, because the more exterior compass, is cleansed
by its frequent rubbing against the gums and palate.

6. Sometimes it happens in Fevers, and especially about their declinations,
that the Tongue, palate, gums, yea the cavity of the whole mouth, and throat,
are covered over with a certain viscous matter, as it were a whitish crust;
which being often wiped off, presently new springs again, and unless by rubbing
diligently, and washing the mouth, this crusty matter be frequently wiped away,
the sick are in hazard of being choked. This kind of distemper, is most often
excited in Children newly born; for they are wont, for the most part, within
fourteen days with an external growing hot, to be sprinkled through the whole
skin, with broad and red spots; if that this suffusion of redness, do not
freely break forth, or vanishes away sooner than it ought, for the most part,
this whitish cursed follows, in the parts of the mouth. This symptom, when it
troubles Infants, after this manner, is wont to be ascribed to the fault of the
Milk, to wit, that being to sharp, it induces the ulcerous distemper of the
mouth. In those sick with Fevers, it is commonly attributed to thick vapors,
and soottie, elevated from the ventricle: But to me it seems most likely, that
in either, this distemper arises, from the impurities of the whole Blood, (and
perhaps in some measure of the nervous Juice) deposited about these parts: for,
as often as in the mass of either humor, any extraneous thing intimately mixed,
is contained, that it is not to be dispersed by sweat, nor easily sent away by
Urine, that, most often, is fixed, with the serous filth about the mouth; from
whence Catarrhs, tumors, and troublesome spittings are caused: For when for the
chewing of the meats, the salival humor in this place ought to be plentifully
suffused; nature very often endeavors to send forth of doors, what is
superfluous, or otherways troublesome, by these usual ways of excretion. Hence
from Mercury being taken, when both the Blood, and nervous Juice, are
abundantly stuffed, with its most smally divided particles, and endeavor to
thrust them forth, being involved with serum, because they are not able to
exterminate those mercurial little Bodies, being intimately confused, neither
by sweat, urine, or by any other ways, what is remaining, they endeavor to
expel through the Arteries, and other passages, which supply the mouth with
spittle, the same being involved with the serous Latex. Also in like manner, in
Fevers, when from a long deflagration of the Blood, the adust matter is very
much heaped together, of which no small part remaining, after the Crisis, is
yet confounded with the Blood, and nervous Juice, being fixed either to the
brain, or to some other place, from them it is at length supped up again, it is
most probable, that this matter, is thoroughly roasted, by a long concoction,
and so becomes almost like Glue, thick, wherefore, being not able to be
dispersed, neither by spittle, or insensible transpiration, nor to be separated
by the urinarie passages, but at length leisurely runs out, by the little
Arteries, and other passages of the spittle, lying open into the Palate, as the
most usual way of excretion, and forthwith by reason of its thickness grows
into that glewiness. The same reason holds in Infants, whose Blood being made
impure, by filths contracted in the Womb, presently it endeavors to purify it
self, by that exterior putting forth, which if it do not rightly succeed, by
reason of the thickness of the matter, immediately the viscous impurities, are
exterminated by this way, as the more open. I have known some, in the
declination of a Fever, to whom, not only this kind of Crust of gummy matter,
has happened in the parts of the mouth, but a copious salivation, as if they had
taken mercury, with a stinking of the breath, also a swelling of the Tongue,
and Gums, has been raised up for many days.

7. The pain of the Head, in Fevers is excited, because of the Meninges of the
Brain, being pulled or hauled with vapors, and with a sharp Blood, and hot; for
the Blood being impetuously moved, by reason of the direction of the great
Artery, is carried in a greater plenty to the Head, than to the lower parts;
because the passage, from the bosom of the Heart to the head, is strait, from
the same, to the inferior members, oblique, and as it were reflected;
wherefore, as the membranes are very sensible, and that there the Blood is
stopped, and reverberated, in its rapid course, it is no wonder, if cruel
headaches are excited in Fevers. Besides, this impetuous flowing of the Blood,
wherewith (as it were by a certain Ramming) the membranes of the Head being
distended, ache grievously; also sometime, Headaches arise, by reason of the
nervous Juice, (which is supplied from the burning Blood) being too sharp, and
pricking: wherefore, when the membranes, and nervous parts, are watered, with
the same, they being pulled by its acrimony, are moved into Pains and
Convulsions.

8. In like manner also, the other distempers of the Head, as watchings,
delirium, Frenzy, Convulsion, etc. arise, sometimes from the Blood being in a
rage, and so stirring up inordinate motions in the Brain, and sometimes also,
from the nervous Juice being depraved, and therefore made inproportionate, to
the regiment of the Animal Spirits: But most often, these kind of symptoms are
frequent in Fevers, by reason of the translation of the Feverish matter, from
the bosom of the Blood, into these parts. For the Blood, being full of the
adust recrements, remaining after the deflagration, endeavors (like the
flowring of new Wine) to subdue, and exclude them from its Company, by every
manner of way; which, a Flux being arisen, when it cannot expel by Sweat,
Urine, or bleeding, it oftentimes tranfers, to the substance of the Brain, and
there fixes them: and from hence chiefly, the aforsaid distempers, when they
are fixed, and firmly rooted, draw their original, when as the lighter, and
that are easily moved, often proceed from the afore-recited causes.

9. Convulsive motions, happen in Fevers, for diverse causes: sometimes, because
of the matter being heaped together in the first passages, which there haules
the membranous parts, with its notable pravity, and then, by the consent of the
nervous stock, the Convulsion is presently Communicated to the beginning of the
Nerves, in the Brain, and by that means draws aside now these, and now those
parts: by which means, Worms abounding in the Viscera, sharp humors being
stirred, and strong Medicines, induce Convulsions: or secondly, when the
Fever, is a partaker of some malignity, so in the small Pox, Measels, or the
Plague frequently Convulsions happen; to wit, because the Blood is altered,
from its benign and natural temper, into a destroying and venomous, by which
the Nerves, and their beginnings, are pierced, and forced into Convulsions.
Also, oftentimes without the suspicion of malignity, in a putrid Fever,
Convulsive motions are induced, by reason of the translation of the Feverish
matter, to the Brain, as was but now intimated: so I have often observed, when
the Disease is not presently cured with the Crisis, the sick ly by it, with a
tedious sickness, and are made obnoxious to tremblings, and Convulsive motions.
Thirdly, and lastly, for the most part in every Fever, which terminates in
Death, Convulsive motions are the sad forerunners of it; which I think to
happen, not only from the malignity of the matter, with which the nervous stock
is pulled and pierced, but because the Spirits, very much exhausted and
debilitated, do not sufficiently blow up, and distend the Bodies of the Nerves,
wherefore, being released from their wonted extension, and tonick motion, they
are however by a more weak endeavor of the Spirits, agitated into a disordered
motion.

10. A syncope or swooning, is wont to be raised up several ways in Fevers,
but chiefly for these three causes, to wit, either from the mouth of the
Ventricle being distempered, which part, as it is interwoven with a manifold
texture of Nerves, is very sensible, and because from the same branch of the
sixth pare, little shoots of Nerves, are equally derived to the heart, and to
the Ventricle, of the Orifice of the Ventricle, so implanted with Nerves, be
distempered, with any great trouble, it is also Communicated to the heart, and
either the motion is stopped in it, or at least an inordinate one is excited,
whereby the equal Flux of the Spirits, and the Blood, is interrupted for a
time. I knew one in an acute Fever, taken with a frequent swooning, which
distemper wholly ceased, after he had cast forth by Vomit, a long and smooth
Worm. Secondly, a syncope also, is sometimes induced, because the invenomed
matter is circulated with the Blood, which suddenly fixes, and extinguishes the
vital Spirits, and congeals the Blood it self, that it is apt to stagnate in
the heart, as usually happens in the Pest, small Pox, etc. of which we shall
speak particularly hereafter. Thirdly, a syncope is wont to happen, by reason
of the more rare texture of the Spirits, which as they are very tender and
subtle, are easily unbent, by any immoderate motion or pain: so I have known
some, who being quiet in bed, have found themselves well enough, but being
removed from one place to another, presently have swooned away.

11. The pain of the Heart happens in Fevers, when the Ventricle, and
especially its Orifices, by reason of the manifold insertions of Nerves, being
very sensible, are beset with a sharp and bitterish humor, or else with an
acid, and corrosive; for hence a pain and trouble arises from the acrimony of
the humor, after the same manner, as when the sphincter of the fundament is
afflicted, in Cholloric dejections, with pain and molestation.

12. By reason of the same cause, Vomiting, and nauseousness are wont to be
excited, to wit, by the Ventricles being beset, and irritated to a Convulsion,
from an extraneous matter, and not akin to it self: Such an excrementitious
matter, may be gathered together in the Ventricle, by three ways; for either
the aliments, partly by reason of a want of an acid ferment, by which they
should be rightly Cooked, and partly by reason of the burning heat of the
Ventricle, are roasted into such a Corruption; or Secondly, this kind of
matter, is laid up in the Ventricle, from the Arteries, terminating in its
Cavity, as uses to happen in the small Pox, the Plague, and malignant Fevers;
or Thirdly, mere Choler, being pressed forth from the Choleduct Vessels, into
the empty intestine, by reason of an inverse motion, and as it were Convulsive,
of that intestine, it is poured into the Ventricle, want of Appetite, also
happens, by reason of the Ventricles abounding with vicious Juices, and because
the acid ferment, is wholly perverted, by the scorching heat. These kind of
distempers of the Ventricle, and Viscera, sometimes arise from an
excrementitious matter, (to wit, alimentous, degenerated in the concoction)
heaped together, a long while before the Fever, in the first passages, which
not seldom becomes, the occasional cause, of the Fever it self: but sometimes,
nauseousness, want of Appetite, Vomiting, pain of the Heart etc. are the
immediate products of the Fever; for when the day before the sickness, those
distempered, have been well enough in their Stomach, as soon as the immoderate
heat of the Blood was induced, whilst it boiled up above measure, both the
Effluvia, and the recrements, being wonted to be evaporated outwardly, also the
bilous humor, flowing out of the Choleduct Vessels, are poured into the
Ventricle; by which, its Crasis is overthrown; also the Relics of the Chyle,
and other contents in the Viscera, are egregiously depraved; from whence, the
aforesaid Distempers draw their Original.

14. No less frequent a symptom in Fevers, is a Diarrhea, or Flux of the
Belly, which sometime happens about the beginning of the Disease, and arises
(for the most part) either from the Bile, flowing forth of the Coleduct
Vessels, into the Duodenum; or from the recrements of the Blood, and Nervous
Juice, poured forth from the Arteries, and the passage of the Pancreas, into
the intestines. All the aforesaid humors, (but especially the Choleric) when
they are supplied in abundance, often Ferment with the mass remaining of the
Chyme, that the same swelling up with a spumous rarefaction, irritates the
intestines, and provokes to the motion of excretion: sometimes also, about the
standing of the Disease, and in the declination of it, a Lask is excited; and
so, either Nature being Conqueress, the more thick purgings of the Blood, are
this way critically sifted forth; or being overcome, the Flux of the Belly, is
the effect, and sign, of the Viscera wholly losing their strength, and firm
tenor. It sometimes happens in a Fever, that the Belly is always bound, that
it is not at all loosned, but by Physic, and tho the sick take nothing but
liquid things, for many days, the stools are still of a solid consistence, and
hard, this seems for the most part to be done, when the Blood growing sharply
and exceeding hot, like fire, consumes the humidities, wherever they flow, and
draws to it self, out of the Bowels, the watery matter, by a Copious emission
of vapors, and presently makes it to be evaporated outwardly: wherefore, the
thicker part, being left in the intestines, is made firm, from the scorching
heat as it were a Caput Mortuum, remaining after distillation.

A Dyssentery is a distemper, so frequent in continual Fevers, that some years
it becomes Epidemical, and not more mild than the Plague kills many: The cause
of it is wont to be, not any humor produced within in the Viscera, that
corrodes the intestines with its Acrimony, (as some affirm) but a certain
infection impressed on the Blood, and so intimately confused with it, that,
under the form of a vapor, or a sincere humor, it cannot be pulled away from
the Blood: wherefore, the thrusting forwards, toward the intestines, unlocks
the little mouths of the Arteries, and makes there little Ulcers, and
exudations or flowings forth of the Blood, like as when from the Feverish
Blood, Pustles and inflammations break forth outwardly, with a flowring toward
the skin: But it is most likely, these dysenteric distempers, which accompany
Malignant, or Epidemical Fevers, arise from a certain coagulation of the
Blood, as shall be more fully declared hereafter.

And here also, among the symptoms of Fevers, might be recited, what are wont
to appear outwardly, in the superficies of the Body, as are Spots, Whelks,
Buboes, Carbuncles, etc. but because these belong after an especial manner to a
Malignant Fever, therefore we will forbear in this place, from the
consideration of them, until we shall speak of the Plague, Smallpox, the
Pestilential, and Malignant Fever.

The Pulse and Urine shall conclude here the troop of symptoms and signs in a
Putrid Fever, which are much heeded, for the finding out, both the state and
the strength of the sick: For, as there are two things, by which our life is
propped, viz. Heat inkindled in the Heart, and concoction to be made in the
Viscera, and Vessels, because the Pulse and Urine, best show the alterations in
either, induced in a Fever, therefore from hence, a most certain judgment is
taken of this Disease, about to end, in Death or Health. I think it is not
needful, to speak of these at large, or to recount the several causes and
differences of either: It will suffice for me to note here, the chiefest things
of them, and what are worthy of consideration in the course of Fevers. And
first of all the Pulse is consulted, as it were a Thermometer or Weather-Glass,
constitued by Nature, that from thence, the heat inkindled, in a Fever might
be meted; which if it should be more strong, stirs up a great ebullition or
boiling up of the Blood, the Artery beats more strongly and quicker, so long as
the Spirits are in strength; then they being a little exhausted, the more
strong Pulse is remitted; which however is compensated with swiftness, and is
made quick, and small. If the Fever be gentler, and is troubled with a lesser
burning, the Pulse also declines less, from its Natural condition, and the
moderation of this, in the whole course of the Disease, denotes the truces of
Nature. Neither does the Pulse only, betray the forces of the Fever, as of an
Enemy, but shows also plainly the strength of Nature, and her ability of
resisting. So long as the Pulse is laudable, the matter goes well, and it shows
good hopes; but from the evil state of this, a bad omen is shown, and a despair
of Health. So without a frequent, and diligent examination of the Pulse a
Physician connot make a right judgment or Prognostication, or safely prescribe
Physic.

1. As to the first thing, it ought to be known (as much as may be) what every
ones Pulse is, according to its Natural Constitution; for it is in these
stronger, in those weaker: then it is to be considered, in every moment of the
Fevers, by what degrees it is distant from its Natural state: for now it is
sometimes more vehement, and argues the Fever to grow stronger; now it is
depressed, below its wont, and denotes the Spirits and Strength dejected.

Those whose Pulse in Health beats weakly and languishing, when taken with a
Fever, if they have a small and weak Pulse, it is not so evil a sign, that we
should presently despair of their Health: In whom the Pulse is by Nature strong
and vehement, if after the Crisis of the Disease, it has scarce a moderate
vigor, tho it be not wholly weak, it argues the condition of the sick to be
suspected, and not safe.

If from the beginning of the Fever, before the Blood has flamed out, or if a
Crisis being made, when part of the burden is drawn away, or at another time,
without an evident cause, the Pulse becomes weak, it portends evilly: but if
after long watchings, or great evacuations, the Pulse is made a little weaker,
Health is not therefore to bedespaired of, because the strength cast down by
these means, or overwhelmed, may be restored, and the Spirits renewed.

When the Pulse is suddenly altered for the worse tho the sick seem to be
better, as to the rest of the symptoms, you may forespeak the said
prognostication of Death; and so contrariwise, although most horrid symptoms urge,
and yet the Pulse is laudable, Health may be yet hoped for. If in a strong man,
that has a Fever, the Pulse is very small, and creepingly, or becomes like
the motion of Ants, death is at hand.

2. In the exhibiting of Medicines, cautions and rules of no small moment are
taken; Purging and Vomiting are forbid, by the pulse being too quick and
violent; also by being low and depressed; because, whilst the Blood is too
fervent, evacuation helps little, because both what is hurtful is not
separated, also for that by the perturbation, the strength or spirits, are more
debilitated. But when the spirits are broken, and strength cast down, Medicines
cast them more down, and sometimes wholly overthrows them. Wherefore, when a
Physician thinks of evacuation, upwards or downwards, he first examines the
pulse, and goes about this work only, when Nature is strong and quiet; that she
may at once be at leisure, for the operation of the Medicine, and may have
sufficient strength.

Nor is there less need of circumspection, in sweating Medicines and Cordials:
which, if administered in the Feverish fit, do too much strengthen, the former
violent motion of the Heart, and oftentimes break its strength; also, when the
Pulse is very languid, if hot and strong Cordials are administered, (as when a
small flame is troubled with a more strong blast of wind) life is easily
extinguished; wherefore, it is a vulgar observation, that Cordials often
accelerate death, for that by too much troubling the Blood, they sooner beat
down strength.

There is yet the most need of the caution, and direction of the Pulse, in
exhibitiug narcoticks; for these, (because they perform their work by
extinguishing, and fixing the too fierce vitalspirits) if used in a weak or
inconstant Pulse, either by diminishing the vital spirits, render them wholly
insufficient for the Disease, or by suffocating them too much, cause a
perpetual sleep: wherefore, in a languid, unequal, or formicating or creeping
Pulse, opiats are to be shunned, more than a mad Dog or a Snake.

An unequal, and intermitting Pulse, has a most evilreport, from the writings
of Physicians; yet, although of an ill note, does not so certainly portend death,
as a weak Pulse: for I have known many, to have recovered, tho by those kind of
signs condemned to the Grave; because the inordination of the Spirits, and the
Blood, may be more certainly and easily composed, or allayed, than their
dejection restored.

2. The inspection of Urines in Fevers, before all other Diseases whatsoever,
has more of certainty, and is of greatest use: for from hence, the conditions
of the sick, and of the Disease are best known, and the medical intentions,
concerning what is to be done, are better directed; what observations, and
rules, concerning this thing, are vulgarly set forth, are so many, that it
would be almost an infinite labor and tediousness to recount them all: it will
be sufficient here, to note the chief of them.

Concerning the Urines of persons in Fevers, there are chiefly to be
considered, the color, consistency, contents, and subsidency or settling. The
color of the Urine, shows the measure, or excess of heat in the Blood; which,
as it is increased, and becomes more remiss; the Urine also is more, or less
red; the cause of which is, the ebullition of the Blood or the effervescency
induced from the Fever, to the Blood; by reason of which, the particles of
Salt, and Sulphur, implanted in the Blood, humors, and solid parts, are more
dissolved, and incocted with the serum, and impart to it a redness; even as,
when Salt of Tartar, and common Sulphur being mixed one with another, and
boiled in water, impart a deep red color to the Liquor.

The Urines of some, are highly red, when they are but a little, or lightly
Feverish: and on the contrary, the Urines of others, laboring with a
Feverish burning, are less colored. Who abound with lively heat, and a very
hot Blood, or are obnoxious to the Scurvy, phthisis, or hypochondriac
distemper, when by taking cold, condensation, surfeit, or drinking of Wine,
they are troubled by any little Fever, they render a Urine strongly red: for
that the particles of Salt and Sulphur, remain exalted in their Blood, and
before half loosned; wherefore, there is a necessity, that the Fever urging,
they are more boiled in the serum; on the contrary, they who are endued with a
cold temper, with a faint and weak Pulse, being taken with a Fever, with a
greater effervescency of the Blood, render their Urine less colored.

The consistency, contents, and subsidency of Urines, being put as it were upon
the same third, depend all of them, on the adust and recrementitious matter,
which is remaining in the Blood, after the Feverish deflagration: if there
shall be plenty of this, the consistency of the Urine becomes somewhat thicker,
and after it has stood, it is troubled by the cold: but if there be a lesser
quantity of this, or otherways derived than to the Reins, (to wit, by sweat, or
is called away by a critical translation, to this or that part) the consistency
is made thinner, and the Liquor remains clear. Also the particles of this
matter, do enlarge the contents of the Urine, which show themselves diversely,
according as the nutricious Juice, is now somewhat cooked, and assimilated by
the Blood, now altogether perverted, and carried into a putrefaction, some
signs of concoction, and assimulation, show themselves, in the Urines of
Feverish persons, now a laudable Hypostasis, now some marks and rudiments of
the same: A want of Hypostasis, and the confusion, and perturbation of the
Urine, denote the concoction vitiated, But as this matter is more or less
roasted, in the Blood, the contents are now of a pale, now of a red color,
like oker. By reason, that the recrements, confounded with the Blood, either
the Spirit being strong, begin to be overcome, and separated, or the same being
depressed too much, they are less able to be separated, also the contents of
the Urine, are wont to be more or less, sooner or slower separated, from the
rest of the Liquor, and to sink down toward the bottom.

As to the Prognostics, to be taken from the Urine, we may take notice, that
the color of the Urine being somewhat more remiss, the consistency mean, the
contents few, and the subsiding free or easily collected into a Cloud, portend
good: on the contrary, a deep red, a thick and troubled confistency, thick and
cloudy contents, which slowly or scarce at all sink to the bottom, denote a
very great heat, plenty of adust matter, and its being brought under, and
secretion, difficult or frustrated.

As to the Medicinal directions, the business depends on this, that we attend,
by the frequent inspection of the Urine, the motion of Nature, and be helpful
to the same; neither is it to be moved, by purge or sweat, but when a certain
hypostasis of the Urine shows signs of concoction and separation. I thought it
needless to say any more here concerning this matter, because those things are
more largly handled elsewhere, in a proper place, which belong to Urines.

CHAP. XI. Of the Kinds, and Cure of a Putrid Synochus, or contitinual Fever.
ANd thus much for a Putrid Synochus in general, in which is described its
formal reason, according to the accidents and symptoms which are commonly
observed in its Figure; there are besides, (I shall not say species but) some
varieties, or irregularities of this Disease, in which, this Fever sometimes
declines from this common Rule, and by reason of some accidental Distempers,
gets new names and distinctions.

In the first place therefore, a Putrid Synochus is wont to be divided into
Symptomatick, and essential; It is called Symptomatick, which draws its
beginning from some other Distemper, or Disease before excited in the Body, so
that the Fever, is only a symptom, coming upon that other Disease: of which
sort is accounted, what depends upon the squinancy, plurisie, the inflammation
or imposthume of the Lungs, or any imposthume from a wound, or ulcer in a
principle part, or its neighborhood, of which we think a little otherways,
viz. That truly no Putrid Fever is merely Symptomatical; perhaps it may arise
occasionally, from some other Distemper; but it is founded immediately, in the
Sulphurous part of the Blood being made too hot, and as it were inkindled: for
without a Procatarsis, or preceding indisposition of the Blood, the aforesaid
Distempers, rarely, or not at all, cause a Putrid Fever.

As to what respects the squinancy, plurisie, the inflammation or imposthume of
the Lungs, and the like; I say, that these are the products of the Fever, or
Distempers following it; but by no means the cause of it; for most often the
evident cause, went before, which produced the Feverish effervescency of the
Blood, as a taking of cold evacuation being hindered, etc. then, although the sick
do not openly grow presently into a Fever, yet a greater ebullition of the
Blood, than was wont, is stirred up, as may be easily conjectured from the
Urine, Pulse, and inquietude of the whole Body. After some days, (nhw sooner,
now later) an Inflammation is brought forth, in one part or other; the reason of
which, may probable enough be said to be of this sort: The Blood, by reason of
the effluvia being retained, (which are like ferment) is increased in its bulk,
and grows more turgid than its wont, in the Vessels; and when for want of
Ventilation, it is straightened in the space of its circulation, it easily
springs forth, where it can find a passage, through the Arteries, and being
extravasated, from the broken thread of Circulation, it gathers together into a
Tumor: and because from this kind of tumor, an heat, and pain, are increased in
the part, the Blood is more disturbed in its motion, and so the Fever, at
first inkindled, is more aggravated.

Further, in these kind of Distempers, we may take notice, of a certain
aptitude of the Blood to be coagulated, whereby it is made less fluid, so that
it is apt to be congealed in the lesser Vessels: even as it is to be perceived
in Milk, when it begins to sour, for then it will not be boiled, nor heated
over the fire, without coagulation: and in like manner, there is to be
suspected in the Blood, a certain disposition to growing sour, by reason of
which, it is made more obnoxious to coagulation; for it easily appears, that in
a plurisie, a peripneumonia, the squinancy, and the like Diseases, the
inflammation, or extravasation of the Blood, does not always depend on the
exuberancy of the Blood, and plenitude of the Vessels: for oftentimes, the
Blood is stopped in its motion, with a weak pulse, and a sinking down of the
Vessels, and beign extravasated in the side, or elsewhere, causes a most acute
pain, yea being driven from one part, by and by its fixed in another: and
sometimes it begins to stagnate in the heart it self, and there oftentimes
induces a deadly oppression: wherefore, some pluritical people, are wont, when
the pains are gone, to complain of a great burden, and as it were weight,
fixed about the region of the Heart: And when we have opened the dead Bodies,
of such as have dyed of these kind of Diseases, we have seen the Blood to be
gathered together, in little bits, or oblong gobblets, in the secret parts of
the Heart, and round about the cavities of the Vessels. But for that these
Diseases, are wont to be handled apart from the Fever, therefore we shall say
no more of them here.

It only remains, that we inquire, whether the Fever which acompanies these
Distempers, is to be esteemed in the rank of those, that are called Putrid, or
not? To which we reply, that most often, they are simple Fevers, in which only
a subtle, and spirituous part of the Blood is inflamed; and therefore, if the
extravasated Blood may be restored to circulation, by a plentiful detraction of
the Blood, or an emptying the Vessels by sweat, presently the growing hot of
the Blood is appeased, and the Fever shortly allayed. But sometimes, when a
predisposition, as in a Plethora, or fullness of good humor, or in a great
Cacochymie or fullness of evil Juices, brings it on, together with the same kind
of distempers, a Putrid Fever is inkindled, wholly from the same cause.

Among the symptomatick Fevers, is reckoned that which is commonly called the
slow Fever: they who are sick of this, are more than usually hot, especially
after eating, any motion, or exercise; the Urine for the most part is red, the
Spirits are feeble; and strength cast down, as to their appetite, and rest,
they are indifferently well, they have neither Cough, nor much spitting, but
they daily (like those in Consumptions) grow lean, without any evident cause.
The fault for the most part is ascribed, to obstructions in some inward, (as
the liver, spleen, or mesentery) by whose default, the aliment is not well
Cooked, nor rightly dispensed. But it seems to me, that this sort of distemper,
is immediately founded in the evil disposition of the Blood, by which it is
inclined, into a too salt and sour temper, and therefore is rendered less apt
for nutrition, and an equal circulation. For the Blood in the Heart, just like
oil in a Lamp, if it redounds too much with saline Particles, is inkindled not
pleasantly, and equally, but with a noise, and great evaporation of the parts;
whereby indeed, it is sooner wasted, and exhibits but a languishing, and weak
flame. I opened one, sometime since dead of this Disease, in whom the Viscera
destinated to concoction, were well enough, but the Lungs were without
moisture, and dry, and beset throughout with a sandy matter like Chaulk. Also
oftentimes, in this Disease, the Mesentery is beset, the glandules being filled
with such a Chaulky matter: But whether the Blood being made more saltish, does
first bring in these kind of distempers of the Viscera, or whether the
Dyscrasie, or evil disposition of the Viscera, first brings it upon the Blood
is uncertain: it seems probable, that either distemper depends upon the other,
and that the causes of either evil are reciprocal.

But the Fever, which chiefly deserves to be called Symtomatic, is that which
is excited in Phthisical persons, from an Ulcer, or Consumption of the Lungs.
For the whole Blood, whilst it passes through the Lungs, in its circulation,
often impresses on this Inward, the ideas of very many Diseases; and on the
other side, receives the same from it, being evilly affected, whatsoever impure
thing is contained in the mass of the Blood, as the flowring of New Wine, is
cast forth by extremities of the Arteries; wherefore, when Nature being made
more weak, it cannot transfer its recrements into the superficies of the Body,
it deposes them, by a more near Purgation into the Lungs. From hence a
Cacochymia, or fullness of ill juices, and many Chronical Diseases, end in a
Consumption: in like manner, when the flesh of the Lungs wastes, or abounding
with an Ulcerous matter, becomes half putrid, the Blood passing through it, is
infected with the purulent matter, or tabid infection, and for that cause, is
stirred up into a continual Effervescency, by reason of the confusion of
something not miscible, and wherefore, it induces an assiduous Fever, and
wholly perverts the Alible Juice. The same reason is, of Fevers, form an
Ulcer, or Imposthume, oftentimes raised up in other parts: for these, even as
the tabid constitution of the Lungs, cause oftentimes a Consumption, and
Hectic Fever. The full consideration of these, are not for this place,
wherefore, we will return, whence we have digressed, to a Putrid Fever properly
called, or essential.

The Essential Putrid Synochus, is wont to be divided, into a Putrid (such as
is already described) into a Causon, or hot burning Fever; and besides into a
Quotidian, Tertian, and Quartan: The Putrid Synochus, but now delineated, ought
to be the rule or square of the rest, to whose type, most Fevers, which are of
this kind, are to be composed. As to the rest, but now mentioned, according as
they vary their kind, I shall briefly subjoyn.

The Causon, or Burning Fever, is that which performs its course, with a
greater heat, almost intolerable thirst, and other symptoms, arguing a greater
inflammation of the Blood: The formal reason of it, by which it is differenced
from the rest, consists in this; that the temper of the Blood is hotter, that
is, abounds more with fireable Sulphur; therefore, when it grows fervent, it is
inkindled in a greater plenty, and with its deflagration, diffuses the Effluvia
of a most intense heat, through the whole Body: its motion is acute, and
quickly comes to its standing, it is compassed about with more horrid symptoms,
has a difficult Crisis, and an even full of danger.

But as to what respects those periods, or fits, in which a Putrid Fever
sometimes is wont to be more cruel, at a set time; and (as if intermitting) now
every day, now every third, or fourth day, repeats as it were the Feverish
fit; the reason of this seems not easily to be explicated: especially, if we
reject from this cense, the fewer humors, to the spontaneous motion of which,
this distemper is commonly ascribed, concerning this matter, what seems most
likely to me, I shall doubtingly propose. In a continual Fever, there are two
chief things, (as we have already noted) which for the most part, induce the
Effervency of the Blood; to wit, the exaltation and inkindling of the
Sulphurous part of the Blood, then consequently, an heaping together of the
adust matter, and remaining after the burning of the Blood, to a swelling up:
upon the former the continuance of the fever, upon the other, its standing,
and critical perturbations, depend: to these some times, a certain third thing
happens, to wit, a fullness, and swelling up of the crude Juice, from the
Aliments newly taken; which in a continual Fever, (as in the fits of
Intermitting Fevers) induces a greater Effeervency, at set intervals of times.
But why this does not always happen, nor wholly after the same manner, the
reason is this: when the Putrid Synochus is very acute, and the whole Blood
almost is quickly inflamed, and highly rages, whatsoever of Nutritious Juice,
is poured to the Blood, is presently burnt, and consumed by the fire;
wherefore, little or nothing of it, is contained in the mass of Blood, of rthe
matter of a fit. But if this Fever be less acute, and the Blood only flames
forth moderately, and in parts, the supplement of the crude Juice, is not
wholly consumed, by the burning; but is perverted, by a more gentle fire, into
a Fermentative matter, which, when it arises in the Vessels to a fullness of
swelling up, conceives a Flux, and by its Effervency, makes stronger the
Feverish heat, before glowing in the Blood, as it were by the coming of new
fuel. The flowring of this matter does not seldom begin with a light
shivering, or cold, and sometimes end with sweat: but for the most part, it is
exhaled by insensible transpiration. In every fit, besides the provision of the
degenerate Nutritious Juice, something fro the adust, and burnt matter of the
Blood, evaporates; wherefore, the Crisis of the Disease, is drawn forth longer,
that it is hardly cured, under eleven or fourteen days; yea (for the most part)
in this sort of Fever, with fits and remissions coming between, the perfect
Cure of the Disease happens, scarcely within twenty days: and sometimes
leisurely, without any through Crisis, it remits, and then, by a long
declination, it is ended in Death, or Health.

But that this kind of remission, and acerbation or growing more violent, are
varied, according to the type of an Intermitting Fever, that they repeat their
turns now every day, now every other day, and sometimes not but within four
days, the reason of this is to be sought, from the Doctrine before delivered,
of Intermitting Fevers: to wit, that according as the Dyscrasie of the Blood,
diversely appears, the suppliment of the degenerate Nutritious Juice, arises to
the fullness of swelling up, either sooner or later; and for that reason, its
Effervency, causes now more frequent, now more rare fits in this Fever.

Concerning the Cure of Putrid Fevers, of every kind, there are four general
intentions, on which, the whole stress of the matter depends. First, that the
Blood, (if it may be done) may be defended from burning, and the flame, or fire
inkindled in its Sulphurous part, the wholly suppressed; which about the first
beginning of this Disease, happens to be often brought about. Secondly, that
when the Blood having taken fire, cannot be presently extinguished, that at
least it may perform its burning more mildly, and with lesser hurt. Thirdly,
the deflagration being ended, that the Liquor of the Blood, be freed from the
recrements of the adust and burnt matter, and afterward restored, to its
Natural temper and vigor. Fourthly, that the symptoms chiefly troubling may be
timely helped, the which, unless taken away, will frustrate the work both of
Nature and Medicine.

As to particular Remedies, with which these intentions may be served, there
are various prescriptions, and forms of Medicines, not only among Physicians,
but also among old women and Emperics, ordinarily in use: from which however,
like a Sword in a blind man's hand, used without difference, and exact method of
healing, more hurt than good, most often accrues to the sick. There will be no
need here to repeat the forms of Purges, Cordials, and of other Medicines,
eligantly enough delivered among many Authors: I will add in few words, some
chief indications, and Medical Cautions, which ought to be observed in the
course of this Fever, according to its various times, and diverse symptoms.

1. At the first beginning of this Disease, the business will be, that the
Fever may be presently suppressed; and the inflammation of the heated Sulphur,
may be inhibited: to which, the opening of a Vein does chiefly conduce; for by
this means, the Blood is eventilated, and the heated Particles, too much heaped
together, and almost ready to be fired, are dissipated one from another: as
when Hey, apt to burn, if exposed to the open Air, its firing is prevented.
Besides, let a slender diet be instituted, in which nothing Spirituous or
Sulphurous ought to be administered; The Viscera, and first passages should be
freed from the load of excrementitious matter; wherefore, Clysters are of
necessary use; sometimes also Vomits, and gentle Purges; by which, sometimes
timely and with judgment administered, the Fever presently after the beginning,
is extinguished, the Food of the fire being drawn away. If that notwithstanding
this method the burning spreads more abroad, and more and more, daily snatches
hold of the Sulphurous Particles of the Blood; it must be endeavored, (as
much as may be) that the deflagration proceed gently, without great tumult.

2, When the Fever is augmented, if the Blood be too hot, and distends the
Vessels very much, with a vehement and strong Pulse; if watchings, a Frenzy,
or a pain of the Head cruelly urge, the letting of Blood may be again repeated;
Transpiration (as much as may be) should be freely procured, wherefore, let the
sick keep in bed, for the most part; let the diet be sparing, of the most
slender Aliments, also drink small, and plentiful, that the burning Blood, may
be diluted with a more plentiful Serum: Clysters are administered safe enough,
and in truth commodiously; but Medicines, whether Cathartics, or Diaphoretics,
and which too much exagitate the Blood, are to be shunned, with the same
industry, as blasts of wind to burning houses: but rather Opiates, and Anodines
which fix and bind up the Blood, and Spirits, are to be made use of; also
Juleps, and Decoctions, which refrigerate the burning Viscera, attemper the
Blood, and cherish the Spirits, are often to be exhibited: acetous Liquors of
Vegetables, or Minerals, also putrified Nitre, because they restrain the rage
of the Blood, and extinguish Thirst, are truly convenient. Hot waters, and
Spirits, Cordial, and Bezoartic powders, (so long as the Disease is not
malignant) are not to be meddled with. If that the Blood be unequally
circulated, and is carried more toward the Head, than the Feet, Epithemas are
profitable, of the warm flesh, or Inwards of Animals, applied to the soles of
the Feet.

3. When the Fever is at its standing, the motion of Nature is diligently to
be attended, whether it will make a Crisis, or not; Wherefore, nothing rashly
is to be attempted by the Physician; the opening a Vein, or strong Purgation,
is wholly to be forbid; but after that the Feverish burning is somewhat
remitted, from the deflagration of the Blood, and signs of concoction appear in
the Urine, if that the motion of Nature be slow, a Sweat, or gentle Purge may
be admitted; which however are better, and safer done, by the Physician, when
Nature first, by a critical motion, has entered upon the seclusion of the
Morbific matter. If that all things are crude, and troubled, the Urine yet
turbid, without sediment, or separation of parts, if the strength be
languishing, the Pulse weak, if there be no Crisis going before, or only in
vain, any evacuation, either by Sweat or Purge, is not to be attempted, without
manifest danger of life: but it must be longer staid for, that the Spirits of
the Blood may recover themselves, may by some means overcome the
excrementitious and adust matter, and then by degrees may separate it, and put
it forth; in the mean time, the Spirits are to be cherished, with temperate
Cordials, the immoderate Effervency of the Blood (if it still be) is to be
stopped, and its due Fermentation sustained, which in truth is best performed,
by Corals, Pearls, and such kind of powders; which indeed are dissolved by the
Ferments of the Viscera, and then Ferment with the Blood, and greatly restore
its weak and wavering motion. In the mean time, (whilst Nature is laboring)
all obstacles, and impediments are to be removed, and especially the provision
of excrements, heaped up in the first passages, is to be brought away, by the
frequent use of Clysters.

4 By what way or method, the symptoms chiefly urging, ought to be handled,
will not be easily prescribed by certain Rules; because, they themselves
require sometimes to be presently appeased, and quieted, and sometimes to be
quickened forward: and what is something more, perhaps at another time, they are
to be left wholly to Nature. Some of these are too opposed, with gentle and
lenitive Remedies, but others with more sharp and irritative Physic: yet in the
mean time, it is a precept to be held in all, that you dilligently wait upon
the footsteps of Nature: which if it works wrongfully, its disorder is to be
reduced; if rightly, yet too vehemently, to be bridled: If she works rightly
yet too slowly, or more weakly than she should, the business will be, that her
endeavor may be incited, and helped, by the help of Medicine.

5. In the declination of the Fever, when after a perfect Crisis, Nature is
stronger than the Disease, the business goes well, nor is there much business
left for a Physician: It only remains, to propose an exact manner of diet, that
the sick may soon recover strength, without fear of relapsing: also it is
requisite, to exterminate the Relics of the Feverish matter, with a light
Purgation. About Diet, they often fall on the Rock of relapsing, viz. by the
too hasty eating of flesh meats, or more strong Food, the sick relapse into the
Fever: for when the Viscera are weak, and the Aliments (unless very slender)
not easily digested, and when also the disposition of the Blood, is weaker,
that it does not assimilate the more strong nourishing Juice; if any thing
improportionate is brought to either, the regiment of Nature is again
perverted, and all goes ill. Wherefore, those growing well, should for a long
time refrain from flesh, and when at length they use it, it should not be
unless the Urine shall be like that of healthful people, and no more troubled
by the cold: and then indeed it will be safest, to begin with broths made of
flesh, and then by degrees, to proceed to more strong Aliments.

6. When from an imperfect Crisis, things are grown doubtful, and remain yet
undetermined; then is the Physicians most difficult task: The motions and
strength of Nature are carefully to be waited on, whether it begins to prevail
on the Disease, or to yield to it: If signs of concoction appear, and that
there is strength, a gentle evacuation, and only by leisure, is to be
celebrated. In the mean time, the symptoms most urging, are to be succored,
with convenient Remedies, all impediments to be taken away, and strength is to
be sustained (as much as may be) with Cordials, and a right manner of living or
diet.

7. When from an evil, or no Crisis, all things turn to the worse, and when the
Physician almost dispaires of Curing the Disease, he may predict its event
suspected, and much to be feared, But yet, he ought not to trust to a naked
Prognostication, to hinder all things else, but that as yet, what is in the
Medical Art, should be consulted for Health, tho desperate: Remedies may be
administered, to the symptoms most infesting; the Spirits of the Blood almost
extinct, may be restored by Cordials. When we despond of Health, life should be
prolonged as long as it may, and at least a fair exit procured.

According to the various types but now described, of a Putrid Fever, I might
readily add very many Histories of sick people, and particular observations,
made about their Cure; for these kind of examples are usually met with in our
daily practice, so that they are sufficient to fill a great Volumn; out of
these however, with the good leave of the honest Reader, I will briefly propose
some few, respecting the several kinds of the aforesaid Fever, by which their
Doctrine, and Method of healing them, above delivered, may be illustrated.

A Noble Matron, about fifty years of Age, of a slender habit of Body, little
stature, endued with a ruddy Complexion, when on the fifteenth day of June, by
reason of the Summers heat, she had put on more thin Garments, than she was
wont, felt herself ill in the Evening; from thence she was distempered with a
nauseousness, and oppression of her Stomach, she felt wandering pains, troulbing
her now in her shoulders, now in her back, very thirsty, yet without any
immoderate heat: on the second, and third day, almost after the same manner, on
the fourth day after a Vomit, Viz. of the infusion of Crocus Metallorum one
Ounce given, she cast forth yellow bile four times, and had three Stools, and
seemed to be eased: the night following, she slept something better: but on the
next day, the Fever being thoroughly inkindled, she complained of thirst, a
burning of the Praecordia, and of a pain, now in her side, now in her back;
presently blood was taken to eight Ounces, her Urine was of a very deep red,
thick, and troubled without any Hypostasis, or settling of the Contents, her
Pulse unequal, and often intermitting, the following night without sleep: on
the sixth day of the Disease, early in the Morning, a small Sweat broke forth,
from whence the heat something abated, which in the Evening again grew stronger:
on the seventh day, a very acute heat, with thirst, burning, an inordinate and
intermitting Pulse, as also with a mighty restlessness, and tossing of the
whole Body troubled her, on the eighth the symptoms were somewhat more remiss,
also in the Urine, some marks of an Hypostasis; she took that day posset drink,
with Meadow-sweet boiled in it, and sweated plentifully; and was cured of her
Fever. All the time of her sickness, for Food they gave only small Beer, Posset
drink, Barley broth, or Grewel, also frequently Clysters; Drink, and a cooling
Julep, they gave her at her pleasure.

This Noble Lady, through transpiration being hindered, fell into a Putrid
Synochus: the Effluvia, wont to be evaporated through the skin, being retained
within, (together with the Choler flowing out of the Choleric Vessels) and
fixed to the Viscera, did overthrow the dispositions of their parts, and
especially gave trouble to the Stomach, and raised up pains and Convulsions, in
the parts filled with Muscles and Membranes: the Pulse was unequal, and
intermitting, not because of the malignity of the Disease, as in the Plague,
but by reason a certain proper disposition of the Heart, by which indeed, its
ferment being not well constituted, the Blood growing fervent is not presently
equally inkindled, and wholly leaps forth, but a part of the Blood, in flowing
in a small, then a greater, and after some turns the graatest proportion,
stoping for a moment of time, in the Bosoms of the Heart, produces the unequal
and intermitting Pulse. I have known in many others, clearly, the like
distemper of the Pulse: to wit, so long as they were free from intemperance,
the Pulse was altogether equal, and orderly, but if they were more strongly
heated than usually, by any sudden passion of the mind, or too great agitation
of the Body, presently they were affected with an unequal Pulse, and between
the vibrations or strikings, intermitting perhaps 4, 7, 10, or 20. and as often
as they fell into a Fever, the Pulse showed it self after this irregular
manner. When this habitual irregularity, concerning the Pulse, was not yet made
known to me, by frequent experience, I was wont to suspect still a malignity in
the Disease, and to foretell a fatal event, which happened otherwise.

On the fifth day, in this sick person, the Fever, although slowly inkindled,
came to an augmentation, and from thence past through the rest of the stations
with a swift motion: on the sixth a light emptying of the adust matter, arising
to a fullness, a sweat being risen, and so a certain remission of the Feverish
heat followed: on the seventh day, this adust matter arising to its height of
increase, made the standing of the Disease, to which, at length on the eighth
day, a plentiful sweat, with all things requisite to a good Crisis, followed,
and perfectly Cured the Fever: because (as it ought to be: those three things
went before this criticial evacuation, viz. first a full and sufficient
deflagration of the Blood, as appeared by the very strong heat, and plainly
fiery, continued for three days before: also secondly, a congestion of the
adult matter to a plenitude, as was collected by the high disquiet, and tossing
about the preceding and then a certain Pepasmus or Concoction of the same
matter, and a begun secretion in the Blood. which a ceasing of the symptoms and
signs of Concoction in the Urine, showed: wherefore, the Copious sweat, coming
upon so laudable a sign, so long as there was no suspicion of malignity,
portended nothing but good.

About the beginning of the year 1656, a Gentleman endued with all active habit
of Body, without any manifest cause, (unless that being much addicted to study,
he used no exercise after it) became ill; at first he complained, of a
nauseousness and want of Appetite, with a great Headache: on the second day, he
was affected, now with a shivering, now with heat, several times reciprocating,
besides, with thirst, and burning of the Praecordia, with a scurfieness of the
Tongue, and an ungrateful savor. On that day, he took ten drams of an Emetick
Liquor, by which he Vomited seven times, and cast up a great quantity of yellow
bile, and had four Stools; the night following he was unquiet, and almost
wholly without sleep, and in which the sick person grew more Feverish, with an
increased heat: on the third day, when the aforesaid symptoms were grown worse,
he was let Blood to ten Ounces: his Urine was red, thick, and with a copious
sediment; his Pulse quick, and vehement; at night he sweat a little, with a
sort sleep, but disturbed: on the following morning, he seemed to be a little
eased: yet in the evening all things grew worse, with most strong wakings,
heat, and thirst: on the fifth day, by a lightsweat, the heat somewhat remitted,
which yet a little before the evening, returned with its wonted fierceness, The
night again was wholly without sleep, with a continual tossing up and down of
his Body: In the morning, by a little gentle sweating, he felt a little ease;
in the evening an increase again of all things more cruelly; the night also was
very unquiet: about the beginning of the next day, a sweat, as before
succeeded, and a little more plentifully: on this day was a manifest change
toward health; the heat and thirst was a little less vehement; his Urine was
less red, with some Hypostasis; thence, for three days, the Fever leisurly
declined; yet every night he had a certain fit, but more remiss than before on
the eleventh day, he sweated more plentifully, and was perfectly Cured: all the
time of his sickness, he used a most spare diet, taking truly nothing of
Aliment, besides small Beer, and Posset drink made of it; he sometimes took
drink, and cooling Juleps, of boiled Barley, and distilled waters; daily, if his
Belly was not loose of it self, an emollient Clyster was administered: he used
no other Physic besides, to wit, neither Purge nor Cordial. But the Fever
being allayed, he was twice Purged, and from thence quickly grew well.

This Fever was a Putrid Synochus, as may be conjectured by the shivering
about the beginning, and then with continual heat, thirst, watchings, and other
symptoms grieviously infesting, for many days: but forasmuch, as its
intemperature was exasperated every night, it might be called a continued
Quotidian: This Disease, made its first assault without any evident cause,
because the Blood being little ventilated, like Wine growing hot of it self,
had conceived an ardour, from the exalted Sulphur; the Choler flowing forth
from the Choleduct Vessels, and likewise the Purgings of the raging Blood,
being poured about inwardly, (as it is wont to do for the most part in Fevers)
presently stirred up troubles, and disorders in the first passages: therefore
by reason of the excrementitious matter there heaped up, there was procured a
depletion, and soon after the beginning, a Vomiting: notwithstanding which
evacuation, and likewise a more strong Purging of the Belly by Stool, if
administered, the Fever being wholly inkindled, because they too much agitate
the Blood, and disturb greatly the Concoction of the adust Feverish matter,
for that reason bring more damage for the most part than benefit to the sick:
The first station of this Disease, viz, until the whole Blood was fired, was
extended to the third day; and then from thence, when the Blood flaming forth
was burdened with adust recrements, its greater ebullition, with a frequent
endeavor of expulsion by sweat followed: on the seventh day, when the Blood
for the greatest part had flamed forth, and the adust recrements, heaped up in
its bosom to a fullness of swelling up, began to be troublesome, the critical
motion was stirred up: by which nevertheless, that matter not being as yet
wholly subdued, nor ready for separation, the Disease was not perfectly Cured;
but after another period, the same increasing, at last being stirred up, on the
eleventh day, brought on that other, and perfectly Curing swelling up: in the
days between, because, besides the recrements remaining after the deflagration
of the Blood, and reserved for a Crisis, also from the Nutritious Juice not
presently taking fire, but after a peculiar manner depraved, other matter in
the bosom of the Blood, apt to a swelling up, was gathered together; therefore,
from the continual increase, and Flux of this, there happened to this Fever
continual fits, (such as are wont in Intermitting Fevers) on set days, and
hours.

A studious young man, about twenty five years of Age, of a dark Countenance,
and Melancholic temper, without any manifest occasion, began to be sick, in the
Year 1656. At first he complained of a Feverish distemper with thirst, a
spontaneous weariness, and want of Appetite: moreover, on the second day, of a
pain in his right side, and a distention of either Hypochondrium, also, with
almost continual Vomiting, waking, and very great pain of the Head; a Physician
being sent for, he was presently let Blood to twelve Ounces. In the evening he
grew more hot, and was light headed, afterward, a sweat, tho small succeeding,
he was better the next morning: on the fourth day again, he cast up whatever he
took presently, also he was troubled with an almost continual endeavor of
Vomiting. The exhibition of a Vomitory Medicine, proposed by the Physician,
both the sick person, and also his Friends, taught by the danger of it before,
rejected. From a Clyster given him he had six Stools, and seemed to be a little
alleviated; also the night following he slept somewhat: on the fifth day he
again fell into frequent Vomiting, with intolerable thirst: he burnt inwardly,
but outwardly could not be felt any immoderate heat; because the recrements of
the effervent Blood, which ought to exhale through the skin, seemed to stagnate
within, and to flow forth into the Viscera. Therefore in the evening, this
Bolus was given him, to provoke sweat. Of Conserves of Roses Vitriolate one
Dram, of Gascons powder one Scruple, of Laudanum soluted in Balm water one
Grain: that night he slept moderately, and by a copious sweat following, the
symptoms seemed to be mitigated: Nevertheless on the sixth day, all things
again were imbittered, and a through heat, thirst, and burning of the
Praecordia, cruelly tormented him: on the seventh and eighth day the Pulse was
unequal, and disordered, for the most part he talked idly, and if moved in his
bed, fell often into a swound. On the ninth day, the same symptoms stopped,
also he was troubled with a contraction of the tendons in his wrists, and
Convulsive motions of other parts, that we almost despaired of life. Because
that morning Nature seemed to be given over as conquered, she was now to be
succored, with what ever remained of Art. Wherefore, intending a more copious
sweat, as the last refuge, I gave him a Dram of Spirit of Hartshorn, at one
time, in a small draught of Cordial Julep; upon which, being for four hours
very unquiet and furious, he could scarce be held in his Bed; but afterward
sleep creeping upon him, he sweat very much, and the business suddenly came to
be out of all danger. On the following night, for the continuing of the sweat,
I ordered to be given him, every six hours, a dose of the powder of
Contrayerva; the Fever, and the Distempers of the Nerves, shortly ceased, and
the sick person became well.

This Fever, as to the manner of its figure, may be called a Putrid Synochus;
which, in this sick person, from the Blood being made hot of its own accord,
like Hay heating, and so conceiving an immoderate fermentation, took its
original: by reason of the Melancholic temper of the Blood, the heat was less
strong, although the symptoms were otherwise worse, and happened to be chiefly
inimical to the Nervous stock: for the Blood burning forth, as fire in a
Furnace, covered with chips, glowed with a most intestine burning: therefore,
the sick complained of the heat of the Praecordia, with an intolerable thirst,
when in the mean time, the exterior parts were but little heated: for this
reason, and because the Body was less perspirable, the adust recrements of the
Blood being about to make a Crisis, and which were wont to be dispersed
outwardly, at set times, being suffused inwardly, (Nature being very much
oppressed, and perpetually provoked) brought on cruel, and almost continual
Vomitings; wherefore, when the Feverish matter was derived to the first
passages, by so frequent an endeavor of its expulsion, before the fullness, or
concoction, no Crisis followed thereupon. Nor was the sick man the better for
that irregular evacuation, yea, the Blood being still made worse in its
mixture, began to be corrupted in it self, and wholly to pervert the Nervous
Liquor; from whence, besides the assiduous Vomitings, frequent Swoonings,
inequal Pulse, also Deliriums, and Convulsive motions did arise; but forasmuch,
as the mixtion of either humor, and disposition, being not yet wholly loosned,
or overturned, the Diaphoretic was administered, which by reason of its great
agility, quickly past through both the Blood, and the Nervous Liquor, and a
lively, and hasty Fermentation being raised up anew, carried forth of doors
their impurities, and extraneous mixtures; the state of the Disease tending
toward Death, was reduced to Health, and by this means, instead of a Natural
Crisis, by the help of a supplying Medicine, the sick man, as it were recalled
from the dead, quickly recovered Health.

A woman, being about thirty years old, of a strong Body, and Melancholic
temper, (as might be gathered by her very austere manners) in the third month
after her lying in, got cold in giving her child suck, and uncovering herself,
and upon it fell presenly into a shivering: To this, a heat more increased than
usual, followed, which afterward, (a light sweat arising) quickly remitted. On
the second and third day, she was very thirsty, and without Appetite to Food,
yet without immoderate heat, that she could scarce believe herself in a Fever:
she lay quiet every night, but wholly without sleep; her Urine was highly red,
and with the multitude of Contents, thick, and cloudy, which however not
troubled by the cold, remained still after the same manner, without Hypostasis,
or sinking down of the parts. On the fourth day, the heat was inkindled
throughout the whole, wherefore, a Physician being then first sent for, about
twelve Ounces of Blood was taken from her Arm; after the letting of Blood, and
her Belly the same day copiously emptied, by a Clyster, in the evening she fell
into a sweat, by which nevertheless she was nothing eased, and (tho an Anodine
Medicine was given her) she wore out the whole night, (as before) without
sleep. On the fifth day, from a Clyster being given, she had three Stools, and
felt some ease: her Urine still remained red and troulbed: when Blood was
prescribed to be taken from her Ham, the sick obstinately refused, esteeming
herself to grow well; on the following night, when she had lain long without
sleep, and unquiet, she at length was troubled with a fit, such as is commonly
called Hysterical, after a grievous manner; and at first, with a certain
numness, or sense of pricking, possessing the extreme parts of her Body
(especially her Feet, Thighs, and Legs) she was affected; and together with a
wind, cruelly distending the Intestines, Ventricle, and Hypochondria: she felt
in the bottom of her Belly, as it were a certain bulk to creep upwards; which
when it had ascended to the Heart, and thence to the Brain, the sick woman
presently was weakened in her Intellectuals, and all the night lay talking
extravagantly and idly. On the sixth day, after her Belly was taken down by a
Clyster, she returned to her self, and remained in her right mind, and seemed
to be indifferently well. But in the Evening when she was moved in her bed, she
began to feel the same kind of fit as before, to wit, she had a sense of
pricking, as if stung with nettles, in all her body, together as it were a
round thing rouling about in her belly, which creeping upwards, distended the
Intestines and Ventricle, that she emitted by means of it blasts, and
belchings: for ease sake, she required a draught of cold water. Moreover, the
Remedies usual in hysterical distempers, as Castor, the smell of Asafaetida,
the fume of burnt feathers, ligatures, and frictions of the Legs, and the like
were administered, by the use of which, she seemed for the present, free from
the aforesaid distemper, and was wholly without it for four hours: but when she
lay upon her back in her bed, as she had settled her self to sleep, on a sudden
she complained that the same Symptoms, did at once run through her whole Body,
and by and by, she fell upon it into a delirium; houling and crying out, she
talked idely the whole night; the day following, her eyes being open, she lay
without speech or motion: again in the Evening, when her Fever being
increased, she grew furious, that she could scarce be held in her bed: and so
she remained for three days, now delirious crying out, and wailing, now as it
were stupid without motion, or voice; yet still she was tormented with
Convulsive motions, about the tendons of the muscles: on the tenth day, she
drew her breath deep, and difficultly, with a weak, and as it were a creeping
pulse, and about the middle of the night died.

This Fever was of the rank of the Putrid Fevers, which nevertheless, by
reason of the melancholic disposition of the Blood, (as we before intimated)
was not very grievous, with heat or burning; but yet being very much infestous
to the Brain, and nervous stock, was more difficult to be cured: The Blood
being predisposed to a growing bot, easily contracted the distemper by taking
cold, but yet, from the salt, and earthy seculencies, together with the Sulphur
being moved, it was not openly inflamed; nevertheless, burning with an
intestine, and as it were shut up fire, it was more notably depraved: Hence,
presently from the beginning, the Urine was highly red, and troubled, also she
continued wholly without sleep: on the fifth day, the Blood burning forth, and
being filled with the recrements, or adust matter, was irritated by its
plenitude to an endeavor of excretion; wherefore, this night, a swelling up
being arisen, it transferred its load, not dispersable by sweat, into the head,
and there affixed it to the Brain, and nervous stock: From thence, presently,
the wonted irradiation of the animal Spirits, being disturbed in the fountain
it self, their inordinations first happened to be felt, in the extreme parts;
wherefore, there was a pricking in the whole Body, the Belly inflated, the
hypochondria distended, and as it were a certain substance or live thing,
ascending upwards, and successively running through the Belly, precordia, and
at length the head: For these kind of Symtpoms, arise not (as it is commonly
believed) always from vapors, lifted up from the Womb, and striving or
thrusting upwards; but, not seldom, from the Brain, and the beginning of the
nerves being distempered: for, when the evil is there inflicted, that the
animal Spirits nigh their origin, are disturbed in their motion, neither (as
before) blow up, and distend the nervous Bodies, presently the other Spirits,
implanted in the extremities of the nerves, being deprived of their wonted
influence, begin to tumultuate, and being moved inordinatly, and toward their
beginnings, cause Convulsions in those parts in which they dwell. This
irregular, and Convulsive motion, begun in the extremities, by the continued
passage of the Spirits, and of the nervous parts, creeps by and by into other
parts, and then to others, still to those nearer to the Brain, till at length,
(the whole series of Spirits, like Soldiers being carried successively
backwards) the Convulsions are continued, into the fountain it self of motion;
So as in truth, by this means, the Convulsive motions, are sometimes begun, a
most long way, from the cause, or place of the distemper, as by this only
argument plainly appears: to wit, as often as the influx of the animal Spirits,
is inhibited in the leg, or arms, by a strict ligature, or by leaning hard on
them, a fense of pricking, or a cramp, with a numness, is felt, first in the
foot or hand, which afterward successively ascends toward the affected part:
wherefore, in this sick woman, by reason of the Feverish matter, (to wit, the
adust recrements) fixed on the Brain, by a critical translation from the bosom
of the Blood; and there besetting the beginnings of the nerves, those Symptoms,
imitating the histerical distemper were stirred up: by reason of the nerves,
(which are dispersed through the whole Body, by means of the spinal marrow)
being distempered near their original, the fense of pricking begun in the
extreme parts, by and by is perceived in the whole. By reason of a like hurt,
of the sixth pare in the fountain, Convulsions and distentions arise, first in
its little branches, most thickly set about the Abdomen: That ascent, as it
were of a certain substance, was only a tumefaction of the Viscera, and
muscles, successively inflated or blown up, by the Convulsion; from thence, the
same distemper (by the mediation or coming between of the branch of the same
sixth pare) creeping along more upward, and still more near the Brain, the
precordia, and then the head it self, (as by a certain vapor raised up from
beneath) seemed to be taken; on the next day, when this Feverish matter, at
first lightly fixed in the Brain, was at length again amended by the Blood, the
aforesaid Symptoms ceased for a time: Then soon after (the Blood again flowing,
and deposing its recrements again in the Brain) the same kind of distemper as
before, this sick woman felt to come upon her; which however, with rubbings,
the smell of stinking things, and other Remedies used in the histerical
passion, was retarded for four hours, from its assault; to wit, forasmuch as
the animal Spirits, being tired out by the external object, and irritated into
a violent motion, were hindered, that they could not so suddenly conceive
Convulsive motions: but afterward, when that incitation of the Spirits,
outwardly exhibited, did cease, the morbific cause still troubling, those
Spirits being grievously beset, not successively (as before) beginning at the
extremities, but on a sudden, all, both in the Brain, and the nervous appendix,
were at once acted into Confusion. The Crisis being after this manner
attempted, viz. By the translation of the Feverish matter to the Brain, the
event of the Disease, both in this sick woman, and also in others, whose
sicknesses I have diligently observed, for the most part has a mortal success.
For the Blood, unless extremely depraved, and hindered, scarce ever endeavors to
purify it self, by such a Crisis: and as often as it endeavors an excretion by
this means, it inflicts on the Brain, and nervous stock, an evil, not quickly,
nor easily to be blotted out: also, the mass it self of the Blood, very rarely,
by the motion of such a flowring, is rendered free, from the impure mixture of
the Feverish matter.

A learned young man, of a lean habit, and pale countenance, in the coming in
of the Spring, being conscious of no error as to his diet, began to complain of
a weariness, and impotency in walking, also of a drowsiness, and sleepiness of
his head: on the second day also, he was tormented with thirst, want of
appetite, and an heat of his precordia: on the third day, the Physician being
sent for, he took a Vomit, by which, when he had Vomited three times, and cast
downwards five times, choleric and hot matter, he became somewhat chearfuller,
and the night following slept indifferently well: on the fourth day, he bled a
small quantity; then his thirst, and heat very much increased: his Urine was
red, with a copious sediment, and a little hypostasis. But because, after the
signs of concoction in the Urine, the endeavor of Nature, as it were
oppressed, appeared for separation, without sufficient evacuation, therefore he
was let Blood to seven ounces, and he seemed thereby to be very much eased, yet
in the evening, all things grew worse, and then for three days, the Fever
seemed still to be increased: on the seventh day, he complained of a great
heaviness in his head, and of a darkness, turning about in his eyes: after
noon, an hemorrhage or bleeding copiously followed, that for the great loss of
Blood; the sick person had almost lost all his strength, and there was a very
great necessity of medicinal help to stop the Blood: For this end, when a vein
in his Arm was opened, Ligatures, and proper medicines were applied, both to
his head and belly, and very many other Remedies (the occasion of hasty curing
urging) prescribed by every body, were tried in vain; at length, by the
persuasion of a woman, coming there by chance, a red hot Iron was held to his
bleeding nose, and on a sudden, from the vapor of the burnt Blood, received
into the nostrils, its Flux was stayed; this Remedy, I afterward knew used to
many, with very good success. This great hemorrhage cured the continual Fever,
to which nevertheless, an intermitting quotidian followed, which afterward was
quickly cured, by the method of curing already delivered.

This Fever, beginning without any manifest occasion, and continued for many
days with thirst, and heat, may be called a Putrid Synochus; which yet without
any horrid Symptom, about the beginning or standing, was cured by an easy
course, tho at length by a dangerous, and difficult Crisis: The turgescency of
the Blood in the Spring time, and together the defect of ventilation in the
same, gave the beginning to this: The Blood burning out, with a Feverish fire,
about the fourth day, had heaped up something of adust matter; that flowring it
attempted a critical motion, tho with a small hemorrhage: The defect of a more
full evacuation, the opening of the vein supplied for a time, afterward, the
adust recrements being heaped together, in great plenty, the same being not apt
to be dissipated by sweat, in a body not rightly perspirable, at the time
nature was about to endeavor a Crisis, a mighty bleeding followed. For when
the Blood, by reason of the seclusion of the Feverish matter, is agitated with
a critical motion, very many of its particles are loosned from the mixture, so
that a greater swelling up being provoked, they carry forth every extraneous
thing confused with them: if at this time the breathing places of the skin, be
but little open, the mass of the Blood (as new Wine stopped up in a bottle of
a small mouth) even more notably grows turgid, and because it cannot shake off
the Feverish matter, by sweat, it carries it self forth of doors, together
with it, any way it can find; wherefore, when there lies a most easy passage,
for the boiling Blood, through the vessels opening into apertures of the
nostrils, from that Port (like the same new Wine when the vessel is opened)
being enlarged by a spumous refraction, it abundantly leaps forth. The
continual Fever being cured, by this means, an intermitting Quoridian
followed, because after a long deflagration of the Blood, and great loss of it,
what Blood was remaining, being very much deprived of Spirit, and the Salt,
with the left Sulphur being thoroughly roasted, easily contracted that kind of
disposition, whereby it was apt, not rightly to concoct the alible juice, but
to pervert it into a matter very fermentative.

A Matron, about sixty years of age, when she had sat up a certain night, going
to bed in sheets not thoroughly dry, began to be ill, at first she was troubled
with a suffocating Catarrh, that by reason of the serous deluge, falling on the
sarynx, she could hardly breath; neither could she sleep; the next day with a
nauseousness, and want of Appetite, with some little excess of thirst and heat:
on the third day, an acute pain invaded her in her side, with a Cough, and the
Fever increased: her Urine was red, and clear, with a laudable Hypostasis, an
unequal, and an intermitting pulse. A Physician being sent for, she was let
Blood to ten ounces, also that day, her belly was copiously loosned by a
Clyster: About night the pain vanished, and she slept indifferently: her Urine
was then red, troubled, and full of contents: on the fourth day, the Fever was
somewhat increased: In the evening troubled with a Cough very much, and by and
by following thereupon the acute pain (as before) in the same side; her Urine
being again clear, with an hypostasis: Her pain, from her being let Blood again
ceased; on the fifth day, the Fever was more remiss, but at night she was
unquiet with heat, and a tossing up and down of her body, but without pain. The
next morning she sweated plentifully, and was eased; then using still a slender
diet for some days, and being once purged, she grew well without relapsing. It
is worth observation, that whilst the pain troubled her, the Urine was clear,
and with an hypostasis, nor troubled by the cold; which however, the same being
allayed, became presently thick, more red, and filled with contents.

This Disease, because of the acute pain in the side, as it were a P^thognomic
sign, might be called a Plurisie: but we have here a Fever, preceding the
pain, and not the product of it; The evident cause of the sickness was
Transpiration being hindered by the constriction of the pores; The Blood growing
hot, by reason of the Effluvia being retained, and also too much abounding with
a serous latex, as it were vomiting very much of it, from the Arteries
terminating in the Larynx, caused the sense of the suffocating Catarrh: For
this kind of distemper (as also the Cough with great spitting) arises not, for
that the watery humor (as is commonly said) falls from the head, into the
throat, and lungs; but because the serous Latex is poured forth, now from the
pneumonic vessels, immediately into the lungs, now dropping forth from the
Arteries opening into the larynx, falls down on the breast; on the third day,
from the same serous humor, with a portion of the Blood, being fixed in the
side, the acute pain arose; for the Blood beginning to grow fervent, when as
yet it did contain in it self a crude matter, and (as it should seem) something
sour, from the degenerate alible juice, deposed the same, (because it could not
cast it forth of doors by sweat) by a proper lustration or purging through the
intercostal Arteries, into the membrane surrounding the Ribs; and there (as it
is always wont in a Plurisie) either by coagulation, (which may be lawfully
suspected) or by the shutting up of the vessels, the Blood being entangled with
the same matter, is stopped in its motion; then being increased in its bulk, by
a new coming still of the Blood, it causes a break of the union, and so an
acute pain. That in this sick woman, the same kind of matter, disturbing the
mass of Blood, with a portion of it extravasated, was fixed about the Pleura,
it from thence happened, because the pain urging, the urine was clear, and not
full of contents: then, when the vessels, by reason of Phlebotomie, being
emptied, they supped up again that matter, into its mass, before exterminated
from the Blood, the urine presently became troubled, and again big with
contents: The pulse was unequal, and intermitting, because of the idiocrasie or
proper disposition, which she was wont to have in every intemperature: for when
I. cured this woman of a Fever, many years before, her pulse being unequal,
and intermitting, had struck a fear in me, and others, of a sad presage,
concerning the event of the disease, which however at that time, (as also in
this sickness) ceased, prosperously, without any horrid Symptom.

A strong young man, and corpulent, after immoderate exercise, about the Summer
solstice, and then a sudden cold coming upon the heat, found himself ill: At
first, a want of Appetite, nauseousness, and cruel pain of the head, as also
thirst, and a more intense heat than usual troubled him; on the second day, an
acute pain invaded him in his right side with a Cough, and difficult breathing;
Blood being presently taken plentifully from the Arm of the same side, that
pain remitted somewhat, which yet in the evening returned, being made more cruel
by a Cough, and bloody spittle. The night followed, without sleep, and very
unquiet: on the third day, he was again let blood, besides Liniments, and
fomentations were applied to his side; Moreover pouders, Juleps, and
antipleuretick decoctions, being taken inwardly, about night the pain almost
wholly ceased. Then by and by, he was afflicted with a cruel headache, and a
vertigo: on the fourth day, a stream of Blood fell from his right nostril,
about two ounces, by which the pain of his head clearly ceased, and the
vertigo; but in the Evening, the pain in the side before distempered, returned
with greater fierceness: In the mean time his Pulse was small, and weak, that
when it was consulted upon, for the letting him blood again, 'twas thought
dangerous, lest his dejected strength would not admit of such a remedy:
wherefore, Phlebotomie was performed only, in a very small quantity, and a
fomentation, and a Cataplasme was prescribed to be diligently applied to his
side; besides twenty drops of the spirit of Hartshorn, to be taken in a
spoonful of Cordial Julep, and the same to be repeated continually, within the
space of six hours: He sweat that night very much, and the pain much remitted,
his spitting was but little, interspersed with Blood, which, within a day
wholly ceased, and the pain also leisurely vanished. The sick man took twice a
day, a scruple of the same spirit of Hartshorn, and within a few days, he grew
perfectly well, without relapsing.

This Fever was a simple Synochus, stirred up from the evident cause, viz. a
Constriction of the pores: as soon as the Blood began to be somewhat filled with
adust recrements, and so to swell up more, the matter, which should have been
separated, by reason of its peculiar evil, was transferred into the Pleura, and
being there fixed, compelled the Blood coming to it, to be coagulated, and
therefore to be stopped in its circulation, and (when it could not be received
by the veins) presently to be extravasated: from hence happened the acute pain in
the side, and bloody spittle, by and by, after the beginning of this Disease;
then afterward, the same matter being thrust out of that nest, which it had
got, and being supped up again into the mass of Blood, was fixed in the head;
and there inducing the like stagnation of the Blood, and (as it is probable)
coagulation, caused the vertigo, and cruel pain; which nevertheless was quickly
cured, by the hemorrhage being arisen, by reason of the extravasated Blood. A
part of the morbific matter, being after this manner drawn away, the other part
resumed by the Blood, was again conveyed to its usual nest, to wit, the side
before distempered; where depositing its latex, (to wit, a portion of the
Blood) it did coagulte it again, and compelled it to be extravasated or to flow
out of the vessels: For that pain being renewed on the fourth day, with the
bloody spittle, from the ebullition of the Blood, too extremely, and therefore
flowing out of the vessels, would not be brought away; because at that time,
the Pulse was small and weak, with a falling down of the vessels, that indeed
the Blood was thought to have been run all out of the vessels, for that being
coagulated by the morbific matter, (and therefore tho expulsed the Arteries,
yet not being able to be carried back by the veins) it was stopped in its
circulation. Upon this, an acute pain followed, because the Blood being heaped
together by its frequent approach, and elevated into a Tumor, made a
dissolution of the union; also, by and by from the beginning, a bloody spittle
came upon it, because the Blood being restrained within, in the Body, somwhere
in its motion, by reason of the most tender, and easily opening little mouths
of the vessels, ran forth into the Cavities; when to the same outwardly
extravasated, by reason of a more thick skin, and the mouths of the little
vessels being locked up, no way lay open, unless by its being made and ripened
into an Imposthume. The opening of a vein profited in the beginning of the
Pleurisy, because it restrained the Blood, somwhere hindered in its circuit,
from too great effervency; but especially, for that, when the vessels were by
that means greatly emptied, they did again receive, and render fluent,
whatsoever humors were before exterminated, and also the Blood beginning to
stagnate in the distempered part. Also, the remedies helping most, about the
beginning of this Disease, were of that sort, which hinder the coagulation of
the Blood, or dissolve it in the coagulating; such they are, which abound very
much with a volatile, or an alchalisate Salt: to wit, spirit of Soot, of Blood,
Hartshorn, also spirit and salt of Urine, the powder of the claws and eyes of
Crabs, of a Boars tooth, or the Jaw of a Pike, are of known use. Among the
common people, it is a custom to drink an infusion of Horse dung; which
medicine indeed, I have known often to have brought help, in deplorable cases.
In the mean time, all acid things whatsoever, because they more coagulate the
Blood, and hinder expectoration, are highly hurtful in this Disease.

CHAP. XII. Of a malignant or pestilential Fever in general.
BEsides the continual Fever, which is already described, and which arises
from some principle of the Blood being too much carried forth, there is another
species of this, which is stirred up, by reason of the Blood being touched with
some invenomed Infection, and therefore liable to enter into various
coagulations, and corruptions: In which, not only the Spirit and the Sulphur,
as in a Putrid Fever, rage, and compel the Blood to grow immoderately hot, but
besides, the mixture of the Blood is presently dissolved, and its liquor goes
into parts; and so most horrid Symptoms, with manifest danger of life, are
induced in this sort of distemper. Under this rank, we comprehend malignant,
and pestilential Fevers, the Plague, small Pox, and Measles: of which we shall
speak presently.

Pestilential Diseases, wander so in the dark, and have an unknown original,
that their causes, and beings are seldom explicated, without having a recourse
to occult qualities. By the unanimous consent of all, the strength, and power
of these are placed in an invenomed matter; because we perceive, from a
pestilent distemper, strength suddenly to be overthrown, and life quickly
destroyed, no otherwise than from the drinking of Poison. And therefore, for
the explicating the nature of the pestilence, it will not be besides the
matter, first, to inquire concerning Poison in general, and by what means it
distempers our Bodies, then to show what sort of Poison is sprinkled in the
Plague, and contagious Diseases: which being performed, we will treat
particularly of the Diseases but now recited.

Every thing deserves the name of Poison, which striking into our Body, after
an occult manner vehemently hurts the temper, and actions of any part, or of
the whole, profligates the Spirits, or perverts their motions, solves the
mixtures of the Liquors, and induces Coagulations and Corruptions, destroys the
functions and ferments of the Viscera, and so suddenly and hiddenly brings life
into danger. of these, which after this manner lie in wait for us, there is a
mighty plenty, and very rich provision in the nature of things: oftentimes they
are inly begotten within our body; outwardly they are abundantly supplied from
every Coast, and out of every tract of Earth, water and air, these daily arise
out of the distinct families of minerals, vegetables, and Animals, and so
mingle themselves with our food, yea with our medicine, that we may complain
with Pliny, quod non sit fateri, an rerum natura largius mala, an remedia
genuerit. That it was not known, whether Nature had begot greater Evils, or
Remedies.

As there is great varieties of Poisons, so, as to their Subjects, and ways of
hurting, there is no less diversity of them: for the most Poisons, in their
whole substance are said to be contrary to us, that whatsoever they come to,
with a burning force, and like fierce fire, they reduce into ashes, yet out of
these, some being noted for a peculiar raising of hurt, do more endammage one
part or substance than another. The subjects, on which the taint of Poison, is
next and more immediately inflicted, are twofold; to wit, the animal Spirits, or
the spirituous subtle Liquor flowing in the Brain, and nervous stock; and the
Blood flowing in the Vessels, and heart, when the object is carried only to
one, or being improportionate, at one to either, that from thence, the
disposition of the Liquors, or of the containing parts, is overthrown, whereby
the necessary functions, for the performing of life and sense, are restrained,
and this done latently, and as it were unforeseen, these kind of distempers, we
ascribe to Poison.

The nervous bodies, with the animal Spirit, are not invaded wholly after the
same manner, by every sort of Poisons; for they are tormented, now with a
Stupor, now with Convulsions, and those of diverse kinds, and manners: The bile
of a Tarantula causes dancing: A power sent from the Torpedo, by the Angle, or
lines of the Net, stupifies the hand of the Fisher. The roots of the wild
Parsnip, or the seeds of Lolium or Darnel, being eaten, make men mad: Opium,
Mandrakes, Henbane, and the like, cause deep, and sometimes deadly sleep. These
and many others, chiefly impress their Poison, on the spirituous or animal
faculty, without any great perturbation of the Blood, or hurt brought to the
heart.

There are also some Poisons, which most of all insinuate their malignity, to
the mass of Blood; wherefore, from some Medicines, there have been produced, a
yellow or black Jaundice, sometimes a Leprosy, or leprous distempers, and
swellings of the whole body, vapors breaking forth from secret hollows of the
Earth, also from Coals newly inkindled, often suffocating the vital Spirits, at
once congeal the Blood, and stop it in its motion, whereby the flame of life in
the heart, could not be continued. How much corruption of the mass of Blood is
imparted from the pestilent Infection, is perspicuous to every one, from the
spots and Whelks, which are as it were the marks of the blasted Blood.

If the hurt, being first inflicted to either, viz. The regiment of the Heart,
or Brain, be more lightly made, it is for the most part cured, without any
great offense to either; wherefore, Convulsive motions, Stupifaction,
Lethargy, Melancholy, Paralytick distempers, do not seldom begin with a
laudable Pulse, and without an immoderate effervescency of the Blood; and then,
if the distemper does not get strength, leisurely end, and cease. There are
other Poisons, which often deprave the Blood, and by dissolving its mixture,
corrupt it, in the mean time the animal functions remain whole enough. But if
the ferment of the Poison be stronger, and has more deeply fixed its roots,
presently the Poison is dispersed, from one Province to the other: for when the
nervous parts swell up, with a virulent juice, a portion of the Poison, is
carried with the nervous Latex returning through the Lymphatick Vessels, into
the veins, easily into the bosom of the Blood, and infects its mass, with the
evil with which it was big: also, from the Blood being grievously impoysoned,
the juice, by which the nerves are watered, quickly contract the infection;
hence mad men are in a Fever, and those taken with a pestilent Fever, are
most often tormented with a Delirium, or Frenzy. Concerning these things, we
must consider, what the alteration is, or the impression of hurt, which is
inflicted from the Poison, to the animal Spirit, with the brain and nervous
appendex; and what also, to the Blood, with the Heart and the annexed Vessels:
tho here, it is not in the power of humane skill or wit, plainly to show, or as
it were point out with the finger the manner of its being done; yet we may be
able to attain to some little knowledge of this thing, by reasoning, and by
comparing it, with other distempers.

Concerning the former, we shall observe, that the subtle Liquor, or animal
Spirits, wherewith the Nervous Bodies are blown up, and by whose expansion,
sense and motion perform their reciprocal actions, are easily perverted from
their tensity, and equal expansion: for as the Nerves are of a soft texture,
and the Spirits which abound in them of a very subtle substance, they cannot
endure any strong or vehement objects; wherefore when any violent or
improportionate thing falls on them, they are often compelled from their
expansion, and excursion into flight, and a running backward, and not seldom
into irregularities of motions: wherefore sudden passions of the mind distract
them, and drive them into Spasms, and Convulsions; when the Alible Juice, by
which they are repaired, is supplied too sharp, sour or austere, they suffer
now Palsies, and now contractures: If that some object more incongruous, (such
as we have affirmed Poison to be) should be offered, whose Particles are endued
with such fierceness, or are of such a kind of configuration, that when they
grow impetuously hot with the Nervous Liquor, they shake or lose here and there
its more subtle or spirituous part, or wholly drive it away, and fix the
remaining Liquor either with a styptic force, or by ebullition, force it into
inordinate motions; hence of necessity, evil distempers of the Brain, and
Nervous parts arise, viz. sometimes a Convulsion, Trembling, Shivering, sometimes
loosnings, or a stupefaction, and other symptoms of more grievous note. What
things after this manner infect the Nervous Juice with Poison, are now more
thick, and only when they are applied in a very Corporeal substance, do inflict
their hurt; now they are thin, and being resolved, even into a vapor or
breath, pour forth from a certain little prick, the ferment of Poison, through
the whole Nervous stock. Sometimes the Poison of some hurtful thing, being
eaten, first begins its Tragedy in the Ventricle; more often by a naked touch,
leaves on the superficies of the Body, a virulent taint, which easily and
quickly with its ferment, contaminates the Spirits, dispersed through the
whole. The Infection, wherever inflicted, either within or without, is more
largely dispersed from the extremities of the Nerves, by their easy passage,
being from thence brought into consent of the evil, by the very many little
shoots of the same branch. Often a more light touch of an invenomed thing, by
the finger, or extremity of any other member, presently communicates to the
Brain, the received infection, and from thence it is retorted into the whole
Body, and the farthest members; the reason of this is, that both the Particles
of the Nervous Juice, and of the same invenomed infection, are so light, and
ready for motion, that they pass through most swiftly, as the Rays of light
through a Diaphanous medium, the whole mass of one another.

2. As often as the Blood contracts hurt from some Poisonous thing, the Poison
is fixed within; either slow, and of lesser activity, which does not presently
betray it self, nor break forth into cruel symptoms, till of a long time after,
it is ripened by a silent fermentation, and has first infected the whole mass
of Blood, as may be observed in some Poisons, which are said to kill at a
distance, and not till after some months, or years. Or the Poisons inspired
into the Blood, are imbued with a much more acute sting, that from their
Contagion, the Infection contracted, presently breaks forth into cruel
symptoms, and thereupon follows now a Feverish effervency with Vomiting,
Thirst, and burning of the Precordia, now a swelling up of the whole Body, a
discoloration of the skin, oftentimes a breaking forth of whelks, and buboes,
and frequently also a sudden loss of all strength, so that sudden death,
without tumult, and almost insensibly steals upon one: where by the way it is
to be noted, If the Spirits of the Blood, provoked by the enemy, are able to
encounter him, and to strive for the victory, this Feverish ebullition of the
Blood is stirred up from the conflict; but if the Particles of the Poison,
being far stronger, suddenly profligate the Spirits of the Blood, and
extinguish life, presently the Bloody mass is corrupted, neither can it be
circulated in the Vessels, nor rightly inkindled in the heart.

If it be yet demanded, what mutations, the Blood infected with Poison,
undergoes, either in its substance, or consistency, that, for that reason it is
rendered unfit for the sustaining of Life? I answer after this manner; some
Poisons fuse the Blood, and too much precipitate its serosity, such are
Medicines, which by a strong killing Purging, or by a Profluvium of Urine, or a
discoloration, or swelling up of the whole Body, or with an eruption of
Pustules, cause a very great secretion of the serous Latex; in the mean time a
great ebullition of the mass of Blood is induced, whereby the Vital Spirits are
greatly destroyed, the Particles of Salt and Sulphur too much exalted, by the
Concoction, and are often so roasted, that a Yellow or Black Jaundies is caused.

There are Poisons of another kind, far more dangerous, which congeal the
Blood, and by destroying its mixture, corrupt it, viz. the first induce a
congelation to the Bloody mass, and then a Putrefaction: for when the Spirits
of the Blood, being overthrown, by the contagion of the Poison, are dissipated,
the equal mixture of the Liquor is loosned; wherefore the more thick Particles
mutually infold one another, and (like Milk when Rennet is put to it, or
growing sour of it self) are coagulated apart: hence the Blood curdles in the
Vessels, that it is less readily circulated in them: coagulated portions of
this, being inwardly diluted, into the bosom of the Heart, are apt to stagnate
there, and so to bring forth frequent syncopes, and swounings: being carried
outwardly, and in the circulating, fixed in the skin, sometimes being more
plentifully heaped together, they induce a suffusion of blackness through the
whole, sometimes being more sparingly dispersed, they cause only spots, or
Purple marks, like black and blew strokes, and other appearances of malignity.
But the coagulation of the Blood, quickly disposes it to putresaction or
corruption; as is seen in extravasated Blood, which is wont to grow soon black
and putrid. For the Spirit being exhaled, the Particles of Sulphur and Salt
remaining in the Blood, begin to go apart one from another, and to break the
bond of the mixture, from whence follows Putrefaction.

These things being thus premised of Poison in general, the reason of the
method requires that we enter upon the handling of Fevers, which draw their
Original, altogether from a malignant, and invenomed infection: and as under
this title, the Pest or Plague easily obtains the chief place, I will begin
with its consideration, and afterward, I will speak of malignant Fevers,
Smallpox, and Measels, in order. But yet, before I shall propose its
definition, I will briefly inquire, of the pestiferous Poison, what its
disposition and Nature may be; also, from whence it may be born, and lastly, by
what means it is propagated into others, by contagion.

For the expressing the Nature of the Plague, Authors are wont to choose some
invenomed Bodies, and from their names to frame an Elogy of this most wicked
Disease; wherefore in the definition of the pest, are commonly recounted the
Nepelline, Aconital, and Arsenical Poison: the Lethiferous force of which
however, as it consists in a very thick matter, and does not exert or put forth
itself but by a Corporal contact, does not truly imitate the essence of the
Pestilential Disease: for this is founded in a Spiritual and Vaporous
infection, by which its Effluvia being every way diffused, so potently unfold
themselves, that out of the best seminary or seed plot, they quickly propagate
a fruitful Crop of death and destruction, By reason of its notable activity,
this infection may deserve to be called, as it were a certain quintessence of
Poison; the very agil and subtle Particles of this, do penetrate all Bodies,
and inspire them with its ferment: for either being dispersed through the Air,
or hid in a certain tender or cherishing nest, tho they strike against the
human Body but lightly, and as it were through a Casement, they easily subdue
it; for both the Animal Spirits, and those of the blood, they quickly infect,
and by that means, shortly pour forth the Venomous taint, into all the members.

When a Pestilential Breath or Vapor, has invaded any one, and that Poison
has first laid hold on the Animal Spirits, or those of the Blood, or both of
them at once, (as has been already said of Poisons) the taint is quickly
derived from the subtle and more thin substance of these, into a more thick
matter: because it quickly ferments the whole mass of Blood, or of the Nervous
Juice, and the excrementitious humors, every where abounding, and from thence
is deduced into the solid parts, and fixes the evil in them. If this Disease,
first possesses the Animal Spirits, presently the hurt is communicated to the
Brain, and the Nervous stock, and especially to the Ventricle, forthwith it
impoysons the humor growing in these; loosens its mixture, perverts the
regular motion, and renderr it wholly incongruous, and infestous to the more
tender substance of the containing parts: by and by from thence, Cramps and
Convulsive motions, cruel Vomitings, pains of the Heart, also Phrensies,
deliriums, or pertinacious watchings, are stirred up, about the first assault
of the Disease: when in the mean time, the infection not being yet dispersed
through the Blood, the sick are not Feverish, nor are troubled with inordinate
Pulse, or Syncope, or appearances of marks; which symptoms however arise
afterward, as soon as the Blood is infected. If when the Spirits of the Blood
are first possessed, with the impoysoned infection, either drawn in with the
Air, or attracted through the pores, its ferment is presently dissipated
through the whole mass of the Blood, the infested portions immediately begin to
be loosned from their equal mixture, to go into parts, and to be coagulated,
and the same, being delated, into the bosom of the Heart, are wont there to
stagnate, and so to induce a Syncopy, Swoonings, and often sudden Death; also
being carried outwardly, fixed about the skin, to cause Buboes, inflamed
risings, and other marks of Poison; in the mean time, the sick appear well in
mind, nor are they troubled with Delirium nor Convulsive motions. If that from
a more strong cause, the hurt is inflicted to both parts at once, the course of
the Disease is performed with a more horrid provision of Symptoms, and
especially with a Syncopy, and Frenzy at once infesting.

As to what appertains to its rise; when the Plague first arises in any Region
or Country, there is attributed a twofold cause of it, viz. Primary or
Metaphysical, also Secondary or Natural, subordinate to that: The very Heathens
did acknowledge this Disease, wherever it raged, sent first of all from God, for
the castigation of the wickednesses of men, and therefore for its extirpation,
they equally made use of Prayers and Sacrifices as of Medicines. As to what
belongs to the Natural cause, there are diverse opinions. Some will, that the
Pestilence newly arisen, be derived from the Heavens, and influences of the
Stars only: on the contrary, others have affirmed it only to arise from the
internal putrefaction of the humors of our Body: but these endeavor to deduce
the cause of this sickness too far off, and these more near than it ought. We
will walk in the middle way, and what Reason persuades, and what very many
Authors assert, we will place the chief and first seminary or seed plot of this
Poison, in the Air; because, it seems consonant to Reason, that from the same
Fountain, from which the common food of life is had, the beginnings of death,
no less diffusive, are to be sought. There is the same necessity for our
breathing in the Air, as of Fishes living in the Water; wherefore, as to waters
infected by Poison, the murrain of Fishes dying in heaps is ascribed; so men
dying of an Epidemical slaughter, without any manifest cause, nothing could
kill, besides the infection of the commonly inspired Air.

For the Air, which we necessarily draw in for the continuance of Life,
consists of an heap of vapors and fumes, which are perpetually breathed forth
from the Earth; in which the exhalations of Salt and Sulphur, being mingled
with the atomical vaporous little Bodies, constitute here as it were a thick
cloud: the motions of these are swift and unquiet, they are of a manifold
figure, and very much diverse, wherefore some continually meet against others,
and according to their various configurations, they cohere with these, and are
mutually combined one with another, and from those they are driven, and fly
away: from hence the reasons of the Sympathy and Antipathy of every thing,
depend. From the diverse agitations of these kind of Atoms, near the
superficies of the Earth, this or that tract of the Air, enters into diverse
alterations, by which, Bodies, chiefly the living are variously affected:
because the intestine motion, of the Particles of every Animal, depends very
much upon the motion and temper of the Particles of the Air: forasmuch as these
perpetually exagitate those, raise up those lying asleep, repair the loss of
those flying away, shake the vital flame with their Nitrosity, and supply it
with a Nitrous-Sulphureous Food, eventilates it being inkindled by continual
turns of access and recess, and carry away the Soot and Fumes. So long as an
apt contemperation happens in either, for motion and configuration, living
Creatures enjoy perfect health and life; but if the little Bodies swiming in
the Air, be of that sort of figure and power, that are plainly adverse to the
Spirits implanted in living Creatures, they loose the mixtures of these, from
the rest, from whose Elements they are collected, and pervert their motions;
hence the dispositions of things are destroyed, life profligated, and, the same
being scarce extinct, the Bodies undergo putrefaction; hence the tops of
Trees, or of Corn, being struck with a blast, suddenly grow dry or wither;
hence among Cattle, the murrain often rages, which kills at once whole Flocks;
by reason of this kind of cause, the Seeds of the Pestilence first put
themselves forth, and attempt the slaughter of human kind: for as invenomed
Bodies in the bowels of the Earth or concreted on its superficies, produce the
Arsenical or Aconital mixtures, so these being even resolved into vapor, and
heaped together in the Air, create most pernicious Airs, from which Malignant
and Pestilential Diseases arise; the infection, which after this manner
Contaminates the Air, the most ingenious Diemerbrochius, a searcher of this
Disease, contends, that is only sent (as the wrath of angry Apollo) immediately
from the angry right hand of God: but this were to multiply without any pretext
of necessity (I will not say beings but) miracles, and in every Plague to
assert a Creation of new substance; when in the mean time, the virulent product
of Minerals and Vegitable, which daily appear, and of as quite adverse Nature
to us, as the Plague, clearly testify, that there lives hid in the Bowels of
the Earth, plenty of invenomed matter, sufficiently fitted for this business.
For the little Bodies, which being roled about with earthy matter, do constitute
the Poisonous mixtures in the bosom of the Earth, the same being resolved into
vapors, will be no less hurtful afterward, and impress a pestiferous blast to
the Air, which they wander through: wherefore, by the leave of so Learned a
man, I should say, that it seems not improbable, that the things which first of
all affix the seed plot of the Pestilence, to any tract of Air, be the
Poisonous Effluvia of fierce Salts and Sulphurs, and (by the Divine Will
instigating) breathing forth from the bowels of the Earth; which sometimes,
being a long time before shut up, are leisurely exhaled out of Dens and
Caverns; sometimes by reason of the motion of the Earth, or Earthquake, or a
gaping of the Earth, they break forth in heaps; also, of the same kind, are
those which ordinarily are breathed forth from the filth of Soldiers in their
nasty Camps; or from unburied Carcases; or from places, beset with standing and
stinking Mud: but the little Bodies after this manner exhaled, obtain their
wonderful height, properties, and abilities, by a long putrefaction, that
therefore they are incongruous, and heterogeneous to all others whatsoever, and
so being received into the Air, ferment it (as it were a mass of Liquor) and
pervert it from a wholesome and benign, into a most pernicious and wicked Nature.

Some Bodies more easily, others not so readily receive the malignant tincture
of the Pestilent Air. Those who by reason of ill feeding are full of evil
humors, and who by reason of fullness, have their Blood stuffed with firable
Sulphur, receive the Pestilential Poison, by the lest blast of the invenomed
Air, especially if fear or sadness happen, which convey inwardly, and lead to
the Heart, as it were by a certain attraction the most light darts of the
contagion. On the contrary, those who have their Viscera clean, and the mass of
Blood well tempered, and are endued with a strong, and fearless mind, do not so
easily receive this infection, and sometimes exterminate it soon, being received.

Thus much for the beginning and divulgation of the Pestilence, according to
its first Fountains, and from thence the stream of the infected Air being
deduced: it remains for us to speak concerning its propagation by contagion,
forasmuch as it is derived, as it were extraduce from some and so to others.

We understand by Contagion, that force or action, by which any distemper
residing in one Body, excites its like in another. But as this may happen,
either immediately by contact, as when any one lying in the same bed with
another, taken with the Plague, or mediately, and at a distance, as when it
happens that the infection is transferred from one house to others remote, or
also if the Plague come upon any one, after many days or months, perhaps years
handling a Garment, or household stuff, brought from an infected house:
therefore that the Nature of the Contagion, and its diverse modes may be
plainly made known, we will first weigh what that is, which streams from an
infected Body. Secondly, how it bears it self through the Medium of its
passage. Thirdly, by what means it begets a distemper like it self, in another
Body.

1. That from every Body, although of a more fixed Nature, Effluvia of Atoms
constantly fly away, and run forth, which round about constitute as it were a
Cloud or Halos, and as it were cloth it, like the down of a Peach, is so much
received among the more sound Philosophers, that nothing can be more. But by
how much the more any thing consists of active Particles, by so much the more,
it sends from it self, little Bodies of more remarkable virtue and energy.
Hence the Effluvia which fall from Ambers, are able to move other Bodies from
their place: emanations proceed from Sulphurous things, which fill the whole
neighborhood with odors. And so when the Pestilential venom, as has been
already said, is from hence any where fixed, and tho in the smallest bulk, is
of great efficacy and operation, there is a necessity, that some emanations,
proceed from the Bodies imbued with it, which refer the nature or disposition
of the same Poison and malignity, and diffuse them on every side according to
its sphere of activity. But when these little Bodies, which retain the
contagion of the Pestilence, as they stream from one Body, are not presently
received by another, we shall inquire, how they carry themselves, in respect of
their passage, through the medium.

Where we shall presently meet with a difference in those, from many others,
for that the Effluvia, which ordinarily evaporate, do not long retain the
Nature or Disposition of the Body, from which they flow, but either vanish into
Air, or being impacted to other Bodies, are assimilated to them: but those
Particles, which fall from a Pestilential Infection, are not easily supped up
by the Air, or any other Body, so as they may be wholly destroyed; but among
the various confusions of Atoms, and the dashings of other Bodies, they keep
themselves untouched, For this untamed Poison remains still the same almost,
and not to be overcome by others, and tho it consists of never so little heap
of Atoms, will not presently vanish; but with its ferment, imbues the next
little Bodies, and so acquires new forces, and gains strength by going; from
whence it lurks a long while in some nest, and after a long time, when it
assaults a convenient subject, puts forth it self, and imparting the taint of
its Poison to another, raises up again the Disease of the Pestilence anew,
which seemed before to be exploded, and tho from the smallest seminary,
sprinkles far and near its deadly Poison.

For the Pest, brings forth such most sure signs of its contagion, that some
Authors contend, that for this reason it only continues among Mortals, and does
never spring up anew, but is only conserved from its nest, and carried from
thence, from one Region to another. Histories relate, that the seeds of this
have lain asleep for several years, in some Garment or Bedcloaths, and that
afterward, they being stirred, it has appeared, and has stirred up anew the
Disease of the Pestilence, increasing with a mighty slaughter of men. When by
reason of the tinder, or cherishing nest, the Plague is propagated after this
manner, at a distance, the invenomed little Bodies, which remain in the
infection, being moved, presently leap out, and unfold its Poison every way, as
it were by a certain irradiation: if that they strike against an human body,
presently they lay hold on the Spirits, and are by their Vehicle conveyed
inwardly, and then by an easy labor, they infect the Blood and Humors,
wheresoever flowing in the Vessels, with their ferment, and quickly bring to
them coagulations and putrefaction. And after this manner, through the most
subtle Effiuvia, is made as it were a certain transmigration of the
Pestilential Disease, even as when a shoot being cut off from some Tree, and
laid up for a time, and afterward ingrafted to another Trunk, tho from the
smallest bud, it is able to produce a Tree of the same Kind and Nature.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Plague.
THus far we have discoursed of Poison in general, also of the Pestilence, its
beginning and propagation by contagion: it now remains, that we explicate the
description of the Plague, its Nature, according to its accidents, and
symptoms, most worthy of note; then some things shall be added, which belong to
its Cure.

The Plague may be described after this manner, that it is an Epidemical
Disease, Contagious, highly infestous to human kind; taking its beginning from
an invenomed Infection, received first by the Air, and then propagated by
Contagion; which having hiddenly and largely set upon men, causes extinctious
of the Spirits, coagulations of the Blood, blastings, mortifications or
deadnesses of the solid parts, and with the appearances of whelks, buboes, or
carbuncles, as also with the horrid provision of other symptoms, brings the
sick in danger of life.

Although the Plague be one kind of Disease, and its specifical differences, or
essential are not found, yet by reason of the diverse kinds of accidents, which
come upon it, some diversities and irregularities of it are observed, which
something vary the type of the Disease, tho they change not the species. For
first this distemper sometimes is more universal that it rages every where
through many Vilages and Cities at once; but sometimes it is circumscribed in
narrower bounds, and only threatens one Region or Tract of Land. Secondly,
sometimes the Plague comes simple, and unmixt with other Diseases, wherefore
privily, and as it were by surprise, almost without a Fever, or vehemence of
symptoms, brings a secret killing of the sick. Sometimes it is complicated, with
a number of other Diseases, that the business is carried with tumult and
frequent skirmishing between Nature and Death. Thirdly, the degree of malignity
constitutes a great difference; for the Plague in some places, and times is
much more mild, that many of the sick escape; sometimes it is highly mortal,
that most taken are killed, and that scarce one of an hundred recovers.

But because this Disease hides its weapons, and coming on men unawares, kills
them suddenly, therefore it shall be our work, that by some signs, as it were
watchmen planted, we may know the Clandestine coming of this enemy, although we
are not able to foresee it from afar. Very many signs happen, which foretell
shortly a Plague about to come: to wit, if the year keeps not its Temper, but
has immoderate, and very unseasonable excesses, either of heat or cold, or of
dryness or wet; if the smallpox or Measles, do every where rage; if Boils or
Buboes, accompauy reigning Fevers. Besides Astrologers are wont, from the
Aspects of the Stars, or appearances of Comets, to predict the approaching
Plague, but this ought rather to be called a vain conjecture, than a certain
foreknowledge. From a preceding Famine, a most certain presage may be taken,
of a Plague to follow, as in the Adage-(...). The Plague comes with the Famine.
For the like Constitution of the year, which for the most part, by reason of
the Corn being blasted, brings scarcity, is apt also to produce the Plague:
also, an evil way of feeding which people in dearths use, eating all unwholsom
things, without choice, disposes their Bodies, to the more easy receiving the
Infection. Yea, also earthquakes fresh openings of Caverns, and secret Vaults,
by the gaping of the Ground, by reason of the eruptions of malignant and
impoysoned Airs, often give beginning to the Pestilence. For indeed, as there
is need of great diligence, to foresee, as it were from a Watchtower, the
approaching Plague, so there is no less need of care and diligence, to
consider, or take notice of the same, being fresh risen, and the shooting of
its first darts: For oftentimes, being too solicitous, we dread vulgar Fevers,
if perchance they end in death, for this Disease; and sometimes being too
secure, contemning the Pestilence, by reason of its Symptoms, like to a common
Fever, we apprehend not our danger, till too late; wherefore, for the more
full knowledge of this Disease, we will subjoyn its Signs and Symptoms both
common, and Pathognomic or peculiar, and briefly describe their causes, means,
and manner of being done.

Besides the signs already delivered, which by a certain demonstration a priori
or beforehand, bring a suspicion of the Plague about to come, there are
others, the concourse of which, plainly show its presence, in the sick body: of
these, some are common to the Plague, with a Putrid Fever, some are more
proper to this distemper. For the impression of the Pestilence, most often
stirs up an effervency of the Blood, and so has frequently a Fever joined with
it, that among some, in the definition of the Plague, it has the place of a
kind of Fever; wherefore, by reason of the ebullition of the Blood, and the
hurt brought to the Viscera, presently there follows, a growing hot, a
spontaneous weariness, thirst, a burning of the precordia, often great
Vomitings, pains of the Heart, torments of the Intestines, a scurfiness of the
Tongue, or a blackness, a pain of the head, watchings, Frenzy, palpitation of
the Heart, swooning, and sudden loss of strength: tho Fevers are most often
beset, with these kind of Symptoms, yet if at the same time, the Plague has
spread in the neighborhood, and a fear of it has possessed the minds of men,
hence a greater suspicion of this evil is caused, especially, because, whilst
the Pestilence reigns, other Diseases in any one, leave their proper Nature,
and change into it: wherefore, if there happens to the distempers but now
recited, a Communication of the same sickness to many, and a frequency of
Burials, that it becomes every where very deadly, and spreads largely even by
contagion; and if besides, Buboes, Carbuncles, Spots, or other marks of the
pestiferous infection appear, the business is put without doubt, and we may
with no less faith denounce it the Pestilence, than when we see an house
flaming, with fire breaking through the Raftures, we cry out Fire. But because
here is mention made of Buboes, Carbuncles, and of other Symptoms, (of which we
have already spoken, where we treated of Putrid Fevers) it remains, that we
briefly touch the causes of them, and the manner of their being made: They are
these: A Carbuncle, a Bubo, Whelks, Inflammations, and malignant Pustles.

Concerning these in common, we say, that they are all produced of the Blood,
and nervous juice, touched with the pestiferous Poison, and coagulated in
parts, in their circuit, and distempered variously with putrefaction; forasmuch
as the Spirits, residing in either Liquor, especially in the Blood, are no
sooner profligated, by the blast of this malignant Disease, but a coagulation
is induced to the remaining Liquor, even as milk growing sour, or when some
acid juice is poured to it; wherefore, portions of it being more grievously
touched with the Poison, they soon curdle or grow into gobbets, and suffer
corruption with blackness, like Blood out of the Vessels; from whence,
presently they hinder the motion of the rest of the Blood in the Vessels, and
in the Heart, and by means of its ferment, more coagulate it; but whatsoever by
congelation grows into curdled gobbets, unless it be presently cast out of
doors, causes death quickly, by restraining the circulation of the Blood; and
being thrust forth outwardly, toward the superficies of the body, it is
stopped in its motion, between the narrow windings of the Vessels; and being
wholly destitute either of Spirit, or being struck by a blasting, produces its
deadness, black and blew spots, and black or purple marks; or, by reason of the
Salt and Sulphur, being exalted, by the pestilential ferment, and affecting new
things, grow together into tumors of a various kind.

A Carbuncle, or Fiery Inflammation, is a fiery Tumor, with most sharp and
burning Pustules round about it, and infesting the sick, with an acute pain;
which arising in various places severally, will not be ripened, but creeping
more abroad on the superficies, burns the skin, and at length shakes off the
lobes, or gobbets of its Corruption, and leaves an hollow ulcer, as if burnt by
an Escharotick or burning Plaster.

The generation of Plague-sores, seem to be made after this manner, when
Poisonous infections do strike into the Blood, in its own nature torrid,
portions of it congealed, are fixed in the superficies of the Body; and in that
place, because the motion of the Blood is a little hindered, a tumor at first
small, is induced; which afterward, by a malignant ferment, unfolding it self
more largely, being leisurely increased, creeps into the neighboring part: A
suppuration follows not, because the matter being extravasated, and stagnating,
is not concocted and digested by a gentle heat, but by reason of the particles
of the outrageous Sulphur, together with the carried forth Salt, being heaped
up in these Tumors, and because of the stagnation, they being presently
loosened from the mixture, a burning is excited, as if a Cautery were affixed
to the part: pieces and lobes of skins, eaten as it were from a covered Eschar,
fall off, because the Corrosive venom, impacted in the Muscles, gnaws not only
to the superficies, but those that lie transvers through the whole substance;
wherefore, before all the flesh is consumed, with the membranes, in which the
eaten pieces were invalved, some piece, as it were cut off from the rest falls
away. A Carbuncle, oftentimes but one, oftentimes more arise: sometimes they are
alone, sometimes they are accompanied with a Bubo.

A pestilent Bubo springs forth, only in glandulous places, into whose
substance goes, not only the Blood congealed by the Poison, and carried through
the Arteries, but the nervous juice heaped up there, and carried back into the
Veins. Because this Tumor happens from less torrid juices, and in part more
frigid, therefore it partakes of suppuration. For the matter being leisurely
heaped together, when (by reason of the stagnation, the vital Spirit being
departed) it had lost the form of Blood, it was by a long concoction converted
into matter, from the particles of Salt and Sulphur exalted, and restrained in
the Tumor. But that these Tumors only happen in the Glandulas, the reason is,
not that by the destination of Nature, the nest or tinder of the Disease, is
carried to these parts, but as the particles of the virulent infection, abound
every where in the Blood, and nervous juice, they are more readily gathered
together, as in a common Family, and where the Blood being dilated to the
extreme parts of the Arteries, and is so not readily received, and carried back
by the veins, and also the alible juice, to be carried back from the nerves,
into the veins, is deposed: either of these, as it appears clearly, by late
observations of Anatomists, and by experience, are made or done about the
Glandulas; wherefore, when in these parts, either humors, being stuffed with
the pestilent feeds of the contagion, come together at once, as it were the
nest of the malignity, because of the virulency here deposed from either, is
blown up.

Whelks, fiery inflammations, and purple spots, in respect of the venom, are of
the same stuff, as the Tumors but now described: but in these, the product of
the virulency, consists in a lesser substance, yet with greater danger, by
reason of the seeds of the Poison, being more dispersed: more small portions of
the coagulated Blood being fixed in the skin, constitute these lesser
appearances, wherefore, out of these, some being increased, are ripened into
little itching blisters: others, by reason of a certain blasting, or deadness
of the corrupted Blood, grow into black and blew, and purple Spots.

Although the Plague, by reason of its sudden, secret, and very swift assault upon
sick people, hardly gives time or place, for a prognostic, and when this
Disease, by reason of the occult manner of hurting, contains in it self nothing
that is not suspected, yet there are some signs, that appear in its course, by
which we are wont to foretell, either Life or Death. The business is then
desperate, if the Disease pass presently into an Epidemical distemper, and
makes violent assaults; if that bleeding, or only a small sweat follows, in the
beginning of the Disease; if the Urine be thick and troubled, the Pulse
unequal, and weak; if a Convulsion, or a Frenzy presently follow; if the
Vomits, or Stools are bluish, black, or highly stinking; if the Whelks at
first contract a redness, afterward a blewness; if the Carbuncles are many; if
the Buboes at first swelling up, disappear; if strength be suddenly lost, the
face horrid, or grows black and blew; if with a shivering of the outward parts,
there be an heat of the bowels, especially if these, or many of them happen in
a body full of ill humors, or in an unwholsom season. On the contrary, the sick
may be bid to be of good cheer, if the condition of the Pestilence be lighter,
and less deadly; if the Disease happens in a robust and healthful body, with a
strong mind; if remedies may be timely had, before the Disease has possessed
the whole mass of Blood. Also, if with a continuance of strength, high and
equal Pulse, a suppuration of the Buboes, and a large profusion of matter, with
the absence of more horrid Symptoms, the course of the Disease is performed: In
the mean time, although here we may hope all good, yet we are not to be secure,
because, sometimes the snares of life, are laid privily, with the laudable
appearance of signs, and we suffer most grievously as from a reconciled Enemy,
whose fierce threatenings we seemed to have shunned.

Concerning the curing of very many sicknesses, the business is chiefly
committed to Nature, to whose necessity, Physic is the Midwife: and the
office, and science of a Physician, chiefly is busied in these, that occasions
of giving convenient aids, to this laboring, be attended, but the Plague has
this peculiar, that its cure is not at all to be left to Nature, but that it is
to be endeavored any way, by remedies gathered from Art. Nor are we to be
solicitous of a more opportune, or as it were a gentler time, but Medicines are
most quickly to be prepared, and we must not stay for them some hours, no nor
minutes. But because, whilst the Pestilence reigns, there is no less need of
care, that the Contagion may be driven far away, than that the Disease being
impressed may be cured, therefore, a double task is incumbent on the Physician,
to wit, that he looks to the prevention of this malignant Disease, as well as
to the cure. To prescribe a method for both these, had been a work of too much
tediousness, and to have given you a dish a thousand times dressed by Authors,
wherefore, we will only touch lightly here, some chief Indications, and have to
other things.

Preventive cautions, either respect the Republique, and belong to the
Magistrate, or private persons, to whom it should be taught, what is to be done
by all men, when the Plague is feared.

The public care in the time of the Plague, consists chiefly in these, that
Divine worship be truly observed, that all nests of Putrefaction be cut off,
that filths, Dunghils, and all stinking things may be removed out of the
Streets, and all occasion of the Contagion diligently avoided, and that an
wholesome means of living be constantly observed by the Citizens. For which end,
the use of fruits, and of other unwholsom things should be interdicted: that
poor people, who have not plenty or choice of food; should be provided for, at
the public charge: If still the Pestilence begins to spread, the empoysoned
force of the Air should be corrected, as much as may be, which may be best
done, by the frequent burning of Sulphurous things; the infected should be
separated from the sound, and the dead Carcases, and household stuff should be
avoided; and lastly, that able and fit Physicians, and Ministers be provided
for the use of the sound, and the necessities of the sick.

The preventive means of a private person, is wont to be concluded in these
three things, viz. Diet, Physic, and Surgery. Diet respects the six
nonnatural things, among which, of the greatest moment are, the Air and
passions of the mind: as to the rest, Hippocrates his precept may suffice, viz.
Labor, Meat, Drink, Sleep, Venus, should be taken moderately. The Pestilent
Air should be avoided, by going into some other place; or corrected by the well
burning of Sulphurous things, or whilst we breath it should be cured by
fumigations and sweet smells, often carried near the nostrils. As to the
passions of the minds, fear, and sadness, whilst the Pestilence rages, are as
it were another Plague; for in these, the seeds of the envenomed Contagion,
which are placed in the superficies of the Body, as it were on the edge of a
whirlpool, are snatched inwardly, by a certain force, and carried to the Heart;
wherefore, it is a most excellent Antidote, to be of a cheerful and confident
mind. I have known many, who (as Helmont was wont to say) by fortifying the
Archeus, with Wine and confidence, never used any other Poyson-resisting
Medicines, and remained without any hurt of the Contagion among the infected:
and on the contrary, some struck with fear, when they have dwelt far from all
Contagion, have drank in the seeds of the Pestilence, as if they were derived
from the Stars.

Among the Chirurgical things, to be administered for preservation sake, are
wont to be commended, the opening of a Vein, Cauteries, and Amulets. Where
there is a fullness, with a great swelling up of the Blood; or in those who
constantly, by long custom are wont to be let Blood, it is convenient to open a
Vein: For the less the Blood grows hot, and is circulated without Tumult, in
the Vessels, it will be so much the longer, ere it be contaminated, by the
pestiferous Disease. Issues made by Cauteries, are so much used, almost by the
suffrage of all, for preservation sake against the Plague, that it is become the
most common receipt: For these by a constant transmission pour forth the
assiduous coming of the superfluous and excrementitious matter; and if that the
infections of the Pestilence be admitted inwardly, they are cast forth of
doors, at these open ports.

Amulets, hung about the neck, or born on the wrists, are believed to have a
wonderful force against the Pestilence; of these, among some, of the greatest
esteem, are such as are made out of Arsnick, quicksilver, the powder of Toads,
and other Poisons. That the same in this case may be profitable, besides the
observations of Physicians this reason may seem to persuade something. The
Effluvia, or atomical little bodies, emerging now from these bodies, now
residing upon these, are before affirmed to fly about through the whole Region
of the Air; these, as they are diversely figured, some of them easily cohere
with others, but if they strike against some of another form, they oppose and
overturn them: hence, the particles of the pestilent Infection, which are
adverse to our Spirits, excellently agree with those little bodies of Poison
placed near, and are readily fixed to them: wherefore, the Amulets made of
Poison do this, viz. They receive the seeds of the Pestilence meeting us, into
themselves, by reason of the likeness of parts; also, by alluring the same from
our bodies, into their embraces, they in some measure, free the infected from
the infection.

The Medicinal prevention has a twofold scope: First, that the assiduous
coming of the excrementitious matter or humors be taken away by a gentle
purging, as often as there is need: Secondly, that by the daily taking
Poyson-resisting Medicines, our Spirits, and Body may be fortified against the
assault of the Poison: By the former, the Food and cherishers, of which
increase putrefaction brought in by the Poison are drawn away; by the latter,
the first inkindling of the pestiferous Infection, as it were a deadly fire, is
inhibited. Alexipharmies or Medicines contrary to Poisons seem to be helpful
against the contagion of the Plague for this twofold Reason; Both because the
mass of Blood and Viscera being filled with the particles of these, and also
the Spirits before possessed with the same, they do not easily admit of the
company of the impoysoned Infection; also, because the Blood being incited by
the gentle fury of these is kept from coagulation.

Thus much for preservation, it follows now, that we speak of the cure of the
Plague. The doctrine of which, is either general, and comprehends remedies,
which for this end, are taken from Diet, Surgery, and Medicine; or special,
which delivers the use, and Cautions to be exhibited, about those Remedies; and
by what men's we are to oppose the Symptoms variously arising.

Diet comprehends the use of the six non-naturals, but the chief care, and
medical cautions, are to be given about eating, the primary Indications of
this, consist not at one and the same time together, but ought to be supplied
by turns, according to the nature of the thing, and the exigency of nature. In
respect of the malignity, and of the loss of strength, Aliments are to be
desired, which greatly cherish the Spirits, and bring a more plentiful
nourishment: in respect of the Feverish distemper, a more slender
refrigerating Diet, and temperating the Blood, seems to be required: The
Physician must regard either, but he may rather intend his Remedies against the
malignity, than the Fever.

The helps that belong to Surgery, are the opening a Vein, which seldom and
very cautiously ought to be used in this Disease, because the Blood being too
much exhausted, and the Vessels falling down, sweat is not so easily procured;
instead of this, it is better to use Cupping, with scarification. For this, and
Blistering, are rightly applied for the drawing forth of the Venom; moreover,
against Buboes, Inflammations, or malignant Ulcers produced by them, Cataplasms,
Fomentations, Plasters, Ointments, and many other things, to be outwardly
applied, are to be sought for from Surgery, in which some Poisons, as the
Electric of Poison, are prescribed by some to be admixed; wherefore,
preparations of Arsnick, to wit, the oil and balsom of it, are commended by
many, in this case too of most excellent use and efficacy.

Medicines for the cure of the Plague, are either Evacuators, or
Poyson-resisters: The intention of the former is, that the serous Latex in the
Blood, and the excrementitious humors, which abound in the Viscera, be thrust
forth of doors; and together with them, very many particles of the invenomed
Infection, every where dispersed in the Body: But these are both Vomitories and
Purgers, the use of which is more rare, and only in the beginning of the
Disease, also Diaphoreticks or sweating Medicines, which at some times may be
suffered according as there is strength, are to be prescribed in the Plague:
For these more fully, and from the whole body at once evacuate, yea, and by
agitating the Blood, defend it from Congelation, and as they move from the
Center, still to the Circumference, they drive the empoysoned ferment, also the
Corruptions of the Blood and humors, far from the heart, and so chase the Enemy
without the Camp. But Vomits, and Purges evacuate less universally, and by
Concentrating the malignant matter, oftentimes carry it inwardly, and fix it to
the Bowels. But these Medicines, whether they operate by purging, or sweating,
ought to be of that kind, which have particles, rather agreeable to the
empoysoned infection, than to our Blood or Spirits; for such a Medicine, will
pass through the various windings of our body, with its whole forces and
unmixt, and by reason of the similitude of either, more certainly takes hold of
the virulent matter of the Disease, and carries it forth of doors with it self,
by the mutual adhesion of the parts, which way provoked nature leads.
Wherefore, Medicines, whether Catharticks or Sudorificks, are commended before
others, which are prepared out of Mercury, Antimony, Gold, Sulphur, Vitriol,
Arsnick, and the like; which, when they cannot be subjugated by our heat, or
mastered, become the best Remedies against the Poison of a pestilent Disease:
for these do not only potently evacuate superfluous things, but when as they
put forth very strong and untameable particles, and explicate them every where
in the body, dissipate the ferments of the Poison growing here and there, and
hinder them from maturation; and as these Remedies, being of themselves not to
be overcome by Nature, are necessitated to be carried outwardly through the
open passages of the body, they carry forth of doors with them, whatsoever
extraneous or hostile thing is met with.

As to Poyson-resisting Medicines, or Alexiterians, which are said to resist
the Poison of this Disease, without any sensible evacuation, they are (for the
most part) such, whose particles are not very much of kin to Nature, so as to
go into Aliment; nor so diverse, as to provoke to an excretion. The same being
inwardly taken, and broken into the smallest pieces, inspire the Blood, and
juices flowing together in the Vessels, and Viscera, with their little bodies,
as with a new ferment, and by moving the same gently, and by keeping them in an
equal mixture, defend them from Coagulation, and Putrefaction; dissipate the
particles begun to be heaped up, one from another, by the same gentle
agitation, and hinder them from maturity; and lastly by pre-possessing the
Blood and Spirits, defend them from the impressions of the pestilent mark.
Among these, some more simple Remedies are commended as Rue, Scordium, etc. but
most of all by far are esteemed, those that are compounded, wherefore, Treacle,
Mithridate, and Diascordium, some of which are composed of no less than fifty
simples; that, it is esteemed a crime in Medicines so complete in all numbers,
to omit one Plant, or one Dram of them in their Compositions; the reason
perchance is, because very many things being put together, may make a mass,
whose diverse kinds of particles being exalted, by long digestion, may stir up
the greater fermentation in our Blood and humors.

Having after this manner ranked the Remedies, in which we ought to be
instructed, for the curing of the Plague; now next we should speak of the
method of cure, viz. What first, and then what next, should be done in order:
but that this Disease has so precipitous a Course, that there is neither place
for deliberation, nor is there frequently any Physician to be gotten, for fear
of the Contagion; wherefore, there is no need here of of many prescripts, or a
long feries of Indications; this business is to be quickly performed, and may
be comprehended in a few things. Therefore, when the pestilence reigning, any
one is distempered with the Contagion of this Disease, the help of the
omnipotent God being requested by Prayers, presently Remedies are to be flown
to: If the Plague happens in a body not thoroughly purged, and prone to
Vomiting, presently let a Vomit be taken, whose operation being finished,
immediately let a sweat be provoked, by taking Diaphoreticks, and the same
continued as strength can bear it, and afterward be often repeated. Besides,
let Alexipharmicks or Poyson-resisters, be used almost every moment, until by
the eruption of Whelks, Inflammations, or Buboes, all the Venom be wholly driven
forth of doors: but in the mean time, proper and respective Remedies, are to be
opposed to the most urging Symptoms: but especially, fit helps are to be fought
from Surgery, for the cure of the Buboes, and Plaguesores: the whole weight
of this business, leans on these two Intentions, that the pestiferous Poison
may be every way expelled from within, and then, that the recourse of what is
driven forth, be with equal diligence prevented.

Concerning the Plague, we cannot so readily write examples, and histories of
sick persons, with exact diaries of the Symptoms: because these kind of
sicknesses came not every year, neither when they spread, is it lawful for
every Physician that takes care of his own health, frequently to visit the
sick, or to stay long with them, whereby he may denote all accidents, and
diligently consider the reasons of them; which task however, the renowned
Diemerbrochius, did so firmly persist in, that after him, others may lawfully
be superseded from this work: when sometimes past, in this City, viz. 1645. the
Plague (tho not great) had spread, Doctor Henry Sayer, a very learned
Physician, and happy in his practice, many others refusing this province,
boldly visited all the sick, poor, as well as rich, daily administered to them
Physic, and handled with his own hands, their Buboes, and virulent Ulcers, and
so cured very many sick, by his sedulous, tho dangerous Labor. That he might
fortify himself against the Contagion, before he went into the infected
houses, he was wont only to drink a large draught of Sack, and then his
perambulation about the borders of Death, and the very jaws of the Grave being
finished, to repeat the same Antidote; After he had in this City, as if
inviolable as to the Plague, a long while taken care of the affairs of the Sick
without any hurt, he was sent for to Walling ford-Castle, where this Disease
cruelly Raged, as another Aesculapius, by the Governor of the place: But there
being so bold, as to lie in the same Bed; with a certain Captain (his intimate
Companion) who was taken with the Plague, he quickly received the Contagion of
the same Disease: nor were the Arts then profitable to the Master, which had
been helpful to so many others, but there, with great sorrow of the
Inhabitants, nor without great loss to the Medical Science, he dyed of that
Disease. As to others, distempered by the Pestilence, he was wont to order this
kind of method of healing, if he was sent for before the Buboes or Whelks
appeared outwardly, for the most part he gave a Vomit, the prescriptions of
which were of the Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, sometimes with white, and
sometimes with Roman Vitriol: The Vomiting being ended he commanded them to be
presently put into a sweat by the taking of Diaphoreticks; and thence, some
intervals being granted, for the recovery of strength, the sweating to be
continued to the declination of the Disease: but if he were sent for to the
sick, after the appearances of the marks, the Vomiting being let alone, he
insisted only upon Sudorificks.

CHAP. XIV. Of Pestilential and Malignant Fevers in specie, and of others
Epidemical.
AFter having unfolded the Nature of the Plague, by the order of our Tract, we
ought to proceed to the Diseases, which seem to be nearest like its Nature;
which chiefly are Fevers, called Pestilent and Malignant; for it is commonly
noted, that Fevers sometimes reign popularly, which for the vehemence of
symptoms, the great slaughter of the sick, and the great force of contagion,
scarce give place to the Pestilence; which however, because they imitate the
type of Putrid Fevers, and do not so certainly kill the sick as the Plague, or
so certainly infect others, they deserve the name not of the Plague, but by a
more minute appellation of a Pestilential Fever: Besides these, there are
Fevers of another kind, the perniciousness and Contagion of which appear more
remiss, yet, because they are infestous, beyond the force of Putrid Fevers,
and seem to contain in themselves in a manner, the (...) or hand of God of
Hippocrates, are yet by a more soft appellation, called Malignat Fevers.

Those Fevers differ both from the Pest, and from one another according to the
degree, and vehemence of contagion and deadlyness: as the Plague is a Disease
highly contagious, and deadly to human kind; it is the Pestilent Fever, which
commonly spreads with a lesser diffusion of its infection, and frequency of
burials. When the infection is only suspected, and the Crisis happens beyond
the event of vulgar Fevers, only not to be trusted or less safe, it is esteemed
for a Malignant Fever. They are yet more fully described thus.

When the Fever commonly spreads abroad, which for the variety of symptoms,
puts on the likeness of the Putrid Fever so caled, to wit, when there are
present, Thirst, Burning, Weariness, Anxiety, roughness of the Tongue,
Watchings, Frenzy, Vomiting, want of Appetite, Syncopy, Swooning,
Heart-pains, and a concourse of other most terrible accidents; if there happen
besides, spots either like to the little Flea-bites, or broad ones like black
and blew strokes, and livid, we esteem this disease of an evil Nature. If
besides these, it is not cured after the wonted manner of Fevers, but that the
strength of the sick is cast down, without any manifest cause, and that death
comes often unlooked for and unsuspected, against the Prognostic of the
Physician, there is yet a greater cause of suspicion of malignity: But if it
kills very many of the sick, and that those who converse with the sick,
contract the evil of the same Disease, that the same Disease spreads through
all the Villages or Cities, it may be said to be more than malignant, a
pestilential Fever: which is yet fully proved, if it rages in very many
ordinarily with a certain common symptom, as when a Squinancy, Dysentery or
deadly Sweat, such as in times past spread in England, accompany these sort of
Fevers.

If that a Fever arises, which Distempers many living in the same Region
together, almost after the same manner, which notwithstanding observes the laws
of a common Putrid Fever in its course, and is cured almost after the same
manner, this is not said to be Pestilent, but only a Malignant Fever; unless
that in some laboring with a remarkable Cacochymy, or fullness of ill humors,
the appearances of Buboes, or of spots, sometimes with a deadly Crisis, and a
contagion creeping upon others, betray some signs of Malignity.

If it be demanded, to which Class of the aforesaid Fevers, these sort of
Pestilential and Malignant Fevers ought to be placed, we ascribe them only to
the rank of continual Fevers; we discharge or acquit intermitting Fevers,
because by intervals they grant such firm Truces to Nature, and then they
regularly and exactly observe their periods, which does not confist with an
invenomed disposition. Also we except Hectic Fevers from malignity, because
otherwise their mortality would not be so long delayed, but that partaking of
Poison, they would kill sooner: among continual Fevers, although we affirm, that
the simple synochal Fevers, are not free, yet they are rarely touched with
this evil: but most of all, the Fever which shows the notes of pestility or
malignity, is of that sort, which resembles the figure of the Putrid Fever so
called: for when in these Fevers, besides the appearances of virulency, we
perceive a continual growing hot of the Blood, which passes through the courses
or stadia of beginning, increase, standing and declination, as in Putrid
Fevers, we deservedly affirm here, the Sulphurous part of the Blood to be
heated and inkindled, and by its burning to have brought in the Fever:
wherefore in these kind of Fevers, two things are especially to be noted, the
growing hot of the Blood and the malignity joined with it, of which now this,
now that is the greater: also, in both there is a great Latitude, and very many
degrees of its intension or heat, according to which the Fever becomes more or
less acute or malignant.

The growing hot of the Blood is performed after the same manner, as is already
said concerning Putrid Fevers: to wit, the Sulphurous part of the Blood
growing hot above measure, as it were takes fire by its fervor; in the time of
its burning it accumulates a great quantity of adust marter, upon whose
subaction and seclusion, depend the state and Crisis after the wonted manner of
Fevers: but besides these, the Blood being infected with a certain venornous
taint, in the burning it begins by reason of the malignant ferment, to be
coagulated into parts, and to putrify: wherefore besides the usual symptoms of
the common Fever, by reason of some congealed portions of the Blood, follow
either deadly Distempers, Swooning, a dejection of the Spirits, also
appearances of spots and marks: besides venomous Effluvia, which depart from
the sick, that are able to raise up the like Distemper in others, by the force
of their contagion; wherefore by reason of its perniciousness and contagion,
and their various degrees, it is called, either a Pestilent or Malignant Fever.

Also whilst the Blood growing hot, is infected with a venomous and malignant
ferment, not only proper coagulations of its mass, with a disposition to
putrefaction, are induced; but also the Nervous Liquor, easily contracts the
taint of this, from whence it being made improportionate to the Brain and
Regiment of the Animal Spirits, stirs up great irregularities in them:
therefore upon these sort of Fevers, come not only spots and whelks, but most
often a Delirium, Frenzy, Sleepiness, Tremblings of the Limbs, Cramps, and
Convulsive motions; I have often observed, that in some certain years,
Malignant Fevers have increased, which have shown their virulency, without the
appearances of marks, chiefly about the Nervous stock; because in some,
presently after the beginning, has followed a sleepiness, with a mighty
heaviness of the Head, in others, strong Watchings, a perturbation of mind,
with Trembling and Convulsive motions, but in most, either none, or only an
uncertain Crisis, and instead of it, a translation of the Feverish matter to
the Brain; besides it is observed, that these Fevers creep upon others by
contagion, and that very many are killed by them, that therefore they do
deserve to be called Malignant.

But these kind of Fevers are sometimes first begun from a venomous infection,
and the Blood being touched with the Particles of the venom, conceives of it
self an Effervescency, and is inkindled; as when from a contagion or malignant
Air being inspired, any one has fallen into a Malignant Fever, without any
evident cause or predisposition: But sometimes the Feverish Distemper is
induced from a proper cause, and then the seeds of the Malignity, either lying
hid within in the Body, exert themselves in the Effervent Blood, or they come
from another place by the contaminated Air, as it were the Food of the flame
before inkindled; for it appears by frequent observation in the time in which
an Epidemical Fever spreads, that others being any way arisen, turn into it.

Malignant Fevers, as also Pestilential, for the most part are popular, and
invade many at once: but sometimes they are private, and not ordinary, so that
perhaps only one or two are taken in the whole Region; in such a case, it is to
be suspected that they come not from a malignant Air, or Epidemical cause, but
from a morbous provision of the Body; for I have often observed that when in
the Spring or Autumn, a Fever sufficiently common, has spread in some City or
Town, of which very many have dyed, perhaps some one on whom an evil
predisposition, and a more strong evident cause, has brought the Fever, has
lain by it, with more horrid symptoms, and great notes of malignity: in which
case that malignity is not to be called common to the Fever, but not ordinary,
and accidental only.

Although the greatest reason of the difference, by which these kind of Fevers
are distinguished from one another, and from other Fevers, consists in their
deadliness and contagion; yet sometimes, they are noted with a certain peculiar
symptom, from which they take for that time, both the note of malignity, and
the appellation of the name: hence in some years an Epidemical Fever reigns,
which induces to most of the sick a Squinancy, another time an inflammation of
the Lungs, a Pleurisy, Dysentery, or some other distemper, and that oftentimes
most dangerous, and contagious: so the seeds of Diseases, not only derived from
the Parents by traduction, excite their fruits as it were by a certain
designation, in the same part or member; but also, those received from an
Infection commonly spreading, produce in all, a distemper of the same mode and
figure: which yet I think to happen, not because the seeds of the venomous
Infection, respect either this or that Region of the Body, with a certain
peculiar Virtue; but these so affect the mass of Blood, by a like manner in
all, that there is a necessity, for the sake of washing away this stain, that a
Crisis be attempted after the same manner in all. For when, without malignity,
the Blood, by reason of Coagulation, or perhaps other causes, is apt to be
extravasated, the usual places, in which portions of the same being
extravasated, are wont to be fixed, are the Throat, Pleura, Lungs, and
Intestines: wherefore, it is no wonder, when from a malignant cause, the
congelation of the Blood, and for that reason an extravasation is induced, if
the Disease is nested in the accustomed cherishing place of Nature.

Concerning the causes of these kind of Fevers, there is not much business:
they are for the most part deduced, in respect of the malignity, from the
vicious Constitution of the Air; in respect of the Feverish heat, from the
morbous provision of the Body: either of these, are easily made clear, by what
has been already said, concerning a Putrid Fever, and the causes of the
Pestilence: If the malignity be stronger than the Fever, and has induced it,
the impression of it is to be imputed to the inspired Air, or to a Contagion
received from others; if the Fever be first, its inkindling is ascribed to
transpiration being hindered, to a Surfeit, or to some other of the evident
causes above enumerated.

As to the signs, besides contagion and destruction, these show the malignity
of the Fever, a sudden loss of strength, a weak and unequal pulse, and evil
affection of the Brain and nervous parts, being suddenly induced, cruel
Vomitings, blackness of the Tongue, a suffusion of darkness through the whole
Body, but chiefly the appearances of Spots, Buboes, and of other marks.

For the cure of Fevers, both Pestilential and Malignant, there is greater
need of Judgment, and Circumspection, than in any others whatsoever: For when
there are two primary Indications, to wit, the Malignity, and the Feverish
intemperance, and when one can scarcely provide for the one, without detriment
to the other, it is not easily to be discerned, which should first be helped,
or soonest regarded. In respect of the Fever, purging, opening a Vein, and
cooling things, do chiefly help; but whilst these are performed, the Malignity,
for the most part is increased, and being neglected, spreads abroad more
largely its Poison: against the Malignity, Poyson-resisting Cordials, and
Diaphoreticks are required, but these extremely heighten the Fever, they more
shake the Blood and Spirits before inkindled, as it were with the blast of
Bellows, and force all as it were into a flame; wherefore, here is great need
of skill, that these things be rightly ordered in themselves, and where there
is most of danger appearing, thence the Curative Intentions are to be more
immediately designed; but so, as whilst one is consulted about, the other be not
neglected. But in these cases, besides the private Judgment of every Physician,
experience may supply the chief means of healing: for when as these Fevers
first spread, every one almost tryes several Remedies, and by the success of
them collated together, it may be easily reckoned, what kind of method is to be
relied on, till at last, by a frequent trial, or the footsteps of those passing
before, there is made as it were a high and broad Road, for the curing of these
sorts of distempers, bounded both with various observations and warnings.

Besides these sort of Fevers, which spread on many at once, and by reason of
the Contagion, deadliness, and conspicuous notes of virulency, deserve to be
called Pestilent or Malignant; there are some others, epidemical or popular,
which almost every year, either in the Spring or Autumn, rage in some
Countries; of which the Inhabitants for the most part of them are wont to be
sick, and not few, especially of the Elder, to dye: In which notwithstanding,
no signs of Pestilence or Malignity appear, neither does the Disease seem to
spread, from one and so to another, so much by Contagion, as to lay hold on
many, by reason of a predisposition, impressed almost on all. But these kind of
distempers, depend chiefly upon the foregoing Constitution of the year: for if
the season going before was very intemperate, by reason of excess of cold or
heat, of dryness or humidity, and so had continued for a long time, it changes
our Blood very much, from its due temperature, whereby it is apt afterward to
conceive Feverish effervescencies; and from hence a Fever, now of this Type
or Figure, now of that is produced; which presently becomes Epidemical, because
it draws its beginning from a common cause, wherewith the bodies of all, are in
a manner affected: But such Fevers, forasmuch as they depend upon the Blood
having gotten a disposition, now sharp, now austere, or of some other kind, by
reason of the temper of the year, for the most part are of the rank of
intermitting Fevers: yet, by a proper provision of Symptoms, they are wont to
be noted, according to the peculiar Constitution of every year. These are not
able to be comprehended, under a certain common rule, or formal reason, which
may quadrat to the nature of each of these; because they vary every year,
according to their several accidents. However, we will give you the
descriptions of these kind of Fevers, spreading of late years in this Region,
had at that time, for some specimen of the rest, and add it for a conclusion at
the end of this Tract.

There yet remains to be ascribed to the rank of malignant Fevers, some other
private Fevers, and participating of no Contagion: of which sort chiefly are
those, which are wont to happen to Childbearing women, by reason of difficult
and hard labor, or by reason of the stoppage of their Courses. Indeed it
sufficiently appears, by common observation, that these are very dangerous, and
often mortal: for if, by the parts of the Womb being hurt, or by cold being
admitted, or perhaps by any other cause, the Courses are stopped, and the
humor which ought to be thrust forth, shall be confused with the mass of the
Blood, it most wickedly infects it, as it were with a certain venomous mixture;
that by that means, presently a Fever is excited, which with an evil provision
of Symptoms, is very much beset, viz. with heat, and cruel thirst, Vomiting,
pain of the Heart, and watchings, and for the most part obtains, either no
Crisis, or a very difficult one: because, unless the wonted way of the flux of
the Courses, may be at length restored, it is wont, after the heat of the Blood
has been continued for some days, to Communicate the evil to the Brain, and
nervous stock; from whence, by and by, a Delirium, Frenzy, Convulsions, and
other most wicked distempers, are most often induced, which do not seldom end
in Death: but these sort of Fevers deserve a peculiar consideration which we
have more fully determined to show hereafter in a particular discourse
concerning this business; in the mean time, we will undertake to propose some
instances or examples of the Fevers, but now delivered, viz. of the Pestilent,
and Malignant.

The pestilent Fever, of late years, has more rarely spread in these Regions,
than the Plague it self: of the only one of this kind, which fell under our
observation, I will give you a brief description. In the year 1643, when in the
coming on of the Spring, the Earl of Essex besieged Reading, being held for the
King, in both Armies there began a Disease to arise very Epidemical; however,
they persisting in that work, till the besieged were forced to a surrender,
this Disease grew so grievous, that in a short time after, either side left
off, and from that time, for many months, fought not with the Enemy, but with
the Disease: as if there had not been leisure to turn aside to another kind of
Death, this deadly Disease increasing, they being already overthrown by Fate,
and as it were falling down before this one Death. Essexe's Camp moving to the
Thomes, pitched in the places adjacent, where he shortly lost a great part of
his men: But the King returned to Oxford, where at first, the Soldiers being
disposed in the open Fields, then afterward among the Towns and Villages,
suffered not much less: For his Foot, (which it chiefly invaded) being pact
together in close houses, when they had filled all things with filthiness, and
unwholsom nastiness, and stinking odors (that the very Air seemed to be
infected) they fell sick by Troops, and as it were by Squadrons. At length the
Fever now more than a Camp Fever invaded the unarmed and peaceable Troops, to
wit, the entertainers of the Soldiers, and generally all others, yet at first
(the Disease being yet but lightly inflicted) tho beset with an heavy and long
languishment, however many escaped. About the Summer Solstice this Fever began
also to increase with worse provision of Symptoms, and to lay hold on the
Husbandmen, and others inhabiting the Country. Then afterward, spread through
our City, and all the Country round, for at least Ten miles about. In the mean
time, they who dwelt far from us, in other Counties remained free from hurt,
being as it were without the sphere of the Contagion. But here this Disease
became so Epidemical that a great part of the people was killed by it; and
as soon as it had entered an house, it run through the same, that there was
scarce one left well to administer to the sick; strangers, or such as were sent
for to help the sick, were presently taken with the Disease; that at length,
for fear of the Contagion, those who were sick of this Fever, were avoided by
those who were well, almost as much, as if they had been sick of the Plague.

Nor indeed, did there a less mortality, or slaughter of men, accompany this
Disease: because Cachectic, and Pthisical old men, or otherways unhealthful,
were killed by it; also not a few of Children, young men, and those of a more
mature and robust age. I remember in some Villages, that almost all the old men
dyed this year, that there were scarce any left, who were able to defend the
manners and privileges of the Parish, by the more anciently received
Traditions.

When this Fever first began, it was something like the figure of a putrid
Synochus; but it was harder to be cured, and when it seemed to be helped by a
sweat or looseness, presently it was wont to be renewed again: but for the most
part, after the deflagration of the Blood, continued for six or seven days,
this remitting, and instead of a Crisis the adust matter being translated to
the Brain, the sick for a long time keeping their Beds with raging sometimes,
but more often with a stupefaction, with great weakness, and sometimes with
Convulsive motions, scarcely escaped at last. About the middle of the Summer,
besides the Contagion and frequent burials, this Disease betrayed its
malignity, and pestilential force in open signs, viz. By the eruption of Whelks
and Spots: because about this time in many there appeared without any great
burning of the Fever, an unequal, weak, and very much disordered pulse; also
without a manifest expense of Spirits, their strength presently became
languishing, and very much dejected: In others, sick after the same manner,
appeared little Blisters or Measles, now small and red, now broad and livid: in
many, Buboes, (as in the Plague) about the glandulas: of these some died
silently and unforeseen, without any great struggling of the Spirits, or
Feverish burning excited in the Blood: in the mean time others, by and by
becoming furibundous, whilst they lived suffered most horrid distractions, of
the animal Spirits. Those about to escape from this Disease, without any
laudible Crisis, (unless they were the sooner freed by a sweat provoked by Art)
the Brain, and nervous stock becoming distempered, at length, with a
benummedness of the senses, tremblings, vertigo, debility of the members, and
Convulsive motions, did not grow well but of a long time after. During the
Dog Days, this Disease being still infestous, began to be handled not as a
Fever, but as a lesser Plague, and to be overcome only by Poyson-resisting
Remedies; letting of Blood, was believed to be fatal to this: Vomits, and
Purges, sometimes tho not often, were made use of, but the chiefest means of
Cure, were accounted to be procured by Alexiteriums, and timely sweat. For this
end, besides the prescripts, of Physicians, to be had at the Apothecaries, some
Emperical Remedies deserved no small praise; then first of all, the powder of
the Countess of Kent, began to be of great esteem in this Country; also of no
less note was another powder, of the color of Ashes, which a certain Courtier
staying by chance in this City, gave to many with good success; and to others
approving of the use of it, he sold it at a great price; the sick were wont
having taken half a dram of this, in any Liquor, to fall into a most plentiful
sweat, and so to be freed from the virulency of the Disease; That Diaphoretick
(whose preparation I afterward learnt, from the Cosen German of the Author)
was only the powder of Toads, purged thoroughly with Salt, and then wshed in the
best Wine, and lightly calcined in an earthen Pot. The Autumn coming on, this
Disease by degrees remitted its wonted fierceness that fever grew sick of it
and of them many grew well; till the approach of the Winter, when this Fever
almost wholly vanished, and health was rendered to this City, and the Country
round about fully and wholly.

Thus you have seen the beginning, progress, and end of this Fever, at first
only a Camp Fever, but at length became Pestilential, and Epidemical. That at
first the Disease began in the Soldiers Camp, may seem to be imputed, not only
to their nastiness, and stinking smells, but in some sort to a common vice of
the Air, for as these Fevers come not every year, their original may be
ascribed, partly to the peculiar Constitution of the year. Because, by that
means, a more light intemperance of the Air being contracted, tho it did not
affect the more healthful Inhabitants; yet in the Army, where evident causes,
viz. errors in the six non-naturals, very much happen to the general
procatartic cause, there is a necessity for these kind of sicknesses easily to
be excited. For the constitution of this year, was in the Spring very moist,
and slabbery, almost with continual shours, to which a mnore hot Summer
Succeeding, and the infection of the Feverish Contagion here first increasing,
still grew worse, and disposed all Bodies the more for the receiving it;
wherefore, that this Disease was almost proper to this Region, and at this time
Epidemical, the seed of it ought to be ascribed to its first rising from the
Army, being quartered round about. But forasmuch, as it afterward being made
Pestilential, and very Epidemical, it infected most of the people living here,
and killed not a few, the reason was, the evil affection of the Air; which
because of the intemperance of the year being unwholsom, besides by the
continual breathing forth of stinking vapors from the Soldiers Camps, and the
quarters of the sick, it became at last so votious, that the infection of the
Fever, being dispersed in it, was greatly exalted, and arose almost to the
virulency of the Plague. Diemerbrochius relates from the like Camp Fever,
arising in the Summer at Spires, afterward another Malignant and Pestilential,
and then the Plague it self to have accrewed. Also, it was a sign that this
Fever of ours, became at last equal to the Plague it self, besides the great
force of the Contagion, and the frequency of Burials, most wicked distempers of
the Blood, and nervous Liquor, being brought presently upon all, by it:
because, strength being suddenly overthrown, the weak intermitting pulse, the
creeping forth of measly Blisters, the eruption of Buboes, argued the
Coagulation, and corruptive disposition of the Blood: besides the Delirium,
Madness, Frenzy, Stupefaction, Sleepiness, Vertigo, Tremblings, Convulsive
motions, and diverse other distempers of the Head, showed the great hurt of the
Brain, and nervous stock.

That the figure, or Idea of this malignant Fever, may be painted to the life,
very many observations or histories of sick people, are easily to be had; of
the many examples of this Disease, I shall only mention a few, which happened
some years since in the house of a venerable man, and as with a mournful
slaughter, so not without some admiration.

About the Winter Solstice, in the year 1653. a youth of about Seven years old,
without any manifest cause, found himself ill, being troubled with a pain of
his Head, Sleepiness, and mighty Stupefaction; with it he had a Fever, tho not
strong, with an ordinary burning, which grew more grievous, only by wandering
fits, sometimes once, sometimes twice in Twenty four hours space: presently from
the beginning, he slept almost continually, also he was wont in his sleep to
cry out, to talk idly, and to leap often out of his Bed; being awakned, and
sometimes of his own accord awaking, he presently came to himself, and
constantly called for drink; his Urine was red, and full of Contents, his pulse
equal, and strong enough; in his wrists appeared light contractures of the
tendons, and in his neck, and other parts of his Body, some red spots like
Flea-bites. At the first, was ordered a light Purgation, and a frequent taking
down of the Belly, by the use of Clysters; he daily took Cordial Julaps, with
Poysonresisters; Vesicatories or blistering Plasters, were applied to his neck,
and other Plasters to the soles of his feet: on the sixth day, a little Blood
streamed from his nostrils; on the seventh, without any manifest through
Crisis, the Fever very much abated, the heat so gentle as to be perceived only
by the Touch; also, the Urine pale, thin, and without any sediment, yet he was
much more grieviously troubled with sleepiness, and a stupefaction of the Head,
so that his Urine, and the excrements of his Belly came away involuntarily;
however, being called upon, he knew the standers by, and answered to their
questions; These distempers, notwithstanding the Remedies every day grew worse:
About the Fourteenth day, the sick youth became so stupid, as neither to be
able to understand, nor to speak, yet he swallowed still what was put into his
mouth, tho unknowingly, and his pulse was laudable enough: about this time, he
fell into a Flux, excited of it self by Nature for four days, which at last
ceasing, a whiteish crust or scurf, and as it were Chaulky, began to spread
over the whole cavity of his Mouth and Throat, which being often in a day wiped
away, new presently broke forth: when he had thus for four days more been sick,
he became better in his intellect, and sense, so that he was able to know his
Parents and Friends, to take notice of their words, and to do something as he
was bid: but as his sensitiv faculty began to be restored, so he began to grow
worse as to his speech and the Organs of swallowing; without doubt the matter
being fallen from the Brain, into the beginnings of the Nerves, a Palsy in the
Tongue and Throat had succeeded to the heaviness and stupefaction: which
distemper in a short time so increased, that afterward the sick person could
not swallow at all, but that what he took in at the Mouth presently flowed back
again, neither could any thing go down into the Stomach; when besides the
cruelty of the Disease, there was danger least he should be killed by Famine,
an Instrument was prepared of a pin of Chalk, put into a little plaint wand,
and on the top of it, a little tuft of silk made fit; and this being thrust
down his Throat, opened the closing for a time, whereby the Food taken in, ws
suffered to pass, after the use of this for a day or two, he was able to
swallow again, and afterwardsto take his Food well enough: and within a few
days, he began to speak, to discern any thing, and becoming wonderful hungry,
to ask for, all day long, all sorts of Food, and greedily to devour what ever
was brought to him. In the mean time, by reason of his long sickness, and the
Nervous parts being grievously hurt; he was grown so Lean, that the Bones
scarce sticking to the Skin, he represented exactly a living Skeleton. But
afterward, by the sedulous, indefatigable, and prudent care of the Mother
about his diet, he recovered perfect Health, and is yet living, and well.

When this child had hardly arived ot the height of his sickness, his Brother,
elder about two years, on the Ides of January, was taken almost after the same
manner. At first he was troubled with a Torpor and heaviness sof the Head, then
growing Feverish, with a sleepiness and stupidity: he began to talk idly in
his sleep, then being awake hardly to come to himself: after four or five days,
these symptoms grew more grievous: he was able to understand little, nor scarce
to speak articulately, and not without stammering. His Urine was thick, cloudy,
without Hypostasis, or settling of the Contents: there appeared, as in his
Brother, red spots, small, like Fea-bites; his Excrements both of his Belly and
Bladder, came away involuntarily. But his Pulse was yet strong and equal; his
Hypochondria were stretched out, and inflated with a tumor of the Abdomen;
about the eighth day, he had a small stream of Blood: on the eleventh day of
his sickness, he fell into a Diarrhaea, by which, in the space of five hours,
he cast forth seven times, bilous, thin, and highly stinking stuff, from whence
there was some hope of his amendment; but the next day after, the flux of his
Belly ceasing, pains, and torments cruelly infested his Belly, that crying out
and moaning night and day, he sent forth most heavy complaints; his
Hypochondria and Abdomen were tumid like a Tympany, and mightily distended;
when he could not receive any thing of ease, from no remedies, the most
exquisite skill of many Physicians being tried, on the fourteenth day he died
Convulsive, in these torments.

A little after his death, viz. on the thirteenth of February, his Brother,
elder than him, about eleven years old, a youth of great hopes, began to be
Feverish; and as the others, with a Torpor and heaviness of his Head, tho less
strongly affected; but the heat in the Blood was greater, which was of a more
hot temperament, and greater perturbation appeared, that for the first six
days, besides heat and thirst, he was troubled with a continual endeavor of
excretion, now by sweat, now by stool. His Urine was red and troubled; some red
spots, as in the rest broke forth; on the seventh day he had a bleeding about
five Ounces, which ceasing, a great benumedness succeeded, that for all that
day and the night following, he could scarce lift up his Eyes: on the eighth
day, a most plentiful bleeding followed again at the Nose, that there was
danger, lest he should have lost his life, together with his Blood: the Blood
sprang so copiously from his left nostril, that being received in a Basin, it
made little Bladders or bubbles by its fall: when he had lost above two pound
of Blood, and being taken with a cold sweat, began to lose his strength,
remedies were at length administered, and the Flux was yet hardly stopped. The
Haemorrhage being stayed, the Youth slept soundly, and all that day became
sleepy: yet often awakning, he remained well in his senses and was quick in
sense, and understanding; and being asked of his health, he said he was pretty
well; his Urine, which was before red and troubled, then appeared pale, thin,
and with a laudable Hypostasis, that the sick seemed, (especial because he
wanted thirst, or immoderate heat) to be perfectly cured and freed from the
Fever: on the following morning, being the ninth day of the Fever, he
remained yet torpid, but being raised up, he living cheerfully and without
intemperance, seemed to be in a condition of growing well, but that he began a
little to faulter in his peech: in the evening, when it was lest suspected, the
Fever being again inkindled, on a sudden he fell into a Lethargy, that he was
scarce able to be awakned from sleep, and being pulled, scarce to know any
body, or to speak plainly: although so great a loss of Blood had gone before, the
Pulse was yet quick, high, and vehement, also his Urine red: after deriving,
and withdrawing remedies, had been used all that Night, this Youth seemed to be
in a little better condition, so that in the morning, he continued a long time
from sleep, but began to role about his Eyes hither and thither, and to set
himself up a little; yet without speaking, or knowledge of those that were about
him: before noon, his Eyes being shut again, he wholly lost the use of every
Animal faculty: he lay for three days, as it were Apoplectick, with an high and
vehement Pulse, with a palpitation of the Heart, and a difficult and painful
breathing; his Pulse at length growing lesser by degrees, he dyed the
thirteenth day of the Fever.

On the fifteenth of February, his Sister, somewhat lesser than he was, began to
complain of a pain and torments in her Belly, a trembling in her hands, and a
painful tension or stretching out of the Muscles of her Neck, with a Feverish
intemperance, and thirst: on the last day of February, she growing plainly into
a Fever, could not keep out of her Bed: moreover she was troubled with a
wandering heat, now in her Face, now about her lower parts; also she became
heavy and somnolent, and awaking from sleep, could not presently come to her
self. On the first of March she was lightly Purged and with ease, with an
expression of Rhubarb: her Urine was thick and red; elso petechial red spots,
(as in the rest) were conspicuous: we gave her after that, for four days, at
several times, to wit, after the interval of every six hours space, ten drops
of the spirit of Hartshorn, in a Spoonful of Cordial Julep; the aforesaid
symptoms afterward leisurly remitted, and this sick child, tho slowly,
recovered health without a manifest through Crisis.

About the same time her little Brother, younger than any of these, fell sick
almost after the like manner; who, yet, a looseness arising Naturally of it
self, for many days, voyding Choleric and greenish stuff, was easily cured.
Also in the same Family, many other Domestics, and some strangers coming to
help them, the evil being propagated by Contagion, fell sick of the same
Disease: who notwithstanding, at length became well, tho with difficulty, and
slowly, without any regular Crisis being made.

That this Fever was malignant, plainly appears by the Contagion, Mortality,
and appearances of spots, and many other signs; tho that infecting contagion,
whereby it spread from one to another, showed it self slow, and of lesser
Efficacy; because, between the sicknesses of each of them, many days, and
oftentimes weeks happened to be, that the infection of this tho acute Disease,
and the dissemination on others, was scarcely finished in four months space, in
the same House. The Fever about the first beginning seemed gentle and mild,
not very terrible as to burning; but the matter being heaped together, from the
deflagration of the Blood, became presently untameable, hard to be
exterminated, also enemical to the Brain and Nervous stock; wherefore in each
of them, the beginning of the Disease, was to be known rather by the torpor and
somnolency, than the fervor and heat; also, the Crisis, tho by several ways
attempted, viz. by Sweat, Flux, Bleeding, did not happily succeed, but for most
part, the Blood growing turgid with the critical motion, endeavored to
transfer the Feverish matter, upon the dwellings of the Animal Spirits; yet it
self notwithstanding, became not putrified by this means, but that about the
standing of the Disease, both humors (to with the Blood and Nervous Juice)
being vitiated, by an impure mixture together, and grievously touched, caused
the event of the Disease, to be either deadly, or extreme dangerous.

CHAP. XV. Of the Measles and Smallpox.
IN the next place, we refer the Smallpox and Measles to the rank of
pestilential and malignant Fevers, which indeed are mixed Distempers,
consisting at once according, and contrary to our Nature. As to their Original,
they have their seminary born with us: but as to the effect, they produce
preternatural symptoms, and (as the Plague it self) poisonous; so that they
constitute ar it were a certain peculiar kind of Fevers, proper indeed to men,
but after another manner, than Porphyrius has assigned; for it happens for
every man only, and once to be distempered with the Smallpox or Measles: if
perchance any one lives free their whole life, or another more ofen fall into
these Distempers, they are rare and unusual events of Nature, which lessen not
common observation; yea it is fully confirmed, to wit, that all, and only men are
obnoxious to the Smallpox and Measlles, and are wont to be rid of them at one
sickness. Concerning the Smallpox, we will treat of them apart from the
Measles, what the cause of them is, then what signs and symptoms they have, and
lastly what things belong to the Crisis and Cure.

Concerning the Causes, we ought to consider in the first place, what is the
secret leading Cause, to wit, which renders only and all mankind, and that
once, obnoxious to this Disease. Secondly, we will inquire concerning the
evident Causes, viz. by what and how many ways, this latent and occult
disposition, is wont to be, now sooner now later, deduced into Act. Thirdly, it
shall be declared, what is the conjunct cause, to wit, by what motion and
alteration of the Blood, the figure of this Disease is produced.

1. As to the first, this disposition or Natural predisposition, which inclines
human kind to this Disease, seems to be a certain evil or impurity of the
Blood, conceived in the Womb, among the first Rudiments of Generation; almost
all Authors, would have this ascribed to the Menstruous Blood: which Opinion
seems not altogether improbable: because in a woman's Womb, (otherways than in
most other living Creatures) there is generated a certain Ferment, which being
communicated to the mass of Blood, affords to it vigor and spirit, and then at
set periods, procures a swelling up, and an excretion of the superfluous Blood;
but at the time of Conception, when the Menstrua wholly cease, very much of
this ferment is bestowed on the Faetus or Child; and its Particles, being
Haeterogeneous to all the rest, as a certain extraneous things, are ocnfused
with the mass of Blood and humors; with which being involved and separated one
from another, lurk or ly hid a long while; yet afterward, at some time, being
moved or stirred up, by some evident cause, they ferment with the Blood, and
induce to it an ebullition, and then a Coagulation; from whence very many
symptoms of this Disease arise.

These fermentative seeds sometimes are few and gentle, and so involved with
other little Bodies, as they do not easily appear, and are brought into act;
sometimes they are more and stranger; so that on the least occasion they are
ripened into this Disease; hence indeed some are taken sooner, with the
Smallpox in their tender years: others more slowly, and not till full or more
ripe age: also some easily receive the contagion, but others converse often
with the sick without danger. The sooner that any one has this Disease, the
more secure they are; wherefore children most often escape, oid men, or such as
are of years, are more in danger, viz. in children or young people,
transpiration is more easy, also the habit of the Body more firm and
healthful. But although the venomous seeds of this Disease, for the most part are
wont to be dispersed or blown away at once, and with one sickness; yet it
sometimes happens, that a part of the ininfection being still left, the sick
have fallen into this Disease twice or thrice.

2. The evident cause which stirs up these fermentative seeds, and most often
brings them into act, may be said to be threefold, viz. The contagion received
from some place: the disposition of the Air, and the immoderate perturbation of
the Blood and Humors. It is most manifest by daily experience, that this
Disease does come upon others, and spread abroad by contagion; viz. from the
infected Body, continually flow Effluvia, which being received by other Bodies,
presently like poison they ferment with the Blood, and suscitate or awaken the
lurking or sleeping seeds of the same Disease, Homogeneous with themselves, and
dispose them into the figure or Idea of this Disease: neither is the infection
only communicated by contact, but at a distance. They who live within the same
house, or neighboring to the sick, easily receive the infection; also it is
cherished in Clothes, and dissipated afar off, and transferred to more remote
places. They who are of kin one to another, soonest infect each other: also
they who are fearful, and extremely dread this Disease, more readily fall into
it: For by fear, the Particles of the infection are conveyed inwardly from the
superficies of the Body. At what time the contagion spreads, and that the
Smallpox are Epidemical, all other Diseases almost degenerate into this.
Secondly, a certain peculiar disposition of the Air, notably induces the
Smallpox; hence most often it becomes Popular, and rages ordinarily through
whole Regions, Cities and Villages; hence also it more often exists in the
Spring and Autumn: because at that time especially diverse manners of little
Bodies, and by that means tumultuating flow about in the Air, which we draw in
with the vital Air, and so various effervescencies of the Blood and Humors, and
Ideas of Diseases are raised up, Neither does this Disease become only more
frequent and Epidemical, for these Causes, but also it gets a manifold Nature,
that sometimes the Smallpox are deadly, and as it were pestiferous, and
sometimes they are more mild and benign; to wit, as they have contracted more or
less of malignity from the Air; hence also sometimes black and livid Whelks or
Pustils appear, and have much of the Nature of the Plague. Thirdly, sometimes,
tho the tinder of contagion be absent, and that no malignant constitution of
the Air had gone before, yet by reason of the Blood and Humors being
immoderately disturbed, the Smallpox do arise: so I have known some to have
fallen into this Disease, from a surfeit, or immoderate exercise, when none
besides in the whole Country about, has been sick of it, to wit, the seeds of
this evil, lying hid, without any previous infection, being stirred up by a too
great fervor of the Blood, and being associated, gathering together, easily
defile, and infect the whole mass of the Blood, with their ferment.

3 So much for the secret leading, and evident causes, but as to the conjunct
cause, viz. which is the formal reason of this Disease, or the manner of its
being made, the business seems a little more intricate. It is commonly wont to
be compared to Must growing hot, or Beer when it Purges in the Vat: For if you
put to these Liquors, any thing of ferment: as their Particles are
Heterogeneous, and of wonderful activity, presently they diffuse themselves
through the whole substance of the Liquor, they exagitate the more thick and
impure Bodies, against which they are dashed, beat them asunder, and role about
them, until a flowring being made, they drive the same from the intimate
embrace or company of the Liquor, to the outmost superficies. After the like
manner the Heterogeneous seeds of this Disease, are thought to ferment the
Blood, and then by a certain eruption of Whelks or Pustles, like the flowring,
purifies it. But indeed, if we should more strictly consider the business,
there will appear here a great difference: because the infection of the
Smallpox, is as it were a ferment, but corruptive, and compels the Blood to
grow hot, not toward perfection, but depravation; for when the Particles of
this venomous infection strike against the receiving subject, they presently
raise up little Bodies like to themselves, and born with us, with which being
associated, they pass through the whole mass of the Blood, and make it to grow
highly turgid, and to boil up, and after some time growing fervent, to go into
parts, and to be coagulated, viz. the dispersed seeds of the Poison, dissolve
the mixture of the Blood, presently profligate the more pure Spirits, then they
join its more thick Particles to themselves, and by their adhesion, render them
as it were congealed: The portions being so coagulated, together with the
infolded seeds of the poison, being left by the rest of the Blood, in its
circuit, between the extremities of the Vessels, are affixed to the skin: by
which means, if Nature being strong enough, does cast forth the whole poison,
with the congealed Blood, the remaining mass of the Blood, although made poorer,
remains however in a condition to continue life and health: but if the Blood,
being too excessively congealed, cannot be purified after this manner; or if
portions of the Blood growing together with the poison, do not fully break
forth, or at last do stagnate within, they wholly corrupt the Liquor of the
Blood, or else being affixed to the Viscera, and especially to the Heart, they
destroy their constitution and strength.

Portions of the congealed Blood, with the poison, begin to break forth about
the fourth day, (now sooner now later:) because coagulation is not presently
induced, but after some time, in which the venom unfolds it self, and ferments
the Blood with its effervency: First, light portions of the infected Blood, and
those but few in number, like to Flea-bites, are fixed in the skin: quickly
after more appear, and those first broke forth, by the accession of new matter,
and by the continual appulsion of the congealed Blood, increase and are
elevated into a tumor: then these whelks at first red being by degrees
increased, at length grow white, viz. the Blood being thrust forth of the
Vessels with the poison, by reason of the heat and stagnation, is changed into
matter: about the seventh day after the eruption, the white tumors grow crusty,
into a dry scab; for the more thin part of the matter being evaporated, the
rest grows hard, which then having eaten, and broke off the Cuticula, or
outward thin skin, falls away from the flesh or next skin.

When the infection of the Smallpox, is at once impressed on the Blood and
Spirits, it very rarely can be blotted out, or dissipated by Medicines, or
blood letting; but that its hidden disposition, will break forth into act;
wherefore at first it diffuses it self by little and little, and inspires the
mass of Blood, as it were with a ferment, hence an ebullition and growing hot
are produced in the whole Body, the Vessels are distended, the Viscera
provoked, the membranes pulled, until the seeds of he contagion, by fusing and
coagulating the Blood, being at length involved with its congealed portions,
are thrust forth of doors. The essence of this Disease will be better laid
open, if that I shall recount the signs and symptoms, which are to be observed
in its whole course, and shall add in order the reasons and causes of them, on
which they depend: but they are those which either indicate the Disease being
present, or tht foretell its state and event.

As to the Diagnosis of this Disease, by which it may be known, whether any one
at first falling sick, will have the Smallpox or not; at that time are to be
considered, the force of the contagion, and the concourse of the symptoms first
appearing; for if by reason of the evil constitution of the Air, this Disease
does spread abroad every where, none then is taken with a Fever, without the
suspicion of the Smallpox, especially if they never had them before in their
lives; but if this Disease be more rare, and without fear of contagion, yet its
unlooked for assault quickly betrays it self, by these sort of signs and
symptoms.

1. There is a wand ring and uncertain Fever, sometimes strong, sometimes more
remiss, observing no reason of increase, or growing continually hot, so that
the sick are now highly hot, by and by without any evident cause, they are
without a Fever; the cause of which is, for that the fermentative seeds are
not agitated by an equal motion, but like fire half choked, now increases
more, and now are almost quelled, and ready to expire, until the burning
spreading more largly, the flame every where breaks forth.

2. A pain in the Head, and Loins, is so peculiar a sign in this Disease, that
it almost alone, in a continual Fever, signifies the approach of the
smallpox: the reason of which is commonly imputed, to the greater Vessels
being very much distended, by the effervency of the Blood: but indeed it
appears not, wherefore the same trouble is not caused equally in other parts,
by reason of the like distention of the Vessels, and wherefore in the
smallpox, more than in a burning Fever, or in other Fevers, where the Blood
grows more hot, these kind of pains should increase; yea, it may be observed,
that great pains, now in the Head, now in the Loins, do urge, when the Blood
but little swelling up, the Vessels are not amplified, viz, in the beginning of
the Disease, when the Feverish disteper is not yet conspicuous, whilst the
sick as yet go abroad, and are well in their stomach, upon the first coming on
of the smallpox, they betray themselves by these kind of pains. Wherefore, the
cause of these kind of dolorific pains, seems rather to subsist in the nervous
stock, viz. in the Brain, and spinal marrow, and that by reason of the
membranes, and nervous parts being pulled or hauled, by the particles of the
Poison, these pains do arise. For it is most likely, that the innate seeds of
the smallpox, are chiefly hidden in the Spermatick parts, and that first of
all, the Contagion lays hold on, for the most part, the animal Spirits; hence,
the first effervency is stirred up in the juice, wherewith the Brain, and
nervous parts, but especially the Spinal marrow are watered, and from thence
the evil is Communicated to the mass of Blood; wherefore, this Disease
beginning, the Head and Loins are tormented with cruel pain; afterward, the
venom being translated into the Blood, the Feverish effervescency is stirred
up in the whole.

3. Great anxiety, and unquietness, and sometimes a swooning, infest the sick,
viz. by reason of the perturbed motion of the Blood, as also its equal mixture,
beginning to be solved, by the Poisonous ferment, the Blood from thence being
apt to stagnate in the Heart, and to be hindered in its Circuit, causes these
affections to be thus excited.

4. Cruel Vomiting, also when the Ventricle is free from an impure ballast of
humors, very often accompanies this Disease; the reason of which is, because
the fermentative seeds, being stirred up into motion, by the little Arteries
gaping into the Coats of the Ventricle, are deposed by every appulse of the
Blood, and raise up Vomiting, as if the particles of stibium had been
swallowed; but afterward, afloon as sweating being procured, the Poison is
driven forth outwardly, this Symptom ceases, and the sick are well in their
stomach, without any purging forth of the noxious matter.

5. With these may be ranked, the Symptoms which show themselves, according to
the various habitudes of the Body, after a diverse manner, as heavy sleepiness,
terrors in sleep, deliriums, tremblings, and convulsions, sneezing, heat,
redness, a sense of pricking over the whole Body, involuntary tears, a
sparkling and itching of the eyes, a tumor or swelling up of the face, a
vehemence of Symptoms from the beginning, that the Disease seems presently to
have attained its strength: the reason of all which, may easily be elucidated,
if what has been already said, concerning the Symptoms of Fevers, be
observed; with respect to the diverse tempers of the sick, their habit, and
age, as also the condition of the year.

2. As to the Prognosis of this Disease, by the Symtomatick signs, it is
indicated to be either salutary, or mortal, or of a doubtful Event.

1. The business promises well, when this Disease has benign circumstances; to
wit, when it happens in a good constitution of the Air and Year, at what time
the smallpox are less malignant and pestilential; as in the year 1654, at
Oxford, about Autumn, the smallpox spread abundantly, yet very many escaped
with them: but before, in the year 1649. this Disease was more rare, yet most
dyed of it. Also, thee is less danger, if it should happen in the age of
Children, or Infancy, or in a sanguine temper, and good habit of Body, or in a
Family, to whose Ancestors, the smallpox have not proved mortal: Besides, if
in the whole course of the Disease, the Symptoms prove laudable, if in the
first assault, there be a gentle Fever, without cruel Vomiting, Swooning,
Delirium, or other horrid Distempers; if the Fever about the fourth day be
allayed, with the Symptoms chiefly urging, and then some little red spots begin
to appear: if on the second day, of the coming forth of those little red spots,
they become more conspicuous, which afterward grow together by degrees into
little Pimples, and are ripened into matter; if about the tenth day, or
thereabouts, after the eruption, the white tumors begin to scab, and by little
and little from thence to fall off: if after their first coming forth, the
smallpox are soft, distinct, few, round, sharp pointed, lying only toward the
skin, and not in the inward parts, you may be confident the sick will do very
well, and is in a good condition.

2. The appearances, which in the smallpox, signify the business to be
suspected, and full of danger are of this sort: if there be a maligant
constitution of the Air that this Disease becomes Pestilential, and that many
die of it: if men of more ripe years, or middle age, be taken with it; if it
happens in a cold and melancholic temper, or in an impure or evil humoured
Body, where the Blood is not rightly circulated, nor transpiration truly
performed; or if the Hypochondria, or Precordia are obstructed, some of the
Viscera infirm, or troubled with an Ulcer, or if the habit of the Body be too
fat, the smallpox happen not without great danger of life; nor is it less to
be feared, when presently after the beginning, a great Fever, cruel Vomiting,
Swooning, a dejection of strength, Frenzy or Delirium, come upon them, and
that these desist not, upon the full coming forth of the smallpox, for these
signify a too great perturbation in the Blood and humors; also, a confusion
and contumacy of the morbifick matter, which can neither be subdued, nor easily
separated from the mass of Blood, or equally extruded from it: if there be an
anxiety, and great unquietness, with an inordinate boiling up, and growing hot
of the Blood; also a great thirst, a difficulty of breathing, also a flux of
the Belly, or Dysentery, they show that sweating is hindered, and that the
malignant humors, restagnate toward the inward parts: The smallpox breaking
forth slowly, argue the crudity, and untameableness of the matter, and the
impotency of Nature, and it is much more a sign, if they come forth double, and
continued, in too excessive a quantity, and confusion, and also if there be a
disordered expulsion, and irregular, of that matter, when not in certain
issues, but every where undistinguishable. The pox being hard, signify the
incoction of the same matter, being depressed, a weak expulsion; and they are
the worse, if in the midst of them appear black spots; or if purple spots
familiar to the Fever, or the Plague, are sprinkled among the pox, they
indicate a great malignity, and putrefaction of the Blood, such as is wont to
be found in the Pestilence. Lastly, the pox being black, livid, or green, are
of an evil omen, because, besides the coagulations of the Blood, they argue its
deadlinesses, and corruptions, as in a Gangreen, or pestilent Plague sore; if
when the smallpox being come forth, they presently grow dry, and the swelling
of the parts remit, it shows a going back of the malignant matter, or of the
congealed Blood, with the Poison, and a restagnation of it to the inward parts;
from whence, unless a more free Diaphoresis or sweating be excited, that it may
be thrust forth of doors again, death for the most part quickly follows: For
from hence, the Blood being more coagulated, enters into putrefaction, also it
is apt to be hindered in its motion, and to stagnate in the heart, and Vessels.
If after the coming forth of the smallpox, a flux of the Belly, or a Bleeding
at nose, comes upon them, it is an evil sign, because, by this means, the Venom
driven outwardly, is again called back inwardly; but sometimes I have observed
these Symptoms to have happened, with great ease to the sick, viz. Nature being
before oppressed, and burdened; after this manner, part of the burden being
as it were detracted, she was eased; wherefore, she buckled her self to the
work of sweating, and more readily expedited the expulsion of the noxious
matter.

As to the Curative part, since the stadium or course of this Disease, has
three seasons, as it were so many measures, distinct one from another, the
Curative intentions ought to be accommodated to each of these; wherefore the
Curative method concerning the smallpox, teaches first, what is to be done so
long as the Blood boyles up, and grows hot inwardly, with the motion of the
fermentative matter, and before the smallpox appear, which period for the most
part is finished, in four or five days.

Secondly, what means or manner of Diet and Physic is to be instituted, after
the coming forth of the smallpox, until the state or standing of the Disease,
viz. whilst the whelks or pox come to the height, and being fully suppurated or
ripened, begin to dry. Thirdly and lastly, what we must observe in the
declining of the Disease, even whilst the smallpox growing dry, fall off.

1. As to the first, let the intention be, that we may carry away every
impediment of Nature, whereby the Blood being infected by the ferment of the
Smallpox, and apt to be coagulated, may yet retain an equal motion in the
Heart, and without stagnation in the Vessels, and growing hot, may expel forth
of doors the congealed portions with the Poison; in the mean time, there must
be a caution, least the work of fermentation or growing hot be any ways
hindered, or too much provoked; for by this, the mass of the Blood is agitated
into congealed portions, more than it ought to be; by that other, it is
restrained too much, in it motion, nor are the invenomed Particles sent forth
of doors, with the congealed Blood; Nature in the work of secretion and
expulsion, is wont to be hindered, by too great an heap of excrements in the
Viscera, or by the abundance of Blood in the Vessels; wherefore, upon the first
assault of the Disease, care must be taken, that if need be, an evacuation by
Vomit or Stool, be timely procured; but only more mild Purges, and gentle, are
to be used, which do not too much provoke, or disturb the Humors: wherefore, at
this time, Purges, Emetics, or Clysters, now these, now those, take place; also
the letting of Blood, if there be a fullness, is performed with good success.

During this growing hot of the Blood, diet ought to be instituted slender and
moderately cooling, viz. Barly-Broth, or Grewel of Oatmeal, Posset Drink, Small
Beer or the like: Flesh, and Flesh Broths are to be avoided, whereby the Blood,
by reason of the too great plenty of Sulphurous Food, may be inkindled more
than it ought; also all cold, and sharp or acid things are hurtful: for these
congeal and Blood more, and contract the little mouths of the Vessels, by their
astriction or binding Nature, that the Smallpox come forth less freely; also
hot things, and Cordials are cautiously to be administered, for by these the
Blood and Humors are too much agitated, and driven into confusion.

2. When the Smallpox begin to appear, there are three things, which by a
constant Rule we prescribe to be performed, to every sick person; to wit, that
a soft and gentle Sweat be still continued in the Blood; also, that the Throat
and Eyes may be preserved, from a too great eruption of the Smallpox. That the
Blood lightly growing hot may emit the Smallpox, decoctions of Figs, Marigold
flowers, and shavings of Hartshorn in Posset Drink, are commonly prescribed,
and the use of them is general for a long time, almost with all people; for the
same intention, we are wont sometimes in a day, to give them moderate Cordials;
but the more hot and strong are carefully to be shunned. Purging and Blood
letting here are most wickedly enterprised, and these, tho necessity compelled,
Physicians dare not meddle with for fear of blame: For to defend the Throat and
Gutteral parts, we put on the outer skin, a defense of Saffron dipped in Breast
Milk, and sowed in a Rag; for these, by opening the pores, draw away the venom
outwardly, from the most inward part of the Throat; also for this end, we
administer Gargarisms, and things to wash the mouth, which by their
restriction, restrain the coming forth of the Smallpox withing: we defend the
Eyess, with peculiar Medicines, of Rose Water, and Breast Milk, with Saffron,
and such like, frequently iterated, from the incursion of the Smallpox:
Besides these, sometimes certain most horrid symptoms do trouble, which must be
timely helped with convenient Remedies; sometimes there are present, Watchings,
Frenzy, Bleeding at Nose, Vomiting, Looseness, and a falling back of the
Smallpox: for these and diverse others, as occasion arises, a prudent Physician
knows how to provide; in which however there is need of great caution, least
whilst we take care fo the smaller matters, the great work of Nature should be
disturbed by a too great molestation of Medicines. For in all this time there
is one, and a continued Crisis: wherefore nothing is to be meddled with rashly.
There is required the most care and circumspection of the Physician and Nurses,
or those that administer to the sick, when this Disease is at its height or
standing, viz. least that when the Smallpox. be fully come forth, and brought
to their greatest height, transpiration should be hindered; for then the sick
are in danger of renewing the Fever, and of the restagnation of the Malignant
matter within, whilst we study to prevent the one, we for the most part bring
on the other.

3. When the Disease shall be in its declination, and the Smallpox begin to
wither and Scab, the business for the most part is out of danger, nor is there
much need of a Physician: let the sick, tho he grow very hungry, content
himself still with a slender diet, and without flesh: if the Scabs fall off
slowly, we are wont to ripen them with Lineaments, and peculiar Medicines, to
make them fall, and care should be taken that they leave not behind them too
great pits: after the sick having the Sacbs every where fallen off, and are
able to rise and walk about the Chamber, the filthy Excrementitious matter in
the Bowels, is to be carried away, by two or three times Purging, and then they
may be permitted to use a more plentiful and stronger diet.

The Measles are so much akin to the Smallpox, that with most Authors, they
have not deserved to be handled apart from them, but that either distemper have
been treated of together, after the like manner and method. The essence and
cure differ at least accidentally, or as they are greater or lesser; because in
the Measles the whealks rise not up to so great a bulk, neither are they
suppuritated; wherefore the sickness is sooner ended and with less danger. This
distemper is wont mostly to spread upon children, more rarely among those of
years, or old men, also those who first have had the Smallpox, are not
afterward so obnoxious to the Measles, but in most things, either distemper
are of kin, viz. the evil being contracted in the Womb, disposes men only, and
all men once, to the Measles; the malignant constitution of the Air, and
sometimes a surfeit, and most often the contagion, are wont to bring the hidden
disposition into act: there are present marks of malignity, and the sickness
oftentimes becomes Epidemical, and with mortality and contagion.

That I may briefly contract the sum of the matter: it seems that the Measles
are a certain lighter flowring, of on extraneous ferment, contracted from the
Womb; by which, some Particles being stirred up into motion, make the Blood
lightly to grow hot, and to be a little coagulated: wherefore the marks from
thence spread abroad, are dissipated without any breaking of the Cuticula, or
outward skin, by evaporation only: but the Smallpox are a more full and strong
agitation, according to all the Particles of the same ferment, which causing a
greater ebullition and coagulation of the Blood, produces far more full whelks,
and greater in bulk, and not to be dissolved, but by suppuration, or growing
into matter: when the Smallpox preceed, they are not only exempt from the same
disease any more, but also from the Measles, because they consume only some of
the Particles of the ferment, leave still a disposition to the Smallpox;
wherefore old men, or those of years, are not so readily infected with the
Measles, because they are either freed from the contagion, by having before had
the Smallpox, or else the infection of this more light Disease, is easily
resisted by their more strong Spirits.

It were easy to illustrate the afore-recited Doctrine, concerning the Small
Pox, with Histories and Observations fo the sick, because there is no Disease
besides can supply with a greater plenty of Examples, or variety of Accidents:
but of the great number of this kind, I shall only propose in this place a few
Cases, and those remarkable for some irregularities.

It is a usual thing to handle all that are sick of the Small Pox, with a like,
or wholly the same method of Curing, and manner of Diet; wherefore, a Physician
is rarely sent for to the common sort, but the business is wholly committed to
some women, professing themselves skilful in this Disease: and these are wont
to boil in their broths, and all the suppings of the sick, Marigold Flowers,
shaving of Hartshorn, and sometimes Figs; also every night to administer a
Bolus of Diascordium: and they who grow not well by this kind of Government,
tho not neglected, yet are affirmed to be incurable, by reason of the cruelty
of the Disease. But truly this kind of practice is not convenient for all
alike, nor to be administered to every one indifferently, as these two following
Histories will make manifest.

A Young Man, about 20 years of Age, of a slender body, and more hot
temperature, began to be feverish in the beginning of the Spring, at first
cruel Vomitings, an oppression of the heart, and frequent changes of heat and
shivering, a pain in his Loins, a disturbance of his sancy and wakings infested
him: on the third day, the Small Pox appearing, those symptoms remitted, but
still the Fever, with heat and thirst continued. Not only the accustomed
Decoctions in this Disease, but also a most elegant Julep, of a most grateful
taste, were so nauseous and troublesome to him, that he would not so much as
taste the same, but with a great deal of trouble: as often as he took going to
sleep, Diascordium, or any other more temperate Cordial, for the continuing his
sweat, tho in a very little quantity, the night following he was without sleep,
and in great disquiet; and then in the beginning of the morning a bleeding
followed, by which means, indeed, the Small Pox being full come forth, the Life
of the sick was in great danger, by reason of this occasion happening once or
twice; wherefore, when I had found by observation, his blood apt to grow
immoderately hot, by so light a provocation, I instituted this method as
occasion served. All Medicines being let alone, he took for the quenching his
thirst small beer, and simple Almond Drink, at his pleasure: for his food,
because he vomited back all Oatmeal Grewel, or Barley Broth, he eat only apples
roasted tender, and dressed with suggar and rose water, often in a day. Nature
being contented with this slender ordering, and being seen to be disturbed with
any other thing, performed happily its work, that the sick person grew well,
without any grievous symptom afterward, the Small Pox from thence ripening,
and then of their own accord falling off.

In the middle of the Autumn, of the former Years, a Gentile Young Man, being
endued with a sharp Blood, and obnoxious to a frequent bleeding at Nose, fell
sick of the Small Pox; his Blood of its own accord grew immoderately hot, that
the whealks very quickly broke forth over all his Body: Posset Drink, with
Marigold Flowers, and other usual things boiled in it, also Juleps, or any
Cordials, tho temperate, and gently provoking sweat, most certainly stirred up
a Flux of Blood in this Person; wherefore I ordered the like manner of Diet, as
in the sick Person before cited, by which he found himself better, however, in
the very state or standing of the Disease, (when the Small Pox being fully come
forth, by reason of a more difficult transpiration, the Fever is wont to be
somewhat renewed in all) this sick Man fell into a most plentiful bleeding;
that after a large profusion of Blood, the Small Pox began to flagg or fall:
After that Remedies, very many, were tried in vain, for the staying of the
Blood, at length a little Bag being hung about his Neck (in which was a Toad
dried in the Sun, and bruised) he first, and immediately perceived ease; tho
the bleeding was by this means stayed, and not any more returning, (whilst he
constantly wore this peculiar Medicine in his Bosom) our sick Man still using a
most thin and cooling Diet, grew quite well; that indeed from hence it may
appear, that although the Blood in this Dissemper, is apt to be greatly
coagulated, yet so long as the Vital Spirits, being strong and robust, are able
sufficiently to execute their government, they endeavoring by their proper
strength or forces, do best of all separate and thrust forth the congealed
portions of the Blood, as it were by a certain skilful separation; and this
work is most of all hindered, when the same spirits are too much irritated by
Cordials, or more hot food, and agitated into confusion: But in the Plague it
happens otherwise, because in this, if any delay be granted, the Spirits
themselves are presently profligated by the venom; wherefore, here they must
fight close and quick, when in the Small Pox, the Physician does his business
better by delay.

Concerning letting of Blood, at the instant breaking out of the Small Pox, it
is very dubious: formerly, among our Contrimen, this was esteemed a wicked
business, neither were they wont to admit of Phlebotomy under any pretext of
necessity: but of late, experience having taught us, in some cases, it is
found, that to let Blood has been wholly profitable and necessary; which
evacuation however, if it should be administered indifferently in every
constitution, or when this need should be, it should be performed in too large
a quantity, by that means oftentimes very great damage arises.

Some years before, I visited a young Gentlewoman, of a florid countenance, and
more hot temperature, growing into a Fever, after the fourth month of her
being with Child: she was troubled with a cruel vomiting, a most cruel pain of
the Loins, besides with most strong heat and thirst: her pulse was swift, with
a strong and vehement vibration or beating; although the Small Pox had never been
in that place, yet these symptoms gave no light suspicion of this Disease;
however, its great effervescency indicated that Blood should be taken away;
wherefore I took away about six ounces presently, upon which the heat remitted
somewhat, yet the vomiting, with a cruel pain in the Loins, remained still: At
the hour of sleep I gave her a Cordial Bolus, with half a grain of our
Laudanum, by which means quiet sleep followed, with a pleasant sweat, and an
allaying of all the symptoms: the next morning the Small Pox came forth, with
which, although the sick Gentlewoman was greatly distempered, yet she grew well
without any dangerous sickness, or fear of miscarrying, and went out her full
time.

The last Autumn, a strong Man, of an active and robust constitution of body,
yet of a pale countenance, and more cold temper, fell into a Fever: on the
second day he was tormented with heat and thirst, and a most cruel pain in his
Loins: when I had prescribed Blood to be taken in a small quantity, the
unskilful Surgeon, who was sent for, took from him almost half a pound; a
little after, the sick man began to be all over in a cold sweat, on a sudden to
loose all strength, to be troubled with a shivering, a weak Pulse and unequal,
and frequent swooning: At this time being sent for, I gave him a temperate
Cordial, to be taken frequently. His Spirits and Pulse being thereby restored,
the Fever was renewed, which afterward, for some days, yea, weeks, exercised
the sick man, after a very irregular manner; for he was wont for three or four
days, to grow very hot, also to be infested with thirst, watchings, headache,
and other symptoms, then to be troubled all over with a copious and critical
sweat, by which indeed for half a days space he found himself better: But from
thence; the Fever still growing worse, heaped together again new matter, till
it was dispersed by another Crisis, and then another. After that he had been
thus feverish, for at least twenty days irregularly, at length the Small Pox
began to come forth, in several parts of his Body, here and there, and then the
Fever wholly remitted; yet within few days, by reason of some errors committed
in his Diet, very many of the whealks began to fall down again, few of them
only being brought to maturity: However, instead of the subsiding Small Pocks,
a mighty Bubo grew up behind his right Ear; from which, being soon ripened, and
broke, a great plenty of matter flowed forth for many days, and so at length
the corruptions of the Blood, unable otherways to be dissipated, were carried
forth by degrees, and the sick Person recovered perfect Health.

CHAP. XVI. Of Fevers of Childbearing Women.
VUlgar Experience abundantly testifies, that the Fevers of Women lying in are
very dangerous, beyond the disposition of other common Fevers: also that the
same differ very much, as to their essence, from both a simple and putrid
Synochus, plainly appears from their signs and symptoms rightly weighed:
wherefore, I believe it not to be from the matter, to handle after malignant
Fevers, the acute Diseases of Women lying in being exceeding near of kin to
those, for their mortality or perniciousness. Yet, before I shall enter upon
the unsolding these Diseases, it behooves us to consider their subjects, viz.
the Bodies of Women in Childbed, after what manner they are predisposed, and by
what provision they are made obnoxious to these kind of sicknesses.

Concerning this, the first thing that offers itself, is, that the Flux of the
menstruous Blood, is wholly convenient to be suffered by human kind, and at
this time for women, concerning whose nature and original we shall not inquire
in this place; but it shall suffice to note, that in them, the particles of the
Blood, to be periodically thrust forth, are very Fermentative; which, if
retained in the Body, beyond the wonted manner of Nature, are very often the
cause of many Diseases: unless only when a Woman conceives with Child. For all
the time of her being big Bellied, the monthly Flowers are stopped without any
incommodiousness; and in the mean time, milk, or the alible juice, is disposed
in great plenty, about the parts of the Womb, for the nourishment of the Child:
but after the Birth, this daily suppression of the monthly Flowers, is
recompensed by a copious flowing forth of the Lochia, or what comes away after
the Birth; and the milk within three days having wholly left the Womb, springs
forth plentifully into the Breasts: at which time, Women lying in, are wont to
be troubled with a small Fever. If that the milk be driven away from the
Breasts, it restagnates again toward the Womb, and is thrust forth, together
with the Lochia, under the form of a whitish humor. In the mean time, the
Womb, after the Birth, becomes subject to various distempers; for oftentimes,
its tone is hurt, the unity is dissolved, and many other accidents are induced,
which render Women lying in subject to danger: wherefore, that their acute
Diseases may be rightly unfolded, it is convenient, for to consider chiefly
these three things, viz. first, the nourishment of the Child, or the Generation
of Milk, both in the Womb, and in the Dugs, and the metastasis or translation
of it from one to another. Secondly, the purging of the Mothers Blood, or the
profluvium of the Lochia, after a long suppression of the Menstrua. Thirdly,
the condition of the Womb after the Birth, and its influence on other parts of
the Body. And these being premised, we will speak of the Fevers of Women lying
in, viz. both the milkie, and the putrid, called, and that deservedly,
malignant, by reason of its deadliness.

First the Milk, and nourishing humor, being heaped up in the parts of the
Womb, for the nourishment of the Child, are of a like nature, tho somewhat
different in consistency. Milk is indeed more thick, because it ought to be
received in at the mouth, and to be kept in the Ventricle, and afterward it
more thin portion to be conveyed to the mass of Blood. The other alible Juice
is more thin, and like the water of distilled Milk, because it is immediately
poured into the Blood of the Embryo, through the umbilick Vessels, without any
previous digestion. Either Juice is supposed to come from the Chyle fresh made
in the mothers stomach; what is reposed, or laid up in the Breast, is more
thick and white, by reason of the more thin or open strainer, and coction in
the greater Glanduals; on the contrary, it happens in the Womb otherwise, where
the Glandulas are smaller, and the Straining more close. But there in a great
disagreement among Authors, concerning the passages, by which this humor is
carried, both in the Breasts, and into the Cake of the Womb. Some contend, that
Milk only is begotten of the Blood, more plentifully cocted in the Glandulas,
which yet, by reason of the immense dispense of Milk, which consists not with
the Blood, this seems not probable. Others affirm, that the Chyle, or Milkie
humor, is immediately conveyed from the Viscera of Concoction, through occult
passages, without any alteration, into either receptacles. But in the mean
time, while these passages lie open, it seems indeed to me more likely, that
from the meat taken into the Mothers Stomach, a portion of the Chyle thence
made, is presently supped up into the Veins, which having obtained the vehicle
of the Blood before it be assimilated by it, is laid up in the Glandulas,
destinated here and there for the receiving of it, being carried by the
Arteries, and lastly separated from the mass of Blood; for as it appears, that
drink being plentifully taken, presently passes through the whole mass of Blood,
and is rendered by Urine like water: and as old Ulcers, by means of the Blood
coming between, prey upon the nutritious humor, from the whole Body, and pour
it forth under the shape of a putrified matter, Why may not the alible Juice in
like manner, being strained by the Collander of the Glandulas, before it has
endued the color of Blood, go into a Milkie humor? This indeed seems more
probable, because, whilst the Milk is carried from the Womb into the Breasts,
and on the contrary, passing through the mass of Blood, it is wont to stir up a
perturbation through the whole, with a feverish intemperance; besides, in the
first days, after the Birth, when the Glandulas do less rightly perform the
office of secretion: Beasts, who have not the Lochia, give a bloody Milk, which
is drawn forth of their Udders, that is, mixed with Blood, by reason of the
plenty of it flowing forth together.

Secondly, As to what belongs to the Menstrua being suppressed, in the time of
being with Child, and the Lochia plentifully' coming away, after being
Delivered, we say that after the Conception of the Child, the Menstrua ought to
be suppressed by Divine Designation, for that the flowing of them often causes
abortion; then, because the Vessels are filled by a continual stilling forth of
the alible juice into the parts of the Womb, the mass of the Blood does not
arise into swellings up, to be allayed by the menstruous Flux. For the same
reason, Women for the most part, have not their courses so long as they give
suck. Perhaps in some, endued with a more hot Blood, the monthly courses flow,
both whilst they are Big-bellied, and in the time of their giving suck, but
that more rarely, and is wont not to happen without trouble; yet in the mean
time, the Menstrua being suppressed, during the time of being with Child,
because much less of the nutritious humor is expended at tha ttime for Milk,
they much more deprave the Blood, than the same being restrained at the time of
suckling the Child, are wont to do: yea, from them being long suppressed, in
the former condition, an, as it were, envenomed taint is impressed on the mass
of Blood, which, unless it be purged forth by the daily Flux of the Lochia,
presently after being brought to Bed, produces grievous, and almost malignant
Distempers. Wherefore, that I may give my opinion of the flowing of the Lochia,
I say, that this bleeding proceeds immediately from the Vessels being broken,
by which the Afterbirth did stick to the Womb, and that by this way, the
excrementitious Blood and humors, being partly heaped up about the Womb during
the time of being with Child, and partly flowing from the whole mass of the
Blood, are evacuated, viz. whilst the Womb at first intumified in its bulk,
falls down presently after the Birth, and is contracted into a lesser space,
the Blood is plentifully pressed forth, from the Vesseis opening into it. But
besides, forasmuch as during the suppression of the courses, the bloody mass is
imbued with very fermentative Particles, as soon as after the Birth, the mouths
of the Vessels are opened, forthwith, as it were at the instant of a more large
Flux of monthly courses, the whole Blood grows hot (even as Must of new Wine
upon the opening the Bottle) and endeavors to purge forth the highly
fermentative particles, out of its bosom, by the going away of the Lochia, as
it were the flowring: And therefore, besides the Blood, which in the first
days, oftentimes flows pure, by reason of the fresh opening of the Vessels,
afterward is sisted forth matter very much discloured, viz. livid and green,
and this very stinking, This kind of Flux is wont to continue, at least for 14
days, yea, in some for a month; and if that by reason of any error, it be
stopped before the mass of Blood be thoroughly purified, by such flowring,
presently a Fever, very dangerous, with horrid provisions of symptoms, is wont
to be induced: of which we shall speak anon in its proper place.

The third consideration, previous to the Doctrine of Fevers, belonging to
Women in childbed, is chiefly about the Womb it self; to wit, how it is
affected after Childbearing, and what influence it has on other parts of the
Body. As to the first, there are chiefly two accidents, upon which the acute
Diseases of Women in Childbed very much depend, viz. First, The falling down
of the Womb, or the reduction of it, from the bulk of ingravidation, to its
natural site and magnitude: Secondly, the solution of the unity, within its
cavity, by reason of the breaking of the connection, or tying to the cake of it,
or Afterbirth. When the Child; with what wraps it about, is put forth,
presently the sides of the Womb it self, before very much amplified or
enlarged, do mutually close, and by the help of the Fibers, leisurely contract
themselves into a narrower space; by reason of this kind of contraction, the
Blood and Corruptions, or matter, are plentitully pressed forth, from the
Vessels and Pores of the Womb, and are thrust forth with the Lochia. But
sometimes it happens, by reason of some preternatural things contained in the
Womb, as part of the secondine or after Birth, a Mole or piece of Flesh,
clodders of Blood, etc. also, if there happen after a painful Birth, a
Contusion or great Dilaceration, that the Womb cannot rightly draw it self
together, but by an inverse motion of the Fibers, ascends upwards, and is
lifted up into a bulk; also the membranes being affected with a Convulsion, it
self is still tormented with torments, as if it were yet in Travel; which kind
of Distempers, if they long continue, by reason of the Orifice of the Womb
being tied together, with the Convulsive motion, the Lochia are oftentimes
stopped also: from hence grievous symptoms follow, and very often the Fever is
either first excited, or it happens, being for some other cause induced, to be
rendered far more dangerous. Secondly, as to the solution of the unity, from the
cake of the Womb being broken, it comes to pass, that the Birth, either at its
just time, or precipitous, being too much hastened; then the secundine is cast
forth, either whole, or being torn, or pulled away, part of it being left
behind, it is cut off as it were in half. If the Child be born at its just
time, and the Birth, with what inwraps it, comes away from the cavity of the
Womb, as ripe fruit from a Tree, whole, and without violence, the mouths of
Vessels are somewhat unlocked, and the Lochia moderately flow; but from hence
no grievous symptom is to be feared: but if the Child, not being yet ripe for
the Birth, is pulled away, or breaks forth as it were by force, although the
Cake, with the membrane is pulled away whole, yet the Vessels being torn, a
greater hemorrhage or bleeding, and at length an Ulcerous disposition follows,
the little mouths of the Vessels spewing forth a stinking matter. If that part,
or the whole secundine sticks to the sides of the Womb, after the Birth, it
there putrifies, and sends forth very stinking matter or corruption, and stirs
up wicked distempers: oftentimes the Orifice of the Womb is shut up, and
retains within gobbets of clodder'd Blood, little pieces of Membranes, or
Flesh, which putrefying, by reason of the heat, impoyson the Blood and humors,
flowing together to that place, by Circulation, from the whole body; also, by a
trouble some itching or provocation, they stir up the parts ofo the Womb, being
so very sensible, into Convulsions.

When therefore hurt is brought to the Womb, from Childbearing, after the
aforesaid ways, the same is quickly communicated to other parts, not without
trouble to the whole body; which thing indeed is wont to be done by a double
means. For first, this happens, because the Lochia being hindered from being
thrust forth, presently restagnate or flow back upon the mass of Blood, and
infect it as it were with a virulent taint: moreover, from the contents
putrefying in the Womb, either the substance it self of the matter, or the
Particules coming away from the cadaverous substance, are mingled with the
Blood, and nervous juice, passing through that place, and quickly infect their
whole liquors. Secondly, hysterical Distempers, are more largely extended, by
reason of the notable consent, which happens between the Womb and the Brain,
with the Fibers and Membranes of the whole body, by the means of the nervous
passage: for when the extremities of the Nerves, planted about the parts of the
Womb, are driven into Cramps and Convulsive motions, by reason ofo the presence
of some hurtful humor, the Convulsions there received, presently creep more
largely upwards, by the endeavors and circumduction of the Nerves, toward the
Brain; and so it happens to the Viscera to be successively inflated, and
cruelly haled together, and the Brain it self at length to be pierced, and its
functions to be as it were overwhelmed: hence, from the convulsive motions,
arising about the Womb, an inflation of the Belly, and hypochondria, a
rumbling, vomiting, sobbing, and streightness of the Praecordia, difficult
breathing, a sense of choking, and oftentimes a stupor, and want of speech, or
at least some of these are excited: nor does the Tragedy so easily leave, but
that also the Brain being hurt, by the continuance of the distemper, by that
means, the evil is retorted upon other parts, that oftentimes the whole nervous
stock is compelled into irregularities of motions; For what commonly is said to
be done by vapors, and the distemper, called the ascent of vapors, creeping
from the nether parts, to the upper, is nothing else than the parts of the
Membranes, and nervous passages, being successively driven into Convulsions.
Further, in these sort of distempers, the hurt action does not always begin, or
is at first perceived, in that region or place where the hurt is inflicted,
neither do the passions which are called hysterical, proceed only from the
Womb; for sometimes, the trouble is immediately brought from the Brain, or the
Convulsions and Contractions begin in the extreme parts, and sometimes the
extremities of the Nerves, somewhere in the Viscera, as the Stomach, Spleen,
Reins, no less than the Womb, are haled; in which, irregularities being arisen,
they are continued into the neighboring part, and from thence to the Brain:
From whence again, the Convulsions are reflected to other parts, and not seldom
through the whole Body. Just so the business in Childbearing Women, and with
others in Fevers, as I have often observed; to wit, some by reason of their
Womb being evilly affected, but others by reason of a Feverish matter fixed in
the Brain, by a critical metastasis or translation, fall into passions like to
the hysterical. And these things being rightly prepensed, concerning the
praevious provision, in the Fevers of Women in Childbed, there is not any
thing that we should stick at in the entrance more, so that we take notice that
the bodies of Women lying in, (especially those who are feeble, and of a more
tender constitution) are debilitated, chiefly after a difficult and hard
Labor; so that, by reason of this occasion only, they easily conceive
feverish intemperatures, and being brought in by this or any other means, they
are hardly able to bear them. We will next speak of the Fevers themselves,
with which Women Lying in are wont to be sick, of which Distempers there are
commonly recounted as it were three kinds, viz. the Milkie Fever, the Putrid,
the Symptomatic, or of that manner by a certain borrowed symptom, but is
chiefly marked with the Pleurisy, Squinancy or the Smallpox: of which we will
discourse in order.

The Milkie Fever.
WE have already said, that as yet it was uncertain of what matter Milk was
immediately made, and by what passages it is carried into the Breasts, moreover
when this part appears not at all to anatomical inspection, I am of the
opinion, that the Milkie Chyme, being made out of aliments in the Bowels, and
from thence confused to the Blood for nourishing juice, is presently again, for
the most part of it, separated from its mass by the help of the Glandulas in
the Womb, or in the Breasts, that it might supply the Child with nutriment,
either in the Mothers Belly, or in her bosom by the Breasts. In the time of
going with Child, although the greatest part of this is derived to the Womb, yet
in the last months, a little quantity of it is laid up in the Breasts; but
about the third or fourth day, after being brought to bed, the Milk is more
plentifully carried into the Breasts, and as it were with a certain force, that
it quickly fills them to a stretching them forth, and begins to be troublesome.
At this time, Women lying in (tho not all, yet most) are wont to be troubled
with a feverish intemperature, with thirst, heat, and an inquietude of the
whole Body, they complain of a pain very troublesome in the Back and Shoulders,
of a fullness and burning of the Breasts; and unless the Milk be diligently
drawn forth, it being too much congested or heaped up, oftentimes brings forth
an inflammation, with an Imposthume following of it in the Breasts. This Fever,
whilst the Lochia are in good order, hardly lasts three days, but that about
that space it is wont to be allayed, a plentiful sweating arising of its own
accord: yet this intemperature being excited by the coming of the Milk, is
somewhat increased and continued longer, if that the Milk entering the Breasts
in abundance, be not milked forth, but is again repelled from thence; for by
its departure, as well as by its coming, a perturbation is wont to happen in
the whole Body, with thirst and heat, which also more certainly comes to pass
if it happens to be driven away violently, by repelling Topics. But being
driven by their help from the Breasts, or departing of its own accord, it is
thrust forth, with the Lochia, in the form of a whitish humor, and a sweat, or
more plentiful transpiration, exterminates the Relics of the Disease. If that
with this kind of intemperance, brought in by reason of the commotion of the
Milk, the Lochia be stopped, or errors in eating and drinking be committed, or
any other evident cause should happen, that may increase the fervor of the
Blood, very often the Milkie Fever, presently acquiring worse symptoms,
changes into a putrid, or rather malignant Fever.

The cause, or formal reason of the aforesaid Fever (whilst the way of the
Milk lies hid) may be only proposed, from an hypothesis, and as it were a
certain Augury; for being supposed, that this milky humor is carried to the
Breasts immediately, by a peculiar passage, from the Viscera of concoction,
without any commerce with the Blood, this feverish Distemper arises, for that
the Breasts being filled with Milk, and greatly distended, the sanguineous
Vessels are so compressed, that they do not easily transmit the Blood flowing
thither; from whence, the Blood being hindered in its circuit, begins to
tumultuate through its whole mass, and the Spirits being inordinately moved, and
wholly confused, it conceives a fervor, such as being induced by a stopping,
Surfeit, Inflammation, or Wound, constitutes ordinarily the simple Synochus; but
if the matter of the Milk (as it is not improbable) passes through the Blood,
this Fever of Women in Childbed, seems to spring from hence, that when this
Latex is transferred to the Breasts, having left the Womb, a great portion of
it subsists in the mass of the Blood, which indeed, for that it exceeds the due
provision of the nourishing juice, and so cannot be wholly assimilated, and
besides abounds in heterogeneous parts, and as it were something extraneous,
and not mingleable with the Blood, creates a trouble, therefore for the
carrying it forth of doors, and putting it forth, this three days feverish
Distemper is employed: For when the milky Chile, being used to be separated
about the Womb, by and by, after being Delivered of a Child, that wax of
excretion is hindered, restagnating into the mass of Blood, it is there first of
all heaped up more plentifully, than that the whole may go into nourishment, or
be received into the Breasts: wherefore, the Milk, not only in its passage to
the Breasts, but also in its return toward the Womb, brings forth the Fever,
to wit, by reason of either passage through the Blood.

But however the cause of this Disease is ordained, it matters little or
nothing toward the Cure; for this is wholly committed to Nature, and so long
as the Lochia are in good order, it proceeds for the most part happily, without
any Physical help: because, after the growing hot of the Blood, for three or
four days, either a plentiful sweat, or a more free transpiration, cures this
Distemper, to wit, either the Particles of the Milky humor, degenerate in the
assimulating, or the adust recrements, remaining after the deflagration of the
Blood, or both of them at once supplying the food or tinder of the Fever, are
by little and little subdued, and evaporated out of doors, which being
excluded, the Blood becoming free from the extraneous mixture, quickly recovers
its pristine condition; yet in the mean time, certain vulgar Rules are wont to
be observed, about the admission of the Milk into, or the driving away of the
same, out of the Breasts. If the Milk too plentifully springs into the Breasts,
that their inflammation, as also the immoderate growing hot of the Blood, may be
prevented, at that time, a more thin and sparing diet, to wit, no flesh broths,
and also in a less quantity, is to be ordered: also the Breasts are to be
frequently drawn. If it be not commodious for the Mother to suckle her Child,
it is usual after the first or third day of her being Delivered to cover all
the Breasts over with Sear-Cloaths moderately binding (as the Plaster of
Red-lead, etc.) for so the spongious substance of the Glandulas, is somewhat
constrained, or closed together, whereby they less readily receive the milky
humor flowing thither, yet this kind of Remedy ought to be cautiously
administered, lest if the Milk be wholly excluded, or driven out of the Breast
too abruptly, restagnating suddenly in the Blood, it induces its disorder, the
prodromus or forerunner of the Putrid or Malignant Fever: of which it remains
that we speak next.

The Putrid Fever of Women in Childbed.
WOmen Lying in, from the fault of an evil affected Body, as by the Cotagion of
a received Pestilential Air, are found to be too obnoxious to the Putrid, or
rather Malignant Fever; but all do not alike receive the Infection of this
sort of Disease; for poor people, Laboring Women, Country Women, and others
accustomed to hard Labor, as also Viragoes, and Whores, which are brought to
Bed clandestinely, bring forth without any great difficulty, and then, after a
little time, leaving their Beds, return to their wonted Labors: But more rich
Women, tender and fair, and most living a sedentary life, as if participating
after a more grievous manner of the Divine Malediction, bring forth in pain,
and then presently after the Birth they are subject to difficult and dangerous
chances; the reason of which seems to lie in this, that those who are used to
much exercise, continually agitate and eventilate the Blood, and therefore
fewer infectious taints from the monthly Flowers being suppressed, do gather
together for the matter of a Disease; moreover, laborious and nimble Women, as
they have their nervous parts more firm, therefore they are less subjected to
convulsive motions, and to the passions commonly called hysterical: on the
contrary, in delicate, and idle Women, the mass of Blood, in the time of their
going with Child, becomes very impure and sermentisible; besides, because they
have the system of the Nerves, and the Brain soft and weak, upon every light
occasion, they suffer distractions of the animal Spirits, and inordinate
motions of the nervous parts. And here, by the way, it is to be noted, that
Women more than men, and that some of the same Sex before others, are sensible
of the affections called hysterical, not so much by the default of their Womb,
as for that they are of more weak constitution of Brain, and nervous stock; for
in those so affected, the passions of anger, sadness, fear, as also all
troublesome and more strong objects, easily pervert the dispositions and
functions of those parts, which, when they are once hurt, for the most part
afterward, are accustomed to those irregularities. But we will return from
whence we have digressed. The Fever but now proposed, is wont to infest Women
Lying in, indeed at various times, and by reason of diverse occasions, now
presently after the Birth, especially if it be difficult and laborious, now it
arises in the first, now the second, third, or fourth week; yet the sooner it
begins, the more safely it is wont to be cured. The Type or Figure of this
Disease, is performed almost after this manner. After a previous indisposition,
an open feaverishness, for the most part with a shivering, or horror,
constitutes the first assault, which is followed with heat, and afterward
succeeds a seat: perhaps, for a day or two, they have various reciprocal fits
of heat and cold; then the Blood being wholly inkindled, the Lochia, if not
before suppressed, either flow smally, or are wholly stopped: If the Disease be
acute, and of a swift motion, it comes to its height on the third or fourth
day, then an intense heat, with a very troublesome thirst, a vehement pulse, and
quick pertinacious wakings, a great inquietude of the whole Body, that they are
continaully tossing themselves in their Beds hither and thither, a thick Urine,
and high colored, and other most grievous symptoms, are wont to trouble them:
whilst the Fever is after this manner at its height no Crisis is to be
expected; for I never saw this Disease cured by a critical sweat, but that the
business was still very precipitously acted, as after the Blood was grown hot
for a little time, presently the adust matter being translated to the Brain,
most dangerous and heavy inordinations of it, and the whole nervous stock
forthwith come upon them; for most often are stirred up, convulsive motions of
the Tendons, wonderful distentions, and inflations about the Viscera, like to
the hysterical passions; then sometimes, also follow a frenzy, or dilerium,
not seldom a stupefaction, and speechlessness; the strength is suddenly cast
down almost in all, without any manifest cause, the Pulse becomes weak, and
unequal; and the sick are suddenly precipitated to death: If that any perhaps
escape, either by the return of the Flux of the Lochia, or a Lask, coming upon
it, they hardly recover but of a long time: I have known in some, purple spots
to have appeared, and certainly in many, symptoms that respect either the Blood
or nervous juice, which argue no light Malignity.

We will distinguish the causes of this Fever, after the ordinary manner, into
Procatartic, Evident and Cojunct. Those of the first sort, upon which the
malignity, and the greatest perniciousness of the Disease depend, are two, viz.
first, a depraved disposition of the Blood, from the long suppression of the
monthly Flux. Secondly, after the Birth, the evil affections of the Womb, from
the dangerous Labors of Women, (who undergo the Divine Malediction appointed
them) from the Menstrua being long suppressed, the Blood not only swells up,
and its Sulphurous parts being too much carried forth, are rendered more apt
for burning, but besides, the mass of the Blood is imbued with very
fermentative Particles, so that (as has been already hinted) as if it were
touched with a venomous infection, presently growing fervent, it is disposed
toward putrefaction, and corruptive disorders; and besides, forthwith
impoysons the nervous Liquor, and renders it infestuous to the Brain and the
whole nervous stock. These kind of evils, being impressed on the Blood, ought
to be purged forth, by the Flux of the Lochia; but if after the Birth, the Womb
be out of order, the Lochia are not only stopped, and so a purifying of all the
Blood is hindered, but besides, stinking corruptions or defilements, are thence
bestowed on the Blood, and grievously infect it: Also, by reason of convuslive
motions, begun about the Womb, and from thence continued to other parts,
inordinations are stirred up in the Blood and juices, which oftentimes
conspire, either the production, or the acerbation or growing worse, of the
Fever.

The evident causes, which induce an actual effervescency, either to the Blood,
having gotten an ill disposition, or invert the vices of the whole Body to the
Womb, are after a diverse sort. A painful Labor, a solution of the unity about
the Womb, a bruise, a retention of preternatural things, an ulcerous
disposition, and very many other accidents, which are induced by a certain
necessity, may do this. But the occasions, that are at the dispose of the
Patients, and easily to be avoided, which are wont to excite this kind of
Fever, are chiefly two, viz. an ill manner of Diet, and the taking of cold. It
is an usual thing, to give to weak Women, after being Delivered, on the first
or second day, the flesh of living Creatures, or Broths made of flesh meats,
and other Foods, very improportionate to their dispositions, from whence
presently arise an indigestion, and great trouble in the Bowels, and a
feverish distemper in the Blood, by reason of a more rich mutritious juice
than ought to be. Besides, the errors in Diet, oftentimes hurt is caused, for
that their Bodies, being so very tender, also by reason of the labors of the
Birth, and bringing forth the Child, the passages are on every side opened,
they are exposed too heedlessly to the cold: for most of them, being impatient
of their Bed, within a day or two, or sooner than they should do, rise out of
it, and put on their Clothes, from whence, presently the Pores of the skin
being suddenly contracted, and the Air being admitted into the parts of the
Womb, transpiration is hindered, and often the Lochia, on the sudden are
stopped, either of which suffices to excite the feverish distemper.

The cojunct cause, or formal reason of this kind of sickness, chiefly
comprehends these three things, to wit, there are present, first, a very
notable discrasie of the Blood, that growing hot, from the Fever being
occasionally induced, it does not equally burn forth, nor leisurely overcome
the adust recrements, and afterward critically thrust them forth; but the
Blood growing hot, is presently loosned in its mixture, and its frame being
unlocked, turns and declines toward corruption; hence, when it grows but a
little cool, the spirits being shaken out of their dominion, are moved into
confusion. In the mean time, the Sulphurous Particles become untamed, and
fierce, wherefore, the strength falls down without any manifest cause, the
Pulse is made weak and disordered; after the deflagration of the Blood, although
the adust recrements are very much heaped up, yet nothing is rightly concocted
or separated, but the sick being greatly oppressed in Nature, tho they
continually sweat, receive nevertheless oftentimes no ease from thence; but the
feverish matter, which ought to be thrust forth, being transmitted into the
head, and neervous stock, induces there most grievous perturbations of the
animal regiment. Secondly, the Tragedy of this Disease owes no small part of
it, to the nervous juice being presently made sharp, and so improportionate to
the Brain, and its Appendix; for this being infected; from the traint
contracted from the Blood, does not gently water, or pleasantly blow up its
subjects, but notably hale or pull those tender parts, (as when an infusion of
vitriol is poured upon a Worm) and irritates or provokes them into convulsions,
and into motions, as if of dancing or suddenly leaping forth, and sometimes
wholly overturns their functions; hence comes contractures, grievous
convulsions, dilerium, wakings, and sometimes stupification, and the sleepy
Disease, upon Women Lying in. Thirdly, whilst these things are done, oftentimes
a third band of symptoms infest the sick, to wit, for that the Womb, being hurt
by some evil, moves it self disorderly, and is struck with a Convulsion,
according to these or those parts, from thence by and by, convulsive motions
invade, by the membranes, and nervous passages, the whole Region of the
Abdomen; wherefore, the Viscera and Hypocondria are blown up, belchings, and
grievous vomitings are stirred up, then the Distemper creeping upwards, and
possessing the nervous parts of the Thorax, a difficult breathing, and unequal,
a palpitation of the heart, a sense of choking in the throat, by reason of the
Muscles being there drawn backward, and other symptoms, through the whole Body
are excited, the same evil being at last carried to the Brain.

The Fevers of Women in Childbed almost never want danger; but sometimes it
happens, about the beginning, that they are cured by a slender Diet, and by the
Flux of the Lochia being restored; but if the feverish distemper does root it
self more deeply, that the whole Blood is inkindled, and immoderately grows
hot, the Prognostic ought not to be esteemed of a light Omen; and there will
be a greater reason of danger, if besides the heat being suffused all over, the
sick are troubled with a frequent shivering, if they are affected or molested
with a great disquietness, and wakings, with sudden concussions of the Body, or
a contracture of the Tendons: or if, thirdly, they complain on the fourth day,
of a tingling of their ears, with a great repletion or fullness of the head, you
may from thence collect the evil to grow worse, viz. a translation of the
feverish and hurtful matter to the Brain; nor is it less to be feared, if they
have on them an oppression, and weight of the Praecordia, that the sick cannot
breath freely, nor draw their breath deep, and from the bottom of their breast,
but only from the top, and that frequently, and sighingly, and that they move
themselves restlesly hither and thither: For this argues the Blood to stagnate
in its circulation, about the Heart and Lungs, and also to be apt to grow into
clodders, and to be coagulated: that if yet worse distempers of the Brain and
nervous stock follow, and the Pulse should become weak and unequal, you may
pronounce the business almost deplorable; but if (as sometimes tho it more
rarely happens) after the Fever being inkindled, and grievously threatening,
either the Flux of the Lochia returns, or a Diarrhea with ease succeeds, some
hope of health may be admitted, tho the same beat the last cast.

Concerning the Cure of these kind of Fevers, there lies a very great task
upon the Physician, because any Physic is esteemed with the vulgar, not only
unprofitable, but also hurtful for Women in Childbed; wherefore, Physicians
are rarely sent for, unless when there is no place left for remedies, and the
opportunity of all profitable means be wholly past: If that perchance they
should be present, about the beginning of the Disease, it will not be easy to
procure health to the sick by vulgar Remedies; but whatever they should
attempt, unless it should bring help, it would be said by the Women, and others
about the person, to be deadly, and the only cause of her death; that in truth
there is wont to happen to us, less of profit, or more of ignominy, about the
Cure of no other Disease, as in this.

But the method of curng (even as in Contagious Diseases) ought to be
instituted twofold; to wit, Prophylactic or Preventive, and Therapentie or
Curative: The former of these, delivers precepts and cautions, whereby Women
Lying in, may be preserved from the assault of Fevers: the other suggests
Curative intentions, whereby the sick (if it may be done) may at length recover
health.

1. Although this Fever be somewhat Malignant, it is not caught by Contagion,
and there is no fear of the sicks receiving outwardly any invenomed taint;
notwithstanding, all Women in Childbed, have an innate mine of virulency, and
from the evil of this, as it were the tinder of most high Malignity, they ought
to beware; wherefore, they need an exact ordering, to wit, whereby after the
Birth, the impurities of the Blood and humors, may be rightly purged forth,
without danger of a Fever; also, that the evil affections of the Womb, may be
healed, and that the strength being broken and debilitated, by the Labor, may
be restored after its due manner. For these ends, these three things are
chiefly to be inculcated, for prescripts by Physicians. First, I judge it
necessary, that a most exact manner of Diet be commanded to Women in Childbed;
to wit, that they be wholly fed with Oatmeal Caudle, made sometimes of Beer,
and sometimes of Water and White Wind mixed together, also with Panada, and
other light nourishers, for a week at least; because they are much emptied,
therefore it may be lawful for them to sup often, but nothing of solid or more
strong food is to be given. For I have diligently observed that these Fevers
have been oftenest induced, by the eating too soon flesh, or strong Broths or
Food. Forasmuch as Women Lying in, ought to be handled, not only as those that
are grievously wounded, but as those that have got a feverish indisposition,
from a disturbed disposition and temper of the Blood: For with them, the Blood
being already too much carried forth, and as it were touched with an impure
infection, most quickly catches Flame, by the access or means of any
Sulphurous thing. Secondly, after Diet, the care will be, lest the Pores by
shut up; by the incautiously taking cold from without, or that the Lochia
should be stopped: for upon the least occasion, the manner of transpiration
being changed, the Blood first growing hot, conceives disorders: orders: also
the Womb being touched by the blast of Air, contracts it self, and shuts up the
mouths of the Vessels, whereby the Lochia flow forth less: wherefore, for five
days at least, after being Delivered, I would have Women wholly to keep their
Beds. I know that it is a common custom, to raise them from Bed on the third
day, but by that means I have known many that have fallen into Fevers; and in
truth, if we desire to keep Women in Childbed from all danger, the safest
means will be, that they may be kept long in their Beds. Thirdly, concerning
preservation, the intent remains, that by causing a gentle provocation of the
Blood, in Women Lying in, the Flux of the Lochia may be continued: for this
end, Midwives are wont (if after a difficult Labor they fear that evil) to
give them Sperma Ceti, or powder of irish Slate, or Saffron steeped in
White Wind: Moreover, to make them Oat-meal Caudle, that may more fuse the
Blood, of Water, and White and Rhenish Wine mixed together, in which they boil,
or in posset drink also, Marigold Flowers, leaves of Penyroyal, or Mugwort,
there are many other kinds of administrations extant, about the ordering Women
in Childbed, which being commonly known, I willingly pass over-here.

The Cure of the subsequent Fever of Women in Childbed, is far from the usual
method in Putrid Fevers: for in this, it is not to be expected, that the Blood
being touched with a feverish burning, should by degrees burn forth, and the
same should be separated by a Crisis, but rather (as it is done in a Malignant
Fever) as soon as the Blood grows immoderately hot, it is convenient for it to
be moved by gentle Diaphoretick Remedies, and its hererogeneous and impure
mixtures to be carried forth of doors; wherefore, among the common people it is
a custom (and that not bad) to give to feverish Women Lying in, sudorificks
presently: by this means, the Blood being eventilated, its effervency is
allayed; also, by reason of its agitation, the Lochia apt to be restrained, are
provoked into a Flux. There is great difference among Authors, from whence the
beginnings of these kind of Fevers ought to be computed, viz. whether from the
Birth it self, or from the first sense of growing feverish? however it matters
little whether it be after this or that manner: For since this Fever runs not
the usual stadia or courses of the Putrid, neither has a Crisis, nor wholly
admits the use of Cathartic or Purging Remedies, we need not be solicitous so
much for the days, concerning its period and mensuration. But yet, as to the
Curative indications, it will be of use only to distinguish what is to be done
in the beginning, increase, and end of this Disease: also, what we ought to
endeavor whilst there is some strength remaining, as also what, when it is
oppressed, and very much dejected.

When therefore any Woman in Childbed is first taken with this Fever (whose
assault is known from the milky Fever, because for the most part it begins
with a shivering) you must presently let it be your work, tha tthe more
plentiful sustenance may be drawn away from the burning Blood, and as I have
already admonished, that the flesh of living Creatures, and Broths made of
them, be utterly forbidden; yet in the mean time, all cold things, and that are
endued with a styptic or binding virtue, are equally to be avoided; for these
fix the Blood, and bind it too much, and hinder its very requisite Purgation,
both by the Lochia, and by transpiration through the skin. But rather, though
the Fever be urgent, give them decoctions, powders, and confections of things
moderately hot: of which sort are, (as is already said) decoctions, or
Distilled Waters of the Flowers of Marigoids, the Leaves of Pennyroyal,
Mugwort, the roots of Scorzonera, also Bezoartic Powders, Spirits of
Hartshorn, fixed salts of Herbs, etc. If the Lochia should be stopped, that
their Flux may be again provoked, must be endeavored every way: To the moving
of this, conduce frictions and ligatures about the Thighs and Legs; sometimes
Cupping-Glasses, or Blisters about the Thighs or Hips, also in the soles of the
Feet: also, sometimes the opening a Vein in the Ankle is convenient, in the
mean time a fomentation of the hysterical decoction, is to be applied about the
Pubis, or the Caul of a Weather or Sheep, taken out warm, may be laid to the
bottom of the Belly; and experience manifests, that sometimes injections into
the Womb are profitable: If the Belly yields not, it may be gently brought
down, with a violet suppository so called, or an emollient Clyster; of more
strong provocations you must take heed, because in Women Lying in, even as in a
Malignant Fever, from a copious dejection, with loss of Spirits, Life is
quickly lost. If with the suppression of the Lochia, there be a notable
perturbation of the Blood, with vomiting, thirst, and wakings, I have often
known, Laudanum mixed with Saffron, given with happy success. Instead of a
cooling Julep, this kind of mixture is convenient, viz. take of water of
Pennyroyal, and Balm, each three ounces, of hysterical water two ounces, of the
Syrrop of Mugwort three ounces and an half, of the tincture of Saffron two
drams, of Castor ry'd in a rog, and hung in the glass, one scruple, mingle
these, and let them drink of this three or four spoonfuls oftentimes in a day.

2. If notwithstanding the use of these Remedies the Fever grows still worse,
and by degrees is increased with worser symptoms, that besides the disorders of
the Blood, the Brain and nervous parts begin to be touched, Medicines, tho many
of every kind may be rayed, do little; yea, in this case the indications are
almost the same, with those made use of in the Plague it self: forasmuch as the
Lochia being for a good while suppressed, they cannot easily be reduced, or
scarcely at all, in the great confusion of the Blood and humors, therefore it
is convenient quickly to move a sweating, to wit, that the corruptions,
impressed on the Blood and nervous juice, and restagnating from the Womb, may
be carried forth some how, by sweat, and insensible transpiration. Therefore
here, Powders, and Confections of Bezoar, Spirit of Hartshorn, or of Soot,
tinctures of Corals or Pearls help. I have sometimes seen, by the help of these
kind of Medicines, in a desperate case, when the Pulse, and other symptoms have
appeared a little better, some small hopes to show themselves; yet Cure rarely
to follow: but when the use of these Cordials were left off, the sick with a
weak Pulse, and a Looseness presently arising, have been precipitated to Death.

3. When yet the business of the sick proves still worse, when the Fever being
increased, the Pulse is weak and unequal, and frequent horrors, and convulsive
motions in the whole body, with a delitium, and stupefaction infest them; then
the Physician having first made a Prognostication of Death, may insist upon a
few Remedies, and those only Cordials, and must wholly abstain from
blood-letting, scarification, blistering, or the use of Cupping-glasses: for
such administrations beget only an odium and blame, that by so doing, we are
esteemed by some Women, as wicked and cruel.

The Symptomatic Fevers of Women in Childbed.
THE Acute Diseases of Women in Childbed, show themselves not only according
to the Figure of the aforesaid Fever, but sometimes they are beset with some
signal symptoms, to wit, the Squinancy, Pleurifie, inflammation of the Lungs,
Dysentery, Smallpox, or of some other kind; and at that time, they get the
appellations of those Distempers. It will not be here seasonable, to repeat at
large, what belongs to the essences and natures of each: but I shall Briefly
show, what these sicknesses, being complicated with the distempers of Women
Lying in, contain peculiarly, as to the Causes or Cures.

All these symptoms, we suppose to proceed, from a certain Coagulation of the
Blood, and from thence its extravasation: But whilst the Blood is extravasated,
or put forth of the Vessels in one part, its efflux, however natural, and
critical, is hindered in another: wherefore it is dangerous, lest whilst the
Blood begins to be coagulated, either in a particular or accustomed nest of
Coagulation, or universally in its whole mass, the flowing of the Lochia be
stopped, which in truth for the most part happens, and therefore these
Distempers, for the most part, are deadly to Women in Childbed: yet the cause
of their Death, for the most part, happens with some difference, viz. in the
Small Pox, the flowing of the Lochia, draws inwardly the malignity, begun to be
carried forth outwardly, and forthwith compels the mass of Blood, and the heart
it self, to be impoysoned, with its evil; and therefore in the Small Pox, these
purgings of the Womb, are convenient to be stopped: But in the Pleurisy,
Squinancy, and the rest, when the provocative of the Disease, being fixed here
or there, in a particular place, draws to it self the impurities of the Blood,
which ought to be separated or sifted forth by the Lochia, and derives it
straight from the Womb, for that reason it increases the impurity of the Blood.
The Lochia being stopped in the Small Pox, by the more universal manner or way
of excretion, may be shut forth of doors, with the venomous Particles of the
Disease, which thing indeed does not succeed in the rest, by reason of the
minute, and more sparing manner of excretion.

Of these, the Squinancy, Pleurisy, and Inflammation of the Lungs, by reason,
both of the great similitude of the Cause, and analogy of the Cure, may be
considered together: when any Woman Lying in is distempered with any of these,
it is to be supposed, that besides the Infection, gathered together in the time
of being Bigbellied, there happens a certain sourish disposition of the Blood,
by the means of which, whilst that it self grows feaverishly hot, certain
Particles of it, being fused with the sourness enter into congelation, in this
or that part, like Milk growing sour, and then to be coagulated: The Blood
being there frozen or congealed, and hindered in its circuit, stops the passage
of the rest; but the Blood being obstructed in its motion, buts against the
impediment, and so being heaped up about it, and driven forth of the Vessels,
grows into a tumor: from thence presently, whatsoever is contained in its
mass, that is heterogeneous, and to be sifted forth, is laid aside into the
distempered part, as it were a sink: wherefore, the corruptions of the Blood,
that ought to be purged forth by the Womb, are derived from thence toward the
nest of this Disease, which, when they cannot be sufficiently purged forth by
this way, both more remarkably corrupt the Liquor of the Blood, and render the
particular distemper, viz. the Squinancy, Pleurifie, or any other more hard to
be cured.

For the Cure of these kind of complicated distempers, presently from the very
beginning, it should be endeavored, that the Blood being fixed somewhere, and
begun to be extravasated, may be restored to Circulation, that it may not
impostumate; because, very rarely, Women Lying in, are cured of these
Symptomatic Fevers, by an Imposthume, or spitting forth of the corrupt matter:
Wherefore, internal Remedies, which fuse the Blood, and free it from
Coagulation, are to be made use of; of which sort are chiefly Diaphoretics full
of a volatile Salt, as Spirit of Hartshorn, Soot, Urine, also the Salts
themselves; in like manner Shelly and Bezoartic Powders, Lapis Prunellae,
Decoctions and Juleps of Vegetables provoking Urine, or the terms, with all
which ought to be mixed, what by experience are found proper for the distempers
of the Womb: Besides, discussing Remedies, which may drive away the impacted
matter, and disperse it (of which sort are Liniments, Fomentations, and
Cataplasms) are diligently to be applied. In the mean time, the more impetuous
motion, and immoderate effervency of the Blood, are to be removed, and its
purgings, by all the ways possible transferred to the inferior parts. For this
end Frictions, Ligatures, Epispastics, and (if need be) Scarifying about the
Feet and Legs, are to be administered; if the distemper very much growing worse,
a taking away of Blood be indicated, unless there be a great fullness in the
whole Body, and a very acute inflammation in the distempered part; it will be
best to open a Vein in the Foot, or to take away Blood from the hemorrhoid
Veins by Leeches: But if necessity urges, it may be done in the Arm it self; if
after that Letting Blood (if another be admitted) let it be done in the Leg;
but you are to be warned, that in these cases, the opening a Vein is to be
ordered very cautiously, for unless it brings present help, (which I have
rarely known it to do) immediately the Pulse being made more weak, the business
of the sick becomes much worse.

The Dysentery takes its rise almost for the like cause, with the aforesaid
distempers; but in this, because the extravasated Blood is presently poured
forth, nor being retained in the Body, becomes there troublesome, or is any
more corrupted, and as this Flux makes an excretion near the Womb, and does not
afterward dreive it to any other place, there is less of danger to be feared,
from this Disease, than from those aforesaid: yet oftentimes this Disease is
fatal to Women in Childbed, for that indeed, the rather, because things
attempering the Blood, and moderately binding, are ordered for the Dysentery:
for these are found too apt to inhibit the Flux of the Luchia; wherefore in
this case, until the Women Lying in are sufficiently purged by a long Flux, the
Cure of the other Disease is to be omitted, and the fierceness of the symptoms
is to be allayed, only with gentle asswaging things.

The indications of the Small Pox, do not only differ from those above
described, but indeed they are beset with contraries to themselves; for they
require (as has been said) that the Flux of the Lochia should be moderately
staid: yet in the mean time, that the flowring forth of the Blood, and a gentle
sweat ought to be continued; for when in this Disease, the invenomed ferment is
twofold, and the corrupt Particles of the Blood, are carried outwardly in a
twofold way, you must beware, lest that the lesser, and straiter part, should
draw to its door, the whole matter, or more than it were able to send forth:
therefore, lest the Lochia flowing more plentifully, should recall inwardly the
venom, apt to flower outwardly, the manner or way of Diet is somewhat to be
changed, and specially those things which have a poison resisting force, and
are also astringent (as the roots of Tormentil and Bistort) are to be boiled in
the Broths of the sick; also Powders, Juleps, and Opiats, endued with such like
virtue, are convenient to be administered at due intervals: yea, in this case,
by no means, Women should be indulged, that they might eat flesh, or Broth made
of it, or to rise out of their Bed: but the quiet, both of mind and Body, is to
be procured, as much as may be, and a Diet to be ordered of those things, that
move not the Blood, and the business almost wholly to be committed to God and
Nature.

What has already been said, concerning the acute Diseases of Women in
Childbed, may easily be illustrated with Histories and Observations: But
examples which may be brought in this thing, for the greatest part, are
mournful and of an ill chance: because those Fevers for the most part end in
Death. But to describe these kind of sicknesses, does neither confirm the work
of the Physician, nor render approved the method of Medicine, altogether taken
in them; however, because the knowledge of these may make for the better
discovery of this Disease, I shall here propose some singular cases of Women
Lying in, and variety of symptoms; in which, although the forms and means of Cure
more sparingly occur, yet we may have some rules of precaution, of no
contemplable use.

A Gentlewoman in her six and twentieth year of her Age, brought forth her
sixth Child, with very difficult Labor, and not without danger of her Life;
yet presently after, she began to be better; on the second day she eat a whole
Chicken, on the third rose out of her Bed, and sat in a Chair for four hours;
the night following she found her self ill, at which time her Milk came into
her Breasts; which, by the application of Diaculum Plasters, soon vanished;
the next morning she complained of a weariness, and as it were an ulcerous pain
of her whole Body, also of a vomiting, nauseousness, and fullness about the
Ventricle, and Hypochondria: the following night was full of trouble; on the
fifth day she was plainly in a Fever, she felt now a shivering, now a heat,
every where increasing, she nauseated every thing, and was troubled at her
Stomach, moreover being unquiet, and without sleep, the Lochia flowed little,
but a whitish humor (commonly called the Flux of the Milk) came away: In the
evening she had a weight, and as it were a sleepiness about her forehead and
temples, and began to sleep a little; but awaking in half an hour, being
disturbed with Phantasms, she complained of her head, as if increased in bulk,
also of her jaws being set, that she could not open her teeth, and her fists
being strongly clutched, she seemed as if she felt a pricking and slupor, or
numness in her whole Body; her Ventricle and Hypochondria stood still inflated,
and stretched forth; they administered to her Frictions, Ligatures,
Cupping-glasses, and other Remedies, both inward and outward, that might recall
the Lochia, and drive the recrements of the Blood from the head: Her Pulse
being weak, and disordered, would not admit of Letting Blood; Powders, and
Juleps, which might gently move sweating, and fuse the Blood and nervous juice,
and hinder them from restagnating, were diligently given her; yea,
somentations, now of Woollen Clothes dipped in empollient Decoctions, and now of
warm inwards of living Creatures, were applied to her Belly; in the mean time,
stinking things (such as they use to the Mother Fits) were put to her nose,
which might drive away the impetuousness of the Spirits and Blood, carried into
the head, but these, and other things, being for several hours carefully
performed, she seemed to feel some ease; but still she feared to shut her eyes,
or to settle herself to sleep, for her eye lids being closed, a thousand
Phantasms ran in her mind, with noise and tingling in her whole head: she
continued that night almost without sleep; as soon as she had begun to sleep,
presently being affrighted, and feeling a weight in her Precordia, she was
awaked: on the sixth day about noon, she was troubled with a great shivering,
or rather an horror, with a strong concussion of the whole Body; to which, as
in the fit of an Ague, by and by heat, and then sweat copiously followed: but
from thence, nothing of ease accrued to the sick, for presently after the
sweat, the feverish heat was renewed, and convulsive distempers infested her
more: the night following, with the rest of the symptoms growing worse, first a
Palsy was excited in her tongue, and by and by in her throat, that she could
not speak, and scarce swallow at all: on the seventh day, about the same hour,
a shivering invaded her again, with heat and sweat; then her Pulse being much
weaker, and unequal; also a difficult breathing, and fetching the breath short
and quick, with her Breast lifted up, she knew not them about her: on the
eighth day she died.

There was a manifold occasion of the death of this Gentlewoman, predisposed to
a Fever, by reason of her Big-belly, and which had increased the malignity of
the Discase over and above; for the hurt received by her hard Labor, the
sudden exclusion of the Milk from her Breasts, the earing of flesh, and the
rising too soon out of her bed, happening together, made as it were a
conspiration for the greater evil: The Blood being touched with a feverish
burning, presently conceived inordinations, and snatched into it self the
Lochia, and perhaps other defilements of the Womb, and so by that means
acquired a greater infection, and plainly venomous disposition; the membranes
of the Viscera, being imbrued with the degenerate nervous juice, were struck
either with Convulsive motions, or with Convulsions continued to them from the
Womb; for these kind of inflations, about the Abdomen, and those distentions
are the effects of Convulsions: For although the direct Fibers drawing the member
do oftentimes press it, yet since the Fibers are direct and transverse, and
others placed in a various site, the membranes are pulled together into an
hollowness, by their coming together, the part swells up like a blown bladder,
into whose vacuity the Air being rarefied secondarily carries it self forward:
But it is not the Air (as is commonly said) or a blast there at first heaped
up, that is the cause of the distention. The Blood growing hot in our sick
person, and being quickly filled with an adust and malignant matter, did
endeavor to subdue it, and being unable to put it forth by sweat, forthwith
fixed it in the Brain; the first suffusion of the same matter into the head, by
reason of the animal Spirits being half overthrown, brought in that sense of
her head being much increased in bulk; which thing happened by the like means,
as when the foot being taken with a sleepiness, seems as if it felt much bigger
than it is: But that after some ease, the distemper grew worse, by sleep and
closing of her eyes, the reason is, because waking, and the exercise of the
senses, shake off and remove from them, somewhat, the matter besieging the
Brain and Nerves; which notwithstanding being near and in its precincts, sleep
creeping on, is as it were supped up by them, and enters their Bodies more
deeply with the alible juice. But the Blood, although it had plentifully poured
forth its recrements in the Brain, yet did not itself become free; but being
still full, with an impure ballast, it conceived as it were a critical
flowring, and attempted to shake off its burden once or twice (as it is wont
in a great excretion) with a shivering, and with heat and sweat following it,
by which endeavor however nothing was further effected, than that the matter
sticking to the Brain, pierced more deeply into it, and becoming fixed in some
little shoots of the Nerves, took away her speech and swallowing, and
afterward her senses; and mass of Blood, being by degrees more and more
depraved, at length became unable to sustain Life.

A noble Gentlewoman, being married a little before she was twenty years of
Age, and being with Child, used, during the time, an ill diet, and little or no
exercise; yet falling into Labor, and suffering the torments with
intermission, and frequent cafe for twelve hours, at length was brought to Bed
of a Son: The Child, with the afterbirth came away, and all things were right
about the Womb: the first and second day she found her self indifferently well,
but on the third, after a light shivering, she began to complain of thirst and
heat; to which a looseness followed, that she had that day four stools: the
following night she was almost without fleep, the feverish distemper remained,
after that, in the same manner for two days; daily she purged three or four
time; the Lochia as yet flowed moderately: when on the sixth day, by the
persuasion of the Women, she had took some astringent thing, to moderate the
Flux of her Belly, the hpurgings of the Womb were almost wholly stayed: at
which time the Fever became more strong, and symptoms as it were hysterical
appeared; for in her Precordia, she had great and frequent oppressions, and was
troubled with a sense of choking in her throat; on the seventh day, the heat
was yet stronger, and her breathing difficult and laborious; but then, by the
prescription of a Physician, at that time first sent for, Blood was taken from
her foot to three ounces, by which she was better for four hours; for a quiet
sleep, with a plentiful sweat followed upon it, and the Lochia appeared again
tho in small quantity: In the Evening again, all things grew worse, her
strength being very much lost, her Pulse weaker and unequal; she complained
also of a noise and tingling of her ears, with a fullness of her head, moreover
a leaping up of the tendons in her wrists; also she had sudden concussions of
her wholly Body, yet still her looseness held; to her were administered, by the
prescripts of several Physicians, Cordials, and other Remedies, and kinds of
Administrations carefully, but nothing profited: her Pulse being more weak, and
her strength leisurely wasting, she died on the ninth day, after she was
delivered.

This Fever very much depended upon the vicious provision of the Body, as the
procatartic cause; for I have often observed, that it sates ill with Women
Lying in, who when Big bellied devoured fruit, and any unwholsom trash, and
living without motion or exercise, indulged themselves with ease and rest: the
Blood, by reason of the previous Cachexie, conceived a burning without any
evident cause, as it were of its own accord: But growing hor, laying inwardly
still its recrements, and impurities, caused the Diarrhea: neither yet was its
mass made more pure, by its almost continual excretion, yea, rather being still
more depraved in its mixtion or crasis, the Blood at length wholly departed
from its proper disposition, and became unable to be fermented in the heart,
whereby heat and breath might be every where dispersed: The looseness, excited
by the motion of Nature, was untowardly stopped, especially by the use of
astringent things; for this I have often observed, never to be done without
paying for it; because the Flux of the Belly has cured some that have been ill,
but in this Lady, and in many others (as has abundantly appeared to our
experience) although it did not take away the Fever, yet it freed her from the
more grievous distempers of the Brain and nervous stock: from whence this sick
person was wholly free from a Delirium, nor was struck with Convulsive motions,
till reduced almost to extremity.

The Mother of a Family, and a Gentlewoman, about 36 years of Age or upwards,
being with Child of her serventeenth Child, was troubled, and very anxious,
lest she should die of that Childbearing: But (God favoring) she was
delivered well enough of a Son, and for three days after she was very cheerful:
on the fourth day, when she had eaten more than she should do of a Chicken, a
little before night she fell into a feverish Distemper, with vomiting, and a
stopping of the Lochia: all night she lay restless and without sleep, the next
morning she had four stools, and seemed somewhat eased: about Noon (about which
time I came to her) she complained again of heat and thirst, as also a
palpitation of the heart, and of the ascent of some substance in her throat;
her Pulse was quick and small, her Urine red, the Lochia scarce appeared: I
ordered her Juleps, Cordials, and things to purge the Womb, besides a
somentation for the bottom of her Belly, also her Legs and Feet to be rubbed
often, with warm Woollen Clothes; at going to sleep I gave her of Laudanum one
grain, with Saffron Powder half a scruple, in a spoonful of Treacle-water: She
slept well, and the Lochia came down plentifully, and by that means, with a
slender diet, and continuing to provoke moderately the Flux of the Womb, for a
few days, she became very well.

The immoderate eating of flesh, as an evident and almost only sufficient
cause, without any great provision, or vicious predisposition, induced the
Fever. The Lochia restagnating into the Blood, increased its intemperance, and
presently brought troubles upon the nervous kind; but in the mean time, the
Blood although growing hot, did not undergo any great corruption, but when the
recrements, heaped up by the Surfeit, were sent forth by the looseness, and the
Blood, the Lochia being restored, began to be purged forth again after its
wonted manner, this Fever wanting a further malignant ferment, quickly
vanished.

A noble Lady, young, and fair, was brought to Bed of a second Child, and for
six days, as to the Lochia and other accidents, she was well, and wholly free
from the suspicion of any intemperature: she ate flesh daily, and rising from
her Bed, was brisk and cheerful in her Chamber; on the seventh day, without any
manifest cause, a shivering came upon her, with a Fever, and a lessning of the
Lochia, but not supprossed: to the tenth day after her Delivery, she was only
moderately feverish; whilst the purgings of the Womb yet flowed, she remained
free from any grievous symptom: but then, although she was greatly seaverish,
she was more cheerful than ordinary, and seemed more confident of her health:
at Night she slept little or nothing; the morning following (at which time I
first visited her) she clearly raved, the Lochia were stopped, also her whole
Body was shaken with horror, the tendons in her wrists were pulled together, so
that I could hardly distinguish her Pulse, which in the mean time was weak,
unequal, and very quick. I said she would die quickly, unless God should
miraculously restore her by his Divine Power, however, six grains of Oriental
Bezoar being given her, in a spoonful of Cordial Julep, brought upon her a
plentiful sweat, with a better Pulse; then other Cordials being given, with due
intervals, gave some little hopes, tho I doubted they would not continue: after
four hours from the time that I came, the sick Lady had of her own accord a
great Stool, and presently her strength wholly failed her, and within half an
hour she died.

When there happened nothing of ill to this Lady, as to her Delivery, or Womb, so
permicious a Fever, and so suddenly Mortal, could not happen without a great
and malignant procatarsis of the Blood and humors: whether a more full Diet, or
taking Cold, or any other evident cause, gave a beginning to this is uncertain;
because, the Women and Nurses helping her, knew of no manifest occasion of her
sickness: The Fever being inkindled, the infection of the Blood could not be
wholly carried away, by the purging of the Womb, tho long continued; tho for
that reason, the more cruel symptoms came not presently upon her, yet the evil
still lurked within, and the Disease being very acute, showing it self with a
swist motion, on the fourth day, when Nature should have endeavored a Crisis,
the matter of the Fever being moved, but not overcome, as it were in a moment
overturned at once, the Brain and nervous parts, whence Death was to be
expected, and suddenly followed.

A Woman well known, who had scarce passed the twentieth Year of her Age, of a
florid countenance, and slender Body, after her being brought to Bed, when the
Lochia flowed immoderately, made use of some astringent Remedies, by the
counsel of those about her, by which means they were wholly stopped; but a Flux
of her belly succeeded, which when it had increased for three days, the Women
gave her other things for the stopping her Looseness: nor were they frustrated
in the success; in the mean time, in the place of the former evil, they had
brought a most dangerous Fever, and distempers as it were hysterical: for the
unhappy Gentlewoman Lying in, was troubled with thirst, heat, wakings, and at
several turns, with swoonings, and cold sweats; at this time being sent for, I
prescribed her Cardaic Remedies, and such as moved the purgings of the Womb,
and also a Clyster to be given her: at length, the Flux of her Belly being
provoked, the Lochia also came down, and the sick Woman being freed from the
aforesaid symptoms, and the more grievous Disease, to wit, the Remedies of the
Nurses, quickly grew well of her Fever.

The more plentiful Flux of the Womb, happening to this Woman, removed the
Procatartic cause of a more grievous Disease: wherefore, when they had
committed so many errors about the ordering her, ( viz. first in stopping the
Lochia, then what might compensate their defect, in hindering the Flux of her
Belly) yet the Fever was only light, and without any venomous taint impressed
on the Blood; the like to this I have known to happen frequently, to wit, when
at first the purgings of the Womb have flown very plentifully, afterward when
they have flown very sparingly, and sometimes stopped, the women in Childbed
have escaped. And by the way, it is here to be noted, that it is wholly
dangerous, to inhibit, or at least divert, and cross and motion of Nature,
incited, tho irregular.

A Noble Gentlewoman, about 20 years of Age, endued with a smooth and full
habit of Body, miscarried twice in the space of a Year; when she had again
Conceived, by the prescription of her Physician, she provoked a Vomit once a
month, by drinking plentifully Posset Drink, by which she was wont to cast
forth much thick tough Phlegm; also in the time of her being with Child, he Let
her Blood 5 times; the time of her going being over, she was brought to Bed of
a Son, with very hard Labor; the Secundine came whole away, and she purged
notably: on the second day, whilst she was lifted upon her feet in Bed, that
the Sheets and the Blankets might be laid in better order, she took Cold, and
by that means the bloody Lochia wholly stopped, and only a little serous Water
came away: on the third day she began to complain of an acute pain in her right
side, to which the Women laid Bags of Camomil made hot with Bricks, but the
distemper grew worse with a bloody spittle; on the fourth day of her being
brought to Bed, a most sharp pain, with a difficult breathing, and very
Laborious, invaded her: by the prescription of her Physician, then coming to
her from the neigbourhood, six ounces of Blood was taken away, out of the
Basilic vein, and she felt sudden ease, for 10 hours she was better, in the
middle of the night the pricking pain returned with its wonted fierceness: at
length, other Physicians being called to Counsel, they agreed that it was
necessary to open a Vein again, in the arm of the distempered side: four ounces
of Blood being taken away, the pain remitted, and the sick breathed better;
then by Diasphoretic Remedies, she fell into a great sweat, with a quiet sleep:
But the Pulse was made quicker and weaker, also contractures of the tendons in
her wrists appeared: presently afterward she talked idly, and within 24 hours,
after she was last Let Blood, she departed.

That this Lady fell into a Pleurisy, with a Fever, upon the Lochia being
suppressed, the cause in some measure seemed to be, the Letting of Blood so
often in the time of her being with Child: for by this means, the Blood being
accustomed to be eventilated at the arm, afterward growing hot, leaving the
Womb, was carried violently toward the place of its letting forth, where, when
it found not a passage, it fixed in the neighboring side, as thenexe nest to
the place of extravasation; yea, besides the usual manner of a Pleurisy, there
was no small malignity happened to this Disease; for the Blood being hindered from
being let forth of the Vessels, began presently to be corrupted in its
disposition, and in the third day of the Fever, was so much depraved, that it
could not be any longer fermented in the heart so as to Prorogue Life.

It was not so with the Wife of a certain Smith, who was brought to Bed, at
what time her Children had the Small Pox in the same House, and she her self,
as it seemed, had taken the Contagion of the same Disease, for on the second
day after her Delivery, they began to break forth with a feverish heat, and
pain in her Loins, which indeed for three days, whilst the Lochia moderately
flowed, arose rightly into little swellings; although the purging of the Womb was
very copious at that time, she had the Small Pox very thick all over her Body,
not only in the superficies of her skin, but also they filled the cavity of her
mouth and throat, so that she could scarce speak or swallow: The sixth day of
her Lying in, the Lochia flowed immoderately, from whence presently fell upon
the sick, a frequent swooning, with a flagging of the Small Pox, Convulsions,
and other symptoms of an ill nature, which threatened Death soon; being sent
for, I prescribed half a dram of this Powder, to be taken constantly every
three hours, in a spoonful of the following Julep, viz. take of the Roots of
Tormentil in Powder, drams two, of the best Bole Armonie, dram one, of the
species of Hyacinth half a dram, make a Powder. Take of the Compound Water of
Scordium, of Dragons, of Meadowsweet, each three ounces, of There call Vinegar
one ounce, of the Syrup of Corals two ounces, of Hartshorn burnt half a dram,
make a Julep. Besides, I ordered to be boiled in her Broths, and in every thing
she drank, the Roots of Totmentil: by these Remedies, the purging of her Womb
was soon wholly stopped, and the Small Pox by degrees being ripened, came off
without any grievous symptom.

Indeed this case was difficult, and was cured with great danger, viz. for
either the Lochia, or the Small Pox to have been restrained inwardly, was very
dangerous, and yet the more full eruption of the one, hindered the motion of the
other; so long as either moderately proceeded, things being permitted to the
conduct of Nature was moderately well: but when one of them became ill, the
work of Art was required, and it was requisite to bridle the Lochia, but to
provoke the Small Pox.

CHAP. XVII. Of Epidemical Fevers.
HAving meditated rather a Commentary, than an entire Tract, I had thought here
to have concluded our Discourse of Fevers: But forasmuch as certain Epidemical
Fevers do often spread, which observe no Laws, nor can be brought to any
certain rule of Doctrine, but being irregular vary every year, and for that
reason, as often as any of them increase or spread abroad, presently it is
called the new Disease; therefore, I thought it worth out while, because
general precepts concerning these Fevers are not to be delivered, to subjoyn
some particular Histories, of some of this kind; for out of the various
provision of symptoms, whereby they are wont to be noted, the nature and the
whole formal reason of these kind of distempers, may somewhat appear. Since
therefore of late years, within a short tract of time, three popular Diseases
have spread in these Countries, I will add, as a Crown to this work, the several
Descriptions of them, made at those times, when these Fevers raged.

A Description of an Epidemical Fever, spreading about Autumn, in the Year
1657. taken in the middle of September.
WHilst we meditate the Description of a Fever, at this time cruelly raging,
it is fit, that following the example of Hippocrates, we first consider the
foregoing constitution of the Year, its intemperance and excess of qualities.
For Epidemical Diseases, and commonly excited among the people, are from a
common cause; such as the habit of the year, and by that means contracted, a
disposition of the Blood, by which many are alike affected. But that we may
draw the matter from the beginning, the last Spring, and the time succeeding
it, even to the end of the Summer, was all that half years space extremely dry
and hot, but especially after the Summer solstice, the heats were so intense
for many weeks following, that day and night there was none that did not
complain of the heat of the Air, and were almost in a continual sweat, and were
not able to breath freely: About the Calends of July, this Fever, at first
sporadical or particulat, began to break forth in some places, that perhaps one
or two were taken in the same City or Village: In many it imitated the likeness
of an intermitting Tertian, viz. the Fits returned every other day; which yet
infested the sick with a most intense heat, without any cold or shivering going
before; Vomiting and Choleric Stools plentifully happened to most, sweat
succeeding but difficultly, and often-interrupted, whereby the feverish fit
rarely ended in a remission, but that all the time between, the sick continued
languishing and weak, with thirst and restlessness; in some, when the business
began to grow better, affer three or four fits, cold and shivering began the
fits, and the Fever became an exact intermitting Tertain: But in most, the
Fever still grew worse, and presently became of an evil nature, and difficult
Cure, with a depraved provision of symptoms; for when the sick were highly
heated in their fits, and hardly sweated, they were wont to commit errors,
which daily increased the strength of the Disease, because by reason of the
inpatience of the siek, and the unskilfulness of Servants, the sweat being
interrupted, which should have ended the fit of the Fever, after one fit was
scarce finished, another presently succeeded, and so the Disease was wont to
have wandering and uncertain periods, without any intermission between, and
afterward to pass into a kind of continual Fever. The condition of which,
sometimes being very dangerous, with an evil affection of the Brain and nervous
stock, so that oftentimes a Lethargy, or Delirium, or not seldom cramps, and
and Convulsive motions, were excited: About the month of August, this Fever
began to spread far and near, among the people, that in every Region and
Village many were sick of it; but it was much more frequent in the Country, and
smaller Villager, than in cities or Towns. It was still like an intermitting
Fever, unless that it seemed more infestous than that is wont, and with more
cruel fits, and shorter intermissions, and therefore was called the new
Disease: besides, it underwent the note of a certain malignity, and gave
knowledge of its Contagion and Deadliness; insomuch, that it crept from house to
house, infected with the same evil, most of the same Family, and especially
those familiarly conversing with the sick; yea, old Men, and Men of ripe Age,
it ordinarily took away.

If you respect the nature and essence of the Disease, this Fever properly
should be referred to the rank of intermitting Fevers, for the fits returned
at set times, also for the most part they began with cold and shivering, and
oftenest with vomiting, and by and by a most intense heat proceeding, they were
finished at last with a sweat. The Urine in most appeared of a flame color,
thin in the fits, with some hypostasis, without it more thick, and with a
redish sediment; although with a most copious sweat, and often iterated, the
Disease was not cured, which might be expected in a continual Fever; yea, the
diftemper continued exceeding long, for many days, sometimes months, tho much
evacuation almost daily happened by vomit and sweat: which we observe frequently
in an intermitting Fever, rarely to happen in a continual; out of the fit, at
any time of the Disease a purge was profitably instituted, which in a Synochus
before the sign of concoction, were a wicked thing to attempt; besides, that
this Fever was of the intermitting kind, it seems to appear from hence,
because very many recovered of it, that scarce one of a thousand died, which I
scarce every knew in an Epidemical Synochus. About the first beginnings of this
Disease, it appeared very like to an intermitting Tertian, although afterward in
some, by reason of the vicious provision of their body, and errors committed in
Diet, and sweating, it seemed to change into a continual; for in whom the fits
were not rightly concluded, nor ended in a remission, by reason of the morbific
matter not being thoroughly dispersed, their Blood was continually hot: from
whence it came to pass, that the fits sooner returned, and continued longer;
till at length, by reason of the plenty of matter, and the languishment of
Nature, the Blood being made weaker, endeavored no longer to swell up, and to
separate the feverish matter at set hours, but to subdue it by little and
little, with a continual effervency.

We are to inquire concerning the causes of this Disease, what may be the
leading, evident, and conjunct cause, viz. by the means of which it spread so
generally, and became Epidemical through all England; by what means, and for
what occasion, it was wont to be excited in all men: and lastly, what kind of
alteration of the Blood and humors, being induced, brought forth this kind of
Fever, with such a provision of symptoms, and conserved it in the Act.

I know it is easy to place wholly the cause of this so popular Disease in the
malignant consitution of the Air, to wit, that the Particles of the Air, in
which we breath, were infected by a certain extraneous Infection, and not
agreeable to our Nature, the little bodies of which Infections being admitted
within, did ferment with the Blood and humors, and so in most, brought in this
Fever, almost with the same appearance of symptoms. For who dares deduce the
original of a Disease so genearlly raging, from a less public fountain? or
refer to any other place, the received causes of Diseases, than to that nest of
Vital Air, on which every one seeds? But whilst I more attentively consider the
thing, it seems to me, that its stem, and as it were its first beginnings, are
to be sought a little deeper. To wit, that this Leaver is born not from the
Contagion communicated by the Air, and immediately fixing its evil on men, but
rather from a certain feverish predisposition or nature, impressed somewhile
before on our Bodies, because of the intemperance of the Year, which at length
having gotten maturity, on the least ocasion is brought into Act, and so breks
not forth into this Fever, so much as it sifts it forth.

For when about the Calends of July, the Air was immoderately hot, with a most
intense heat for many days, it casily altered our Blood toward an hot and
bilous intemperance, by which (as in wine growing more hot than it should do)
the sweet part, and the spirituous was much consumed, in the mean time, the
Saline and Sulphurous was too much carried forth, that by that means, the
Liquor easily contracted a rancor or sourness: We have in another place shown,
that this kind of disposition of the Blood, whereby indeed it turns from a
sweet and spirituous temper, into a bilous or choleric, is most apt for
intermitting Fevers: Hence the alible juice, which is continually carried into
the mass of Blood, is not rightly concocted, nor assimilated into Blood, but
perverted as it were into an extraneous and fermentative matter: which arising
to a fullness in the bosom of the Blood it self, and growing turgid according to
its increase at set periods, as we have already shown, induces the fits of the
intermitting Fever: when therefore, fore the great burning heat of this
Summer, the Blood almost of all men, becoming more hot than usual, was very
much scorched, it is no wonder, if from thence it should contract a great
aptitude for intermitting Fevers. But why not whilst the servor of the Heaven
was yet urgent, but a little aster, this Disease spread it self, the reason is,
because this indisposition is not impressed on our Blood at once, or at one
time, but by little and little, and not but of a long time; and therefore,
Diseases like Fruits, are chiefly ripened in Autumn, after the foregoing heat
of the Summer.

This aptitude or feverish disposition, all do not contract alike; those whose
Blood is of a more hot Nature, and abounds more in Sulphur, and for that cause
is sooner scorched, also such who labor, or stay long in the heat of the sun,
and open Air, by reason of their Blood being more remarkably torrified, more
easily fell into this Disease; wherefore, at first, it chiefly raged among
Husbandmen in the Country: of these, who had acquired an aptitude to this
Fever, from the Blood being before scorched, some perhaps fell into this of
their own accord, the feverish disposition being leisurely carried forth to a
maturity; others, by reason of a light occasion or evident cause, which was
wont otherways to stir up the feverish burning, as from taking Cold, Surfeit,
drinking of Wine, and the like; and others fell sick from the Contagion
received of others, for as the effluvia constantly came away from the sick,
when they pierced Bodies predisposed to the like distemper, they easily excited
the hhid powers into Act.

As to the third Proposition, to wit, that the conjunct cause of this Disease,
and its formal Reason, may be known, we must put you in mind of those things,
which we have elsewhere delivered concerning the nature of intermitting
Fevers; for we suppose the retorrid and bilous constitution of the Blood, as
the basis of the Disease, by reason of which, the alible juice, being supplied
daily, as it were in a certain measure, is not rightly concocted, but by the
assation or scorching, becomes or goes into a fermentative matter, not miscible
with the Blood. When the Blood is filled to a fullness with this matter (which
happens at set intervals of times, because the alible juice is supplied as it
were by a set measure) it of its own accord conceives a swelling up, and the
growing hot or effervescency being excited, for the carrying away of this
matter, causes the feverish fit. which so long indures, till this feverish
matter being inkindled, and as it were burnt in the heart, is wholly dissipated
with sweat.

From these things premised, it is made plain, that in the distemper, we now
discourse of, there are some things happen by a peculiar way, from the common
kind of intermitting Fevers, and therefore it was noted, and that not
undeservedly, with the appellation of a New Fever; which are, First, That
about the beginning of the Disease, fits did a long while afflict the sick,
without cold or shaking, but with a most intense heat, thirst, and cruel
vomiting; by which, the sweat hardly, and for the most part partial, and often
interrupted, succeeded, whereby the fit was not finished but of a long time.
The reason of which, may be only laid upon the very choleric disposition of the
Blood, and being above measure scorched: For this proceeding from the
domineering Sulphur, wholly inhibits the wonted sourness of the Blood, which
follows its turgency or sweeling up, and is wont to stir up the cold or
shivering; and by reason of this kind of temper of the Blood, too much roasting
and as it were burning the alible juice, the Blood growing turgid, together
with that juice, and being stirred up into motion, is inkindled more than it is
wont in the heart, and by its deflagration, induces a most intense and
troublesome heat, with thirst, to the sick. Choleric vomitings, happen not
only at the beginning, but in the middle of the fit, by reason of the abundance
of choler, with which, the Choleduct Vessels being too much filled, infuse the
intestines; which then a Convulsion being stirred up, is easily emptied into
the Ventricle: sweat hardly succeeds, because the bile abounds more than the
serum, wherefore the feverish matter being burnt, it is not easily sisted
forth by sweat, but being either mingled with the Blood, cause the long
effervency, or being carried toward the intestines; produces Vomiting, or a
Flux. Secondly, This Fever differs from the vulgar intermitting Fever,
because after the fit was ended, there was no full intermission, even to a
remission, but the sick still remained languishing and thirsty; and as to
appetie, sleep, and other accidents, very ill: which indeed happened, because, by
the intense heat of the fit, more of the Blood and feverish matter is
inkindled, than that its recrements remaining after its deflagration, are able
presently to be dissipated, especially, because the sweat, by reason of the
dryness of the matter, very hardly succeeds, nor is the feverish matter enough
diluted with the serous Latex, to be sifted forth; wherefore, the Blood by its
Contagion, in the time of the fit, not being perfectly freed, grows hot still,
neither the fit being ended, does it get any full truce from the Disease: In
the mean time, whilst the Blood is urged after this manner, with almost a
continual effervency, it differs from a Synochus; because in this, the
Sulphurous part of the Blood, being too much carried forth, and as it were
inflamed, causes the Fever by its deflagration; but the continual ebullition,
which after this manner comes upon this intermitting Fever, wholly depends
upon the confusion of the not miscible matter, and its hard secretion from the
Blood. The Synochus happens like Wine growing hot of its own accord, by reason
of its richness, the other conceives its fury, like the same Wine, by reason of
some heterogeneous thing poured to it: wherefore we remark, that whilst our
Fever is seen still to be continual, it is not cured by sweat or the Flux of
the Belly; although they frequently and copiously happen: because it depending
upon the Blood being depauperated, rather than being inflamed, it continues
long, and disposes the sick toward a Cachexie,

3. There is a third reason of difference, by which this Fever may be
distinguished from the common rank of intermitting Fevers, and it is this,
that it is easily propagated to others by Contagion; the reason of which is,
because here very many bodies are predisposed after the same manner, toward
the same distemper, hich happens not at another time; wherefore, the mere
effluvias from a diseased Body, are able to excite the like effect, in a very
fit subject; even as some Beams of Flame enkindle Flame, in a very combustible
matter: In the mean time all do not alike contract the Infection of this
Fever, but that some being less prepared or fitted for it, converse with the
sick without harm.

4. There is another symptom occurs, not constant to this Fever, but only
happening in some places, that discriminates it not only from the common, but
varies its own proper type; to wit, sometimes it happens, this Disease to be
accompanied with a Dysenterick distemper; in some choleric Vomits, and bilous
Stools very much infest, and in others Bloody Stools follow, with cruel pains
and torments of the Belly. The former I often observed in our Neigbourhood, and
the reason of it may be deduced from the highly bilous temper of the Blood: For
by reason of this, the adust matter, not to be dissipated by sweat, is
copiously sifted into the Liver; then by reason of the choler-carrying Vessels,
being filled to a flowing over, it is sent away to the Ventricle, and
Intestines. The other Dysenterical distemper, was found only in some places,
and there peculiar rather than common, it laid hold only of some sick. The
origin of it may be referred to the peculiar dispositions of some Bodies, or
vicious provision, also to the site of the place, or condition of the Air; then
the Disease is to be suspected, to be thence translated to others, not without
the communication of a certain Infection.

There is to be had a double Prognostication concerning this Disease: First, of
the Fever in General, what end it shall have, and when; what it may threaten
to the Land: whether it precede not (which is commonly feared) the Plague, or
Pestilential Sicknesses. Secondly, The signs ought to be laid down, whereby we
are wont to presage health, or danger, in the various cases of the sick.

As to the First, Because we have shown that the Origin of this distemper is
not to be fetched from the Contagion of the Air, or its being infected with any
venomous Infection, nor from-any malignant seeds of Vapors diffused through
the Air, but only from the signal bilous temper or disposition of our Bodies,
with the Blood being made adust and roasted extremely, by reason of the Summer
heats, I think there is no reason of fear, that this Fever should be carried
forth into any thing worse, by the vice of the Air, or might at length grow to
be Malignant or Pestilential. But rather (that the season of the Year being
changed, and the alteration of our Blood assuredly to be expected) we might
fear lest this Fever, which now imitates the way of an intermitting Fever,
should afterward pass into a Quartane, the Blood growing into a melancholy
temper. Which thing indeed I observed to happen to some already, and I believe,
that before the Autumn be fully passed over, will happen to many more.

As to the particular Prognostication, the chiefly notable signs, which occur
in the course of this Fever, and in a manner foretell its condition and event,
and of this sort; if the Disease happens in a firm Body, well tempered, and
easily perspirable; if vomiting with ease succeeds, and that the Belly be
loose: if the fit begins with a light shivering, and afterward a moderate
heat, with sweat concludes it, and that the intermission be with some tolerable
remission; if the Pulse be strong, the Urine of a flame color, clear, and with
a laudable hypostasis, we may Predict that the Disease will quickly end without
any danger. But if this Fever be excited in a fat Body, and of a vicious
habit, if with troublesome vomiting, an intolerable thirst, and fierce heat,
long exercise the sick; if to the heat a difficult sweat, and partial, and
often interrupted, and between frequent vomitings succeed, and that it ends not
in a remission, we may declare, that this Disease may be long, and of a
dangerous issue. But if the sick remain in strength, and the Urine show signs
of concoction, we need not despair of health; especially, if after four or five
periods, the Disease, as it is wont to do, remits of its wonted fierceness.
Thirdly we observe, if this Disease is excited in an old Body, or others broken
with sicknesses, or debilitated; if besides horrid vomitings, there happen
swoonings, faintings, Deliriums or Lethargic distempers; if after many fits,
the sick having lost their strength, the Disease remits nothing, but exercises
the Blood, with a continual effervency, and that the Vital Spirits are much
destroyed; if the appetite be lost, wakings pertinacious, and that they have
Convulsive motions, with a weak Pulse, and Urine troubled, or thick, we judge
the matter to be full of danger: yet is not the sick to be left as desperate,
because the Disease is not hasty, and kills not suddenly, and out of hand; but
is drawn out at length, and grants time and occasions to nature, of
recollecting her self, and to the Physician, of giving Remedies.

The Therapeutic Indications, which have place in the Cure of this Fever, are
chiefly four. First, That the Blood being now scorched, and made too choloric,
may be reduced to its due temper. Secondly, That the depravation of the
nourishable juice, and its alteration into a fermentative matter, may be
inhibited, or at least lessned. Thirdly, That about the declining of the
Disease, the Blood depauperated by a frequent deflagration, and made more
impure by the fusion or pouring into it the morbifick or adust matter, may be
restored, and rendered as it should be volatile. Fourthly, That the symptoms,
which chiefly infest in the course of the Disease, may be timely helped, by fit
Remedies; that these intentions may be satisfied, I counsel that this following
method be used.

About the beginning of the Disease, if the bilous or choloric humor, flowing
forth of the choler bearing Vessels, and being suffused into the Venticle,
cause the sick to be prone to vomiting, let a more plentiful evacuation be
procured, by a gentle Emetic in the time of the fit: The opening of a Vein, and
Purging, ought not to be administered, unless between the fits: for whilst the
Blood grows mainly hot, or is resolved into sweat, Nature ought not to be
called back from the Work begun, nor her endeavors to be disturbed, by the
preseriptions of Physicians; wherefore, after the fit being past, and the sweat
thoroughly finished, a Purging may be instituted, by a gentle Cathartic, and the
same afterward sometimes repeated, on the like occasion: for by this method,
not only the provision of the excrementitious matter, is brought away; from the
first passages, but chiefly the choler-bearing Vessels being emptied, the
choler is copiously drawn forth from the mass of Blood, and by that means the
Blood is restored to its natural Crasis or disposition. The Letting of Blood,
if is be indicated, should be performed presently after the beginning; for so
its Liquor being too turgent of swelling up, is eventilated, whereby both the
nutritious juice is less perverted, and the fiturging, it burns forth with a
less heat, together with the morbifick matter: but otherwise, if a Vein be
opened after a long sickness, when the Blood being made poorer, and more watery,
more of the morbific matter is heaped together, and does not rightly concoct,
and silt it forth, it detracts much from the strength of Nature, and nothing
from the power of the Disease. In the interval of the fits, when there is no
place for opening a Vein, nor Purging, let the Belly be kept loose, by the
constant use of Clysters; also digestive Remedies, of acetous or saline Liquors
and Powders, are to be exhibited; of which sort are, Cream of Tartar, fixed
Salts of Herbs, Tartar Vitriolate, Hartshorn burnt, Spirit of Vitriol, and
Salt, etc. for these restore the lost, or sleepy ferments of the Viscera,
purify the Blood by fusing it, also separate the morbific matter, and as it
were precipitate it: also, at this time, between, if pertinations waking infest
the sick, and overthrow their strength, it may be lawful to administer anodyne,
and gentle narcotic Remedies; but never in the fit: for then they greatly
hinder the subduing, and sifting forth of the feverish matter, and draw out in
length the fit that would end sooner.

These things are to be done about the interstitia, or intervals of the fits;
but whilst the fit is urgent, although the sick then chiefly send for, and call
upon Physiicans, yet at this time their prescripts are limited to a narrower
space: If Vomiting (notwithstanding an Emetic being given) still infest, it may
be more freely provoked, either by simple Posset Drink, or with bitter Herbs
boiled in it: But let the chiefest means of help be, in temperating the heat
and thirst, which most grievously torments the sick in this Fever: For whilst
the Blood growing hot, with the morbific matter, and being inkindled in the
Heart, leaps forth into the Lungs, flirs up there a cruel Inflammation, which
requires a profusion of a cold humor as it were for the extinguishing the
Flame; wherefore they greedily desire without any measure drink, for want of
which the sick are almost killed with too great heat, and their Blood being
almost wholly rarefied into flame and fume, the third of Circulation is hardly
continued; wherefore, drink ought to be wholly granted, to those in Fevers:
which however, if it be taken in too large a quantity, it at first more
disturbs the estuating Blood, and at length brings confusion to the feverish
matter, begun to be separated; that from thence, the Work of subaction and
secretion is longer protacted, and the fit is made longer: also, besides, large
drinking causes troubles in the Ventricle, and by disturbing it, and often
provoking Vomiting, hinders the breathing forth, and calls inward the sweat
breaking forth, or perhaps already broke forth: wherefore, at first, the heat
of the Fever being inkindled, although the sick be very thirsty, let them only
sip a little, and abstain from drink as much as they can; afterward, when the
matter being burnt, and subdued, begins to be dissipated by sweat, they may be
more freely indulged as to this, for so the swealing is greatly helped, and the
fit is sooner finished: as to the nature of the Drink, let them take sometimes
Posset Drink, sometimes Small Beer, or Barley Water, and sometimes simple Water,
or sharpened with the juice of Lemons: In this case, the use of Sal Prunellae is
deservedly praised, to be given in every Liquor; for this, with its nitrosity,
wonderfully allays the raging Blood, and potently moves sweats, I have often
observed, in the midst of a fit, the sick wont to fall into a swoon, or
syncopy, to whom presently they give Cordials or hot Waters that much increase
the violence of the Fever, and bring forth more troubles than usual, that the
fit is more difficultly finished: But these faintings, for the most part,
happen, either from a bilous humor suffused in the Ventricle, or by reason of
the sweat suddenly breaking forth; and against these I always found the most
present Remedy, that either a feather being put down the throat, Vomiting may
be provoked, or that Liquor being plentifully drunk, a sweat may be again
raised up: also, in the whole course of this Fever, I am wont never to give
any Cordials, or alexiteriums.

The Diet in this Fever ought to be only slender, and not nourishing, all
sorts of Flesh, or any thing prepared of them, are wholly to be avoided; for as
these abound with Sulphur, they give a more plentiful food (as Oil poured on
Flame) to the hot or enkindled Blood: besides, nothing spiritous, as strong
Waters, strong Beer, or Wine, is to be yielded to; but Decoctions, or Broths of
Oat-meal, or Barley, altered with cooling Herbs, are chiefly to be used; also
Posset Drink, and small Beer, or Whey, is to be given them at their pleasure:
for by this means, when a very slender and watery nourishing juice, is conveyed
to the mass of Blood, the soluted Particles of Sulphur, burn forth sooner, and
with the less tumult; also the recrements of the adust matter, are more easily
carried from the bosom of the Blood: but if on the contrary, a more rich or
plentiful nourishment be administered, the effervency of the Blood is thereby
very much augmented, and the Blood is more infected, by the confusion or
pouring in of the adust matter.

After that the Blood being much burnt forth by frequent fits, and the Fever
being in its declination, remits of its fervor and fierceness, you must take
heed, lest the sick at length growing well, fall not into a Cachexie, or
Scorbutic Distemper: for the disposition of the Viscera being hurt, and the
Blood very much depauperated, the alible juice, though not scorched so as at
first, is not however rightly concocted, and ripened into perfect Blood: but by
reason of the want of transpiration, the serous excrements, being imbued with a
fixed salt, are greatly heaped together, and now fixed in the Bowels, now in
the extreme parts, bring forth various Distempers. Wherefore in a long
languishing of the sick, or otherwise for the sake of being sooner well,
Remedies should be given them, which volatilise the Blood, or hinder the
stuffings of the Viscera, or if stuffed, may open them, and their ferments as
if extinct, restore: for this use, those Remedies and Preparations chiefly
help, which are commonly called Digestives and Antiscorbuticks; with which
being timely administered, I have known very many weak, pale, and as it were
without Blood, suddenly to recover a liveliness and vigor.

The Description of a Catarrhal Fever Epidemical in the middle of the Spring,
in the Year 1658. taken the fourth of June.
AN equally intense Frost followed the next Winter, the immoderate heat of the
foregoing Summer, so that no one living could remember such a Year, for either
excess both of heat and cold. From the Ides of December, almost to the vernal
Equinox, the Earth was covered with snow, and the North wind constantly
blowing, all things without doors were frozen: also, afterward, from the
beginning of the Spring, almost to the beginning of June, the same Wind still
blowing, the season was more like Winter than Spring; unless now and then a hot
day came between. During the Winter (unless that a Quartan Fever contracted in
Autumn infested some) among our Countrymen, there was a moderate state of
health, and freedom from all popular Diseases. The Spring coming on, an
intermitting Tertian (as used to do every year before) fell upon some. About
the end of April, suddenly a Distemper arose, as if sent by some blast of the
Stars, which laid hold on very many together: that in some Towns, in the space
of a Week, above a thousand people fell sick together. The particular symptom
of this Disease, and which first invaded the sick, was a troublesome Cough,
with great spitting, also a Catarrh falling down on the palate, throat, and
nostrils; also it was accompanied with a feverish Distemper, joined with heat
and thirst, want of appetite, a spontaneous weariness, and a grievous pain in
the Back and Limbs: which Fever however was more remiss in some, that they
could go abroad, and follow their affairs in the time of their sickness, but
complaining in the mean time, of want of strength, and of languishing, a
loathing of food, a Cough, and a Catarrh: But in some a very hot Distemper
plainly appeared, that being thrown into Bed, they were troubled with burning,
thirst, waking, hoarsness, and coughing, almost continual; sometimes there came
upon this a bleeding at Nose, and in some a bloody spittle, and frequently a
Bloody Flux, such as were endued with an infirm Body, or men of a more
declining Age, that were taken with this Disease, not a few died of it; but the
more strong, and almost all of an healthful constitution recovered: those who
falling sick of this Disease, and died, for the most part died by reason of the
strength being leisurely wasted, and a serous heap more and more gathered
together in the Breast, with the Fever being increased, and a difficulty of
breath, like those sick of an Hectic Fever. Concerning this Disease, we are to
inquire, what procatartic cause it had; that it should arise in the middle of
the Spring suddenly, and that the third part of Mankind almost, should be
distempered with the same, in the space of a Month: then the signs and symptoms
being carefully collated, the formal reason of this Disease, also its Crisis
and way of Cure ought to be assigned.

That the Northern Wind is most apt to produce Catarrhs, besides the testimony
of Hippocrates, common experience does make known: but why Catarrhs did not
spread, at least in some peculiar places, all the Winter and Spring, but only
in one months space, and then joined with a Fever, this Distemper should
become Epidemical, does not so plainly appear. I know many deduce the cause
from the unequal temper of the Air, at that time; which although for the most part
very cold, yet the North Wind fometimes lessening, there would be a day or two
very hot between: wherefore, from this occasion, as from cold taken after the
heat, men should commonly fall sick: But indeed, for the exciting the
Distemper, so suddenly rising, and commonly spreading, there is required,
besides such an occasion, a great foregoing cause or predisposition, tho the
other might suffice perhaps, for an evident cause, for to distemper them with
this sickness; for we ought to suppose, that almost all men were prone to the
receiving this Disease, otherwise no evident cause could have exercised its
power so potently on so many, wherefore, it seems very likely, that this
Disease had its Origin from the intemperance and great inordination of the
year: and as the Autumnal intermitting Fever before described, was the product
of the preceding immoderate heat, so this Catarrhal Fever, depended altogether
upon the following part of the year, being so extremely cold: For the Blood
being now thoroughly roasted by the very hot Summer, and prone to the Fever
before described, then being made more sourish by the Autumn urging it, and apt
for a Quartan Fesver, afterward being a little eventilated by reason of the
strong cold of the Winter, and hindered from its due perspiration, retained yet
its Dyscrasie, or evil disposition, and readily broke forth on the first
occasion given: wherefore, when the Blood, in the middle of the Spring, (as the
juice of Vegetables) being made more lively, and also begun to flower and grow
rank, by reason of the stoppage being still continued, was straightened in its
Circulation, and easily made prone to a feverish effervescency: and as the
serous Water redounding in the Blood, could not evaporate outwardly, because of
the Pores being still straightened by the cold, restagnating within, and chiefly
falling upon the Lungs, (where it might be moved about, instead of an outward
breathing forth) excited the so frequent and troublesome Cough.

The Original therefore, and formal Reason of this Disease, are founded chiefly
on two things, to wit, that there together happened a greater effervescency of
the Blood than usual, from the coming on of the Spring season, and also a
stoppage, or great constriction of the Pores, excited by the too great cold of
the foregoing season; that therefore there was not a free space granted to the
Blood, flowring or luxuriating in the Vessels: The business being after the
same manner, as if Wine begun to grow hot, should be put up into close shut
Vessels, for by this means, either the Vessels, or the Liquor, were in danger
to be lost.

Wherefore, that we may contract the thing in short, the cause that this
Disease begun in the middle of the Spring, having presently spread largely,
seized very many, was not the blast of a malignant Air, whereby the sick were
distempered, as if struck with a blasting, but that at this time, the Blood
being inspired by the constitution of the Spring, and so luxuriating, and apt
to grow hot, was contracted or straightened in its motion, and, the effluvias
being constrained inwardly, could not be sufficiently eventilated or cooled. In
every year, tho temperate, it is usual in the Spring and Autumn for some
Epidemical Diseases to reign, because at this time, the Blood being as it were
restored, flowers anew; and therefore, intermitting Fevers, and sometimes the
Small Pox ordinarily spread in this season; wherefore, it is no wonder, after a
great unequal constitution of the year, and not natural, when in this Spring,
the Blood boiling up more lively within the Vessels, by reason of transpiration
being hindered, could not be freely circulated, and sufficiently eventilated, if
for that cause, great disorders follow, and from this most common cause, a
distemper greatly Epidemical should be excited.

As to the symptoms joined with this Disease, a feverish intemperature, and
whatsoever belongs to this, the heat of the Praecordia, thirst, a spontaneous
weariness, pain in the Head, Loins, and Limbs, were induced from the Blood
growing hot, and not sufficiently eventilated: hence in many, a part of the
thinner Blood being heated, and the rest of the Liquor being only driven into
confusion, a simple Synochus, or of more days was induced, and this for the
most part ceased within a few days: But in some endued with a vicious
disposition of Blood, or evil habit of Body, this kind of Fever, arising by
reason of the same cause, quickly passed into a very dangerous Putrid Fever,
and often Mortal.

The Cough accompanying this Fever with a Catarrh, draws its Origin from a
serous humor heaped up together in the Blood, by reason of transpiration being
hindered for a long time, and then an effervescency being risen, dropping forth
more from the little Arteries, gaping within: for when the Pores are
constrained, the superfluous serosities in the Blood, being wont to evaporate
outwardly, are poured forth on the Lungs, by a proper castration or cleansing
of the Blood, wherefore, by taking cold, (as they commonly term it) that is,
from transpiration outwardly being hindered, the Cough for the most part is
stirred up: And for a foregoing cause to this Distemper, the flowing forth of
the serum into the mass of Blood, has for the most part the chief place; for,
from the long cold hindering the scorching of the Blood, or the provision of the
bile, and prohibiting the breathing forth of the watery humor, there was a
necessity, that very much of the serous humor should be heaped up in the Blood:
wherefore, when the Blood flowring in the Spring, conceived an heat, the
flowing forth of the serum, and a pouring of it on the interior parts, was wont
to cause first the Cough, as the proper symptom of this Disease: and those,
whose Blood was more diluted by the mixtion of the serum, and who were greatly
obnoxious to the Cough and a Rheumatic Distemper, were cured with less trouble
of the feverish Distemper. the Prognostic of this Disease, concerning private
persons, is for the most part easy, that one may deliver the event, from the
first assault; for if this sickness be excited in a strong Body, and healthful
before, and that the feverish Distemper be moderate, and without any grievous
and horrid symptom, the business is free from danger, and the Distemper is to
be accounted but of light moment, as that commonly is of catching cold, neither
needs a Physician be consulted, nor Remedies, unless trivial and ordinary, be
administered: But if this Distemper happens in a weak and sickly Body, with an
evil provision, or that the Fever being carried into a Putrid Fever, or the
Cough growing grievous, induces difficult breathing, and as it were a tabid or
Consumptive disposition, the event of the Disease is much to be suspected, and
often terminates in Death. The common Prognostic, that was taken from hence,
concerning the future state of the year, conteins nothing to be feared, or
ominates any great ill; by reason of the unequal intemperance of the year, the
great heats, and then excessive cold, we might fear Diseases to arise from the
Dyscrasie of the Blood, yet from the present condition, we need neither suspect
any noted depravation of the Air, or Infection with poisonous breaths; that
from thence may be had any judgment of the Plague, or Malignant Disease to be
at hand.

As to what belongs to the Cure, when this Disease is more lightly inflicted,
its Cure for the most part is left to Nature: for this Fever, when it is only
a simple Synochus, is wont to be cured within a few days by sweat: wherefore,
by a copious sweating, for the most part about the third or fourth day, the
heat, and thirst, the weariness, and heavy pains are allayed; then the Cough
being somewhat longer protracted, by little and little afterward remits, and
at length the sick leisurely grow well; if this Disease has rooted it self
more deeply, there is need of fit Remedies, and an exact method of curing, the
Fever growing worse is to be healed, according to the Rules to be observed in
a Putrid Fever: but nevertheless with this difference, that, because
transpiration being hindered, and the suffusion of the serous humor on the
Lungs, are chiefly in fault, therefore Diaphoretic Remedies, and those called
pectoral are of more frequent use, for these restrain the flowing forth of the
serum, from the Vessels within, or by opening the Pores convey it forth of
doors; or precipitating it from the bosom of the Blood, send it forth by the
urinary passages; therefore the method of Medicine for this Disease, being
brought into the worser state, respects both the feverish intemperance, for
the sake of curing which you are to be directed, according to the intentions
shown in the Putrid Fever, and also the Rheumatic Distemper, which however let
it be secondary, and not every expectorating Remedy, or those used against a
Cough are to be admitted, but of that kind only which do not increase the
Fever: the forms of these, and the means of curing, are to be sought from the
precepts, delivered generally for the Cure of the Putrid Fever, and of the
Cough; the helps, which now, by frequent experience, are commonly said to bring
Care chiefly in this Disease, are sweating, or the provoking of sweat, and
letting of Blood: for the Vessels being emptied by this or that means, both the
immoderate heat of the Blood, and the abundance of the serum, are restrained.

A Description of an Epidemical Fever arising about the beginning of Autumn
1658. taken the 13th of September.
THE vernal Fever but now described, did not last longer than six weeks, that
it plainly was seen, that it was only a more light flowring of the Blood, which
swelling up in the Spring, and at the same time straightened in space, for want
of ventilation, most impetuously boiled up, like new Wine close shut up in
Bottles, and then ceased of it self. Yet from thence, as neither the year, so
neither our Blood did recover its due temperature, and so another tinder or
nest for a new Fever, was quickly gathered together. Because after the Summer
solstice, the North wind still blowing, a cold season remained for a long
while; so that the Fruit and Corn this year, was feared by the Husbandmen,
would scarce be thoroughly ripened; but after this, a little before the
beginning of July, a most fierce heat followed, for several days: and when the
Dog days were begun, the Air grew most cruelly hot, that one could scarce
endure the open Air. By reason of this heat and cold in excess, the temperature
of this year was very unequal: wherefore, there was a necessity, for our Blood
to be now fixed, and as it were congealed, now too much roasted, and so
perverted from its natural disposition, to a scorched, and melancholy temper;
also it came to pass that the Pores of the skin were much altered from their
right constitution, that by that means, an insensible transpiration could not
be performed, after the wonted manner.

From the time that the former Fever ceased, almost to the end of the Dog
days, there was a state of health, and free from all popular Diseases; but then
a few here and there among the Villages, and in lesser places, first fell sick;
but afterward, about the end of August, a new Fever suddenly arising, began
to spread through whole Regions, everywhere round about us; also, this as the
other which spread the last Autumn, raged chiefly in Country Houses and
Villages; but in the mean time, few of the Inhabitants of the greater Towns and
Cities fell sick. At the same time, in other Regions, situate at a distance
from us, yea, almost throughout England, the Epidemical Fever was said to
rage; and in some other places, to be far more deadly, than it was about our
Country. Perhaps the Idea of this Fever now reigning, had not the provision of
its symptoms alike in all places, or was noted wholly with the same appearances
and accidents: yet whatever it showed in our parts, as to its nature, I shall
briefly and succinctly add, from our own proper observation, or what I had
learnt, being communicated from others.

About the beginning of this Disease, its figure was wandering, and very
uncertain; because in some there was a continual fervor, in others it was
intermitting, being renewed by set fits; but at this time it happened to very
many, as a pathognomic symptom, that they were ill in their brain, and nervous
stock, that presently from the very beginning of this Fever, almost all
complained of their head being grievously distempered: For a cruel headache
infested some, and hardness of hearing, with a noise in the ears troubled
others, but to most was wont to happen, either a stupidness, and heavy
sleepiness, with a vertiginous Distemper, or pertinacious wakings, with a
delirium, and distractions of the animal spirits. I have observed in some, that
on the first or second day of their sickness, that little broad and red spots,
like to the measles, have leisurely broke forth in the whole body, which being
shortly vanished, the Fever presently became stronger, and especially the
Distempers of the head, far more grievous. From thence a benumedness of the
senses, and a sleepiness fell upon some for many days, that they lay a long
while as if dying, without speaking, or knowledge of their friends. I knew
others to have fallen from hence into a Lethargy, and others cast into an
Apoplexy, and some into a Frenzy, and Delirium. Of these, the younger, and
strong men (yet not without a long languishment, and doubtful recovery) most of
them escaped; in the mean time, old men, or other ways weak and sickly,
generally died. Those who fell sick with the Fever, as it were continual, with
those notes of malignity, were more rare, and the distempered were only
sporadically, in some houses only. But the sickness which most commonly spread
about us, fell upon most, and tho it cruelly raged, it seemed to imitate an
intermitting Fever, to wit, either a Tertian, or a Quotidian: for that the
sick had fits, either every day, or (which I more often observed) every other
day, which infested them grievously, and a long while, with cold, heat, and
sweat, succeeding in order: but these kind of fits, as also the course of the
whole Disease, were wont to be noted with diversity, according to the age and
temper of the sick; and with various concourse of symptoms, and accidents. Yet
this was common to most of (I had like to have said all) the sick that together
with the Fever, they were troubled with Cephalic Distempers.

When therefore any one was troubled with this Disease, (whether the sickness
was excited from an evident cause, or Contagion, or without any manifest
occasion) its coming betrayed it self, by a pain in the head, and often in the
loins, with thirst, want of appetite, spontaneous weariness, and heat tho not
strong: if it happened in a young Body of a florid Blood, and more hot temper,
the fits wanted the cold and shivering, about its beginning, but they were very
troublesome, and sharp, with long heat: The sick were often troubled with
vomiting, and their head aked cruelly for the most part; sweat difficulty
succeeded, which being often partial and quickly broke off, rarely cured the
fit, but when the sweat failed, they grew hot again, that scarce in 18 or 24
hours the fit was finished in some. In the mean time, from the Blood being very
fervent, the fantasy was disturbed, that oftentimes a Delirium, absurd or
idle talking, wakings, and high inquietudes were stirred up during the fit; but
the same being finished, in the time between, still a troublesome thirst, a
slow heat, languor of spirits, and great debility of strength, with an headache,
and a vertiginous Distemper, for the most part molested them. It was rarely
found, for any to find themselves indifferently well, as in a common Tertian,
between the fits. About the beginning of the Disease, the feverish
fiercenesses were somewhat more mild, which afterward at every turn, leisurely
grew worse, and then began with cold and shaking; to which nevertheless, after
a long and very troublesome heat, sweat very hardly succeeded in most, so that
the fit rarely ended in its due temper. Within six or seven periods, the
strength of the sick was much cast down, that being made languid, and weak,
they had an hard task to struggle with the Disease: because unless Nature were
succored by Art, the Fever still prevailed, and rarely or never in a short
time, was it cured by a Crisis, or leisurely remitted; but it brought the sick
into great streights, by its long siege, and still persisting, till the Blood
being by its frequent deflagration made very liveless and watery, was unable to
grow too hot in the Vessels of its own accord, or to be inkindled more
plentifully in the heart, and then oftentimes, became so dead, and wanting of
spirits, that, being insufficient for the continuing of the Vital Lamp, it
brought in Death. But sometimes the mass of Blood being depraved, and made
poor, by this Disease, was able (tho hardly) to continue the half extinct Vital
Fire, and to renew it by little and little, with spirit and vigor, in a long
time: yet in the mean time, after the height of this Disease, when the Blood
being made more weak and impure, could not expel forth of doors this feverish
matter, or adust recrements, by a critical motion, it often transferred it to
the Brain; and therefore about the height of this Fever, a torpor, and
stupidity of spirits, sleepiness, vertigo, tingling of the ears, tremblings,
and convulsive motions, with a great oppression of the whole animal faculty,
were most often induced.

Men of a more cold temperament, or in years, who were taken with this Disease,
although they were but little feverish, were wont however to be in greater danger
of Life; because, in these, besides the disposition of the Blood, not easily
reducible, also what was gathered together in the fits, that was extraneous and
not to be mixed, was hardly subdued, and difficultly sifted forth of the mass
of Blood; wherefore, both the Blood was still more notably depraved in its
Crasis, and in every fit more infected by the impure mixture: Moreover the
nervous Liquor was greatly perverted from its due temper, and defiled most
badly, by the adust recrements continually poured on the Brain. Therefore, when
old men, melancholic, or otherways sickly persons, fell into this Fever, they
became, presently after its first assault, stupefied, and for the most part
vertiginous: Tho in the fits, the heat was not very sharp and piercing, they
were however very unquiet, and still tossing about, oftentimes they talked
idly, and at random; after a long burning, either no sweat, or only partial,
and often broke off, followed; whereby the fit was not fully helped, but that
in the whole intervals, the sick were thsrstly, and remained very ill, with a
dryness of the mouth, a scurfiness of the Tongue, and a suffusion of a viscous
filth. After some fits, their strength being exceedingly cast down, they were
wholly fixed to their Beds, or rise only for a little while, could scarce stand
or set a foot before another, to move from place to place, or able to walk: in
the mean time, they labored with a languishment, a difficult breathing, a
nummedness of senses, and a great debility of the whole nervous stock: The
Urine in most was highly red, of a more deep color, and of a thicker
consistency, than in a common Tertian: The Pulse, whilst the strength was not
wholly cast down, for the most part was strong and equal; afterward, when the
sick became very languishing, it was weak and unequal, and oftentimes
intermitting; to which also, constructures of the tendons, and convulsive
motions in the wrists, being joined, were for the most part prognostics of
Death. Those who leisurely being debilitated, declined toward Death, some
little time before they died, lay for the most part without speaking, or
knowing those about them, as it were stupid: and it rarely happened in this
Fever, that any one about to die, was so perfect in their memory and
intellect, as to dispose of their Family affairs, or to take leave of their
friends. But it happened to those who escaped, from a deep languishment and
almost desperate condition, not quickly, or suddenly to recover, from their
manifest evil disposition, but lying a long while wavering, stupefied, and
without strength, that Nature at length, not but after a doubtful and difficult
strife, got indeed scarcely the better of the Disease, and then recovered
strength by degrees, and health lingringly and slowly.

If the nature, and formal reason of this epidemical Fever but now described,
be demanded, we say, that this (as that of the former year) properly is an
intermitting Fever: for what commonly spread bore that figure; although some here
and there, more rarely, had it continual, which we shall by the way mention by
and by. The seed plot or seminary of this, need not be derived from the air,
being infected with any Infection, but rather its leading cause is to be
sought, from the undue constitution of the year, and from thence an
indisposition of our Blood being acquired. Because, in the Spring and Autumn,
intermitting Fevers have yearly sprung up and increased; to wit, for that our
Blood, like to the juice of Vegetables, is wont to be more lively moved than
usual, and to flower at those times. Wherefore if the mass of Blood, by reason
of the foregoing season, of the Summer, or Winter, should be altered from its
due temperature, and should contract either a sharp or atrabilous disposition,
or of any other kind, its evil dispositions begun before, are chiefly ripened
about the Equinoxes; to wit, when the Blood more freely fermenting (if that it
has departed from its natural disposition) does not so easily sanguifie, but
that it will be apt to pervert the alible juice, poured to it, into an
extraneous and feverish matter. When therefore this year, had not very much
declined from a right constitution, (as not only the Dog Days going before but)
that the two solstices, and the equinoxes, were wholly intemperate, it was no
wonder if intermitting Fevers, more frequent than usual, and those noted with
some unusual symptoms, did increase about the Autumn. That therefore an
intermitting Epidemical Fever raged at this time, I judge it not to be
attributed to the fault of the present Air, but to the irregularities of the
foregoing season: yet from what causes and occasions, some symptoms proper to
this Fever, and distinct from the common rule of intermitting Fevers, did
arise, will be worth our Inquiry. I have already said, that the provision, that
made this Fever so deadly, consisted in two things, chiefly, viz. the temper
of the year, now extremely cold, then upon it very hot, then that it had
variously perverted the disposition of our Blood, and had distempered the pores
of the skin, with an undue constitution. According to the reasons taken from
either, I shall endeavor to explicate the accidents of this Disease, and to
assign the causes of its appearance.

1. First, We shall observe, that the type of this Fever was various, to wit,
in some with a continual heat, in others with an eruption of spots, but in most
intermitting, and like a Tertian, and sometimes (tho rarely) a Quotidian,
repeating the fits every day, or every other day: the cause of this diversity,
we impute to the more strong and potent morbific procatarxy of this year, which
produced in the Autumn, a more common intermitting Fever than it was wont,
wherefore, in some (perhaps endued with a more praved habit of Body) it stirred
up Fevers something malignant; and in whom it caused intermitting Fevers,
according to the wonted manner of the season, it made them to be noted with a
peculiar appearance of symptoms.

2. Those taken at this time, with the Epidemical Fever (whether it was
continual or intermitting) suffered presently evil Distempers of the head, viz.
now they were wont to be infested with cruel headache, now with a stupor, or
too great distraction of the Animal Spirits. The reason of this is, that the
nervous juice, as well as the Blood, by reason of the intemperance of the year,
was much altered from its due Crasis or Disposition, viz. by nature sweet and
spirituous, and was become now heavy, and almost lifeless, now sharp, and too
much pungitive. Besides, also, the mass it self of the Blood, very much
contributed to this evil; for whilst it grew hot, the vaporous effluvia, which
ought to have been dispersed outwardly, by reason of the Pores being shut up,
were poured upon the Brain, and membranes of the head: and by reason of this
kind of stopping, impressed almost on all, sweat hardly, and not but partial,
and often interrupted, succeeded in the fits; hence also in the height of the
Disease, a perfect Crisis, or spontaneous, rarely or never happened to Cure it;
but instead of this, if the business was committed to Nature, the adust matter,
or recrements gathered together in the Blood, were transferred to the head, and
there raised up now the sleepy evil, now Phrensies, and those long and stubborn.

3. That the fits sometimes begun without cold or shivering, but with a
troublesome heat, and were prolonged with a difficult sweat, partial, and often
interrupted; then forasmuch as the same being finished, the sick began again to
wax hot, that the fits were not finished without a long evaporation of a dry
breath; the cause was, the too sharp and bilous disposition of the Blood,
whereby when it grew turgid, it was stuffed rather with adust Salt and Sulphur,
than a serous juice, and presently conceived an inkindling, without any
previous Flux of nitrous matter; and therefore for want of serum, and by reason
of the Pores being shut up, its deslagration was continued for a long time,
almost only with a dry exhalation, and scarce at last ended in a remission. And
therefore the interstitia of the fits were most troublesome with heat, and
thirst, Headache, Vertigo, and other Distempers: because the feverish matter,
being heaped up in the Blood, was not all dispersed by the several fits, but
part of it being left after the fit, as it were extraneous and not miscible,
induced almost a continual burning.

4. It was observed, that those distempered with this Fever, presently lost
their strength and flesh, that after a fit or two, they panted for breath, and
being very weak, were not able to stand or go, without being led; when it is an
usual thing, in an intermitting Fever that is common, for the Patient to be
very lively and cheerful, between the fits: the reason of the difference is,
because in this Fever, the mass of the Blood is both more depraved by the
impure mixture of the degenerate juice, and especially, that the same is more
perverted from its natural disposition, and therefore, when it boyls up less
out of the fits, it yet ferments not rightly, and equally in the bosom of the
heart: wherefore, when by any more quick motion, or agitation of the Body, the
Blood is carried more impetuously into the bosom of the heart, because it is
not there presently inkindled, it both leaps forth of doors, and by its
stagnation, causes the oppression of the heart, and great weakening of the Vital
Spirits. By reason of this kind of dyscrasie of the Blood, to wit, whereby it
is made more unfit for due Fermentation and inkindling in the heart, also some
Beasts, and especially Horses, in the Spring time, are made hard breathed, and
very unapt to any rapid motion.

5. Lastly, We are to inquire, concerning this Fever, wherefore it spread
chiefly in Villages, in lesser Towns, and the Country, when Cities and greater
Towns were less troubled with it. It might seem that this Distemper, should be
excited from marshie Fogs, and other hurtful Vapors, plentifully heaped
together in this or that Tract of the Air: but there iws a better reason, for
that the inhabitants of these kind of places, being more exposed to the Spring
cold, and then to the Summer heats, might have contracted a greater Dyscrasie
of the Blood, and so a more apt disposition to this Fever. For in truth, the
Inhabitants of the Country, could scarce go out of their houses, but they were
exposed to the Sun's Beams, or the fervor of the heated Air. Besides,
Countrymen, Husbandmen, and such as were accustomed to Labors (among whom this
Fever chiefly raged) from their immoderate toil in the Sun, or open Air, also
using a bad and sharp Diet, sooner acquired an adust and torrid disposition of
the Blood, and so more apt for this Disease, than Citizens and Townsmen, who
lived an idle life, and enjoyed wholesome food, and mostly continued within
doors, and in refrigerating shades. We may believe this assertion, for that not
only the Epidemical Fever now raging, but also another of the Autumn before,
excited by reason of the evil disposition of the Blood, increased chiefly among
the Countrymen, and inhabitants of the Country: but the popular Fever, which
arose in the middle of the Spring, depending chiefly upon transpiration being
hindered, mostly infested Citizens and the Inhabitants of Towns; whilst rustical
men, that were wont, by Labor and Exercise, to procure a more free breathing
forth, remained free.

The general Prognostication of this Disease, seems only to ominate or foretell,
the like evil almost to follow this, as followed the Epidemical Fever of the
former Autumn, to wit, (the Augury being taken rather from the intemperance of
our Blood, than from the evil of the Air) not the Pest, but a Quartane Fever
might be feared to come upon it. As to the particular Indication, as Signs that
promise Health or Death, I shall briefly mention them; and they chiefly respect
the temper and government, either of the Blood, with the Vital Spirit, or else
of the nervous juice, with the animal Spirit. If it be plainly indicated from
the Pulse, Urine, from Actions less hurt, and the appearance of other symptoms,
that the Blood, as to its feverish disposition, is not very much perverted,
from its natural temper; that in the fits it moderately burns forth; and in
every Combat easily subdues the load of the feverish matter, and wholly shakes
it off from its company; that after some fits, the mass of Blood is somewhat
restored toward its due temper; that it perverts little the alible juice, and
fifts forth, with a more gentle rising up, what is extraneous, and not
mingleable, and that if in the mean time, the other spirituous Liquor, rightly
inspires and waters the Brain, and nervous Bodies, that sleep, waking,
sensation, and motion, are performed well, or at least indifferently, all good
is to be hoped concerning the sick. But if it appears from the same Fountains
of Indications, that the Blood has acquired in this Fever, a disposition far
removed from the natural, if it perverts much of the alible juice, and then
from its extraneous and incongruous mixture, the Liquor of the Blood is greatly
disturbed, and the Spirits driven into confusion; if in the fits, the Blood too
strongly, and in a long time burns forth, yet does not truly subdue the
feverish matter, or exclude the whole, but that by its impure mixture, it is
still more and (in every feverish fit) more infected, and the Spirits being
continually consumed, it becomes poorer, we may pronounce the life of the
patient to be in much danger. Besides these, if the vices of the nervous juice
happen, that being altered from its due temper, or being too dull, and as it
were liveless, little actuates the Brain and nervous stock; or being above
measure sharp, continually provokes the same into Convulsions and Distractions;
and if besides the vaporous effluvias continually falling away from the Blood,
or the adust recrements being wont to be fifted forth by a critical sweat,
should be transferred into the head, and there induce Lethargic or Phrensical
Distempers, the hopes of health will be little, and we may fear a very deadly
event.

Concerning the Cure of this Disease, the intentions will come under three
considerations chiefly. First, a quick reduction (as much as may be) of the
Blood, and nervous Liquor, to their natural tempers, or at least a prevention
of their too great depravation. Secondly, Concerning the right handling the
fits of the fick it ought to be procured, First, that less of the degenerate
juice, may be gathered together, for matter of the fit; Secondly, that what is
gathered together may be wholly dispersed by every fit, that thereby the sick
may be better in the intervals; Thirdly, that the Body being altered for the
better the fits may be inhibited by anti-feaverish Remedies. The third
intention respects the symptoms chiefly urging, which should be timely opposed,
whereby Nature, being not hindered, may reduce whatsoever intemperance may be
contained in the Viscera or Vessels, may subdue and sift forth the extraneous
matter, and at length may recover a lively force and pristine vigor.

First, therefore, for the reduction and emendation of the Blood and nervous
juice, diverse manners of evacuations are wont to be exhibited in this Disease,
about the beginning of the Sickness, with good success. It appears plainly from
Modern practice, that vomitories are of more noted use in this Distemper, than
in a common Tertian: wherefore in a robust Body, and prone to Vomit, about the
beginning of the second or third fit, it is convenient to give an Emetic
Medicine. The operation of this seems to be very helpful in this Fever,
forasmuch as it more plentifully evacuates the filth from the ventricle, and
the yellow bile from the choler-bearing Vessels; and because it copiously
presses forth the serous juice from the emunctories of the nervous stock,
planted about the Pancreas and Intestines, and by provoking them draws it out.
Wherefore we observe, that from a Vomit being taken, the sick do find
themselves better about the Distempers of the Head. A Purge (to whom a Vomit is
not convenient) may be ordered instead of it, the day following the fit, also
tho an Emetic have been taken, it may be well permitted after a fit or two: But
yet only with gentle and benign Physic, let it be performed, which will not
disturb or too much move the Blood. We were wont in these Fevers, letting
alone Diagridium or any Aloetic Medicine, only to give an infusion or Powder of
Senna, Rhabarb, and yellow Sanders, with Tartar and Salt of Wormwood; and to
celebrate this kind of Purgation not very long after the beginning of the
Disease: But at other times to keep the Belly soluble, with the frequent use of
Clysters. Frequent experience has sufficiently taught, that Letting of Blood is
highly profitable in this Disease: for when by reason of the Pores in every
one, being more strictly closed than usual, that Blood growing hot, by the
Fever, wanted Ventilation, the Letting of Blood supplies the place of a more
free breathing forth, and prevents the restrained effluvia, from so readily
suffusing themselves on the Brain and nervous stock. But this Remedy is chiefly
indicated from the very fervent Blood and more hot temperament, nor ought to be
indifferently used to old men, Phlegmatic, and other very weak persons, unless
perhaps in a small quantity, that the mass of Blood may be somewhat
eventilated, and that the removal of the feverish matter into the Brain, may
be hindered. If it be convenient to open a Vein, let it be done about the
beginning of the Fever, or at least before the fourth or fifth fit, viz.
before the Blood is made very lifeless by the frequent deflagration, and
rendered too impure by the confusion of the adust matter: because, if Phlebotomy
be made use of, whilst the Blood is highly corrupted, the Vital Spirits, and by
that means the strength of the sick are more debilitated, nor yet is there any
thing taken away, from the power of the Disease, or from its cause. There
remains another famous way of evacuation, in this Fever, to wit, Vesicatory
Plasters applied to various parts of the Body; these are commonly observed to
be so helpful, that those that abhor and dislike very much such a Remedy, by
the example of others being the better for them, have admitted them. By what
means they separate the Cuticula from the skin, and lift it up like a Bladder
filled with Water; or whether they press forth this watery and limpid humor,
out of the Arteries, or out of the nerves, is not in this place to be inquired
into; yet that they are profitably administered in this Disease, besides
experience, Reason seems something to persuade; because it in some manner
compensates the want of transpiration, by the large profusion of this kind of
serous Latex: Moreover, this kind of Remedy, as it were opens the ways and
doors, by which both the Blood, and nervous juice, may forthwith send forth by
a proper purging, the extraneous matter, confused with them; wherefore, in the
Plague, and Malignant Distempers, Vesicatories are esteemed very profitable.
Also it appears by common observation, that in this, and other Fevers,
frequent at the same time, they did prevent the more grievous Distempers of the
Head, and were wont to help them, if they were brought in before: wherefore,
epispatic Plasters, may be applied about the beginning of the Disease, for
preservation sake, to Phlegmatic persons, elderly people, and men of a more
cold temper; and they are wont profitably to be administered to several others,
laboring with a Vertigo, Stupefaction, or cruel Headache, for the Cure of the
same Distempers. But in constitutions very hot, where with the defect of the
serum, the Blood is too much burnt, and if those sick of the Fever are
obnoxious to wakings, or a Frenzy, with intolerable heat, blisterings seem
then to be of little use.

For the mending of the temper of the Blood, and also the tenor of the Viscera,
at vacant times, when there is leisure from purging, attemperating Remedies
have place, and digestives, which fuse the Liquor of the Blood, and separate
its faeculencies, and as it were by precipitating them, thrust them toward the
emunctuaries: For these sort of intentions, are wont to be given Juleps, and
refrigerating Decoctions, sharpened with spirit of Vitriol, of Salt, Tamarinds,
or with the juice of Oranges or Lemons; forms of which choice enough are
commonly to be had. Also for this end acetous, saline, and shelly Powders are
used, to wit, prepared out of Tartar, Salnitre, the fixed Salt of Herbs, of
burnt Hartshorn, also the claws and eyes of Crabs. As for example, take of
Cream of Tartar drams three, of Salt of Wormwood dram one and an half; the Dose
half a dram, in an opening Decoction, twice in a day out of the fit. Or take of
Cream of Tartar dram one, of the Powder of Crabs eyes dram one, of purified
Nitre half a dram, mingle them, let them be taken after the same manner. Or
take of Hartshorn burnt drams two, of the Spirit of Vitriol, what the Powder
will drink up, the Dose is one scruple, it is of excellent use when those in
Fevers are infested with Worms. These kind of Remedies, promote the secretion
of the feverish matter, and also restore the almost destroyed ferments of the
Blood, and Viscera.

The second intention, viz. concerning the right handling the fits, comprehends
more. First, there ought to be instituted a right order of Diet, whereby the
more full heaping up of the degenerate juice, for the matter of the fit, may be
inhibited; wherefore, they are only to be fed with thin aliments, and they must
wholly abstain from flesh, (or broth made of it) Eggs, strong Drink, and all
rich meats and food whatsoever; and be contented only with Barley Broth, or
Grewel, Panada, Whey, and small Beer: for that a more plentiful aliment is not
digested, or assimilated, but loads the Ventricle, and being poured into the
Blood, disturbs its Liquor, and compels it to grow impetuously hot. In the
beginning of the fit, and the time of its duration, no food should be taken,
unless for the allaying of thirst: But for the tempering of heat and thirst,
Juleps, and cooling Decoctions, and especially small Beer, and posset Drink
should be granted. Secondly, a little before the coming of the fit is expected,
a gentle Medicine may be administered, which may drive away the fit by
preventing it, or make it more easy by procuring a sweat: for this use, the
febrifuge potion of the most learned Riverius serves well, of the Water of
Carduus, with oil of Sulphur, and salt of Wormwood: Or take of Cream of Tartar,
of salt of Wormwood, and the feeds of Nettles, each one scruple, let it be
given in the Decoction of the Roots of Sorrel; when the Fever begins to
decline, and that the fits are a little more remiss, proper febrifuges, applied
outwardly, often inhibit the comings of the fits. Yet in the mean time, so long
as the fits of the Fever return, the sick are to be handled so, that in every
fit, the feverish matter heaped in the Blood, may be thoroughly dispersed;
wherefore, when sweat hardly succeeds, it should be a little excited by
temperate Medicines. Also the sick should be kept in bed, with a gentle
breathing many hours, nor quickly permitted to rise; for I have often observed,
that sick persons have been still worse, because impatient of their bed, they
have put on their clothes before the vaporous effluvia were sufficiently
exhaled.

Thirdly, as to the symptoms, and particular accidents, wherewith the sick are
wont to be infested in this Fever, it is sufficiently provided for most of
them, with Remedies, in the method of Cure hitherto described: again thirst,
the heat of the mouth, the scurfiness of the tongue, vomiting, the looseness,
fainting, swooning, may be referred hither, very well the prescriptions
commonly used in other Fevers: but what may seem to require in this Disease a
peculiar method of healing, are chiefly the Distempers of the head and brain,
with the nervous stock, which not being timely helped, may soon put the sick
into great danger of life: As to the indications of these kind of evils of the
head, they are of a twofold kind; if it appears from a stupefaction or torpor,
a Sleepiness, Vertigo, or Headache, that the nervous juice is become too dull,
and as it were vapid or lifeless, and therefore does not sufficiently actuate
the brain, and nervous bodies; besides the Remedies already delivered, and
especially vesicatories, Medicines full of a volatile salt do chiefly help:
wherefore, spirits of Hartshorn, and of Blood, also the salts of them, are of
excellent use: but if the nervous Liquor be too sharp, or the effluvia suffused
from the estuating Blond, drive the Animal Spirits into confusions or
distractions, Remedies of the same sort of volatile salt are administered with
success in a little smaller quantity. Besides, a frequent letting of Blood, and
asswaging Medicines, against its Fervor, help much; as Emulsions, Whey, and
simple Water, plentifully drunk; Opiats are cautiously to be given in this
Fever, for the Frenzy being often allayed by them, is changed into a
Lethargy, or a deep stupefaction.

FINIS.

