10 RVMINANS: OR THE REPERCUSSION OF A TRIUMPH Celebrated in the Palace of
Diana Ardenna.

By the Rustic Muse of R.W. (...).

And. Epig. Lib. 1. Vror amore miser, tantoque potentius utor,
Quanto, qui me urit, longius ignis abest.
I burn in flames of love, and fry
More by the fire's longinquity.
Printed Anno Virginis parturientis.

1662.

THE DEDICATION. TO THE Transcendently Formose, AND (As far as can be concluded
from the Topics of Ommatology) MOST HEROICALLY VIRTUOUS Mrs Anne Gibbs.
Who personated Gartrude in Tu Quoque July 3.6.4.4.8.5.5.8. Harebr. wife in
Madworld my M. July 3.6.4.4.8.5.5.8. Rosinda in Young Admiral July
3.6.4.4.8.5.5.8. Dionysia in All Is lost by lust July 3.6.4.4.8.5.5.8. A Lady in
Merry Milkm. July 3.6.4.4.8.5.5.8. LUCRETIA in Rape of Lucrece July
3.6.4.4.8.5.5.8.


1661.

At the ( Quondam-Antelope, now) King's Arms in Holywell Oxon.

RICHARD WALDEN, To intimate his retention of those indelible Characters
imprinted on his heart by the emissive Organ of her fulgurant eye, DEDICATETH
THIS Encomiastick Decameron

From his Grotto at the foot of in ARDEN Aug. 10th 1661.
PROLOGUE (by the Book)
Thus I Am Commanded to forestall the eyes
Of those few Readers that will not pass by's.
FEar no sarcastick Placard such as cloth
The sides of Pasquin and Morforeo.
Here you will find nothing bitter, not so much
As to protect for Momus's teeth, for such
Our Author thus accosts, I know there is none
Exempted from thy reprehension.
Thou carp'd'st, as Vulcane's man, 'cause he had not
A breast transparent, and 't was Venus's lot
To has the same doom on her creaking shoes;
To both which censures it is obnoxious.
Yet needs it not a patron to defend it;
For none, I Am sure, will carp at, that can mend, it.
But thus the humble Author does subject,
To that acute discerning Intellect,
This his Capriccio, which did distill
From a dull brain, through an obtuser quill.
I know my weakness in a task
Of such a Magn'tude which does ask
A quill from Marcab, if you would have it
Done well, sure to delineate
Such a Platonic she that may
Be Monarch of Utopia,
Requires a fancy that is sublime,
And such a strain that is buskined, mine
Desid'rates both these, for the most,
And that is imperfect, I can boast
Is so much knowledge as to tell
It Is Pansophy to know you well.
Thrice happy he then that shall be
Blessed with that Encyclopaedy.
CANTO I. Or the INTRODVCTION.
I Am he who once sat by still Charwell's side,
Amongst the Ouzonian Girls, and whilome tried
To whisper out a Dirge for her, when her
Who was the Pole Star of our Hemisphaere.
(That Heledonian Nymph who from her sire
Came murmuring this sad news did me inspire,
And brought Melpomene, who needs would be
My Abcedarian in Philomusy.
Nor is it strange, though scarce observed yet,
(A) Should begin the Muse's Alphabet.)
But now reposed upon the shady lawns
Of dimpled Cune amongst old Arden's Fauns.
I sing the triumph of that face which meant
To give (a) So the learned Bouchert in his Phaleg gives the Etymology of
Europe, exploding those of Verhop, and the Fable of Europa. In the Punick
tongue it signifies an excellentcountenance.
Vrappa to our (b) Poetica licentia, yet according to the opinion of Verslegan,
etc.
continent,
If not anticipated, it is she alone,
I Am sure, has verify d that Etymon.
SHE who each frown or smile can show more dead,
Than e're were petrified by Medusa's head.
Whose tongue speaks sophisms, that would baffle Sphinx
Whose eyes charm Basilsks, and blind the Linx.
The azure streams that circle in whose hands
Out vye bright Pactolus for all his sands.
Whose all is such that who so views't shall find
She is the Auxesis of womankind.
She't is that claims these fettered slaves to be
Exposed as Trophys of her victory.
CANTO II. Or the GARTRUDADE.
'Twas when Hyperion was turning back
From his aestiral Tropic, and did make
His way through raging Alased, that time
The Euronymides and the Thespian Nine,
Led by their Alytarch Apollo, hye
To celebrate their Anniversary
Upon those learned banks, where Charwel makes
A Chersenese, as she the Bride o'ertakes,
Posting to Dorchester the place designed
To join her to the rude Chilternian kind.
That most unhappy-happy day the sky
Was governed by the sweet-lipp'd Mercury.
And Phoebus past the Zenith of his course,
Going to Neptune's bed with all his force
To's sister Thetis, when first these mine eyes
Saw a far brighter luminary rise,
And from his country too, which did Eclips
His luster with the tincture of her lips.
To make this good my fancy did suggest,
His horses might be casually reverst.
But when I saw her eyes an ecstasy,
Put me in posture of a Niobe.
These are those twins which all that chance to view,
'Count more resplendent than the Delian two.
But her tongue soon revived my Dormant sense,
In augmentation to her eminence,
And as the Saylors list to the Syren's song,
And have nor will nor power to steer along,
But hover near the Rocks and Shelves till they
Have time to make both wreck and the. their prey.
So those melodious accents rendered me
The attentive slave of this Parthenope.
Then did the welkinlowre, which did ever while
Behold us with a look, beyond a smile.
Good reason why, SHE went away, the beams
Of whose bright Planets caused those dazzling gleams;
But as the Sun is often hid from the crowd,
Behind the sable curtains of a cloud,
Yet soon returns, so did this envious veyle,
Which interposed it self, as often recoyle.
GARTRVDE did often encounter Geraldine,
As often wished I that his Cue had been mine.
For though at first she would not have released
Those secret embers raked up in her breast,
Yet if my Exit prove as good as his
'Twill wrap my soul in ecstasy of bliss.
'Twas unto Hymen's temple which to you,
My Musc, shall be a Ne-plus-ultra too.
For we will retire, yet before we go let us add
As her just merit this small (a) A verbo (...) laudo unde deducunt alii
titulum, Virgilii Aeneidos.
aenead;
That though her modesty would not permit
Her swasive tongue forbear denying it,
Yet who that saw her personate with the rest,
Can choose but say that she performed best.
CANTO III.
COme from thy dormitory, Muse, and prove
A diligent Notary, Then Mighty Jove
Sat at the helm, and mortals began to sing
Their silent Mattens to him, every thing
Conspired to aid us in the quest of her,
Of whom in all Time's rusty Register
There Is never a Parallel, but this her part
Is so discordant from her virtuous heart,
Thou shall now praetermit it, draw thy rein,
And, craving leave, return to bed again.
CANTO IV. Or the ROSINDADE.
THen the Plebeans hastened to adore,
And chant their Vespers to, their great god Thor
But that is not our theme, my Muse, we will see
Renowned ROSINDA's hospitality
In Naples, for it was her private jarrs
That blew the trumpet to the intended wars.
She forfeits her prerogative to woo,
The Prince to what she never could tempt him to:
Or by facility or kindness, he
But poorly retributes her courtesy.
Degenerate cold Prince, whose frigid fire
Only admits the name of love, 'cause blind.
How else could thy excaecated desire,
Tend to ought else but her that was designed
To grace the bed of the Phaenix of his kind.
'Count but externals, she deserves no worse
Than one that might inherit the Universe.
Poize her intrinsic virtues, and she calls
For one that could ingross Heroicals.
Nay but for fear of a Dilemma, I
Could name the extract of formosity.
But he affects Cassandra, on whom she
Means to employ her best Surgery,
Which cannot be ineffectual, when each part
's Magisterial to allay the smart.
Her touch is a Dictamnum, and her eyes
Dart smiles more sovereign then Panaces.
And so it proved, her patient did regain,
At once, both strength and vigor of her brain,
Witness her plot to quench ROSINDA's fires
By the consummation of her chaste desires.
The Prince came to the camp of Scicily
Upon her summons for ROSINDA, she
To save his life became a prey to them,
And won Cesario by a stratagem.
CANTO V. Or the DIONYSIADE.
Did see, my Muse, how yonder wanton whore
Proud 'cause Queen Regent of this day and hour,
Came whirling in her Coach, as if she meant
To sport in some opacous firmament,
With her old Martial Paramour, while he
Rode on before her through the Galaxy?
But we will wink at that, it is my intent
To enterprise a thing more eminent.
Let us observe Antonio that way
Encountr'd by his DIONYSIA.
A dreadful combatant, nay do not start,
In Cupid's lists she is sure to thrill the heart.
Nor was she long in winning of the field,
Antonio was soon enforced to yield
Himself a wilful subject, and forget
The allegiance he vowed to Margaret.
"Such is the potency of her who darts
"Glances so piercing that they conquer hearts.
Yet he was loath at first to quit the yoke
Of's lawful sovereign, but did revoke
His resolution, till a missive, brought
From DIONYSIA, entertained his thought.
Then read, considered, wept a while, and then
Thinking ha'd past o'r something, read again.
This raised a tempest in his troubled breast,
He re-enacted what he now reverst,
Thought of his Margaretta, and the oath
In Hymen's temple taken by them both.
Then weighed his DIONYSIA's courtesy,
Which put his mind in aequilibrity.
Consulted with his friend, who did prefer
The last, and made her scal the heavyer.
Until she came her self on embasie,
And turned the scales by th magic of her eye.
Which made him to conclude he would go on,
Although he grappled with destruction.
"And who could choose but be for such an one
"A renegado from's Religion.
"Perfect Antonio, what thou do begin,
"Let the worst come on it, 'twill be a splendid sin.
Thus troubled DIONYSIA designed,
To meliorate the Crasis of his mind
By her prescriptions, O thrice happy man
Who had so potent a Physician.
Whose tongue whosoe' experiments shall find
Galeni Exhilerans to a pensive mind.
Whose eyes I Have tried my self and now conclude
It Is the only Acopon for lassitude.
A kiss from whose sweet lips, but he alone
Must be thus blisful, is a panchreston.
Yet all these Ana's could not do him good,
Naught can repair his health but his own blood,
Which cures her too, she and her rival friend,
Like to undaunted Amazons, contend,
One weeping, the other smiling, who could do.
An act most worthy their Antonio.
CANTO VI.
BUt why so hasty, Pegasus? look, here
Is no great cause for such a swift career;
There Is naught in Friga's Vespers does require
So high a Pannade, nor is it my desire
That thou should take the needless pains to sing
The virtues of Landoff's famed Magic ring.
Which sure made her invisible, for I
With all my indagations could not 'spy
That Non-parel, who with her troops possessed
The Elective Empire of my torrid breast.
CANTO VII.
Saturn succeeded next who did ordain
GARTRVDE's re-entrance in the lists again,
With her Antagonist, which we will pass over
Because we saw, the combat once before.
And Seater's Vespers too because they lie
Without our Province's territory.
CANTO. VIII.
BRight Sol the next usurped the Imperial throne,
But vex't to see beams brighter than his own.
He called to Zephyrus to bring supply
Of Clouds, as she dispelled them with her eye.
But whence those powerful rays were sent, did lie
Out of the dominions of my prying eye.
So you may sleep, my Muse, but come anon
To take thy ultime valediction.
CANTO IX. Or the LVCRETIADE.
THen Cynthia 'rose the Empress of the sky,
But from this pensive palefac'd Deity
My forward fear presag^d some Tragic end
Our Acidalian revels did attend.
Now, Muse, thy Pegasus his course has run,
This is the day Albions refulgent Sun
Did pass that line which terminates my sight,
And left me groping in a polar night.
LVCRETIA, of whose virtue Fame has hurled
Sufficient Euges through the capacious world,
Did from her modest eye such lightning dart
Kindled lascivious fires in Tarquin's heart.
Who posted from the camp to raze the splendour
Of that stout fortlet which would not surrender.
But having lost her name regardless she,
Resolved not to survive, by battery
Demolished the fabric. Thus that Roman dame
Resigned her life to notify her name
In Fame's records, but this, no doubt, did write
The copy fairer than the prototype.
Had this been real 'twould go nigh, I fear,
To cause a fatal Regifugium here.
Then I retir^d, yet dubious whether she
Deserved my plaudite or plangite.
For, if those hapless men, whose lot did fall
In The farthest part of the frigid Zones, bewail
Their half-years-night, yet sure their Sun will turn
At's period, what cause have I to mourn?
Doomed from the sight of mine, whose brighter rays
Make me more sensible of such delays.
Especially since I do not know
Whether 't will ever be day again, or no.
CANTO X. Or the CONCLUSION.
THus was I partially eclyps'd, and here
Apollo too forsook our Hemisphere.
And went to's brother Neptune's bed to cool
His fiery chariot in his Western Pool.
Leaving his Lacquey Vesper in his seat
T^ unharness the horses and provide them meat.
Mean while my restless fancy my feet leads
TO expatiate in the adjacent meads,
Where silent Charwel revels as she goes
To the Nuptials of her elder sister Ouze.
And to this Nymph I made my moan till night,
With his black mask had hoodwinked all the light.
Cynthia was absent too, sure she was gone
To Latmus to salute Endymion.
So I was forced to retire to rest,
But Morpheus with his wiles could not arrest
My watchful senses, then Aurora led
The blushing Morn from her Mygdonian bed.
And made the rays of light in tumults throng,
Which come too soon, although they stayed too long,
For warlike Mars usurped the reins o'th'sky
The last of this so famous Heptarchy,
And would needs be my convoy till I come
Out of the precincts of Elysium.
For such were those most blessed banks that while
SHE darted there her beatifick smile.
Then blame me not if I was scarce content
To want those Aspec^s, yet at last I went;
But with eyes so retorted that I made
My t^rdy paces seem all retrograde.
Yet was my tedious journey too soon done.
Our jades, before the Sun's, their course had run*
But here are none before whom to vent my woes,
And flames depressed grow but more vigorous,
Experience dictates, for this he^rt of mine
Is daily holocaust^d to that shrine.
The Book EPILOGizeth.
THus have my pages entertained your eye
With some reflections of formosity.
He that enumerates all shall find it more
Than the task of the Segamore's Ambassador.
And now let Critic Catos vent their rage,
In their censorious descants on each page.
All such Malignant Planets I Will neglect,
So you will but deign me your benign Aspect.
-- F^rsan and hec olim meminisse Juvabit.

FINIS.

