THE VANITY OF Man's Present State PROVED and APPLIED, IN A SERMON on Psalm 39.
5.

With diverse Sermons of the Saints Communion with God, and Safety under his
Protection, in order to their future GLORY, on Psalm 73. 23, 24, 25, 26.

By the late able and Faithful Minister of the Word JOHN WILSON

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Sprint, at the Bell in Little-Britain. 1676.

TO THE HONORABLE The Lady CATHARINE BOOTH.
MADAM,
THese Sermons to which you gave so free entertainment when they were preached
under your ro^f (which you made a Sanctuary) do not doubt of your Countenance.
The first part (being of man's state altogether vanity) was by the reverend
Authors own hand scarce finished before his distemper bad disabled him from
service of this nature. And albeit, the latter part were by him destined to
obscurity amongst his private papers; yet by the assistance of special friends,
that compared his short notes with what was taken from his mouth. I have
answered the importunity of others, that often pressed me to make them public;
being very much persuaded that (howbeit they want those enlargements and
pollishings which they would not have wanted, had he designed them for the
Press.) I shall not in the least be injurious to his memory, amongst those that
were acquainted with his learned abilities; and have the ingenuity to grant
what allowance may be justly challenged, where the author is not the putter
forth of his own work; and withal, will understand the disadvantagious
circumstances he lay under, both in his studies and preaching. His strong body
and vivacious spirits being weakened and rendered languid by an inveterate
distemper. I presume (Madam) these discourses will have due esteem and value
from you, who have made Religion your most serious and close concern, received
the word with all readiness, given eminent testimony of the power of it in a
mortified and holy conversation, and especially prized old, plain, substantial
truths, which have put you in mind of your frailty, and been furtherance to
your faith, love, and holy obedience. Whilst some, either utter strangers to
communion with God (or worse) malicious scorners have undervalued the Saints
heaven upon earth; and too many others, leaving necessary and acknowledged
doctrines, in the study and practice of which, the servants of Christ have
lived holily, and died happily and gaping after new-nothings, strange notions,
not at all conducing to their improvement of an heavenly life, have puffed up
their fancies and thinned their souls. I cannot forget with what pious zeal,
and Christian courage God has spirited you that have adventured to be singular
in the strictest profession and practice of piety; and set you aloft, high
above all the little dangers and fears of sullying your quality by being
thought over serious and too busy about soul-concerns; well understanding that
the noblest extraction cannot be embased, but the meanest ennobled by holiness,
and that it is honor of a double die, for which Ladies are more beholding to
their virtues than titles or Escutcheons; their devout lives, than dead
Ancestors. With what a public spirit has God acted you, to appear so worthily
for his desired service? Though well aware that it would cost you the
indignation of the greater sort, and the rude taunts of the profane rabble,
which have concerned you no more, than to animate your godly resolution to be
yet more vile in the discharge of a good conscience, service of God in your
place, and according to your degree. Nay your manner of life so blameless, so
exemplary; your zeal for God and his truth are and shall be your lasting
honor, and embalm your name, when the sect of the Libertines (that live at so
lewd a rate as if their immortal souls were designed only to give a freshness
to their faces, gracefulness to their carriage, briskness to their spirits, and
in all to serve their vanity) shall be sweetly fed upon by the worms, and leave
a memory more odious than their carcases. But, while I am doing Justice to your
virtues, least I should offend your humble modesty, (which deserves so much the
more, by how much it less affects mention of what is due to the world as well
as you) I shall add no more but my humble and earnest prayers to almighty God
to sanctify you wholly to preserve your whole spirit, soul and body blameless
unto the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ.

TO THE READER.
It cannot but be highly proper, that the sons of men should be acquainted with
the nature of their present state, that so they may see whether they are to
acquiesce in it, or seek after another, which may afford more happiness and
contentment. Their endeavors after another state will doubtless be
proportionable to their apprehensions and esteem of this. If they take this to
be good, they will rest satisfied with it without seeking any farther: but if
otherwise, they will look about them, and enquire after another. Those
Israelites which think well of Egypt, move but faintly toward Canaan. And
whiles Peter persuades himself he has glory enough upon Mount Tabor, he cares
not for seeking for any more. He will never care much for an heaven above, who
conceits he has one below. But then on the other hand, he who takes this
present state to be a state of vanity, and sees he is like to pass away his
days in sin and misery, will (if he be one that has not lost the use of his
reason) cast about, and endeavor to possess himself of a better state, wherein
he may be free from those evils which now he groans and sighs under. Such a man
will be ready to cry out and say, O what shall I do? What course shall I take?
Which way shall I deliver my self out of my present distress? Oh that I had
wings like a Dove, that I might fly away, and be at rest! Oh for Elijahs
Chariot and and horses, to convey me up to glory! Oh that I could climb up
beyond the Stars, and seat my self amongst those blessed Souls which are about
the Throne of God! Then might I wipe away all tears from mine eyes, and triumph
over my present misery. But whiles I am in the state wherein I am, surrounded
with ten prations, sins, afflictions, what can be expected, but that I should
sit like Jerusalem, with the tears upon my Cheeks, and make them my meat and
drink night and day? What more than this can be expected from me, save that I
am to despise the World with all the flatteries thereof, and exercise my self
in a vigorous and restless pursuit of a state which will yield me that comfort
which this is utterly incapable of affording? Such as this will be the language
of a man, who understood the nature of this present state. And to work the Sons
of men to such resentments of it, and truly endeavors after a better state, is
the intent of this small discourse: Wherein I have endeavored to show what a
kind of state this is, how it came to be so, and what use we are to make of it.
It was indeed some late unhealthfulness of mine own, which lead my thoughts to
this subject, but there is no reason wherefore that should render it less
acceptable; for the nature of it is so common to all mankind, that there are no
persons whatsoever, but are concerned in it. And there are none sure, unless
they have lien a sleep ever since they came into the world, but can contribute
some evidence to the present truth. He that has lived any considerable number
of years in the world, and yet has nothing to say of the vanity of his present
state, is rather to be looked upon as overwhelmed with vanity than exempted
from it. But whether men are sensible of the vanity of their present state or
not, the point insisted on will nevertheless remain in force against them. Now
let the great Lord and disposer of souls, bless the following instructions,
open the eyes of men that they may see the vanity of their present state, and
stir them up seasonably to make out after a better, that so being freed from
sin and misery, they may they may enjoy a state of holiness and peace for ever.

In sequentem doctissimi Domini Johannis Wilsoni de statu Vanitatis vanissimo
Tractatum.
ALitis aucupio argenti lassatus inani,
Crasse, sitibundus fulvum, liquidumque metallum
Deglutis. Quis non crassus? Sud^re solutae
Liquuntur vires, cura laniantur atroci,
Fallitur, eripitur, lato captatur biatu,
Ulterius sitiens tamen urget hirudo petendi.
Quis petit ah quis! Aquas ex font salutis aperto?
Quisve Deum, Christum, coelum sectatur anhelus?
Aut tempestiva quis s^llicitudine status
Pungitur aeterni? Nullus? Forte unus, and alter.
Pro Coelo certare jubet sapientia, clamans
Excute segnitiem, cessator, ad arma vocaris;
Persentisce, piger, stimulos torpedine dempta;
Dum radio claro fallacia gaudia monstrat
Brachia Centimano desunt, obtorpet Arachne,
Lynceus and talpa est, O Monstrum! Batte, silebis,
Midas auritus petulante reculcitrat aestu,
Parve; tibi suade^e, liber, provincia dura est.
Sed quid dico? Tuum non est opus, illa potestas
Sufficit hic tantum cui mundi machina debet,
Illius auxilio pravorum dedoceantur
Artifices, discant potius pollere supernis,
Turpe, rogent nostrum quo tandem vivere ducat,
Crustati vitiis mollescant; sintque lacertis
Herculis indomiti vera pietate subacti;
Aures atque graves pateant dum tympana pulsas,
Det Deus and monitis corda incrassata terebres.
Imitat. Persii. Sat. 5.
Segniter in quot, inepte, dies dormis vocat, instet
Spiritus. Ah nondum? Rursum vocitabere? Surge
Eia ais? Inquit Surge. Negas? Sed surgito. Surgam
Quando? Cras, Cras? Ludis. Sum serius Hei ho,
O abiit jam tota dies dum clamito surge.
Quorsum? en prae foribus vigiles minitantur acerba
Mors armata, Sathanque furens, Barathrumque dehiscens.
Pectora justitiae verae thorace tuere,
Speque salutifera galeatus protinus esto;
Arreptus subito scripturae stringitor ensis;
Quo minus igniferis telis penetrere Sathanis,
Mors armis exuta suis captiva trahatur,
Infernusque vorax frustra dilatet hiatum,
Stertis adhuc? abeo, nec habebis porro vocantem.
J. GOLBORNE.

Upon the much lamented Death of the Reverend Mr. JOHN WILSON Minister of Gods
Word.
LEt him that lives by Funerals, whose Verses
Do mercenary duty to proud Herses.
Go Court some puling Muse with bleared eyes
To cut foul faces at the obsequies,
And put the World into a peck of fears,
Lest that it should be deluged by her tears;
Call in some greedy Heir to help, when clad,
He Is a close Mourner, for his clothes are sad.
The occasion here too mournful is to be
Assisted with the paint of Pageantry.
The Irish howlers, or the formal Mum
Of solemn Statues would but ill become
This sober sadness, such are Hirelings, where
The sorry loss can scarce squeez out a tear.
Here a large sum of sighs not to disburse
Were gross stupidity, or something worse.
Where those that know him well, cannot review
Their loss at distance, but their griefs renew:
Time and experience do make them know
Their want much better, and their sorrows grow:
His love, care, tenderness, well understod
Do highly aggravate the Widowhood
Of his dear Relict; thought on more and more
Show the loss greater than they did before.
Their sweet converse together, grave and free,
Did se^m a strise, who should most winners be.
A strife by married couples to be chose,
Where both are winners, and yet neither lose.
Prudent provision, fruit of moderate cares,
He left his children, and what is more, his prayers:
And for the Church his Son's designed; yet knew,
From what point only Church-preferment blew.
Disliked their Policy, who cunning grown,
Ensnare their children; but to make their moan,
Cherished no secret hopes that they might find
The art to tack about and gain the wind.
He was a true Peacemaker, more because
Not biased by unjust and partial Laws
Of hearing, and adhereing to one side:
His aim was to make friends, and not divide.
They who befriend one party, take on trust
Complaints, if they do right, yet are not just.
His widow, children, friends he left to moan
The Churches loss much greater than their own.
Judgment, wit, memory did well agree,
Yet strove who most should been factor be.
His fancy did not judgments strength abate,
As some gums into air evaporate.
Nor was his judgment so devoid of it,
With harlotry to brand all modest wit.
The choicest readings clarified by
His judgment lay hiv'd in his memory.
They who with slight stuff memory abuse
Vaunt gaudy Sumpter of old boots and shoes.
He was close student, and the very prime
Of learned Authors did employ his time.
To fathers he due veneration bore,
Valued the Authors much, their reason more;
The Scripture most, with which they Hydra slew,
Lopping off heads of errors as they grew:*
With that they baffled the Religion,
Whose wicked gods and goddesses had none:
If not belyed by their votaries,
The fatal tree is hung with Mercuries:
And though great Jupiter might save his gullet,
Yet should not escape the clyster of a mullet.
He thought not fondly what a father says,
Without the book a solid ground for faith,
Or that they could not err, who disagree,
Or that from errors Peter's charge was free.
He was acquainted with the very best
Of modern Authors, and did know the rest:
Of strange Religions, and their grounds by view,
Being confirmed in doctrine of the true,
Substantial truths received did not move
Him less to value, but them more improve.
With great pains, plainness, judgment he did preach,
Ordered his words not to confound, but teach.
His Doctrine solid, aimed to make men know
That which was good, his use to make them so.
His sweet allurements, pleasing were and grave
With holy guile lost souls to catch and save.
With Mushroom-notions light he did not cheat
Attentive hearers giving froth for meat;
When they flocked to the windows to be fed,
They were not served with air instead of bread:
But faithfully dispensed with good skill
The judgment to inform, incline the will;
Denying commonly his learned parts
The better to convince and win men's hearts,
Which did succeed: the word that caused a flame
In his own soul, in others raised the same.
His studies, prayers, and sweat, wherewith he taught,
Did clearly show at how great rate he sought
The welfare of his people: being bent
As those he valued for them to be spent*
For persecuting sickness made him pay,
A round fine for the labors of each day,
This grew by gains at length, that did amount
To its own ruin, and his great account.
That cruel rigor made him not to cease
Till its injustice bound him to the peace,
Whom close imprisonment, nor Panick dread
Of men's severity had silenced.
Without thy hand, Lord, what could sickness do?
It was thy Sergeant, I am silenced too.
Thy Providence, yet how shall we expound*
Thy choicest goods when thou hid'st under ground.
Is not some evil drawing on, when one
Into thy work scarce enters but is gone?
Another not till middle of the day
Is suffered there, but must be had away:
The third be gone about his ages noon,
Of whom a late departure were too soon,
When Laborers are few, the harvest great,
This star of the first magnitude must set,
This holy Prophet fall. Why do I call
A soaring flight from Earth to Heaven a fall;
Where (whilst in this vain world, and vale of tears,
Our faith, hope, love are weakened by our fears:
Our sweets embittered, and the pleasant things
This world affords are not without their stings:
Our bodies sickly, subject unto pain:
Our souls polluted with sins loathsome stain)
He is secure from sin above the treats
Of worldly blandishments and cruel threats
Of violence, is licenced to preach
The glories of the King, and fears no breach
Of Law. There he is beneficed. It Is cross,
That his great benefit should be our loss.
J. G.

The present State of Man, a State of extreme vanity.
SERMON I.
Psalm. 39. 5. Verily every man at his best State is altogether vanity. Selah.
MY design at this time is to speak of the present state of man, and to give
you what account Scripture, Reason, and Experience affords us thereof: and
withal, to show you what considerations we are to take up from thence, and what
use we are to make of it. There is a twofold State of man: the one is present,
and the other future. The former is a State of exercise and service: the last
of retribution and reward. It is the former of these I intend at present to
discourse of, in order whereunto I have chosen these words, wherein David (who,
as appears by the title, was the author of this Psalm) gives us a peremptory
and full account thereof. From the contemplation and view of his own misery, he
takes occasion to consider what was the condition of others, whether hiscase
were altogether singular, or whether it were not with others as it was with
him: and after much serious musing and diligent inquiry, he breaks forth into
this positive and general conclusion, Verily every man at his best state, etc.

In such sort does God often times dispose of men as to their abilities,
opportunities, observances, experiences, that some are more capable of giving
us an account of one thing, some of another. For instance, David being one that
was exercised with various conditions, one while lifted up to the clouds by
prosperity, another while thrown down into the bottom of the Sea by adversity;
we must needs look upon him as highly capable of giving us a true and certain
account of the nature of man's present state. In like manner Solomon his Son
being one that gave up himself so much to the study of earthly things, such as
Riches, Honors, and Pleasures; and being attended with such advantageous
circumstances tending to help and further him in his Inquiry, we must needs
look upon him as far more fit to give us an account thereof, than one whose
studies and conditions carry his thoughts another way. Now by how much
Providence does the more dispose, and qualify any persons for giving us an
account of the nature of things, by so much we should be the forwarder in
advising with them, and look upon the account which they give of them, as more
considerable and valuable. If then a man would have an account of man's present
state, he should go to David: If of the nature of earthly things, he should go
to Solomon. Now the account which David gives of man's present state, we have in
the recited words, Verily every man at his best state, etc. which passage is so
full and emphatical, that more could not have been said in so few words.

1. He tells us, man is vanity; not only vain in the concrete, but vanity in
the abstract: thereby signifying how far vanity has invaded him, and prevailed
upon him, which it has done in such a degree, that he is become even vanity it
self. Were it only some little tincture of vanity that he labored under, his
case were less miserable: but alas! it is much otherwise; vanity has got such
head, that it rules and bears sway in him; insomuch that it has power to
denominate him, and give him his name. There is a great deal of difference
betwixt those terms which pass in the concretive form, and those which pass in
the abstractive. Those which pass in the concretive, import there is some
degree of that, which is spoken of in the subject referred to: but those which
pass in the abstractive, import there is that which is spoken of, and little or
nothing else. To say man is vain, imports there is some degree of vanity in
him, but to say he is vanity, imports a great deal more. But on this I need
less to enlarge because of what follows.

2. As if th^^ were not sufficient to acquaint us with the nature of his
condition, he says he is (...) altogether vanity, thereby importing as much as
if he had said, he is mere vanity, or he is nothing but vanity. Hence that of
Muis, Homo in se uno omne genus vanitatis complectitur, Man in himself alone
contains all kind of vanity. And hence likewise that of Genebrard, Homo non est
particula vanitatis, sed tota, integra, and solida vanitas, Man is not a
particle of vanity: But the whole, entire, and full business of vanity,
insomuch that as he does partake with all other creatures in the nature of his
existence, so the vanity which is dispersed amongst all the creatures seems to
be aggregated and united in him: with Inanimates he is obnoxious to chance,
with Plants to decay, with Brutes to sufferings: Nay the vanity which is in him
alone exceeds all the vanity of all the creatures joined together. Oh it is sad
it should be thus with us! Its sad that he for whose sake all the creatures
were in some sort made, should be vainer than any of them, nay vainer than all
of them taken together: But thus it is, and we are to know it, and consider it
for our good. And,

3. It is not thus with one particular man, but with the whole race of mankind
as they remain in this militant, warfaring state. (...) All Adam, all vanity:
so the Original, word for word, which our Translators have thought fit to
render, Every man is altogether vanity. Vanity like an Universal contagion,
has not only seized upon one, or a few, but has overspread the whole
posterity of Adam; so that all without exception, are born, live, and dye
therein. There is not any Nation, or people under the whole heaven who are not
concerned in this matter. The Sun it self never beheld that man whose state
here was not a state of vanity. Had a man the wings of the morning so that he
might fly into the uttermost parts of the earth and take a view of the several
people thereof, he would abundantly find the truth of what I now say, and
return with this report, Oh the state of them all, every one, is a state of
vanity. And,

4. It is not thus with man only when he is in adversity, and things are at the
lowest ebb with him, but in his highest prosperity when things go best with
him. Verily every man at his best state, etc. The word here translated best
state, is (...) which how it should be rendered, has, I find, more then a
little exercised the thoughts of interpreters. But not to trouble you with a
recital of different versions and opinions concerning it; the design of the
Psalmist in it seems to be this, That man when he is in his prime consistency,
or when he is most erect, or established, is even then altogether vanity: when
like Joseph's sheaf, he stands upright, and the sheaves round about him make
obeisance to him, Genesis 37. 7. Or when like David, having overcome all his
enemies, he is settled in his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 22. 1. even then he is altogether
vanity. That when a man is low in the world, laboring under poverty, pain,
sickness, disgrace, persecutions, and the like, he should be in a state of
vanity, is not so incredible, but that when he abounds with all the felicities,
and good things of this life, he should be so, is not so easy to be
apprehended. Yet the Holy Ghost who is the most competent Judge in this, as
well as in all other cases, will have us to know that when he is in the best
condition, and attended with the most favorable circumstances, the world can
afford him, he is even then in a state of vanity.

5. For working in us a stronger belief of this truth, it is ushered in with a
note of asseveration, (...), Verily, as if the Psalmist had said, it is a most
real and certain truth, and worthy to be believed of all mankind that every man
in his best consistency, or most flourishing condition, even when he may
promise himself the greatest measure of stability and happiness, is altogether
vanity. When his circumstances are most benign and favorable, and afford the
best aspect they are capable of yielding, even then he is mere vanity.

6. And all this for the further confirmation of the matter, is backed with a
Selah: which I am apt to think, with Vatablus, and Grotius, stands here not
only as a musical note directing the fingers in the Temple how to order their
voice, but as a note of excitation to stir us all up to greater attention and
observation. And surely if there be any thing which is worthy the consideration
of the sons of men, and which may serve to take them off their pride, and vain
glory, and make them base, and vile in their own eyes; it is this, that all of
them in their best condition, are most certainly in a state of extreme vanity.
And thus I have given you an account of the design, extent, and Emphasis of the
Text: And now desire to know how more could have been said in so few words, nay
in the greatest multitude? The Psalmist seems to have served up this truth to
the greatest height he could possibly raise it. When a man has studied, and
said all that ever he can, what can he say more than we have here in these
words? When he has exercised both brain and tongue, when he has gathered
together whatever either wit or language can afford, What can he say more, than
that every man at his best state is altogether vanity? The importance of the
words being thus laid before you, I shall offer you the point I intend to
insist on, which is this, That the present state of man is a state of extreme
vanity: Notwithstanding his splendid appearances, his high apprehensions of
himself, and his great hopes of a Terrest^al happiness, yet his present state
is a state of extreme vanity. He ruffles a while in the world, makes a great
bussle and stir, feeds himself with golden dreams, promises to himself fine
and delicate things; and after he has exercised himself a season herein, in
spite of all his pretenses and hopes, he finds the Text verified in him, and
that he is no other than a heap of mere vanity. To fetch in proof of this from
other places of Scripture were needless; for the Text it self is so clear and
full, that to those, who acknowledge the Authority of this Book, it cannot but
be abundantly sufficient. However, to show you the agreement of other places of
Scripture with this, I shall offer you two or three passages holding forth the
same thing: Hereof God first gave notice in Adams name, which signifies earth,
or dust; whereunto he seems to have reference, when he says, Dust thou art,
and unto dust shall thou return, Genesis 3. 19. Not but that if he had persisted
in his innocence, he should, (contrary to what the Socinians teach) have been
free from death; for God in pursuance of his Covenant with him would have
secured him from it: But having deserted his innocence, and thereby forfeited
the benefit of the covenant, he was in himself, or in respect of his
constitutive principles liable to dissolution and putrefaction. And truly it
was not difficult in the frame of his nature and some other circumstances to
see, that he was designed for a fall. And as if this were not sufficient, Adam
himself taught it in his Son Abels name, which is the very word used in the
Text, and signifies vanity, Genesis 4. 3. So early did he see, that he and his
posterity were designed here for a state of vanity, that the second Son which
he has, he styles Abel, or Vanity. But though these Texts afford much light as
to this matter, yet there are others wherein this doctrine is much more
conspicuous. Job 11. 12. Zophar speaking of man says, Vain man would be wise.
He is certainly vain, but yet would believe himself, and would likewise have
the world to believe that he is otherwise. There are some diseases which
invading the head, and there seizing on the animal spirits, work such
discomposure that the persons who are exercised therewith are unsensible of
them: And thus it is in the present case: the vanity which has seized upon
man, has so far prevailed upon him, that he is become unsensible of it, which
does aggravate his misery in this respect, that it disables him from those
endeavors after relief, which otherwise he might make use of. And says the
Apostle, Jam. 2. 20. Will thou know O vain man? A vigorous and quick
expression, declaring the great vanity of man, and as in other matters so
particularly in his disputing, and reasoning in the things of God. And the
Psalmist, Psalm. 89. 47. seems somewhat earnestly to expostulate with God about
this matter, saying, Wherefore have thou made all men in vain? Or as Castellio
turns it, Quam frivolum creaveris omne genus hominum; What a frivolous thing
have thou made all mankind? Than these places, what can be more plain? What man
is there who acknowledging the authority of the Scripture, will not confess the
truth of the point, and grant that the present state of man is vain? We
commonly have good evidence ere we yield to what is spoken against our selves:
But here the evidence is so clear and strong, that there is no room for
gainsaying, or doubting: So that my business will not lie so much in
confirming the point in general, as in making it good in the several
particulars belonging to it, and setting it home on our hearts and Consciences,
that so we may do what is meet to be done upon the revealing of such an
important, and affecting truth. For the prosecution and management whereof I
shall,

1. Show what Vanity is, or what it is to be in a state of vanity. And the word
Vanity is of such signification, that it is ever used in a bad sense. Where
ever we find it in Scripture, it still denotes either sin or misery, or both.
The Apostle, 1 Pet. (...) 18. calls a sinful Conversation, a vain Conversation.
And Job 7. 3. terms those months of affliction and distress which he endured,
months of vanity; I know sometimes it has a more particular notation. Yet
still such as falls under one of these two heads, Sin or Misery. Sometimes its
put for deceitfulness, or falseness, and so Psalm. 12. 3. David setting forth
the deceitful, false speaking of the wicked, says, they speak vanity. And
because Idols do not answer the expectations of those who confide in them, the
Prophet, Jer. 14. 22. speaks of them under the notion of vanities. And in
regard worldly enjoyments do not yield the satisfaction and contentment which
men are apt to expect from them, Solomon, Eccles. 1. 2. speaks of them under
the same term. Sometimes its put for fruitless, or ineffectual labor or pains
which men take without receiving any profit therefrom: And so Psalm. 78. 33. its
said of the Israelities, That God consumed their days in vanity; exercising
them with tedious peregrinations in the Wilderness, without bringing them into
the Land of Canaan, toward which they were so long in going. Sometimes its put
for temporariness or short continuance: And so Job 7. 16. tells us his days are
vanity: that is of very short continuance. And sometimes its put for
obnoxiousness to the several evils whereunto the inferior Creatures through
Gods permission, and man's tyranny, do lie open, so the Apostle, Romans 8. 20.
tells us, how the Creature was made subject to vanity: that is, to manifold
abuses and grievances. Thus, as I said, the word Vanity has sometimes a more
particular notation; yet still such, as falls under one of these two heads, Sin
or Misery. From which it is easy to gather what the design of the Holy Ghost
in the Text is, when he tells us that man's present state is a state of vanity.
We must from the account I have now given you, necessarily infer it is a state
of sin or misery, or both. And it were well for us, if it contained only one of
them, either Sin without Misery, or Misery without Sin: But such is the badness
of it, that it contains both the one and the other, and that in a very high
degree, as will appear hereafter in its proper place. The result then of this
particular is this, that when David tells us, man's present state is a state of
vanity; his meaning is, that it is a state of Sin and Misery. We exercise our
selves in sin, and God in love does chasten us, and in justice does punish us
for it: whereby it comes to pass that our best days are evil days; according to
that of the good Patriarch, Genesis 47. 9. Few and evil have the days of the years
of my life been. Who (in those times) lived either longer or better than Jacob?
And yet such was the nature of his days that they were both few and evil. And
when we our selves have lived as long, and as well as ever we can, we shall
have occasion to give in the same account, and say, Few and evil have the days
of the years of my life been. There is not any thing comprehended under the
name Vanity, but it attends the days of the holiest and best men. Thus it all
along has been, and thus it will be to the end of the world.

2. Having showed what vanity is, I shall show you in what degree man falls
under the charge of it, or how vain he is. Some account I have given you hereof
in the opening of the Text, but that not being sufficient, I shall here do it a
little more fully: And,

1. He is really vain. Whether you look upon Vain as importing Sinful, or
Miserable, or both; Man is really so. He does not only seem to be so, but he is
so: As sure as he is man, so sure he is vain. The same evidence we have for his
existence, the same we have for his vanity: We cannot take any considerate,
serious view of the one, but we must needs behold the other: What faculty,
sense, limb, member, enjoyment, concernment, belonging to him can we look upon,
but we may see vanity as legibly engraven in it, as if it were writ with a beam
of the Sun: Psalm. 62. 9. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high
degree are a lie. Surely; see how peremptory the Holy Ghost is in this matter.
What thing does he offer to us throughout the whole Word, which he prefaces
with notes of greater certainty and truth then this? So that we are not to look
upon this doctrine as a fiction, or device to work us to mean thoughts of our
selves; but as a real truth, which whether we will or no, we shall find made
out to us every day throughout our whole lives. For my part, I look not for
that day during my whole life wherein Providence will not some way or other
offer me that which in its own nature will be fit to convince me, that my
present state is a state of vanity. How happy were we, if what we are told of
this matter were a mistake, and thatthings were otherwise then they are
represented? Could we upon our awaking out of sleep find that what we are told
concerning this matter were a mere dream, and that the state of things in
reality and truth were otherwise, it would be an happy awaking for us, and
deliver us from that sorrow and anguish under which we now labor: But alas,
when we have slept and awaked a thousand times over, and bethought our selves
of all the arts and ways whereby we may escape the evil spoken of, we shall
find our selves fast bound under the power of it. What man is there who if he
had it, and might it be available, would not give mountains of Gold to be
delivered from this truth? But there is no thinking of any such things: when we
have offered all the bribes, the whole world can furnish us with, to have it
cancelled and reversed, we shall still find it in full force against us.

2. He is universally vain. This I shall amplify, and explain in two
particulars.

1. Every man is vain. Vanity has so diffused it self over the humane nature,
that there is not any rank, order, or degree of persons in the world exempted
from it. Witness the forecited place, Psalm. 62. 9. Surely men of low degree are
vanity, and men of high degree are alye. Whereby we see that the vanity which
has befallen us, has not confined it self to this, or that particular rank,
or degree of persons, but has most unhappily extended it self to all, so that
there is none free from it. Let men be what they will, high or low, rich or
poor, they are all infected with it, and labor under both the guilt and burden
of it. Now this does much aggravate the business. Had it confined it self to
the mean only, we might perhaps have secured our selves from it by greatness:
or had it been the lot of the poor only, we might have found some remedy in
riches: But such is its universal nature, that it reaches to all, so that there
is not any degree of blood, or place can preserve us from it: There never was
man since the Creation who had not cause to complain of it; and there never
will be man to the worlds end (though it were at a far greater distance than it
may rationally be presumed to be) but will have cause to do the like. What age,
or generation was there ever in the world that could afford a man, that was not
in a state of vanity; or what age or generation is there like to be in the
world which we may with any color of reason expect it from? When once we have
men set before us who are not in a state of vanity, we may cry out with the men
of Lystra, the Gods are come down to us in the likeness of men. Acts 14. 11.
Should you call to the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, to all the
Saints in Heaven, nay to the whole deceased race of mankind, and ask them what
their state was when they were on earth, they all either would, or at least
might answer, Oh it was a state of vanity. And could you converse with the
Generation yet to come, they would all give you an answer to the purpose, that
this temporal state is a state of vanity.

2. Every man is altogether vain. He is so, not only in some mean degree, or
respect, but he is altogether so. Job 27. 12. speaking to his friends of the
inconstancy of the Hypocrite in the duties of Religion, says, Behold ye your
selves have seen it, why then are you thus altogether vain? Such is the vanity
of man, that take him extra gratiam Dei, without the grace of God, as Gejerus
expresses it, and he is wholly vain, so that there is nothing but vanity to be
found in him. Look upon a poor unregenerate, unsanctified man, and what a
despicable creature is he? He is vain in head, and heart, in soul and body, in
life and manners, in all his undertakings, and in all his concernments. What
thing belonging to him can any one offer to our consideration, wherein he is
not altogether vain: Or what has he that he can fasten his eye on, wherein he
may upon good grounds take comfort? Nay, what has he that is not a judgment
to him, and matter of great sorrow? Such is the sadness of his condition that
by how much the things he injoyes are the best, by so much they make the more
against him; insomuch that take the choicest benefits; God has given him, and
he has cause to bewail it, that ever he had them from him; for as evil things
prove good to him that is in a state of grace and holiness, so good things
prove evil to him who is in a state of nature and sin. Thus it is with him who
is unregenerate and unsanctified, his state is altogether vain. And then for
him who is a pious good man, though it go better with him, though he be in a
way of cure and recovery; yet in some respects, as I shall show hereafter, his
present state is altogether vain. Doubtless those inspired and good men, who
tell us in Scripture, that the state of every man here is altogether vain, did
not exclude themselves, or others in the same condition, but comprehend them.
Is it to be imagined that when David in the Text from the contemplation of his
own distress tells us that every man at his best state is altogether vanity,
does exclude himself? No, he proposes himself both as the occasion of what he
says, and as a special instance of the truth thereof. So that what we have
asserted in this head, remains firm and clear; that man is universally vain.

3. He is vain at the best state the world is capable of advancing him to. Even
when he has attained to the greatest confluence of outward things, he is then
so far short of real, and substantial happiness, that he is altogether vain?
When birth, youth, strength, beauty, parts, wealth, honor, friends? do all
unite and contribute their utmost assistance to render his state happy, he is
even then exceeding miserable. When Solomon was in the very height of his
magnificence and glory, and had even what ever his eye, ear, or heart could
desire, Was he then free from a state of vanity? Could he then boast of true
happiness? Could he then make any exception against the doctrine his good
father had (as you have heard) in so many places taught? No, notwithstanding
all his wisdom, pleasures, delicate works, houses, vineyards, gardens,
orchards, pooles of water, multitude of servants, singing-men, and
singing-women, instruments of music, great wealth, and the like; yet he tells
us all is vanity, and vexation of spirit, and there is no profit under the Sun,
Eccles. 2. 11. Upon a strict inquiry into these things, he found not only that
they were vain, but that he was vain in the enjoyment, and use of them. Alas
then what hope is there for a man of attaining to a state of true happiness in
this world? for though he may ascend to such an height as to possess himself of
the wealth, honors, and pleasures of the greatest Prince on earth, even then
he is so far from true happiness, that his state is as truly, and really vain
as it was before. When Solomon was in the state of a child and and Subject, his
condition was vain: and when he had his fathers Crown, Throne, and Kingdom, and
reigned quietly therein, in as much splendour and glory as ever any Prince in
the world enjoyed, he found himself but at the same pass, Eccles. 1. 12, 14. So
that when the providence of God advances a man from a state of meanness to a
state of greatness; we are not to look upon it as a translating of him from a
state of vanity to a state of true happiness, but from one state of vanity to
another. Nay, taking vanity (as indeed we ought) for the opposite of true
happiness; that is, as importing sin, unholiness, trouble, discontent, and the
like: And how much more do the great ones generally labor under it, than those
who are in any degrees below them? Greatness is so far from sccuring the sons
of men against vanity, that commonly the more greatness, the more vanity.

4. He is vain throughout the whole course of his life, even from the one end
unto the other. Vanity is so deeply, and firmly rooted in his nature and life,
that it attends him through the several periods thereof, down to his very
dissolution and change. As the blood in its appointed circulation, runs
throughout the whole body, so does vanity throughout the whole life of man. Its
born with him, pursues him, and follows him to his very grave. According to
that of Solomon, Childhood and youth are vanity, Eccles. 11. 10. A very
remarkable passage, carrying with it much strength and evidence; for if those
more serene, and pleasant ages, wherein we are free from the decays, maladies,
cares, we are usually exercised with, when we arrive at a grown and aged
condition, be vanity, what can be expected afterward? Children, and young
people commonly pass away there time in much content and delight: But for
persons of a grown, aged state, what complaints do we hear from them? How many
grievances and vexations are they ready to give us an account of? Who ever
lived to see forty years of age, that could not afford us a large Catalogue of
his sins, burdens and troubles? It Is an observable passage of Solomon, Prove.
24. 16. A just man falls seven times and rises up again. It Is disputed
amongst expositors, what is here the meaning of the just man's falling and
rising? Some think we are thereby to understand his falling into, and rising
from sin: So Bid and others. But this, Grotius, Gejerus and others are
against, alleging the word (...) here rendered to fall, is never amongst the
Hebrews put for falling into sin: and also that the taking of it in such a
sense, suits not with the design of Solomon in this place, whose business is to
show the calamities, and miseries that both the righteous and the wicked are
incident to in this life: but withal, what privileges the one have above the
other; for whereas the latter plunge themselves into such misery as proves
altogether exitial and destructive to them; it is not so with the former; they
indeed fall, but yet so as to rise again. But whether we understand the place
of falling into sin or misery, it comes all to one, as to what I allege it
for, which is to show the great obnoxiousness, even of the best of men in this
life to vanity, which is such, that they fall seven times; that is very
frequently, or often: so that even their whole lives consist of sin and
punishment for it: What day, what hour is there from first to last, wherein
they have not cause to cry out, Oh the vain state of poor lapsed man! Oh what
evils are we incident to! Oh what distress have we involved our selves in! And
that which does aggravate the business is this, that,

5. He is vain unavoidably, and remedilesly. This I speak still with reference
to his present state and condition, during which there is no expecting to be
delivered from the evils unto which he is obnoxious. God who sits in heaven,
and rules the world, has ordained, and designed that his present state shall
be a state of vanity, and notwithstanding all the arts and remedies that may be
used to avoid it, it will be sure to prove so. I know, grace, the light of Gods
countenance, and assurance of a future and better state, may do much toward
the mitigating of the evils of this: But notwithstanding all, we shall still
find it a state of vanity: Who more capable of finding it otherwise than
Solomon? Who in a fairer way for the Philosophers stone than he? Who in the
world more likely to escape the severity of his father David's words than he?
And yet so far was he from it, that none has said more for the vanity of m^n^
present state than he himself has done. What Chapter is there in all the Book
of Ecclesiastes* (which seems to have been penned by him, in the time of his
greatest wisdom and holiness, and when he was most capable of making a right
judgment on things) wherein he does not with greatest peremptoriness avouch the
present state of man to be a state of vanity, and that without any means the
whole world can afford of relief? This is his judgment and testimony in the
case: and if that be not valuable, I know no evidence capable of yielding
satisfaction in the case. We are all during this life, designed for a state of
vanity, and bound up therein, and there is no way whereby we may extricate, or
deliver our selves; but though we turn our selves which way we will, we shall
still find our selves laboring under it. This I might farther make good here,
but being loath to anticipate my self in my intended Method, I shall wave it for
the present, and leave it to its proper place.

3. Having showed in what degree man falls under the charge of vanity, or how
vain he is; I shall now show in what respects he is vain. And,

1. He is vain in his soul, which is woefully depraved in the several faculties
thereof, so that it is utterly unable to perform those functions it was once in
an high degree qualified for. Oh what a curious piece was the soul of man
before the fall! What rich ornaments was it then endued with! What thing in all
the visible World was like unto it! But now it is in a far other state than at
that time it was. Now it is so degenerated and altered, that it is vain in the
several faculties and powers of it. But for the better discovering of this
vanity of man in respect of his soul; I shall manage the business a little more
particularly. And,

1. He is vain in his Understanding, which is full of ignorance, folly, and
error. It was once a choice and precious lamp, affording a pure and shining
light, fit to conduct and lead him in the several duties of his life; but now
it is full of darkness and error, apt to mistake in the plainest cases. Zophar
speaking of man, says, Vain man would be wise, though he be born like a wild
Asses colt, Job 11. 12. An Ass is a foolish creature, insomuch that we use to
call one who is a fool an Ass: yet Zophar likens man in his natural condition
not only to an Ass, but to a wild Ass, nay to a wild Asses colt, which is one
of the most stupid, silly things in the world. And what plentiful evidence do
the several people in the world afford us of the truth hereof. Go amongst the
heathenish Philosophers, even those who by study and converse, had raised
themselves to a degree of knowledge and wisdom far above what what the common
people had attained to, and how ignorant and blockish were they in the things
of God? How absurd and gross in their notions, touching Celestial and future
things? How divided in their apprehensions, and opinions? Paul who by his great
travels, had opportunity to be acquainted with them, gives this account of
them, That they became vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was
darkened: and that professing themselves to be wise, they became foolish, Romans
1. 21, 22. And in another place discoursing of them, he makes mention of the
(...), or the vanity of their mind. Ephesians. 4. 17. They did indeed retain a (...),
or intellectual faculty which was there (...), or guide in their affairs and
proceedings, and which they so much celebrated, and cried up, but so miserably
was it infatuated, and depraved, that there was little or nothing but vanity to
be found in it. And this does abundantly appear in their gods, sacrifices,
worships, lives, which were such that they would never have owned or used them,
had it not been that they had in a great degree lost their understandings, and
were besides themselves. And if we go amongst the Jews, and enquire how things
went with them, even whiles they were Gods peculiar people, how foolish and
vain were they? Though for a supply of the defect of natural light, they were
furnished with such as was supernatural, and that in such a degree, that there
was no people which in that respect was like unto them in all the world: Yet
what charge and complaints does God bring in against them, as to their folly
and ignorance? The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters crib, but
Israel does not know, my people does not consider, Isa. 1. 3. Again, My people
is foolish, they have not known me, they are sottish children, and they have no
understanding: They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge,
Jer. 4. 22. And if we come amongst our Saviors own Disciples, who had the best
Master in all the world, how stupid, and unteachable for a time were they? How
averse to receive the instructions offered to them? How ignorant were they for
a time in diverse important points of Religion, such as our Saviors Death, his
Resurrection, the nature of his Kingdom, and the like? which drew from our
Savior that severeexprobration, Luke 24. 25. Oh fools, and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken! And if we take notice of the whole
body of Christians as they lie dispersed throughout the world, What ignorance
and error do they labor under? In how many things do they differ, both from the
truth and one another? Nay what abundance of darkness and blindness does attend
the most intelligent, and enlightened minds? Now (says Paul) we see through a
glass darkly, but then face to face: Now I know in part, but then shall I know
even as also I am known, 1 Cor. 13. 12. And if such inspired and extraordinary
persons as the Apostles were, were so imperfect, and weak in their knowledge,
What then may we imagine is the condition of such poor creatures as we are, who
never had those special aids vouchsafed us from heaven, which they were blessed
with? In a word, the mind of man, which heretofore was a region of sacred and
heavenly light, is now become a mere sink of darkness, folly, and error; which
does much contribute toward the rendering of his present State a State of
vanity.

2. He is vain in his memory, which is so frail, and treacherous in the matters
of God, that it presently loses those things which are commended to it. Whereas
it should be a secure treasury of sacred truths, it presently lets them slip as
if they were unworthy to be regarded. Hereof we have in instance in the
Israelites, of whom it is said, That they forgot Gods works, and the wonders
that he had showed them, Psalm. 78. 11. Though they were his works, and though
they were wondrous, yet they forgot them. And as if this were not sufficient to
discover their lamentable vanity, as to this particular, they went further,
they forgot even God himself, and set up other Gods in the room of him. Hos. 2.
13. I will visit upon her the days of Baalam, wherein she burnt incense to
them, and she decked her self with her earrings, and her jewels, and she went
after her lovers, and forgot me, says the Lord. This was both strange and sad:
but what will not man's nature do, when it is once delivered up to a state of
vanity? And this is an aggravation of its vanity, that whiles it is thus frail,
as to spiritual, and holy matters, it is more tenacious as to those which are
of an inferior nature. Whiles the most important, and weighty truths are
forgotten, a deal of putrid stuff, idle stories, and frivolous conceits, which
tend to the corruption of manners are retained and preserved. Oh unhappy
business, that ever a faculty designed by God for the retaining of high and
sacred matters should be made to serve such bad ends and purposes! Were it not
an unpleasant thing to see a rich Cabinet made the repository of dirt and dung?
Who would not be affected and moved with such a sight? Why, such a sight we
have before us in the memory of man; for whereas it was designed for a Cabinet
of sacred verities which were to be brought forth, and used according as
occasion required, it is become the repository of little else but dirt and
dung; that is to say, vicious, impure matter tending to pollute the mind,
tongue, and life, and render them much more unholy and faulty then they are.
Whereas it should minister to the mind in furnishing it (as there is need) with
an account of those useful and profitable truths which have been commended to
it; it does instead thereof offer it a deal of frothy, vain stuff, tending to
debauch it in those true and wholesome notions it is possessed of, and also to
divert it from the contemplation and pursuit of better things, which is another
particular thing wherein the vanity of man, in respect of his soul, does
express and show it self.

3. He is vain in his Affections, which run out upon improper objects, and that
with such vigor and strength, as is utterly unsuitable to the nature of them.
God has propounded to us such things as are fit for our affections to work on,
and as are worthy of their greatest fervor and heat; but instead thereof we
place them upon other things which are of a lower nature, and are utterly unfit
for them. He propounds to us himself, Christ, holiness, salvation, which are
things of highest moment and were worthy of our affections, were they a
thousand times better than they are: But instead of setting them upon them, we
set them upon such trivial things as riches, honors, pleasures, which is a
business so ignoble, and so far below us, that it is as if a Star should court
a dunghill, or a beam of the Sun embrace a straw. The young man loved his
Possessions more than Christ; Mat 19. 22. And some of the chief Rulers who
believed on Christ, did notwithstanding, love the praise of men more than the
praise of God, Joh. 12. 43. And Paul foretells, that in the last days some
shall love pleasures more than God, 2 Timothy 3. 4. And alas! how does the world
even swarm with such as each of these? The sons of Adam are generally become
Sons of Belial, without Government or restraint. Setting out some few holy
persons who addict themselves to God, and the life to come, the whole world is
set upon riches, honors, and pleasures, and that in such sort, that they but
despise other things, how great, or desirable soever they are in comparison of
them. It is exceeding sad it should be thus, and that which will ever remain as
an instance of great the degeneracy of mankind. Were it a thing uncertain, the
case were more tolerable, but it is not so: It is so notorious that there is no
room either to deny, or question it: We may lament it, but we cannot either
deny or question it. Besides the evidence we have of it in others, there is so
much of this temper in our own hearts and practices, that we have all cause to
sit down and say, Oh how vain a thing is man! How does he misplace his
affection! How does he set them upon shadows and dreams whiles the greatest
things which are every way worthy of them, stand by despised and rejected. This
is a lamentation, and let it be for a lamentation. Having thus spoken of the
Vanity of man, as to his interior part, we shall now consider what he is as to
the exterior. And,

2. He is vain in his Body, which is subject to many evils, which render its
present State very despicable, and uncomfortable. It Is subject not only to cold
and heat, hunger and thirst, disturbance and weariness, but likewise to
diseases, pain, sickness, weakness, death. What Physician in the world, is so
skilful as to give us a full account of all the maladies and distempers the
body of poor man is liable to? Upon the sin of our first parents, God passed
this sad and heavy, yet just and deserved sentence, Dust thou art, and unto
dust thou shall return again, Genesis 3. 19. And Tirinus, with others, tells us,
that the very moment wherein Adam sinned, he was visited with a Phthisis, or
consumption of the inwards, whereof he all along languished, and after dyed.
Whether this be true, or no, I shall not now inquire, but this is certain, that
ever since that unhappy business which was done in Eden, man has all along
labored under a world of maladies and distempers, which before he was free
from. One, with the Shunamites Son, complains of his Head, 2 King. 4. 19.
Another, with Jeremy, of his Bowels, Jer. 4. 19, Another, with David, of his
loins, Psalm. 38. 7. One is exercised with the Stone, another with the Gout,
another with the Palsy, and every one with either one malady or other. One we
have groaning in his chair, another in his couch, another in his bed. Oh the
dolorous nights and tedious days that the poor Sons of men endure! Oh their
restless tossings and turnings! Oh their heartbreaking sighs and complaints!
In the evening they cry out, would God it were morning, and in the morning,
would God it were evening, Job 7. 4. Notwithstanding the rapid and swift motion
of the Sun, yet through the greatness of their extremity, how slow do they
think its progress? They are ready to say of it, as the mother of Sisera did of
her Son, Why is his Chariot so long in coming? Why tarry the wheels of his
Chariots? Judge. 5. 28. How negligent do they think the Clock, how long the
hours? What house, chamber, bed, is there that has not been a witness of what
I now say? Nay, how ordinarily are the sons of men brought to such misery, that
being impatient of their lives, they do even court death and the grave? Who was
ever blessed with greater magnanimity and patience than Job; and yet what a do
did he keep with the grave to take him and close him up? Job 17. 14. I have
said to corruption, thou art my father, to the worm, thou art my mother and my
sister. So great was his misery, that having taken leave of his Relations and
house, he claims kindred with corruption and the worms. As when we have
occasion to use persons, and crave their assistance, we commonly claim kindred
with them: so Job having a desire, that corruption and the worms would take him
into their society, he thus claims kindred with them. The words imply as much
as if he had said, I had indeed other kindred, but they being less suitable to
my condition, I have taken my leave of them, and now desire to be owned and
entertained by you. Oh what dismal and unpleasant thing's the vanity of man's
present state put him upon desiring! What more distastful to flesh and blood
than Corruption? What more unpleasant companions than the Worms? Yet sometimes
his extremity is so great, that it puts him even upon the desiring of these
things. And when man has been exercised here with extremity a season, death
comes and puts a period to his life, and so he is carried forth to his grave,
and there left to dwell and converse with his new kindred, corruption and the
worms, with whom he is to continue till the heavens be no more. And herein the
hand of Providence is so steady, and vigorous, that there is no resisting of
it. Whether we be for it or against it, to the grave we must go, and there
abide. Should we all fall down on our knees, weep the eyes out of our heads,
and sigh till our hearts are ready to burst, in order to the preventing of it,
yet could we not prevail. What man is he that lives (says the Psalmist) and
shall not see death? shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?
Psalm. 89. 48. And says Job, I know that thou will bring me to death, and to
the house appointed for all living, Job 3. 23. Both which places hold forth
thus much, that as death is the portion, so the grave is the habitation
appointed for all the living. And what thing is there in the world that is more
evident? Where are those vast numbers of people that lived in the world before
us? Where are those thousands of young flourishing Gallants, that in their
prosperity despised death, and derided the grave? In what place do they remain,
or what is become of them? Are they not now fast under the power of those
things they once scorned and slighted? Oh how fully are they now convinced of
their own folly, and how far are they from the presumptuous conceits they
formerly maintained within them? Oh how much is the State of man altered from
what it was in innocence? Then he was in a sort immortal: so that as Austin
teaches, Poterat non mori, He might live, and not die: But now the case is
otherwise, now he is absolutely mortal, so that, non potest nisi mori, he
cannot but he must needs die. This is sad, but yet if God will hereby make way
for a better State, then either of the former wherein non potest mori, a State
wherein he may be wholly immortal, and above the power of death, it will do
well.

3. He is vain in respect of his worldly designs and hopes. He has an active
head, and a working heart, and according as he apprehends his interest lies, so
he imployes and lays out himself. And inasmuch as through the blindness and
error of his mind, he thinks his interest lies in possessing himself of the
riches, honors, and pleasures of the world, he forms various designs and
projects for the furnishing of himself therewith He contrives this, and the
other way for the raising of himself in the World, pursues it with care and
diligence, and promises to himself much felicity and comfort therefrom: and
whiles he is entertaining himself with apprehensions and thoughts of this
nature, the Providence of God comes like an armed man upon him, and presently
spoils him of those vain hopes he had so much pleased himself with: One man
lays out himself one way, another, another way: one lays out himself in
purchasing, another in improving, another in building, and each promises to
himself much success and contentment; but alas! before they are aware, they are
stopped in their design, and all falls to the ground. According to that of Job
17. 11. My days are past, my purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my
heart. Whereas he purposed to do this and the other thing, in order to the
rendering of him prosperous and happy in the World, and had possessed his heart
with some pleasant apprehensions hereof, the Providence of God engages against
him, and disappoints him. With which agrees that of David, Psalm. 146. 4. where
speaking of man with reference to his death, says, His breath goes forth, he
returns to his earth: in that very day his thoughts perish. But how do they
perish? What, does he then lose his cogitative faculty? Does he from
thenceforth cease to think? No, the meaning is, that his designs and projects,
and the expectations and hopes which he had raised therefrom, become
ineffectual and fruitless. And how many are the instances which the Scripture
(to go no farther) affords us hereof amongst projecting, and designing men? How
famous is the case of Nebuchadnezzar? Dan. 4. 29, 33. At the end of twelve
months he walked in the Palace of the Kingdom of Babylon. The King spoke and
said, is not this great Babylon, that I have built for the house of the
Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty? While the
word was in the Kings mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, saying, O King
Nebuchadnezzar, to thee it is spoken, The Kingdom is departed from thee. And
they shall drive thee from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of
the field; they shall make thee to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall
pass over thee, until thou know that the most high rules in the Kingdom of
men, and gives it to whomsoever he will. The same hour was the thing fulfilled
upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen, and
his body was wet with the dew of heaven; till his hairs were grown like eagles
feathers, and his nails like birds claws. Oh strange and affecting passage!
Where observe, 1. The extreme arrogance, and pride of this man. Though Daniel
from the vision which the King himself had seen, had declared unto him, that by
virtue of a decree of the most high, He should be driven from men, and his
dwelling should be with the beasts of the field, and that he should eat grass
as oxen, and the like,; yet the execution hereof through Gods great patience
being delaied, he walks in great Majesty and state upon the roof of his Palace
(which according to the flat building of those times he was capable of doing)
and from thence taking a view of the City, he cries out, Is not this great
Babylon that I have built? One would have thought his own vision interpreted as
it was by Daniel, and Gods patience for a whole year should have had better
influence on him. But what outward means are there, which either can, or will
prevail, unless God set in with them, and bless them? But see how his pride and
vain glory transports him into mistakes? He speaks as if he had built the City,
whereas it was Nimrod that built it; after which Semiramis enlarged,
beautified, and strengthn'd it: yet in regard he erected some edifices, hanging
gardens, orchards, walls, he talks as if he were the only Author and Founder of
it. And from this his present greatness, he promises himself, not only an
exemption from the vision, but likewise great felicity and prosperity. But 2.
see his remarkable disappointment and downfall. It Is said the same hour the
thing was fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar, and he was driven from men, and did
eat grass as oxen, etc. Oh what a sad disappointment was here! How far did he
fall short of what he aimed at? How miserably did his thoughts perish? First he
becomes a beast in respect of his disposition or manners, and then God makes
him a beast in respect of his condition or outward state. First he is mad with
pride, and vain glory: and then God in just judgment strikes him with another
kind of madness, so that being bereaved of his understanding, and thereby
rendered unfit for Kingly rule and dignity, he betakes himself into the
wilderness, and there for seven years lives like a wild beast; after the
expiration whereof, recovering his understanding, and humbling himself before
that God, whom he had by his pride offended, he returns to the Government of
his Kingdom. Oh how dangerous a thing is it, for the greatest persons to lift
up their heads against God! How soon can he divest them of their greatness, and
ruin them in their designs, and hopes? An instance like unto this, we have in
the spiritual, or modern Babylon, Rev. 18. 7, 8. She says in her heart, I sit
a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow. Therefore shall her plagues
come in one day, death and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt
with fire. Whiles she suggests, she is as happy as may be, and promises to her
self, that she shall be so still, without interruption or disturbance, she is
brought to utter desolation and ruin: and as for other reasons, so for this in
particular, that she put such confidence in her present state. And our Savior,
Luke 12. 19. 20. brings in a rich man saying Soul, Soul, thou have much goods
laid up for many years, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. But God said
unto him, Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose
shall those things be, which thou have provided? What reckoning did this man
make of his great possessions? How wealthy did he imagine himself to be? And
what strong felicities did he promise himself from those good things God had
bestowed on him? But whiles he is congratulating himself in the apprehensions
and hopes of his future contentments, he is cut off and bereaved of all, and so
he and his hopes fall to the ground at once. And how many thousands have there
been in the world to whom it has thus happened? After they have taken a deal of
pains in forming such and such contrivances and ways for the furthering of
their worldly interest, engaged themselves in the diligent pursuit thereof, and
promised themselves much happiness therefrom, they have been suddenly cut off,
and utterly bereaved of what they made full account to enjoy. How many have we
our selves known, who after they have erected such a building, purchased such
an estate, made such a bargain, got themselves out of debt, or done some
business from whence they promised themselves much happiness, have been
suddenly taken away, and thereby disappointed of those comforts they made such
reckoning of? This is a case that falls out so frequently, that there is no man
who has any acquaintance with the world, but he can afford us various
instances thereof.

4. He is vain in respect of his Labors and Endeavors. Upon the fall God
denounced this curse against him, In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat
bread, Genesis 3. 19. And this we every day see fulfilled in all places
wheresoever we come. One lays out himself in one employment, and another in
another: one drives on his interest this way, and another that; and each in
such a way as he thinks fittest to serve himself. Eccl. 1. 8. Solomon says,
All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it. And as it was then so it is
now: insomuch, that it is even unpossible to express the great, the various,
the tedious labors wherewith the sons of men exercise themselves. When we look
about us, and take a view of their proceedings, What a bussle and hurry do we
find them in? Some are busy upon the Sea, others at Land: some in their Shops,
others in the fields, and every one promises himself much advantage from the
way, wherein he is engaged. Like a company of Ants, they run up and down, and
hasten to and fro, and every one is in chase of a particular interest, from
which he makes account to receive, not only that which will countervail his
pains, but yield him very much happiness. Now what is the use of all this
labor and bussle? Does it render the Author thereof happy? Alas no, it yields
nothing but disappointment and vexation. Who more likely in regard either of
interest in God or his own wisdom, to direct his labors to a good issue than
Solomon? Who knew better how to manage them than he? And yet how ineffectual
his labors were, and how far they were from answering his end, he himself
shows, What profit (says he) has a man of all his labor which he takes
under the Sun? Eccles. 1. 3. Again, then I looked on all the works that my
hands had wrought, and on the labor I had labored to do: and behold all was
vanity and vexation of spirit, and there was no profit under the Sun. Yea, I
hated all my labor which I had taken under the sun: because I should leave it
unto the man that shall be after me Eccles. 2. 11, 18. So that notwithstanding
all his wisdom, parts, diligence, labors, they were so far from answering his
ends, that they were unprofitable, vexatious and hateful. And he was not herein
alone. How wise a people were the Jews, and yet to how little purpose did they
employ their labors? Wherefore (says the Prophet) do ye spend money for that
which is not bread and your labor for that which satisfies not? Isa. 55. 2.
And thus it was with the Babylonians, Jer. 51. 58. Its said, They labored in
the fire; that is, their labor amounted to no more than only the creating of
fuel to feed the fire. They took pains to make a fire to burn themselves.
There labor was so far from making for them that it made against them. And how
hard did the Disciples labor, and yet to how little purpose? Master (says
Peter) we have toyled all the night, and have taken nothing Luke 5. 5. But what
need of particular instances? How great are the labors of many amongst whom we
live, and yet to how small an account do they bring them? Oh how thoughtfull
and careful are they? What arts and projects do they use? What diligence and
pains are they at? How early do they rise and how late do they go to bed? How
restless and unwearied are they in the pursuit of their business? And when all
is done, their labors signify no more, than that they have kept a great deal
of stir to little or no purpose; for either their labors yield increase, or
not: if not, they are evidently in vain. If they do, what is the increase which
they yield, what does it it amount to, what can it do toward the rendering of
them truly happy? no more than a little air can do toward the filling of a
man's purse, or a little wind can do toward the satisfying of his appetite or
stomach. So that whether men's labors yield increase, or not, the issue is
still this that they are in vain.

5. He is vain in respect of his possessions, and enjoyments. He takes a deal
of pains to get an estate, and when he has it, he is vain in the enjoyment of
it. If it be small, he is vain: and if it be great, he is notwithstanding vain;
so that let it be what it will he is still vain. If he live, and enjoy it
himself, he meets with discomforts in it: and if he die and leave it, he knows
not who will have it, or what use will be made of it after he is gone. Perhaps
it falls into the hands of a wise man: and if it do, what great matter of
satisfaction can it be, that he has transmitted to him an heap of vanity,
which perhaps may make him both a fool and a beast? But it may be it falls into
the hands of a fool, that will be as prodigal in spending it, as he was
industrious in getting it. Nay it may be it falls into the hands of one that
will not only prodigally spend it, but likewise deride him, both for his care
and pains in getting it, and his frugal living upon it. Now this must needs
render a man very vain in that estate Providence is pleased to bestow on him,
and entrust him with. This David urges in the verse following the text: surely
every man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain: he
heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them; that is, so as to
possess and enjoy them. And this Solomon his son renders as the reason
wherefore he hated all the labor he had taken. Eccl. 2. 18, 19, 20. Yea (says
he) I hated all my labor which I had taken under the Sun, because I should
leave it unto the man that shall be after me. And who knows whether he shall
be a wise man or a fool? yet shall he have rule over all my labor wherein I
have labored, and wherein I have showed my self wise under the Sun. This is
also vanity. Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the
labor which I took under the Sun. And no marvel, for admit a man have a
plentiful estate, what comfort can he take in it, when he does not know, but he
who succeeds him may spend it to the dishonor of God, the disgrace of
religion, and the everlasting shame of himself who has taken pains for it, and
conveyed it to him? He may perhaps use it well, but withal it is to be
considered that he may do otherwise; he may employ it to the promoting of
wickedness and vice, and the eternal undoing of himself and others. And when a
man thinks of this what an allay must it needs be to the complacency he might
otherwise have in what he injoys, that it may, for ought he knows, after his
decease, be employed to such bad ends, and purposes? In these five particulars
I have evinced to you that man is vain: and might have have instanced in some
others, but these are sufficient to make good the point before us, which is,
that the present state of man is a state of extreme vanity.

4. Having in what went before showed in what respects man is vain, or how far
the vanity which is in him has diffused it self, I shall now give you an
account how he came to to be thus vain. And.

1. This is come to pass, partly through the proceedings of God with him in the
business of Creation. He having supreme rule, and liberty might make him in
what fashion he thought, and dispose of him to what State he pleased. As the
Potter has power over his clay to make thereof what vessels he sees good, so
had God power over the whole stock of mankind to dispose of them to what state
he should think fit. Romans 9. 21. Now in pursuance of the rule and liberty
belonging to him, he made him indeed happy, but it was not unalterably but
mutably, so that he remained at his own free will and choice either to stand or
fall. Upon which account the vanity he labors under at this day, is in some
sort to be ascribed unto God; not as a fault (that without blasphemy is not to
be imagined) but as the just exercise of his own liberty, who not being bound
to make him unalterably happy, might make him otherwise. So Job 5. 7. Man
(says Elipbaz) is born unto trouble as the sparks fly upward. In the Original
it is, (...) as if Eliphaz had said that Adam who was our first parent (and his
offspring) was born to trouble. As the sparks those sons of the coal (as the
Hebrew phrase is) were by the Law of Creation designed to fly upward, so was
Adam designed for trouble. And if he were designed for it, what can his
posterity expect? This the Psalmist is so affected with, that he expostulates
with God about it and says, wherefore have thou made all men in vain? Psalm.
89. 47. so our translations render it, but in the Original it is (...),
wherefore have thou created all the Sons of Adam in vain, or in vanity, or to
vanity? mark, created: the word in the Original is the very same with that,
whereby Moses sets forth the creation of our first Parents. Genesis 1. 27. so that
according to the Psalmist, man was in some sort created in a state of vanity,
which he here makes bold to reason with God about. Taking a serious view of the
affliction and mortality of man, he makes bold to expostulate with God about
it, and enquire of him wherefore he had disposed of him to such a vain state.
Not that he meant in the least to impeach God upon it, or to reflect upon the
stupendous and noble work of our creation but to inform himself of the true
reason of it, that so he migh the better comply with the will of God in it, and
do his duty. God was at his own liberty in our creation: he might have made our
condition better, and he might have made it worse, and therefore our business
is not to censure, or find fault with him, but to acquiesce and submit, and
take care that we perform the duties which such a condition calls for. He might
indeed have ordered things far otherwise then he has done: he might have made
every Cloud a Star, and every Star a Sun, and every Sun a thousand times bigger
and brighter then that we now have; but he has thought good to manage things
otherwise, and who is there that may find fault? And as we are to reason thus
as to other creatures, so we are to do it as to our selves: he has disposed of
us to a State of vanity, and we must bow our heads, and submit.

2. This is come to pass partly through the malice and activity of Satan, who
having undone himself, and envying the happiness of man, who was once in a
condition below him, solicited him to eat of the forbidden fruit, whereby he
knew he would incense God against him, and provoke him to throw him out of that
state of Happiness wherein he then was, into a state of Distress and misery.
That he should thus seek the ruin of an impotent creature, who had no way
offended him was a piece of extreme malice, and wickedness, and such as will
remain an argument of the great degeneracy, and baseness of his nature to all
eternity. However, he attempted it, and not without too much success. The
Serpent (says the Apostle) beguiled Eve through his subtilty. 2 Cor. 11. 3.
Behold here the early policy of this wretched Spirit! That he might carry on
his work with more security, he disguises himself, enters into the serpent, a
poor innocent creature, from which no evil at that time was to be suspected,
and so falls into a treaty with the woman, urges her to eat of the forbidden
fruit, and most unhappily prevails upon her and overcomes her, to the undoing
of her self, husband, and posterity. Under the sad fruits of that unhappy
intercourse, we all groan and sigh to this very day, and so are our posterity
like to do successively, even to the worldsend.

3. This is come to pass partly through man's sinful complying with Satan, and
deserting the state wherein he was created. Though it was (as you have heard) a
mutable state, yet it was a state of mavelous happiness, and such as he both
had liberty to abide in, and stood greatly bound to do it. But alas, he early
deserted it, and thereby threw himself down from a state of great (though
uncertain) happiness, to a state of great and certain misery. So that God may
say to him, as was said to the King of Babylon, How art thou fallen from Heaven
O Lucifer son of the morning? Isa. 14. 12. Oh what high and noble
qualifications was he once endued with? what communion and fellowship had he
with God? How fit was he for his work and service? But it continued thus but
for a season: by that time he was well possessed of that happy state God had
put him into, he threw himself out of it, and involved himself in a state of
sin and misery, which his Posterity remains in at this day. And the truth is,
it was just with God when we would not be content with such an happy state as
that wherein we were, to cast us into a far worse, and thereby show us the
meaning of our unthankfulness and folly.

4. This likewise comes to pass partly through the inability of the creatures
which God has put into subjection to him, and entrusted him with the use of,
to yield him any considerable happiness. Were the creatures free from vanity
themselves, he would be more happy in the enjoyment of them: but alas herein
he is distressed, that those things which should lift him up above a state of
vanity, are vanity themselves, what vain things are silver, and gold, houses
and lands, sheep and Oxen? what can they do toward the rendering of one who is
vain in himself, happy? They may indeed puff him up with high conceits, and
fill him with strong imaginations, but they cannot make him happy, Could they
have made him happy, what an happy man had Solom on been? for what a mighty
confluence had he thereof? yet so far was he from being truly happy in them,
that we have no man who makes such complaints of disappoin tment in that case
as he does. And it can not with all rational and sober persons but be a great
argument of the vanity of such things, that those who have the greatest share
of them are commonly the furthest from satisfaction. Indeed David. Psalm. 144.
15. speaking of such as have plenty and abundance of earth ly things, says,
Happy is that people that is in s(...)ch a case, yea happy is that people whose
God is the Lord. So our translators render it, but the Syriack turns it
interrogatorily; is the people happy that is in such a case? which does greatly
alter the sense, holding forth that such a people are not happy, no, by no
means: but those rather who have God for their Lord. But admit we are to read
the words as our translations offers them to us, diverse things are to be said.
As 1. Those people which have such abundance are happy judicio vulgi, in the
judgment of the common people, who value those outward things at such a rate as
if true happiness consisted in the enjoyment of them. So Mariana, and others.
Or 2. They may be said to be truly happy, but then it is not merely because
they enjoy such things, but because they are a sign of Gods love to them whose
favor renders those happy who are the objects of it. Which yet is to be
understood in a peculiar manner of the Israelites: for God, having promised
them all manner of temporal good things upon their obedience, their receiving
and enjoying thereof was to be looked upon as a token of his gracious
acceptance of them and their service. Thus Muis: but whether this holds as to
others, who have no such special promises of temporal good things made to them,
is to be considered. But 3. What ever the sense of the former part of the verse
is, there seems to be a correction or revocation in what follows, yea happy is
that people whose God is the Lord. As if the Psalmist had expressed himself
thus; I said indeed that those who have such earthly things are happy, but I
should rather have said, they are happy who have him for their Lord who is the
fountain and Doner of such things. So Gejerus. In a word, earthly things may
afford some small transient happiness but they cannot afford us any thing like
true happiness neither can they afford us any competent relief against the
vanity of our present state. This appears in this, that the wisest and soberest
men who have been the meetest judges in the case, have declined them and turned
their backs upon them. Agur desires God he will not give him riches, Prove. 30.
8. And when God seemed to offer Moses as great riches, honors, and pleasures
as any Nation in the world did afford, he refuses them, and betakes himself to
a course and state wherein he was like to meet with great afflictions and
troubles, Heb. 11. 24, 26. Now is it to be imagined that wise men would ever
decline the great things of the world, and turn their backs upon them when
offered to them, in case they apprehended they could contribute any thing
toward the increase of their happiness or the bettering of their condition?
No, we may rather make account (especially, they being so grateful to flesh and
blood as they are) they would pursue them with all intentness and diligence,
and leave no stone unturned, whereby they might procure them. The sum then of
these particulars is this, that God, satan, man, and the creatures under his
power, do all in a fort conspire and unite in this conclusion, that the present
state of man shall be a state of extreme vanity. And oh poor man, how
unavoidable, and incurable is his vanity (during this present state) like to
be, when such great powers and forces do concur to the effecting of it! Had
only one of these appeared in it, it would have found him work enough: But that
Heaven, Hell, Earth, God, Devils, man's own self, and the creatures he is
possessed of, should all join against him, and concur to the promoting of his
vanity, how sad must his condition needs be!

1. Use. Having dispatched the Doctrinal part of this discourse, and therein
showed the meaning of vanity, how vain man is, in what respect he is vain, and
how he came to be so; I shall now descend to the Uses. And the first may be for
information, to acquaint us with these following heads, which result as so many
particular inferences from the general point: And,

1. If man be so vain, or in such a state of vanity as you have heard; then
what a wonder is it that the great God, who is Lord of Heaven and Earth should
have such regard to him as he has, and concern himself in his welfare as he
does. So low has poor man brought himself, that he is become a very heap of
sin and misery. Under what sad and affecting terms does the Scripture represent
him to us? According thereunto, as to his spiritual state, he is a Rebel, Isa.
30. 9. a Traitor, Mal. 2. 11. Miserable, Romans 7. 24. Undone, Isa. 6. 5. And
then as to his temporal state, what a despicable thing does the Scripture make
him? According thereunto he is a Shadow, Psalm. 109. 23. a Worm* Psalm. 22. 6.
Dust and Ashes, Genesis 18. 27. And what a sad and pitiful thing must that
creature needs be, whose nature and condition is such as falls within the
compass of these terms? What words can be used which may render the state of a
creature more vile and contemptible? In case you would sink a creature down
into a state of greatest baseness and distress, what terms could you use,
whereby you might do it with more advantage? There are two things which concur
to the rendering of his condition extremely unhappy: first his sin, and that
renders him detestable; then his Misery, and that renders him despicable. Now,
that notwithstanding both these, his Sin and Misery, his detestableness, and
despicableness, the great and holy God should stoop so low as to take care of
him, and concern himself in his welfare and happiness; is that which we are to
look upon as a piece of rare and wonderful condescension. Its condescension in
him to take notice of the things that are in Heaven. This the Psalmist
expresses with no small emphasis and affection, Who (says he) is like unto the
Lord our God, who dwells on high: who humbles himself to behold the things
that are in heaven? Psalm. 113. 5, 6. In the supreme heaven (for of that as Dr.
Hammond thinks the Psalmist here speaks) there are matters of an high nature:
There are blessed Saints, holy Angels, fountains of joys, rivers of pleasure,
and things so glorious that they cannot be uttered; and yet it is a piece of
wonderful condescension in God to stoop so low as to take notice of them. Oh
then what is it for him to take notice of fuch poor trivial things as we are,
who labor under so much sin and misery? What are the best of us, but a little
animated clay, or living dust, ready every hour to resolve into putrefaction
and rottenness. And yet notwithstanding this; the great God should look after
us, and concern himself about us, is that which may for ever exercise our
admiration and wonder. This holy men have been so affected with, that they have
even been astonished at it. Job having discoursed of his own afflicted and
miserable state, he cries out, What is man that thou should magnify him, and
that thou shoudlst set thine heart upon him? Job 7. 17. As if he had said, Lord
the State of man being so despicable and miserable as it is, how comes it to
pass that thou take notice of him, so as to contend with him and afflict him?
As he is unworthy to be accounted thy friend, so he seems altogether unmeet to
be thine enemy. For thee to make him thine adversary, and thereby take him, as
it were, into competition with thy self, argues thou make greater reckoning
of him than he deserves. Alas, such is the meaness of his condition, that he is
unworthy thou should trouble thy self with him, or be concerned about him*
And that thou art pleased to keep such a do with him, is that which fills me
with no small admiration. And to the same purpose is that (...) David, Psalm. 8.
4. where upon his contemplation of the Heavens, the Moon, and Stars, and his
considering them to be the work of God hands, he cries out, What is man that
thou a(...) mindful of him, and the son of man that tho(...) visitest him?
Taking a view of the Heavens and considering their spaciousness and vastness
their rapid and orderly motion; and also taking a view of the Celestial
bodies, and considering their magnitude, light, and influence; and then
weighing with himself, that God was the maker and disposer both of the one and
the other, he breaks forth into wonder that ever God should have such regard to
poor man, and yield him such respect as he has been pleased to express to him.
And certainly there is nothing in all the world which in its own nature is more
apt to beget admiration than this very thing. That God being so exceeding high
and lifted up, and man being so impure and despicable, God should
notwithstanding show him such respect as he has done, is that which may
exercise our thoughts. That notwithstanding all his unworthiness and baseness,
God should set his heart upon him, send his own dear Son out of his bosom to
redeem him, favor him with a Covenant of grace, entrust him with so many
precious ordinances, give him dominion over the creatures, and make such
provision for him, both as to his holy and comfortable living here, and his
obtaining and enjoying of highest bliss and happiness herereafter, is that
which will ever remain a wonder. Had man been an holy Angel, for God to have
showed such respect to him, had not been so considerable: but for him to be
such a creature as he is, and yet to do it; nay to pass by the fallen Angels, and
after their rejecting to express so great respect to a creature of an inferior
nature, whose present state is so exceeding vain, is that which we are never to
mention without wonder and praise.

2. If man be in such a state of vanity, then this shows us what little reason
men have to carry their heads so high, and behave themselves so loftily and
proudly as they do. A low condition and an high spirit are bad companions.
There is nothing more unseemly, or provoking. And yet how ordinarily do we find
these two united in men? How frequently do we see an high spirit attending on a
low condition? How miserable are the generality of men, and yet how well do
they think of themselves? What a graceless, unsanctified wretch was the
Pharisee, and yet how does he boast of his own righteousness? Luke 18. 11. And
what a distressed state was the Pastor of the Church of Laodicea in? He was
wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked: But how far was he from thinking
any such thing? He was so far from that, that he looked upon himself as rich,
and increased with goods, and having need of nothing. Rev. 3. 17. And such as
the apprehensions of men are, such is their carriage. How contemptuously do
they carry themselves both toward God, and one another. As for God,
notwithstanding all his greatness, Majesty, and Glory, how light do they make
of him? Who (says Pharaoh) is the Lord that I should obey his voice? Exodus 5.
2. And as for their brethren, how do they dospise them? They make no reckoning
of them they do but puff at them Psalm. 10. 5. And then for the good creatures
of God which he has given them for their sustentation and use, how do they
slight them and trample upon them, as if they were altogether below them, and
unfit for them? This thing is not good enough for them, and the other thing is
not good enough for them, whereas there state is such that they deserve nothing
at all. What choice food was the Manna God vouchsafed the Israelites in the
Wilderness? Such was the delicacy of it, that the Psalmist calls it Angels food
Man (says he) did eat Angels food, Psalm. 78. 25. So our Translations, as well
as diverse others, renders it: But the word in the Original is (...) which
Bootius says is never used of Angels, but still of great, and eminent men. And
so the sense is this, that God in furnishing the Israelites with Manna, gave
them such food as was fit to be set before the greatest and eminentest men,
even Princes and Nobles. Notwithstanding this, how little did they value it?
Our souls (say they) loatheth this light bread* Number. 21. 5. Not being of such a
substantial, solid, nature as the food they had in Egypt, they contemned and
despised it. And nothing is more ordinary with carnal men, than when God out of
his bounty has furnished them with such accommodations as are a thousand times
too good for them, to disdain and slight them, as utterly unworthy to be made
use of, or regarded by them. Now what does this high, contemptuous carriage in
men discover, but that they are unacquainted with their present state? Nay,
what does it but discover, that their present State is a State of vanity? For,
for men to be so miserable, and yet to carry themselves so highly and proudly,
is not only an aggravation of their own misery, but an evidence of it.

3. If man be in such a state of vanity, then this shows us what little reason
men have to esteem so highly of, and to be so much in love with their present
state. Were it a state of true happiness, they might with more reason esteem of
it, congratulate themselves in it, and be pleased with the thoughts of its
continuance: but it is much otherwise, its a state of extreme vanity. I told
you in the beginning the meaning of vanity: it still imports either sin, or
misery, or both. And such is the nature of man's present state that it
comprehends both these.

1. Its a state of sin, which is the greatest evil, and the worst thing in all
the world. Would you say the worst of a person, or thing you can, you must call
it sinful, which of all Epithets continues in it the greatest evil. The Apostle
therefore having occasion to speak of sin, and wanting a word to reach its
nature, without making use of any paraphrase or circumlocution, describes it by
it self. By the commandment (he tells us) sin becomes (...), Exceeding or
transcendently sinful, Romans 7. 13. The nature of some things is so odious, and
so well known, that it cannot be set forth by any name so well as by their own.
Would a man set forth the loathsomness of a toad how could he do it better than
by telling you it is a toad, the thing it self being become so hateful to us
that it is usually made the illustration of what is so? And thus it is in this
case: such is the odiousness of sin, and so well is it known, that there is no
name so fit to describe it as its own. When we have to do with a matter that is
full of evil, and can meet with any thing which is known to have more evil in
it, or which is known to be equal to it in evil, we may describe it by that,
but when there is nothing which reaches it, then we must describe it by its
self. Now this is the nature of sin that it exceeds all other evils: and that
in this respect that as it is most contrary to the nature, will, and interest
of God, so it is the cause of all other evils, so that whatever evil we meet
with, or endure, it results therefrom. Notwithstanding which, how do we abound
with it in our lives? such is the pravity, and vitiousness of our natures that
we are apt to be overcome by every temptation, and miscarry upon every
occasion. There is an habitual, settled aversness in us to good, and proneness
in us to evil, by the strength and power whereof we are even continually
offending. What period of our our age, what condition, ordinance, duty,
undertaking, performance have we not filled and polluted with sin? who (says
David) can understand his errors? Psalm. 19. 12. There is no man so good but he
has his errors, and that in such a degree that they exceed his understanding.
We have all of us exercised our selves so long in erring that we understand not
what we have done. Our errors are so many that they cannot be numbered, so great
they cannot be measured, and so vile that they cannot be expressed. And hereby
we are become obnoxious to divine justice, and liable to everlasting damnation.
And things being thus, how should our present state choose but be a state of
vanity?

2. Its a state of misery. We sin, and God in justice punishes for it. We fill
our lives with impiety and error, and God fills them with misery and trouble.
We have found out various methods and ways whereby to offend and provoke him,
and he has found out as many methods and ways whereby to afflict and disquiet
us. Few and evil (says Jacob) have the days of the years of my life been, Genesis
47. 9. And (says Job) Man that is born of a woman is of few days and full of
trouble. Job. 14. 1. And (says Moses) all our days are passed away in thy
wrath. Psalm. 90. 6. So that according to the sentence of these three great, and
famous men, evil, and trouble, and wrath are the attendents of those days we
live here in the world. It is but a little, little while we are to continue
here. By that time we are well got into the World, we are going out. Our Cradle
stands so near our graves, that the one is ready to receive us from the other.
And as if this were not sufficient to prevent our being fond of our present
state, that little, uncertain time we do abide here, is attended with very many
and great afflictions. Oh the distressed condition of poor Mortals! How unhappy
and miserable are we! One is afflicted one way, and another another way. One is
afflicted in his Soul, another in his body, another in his name, another in his
relations, another in his estate, another in his affairs and some in several,
nay in all of these, but to be sure all in some or other of them where is the
man that has not his particular grievance? Where is he that can say I am free
from affliction? I know God does proceed variously with men, afflicting some
spiritually, and other corporally, some more, and others less, but yet where is
the man that is altogether free? Could your ears but reach through the Earth,
and hear the many hideous cries, and sad complaints that are therein, you would
be so far from making any question of what I now say, that you your selves
would break forth into cries and complaints, and say Oh, the miserable
condition of the Sons of Men! Oh the strange afflictions that do attend them!
Oh the heavy and sore troubles they are exercised with! Now this being the
nature of man's present state what reason has he to set his heart upon it? what
reason has he to affect it, or be pleased with it? He that can love such a
state as this, can love that which is not only a state of sin, but a state of
misery.

2. Use. If this be so, that the present state of man is such a state of
vanity, then it may be useful to us by way of Lamentation to stir us all up to
bewail our selves upon the account of the sad condition wherein we are. There
was a time when our state was a state of happiness, during which we were free
both from sin and misery, bathing our selves in the streams of Paradise,
enjoying sweet communion with God and delighting our selves in those high and
noble contentments he was then pleased to favor us with. Then we had neither
sin to grieve us, nor misery to annoy us. We had then none of that ignorance,
unbelief, hardness of heart that now we are troubled with: we had then none of
that pain, sickness, weakness, that now we labor under. Such was our state
then, that we had no evil either of one sort or other to disquiet or trouble
us, but were even as happy as our very hearts could wish. We had then no
occasion of lamentation, or sorrow. We had then nothing to do, but to
contemplate the perfections of our Creator, hold communion with him, and praise
him for his goodness to us. But Oh how is the state of things altered!
Imitating the fallen Angles, we left our first state, and sunk our selves down
into a state of extreme vanity. That Star which stood shining in an high and
pleasant orb, is now falen down into a dunghill, and become the object of
derision and scorn. Oh how great was our happiness, but how short was our
continuance in it! many learned and judicious writers think that man fell the
very same day he was created. Hugh Braughton is confident in it that he
continued not a whole day in his innocence: and tells us from Maimonides that
all the Jews are of one opinion, and that the Greek Fathers go the same way.
And the modern Greeks their common maxim touching this matter is (...), that
he was formed and deformed one and the same day. And the Psalmist tells us,
Psalm. 49. 12. That man being in honor abides not So our translators render
it, but it may be rendered Adam being in honor lodges not in it. Whereupon
some will have it to be spoken with reference to the first man, who they think
remained so small a time in Paradise that he did not so much as lodge one night
in it. But this some look upon as uncertain, others as unprofitable. Gataker in
his Cinnus disputes against it, urging the things which were done betwixt the
creation of man and his fall, which he thinks required more time then one day
for the effecting ofthem. However this is undeniable that man's continuance in
his happiness was very short. Admit he continued in it till the next day, or
till that day seven night, or till the thirteenth day, or forty days, or twenty
years, as some have imagined, what is that in comparison of the time that has
passed since the creation? Nay in comparison of the time he would have remained
in it had he not fallen. Oh how sad a thing was it that he should be put into
such a state of happiness, and thrown so soon out of it! But he may thank
himself for it: for had he continued in his obedience, he had also continued in
his happiness, but deserting the one, he was deservedly thrown out of the
other, which was a thing of such unhappy influence both to himself and his
posterity, that we have all cause to sigh and mourn under it whiles we have a
day to live. Oh where is our ancient glory, what is become of our makers image,
where are those pure and spotless excellencies we were once endued, and adorned
with? Oh where is our primitive knowledge, righteousness, and holiness? what is
become of our peace, health, and immortality! where are all those happy
contentments, we were blessed with? Alas, they are all gone, and we miserable
upon the account thereof. And things being thus, what remains but that with the
Israelites declining our ornaments, and clothing our selves in Sackcloth we
sit down in the dust and bewail our selves? If upon the loss of a friend, or
some outward temporal enjoyment, we weep, sigh, and wring our hands, what then
should we do upon such a loss as this which is enough to break any man's heart
that understands it, and make him go mourning to his grave? Were this matter
well considered, what lamentation would it cause in all houses, streets, and
places? What shedding of tears, and wringing of hands would there then be? What
a valley of Bochim or Mourners would the world then become? We should then hear
all persons crying out alas, alas! Woe unto us for we are spoiled! And, woe unto
us for we are undone! We indeed were happy, but would not remain so, and now we
must bear the smart of our ingratitude and folly. And that which aggravates the
business, is this, that we have not only lost the happiness we were possessed
of, and brought our selves into a state of present misery, but (which is a
thousand times more considerable) have rendered our selves liable to a state of
eternal misery. Might our lives and misery end together, our loss (though
great) were not comparable to what it now is: but it is far otherwise; when we
have lived here a life of great misery and troubles, we shall then (if special
grace prevent not) enter upon a life far more insupportable and grievous. Poor,
ignorant people use to say their condition is so bad here, it will sure be good
hereafter: And oh happy were it for them might it so prove! But it is not
present misery will excuse us from future. When we have here lived the most
afflicted, uncomfortable lives, we shall then (if grace prevent not) enter into
a condition a thousand times more tormenting and grievous. And oh that men
would consider this, and lay it to heart! Oh that they would weigh what
happiness they have lost, what misery they have already brought themselves
into, what farther misery is yet before them, and that they would be duly
affected therewith! But alas, this is one part of our misery that we are not
sensible of our misery: whence it comes to pass that whereas we should bewail
it, and seek for relief against it, we remain securely and contentedly in it.
Such is the regardlesness of the poor birds, that they are often feeding, nay
playing when the fowler is taking aim at them, and so lose their lives, whilst
they might with greatest felicity preserve them. And thus it is with men: such
is their regardlesness of their welfare, that they eat, drink, play, loyter,
trifle, when justice is directing its arrows against them, and so perish whilst
they might (if they would bestir themselves as they ought) escape and do well.
Oh that the gracious God would open the eyes of men, awaken their Consciences,
teach them compassion toward themselves, that they may look after their own
safety, and not suffer them to go on, adding sin to sin, and misery to misery,
till they are past help and recovery.

3. Use. If it be so, that the present state of man is such a State of vanity,
then it may be useful to us by way of Exhortation, to put us upon the discharge
of the following Duties, And.

1. Let us be base and vile in our own eyes, abhor our selves, and repent in
dust and ashes. Lets take a view of our vanity in all its dimensions and
aggravations, be ashamed of it, and loath our selves for it. What, vain really,
universally, in the best condition, all the life long, and remedilesly (during
this present state) Oh doleful condition! What, vain in soul, body, designs,
labors, possessions, Oh heartbreaking tidings! What wall is there that has
not a Mean tekel upon it? Which way can we turn our eyes, or what can we look
on, but we may read our own vanity? If we look within us, we find our selves
full of vanity, and if we look without us, we find our selves composed with it:
So that let us turn our selves which way we will, we find it still before us.
If we turn to the one hand, we see our sin: if to the other, our punishment. If
we look this way, we see our folly and wickedness: if the other, our distress
and misery. There Is not a bit we eat, a drop we drink, or an hour we live, but
death is ready to arrest us, the grave to receive us, and eternity to swallow
us up. And is this to be looked upon as a small matter? Oh no, this is an
affecting business. This is that which may make the proudest gallants in the
world to throw off their bravery, cloth themselves in black, and hang down
their heads to the ground, saying, Oh poor creatures, what a sad condition are
we in? How have we been misstaken in our selves? We thought we had had a
mountain that would never have been removed, that we had had goods laid up for
many years, that we might without care or regatd, have eaten and drunken and
been merry, and that to morrow would have been as this day, and much
abundantly: But alas, we see we are in a mistake, we are already in a state of
vanity, and know not how soon we may be in the grave and hell! Oh that men were
wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!
Deuteronomy. 32. 29. This is not a business fit to be slighted, or disregarded: No, it
is such as calls for our most serious thoughts, and deepest resentments. And if
things be at this pass, we are to consider what manner of opinion we are to
have of our selves, and what manner of respect we are to bear toward our
selves; Whether we are to honor or despise, affect or abhor our selves? Were
our state a state of happiness, we might esteem of, and bear respect unto our
selves in a way answerable to it: But being its a state of extreme vanity,
which we have by our own folly and wilfullness brought our selves into; what
remains, but that we even despise and loath our selves as a company of fools,
who preferred a state of vanity before a state of happiness? When a person that
is possessed of a fair and plentiful estate, does by his prodigality and vice
consume and wast it, and make himself a beggar, with what indignation and
disdain do men look upon him? What a fool and a beast do they count him, that
to please his lusts, would throw himself out of such a condition of plenty and
honor, into a condition of poverty and disgrace? Nay, and many times such a
person himself when he comes to consider things a little, and weigh what his
condition was, and what it is, looks upon himself with the same eye, esteeming
himself as no less than mad, that would go and bring himself into such distress
and misery. How ordinary is it for a man when he has played the Prodigal, and
comes to himself to loath and condemn himself, nay to be ready to offer
violence to himself, that he should be such a fool, and have so little regard
to his own welfare? And is not this our case? Have we not played the Prodigals,
and that in matters of a thousand times higher nature than those of the World?
Have we not sinned away that fair and goodly patrimony that our heavenly Father
was pleased to bestow upon us? Have we not ruined and undone our selves? Have
we not thrown our selves from a state of happiness and honor, to a state of
misery and shame? What then remains but the suting our apprehensions and
affections to our carriage and demerits, we look upon our selves as a company
of fools, who by our prodigality and madness, have undone our selves, and upon
that account despise, and loath our selves?

2. If it be so that our present state is a state of vanity, then let us
endeavor to alienate our hearts from it, and become dead to it. Were it a
state of happiness we might like it and love it, and endeavors the securing of
it to us: But being a state of extreme vanity, what reason have we to set our
hearts on it? David has an earnest expostulation with the sons of men about
this matter: How long (says he) will you love vanity? Psalm. 4. 2. If it be
proper for us to love such things as temptations, sin, sickness, weakness,
pain, dishonor, trouble, death, and the like, then we may love this present
state, but if otherwise, then it concerns us to lay a restraint on our selves
as to this particular. To this purpose is that of the Apostle, Love not the
world, neither the things that are in the world: if any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. If God favor us with the good
things of the world, such as health, strength, liberty, peace, riches, honor,
we are to be thankful for them, and take care we make good use of them: but we
must not set our hearts on them. They do not make any such alteration in our
state, as we imagine. If we have a lesser portion of that, our State is a State
of vanity: and if we have a greater portion of them, even the greatest
abundance, we are still at the same pass, our State then likewise is a State of
vanity. If we gain the things of the world, we gain but vanity, and if we lose
them, we lose but vanity: If we have them, we have but vanity, and if we are
without them, we are but without vanity: So that whether we gain them, lose
them, have them, or are without them, our State is still a State of vanity. And
shall we go and set our hearts upon vanity? No, lets never be guilty of so much
folly and weakness. Let not either men or Angels have occasion to charge us
with any such indiscretion or madness. If we will be bestowing our affections,
lets do it upon such things as are worthy of them. It is observable how happily
David's practice agreed with his Doctrine: It was he, you know, that furnished
us with the point I have been insisting on: And how did his affections work
toward his present State? Did his Doctrine and practice clash with each other?
Had he any great value for that condition which he represented to be a State of
vanity? No, Surely, (says he) I have behaved and quieted my self as a child
that is weaned of his mother: my soul is even as a weaned child, Psalm. 131. 2.
So our Translations renders it, but in the Hebrew the words run in the form of
an imprecation, (...) if I have not behaved, etc. As if he had said, if I have
affected great things, as my enemies suggest, then let me be dealt with
accordingly. For the occasion of the Psalm (as Muis notes) seems to be this,
that some of Saul's Nobles charged David with an affectation of the Kingdom, and
an aspiring after great things. Hereupon he makes his appeal to God, and draws
him to witness, whether he were guilty of any such thing, praying that if he
were, he would avenge himself on him, and punish him for it. Some, conceiving
there is an Apo^^opesis in the words, suppress the imprecation: but others
mention it, thinking it is contained in the word (...) which they render,
reward: As if David had said, if I have done any such thing, let God reward my
soul accordingly, or let God recompense it upon my soul, or let God deal with
me in a way answerable thereunto. But whether Interpreters do suppress the
imprecation, or mention it, this is evident, that there is one employed in the
word which affords great Emphasis to them. The words imports as much as if the
Psalmist had said, Lord, if I have been guilty of any such ambition as my
enemies charge me with, then let me be disappointed, let me lose thy protection
and favor, nay, let me for ever perish. By this you see how his Doctrine and
practice a greed. As he taught that the present State of man is a State of
vanity, so he carried himself toward it accordingly. Saul's servants thought he
had thirsted after the Kingdom, and such like matters, but they were mistaken.
Even as the child that is weaned, disregards the breast, so did he the things
of the world. He had Saul's Crown, Throne, and Kingdom before him, but he valued
them not any farther, than he might serve the Counsel of God, and be useful to
his interest. He saw such emptiness in them, and all worldly things, that he
made light of them. And if we will carry our selves like wise men, we must do
the like. Taking a view of the things of the world, and weighing the extreme
vanity thereof, we must keep our hearts at a distance from them. And inasmuch
as our present State in regard of the inability of the things of the world to
make it otherwise, is a State of vanity; we must in like manner keep our hearts
loose from it, and not suffer them to be inamoured with it. There is not any
such desireableness in it, that we should let them out upon it, and therefore
looking upon it as an un(...)t object for them, we must reserve them for such a
State as is worthier of them.

3. If our present State be such a State of vanity, then let us look out after,
and labor for an happier and a better State. By how much we find this State
the worse, by so much we should take the more pains for a better. The worse the
house is we live in, the more we lay out our selves in providing one that is
more commodious. And thus we are to proceed in the present business. The more
vain and inconvenient we find our present State, the more we are to concern our
selves in inquiring after, and seeking for an interest in a better. That there
is a State of happiness, and that it is a desirable thing to be in it, is a
principle so deeply rooted in Nature, and so generally acknowledged by mankind,
that I shall not give any one thanks to grant it. Men may as soon cease to be
men, as abolish out of them either the general notion or desire of happiness. I
know men differ greatly in their apprehension of happiness, some conceiving it
consists in this, others in that, yet all agree both that there is a State of
happiness, and that it is desirable to be in it. And for the mistakes which
the sons of men labor under concerning it, God has afforded us relief in his
word, especially in the Gospel, whereby Jesus Christ has (as the Apostle
teaches) brought life and immortality to light, 2 Timothy 1. 10. The world had
some notice of it before, partly from the light of nature, partly from the
writings of the Prophets; but that was only a small hint, in comparison of what
Christ by himself, and his Apostles, has afforded us in the New Testament.
Therein he does not only declare that there is such a state, but likewise urges
us, and that with great importunity to seek after it, and labor for it. Seek
you first (says he) the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you. Mat. 6. 33. And, strive to enter in at the
strait gate: for many I say unto you will seek to enter in, and shall not be
able. Luke 13, 24. And, Fight the good fight of Faith, lay hold on Eternal
life, whereunto thou art also called, and have professed a good profession
before many witnesses. 1 Timothy 6. 12. O how good is God, that to relieve us
against this state of vanity, has been pleased to provide for us a state of
happiness: and oh how ungrateful, and unworthy were we, if we should not so far
comply both with his kindness and our own welfare, as to endeavor to to attain
to it! what were this but to withstand God, and our own Salvation at once?

But you will say, I believe there is a state of happiness, and am desirous of it,
and would gladly enjoy it, but what must I do to attain to it?

Answ. For the directing of you herein, I might treat you with many
particulars, but I shall offer you only these few. And,

1. If you would attain to a state of happiness, look up to God with an eye of
faith, so as to cast your selves upon him through Jesus Christ, both for the
delivering of you from your present vanity, and the raising of you up to a
state of glory and blessedness. He has a better state to prefer you to, and if
you will but look up to him with an eye of Faith, he will both entitle you to
it, and in his own due time give you possession of it. So graciously has he
ordered things for us that the state of man by Christ, is in some respects
better than what it was in innocence. To this purpose is that Romans 5. 17. If by
one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they that receive abundance of
grace and of the gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one Jesus Christ.
Here the the Apostle sets the second Adam over against the first, and shows
that the former was not so able to work death, but the latter is more able to
work life. The words imply as much as if he had said, if the first Adam, who
was but a mere man were able by his sin to work death, and give strength and
power thereunto, how much more is the second Adam who is God, and able by his
righteousness to work life? Nay he is so far from being unable to equal the
first Adam herein, that he is able to raise us up to an higher, and nobler life
than the state of innocence afforded. Indeed the life which that state afforded
was a pleasant and sweet life, but it was far short of that life which Christ
has purchased for us. That life was of a more terrestrial, sensual, uncertain
nature, but this is such as is celestial, spiritual, and eternal. The
difference betwixt them is so great, that there is no comparison betwixt the
one and the other. So that our fall through Christ is so far from being
prejudicial to us, that it has conduced to our greater happiness. The selling
of Joseph into Egypt, you know, made way for his advancement: and so our fall
through Christ has made way for our greater happiness. Oh how good is God that
he has not only provided a remedy against our fall, but thereby made way for
the lifting of us up to a better state! Well, this happiness which God in
Christ has provided for us, and which is so exceeding great we must seek to
attain to in the use of those means he has prescribed, amongst which this is
one, that we should with an eye of Faith look up to him, upon the doing
whereof, he has promised to bestow it on us. Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me (says
he) and be ye saved all the ends of the Earth. So our tranlation renders it,
but in the Hebrew it is (...), which Paguine renders in the future tense, Salvi
eritis, ye shall be saved. But whether we take the words in the imperative or
future tense, they imply as much as if God had said, whosoever throughout the
whole Earth will look up unto me with an eye of Faith, owning me for the true
God, and casting himself upon my mercy in Christ Jesus, for justification and
acceptance, he shall be saved. And this is one of those means he has
prescribed, in order to the delivering of us from our state of vanity, and the
raising of us up to a state of happiness.

2. If you would attain to a state of happiness, then carry your selves holily
during this your state of vanity. I told you in the beginning, that the present
state is a state of exerecise and service: and according as you behave your
selves, herein God will deal with you as to a state of happiness. Though he be
marvellously gracious and liberal in bestowing of happiness, yet such is the
purity of his nature, that he will not grant it unto any but such as are holy.
Such is the indispensable necessity of holiness to the obtaining of happiness,
that let men be what they will, if they have not holiness they cannot arrive at
happiness: without it, the Apostle tells us, no man shall see the Lord. Heb.
12. 14. So much does God stand upon holiness, that according as men are
furnished therewith, so he deals with them, as to their eternal condition. On
the one hand, let their degree in the World be never so high, yet if they want
holiness, they must never come to happiness: and on the other hand, let their
degree in the World be never so mean, yet if they have holiness, they are sure
to be happy. And therefore as ever you mean to be happy hereafter, see that you
are holy here. Now for the preventing of mistake, and that you may the better
secure your selves of holiness, I shall in a few words acquaint you what
holiness is and wherein it consists. And it is such a quality as imports
separation, or devotedness to religious uses. It consists in a withdrawing of
our selves from common and profane matters and a giving up our selves to the
worship and service of God. We may know what sanctified or holy persons are, by
knowing what the things are which fall under that denomination. Sanctified or
holy things are things which are separated from common uses, and devoted to
such as are religious. And so Sanctified, or holy persons are such persons as
withdrawing themselves from profane and common things, do give ^p themselves to
God, and the serving of his will and glory. Know (says David) that God has
set apart him that is Godly [or holy] for himself. Psalm. 4. 3. Whereby we see
that a godly or holy man is one that is set apart for God, to attend on him,
and minister to him in the duties and ways he has prescribed and appointed.
And there is such necessity of our being thus set apart, and addicted to God,
that there is no expecting happiness without it. If we will withdraw our selves
from common uses, and addict our selves to communion with God and his service,
we may attain unto that happiness he has designed for his sanctified, and holy
ones: but if neglecting him, we give up our selves to the pursuit of the World,
and the sinful practices thereof, instead of being delivered from the present
vanity under which we labor, we must make account to enter into a state a
thousand times more sad, and grievous. Instead of passing from a state of
vanity to a state of happiness, we must look to pass into a state of
superlative, and extreme misery. And how sad is the condition of that man whose
portion here is vanity, and whose portion hereafter must be superlative and
endless misery?

3. If you would attain to a state of happiness, then go to God in prayer, and
beg earnestly of him, that he would not put you off with this present state,
but advance you to a better, wherein you may be liker to him, and hold sweet
communion with him. To live all our lives long in a state of vanity, and after
pass into a state of endless torment, oh what heart which is not become a
stone, would not dissolve into sighs and tears to think of it! What, after all
our temptations, sins, pains, sicknesses, weaknesses, crosses, troubles, to
enter into a state which is infinitely more vexatious, and insupportable, Oh
what soul that is not become mad and desperate would not be affected with it!
As ever then you would let the World see that you are in any complete measure
solicitous about your own good, seriously consider what a vain state your
present state is, and how much worse the state is, which after this you must
enter into, if divine grace do not prevent and endeavor to get your hearts,
and souls truly affected therewith, and beg of God that he will have mercy on
you, and afford you relief as to this particular. And whereas he has been
pleased to provide a better state than either of those mentioned before,
entreat him with all the importunity you can possibly raise your Souls to, that
he will be pleased at the present to interest you in it, and in his own due
time take you into it. Though it be no small matter to deliver you from the
vanity of your present State, and the danger of a worse, and to take you into a
state of happiness; yet such is the respect he bears to the ordinance of
Prayer, that to those who in a due manner exercise themselves therein, he has
promised to do it for them. How often has he declared in the Word, That
whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved? Joel 2. 32.
Acts 2 21. Romans 10. 13. This frequent asserting of the thing, is partly to show
us the certainty of it, and partly to work us to a firm belief of it, and stir
us up to the duty of Prayer, which through the grace of God is of such
efficacy, that it is able to raise the soul from earth to Heaven.
Notwithstanding the vast distance there is betwixt Heaven and earth; yet if you
will in a believing, serious, affectionate manner call upon God, own him in his
several perfections and entreat him to take you up thither, he will do it. Thus
he dealt with the good Patriarchs: they desired a better Country, and he
prepared for them a City. Heb. 11. 16. Though Canaan was a good Land, a Land
that God had blessed, a Land that he had his eyes on from one end of the year
to the other, a Land that ever flowed with milk and honey, that is, abounded
with what ever was necessary for humane sustenance and refreshment; yet they
found such inconveniences in it, that being unsatisfied with it, and all other
Lands, places, and enjoyments in the world, they entreated God to furnish them
with some other place which might better agree with those holy principles and
affections he had planted in them, which he in compliance with their desires
was graciously pleased to do. And if we take the same course that they did, we
may make account he will deal with us after the same manner he dealt with them.
The way to go to Heaven in our persons, is first to go thither in our hearts
and prayers. Send up therefore your prayers first to Heaven, and they, as it
were with Golden cords, will draw you up after them.

And thus I have given you an account of some of those means which God has
prescribed toward the helping of us to a State of happiness. And oh how much
are we indebted to him, that he is pleased to deal with us upon such easy
terms! What, will such easy matters as Faith, Holiness, and Prayer, help us to
happiness, who then would not betake himself to the pursuit of it? How worthy
is he to remain in a state of vanity, and from thence to pass into a State of
extreme misery, that will not use such means to be delivered therefrom? When we
had sunk our selves down into a State of vanity, and rendered our selves liable
to everlasting misery, God might justly have let us alone, and left us to spend
both time and eternity in fruitless sighs, and groans: but out of his
transcendent grace he has dealt better with us: he has provided a remedy for
us, not only against our present vanity, but likewise against our future
misery. Now if we should not make use thereof, especially it being so easy,
how worthy will all the world judge us to perish? All I shall further add is
this; you have yet, Sirs, your understandings, and are capable of
distinguishing betwixt good and evil: and though you are at the present in a
State of vanity, and are liable to such a State as is far worse; yet through
the grace of the Gospel, you may be freed from the one, and escape the other;
and what you are to do in order thereunto, I have in a few words showed. If you
prefer happiness before misery, you may do well to close with the Counsel
given: if otherwise, you may contemn and reject it, and go on in your secure
and extravagant courses; but if ere you allow your selves such liberty, you may
do well to consider, whether you may not have cause to repent, when it is too
late. The Lord of Heaven, who is the Author and disposer of true happiness,
Bless what has been said, and make it effectual.

SERMON II.
Psalm 73. 23, 24, 25, 26. Nevertheless I am continually with thee: Thou have
holden me by my right hand. --
IT is a Controversy amongst Expositors, who was the Penman of this Psalm,
whether Asaph or David; for without question it was composed by one of them.
Indeed the Title as it stands in our Bibles, gives it clearly to Asaph: but we
are to know, that in the Original (...) which may be rendered either of, or to
Asaph. However, it is generally believed to have been penned by Asaph: and the
reasons that have induced the generality of Expositors to believe it, are such
as these, (1) It appears that Asaph did compose some Psalms, 2 Chronicles. 39. 30.
Hezekiah commanded the Levites to sing praise to the Lord, with the words of
David and of Asaph the Seer. So that it appears some Psalms composed by Asaph
were Canonical, and of use in the Church, as the 74, 76, 77th, and some other
Psalms: Some think he composed this, the ten following, and so others. (2) The
genus dicendi, manner of speaking seems to be more sublime, and obscure than
that of David, whose discourses seem to be more simple and plain. (3) Its
expressed to belong unto Asaph under the same form in Hebrew that those which
were penned by David, are expressed in, as belonging to him.

The Psalm it self contains an account of the conflict Asaph was in through his
beholding the prosperity of the wicked, and the adversity of the godly, that
which has been a great stumbling block in the world. Look into the word of
God, and you shall find that it has very much exercised the thoughts of the
righteous, and Seneca the Philosopher, canvasseth this grand Case, how it
should come to pass that the wicked prospered. This much exercised the
Psalmists thoughts: One while he resented it one way, and another while
another: One while he was satisfied, another while unsatisfied: One while his
spirit was calm and quiet, another while tumultuous and restless. Like the ship
in the boisterous wind he is tossed up and down not so high now, but as low
anon. Yet notwitstanding the distressd condition this good man was in;
notwithstanding the various apprehensions he had concerning it: yet he still
adheres and keeps close to God. Nevertheless I am continually with thee. In
these words, being the former part of the 23 v. There are two things observable.

1. His tumultuous and sad condition, sometimes God exercises his own dear
servants with much distress, both in body and mind, and thus he dealt with
Asaph.

2. His adherence to God, and communion with him. Though his temptations and
difficulties were such, that he was even overwhelmed; yet he still keeps close
to God, as knowing that (if there were any true safety, and rest to be had in
the world) it was with him. Here we are to note there is a twofold being with
God. There is a being with him in respect of his care, and protection; and
there is a being with him in respect of fellowship and communion. Now I
conceive, when the Psalmist says, nevertheless, I am continually with thee he
aims at both these: however I shall for the present discourse of the words with
reference only to the latter.

Doct. That it is the property of pious, and holy men to be with God, or to
have their abode with God, or to live in communion with God. Though the world
do generally neglect him, and live at a distance from him, scarcely so much as
thinking of him, it is not so with pious and holy men; they do not only think
on him, but prefer him above all, and spend their time with him. Phil. 3. 20.
For our Conversation is in Heaven. He exhorts them to an imitation of him, and
his fellow Apostles, which he inforceth with this reason 1 John 1. 3. That ye
may have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and
with his son Jesus Christ. Some keep company with one, and some with another:
but good men they keep company with God. All persons that have not lost their
reason, have a reverence for a Divine and heavenly life: this, says he we have
to commend us to your acceptance, that our conversation is in heaven, and
invite you to the imitation of us, that have our fellowship with the Father,
and the Son.

1. I shall lay down some propositions to make way for a better understanding
of the point.

1. Man upon his Creation, while he remained in his innocence lead a Divine
life, enjoyed sweet communion with God, and lay as it were in his very bosom.
He then knew not what it was to stand at at a distance from him, lie under his
displeasure, or bear his wrath. There was then nothing to interpose betwixt
God, and him, or interrupt him in his communion with him. Had his state been as
certain, and constant as it was pleasant, and comfortable, oh how happy had he
been!

2. By his fall he deserted God, placed himself at a distance from him, and
grew strange to him, Genesis 3. 23 24. The case was quite and clean altered, as to
the state of things. God, that before the fall had man in his Arms, there
hugging him with delight, and tenderness, now he drives him out of the Garden
as worse than a beast, not fit to be there. He that had communion with his
Maker is turned out, and the Angel set to keep him out, that he might not eat
of the tree of life. He go's away from his Father as the Prodigal, pleases
himself in his distance from God, lives in a far country, hides himself from
his presence, riots it in voluptuously entertaining, and indulging the flesh.
And herein the propagation of Original Sin, and the great degeneracy of our
natures does appear, that we are all by birth at a distance from God, and
strangers to him, Psalm. 58. 3. They go astray from their birth: as soon as they
be born, they are found at a distance, and strayed from God. And this is true
not only of reprobated ones; but the elect too; yet with this difference, that
whereas the former persists therein, the latter do not; but in time reurn to
him, become acquainted with him, and fall into familiarity with him.

3. God in his great love to his elect and chosen, is pleased to look after
them in their far County, take them off their estrangedness to him, and bring
them into a state of Communion with him. Whiles they are engaged in their
prodigal wanderings from him, he calls after them, lays hold on them, shows them
their way and duty, and brings them home to himself, Isa. 30. 21. Thine ears
shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye
turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left. There shone a Light about
Paul. Acts 9. 3, 4. And what the Prophet had said was in a more illustrious
manner confirmed, suddenly there shined round about him a light from Heaven.
You know how Paul carried it to Christians; how he held it to be his duty to
imprison the faithful; how he engaged in his hellish hot service of
persecution, night and day; how when he was in the height of his carreer, and
came near Damascus a light shined. He was in darkness, and God gives him light.
He heard also a voice saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? He
tells him that he was Jesus whom he persecuted. This was the voice behind him,
saying, This is the way walk in it. What meanest thou, Saul? Will thou thus
offend the God of Heaven? will thou harden thy heart, and blind thine eyes
against that light and evidence, that I have given, to show by infallible
signs, that I am Jesus the Savior? Will thou boldly, violently, and
dangerously, go on to affront the dearest love, and clearest light, that ever
was manifested to the World, that unquestionable, and irresistible authority
andpower, by which if thou be not ruled, thou will be ruined. It is hard for
thee to kick against the pricks. Consider what thou art about to do, that which
will show thy madness, and beget thy sorrow. Thus poor Saul, that confesses
after, that he was exceeding mad, is overwhelmed, falls on the earth, and cries
to him whom he had blasphemed and unmercifully persecuted in his members. Lord
what will thou have me to do? I know thou will have me to do something as well
as desist from what I was wickedly about to do. I will do what lies in me, I
have engaged in what I could against thee; but now I will do what I should for
thee.

4. He causes them thus returned to behold an amiableness in him, and to
delight, and take pleasure in him. He discovers to them such glory and
excellency in him, and affords them such refreshment and comfort in the
enjoyment of him, that they account it their happiness that they may be with
him. Oh (says a good man) that I were with God! I cannot live without I may be
with him. Cant 2. 3. As the apple tree among the trees, so is my beloved (says
the Church) among the sons. I sat under his shadow with great delight, and
his fruit was sweet unto my taste, etc. Even as your spreading trees yield a
pleasant shadow, and the apple tree a a pleasant fruit; so Gods presence yields
much refreshment and repast unto his people.

(2) When or in what degree pious and holy men are with God? And they are with
him very much, so that according to the liberty used in the common manner of
speaking they are said to be ever with him. Psalm. 139. 18. When I awake I am
still with thee. A good man as he concludes the day with God, saying, Lord into
thy hands I commend my spirit; So he does likewise begin the day with him; no
sooner does he open his eyes, but he looks up toward heaven, acknowledges the
goodness of God the night past, and craves it for the day approaching: so Luke
15. 31. Son thou art ever with me, and all that I have is thine. Oh happy Son,
that might have such familiarity with his good father! And oh wise Son that
when he might have it would make use of it!

3. What pious and holy men do while they are with God! How they do employ and
exercise themselves?

1. They contemplate and view his perfections. They view him in all his
Attributes and properties, in his wisdom, power, goodness, glory. Mat. 18. 10.
Their Angels do always behold the face of my father which is in heaven: where
observe, (1) What relation the Angels stand in to the faithful, according to
Luke 15. 31. They are ever with God. Let not any of the pious be disconsolate,
The Angels are Ministering spirits sent forth. Oh the wonderful goodness of God!
How highly has he advanced poor men! (2) What the Angels do, They behold the
face of God, that is enough to make a continual banquet unto them. This is
partly to view his perfections, and partly to receive in structions from him.
This is it which pious men do. They behold the face of God, they view God in
those rare and infinite excellencies, that are in him, in his mercifulness,
goodness, and holiness. I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence
comes my help, Psalm. 123. 1. This is the posture of an holy man, he is looking
up to God from whom comes his help.

2. They admire him and adore him, as the supreme Being, the highest Lord, the
chiefest good, and the only object of religious worship, Exodus 34. 8. They bow
before him as Moses. You read before how the Lord descended in the cloud,
becomes his own Herald, proclaims his own greatness, The Lord, the Lord God
merciful and gracious. -- Moses hereupon does reverence and adore this merciful
and glorious God, bows his head, as if he should say, What glory is here? What
incomprehensibleness, and incomparableness of glory and Majesty is here? So
Rev. 5. 14. The four and twenty Elders fell down and worshipped him that lives
for ever and ever.

3. They rejoice and glory in him as their portion and treasure. Herein they
esteem themselves happy, that they have such a God, and that they may be with
him. Oh says the godly man, what a God is here? Not such an one as the Calves
at Dan and Bethel. This is a privilege indeed to have such a God, an interest
in him, that I may be entitled to him, that I may be one with him, and be still
with him. In this a man may boast. My soul does magnify the Lord, and my
spirit rejoices in him, Luke 1. 46.

4. They treat with him in the behalf of their souls, and their eternal welfare
and happiness. They consider their own condition, weigh the terms he has
proposed of reconciliation and peace, and with all cheerfulness submit to them,
Matthew. 19. 16. When all controversies come to an end, this will be the great
Question which the young man propounds, What must I do to inherit eternal
life? What will thou have me to do? says Paul: and a gracious person
inquires, which way he might get nearer to God, nearer to Christ.

5. They exercise dependence on him for a seasonable and happy deliverance of
them out of the several temptations straits and troubles wherein they are. A
good man when he is with God, says, Thou Lord rulest the world, thou have
brought me into these troubles, thou only can bring me out of them, and on
thee do I depend for the doing of it. Psalm. 123. 2. As the eyes of servants
look unto the hand of their Masters, and as the eyes of the maiden unto the
hand of her Mistress: so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God until that he have
mercy upon us. The good man has his eyes up to God in way of dependence, to
attend how long it will please him, they shall be under exercise and service,
and waiting for the issue and end thereof. This I conceive the Psalmist has
respect unto in the Text. I am continually with thee, not only that I may have
thy care and protection; but that thou would determine those troubles, that I
am waiting and groaning under, and that thou would quiet and still my soul,
and work it to an happy calmness. Now I shall give Reasons why the godly are so
much with God.

1. Because he has appointed them to come unto him, and make their abode with
him. It belongs to him to give laws touching the disposal of their lives, and
manners, and amongst other precepts, he has delivered to them, to that end,
this is one, that we should be continually with him. He requires not only that
we should live to him; but likewise that we should live with him. Jam. 4. 8.
Draw nigh to God and he will draw nigh to you. If he command then that we
should draw nigh unto him, maintain communion with him, it is the duty of every
man so to do. God has made man and set him in a Sphere higher than that of
beasts, given him a reasonable soul, and faculties, that are rational, for this
end that he might dwell with him.

2. He is the best company that men can possibly be with. Man is animale
sociale a creature addicted to society, and of all company Gods is the best.
There is no company either in heaven or in earth comparable to his. Psalm. 73.
25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee. Look upon the earth how many godly and choice men are in it? How
many excellent persons for converse and holy entertainment were in the Land of
Judah? But if these men of parts, heavenly qualifications, would not satisfy
him, might he not have mended himself in Heaven? No, whom have I in heaven but
thee? Not the blessed triumphant Saints are company good enough without God:
Not the glorious Angels that never had speck of pollution upon them will
suffice without God. Thus the Psalmist still fixes upon God. Hosea 2. 7. I will
return to my first husband, for then was it better with me than now. Israel had
wandered from God, and betaken her self to Idols, at last comparing things with
things, she resolves to return, and go to her first Husband: Like the Prodigal,
if we go and ramble up and down the world, in the end we shall have cause to
say, we will return to God, having bought our experience of the insufficiency
of all other comforts and company at a dear rate, the loss of Gods presence, or
the withholding of his comforts. Joh. 6. 86. To whom should we go, (says
Peter, in the name of all the Disciples) thou have the words of eternal life?
To leave Christ for other company were a great madness; to forsake the fountain
in the time of great drought, and take to the broken cistern. Do we desire
safety, he is the best company? Where can we possibly be safe if not with God?
Psalm. 37. 39. The salvation of the righteous is of the Lord, he will help and
deliver them because they trust in him. So Isay 43. 11. I even I am the Lord,
and besides me there is no Savior. If a man therefore would study his own
safety, he could find no society but in God. Do we desire honor? This must be
had with God. If you be in company with a great man, walk, and talk familiarly
with him, you account it a great honor: What then is it to talk with God, to
walk with him; to be called* and admitted to freedom as the friend of God. This
honor have the Saints: 1 Samuel 2. 30. Them that honor me, I will honor, and
they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Would we have comfort? The
society of God yields sweet contentment and satisfaction. Thus, (says God) to
Moses, Exodus 33. 14. My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.
Oh the ravishing quietness that is to be had in God! They (says David) shall
be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them
drink of the river of thy pleasures. In Gods house there is very good
entertainment, there is the fat and sweet to eat, and rivers of pleasure
whereof to drink. Revel. 7. 17. The Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne
shall feed them, and shall lead them into living fountains of water. See the
abundance of comfort and refreshment: there is water, fountains of water,
living fountains of water, and these attended with satisfaction and delight,
they shall eat and drink with merry hearts hearts, all tears shall be wiped
away from their eyes. It was the saying of Galeatius a Marquess (when he was
solicited to renounce Christ, and closewith Antichrist) let them and their
money perish, that do look upon, or esteem all the gold in the world more than
one days company with God. A King seeing Plato, and some other Philosophers
together, oh (says he) yonder is life and happiness, making account that they
in their society and discourse, were more happy than he in all his princely
enjoyments. Well then, upon our seeing men conversing with God, we may cry out,
happy are the people that are in such a case, thrice happy are they whose God
is the Lord.

3. There are many special advantages they reap, and therefore holy men have
and hold communion with God. Of these I shall give you an account in diverse
particulars, which will evince, that it is a point of great prudence to be with
God.

1. They hereby come to be better acquainted with God, his nature, properties,
counsels, secrets. Those that are much together know much of one another
minds, and good men being much with God, they come to know more of God than
others. Genesis 18. 17. And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham that thing
which I do? Is there that thing which I to intend do, wherein Abraham is
concerned, and that may be for the instruction of his family? and shall I hide
it from him? from Abraham that has lived with me. From Abraham my Friend. No,
I have confidence in him that he will command his children, and household after
him that they shall keep the way of the Lord to do justice, and judgment, Psalm.
25. 14. The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him. To those that live,
and more intimately converse with him, he tells his secrets: These know strange
things before they come to pass, by beholding and viewing the face of God, by
holding communion with him they have these things imparted andr evealed to them
which others are strangers to: They are not only his servants but his friends,
a servant knows not what his Lord does, but it is made known to these holy
ones, that God has loved them with an everlasting love, what his will is that
they should do, and what unspeakable things are laid up for them.

2. They hereby come to have holy boldness in them. While a man is a stranger
to a great person he is afraid; but when acquainted with him he becomes more
emboldned: so when the pious soul is in^red to the presence of God, makes
frequent visits, and has reception, the dreadfulness of the divine Majesty is
taken away and it made confident. Ephesians. 3. 12. In whom we have boldness, and
access with confidence by the faith of him. Through the satisfaction of Jesus
Christ, and through his intercession we come with boldness and confidence to
the throne of Grace.

3. It actuates and excites their graces. Good men being together do heat and
inflame one another, how was Dr. Tailor ravished with the company of that
excellent man Mr. Bradford? And if poor sinful men have such power to stir up
our graces, what then may be expected from the great and holy God, who is light
and life it self, Cant. 1. 12. While the King fitteth at his table, and my
spikenard sends forth the smell thereof as if the Church had said, while I
held communion with him my graces broke out, I was not the same as before: as
the Sun has influence upon the flowers; so the spirit of righteousness has
influence upon the graces of Gods people, Luke 24. 32. They said one to another
did not our hearts burn within us while he talked with us by the way, and
opened to us the Scriptures, such is the heat of the Son of righteousness, that
can bring life to the deadest, and warmth to the coldest heart. I am persuaded
that many of your own experiences will bear witness to this truth, that there
is power and life in his presence. How many a time when you have been with God
in prayer, or at a Sermon, have you come away inflamed with better resolutions,
and stronger affections? How great impressions of sorrow, joy, fear, hope, have
been made upon your spirits, according to the word that has been delivered,
and the dispensation of Gods grace therein.

4. They hereby derive glory and luster from him, Exodus 34. 30. When Aaron and
the children of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone, and they
were afraid to come nigh him; Moses had been with God in the Mount. Men that
are known to be much with God derive such Majesty that those who are guilty,
and have their consciences in any degree awakened, are even afraid of them.
Such are commonly reverenced, and beget an awe in those that hate them for
their strictness. Joh. 18. 6. As Soon as Christ said to the men that came to
apprehend him, I am he, they went backward and fell to the ground. Christ did
not use any violence against them: but with amazement they all fall down before
him. Thus Foelix that proud Governor trembles while he has a pious, and holy
divine man before him, reasoning of so high matters as righteousness and
temperance, and judgment to come. One would have thought Paul macerated and
worn away with watching, and laboring with fasts and imprisonments, should
have trembled before Foelix; but Foelix trembles before a poor despicable man,
and his prisoner. Acts 24. 25.

5. They hereby come to be in a better capacity of obtaining what they stand in
need of, and desire from him. Those that are at Court, and about the King are
in the way of gaining favor, and being preferred. Their petitions may more
easily be presented, their addresses made, and desires obtained, than those
that are at a distance from, and strangers to the King: so they that live with
God may by their prayers more prevail with God, than those that are strangers.
What can God deny that man that is still with him, and is his favorite, who is
ever admiring and adoring his perfections? Exodus 32. 10. Now therefore let me
alone says God to Moses, such power have the servants of God. God bids Moses
to forbear to solicit him, and hold his hand when he is going to fetch the
blow of his vengeance upon his Israel. Psalm. 145. 18. 19. The Lord is nigh unto
all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. He will
fulfill the desires of them that fear him; he also will hear their cry and save
them. The cries of a child, especially if for bread, for help, do move the
heart of a compassionate parent, and will not God then hear the cries of his
children, since he is a God of bowels, and tender mercies?

6. This abiding with God here does make way for their abiding with him for
ever. The way to live with him for ever hereafter, is to live here with God.
Here Asaph is a proof, thou shall guide me by thy counsel and afterward
receive me to glory. This is the way and preparation for glory. This being with
thee here, is to make me fit for thee hereafter. Having given you the reasons
why pious men live with God, now we come to the application.

Use 1. of Information to inform us (1) of the great condescension and goodness
of God, that will receive and suffer such vile creatures, as we are, to come
into his presence, and be familiar with him: oh what condescension and goodness
is here! It is a great piece of condescension to suffer the best men on earth
to be with him, nay to let the highest Angels stand before him and admire his
glory: therefore for God to permit such sinful unworthy creatures as we are, to
come and live, and be with him, is great condescension indeed. For a Prince to
suffer one of his poor subjects, nay one that has been an enemy to his crown
and dignity and very life, not only to come into his presence; but likewise to
be familiar with him, would be deservedly looked upon as an instance of great
condescending goodness. How much more has God done, that is the great King;
King of Kings, capable of greater injury and affront, as having greater glory,
and more sensible of it than the greatest mortals can be, and yet has sent his
beloved Son to beseech rebels to be reconciled unto God, and to draw as many as
are children of peace after him, that they may be where he is, that is with
God. Great persons are loath to take those that are of inferior rank into
familiarity with them, says Job 30. 1. speaking of those his enemies, that
took advantage of his grievous affliction to deride him. Now they that are
younger than I, have me in derision, whose fathers I would have disdained to
have set with the dogs of my flock. So far below him in estate* esteem, parts,
and qualifications. Now for the great high and mighty God, to whom the
inhabitants of the earth are as Grasshoppers, to take poor and contemptible
worms into familiarity with him, is an argument of wonderful condescension.

2. It informs us of the happiness of pious and holy men, that they may be
admitted into the presence of, and unto familiar converse with God: Oh this is
a singular privilege, and worthy to be pursued with greatest praise and
gratitude. What the Queen of Sheba says of Solomon's servants, 1 Kings 10. 8.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, which stand continually before
thee, and that hear thy wisdom: may much rather be applied to the servants of
God: Happy indeed are they that may appear before God, behold his glory, as
well as hear his wisdom, and taste how good he is. Psalm. 89. 15. Blessed is the
people that know the joyful sound. Not only the sound of the ordinances and of
the Trumpet, but relish the spiritual refreshments that are exhibibited in
them. They walk O Lord in the light of thy countenance; and in Matthew. 4. 17.
says Peter, in a rapture and transport with the greatness of the glory of
Christ's transfiguration, It is good for us to be here. It is good for me to
draw near to God.

3. It will inform us of the great difference that is between good men and
others, the one lives above, the other below, one upon the Creature, the other
on the Creator. Some are so far from being ever with God, that they desire it
not: They say unto God, Job 21. 14. Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. Psalm 10. 4. God is not in all their thoughts. There is
a vast difference between the dispositions of good and bad. Take a good man,
and the frame of his heart is to be solicitous about God, and thoughtful about
God in duty: Will this please, will this honor God? As to sin, How shall I do
this evil and sin against God? As to Ordinances, he seeks God in them, and
enquires whether he have met with God? If God has withdrawn himself he is
troubled. It is not so with the wicked, they are not solicitous about any such
thing, their care, thoughts, and endeavors, is how they may be well thought
of, reputed; how they may drive on their covetous, lustful, or malicious
designs? How they may gratify their senses. They fense and keep of any passes,
that are made by Gods messengers to pierce them toward their conviction and
amendment: They will not bear the thoughts of God and their duty.

Use 2. of Exhortation. If it be the property of pious and holy men to be with
God, to abide with him, and herein to rise to this degree of being ever with
him: Then as ever we would be pious, and holy men, reputed such, and found
such, let us endeavor ever to be with God, spend our days with him: No company
is like unto God's, you have heard in the Reasons. Let the Devil, the World,
the Flesh, say what they will, no company like society with the Father and the
Son. Let us seriously consider, whether it be not as well our interest as our
duty, to live more unto and with God. It may be for a Lamentation unto us, that
when some pious Christians have been spending all their time with God; yet we
have been but little taken up with that good company: How little Lord have we
been with thee, even when we have stood before thee as thy people that desired
to know thy ways, and do thy will? How little of our hearts have thou had, when
with our mouths we have professed much love? How have the world, our lusts, run
away with our souls, thoughts, and affections, and left thee the outside and
carcases of Christians? Let us run through all difficulties that we may get to
God: Idolaters would run through the very fire to get to their Idols, 2 Kings
16. 3. A strange piece of devotion; and this was partly to express their great
zeal toward them, and partly to be purged from their sins, and so to be a
fitter sacrifice for their Idols. Let our souls then make hard after the true
and living God, though through difficulties and fiery trials, Psalm 63. 8. My
soul follows hard after thee. Hereunto take these directions:

1. Withdraw your affections from the world. Look upon it as below you to spend
your precious time in converse therewith. Reason thus with your selves; What
has God given me a a soul fit to converse with himself, and shall I pass my
time in converse with this dunghill, this impure filthy world? God forbid: He
has designed me for nobler matters, and shall I not do what I can to pursue
them? As ever you love God, and would be with him to enjoy his love for ever,
love not the world, withdraw your affection from it, 1 John 2. 15. Love not the
World, neither the things that are in the World: If any man love the World, the
love of the Father is not in him.

2. Take pains with your souls to raise, and lift them up to God. They are
naturally averse to be with God: as children are naturally averse to be with
their aged parents, they would rather be in the streets with their
play-fellows, and children of their age and humor, so natural men are averse
to be with God, they would rather be in the World about trifles. By how much
the more backward they are, the more pains we should take take with our hearts;
say thus to thy self. It is better for me to be at some pains and trouble now,
than to be in eternal flames and misery for ever: David labors to lift up his
heart, Psalm. 25. 1. Unto thee O Lord do I lift up my soul. The heart is
naturally addicted to sink down into sensuality, it should be raised up. Isa.
64. 7. There is none that stirs up himself to take hold of thee. There must
be a rowsing, and stirring up of these sluggish and indisposed hearts of ours.
How vainly and unreasonably do many wicked persons reason themselves into Hell
and destruction? I am as good as God has made me, and shall I be damned for
that averseness of spirit, which is natural to me, and I brought with me into
the World? This is Christians divelish arguing, which Satan suggests and puts
into men's mouths, that he may drive them on farther to ruin. You must be taken
off your own bent and affections, or you will be ruined for ever. It had been
better you had never been born, than that you should rest in the same state of
wretchedness, wherein you are by nature. Take pains therefore with your hearts,
though they shrink and draw back, yet follow them from room to room, from one
idle excuse to another, till they be driven out of all harbor. Lay hold of
them, keep them fast, say, soul I must, I will have thee up to God. Thou must
dwell with God here, or else thou must never dwell with him hereafter.

3. Allow not your selves in any sinful and ungodly course, that sets God at a
distance from you, and begets a fear and dread in the soul that makes it run
from God as offended, till it recover the thoughts of Gods mercies, and then
the soul returns and comes toward God with trembling. Now if the soul would be
still with God, with how much boldness might it approach into the divine
presence? If you do allow your selves in any unwarrantable course, you stop
that intercourse you might have with God; therefore when you begin to feel your
souls starting aside from God, recall them, charge them to keep close to God,
leave them not, till you have brought them into some good frame, and resolve as
David, Thy benefits are so innumerable, they are so large a theme for my
thoughts, that Psalm. 139. 18. When I awake I am still with thee. Yet he had a
holy jealousy over him self, ver. 23. 24. Search me O God, and know my heart,
try me and know my thoughts. And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead
me in the way everlasting. Daved was a man that did commune much with his own
heart, and knew how things went with himself: Yet he is desirous that God would
make a search, that what he had done amiss might be taken away and amended.
Thus should we do, searchhow it goes with head, heart, life, conversation, and
practice, if it go ill with them, our communion* with God is like to be much
interrupted.

4. Pray to God to call you home from your extravagancies, take you into a
state of familiarity with him, and preserve you therein. Say, oh thou that by
the beams of the Sun drawest up the dew of the morning, by the beams of thy
grace and love draw up our souls to thee. draw up these heavy hearts of ours:
we have been heaving at them, but do what we can they are pressing downward. We
find so many intanglments of the world, besides earthly propensions in us, that
unless thou draw, our hearts will not be gotten up says David, Psalm. 119. 10.
With my whole heart have I sought thee; Oh let me not wander from thy
commandments. The hearts of the best of men are addicted to wandering from God,
and such is our weakness that every thing interrupts us, and draws us from God:
but we must lift up our hearts to God, that he would lift them up to himself,
and never rest till he have united them to him in love and holiness.

Obj. Here is a question that many may put. You speak of abiding with God and
dwelling with him. I have been about this many years, have had convictions, and
look upon an holy life best agreeing to the soul, and the faculties thereof,
and according to these convictions, I have been endeavoring what I can, using
means this and that way: yet God is strange to me, what shall I do? What help
in this case, that I may have nearer approaches to God?

Ans. 1. It is a good sign you have to do with God, in that you are sensible
that he is strange unto you, and are affected with it. As for wicked men they
desire not the knowledge of God they are without God in the world, and content
so to be. But your sense of Gods displeasure, his withdrawings, the
disconsolateness of being at a distance from him, argues that there is more
than flesh and blood, a principle within thee.

2. If it be so as you say, betake your selves to searching of heart, and see
whether there be not some reason that God should stand at a distance.
Notwitstanding the riches and bowels of Gods unbounded mercy, yet he has
regard to his own honor and glory. He has more attributes to look after and
vindicate than one. Therefore it concerns you, if God carry it strangely, to
consider whether God have not afforded you opportunities, invited you to
converse with him, called, cried, waited, to try whether you would come; and
whether you have not refused and slighted, that he may complain. You would none
of me, if it be thus no wonder God is a stranger to you. Judge. 5. 15. For the
divisions of Reuben there were great searchings of heart. Sure then Sirs, there
should be some searchings of heart upon this account, when your sins have
separated your God from you. I commune with mine own heart, says the Psalmist,
Psalm. 77. 6. And my spirit made diligent search. He was under this great
affliction, God seemed to carry it somewhat strangely, his trouble hindered his
sleep, and did so fill his heart that he could not speak, he was under Gods
desertion as to comfort. This puts him upon enquiring how come things to be
thus with me? If a friend carry it strangely, it does not satisfy us to wonder
at it, and so let it pass, as we would do with another, but we enquire what
word or action proceeding from us, what neglect or injury might cause it. If
God look not with the same countenance upon us as formerly, and his favor be
not as heretofore, we must make enquiry and diligent search into our whole
lives, to find what was the meaning of Gods dealing thus. How comes it to be
thus?

3. You must distinguish betwixt his withholding his presence and his comforts.
Though perhaps you have not much comfort, yet you have protection and support,
which is matter both of satisfaction, and thanks, so in the words
immediateately following, the Text, thou have holden me by the right hand. The
Psalmist, you may find, was exercised with disquietments, yet he had support
from God, though disconsolate.

4. Though God withhold his presence, it is not because he is loath to afford it
you, but that he may make you more tender of it, and value it at an higher
rate. Cant. 5. 6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself,
and was gone; this must beget a sad damp in the heart of the Church. My soul
failed when he spoke, she sought him but could not find him: Before instead of
opening to her beloved she excuses her slothfulness, now he is withdrawn he
will make his offers more acceptable, and more readily embraced.

5. Wait upon God for a more free, full, and comfortable exhibition of himself
to you. He is a gracious God, adhere therefore unto him, and depend upon him.
Though he may for a time carry himself somewhat strangely toward you; yet
after a season he may be pleased to be more favorable, Isa. 1. 15. I will wait
upon the Lord, that hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will look
for him. This is a good, and truly generous, and brave resolution,
notwithstanding all opposition and danger, to go on in faith, patience and
obedience.

3. Use Of examination. Let us examine how things go with us as to this matter,
where it is that we are, with whom we live, and with whom we abide, see what
communion and fellowship we do maintain with God. I shall give some characters
of those that abide with God.

1. A man that abides with God, has his eyes ever upon the Lord, choose where
he is, he he has still an eye unto God: whether he be at home or abroad, his
eyes are toward heaven. The Lord is his refuge his chief possession, Psalm. 25.
15. Mine eyes are ever toward the Lord, and this was partly in a way of
reverence, as one afraid of offending him; and partly in a way of dependence,
as one desiring instruction, support and help from him. Can you say this that
your eyes are to the Lord, the eyes of your mind and your thoughts are toward
God, are you upon every occurrence running to God? If it be so, you are with
God.

2. He acts ever as in Gods presence. He carries himself as one that considers,
that God has his eye upon him wherever he is, what ever he does, Psalm. 16. 8.
I have set the Lord always before me, he is at my right hand. He set God
before him, not only as the object and end of his actions, nor only to be a
comfort and support to him, whereupon he might rejoice, and his heart be glad;
but as a witness and judge of his actions, which might engage him to sincerity.
If we did really and fully consider that God sees us, and takes notice of us,
how would it influence upon us to be more serious, reverent and holy. The
wicked and hypocrites have no fear of God before their eyes. God is not in
their thoughts. They say in effect he sees not, he knows not, or does not
consider: but this holy man sees God observing him, and therefore he is the
same in private that he is in public. The same in his own house that he is
abroad, Psalm. 101. 2. I will walk within my house with a perfect heart. Many
when they are abroad carry themselves plausibly and fairly, but follow them
into their own houses, what frothy talk, what cursing and swearing, what
passion and bitterness: How disorderly are they there? How little of God in
their mouths, and less in their lives? As when they go abroad they put on
commonly other clothes, so they do other deportment. But when returned to their
own families, they fall into the same unhappy disorder and confusion; as if
they had forgotten what manner of persons they were.

3. He that is ever with God affects solitude and retirement. He would not be
always in company, though never so good and proper. He would sometimes be
alone, that he might more closely converse with God: Thus Isaac go's into the
fields to meditate and pray, Genesis 24. 63. The word in the original may be
understood of both, and no doubt this good man had supplication and prayer
joined with meditation. How often do we read of our blessed Savior that went
apart to pray? Mat. 14. 23. He went up into a Mountain apart to pray, so Mat.
26. 36. He leaves his disciples with this command. Sit ye here while I go and
pray yonder. To the same purpose Luke 9. 28. He took Peter, and John, and
James, and went up into a Mountain to pray. The more pious any man is, the more
he desires, at least some times to be alone. Those that cannot endure to be
alone loose much of the sweetness and ravishment of communion with God.

4. He hastens through the creature to God. When he is engaged in his calling,
he hastens through the concernments of the world, that he may enjoy himself
with God. Though what appertains to his place he does with diligence, yet this
is not the principal object of his care, nor the end of his thoughts. When he
has gotten this dispatched how glad is he, that he may entertain himself with
meditation and other holy exercises which are a most pleasant refection to him?
This is the difference betwixt carnal and good men, they both hasten, but the
sensual makes all possible have, and hurry through his duty, he thinks of, and
longs for the end before he begin: the good man is of another spirit, he
hastens through all business, that he may have time and leisure to converse
with God. In relations and friends, he finds comfort; but abundantly more with
God. Psalm. 63. My soul follows hard after thee. As a man in a crowd presses
hard to get to his friend. So the Psalmist though he was in a crowd and
multitude of business and obstructions, yet he presses hard to get to God.

5. He is glad of an opportunity of being with God, whether it be to be with
him publicly or privately. A carnal heart shrinks from duty, looks on it as a
burden, when will this Sabbath be over! O that I might fall upon my worldly
business! David was glad when there was an opportunity of drawing nigh to God,
Psalm. 112. 1. I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of
the Lord.

6. He that is ever with God, takes care to state things aright between God and
him, to set all straight, and keep all well. In the evening he enquires, how go
things betwixt God and and me? what good have I done this day? wherein have I
been useful? what evil have I done? and wherein have I offended? How go's the
case between God and me. Soul, I must not lay mine eyes to sleep, till I have
cleared all between God and thee! After he lays himself down and sleeps, and
dwells in safety. Psalm. 4. 4. Let me ask you one question, Christians, do not
trifle but give Connscience leave to make the answer, what prayers and
diligence have you used to interrogate and examine your state and settle your
spiritual concerns? Have you used your utmost care and the best advice (as you
would do in a worldly concernment, for fear of fraud or crime) to direct you
and keep you from mistakes? Have you not contented your selves with easy work
and slight evidences? I doubt, upon a faithful trial and a true account you will
find much amiss.

7 The more any duty or ordinance has of God in it, the more he is pleased
with it; Sometimes God affords more of himself in an ordinance, sometimes less.
He is at his own liberty and so will be, let himself be enjoyed as he sees
good. But according as God does let out himself he is more or less affected
with them. It is God that he desires, and therefore his respect to ordinances
is such, as carries a proportion in it, to what they have of God.

8 He that is ever with God, despises all in comparison of God. Heaven, Earth,
and all are but baubles, trifles, and nothing in comparison of God, as in the
25th verse of this Psalm the language of an holy man is, whom have I in Heaven
but thee?

9 When he has been with God, he keeps in mind how God carried it toward him,
what communion he had with God, and how things passed betwixt God and him. Did
God awaken me by such a sermon? Did he enliven and quicken me in such a prayer?
David remembered how God had appeared in the Sanctuary, Psalm. 63. 3 He longed to
see Gods power and glory, as he had seen it in the Sanctuary. Those revivings
and outgoings of ^od were written and imprinted in his heart, Psalm. 77. 3. I
remembered God and was troubled. To think how God had carried to him at other
times.

10 One that is continually with God, counts the intervals of his being with
God long and tedious. A pious man says, when will the Sabbath or Lords day
come, that I may sing forth the praises of God. When shall I be with God, to
hear from him, and pray to him as David Psalm. 42. 2. When shall I come and
appear before God? Now revise these particulars and see how they suit with your
temper and frame, and if upon a serious scrutiny you find these not agree to
your case, bless God that he has wrought these in you: but if otherwise humble
your selves, and mourn, and never cease till you can bring the matter to this,
that you may say with the Psalmist. Nevertheless I am continually with thee.

SERMON IV.
Psalm 73. 23. -- Thou have holden me by my right hand.
HAving dispatched the former part of the verse and from thence given you an
account of the Psalmists communion with God, which was all I intended to speak
of, when I took up these words, I shall proceed to this latter part, which
contains communication of help, assistance and comfort to those that have
fellowship with God, which is the reason and fruit of their adherence to him.
The words in the Original are Ahazta bejad jemini which Molterus renders
Tenuisti manu dextram meam (bejad) in the Hebrew he will have to refer to Gods
hand, and jemini according to our translation to refer to the Psalmists hand;
but (bejad) does not refer to Gods hand, for the assuming of ( --) for ((...))
in Regimen shows its relation to the subsequent substantive thus it is used
Jer. 22. 24. Psalm. 121. 5. And then the words run thus, Thou have holden me by
the hand, even my right hand, as if it had been according to the Hebrew
Pleonasme be jad brinini by the hand, even by my right hand. The hand of God
may easily be understood in the signification of the verb ahazta, which imports
as much as thou have laid hold of, with an Ellipsis of the Pronoun me. Muis
does peremptorily paraphrase on the words, thus Lapsuro, mihi dextram
porrexisti, I being ready to fall, thou did reach out to me thy right hand.
And differs from our translation in the word jemini making it an adjective, and
so agreeing with its substantive bejad and not put in Apposition; but so it
should have been jemani without Hizer in the middle; or if within it 2 Chronicles.
3. 17. yet read by Camets. There is no necessity of such a streyned
construction, for as has been shown, this way of rendering the words is the
most usual and unforced, and it makes the sense most easy, whereas how scant
would the words be to express the sense, if there were no suffix? But they must
be read thus. Thou have holden by the right hand. Gods affording his special
respects toward, and care of his people, is expressed by his being at their or
holding them by the right hand, Isa. 41. 13. I the Lord thy God will hold thy
right hand. And though the metaphor of a person sinking or falling, were
supposed most pertinent here, and it matters not then, whether a friend lay
hold on me, sinking by the right hand or the left, so that he draw me out of
danger, but it is not all one which of his hands he takes me by; yet the
emphasis will be here as considerable and more; for God by his right hand of
power does lay hold of the right hand of faith of his people. So my right hand
may signify the Psalmists faith, and adds to mercy as well as the assistance
God does afford. The right hand is the hand of dexterity, wherewith we are more
ready to lay hold on any help that is offered. And so the words would bear the
paraphrase, I was ready to sink and thy waves to pass over me. My soul even
fainted and sunk within me; yet I remembered the Lord, I stretched forth my hand
in prayer, I cried Lord save me I perish, and thou have stretched forth thy
hand, thou have caught me; thou have holden me by my right hand. But if the
right hand of God be not peculiarly meant, they will stand well in their
connection with the present and subsequent words; for he had given immediately
before an account of his communion with God, which frequently in scripture is
set out in walking with God, and God is said to be at their right hand, Psalm.
16. 1. I have set the Lord always before me, which is spoken in other words in
this verse, I am continually with thee: He is at my right hand, and that is
answered by these words Thou have holden me by my right hand. God holds his
people by the right hand, and with his right hand he does defend them against
their deadly enemies, that lie in wait for, and are armed against them. Though
the people of God are in the hand of God, and none can pluck them thence, yet
the Devil and the World will do what they can to make them leave their hold of
God, but here is their comfort that God puts himelf between them and danger.

Doct. That God does uphold his pious and holy servants in the time of their
distress, when they are in distress he does not turn his back upon them and
disown them; but stands by, beholds and upholds them, Psalm. 31. 7. Thou have
known my soul in adversity. Afflictions and troubles upon me, change not thy
countenance toward me: when worldly friends are as the waters that fail, look
shy and strange upon me. Thou art my God, thou will strengthen, help, uphold
me. Thou will not be far from me, when trouble is nigh God does maintain the
Lot of his people, Psalm. 16. 5. That Dimensum of grace and comfort, which he
has bestowed on them. He is their staff and stay, whereby their natural
spiritual and eternal life is supported, not a staff of reed like Egypt, that
if a little stress be laid on it will break. The Church finds it her
security, support, and comfort to lean on Christ, Cant. 8. 5. Being taken with
all carnal confidences and dependence on creatures, lays the weight of
temporal spiritual, eternal life, and concernments on him. O what familiarity,
what condescension in God does it argue to suffer to suffer his Church as his
beloved, to lie in his bosom, his left hand being under her head, and his
right hand embracing her! The Lord strengthens his people with strength in
their souls as Paul was supported, 2 Timothy 4. 17. The Lord stood by me and
strengthened me. In the prosecution of this point, I shall show what God upholds
his people from, and what God upholds his people by.

1. What God upholds his people from? 2. From sin. Their natures are corrupt as
well as others, and they are averse from good, prone to evil as the sparks do
fly upwards, and though in part enlightened, sanctified and recovered; yet they
have still evil habits and dispositions in them; so that if God did not
restrain them, they would fall into those miscariages which would be highly
injurious, both to them and Religion Romans 7. 14. 19. Oh what a sink of impurity
and sin did this Apostle find in himself! yet was one of the holiest and best
men that ever the sun saw. And what a tottering condition was Asaph in? Psalm.
73. 2. 3. For he could scarce keep his feet, he was almost gone, when he saw
the prosperity of the wicked. David was withholden by the Lord from shedding
blood, and pursuing his rageful and cruel design against Nabals house, 1 Samuel
25. 26. The Lord like a loving Father looks after and regards his servants,
keeping them from the unhappy extravagancies their corrupt natures lead and
prompt them to. Though God do permit them sometimes to fall foully by their
iniquities, yet he keeps them from total and final Apostasy, from the belief of
the truth, and the life which is according to godliness.

2 God upholds his people from desponding and fainting; sometimes their trials
and troubles are so great, that they know not what in the world to do with
themselves, so that if he did not interpose, they would faint and throw up
their Religion and hopes at once, Psalm. 73. 13. 21. Now to prevent this, God
comes in with his cordial waters, instructs, satisfies, and comforts them. When
they were about to pull Paul in pieces, Acts 23. 11. Its said, the night
following the Lord stood by him, and said be of good cheer. The Lord upholds
his people under spiritual disertions, that they shall not be utterly and
irrecoverably cast down, and sunk under the sense of his displeasure and the
hiding of his face, he presents to them, and convinces them of their great
weakness in their complaints, and shows them the days of the right hand of the
most High, helps them that sit in darkness to reflect on former experience, when
they had sunshine and his promise, that he will be a light unto them, a Sun and
a shield, and will withhold from them no good thing, so Psalm. 77. 7. 8, 10.
Psalm. 42. 6. 8. He assures them that he is not gone for evermore, that he is
not quite gone. Though for a small moment he forsake them, yet with great mercy
will he gather them, Isa. 54. 7. 8. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee
for a moment, but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy upon thee. Under
their greatest dejections there is some sprig or other of comfort that they lay
hold on, and is stretched out unto them, that they may be kept from being
overwhelmed, some twig or other of a promise or experience, that may bear them
up. Though God seems to be departed from them quite, yet he does but hide his
face, whereby his favor is discovered in more clear features. He is nigh to
them by his special grace, when they think him afar off, when they are crying
the Lord has forsaken me, my God has forgotten, and are groping for him in
the dark, he is at their right hand. The Lord upholds them from being
discouraged, and fainting under outward afflictions, and therefore shows them
how needful and useful they are, how much love, care, and fatherly tenderness
and providence there is manifested in them, and the design of them; how light
and short they are compared to the mass of glory that is set before them; what
the end of the Lord is with his servants, who patiently expect the coming of
Christ, lest they should be weary and faint in their minds. Heb. 12. 3, 5.

3. God apholds his people from ruin and destruction, both temporal and
eternal, 1. From temporal ruin, and so he either upholds them against troubles
of the world that they shall not touch them, or keeps them from the evils of
World though they share in common calamities, and though they do not escape,
yet they shall be enabled to bear afflictions, that the trial of their, faith
may be found, though it be tried by fire, unto praise and honor, and glory at
the appearing of Jesus Christ. Sometimes God preserves them from the eminent
judgments he brings upon the world of the ungodly. They are separated from the
plagues brought on the wicked, when their preservation may make eminently for
his glory, and when they have born remarkable witness against the sins that
have brought judgments. While Lot lingered, Genesis 19. 16. the men laid hold upon
his hand -- the Lord being merciful to him, and they brought him forth and set
him without the City, thus was he delivered from that flaming destruction, an
emblem of hell, which turned Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes. That righteous man
dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul* from day
to day with their unlawful deeds, and filthy conversation, 2 Pet. 2. 6. 7, 8.
The Lord knows how and when to deliver the righteous and godly out of
temptations, and out of judgments, and how to reserve the unjust unto the day
of judgment to be punished, God spared not the old world, but saved Noah the
eighth person a preacher of righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world
of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 5. That God might show his power, and publish his
name through all the earth, he raised up Pharaoh, and destroyed him, when he
made a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters, for Israel that was
precious in his sight, when they passed through the waters in the red Sea, the
Lord was with them, and when they passed over the river of Jordan, it did not
overflow, so the God in whom the three Worthies in Babylon trusted, Dan. 3. 16.
17. was able to deliver them from the fiery furnace, that they were not burnt,
neither did the flame kindle upon them. If they cannot promise themselves
security from common calamity, as ordinarily they cannot, yet they pray, and it
is promised that they shall be delivered from this present evil world. The Lord
is faithful, who shall establish and keep them from evil, 2 These, 3. 3. And our
Lord Jesus, who knew what was most necessary and proper for his Disciples, Joh.
17. 15. Prays not that God would take them out of the world, in which world
chap. 16. 33. He had told that they should have tribulation, but that he would
keep them from the evil. And Christ gave himsef for our sins that he might
deliver us from this present evil world. Though they fall into the hands of
violent and unreasonable men, that neither have faith nor humanity, yet they
are in the hands of God, not forsaken of him, and therefore not utterly cast
down. Though they fall, they shall not be utterly cast down, for the Lord
upholdeth them with his hand. Psalm. 37. 24. When trouble is on every side, and
they seem to be hedged in with thorns, they are not disstressed, so that there
is no way can be found for them to escape, when they are in the snare of the
fowler, God breaks the snare and they escape. They may be perplexed, but not in
dispare, persecuted, but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed, 2 Cor. 4.
8, 9. God will be with them in six troubles and in seven. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous, but the Lord delivers them out of them all,
Psalm. 34. 19. Their fall shall not be irrecoverable and desperate, but they
shall arise out of their afflictions, and their faith shall triumph over the
reproaches and malice of the malignant world, Matthew. 7. 8. When I fall, I
shall arise. A just man falls seven times and rises up again. Prove. 24. 16.
There shall be an end of their troubles, their redemption draws on. Blessed is
the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried be shall receive the
crown of life, which the Lord has promised, Jam. 1. 12. It would be madness
indeed to cast away their confidence, which has great recompense of reward.
They had need of patience, that after they have done the will of God, they may
receive the promises. But yet a little while, and he that shall come will come,
and will not tarry. Heb. 10. 36, 37. Their miseries shall have bounds, and an
end. They shall not always be sighing under their burdens^; sobbing out their
complaints, there is a rest after all their travels, a land flowing with milk
and honey, with rivers of pleasures for a dry and barren wilderness. The
wickedness of the wicked will come to an end, the Devil may rage, and roar, and
raise persecution, and they suffer tribulation ten days, Rev. 2. 10. The
Devils Agents have their hour, Luke 22. 53. This is your hour and the power of
darkness. Nay all the calamities of the people of God are light, and but for a
moment, if compared with eternity of glory.

2 They shall be upheld and kept from eternal destruction. The ungodly shall
not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the Congregation of the righteous, Psalm.
1. 5. They shall be cast and fall in the trial, when the assembly of the
firstborn, shall stand and be acquitted, and received into those everlasting
and blessed habitations, with a happy welcome, Come ye blessed of my Father,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. They shall be kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation, 2 Pet. 1. 5.

2. Having shown what God upholds his people from, in the next place we shall
show by what God upholds them.

1. By his own immediate hand, without the interposition or ministry of his
creatures, as Christ caught Peter sinking. This is called Gods creating of
their happiness, that they may be glad, and rejoice in that which he does
create, when he creates Jerusalem a rejoicing, brings about the prosperity of
his people, when there is nothing of sufficiency or disposition in matter and
means to produce such an effect. When by his Fiat he commands deliverance for
Jacob. And although some creatures are made use of, they are such as are
inconsiderable, and ineffectual without miraculous power, to cause any thing of
this nature, and conduce the least naturally toward their deliverance, nay it
may be contrary to their nature, and above their ordinary power, they are
commanded to their service, and answer Gods command. The sea is taught to
distinguish between the Egyptians and Israelites, and made a way for the
ransomed to pass over. Elijah is fed by a Raven. When Daniel is thrown into the
den, the hungry Lions Forget their hunger and cruelty. The vermin plague
Egypt, and trouble not Goshen. At the sound of the rams horns and the shout of
Israel the walls of Jericho fall. God has secret and invincible ways of
conveying relief to his people. They cannot be in so close a prison, so begirt
with danger but he can come to them, comfort and deliver them, manifest that
help and salvation is from the Lord. He sends in his comforts to them that can
pass through guards and iron gates, unseen, unheard, and not to be resisted,
which their enemies cannot hinder them of, and these they cannot take away from
them, Hos. 2. 14. When he has brought them into the wilderness, he speaks
comfortably to them, he sends an encouraging message to Paul. Be of good cheer
and in the multitudes of their thoughts within them, his comforts delight their
souls, Psalm. 94. 19.

2. God upholds his people by his word, whereby he affords them instruction,
encouragement and comfort. When they are in distress, they betake them thither
as to a Sacred Directory, and are preserved from evil, Psalm. 17. 4. By the
words of thy lips I have kept me from the path of the destroyer. Thy word have
I hid in my heart that I might not sin against thee. Psalm. 119. 11. They go to
the word as a Sanctuary, and in the word the Psalmist took sanctuary against
his fears. Psalm, 73. 17. He was perplexed till he came into Gods Sanctuary:
Some by Sanctuary do understand Heaven, till he thought of heaven he was not
satisfied. Others by Sanctuary understand the place where Gods word was read
and unfolded, and there are that by Sanctuary will have the word of God to be
meant. Though Asaph might not mean the word by Sanctuary, yet it was the word
in the Sanctuary which afforded him comfort and resolution in that great
perplexity. And this was David's comfort in his affliction, the word of God
quickened him, Psalm. 119. 50.

3. God upholds them by his creatures, his Angels, his ministers, and their
brethren in tribulation and suffering. Our Lord himself was strengthened by an
Angel, Luke 22. 43. and Heb. 1. 14. Are they not ministering Spirits sent forth
to minister for them, who shall be heirs of Salvation? By his Ministers he does
mightily uphold and strengthen them. They are given for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till they come to a perfect
man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. We
are helpers of your joy, says the Apostle to the Corinthians, not exercising
Lordship over your says, 2 Cor. 1. 24. What mighty confirmation were Paul and
Barnabas to the Churches, Acts 14. 22. They returned to Lystra, Iconium, and
Antioch, confirming the souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the faith. The people of God are mutually helpful for the establishing of
one another, Job did uphold many, Job 4. 4. And Eliphas spoke true in saying
That he had strengthened the feeble knees, and weak hands, and had upholden him
that was falling, And God blesses some with special comforts, that they may be
a relief to others by their experiences, and may tell what God has done for
their souls. 2 Cor. 1. 4. Who comfort us in all our tribulation, that we may
he able to comfort them, which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we
our selves are comforted of God.

4. By his Providence which have been so signal and remarkable, that have
raised them out of their fears, and revived their hope and confidence, when
their eyes have even failed with looking: When mercies have come in, which they
have been almost ready to despair of: And God has turned the stream of affairs
toward their relief and prosperity, and brought about that which was
improbable, and they looked not for. Thus Jacob was revived, Genesis 45. 22.

We come to the reasons, Why God upholds his people? And they are drawn:

1. From the love of God. His love to them is so great, that they are called
the beloved of his soul, Jer. 12. 7. He has more love, care, tenderness than
the fathers of our flesh. If they being evil know how to give good gifts unto
their children: how much more shall our heavenly Father give the holy spirit to
them that ask him? Luke 11. 13. In correcting his people he shows more pity
and goodness; For the Fathers of our flesh corrected us, and for a few days
chastened us after their own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be
partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. Not the most tender hearted mother does
yearn with such bowels of compassion toward her only Son, as God does toward
his people. Isa. 49. 15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should
not have compassion on the son of her womb; yea they may forget, yet will I not
forget thee. This love to them is the reason why he will uphold them. Why did
God lead Israel in the Wilderness, why did he so eminently preserve them?
Because he loved them; therefore he chose them to be a peculiar people above
all people, that were on the face of the earth, Deuteronomy. 7. 6, 7, 8. And the
reason why he loved them, was because he loved them: not any goodness, or
goodliness in them; but because he loved them, he set his love upon them. He
has mercy on whom he will have mercy: He will have compassion on whom he will
have compassion, Romans 9. 15. Exodus 33. 19. God his love to his people, is the
ground and offspring of all mercies to his people, spiritual and temporal. God
so loved the world, that he gave his Son, Joh. 3. 16. Christ so loved his sheep
that he laid down his life for them. Who loved me and gave himself for me, Gal.
2. 20. God did extend and draw out his richest mercy for Israel: he did extend
kindness to them in the choosing of them, in his covenant with them, his
promises to them, his deliverances of them, because he loved them. I have loved
thee with an everlasting love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn
thee, Jer. 31. 3.

2. From their great necessity. They have none else to uphold them. When the
Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it was bittter, and that there was none
shut up or left, nor any helper, 2 Kings 14. 26. Then he saved them by the hand
of Jeroboam the Son of Joash. When he saw that there was no one to take up the
righteous cause of his people, then he arms himself. He saw that there was none
to help, and wondered that there was none to uphold, therefore his own arm
brought salvation to him, and his fury it upheld him, Isa. 63. 3. And he put on
righteousness as a breast plate, and an helmet of salvation upon his head, he
put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a
cloak, When he saw that there was no intercessor.

3. From his Promise. For the assurance and encouragement of his people he has
obliged himself by promise. Isa. 41. 10, 13. Fear not, for I am with thee, be
not dismayed for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee;
yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. In the 13th
verse the Promise runs in the words of the Text, I will hold thy right hand,
saying unto thee, fear not, I will help thee. Sooner then Israel shall always
groan under their burdens and Taskmasters, and the oath to Abraham and his
seed be violated, God will show signs in Egypt, and wonders in the Land of Ham,
Psalm. 105. 27. Nay Heaven and earth shall pass away sooner than one tittle of
the promise of God should fail. He that has called his people according to his
purpose, out of darkness into his mavelous light, will uphold them and
preserve them blameless unto the coming of Christ Jesus. Faithful is he that
has called you, who also will do it, 1 These. 5. 24.

4. From their Prayers grounded and urged upon his Promise, being sensible of
the great evil and danger of sin, knowing their proneness to slip, they
solicit God with their prayers to secure them from falling. Psalm. 51. 12.
Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with thy free spirit.
Uphold me according to thy word, that I may not be ashamed of my hope. Hold
thou me up and I shall be safe, Psalm. 119. 116, 117. When they are thinking of
their danger, sinking in the apprehension of it, if they cry unto him, he
stretches out his hand and saves them.

5. From his own honor and glory, that is much concerned herein. This is that,
which he proposes to himself in all his performances: This he is tender of,
zealous for, will not have given to another. This he would have us to propound
to our selves in all our actions. There is nothing he does, but he proposes to
himself therein the praise either of one Attribute or another. He has created
all things for himself, for the glory of his power, goodness, and other
Attributes. Whether things that be on the earth, or things in heaven, visible
and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, Principalities or Powers,
all things were created by him and for him, Col. 1. 16. For of him, and through
him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever, Romans 11. 36. He has
created Jacob his servant for his glory, he has formed, he has made him, Isa.
43. 7. God will look after his great name; and it does concern Gods glory much,
that his people should be upheld. What would the enemies say, if Israel should
be cut of, and turn their backs before their blaspheming adversaries. God is a
wise builder, in Christ Jesus they are his workmanship: now he does not begin
what he is not able to finish. He is the Author, upholder, and finisher of our
Faith, he will bring his people to their full stature, unto a perfect man, unto
the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.

Use of Informat. 1. Of the transcendent and inexpressible goodness of God.
What manner of love is this, that we should be called the Sons of God, and be
dealt with as his children, friends, familiars? Here is goodness incomparable
to admit beggars, and worse, that is, sinners into fellowship with him. Here is
firmness of love and goodness, that he will not forsake them: whom he loves,
he loves to the end. I will not leave thee nor forsake thee. That he should
admit not only into protection, those that had cast off their allegiance and
rebelled against him, but communion. This is condescension indeed Substantial,
and not Ceremonial as that of Princes many times is. Revel. 2. 1. He holds
the Stars in his right hand, and walks in the midst of the seven Golden
candlesticks.

2. We may be informed of the difference between God and other friends. Other
friends look upon us as their Sun Dials, when the Sun of prosperity shines upon
us; but when it is a black and dark day, of Clouds and gloominess and thick
darkness; of trouble and distress, then we signify nothing to them. But God
deals not so with his people: But when all are fled and gone, he sticks close
to his people. Tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril,
sword, cannot separate God from his people. 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17. At my first
answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me, notwithstanding the Lord
stood with me and strenthened me. -- and I was delivered out of the mouth of
the Lion.

3. We may see why good men do not sink more under their distress. It is
strange they are not born down by the violence, impetuousness of troubles and
afflictions, that abide them upon all occasions. At how noble a rate are they,
through Christ strengthening them, enabled to carry it; rejoice in hope, glory
in tribulations, sing in prisons, take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, to
thank God that they were thought worthy to suffer for his name, embraced the
flames. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Thanks be unto God which always caused us to triumph in
Christ. Thanks be to God who gives us the victory over death, the grave and
sin through our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 57.

4. This shows the madness of those that run from God by an evil heart of
unbelief to secure themselves, and bear themselves up with carnal confidences.
Cain departs from the presence of the Lord to outrun his fears. Thus men expose
themselves to sin and ruin, and yet flatter themselves with the imagination,
that they are safe. If dangers be nigh by compliance with evil, sinful shifts
for present outward security, we are not to run from, but to fly to him, lay
fast hold of him, not let him go. Nay, we should cling closer to him, and hold
harder, when evil approaches, as a child would of the parent from whom it,
expected relief.

2. Use of Exhortat. In all our troubles let us have recourse to God. Are we in
danger of sin, of despondency, of ruin? Let us get us to our Rock, refuge,
fortress, and strong tower, to which the righteous fly and are safe. His
Counsels will mightily avail us in our perplexities and multitudes of
dissatisfied thoughts. Let us trust him with all our concernments: for he is a
buckler to them that put their trust in him. He will stand between them and
danger. Let us encourage our selves in God, be of good courage; be strong in
the Lord and in the power of his might. Put on resolution that nothing shall
drive us from God, rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of our salvation,
though we meet with disasters and disappointments; Love and praise God for his
help, and the health of his countenance; for this end God does turn the
mourning of his people into dancing: he puts off their sackcloth, and girds
them with gladness, that they may sing praise to him, and not be silent, Psalm.
30. 11, 12.

Use 3. of Consolation. What abundance of encouragement does this doctrine
afford, how may it strengthen weak hands, and confirm doubting hearts? Walk out
and be delighted with this abundance of respect, honor, and advantage, that is
done to you by Gods upholding you by the right hand. Here is encouragement
against infidelity; fears, sorrows. Fear not, be not dismayed, the Lord is your
God, the holy one of Israel your Savior. God is a refuge to you, a strength to
you, a very present help in trouble, what need you fear though the earth be
moved, God is with his people, they shall not be moved, God shall help them;
and that right early. When the Devil accuses them because of their sin, they
have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. 1 John 1. 2. Who
shall lay any thing, therefore (since Christ is the propitiation) to the charge
of Gods elect? It is God that justifies, that has accepted of the
satisfaction of Christ, and that ransom paid, as appears by the resurrection of
him from the dead and his exaltation. Who can condemn, since Christ died, is
risen again and makes intercession for us? Romans 8. 33. etc. God having
declared the remission of sins that are past, Romans 3. 25. Satan has nothing to
allege against the elect and called of God, that are found in him, Not having
their own righteousness, which is of the Law, but the righteousness of Christ,
which is by faith: So that the life they live is by the faith of the Son of
God. What has Satan to say? For what the Law could not do, in that it is not
able to answer its demands, and therefore it was weak through the flesh, that
Christ by taking up our flesh has done, so that the righteousness of the Law,
which could not be fulfilled by, might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after
the flesh but after the spirit. What comfort does it speak to Jerusalem, when
it is proclaimed that her iniquities are pardoued? How tenderly did God proceed
with Israel in the way of his gracious providence with them? God alone led
them, he kept them as the apple of his eye, Deuteronomy. 32. 10. God taught Ephraim to
go, taking him by the hand, Hos. 11. 3. Takes that pains to bring up, nourish,
instruct, defend his people as a careful nurse would her little one, and about
the time of forty years, suffered he their manners in the wilderness, Acts 13.
18. which some read (...) changing ((...)) into its aspirate ((...)) and using
a word that signifies his nursing care of them, however God did bear with their
childishness, ignorance, peevishness. Such love bears God to all his Saints,
therefore lift up your heads, the Lord your redeemer is at hand. He will see
that your faith fail not, that your patience hold out. The Lord will stand at
your right hand, to assist you in every good work and office, and he will
deliver from every evil work, and will preserve you blameless unto his heavenly
Kingdom. You have the same encouragement to uphold your hearts, that the Saints
and holy men of old had, that were strong in faith, and gained a good report
for their faith. The word of God that upholds the Heaven and Earth, may uphold
your hearts. It is impossible that God should not be, and then it is impossible
that he should lie, and he has promised and given the greatest security, that
you might have strong consolation, who fly for refuge to lay hold on the hope
set before you.

SERMON V.
Psalm 73. 24. Thou shall guide me with thy Counsel here, and after receive me
to glory.
THe former Verse I have dispatched, and told you when I first pitched my
thoughts upon the preceding words, I did intend to proceed no further: but the
truths following are so sweet, that I intend a farther prosecution. The
Psalmist in the preceding words having given an account of Gods gracious
supporting of him in trouble, draws this comfortable inference, that he would
yet favor him with farther kindnesses. Thou shall guide me by thy counsel. --
For in such sort does God sometimes dispense his blessings to his servants, he
does not only afford them present relief, but future mercy: So it happened with
this good man Asaph. In time of trouble God supports, in doubts, fears, and
discontents he upholds; and God at this time did not only support him, but
yield him evidences of farther and future kindness. This future kindness the
Psalmist expresses in two Phrases: (1) Thou shall guide me by thy Counsel. (2)
And afterward receive me to glory. Thou shall guide me, in the Original is,
(...) which Montanus renders in consilio tuo duces me; and Vatablus in
consilium tuum, that is, into the knowledge of thy counsel: But I shall adhere
to our Translation, which renders it, with thy counsel. God had supported the
Psalmist for the time past, and from thence he concludes he would guide him for
the time to come: so that he might not offend him with quarrelling at his
providence as he had done. The other Phrase is, and after receive me into
glory. As if the Psalmist had said, I see, and read so much of thy love, that I
know thou will do more for me; when by thy Counsel thou have lead me through
the difficulties of this life, thou will show farther kindness, take me into an
estate of glory, removing me to a state, wherein I shall be free from those
evils I am perplexed with. From hence observe,

1. Doct. That God will, or does guide his faithful people with his Counsel.

2. Doct. That when God has guided his people by his Counsels, he will receive
them into glory. To the first,

That God will and does guide his faithful servants with his Counsel. He
abounds with Counsel. Prove. 8. 14. Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom. Mark
sound wisdom in opposition to that which is humane and vain, which oftentimes
proves foolish and deceitful. As he abounds with this Counsel and sound wisdom,
so he communicates thereof abundantly to his people. He sees to, looks after
them, and according as there is occasion administers Counsel to them. Sometime
they are brought into such straits, that they are ready to cry out with
Elisha's men upon the sight of the Syrian Army, 2 Kings 6. 15. Alas how shall
we do! Then when they do not know what to do, he comes in, and advises them
what to do, what course to take. Thus he did with Asaph. Till I went into the
Sanctuary of God, says he, I knew not what to make of things: but then I
understood their latter end. I shall show you (1) What a kind of guide God is.
(2) What kind of Counsel God gives his people. (3) Then give the reasons. (4)
Answer an Objection that is, if God guide his people with his Counsel, how
comes it to pass that they fall into such disorders? (1) What kind of guide God
is. And (1) Generally he is the best guide in all the world: None so able to
guide us as he is, and and none so willing to do it as he. There is none we may
so securely venture our souls with, as with him: Such a guide is he, that were
our souls, affairs, concernments of a thousand times greater value, and
importance than they are, we might with greatest security trust them with him.
The soul of man is his darling principal one, his glory and excellency, and if
it were a thousand times more excellent; yet here might it be safely deposited.
There is not a guide either in Heaven, or in Earth, that is comparable to him.
ver. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none on earth in
comparison of thee. Oh how great and eminent is he in Counsel! Jer. 32. 19.
Great in Counsel and might, in words and in doing. He is wonderful in it. Isa.
28. 29. Wonderful in Counsel, and excellent in working. This may make the
wisest to stand and wonder, Romans 11. 33. O the depth of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! We read in the Scripture of some that were eminent
for Counsel, Ahitophel, 2 Samuel 16. 23. was eminent for his Counsel. The Counsel
of Ahitophel in those days, was as if a man had enquired at the Oracle of God.
He was a politic man, and could guess at things extraordinarily, and the issue
of them; insomuch that things commonly fell out according to his word. So 2 Samuel 20. 18. The inhabitants of Abel were so prudent and just, and had so great
repute for wisdom and Counsel, that when differences arose among men in
neighboring parts, they would come thither for advice, upon the receipt
whereof they commonly ended the matter. And we read of others that were notable
for their Counsel: But what is all theirs to the Counsel of God? Alas, what are
the greatest Counselors in the world in comparison of him? Job 12. 17. He
leads Counselors away spoiled, and makes the Judges fools. He infatuates,
blasts their Counsels, and leads them away, as it were in triumph.

2. More particularly he is,

1. A wise and skilful Guide. He knows which is the best way to lead his
servants in. He is acquainted with all ways, knows how to compare one with
another, and distinguish betwixt the good and the bad: And he likewise foresees
how things will work, and what shall fall out; for all things are and shall be
according to the Counsel of his own will. The wisest of his Creatures can at
the best, but conjecture, and their wisdom is to confess their ignorance in
what is contingent and unrevealed: but God knows what is most hid and reserved
in the remotest causes, and that distinctly and infallibly. And this property
is so peculiar to himself, that he does both challenge and insult over the Gods
of the Gentiles upon this very score, Isa. 41. 21, 23. Produce your cause says
the Lord, bring forth your strong reasons says the King of Jacob, show the
things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are Gods. -- Here
is a challenge God sends to the Gentiles, if you will have your dumb, blind,
senseless Idols to be God, let them make it out, and tell what shall come to
pass. This is the only and true Gods Prerogative. Now God having this peculiar
insight into things, it must needs render him highly fit to guide and lead his
servants, Psalm. 78. 72. He guided them by the skilfulness of his hands. By the
hand commanders show much skill, and conduct, directing those that are under
their command which way to go. David had a mighty skilful hand herein; yet what
was his skill to Gods, so far he sees himself below him, that he seeks to God
for guidance, Psalm. 123. 2. Our eyes wait upon the Lord our God.

2. He is a gracious Guide. The conduct which he exercises toward his servants
is ever attended with designs of grace and love. The thing which in all the
windings and turnings of his Providence he aims at, is that they may be holy
here, and blessed herafter. He sometimes leads them through wildernesses and
desolate places: but this is not out of hatred, but love, it is in order to
their welfare, Psalm. 25. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto
such as keep his Convenaut, Romans 8. 28. All things work together for good to
them that love God. When they are in the greatest straits and perplexities, and
though all may say, these things make against them: yet all are for their
benefit, who are the called according to his purpose.

3. He is a faithful guide, one that will not betray or ensnare them, his
guidance is ever such as tends to their good. As he knows which is the best
way, so he leads them therein, Psalm. 25. 10. His paths are truth. He may deal
severely with his servants; but he cannot, he will not deal falsely, Isa. 54.
10. The mountains shall depart, the hills shall be removed: but my kindness
shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Convenant of my peace be removed.
Sooner shall heaven and earth cease, than he will prove unfaithful, his people
have his Word, his Oath, his Being and Nature, in security for their faith and
confident dependence on him. This promise is worth mountains of Gold. How great
a matter is it to have a faithful, a skilful guide that we may put confidence
in; one that will not fail his people, that is faithful in his promise and in
his proceedings, Prove. 13. 17. A faithful Ambassador is health.

4. He is his peoples only guide, so far is he above all other guides, that
there is none fit to bear that name with him, Deuteronomy. 32. 12. The Lord alone did
lead him, that is, the children of Israel. There was indeed the Ministry of
Moses, but that was such a subservient inconsiderable thing, that Moses himself
declines the mention of it, ascribing the conduct of Israel to God only. And
hence it is, that his servants depend only on him. Psalm. 65. 2. Oh thou that
hear prayers and workest deliverance. And ascribe their welfare only to him,
Psalm. 4. 8. Thou Lord only make me dwell in safety.

5. He is a continual guide. He is ready upon all occasions to conduct and lead
them. He does it not for a day or two: but during their whole lives. Psalm. 48.
14. This God is our God for ever, he will be our guide even unto death. Isa.
58. 11. And the Lord shall guide thee continually He never ceases guiding them,
till he have brought them through all danger, till he has received them up to
glory.

6. God is an effectual guide to his servants, and that in two respects.

1. He makes them close with his guidance, when he sees them go astray, he
constrains them to close with his counsel, and to be obsequious to his conduct.
When he sees them wandering, he calls to them saying, Isa. 30. 21. This is the
way walk in it. When they are going astray, turning to the right hand or to the
left* either in prosperity or adversity. God takes them as it were by the hand,
and makes them to go along with him. He delivers to them his advice, and causes
them to close with it, Jer. 18. 2. Go down to the potters house, and there I
will cause thee to hear my words, Ezekiel. 32. He caused me to eat the roll. What
a Magnetism was there in the words of Christ, when he spoke to Simon and
Andrew? what an attractive and drawing power had they, Mark 1. 18. For they
straitway forsook their nets and followed him. It was a strange thing, that the
words of a stranger, and one that had no outward splendour; nor authority and
power, no glory and luster should so prevail upon men that were busy upon
their employments, to throw all away, and immediately follow him. There went
power from Christ to engage them secretly to yield to his commands.

2. He is an effectual guide, because he blesses his guidance to them, insomuch
that they attain the end which they propose to themselves, in following him,
Mat. 19. 28, 29. You that have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of
man shall sit in in the throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve
thrones judging the twelve Tribes of Israel. Those that follow him shall not do
it for naught, they shall not be losers, though they leave father, mother,
wife, children, lands, for his names sake: but shall receive an hundred fold,
and inherit everlasting life.

2. What kind of counsel God guides his people with, and there is a fourfold
counsel that he guides them with.

1. There is the counsel of his purpose. The Holy Ghost uses to call the
purpose of God his counsel, Psalm. 33. 11. The counsel of the Lord stands for
ever, The thoughts of his heart to all generations. This is the purpose and
council that shall stand. Prove. 19. 21. When the devices in men's hearts, and
their subtle and secret thoughts shall be cut off. God can bring about his
purpose, that all things shall fall out according to the counsel of his will.
Let mountains lie in the way, God can remove them; if rocks, God can divide
them; if waters, he can dry them up; if fire, God can quench it. God does guide
his people by his counsel, inasmuch as he fulfils it upon them, and conforms
their condition to it. As if a father take up such purposes concerning the
government of his children, and then manage all things toward them in a way
agreeable thereunto, he may be said to govern them by those purposes, so it is
in this case, God does rule and govern, guide and direct his people according
to his purpose and counsel set down with himself, that nothing shall happen to
them but what he has designed, and for very good purposes to them. So Romans 9.
11. That the purpose of God according to election may stand. Jacob have I
loved: Romans 11. 7. The Election has obtained mercy in Christ. So strict herein
is God, that in all his proceedings with his children, he still keeps close
unto his purpose, not departing so much as an hairs breadth therefrom. So that
we see, though his purposes be no rule to us, it is to him, the perfection of
his nature requiring that what he purposes, he should perform.

2. There is the counsel of his word, that the Holy Ghost styles his counsel,
Luke 7. 30. But the Pharisees and Lawyers, rejected the counsel of God against
themselves. This is the revelation of his counsel, and eternal purpose, and
contains omne quod a nobis vult fieri, and multum quod ipse vult facere. All
that he would have us do, and that much he himself will do, but not all; for it
is enough, and abundantly sufficient that God has revealed what is our duty,
and what we should do. This is that fixed and standing rule God has delivered
to us to walk by, Psalm. 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light
unto my path. It is the Lanthorn that God has hanged out of heaven, to guide
us thither. Hereby he directs us what to do in order to our comfort here, and
happiness hereafter; this word we are to have recourseto, upon all occasions.
We must have an eye to the Law and to the Testimony. Asaph went to the Temple,
heard the word of God, then his questions were dispelled; his doubts and
scruples resolved.

3. There is the counsel of his Spirit, whom he sends to them to acquaint them
with the meaning of his word, and to help them to accommodate it, and apply it
to their present case and condition. The word through our weakness, not being
sufficient, he sends his Spirit in to our assistance, not to make any new
revelations to us, or to acquaint us with any more than the word contains, but
to enlighten our understandings, that we may see the meaning of it, and bow our
wills to a compliance with it. God will add to him the plagues that are written
in this book, that shall add to these things. Rev. 22. 18. Joh. 16. 13. He
shall guide you into all truth. The Holy Ghost does guide us into all those
necessary truths contained in the word of God.

4. There is the Counsel of his Providence. God does many times discover his
will to his servants, in them thereby declaring what he likes and what he
dislikes; what he would have them to do, and what to decline, Psalm 32. 8. I
will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shall go, I will guide
thee with mine eye. The Master when he is in Company, sometimes directs his
servant by his eye what to do; and so God. There is an eye in his Providence,
he does sometimes look upon his people, when backsliden, as Christ did upon
Peter, when he had denied him, which makes them remember what they have done
and weep bitterly. The eye of this Providence, says a gracious soul, is upon
me: I must do this and the other Duty. Sometimes Gods Providence carry in them
so much light and evidence, and such plain intimations of his mind and will,
that there is no room for contradiction or doubting, as Genesis 24. 50. The
Providence mentioned by, and afforded to Abraham's servant was so pat and
evident, that Laban and Bethuel answered, The thing proceeds from the Lord.
We cannot speak unto thee bad or good, that is, either one thing or other
against it: It is as Munster and Fagius note, a Synecdoche, expressing both
parts, but intending only one: Good they could not speak against it, evil they
would not. The like Proverbial speech we have, Genesis 31. 24. God charge Laban,
as he was pursuing Jacob, that he should not speak to Jacob neither good nor
bad, by no means direct or indirect to do him violence, by flatteries or
threats to detain him

Why does God does thus guide his people by his Counsel?

Reason 1. Is taken from their necessity of it. And that proceeds partly from
the difficulties attending our present condition, partly from our inability to
manage them, and get through them. As for the difficulties attending us, they
are many and great, Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the afflictions of the righteous,
but the Lord delivers them out of them all. Acts 14. 22. That we must through
much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. And then for the due management
and getting through them, we are not of our selves able to do it. Were we
furnished with natural light and wisdom, sufficient to direct us upon all
occasions, and help us through all our troubles, the Counsel of God might be
spared: But alas, still our abilities are so weak, natural or acquired, and we
are surrounded with temptations to lead us, as ignes fatui do many, out of ^he
way, and into danger, if not destruction: And have such deceitful hearts, that
entertain the enemy many times, pollute and profane Gods Ordinances, we have
need of Gods deliverance and guidance. The best of Gods servants are not
without their sins, Deuteronomy. 32. 28. We are void of Counsel, neither is there
understanding in us. How ignorant, blind, and dull were Israel, an holy people,
in the matters of Religion? How were their neighbors ever and anon, drawing
them to Idolatry; or rather they like wantons gadding abroad to learn the
fashions of the heathenish abominations: When Moses their guide was in the
Mount, how do they run mad upon their Idolatry? How much more should we lie
open to all wickedness, had we not God for our guide? God sees our frailty and
weakness, and therefore complies with our necessities, and conveys his guidance
to us.

2. From their prayers to him for his guidance and Counsel, being sensible both
of their difficulties, they must encounter, and inabilities to overcome them,
and get through them of themselves, they betake themselves to him, and crave
his help, Psalm. 31. 3. Thou art my rock and my fortress, therefore for thy
names sake lead me and guide me. David was wiser than his teachers, had made
great progress in Religion; yet with what argument and importunity? With what
sense and affection begs he the guidance of Gods spirit? For thy name sake lead
me. as if he had said, such are my straits and infirmities, that except thou
guide me by thy Counsel, I shall perish, I shall be lost and undone. What
influence their earnest and believing prayers have on God, appears from Genesis
32. 26. says the Angel to Jacob, Let me go. Jacob would not let him go, unless
he blessed him. Thus as a Prince he has power with God, and prevails for a
blessing. So Moses wrestles with God, Exodus 32. 10. till God says, Let me
alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them. God
speaks as one that is held back from beating his child. Oh the mighty power
that poor praying believing Jacobs and Moseses have with God, to hold as it
were his hand striking! not that there is any impotency in God, but to give a
greater luster to his Ordinance.

3. From the mercy and goodness of his own nature, which puts him upon helping
his people in their Distress. When the father sees his child fallen into distress
he runs and helps: So God when his servants are perplexed and fallen into
doubts, he resolves them by his Counsel; when they are dangerouslly wandering
amongst pits and snares of temptation, he runs in to their preservation or
rescue, and leads them in a safe way. He will not stand over them and see them
perish, but when they are sinking he puts forth his hand as Christ to Peter,
and saves them. Whence does this proceed? From his mercy to them that will pull
them out of danger, as the Angels did Lot, his wife and daughters, taking them
by the hand. So Isa. 49. 10. Hunger or thirst, heat or Sun shall not hurt them.
For he that has mercy on them shall lead them, even by the springs of water
shall he guide them. Which is mentioned not only as a description of his
nature; but likewise as the reason wherefore he would do it. He has mercy on
them; therefore he will do it upon the account of that mercy, that is in his
own bosom.

4. From his promise whereby he has engaged himself, as they stand in need to
administer advice to them, to furnish them with matter of hope and confidence,
Psalm. 32. 8. Isa. 58. 11. To the goodness of his nature he adds his promise.
This he does not to secure himself either from unmercifulness or inconstancy;
but to quicken and encourage them to faith and prayer. Such is the veracity and
faithfulness of God, that when he has engaged his word of promise, he will be
sure to perform. Though men break their words and covenants, are perfidious,
yet let God be true. Let the difficulty as to the performance be what it will,
his word shall not fail, nor his servants that trust in him be disappointed in
their hopes. Notwithstanding all the appearing unlikeliness that Gods promise
to Abraham should be fulfilled to Israel his Seed, that they should possess the
Land of Canaan, when they were in Egypt, and sighing under their burdens and
Taskmasters: yet he will make himself known by his name Jehovah. Josh 23. 14.
Joshua amongst some of his last words tells the Elders and Judges of Israel,
and appeals to their own knowledge, that not one thing has failed of all the
good things, which the Lord spoke concerning them, All things, says he, are
come to pass unto you, and not one thing has failed hereof. This is farther
attested, 1 Kings 8. Blessed be the Lord, says Solomon, that has given rest
unto his people Israel, according to all that he promised: there has not
failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by the hand of Moses
his servant. God will shake even heaven and earth, and overturn them rather
than one promise of his shall fail.

5. He guides them, that he may at last take them up to his glory. All that
care and pains God exercises toward them here, is that he may do them good in
their latter end. Deuteronomy. 8. 16. All the Afflictions upon Israel were that he
might humble them, and prove them, and do them good at their latter end. See
the difference there is betwixt Gods proceeding with the wicked and the
righteous. All the mercies and judgments of God on them do but ripen them for
vengeance, and ruin them in the latter end. Psalm. 92. 7. When the workers of
iniquity do flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed for ever. He puts them
in the fat pastures, and thereby they are fatted for slaughter. Job is a
notable instance of Gods dealing and design with the righteous, Job 42. 12. The
Lord blessed the latter end of Job more then his beginning: And the Apostle
mentions that ye have heard of the patience of Job, and what was the end of the
Lord. Psalm* 37. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace. So in the Text, Thou will guide me with thy counsel here,
and after receive me to glory. This is not only a part of his kindness, but it
is in order to farther kindness. He leads them, (says Gejerus) per Aspera ad
Astra, even by Hell to Heaven.

Object. The next thing is to answer an Objection. Does God guide his people
with his Counsel here? How then comes it to pass they fall into such mistakes
and miscarriages, and those of an heinous nature? As David guilty of gross
miscarriages, that complicated sin in the matter of Uriah. Peter denying his
Master with Oaths and execrations. Did they look like those that were guided by
Gods Counsel, or Satan's temptation, an enemy to mankind, and especially to the
Church and people of God? To this it is answered:

Answ. 1. This was not because he did not afford them Counsel, but because they
did not take his Counsel. There was Counsel enough in the book of nature,
reason, Conscience, and the word of God, that if they had taken heed to it,
they had not fallen so foully as they did.

2. When I said he is an effectual guide, I did not mean as to the preserving
them from all sin, but for the working of them to a state and life of saving
holiness here, and the lifting of them up to glory at the last. Christ prayed
for Peter, that his faith should not fail, the root of it dye, though it was
much weakened as to the act of confession, which is the fruit of faith; with the
heart man believe thunto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made,
as a fruit and sign of the inward persuasion: the current of Peter's faith was
stopped, but the spring remained. God has entered into a Covenant of grace with
his people, by which he has engaged himself to lead them through the valley of
Achor unto the Land of rest, though they may have many wanderings, yet they
shall not perish in the wilderness.

3. Whereas he does not guide them so as to preserve them from all sin, but
lets them fall into mistakes and miscarriages, it is that he may make them more
humble, and exalt his own grace in the pardoning and saving of them. As to
instance in Paul, that after he had fallen into such mistakes and miscarriages,
God should receive him into favor. He was a great sinner; yet adhered to the
letter of the Jewish Law, as touching the Law blameless, he was injurious, a
Persecutor, he breathed out threatenings, he was mad against the Church, a
zealot to do mischief: Christ lets him go on after he had consented to the
death of Stephen* not only go so far, when he might have laid him at his feet
before, but he lets him run on, that in him he might manifest the riches of his
grace, and make him base and vile in his own eyes God who is rich raises to
life those that were dead in sins. Now was that eminent vessel of mercy
ravished with the sense of Gods great goodness, that had mercy on him, and made
him a Minister of reconciliation, Ephesians. 3. 8. Whereof I was made a Minister
according to the gift of the grace of God given unto me, by the effectual
working of his power unto me, who am less than the least of all saints, is this
grace given. Oh that I should preach the Gospel, how astonishing love and grace
is this, that the glorious Gospel of the blessed God should be committed to my
trust, that I should be enabled, and counted faithful, putting me into the
Ministry, who was before a Blasphemer and a Persecutor, and injurious! He
thinks he can never think, speak enough of this grace, never acknowledge and
give praise enough to God. Amongst all the Apostles, none so great an admirer
of free grace as Paul. How low thoughts has he of himself, not worthy to be
called an Apostle, because he persecuted the Church of God? Thus
notwithstanding the enormous outrages of those that are Gods chosen, his grace
shall fetch them in, and notwithstanding great failures, his called shall have
grace enough to bring them unto glory.

2. Use of Informat. 1. Of the goodness of God, as he expresses it in admitting
them into Communion with him, and holding them by the right hand: So in
receiving them up into glory, Ephesians. 2. 6. He has raised us up together, and
made us sit together in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus. By virtue of our
union with Christ our head, that is ascended into glory, and the unchangeable
decree of God that will perfect for us what he has begun in us, we are
glorified. That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his
grace in his kindness toward us through Jesus Christ. For a man that sees his
neighbor in distress, to be so neighbourly as to go and give him such Counsel
as may make him happy, argues great kindness. What is this to the goodness of
God, that condescends to bow the Heavens and come down to visit and Counsel
poor miserable, wandering and distressed sinners in the way wherein they should
walk, leads them by the hand through all the difficulties of this life, into
the Kingdom prepared for them before the foundation of the world. Psalm. 73. 1
Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.

2. This may inform us of the happiness of the servants of God, that have such
a friend and Counselor as none other people in the world. If a man have a
friend that is a great Counselor, and ready upon all occasions to advise him
in his affairs, how great a privilege is it, and how happy is he accounted?
How happy then are the people of God, that have the great God for their guider
and counselor, from whom they may have direction and instructions what to do
in all their straits? They may go to him when and upon what business they
please, for their good, and find him at hand, a very present help without any
money or fee. If it were happiness to Solomon's servants to stand about him, and
hear his wisdom, 1 Kings 10. 8. What happiness then is it for the people of
God, to be in the presence of God, to hear his counsel? What would the servants
of God do, if they had not God to look after them? Prove. 11. 14. Where no
counsel is, the people fall. Were it not for this counsel, when Satan and the
world rage, when temptations and corruptions are many, and the soul full of
fears and perplexity, it would go very ill with the people of God.

3. It informs us whence it comes to pass that the people of God break through
such straits, and conquer such difficulties, it is the conduct of God, that
leads them into the land of rest, that makes way for them through dangers and
exposition. Thus the Israelites passed through the great and terrible
wildernss, wherein were fiery serpents, and scorpions, and drought. Whence had
they ability to do it? Why, the Lord did lead them.

4. It informs us of the reason wherefore the Salvation of good men is so
infallible and certain. A good man is as sure of heaven as if he were already
possessed of it, and though it may be doubtful to his sense, and distrustful
fears, yet his title is good, and there is a certainty of the thing. The
Kingdom is assured to him. He may have his temptations, sins, doubts, fears,
yet is he sure of heaven, Psalm. 37. 37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the
upright, for the end of that man is peace, this man is remarkable, and it is
remarkable how sweetly this man ends, what a blessed end has he? Consider not
only his great afflictions, how the hand of the Lord is upon him, as Job, but
what all ends in, the end is peace and prosperity for ever. Though he usually
does meet with a wilderness betwixt him and his Canaan, yet his end shall be
happiness.

5. If God guide his faithful servants with his counsel, then it is good in
matters of Religion to advise with the people of God, consult those that lie in
the bosom of Christ, to them he discovers his secrets, he makes known his
counsel, John 13. 23, 24. There was leaning on Jesus bosom one of his
Disciples, whom Jesus loved, Simon Peter beckned to him, that he should ask of
whom he spoke, when he told them one of them should betray him.

Use 2. By way of reproof to such as profess themselves Gods servants; and yet
in their straits do not advise with him. Though he offers his counsel and is
ready to afford it, yet they will not have recourse to him. Oh how many
businesses are undertaken without any advising with God! They advise with
others instead of him, Hos. 4. 12. My people ask counsel at their stocks, and
their staff declares unto them. By stocks we are to understand their Idols, or
images made of wood, which they were so blockish as to consult. Like unto them
are they that make them. Therefore the Prophet spoke of their Idols, that they
asked counsel of, under the name of stocks, by way of indignation and scorn.
And then for their staff, we are to note that in former times Magicians had
staves, or rods, whereby they divined. Exodus 7. 12. To this purpose is thatin
Virgil. -- Hac animas ille evocat Orco. It Was sad that any should be so
sottish, and such images of men, as to worship what they had made, and to ask
counsel of wood, part whereof makes a fire and part an Idol: but that a people
in Covenant with God, so graciously dealt with, so delivered, conducted,
increased, was sad indeed. And its laid to the charge of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.
That in his disease he sought not unto the Lord, but to the Physicians. Though
God allow; and require the use of means that are proper: yet he forbids
confidence, and trusting in these, he would have us in the use of them to look
beyond them, but stocks and stones were not proper means for counsel, yet his
people went to these, and neglected him. How God resents this, we may see by
the punishment he inflicts for it. Psalm. 107. 11, 12. Because they rebelled
against the words of God, and contemned the counsel of the most High. Therefore
he brought down their heart with labors they fell down, and there was none to
help. Prove. 1. 24, 26. Ye have set at naught all my counsel and would none of
my reproof, I also will laugh at your calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes, so far will God be from helping those that make small reckoning of his
counsel, that he laughs at them.

Use 3. Exhort. 1. Let us bless God for his gracious condescension, and
goodness that he favors us, so far as to guide and counsel us, Psalm. 16. 7. I
will bless the Lord who has given me counsel. Though he were a King of great
personal worth, yet he looked upon it as a piece of great condescension in God,
to favor him with his counsel, and blesses him for it, what then should we do
who are every way so far below him? How desirous of, and thankful for his
counsel should we be? How should we acknowledge his condescension that looks
through troops of Angels, multitudes of Saints upon us sinners? 2. When we are
in straits let us make our applications, and have our recourse to him, advise
with him. When we are exercised with any doubts, fears, or troubles, let us
open our case to him, and desire his help. Psalm. 85. 8. I will hear what God
the Lord will speak, for he will speak peace unto his people, Psalm. 73. 17.
Gods providence and the wisdom and Justice of his counsel therein were too
painful for him, till he went unto the sanctuary of God, then understood he
their end. 3. Let us close with what counsel he is pleased to give us. We must
take diligent care that we be not mistaken, that we take not that for the
counsel of G^d which is not, when he has imparted his mind unto us, we must
be sure to close with it. Let it appear with what aspect it will, it is that
which tends to our good. It is that which being followed will lead us up to
glory. Now having dispatched the first part of this verse, thou shall guide me
by thy counsel, we proceed to the latter part, and afterward receive me to
glory, wherein we draw this doctrinal position, according to the words of the
Text.

Doct. That after God has guided his faithful servants by his counsel, he will
receive them to glory. He has ever exercised the thoughts of wise and
considerate men, what must become of them after the expiration of this life!
This is the language of every serious man, oh what will become of me! Where
must I be, and what must I do for ever? Nay the more regardless and desolate
sort of men, when they come to die, are not altogether without such thoughts
witness Adrian a great wit, but a bad man, being upon his deathb^d, says he, O
my soul, quae nunc abibis in loca, into what place art thou, a going. Now, as
it is God only who can resolve this doubt, so he has done it by degrees in the
old Testament, more obscurely; in the new, more clearly and distinctly, 2 Timothy
1. 10. Now it is made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ,
who has abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the
Gospel. Though in the old Testament this be exhibited more darkly: yet has he
set down many passages therein, especially as to what shall become of the
righteous, from which an observant person may receive much light, amongst which
this is one, thou will guide me by thy counsel here, and afterward receive me
unto glory He is the King of glory. Psalm. 24. 10. Who is the King of glory? The
Lord of Hosts he is the King of glory. He has glory to dispose of. 1 Chronicles.
16. 27. Glory and honor in his presence. And he will in such a way, and at
such a time, as he thinks fit, convey his servants to it, Psalm. 49. 15. But God
will redeem my Soul foom the power of the grave; for he will receive me, whilst
the wicked shall be thrown into the graves, and into hell, he will receive me
into a state of glory and rest. So Isa. 58. 8. Thy righteousness shall go
before thee, and the glory of the Lord shall be thy rere-ward in the original
it is (...) which Pagnine renders gloria dei colliget te. A very remarkable
passage, importing as much as the glory of the Lord is ready to gather us up
into it, so prepared is it, and fitted for us. If we will but fear aright, obey
aright, and live aright, we shall see the day wherein the glory of the Lord
will stretch its arms round about us, and gather us up into it self, hence the
words of Christ entering into his Fathers Joy and Rest, Psalm. 15. who shall
abide in Gods Tabernacle, and dwell in his holy hill, that is not meant of Zion
or Moriah, those not being able to contain all such as there are mentioned, but
who shall dwell in heaven? who shall be admitted into thy kingdom of glory, to
behold thy face for ever? For the farther illustration and proof of this
position we shall consider four things, 1. What is meant by glory, 2. What kind
of glory this is, that God will receive his servants into, 3. In what manner
God will manage his business, 4. When he will do it.

1. What is meant by glory? The word is (...) which in its primary notation
imports gravity or weight. According to the more frequent use of it, it imports
glory. To both those notations the Apostle seems to have respect. 2 Cor. 4 17.
When he opposes the weight of glory to the light affliction. This glory is
ponderous, it weighs much with his people, more than all their sufferings. Thus
Christ for the Joy set before him endures the cross. Now for the word glory.
The meaning of it is so well known, that I can scarcely offer you a word for
the describing of it, which is not as obscure as it self. It does in this place
import a splendid magnificent state, such as is attended with a confluence of
all good things, even what ever is requisite to the rendering of a man happy.
This the Holy Ghost proposes to us under several notions; as a Crown, Rev. 2.
10. I will give thee a Crown of life; a throne Rev. 3. 4. To him that
overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my Throne; A kingdom, Mat. 6. 33.
seek first the kinglom of God and the righteousness thereof; Rest. Heb. 4. 9.
There remains therefore a rest to the people of God; Joy. Matthew. 25. 21.
Enter thou into the joy of thy Lord; Pleasure. Psalm. 16. 11. At thy right hand
are pleasures for evermore; and here glory. These and such like terms does the
Holy Ghost use to hint unto us the meaning of that state, which God (after he
has guided them with his counsel) will take his servants into it.

2. What kind of glory is this? and here I would give you a particular account
of it. But alas, who am I that I should do it? that I should attempt it? This
is a work fitter for some glorious Angel than for such a worm as I am. In these
mystical and sublime matters we can go no farther, than God is pleased to help
us with special revelation. And what he has revealed concerning the present
business he has set down in his word. But the account we have therein
concerning it, consists rather of some few general hints, than any particular
distinct discoveries. Even the Sacred Penmen themselves, found themselves at a
great loss in this matter, 1 John 3. 2. It does not yet appear what we shall
be; John the beloved John that lay in the bosom of Christ was the beloved
Disciple; he that was in the mount with Christ did not fully understand what
the Saints shall be. And when we have gone over the Bible, perused all that the
holy men of God have left behind them concerning it, and set it together, it
will be but like the Prophets pourtraying of Jerusalem upon a tile, Ezekiel. 4. 1.
a rude draught of that glorious City, or Jerusalem that is above, which is a
thousand times more glorious than ever the earthly Jerusalem was in its most
ample and succesfull estate. Some of those general hints which the word
contains of it, I shall give you in these following heads. 1. Its Ancient. 2.
Real. 3. Supernal. 4. Satisfying. 5. Transcendent. 6. Eternal glory.

1. Its Ancient; it is such as God himself has been enjoying and delighting
himself in from all eternity. Before there was any such thing as worldly glory,
this glory was in being, Joh. 17. 5. And now, Oh Father, glorify thou me with
thine own self, with the glory, which I had with thee before the world was.
Besides which, there is a created glory which God is said to have prepared for
them from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25. 34.

2. It is real. As for the glory of the world its but a mere show or fancy,
Psalm. 39. 6. Surely every man walks in a vain show, (...) in a disguise. The
glory of the world is like a Play, wherein one is a King, another a Queen, a
third a Peasant, according to the Plot and will of the contriver; whereas they
are no such persons but carry a little present resemblance of them. Of this
nature is worldly glory, its rather an appearance, or show of glory, than glory
it self, a piece of pageantry, a show, not real. With what magnificence and
state did Agrippa and Bernice enter into the Judgment Hall? And how does the
Evangelist express it, he says they came (...), Acts 25. 23. With much Fancy.
All their Princely gallantry and bravery in the Judgment of the Evangelist
amounted to no more than a mere conceit or Fancy. They were glorious no doubt
in their own eyes, and admired by the people that love to gaze at Pomp: but
this was but conceitedness, fantastical and vain show. But now this glory that
is to be revealed, but does not yet appear in its refulgency so as it will, is
real and solid, such as has substance and weight in it, 2 Cor. 4. 17. A weight
of glory, the word is (...), in answer to the Hebrew word (...) which, as I
told you, in its primary notion, imports weight, or heaviness. As much
difference as there is between Massy Gold and Copper or Tin: so much between
the glory of this world, and that glory which is laid up for them that love
God, and wait for the coming of Christ.

3. It is supernal or above. Indeed God can create glory wherever he pleases:
If he will have glory to be on Mount Sinai, or Mount Tabor, there glory shall
be. Where this King of glory does manifest himself more fully, there glory does
appear: but the place he has pitched upon for the exhibiting of himself in
glory, in a settled standing way, is above. No place on earth being fit for so
high and noble use, he was pleased to make choice of one above. Psalm. 8. 1. How
excellent is thy name in all the earth, who have set thy glory above the
Heavens? Psalm. 103. 4. The Lord is high above all Nations, and his glory above
the Heavens. Those visible heavens, when Stephen looked up steadfastly into
heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
which if it were more than a created representation of it to his outward and
inward senses, we must understand of a miraculous vision, wherein Christ
arrayed with glory and Majesty, was beheld by him supernaturally enlightened.
Into this glory above then our Lord Christ was received, 1 Timothy 3. 16. So that
if ever we will share in this glory, we must leave the earth, ascend into the
Heavens, and pass beyond both Clouds and Stars.

4. Its a satisfying glory. To have a glory out of the reach of enemies is
much: then to have it satisfying, to answer the desires of souls is a great
matter. As for the glory of the world it does a little dazzle the eye, and
tickle the Fancy, but it does not satisfy the soul. Who had ever greater
glory than Solomon? he was glorious as Job was poor: To a Proverb Mat. 6. 29.
Solomon in all his glory. He built houses, planted Vineyards, made Gardens, and
Orchards, planted trees of all fruits, made pools of water, he had servants and
maidens, possessions of great and small cattle, he gathered silver and gold, he
got him men singers and women singers, he withheld not his heart from any joy:
But was he satisfied, though he had what heart could wish? No, Eccles. 1. 8.
All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it. The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. But this glory I am speaking of,
will afford satisfaction, Psalm. 17. 15. As for me I will behold thy face in
righteousness, I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness. When Peter
upon Mount Tabor had but a little resemblance of it, he was so affected with
it, that he cries out, Mat. 17. 4. Lord it is good for us to be here. Oh what
would he have said if he had been in Heaven, and seen all the glory there! Seen
the blessed Saints and Angels, those pure and perfect creatures, beholding the
face God, Seen the Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, attended most
gloriously, and sitting at the right hand of the Father, heard the incomparable
melody of the Hallelujahs sung. How would this have ravished him? Could I
present you with a glimpse of this glory, you would long to be there, where you
might have a perfect prospect, and then you would say not one half; nor the
thousand part of the glory was told you.

5. It is transcendent Glory. It exceeds all other glory, nay all expressions
and imagination. So great was the glory of God upon Mount Sinai, that the rays
of it made the skin of Moses his face to shine, Exodus 34. 29. The spirit of
grace and glory shone in Stepbens face, when he made his confession of Christ:
all saw his face as it had been the face of an Angel. And so great was the
glory of Christ when he appeared to Paul in the way to Damascus, that it dazzled
his eyes, Acts 22. 11. He could not see for the glory of that light, Nimis
sensibile laedit sensum, The brightness of the Object overcame his sight. And
God does sometime adorn his Church Militant with much glory, Isa 66. 11. That
ye may be delighted with the abundance of her glory. But alas, what is all this
in comparison of the glory of that place I am speaking of. 2 Cor. 4. 17. A far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. The words in the Original are
(...), which is a phrase so high and lofty, that Expositors scarce know how to
express: But this is evident, that it imports such glory as is exceeding high
and transcendent. Here every thing is glorious, Isa. 60. 13. I will make the
place of my feet glorious. Here, to say nothing of Crowns, Thrones, Mansions,
the very Street is pure Gold, Revel. 21. 21. The twelve gates were twelve
pearls, every several gate was of one pearl, and the street of the City was
pure gold, as it were transparent glass. All these illustrious resemblances are
but a shadow of the brightness and glory of Heaven. To add no more, How high is
the account of the Apostle? 1 Cor. 2. 9. As it is written, eye has not seen,
nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God
has prepared for them that love him. What could the Apostle have said more?
The eye has has seen great glory and magnificence: the ear has heard
exquisite music: The heart may imagine a great deal more, Rocks of pure
Diamonds, mountains of Gold, a thousand Suns more glorious then it is; yet
neither can the eye, ear, or heart, reach those glories that are prepared for
them that wait for God.

6. This glory is eternal, and perpetual. As for the glory of the world, its of
a transitory nature. What is the most glorious Potentate but grass? 1 Pet. 1.
24. All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of grass, the
grass withers, and the flower thereof falls away. Man like grass
flourishes in the morning, and is cut down before night. Who has not learned
to say, Sic transit gloria Mundi, Thus the glory of the World passes away.
What Is become of all the Triumphs and Jubilees that have been in the World? How
short was their continuance? How quickly were they over, and how soon
forgotten? 1 Cor. 7. 31. For the fashion of this world passes away. The world
puts it self into this and that fashion: but whatever fashion it puts it self
into, its still in a state of fluctuation. But now this glory is unchangeable,
its not only lasting but everlasting, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Some refer the (...), to
eternal, and then it is as if he should say, Oh this weight of glory is
transcendently, transcendently eternal; that is, so eternal as never to have an
end, 1 Pet. 5. 10 The God of all grace has called us unto his eternal glory by
Christ Jesus.

3. How will God receive his servants to his glory after he has guided them
with his Counsel?

Answ. The Scripture sometimes represents this as done immediately by God
himself, Genesis 5. 24. God took Enoch. That being an extraordinary case, and
perhaps he might proceed in an extraordinary manner, and take him up to glory
by his own immediate hand. But the Scripture does most frequently represent it
to be done by the Ministry of Angels. They minister to the faithful whilst they
are here, Heb. 1. 14. and they minister to them in their passage to glory. (1)
Some of them like a Guard do conduct and lead them thither. 2 Kings 2. 11. A
Chariot of fire, and horses of fire appeared, Elijah went up by a whirlwind
into Heaven. By this Chariot we are to understand Angels which appeared in the
form of a Chariot, and horsemen. So Luke 16. 22. The beggar dyed, and was
carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom. Oh the difference there is betwixt
the esteem the world has of Gods poor servants, and the esteem that God has
of them! The world looks on them as deserving no better company than the very
dogs: But God looks on them as not only worthy of the company, but ministry of
Angels. Whilst Jehojakim and such like, have the burial of an Ass, are thrown
into the earth without lamentation or honor. God appoints his Angels to convey
a poor despised Lazarus into Heaven. 2. Others as Porters, do admit and take
them in, open the gate wide, that the poor servants of God may have an abundant
entrance into the Kingdom of Heaven. Rev. 21. 12. Heavenly Jerusalem has
twelve gates, and at the gates twelve Angels. They stand not here like the
Cher^bims of Paradise with a flaming sword to keep us out, but with stretched
out arms to take and welcome us in. Oh the wonderful grace and love of God! For
a King not only to suffer his poor subjects to come into his Palace; but to
employ his Nobles both in leading them to it, and letting them in: Oh what
Princely favor is it! What condescension and favor is it in God to make his
Angels their guard unto eternal life, the place of happiness, and ready at
heaven gates to receive those great guests, Gods little ones that are of small
account in the world!

4. When is it that God receives the faithful to glory?

Answ. He does it partly at death, then he takes their souls up to glory.
Herein the Papists, Socinians, and some Anabaptists do oppose us, all useing
the same Arguments and Answers; but the Scripture is very clear, Luke 23. 43.
To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. The soul neither sleeps, nor calls at
Purgatory, but strait to Heaven, 2 Cor. 5. 1. We know if our earthly house of
this tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
with hands, eternal in the Heavens. The Apostle groans to be clothed with the
heavenly house, and to be uncloathed of the earthly, so says the spirit,
Revel. 14. 13. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, from henceforth they
rest from their labors. But more completely and fully he does it at the
Resurrection, when both soul and body being reunited, he will take them both to
glory, Job 19. 25, 26. I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand
at the latter day upon the earth. And though after my skin, worms destroy this
body; yet in my flesh shall I see God. Here is a plain account of the
Resurrection of the dead, the coming of Christ, and beatificial vision of God.
So Isa. 33. 17. Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty, they shall behold
the Land that is very far off. This may have relation to Believers being with
Christ, to behold his glory. 1 These. 4. 14. If we believe that Jesus dyed and
rose again: even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. In
the next place we shall give the reasons of the Doctrine, Why will God take his
people into his glory?

Reason 1. Is taken from his own good pleasure; He may do what he will with his
own: Grace is his, and Glory is his, and he may dispose of it as he sees good.
He gives his grace to whom, and in what measure he pleases, so may he dispose
of glory. Matt. 20. 15, Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own? As to the persons he chooses, calls, and saves, Who can say unto him, what
do thou? The Potter has power over his clay, to make one vessel to honor,
another to dishonor? Now we are told what the pleasure of God is, Luke 12. 32.
Fear not little-flock, it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a Kingdom.
And what needs any farther reason to prove the lawfulness and equity of it. If
he be for it, what has any one to do to be against it, Romans 21. 9. 21, 23.
What if God be willing to make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of
mercy, which he has before prepared unto glory, shall any one dare to question
his proceedings? What will men make of God? Shall the Potter have more power
over his clay, than God has over his creature? That is the clay, and he the
Potter? Nay O man, who art thou that replyest against God?

Reas. 2. Is taken from his promise, whereby he has engaged himself to do it.
As he has promised to guide them by his counsel, and given his Angels charge
concerning them: so he has engaged himself, and given his royal word for it,
that however mean and despicable they are, and are exercised with diverse
afflictions, yet after they have suffered a while, he will take them up unto
himself, Psalm. 84. 11. He will give grace and glory, and will withhold no good
thing from them that walk uprightly, Dan. 12. 3. They that be wise shall shine
as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to righteousness
shall shine as the stars for ever, and ever. Oh what a ravishing truth is this!
Take this along with you. Go home and wonder, that such poor mortal sinful
carcases as we, should shine as the firmament, the stars for ever, nay as the
Sun, Mat. 13, 43. Then shall the righteous shine, as the Sun in the Kingdom of
the Father. If you have ears, hearken to this; if you have hearts to be
affected with the glorious grace of God to sinners through Christ. Let men and
Angels, Heaven and Earth, stand astonished at it for ever and ever. As sure as
this is the word of God, this honor shall be done his Saints. If you will not
receive and be affected with this truth, get you another bible that may affect
you more and reward you better. Let the worldlings, voluptuous, ambitious, go
to their Mammon, their delicious fare, their preferments, and see what they
will do for them. What can they promise? more than they will ever perform, they
can do nothing but help to a treasure of wrath, and fearful recompense. Not one
Iota, not one title of Gods word shall fail. Here are words and more than bare
words of eternal life, which are delivered by truth it self, God that cannot
deceive, God that cannot lie. This truth I will stick by, and yet that such a
poor mouldring, ever dying and perishing creature as I, ready to turn to
putrefaction and dust, should be carried above the heavens, have the conduct of
Angels, and the welcome of those blessed creatures unto the land of happiness,
how does it amaze me with wonder at free grace! What a thing is this? Though it
be great, yet he (having given his word) will be sure to effect it: as for
other reasons, so this in particular, that he has given it under his hand as
well as engaged his word, called heaven and earth to witness. Before he has
issued out his promise, he does such things for his own pleasure, but when he
has granted his promise a farther reason, accurs to strengthen our consolation
and good hopes through grace.

Reas. 3. Is taken from the will of Christ, who upon the account of his
interest in the Father, and his own merits intercedes with his father to do it.
Our blessed Savior has ever been concerned about man's welfare. None save
Christ could bestead us, when we were thrown out of Paradise, then, says
Christ, I will undertake, be surety for them. Lo I come to do thy will, O God,
I will pay the debt and ransom them though it cost me dear. This loss shall be
for their advantage, they shall be conveyed to another and better estate than
ever they were in upon earth. When Christ was upon earth he died for them, and
now he is in heaven he pleads his death, and as for other purposes so for this
in particular, that God would gather in his elect, that they may be where he
is. O Lord and Father remember my sufferings, how the Messiah was not cut off
for himself, not for any sin of his own. He knew no sin, but was made sin for
thy people, he bore their sins on his body on the tree. And our Lord ever livet
h to make intercession for his people, Heb. 7. 25. What his intercession is you
may, learn partly from his intercession on earth and his last desires, he left
this to uphold the hearts of his people in his will and Testament, which by the
death of the Testator is confirmed to us, Joh. 17. 24. Father, I will that they
also, whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me. Oh sweet words! that where he was his people
should be. His lips were as a thread of scarlet and his words comely. His lips
drop sweet smelling myrrh, partly by his promise. John 12. 26. If any man serve
me, let him follow me, and where I am, there shall also my servants be, what
Christ has promised he can make good, he did reveal his Fathers mind, and God
has a mighty regard to the will of his Son. As the Son never disobeyed the
will of the Father: so the Father never denied the request of his son. Joh. 11.
41. 42. Father I thank thee that thou have heard me, and I know that thou
hear me always. Could Christ prevail while on earth for the raising of
Lazarus to life? Now he is in heaven, his arguments and interest are strong and
great enough to raise his people to glory.

Reas. 4. God will take his servants to glory, that Christ may enjoy the
benefit of his own purchase. He has made a double purchase. He has purchased
glory for them, and them for it. As for glory it is the purchased possession or
inheritance. 1 Ephesians. 1. 14. And he has purchased his Church with his own blood,
we are redeemed, not with corruptible things, as silver and Gold, from our vain
Conversation, that we may be made meet for his his glory, but with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, or without spot. Its highly
reasonable Christ should have his bargain that he has paid considerably for,
and he shall have the fruit of this double purchase without fraud from the just
God, whose ways are equal and who deceives not. Christ has redeemed his
people that were slaves to sin and Satan, has wrought deliverance for the
Captives, has bought an inheritance in glory for them, and when he has guided
them by his Counsel here, without farther delay afterward they shall be
received up into glory.

Reas. 5. That the head and members may be together. That Christ is their head
the Scripture thews, Ephesians. 5. 23. And that he is in heaven we are taught in
Scripture. 1 Timothy 3. 16. God that was manifest in the flesh -- was received up
into glory. And that the head and members should be together is undeniable,
whether it be a body Natural, Politic, or Mystical, and so our Savior seems
to hold forth. Joh. 12. 26. And for this reason he receives them up into glory,
that head and members that have suffered together may rejoice together Romans 8.
17. Being heirs of God joint heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with
him, that we may be also glorified together.

Reas. 6. May be drawn from the preparation that has been made in order to the
taking of them up to glory. 1. God has prepared glory for them. Mat. 25. 34.
Inherit the Kingdom prepared for you. John 14. 2. I go to prepare a place for
you. Those invisible, inexplicable things of glory, God has prepared for them
that love him. This is the City that God has prepared for them that are not
minded to take up with the Kingdom of this world or the glory thereof. Heb. 11.
6. And this preparation was made, partly by the erecting of this glory at the
Creation; partly by sending his Son to purchase it for them. 2. He has
prepared them for it. They are the vessels of mercy which he has before
prepared unto glory. Romans 9. 23. He makes them meet to be partakers of the
inheritance of the Saints in light. Col. 1. 12. What work does God make,
preparing happiness for them by his goodness, his grace and mercy, and
preparing them by sanctification of the spirit, belief of the truth, that they
may partake with those that are sanctified, of the glory ordained and made
ready for them.

Reas. 7. From their prayers, they pray that they may be received up into
glory. And when they have finished their course here, they have done the work
appointed them to do, how do they long to appear before God in glory! There is
no one who retains any thing of the nature of a man: but he would when he dies,
enter into glory, Numb. 23. 10. Balaam says, let me die the death of the
righteous, and let my last end be like his. The greatest despisers of
godliness, the persecutors of the servants of God, that were thorns in the eyes
of them by their holy Conversation, and stinging convictions of their own
wickedness, would desire to be like these that they bitterly hated and injured.
What then may be expected from those, that are of better principles and
affections, we may well account, that as they pray that God would guide them by
his Counsel here, so receive them into glory. How does Moses desire to see Gods
glory, the back parts of which he was only capable of beholding flesh, for he
could not see his face and live. Exodus 33. 18. I beseech thee (says he to God)
show me thy glory. By the goodness they partake of now, they are inflamed with
earnest desire to see the face of God in glory, and how glorious will the mercy
and grace of God appear in heaven?

Last Reas. He takes them up into glory, that he may recompense them for the
service they have done. They have done him service, though all according to
strictness of demand renders them no more than unprofitable servants, that have
but done and not fully what they ought to have done. Yet God is not unmindful
of the good wills and the labors of his servants, Heb. 6. 10. God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labor of love, which ye have showed
toward his name -- And he so remembers it as to requite it, as in other ways,
so principally in receiving them up into glory, Mat. 25. 34. Inherit the
Kingdom prepared for you, for I was an hungered and ye gave me meat, I was a
thirsty and ye gave me drink. -- Hence it is called a reward, Heb. 11. 26. He
had respect to the recompense of reward. Not that our service does bear any
proportion to it, but that God has promised glory thereunto. Be thou faithful
unto death, and thou shall have a Crown of life.

Use 1. of Information Of the wonderful goodness of God. What that he should
be at the pains and care of guiding us here, leading us by the hand, teaching
us to walk in his ways, leading us in the ways of uprightness! and after he
has done this take us up to glory, oh what goodness is this! Alas, who or what
are we, that we should have to do with glory? We have all sinned and come short
of the glory of God. Romans 3. 23. That is of deserving it by any works or
performances of our own. We are not worthy of the least crumb of bread. We have
more reason to think of prisons, gibbets, flames, and damnation than glory,
when we consider our deservings from God. This is perfectly an act of grace and
faithfulness, grace in making the promise, faithfulness in performing it.

2. This informs us of the profitableness of Religion. We may neglect,
blaspheme and persecute it, but there is no way comparable to it. Men may
wonder and scorn at it, and think strange, that serious professors run not with
them into the same excess, bear patiently reproaches, greatly esteem the
reproach of Christ, take joyfully the spoiling of their goods, glory in
tribulations, not accept of deliverance: but the servants of God see reason for
it, and great advantage in Religion though with persecution. They have as much
as heart can wish. Whom have I in heaven but thee; there is none on earth that
I desire beside thee. In the words immediately following. 1 Timothy 4. 8.
Godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come. Would you have honor, pleasure, length of
days? Prove. 3. 16, 17. Length of days is in her right hand, and in her left
hand are riches and honor. Her ways are ways of pleasantness. If these are not
given in a carnal and sensual way, they are in a nobler and better.

3. This informs us of the happiness of the servants of God. If we see a man
that has great things toward him, we count him an happy man. Mal. 3. 15. We
count the proud blessed, not because they are proud, but because (as it is
said) they have something to be proud of. Happy then is the man that is in this
case, that has God for his Lord, that has right to glory, has an expectancy
of a Kingdom of glory, which he shall not miss of, or be in possibility to be
dispossessed of. A Kingdom that shall not be shaken. There is abundance of
difference betwixt the condition of worldly men and the servants of God. As for
the former, their happiness is only for term of life; but for the other their
misery is only so.

Use 2. By way of exhortation, 1. More generally. To all you who would do well
hereafter, labor to be holy and the servants of God here. Follow not your own
understandings, in all your ways acknowledge him, by leaning upon him for
direction and he shall direct your paths. Follow not the perverse and
licentious dictates of your corrupt wills; but endeavor to know what the will
of the Lord is, that you may do it. There is no man who has the use of reason:
but he concerns himself in the young man's question, Mat. 19. 16. Good Master
what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life? That you may have
eternal life, see (...)t you be the servants of God in all manner of con(...)
sation; let it be your care to study, know, love, honor, obey, and serve him.
Though Carnal men throw dirt in your faces and disquiet you, yet go on in the
discharge of your duty and prefer your own safety before their good will.
Alas! what is the affection, what is the good will of men worth, what can it
do for us when we come to die, if thereby we have procured Gods displeasure?
God, and God only can bestead us then, then we are left to approve our hearts
unto God, to God who will be our judge. 2. More particularly, let us be under
what discouragement soever from the world may be, this may lift up our hearts
that our Redemption draws nigh, we may rejoice, and be exceeding glad when our
friends are weeping about us that great is our reward in heaven. Romans 5. 2.
Having peace with God we rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

2. With cheerfulness perform those services God is pleased to call you to. God
sometimes calls his servants to undertake great and difficult services, and if
he deal so with us, let us not think strange concerning the fiery trial, and be
discouraged by temporary sufferings, which are but for a moment, to let down
our hope, expectation, and prosecution of eternal glory, which will abundantly
recompense for all the sorrows of the servants of God. Thus Moses was animated
under banishment, when he was in as fair a way to have had an abiding place,
and Country as any, having respect to the recompense of reward, Heb. 11. 24,
25, 26. And hereupon he refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs daughter,
whereby if he had been minded, he might have entitled himself to advancement.

3. With patience undergo the sufferings he may exercise you with. Who would
not with patience endure a bad day, so that he might be a Prince at night? Let
us look unto Jesus and observe, what bore him up under cruel mockings, under
bloody affronts and injuries, Heb. 12. 2. For the joy that was set before him
he endured the Cross, despised the shame. He was a famous instance of
suffering. What contradiction of sinners did he endure against him? and glory
set before him, did keep his hand above discouragement. Many a bitter cup did
he drink, many a stormy day did he endure, before he came to his pleasant
harbor. He was exercised with tossings, treasons, torments, he sets the joy
before him? And so should we, though we meet with many a stormy day, yet let us
consider that a night of repose will come; and the joy of glory will preserve
us from being weary, or fainting in our ^inds, and as the woman that has
brought forth a manchild, it will make us forget all our sorrows. What is there
glory ordained and prepared for the generation of the Just? This may make them
lift up their heads and hearts in trouble.

Use 3. Of Consolation to you, who are the servants of God. Behold I bring you
glad tidings of great joy! Here is that which may make the lame leap, and go
skipping and praising God. What an affectionate passage was that, Exodus 16. 17.
In the morning ye shall see the glory of the Lord, when they had deserved by
their murmurings, his terrible and avenging appearance. But what was that to
this glory more refulgent, magnificent, and ravishing? You are exercised here
with manifold evils, temptations, sins, miseries, but there is a day
approaching that will abundantly recompense your labor of love. Comfort one
another with these words, 1 These. 4. 16, 18. That the Lord shall descend from
heaven with a shout, and with the voice of the Archangel, Then we shall meet
with the Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord. That is, after
he has guided us by his Counsel, we shall be received by his glory, but at the
grand Assize, Christ his appearance shall be more solemn, and the Saints shall
receive the utmost perfection of their glory in soul and body with Christ for
ever.

SERMON VI.
Psalm 73. 25. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth
that I desire besides thee.
IT is the proper work of all the Creatures to employ themselves in celebrating
the perfections of the great Creator. That is the end both of their existence
and preservation. This good men know, and therefore employ themselves therein.
Hereof we have an instance in the Psalmist in this place, who having in the
precedeing Verses discoursed of Gods great goodness to him, is so affected and
moved therewith, that he betakes himself to an holy glorying, and boasting in
him, as if he should say, Oh what a God have I! Oh what love has he expressed
to my poor soul! How many ways does his favor break forth upon me? As for time
past, he has taken me into communion with him, and holden me by the right
hand; and for the time to come, he will guide me with his Counsel, and
afterward receive me up into glory. Oh! What a God is this? Who is there either
in heaven or earth may be compared to him? Amongst that glorious Constellation
of Saints and Angels that are above, there is none like him. Oh how am I
ravished while I behold him! I cannot think of him, I cannot speak of him
without admiration and wonder: Such rays and beams of divine glory proceed
from his blessed face, that make my poor heart even to dance and leap within
me. I did indeed in my distress, entertain many peevish and hard thoughts of
him; but I was a beast for it. I see there is that excellency in him, that
neither Heaven nor earth can equal.

The words are an assertion of the supreme and transcendent excellency that is
in God. This the Psalmist expresses in two passages: 1. Whom have I in Heaven
but thee? (2.) And there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. In the
Original (...) with thee, that is equal with thee, as Gejerus notes. There are
things in Heaven that I value, and things on earth that are excellent, even the
excellent of the earth: but none either in Heaven or Earth, that I make such
reckoning of as I do of thee. From these two parts of this Verse take this,

Doct. That there is none either in Heaven or Earth, either amongst Angels or
men like unto God, or to be desired in equality with him. Indeed the Angels are
very goodly creatures, and holy men have much worth in them: but God is far
above them both. There are glorious things in Heaven, and curious things on
earth, but none comparable unto God. When all is done, he is the glory as well
as the Author of the whole Creation. As for the proof of the point, he himself
affirms it, Isa. 46. 9. I am God, and there is none else, I am God, and there
is none like me. So Jer. 49. 19. Who is like me, not only as to my glorious
perfections in my nature: But as to the manifestation of my power, wisdom,
goodness. Whom can the Creature propound to it self as an object equal in
goodness, might, and knowledge, with my self? And the servants of God teach
this, that there is none like God: They have found by experience that there is
none to be compared to him, Deuteronomy. 33. 26. There is none like unto the God of
Jesurun, who rides upon the heaven in thy help, and in his excellency on the
sky. Psalm. 89. 6. Who in the Heavens can be compared unto the Lord? Who
amongst the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord. 1 King. 8. 23.
There is no God like thee in heaven above, or on earth beneath. This is the
constant language of the Scripture, None like God, none to be compared with
God, none equal to him, which saying I could wish were ever sounding in our
ears, that so we might yield him that respect which the incomparable perfection
of his nature, and unspeakable communication of his goodness calls for.

1. Then we are to consider in what respect there is none like to, or to be
compared with God.

1. There is none like him in his Nature, or Attributes, which are such, as
none else are endued with.

1. In his knowledge and wisdom none like him. Some men know very much, and
Angels know incomparably more: but God knows infinitely more than either He
knows whatever is to be known, what is possible to be comprehended by
knowledge. There is not any thing in Heaven or Earth, Sea, or Land, but he is
acquainted with it. He knows all persons and all their concernments. He knows
all things past, present, and to come, and that distinctly and infallibly. Jer.
32. 19. Thine eyes are upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give every one
according to his ways. And that which adds much to the perfection of his
knowledge, is this, that those things which lie in the deepest obscurity, and
are most remote from humane observation, are as obvious to him as any other
things whatsoever, Jer. 23. 23, 24. I am a God at hand, and not afar off. Can
any hide himself in secret places that I shall not see him says the Lord? And
that which does yet further commend his knowledge to us, is this, that he knows
how to improve it, and make it serve his own interest. Some men have a great
deal of knowledge, but know not how to use it: but God by his infinite wisdom
orders things so, that whatever falls out in the world (let the Providence seem
dark and harsh) yet he makes it serviceable to his glory, and he governs the
actions of his enemies, which they mean for their particular malicious ends,
unto his own service and praise.

2. There is none like God in his might and power. Some men have much power,
but the Angels excel in strength, they are able to do mighty things; but God
does quite transcend them. Who is like unto thee O Lord, amongst the gods who
is like thee? Amongst the gods is in the Original (...) which Tremelius and
Junius render inter fortissimos, amongst the most mighty ones. So Psalm. 89. 8.
O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? Who is able to stand
before him? What are Armies, Kingdoms, Empires, when he engages against them?
What creature in all the world is there so great and potent, which he is not
able to frown into fear and trembling, anguish and horror? What difficulty is
there which he is not able to break through and conquer? Is there any thing too
hard for the Lord, Genesis 18. 14. I am the Lord, the God of all flesh, is there
any thing too hard for me? Nothing can be too hard for him, for nothing is hard
to him: There are only two sorts of things which cannot be done by God; the
first, those which imply a contradiction, and those cannot be done, as a thing
cannot be, and not be at the same time, etc. The second are those which imply
impotency: As we say God cannot sin, so Tit. 1. 2. In hope of eternal life,
which God that cannot lie promised. Now that he cannot do the first, arises
from the impossibility of the thing in it self. And that he cannot do the
second, arises from the perfection of his nature, that is such, that it can do
nothing, but what is holy and good. But then for whatsoever things are possible
to be done, and fit to be done, he can do them.

3. There is none like God in his Sovereignty and Dominion. There are some
Princes have great Sovereignty, as Ahasuerus, who is supposed to be that
Xerxes, whereof we have mention in profane History, Esth. 1. 1. But what is this
in comparison of the Sovereignty which God has? The mountains fly before him,
the Heavens melt, the Seas and Rivers are made a Crystal wall for the ransomed
to pass over, the Sun stands still, the Stars fight, the winds are still when
he gives command; and inflated Monarchs commanding the creatures from their
natural course, have discovered more their prodigious folly than power. In all
this great earth there is not a spot of ground but it is his. Though he lets it
out to the sons of men, yet he still remains the chief Proprietary and Lord, he
is the chief Lord, and so will be to the worlds end. He is the King of all the
earth, Psalm. 47. 27. He is a great King over all the earth. Men count it a
great matt^r if they can but once possess themselves of a l^ttle part of the
earth: But he is Lord of all. The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.
If I (...) hungry I would not tell thee, for the world is mine, Psalm. 50. 12.
What is a small Center to the wide circumference of the Heavens? And what are
the visible Heavens, to the Heaven of Heavens that cannot contain him.

4. There is none like him in his Ubiquity, or Omnipresence. He is every where,
neither man nor Angel can be in several places at the same time. Their alicubi,
being in some place* or ubi excludes alibi elsewhere, being in another place or
space: But God is every where at one and the same instant, included by,
excluded out of no place, Psalm. 139. 7, 12. Whither shall I go from thy spirit?
or whither shall I flee from thy presence. Here David discourses of Gods
Omnipresence, and shows it is such, that neither Heaven nor Earth; neither Sea
nor Land; the depth of the Sea, the uttermost parts of the Earth; neither light
nor darkness can secure us from him, or hide us from his presence, Jer. 23. 24.
Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the
Lord? Do not I fill heaven and earth says the Lord? Oh great is the Earth, and
how spacious are the Heavens! and yet he fills Heaven and Earth. How wonderful
is God herein? To think he should fill up all places and distances, Oh how
amazing is it!

5. There is none like God in his benignity and goodness. There are some drops
of it in men and Angels, but in him there is an whole Ocean. How Ioth is he to
be angry, how apt to forgive, how ready to show mercy, and communicate of his
goodness? Psalm. 33 5. The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. He has
infinite goodness in him, and he communicates thereof unto his creatures. He
deals it out to Angels and men. The fowls of the air, the beasts of the field,
the fish of the Sea, they all live and feast upon his goodness. There is not a
fly, or worm, but it lives upon the goodness of God. And then for the state of
his people in the life to come, his designs are wonderful, Psalm. 31. 19. Oh how
great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which
thou have wrought for them that trust in thee! His wine is all good, but yet he
has some that is better than the rest, which he keeps till the last.

6. There is none like him in Majesty and Glory. There are some creatures that
be very glorious. The Sun is a very glorious creature: What eye can withstand
the strength of its rays, behold its glory without dazzling: when it breaks
forth, the Stars disappear as ashamed of themselves: but yet all the glory
thereof is but dark and despicable, in comparison of what is in God. When he
steps forth, then the Sun it self disappears, as ashamed of its self. If he
speak the word, the Sun is turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, Joel
2. 31. When he afforded a little manifestation of himself upon Mount Sinai,
what a strange appearance was there? Exodus 24. 17. The sight of the glory of
the Lord was like consuming fire on the top of the mountain, in the eyes of the
children of Israel. Oh then what will the sight of him be when he appears in
all his Glory?

2. As there is none like him in his nature, so neither is any one like him in
his Laws, which do exceed all Laws whatsoever. Many Princes in the world have
had good and wholesome Laws; but none had ever any comparable to the Laws of God.
Deuteronomy. 4. 8. And what Nation is there so great, who has statutes and judgments
so righteous as all this Law, which I s^t before you this day. As if he had
said, bring me a Nation of the world that has such Laws as you have. That
these Laws are none such Laws, I shall show in five particularss

1. In their extraction there are no Laws like the Laws of God. They come from
heaven. If any ask concerning them, as our Savior did the chief Priests and
Elders concerning John's Baptism, whether they are from heaven, or from men, we
may safely answer, from heaven. All other Laws come from the earth, but his
come from heaven. There his tribunal is, and from thence he dates those Laws
whereby he rules the world. It is a commendation to any thing, that it comes
from heaven, Psalm. 78. 24. Manna was more rare because it came from heaven, it
is called heavenly food, the corn of heaven. So this Law, as the pure river of
the water of life clear as Crystal, Rev. 22. 1. proceeds from the Throne of
God and of the Lamb. And there needs little proof of it, for it breaths forth
heaven in every part of it.

2. In their supreme authority they are such as are above all Laws whatsoever,
and to be observed before them. There are not any Laws of any Prince or state
in the world, but the Laws of God are above them. Other Laws may and ought to
be respected, but yet this will ever be the standing prerogative of the Laws of
God to take place before them. Nay so far are other Laws from an equality with
his, that they are no further to be obeyed than they comply with them. And the
Ministers of God are, as to be faithful in declaring the whole counsel of God,
that they may be clear from the blood of all men; so they are to take heed that
they add not to this Law. And what Balaam under the constraint of the spirit of
God and restraint too, said, that should the ambassador of Christ out of good
will and obedience, Numb. 24. 13. If Balack would give me his house full of
silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the commandment of the Lord, to do either
good or bad of mine own mind: but what the Lord says that will I speak. Nay
though there be the wages of righteousness proffered, and the word of a King for
the performance, as Balaam had: yet should we not step aside from the word of
God.

3. In their spirirituality no laws are like the laws of God. They are such as
reach the inner man, our thoughts most reserved, our reasonings most suitable
and private, our designs most deep and latent. As for the Laws of men they
reach only the outward man, and no more falls under their authority or
cognizance: but the word of God is a discerner of the thoughts, and intents of
the heart, Heb. 4. 12. So that there is no man that makes conscience of it, but
if he have so much as an evil thought in his heart, he is concerned about it.
Now this is a commendation of Laws, that they are such as help to secure the
inner man: for as long as there are evil workings, there the life cannot be
good. The Law of God who is the Lord of the Conscience and to whom it only is
subject, does bid the inner man keep all right there, and so preserves the
ministerial acts of the outward regular and in order.

4. In their Justice and righteousnesness there are no Laws comparable to them,
being such, as that (may they be observed) there will be no such thing as
injury or wrong in the world. This was the matter of Moses his challenge to the
Israelites Deuteronomy. 4. 8. To show whether any Nation under the Sun had such
Statutes and Ordinances as they. There were at that time much people in the
world, and many Laws; but there were none that were attended with such Justice
as the Laws of Israel. So far are the Laws of God from allowing evil, that they
allow not any motions that way, Mat. 5. 4, 22, 27, 28. An angry word is
forbidden as well as Murder and Adultery in the heart, nor do they allow any
appearance. 1 These. 5. 22. Abstain from all appearance of evil.

5. There are no Laws comparable to the Laws of God in respect of comfort and
sweetness. If a man be distressed or exercised with trouble of mind, with
inward horrors, what is there in all this world that can give him comfort, that
can afford relief, but the word of God, Psalm. 119. 50. This is my comfort in my
affliction, for thy word has quickened me. Nothing but this word can afford
relief. verse. 92. Unless thy Law had been my delight, I should then have
perished in mine affliction. As the word contains precepts of Piety and virtue;
so it affords notable consolations to encourage us there^nto. What condition
can a man be in, but he may receive comfort therefrom? If I ly^e on my sick bed
and can lay hold on a promise, how reviving must it be, what a cordial to raise
me up? This word is a rich Mine of comforts for all times and conditions.

6. There are no Laws like Gods in duration. They are eternal and are not to
give place to any succeeding Laws. As for humane Laws they expire and are
disanulled every day, but the Laws of God endure for ever. 1* Pet. 1. 24, 25.
The grass withers, the flower thereof falls away; but the word of the Lord
endures for ever.

3. There is none like God in his works, which are such as none ever did or
could perform. Psalm. 86. 8. Among the Gods there is none like unto thee O Lord,
neither are there any works like unto thy works. And it was requisite that God,
who is above others should perform such works as none else can do. His works
are like himself, of a transcendent nature, exceeding the works of all
creatures whatsoever. Now his works are. 1. That of Creation, which was so
great and stupendous, that the very Angels gave forth a shout upon the view of
it. Job 38. 7. When the morning Stars sang together, and all the Sons of God
shouted for joy. As upon the building of the Temple the people shouted. Ezra 3.
11. When they praised the Lord because the foundation of the house of the Lord
was laid. Zech. 4. 7. He shall bring forth the head stone thereof with
shouting, crying, Grace, Grace, unto it. No marvel that the Angels wonder at
Gods work. For with what strange and wonderful art has he formed every thing?
As for the heavens what vast bodies are they? How rapid and orderly are they in
their motions? And with what variety of curious lights are they decked and
adorned? And for the Earth likewise, what a vast body is it? How strangely does
it hang in the midst of Heaven? To build Castles in the Air, for men to attempt
is a proverbial vanity. God has built this vast body of the Earth with all the
burden upon it in the Air hanging on nothing but his word. With what variety of
creatures does the Earth abound? And for the Sea, what a vast body likewise is
it? How does it roll and tumble it self, in its pride and greatness? And what
rarities and wonders does it afford? But alas, I need not to speak of these,
for what Creature is there, which does not express so much of the Creators
widom, and skill, as is enough to fill us with admiration?

2. There Is his work of Redemption, or the reconciling of the world to himself
by the death of his Son, which doubtless is the noblest act that ever the world
was witness of, and such as will be admired as long as eternity it self shall
endure. Upon the Creation the Angels shout, but when they come to this, they
find it so full of mysteries that they are astonished, 1 Pet. 1. 12. Which
things the Angels desire to look into. Oh Sirs, that the Word should be made
flesh and dwell amongst us, and perform what he did, was a work so sublime and
high, that it was not for any but God, so much as to think of it.

3. There is his work of Providence. He has his eye upon all his Creatures,
takes care of them and provides for them; so that they all have convenient and
seasonable sustenance, Psalm. 145. 15. The eyes of all things wait on thee, and
thou give them their meat in due season. He feeds the young Lions, he has
taught all creatures whither to look, to cry to him when they lack, he gives
places of shelter to them; he gives convenience for rest, and as he provides
for them; so he rules them and maintains them in that order wherein they are,
keeping one from devouring another. He keeps Devils from devouring men, and men
from destroying each other. He likewise keeps the beasts of the field from
offering violence to us, which otherwise would make a prey of us. He likewise
restrains the Elements; and keeps them in order, which otherwise would turn the
world into a Tophet of horror and confusion. If he let loose the fire and water
a little upon each other, with what terrible thundrings and lightnings do they
fill the world, enough to make the inhabitants thereof creep under the
mountains for protection and defense. If he let the Air a little into the
bowels of the earth, what dismal convulsions and tremblings does it occasion?
It makes it stagger and reel like a drunken man. For him to keep as he does,
the several Elements in such harmony and order, is a great work. And he
likewise restrains the sea from overflowing the earth. This he insists on to
Job as an argument of his transcendent power and greatness, Job 38. 11.
Hitherto shall thou come; but no farther and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed. God sets doors and bars to the waters. Hereunto I might add his notable
delivering his people and destroying their enemies, whereby God has made his
name great, and terrible in the world, and has showed a tender regard of his
servants, not sparing Kingdoms for their sakes, bringing down the mighty,
making the worm Jacob to thresh the Mountains. But

2. For what uses or purposes, there is none like him.

2. None like God to be advised with, in straits and troubles. We cannot be in
such straits but he can put us into a way whereby we may escape. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
He will with the temptation also make a way to escape, that they may be able to
bear it. What a strait was Asaph in about the prosperity of the wicked and the
adversity of the Godly, but he advises with God in this matter, who was
faithful and resolved him and quieted him. He could get no satisfaction till he
went to him, and when he came to him he was satisfied. And all that I shall add
is, that he is hard to be satisfied whom God cannot satisfy.

2. None like to God, to be invocated or called upon. For as he is able to
help; so he is willing to do it: Such is his addictedness to hear prayer, that
it is become one of his standing titles, Psalm. 65. 2. O thou that hear
Prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. No sooner sometimes have his people
done praying, but he gives them a gracious Answer, 2 Kings 20. 4, 5. Thus
Isaiah must return immediately after the delivery of his message to Hezekiah,
and tells him that his prayer was heard, a quick return did God make. Nay
sometimes he does it while they are praying, Dan. 9. 20. Whilst Daniel was
praying, confessing his own and the peoples sins, even while he was speaking in
prayer, Gabriel being caused to fly swiftly, came and touched him, ver. 23. He
says, that at the beginning of his supplication, the commandment came forth,
and he was sent to tell him things which should be afterward brought to pass.
Nay farther, sometimes he does it before they pray, Psalm. 3. 4. I cried unto
the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holy hill. So our
Translation renders it in the Preter-tense, but the word is (...) which is in
the future, I will call and he heard me, as if he should have said, I was about
to pray to the Lord, and am still resolved to do it: but as to that which I
thought to beg of him he has happily prevented me; for he has given it me
before I asked him for it. So Isa. 65. 24. Before they call I will answer, and
whiles they are yet speaking I will hear. While Daniel was speaking God heard,
and before David cried to the Lord he heard him. It is much grace in him to
grant our requests when we have made them, and persevered in soliciting his
savor, more to answer whiles we are making our requests, but to do it before
we make them, does marvellously express the goodness of his nature.

3. There is none like God to be confided and trusted in. Men are deceitful and
false, and apt to fail those that trust in them: They make fair flourishes and
pretenses, when a man has no occasion to use them, and afterward when he
needs the performance of their promises, turn their backs upon him; but God is
as firm as the very rocks. How ordinarily does the Scripture propose him as the
Rock of his people, Psalm. 31. 3. Thou art my rock. Deuteronomy. 32. 4. He is the Rock,
withal telling us, there is none worthy of that title but he, 2 Samuel 22. 32.
Who is a rock save our God? Who ever was disappointed by this God, whose ways
are perfect? Who ever was ashamed that trusted in him? Psalm. 22. 4. Our fathers
trusted in thee, they trusted in thee and were delivered. And Psalm. 28. 7. My
heart trusted in him, and I am helped.

4. There is none like, or beside God to be loved or desired. Such is the
generousness of man's heart, that it will bestow it self upon one thing or
other. Now there is none in all the world so worthy thereof as God; and
therefore he forbids us to bestow it upon other things, and commands us to
bestow it upon him, 1 John 2. 15. Love not the world, neither the things that
are in the world: if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in
him. Whom then must we bestow our love on? Prove. 23. 26. My son give me thine
heart. And it was Asaphs sense of his peculiar fitness for it; that made him
cry out Whom have I in heaven but thee, and there is none on earth that I
desire in comparison of thee.

5. There is none like God to be worshipped and adored. He is worthy of divine
and Religious worship, that is to be worshipped as the Author of what good we
enjoy, the Judge of our actions, and disposer of our conditions, and there is
none else worthy of it but he, Matthew. 4. 10. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. Our Savior speaks not here of Civil
worship, for such we are to yield to others: but such as is religious, and that
he shows is peculiar to God. There is neither Saint nor Angel that is fit for
it: and therefore we find, when it has been offered to them they have refused
it. Acts 10. 25, 26. When Cornelius fell down at Peter's feet and worshipped
him, Peter reproves him with this, I my self also am a man. A greater worship
were the people of Listra about to show to Barnabas and Paul, Acts 14. 11, 14.
They cried out the Gods were come down in the likeness of men, and were about
to do Sacrifice: but Barnabas and Paul rent their clothes when they heard of
it, ran in amongst them, crying, ver. 15. We are men of like passions with you.
When John fell at the Angels feet to worship him, he is forbidden, Revel. 19.
10. See thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren that have
the testimony of Jesus, Worship God. Again, Rev. 22. 8, 9. When he had heard
and seen those things, which before we showed, he fell down to worship before
the feet of the Angel which showed him those things. The Angel forbids him, See
thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and
of them which keep the sayings of this book; Worship God.

6. There is none like God for a man to be with, or whose glory he should
desire to partake of. I pray think of this, we are each of us to choose one for
our selves, a companion to abide with us to all eternity: And there is none
like God. Saints are sweet companions, and much good is to be had in their
company: the Angels are heavenly company; but neither Saints nor Angels are
like God. The Apostle urges it as greatest matter of comfort to the Godly, 1
These. 4. 17, 18. Then (when Christ shall appear to judgment) we that are alive,
shall be caught up to meet the Lord in the air, and we shall ever be with the
Lord: wherefore comfort one another with these words.

1. Use of Information. Of the goodness of God that would be pleased to make
known himself to us, and work us to a closure with him, that he who is so
great, high, that does infinitely transcend Heaven and Earth, Angels and men,
should work us to a closure with himself. We are all naturally addicted to a
Deity: Its even as easy to keep men from eating and drinking, as from the
pursuit of a Deity; for the latter is as rational and agreeable to the dictates
of reason, as the former is natural to the cravings of the sensual appetite. If
we close not with one God, we shall with another, and men will rather have a
thousand Gods than none. Now for God, when we were to make our choice, to come
and tell us that he is the true God, and work us to a closing with him, Oh what
goodness was it! This was a favor worth ten thousand Hallelujahs. Indeed by
the contemplation of the works of Creation and Providence, we might have
learned that there was a God, and that he was wise, mighty, good, and the like:
But that we should know that the God of Israel* was he, and that we should know
him in a saving manner, that he should look after us, shine before us, put
himself into our arms, make us to decline all other Gods, this is the working
of God, distinguishing love, and it should be mavelous in our eyes. Mat. 11.
25. I think thee O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. Ver.
27. Neither knows any man the Father but the Son, and he to whomsoever the
Son will reveal him. This saving knowledge is made known to us in and by
Christ. That God should make known himself to us by his Son, and not unto the
world. That he should keep us from the evil shares and practices of the world:
redeem us to himself by the blood of his Son, put us into a state of salvation,
should make us wonder, 1 Cor. 4. 7. Who makes us to differ? We have nothing
but what is received. What would have become of us, had it not been for the
love of God? We might have with the World lien in wickedness, and been
condemned with the world. We might have been aliens from the Israel of God,
strangers to the promise of life.

2. This informs us of the happiness of those who have God for their God. Oh he
is the sum and top of all perfection! There is in him whatever is requisite to
the rendering either of himself blessed, or the faithful blessed in the
enjoyment of him. If a man have him though he have nothing else, he has
enough; and though he has every thing else, and be without God in the world,
he has nothing. So that upon a due stating of things, it is interest, or not
interest in him, which does determine our happiness or misery. Blessed are
those who enjoy God, and miserable are those who have no saving interest in
him. Those that have full Garners, store of Oxen and Sheep, were thought in a
happy case; but rather happy is that people whose God is the Lord. Persons do
mightily mistake good, and happiness looking for them in corruptible, mortal,
earthly enjoyments, they count the proud and rich happy, whereas in the favor
of God is good to be found; when he lifts up the light of his countenance,
appears blessedness, the highest good that the soul is capable of. So Psalm.
146. 5.

3. This informs us why wise and good men set such a value upon him, and are so
much affected with him. They prefer him above all, and are ready to do or
suffer any thing for him: They are ready to run through fire and water so they
may but serve him, and approve themselves to him. As for David he had such an
esteem of him, that he thought there was none that could sufficiently praise
him, Psalm. 106. 2. Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? Who can show
forth all his praise? And for the Primitive Christians, there were no
sufferings which they were not willing to undergo for him, Rev. 12. 11. They
loved not their lives unto death. And what was the reason of this hardiness of
those good Soldiers of Christ? They judged none like him, their lives but a
small sacrifice for him, no longer would they live than they might enjoy him,
and not unwillingly would they dye, that they might be for ever with him.

4. This informs us what a folly it is for any to attempt to be like unto God,
or to compare themselves with him. Hereby the fallen Angels draw upon themselves
the charge of folly, Job 4. 18. His Angels he charged with folly. And hereby
our first parents laid themselves under their makers derision, and scorn, Genesis
3. 22. Behold the man is become as one of us to know good and evil, he was
cheated into this expectation by the devil, and God does upbraid him with the
tree of life, lest he take of the tree of life and live for ever. There was no
likelihood of that when he had sinned, but he derides any such vain hope that
now especially might be in him to save him from the curse. This was the ruin
of the King of Babylon, Isa. 14. 12, 14. How art thou fallen from Heaven O
Lucifer, ver. 13, 14. You have the pride of the Babylonian King, I will ascend
into heaven, I will exalt my throne above the stars of God. I will ascend above
the heights of the clouds, I will be like the most High. Yet should he be
brought down to hell, to the sides of the pit, ver. 15. What do men think of?
Do they think that when God by virtue of his essential perfections, is
transcendently above them, he will suffer them to come, and justle him up as if
they were equal to him? No, let them not imagine any such thing, God will not
endure it, such presumption is likely to be their bane and ruin.

Use 2. By way of Reproof. This may reprove carnal men that make light of God,
and yet there is none in heaven or on earth to be compared with him.
Notwithstanding all they have heard of his Nature, Laws, Works, they disregard
him, Job 21. 14, 15. They say unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what
profit should we have if we pray unto him? So far are they from preferring him
above all, and yiedling him the respect, reverence, honor, praise, obedience,
which is meet, that there is scarce any thing which they do not prefer before
him. What lust, or temptation is there, which they will not sooner hearken to
than him? Now Sirs consider what you are, Are you men or beasts? If beasts,
What do you amongst men? Its fitter you should be in the fields among the
herds. If you are men, then open your eyes, look up to the Heavens, and see
whether there be not one there, who is worthier of your affections than those
trifles you keep such ado about. Its observable, how importunate the Holy Ghost
is in calling upon us to be men, and to act like men. Isa. 46. 8, 9. Show your
selves men, (...) In what should they play the man? Remember the former things
of old, for I am God, and there is none else, I am God, and there is none like
me. So 1 Cor. 16. 13. Quit your selves like men, (...). Oh what a deal of work
has the Holy Ghost to do in the reformation of ungodly men! He is not only of
men to make them holy, but of beasts to make them men, and to put them upon
carrying themselves as such, The Crown is fallen from our heads, woe to us, for
we have sinned.

Use 3. of Exhortation. 1. To you who stand at a distance from God. Labor to
be acquainted with him, and to get an interest in him. When we hear such a
person is a person of singular worth, How ambitious are we all to be acquainted
with him, and to get an interest in him? Oh how ambitious and impatiently
desirous should we be to get acquaintance with, and interest in God, that fills
heaven and earth, that is worthy of all glory, honor and praise! Rest not you
that are at a distance till you can say, this God is my God. This is the very
end for which you were made, that you should seek after him, know him, and
yield him the respect belonging to him, Acts 17. 26, 27. He has made all
Nations of men. -- That they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him, and find him. God does so exhibit himself in his creatures that he
is therein even palpable and sensible.

2. The Exhortation, is to you who are come near to God, are acquainted with,
and have interest in him, perform the duties you owe him upon the account of
his supreme excellency.

2. Let Us value and love him above all. The more we enquire into his nature and
concernments, the more cause we shall see we have to value and love him. There
is this difference betwixt him, and his creatures: that as for his creatures,
the more we know them, the less commonly we esteem of them and respect them:
But for God, the more we know him, the more cause we shall still find that we
have to value and love him. Here looking increases loving, as it causes
likeing.

2. Let Us rejoice in him. If we have a Relation or Friend that is endued with
high virtues, we count it matter of great joy. What matter of joy then should
we count it, that he whom we have chosen for our God, and whom we make account
for ever to dwell with, is induced with such transcendent perfections? All
those excellencies which are spread throughout the whole volume of the
Creation, are not only contained in him; but infinitely exceeded by him. And Oh
what matter of joy is this! such a wellspring is he of joy and gladness, that
when we can rejoice in nothing else, we may rejoice in him, Habb. 3. 17, 18.
Let what will come of loss, and though I be cut off from worldly comsorts, yet
will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation. Oh there is
in him matter of fresh and everlasting joy! Phil. 4. 4. Rejoice in the Lord
always, and again I say rejoice.

3. Is there none like God, then let us glory in him, and boast of him. Though
there is nothing in the world we may glory in, yet in the Lord may we glory,
Jer. 9. 23, 24. Wisdom, strength, or riches are not to be boasted of: But let
him that glories, glory in this, that he understands, and knows me, that I
am the Lord. He is the excellency of Jacob, Amos 8. 7. He is our glory, Jer. 2.
11. My people have changed their glory for that which does not profit. He is
our praise, Deuteronomy. 10 21. He is thy praise, and he is thy God And therefore let
us extol him, and lift him up: whilst the poor blind Heathens are praising
their Gods of Gold, Silver, Brass, Iron, Wood, Stone, Dan. 5. 4. Shall we fit
still and hold our peace? Oh no, let our tongues rather be as the pen of a
ready writer. As long as we have tongues to speak with, let us employ them in
praising him, Psalm. 104. 33. I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live, I
will sing praise to my God, while I have my being. Such are his perfections,
that we can never praise him sufficiently, Stand up, say the Levites, Nehem. 9.
5. and bless the Lord your God for ever and ever. And blessed be thy glorious
name which is exalted above all blessings and praise, Psalm 106. 2. Who can
utter the mighty acts of the Lord? Who can show forth all his praise?

4. Let Us be willing to be taught and ruled by him. Who so fit to rule and
teach us as the supreme being? How do we find good men very ready to comply
with the instructions of God? Heb. 11. 8, 17. Abraham obeyed the command to
leave his own Country, went out not knowing whither he went: He does Caecam
obedientiam praestare, which to do to men is folly, but to do to God is
greatest wisdom. Abraham disputes not the case, but goes and offers up Isaac;
How so? That is, he was willing, and the will is accepted for the deed.

5. Let us adhere and keep close to him, whatever difficulties, trials,
discouragements, lie in the way. We see we cannot possibly chose one like to
him; nor can we follow one whose good guidance we may be more sure of. As
Abraham when he was so hard tasked, yet readily obeys; so must we, and not only
be directed by him, but yield ready obedience without disputing, quarrelling,
scrupling, so are we in every respect to own God as our God. Genesis 28, 21. 22.
Jacob vowed, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go,
and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to
my fathers house in peace; then shall the Lord be my God. Here Jacob does not
capitulate with God upon any high terms: What if God will not perform these
conditions, shall he not be Jacobs God? Yes: But if he give me meat, and
raiment, and return me to my Fathers house, he shall be much more my God. This
shall be an additional obligation upon him. All people will walk every one in
the name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever
and ever. When men are blindly busy, groping for God, though he be not far
from them, and adoring the creature instead of the Creator, who is blessed for
ever: let us be better, and more wisely employed in seeking, finding, and
serving the Lord our God, in whom we live, move, and have our being. We may
make trial of as many as we please; but when we have done, we shall have cause
to say, with revolting Israel, Hos. 2. 7. I will go and return to my first
Husband; for then was it better with me than now. Neither Heaven nor earth can
afford us a God like him.

4. Use of Comfort to you who have made choice of God for your God. What a
comfort must it needs be to a man, that he has a God to whom none is like in
Heaven or Earth? Why, this is your case; and this is that which may swallow up
all your sorrows, and wipe away all your tears. Oh what comfort have good men
taken herein! They havefeasted themselves in the thoughts of his mercy, that
God was their God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. David encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
Psalm. 48. 14. This God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even
unto death. He is no worse, no less good now than he was then, the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. The differences of time, make no
difference in him. A poor man may say, though I am not so rich and honorable
as other men are; yet for a God I dare compare with the greatest of them all:
Wherein I am defective, there is enough in him to make it out. With this I will
comfort my self as Asaph, Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none on
earth that I desire besides thee.

SERMON VII.
Psalm 73. 26. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.
HAving done with the former verses, we are now come to this, wherein the
Psalmist go's on in setting forth the excellency of God, showing of what great
use and advantage he was to him in the time of his affliction and distress. In
the preceding words he expresses it in a more general way, and here he does
more particularly enlarge on Gods excellency in giving an account of special
favors and kindnesses, that he had testified toward him and given to him in
his own person. The words contain two parts.

1. The Psalmist sets down his afflictions and disstress; and these are
expressed in two passages (...), My flesh fails. By flesh here as Muis and
others note, we are to understand the body, which in Scripture is sometimes
spoken of under that notion, Prove. 5. 11. And thou mourn at the last. (...)
when thy flesh and thy body are consumed. Then for the word (...) here rendered
fails. It is variously read by some, my flesh did fail me: By others, When it
does fail me; by others, Although and if it fail me. But the difference is not
very considerable. His meaning is plainly this, that his body was liable to
fail him, and that he made account it would so do, though he had been of an
active body; a strong and healthful complexion, strengthened by exercise and
notable achievements. Yet his flesh would fail. 2. To aggravate the affliction
he adds, (...) and my heart fails. By heart, as Muis notes, we are to
understand the soul, for as the heart is the principal part of the body, so it
is animae seeds. Now this was a great aggravation of the Psalmists affliction
and trouble; that his soul failed him as well as the body. When the body fails,
the soul may support it, but when the soul fails, what can a poor creature do?
Prove. 18. 4. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmities: but a wounded
spirit who can bear? If I have a languishing body, but a vigorous soul; the
liveliness and cheerfulness of one, will help to bear the infirmities of the
other: but if the body and soul both droop under affliction, the man is brought
to a sad pass.

2. The Psalmist sets down the advantage or relief that God afforded him. This
he expresses likewise in two passages.

1. (...), God is the strength of my heart, or according to the Hebrew, God is
the rock of my heart. But you will say why says he nothing of Gods helping his
body? God sustains his soul, and his soul sustains his body. 2. (...) And my
portion for ever. As though he had said, He is not only of use to me for the
present, but he will be so for ever. I see such lines in his love to me, as
reach into eternity it self. And this does much refresh my drooping heart, that
he will deal well with me not only here, but hereafter. Time will soon be run
out and gone. All the business is, how it will go with us for ever. I have this
to comfort me, that God will be my portion for ever. He will deal well with me
to eternity, let it be as long as it will. I look, and look into eternity and
see no end of his love, when my soul and body have failed me over and over
again, I have a rock in heaven as firm as my heart can wish. In him will I
repose my confidence, and fix my hope for ever.

Doct. That the bodies and souls even of good men are apt to fail them in time
of affliction and distress, or the affliction and distress of good men is
sometimes so great, that their very bodies and souls are apt to fail them
therein. Sometimes the cup that God puts into their hands is so bitter, that it
makes their hands shake, and their hearts fail. Lesser afflictions they can
bear up under: but when the great billows of God and the waves pass over them,
then their souls are ready to faint. How good a man was Asaph, yet he cries
out. My flesh and my heart fails. This I shall handle a little more
distinctly, and, 1. I shall show that sometimes their bodies fail them; and
this is so familiar and evident, that I need not spend many words about it. God
long ago issued forth this decree, Genesis 3. 19. Dust thou art, and unto dust
thou shall return. This he has been putting in execution throughout all
generations ever since. Now there are three ways whereby the bodies even of
good men, do fail them.

1. By the the decay of their senses; those active and pleasant Organs, when
evil days come, do fail to perform the services for which they were designed,
an instance whereof, we have in Barzillai the Giliadite, 2 Samuel 19. 35. I am
fourscore years old this day. Can thy servant taste what I eat, or what I drink?
Can I hear any more the voice of singing men? -- and thus it is with others.
First one thing fails then another. First the eye grows dim, then the ear grows
deaf: one sense fails after another, till all of them be disabled from their
proper work.

2. By the decay of their strength. When evil days come, then strength fails
and leaves the body laboring under feebleness and weakness. How strong a man
was David, such was his strength, that he could draw in pieces a bow of steel,
Psalm. 18. 34. So that a Bow of Steel is broken by mine arms. And yet what
complaints have we of the failing of his strength? Psalm. 38. 10. My heart
pants, my strength fails me, as for thee light of mine eyes it is gone from
me. Before he could encounter with a Lion, a Bear, a Goliath, But now he is
weak. Even the most vigorous and active, when evil days come, like Sampson
when his hair was cut, find themselves bereaved of their former strength.

3. By the decay of their health. Besides the loss of our senses and strength,
we are subject to sickness and diseases, which contribute much toward the
discomfort of our lives. How fearful was good Hezekiah, lest God would cut him
off with pining sickness? Isa. 38. 12. Mine age is departed and is removed from
me as a shepherds tent: I have cut off like a weaver, my life: He will cut me
off withpining sickness. And what a sickly time was it among the Corinthians
when they had profaned the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 11. 30. For this cause many
are weak and sickly amongst you, and many sleep. Oh what fainting hearts, pale
faces and doleful complaints attend the sons of men? They spend their days in
sorrow, and after go to the grave.

2. Sometimes their souls fail them. There lies their chief strength, yet Psalm.
143. 7. (...) My spirit fails, the same word with that in the Text. As their
bodies have their infirmities, so their souls have theirs by virtue whereof,
they are sometimes brought very low. Now their souls fail them three ways.

1. By sorrow. Sometimes they are so affected with their afflictions, that they
are even overwhelmed with sorrow Psalm. 40. 12. Innumerable evils have compassed
me about, mine iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to
look up: they are more than the hairs of mine head; therefore mine heart
fails me. Or my heart has left and forsaken me, that prae dolor as Uatablus
notes, so Cant. 5. 6. My soul failed when he spoke, (...) Anima mea Egressa
est. My soul went out of me. She fell into a sad delquium or fainting fit; and
what is the reason? Why, it was her sorrow upon the account of her former
security. As if she had said. Oh how have I played the beast? What noble,
importunate, constant love have I neglected and abused? Oh how shall I ever
look my Lord in the face, or restore my self into his favor?

2. By fear. They see there are dangers before them, and therewith they are so
aff^cted that their souls fail within them. Thus as one of Jacobs sons opens
his sack, he finds his money in the mouth of the sack tells his brethren and
their hearts failed them, (...). Their heart went out of them and they were
afraid. They knew not what this might work; what might be the issue of things,
and fearing the worst their hearts overran them. This effect of fear is
expressed by the melting of the heart, thus the hearts of the Canaanites melted
with fear, Josh. 5. 1. Your terror (says Rahab to the spies) Josh. 2. 9. 10.
is fallen upon us, and all the inhabitants of the Land faint because of you.
verse. 11. Our hearts did melt, neither did there remain any more courage in any
man, in many other places, Isa 13. 7. Nahum 2. 10. Ezekiel. 21. 7. Whether it be
by grief, as Psalm. 119. 28. And so the heart melts in tears or fear which as it
were, causes colliquation or melting.

3. By distrust, judging of the issue of things by causes, they sometimes
despair of deliverance and give up themselves for gone, so 1 Samuel 22. 1. David
said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul. His heart
sinks through distrust, and he thinks to take an unwarrantable course for his
security. Notwithstanding his brave and heroic mind at other times and upon
other occasions which made him to attempt difficulties, slight discouragements
notwithstanding the experience of Gods goodness, and the promises God had made
him of the Kingdom: yet his heart failing, and his spirit being sunk down into
a fit of despondency, he thus says in his heart, and resolves on a course to
the great offense of his friends, triumph of his enemies, and dishonor of true
religion.

3. Why God suffers it to be thus with people, that their bodies and souls
should fail.

1. That he may show them their frailty and weakness, teach them humility, and
make them base and vile in their own eyes. When a man finds both body and soul
shrinking him, and failing him, he is ready to cry out, Lord what a poor
Creature am I? What am I that I should glory in my self, or behold my self with
any complacency or delight? When Jobs body and soul had failed him, what
opinion had he of himself? or how did he stand affected toward himself? Did he
admire himself, or was he inamoured of himself? No, Job 42. 6. Wherefore I
abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes.

2. That he may thereby excite them to look up to him, and exercise dependence
on him. As long as we find a sufficiency in our selves, we seldom have any
great regard to God; but when we see our selves unable to provide for our own
welfare, then we begin to look up to him. And for this cause, 1 Cor. 1. 9. He
sends thorns into our beds that he should have little ease there; he brings
afflictions that threatens death that we may look up. We had the sentence of
death in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in God which
raised the dead. When as to natural helps and hopes they are lost, that they
may look up, and throw the arms of faith about him, he deprives us of all
stays and refuges, that we may exercise dependence on him, and stay our selves
upon our God.

3. That he may thereby provoke us, to look after a state wherein we may be
free from these Deliquiums, or failings, both of body and soul, which here we
are liable to. When a man meets with inconveniences in his journey, he begins
to wish himself at home: So when a good man is exercised with decay in his
senses, strength, health on the one hand, and with sorrow, fear, distrust on
the other, then he begins to grow weary of the world* he thinks of God and
heaven, with great longing to be with God, to be in heaven. Then he cries out,
Oh what should I do here! Where shall I have relief? Oh that I were with my
God! So Job 14. 13. desires that God would hide him in the grave, that he would
keep him secret until his wrath was past: Not that he desired the grave it
self, or thought it pleasant to lie in putrefaction and rottenness; but as an
occasion of being conveied into a better state and place.

Use. Is it so that both body and soul of good men do fail them in affliction?
then it is useful by way of Information, to show us what a poor vain thing man
is. How unable is he to stand before his Makers displeasure? In his prosperity
how does he vaunt himself? How goodly is he in his own eyes, and what
confidence does he put in his own abilities? But when his maker takes him in
hand, what a trivial thing is he, Job 4. 19. He is crushed before the moth,
that is, sooner then a moth is crushed betwixt a man's fingers, he is ground to
powder, if God lay his hand upon him; or he is such a trivial thing, that he is
not able to stand in the presence of such a despicable creature as the moth,
this contemptible creature prevails upon him, and conquers him.

2. Use of Exhortation. 1. Let us beware what stress we lay either upon body or
soul. Alas, what are they that we should confide in them? If God do but lay his
finger on them, they droop and languish. What is the bravest spirit in the
world, when God comes and takes him by the arm, and leads him away to judgment?
What work did two or three words writ upon the wall, make with the great
Babylonian Monarch, Dan. 5. 5, 6. His countenance was changed, his thoughts
troubled, the joints of his loins loosed, and his knees smote one against
another. This being our nature, What are we, that we should put confidence in
our selves? Isa. 2. 22. We may neither trust in others, neither may others
trust in us, neither may we trust in our selves? Jer. 17. 5. Cursed be the man
that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from
the Lord. What must we do then? Isa. 2. 22. Cease from man whose breath is in
his nostrils, for wherein is he to be accounted of?

2. Let Us not wonder if sometimes both body and soul fail us. We do not know
how many of these fits we may be exercised with, and when they befall us let us
not wonder at it; its nothing but what the best of Gods servants are liable to,
1 Pet. 4. 12. Think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try
you, as though some strange thing happened unto you. When afflictions overtake
us, we are ready to wonder at it, and to say, it was never on this wise. Never
was any sorrow like to my sorrow, whereas there is no reason to say so,
afflictions are ordinary to the people of God.

3. Let us get an interest in God, that so when they fail us, he may stand by
us and help us, that when one of our fainting fits comes, his left hand may be
under our heads, and his right hand may embrace us. Let our fits be what they
will, if God stand by us, and be with us, we are safe enough; Who shall be
against us? We need not fear the frowns of men, the want of friends, and
comfort, if God befriend and afford his grace unto us. But if he be not with
us, what will become of us? Psalm. 94. 17. Unless the Lord had been my help, my
soul had almost dwelt in silence, brevi habitasset, as it is in the margent of
your Bibles, quickly. God can help us, whether exercised with fainting in soul
or body. It is good to get an interest in God, for this was Asaphs happiness,
that though both soul and body failed him, yet God stuck to him, was the
strength of his heart, and portion for ever. So we come to the second part of
this 26th Verse. The Psalmist in the former part of the verse having set down
his affliction, he does in the latter set down the advantage he had from God
against it, and that in these two passages: God is the strength of my heart.
(2) And my portion for ever. From the former of which this point offers it self.

Doct. 1. That God is the strength of the hearts of his people in their
afflictions and distress: Or more briefly thus, God is the strength of his
people. He looks after them, takes care of them, and supplies them with
strength according as they stand in need. There is a very high and lofty
passage, Deuteronomy. 33. 26, 27. As when a person is in a fainting condition, we take
him into our arms, and hold up his head. So Cant. 2. 6, His left hand is under
my head, and his right hand does embrace me, If we look farther into Scripture,
we shall find that the eminentest of Gods servants, and such as were best
furnished with abilities, have in down right terms acknowledged that he is
their strength. So Exodus 15. 2. Notwithstanding all his wisdom, power, and
greatness; yet he acknowledges it was God that was his strength, who enabled
him to accomplish those great things he had brought to pass. So Psalm. 18. 1. I
will love thee O Lord my strength; in the following words he shows, that he was
the Rock of his heart, The Lord is my rock my fortress. -- My strength in whom
I trust. In the Original, as here, My rock in whom I will trust. We have the
like from Christ himself, Isa. 49. 5. My God shall be my strength.

Now that you may better understand the reason of my following Method, you are
to know, that what is here mentioned touching Gods being the strength of his
servants, is proposed by way of Antidote to their several maladies, and
distresses both in body and soul, insisted on before. So that if I will closely
pursue the intent of the Text, I must reflect upon the evils, which I before
represented them liable to, and show what a remedy he is against them, and what
relief he affords them. And,

1. He relieves them against the maladies of their bodies. Though their bodies
are frail, and subject to many distempers, yet he has relief for them against
them all. There is not any distemper so mortal or dangerous, but he can afford
them help against it, Psalm. 116. 6. I was brought low, and he helped me.

1. He relieves them against the decaies of their senses. He sometimes
preserves them in a strong degree of vigor, beyond what could reasonably be
expected from the abilities and power of nature. How old a man was Moses? He
was an hundred and twenty years old, yet it is said, Deuteronomy. 34. 7. His eyes were
not dim, nor his natural force abated. God is the Lord of nature, and has the
disposal of the several ordinances thereof, so that he can enforce or restrain
them, execute or suspend them, according as he sees good. He can put a youth
into the state of an old man, and an old man into the state of a youth, and
dispose of all persons, and their concernments as he sees good.

2. He relieves them against the decay of their strength. That he sometimes
marvellously renews, and raises to an height beyond all probability and
expectation, as to outward and bodily strength, as well as spiritual vigor:
these words in Isa. 40. 29, 31. is verified: He gives power to the faint, and
to them that have no might he increases strength. They that wait on the Lord
shall renew their strength. So the Lord does alter the course of nature, that
when his servants are in a withering condition, he renews their strength, he
works vigor and activity in them, and enables them to do great things, when he
disables and brings down the strength of the mighty. Psalm. 18. 29, 32, 33. 34.
By thee I have run through a troop, and by my God have I leaped over a wall.
Who is a rock, save our God? It is God that guides me with strength. He makes
my feet like hinds feet. He teaches my hands to war, so that a bow of steel is
broken by my arms. David was naturally a man of great strength, and activity;
yet besides that, God favored him with an auxiliary extraordinary strength,
whereby he was fitted for those great services he performed.

3. He relieves them against the decay of their health. He has many
distempers, whereby to exercise the sons of men, and bring them to their
graves; but yet there is none which he cannot either prevent or heal, Psalm.
103. 3, 4. Who health all thy diseases, who redeemeth thy life from
destruction. Let the distemper be what it will, the Ague, Fever, Stone, Gout:
yet he is able to prevent or cure it. Some distempers are so difficult and
incurable, that they are looked upon as Ludibria medicorum, the scorn and
disgrace of Physicians: But there is no distemper in the world, which God is
not able to heal and cure. He is not under any restraint, but what he lays upon
himself, Psalm. 135. 6. Whatsoever he pleases he does in heaven and in earth.
What his soul desires that he does, Job 23. 13. And he is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3. 20. Oh the greatness of
the Lord our God, and what security is there here for us in the greatest and
most dangerous estate and condition!

2. He relieves them against the maladies of their souls. He is a Physician
both for body and soul, and understands the maladies and distempers of the one
as well as the other, and can heal those which belong to the latter, as well as
those which belong to the former. And,

1. He relieves them against their greatest sorrow. Under their greatest
troubles and discouragements, he can cheer up their souls, and make them
pleasant and joyful, 2 Cor. 2. 14. Thanks be to God, who always causes us to
triumph in Christ. Here are two things to be considered. 1. What a condition
the Apostles were in as to their outward concernments, they were even as
miserable as men could be. 1 Cor. 4. 13. Accounted as the filth of the world,
and the offscouring of all things. 2. What God did for them. Times of triumph,
are times of extraordinary joy: yet such was the goodness of God to them, that
he did not only cause them to triumph; but this he did for them in the time
when their troubles, and the power of the wicked caused their enemies to
triumph.

2. He relieves them against fear. He many times works them to such a
recumbency, and dependence on him, as causes all their fear to cease and
vanish, Psalm. 3. 6. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people, that have
set themselves against me round about. If God assist, no Lion, Bear, or monster
of men, shall do any thing to the quelling of the hearts of Believers. And this
was not a favor peculiar to him, but such as he vouchsafes to other of his
faithful servants. Psalm. 112. 7. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings, his
heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. Notwithstanding the outward effect, and
visible tendency of things to the contrary, yet he works in them this
persuasion, that the issue of things will be good, whereby he dissolves and
scatters those fears which otherwise would perplex and annoy them.

3. He relieves them against their distrust. Sometimes their oppositions,
difficulties, and dangers, are so great, that their very hearts are ready to
sink and faint within them. Now at such a time he often comes in, bears up
their hearts, and satisfies them, resolves their doubts, and satisfies their
jealousies. You know who said, 1 Samuel 27. 1. I shall perish one day by the hand
of Saul. But Psalm. 118. 17. we have him in another temper, then, says he, I
shall not dye, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. Oh how does faith
change the language of the soul, and what happy alterations does it work
therein?

Now we shall proceed to the Reasons:

Reas. 1. Is drawn from the benignity, kindness, and goodness of his own
nature, which puts him upon those gracious appearances, wherewith he is upon
all occasions so ready to favor his people. Other reasons may be assigned; but
this is the fundamental, Original, Sovereign Reason, which gives birth and
existence to those that follow, Romans 9. 15. I will have mercy on whom I will
have mercy. It is the goodness of his nature that puts him upon those eminent
appearings, for the support and deliverance of his people.

2. From their necessity, which is such as cries aloud for it. Alas, who, or
what are they, that they should be able to bear up against the maladies either
of body or soul? Now God being aware of this, does in compliance with their
necessities, afford them relief, Deuteronomy. 32. 36. The Lord shall judge his people,
and repent himself for his servants when he sees that their power is gone, and
there is none shut up or left. This is set down, not only as an account of the
time when God would help them, but likewise as the reason wherefore he would do
it. Men commonly are readiest to help us, when we have least need: but God,
when we have most. He loves to appear in difficult cases, and show himself,
when he may best serve his own praise.

3. From that service which he may hereby do to his own glory. To relieve a
distressed people, is a noble act, and such as is meet to commend the nature of
God to us. And there is not any person who any has tincture of true piety, or
gratitude, but being strengthened by God, will bless and praise him for it.
Exodus 15. 2. The Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation,
he is my God, and I will prepare him an habitation, my fathers God, and I will
exalt him. The people of God have ever resolved to make the Lord, that has
appeared as their strength, their song, Psalm. 118. 14. The Lord is my strength
and song. And for this end does God become the strength of his people, to this
end, to make their hearts and mouths full of the praises of God their
deliverer. Psalm. 30. 11, 12. Thou have turned for me, my mourning into dancing:
thou have put off my sackcloth, and guided me with gladness: To the end that my
glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent, O Lord my God I will give
thanks unto thee for ever.

Use (...). of Information. If it be thus that God is the strength of his
people. 1. We may see whence it is that the people of God bear up, and hold out
under such great oppositions and difficulties. Satan he is against them, and
for the World that is against them, and as if these were not sufficient, they
have infirmities both of body and soul to encounter with, and yet they hold
out. Now whence happens this, 2 Timothy 4: 16, 17. Though all men forsook me,
notwithstanding, says Paul, the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me, and I
was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. God stood by him, bound the
Emperors hands that he could do nothing against him.

2. It appears whence it comes to pass, that they accomplish such great things.
What great and famous things did Moses, Joshua, Gideon, David, and others
accomplish? Whence had they the might, power, and victory. It was not by their
might, their puissance, by their strength that they prevailed, but the spirit
of God, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

3. What folly and unworthiness it is in good men to appear against God, or do
any thing to his dishonor, or against his interest: It is no less than to
appear, and fight against their own strength. Should you see a man strike at,
and beat his own arm, you would take it for a piece of strange madness: And yet
no less madness is it for any one to engage against God, to engage against him
who is his strength. For men to fight against him, is to kick against the
pricks, a folly to a Proverb: and for the people of God to oppose him, is for
Israel to oppugn the strength of Israel, to fight against themselves. He that
sins against me, wrongeth his own soul: all they that hate me love death,
Prove. 8. 36.

2. Use of Exhortation, 2. Let us in time of affliction of body and soul, flee
unto him and make use of him, who is the strength of our life. When any thing
ailes us either in body or soul, let us have recourse to him, for he is
abundant in strength, he is mighty in strength and wisdom, Job 36. 5. None can
enter the lists with him. Who has been his counselor? His strength is
everlasting. Isa. 26. 4. In the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength. He is
ready to communicate it to his people, Isa. 41. 10. I am thy God, I will
strengthen thee. And what more can we desire to encourage us to have recourse
to him?

2. Let us plead it to him, when we are in need of help from him. Let Us urge it
to him, whether he be not our strength, and in case he be, let us plead with
all reverence and holy boldness, whether it be not proper for him to help us,
Psalm. 43. 2. For thou art the God of my strength, why do thou cast me off?
Thou have caused me to hope in thee; thou have said, that thou would be my
strength; thou have engaged that thou will not cast them off that cast their
concerns on thee, that trust in thee, and have hoped and trusted in this word;
I have refused all other things as empty vanities that cannot help, and will thou cast me off? Let men and Angels see that thou art faithful, and wilt not
in thy works, fly off from thy word. Lord let it be unto me according to thy
good word of promise, and as thou have been unto thy people, make it appear, as
1 Samuel 15. 29. That the strength of Israel will not lie.

3. When we undertake the performances of duty, let us undertake and perform
them in his strength. Distrusting our own strength, let us rely and depend upon
his. You know the voice that came down to Augustine, In te stas and non stas.
Such is the weakness of our own strength that if we have no more than it, we
shall do just nothing. When we engage in any duty, pray, read, hear or sing,
let us rely on him to help us to the acceptable performances, to help our
infirmities, when we know not how to offer them as we ought, and to bless us in
the deed. Psalm. 71. 16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God. I will make
mention of thy righteousness even ofthine only. We look upon our selves strong
enough to manage duties, and this has been the overthrow of many a duty, that
we have horribly failed in it, and lost the blessing of it.

4. Let Us not measure our safety or welfare by any thing in our selves, but by
the strength of God. If we measure our strength and welfare by what is in our
selves, we shall be despairing and fainting every day, but measuring it by him,
we shall be capable of preserving our selves in a state of hope and confidence,
when we have such difficulties before us, we may pass the sentence of death on
our selves without blame, and cast off our confidence and let our expectation
perish, but whiles they are no other than such as he is able to deal with,
there is ground of hope, stand still says Moses to the murmuring Israelites
and see the salvation of the Lord. Herein we commonly miss it, that we measure
our safety by a wrong rule.

5. Let us ascribe our enduring of sufferings, and performance of duties unto
him. If we suffer patiently, bear under the yoke of Christ, let us give the
praise to God, saying not to us, but to thy name give the glory, Psalm. 115. 1.
It Is not our own strength, not our own courage that can bear us up under, or
get us out of trouble. The Psalmist ascribes strength to the Lord, as that
which belongs to him, dare not usurp and attribute to himself his
deliverances, Psalm. 59. 17. Unto thee O my strength will I sing, for God is my
defense and the God of my mercy.

3. Use of Comfort. Is God the strength of his people when they are exercised
with any distress? Here then is comfort for you who labor under faylings both
of body and mind. You are exercised perhaps with decays in your senses,
strength, health: with sorrow, fear, distrust, and find your own ability
insufficient to encounter herewith. However, be of good cheer, God is engaged
for you, and what condition can you be in which God is not able to deliver you
out of? It is not your own strength, but his, which you have to trust to. Which
is a consideration so full of comfort, that it may afford us relief in the
lowest condition, in the saddest times and most difficult seasons. How low was
the condition of Asaph? yet he settles his thoughts and quiets himself with
this consideration, That God was his strength, the strength of his heart and
his portion for ever.

Doct. 2. That God is the portion of his people. Notwithstanding all his
perfections, sufficiency and fullness; yet he has bestowed and settled himself
upon them for all those advantages and uses, which a portion is serviceable to.
Not judging any thing in the world good enough to be a portion for them, he
has bestowed himself upon them. Herein he has so ordered things, that the
business stands reciprocal, 1. They are his portion, Deuteronomy. 32. 9. The Lords
portion is his people, Jacob is the lot of his inheritance, Zach. 2. 12. And
the Lord shall inherit Judah his portion in the holy Land. They are the portion
of mankind that he makes his peculiar, that he will own and delight in. And
then 2. He is their portion. Psalm. 119. 157. Thou art my portion O Lord.
Lament. 3. 24. The Lord is my portion says my soul. And that you may not think
he restrains himself to particular persons, he is said to be the portion of
Jacob. Jer. 10. 16. The portion of Jacob is not like them. Now there is a great
deal of difference betwixt the grounds of their being his portion, and his
being theirs. They are said to be his portion, inasmuch as he has chosen them
from amongst all the people in the world to profess his name, hold communion
with him, and serve him. And he is said to be their portion inasmuch as he has
settled himself upon them, in order to their sustentation and happiness. First,
I shall show what a portion is, and Secondly, what a portion God is to his
people.

1. What a portion is. To that I answer, that a man's portion, as you that are
but little experienced in the world know, is a certain measure or parcel of
Money, Lands or Goods which is made over to him, and settled upon him for his
subsistence and livelihood. Thus the prodigal, Luke 15. 12. says to his Father
give me the portion of goods that falls to me. Now when the Scripture says
that God is the portion of his people, we are to understand that he is somewhat
bearing resemblance thereunto; as that he has made over himself to his people,
and settled himself upon them, for the subsistence and livelihood both of their
bodies and souls. Therefore the Priests and Levites should have no inheritance
among their brethren, because that the Lord was their inheritance, Deuteronomy. 18. 2.
They were not to be sharers in the spoil taken from the enemy as the other
tribes were, yet they had this to recompense it, that God was their
inheritance, who did in a peculiar way make provision for their supply.

2. What kind of a portion God is. And 1. He is a real and substantial
portion. As for the things of the world, they are shadows and dreams, void of
reality and substance. Prove. 22. 5. Worldly wealth is a thing of such a nature,
that it has no real existence. It is rather an empty show than any real being,
so Hos. 12. 1. Ephraim feeds on wind, and follows after the East wind.
Frivolous and foolish helps and comforts. What bad food is the Wind? It may
distemper and disorder us, but it cannot satisfy and nourish us. Yet this is
the state of all worldly things, that they are of an airy windy nature, void of
matter and substance. But it is not so with God, he has substance in him,
insomuch that what he seems to be, that we shall find him to the full. Prove. 8.
21. That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, and I will fill
their treasures. (...) is the word for substance, which signifies that which is
really or as a Lapide as others note rem solid, vereque subsistentem, such a
thing as is not a shadow, or mere resemblance, but has a solid and true
subsistence. As for worldly portions they afford an appearance, but want
substance, but now God is such a portion as has substance, durable substance
and precious.

2. He is a plentiful portion. Some have portions, but they are not
commensurate to what is required to their subsistence, but in God there is
whatsoever is necessary for our subsistence, comfort and happiness. He is
exercised with strange wants, whom God is not able to supply. Psalm. 50. 12. The
World is mine and the fullness thereof. And besides the world, he has an
inexhaustible fullness in himself, which would afford sufficient supply, though
the world should utterly fail, Genesis 15. 1. I am thy shield (says God to Abram)
and thy exceeding great reward. It was he that made the world, and he can
supply his servants without it. He can create comforts for his people if he
sees needful. And sooner than they shall want what is necessary for them, he
will proceed beyond the ordinary way of his providence, and show a miraculous
power in raising supplies. They have a God alsufficient, whom no difficulty can
pose, and is able to bring about what is possible to be done, and nothing can
be necessary to any which is impossible to be, Genesis 17. 1. I am the Almighty
God, walk before me and be thou perfect.

3. He is a satisfying portion. Though the portions of persons are never so
great, yet how few are satisfied therewith? Nay commonly the more they have,
the further they are from satisfaction and contentment, Eccl. 5. 10. He that
loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance
with increase. How insatiable are men's desires, and how do their plentiful
enjoyment sharpen their appetite to more, and beget discontented cravings to an
endless dissatisfaction and toil for that which dothnot satiate? But God does
satisfy the souls of his people, Jer. 31. 14. And I will satiate the soul of
the Priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with goodness, says
the Lord. He needs must be very unreasonable whom God will not satisfy.

4. He is such a Portion as can make himself a blessing to us. Now this is more
than any other portion or the donor thereof can do. Men may bestow portions:
but they cannot make them blessings to those who have them. A father may leave
his child a portion: but he cannot command a blessing upon it, nor absolutely
promise himself that the child shall not turn it into a curse: but God has
blessings at command, Psalm. 133. 3. As the dew of Hermon, and as the dew that
descended from the mountains of Zion, for there the Lord commanded the blessing
even life for evermore. And it is not to be conceived how a man should have him
for his portion, and not have a blessing in him. What, have blessedness it
self, and not have a blessing of him? that cannot be immagined.

5. He is an everlasting Portion. He is such, that he can neither be taken from
us, nor diminished. All the arts of men and devils cannot take him from his
people. Plutarch tells of the Tyrians, that they chained up their gods, lest
their enemies by charms, or such like arts, should entice them from them. And
pitiful Gods they were, first that might be chained. 2. That must be chained
least they overrun those who confided in them. Our God forsakes not those that
trust in him. And as he cannot be taken from his people, so after they have
lived upon him thousands of years, they will find him as full as ever they did
before. He is fons indeficiens, a never failing fountain. Nothwithstanding his
supplying heaven and earth from the Creation to this day, yet he is as full as
ever he was before. Though the Sun by its shining, and the Sea by its flowing
should suffer a diminution, the one in its light, the other in its water; yet
God after all his communications will be as full as ever, for he is their
Portion for ever.

3. How became he their portion? Answ. It was his own act and deed. He did of
his own free accord convey himself to us, and settle himself upon us. Seeing us
a poor, lost and undone people, he did of his own mere grace and compassion
bestow himself upon us, Ezekiel. 16. 8. I spread my skirt over thee and covered
thy nakedness, etc. Oh what a great act of grace was this! If a man of a great
Estate, seeing a poor distressed child forsaken; forlorn, should adopt him for
his Son, and settle all he has upon him, would not all look upon this as a
compassionate act? Oh how greatly has God condescended so to compassionate
sinners, lying in their blood and filthiness, as to take them in unto himself,
to give them an inheritance amongst those that are sanctified!

3. Use of Information. 1. Of the rich, wealthy, and happy condition of the
servants of God. Of all people in the world they are best provided for: God who
is the Lord of all is their portion. What then can they want? If Allsufficiency
it self may want, then they may want; but that being impossible, we may make
account that they will not want, Psalm. 23. 1. The Lord is my shepherd, I shall
not want. Psalm. 34. 9. There is no want to them that fear him. Psalm. 84. 11. No
good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

2. We may be informed, what little cause good men have to complain. Sometimes
their spirits are very unquiet, discontented and unsatisfied with their present
condition, and very heavy, and sad complaints proceed from them. Now alas what
reason is there for this? Have they not God for their portion, and is he not
all, and has he not all, and does not the disposal of all belong to him? What
then would they have? God looks when he has bestowed himself on people, and is
become their portion, that they should be content with him, Heb. 13. 5. Be
content with such things as you have, for he has said, I will never leave thee
nor forsake thee.

3. We are informed of the vast difference there is betwixt the portion of the
servants of God, and that of carnal men, Job 20. 29. discoursing of the evils
which attend irreligious and profane men, says, This is the portion of a
wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed to him by God, Psalm. 11. 6.
Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup. And our Savior, Mat. 24. 51.
shows that Hypocrites and profane persons have their portion where there is
weeping and gnashing of teeth. This is sad, but yet whiles God deals thus with
them, he proceeds more favorably with his own people. He himself who is light,
and life, and love, is their portion, when carnal men have alleged all that
ever they can in the behalf of their portions, we may cry out with the Prophet,
Jer. 10. 16. The portion of Jacob is not like them, for he is the former of all
things, and Israel is the rod of his inheritance, the Lord of hosts is his name.

2. Use of Exhortation. 1. Let us rejoice and glory in our portion. When people
have great portions they use to be affected with them. Oh then how much should
this portion transport our hearts with joy! Had we a whole mountain of Silver
and Gold, a whole Empire, nay the whole world for our portion, it were not
comparable to what we have in having God for our portion, Psalm. 16. 5, 6. The
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup, thou maintainest my
lot. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, yea I have a goodly
heritage.

2. Let us live upon him. What have people portions for, but to live upon them?
God then being our portion and inheritance, let him be unto us Gold and Silver,
Lands and Livings, Food and raiment, and let us depend upon him for
preservation and sustenance. By faith we make all things ours, as God hach
offered himself and Son to our faith, 1 Cor. 3. 22. All things are yours,
whether Paul or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, and what is better than the
world, or present life, and the comforts of it? Things to come, which are not
seen, which ate eternal.

3. Let us make account that however things go, we shall be provided for and
supplied. Other portions may fail us many ways: but God is such a portion, that
he will never fail us, but will prove abundantly sufficient to all intents and
purposes, Phil. 4. 19. But my God stall supply all your need according to his
riches in glory by Jesus Christ. We shall not want, here he will withhold no
good from us, and what can he deny that spared not his own Son, and freely
bestows himself upon us, and in glory we shall have life everlasting.

3. Use of Comfort. To all you who are the servants of God, especially to you
who have not those worldly portions and possessions which others have, be of
good cheer; God will be your portion: You have not those hundreds and thousands
which others have: You cannot go at that rate, and feed at that rate as others
do; yet be content, for you have more than ten thousands of Gold and Silver,
God the fullness of all. Though you have not the streams, yet you have the
fountain, what need you to care? You perhaps are troubled to see your selves in
straits, and that it is not with you as it is with others; yet be not cast
down, you have God, and he is Allsufficient: If you think he is not, deal
plainly, and tell us so, that we may vindicate him from your contempt and
blasphemy: If he be, then acquiesce in him. You may be assured so far as he
sees the things of this world necessary for you, he will deal them out to you.
Rem. 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, will with him give us all things.
Asaph had his trouble as well as other men, yet this quieted him, that God was
his Portion for ever.

FINIS.

