ERRATA.
Page 34 line 2 for four Ounces, read three Ounces. p. 35 l. 14 for Batter
Roots, r. Butter-Bur Roots. p. 38 l. 13 for half an Ounce, r. half a Scruple.
p. 39 l. 7 for Bole Armenick, r. Bole Armoniack. p. 65 l. 13 for causes the
swelling, r. causes swelling. p. 69 l. 6 for opened, r. ripened.

portrait of Thomas Willis, M.D. ^.W. sculp.
Thomas Willis M.D


A Plain and Easy Method FOR Preserving [by God's Blessing] those that are
WELL from the Infection of the PLAGUE, OR Any Contagious Distemper in City,
Camp, Fleet, etc. AND For Curing such as are Infected with it.

Written in the Year 1666.

By Tho. Willis, M. D. late Sidney Professor in Oxford, and a Member of the
Royal Society and College of Physicians in London.

With a Poem on the virtue of a Laurel Leaf for curing of a Rheumatism. By W. B.

Never before Printed.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, at the Green-Dragon, without Temple Bar. 1691.

TO THE READER.
Good Reader,
HAving been hitherto very averse from Publishing any of Dr. Willis's
Posthumous Works, because it may be presumed that they want his last Hand to
complete them; and for that Reason, giving no ear till now to any Entreaties of
that kind, though never so powerful, or never so importunate: I think my self
obliged to give the World some Account why I altered my mind as to this
particular, and did at length suffer my self to be prevailed with to Print the
following Treatise, it being now Fifteen Years after his Death; and it is
briefly this: A worthy Friend and an old Acquaintance of mine, desiring if I
knew of, or could procure any choice and approved Receipts against the Plague,
that I would furnish him with some for a Friend of his, for the preservation of
whose Health he had a singular concern, and who was going in the late Embassy
to Constantinople, where that Distemper then was, and did frequently rage: I
promised to use my utmost endeavors to supply him; and calling to mind this
short Tract, which I transcribed from the Doctor's Papers in the Year 1666,
being then his Amanuensis; I knew it would far exceed whatsoever I could
elsewhere obtain, or pretend to collect upon this Subject: Whereupon I allowed
him to take a Copy of it for his Friend's use, upon condition he would not make
it public. But not long since a suspicious Sickness having seized their
Majesty's Army in Ireland, the same Person was very much of opinion, that the
Printing of it might do great service, should that Disease prove Pestilential;
and urged such Arguments, as made me to be also of the same persuasion;
especially, he having showed the Copy to several of the most eminent Physicians
amongst us, whose opinion it was, as he assured me, that the Publishing of it
might be of very great use, it being a charitable instruction in cases of great
danger, for such as cannot procure the attendance of Physicians: I must needs
own, that I could not withstand the judgment of such Persons.

The regard I have always had, and shall still have for the Reputation and
Memory of my dear Master, and best Friend, will not, I presume, be thought to
lessen, by my giving way upon these terms to this Publication; since it is so
earnestly desired, and so well esteemed of: And the Good that is aimed at by it
can be no ill Apology for

Thy Friend and Servant, J. Hemming.
St. Martins-Lane, Sept. 1. 1690.
A POEM UPON A Laurel-Leaf.
Viris admodum Colendis, PUBLICAE SCHOLAE, Vulgo dictae, Harrow super Montem,
GUBERNATORIBUS, VIZ. Dno CAROLO GERARD Baronetto. Dno EDVARDO WALDO Militi.
CHEEK GERARD, Armigeris. DANIELI WALDO, Armigeris. GVLIELMO FEN, Armigeris.
EDVARDO WALDO, Armigeris.


Hoc qualecunque Poema, Gulielmus Bolton M.A. and ejusdem Scholae
Archi-didascalus, humillime dedicat.

In LAURUM APOLLINI dicatam, cujus Foliis (monitu Reverendi Viri Domini Fisher,
and jussu Honoratissimae Dominae, Dominae Gerard) usus sum, quae mihi Morbo
articulari laboranti, saepe medicata sunt.
COnvenere loco quodam flammantis Olympi
(Ut fama est) omnes Diique Deaeque simul.
Queis placuit varias leges edicere, and inter
Istas, de Arboribus Lex fuit una rata.
Esto Jovi Quercus, Pinus Cybelaeque dicata,
Populus Alcidi, Pallas, Oliva tibi.
Sit mihi, Bacchus ait, Vitis, dulcissima Vitis,
Deliciaeque virum, deliciaeque Deum.
Formosae Veneris circundet tempora Myrtus,
Myrto cincta duas vicerat illa deas.
Sol memer and fati Phaethontis, and orbis adusti,
Deposuit radios, qui nocuere, suos.
Pro radiis dixit, cingat mea tempora Laurus,
Sola caput nostrum Laurea s^rta tegant.
Nunc, Quam me juvat Vide Ovidii Metam l. 1.
esculeas dimittere frondes?
Jupiter has solus, si placet, inquit, habe.
Sic Ph^ bus: risere Dii, riscre Deaeque;
Et mira attonito res mihi visa fuit.
Quamvis attonito, causas tamen addere causis
Stat mihi, cur Phoebo Laurea sacra fuit.
Anne quod, aiebam, flammis data conscia Laurus
Dat strapitum, Dominum ceu miserata suum?
An, quod perpetuo Laurus frondescit honor,
Et semper, Juvenis ^^u Deus iste, viget?
An, quod non saevi fulmen timet illa Ton^ntis,
Fulmen, quo Phaethon praecipitatus erat?
An, quod venturi narratur praescia, visa est
Arbor Fatidico Laurea digna Deo?
Nunc hanc, nunc aliam placuit mihi fingere causam,
Quin causa incerta est ista, vel ista mihi.
Arborem in hanc versa de Daphne fabula venit
In mentem; haud placuit fabula at ista mihi.
Ob fructum, dixi, Pallas dilexit Olivam;
Neve minus prudens Pallade, Phoebus erat:
Inveni tandem: Medicorum Divus Apollo est;
Consului Medicos; hi retulere nihil.
Ridebat quidam, si quisquam, verus amicus,
Quique Lucas misero contulit alter opem;
Ridebat, Quare, and, Medicos tu consulis, inquit?
Ut radios, Laurum donat Apollo tibi.
Non capio, di^^: Non me capis, ille ferebat?
D^t Phoebus gratis munera quaeque sua.
Te Medici Laurum, te celavere, salutem
Q^amque Ars istorum non dabit, illa dabit.
Vane, quid a Medicis posthac sperare licebit?
Quum Needhamus opem non tulit ipse tibi.
Non tulit ipse tibi; qui saepe^e faucibus atrae
Mortis, te raptum reddidit art sua.
Needhamus, cui non Medicorum opprobria dici
Possunt, quem doctum noveris atque pium.
Pergit: luce sua qua conspicit omnia, Phoebus
Virtutem Lauro vidit inesse suae.
Nec desivit adhuc: Quendam vidisti n' amicum,
M^re tui misero qui laceratus erat?
Acceptam Lauro gratus fert ille salutem; Dominus Meur.

Vidisti, erectus quam novus Aeson adest?
Arrepta dextra Laurus tunc comiter usum
Me docet; at surdis auribus ille canit.
M^rbo etiam atque etiam fueram distortus acuto;
(Scilicet, haud Laurum corpora sana probent)
Assurgit tandem mulier sata sanguine Regum,
(Cui non est Virtus nobilitate minor)
Haec, tanquam suerat divino concita motu,
Uterer ut Lauro, ter mihi jussa dedit.
Nec mora: continuo illius praecepta facesso,
Atque manu capio munera, Phoebe, tua.
Admota Lauro, morbi fugere dolores,
Et sumunt vires corpora nostra novas:
Auricomis ramis tutus sic Troius Heroes
Tartarei vidit regna timenda Dei.
Post Laurum acceptam, Quam sum diversus ab isto
Olim qui fueram? Quam novus alter ego?
Dissimilis primae Domina es Gerarda Parenti;
Arbore tu vitam, contulit Eva necem.
Visa tuo Regi in somnis dedit herba salutem,
Quam medici haud dederant, sic Ptolomaee, tibi.
Romano, multos hosts qui fudit, habere
Appositam Laurum, fas erat, ante fores.
Heu! Quam non decuit talem sacra Apollinis arbor?
Servasse est Phoebi, non jugulasse viros.
Arbor pluris erit Phoebi, ratione medendi,
(Si minimo vatum scire futura dedit)
Quid? Laurum spectat Phoebus de sede corusca,
Reddentem miseris corpora firma viris:
I nunc, laetus ait, mireris, Pallas, Olivam,
Vitemque ostendas, ebrie Bacche, tuam.
Afficiunt morbis mortales munera vestra;
E Lauro nostra est certa reperta salus.
Quod per te, Alma Pales V. Ovid. de Fast. l. 4.
, valuere hominesque gregesque,
Grata tuis fuerat Laurus adusta focis.
Nunc, per me, Medicis licet ingeminare cachinnos,
Arborem Apollineam dilacerentque jocis.
Gratus ego scribam: Vireat Phaebeia Laurus,
Qua mihi plus nummi, plusque salutis adest.
Upon the LAUREL, sacred to APOLLO, whose Leaves I made use of (by the Advice
of Mr. Fisher, and the repeated Commands of the Honorable the Lady Gerard)
which have often cured me of a Rheumatism.
Paraphrastically translated by T. F. Gent.
THE Gods and Goddesses, with joint Consent,
Met once (as Fame reports) in Parliament,
And there disposed, by high and firm Decrees,
Of all Things; and, amongst the rest, of Trees.
Jove made Dodona's Noble Oak his Choice,
His Right being first to an Elective Voice.
The Mother-Goddess took the lofty Pine.
The fruitful Olive was, Minerva, thine.
And jolly Baccus chose the spreading Vine.
Sacred to Alcides was the Poplar Tree:
The Myrtle, Beauteous Queen of Love, to thee.
Let all the Grove turn round into a Ring,
And bowing low, salute thy Myrtle King.
'Twas made for Rule, though not for Empire fit
By Native Worth, yet by thy Choice of it.
Apollo laid his too bright Glories down,
And wreathed about his Head a Laurel Crown,
Loving much less to be in Sun shine seen,
Than clad in new and everlasting Green.
Jove turned about his Head, and smiling said,
Now, now you have enjoyed the flying Maid.
Most thought the thing ridiculous and odd,
A Choice too foolish for so wise a God;
And all did Pallas and Lyaeus praise,
Who from their Trees both Wine and Oil could raise.
I wondered likewise at an Act so vain,
And feared the God had prejudiced his Brain;
And sought a thousand Reasons in my Mind,
TO excuse the Choice, but could no Reason find.
I knew the Laurel had been always worn,
And still the Heads of Poets did adorn;
But since the Rhiming Tribe are always poor,
(For Father Homer begged from Door to Door)
The Laurel was for Mercury more fit,
As the Emblem both of Poverty and Wit.
At last, thought I, since Phoebus has the Art,
As God of Physic, Medicine to impart,
Perhaps by Laurel he some way has found
To cure an high Disease, or heal a Wound.
I ask't the Doctors, whether it were so;
Who smiling at my Question, answered, No.
But wiser Fisher better Comfort gave,
Fisher the Name of Second Luke may have;
Fisher, that can both Souls and Bodies save.
Consult Physicians, Friend, said he, no more,
But take Apollo's much more bounteous Store;
He with a quick and all discerning Eye
The secret Virtues did of Laurel spy.
All may enjoy alike his Beams and Tree;
He scatters both his Blessings, frank and free;
Gives the best Physic, and yet takes no Fee.
Do thou not know, (thou can not choose but know)
How our dear Friend was wrack't a while ago? Monsieur Meur.

How your Disease did all his Limbs surprise?
A Torture, which almost all Art desies.
Yet he no sooner did these Leaves apply,
But he cried out aloud, I will not die.
I feel, I change this heavy lump of Earth,
And, Aeson like, receive a second Birth.
This, and much more, my dear Friend Fisher told,
And then began its Virtues to unfold.
I stupid, hardly heard the Words he spoke,
Nor minded Counsel, I refused to take:
'Till by a Noble Lady ordered thrice,
I yielded to her safe and wise Advice.
The Prophetess affirmed, the Effects were sure,
And both at once foretold and made the Cure.
Tell me, my Muse, for thou alone can tell,
What Magic in the beauteous Sex does dwell?
What charming Witchcraft do the Fair invent,
To force, and yet persuade us to consent?
Blessed be the Sex, so apt and prone to save,
And blessed the Tongue, which those Injunctions gave.
What different Gifts do I from you receive,
From those bestowed by my first Mother Eve?
She brought in Death by one forbidden Tree,
You by another do new Life decree;
And by an Act, which nothing can confute,
Have made the Leaf more noble than the Fruit:
For nothing, when I Am sick, can that excel,
Which but to use and try, is to be well.
That healing Herb was something like this Tree,
Which Alexander did in Vision see,
And did his Health to Ptolemy restore,
When the Physicians had quite gi'n him over.
Rome (which allowed to each mighty Conqueror
To plant a Laurel tree before his Door)
Mistook its Property, and placed it ill;
The Laurel is to cure, and not to kill.
And therefore Phoebus values it as good,
Rather for saving, than for spilling Blood.
Now, O Physicians, torture whom you please
With nauseous Potions, worse than the Disease.
Who Will now esteem those Medcines you impart,
When one poor Leaf can baffle all your Art.
Mock as ye will, ye have my leave to grin;
I Will trust the Proverb, Let them laugh that win:
And will that safer Physic still pursue,
Which gives me Health, and saves my Money too.
LONDON, Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar. 1690.

Books Printed for W. Crook.
1. Homer's Iliads and Odysses, translated into English, by Thomas Hobbes of
Malmsbury. 12o.

2. The Wonders of the Peak in Darbyshire, commonly called The Devil's Arse of
Peake; in a Poem, Latin and English. By Tho. Hobbes. 12o.

3. The Historian's Guide; or Britains Remembrancer: Being an Account of all
Actions, etc. Designs, etc. Preferments, etc. that are worthy notice, that have
happened in His Majesty's Kingdoms from Anno Dom. 1600. to this time; and showing
the Day of the Month each Action was performed in: With an Alphabetical Table.
In 12o. Price 2 s.

4. Peppa, a Novel, with the Songs set to Music for two Voices. By a
Gentlewoman. In 12o.

5. Britains Glory; or, Englands Bravery: Wherein is showed the Degrees of
Honor from the Prince to the Peasant, and the proper Places and Precedence of
all Persons, from the Throne to the Bondman: With a Dictionary explaining
Terms in Heraldry. Also an Account of all the Orders of Knighthood in
Christendom, etc. By B. Smithurst. 12o. Price 1 s. 6 d.

6. A Modern View of such Parts of Europe that have lately been, and still are
the Places of great Transactions, viz. Italy, France, Germany, Spain, etc. With
curious Remarks of Antiquity. 8o. Price 2 s. 6 d.

A Plain and Easy METHOD, etc.
IN time of Pestilence, because a Physician cannot easily, or often, be
consulted with; Therefore it behooves all Persons, as well Poor as Rich, to be
furnished with Remedies against that Contagious Disease; and certain Rules, or
a Method how to use them: Which Method being very plain, and almost the same to
all People, consists chiefly in these two Parts, viz. How to preserve the Whole
from taking Infection; And how to cure the Sick that are in fected.

Touching the First; Though the surest way is to fly from it, yet in regard
this cannot be done by all, some Means should be used to secure [so far as it
is possible] those that are forced to stay by it. Such Means of Prevention,
either concern the Public Magistrate, which are already sufficiently known,
and commonly practiced in all places that are infected, and it would be
superfluous to repeat them here; Or else such as belong to private Persons,
what ways every Man that lives in, or near an infected place, may arm himself
against the danger of Contagion; Which should be endeavored, as well by
purifying the Air we breathe, as also by fortifying our selves against taking
the Infection at our Nostrils, Mouth, or Pores of the Body, which are the
chiefest, if not the only parts the Poison creeps in at.

That the Air we breathe in may be wholesome, all Things, that may advance or
add to the corruption of it, should diligently be removed; our Houses, and
Streets kept clean; all Filth, and whatever may cause noisome smells, be taken
away; and amongst other things, the smell of Sope-Suds, and Lie, in the washing
of Clothes, be avoided; this, Experience has taught to be very dangerous; as
it is observed by Diemerbroek and Vander Heyden.

Besides the suppressing of Vapors that may increase the infection of the Air,
it is to be purged of that Malignity it brings with it from other infected
places; and this is done by great Fires, which should be continually kept,
except the Weather be too hot, and by Fumes of Sulphur, Nitre, Frankincense,
Pitch, Rosin, Tarr, and the like, which every day should be burnt in the Room
we most frequent, also before our Doors, and on the tops of our Houses. Of
simple Medicines to be used for this purpose, Brimstone is commended for the
best that is; It Is likely that Vitriol, which partakes much of the like acid
Spirit, may be very proper; but in regard it is not easily combustible, make
this mixture, and strew of it on Coals in a hot Chafingdish.

Take green calcined, and of each a pound, beat them well together, and keep it
for use. In close Rooms, and in hot Weather, with or chopped small, and
evaporated in a perfuming Pot; or else Pestilential thrown on a hot Brick. Or
take of each half an Ounce; boil these in a Quart, or three Pints of 'till they
are all dissolved; put half a spoonful of this at a time on a hot Brick. Some
commend Slakeing of Lime, supposing the fume that arises from it, may purify
the Air: It Is possible, if this be done with Vinegar, either simple, or
impregnated with Alexipharmacal Medicines, it may be more effectual.

Next to the Cure of the Air, to render that as wholesome as we can; we must arm
our selves against taking in that Malignity, which [notwithstanding all means
of purifying it] shall still remain mixed with it. Now because the Spirits are
commonly the first that receive Infection; We must fortify them, that they may
not easily admit the approaches of their Enemy, which when they are in full
vigor and expansion, they will repel, and as it were keep off at a distance;
Therefore Wine and Confidence are a good Preservative against the Plague: But
when the Spirits, through fear, or want of supply, do recede, and are forced to
give back, the Enemy enters, and first seizes them, and thence gets into the
Blood and Humors; Therefore much Fasting and Emptiness are bad: But every one
should Eat and Drink at convenient Hours, in such manner and measure, as may
always keep the Spirits lively and cheerful, and endeavor to compose his Mind
and Affection against fear and sadness.

But besides keeping the Spirits in a good height, and more especially when
that cannot be done, as in Persons that are naturally fearful, and of a tender
Constitution, the Spirits should constantly, as it were, be kept armed with
such Remedies as resist the Poison; that is, the use of proper Antidotes
against the Plague.

I shall set down some Preservatives to be taken of every Morning, and again at
Night, by those that live in infected places.

Take of Conserve of four Ounces; and of each half an Ounce; Salt of two Drams;
Confection of one Dram; Roots, and fine of each half a Dram; Pestilential half
an Ounce; mix all with Syrup of Take as much as a Nutmeg, Night and Morning.
For the Poorer Sort, that Medicine of the Ancients, may be proper, viz.

Take of two handfuls, and of each twenty four, common Salt half an Ounce;
Which beat all together in a Mortar, till it be well mixed; Take of it as much
as a Nutmeg every Morning and Night. This Medicine may be several ways
advanced, by adding some Alexipharmacal Remedies to it, as by putting Salt of
Wormwood, instead of common Salt, and by adding an Ounce of Venice Treacle, to
the whole Composition.

For those that cannot take an Electuary, these Tablets may be proper to eat,
about one Dram at a time, two or three times a day.

Take of the Roots of of each two Drams; two Drams; mix all finely powdered,
then dissolve eight Ounces of fine Sugar in Pestilential Boil it Candy high,
and adding the Powder to it, make all into Lozenges. For some that are of a
hotter Constitution, and a high Sanguine Temper, it may be proper to take every
Morning a spoonful of Pestilential Vinegar in a little Carduus water, or plain
Wallnut water; or else drink a draught of Posset Drink, made with a Spoonful of
that Vinegar.

Let the Pestilential Vinegar be made thus.

Take of the Roots of of each half an Ounce, choice of each three Drams; Leaves
of of each one handful; of each half a handful; Seeds of and of each two Drams;
Cut and bruise these, and put them in a Glass-Bottle, with three Pints of the
best to digest for ten days. When the Stomach, by frequent taking of one sort
of Antidote, begins to loath it: In such Cases the use of it may be changed
into some other: And if the Stomach withal should be ill, and defective, in
Appetite and Digestion; let the Party take every Morning, ten or twelve Drops
of Elixir Proprietatis, in plain Wormwood Water, or else in Wormwood Wine.

Those that have Coughs, and ill Lungs, may take five or six Drops of Balsum of
Sulphur, made thus.

Take Flower of two Ounces, melt it in an Earthen Dish glazed on the fire, then
put to it two Ounces of Salt of stir it for a Quarter of an Hour, taking care
that it does not catch fire; Then put into it of finely powdered, of each one
Dram, of half a Dram; Keep this stirring half a Quarter of an Hour; Take it
off, and put half an Ounce of it powdered, to digest in five or six Ounces of
good Spirit of Wine; It will take in a short time a very excellent Tincture:
Which keep for use. Or else this Balsam may be made with Spiritus Theriacalis
Camphoratus, and so will be more effectual against the Plague, Or which is more
applicable to use,

Put an Ounce of that Powder newly made, into a pretty large Glass, and put to
it a Quart of good Sack; Set it in a gentle heat, for three or four Hours, it
will take a Tincture: And of this one may take half a Spoonful at a time: And I
suppose two Spoonfuls in a convenient may be a good to be given one that is
infected. Though Purging in time of Pestilence is not good, as Diemerbroek by
frequent Examples has observed, yet in Cachochymick Bodies, it may be
convenient once in a fortnight, to take a Dose of Pillulae Ruffi; Take half a
Dram at Night, and next Morning take the wonted Antidote, as at other times.

Also for those that live in an infected Air, that there is suspicion that they
may daily take in some pestiferous Vapors, which fermenting with the Blood and
Humors, may insensibly at last break out in the Plague; it may not be amiss,
once or twice a week, to take pretty large Sweats in their Beds: And this to be
done, especially if the Party has had any occasion whereby he may suspect
himself to have been more open to infection, or that he has taken any: After
such Sweat he should keep his Chamber the forepart of the day, till the Pores
are reduced to be as they were before.

To provoke such a Sweat: Take of one Dram; dissolve it in three Ounces of
Water, add a Spoonful of of Pestilential Or take a Draught of Posset Drink,
made with Pestilential In which boil a few Roots: To promote and continue the
Sweat, take Posset Drink with or else with or boiled in it. Besides the daily
and constant use of such Alexipharmacal Remedies, there are other Means, which
occasionally and sometimes continually should be taken. For in regard we always
draw in the Air at our Nostrils and Mouth, these parts should be well guarded
with some Antidotes, that may keep out the poisonous Vapors from entering in,
and especially as often as upon occasion we are more nearly exposed to danger
of Infection. To this end, some things to smell to, others to be held in the
Mouth, chewed, and swallowed down, are frequently to be insisted on.

That which seems at once to fulfill most of these intentions, is taking of
Tobacco in a Pipe; the Smoke of this secures those parts which lie openest, and
at once intercepts the Contagion from the Brain, Lungs, and Stomach: Nay more
than this, it stirs the Blood and Spirits all the Body over, and makes them
shake off any poisonous Matter that adhered to them: Insomuch that Diemerbroek
accounts it not only a Preservative, but tells us, that himself, when he was
several times infected, by taking five or six Pipes of Tobacco together was
presently cured. And amongst us in England it is reported, That in the last
great Plague, no Tobacco-Shop was infected: If it is not of so great virtue
still amongst us, the reason is, because most Men have been accustomed to take
it so excessively; wherefore it is grown so familiar to them, that it produces
no alteration when it should be used as an Antidote.

Besides the frequent use of Tobacco, which doubtless in time of Plague may be
profitable for them that can take it; others, and also Tobacconists, at some
times should be furnished with something to smell to when they pass through
infected Places. Wormwood and Rue, Galbanum, Castor and Vinegar are good: The
vulgar practice of putting Mithridate, or Treacle, or Tar in their Nostrils,
may be very useful; or to have a Pomander to carry in ones hand, or put into
the top of a Staff.

Take of the Roots of and powdered, of each Two Drams; of the best powdered,
half an Ounce; of half a Dram. Let it be made a Powder. Part of this may be
enclosed in a fine Silk Bag, and oftentimes dip it in Pestilential Vinegar, and
so smell to it. To the other part of this, add Oil of Nutmegs by Expression,
and Oil of Cap-ivy, of each a Dram, or as much as will make it into a Mass;
also add of Balsam of Peru one Scruple. Dip Cotton Wool in Elixir Proprietatis,
enclose it in fine Silk, and put it in the head of a Staff, or Civet Box, to
smell to.

For Medicines to hold in the Mouth, and chew on, Roots of Zedoary,
Contrayerva, and Snakeweed are very good; also Roots of Enulacampane, Angelica,
and Masterwort; these either alone, or macerated in Vinegar, and dried again.
Myrrh is very excellent: Some commend Tobacco, and chew it almost continually.

These are the chiefest Remedies which help to keep Infection out of the Body.
There is yet another sort which serves to let it out, and carry it away, before
it grows to a head, viz. Issues, which have been found by often experience to
be good Preservatives in time of Plague: For as much as Nature having a
constant vent for excrementitious matter thrown off the Blood, by the same way
expels poisonous Atoms soon after they are received into the Body.

Concerning Rules of Diet I need not say much, because such Precepts are
commonly known: It Is to be observed in general, that only wholesome Food should
be taken: Very salt Meats, as hanged Beef, Bacon, Pork, salt Fish, also
Shellfish, most kind of Herbage and raw Fruit should be avoided. The Meals
should be moderate, and eaten in due season. Some Antidotal Things may be taken
with the Meat, or mixed in the Sauce; Clove Gilloslowers pickled, also Citron
Peel and Juice, Rasberries, Currants, Pomegranate Juices, Pestilential Vinegar,
and Mustard, made with the Seeds of Thlaspi, may be of some good effect.

These kind of Remedies, and manner of living, ought chiefly to be insisted on
as Preservatives against the Plague. Those that are timorous and of tender
Constitutions require a support from the use of more means; whereas Persons
that are strong, and of a bold temper, have need of the less Remedies. But it is
not safe for any to be so confident as to dare to converse with infected
People, or live in the midst of Contagion without any Antidote at all.

In the use of means, caution is to be had, that strong and hot Cordials be not
too often taken, nor yet indifferently by all People; for that will inflame the
Blood, and make it apt to kindle a Fever, which at such times soon turns to the
Plague.

The like caution is to be had against immoderate drinking of Wine; though a
moderate proportion chears and fortifies the Spirits, yet too much greatly
disorders them, and thereby People are more exposed to take Infection.

Letting of Blood in time of Plague has been observed to be very pernicious; so
also often or strong Purging; for the Veins being emptied either way, will
readily suck in whatever poisonous Atoms lurk in the outward Pores of the Body,
which being admitted, become the more prevalent, because the Spirits being
depauperated, are less able to subdue or repel them.

Thus much of the way of Preservation:
Next we are to treat of the Cure of those that are infected.
The Cure of the Plague admits of no Delay; neither indeed is there need of any
deliberation what ought to be done; but as soon as any one finds himself
infected, let him forthwith take to his Bed, and having prayed to Almighty God
for his Blessing, begin to use the Means.

If the Party is much oppressed at his Stomach, and strains to vomit, or else
with vomiting throws up bitter and stinking Matter; let him presently take a
large draught of Carduus, or Camomile Posset Drink, and in it either half a
Dram of Salt of Vitriol, or two Ounces of Liquor of Squills, and with his
finger or a Feather, fetch up what is contained in his Stomach; but take no
Antimonial Medicine, that will work beyond the Stomach. As soon as he has
vomited, [or if there is no occasion for this Evacuation] let him presently be
put into a Sweat, and continue for twelve hours, more or less, according as his
strength will hold out, and not sleep in it, or not till the latter end of it.

If when he begins to Sweat, or endeavors it, his Vomiting still persists,
then apply to the pit of the Stomach a Toast of White-Bread, spread over with
Treacle or Mithridate, and dipped in Claret Wine or Pestilential Vinegar, made
Scalding hot in a Peuter Dish; Wrap this in fine Linen, and apply it very hot.

After a plentiful Sweat for twelve, fourteen, or eighteen hours, give him some
Refective, as Broth, Caudle, Mace-drink, or the like; and a little while after
suffer him to sleep if he can. Then give him temperate Cordials by way of
Confection or Julep, or both; which repeat every third or fourth hour: Also at
the time that the Party settles to sleep, lay Vesicatory Plasters behind the
Ears, and under the Armpits, and also in the Groin.

After he has slept, or endeavored it, and his Spirits are pretty well
refreshed, at a moderate distance from the first sweating, viz. Eighteen, or
Four and Twenty hours, sooner or later, according as Symptoms are more or less
urgent, and his strength is able, repeat the Sweating again; and so proceed
through the whole Cure; one while Sweating, and another while refreshing his
Spirits by temperate Cordials and Sleep; betwixt whiles administering fit
Nourishment, until such time as the Symptoms are abated wholly, and either the
Disease terminated, or else the Malignity is driven all out in Boyls or
Carbuncles; which how they must be ordered, shall be set down.

Though the same kind of Sudorificks may be given indifferently to most People,
yet because there is variety of such Medicines, in respect both of the Matter
and Form of them, therefore some choice may be had in the administration of
them, that so we may comply with the Patient's taking them best in this or that
kind of Form; and also that those that are hotter be given to Persons of a cold
Temper, and those Medicines which are more temperate to such whose
Constitutions are hot: I shall set down several Forms of Sweating Medicines,
which are given either in Potion, Bolus, or Powder.

Potions.

Take of Two Ounces; half an Ounce; of one Dram; mingle them. Take of Compound
two Ounces; Water half an Ounce, one Dram, one Scruple, Six Drops: Take of
three Ounces, of each one Dram, Pestilential one Spoonful: Take of Water Four
Ounces, Pestilential One Ounce, Pestilential One Scruple: Or make some with
Pestilential in a Draught of it dissolve one Dram, or a Dram and a half, of any
of these Confections, adding one Scruple of Salt of In a Spoonful or two of or
or both mixed; give fifteen or twenty Drops of or of the simple Mixture from
half a Dram to a Dram; or of from ten to twenty Drops, or fifteen Drops of For
the Poorer sort, make Posset Drink with Pestilential Vinegar, and boil in it
some Butter-Roots, and give a Draught hot.

Or make this Potion which Henricus a Bra magnifies above all other Remedies;
from the Experience of it in a great Plague once raging in his Country.

Take and of each one handful, half a handful; boil these in a Quart of strain
it out, and keep it in a Glass Bottle; give two or three Spoonfuls; in which
dissolve of or one Dram. Some others commend a Decoction of Guaiacum, to
provoke Sweat with it, as in the cure of the French Pox.

A plain Decoction of Rue in White Wine, with a little Vinegar added to it, is
highly commended by others.

Seeds of Rue powdered, and one Dram of it mixed with half a Dram of Treacle,
dissolved with White Wind, is accounted an excellent Sudorifick.

Sudorifick Medicines may be given in Powder thus.

Take of and Powder, or Powder, of each one Scruple; give it in two Spoonfuls
of Posset Drink, or of a Cordial Julep, or in Take one Dram, half a Dram: Take
of half an Ounce, of two Scruples, eight Grains: Take of the half a Scruple, of
one Scruple, of one Scruple: Give any of these in a Spoonful or two of any
Liquor, or in a Spoonful of Sack, with as much Pestilential Vinegar; half an
hour after, drink a draught of Posset Drink with Medesweet, or Woodsorrel
boiled in it.

Take of the one Dram; give it in a draught of warm with a Spoonful of
Pestilential Take Give it in the same manner. Likewise given in the same
manner, provokes Sweat powerfully, and expels the Poison of the Plague.
Take of that is gummy and sound, one Ounce, one Ounce and an half, half an
Ounce; mix all in a fine Powder: If the Patient can best take his Medicine in a
Bolus.

Take one Dram, of each one Scruple, as much as suffices. Take each half a
Dram, or two Scruples, one Scruple, vitriolated half a Dram, as much as is
sufficient. Take of half a Dram, fifteen Drops; mix them. When many People are
sick, and there is not leisure to compound every Dose of these Medicines
severally, there should be a large mixture of each kind made up together, which
may immediately, and without trouble be distributed into Doses.

For Sweating Potions thus.

Take a Quart of Water, of Water of and Pestilential of each a Quarter of a
Pint, of two Ounces, one Ounce, of and of each half an Ounce, of each two
Drams; put all together in a large Glass, shake them well together, and after
it ha0s stood Four and Twenty Hours, make use of it: Pour out three Ounces of
the clear, and two Ounces of it turbid or shaken just before: Mix a Powder
thus.

Take of the one Ounce, of each two Drams, of the powdered, half an Ounce, mix
all very well. Or take of the Pouders of Prepared one Ounce, and of half an
Ounce, mix them. For an Electuary to be distributed into several Doses, that of
Hermannus Vander Heyden is a very good one, and as he asserts, approved by
frequent Experience.

Take of one Ounce and a half, of two Drams, of one Dram, Seeds, of each one
Dram and a half, or rather one Ounce, fifteen drops, as much as suffices: make
up all together. Or take of half a Pound, of four Ounces. In time of Sweating,
give the Patient Posset Drink made with Pestilential Vinegar; boil in the Milk
Scordium or Marigold Flowers; if he is very dry, boil Medesweet, or Wood
Sorrel; if he is ill at Stomach, and apt to vomit or faint, give Claret Wine
burnt with Cinnamon and Zedoary Root, and Mint Water mixed with it: Or else
give him Beer boiled with a Crust of Bread and Mace, and sweetn'd with Sugar.
Besides, to the richer sort give now and then a draught of a Cordial Julep, and
sometimes a Dose of a Cordial Electuary; which kind of Medicines should be
given likewise after Sweating is over, once in three or four hours, of one or
other, to refresh the Spirits, and to keep the Malignity from the Heart. Give
him no cold Beer in two or three days. After Sweating wash the Mouth with
White Wind Vinegar and Rose Water: Also dip a Sponge in the same warm, and
gently stroke the Temples of the Head, and Nostrils with the same. Between
whiles give of the Medicines following.

Take and of each Four Ounces; two Ounces; or one Ounce and a half; or of two
Ounces; one Scruple; twelve Drops: Mix them. Or make a Decotion thus.

Take of and of each three Drams; a sliced, half an handful: Boil these in
three Pints of Water, till a third part is wasted; Strain it on two Ounces of
of or or Let it infuse an hour: then stir it, and strain it out: Give a Quarter
of a Pint warm. Whereas we give Emulsions made with such a Decoction and
Almonds, and cold Seeds in Fevers, Diemerbroek affirms, upon his frequent
Observation, Emulsions never do well in the Plague.

Take of the four ounces, of the or two Ounces, two Drams, one Dram and a half,
of half a Dram, one Dram, with a sufficient quantity of Sometimes the Plague is
accompanied with dangerous Symptoms, to which if Remedies are not suddenly
applied, all we do besides is to little purpose. Such Accidents, which call for
respective ways of Cure, are chiefly Fluxes of Blood, and Looseness of the
Belly, and Vomiting.

The first use to happen several ways, viz. at the Nose and Mouth, by Stool or
Urine, by the Haemorrhoids, and in Women by Menstrual Purgations: Some of
which, as by Urine always, and often times by Stool, are mortal; none of them
ever tend to good Therefore in all such cases, Remedies must be administered
which may stop Bleeding: And though Sweating and Refection of the Spirits be
still the principal intention of Cure; yet the other must come in as collateral
with both of them; and Medicines that restrain Fluxes of Blood be mixed both
with Sudorificks and other Cordials, and also be administered with Diet too.

In all Haemorrhages Sudorificks must be compounded of Medicines that are
temperate, and not astringent.

For Potions they be made thus

Take or two Ounces, of six Drams, of that has in it, two Drams, one Dram, of
half a Dram, one Scruple, of three Drams. Or make with boil in it a and in one
draught of it dissolve of two Scruples, of each one Scruple. Make this Apozeme,
and give two or three Ounces three or four times in a day.

Take of half an Ounce, three Drams, one Dram, of one Dram, and of each half a
handful; and of each one Dram and a half; of one Dram: Boil these in three
Pints of Water till a Pint is wasted; strain it, and add to it of two Ounces,
two Drams: Pouders may be compounded thus.

Take of or half a Dram; of each one Scruple; and of each half a Scruple: Syrup
Coral, Tormentil Vinegar. Make a Bolus thus.

Take of each half a Dram; and of each one Scruple; of half a Scruple, of six
Grains, of as much as is sufficient. For Iuleps and Confections, to give in,
and betwixt Sweating, they be compounded thus.

Take of Water eight Ounces, Water, Water, of each three Ounces; of two Ounces,
two Drams, of half an Ounce; Or take of four Ounces, of two Drams, of half a
Dram, of each one Dram, half an Ounce; or as much as is sufficient: These kinds
of Remedies, which are proper in Haemorrhages, are also to be used in Fluxes of
the Belly; likewise by Women with Child, because other more hot Medicines may
provoke an Abortion.

Make Tormentil Vinegar thus.

Take dried and sliced, of each an Ounce, half an Ounce, one Dram: Bruise all
very well, and put to it a Quart of digest it in a common Furnace for four
days: At the same time take of each half an Ounce; of each one Dram; two Drams:
Digest these in the same manner with a Let Extract of Tormentil Roots be made
thus.

Take and of each one Ounce; half an Ounce, two Drams, half an Ounce; bruise
all together, adding of two Ounces; put it in a Vessel to digest with three
Pints of Strain it, and evaporate it with a gentle heat in to the Consistency
of Honey. In the Cure of the Plague, if a course of Sweating, timely
administered, do plentifully succeed, and withal other private Excretions be
either prevented or presently suppressed, the Patient may be judged to be in a
hopeful condition; and sometimes the Venom is quite expelled, without any other
accident: But for the most part, because the Poison, by fermenting the Blood
and Humors, is soon greatly increased; so that all of it, especially the
grosser Particles, cannot easily evaporate, it settles in the outward Parts,
and there causes the swelling and breaking out of diverse kinds: Those that
require any application of Remedies, are Boils and Carbuncles.

The first of these commonly happen in Parts that are very Glandulous; as
behind the Ears, under the Armpits, and in the Groin: They arise with a hard
Swelling, which ought to suppurate and break, and the Corruption to be drawn
all out, by the running of the Sore for some time: These Tumors called Bubo's,
should be ordered thus.

If a Blister is not raised on, or near the place already, it is good to apply a
Vesicatory Plaster just below it, but on the Tumor it self to apply some
drawing Medicine, to attract the Venom outward; as at first, the Fundament of
some living Fowl, or else a Colewort-Leaf dipped in scalding Water, and dried
again, and smeared over with Oil of Lillies or Scorpions. To ripen the Sore,
lay on Pultises or Plasters; or rather first Pultises, and then Plasters,
when it tends to suppuration; which should be renewed every twelve hours at
least.

For Pultises.

Take an and boil them, or else wrap them in a wet Paper, and roast them in the
Embers, afterward stamp both together, adding a little and as much as is
sufficient: Or else roast a with either or both these above-named, and make a
Pultis in the same manner: Or else with either, or all abovenamed Remedies, add
an handful of or washed; and after beat all into a Pultis. Take mollify it
with adding a little and and lay it to the Sore. Some do commend to be applied,
and renewed as often as they die. For a Plaster to break the Sore when it is
opened, with or else those two Emplaisters, and mentioned by Diemerbroek, page
Paracelsus Take of two Ounces, or four Ounces, three Ounces, one Ounce, two
Drams; let them be dissolved in and strained, and adding the of one Ounce, of
one Dram: Emplastrum de Fuligine, or Plaster of Soot, is thus made.

Take of ten Drams, of each one Ounce, one Ounce and a half, of six Drams, half
an Ounce, the and of each two Drams: For the Poorer sort, is as good as any. If
when the Tumor is ripened, it do not soon break of it self, it is best to open
it by Incision; and when it is broken, put in a Pledget dipped in Turpentine
mixed with the Yolk of an Egg; or dress it with Basilicon alone, or the
Liniment of Arceus.

A Carbuncle, which is the other kind of Plague Sore, which requires the
operation of the hand, happens but seldom in any of the Emunctories [and when
it does it portends ill] but uses to be in most places else: It arises with
angry Pustules, sometimes one, sometimes many; which soon grow discolored, and
tend to Mortification, and the substance mortified must be cast out, and then
the hollow Ulcer which remains must be healed.

When a Carbuncle first appears, Diemerbroek commends to be applied to it for
the first and second day, a Red Colewort Leaf, smeared over with Rape Oil: The
same Author mentions a Pultis which he used for the most part, renewing it
three or four times in four and twenty hours, till the Gore was taken out; and
then Digestive Medicines, and others succeedingly are to be used, as in other
Ulcers.

Take and of each two or three handfuls, stamp them, and then beat them with
the and a little lay it to the warm, renewing it three times in a day at least.
FINIS.

