A DISCOURSE OF Monarchy, More particularly, of the IMPERIAL CROWNS OF England,
Scotland, and Ireland, According to the Ancient, Common, and Statute-Laws of
the same.

With a Close from the whole, As it relates to the Succession of his ROYAL
HIGHNESS, JAMES Duke of York.

DEUTERONOMY. 4.32. Interroga de diebus antiquis qui fuerunt ante te, ex die quo
creavit Dominus hominem super terram, etc.

LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Jos. Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness,
at the Black Bull in Cornhil, 1684.

To the most Honorable JAMES Duke of ORMOND, etc. Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
May it please your Grace,
IT was a saying of the late Earl of Ossory (Lord Deputy of Ireland (your Son)
at what time he delivered up the Sword of that Kingdom to the Lord Lieutenant
Berkeley) Action is the life of Government: Common experience tells us,
Usefulness, is the end of Action, and without which (like a Glass-eye to a
Body) a man rather takes up a room, than becomes any way serviceable. The sense
of this, put me on those thoughts, I herewith present your Grace, and unto whom
more fitly, than to a Person, in the defense of which, few men sat longer at
Helm, or suffered more; You, that hung not up your Shield of Faith, in the
Temple of Despair, and never seemed more worthy of the great place you now
fill, than when farthest from it. Nor am I in the so doing, without some
prospect of advantage to my self; in as much, as if the censuring Age, shall
handle me roughly on this account, under your great Patronage, I shall fight in
the Shade.

And now (my Lord) I was just breaking off, when it came into my head, that I
had, in some of our late pieces, found Sir Edward Coke, often quoted,
especially, to the defense of those Notions, which had better slept in their
forgotten Embers; and therefore I thought it not altogether foreign to the
matter, that I used the words of S. Peter (2 Pet. 3.16.) touching S. Paul's
Epistles, In which (says he) are some things, hard to be understood, which
they that be unlearned, and unstable wrest, as also they do the other
Scriptures, to their own destruction: I have purposely made use of him in many
places, as an high Assertor of Monarchy, and Prerogative; Those that find him
otherwise, -- Habeant secum, serventque -- Or let him lie indifferent, my
Argument depends not singly on him: which I humbly took leave to advert, and am,

May it please your Grace, Your most Obedient, Obliged, humble Servant, John
Wilson.

THE CONTENTS.
Sect. I. THat Monarchy, or the Supreme Dominion of one person, was primarily
intended by God, when he created the World. That it is founded in nature. As
consonant to the Divine Government. And of Divine Institution. Acknowledged by
Heathens, as well as Christians. 1 Sect. II. That Adam held it by Divine right.
Cain a Monarch. By the Kingdoms of the most ancient Gentiles, not God's, but
Monarchs were denoted. That the origiginal of Power came not from the People,
by way of Pact, or Contract. The unreasonableness and ill consequence of the
contrary. Noah and his Sons, Kings. A Family, an exemplary Monarchy, in which
the Pater-familias had power of life, and death, by the right of Primogeniture:
Examples of the exercise of it in Judah, Abraham, Jephthah, Brutus. Upon the
increase of Families they still continued under one head. Esau. The four grand
Monarchies. Ancients, and Moderns universally received it, as precedent to all
other Governments. 12 Sect. III. That all Governments have a natural tendency
to Monarchy. Their several Forms, and Rotations. Of Aristocracy. Democracy.
Tyranny, to be rather wished, than either. Examples, of Athens, and Rome; the
first Consulate. Their Tribunes, several Seditions. Marius, and Sylla. Crassus,
Caesar, Pompey. The two latter divide. Caesar complemented to Rome by the
Senate. The Triumvirate, their Proscriptions, and breach. No peace, till
Monarchy restored under Augustus. The sense of those times touching this
matter. 34 Sect. IV. That the Kingdom of the Jews, was a Supreme Sovereign
Monarchy, in which their Kings had the absolute Power, of Peace, and War, and
were Supreme, in Ecclesiasticis. And an Answer to that Objection, That God gave
them a King in his wrath. 62 Sect. V. What is here intended by a Supreme
Monarchy. The marks of Sovereignty; as, the Power of making Laws, and exemption
from any coactive obedience to them. The Power of Peace, and War, etc. That the
Kingdoms of England, etc. are Supreme Imperial Monarchies. Those two marks of
Sovereignty, and seven others, proved to be no other than what has ever been,
the undoubted Right of the Kings of England. The Kings Sovereignty by the
Common Law. The like from the Statute Law. Power in Ecclesiastics. And that
they have justly used those Titles of King, and Emperor, and that from ancient
times, and before the Conquest. 67 Sect. VI. That the King is none of the Three
Estates; in which, two preliminary Objections are examined by Reason; and
answered by the manner of the Three Estates applying to him. What the Three
Estates are. To presume him one of them were to make him but a Coordinate
Power. The King cannot be said to Summon, or Supplicate himself. How will the
Three Estates be made out, before the Commons came in? With a short Series
during the Saxons to the latter end of Henry III. in all which time they are
not so much as named as any constituent part of a Parliament, And the time when
probably they first came in, to be as they are at this day, one of the three
Estates. That the Lords Temporal were never doubted but to be an Estate. Four
reasons offered, that the Lords Spiritual, are one other Estate, distinct from
the Lords Temporal, and one Act of Parliament, in point: With other Authorities
to prove the Assertion. 181 Sect. VII. Admitting what has been before offered,
wherein has our present King merited less than any of his Royal Ancestors? with
a short recapitulation of Affairs, as they had been, and were at his Majesty's
most happy Restoration: and that he wanted not the means of a just Resentment,
had he designed any. 181 Sect. VIII. That notwithstanding the hard Law of the
Kingdom, the Jews paid their Kings, an entire Obedience. Two Objections
answered. The like, other Nations to their Kings. A third Objection answered.
The Precept of Obedience is without restriction; Examples upon it: Nor is
Idolatry any ground to resist; much less, things indifferent. The example from
our Savior in Instituting his last Supper. Least of all, is injury, with the
practice of Holy men of old, in like cases. And that if any ground were to be
admitted, that, would never be wanting. 189 Sect. IX. The Arts of the late
times in working the People from this Obedience. It was to be done piecemeal.
The Kings Necessities, answered with Complaints. Plots discovered; Fears and
Jealousies promoted. Religion cants its part. Leading men, some to make it Law,
others, Gospel; The examples of Corah, etc. The same Game playing over again:
Prognostications, etc. The ill consequence of such Impressions. The examples of
Cade, Tyler, and others. Holy League in France; Solemn League and Covenant, at
home, etc. New Trains to the old Fuel. Our Saviors advice to his Disciples
touching the leven of the Pharisees: What that, and they were, made applicable
unto our selves. 210 Sect. X. A Close from the whole by way of Enquiry, Whether
an Exclusion of his Royal Highness the Duke of York may be of more advantage or
disadvantage. The advantage proposed; and whether an Act for security of
Religion, may not be as safe, as a Bill of Exclusion. The moral impossibility
of introducing the Romish Religion, tho the Prince were of that Persuasion. The
reason why the Kingdom followed the Reformation under Edw. VI. Qu. Mary. Qu.
Elizabeth. That the case cannot be the same at this day. The Crown of England,
an ancient Entail; with the danger of Innovations. Objection, That such things
have been done. So has a King been murdered. More particularly answered, in
Edw. IV. Qu. Mary, and Qu. Eliz. all three excluded by Parliament, yet came to
the Crown. No man changes, but in hopes of better. The advantages of continuing
as we are. It is a bar to Pretenders. The same, as to Competitors. Disorders
avoided. No new Family to be provivided for. The indignity of a Repulse
avoided. Suppose Scotland, and Ireland be of another Opinion; the former of
which has by Parliament asserted the Right of Succession of that Crown,
notwithstanding any Religion, etc. Lastly, all occasions of Jealousy taken
away. Objection, answered. Disadvantages that have attended the laying by the
Right Heir. Examples from old Rome; and Usurpations at home. The Revolt from
Rehoboam; our loss of France. With a conclusion from the whole. More
particularly, as it relates to his Royal Highness. 236
A DISCOURSE OF MONARCHY, etc.
SECTION I.
That Monarchy, or the Supreme Dominion of one person, was primarily intended
by God, when he created the World. That it is founded in nature. As consonant
to the Divine Government. And of Divine Institution. Acknowledged by Heathens,
as well as Christians.

GOvernment is of that absolute necessity (if not to the being) at least to the
well-being of every thing, that without it, Cicero de legibus, lib. 3.
nec domus ulla, nec civitas, etc. nor House, nor City, nor Nation, nor
Mankind, nor Nature, nor the world it self could consist; inasmuch as the
stronger would devour the weaker, and the whole run back again to its first
Chaos: and therefore, the eternal Wisdom, when he had created the world, and
stockt it with living Creatures according to their kinds, as if he had done
nothing, while there yet wanted something more excellent to govern it, made man.

Ovid Metam.
Sanctius his animal, mentisque capacius altae,
Deerat adhuc, and qui dominari in caetera possit;
Natus homo est --
A creature not only capable of it, and that he might the better go through with
it, furnished out accordingly, Cognati retinebat semina coeli, but primarily
designed to it; and, however last in act, yet first in projection; for says the
Text, Let us make man, etc. Genesis 1.26, 27, 28.
And God created man after his own likeness, etc. and blessed them, and said,
Increase and multiply, etc. and have dominion, etc. and over every thing that
moves upon the earth; by which, what other can there be rationally understood,
but the supreme Sovereignty, or Dominion of one: for, if God Almighty had
intended otherwise, how easy had it been, when he created our first Parents,
to have formed a multitude, and given them a joint Commission, to have governed
one another, or at least bade 'em gone together, and agree among themselves:
but he foresaw it would not be, and therefore to avoid confusion, (the
inseparable companion of a multitude) created but one, and erected an exemplary
Monarchy in him.

That it is founded in nature.
Neither will this less appear, if we consider that the very laws of nature lead
us to a Monarchy, Natura commenta est regem, says Seneca, de Clem. As among
all irrational creatures, who having least of reason, are wholly governed by
sense, we find some one that has a pre-eminence above the rest of its kind: And
thus, Birds have their Eagle; Beasts their Lion, and among them also every
Flock its vir gregis:: the Fish of the Sea their Leviathan: a King over the
children of Pride, for so Job calls him: and the shout of a King may be found
among Bees, -- Rege incolumi, men's omnibus una est; Virgil Geo.

Amisso, rupere fidem --
Nor is it more founded in nature, As consonant to the Divine Government.
than consonant to the Divine government of God, and a lively image and
representation of him, who as sole Monarch rules and guides all things: Look
up to Heaven, and we find an Hierarchy among Angels; and one Star differ from
another in glory; yet, every of them paying this homage to the Suns
sovereignty, that they veil their faces, at his least appearance: Take back
again to Earth, and this little world of man, has but one Body, and all the
members of this body, but one head, whereon depends the will, motion, and
sense; and the greater world, but one God: He rules over the Angels, (than
whom he made Man only inferior) they over Men, Men over Beasts, the Soul over
the Body, Man (again) over Woman, and Reason above Affection: by which means,
every good, commanding over what is less good by a certain combination of
Powers, all things are kept in their order: whereas, were there a duplex
Principium, of equal power (as the Ancients fabled) the commands must be
contrary, and consequently thereby either ruin one another, or at least by
their continual jarring, disturb the harmony of the whole: and therefore it is
observable, that albeit God, who comprehended the whole system at once, and
unblotted nature, through all her Meanders; and to every days work (but that of
the second) said, And behold it was good, yet until he had put to his last
finishing hand, i. e. made man, and given him his Commission, of having
dominion, It is not said, And God saw all that he had made, and they were very
good: and by that Divine Commission have Kings ever since reigned, there being
no power but what is appointed of God, who according to the similitude of his
heavenly Kingdom has given unto them, the Scepters of their earthly
Principalities.

Nor need we go far for examples, we find it every where; And of Divine
Institution.
for such was Abraham taken and acknowledged by the Inhabitants when they
called him Principem Dei; and albeit Heaven be the Throne of God, yet we meet
with another of his on this Earth, his Footstool; for so we find it expressed,
1 Chronicles: 29.23.
Solomon sat on the Throne of the Lord, as King: And in like manner the Queen
of Sheba, God set thee on his Throne, to be King for the Lord thy God: 2 Chronicles.
9.8.
As also David is called his King, and his Anointed, He gives strength to his
King, 1 Samuel 2.10. 2 Samuel 22.51.
etc. and again, Has showed mercy to his Anointed. Obj.
To which, if any man shall object, that this was spoken of a good King, a man
after his own heart; Sol.
I answer, That not only Josiah who also was a good King is called the Anointed
of the Lord, 1 Lam. 4.20.
but Saul, a King whom God is said to have given in his anger, has this sacred
Title attributed to him, in eight places in the first Book of Samuel, and in
two other in the second: And the same also, we find God giving to Heathen
Emperors, Isa. 45.1.
Thus says the Lord to his Anointed Cyrus; to Cyrus, whose hand I have holden
to subdue Nations before him. And ver. 4. I have surnamed thee tho thou have
not known me: Howbeit tho he knew not his Founder at first, it is not long e're
we find him acknowledging him; Thus says Cyrus the King, All the Kingdoms of
the Earth has the Lord God of Heaven given me, etc. And he that gave the title
of Anointed to Cyrus, gave the style of his Servant to Nebuchadnezzar (who yet
had sacked Jerusalem, Jer. 25.9.
and led the People thereof into captivity) when he calls him Nebuchadnezzar,
the King of Babylon, my Servant; which also is but the same, wherewith he so
often favors Moses, Joshua and David.

Acknowledged by Heathens as well as Christians.
Neither is this truth, that Kings derive their power from God, less
acknowledged by the Heathens, than us Christians, (...), Kings are from
Jupiter, says Hesiod: Hesiod.
and elsewere you find 'em styled (...), Homer.
born of Jove, and nourished by Jove; whereby God is made their procreant
cause, as well as their conservant; not as deriving their pedigree from
Jupiter, but their Kingly honor: And what the Poet ascribes to Jupiter, Acts
17.28.
the Apostle gives to God, For (says he) as certain of your own Poets have
said, we are also his offspring. And what other does the Psalmist's calling
them Gods import, Psalm. 82.6.
than that they receive their Authority from God, whose place they supply, and
whose person they represent? Many also of the most ancient Philosophers
acknowledge the Regal Office to be a Divine good, and the King as it were a God
among men; and that God had given him dominion; as we have it at large in The
Power communicated by God to the Prince, and the Obedience required of the
Subject; Archbishop usher.
written by the most Reverend the late Lord Primate of all Ireland. In short,
the Psalmist is direct in this point, Psalm. 8.6.
Thou make him to have dominion over the works of thy hands: And therefore
when S. Peter calls Government an Ordinance of man, 1 Pet. 2.13.
it is not that it was invented by men, but as proper to them, and ordained of
God, for the good and conservation of human kind, and exercised by men, about
the government of human Society.

SECTION II.
That Adam held it by Divine right. Cain a Monarch. By the Kingdoms of the most
ancient Gentiles, not God's, but Monarchs were denoted. That the original of
Power came not from the People, by way of Pact, or Contract. The
unreasonableness and ill consequence of the contrary. Noah and his Sons, Kings.
A Family, an exemplary Monarchy, in which the Pater-familias had power of life,
and death, by the right of Primogeniture: Examples of the exercise of it in
Judah, Abraham, Jephthah, Brutus. Upon the increase of Families they still
continued under one head. Esau. The four grand Monarchies. Ancients, and
Moderns universally received it, as precedent to all other Governments.

THat God Almighty was the first King, will not be denied; and that Adam was
the next, appears by his Commission (as I have shown before) a large
Commission, and of as large extent, as having made him a mighty King, and
universal Monarch, and given him an unqestionable right to his Kingdom, which
was, all the inferior world, the Earth, the Sea, and all that therein were;
insomuch that it might not improperly be said of this matter, Jupiter in
coelis; terras, regit unus Adamus:
Divisum imperium cum Jove, Adamus habet.
And now as all things were created in order, and that the infant world might
not sit in darkness, nor their posterity want a light to guide and direct them,
what wonder is it, that for the preservation of that order, God erected a
Dominion himself, and declared his Vicegerent?

Cain a Monarch.
Afterward, when the world began to enlarge, and men lived so long, that they
begat a numerous posterity, Cain with his own Colony went into a strange Land,
and built a City, and called the name thereof, after his Sons name, Enoch;
Seld. Tit. Hon. 4.
which double act carries the character of a Kingdom in it, and that he was as
well the King, as Father of the Inhabitants: neither do the ancientest Gentiles
otherwise speak of those elder times, than with a clear supposition of
Monarchy. The Kingdoms of Saturn, etc. Monarchies.
Those Kingdoms of Saturn, Jupiter, Neptune, Pluto, and the like, denoting as
much, and that under those names, applied to distinct Kingdoms, not Gods, but
the Monarchs of Land and Sea, in the first times were understood. And so
Cicero, Certum est, De legibus, l. 3. Just. l. 1.
omnes antiquas gentes regibus paruisse. And with him agrees Justin, Principio
rerum gentiumque imperium penes Reges erat. But not a word all this while do we
hear of the People, That the original of Power came not from the People.
or that the original of Government came from them by way of pact or contract;
for if the power of Adam, upon his Children, and his Posterity, and so all
mankind whatever depended not on any consent of his Sons, or Posterity, but
wholly proceeded from God and nature, then certainly, the Authority of Kings is
both natural and immediately Divine, and not of any consent, or allowance of
man, and consequently, the people had no more right to choose their Kings, than
to choose their Fathers.

The Irrationality of the contrary.
Besides, to examine it a little farther, if this power of paction, or contract,
had been in the people, then it must lie in all the people, as an equal, common
right, or in some particular part; if in all of them, they would do well to
show how they came by it; or if in any more peculiar part, by what Authority
were the rest excluded; it being a Maxim in Law, Quod nostrum est sine facto,
Co. 8. Rep. 92.
vel defectu nostro amitti, vel in alium transferri non potest, Whatever is
mine, cannot be lost, or transferred unto another, without my own act, or
defect. Nor would it be less inquired, who were the persons supposed to have
made the contract? or whether all, without difference of Sex, Age, or
Condition, were admitted to drive the bargain? and if so, Wives and Children
were not sui juris, and consequently could not conclude others, nor themselves
for any longer time, than during the disability: Vide Bishop Sanderson's
Preface to the Power of Princes.
Which once removed, they were free again: Or if all were admitted, whether it
were with an equal right to every one, or with some inequality? was the
Servants interest (if yet such a thing could be among equals) equal with the
Masters? and if not, who made the inequality? or if equal, who could summon the
rest? or when met, regulate, preside, or moderate? and thus new Atlantis-men,
run round the maze, not knowing how to disentangle themselves; and like men in
a mist, lose their way by seeking to find it.

Whereas on the other hand, The ill consequence of it.
if we should admit the thing, and that Princes had no more right, than what
the People shall think fit to entrust them withal, which also, they may
enlarge, or restrain at pleasure: Then what follows, but that their Power is
precarious, and ambulatory, and subject to be varied, according to the exigency
of times, and occasions; whereas the Jus gladii, i. e. the Sovereign Power
belongs to the King, by the ordinance of God, not the donation of the People:
for he bears the Sword as the Minister of God, from whom he received it, Romans
13.2.
and not as the Minister of the People, who had no right to give it, because
they never had it themselves, and consequently, could not bestow it upon
another, it being also another maxim in Law, Nemo potest plus juris in alium
transfer, Dyer 256 Co^ 4. Rep. 24.
quam ipse habet, No man can give another, what he has not himself. And be this
sufficient, to have been said, against that humor, That the original of
Government came from the People.

But to proceed, Noah and his Sons Kings.
and omitting those traditional Kings, who are said to have reigned before the
Flood, Seld. Tit. Hon. 5, 6.
and of whom Xisuthur in whose time the Flood came, is supposed to be no other
than Noah himself; we have great reason to believe, that after the Flood, the
sole Government was at first in Noah, and that whatever property in several, or
share of Government in any part of the world afterward, his Sons had, they had
it by his sole allotment, and authority, and transmitted the same to their
posterity, merely on that account; those words seeming to import as much, Genesis
10.32.
These are the families of the Sons of Noah in their generations, after their
Nations; and by them were the Nations divided in the earth after the flood. And
so the Son of Sirach, Ecclus. 17.17.
In the division of the Nations of the earth, he appointed a ruler over every
People.

A Family an exemplary Monarchy.
Besides, if we examine Families, (a Family being in nature before a public
Society) we shall find them no other, than so many exemplary Monarchies,
wherein the Paterfamilias, and the firstborn after him, exercised all kind of
Government Ecclesiastical and Civil (so Noah cursed Cham, Genesis 9. Genesis 21.
and blessed Shem and Japhet; Abraham cast out Hagar and Ismael) and had the
power of life and death in the Family. Aristot. pol. l. 1. c. 8.
Patris, in liberis est regia potestas; The Father has the authority of a King
over his Children: for the better understanding of which, it will be requisite
(e're I go further) to show what the Paterfamilias truly was, and give some
instances where he used this regal Authority.

As to the former, What the Paterfamilias was.
Paterfamilias imports no more than Familiae Pater, the Master, or good man of
the house, who had the care of the Estate, and ordering the Family; and so
Tully uses it: C. Quintius, Pro Quintio.
suarum rerum, Paterfamilias, and prudens, and attentus: which in English, we
would call, a discreet and careful manager of his Estate. And in another place,
De Repub. l. 5.
Bono patrifamilias, colendi, aedificandi, and ratiocinandi, quidam usus, opus
est; had need of some skill in Plowing, Building, and keeping Accounts; all
which as yet, carry no more in it, than a bare care of the Family. And to the
second, that this Paterfamilias had the power of life and death, His power of
life and death.
Pater vitae necisque potestatem habebat in filios: Pro domo sua.
A Father has the power of life and death over his Children, says the same
Tully; not simply, and quatenus Pater, or Paterfamilias, which is the same, but
by a regal Authority annexed to it, by the right of primogeniture, whereby the
elder was by the law of Nature, to rule and govern the younger, Genesis 49.1.
he being prior in donis, major in imperio: And so Aristotle, Parens, quod and
amicus, and natu major est, praeficitur, quae species est regiae potestatis.
Pol. l. 1. c. 8.
In which sense, God speaking to Cain of his younger Brother Abel, Genesis 4.7.
says, Sub te erit appetitus ejus, and tu dominaberis illi. Subject to thee
shall be his desire, and thou shall rule over him: which made Jacob so eager in
supplanting his elder Brother Esau, of that birthright; 2 Kings 2.
and Elisha alludes to it, when he prayed Elijah that a double portion of his
spirit might be upon him, i. e. in comparison of the rest of the remaining
Prophets, among whom he had obtained the place of an elder Brother, and to whom
afterward he became a Father.

The exercise of this regal Authority is found every where; The exercise of it
in Judah.
and because examples give a quicker impression than arguments, take a few for
the rest; by this power, Judah passed sentence upon Thamar; Genesis 38.
Abraham.
and Abraham showed his readiness to Sacrifice his Son Isaac; which, had he
done, and had not withal had a regal Power in himself, Genesis 22.
which owned no Superior, less than him, that gave him the command, what
justification for him had that command been, among a people, unto whom at that
time, the God of Abraham was altogether unknown.

Jephthah.
In like manner Jephthah, who (as it is more than probable) actually Sacrificed
his Daughter; for the Text says he did with her according to his Vow, Judges 11.
which was, If thou shall deliver the children of Ammon into my hands,
whatsoever comes forth of my house to meet me, when I return (holocaustum
offeram Domino) I will offer it up a burnt-offering, etc. and is the same word,
which Isaac uses to his Father, Genesis 22.
Behold the fire and the wood, but where is (victima Holocausti) the sacrifice
for a burnt-offering? which is argument enough for me that her Father
Sacrificed her; And that he did it by virtue of that regal power annexed to him
as Father, and not of any power derived to him from the People, when they made
him their Captain, will appear in this, that albeit such an Officer had an
absolute, and independent Authority, when once elected, Godw. Jew. An^^q. c. 1.
yet he was seldom chosen, but in times of imminent danger, which overpast, he
retired to a private life again, as did Gideon, Judges 8.
after he had delivered Israel from the Midianites; and that is the reason why
we find such chasms and vacancies between the cessation of one Judge, and the
election of another: and therefore, that Samuel judged Israel all his days was
extraordinary; and extraordinary examples neither make a rule, nor break one:
so that in short, their Judges were the same in effect with the Roman Dictator
some Centuries after, who was neither Sovereign Prince, nor Magistrate, but
simply commissionated, on some sudden occasion for the making of War,
suppressing Sedition, or the like, which ended, he was no more than a Subject
himself.

Brutus.
Neither can that of Brutus the first Consul, his beheading his two Sons, be
taken to be done by him as Consul, but as having the regal power of life and
death, within his Family: for, besides that the Consuls were as yet in their
Biggens, they never at any time afterward had any regal power, nor could they
either make Laws, Peace, or War, or so much as whip a Citizen (but in time of
War) without leave of the People, whose Subjects and Servants they were, and
might be imprisoned by the least of the Tribunes of the People; as was
Philippus the Consul, by Drusus the Tribune, for that he interrupted him as he
was speaking to the people: from all which I infer, that Families (who as I
said) were before public Societies, were under the absolute obedience of one,
who had a regal power in him, and ruled as King over them: Howbeit in after
times, when Fathers began to abuse that Authority, it was thought fit to abridg
them of it, and place it in the hands of the more public Father, the King; a
Kingdom being no other than a great Family, wherein the King has a paternal
power.

But to proceed; Monarchy, upon the increase of Families.
as the world increased, so did these Families; and being now extrafamiliated,
became a part of the Commonwealth, and for want of room at home, swarmed
abroad into larger Families and Septs, but under the obedience still of one
common head thereof: so Esau is called the Father of Edom, Esau.
and the Dukes descended from him, were heads of Families, and Esau their
chief. Genesis 36,
Hi Duces Edom habitantes in terra imperii sui, ipse Esau est pater: And we
read, that Abraham when he pursued the four Kings in the relief of his Brothers
Son, and Ally, Genesis 14.
Lot, set out 318 ( expeditos vernaculos) light harnessed men at Arms, born in
his own house: Yet hitherto, these may be rather called Reguli, than Reges, as
being Princes of a narrow Territory, and much of the same, with the Kings we
read of in the same Chapter, Josh. 12.
or the 31 Kings that were vanquished by Joshua.

But when in process of time Kings began to encroach upon their Neighbors, and
that whatever it were they had already only showed them, how much more was
wanting, then also were their Kingdoms enlarged. And the first of this kind we
read of was Nimrod, The Assyrian Monarchy.
whom Bodin calls a Lordly Monarch, and the Scripture a mighty Hunter, not only
in that he was a great King, or as he has it, an oppressor; but rather, and the
more probable, that he was the first that usurped on his Neighbors rights, to
enlarge his own Dominions; that path which he first discovered, his Son Ninus
further laid open with his Sword, and left it to his Heirs, who held it, for
above a thousand years; from them, the same Sword translated it to the Medes
and Persians, The Persian.
and from them, to Alexander by the same way; The Grecian.
and continued by by the same right, among his Successors, till being crumbled
by them into lesser morsels, (yet still Monarchs) it became the fitter for the
Roman Swallow, The Roman Monarchy.
and at last an Empire again, under Octavius Caesar; that unwieldy lump of the
Roman Republic, being but a concretion of heterogeneal parts, which (like the
toes of Iron, and Clay in Nebuchadnezzar's Image) might stick together for a
while, but never incorporate: but of this, more at large in proper place.

All other ancient Nations Monarchies.
Nor were these four transcendent Monarchies the only instances of Monarchy,
inasmuch as it has gone out into all Lands; and there is neither Speech nor
Language, where it has not been heard among 'em. The Seythians, Aethiopians,
Indians, Egyptians, Armenians, Bactrians, etc. Nations famous in their Ages,
were all governed by Monarchs; and the Jews when they demanded a King over
them, that they also might be like all the Nations, what other did they imply,
but that all other Nations (for ought at least they had heard) were governed by
Kings: The Cappadocians vanquished by the Romans, had lost their King, and being
persuaded by them to take a popular State, refused it, as declaring they could
not live without a King. In short, Bodin.
where we meet the most ancient Kingdoms mentioned, we hear not (so much as a
Rat behind the Hangings) the least word of Aristocracy, and as little of
Democracy: Selden's Tit. Hon. 10.
That all Greece was anciently under Kings, was never doubted, and till long
after Homer's time, Aristocracy was never dreamt of: And when the Roman
Democracy began, is but to ask the next Schoolboy, when the Tarquins ended;
and therefore he that shall say of either of them, that (in comparison) they
were more than of yesterday, may have it also said of himself, he knows nothing.

And as universally received by the Moderns.
But what need I run so far back, when there are so many examples before us,
even at our own doors; And therefore to pass the Polonians, Danes, Moscovites,
Tartars, Turks, Abissines, Moors, etc. yea, and the salvage People discovered
by the Spaniard, and our selves in the Indies, where all of them, as guided
thereto, by the dictates of nature, lived under a Monarchy: The English, Scots,
French, Spaniard, Irish, (the first and last only excepted during the 12 years
Fever of a Rebellion) never knew other Government than that of Kings; and
therefore if we shall follow the advice of the Prophet, State super vias
antiquas and videte quaenam sit via recta, and vera, and ambulate in ea, Stand
upon the old paths, and consider which is the right and true way, and walk in
it: Custom and usage claims that reverence from us, as that we give Monarchy
the precedence of all other Governments, Precedent to all other Governments.
not only in respect of its antiquity, beyond any other State, but as most
universally received throughout the world, and consequently, allow that of
Aristotle (otherwise no great friend to Monarchy) Necesse est eam quae a prima
maximeque divina cecidit, esse deterrimam. Arist. pol. l. 4,
In short, Lord Baeon.
the Schools may dispute it, but time has tried it: Other States may have
curious frames but they are soon out of order; But Monarchy like a work of
nature is well composed both to grow and continue.

SECTION III.
That all Governments have a natural tendency to Monarchy. Their several Forms,
and Rotations, of Aristocracy. Democracy. Tyranny, to be rather wished, than
either. Examples, of Athens, and Rome; the first Consulate. Their Tribunes,
several Seditions. Marius, and Sylla. Crassus, Caesar, Pompey. The two latter
divide. Caesar complemented to Rome by the Senate. The Triumvirate, their
Proscriptions, and breach. No peace, till Monarchy restored under Augustus. The
sense of those times touching this matter.

I Have in the former Sections endeavored, and I hope satisfied my unbiased
Reader, that Monarchy is of Divine Institution, and has been the most anciently
received and exercised Government throughout the world, even from the first of
time: I come now to show, that all other notions of Government, of what kind
soever, have a natural tendency to Monarchy, and like massy bodies, retain a
trepidation, and wavering, till they fix, and settle on the same center, whence
they were first moved: Nor can this be more readily effected, than by examining
them apart, by which means, and comparing one with another, we shall be the
less apt to mistake.

The common received forms of Government, The several Forms of Government.
have been three, viz. Monarchy, Aristocracy, and Democracy. If the Sovereignty
be in one only Prince, it is a Monarchy: If all the people be interessed
therein, as in one Body, it is a Democracy, Republic, or Popular State: If but
some part of the People, whether excelling in Virtue, Wisdom, Riches, Nobility,
etc. have the Sovereign Command, as in one Body, and so give Laws to the rest,
it is an Aristocracy, Optimacy, or Government of the better fort.

Now because, as says Aristotle, Degenerat regia potestas in Tyrannidem, Arist.
Pol. l. 3. c. 5.
Aristocratia, in Oligarchiam, Respublica, in Democratiam, Monarchy degenerates
into Tyranny; And their Rotations.
Aristocracy into Oligarchy; a Commonwealth into Democracy: Discourse on Livy,
Deca. 1.
which yet Machiavel takes for the same; and therefore says, Democracy
degenerates into Anarchy, and that (of course) runs into Monarchy; it being but
natural, that when the Populace have toiled, and moil'd, and even giddied
themselves in the wild Circle, that they even sit down, and rest themselves
where they first sat out: And here it will not be amiss, to examine that sphere
of Government, which himself and others of that humor, have made to themselves:
viz. That in the beginning of the world, men lived at large, as other
Creatures; but when they began to multiply, they began also to come nearer
together, and then, whether it were that the people (as they would have it)
chose the strongest, or that he took it by force, came Monarchy into the world:
but afterward, when by frequent Injuries, and Rapines on each other, men began
to consider how they might keep what they had, safely, how unjustly soever they
had gotten it, then came in Laws; and from them, property; and then, not the
strongest, but the wisest had it; and in memory of the Father's virtue, his Son
continued it, and from thence, came hereditary Monarchy: but his Posterity,
forgetting that patrum virtus, and living (perhaps) as if they thought the only
character of a Prince, was to exceed others in Rapine and Luxury, they fell by
degrees, into the peoples hatred, and that made the Prince afraid of them; and
that fear (which creates an object, where it cannot really find it) increasing,
he began to study a revenge, oppressing some, disobliging others, until at last
it insensibly altered into Tyranny: And from thence came conspiracies; not of
the poorer, but the better sort, whose spirits not brooking it, they buzzed
notions into the peoples heads, and finding them pleased, laid hold of the
opportunity, and heading the Multitude, both took Arms together, and thence
came Rebellion; and having conquered that Government, the Mobile vulgus (as
Virgil calls 'em) ever desirous of a change, in hopes of battering their
condition, and fond of any thing, but what they were last, submitted to those
that raised 'em, and helped 'em to conquer; whereupon, superinducing new Laws,
they altered the Government, and thence came Aristocracy: but, as man being in
honor abides not, they, and such as followed them, least minding the specious
advantages they proposed to the people, e're they got them to rebel, and not
contented with a civil equality, but blinded by ambition, and taking upon them,
by excluding some of the best by degrees, to grasp the Power into the hands of
a few, and those, the least worthy, the Government was again changed, and from
an Aristocracy, brought to an Oligarchy; so that the Multitude weary of both,
and ready for another change, resolved to restore neither, and concluded on a
Popular State wherein every man taking upon himself to have an equal right in
the Government, it insensibly lost it self in the Mare mortuum of Anarchy, and
upon the whole matter, finding that in all this rotation, they had rather
lighted on some new Physician, than any remedy for the Disease, they returned
to Monarchy, and after all turns of the Compass, came about and settled in the
same point again. And thus, Pigmalion like, men form an image to themselves,
and then fall in love with it: and tho the question be yet to be granted, that
the Sovereign Power was ever in the people, yet it is sufficient to prove my
Argument, That all Governments have a natural tendency to Monarchy, and the
reasons are obvious.

For, if we consider Aristocracy, Aristocracy.
besides that it will be hard to determine who are the most virtuous, wisest,
richest, and most noble, or what shall be the true number of the Commanders, by
reason of the multiplicity of the pretenders (for the more generous they are
the more factious will they grow, their consultations be the more difficult,
and sooner discovered) how will it be avoided, but that (as in Corporations)
the greatest part, i. e. most voices, will overrule the sounder, and the
better; and the more men there be, the less effects will there be of virtue,
and wisdom, when the best men shall be always vanquished in number, by the
vicious, and the resolutions of the lesser, but sounder part, overwhelmed with
the gaggles of the Factious, and Ambitious: They are also in a continual
distrust of one another, and fear of the people, whom for that reason, they
dare neither train to Arms, nor trust Weapons in their hands: so that in
effect, they have a kind of Wolf by the ears, hold him in, then endanger
biting; let him go, then are torn in pieces.

Democracy.
So then if the Tyranny of one be pernicious, that of many must be much worse,
yet neither so dangerous, as that of a multitude, where no one commands, and no
one obeys, and to ask counsel of whom (as in times of old they did) what other
were it than to seek wisdom of a mad man? with whom, on all occasions, instead
of argument, -- Faces and saxa volant, furor arma ministrat. Virgil.
Whereas in difficulties they stagger to and fro, and are in dangers,
confounded: and therefore, one would think, when the Poet described the Chaos
of old, that he carried somewhat more under it, and meant the common people,
Ovid. Metam.
-- Rudis indigestaque moles;
Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners; congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum;
Obstabatque aliis, aliud --
Besides which, the end of all good Government is to flourish in virtue,
justice, valor, honor, etc. but the end of a Popular State, is to banish all of
them, as may be seen in Athens, and Rome; that by advancing the most unworthy
men to Offices, and Dignities, they may make room for themselves; or at least
(as Marius and Pompey bought) get money for their Voices; in which case, who
can blame him for selling by retail, what he bought in gross; more than he would
condemn a Woman, who having abandoned her honor, makes the best of her Trade:
In short, what shall be said, when in most Commonwealths of the Ancients,
instead of Majesty, and Justice, we find nothing but licentiousness, and
impunity? and how much it was improved for the better, in our late times, among
our selves, I appeal to the yet calamitous remembrance of it, when every man
did what was best his own eyes, and for the same reason also, There was no King
in Israel.

And now, Tyranny, to be rather wished than either.
who would not rather wish a Tyranny, than an Aristocracy, or Democracy; for as
many wise skilful Pilots, hinder one another, in striving to govern the Helm,
so will many men, of what condition, wisdom, or virtue soever they may be, when
every one shall seek to govern the Commonwealth, according to the vain images
of his own fancy, or abused imagination: In short, in the multitude of
Counselors, there is wisdom, but the determinative part; is better performed
by one, who having digested their opinions, will the readier execute that,
which the other would scarce resolve on, without contention; it being the
nature of Ambition, rather to see all lost, than admit another, wiser than it
self, or hazard the disrepute, of changing its opinion.

Examples in Athens, etc.
But to proceed; and here, not to weary my Reader with the state of Athens,
under the thirty Tyrants, or the Lacedaemonians under their Ephori, who tho they
carried the specious show of restraining their Kings, were indeed, a scourge,
and plague to the people; I shall only insist on the Romans, whose infancy for
about 250 years (for so Florus reckons it) was under Kings: Florus, l. 1.
Tacitus, l. 1.
And to the same purpose Tacitus, Urbem Roman a Principio, Reges habuere: After
this, Rome from the first Consulate.
upon expulsion of the Tarquins, they set up two Consuls, but not satisfied
with this also, the people take Arms, and leaving the City, declare they will
not return, unless there be appointed some Tribunes of the People, Florus, l.
1. c. 23.
who might bridle the Disorders of the Consuls, and the wealthier sort; Their
Tribunes.
and it is granted: nor would this yet satisfy; they must now know, what the
Law was, and to that end it must be written in twelve Tables, for the doing of
which, the Consuls were laid by, and the Decemviri created, with the Power,
quam modo Consules, Rosi^. Antiq. l. 7. c. 19.
olim Reges habuissent; interim, cessare omnes magistratus alios, donec juxta
leges creati fuerint; but they (as says the same Author) having made an
agreement among themselves, and bound it with an Oath, that no one should
oppose another, but what was approved by one, should be approved by all; that
they would admit no other to be joined to them, but hold an equal Authority
among themselves, Maximamque partem rerum pro imperio, multa tyrannice agerent;
the People took Arms again, and wholly destroyed their power, (and as says
Florus, Lib. 1. c. 24.
laid their persons in chains) the third year from the time they were first set
up; and thereupon the Consuls were again restored.

Add to this the several Seditions of Tiberius Gracchus, slain by Scipio
Nascica: Id. l: 3. c. 14, 15, 16, 17.
that other of his Brother Caius, slain by the Consul Opimius: A third of
Appuleius Saturninus, suppressed by Marius, Several Seditions.
and that other of Livius Drusus, by Philippus the Consul. As also the bloody
outrages between Marius, and Cinna, against Sylla, Marius and Sylla.
of which last (not to excuse either of the former) Plutarch says, In vita
Syllae.
that he had slain 100000 men, 90 Senators, 15 of Consular Dignity, and 2000
Gentlemen: And touching Marius, that of Ovid may not improperly be applied,
Fastorum, l. 4.
Ausus and e media plebe sedere Deus. Yet all this will be little more than the
beginnings of evil, if we consider that Monster of three heads; for so those
times called it, viz. Crassus, Caesar, and Pompey: Crassus, Caesar, Pompey.
the first was wealthy, even to a Proverb, Crasso divitior; and yet, still
gaping for more: the second was for bringing himself into Estimation and
Authority; and the latter, for keeping what he had already gotten; all were
alike greedy of Power, and therefore no wonder if they so easily agreed for
invading the Commonwealth; Caesar takes upon him Gaul; Crassus, Asia; and
Pompey, Spain: This (rope of Sand) held together for 10 years; and such I call
it; for Crassus being slain in Parthia, and there wanting a third, to balance
the other two, they quickly broke asunder: Pompey, begins to suspect Caesar's
Wealth, The two latter divide.
and Caesar casts an ill eye on Pompey's new Authority; Flo. l. 4. c 4.
Nec hic ferebat parem, nec ille superiorem: Nefas! Sic de Principatu
laborabant, tanquam duos tanta imperii fortuna non caperet. The one brook'd not
an Equal, nor the other a Superior: Impossible! they made such work who should
be Chief; as if the fortune of so great an Empire were too little for two. In
short, they made such havoc between them, that any one region of the world was
too little to contain it; and therefore it spread through the whole; for Pompey
having the ill fate of surviving his Dignity, in the loss of his Army at
Pharsalia, and to be as treacherously murdered, by his friend Ptolomy, King of
Alexandria, to whom he had fled for succor, his Sons took up the quarrel; of
whom, Cnaeus (the younger) flying wounded from the Battle of Munda in Spain,
was pursued by Caesar, and slain; from which, Sextus (the elder) escaping, and
having gotten together 350 Ships, Ibid. cap. 8.
he was (after the death of Caesar) overthrown in a Sea Fight near Sicily;
whence flying into Asia, he fell into Anthony's hands, and was there slain: of
which Martial, Lib. ^. Ep. 75.
Pompeios juvenes Asia, atque Europa, sed ipsum
Terra tegit Libyes; si tamen ulla tegit:
Quid mirum toto si spargitur orb? jacere
Uno non poterat tanta ruina loco.
And now, Caesar complemented to Rome by the Senate.
every thing following the good fortune of Caesar, it was not said to the
Senate, And will ye be last to bring the Conqueror home? No, they prevented it,
for besides the bringing his Statues into their Temples, inscribing a month of
the year to him, etc. they met their Enemy in the way, and having new studded
the word Imperator, welcomed him in, with the supernumerary Titles, God. Romans
Ant. 171.
of Pater Patriae, Consul in decennium, Dictator in perpetuum, Sacrosanctus,
and Imperator. But (O the uncertainty of human condition!) depraved natures are
never reconciled; and such, those his Flatterers proved to him; for upon a
Conspiracy of Brutus, and Cassius, and other Senators, he was murdered in the
Senate; they not longer nevertheless surviving it themselves, than in the
effects of that Parricide, Flo. l. 4. c. 7.
to have beheld that liberty lost, they had made such bustle to restore.

And here again, The Triumvirate.
Rome found the want of a Head; for Sextus Pompeius having (as I said before)
set up at Sea, to recover what his Father had lost by Land, and failing in it;
Octavius must be revenged of the murderers of Caesar, who had adopted him;
Antony, of them who had declared him an enemy; and Lepidus, (whose only
business, in hopes of Wealth, was to fish in troubled waters) comes in as fuel
to a flame, and joining with Octavius and Antony, they made a Triumvirate; and
under the common pretenses of revenging the murder of Julius Caesar, and
settling the Commonwealth, which was much out of order, had chief Power and
Authority for five years, Rofin. Antiq. l. 7. c. 21.
which expiring, they refused to resign, but held it other five, enacting, or
reversing, what laws they pleased, and that, without the consent of the Senate,
or People; and having divided one Commonwealth into three Monarchies, viz.
Africa, both the Sardinia's, and Sicily to Octavius: All Spain and Gallia
Narbonensis, i. e. Languedoc, Daulphine, and Provence, to Lepidus; and the rest
of France of either side the Alps, to Antony; the defense of Rome, and Italy,
is left to Lepidus, while the other two, advance against Brutus and Cassius,
who (by a mistake) having lost the day, kill themselves: Upon this, the
Conquerors return to Rome, and exercising all cruelty whatever, without any
regard of person, or condition, Their Proscriptions.
they proscribe and banish at pleasure: Lepidus gave up his Brother Lucius
Paulus, to gratify Octavius: Rosin. Antiq. l. 7. c. 21.
Antony, his Uncle L. Caesar, to requite Lepidus: And Octavius, his friend
Cicero (whose advice had given him the Empire) to appease inexorable Antony,
concerning the Philippicks: And now, nothing but slaughter bestrid the Streets,
when besides the incredible number of Roman Knights and Citizens killed in the
broil, there were no less than 130 Senators proscribed between them, and of
whom those last mentioned, were three.

And Breach.
And now one would think all had been at quiet, the Commonwealth (as I said
before) being divided into three Monarchies, and Antony married to the Sister
of Octavius, yet all would not do; for Antony being gone for Egypt, and Sextus
Pompeius overthrown, Octavius makes War on Lepidus, whose softness and
irresolution made him submit, with the loss of his share of the Triumvirate;
and thence, to keep a War (as he had never less than reason to suspect it) from
home, he follows Antony, whose sensuality, and unpursutiveness lost him the
sole Empire of the World; for Octavius having overcome him and Cleopatra, in
the Naval Battle of Actium, No peace, until Monarchy restored.
the Morning and the Evening of the Roman State, made but one day, and the
Sovereignty once more coming into one hand, the Temple of Janus was now the
third time closed: Upon which, applying himself to preserve that peace he had
so happily restored, he made severe Laws to restrain those evils, a peaceable
Age is but too prone to run into; Florus, l. 4. c. 12.
in due sense of which, it was debated in Senate, An quia condidisset imperium
Romulus vocaretur; sed sanctius and reverentius visum est nomen Augusti. And it
may be observed, that from the expulsion of the Roman Kings to the Reign of
Octavius Augustus (about 450 years) there was seldom above 10 years, without
some Civil War, or some Sedition; whereas Augustus kept the Empire in peace for
above 50 years, and so it continued after his death, till the Pretorian Bands
began to chaffer for the Empire, and others, to comply with them, gave an
Empire for an Empire.

The sense of those times touching this matter.
And now e're I close the Argument, it may not be amiss to recollect, what the
Historians, and Poets, that speak of those times, thought of it. Neque aliud
discordantis reipublicae remedium, quam ut ab uno regeretur, says Tacitus: Nor
is Florus, who wrote not long after him, in any thing short of him. Gratulandum
tamen in tanta perturbatione est, quod potissimum ad Octavium Caesarem summa
rerum rediit; qui sapientia sua, atque solertia perculsum undique and
perturbatum, ordinavit imperii corpus. Quod ita haud dubie nunquam coire and
consentire potuisset, nisi unius praesidis nutu, quasi anima, and mente
regeretur. We have this yet in so great a confusion, to be glad at, that the
upshot of all came back to Octavius Caesar, rather than another; who by his
Wisdom and Policy, brought the shattered, and disordered body of the Empire
into frame again; which without dispute had never met, and joined together, had
it not been actuated, by one chief Ruler, as with a Soul, and Intelligence. And
to the same purpose L. Ampelius, (who wrote before the division of the Empire)
speaking of the several turns of the state of Rome, and the uncertain condition
of the people, Amp. in lib. memoriali, c. 28.
Donec exortis bellis civilibus, inter Caesarem, and Pompeium, and oppressa per
vim liberate, sub unius Caesaris potestatem redacta sunt omnia, Until those
Civil Wars between Caesar and Pompey began, and the public liberty overborn
by violence, all things were reduced under the obedience of one Caesar. And
what the much ancienter Homer's sense of having many Lords, was, we have every
where, (...),
(...).
Nec multos regnare bonum; Rex unicus esto.
And the reason of it is clear. Lucan.
Nulla fides regni sociis, omnisque potestas
Impatiens consortis erit. --
And so another, -- Summo nil dulcius unum est Statius.

Stare loco, sociisque comes discordia regnis.
From all which we may gather, That all Governments, of what kind soever, have
a natural tendency to Monarchy, and (like Noah's Dove) find no rest, till they
return to the same station, whence they first departed. It being impossible
otherwise, but that (as Lines from the Center) the farther they run, the
farther they must separate.

SECTION IV.
That the Kingdom of the Jews, was a Supreme Sovereign Monarchy, in which their
Kings had the absolute Power, of Peace, and War, and were Supreme, in
Ecclesiasticis. And an Answer to that Objection, That God gave them a King in
his wrath.

I Have hitherto, according to my method proposed, discoursed of Monarchy in
general; it remains now that I bring it down to some particulars: I Will begin
with the Kingdom, God erected among the Jews (his own People) and show, That
the Monarchy among them, was supreme, and independent: And here we will take the
case as we find it in Samuel. Samuel was become old, 1 Samuel 8. throughout.
and his Sons not walking in his ways, had distasted the People, who ask of him
a King to judge them like all the Nations; Samuel is displeased, but God
commands him to hearken to them, howbeit to protest solemnly against them, and
show them the manner of the King, that was to reign over them, which he
accordingly does, viz. He will take your sons, and appoint them for himself,
for his chariots, and to be his horsemen, and some shall run before his
chariots: He will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards,
even the best of them and give them to his servants, etc. A hard saying no
doubt, whether we respect their persons, or their possessions, and yet he calls
it Jus Regis qui imperaturus est vobis, thereby also implying, that such was
the manner of all other Nations. And when he wrote it in a Book and laid it up
before the Lord, 1 Samuel 10.25.
he calls it Legem Regni, The Law of the Kingdom; and yet a King they must
have, and had him, adding to that of Samuel, this other, of their own desires,
that he might have the absolute power of Peace, and War; and this appears
within the very letter of their demands, viz. That he might judge them, which is
the power of Peace, and go out before them, 1 Samuel 8.20.
and fight their Battles, which is the power of War. And what Authority he had
in matters of the Church may be seen in this, That Solomon of himself thrust
out Abiathar (the High Priest) and appointed Zadok in his room. 1 Kings 2.27.
And that even the Horns of the Altar were no Sanctuary against him in case of
Treason, 1 Kings 25.34
may be also seen in Adonijah and Joab; and yet we cannot so much as gather,
that God was offended with him for his so doing, or that his person was the
less acceptable to him, by reason of those matters.

To which if it be objected, Object.
That God gave them a King in his anger: I answer,

Moses having foretold the Israelites, Sol. Deuteronomy. 17.15.
that when they came into the Land, they would be asking a King, charges them
to set him over them, whom God should choose; which shows, That a popular
Election was utterly forbidden them: yet they, weary of such Judges, as had
succeeded Moses, and whom God had raised to rule them as Kings, demand a King,
like all the Nations, i. e. of a more absolute power, than those Judges had:
and therefore, not staying Gods time, but taking upon them to be their own
Carvers, he is said to have given them a King in his wrath, in that they had
not rejected Samuel, but himself, who had appointed Samuel. In acknowledgment
of which, and as sensible of their error, they ever after accepted their Kings
by Succession, unless only, when their Prophets had anointed and ordained
another, by Gods special designation: Nor do we find any one in Holy Writ,
chosen King by the Children of Israel, but Abimelech the Bastard of Gideon,
Judges 9.18.
and Creature of the People, who also came in by Conspiracy and Murder: And (as
it seems probable) Jeroboam, 1 Kings 12.3.
who made Israel to sin; for they had sent to him (at that time, a discontented
Fugitive, in Egypt) and he headed them, in a complaint of Grievances to
Rehoboam, which occasioned the revolt of the ten Tribes; both which yet,
reigned as wickedly, as they entered unjustly, and perished miserably.

SECTION V.
What is here intended by a Supreme Monarchy. The marks of Sovereignty; as, the
Power of making Laws, and exemption from any coactive obedience to them. The
Power of Peace, and War, etc. That the Kingdoms of England, etc. are Supreme
Imperial Monarchies. Those two marks of Sovereignty, and seven others, proved
to be no other than what has ever been, the undoubted Right of the Kings of
England. The Kings Sovereignty by the Common Law. The like from the Statute
Law. Power in Ecclesiastics. And that they have justly used those Titles of
King, and Emperor, and that from ancient times, and before the Conquest.

I Have now brought my Discourse whither I first designed it, and therefore to
avoid confusion, which ever attends the being too general, I shall first show
my Reader, what I mean by a Supreme Imperial Monarch, at this day; and in the
next place, prove the Kings of England, etc. are such: And lastly, that however
the Emperors of the West and East, have so much striven about that great Title
of Emperor, or Basileus, that yet the Kings of England (as Supreme within their
Dominions) have also and justly from ancient Ages used it, as no less proper to
their own independent greatness.

England, France, Spain, etc. who owing no service to the Majesty of another,
Inst. 4 343.
is his own Master, and has an absolute Power in himself, no way subject to
the control of another: and of such a one speaks Martial. Qui Rex est, Regem
(Maxim) non habeat. The other, an Homager, or Feudatary, to another King, as
his Superior Lord; such as that of Navar and Portugal (of old) to Castile;
Granada, and Leon, to Aragon; Lombardy, Sicily, Naples, and Bohemia, to the
Empire; Seld. Tit. Hon. 24.
six parts of the Saxon Heptarchy, who acknowledged the seventh, Anglorum Rex
primus; and such was Aella, King of Sussex; the Kings of Man and others, of
whom I shall have occasion to speak hereafter. hereafter. The first of these is
what I intend, and will be the better made out, if we cast our eyes a little on
the marks of Sovereignty, and then, consider wherein they differ from our own
Laws. And amongst others, we find these, Marks of Sovereignty: Power of making
Laws. Psalm. 60.7.
1. The Power of making Laws; and so what our English Translation calls, Judah
my Lawgiver, is in the vulgar Latin, Juda Rex meus, Judah my King: This power
being one of the principal ends of Regal Authority, and was in Kings, by the
Law of Nature, long before Municipal Laws had any Being, the people at that
time being governed by a natural equity, which by the Law of Nature, all were
bound to observe: And so the Poet, -- Remo cum fratre, Quirinus Virgil.

Jura dabat populo --
The like of King Priam; -- Jura vocatis
More dabat populis. --
And of Augustus, -- Legesque tulit justissimus Auctor. So Cicero speaking of
Julius Caesar (as a Lawgiver) says thus, Caesar, si ab eo quaereretur quid
egisset in Toga, Leges se respondisset multas, and praeclaras tulisse; Though
many yet received Laws, at the will of their Prince; and thus, Barbaris, pro
legibus, semper imperia fuerunt: Livy.
which word barbarous, at that time, carried no disgrace with it, but was
applied to them, that spoke a strange Language; And so the Hebrews called the
Egyptians (of all other Nations, the most civilized, and learned) for that they
used the Egyptian Tongue, and not the Hebrew, as we have it in the Psalmist,
Psalm. 114.1.
When Israel came out of Egypt, and the house of Jacob (de gente barbaro) from
a people of strange language.

And exemption from any coactive Obedience to them.
And as they gave Laws to others, so were they loosed from the force of them
themselves, i. e. from all coactive Obedience, or Obligation, to any written,
or positive Law. Thus M. Antony, when pressed by his Cleopatra, to call Herod
in question, Joseph. Ant. l. 15. c. 14.
answered, It was not fitting a King should give an account of what he did in
his Government, it being in effect, to be no King at all. And to the same
purpose Pliny, Ereptum principi, Panegyr. ad Trajan.
illud in principatu beatissimum, quod non cogitur.

Another mark of Sovereignty is the power of Peace and War, Power of Peace and
War.
and which, as Bodin says, De Repub. 163.
was never doubted to be in a King. In like manner to create and appoint
Magistrates, especially such, as are not under the command of others. The power
of the last appeal. To confer Honors. To pardon Offenders. To appoint the
Value, Weight, and Stamp of his own Coin, and make Foreign Coin current by
Proclamation. To receive Liege Homage of an inferior King. And bear those
Titles of Sacred, and Majesty, only proper to Sovereign Princes, apart from all
others; of which you may read at large in Bodin. But I come to the second. Id.
Bodin, 182.


England, etc. are a Supreme Imperial Monarchy; That the Kingdom of England is
a Supreme Imperial Monarchy.
which will the better appear, when by examining those marks of Sovereignty, we
find no more in them, than what the Laws of these Realms have ever
acknowledged, to be the undoubted right of our Kings; and that, whether we
respect the Common Law, Statute Law, or their Power, in Ecclesiastics. I Will
take my rise from the marks of Sovereignty.

The Kings Power in making Laws.
1. The Power of making Laws. The Laws of most Kingdoms (says the Lord Bacon)
have been like Buildings of many pieces, In his Resusc. fol. 153.
patcht up from time to time, according to the occasion, without form or model;
and as to our own, that they are mixed as our Language, Ibid. 154.
of British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Norman Customs. Edgar the Saxon collected
those of his time, Ibid. fol. 276:
and gave them the force of a Faggot bound, which formerly were dispersed. The
Danes imposed upon us their Dane-Law: And the third of that name before the
Conquest, Sir E. Coke's Preface to his third Report.
Ex immensa Legum congerie quas Britanni, Romani, Angli, Daci condiderunt,
optima quaeque selegit, and in unam coegit, quod vocari voluit Legem communem.
Some of which bear his name to this day, as Ordained by him: After him, William
the Conqueror (whom Polidor Virgil calls our Lawgiver) brought in somewhat of
a new Law, as may be seen in this, Sir Jo. Davys Preface to his Irish Reports.
That tho he made but little or no alteration in the Fundamentals, but formulis
juris, he found here, yet, whether it were to honor his own Language, or to
show some mark of Conquest, he set forth his Public Edicts in the Norman
Tongue, and caused our Laws to be written in the same: And likewise, his
Justiciaries, Lawyers, and Ministerial Officers, being at that time all
Normans, it may be none of the least reasons why all our Pleadings and Entries
were in that Tongue, until altered by Statute, That because of the great
mischiefs that had happened to diverse by means of the said Laws being written in
the French Tongue which they understood not, 36 Edw. III. cap. 15.
That therefore all Pleas for the future, should be pleaded in the English
Tongue, and enrolled in the Latin, and that we received our ancient Tenures,
Sir Jo. Davys Preface to his Irish Reports.
from the Normans, is obvious every where. And King John planted the English
Laws in Ireland.

But to come nearer home, and examine how our present constitutions agree with
it; nor are they other than what has been the Practice of all former
Parliaments, wherein, both Houses are so subordinate to the King in the making
of Laws, that neither of them singly, nor both of them together, Sir E. Cook,
Sur West. 2.
can make any binding Law without the Kings concurrence; they might in all
times ('it is true) propose, advise or consent, or, to borrow a Metaphor, Spawn
of themselves; but in the Royal Consent only (like the male touch) lay the vis
plastica, which gave the Embrion life, and quickened it into Laws; and the
reason of it is, because the Legislative Power resideth solely in the King, ut
in subjecto proprio, and the consent of the Lords and Commons, is no sharing of
that Power (which is indivisible) but a requisite condition, Inst. 4.243.
to complete the Kings Power: for otherwise, all those Bills that have passed
both Houses, and for want of the Royal-Assent, lie buried in oblivion, might as
occasion served, be raked from their forgotten Embers, and set up for Laws.
Which also further appears in the several forms of our Kings giving their Royal
Assent, as Le Roy voit, Inst. 2.286.
Le Roy est Assensus, Le Roy Advisera, etc. and makes good this point, That the
Power of making Laws, resides in the King, and that he may, as he sees cause,
either refuse or ratify: And this the Law of Scotland calls, Indictment
against the Earl of Areyle, 1681.
his Majesty's best, and most incommunicable Prerogative.

And as the Legislative Power resides in the King solely, so also, to him
belongs it to interpret those Laws: Si disputatio oriatur, The Kings Power in
interpreting Laws.
Justiciarii non possunt eam interpretari, sed in dubiis and obscuris Domini
Regis erit expectanda interpretatio, and voluntas; cum ejus sit interpretari
cujus est condere (says the Lord Ellesmer from Bracton and Britton) His is the
interpretation of the Law, Cited by him in his Postnaci.
whose is the Power of making the Law. In his recurrendum ad Regem justitiae
fontem; whence he is said to carry all the Laws ( in scrinio pectoris sui) in
his Breast. Sir H. Spelman's Gloss, fol. 107. Inst. 1.99. Inst. 2.168.
To give one instance for all, When King Charles the First (of happy memory)
had just given his Royal Assent, to the Petition of Right, he told the Houses,
That his meaning was to confirm all their Liberties, as knowing, that according
to their own Protestations, they neither meant, nor could hurt his Prerogative,
etc. And on the last day of the Session, before his Royal Assent to the Bills,
saying, he would tell them the cause, why he came so suddenly to end that
Session, he adds, Vide Petition of Right, and his Majesty's Answer, 3 Car. 1.
Tho I must avow that I own an account of my actions to none, but God: And
again, charging both Houses, with their Profession, during the hammering that
Petition, that it was in no ways to trench upon his Prerogative, saying, they
had neither intention nor power to hurt it, he commands them all to take
notice, that what he had spoken, was the true meaning of what he had granted,
But especially (adds his Majesty) you my Lords the Judges, for to you only,
under me, belongs the Interpretation of Laws, Vide Stat. at large, fol. 1433.
for none of the Houses of Parliament, joint, or separate (what new Doctrine
soever may be raised) have any power, either to make, or declare a Law, without
my consent.

And as the King is the sole Lawgiver, His being exempt from their coactive
force.
and Interpreter of that Law when given, so also is he exempt and free from the
Law, for as much as concerns the coactive force of the Law, as being the Head
of the Law, Inst. 1.99.
and of the Commonwealth, Ibid. 73.
and consequently no man can give Sentence of condemnation against him, if he
do any thing against that Law: for besides that every Sentence must be given by
a Superior, upon his Inferior: there must be some Supreme, whereunto all are
subject, but it self, to none; because otherwise, the course of Justice would
go infinitely in a Circle, every Superior having his Superior, without end,
which cannot be: yet admitting it might; the People cannot do it, for they have
no power themselves; or if they had, are his Subjects: and a Parliament cannot
do it; for besides that they are his Subjects also, and not his Peers, who
shall try him? for he is Principium, Caput, and finis Parliamenti; Ibid. 110.
and it can neither begin, nor end, without his Presence in Person, Inst. 4.28.
or by Representation; and hence it is, Ibid. 46.
that his Death Dissolves them. Again, if the People may call him to account,
the State is plainly Democratical; if the Peers, it is Aristocratical, if
either, or both of them, it is no way Monarchical, which is directly contrary to
the known Laws of the Land, ^ract. l. 1. c. 8.
for Omnis sub Rege, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo; Every man is in
subjection to the King, and he, to none but God; and so the Oath of Supremacy
declares him the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, 1 Jac.
of which, more hereafter, when I come to speak of the Statute Law; and
therefore if the King refuse to do right, seeing no Writ can issue against him,
there is a place for Petition, and if that prevail not, Satis ei erit ad poenam
(says the same Bracton) quod Dominum habeat ultorem. And with this agrees
that of Horace, Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos, imperium est Jovis.
And in this respect, a Prince is not loosed from the Law, for as much as
concerns the directive Power of it, but having not the Law, becomes a Law to
himself, as well knowing, Claudian.
-- Observantior aequi
Fit Populus, nec far negat, cum viderit ipsum
Auctorem parere sibi --


The Kings absolute Power of Peace, and War.
2. As to the Power of Peace and War, It is the right of the King (says
Fitzherbert) to defend his Kingdom as well against the Sea, Not. Brev. 113.
as against Enemies; which implies, that it is his right to defend it against
Enemies; and how can he do it without the right of his Sword, when, if he
should be obliged to pray in Aid of others, perhaps they may be of another
mind, or take up so much time in the Debate that the Kingdom may be lost ere
they resolve what to do: And this I take to be one of the effects of
Con-si-de-ra-ti-on, in those matters, whose good or ill fortune solely depends
on Expedition, and Secrecy: for, Dangers, Ess. of Delay.
(as the Lord Bacon says) are better met half way, than by keeping too long a
watch upon their approaches; for if a man watch too long, it is odds he will
fall asleep. But to proceed; Sir Edw. Cook says, Inst. 3.9.
no Subject can levy War within the Realm, without Authority from the King,
unto whom it only belongs; and that it was High Treason at the Common Law, 25
Edw. 3.2.
before the Statute De proditionibus: And in Calvin's case, he makes it clear,
7 Rep. 25.
That to make Leagues, or denounce War, only belongs to the King, who without
his Subjects, may grant Letters of safe Conduct, and Denization; and that this
high point of Prerogative Royal, cannot be conferred upon any other, it being a
right of Majesty, and among the badges of Supreme Power: And now one would
think this were enough, and yet a late Statute of this Kingdom makes it yet
clearer, it being thereby declared, That the sole Supreme Government, Command,
and disposition of the Militia, 13th. of this King, cap. 2.
and all Forces by Sea and Land, and of all Forces and places of Strength is,
and by the Law of England ever were, the undoubted right of his Majesty, and
his Royal Predecessors, Kings and Queens of England; and that both, or either
of the Houses of Parliament cannot, nor ought to pretend to the same, nor can,
nor lawfully may, raise or levy War, Offensive, or Defensive, against his
Majesty, his Heirs and lawful Successors, etc. all which is not introductive of
a new Law, but declaratory of the old, as may be further seen by the penning
thereof. And now what can be added more, but the Purse, without which, what is
the Sword, but (as the Greek Proverb has it) A Bow, without a Bow-man? For in
as much as Money is the Sinews of War, and Peace ( firmamentum belli, Sir E.
Cook, Inst. 1.90
ornamentum pacis) they that hang the Sword on one side, and the Purse on the
other, seem to me, to hazard both; for neither can any sudden danger (
Subscribed to, by all the Judges (in the case of Ship Money) and by Hatten, and
Crook, tho they fell off afterward. Sir Will. Dugdale's Short View, fol. 42.
of which the King was ever thought the Judge) be stav'd off, nor War carried
on, nor the Public Peace be long preserved, without it. And therefore on such
occasions have Parliaments advised and assisted the King in supplying his
Wants, without directing him; it seeming hard, that he should have Power to
Proclaim War, and not be able to maintain it; and be bound to defend his
Subjects, Inst. 1.161.
but denied the means. Qui dirimit medium, destruit finem.

The Kings Power in appointing chief Magistrates, and great Ministers.
3. As to the creation and appointing Magistrates, and Officers, especially such
as are not under the command of others, this also resides solely in the King;
for, besides what I have said in the last Paragraph, touching his sole Power,
in the ordering and disposing the Militia, and all Forces by Sea, and places of
Strength by Land, His is the appointing, all the great Officers, and Ministers
of the Realm, Smith de Repub. Ang. l. 2.
whether Spiritual, or Temporal; the highest, immediately by himself; the
inferior, mediately by Authority derived from him, and as it were, -- De
lumine, lumen. So the King appoints the Lord Commissioner and all other the
grand Ministers and Officers of Scotland; and the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy,
Lords Justices and all other the grand Ministers and Officers of Ireland, who
also (but in his Kings name) appoint under him, according to the extent of
their respective Commissions; so the Kings of England have, and may at this day
by Letters Patents make a Prorex, Locum tenens, or Guardian of the Realm,
before whom (in their absence in remotis) a Parliament may be held: Inst. 2.26.
And such was Edward Duke of Cornwall, 13 Edw. 3. Lionel Duke of Clarence, 21
Edw. 3. John Duke of Bedford, 5 Henry 5. And the Test of the Writ of Summons
shall be in the Guardians name: or, by Commission under the great Seal, to
certain Lords of Parliament, authorize them to hold a Parliament, the King
being then in the Realm, but indisposed: and such was that 3 Edw. 4. to William
Lord Archbishop of York; and that other 28 Eliz. to John Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury and others, Inst. 3.7.
ad inchoandum, etc. and ad Procedendum, etc. and ad faciendum omnia and
singula, etc. nec non ad Parliamentum adjournandum, and Prorogandum, etc. And
so are Parliaments held in Scotland, and Ireland, before the Lords
Commissioners, Lord Lieutenant, Lord Deputy, etc. of the respective Kingdoms.

The Power of the last Appeal.
4. The Power of the last Appeal, i. e. from whose Sentence, no Appeal lies: The
only person (besides the Kings of England) that ever pretended to it here,
Inst. 4.343.
was the Pope; tho yet, the first attempt ever made that way, was by Anselme
Archbishop of Canterbury, Ibid. 341.
in the Reign of King William Rufus, but it took no effect: And the
Archbishop, concerning himself too much, touching the Jurisdiction of the Pope
in England, the King told him, Matthew. Paris, cited by Sir J. Davys, in his
Irish Rep. 61.
Ad Officium Imperatoris spectat, etc. That it belonged to the Emperor to make
whom he pleased Pope, and that for the same reason, no Archbishop, or Bishop
within his Realm, should yield any subjection to the Court, or Pope of Rome,
and chiefly in this respect (cum ipse omnes libertates haberet in regno suo,
quas Imperator vindicabat in Imperio) That he had the same Prerogative in his
Kingdom, that the Emperor claimed in the Empire: And when Pope Innocent the
Third, had against the declared will of King John, caused Stephen Langton to be
Elected Archbishop of Canterbury, and after that confirmed him, and wrote to
the King to receive him, the King returns, that he (the Pope) had subverted the
Liberties of his Crown, Answer to Petit. p. 88.
and that therefore he would prohibit all People going to Rome, and from making
appeals thither: which confirms my former instance, and that this Power was
always in the King, however for a time it might have happened to be neglected;
for otherwise, it had been a vain thing in him, to have expelled the Monks of
Canterbury as Traitors (which he actually did) or to have imagined, that a
Bigoted, Seditious Clergy (as at that time they were, and to be headed by that
Archbishop, at least no friend to the King, if not his Enemy) should be
frightened with an empty Bug bear, touching a matter whereof he had no
cognizance, had he not been satisfied, it was in his Power to do it; Ass. de
Clarend. 10 H. 2. c. 8.
as well as his Father before him, had done it. And having thus occasionally
named him, let me (with all submission) offer this to the memory of that
unfortunate Prince; that his designs, in order to the freeing the Crown from
Foreign usurpation, were mighty, and, that he came short, in what Henry the
Eighth afterward effected, was not, that he was less able, but his times
worse: for considering the unsettled condition of those times, and at what
disadvantages he came in, what wonder if he were oppressed by a Faction, when
deserted by his Subjects, who otherwise, had never suffered him to have made
that Crown (to the defense of which, they had all sworn) tributary, which, many
years afterward, Inst. 4.14.
when the Arrears of that Tribute were demanded, was too late, tho effectually
enough, declared in Parliament, he could not do, nor they consent to the doing
it. But to proceed: When after this the Sea of Rome, would be yet intermedling,
it was by all the States of Parliament, severally examined, and answering, each
State, one by one, personally for it self, 16 R. 2. c. 5.
unanimously Declared, That the Pope's awarding any Processes, or Sentences of
Excommunication, etc. against any Bishops, or other Spiritual Persons, for
executing Judgments, given in the Kings Courts, was clearly in derogation of
the Kings Crown, and Regality, used, and approved, of the time of all his
Progenitors, and which they would maintain as they were bound, by their
Liegance: and thereupon Enacted, That the purchasing any Bulls, from Rome, or
elsewhere, shall be a Praemunire: Vide, The Case of Praemunire, in Sir John Davys.
In which it is observable, That as the Judges before that time, were for the
most part, Churchmen, the Laity being not yet come up to Letters, or where
they were, Rari nantes in gurgite vasto, The Lords Temporal, and the Commons of
this Parliament, were all Romanists, and of what Persuasion the Lords Spiritual
(and their Assistants the then Judges) were, I leave to every man, the question
at that time being not, matter of Religion, but right of Superiority: not the
Church, but Court of Rome: Inst. 4.341.
And so Sir E. Cook speaking of the first Article of the Statute of 25 H. 8.
concerning the Prohibition of Appeals to Rome, says, it is but declaratory of
the ancient Law of this Realm: And (in another place) The same Authority that
the Pope ever exercised in this Kingdom by Usurpation, Inst. 2.602.
was always in the King, de jure. With which also agrees the Lord Chief Justice
Hobart, That whatsoever the Pope did in this Kingdom, Sir H. Hobart, fol. 146.
even then when he was in his greatest height, and strength, was of no better
force, in right, and justice, than at the first, when he was but simple Bishop
of Rome, which was coram non Judice, and so, Jus non habenti, tuto non paretur.

The sole fountain of Honor.
5. The Power of conferring Honors; on which account he may also enable a man to
assign his Surname, Arms, Inst. 4.126.
and Barony to another: For, as by the Laws of England, all Lands within the
same, were originally derived from the Crown, and holden of the King, either
mediately, Inst. 1.65.
or immediately, as Lord Paramount, so also by the same Laws were all degrees
of Nobility and Honor derived from the King, Inst. 4.363.
as the Fountain of Honor. So H. 6. granted to H. Beuchamp, Ut esset primus and
praecipuus Comes Angliae; and that he should use the Title of Henricus
Praecomes totius Angl, etc. ibid. 361. First Earl of all England, etc. And to
the name Count, or Earl, which was the most ancient name of Dignity among the
Saxons, Edw. 3. Ang. Greg. 11. created the Title of Duke, as distinct from that
of Earl (for in elder times they were often synonimous with us) and created his
eldest Son (the Black Prince) then Earl of Chester, Seld. Tit. of Honor, 621.
into the Title of Duke of Cornwall, which he created into a Duchy: and about
the 18th. of his Reign, the most noble Order of the Garter. And in the 9th. of
R. 2. Robert de Vere, Ibid. 628.
Earl of Oxford, was created Marquess of Dublin. And H. 6. the 18th. of his
Reign, created John Lord Beaumont, Ibid. 630.
Viscount Beaumont; of which Titles we find no mention in the Magna Charta, 9.
H. 3. for they were not at that time in being. Inst. 1.69.
And to this yet further, the Kings of England have, and may at this day create
a County-Palatine, May create a Palatinate.
which none but the Emperor, or a Supreme Monarch may do: for whoever is owner
thereof, has in that County, Jura Regalia, as fully, as the King in Palatio,
-- Par curis, solo diademate dispar. So Hugh Lupus, Camb. Britt. 464.
Nephew of King William the Conqueror, was by him created Earl of Chester,
Seld. Tit. Hon. 530.
and the County given him, Tenendum sibi and haeredibus ita libere ad gladium
sicut ipse Rex tenebat Angliam ad Coronam; Inst. 4.211.
by which general words he had Jura Regalia within the said County, and
consequently a County-Palatine without express words; and by force thereof he
created eight Cheshire Barons. So not long after his time was the
County-Palatine of Durham raised. Camb. Britt. 600.
And in the 10th. of H. 1. the Royal Franchise of Ely. In the 13th. of Edw. 3.
the County-Palatine of Pembroke. And in the 50th. year of his Reign the County
of Lancaster was by him erected into a County-Palatine, and by him given to his
fourth Son, Plowd. 214.
John of Gaunt, then Duke of Lancaster, for life: to which, if any one shall
say, that it was De assensu praelatorum and procerum, Sir Edw. Coke answers for
me, That the King may make a County-Palatine, Inst. 4.204. in the Margin.
by his Letters Patents, without Parliament.

Add to this the three first Counties-Palatine created in Ireland, by Henry the
Second, viz. Leinster, which he granted to Earl Strongbow, who had married the
Daughter and Heir of M. Morough, Prince of Leinster. 2. Mead, to Sir Hugh Lacy
the Elder. 3. Ulster, to Sir Hugh Lacy the younger, and had their Barons under
them, answerable to the Barons created by H. Lupus: of which before. Of which
you may read excellent Learning, 9 Jac. in Scac. fol. 49.
in the Case of the County-Palatine of Wexford, reported by Sir John Davys, As
also, Seld. Tit. Hon. 693.
at that time Attorney General of Ireland. As also the County-Palatine of
Tipperary, formerly enjoyed by the Ancestors of his Grace, James Duke of
Ormond, etc. the present Lord Lieutenant of the same, and granted, restored,
and confirmed to him, by Letters Patent at Westminster, Stat. Hibern. 14 Car.
2. c. 20.
the 22. of April, in the 14th. of this King, and not long afterward, confirmed
by Act of Parliament in Ireland; and whence also he bears it as a part of his
Titles, Dominus Regalitatum and Libertatum Comitatus Palatini Tipperarii.

Nor is this all, Have made a King and Lord of Ireland.
The Kings of England have created Kings within their own Dominions, and for
such has the world received them: So King Henry the Second, in the 13th. year
after his coming into Ireland, made his Son John, King of Ireland. And Henry
the Third his Son Edward the First, Seld. Tit. Hon. 38.41.
Lord of Ireland, and well owned the doing it, albeit until the 33 Henry 8.
they wrote but Lords themselves; for their Dignity was merely Royal, as having
their Justices, Custodes, or Lord Lieutenants, and all things belonging to the
Royal Estate and Majesty of a King. Inst. 4.357.
And Sir Edw. Cook tells us he has seen a Charter made in 20. H. 6. to Henry
Beuchamp Earl of Warwick, Inst. 1.83.
whereby he was created King of the Isle of Wight, and (as says Mr. Seldom)
Crowned King of the same. Ibid. Seld. 26.


6. The Power of Pardoning, which is a Royal Act of Grace, whereby the King,
either before Conviction, Sentence, Sir E. Cook 5 Rep. 110. in Foxley's Case.
or Attainder, or after, forgiveth any Crime, Punishment, Execution, Right,
Title, Debt, or Duty Temporal, or Ecclesiastical: on which account he may
restore a man that has lost Liberam Legem, by being recreant: As also, all that
is forfeited to him by Attainder, etc. he may restore by his Charter; but if by
the Attainder the Blood be corrupted, that must be restored by Act of
Parliament; of which, Inst. 3.233. and 241.
more at large in Sir Edw. Cook, Titles, Pardons, and Restitutions.

7. To appoint the Value, The King appoints the value, etc. of Coin.

Sir J. Davys, q. v. Case de mixed Moneys.


Weight, and Stamp of his Coin; and make Foreign Coin current by Proclamation.
As to the first, we need go no farther than the smallest Piece, and that will
tell us whose Image and Superscription it is, and therefore called the Kings
Money; Stat. 25 Edw. 3. cap. 2.

Sir J. Davys in Pref. 5. Rep. 114.


and so King John brought the Irish Money to the English Standard: And as to the
other, the same Sir Edw. Coke tells us, That the King, by his absolute
Prerogative, may make any Foreign Coin, Inst. 2.576.
lawful Money of England, at his pleasure, by his Proclamation. And in another
place, putting both together, he says, That lawful Money of England is of two
sorts, viz. Inst. 1.207.
The English Money either of Gold, or Silver, Coined by the Kings Authority, or
Foreign Coin, by Proclamation made current within this Realm.

Liege Homage received by our Kings.
8. To receive Liege Homage of another inferior King or Homager: and such was
our Henry the Second to the old Kings of Ireland, who are styled Reges, and
Reguli; and may more particularly appear in a grant of his to Roderick King of
Connaught, Seld. Tit. Hon. 26.
that he should enjoy his Territory, under a certain Tribute, Et quam diu ei
fideliter serviet, ut sit Rex sub eo Paratus, ad servitium suum, sicut homo
suus: And that Oneale is sometime styled Rex, and sometime Regulus, denotes the
Subject-Kings of that Country: And long before the Conquest, Edgar had eight
Reguli or inferior Kings, Ibid. 29.
Homagers to him, who at one time rowed him on the River Dee, himself guiding
the Helm, and afterward, glorying to his Nobility, that then every one of his
Successors might boast himself to be King of England, when he received the like
Honor from so many Kings his Attendants. So Reignald Lord or King of Man (Cui
etiam fas erat Corona aurea Coronari) and those of Ibid. 24, 25.38.
Ireland, did Homage to our Henry the Third. And John Baliol King of Scotland,
and David Prince of Wales, to Edw. the First, and James the First, to Henry the
Sixth, for the Kingdom of Scotland. So that Liege-Lord, is he that
acknowledges no Superior; and a Liegeman is he that owes Liegance to his
Liege-Lord; and so the word is frequently used in our Statutes, viz. The Kings
Liege-People: And if such a one shall be in open War, or Rebellion, or join
with a Foreign Enemy against the King, he shall not be ransomed, or proceeded
with as an Enemy, but as a Traitor, Inst. 3.11.
because it is Contra Ligeantiam suam debitam, and so the Indictment runs: Such
was the case of David Prince of Wales aforesaid, who had judgment of Treason
given against him, for levying War against Edw. 1. for that his was within the
Homage and Ligeance of the King.

9. Lastly, to bear those Titles, Their burning those incommunicable Titles of
Majesty, etc.
only proper to Sovereign Princes, apart from all others, as being indivisible,
and incommunicable: And here (not to insist on the words Dei gratia, which are
familiarly seen in the Titles of the Kings of Europe, and Princes of the
Empire, Spiritual Lords, both abroad, and at home, have of elder times
frequently used it in their Styles, and in a Summons to our Parliaments, and
Writs, to Assemble, or Prorogue the Convocation, the King gives it to the
Archbishops, as, Rex etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri, Predilatoque, and
fideli Consiliario nostro, A. eadem Gratia, Archiepiscopo Cant. etc. But in
Warrants, and Commissions to them, it is generally omitted; Tit. Hon. 594.
and never used by themselves, when they wrote to the Pope, Emperor, or a King;
Ibid. 92.
but thus: A. licet indignus, etc. Archiepiscopus, or Episcopus B. etc. whereby
the present use of it among our selves, is easily reconciled, in that they
receive the Attribute, not give it. The Kings of England, are in the second,
and third person, commonly styled, by that abstract of Majesty; as, your
Majesty, his Majesty; which came into the Kingdoms of Christendom, from the use
of it in the Roman Empire; the word in it self, denoting all kind of special
Dignity, and, if as we should say in English, A Greatness; And to peruse our
Statutes, from Magna Charta, to our own time, the most usual expressions are,
Our Lord the King, The King our Sovereign Lord, Most Excellent Highness, Royal
Majesty, Noble Grace, Most Excellent Majesty, Most Royal Majesty, Dread
Sovereign Lord, Most Gracious Sovereign, and as we use it now, Most Excellent
Majesty, and Sacred Majesty, which are but the same Attribute, in other words,
and in their own nature, so unalienable from Sovereignty, that they can by no
process of time be Prescribed against, or usurped upon: neither can it at all
be called an Usurpation, as if it were, proper only to God, unless we as well
deny Wisdom, Power, Clemency, or any other quality to be attributed to men,
because those also, as all else, which is great, or good, are Primarily in him.

And so I have done with the marks of Sovereignty, as they are generally
received; Further instances of the Kings Sovereignty by the Common Law.
and now if there wanted any thing to the further proof of this Sovereign
Imperial Monarchy, There are yet, other Regalities, and Prerogatives, which the
Common Laws of England have ever allowed, and never doubted, but to be inherent
in their Kings. Inst. 1.1.
And hence it is, that the King cannot be said to be a Tenant, because he has
no Superior but God Almighty: And if the King and a common Person join in a
Foundation, Inst. 2.68.
the King shall be the Founder; for the thing being entire, the Kings
Prerogative shall be preferred. That he shall have the Escheat of all Lands
whereof a person attaint of High Treason was seized, Inst. 1.13.
of whomsoever they were holden. That there is no Occupant against the King,
Ibid. 42.
nor shall any one gain his Land, by priority of Entry; for, Nullum tempus
occurrit Regi, That half Blood is no impediment to the descent of the Lands of
the Crown; Inst. 1.15.
as was seen in the Case of Queen Mary, who was but of half Blood to King
Edward 6. and Queen Elizabeth to both: for the quality of the Person alters the
Descent. 1 H. 7.4. Plowd. 238.
That the accession of the Crown purges all Attainders, as may be seen in the
respective Cases of Henry 6. and Henry 7. whose Attainders, were no other than
a present disability, which upon their assuming the Royal Dignity, were ipso
facto void. That the word King imports his Politic Capacity, which is never in
minority, and never dies, Inst. 4.352.
but extends to all his Successors, as well Kings, as Queens. That he is King
before Coronation, for besides that the Law suffers no interregnums, Inst. 3 7.
he holds it by inherent Birthright, the Coronation being but a Royal
Ornament, and outward Solemnization of the Descent; 7. Rep. in Calvin's Case.
and not unlike the public Celebration of Matrimony, between a Man and a
Woman, which adds nothing to the substance of the Contract, but declares it to
the world. Ibidem.
That the Ligeance of his Subjects is absolute, and indefinite, and due to the
natural Person of the King, by the Law of Nature, which is immutable, and part
of the Law of the Land, before any Municipal, or Judicial Law; and, that an Act
of Parliament cannot bar the King of the Service of his Subject, which the
indelible Law of Nature gave him, it being a part of the Law of the Land, by
which, subjection is due to him. And therefore the Statute, That no man,
notwithstanding any non obstante, shall serve as Sheriff, 23 H. 6. c. 8.
above one year, bars not the King from dispensing with it. And William Lord la
Ware, although disabled by Act of Parliament, 11. Rep. of the Lord De la Ware.
was nevertheless called to Parliament, was nevertheless called to Parliament
by Queen Elizabeth, by Writ of Summons, for she could not be barred of the
Service, and Counsel of any of her Subjects. Add to this, That all Restrictions
upon his Sovereign Liberty, are void, 13 Edw. 3.
and therefore Public Notaries made by the Emperor claiming to exercise their
Offices in England, were prohibited, as being against the Dignity of a Supreme
King. Inst. 4.342.
And with this agrees the Statute Law of Scotland, made in the Parliament of
the 5th. of King James the Third; Vide Seld. Tit. Hon. 21. Ann. Reg. 14.
cap. 3. In short, when King John had subjected his Crowns of England and
Ireland, to Pope Innocent the Third, and had become his Feodary, under the
annual Acknowledgment of one thousand Marks to the Pope, and his Successors,
and when afterward the Arrearages thereof were demanded, Ann. 40. Ed. 3.
the Parliament of that year answered, That no King can put himself or his
Realm in Subjection, without their Assent: And how far that Assent reached, we
have it in the 42 of Edward the Third, where, in full Parliament, it was
further declared, Inst. 4.13. and 357.
That they could not Assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the
Disinherison of the King, or his Crown, whereunto they were Sworn: which is no
more, than what the Statute that prescribes the Oath of the Kings Justices has
in it, viz. Ye shall not Counsel, 18 Edw. 3.
nor Assent to any thing that may turn him (the King) in Damage, or
Disinherison; by any manner, way, or color. And to the same effect, are the
several Oaths of the Lord Chancellor, Inst. 4.88. and 104.
and Lord Treasurer; You shall not know nor suffer the Hurt, or Disinheriting
of the King, or that the Rights of the Crown be decreased, by any means, as far
as you may let it. In a word (to omit many others) All such things, whereof no
Subject can claim Property, Inst. 2.167.
as Treasure-trove, Wreck, Estrays, etc. belong to the King by his Prerogative,
which extends to all Powers, Inst. 1.90. and 344.
and Preheminences, which the Law has given the Crown; Inst. 2.496. Bract. l.
1.
and is a principal part of the Law of the Land, and is called by Bracton,
Libertas, and Privilegium Regis, both words signifying the same thing, i. e.
The Kings Prerogative. And by Britton, Britt. f. 27.
Droit le Roy, The Kings Right. Regist. fol. 61.
And in the Register, Jus Regium, which is the same; and Jus Regium Coronae,
The Royal Right of the Crown: And since it has not been wound up so high, as to
endanger the strings, what reason is there to wish it let down so low, as to
render it profanable by the People? When the Philistines returned the Ark of
God which they had taken, the men of Beth-Shemesh must be prying into it; and
he that has a mind to know the effect of their curiosity, may read it in
Samuel, 1 Samuel 6.19.
God slew one hundred and fifty thousand of them.

But enough of the Common Law; we will in the next place consider, what the
Statute Law in further affirmance of the Common Law, The like from the
Statute Law, and that the Crown of England is Imperial. Inst. 4.343.
says to this matter: And here, it cannot be thought (says Sir Edw. Coke)
that a Statute, made by the Authority of the whole Realm, will recite a thing
against the Truth. I Will begin with that of Richard 2. commonly called the
Statute of Praemunire, in which it is declared, 16 R. 2. c. 5.
That the Crown of England has been ever so free, Vide Article against
Woolsey. 21 H. 8.

I^st. 4.89.


that it is in no earthly subjection, but immediately subject to God, in all
things touching the Regality of the same Crown, and to none other. In like
manner the Statute of H. 8. against Appeals to Rome, says, That by diverse
sundry old Authentic Histories, and Chronicles, 24 H. 8. c. 12.
it is manifestly declared, and expressed, that this Realm of England is an
Empire, and so has been accepted in the world, governed by one Supreme Head,
and King, having the Dignity and Royal Estate, of the Imperial Crown of the
same, unto whom, a Body Politic, compact of all sorts and degrees of people,
divided in terms, by names of Spiritualty, and Temporalty, have bounden, and
owen to bear, next to God, a natural, and humble Obedience. And near the middle
of the said Statute, it is further called the Authority, and Prerogative of the
said Imperial Crown. And in the 25 of the same, 25 H. 8. c. 21.
it is called, The Imperial Crown, and Royal Authority, recognizing no Superior
under God, but only your Grace. Vide Cap. 22.
And in the following Chapter, besides the frequent use of the word Imperial,
the Kings thereof are styled, Kings, and Emperors of this Realm. And in another
of the same Kings, 88 H. 8. c. 7.
it is called, The most Royal Estate of your Imperial Crown, of this Realm; and
the same word Imperial, Vide cap. 16.
made use of ten other times, in the same Statute, to the same purpose. And
with this agrees the Statute of Ireland, Stat. Hibern. 28. H. 8. c. 2.
where in express words also, the Kings of England are entitled, Kings and
Emperors of the Realm of England, and of the Land of Ireland; and that too,
five years, Stat. Hibern. 33 H. 8. c. 1.
before the Title of Lord of Ireland was altered into King: And by the Act that
so altered it, it is called The Majesty, and State of a King Imperial. 1 Eliz.
c. 1.
And so in the first of Qu. Eliz. (English) in which the Oath of Supremacy was
enacted, the Crown of this Realm is three times called Imperial: and Cap. 3.
And in the third Chapter of the same year, as often. And in the 5th. of the
same Queen, 5 Eliz. c. 1.
(that requires all Ecclesiastics, Graduates in any University, or
Common-Laws, Officers of Court, Attorneys, every Member of Parliament, under
the degree of a Baron, to take the said Oath of Supremacy, before he enter the
House, or such Election to be deemed void) calls it The Dignity of the Imperial
Crown. And the Act of Recognition of King James, 1 Jac. c. 1.
uses the same expression of Imperial, four times. And upon a like ground,
Stat. Scotiae 5. Jac. 3. c. 3.
of mere Supremacy, was that Act of Scotland, before the Union of the Crowns,
wherein it is said, Our Sovereign Lord, his full Jurisdiction, and free Empire,
within this Realm. (Scotland) And the late Oath, or Test, prescribed to be
taken by all persons in Public Trust in that Kingdom, Printed at Edinburgh,
1681.
declares the Kings Majesty the only Supreme Governor of that Realm, over all
persons, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil. And the Act of acknowledging and
asserting the right of Succession in that Kingdom, calls it the Imperial Crown
of Scotland. In all which matters I have been the more particular, that I might
the better evince my Reader, that this Independent Sovereignty, and Supremacy
of the Kings of England, etc. has not been the opinion of any one time, but the
general consent of all; and that our Kings, hold their Crowns in chief, from
God, and owe no precarious acknowledgments, to the courtesy of the People.

Nor is the Kings Immediate, The Kings Power in Ecclesiastics.
Personal, Originary, Inherent Power, which he executes, or may execute
(Authoritate Regia Suprema Ecclesiastica) as King, and Sovereign Governor of
the Church of England, to be less considered, it being one of those flowers
which Sir H. Hob. 143.
make up his Crown, and preserve it in verdure: And here, I question not but it
will be granted, that the King is the Supreme Patron, of all the
Arch-Bishopricks, Inst. 1.94.
and Bishoprics of England, as being all founded by the Kings of England, to
hold Christi Baroniam (excepting that of Soder, Glanv. l. 1. c. 7.
in the Isle of Man, which was instituted by Pope Gregory the Fourth, Inst.
4.285.
and may perhaps be the reason, why the Bishop thereof, has neither Place, nor
Voice in the Parliament of England) and so, were at first donative, Inst.
1.134. and 344.
Per traditionem annuli, and baculi Pastoralis, by the delivery of a Ring, and
the Pastoral Staff, or Crosier. And the Bishop of Rome persuading Henry the
First to make them Elective, by their Chapters, Ann. Reg. 17.
refused it; But King John by his Charter recognizing the Custom, and Right of
the Crown, in former times, by the common consent of his Barons, granted, that
they should be eligible; as least doubting, he had so far locked up himself, as
that he might not be received, to disapprove, or allow: for before that, I
find, Math. Paris, fol. 213.
That when he had given a Conge d' eslier to the Monks of Canterbury, to Elect
an Archbishop, and Pope Innocent the Third, notwithstanding the Kings desires
of promoting the Bishop of Norwich to it, (whom also, they had Elected) had
under a Curse commanded them, to choose Stephen Langton, with which, for fear
of Excommunicacation they complied, the King banishes the Monks as Traitors,
and writes to the Pope, Answ. to Pet. fol. 88.
that he had subverted the Liberties of his Crown: by which it appears, that he
looked upon himself, as the Supreme Governor of the Church of England, and that
no Archbishop, or Bishop, could be put upon him, without his consent: and what
advantage the Kingdom got by this Usurpation, may be gathered from the effects,
when, after a more than six years Jurisdiction, the King Deposed, and a free
Crown put in Vassalage, it only opened a way to those future Broils, between
him, and his Barons, which lasted all his time, and wanted no fuel to feed 'em,
till toward the latter end of his Son, men began to stand at gaze, and as
infatuated, or startled at they knew not what, thought it more safety to look
on, than lend a hand to master it: nor had they fully resolved what to do,
until the Pope having demanded Homage of Edw. 3. and the Arrears of one
thousand Marks per ann. for the Kingdoms of England, 40 Edw. 3.
and Ireland, (which had been also demanded in the 3 of Edw. 1. and in case of
nonperformance, threatened to make out Process against the King and Kingdom,
then at last, the scales fell from their eyes, and as men got out of a dream,
they began to consider what they had startled at, and as an argument of their
recovered Senses, the Lords Spiritual by themselves, the Lords Temporal by
themselves, The Act is not in the Statutes at large, but you may find it, Inst.
4.13.
and the Commons by themselves, unanimously resolved, and declared, That the
King could not put Himself, his Realm, or his People in subjection, without
their Assent; and albeit it might, it is (as says Sir Edw. Coke) Contra Legem
and consuetudinem Parliamenti, Ibid. 357.
contrary to the order, and custom of Parliament, because it is a disherison of
the King, and his Crown: after which, to avoid all further dispute, the manner
and order of Election of Archbishops, and Bishops, and all things relating
thereunto, is settled by Statute, 25 H. 8. c. 2.
viz. 1. Negatively, That no one thereafter be Presented, Nominated, or
Commended to the Sea of Rome, for the Dignity or Office of any Archbishop, or
Bishop within this Realm, or any other the Kings Dominions. 2, Affirmatively,
That at every avoidance of any Archbishopric or Bishopric (as before) the
King our Sovereign Lord his Heirs and Successors, may grant to the Dean and
Chapter of the Cathedral Churches where the Sea of such Archbishopric, or
Bishopric shall happen to be void, a License under the Great Seal, as of old
time has been accustomed to proceed to Election of an Archbishop, or Bishop,
of the Sea so being void, with a Letter missive, containing the name of the
person which they shall Elect or Choose, by virtue of which, they elect the
said person, etc. or in case of refusal incur the Penalties of a Praemunire. So
that upon the whole, the Election (in effect) is but a matter of form, it is
the Kings mere Grant which places, and the Bishops Consecration, which makes
a Bishop: Neither do the Kings of this Land use herein, any other, than such
Prerogatives, as Foreign Nations have been accustomed unto. Or otherwise, what
made Pope Boniface, solicit the Emperor Honorius, to take order, that the
Bishops of Rome, might be created, without ambitious seeking of the Place. A
needless Petition, if so be the Emperor had no right, in placing of Bishops
there. This was set out by Dr. Bernard, in 16 1. in a Book, entitled, Clavi
Trabales, with the Bishop of Lincoln's Preface to it, p. 82.
Of which, there are several other instances, in a piece of Mr. Hookers,
touching the Kings Power in the advancement of Bishops. In short, if before
that Act of Hen. 8. a Bishop in England had been made a Cardinal, Inst. 4.357.
the Bishopric became void, but the King should have named the Succsseor,
because the Bishopric is of his Patronage. And as to the Archbishops, and
Bishops in Ireland, Ibid. 359.
the respective Chapters (of ancient time) upon every avoidance, sued to the
King in England, to go to the Election of another, and upon certificate of such
Election made, and the Royal Assent obtained, a Writ issued out of the Chancery
here, to the Lord Chief Justice of Ireland, Regist. 294.
or the Lieutenant, rehearsing the whole matter, and commanding him to take
fealty of the Bishop, Fitz. N. Bre^. Printed in 1666. 411.
and restore him to his Temporalties: But now the course is, that such Writs
are made in Ireland, in the name of the King, who nominates the Arch Bishops
and Bishops there, as he does in England, and then the Chapter choose him whom
the King names to them, and thereupon the Writs are made of course. Nor were
the Kings of England, even in those times, excluded, but still acknowledged to
have Power of Dispensation, and other Ecclesiastical Acts. 6 Edw. 3.11. 11 H.
4.68.
And therefore as he first gave Bishoprics and Abbeys, and afterward, granted
the Election to Deans, and Chapters, and Covents; so likewise might he grant
Dispensation to a Bishop Elect, to retain any of his Dignities, 11 H 4.60. 11
H. 7.12.
or Benefices in Commendam: and to take two Benefices; and to a Bastard, to be
a Priest: And where the Statute 25 H. 8. c. 21. says, Sir Hen. Hob. fol. 146.
That all Dispensations, etc. shall be granted in manner and form following,
and not otherwise; yet the King is not thereby restrained, but his Power
remains full, and perfect, as before, and he may still grant them as King; for
all acts of Justice and Grace flow from him: and on this account also, he can
pardon any Ecclesiastical Offense; as Heresy (for example) is a cause merely
Spiritual, Inst. 3.238.
or Ecclesiastical, and yet the King may pardon one convict of Heresy. Fitz.
N.B. 662.
And as the King may dispense, or pardon, so also does that Supreme Power
enable him to several other things relating to Church Matters, which pertain
not to another. He may found a Church, Hospital, or Free Chapel Donative, and
whether he specially exempt the same from ordinary Jurisdiction, or not, his
Chancellor, Inst. 1.344.
and not the Ordinary shall visit it: and he may by his Charter license a
Subject to found such a Church, or Chapel, and to ordain that it shall be
Donative, and not Presentable; and to be visited by the Founder, and not by the
Ordinary. And thus began Donatives in England, whereof Common Persons were
Patrons. So he shall visit Cathedral Churches (by Commissioners) Sede vacant
Archiepiscopalii: Dyer, 348.
He may also revoke before Induction, by presenting another, for the Church is
not full against the King, till Induction: And therefore if a Bishop Collates,
and before Induction dies, by which means the Temporalties come into the Kings
hands, the King shall present to the avoidance, for the same reason. Ibid. 294.
In short, He is the Supreme Ordinary, and on that account may take the
resignation of a Spiritual Dignity. Neither did the Abbots and Priors in Edward
the Fourths time think him less, when they style him Supremus Dominus noster
Edwardus 4. Rex; The same 3 Car. 1 c. 4. Inst. 4.342. Inter Leges Ed. c. 17.
which agrees with the Laws before the Conquest in which the King is called
Vicarius summi Regis, The Vicar of the highest King. Mr. Hooker, of the Kings
Power in matters of Religion, Cla. Trab. 72.
And albeit, Ecclesiastical Councils, consisting of Churchmen, did frame the
Laws, whereby the Church Affairs were ordered in Ancient times, yet no Canon,
no not of any Council, had the force of Law, in the Church, unless it were
ratified, and confirmed by the Emperor, being Christian: In like manner, our
Convocations (that assemble not of themselves, but by the Kings Writ) must
have, both License to make new Canons, and the Royal Assent to allow them,
before they can be put in Execution; and this, by the Common Law: for, Inst.
4.323.
before the Statute 25 H. 8. c. 19. A Disme (i. e. the Tenths of all Spiritual
Livings, in ancient times paid to the Pope) granted by them, did not bind the
Clergy, before the Royal Assent. In a word, Cro. Jac. 371.
the King may make orders for the Government of the Clergy without Parliament,
and deprive the Disobedient. And the Act for suppressing Seditious
Conventicles, 22 Car. 2.
has a saving to his Majesty's Supremacy in Ecclesiastical Affairs. And so (I
hope) I have cleared this point, That the Kingdom of England, etc. is a
Sovereign Imperial Monarchy, of which, the King is the only Supreme Governor,
as well in all Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical Things, or Causes, as Temporal.

That the Kings of England have justly used the Titles of Emperor, etc. and
that from Ancient Ages.
and East have so much striven, about that great Title of Emperor, or Basileus,
that yet the Kings of England (as Supreme within their Dominions) have also
justly used it, and that from ancient Ages, as no less proper to their own
independent greatness. And here, amongst many others, we have Edgar frequently
in his Charters, Seld. Tit. of Honor, f. 17.
stiling himself, Albionis, and Anglorum Basileus, King of Britain, and the
English. And in one of his, to Oswald Bishop of Worcester, in the year 964. and
of his Reign the sixth, Ego Edgarus, Anglorum Basileus, omniumque Regum,
Insularum, Oceanique Britanniam circumjacentis, cunctarumque Nationum quae
infra eam includuntur, Imperator, and Dominus, etc. Sir Edw. Coke's Preface to
his fourth Report.
I Edgar King of the English, and of all the Kings of the Isles, and the Ocean
lying round Britain ( i. e. England, Scotland, and Wales) and of all the People
therein, Emperor, and Supreme Lord; for, the word in this place, bears no less,
as I have shown it before, in the Word, Lord of Ireland. Wherein it is
observable, that as long since as it is, that yet the King of England, or
Britain, was Lord, and Emperor of the British Sea; which agrees with that of
one of his Successors ( Canutus) when sitting in a Chair, by the South Shore,
he used these words to the Sea, Camb. Brit. 189.
Tumeae ditionis es, and terra in qua sedeo, mea est; Thou art of my Dominion
(or Empire) and the Land whereon I sit, is mine; as taking it clearly, that he
was the Supreme Lord, and Emperor of both: whence also, Ibid. Seld.
it is affirmed by Belknap (one of the Justices of the Kings Bench 5 R. 2.)
That the Sea, is of the King Ligeance, as of the Crown of England. Inst. 4.343.
So that Edward his Son, in a Charter to the Abbey of Ramsey, Ego Edwardus,
totius Albionis, Dei moderante gubernatione, Basileus; I Edward by the
Guidance, or Assistance of God, King of Britain. And Edwine, Ibidem.
in a Charter of his to the Abbey of Crowland, is styled, Edwinus Anglorum Rex,
and totius Britanniae telluris, Gubernator and Rector; Edwine King of the
English, and of all the British Land, Director, and Governor. In like manner
Ethelred, in a Charter of his to the Church of Canterbury, styles himself
Angligenum, Orcadarum, Ibid, Seld. 1
necne in gyro jacentium, Monarchus, Monarch (or sole Governor) of the English,
the Isles of Orkeney, and all that lie within that Circuit: but subscribes it,
Ego Aethelredus, Anglorum Induperator, etc. I Ethelred Emperor of the English.
And besides what I said before of King William Rufus, that said he had the same
Prerogatives in his Kingdom, as the Emperor claimed in the Empire, in a Charter
of his to the Monastery of Shaftsbury, he says, Ego Willielmus Rex Anglorum,
anno ab incarnatione 1089. secundo anno mei Imperii. I William King of the
English, in the year of our Lord 1089. and of my Empire the second. And now
having brought it thus far, I shall in the next place examine the
unreasonableness of that new Notion, that the King is one of the three Estates,
and doubt not but to prove the contrary, to any man but him, who will not be
persuaded, tho you shall have persuaded him.

SECTION VI.
That the King is none of the Three Estates; in which, two preliminary
Objections are examined by Reason; and answered by the manner of the Three
Estates applying to him. What the Three Estates are. To presume him one of them
were to make him but a Coordinate Power. The King cannot be said to Summon, or
Supplicate himself. How will the Three Estates be made out, before the Commons
came in? With a short Series during the Saxons to the latter end of Henry III.
in all which time they are not so much as named as any constituent part of a
Parliament, And the time when probably they first came in, to be as they are at
this day, one of the three Estates. That the Lords Temporal were never doubted
but to be an Estate. Four reasons offered, that the Lords Spiritual, are one
other Estate, distinct from the Lords Temporal, and one Act of Parliament, in
point: With other Authorities to prove the Assertion.

THose that would have the King one of the Three Estates, say, That our
Government is a kind of mixed Monarchy, Object. 1.
inasmuch, as in our Parliaments, the Lower House (as representing the Commons)
bear a semblance of a Democracy; and the Lords, of Aristocracy: And others,
Object. 2.
That the King, Lords, and Commons; who as Assembled jointly, to the end of
Legislation, as one Corporation, (and no otherwise) are the Lawgiver. We'll
examine it by reason, which -- Neque decipitur, nec decipit usquam, and only
commands belief, when all things else beg it. Sol. 1.
And here, to come as near the wind as I can, that I may the better get up with
them; admitting the semblance, but not granting the thing, what does this make
for them, or serve to prove, that yet the Government is not a free Monarchy?
because the Supreme Authority (as I said ere while) rests neither in the one
House, or the other, either jointly, or severally, but solely in the King, at
whose pleasure they are assembled, and without whose Royal Assent, they can
make no Law, to oblige the Subject. And therefore not denying Bodin's
distinction, Bodin, l. 2.
of a Lordly Monarch, a Royal Monarch, and a Tyrannical Monarch, which relates
only to the Power, and Practice of the Monarch; yet the distinction of a
Supreme, and mixed Monarchy, which designeth the manner of the Government, is a
contradiction in Terminis; because that Government which extends it self to
more than one, can never be a Monarchy; as is obvious to every one, that
understands the word Monarchy, and was never heard of in our Land, till the
men of our late times, instead of suppressing Idolatry, etc. had framed a new
Idol of their own, and having made it as gay as they could, set it up, to be
adored by the Multitude, always prone to admire every thing, they least
understand: And what must the consequence of it be? but that the Government,
must be partly Monarchical, partly Aristocratical, and partly Democratical,
which are in themselves contrary, and to be governed, by contrary Laws; and if
it be impossible to make any good, out of two extremes (as Monarchy, and
Democracy are) what then shall be made of three, confounded among themselves?
or how can it be that Sovereignty (a thing indivisible) can at one and the same
time, be divided, between one Prince, the Nobility, Ibid. Bodin.
and the People, in common, and not to be altogether, a State Popular; or at
best a Venetian Republic, wherein albeit there be but one Duke (and He for
life) yet, his person being not invested with the Supreme Power of Government,
he is in effect, but -- Magni nominis umbra. And as to the other, Sol. 2.
That the King, Lords, and Commons as one Corporation (and no otherwise) are
the Lawgiver; here, I take the King to be in a worse condition; for, tho to
the making of an Act, the concurrence of both Houses is necessary, yet of no
effect, if the King disapprove: yet, the Case of a Mayor, Aldermen, and
Burgesses (or whatever other the style of the Corporation be) is wholly
different; for they, meeting together (by the Princes grant) in a kind of
Democratical Common Council, for the better Government of the place where they
reside, order every thing, by most Voices, wherein the Mayor himself, has but
one, and is concluded by the greater number; but the King, having no Voice (nor
any one to represent him) in the discussive part of any Act, cannot be said to
give his Royal Assent, as one of the Corporation, but by his inherent
Legislative Prerogative: and how improper the contrary is; will further appear,
in that a Common Council, put what Bylaws they please, upon the Mayor, as long
as they are not contrary to the Law of the Land, because he has no negative
upon them. But in case of a Sovereign, the first mark of it (as I have shown
before) is the Power of making Laws; now, who should those Subjects be, that
should yield Obedience to that Law, if they also had the Power to make Laws? or
who should that Prince be, that could give the Law, being himself constrained
to receive it of his Subjects, unto whom also, he gave it? A thing, not only
incompatible, but even absurd, from every days Practice and Experience: for,
The manner of the Three Estates applying to the King.
do not the Three Estates of this Kingdom upon the passing of all Bills,
address themselves to his Majesty, in the most humble Style? As that of the
Petition of Right, 3 Car. 1.
Humbly show unto our Sovereign Lord the King, the Lords Spiritual, and
Temporal, and Commons in Parliament Assembled, etc. So to King James, Most
dread, 1 Jac. 1.
and most gracious Sovereign, We your most Loyal, and Humble Subjects, the
Lords, etc. So to Queen Elizabeth, 1 Eliz. 3.
Most dread Sovereign Lady, etc. We your most Humble, Faithful, and Obedient
Subjects, the Lords, etc. So to Queen Mary, 1 Mar. Sess. 2.
We your Highness most Loving, Faithful, and Obedient Subjects, etc. do beseech
your most Excellent Majesty, that it may be Enacted, etc. So to H. 8. In their
most humble wise, 28 H. 8. c. 7.
shown to your most Royal Majesty, the Lords, etc. And so to Rich. 3. and
backward, 1 Rich. 3.
By the Advice, and Assent of the Lords, etc. at the request of the Commons. To
Edw. 4. 3 Edw. 4.
By the Advice and Assent of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and at the
special Request of his Commons. To H. 6. By, etc. and at the special instance
and request. To H. 5. the same. To H. 4. At the instance, and special request.
To R. 2. the same. 4 Edw. 3.
In Edw. 3.'s time, These things underwritten at the request of the Commons, be
Established, and Enacted, by our Lord the King, his Prelates, Earls, ^5 Edw. 3.
and Barons; so by the Assent, and Prayer of the Great men, and the Commons.
And in Edw. 1.'s time, At the request of the Commonalty, 1 Edw. 1.
by their Petition, made before him, and his Council in Parliament; as may be
further seen in the Statutes at large, Stat de Scat. 51 H. 3.
till ye can go no further backward, than, the King commands: In which also,
I have been the larger, that by the consent of all times, I might show, that
this is not after the manner of Corporations, or the Language of Equals; and
shall be my first Argument, why the King is none of the Three Estates.

2. This will further appear, What these Three Estates are.
if we shall consider, who these Three Estates are: And those, I take to be,
the Lords Spiritual, viz. Archbishops, and Bishops, Inst. 4.1.
who sit in Parliament by Succession, in respect of their Baronies, parcel of
their Bishoprics. 2. The Lords Temporal, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts, Barons, who sit there by reason of their Dignities, which they hold
by Descent or Creation; and the third Estate, the Commons of the Realm, viz.
Knights of Shires, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of Buroughs, respectively
Elected, by force of the Kings Writ; which three Estates, Sir Edw. Coke says)
the Frenchmen call, Inst. 1.110.
Les Estates, or L' Assemble des Estates: And Philip de Comines, Lib. 5.233.
(speaking how the English grant Subsidies) Convocatis (says he) primis
ordinibus, and assentiente Populo; The first, or chief Estates, being called
together, and the People assenting: And Bodin (who by his Conference with the
English Ambassador, De Repub. l. 1.
for so himself confesses) wherever he speaks of the Constitution of England,
calls it the King, and the Three Estates of the Realm: Coll. Fr. T^^ffe his
Speech to them, from the Duke of Lorain, 1674.
Like which, The Republic of the Kingdom of Poland, in the Interregnum between
the Death of one King, and the Election of another, is styled, Serenissimae
Reipublicae Regni Poloniae, etc. Congregati Ordines: The Estates Assembled: And
such were the Amplissimi Ordines, among the Romans; viz. the Senate, of whom
the Emperor was no part; and signifies with us, The Estates of People, among
our selves, viz. The Clergy, The Nobility, and the Commons, which, being duly
Assembled, we call, a Parliament: And so Sir Henry Spelman speaking of the word
Parliament, says, it is, Sir H. Spelm. Gloss. f. 449.
Solenne Colloquium, omnium Ordinum Regni, authoritate solius Regis, ad
consulendum, statuendumque de negotiis regni indictum. A Parliament (says he)
is a Solemn Conference of all the Estates of the Kingdom, commanded together,
by the sole Authority of the King, to Consult and Order the Affairs of the
Realm. From whence it must necessarily follow, that the King is none of them,
but as the Apostle says ((...)) as having the pre-eminence over them; 1 Pet.
2.13.
for, Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale, Whatever is the cause of any
thing, is greater than the thing caused.

To presume him such, were to make him but a Coordinate Power.
3. To presume the King to be one of the Three Estates, were to make him but a
Coordinate Power, and consequently, concludible by the other two; for, Par, in
Parem, non habet imperium, Among Equals there is no Authority: whereas, the
Supreme Title of King, is distinguished from others, in this, that it
acknowledges no other Superior: And Bodin, speaking of a Supreme Monarch,
says, He is next to God, of whom he holds his Scepter, and is bound to no
man. And to the same purpose Berkly, -- Regum cognata Potentia coelo. Bar. Arg.
l. 1.
Whence it naturally follows, that this Honor is not to be shared with another.

4. Which is a negative instance. He cannot Summon himself.
(And one Negative instance (says the Lord Bacon) is of more force, Novum
Organ. Aphor. 46.
to unfix a pretending Rule, than two Affirmative to establish it.) If the King
were one of the Three Estates, he should be Summoned by Writ; but because all
Writs Issue in his Name, it cannot be said, that he can Summon himself, or
Supplicate himself, as both Houses do him; or not to have Power to depart,
without leave, i. e. of himself, seeing they have no Power to Assemble,
Determine, or Depart, part, without the Kings express Commandment.

Where were these three Estates, before the Commons came in to be a third
Estate?
5. If the King were one of the Three Estates, then it follows of course, as
undeniable, that before the Commons became a Third Estate, and a Constituent
part of a Parliament, as they are at this day, That the King must have been one
Estate, The Lords Spiritual a second, The Lords Temporal a third; or otherwise
there could not have been Three Estates: and, now the Commons, since the Writs
for their Election, being become another, what hinders, but that they make a
fourth? unless (perhaps) we deny the Lords Spiritual to have been one, and
then, before the Commons, there could be but two. To examine it a little:

That Great Councils of Kings, their Nobles, Wise men, and Chief Officers, were
frequently held, of Ancient time, there is hardly any thing more obvious; but,
whether the Commonalty, scarce yet civilized, or if so, for the most part, if
not wholly, without Literature, were any essential or constituent part, of
those great Councils, and Government, might be a question at this day, if there
were any sufficient ground, on which to raise it. Convocavit David omnes
Principes Israel, Duces tribuum, 1 Chronicles. 28.1.
and Praepositos turmarum, qui ministrabant Regi: Tribunos quoque and
Centuriones, and qui Praeerant substantiae Regis; filiosque suos, cum Eunuchis;
and Potentes, and robustissimos quosque in exercitu, Jerusalem. David called
together all the Princes of Israel, the Leaders of the Tribes, and the Captains
of the Companies that served under him, and the Captains over the thousands,
and the Captains over the hundreds, and the Stewards over all the substance and
possession of the King; and his Sons, with the Officers and mighty men, and
valiant men, unto Jerusalem. By which you see, of what persons, this great
Council consisted; all, men of the first note, and not a word of the people. In
like manner Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 5.2.
Congregavit majores natu Israel, and cunctos Principes tribuum, and Capita
familiarum, de filiis Israel, in Jerusalem. He assembled the Elders of Israel,
and all the rulers of the Tribes, and the heads of the families, of the
children of Israel, to Jerusalem: And here too, not a word of the People; Inst.
4.3.
and yet, Sir Edw. Coke calls them both Parliaments; and so no doubt but they
were somewhat like it, or otherwise, so many succeeding Centuries had never
took pattern from them.

Not to run so far from home. What was our Saxon Witenage mote, Micel Synods,
Micel Gemotes, or Great Councils, but so many Assemblies of the Wise men;
concerning whom, it is not to be presumed, but that they were of the first
rate; the lump of the People (as I so lately touched it) being for many Ages,
before, and after, not bred to Letters, and consequently, more apt for Blows,
than Arguments, and readier to cut the knot in two, with their Swords, than
unty it with their Tongues: and in all the Saxon Annals we find the principal,
or chief Wites, Answer to Mr. Petit. 19, 20.
or Wise men of the Nation, Sir H. Spelm. Gloss. 450.
the Assembly of Gods Servants (the Clergy, then so called) Aldermen (or Earls)
Great men, Chiefest men, Noblemen, the constituent parts of those great
Councils, but no Commons to be found, or any that represented them. Neither
does Sir Edw. Coke, in any Authority of his, before the latter years of Henry
3. prove any where, that the Commons at that time, were any such part of those
Parliaments, for if they had, there is no question, but he would have named
them also; as he does those others, that made up those Parliaments. Inst. 4 3.
Rex Eldredus, convocavit Magnates, Episcopos, Proceres, and Optimates, ad
tractandum de publicis negotiis regni, For so Mr. Seldom takes the words, Tit.
Hon. 580.
King Eldred (says he) called together his Earls, Bishops, Barons, and Chief
men; but not a word again of the Commonalty: And with this, agrees the learned
Mr. Seldom, Ibid. 524.
where we have several other instances, to the same purpose, but not one word
in any of them, touching the Commons.

And as the Saxon Great men, Answer to Petit. 44.46.
were only present; in their Great Councils, so were only the Norman Barons,
and their Great men, in those of the Conqueror: for, we often meet
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, but no where find the least mention of
the Commons: neither is it to be believed, that his new acquest, would yet
suffer him, to trust a People, he had so lately conquered, or that he made to
himself, other measures, than what he took from his Sword.

And as to William Rufus his time, we find it the same; for in the sixth year
of his Reign, there was a Great Council held at Winchester; and in the seventh,
Ibid. Answ. 52.
another at Rockingham: and in the tenth, Seld. Tit. Hen. 581.
De statu regni acturus, Episcopos, Abbates, and quosque regni Proceres in
unum, praecepti sui sanctione egit. Being to order some Affairs of the Realm,
he commanded together the Bishops, Abbats, and all the Nobility of the Kingdom;
and yet all this while, not a word of the Commons.

In like manner, albeit in the first of Henry 1. Clerus Angliae, and Populus
universus, etc. the Clergy, and all the People were Summoned to Westminster;
yet here the word Populus, is used, as contradistinct, to the Clergy, Ibid.
Answer, 56, 57, 58.
to which it is opposed; and denotes not, any distinct State, or Order, among
Secular men, or Laics; but an Order and Estate of men, distinct, from the
Ecclesiastics, or Clergy; these two words of Clerus, and Populus, being the
two general States, or Orders, into which all mankind is divided: And so he
cites it, as quoted by Sir Will. Dugdale, Monast. Ang.
touching the Coronation of King Egbert, Veniunt Wintoniam, Clerus and Populus;
The Clergy and People came to Winchester. To which also Mr. Seldom gives a
great light, when of the same Council he says, Tit. Hon. 581.
Ad commune concilium Baronum meorum, is mentioned in it. Or what means that
other of the third of the same King, wherein they are called, Primates
utriusque ordinis, The Chiefs of both Orders, i. e. of the Clergy, viz. the
Lords Spiritual: and of Laity, viz. the Nobles, who are also called, Principes
Regni, The Chief, or Head men of the Kingdom; of which also we have several
instances, in that (beloved Physician's) ingenuious, Pet. 61, 62, 63.
learned Answer to Mr. Petit.

Neither does it appear, that the Great Councils in King Stephen's time,
consisted of any other, than the Clergy, and the Nobility, there being not the
least mention of the Milites, or Liberi homines, Knights, or Freemen, or that
they acted in them. But from these Usurpations, we come to Hen. 2. who ( Robert
Duke of Normandy being dead) came in upon a rightful Title, from his
Grandfather, Henry 1. and yet, the Great Council at Clarendon, which was the
10th. of his Reign, consisted only of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats, Priors,
Earls, and Chief men, of the Kingdom; and albeit Mr. Seldom (as himself from
Hoveden) says, That Clerus, and Populus Regni, the Clergy, and People of the
Land, were then Assembled, it appears not, that any other Estate was meant by
the word Populus, than the Lay Nobles: For, at the great Council of Northampton
(which was the following year) Rex Statuens celebrare solenne Concilium, Tit.
Hon. 583.
omnes qui tenebant de Rege in Capite, mandari fecit. The King having resolved
to hold a Great Council, he Summoned thither, all those, that held of him, in
Capite, i. e. in Chief. Now to hold in Chief of the King, is to hold of him
immediately, and merely as King, and of his Crown, as of a Seigneury in Gross,
and in Chief, above all other Seigneuries, and not as of, or by means of some
Honor, Castle, or Manor, belonging to the Crown. And in the preceding leaf,
Mr. Seldom says, Tenere de Rege in Capite, and habere possessiones sicut
Baroniam, are Synonimies; and, to hold in Chief, and to have their Possessions
as Baronies, Sir H. Spelm. Tit. Baro.
was to have the right of sitting in Councils, with the rest of the Barons:
concerning which, it does not yet appear, that the Commonalty at that time, had
any.

From thence, and during the Reign of King Richard the First, and until the
15th. of K. John, we find it the same; only at that time, the King being at
Rochel in France, commits the custody of England to the Bishop of Winchester,
then Chief Justice, and writes to his Barons, Knights, and to all his
Feudataries, or Vassals, through England, That he had received the Popes Letters,
touching the release of the Interdict (under which the Kingdom then lay, and of
which, I touched before) which he had sent to the said Bishop; and therefore
requires them, as of whose kindness, and fidelity, he had full confidence, that
according to what the said Bishop should then say unto them, they would
effectually give their advice, and aid: as in like manner, he writes to several
other Cities, and Buroughs, thereby earnestly requiring them, that according
to what the said Bishop shall give them to understand, that they effectually
apply themselves to give him a supply, toward the relaxation of the said
Interdict; and thereby also promises them a re-payment with thanks: so, that He
only borrows Money of them on that particular occasion, but does not in the
least hint, or direct them to send their Proxies, or Representatives, to any
Great Council to be then called: as we have it, and the History of that time,
more at large, Pet. 80. ad 99.
in the said Answer to Mr. Petit.

And now, having offered thus far to this matter, I shall go on with the reason
of those times, which I take to be thus. William the Conqueror having subdued
England, began now to consider the way of securing it; and to that purpose (as
it is in the Proverb) cut large thongs out of other men's hides) and (as a
reward of the Service done him) granted a certain compass or circuit of Land,
unto such of his Chief men, as had assisted him, in the acquisition, to them
and their Heirs, to dwell on, and exercise such Jurisdiction therein, as he
thought good to grant; performing also such Services, and paying him such
yearly Rent, as the Grant required: they again parcell'd this Land, to such
other meaner men, as had followed them in the Expedition, under such Services,
and Rents, as they thought fit; and by this means, as those Great men became
Tenants to the King in Chief, so the Inferiors became Tenants to them, who (as
Superiors) exercised a kind of little Kingship over them: The King and his
Successors being Supreme Lords of the whole, and imposing from time to time,
such Laws, as by the advice, and assent of those his Barons, were thought
expedient, and unto which, Sir H. Spelm. Gloss. 451.
Consentire inferior quisque vis us est, in persona Domini sui capitalis, prout
hodie per Procuratores Comitatus, vel Burgi, quos in Parliamentis, Knights and
Burgesses appellamus; to which, every inferior (says he) was presumed to
consent, in the person of his Chief Lord, from whom he held; as at this day, by
the Representatives of Counties, and Buroughs in Parliament, whom we call
Knights and Burgesses: and certainly, there is no doubt to be made, but that if
there had been any such privilege, of ancient time, belonging to the People,
that the Historians of those times would not have passed so material a thing in
silence, especially considering how many of lesser account, are every where
found among them. Polidor Virgil, would have the Commons to have been brought
into those great Councils, in the 16th. of Henry I. Sir Walter Raleigh, about
the 18th. of that King; but Sir Henry Spelman will not allow it; his words are
these, Sine ut sodes dicam, Ibidem.
collegisse me centenas (reor) conciliorum edictiones (tenoresque ipsos
plurimorum) ab ingressu Guilielmi 1. ad excessum Hen. 3. existentium, nec in
tanta multitudine, de plebe, uspiam reperisse aliquid, nil in his delituerit.
Give me leave (says he) to speak frankly, I believe, I have collected an
hundred Acts of Councils (and the forms of most) from the coming in of William
the First, to the going off of Henry the Third; nor in so great a number have I
any where found any thing of the Commonalty, nothing of it lies in them.

And yet, it may be probable, The time when it is most probable they first came
in.
that Henry the Third, toward the end of his long, but troublesome Reign,
brought them in, to counterpoise the Factions of his seditious Barons: for, tho
at the making of the Statutes of Merton, 20 H. 3.
there is not the least mention of the Commons, yet in those at Marleborough,
they are thus named, The more discreet men of the Realm, Vide Stat. 52 H. 3.
being called together, as well of the higher, as of the lower Estate. And in
the Title of the Statute of Westminster the first, made in the third of Edw. 1.
(who, as he was first of his name, after the Conquest, so he was the first,
that settled the Law, and State, and freed this Kingdom, from the Wardship of
the Peers) it is thus said, These be the Acts of King Edward, Son to King
Henry, made at Westminster, at his first Parliament, etc. by his Council, and
by the Assent of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and all
the Commonalty of the Realm, being thither Summoned, etc. And so, that word
Parliament, which (as Sir Henry Spelman says) in King John's time, Gloss. 452.
nondum emicuit, was not yet got up, other than by the name of ( Commune
Concilium Regni) The Common Council of the Kingdom, came in use, as it is now
taken, and the Commons, as they are at this day, an essential, and constituent
part of the same, and a third Estate.

6. That the Lords Temporal are one Estate of the Realm, The Lords Temporal one
great Estate.
was never doubted; Mr. Seldom begins his Privilege of Baronage with it: and
when the Commons came in to be another, I question not but I have fully proved;
and if now I shall make it appear, that the Lords Spiritual are one other
Estate of the Realm, distinct and separate, from the Lords Temporal (I hope) I
shall have gained my point, and that the King is not one of the Three Estates.
In order to which,

1. The Lords Spiritual sit in Parliament, by a different Right, The Lords
Spiritual one other distinct Estate from the Lords Temporal. Inst. 4.1.
from the Lords Temporal, viz. by Succession, in respect of their Counties, or
Baronies, parcel of their Bishoprics; and the others, by reason of their
Dignities, which they hold, by Descent, or Creation.

2. They sit in Parliament, in a different Robe, and on a different side of the
House, from the Lords Temporal, and are commanded thither by a different form
in the Writ, Seld. Tit. Hon. 594.
viz. In fide, and dilectione, etc. And the Lords Temporal, In fide and
ligeancia, etc.

3. They have a Convocation by themselves, consisting of an Upper House, viz.
Archbishops, and Bishops; and a Lower House, viz. the Procuratores Cleri,
Inst. 4.322.
called together by the Kings Writ, and have the same Privilege for themselves,
their Servants, 8 H. 6. c. 1.
and Familiars, as other Members of Parliament; and grant their Subsidies
apart, and distinct from the Lay Nobles; as may be seen by the respective Acts,
by which they have been granted, as also, ratified, and confirmed.

4. The general style of all Acts of Parliament has been such, that sometimes
the Ecclesiastical Lords are respectively named, Stat. 1 E. 1.
as Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors; as well as the Temporal Lords: and
sometimes, Stat. 13 E. 1
by the inclusive name, of the Prelates; and so to the 10th. of Richard 2.
where it is said, By the Assent of the Lords and Commons: under which general
words, of the Lords, they seem at first to be included, as if they were but one
Estate with them; were it not in the 13th. of the said King, again said, Of the
Assent of the Prelates, and Lords Temporal, and Commons. And in another, of the
20th. By the Assent of the Prelates, Lords, and Commons; and in the 14.15.16.
and 17. of the same King, By the Assent of his Parliament; and, the Parliament;
and none of them named apart: from which time, till the 4th. of Henry 4. the
word, Prelates, was again continued, and then, thus altered, viz. By the Assent
of the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and at the special instance, and request
of the Commons; and in the fifth of the same King, By the Advice and Assent of
his Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and at the request of the Commons; which so
continued without any variation in substance, until the 18th. of Henry 6. at
what time it became, as we have it now, viz. By the Advice and Assent of the
Lords Spiritual, and Temporal, and the Commons. Besides, if the Lords Spiritual
were not a third Estate, what is the reason that at the making of the Statute
of Praemunire, that the Commons having declared, that they would stand to the
King, in the defense of his Liberties; and praying, that all the Lords, as well
Spiritual, as Temporal severally, and all the Estates of Parliament, might be
examined, how they thought of that matter. The Lords Temporal, being so
demanded, answered every one by himself; and in like manner, the Lords
Spiritual, severally examined, answered by themselves: which affords me a
double Argument, 1. That by all the States of Parliament there must be
necessarily intended, more than two, if it were for no other reason, than mere
propriety of Speech. 2. That the King could not make up, that other, or third
Estate; because, he is desired to examine all the States severally, which he
could not do, if he had been one of them himself: so in the 40th. of Edw. 3.
(which I should have named first) when the King asks advice of his Parliament,
40 Edw. 3.
Whether King John could have subjected the Realm, as (what in him lay) he did,
The Prelates by themselves, the Dukes, Earls, and Barons by themselves, and the
Commons by themselves, answered, That he could not. From which, nothing seems
clearer to me, than that the Lords Spiritual, are one Estate, distinct from the
Lords Temporal; or otherwise, what needed they have been examined, by those
several names, of Spiritual, and Temporal, or as severally answered, by the
same appellations.

An Act of Parliament in point.
5. And now, if yet there remained any doubt, we have one Act of Parliament,
clear in point; where, the question being, whether the making of Bishops had
been duly and orderly done, 8 Eliz. c. 1.
according to Law, the Statute says, which is much tending to the slander of
all the State of the Clergy, being one of the greatest States of this Realm.
And so, having found Three Estates, without the King, I think (in good manners)
we ought to spare him.

I have hitherto offered some Reasons, Express Authorities to prove the King
none of the Three Estates.
nor without their Authorities. I come now to somewhat more direct, if yet,
those of the 40th. of Edw. 3. the 16th. of Rich. 2. and the 8th. of Qu. Eliz.
last mentioned could be thought otherwise. I Will begin with the Statute of H. 8.
where this Kingdom is called an Empire, governed by one Supreme Head, and King,
unto whom a Body Politic compact of all sorts, and degrees of People, divides
in Terms, and by names of Spiritualty, and Temporalty been bounden: and who can
believe, that the Authority of a Parliament, should utter any thing in
Parables, or under double meanings, contrary to the common sense of the express
words, or that there was ever intended, by the words, (divided in Terms, and by
names of Spiritualty and Temporalty) so many mere words, and no more? However,
to take off all doubt, Sir Edw. Coke says, The High Court of Parliament
consists of the Kings Majesty, sitting there, as in his Royal Politic
Capacity, and of the Three Estates of the Realm, Inst. 4.1.
viz. the Lords Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons: And so Cowel,
Cowel Interp. Tit. Parliam.
The word Parliament, in England, we use it for the Assembly of the King, and
the Three Estates, viz. the Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and the Commons.
And, Title Statute, he says it signifies, a Decree, or Act of Parliament,
made by the Prince, and the Three Estates; unto whom (as I said before) they
are subordinate, in the Legislation, and of no Power of themselves, but joined
to their Figure, have the full strength of their places: which in short we may
thus farther demonstrate, under the familiar instance of a Dean, and Chapter;
of whom, the Dean is no part, but ( Caput Capituli) the Head of them. And now
if any one shall demand, why this term of the Three Estates does not so
frequently occur to us, of Ancient time; I answer, That before the Commons were
brought in, there was no thought of it; and since that time, no dispute of it;
until of late, where many a worse twig was (even learnedly) made use of, to
stilt, and bolster a Ricketed Cause^ However, it is not too late, that the
Point is cleared now. And so we have it, in the Act for Unifermity of Public
Prayers, made the 14th. of this King, where the Form of Prayer, for the Fifth
of November, is thus entitled, A Form of Prayer, with Thanksgiving, to be used
yearly, on the Fifth day of November, for the happy deliverance of the King,
and the Three Estates of the Realm, etc.

And with this agrees the Kingdom of Scotland, of which, Mr. Cambden, Tit.
Scotland, fol. 7, 8.
in his History of Britain, says, That their Supreme Court, is their
Parliament, which consists of Three Estates, The Lords Spiritual, the Lords
Temporal, and the Commons, for Cities, and Burghs: of which, the King is
Directus totius Dominus. Stat. of Scotl. 3 Jac. 1. c. 48.
And so a Parliament of that Kingdom reckons them: It is ordained by the King,
by Consent, and Deliverance, of the Three Estates. Printed at Edenb. 16.
October, 1669.
And the Act of asserting the Kings Supremacy over all Persons, and in all
Causes Ecclesiastical; and the late Indictment, against Argile; and the Acts,
All Printed at ^denbr. 1681.
for the Acknowledging, and Asserting, the Right of Succession, to the Imperial
Crown of Scotland: And that other, for ratifying all former Laws, for the
security of the Protestant Religion, agree in point with it: Nor is it strange
they should, inasmuch, as neither their Langue, nor their Laws, especially,
such as are criminal (as may be seen, by comparing their Regiam Majestatem,
with our Glanvil, De Legibus, written in Henry the Second's time) much differ
from ours: And the Union of the two Crowns, in the Person of King James, is
called, An Union, English Stat. 1 Jac. c. 1.
or rather, a re-uniting of two Mighty, Famous, and Ancient Kingdoms, yet
anciently, but one. And that the Laws of Ireland (a distinct Realm, Inst. 4.351.
or Kingdom, from both) say nothing of this matter, I take it to be, for the
same reason, that the Romans made no Law against Parricide, They never dreamt
it.

SECTION VII.
Admitting what has been before offered, wherein has our present King merited
less than any of his Royal Ancestors? with a short recapitulation of Affairs,
as they had been, and were at his Majesty's most happy Restoration: and that
he wanted not the means of a just Resentment, had he designed any.

I Have hitherto shown, that the Crown of England, etc. is Supreme, Sovereign,
and Imperial; nor will it be from the purpose now, to demand, Wherein has our
present King, less merited, than any of his Regal Ancestors, that it should
appear less on his Head, than theirs; especially considering he is so far from
not getting up to 'em, that (his Royal Father only excepted) he has out-gone
them all in his own example; albeit he wanted not the too many just occasions
of having been otherwise. To recapitulate some few of them; A short
Recapitulation of Affairs, before his Majesty's return.
nor is it less than fit, to burn Incense, where ill Odors have been cast, or
raised. To have seen (then) three famous Kingdoms, that had so often
acknowledged his Princely Progenitors, their undoubted Heirs, (like Aesop's
Pots) broken, against one another: To have examined the Quarrel, of which
(whatever were the pretenses) nothing other was in the bottom, than to kill the
Heir, and divide the Inheritance: To have beheld his Glorious Father, Disarmed
by one Party, and in that condition, left to the growing designs of another,
and the merciless Cruelty of both: To have considered him, not forsaken only,
but ingratefully edged forward to his Destruction, by those Mushromes, whom his
Royal Influence had fermented into somewhat: To have recollected his many
Messages, fruitless Treaties, and that after all condescensions, nothing would
content them, without the Kingdom also: If there be yet room for a thought; to
have remembered (after the Faith of both Houses given him) how he was brought
to Jerusalem to be Crucified by the Jews: To have once more remembered, Him, The
Fountain of all Law, Justice, and Honor, publicly arraigned, by the Tail of
the People, and that too, under the false detorted names of Law, Justice, and
Honor of the Nation, nor without the Fucus of their Religion also, brought in,
to sanctify the Ordinance: To have remembered him (I say) Traitorously
Sentenced by his own Subjects, and as ignominiously (even while the Heads of
the Faction (as the Phrase of that time was) Were seeking God) Infesto Regibus
exemplo, Part of the Epitaph, of Mary Queen of Scots.
Securi percussum, and Murdered before his own Palace; Kingly Government
abolished; the Name, Style, Title, and Test of the King, Scobel's Collection of
Acts, 1648.
altered into, The Keepers of the Liberty of England, by Authority of
Parliament: That notion of a Parliament too, which by the same fatal blow, cut
themselves off, also: Let me not seem tedious, to have remembered himself,
Proscribed, and thereby, made High Treason, to Proclaim him King; The Oaths of
Allegiance, and Supremacy damned; The Royal Ensigns defaced; The Coin altered;
The Regal Statue thrown down, and under that Vacancy, Engraven, Exit Tyrannus,
Regum ultimus, Anno Libertatis restitutae, primo: In short, to have remembered
his helpless Friends, either starving at Home, or by not complying,
necessitated into Foreign Arms, and not the least number of them, so
unfortunate, as to have survived the Ruins of their (once) Families; and
lastly, the more unhappy himself, that could only look on and pity them. --
Quis talia fando,
Temperet? --
What private Gentleman could have born it? But perhaps you will say, he wanted
the opportunity; I think not: For if we consider him, as he was at that time,
not only returned from his Fathers Allies, That he wanted not opportunities of
resenting them, had he designed it.
but the same Professed Son of the Church of England, he first went out, and in
that, the Darling of the People; what particular person, or number of men,
might he not have singled from the Herd, as a just Sacrifice to his Fathers
Ashes, and his own Revenge; had he designed any? He had an Army at his beck;
The Navy regenerated; All Forts, and Garrisons re-inforc'd with Royalists; The
Country returned to its former Allegiance; and the City, crying out, Yea, let
him take all, since my Lord the King is returned to his own House in peace?
What (I say) might he not have done? especially considering, that such as had
been obnoxious, could not but expect, that the Cloud must break, and be afraid,
where it might fall, and consequently ready, each man to have given up his
nearest Relation, to save himself, -- Et quae sibi quisque timere
Unius in miseri exitium convertere -- Virgil.

Can a Mother forget her Son? Or a Son, such a Father? And yet, Quanquam animo
redit usque Pater, Strada.
tamen excutit omnem,
Rex melior --
he so far forgot it, as to avoid the occasions of remembering it: Nay, which of
his Enemies looked up to him, and returned empty? Was not the Childrens Bread
thrown among them, while the helpless Orphans scarce lickt up the Crumbs? And
has not that fullness of Bread, provoked them into wantonness? They have eat,
drunk, and now rise up to play; and it is a shrewd sign they are idle, when
nothing will serve them, but they must be Sacrificing in a Wilderness; yet,
what greater Testimonies could there be, of an entire Forgiveness? And if so,
this methinks should at last mind us, that as Vapors rising from the Earth,
stay not long in the Air, but fall on the same Earth again, That we also, as
truly sensible of the Mercy, return him (at least) the grateful Acknowledgments
of an humble Obedience.

SECTION VIII.
That notwithstanding the hard Law of the Kingdom, the Jews paid their Kings,
an entire Obedience. Two Objections answered. The like, other Nations to their
Kings. A third Objection answered. The Precept of Obedience is without
restriction; Examples upon it: Nor is Idolatry any ground to resist; much less,
things indifferent. The example from our Savior in Instituting his last
Supper. Least of all, is injury, with the practice of Holy men of old, in like
cases. And that if any ground were to be admitted, that, would never be wanting.

I Gave an account before, of that hard Law of the Kingdom given to the Jews,
and yet we find not throughout the Story, that they did in the least repine at
it, but rather the contrary; for when upon the Constitution of Saul, 1 Samuel
10.26.
some Children of Belial, (for so the Text calls them) had despised him,
saying, How shall this man save us? The People (whose hearts God had touched) in
the next Chapter, ver. 12. say unto Samuel, Who is he that said, Shall Saul
reign over us? Bring the men, that we may put them to death. And what value
they put on their Kings Person, may be seen in this, that Readiness Armor-bearer,
chose rather to kill himself, than perform that last (if yet I may so call it)
charitable Office, to his distressed Master, 1 Chronicles. 10.5.
then ready to fall into his Enemies hands, and praying it; neither would the
People suffer David to go forth before them to Battle; For if we flee (say
they) they will not be much concerned at it, 2 Samuel 18.3.
neither if half of us die, will they care for us; but thou art worth ten
thousand of us. In short, he that was King among them, did whatever pleased
him; Eccles. 8.3.
And whatever the King did, 2 Samuel 3.36.
pleased all the people.

And was not this a perfect love between a King and his People? was there ever
a more exact, or entire Obedience? An Obedience, to be reckoned for
Righteousness? And yet, what new paths do we take to our selves? when, if we
would but examine Holy Writ, we might find that, every where directing us to our
Duty. As, 1. Negatively; in that we are commanded, not to think ill of the
King; Curse not the King, no, Eccles. 10.20.
not in thy thoughts: much less then, may we speak it, Exodus 22.18.
Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy people. Least of all, may we do
him hurt: Psalm. 105.25.
Touch not mine Anointed. 2. Affirmatively, We are commanded to keep his
Commandments, and that in regard of the Oath of God: Eccles. 8.2.
Neither may we give him any just cause of anger; Whosoever provokes him to it,
sins against his own soul. (...). 20.2.
To which, (...). 1.
if any one shall say, they were Kings themselves, that spoke it, and 'twere
much they could say nothing in their own behalf: I answer, Sci. 1.
That besides that it has been ever received for Holy Writ, Job, who wrote many
Centuries, before there was any King in Israel, puts the question, Job 36.18.
Is it fit (says he) to say to a King, thou art wicked, or to Princes, ye are
ungodly? The Interrogation is affirmative, and after the manner of affirmative
Interrogations, concludes negatively, i. e. No, it is not fit; for, says the
same Eccles. (which is another of the same) who may say unto him, What do
thou? To which also if it be yet objected, that this Law was given to a
peculiar People, Object. 2.
and that no Law (but the Law of Nature, which is immutable) obliges any, to
whom it was not given: Sol. 2.
I answer (as before) besides that it is Holy Writ, what inconvenience is it,
if we give the same credit to God Almighty, we generally allow to other
Lawgivers? and the rather, in that God, is not the God of the Jews only, Romans
3.29.
but the Gentiles also.

That Reverence, The like of other Nations to their Kings.
the Jews paid their Kings, by a Written Law, the Ancient Heathens took up from
a mere impulse of Nature; and yet, what the manner of their Kingdoms were (in
that the Jews did but desire to be like all other Nations) you have had before.
Q. Curtius tells us, that the Persians had such a love to their King, that
Alexander could not persuade them, either for fear, or reward, to tell him
whither their King had fled; or reveal any of his intentions. In like manner,
when Xerxes fled from Greece, in a small Vessel, Herodot. l. 8.
so full of men, that it was impossible for him to be saved, without throwing
some overboard; the Nobility leapt into the Sea, and by their example, others,
till the Ship was lightened, and the King preserved. And so Boemus Aubanus, De
morib^s gentium, l. 1. cap. 5.
speaking of the Egyptian Kings, says, that they had so much love from their
People, Ut non solum sacerdotibus, sed etiam singulis Aegyptiis, major Regis,
quam uxorum, filiorumque salutis, inesset cura, That not only the Priests, but
every one of them had a greater care of the Kings safety, than of their Wives,
and Children. And in another place, speaking of the Tartars, Albeit their King
(says he) upon his Inauguration, tells them, Oris mei sermo, gladius meus
erit, My word's my Sword; and that all things are in his power, Ibid. l. 2. c.
10.
and no man may dwell in any part of the Land, but what is assigned him by the
King; yet, nemini licet imperatoris ve^ba mutare, nemini latae ab illo
sententiae qualicunque modo contraire; No man may alter his Decree, or in the
least tittle dispute his Commands.

Besides all which, the obsequious impiety of elder times, attributed the name
of God to their Emperors; and whence (perhaps) it might be, that Joseph swore,
By the life of Pharaoh; -- Sceptrum, capitisque salutem
Testatur --
And the Romans, By the Majesty and Genius of the Emperor: And the drinking his
Health, at Public Feasts was decreed to Augustus; as we have it in Peter
Ursinus his Appendix, where also, he cites S. Ambrose, speaking of the custom
of his time, Append. ad Pet. Ciacc. de Triclinio, 327.
Bibamus (inquiunt) pro salute Imperatorum, and qui non biberit, sit reus in
devotione: Let us drink (say they) the Emperors Health, and let him be damned
that refuses it* in which the Father taxes not the thing, but their ill of
doing it.

In the offering of all which, let me not be mistaken, as if I designed to
insinuate, that such a Power as those Kings I so lately mentioned, did
exercise, might be practicable now, or any municipal Law, altered ad libitum;
no, that were to justify that Arbitrary Power, so often talked of, and against
which, our present King, has so publicly declared; the absolute, and
unlimited Sovereignty, which they have by the Ordinance of God, having from
time to time (by their Bounty) been limited, and bounded in the ordinary
exercise thereof, by such Laws, and Customs, as themselves have given the Royal
Assent unto, and allowed; so that in effect, it may be said, What have we, that
we have not received? Upon which score it is, that a Subject may maintain his
Right, and Property, and have Judgment against the King; and in such cases, the
Judges are bound to right the party, according to Law: And there are many
things also, of which it is said, The King cannot do them, i. e. because he
will not do them ( quia refragantur ordini) as being contrary to the Law, and
Order, established in his Realm: And therefore, neither can our Kings, or ought
they in common justice to be esteemed, or thought the less, when they have
scattered any Flowers of their Crown on their Subjects, in as much as the root
rests in the same place, and is as productive of more, when deserved.

Object. 3.
But suppose (may some say) the King be a wicked King, a Tyrant, an Idolater, or
however else the licentiousness of an enraged Rabble may render him, may not
the subordinate Magistrate, the Nobility, or People, restrain, or remove him?

Sol. 3.
I answer, No; for besides that the Precepts of Obedience to Kings, are without
restriction, and therefore extend to all Kings, The precept of Obedience is
without restriction.
be they what they will; if it be not lawful for me to judge another man's
Servant, how much less then, my own Master, whose Power over me is just, tho it
may so happen, that he use it unjustly? The Israelites had a sharp bondage
under the Egyptians, Exodus 1.9, 10.
and wanted not numbers to have made their party good: The Land was filled with
them, and Pharaoh confesses them, the more mighty; yet they thought it better
to quit the Country, than rebel: Nor was their condition much improved in
Babylon, Ezra 6.10.
and yet they are commanded to offer Sacrifices, Jer. 29.7.
and pray for the Life of the King, and of his Sons; and to seek the peace of
the City where they were Captives. Samuel pronounced the rejection of Saul
(whom also, 1 Samuel 15.26, 35.
David afterward spared) yet neither incited the People to rebel against him:
Idolatry, no ground to resist.
Nebuchadnezzar, Achab, Manasses, were Idolatrous Kings; and yet Daniel, Elias,
and the Holy men of those times, continued their Obedience, and tampered not
with others, to infringe theirs: What shall I add? our Savior commands us to
give unto Caesar, Matthew. 22.21.
the things that are Caesar's, and the Apostle who exhorts, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2.
That, first of all, supplications, prayers, etc. be made for all men, forgets
not more especially, Kings, and all that are in Authority: In short, the
Primitive Christians resisted not their Idolatrous Persecutors, and yet
contrary to the opinion of Bellarmin, Bellarm de Po^t. l. 3. c. 9. Buch. de
j^re Reg. p. 61.
and Buchanan, they wanted not numbers: Vestra omnia implevimus, (says
Tertullian) urbes, insulas, In Apolog.
castella, municipia, conciliabula, castra ipsa, decurias, Palatia, forum,
Senatum: cui bello non idonei, non prompti fuissemus, qui tam libenter
trucidamur, si non apud disciplinam nostram magis occidi liceret, quam
occidere? We fill (says he) the whole Empire, your Cities, Princes Houses,
Castles, Corporations, Councils, your very Camps, Courts of Justice, Palaces,
Marketplaces, Senate; with whom are we not able to make a War, who so
willingly offer our selves to the slaughter? did not our Religion teach us,
that (in such cases) it is better to be killed than kill. But instead of it,
prayed, That God would give them, Vitam prolixam, Imperium securum, domum
tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum fidelem, Populum probum, orbem quietum, and
quaecunque hominis aut Caesaris sunt vota. A long Life, a secure Empire, safe
House, valiant Forces, a faithful Council, loyal People, quiet State; and
whatever were the desires of a man, or Emperor: They preferred God, before
Julian's Idolatry, yet, when he said, March, they obeyed him.

Much less, things indifferent.
And if Idolatry be not ground for a Subject to resist his Prince, much less
then may cases of lesser consequence, which touch not the Foundation, but are
only circumstantials: And of this kind, are all ( Adiaphora) things in
themselves indifferent, whether to be made use of, or not made use of, however,
coming to be commanded, by a lawful Authority, the indifferency ceases, and
every man is obliged in Conscience to comply with the Command, as especially in
such cases, where he has made himself a party, Dyer, 23.148.
by his Representative; and from which, if he might retract, by saying, it was
not the sense he meant, why also might not the King, in some other case, say,
he was mistaken, when he gave the Royal Assent? for I do not find, that the
Subject here, shall be in a better condition, than the King. And then, make the
consequence who will, which is as easily done, off-hand, as other matters, that
require no study.

And here I might instance several Ceremonies, which, albeit they were first
devised by man, for the more decent order in the Church, and tho the keeping,
or omitting them, is in it self, but a small thing, yet the wilful, Vide,
Preface to the Liturgy, and touching Ceremonies.
and contemptuous transgression, and breaking of a common Order, and
Discipline, is no small offense, against that rule of the Apostle, Let all
things be done in a seemly and due order: and is no more of private
interpretation, than is Scripture, which (like the Law) pronounces nothing,
but in the mouth of a Judge.

To speak once for all, our Savior who was an Hebrew, amongst whom, The
example of our Savior, in his Instituting his last Supper.
the Roman Customs were not so altogether in use, gives us a remarkable
example, in this matter, and I think no man will question his Authority, --
Solemn quis dicere falsum Audeat? He was (I said before) an Hebrew, and yet, if
we examine his converse among the Romans, we shall find it generally, comporting
to their manners. To pass the rest, that one of Instituting his last Supper,
seems to me to carry no small force: The Triclinium (a Bed, not unlike our
Couches without backs, but broader, on which the Romans at their Feasts, lay in
a manner extended, on their Sides, Breasts, or Elbows) was not in use among the
Jews, that ever I yet met, or learned; yet when our Savior was to keep the
Passover (which the Jews did, Deuteronomy. 12.11.
their Loins girt, their Shoes on their feet, their Staves in their hands, and
in have) the Text says, Discumbebat cum duodecim, which signifies the manner,
how the Romans used those Beds; and from whence S. John is said, to have leaned
on his bosom: yet admitting, that he sat down, it is enough, to prove, that it
was not the Jewish custom, for they stood: besides, the form of the Table seems
to have been Roman, viz. Orbicular, or Oval (of which kind, we have several
figures, Rosin. Romans Antiq. l. 5. c. 27. Lipsii Saturn. lib. 1. c. 6.
in Rosinus, Lipsius, and others) and the reason of it was, that every ghest
might put his hand in the Dish, without reaching over another: and this is
further plain, by that answer of our Savior, to his Disciples, asking him,
Mat. 26.23.
who should betray him, Qui intingit manum in Paropside, etc. He that dippeth
his hand with me in the Dish, the same shall betray me: neither is it possible
it could have been a long Table, for then, how could our Savior (as we have it
in another Evangelist) have given him the Sop; John 13.26.
in as much, as Judas being the last of the twelve (and perhaps for that reason
also, Mat. 10 4.
carrying the Bag) must in all probability have sat lowest, and out of reach
of the Sop, as well as of the Dish: from all which I infer, that if our
Savior, who was no Roman, conformed himself to the customs of the Roman
Empire, to which the Jews, were at that time Tributary, how much more then
ought this be a sufficient ground to us, whereby to follow his example;
especially, in matters, otherwise indifferent, where they are not commanded; it
being but reasonable, that in standing weight, even a grain of Authority should
turn the Scale.

Least of all then is injury any ground for a Subject to oppose his Prince;
inasmuch, Least of all, injury.
as no man can be said to be injured by him, of whom, by the Law of God, and
man, he can take no revenge, without a greater injustice. John 18.11.
S. Peter was reproved by our Savior, for drawing his Sword against Authority,
tho in defense of his Master: S. Paul checks himself for a bare Acts 25.5.
slip of his Tongue, against the High Priest: And look back into the Old
Testament, those times also, hold no such custom, but rather the contrary:
Exodus 12.37.
Thus Moses, and six hundred thousand footmen, besides children, and a mixed
multitude, fled from Pharaoh: David, 1 Samuel 22.2.
in the head of an Army, (and those, if we consider the persons, desperate
enough) from Saul: 1 Kings 19.18.
And Elias, from Jezabel, seven thousand men yet left in Israel, that had not
bowed their knees unto Baal: And as they fled, others supplicated: 1 Samuel 19.4.
So Jonathan, for David to Saul: Jer. 38.9.
Ebedmelech, for Jeremiah, Esther 7.3.
to Zedechiah: And Esther (a Queen) for her Nation, to Ahasuerus.

If any ground were to be admitted, that would never be wanting.
In short, if any cause should be admitted, for which Subjects might resist,
that cause, would never be wanting, against any Prince (let him reign never so
justly) whom the people shall call an Idolater, or Tyrant; and how easy it
will be, to conclude him one, or both, especially, where they that take upon
them to give the Sentence, shall make the case, I leave it to every man:
Impiety must be the ground to accuse him, and that, the common pretense,
whereby to depose him; as if a King, like a Chinese god, Semido in His^. of
China.
might be whipped into a compliance, or if that will not do, thrown in the fire,
and another set up in his room, during the same pleasure, or better behavior.
In a word, I spoke erewhile of flight, and supplications, but they that are too
stiff for the one, will rarely bend to the other, unless (when they can do no
more) they appeal (from the King, to Alexander) from himself, unto himself, as
presuming, that private Spirit which knows not how to deny, will yet so prevail
on his public capacity, that he will remit any thing.

SECTION IX.
The Arts of the late times in working the People from this Obedience. It was
to be done piecemeal. The Kings Necessities, answered with Complaints. Plots
discovered; Fears and Jealousies promoted. Religion cants its part. Leading
men, some to make it Law, others, Gospel; The examples of Corah, etc. The same
Game playing over again: Prognostications, etc. The ill consequence of such
Impressions. The examples of Cade, Tyler, and others. Holy League in France;
Solemn League and Covenant, at home, etc. New Trains to the old Fuel. Our
Saviors advice to his Disciples touching the leven of the Pharisees: What
that, and they were, made applicable unto our selves.

I Have brought it thus far, that Princes are to be obeyed, and yet, ere I
close the Argument, it will not be from the purpose, if we examine how the
People were wrought from it in the late times, and of what ill consequence, the
like impressions may be at present. Wise men are safe, they have wit enough to
keep within themselves; but, it is the Mobile vulgus, the Ignota Capita, Sine
nomine turba, that only fall within my discourse. And truly, considering this
Kingdom in its self, -- Potens armis, atque ubere glebae, A Land so
considerable abroad, and fruitful at home, That Virtue, and Fortune, which
(according to Florus) seemed to have contested about the raising of the Roman
Empire, might have been truly said to have concentered here: And withal,
considering the evils we have past, and the happy days we might enjoy, if we
pleased our selves, it would confound Astrologers, to observe such Planets,
such masculine Planets, Ascending, in Conjunction, in the Houses of their
Exaltation, and yet the Kingdom, Planet-struck. -- Pudet haec opprobria dici;
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
To examine it a little further, and the rather, for this, that by viewing the
Cards, by which the last Game was played, we need not be once more cheated,
unless we please our selves.

That the People were so beset, is agreed of all hands: Whither do Rheumes, and
Humors resort, but to the weakest parts? yet, this was not to be done all at
once; no, they were first to be prepared, and then so disposed, that they saw
nothing but ( sub imagine lusca) by a dull false light. To have asked the People
about sixty years since, if they would have taken Arms against their Prince,
That Prince, whose Ancestor had given them so much, they could not readily
tell, what to ask more; no doubt but they had startled at the question, and
answered, as Hazael to Elisha, 2 Kings 8.13.
Is thy servant a dead dog he should do this thing? No, that was a gobbet too
large for their throats; It was to be done piecemeal.
but given bit, by bit, there was no danger of the swallow, were it never so
raw. Seldom appears the Devil so ugly as the Painters make him, that were
enough to convince an Atheist; but when he offers himself as an Angel of Light,
who would suffer him to shake off the dust of his feet on them?

The Kings necessities to be supplied with complaints.
And here, Religion was a main instrument, but it must stay its time: no man
serves up the last course, till the first, and second are over: the King was to
be first reduced to necessity, to the end, that being forced to extraordinary
means for supply, he might attract an odium: nor must he be supplied, but from
hand to mouth; however, what he might want in that, he had it otherways,
pressed down, and running over: complaints of Grievances, Treasure misspent,
Necessities contracted by mis-providence, Remonstrances against Favorites, not
forgetting the Old Ingredients, of Growth of Popery, Rushworth's Coll. fol.
40.183.402.656.
and Arbitrary Government: and if this was not the Art of that time, my Author
has done them wrong, and that he is seldom guilty of.

By this time the People were shod with the Preparation of the Work; and now,
Plots discovered, Fears and Jealousies promoted.
the French are ready to land, and the old Vault smells rank of Powder again:
The Kingdom must be put into a posture of Defense, Sir Will. Dugd. Short View,
etc. from fol. 67. to fol. 124.
and the Militia into Confiding hands; Fears and Jealousies promoted; Bishops,
and Popish Lords Excluded; the Well-affected Counties Associated; Moneys
raised; themselves Perpetuated; Publick-Faith set up; the Excise slurr'd on the
People for repaying it; and the holy Covenant, to pin the Basket: And one would
think they had laid in well enough, and yet, besides the 11 Millions; which the
Plate, Rings, Bodkins, etc. within London, Essex, and Middlesex, besides other
Counties, amounted to, it is publicly declared, That if any Papists, would
bring in any considerable Sums, October. 6.1642.
upon the Propositions, they should be received; albeit they taxed his Majesty
for raising an Army, by the help of Papists; as their Disciples, some years
afterward, hired Owen Roe O Neal, to raise the Siege at Londonderry in
Ireland, then Beleaguered by his Majesty's Forces; not without suspicion, that
they over-paid him his Wages in a Parting Glass.

And now it is time that Religion Trump up, Religion cants its part.
and justify all they had already laid, or were to act for the future. A
painful, Gospel Ministry, must act its part, and S. Ant'lins Lectures, lead the
way to the Artillery-yard: in order to which, they beat down morality, that
having swept the house of one Tenant, it might be the readier for another. Ye
must not (said they) plant Gospel Truths on legal Foundations, or the rotten
Crab-stocks of carnal Principles: who ever found fault with Fresh Herrings? and
shall we despise Truth because it is a novelty? it is a sign men have a mind to
sleep, when they draw their Curtains, and will have no more light come in:
whereas, it is your work to enquire after further light: To call out, what of
the night? How much of the night of Popery and darkness remains? How near are
we to the taking the possession? and how long may we be kept off ere the
Scepter of the Kingdom be advanced? And is not this fine stuff? And yet the
Pulpit-Drums of that time beat no other March: And all this by Scripture too;
nor (as to themselves) without reason: Don't we give Children Honey and Raisins,
with their Worm-seed? and g^ld Pills, for men of riper years? Did ever Dog
swallow a Cork without Butter? or even a Fool, Angle, without hiding his Hook
in a Bait? No, no, the Needle must be first in, and the Thread follows of
course. Absalom had never gotten the People to him, had he not masked his
Rebellion, under a Vow at Hebron; for the Text says, They went in their
simplicity, 2 Samuel 15.11.
and knew not any thing.

Yet it was not to be expected, Leading men, to make it Law, and Gospel.
that Religion alone should carry on the work, or that the same old drudg
Cloak, should still hold out Rain, without a new Lining: Wisdom built her house
on more Pillars than one, and a mere Foundation was too hazardous for their new
Jerusalem, without Props and Buttresses: And therefore, to prevent the
question, Do any of the Scribes follow him? there must be Hinters, as well as
Holders-forth; Leading-men to countenance that for Law, which their Assembly
had predetermin'd, should pass for Gospel. The examples of Corah, etc.
Corah and his Companions, were of the Tribe of Levi; Dathan and Abiram, of the
Tribe of Reuben; Heads of Families, men famous in the Congregation; Clergy, and
Laity; dissembled Sanctity, to usurped Authority: And that their Quarrel was
Government, under the pretense of Religion too, appears by what they said to
Moses, Numb. 16.3.
and Aaron, Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy,
every one of them, and the Lord is among them: wherefore then lift ye up your
selves above the Congregation of the Lord? So Adoniah (when his Father David,
the Kingdom of the Jews being not yet become Hereditary, had caused Solomon to
be Crowned King, while he yet lived) the better to color his pretense to it,
took to him Abiathar, 1 Kings 1.19.
the High Priest, and Joab the Captain of the Host: And who would think it
strange, that a short-sighted, Sand-blind Multitude, should scruple to follow,
where such Guides lead them?

I have hitherto with what briefness I could, accounted some slights of hand
within our own memories; and shall it be reckoned to our inadvertence, or
folly, that they pass twice in the same Age? That the Devil was once in the
Herd, we have Authority enough; but that he never should quit it, we hold no
such Prophecy. The same Game playing over again.
And yet methinks the Game is playing over again, or else, what means this
bleeting of the Sheep, and lowing of the Oxen? this talking with the People
upon the Wall, 2 Kings 18.2^.
or making them believe, that they, that came into the world (as Cato into the
Theater) only to go out again, should yet be the Saints that are to judge, and
inherit it? why must they that carry their Souls in their Eyes, and their
Brains in other men's Heads, be once more buzzed with Laws, Liberties,
Conscience, Dissatisfaction? or (like Larks) dared to the Net, with every
thing? Prognostications, etc.
Prognostications, Prophesies, Prodigies, etc. which, albeit (like Mercenary
Soldiers) they may be brought to fight on either side, yet every man
superstitiously interprets them to his own advantage, and lets them speak no
other Language, than what his wishes, hope, or fear, put in their mouths: In
short, we have had enough of the Arts by which the people have been already
imposed on, nor will it be unworth the while, if we consider, of what ill
consequence, such, or the like impressions, may further be to them; inasmuch
also, as those Spiritual Druggists, give out the Commodity without garbling,
and vend what they please among the Rabble, for staple Goods and warrantable.
Man, as he is a rational, Hudibras. The ill consequence of such impressions.
so also is he a compound, gradual Creature, the way to his reason, being by
his sense, and appetite, which being disturbed, or prepossessed, how is it
possible for him to take any thing aright, more than for him that is out in the
premises, not to be worse mistaken in the conclusion; or, than that a Bowl,
delivered short, or narrow at hand, should ever come up with the Block: some
Birds are whistled into the Snare, others driven, and Dotterils caught by
imitation of such postures, as others put themselves into: Argus had an hundred
eyes, and yet was surpised sleeping: The evil one in the Gospel, sowed tares,
Matthew. 13.25.
while the Husbandman slept; and what worse effects may not such impressions
have upon the multitude, whose whole life is but one long slumber; or at best,
Per pocula noctes? And therefore considering them (as the Athenians in the
Acts) ever spending their time in nothing else, Acts 17.21.
but either to tell, or hear some new thing; or, taking them, as they are, weak
in judgment, but violent in will; believing, as they affect, and presaging, as
they believe; how easy is it to make them serviceable, to any aspiring design,
shall be cast before them? And if so, how are they to be entrusted with
themselves? much less, to be lasht down-hill especially, if when we have any
credit to the Poet, we also allow him in the advice to Phaeton, Parce (puer)
stimulis, and fortius utere loris, Ovid. Met.

Sponte sua properant, labor est inhibere --
For tho they would be quiet enough, if their drivers would let 'em, yet if
once they get the Bitt in their teeth, or find the Reins lie loose on their
necks, they grow wild, unruly, seditious, and no longer apt to be governed, or
ruled; and as another on the like occasion, -- Non audivere jugales
Imperium, and prono nec sat stetit orbita coelo. Barkeley, Argen. l. 3.

And therefore the Psalmist, that reckons it among the Prerogatives of God,
Psalm. 65.7.
to still the raging of the Sea, subjoyns immediately, and the madness of the
People. Who would have thought, The examples of Jack Cade, and others.
that Jack Cade (alias) Captain Mend-all in Henry 6th.'s time; Jack Straw, and
Wat Tyler in Richard 2.'s time, and their Rabbles, could have done any
mischief? and yet, they put the Kingdom into such a Convulsion, that it
required some time ere it recovered its limbs. And here, I wonder any Citizen
of London can look upon the Bloody Dagger, in the dexter Canton, of the City
Arms, and not remember the Loyalty of Sir William Wallworth, 4 Rich. 2.
then Lord Mayor of London, who with his own hand, knocked down Wat Tyler, in
the Kings presence, in Smithfield, and and thereby dispersed the Rabble; in
memory of which action, that Augmentation, was first given them. In like
manner, That of Thomas Anello (or Massinello) in Naples, about 34 years since,
Vide, The History, written by a noble Neapolitan.
where so inconsiderable a thing, as the Gabel on a Basket of Fruit, or Fish,
raised the People into a Rebellion of above 200000 men, in less than five days;
wherein (ere it ended) 'twas odds, but the Neapolitan Courser, had (for all the
Bridle, and Saddle) thrown his Rider, had not the Policy of that time, thought
the acquest of a disputable Crown, of less concern, than the setting up again a
declining, but popular, emulous, not to say pretending Family, and giving it
once more, the opportunity of an Estate, that was but too mighty in Obligations
already. Add to this, the late Assassination of De Wit, and his Brother, in
Holland, by a wild Rabble, which also, had not been so easily quieted, were it
not natural with the common People, enragedly to vent themselves on the stone
that hurt them, and never regard the hand that threw it.

Holy League in France.
And yet in all this there was no pretense of Religion; but it heightens the
case when that shall be edged in, to blanch the design: and however the voice
may be the voice of Jacob, it seldom happens, but that the hands, are the hands
of Esau. What mischiefs, did the Army of God, Comb. Britt. 509.
and the Church (for so they styled themselves) in King John's time? The Holy
League, in the time of Henry 3. of France; which, albeit himself entered into,
for the Extirpation of the Hugono^s, Lord Bacon ^ Essaya, 78.
yet it was not long ere it was turned upon him: John of Leyden, and
Knipperdolin in Germany: The Sword of the Lord, and Gideon (as it was then
called) under John Knox, in Scotland: And the Solemn League and Covenant in our
own times; Solemn League and Covenant at home.
the Brands of which are it seems) not so altogether extinguished, but that
they, more than once, began to take fire again, tho the flame were prevented.
And do we not find, that in all these, a demure, down look, and an uplifted
eye, went more than half way, and a mistaken violence, the undisputable
Character, of a zeal to the cause? How much therefore, have the people more
need of a Pendulum, than Fly; somewhat to moderate, not multiply the motion? it
being here, as with Gossips Tongues, much easier to raise the Devil, than lay
him. Who ever put a Sword into a mad-mans hand to keep the Peace with? or
entrusted an Ape to range in a Glass-shop? yet such, or worse must it be, where
the People are the Reformer, who never examine what they are doing, but how to
run farthest, from what they were last.

New Trains to the old Fuel.
And if so, what mean these new Trains, to the old Fuel? Jealousies, Murmurings,
Repinings, Libels, Licentious Discourses, false News, half Whispers, Disputing,
Excusing, or Cavilling upon Directions; sometimes praising the Government, yet
but slightly (at most) and that too, not without some pity of Defects, and ill
management -- Ay but -- and a shrug -- It were to be wished -- but who can help
it -- we had -- and may have again -- however -- a good man -- it is pity: and
what is all this, but the blowing one up, to break him, or lifting him from the
ground, to be the surer of throwing him? or, is it not what the Psalmist speaks
of, Sagitta volans in die, etc. The Arrow that flies by day, and the
Pestilence, that walks in darkness; for tho it be not levelled at any
particular mark, it cannot be, but that it must hit some body, as being shot
among a crowd; and so not improperly, in S. Hieroms Translation further
rendered, by Daemonium meridianum: Psalm. 90.6.
And truly if the Conventicles at this day (as the Preamble of the Act for the
Preventing, 22 Car. ^.
and Suppressing Seditious Conventicles, and Sectaries, says) did not under
pretense of Tender Conscience, contrive Insurrections, why might they not be
contented with enjoying their private Opinions within their own Families, and
any other number of persons, not exceeding four? But alas! alas! Religion is
not the matter, but following, and Parties: Is it peace Jehu? What have thou to
do with peace? Get thee behind me: They carry ('it is true) peace in their
mouths, but their hands, are making ready to Battle.

Our Saviors advice to his Disciples.
I Will close this point with the double advice of our Savior to his Disciples:
Mark 8.15.
Beware of the leven (i. e. the Doctrine) of the Pharisees: for the better
understanding of which it is requisite that we consider them as they were, that
is, a sort of men of the strictest Sect, Acts 26.5.
of the Jewish Religion, Luke 18.11, 12.
appearing outwardly (more than ordinarily) righteous unto men, Mat. 23.27.
but within, full of hypocrisy, and iniquity: for, they did works, but to be
seen of men: What the Pharisees were.
they shut up the Kingdom of Heaven, against others; but, entered not
themselves: they made long Prayers; but, under that pretense, devoured Widows
houses: they tyth'd Mint, Annise, and Cummin; but, neglected the weightier
matters of the Law, etc. and therefore our Savior calls them eight times, in
the same Chapter, Hypocrites; and their Doctrine, Hypocrisy. Luke 12.1.
Besides (as Josephus says of them) they were subtle, proud, scrupulous,
Josephus Antiq l. 17. c. 3.
such as were able, openly to practice against Kings, and presumed to raise War
against them, and among them: for, whereas all the Jewish Nation, had by Oaths,
obliged their fidelity to Augustus, these men, to the number of 6000. and
upwards, refused it. And truly the very word ( Peruschim) whence the name is
derived, speaks little less; for it comes from the Hebrew Verb, Godw. Jewish
Antiq. 40, 41.
Parasch, which in the Conjugation Piel, signifies to divide, or separate; in
which acceptance, they are by the Greeks, called (...), i. e. Separatists.

And by the well observing this, we shall be the better enabled, to follow that
other, Mat 25.5.23, 24, 25, 26.
Take heed that no man deceive you; for many shall come in my name, and shall
deceive many: for there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, etc.
Behold, I have foretold you: wherefore, if they shall say unto you behold he is
in the Desert, Go not forth; Behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it
not: What our Savior here said to his Disciples, he said to all men, in them;
Made applicable to our selves.
and therefore, to make it applicable to our selves: when any such Prophet, or
dreamer of Dreams, shall offer us peace, in the Wilderness of a Multitude, and
Religion in the lurking holes, or covert of a Conventicle, that voice had need
continually sound in our ears, Go not out; and, believe it not, be as often
redoubled; for much better it is, that we leave the Ark to shake, as it shall
please God, than follow any unworthy hands, that may pretend (even a Call) to
support it.

SECTION X.
A further enquiry, Whether any Exclusision of his Royal Highness the Duke of
York may be of more advantage or disadvantage. The advantage proposed; and
whether an Act for security of Religion, be not as safe, as a Bill of
Exclusion. The moral impossibility of introducing the Romish Religion, tho the
Prince were of that Persuasion. The reason why the Kingdom followed the
Reformation under Edw. VI. Qu. Mary. Qu. Elizabeth. That the case cannot be the
same at this day. The Crown of England, an ancient Entail; with the danger of
Innovations. Objection, That such things have been done. So has a King been
murdered. More particularly answered, in Edw. IV. Qu. Mary, and Qu. Eliz. all
three excluded by Parliament, yet came to the Crown. No man changes, but in
hopes of better. The advantages of continuing as we are. It is a bar to
Pretenders. The same, as to Competitors. Disorders avoided. No new Family to be
provided for. The indignity of a Repulse avoided. Suppose Scotland, and Ireland
be of another Opinion; the former of which has by Parliament asserted the Right
of Succession of that Crown, notwithstanding any Religion, etc. Lastly, all
occasions of Jealousy taken away. Objection, answered. Disadvantages that have
attended the laying by the Right Heir. Examples from old Rome; and Usurpations
at home. The Revolt from Rehoboam; our loss of France. With a conclusion from
the whole. More particularly, as it relates to his Royal Highness.

I Am fallen upon an Argument, of which, some may, I could not be content to do,
but I must over-do; and yet ( permissu Superiorum) I conceive, not: for besides
that my design in it is plain, and honest, as only tending to the continuance
of that peace, which, his Exclusion, may probably endanger; it is none of the
non disserenda, nor is there (that I know) any Law against it: And therefore, I
shall (without further Apology) put my self upon the favorable interpretation
of my Reader, as placing more assurance in the innocence of my own meaning,
than the most reserved caution, or wariness of words.

The end, to be considered in all things.
He that would hit the mark, must take his level before he part with his Arrow;
and he that would not be cheated, had need see the Scales tried, as well as
weigh the Commodity: In like manner, he that will give a true judgment of this
matter, must begin with the end, that by viewing the advantage, and
disadvantage of either hand, his judgment, and election, may be the more clear,
and the less apt to slide into error.

We Will take the case then as it has been of late, The advantage proposed in
Excluding his Royal Highness.
in relation to his Royal Highness the Duke of York: The People were upon a
pin, and nothing will satisfy them, but he must be Excluded, The advantage
proposed by it, not a little plausible; The security of the Protestant
Religion: and very well; Depositum custodi, was the advice of S. Paul to
Timothy, and it is a good account of a Steward, that he has lost nothing: But
here the question will arise, Whether the Protestant Religion, professed at
this time, in this Kingdom, may not be sufficiently secured against Popery,
albeit the right Heir should happen to be of that Persuasion himself. And (with
submission) I conceive it may: Wherein is at Act for security of Religion less
than a Bill of Exclusion.
for if such a person could be excluded, it must be done by Act of Parliament,
and if so, where lies the difference, that an Act of Parliament, for the
security of the now Established Religion, against any Popish Successor, may not
be of the same force as an Act of Parliament, for excluding him, in as much,
Object.
as the Authority is the same: to which, because I seem to hear some one, more
than whispering, that in the one case, he will not have the opportunity, in the
other he may: ^ol.
I answer, That it is morally impossible to introduce the Romish Religion into
this Kingdom, The moral Impossibility of introducing the Romish Religion, tho
the Prince were a Romanist himself.
albeit the Prince were of that Persuasion: for tho the Kingdom followed Edw.
6. his Reformation, and Queen Mary tackt them about to the Church of Rome; and
Queen Elizabeth bore up again for Edw. 6. yet it will not be the same at this
day; for as to Edw. 6. it was no great wonder that the Kingdom followed his
Reformation; for besides that, The reason why the Kingdom followed Edw. 6's
Reformation.
it was in the hurry of a Change, Henry 8. who, tho he forsook not the Church,
but Court of Rome, had yet shaken it out of its Authority, and by dispersing
the Abbey Lands, among such as helped him, put it out of a condition, of
recovering suddenly: And now, Religion being not the only question, who can tax
the Politics of that time, for not standing to the Pope, when by setting up
that Authority again, they must infallibly have hazarded, if not lost their new
interests? whereas by complying with the Reformation, they were certain of
keeping, what they had already, and in a fair way of getting more: And withal
considering, there were several Opinions, at that time boiling up, what mighty
matter was it to bring them to cry, Erravimus cum patribus nostris.

Queen Mary's going back.
And as to the Kingdoms tacking again with Queen Mary, that also is not so much
to be wondered at; for considering, that under Edw. 6. the Harvest was as yet
small, and the Laborers many; and those too not altogether knit, among
themselves; and that he lived not, long enough, to see the last stone laid; and
that the Queen coming in, so near after her Father, Henry 8. found ribs, and
planks enough of the old Ship, left, to patch up another, for the present
occasion, or till a better could be had: And the main obstacle, of securing the
Abbey Lands, in the hands of the Temporalty, S^at. 1.2. Ph. and Mary, c. 8.
as they lay then, dispersed among them, being first reconciled; no wonder (I
say) if the Kingdom footed it to the Queens measures, and that the note was
changed, to Super vias antiquas.

In like manner, Queen Eliz. return to it.
that the Kingdom followed Queen Elizabeth, in the Reformation, begun by her
Brother Edw. 6. it is not so strange; for considering also, how short a time
Queen Mary reigned; and (an inexcusable fault in Music) that she began a Note
too high, and by that means was forced to run it up, even to cracking the
strings; and that the Reformation had (by that time) gotten some face, and
credit in the world; and therefore, the violent Persecution of it (like Winds
to young Trees) not overthrowing it, had but fastened its Roots; and withal,
that such as had gotten any Church Lands, knew not what another Parliament
might do, or what flaws (in after times) might be found in the former; and that
the probable way, of making all sure, was to order it so, that it should not be
in the Popes power, to hurt them, if he would; neither here also was it a
wonder, that the Kingdom joined with Queen Elizabeth, and altered the Carol, to
a Canticum novum.

That the case cannot be the same at this day.
But the case will not be the same at this day, for besides, that we have the
Authority of a Church, confirmed by several Acts of Parliament, even the People
now, pronounce Schibboleth without lisping. Fox his Martyrs, are not yet
forgotten; and tho the Writ, De Haeretico combruendo, be taken away, the
crackling of the Faggots still rattle in their ears: Nor of less concern are
the Loaves, than the Doctrine; the Land on which the Faggots grew, than the
Faggots themselves: It is now 150 years since those Abbey Lands were given out,
and by this time, they are assimulated in Succum and Sanguinem; and the fear of
losing them, has begot more ill blood, than the first grant of them did good. I
have heard of one Impropriation, given back to the Church, but the Lands,
remain much as they were, tho not altogether in the same hands; they yield good
Rent, and many men are of Vespasian's mind, That all Gold, has the same scent.
Sell all thou have, and give it the poor, lost our Savior a Disciple; and
would be thought as hard a saying now: Men are loath to part with their Wedding
garment, especially, where it may so happen, to be the best to their backs. Add
to this, the vast improvements made upon them in so many years, and the several
exchanges, intanglements, and dispositions from hand to hand, that it would
puzzle, even the Church it self, to say, which were her Sons Coat; from whence,
I close this, That let the Rabbis talk what they will, John 11.48.
of Venient Romani, Nay, till they lay the way half plain before them, it will
be yet morally impossible for them, to take away, either our place, or Nation,
and much more to raise any superstructure of their own.

The Crown of England an old Entail.
Besides, the Crown of England, is an ancient old Entail, the Reversion, in Him,
by whom Kings Reign; and is it not reasonable, that he were first consulted,
before it be dockt? or admitting it were to be done, how are we sure, that he
that is to come after, shall always continue of the same opinion? or how are we
secure, he shall not be worse? The Spaniards have an excellent Proverb, Better
is the evil we know, than the good we do not know. Sana Corpora difficile
medicationes ferunt (says Hippocrates) it is better to make alterations, in
sick Bodies, Aphorism:
than sound: Twigs, and Saplings, may be easily bowed, or removed; but old
grown Trees, are not so safely ventured on: It Is the same in State: The danger
of Innovations.
Innovations and alterations, even in little things, are dangerous, for it
seems to acquaint the people, with the sweetness of a change, and that there
may be somewhat yet, still better, which (like our Philosophers of the Stone)
they had undoubtedly hit, but that something in it, unluckily miscarried.

Object. But such things have been done.
But, may some say, have not such things been done before? Was not Richard Duke
of York in Henry 6. 's time declared by Parliament, incapable of Succession?
(Nay, after he had been declared, Heir apparent) and was not Queen Mary, and
Queen Elizabeth, the same?

Sol.
I grant it; but it is ill arguing a facto, ad jus. That because such things have
been done, that therefore they may be done again. Examples must be judged by
Laws, and not Laws, ^o has a King been murdered.
by Examples. We have in our own times seen, A King murdered by his own
Subjects, and that too, under the specious pretenses of Religion, and Law;
Monarchy abolished; Allegiance made Rebellion; and Iniquity, established by a
Law: And is this an Argument (think ye) that the same things, may be yet
practiced?

To give it a more particular answer; More particularly answered in E. 4. Qu.
Mary, and Qu. Eliz. all excluded by Parliament, yet came to the Crown.
They were declared incapable of Succession: it is true, but not upon any
account of Religion, but interest, as the affairs of those times then stood:
but yet it is as true, that Edw. 4. Son of Richard Duke of York recovered the
Crown, notwithstanding the said Declaration; the only cause of the War, between
the Houses of York, and Lancaster, proceeding from the Right of one, and the
Possession of the other. In like manner Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, 28 H.
8. c. 7.
were both declared by Parliament, not inheritable, and excluded from all
Claim, or Demand to the Crown; and yet they both successively Reigned,
notwithstanding the said Temporary Disability; which (it seems) the accession
of the Crown, purged, as well as it has been said of an Attainder; and yet
their different Persuasions, diametrically opposite to each other.

No man changes but in hopes of better.

Jer. 2.11.


No man yet, ever changed his condition, but in hopes of bettering it: Has a
Nation changed their gods, which yet, are no Gods? (says Jeremiah, upbraiding
the ingratitude of the Jews) And therefore, a wise man begins from the end, and
first considers, whether that be adequate, to the hazard he runs. Touching the
security of Religion, I have already spoken; and next to the glory of God on
High, the chiefest end of Man, is peace on earth. The end of War is Triumph,
and the end of Triumph, Peace: The clashing of the Steel and Flint, wears out
one another, and brings forth nothing but Fire: whereas, Peace is the Balm,
that heals the Wounds, and the Cement, that fills up the Breaches of War. How
careful then ought we be, to avoid, even the beginnings of strife, which
Solomon aptly calls, Prove. 17.14.
the letting out of waters, and will of themselves, quickly wear the breach
wider. Upon which, it properly follows, that we weigh the advantages we have by
continuing as we are, and the disadvantages, or inconveniences, that have
followed such Exclusions. As to the former,

1. The continuance of a Succession in one descent, The advantages of
continuing as we are, Pretenders, barred.
and according to proximity of Blood, is a bar to Pretenders, and the ordinary
occasions of Mutiny, Competition, and Invasion, are thereby taken off: And to
this purpose Tacitus, Minoris discriminis est Principem nasci, Annal. 1.
quam sumi. It is less hazard, to have a Prince born to hand, than to be forced
to seek one; because Subjects more naturally submit to an undoubted,
unquestionable Title, and Enemies will not be so ready, to be fishing in clear
water. A third, never attempts the bone, till two are quarreling.

Disorders avoided.
2. We secure our selves against those disorders, which such a breach opens an
infallible entrance into, and gives Ambition, and Insolence, the reins at
large, which seldom stop, but multiply themselves, and the whole State, into
confusion; when after all, the best seldom carries the day, but the violent
takes it by force. Of which we need no further for instance, Vide Case of
Tanistry, in Sir J. Davis's Irish Reports, f. 29.
than the ancient Brahon Tanistry, before Hen. 2. his Conquest of Ireland.

3. It takes away the danger of having a new Family to provide for: Time was,
No new Family to be provided for.
the Empire could have spread her wings; but now, she has past so many hands,
and been so deplum'd upon every change, that she has almost lost all her best
Feathers, and kept little to her self, but the despair, of getting them back
again,

4. It avoids the indignity of a repulse. The indignity of a repulse, avoided.
Was ever Prince yet content, to see another sit on his Throne? Or did ever men
reckon the Sun the less, that it had suffered an Eclipse? No; mankind naturally
pities any thing in distress, and passionately crowd to the recovering beams.
In short, we picture Time, drawing Truth out of a Pit; and seldom find, Majesty
so sunk under water, but some, or other, have been ever buoying it up again.

Suppose Scotland and Ireland should be of another opinion.
5. There is a present Union, and Amity between these Kingdoms of England,
Scotland, and Ireland; and who knows, whether they may be of the same Opinion.
As to Ireland, it has been determined where it shall be bound, by an Act of
Parliament, made in England; howbeit there is a Gulf between us: But as to
Scotland, the Question was never yet put; not that I speak, as if the Kingdom
of Scotland, which never did, should now begin) to give England Law. No, nor
will I believe it ever thought -- however, were we at odds, Virgil.
-- Fas est, and ab host doceri. Which was the better Son, he that said he
would not go, but went, or he that said he would go, but went not? They have
Recognized, and Declared, Act of Scotland, for asserting the Succession of that
Crown, 1681.
That the Kings of that Realm (deriving their Royal Power from God alone) do
succeed thereto, according to the proximity of Blood. And that no difference in
Religion, nor any Law, nor Act of Parliament, made, or to be made, can alter or
divert, the right of Succession, and Lineal Descent of that Crown, to the
nearest, and lawful Heir, according to the degrees aforesaid. And that by
Writing, Speaking, or any other way, to endeavor the Alteration, Diversion,
Suspension, or debarring the same (by any Subjects of that Kingdom) shall be
High Treason. So now, if it should happen, that the Kingdom of England should
be of a contrary Opinion, must it not in all moral probability, open a gap to a
new breach, and thereby hazard the rending asunder those two Crowns in Blood;
the uniting of which, were so wisely designed by H. 7. and as happily took
effect in King James, without Blood; and what must the consequence of it be,
but that we once more fall to the old trade again. Ovid Met.
-- Furit omnis turba, suoque
Mart cadunt --
And when (perhaps) it shall be said of the Conqueror, as of Alexander (in his
Expedition against the Parthian) That he lost more by the War, than he got by
the Victory; whereas Prudence, in the Adventure, looks at the return, and in
the hazard, at the likelihood, and advantage, of the success.

All occasions of jealousy, taken off.
Lastly, We hereby take off all occasions of jealousy; to which, almost every
thing serves for Fuel, scarce any thing for Physic; it being but natural, That
he must fear many, whom many fear, how groundlesly soever.

But, may some say; Object.
Peace without safety is but a breathing, or bare Truce, at best. How can that
man sleep securely, over whose head, a drawn Sword hangs by a single Hair?

And who shall be Judge of that? Sol.
The Prince, whose safety depends on the love of his Subjects, and never Acts,
but by his Council; or the Multitude, who (besides that number, and Truth, are
seldom of the same side) never condsier what they do, or the true reason why it
happened, to be so hung? What causes that Thunder in the Clouds, but the cross
encounter of Fire and Water, mutually tending to their center of safety? And
while a people keep within their own Circle, what danger is there of a Prince's
breaking in upon them: Genesis 6.12.
God had looked upon the Earth, and pronounced it corrupt, before he sent a
Deluge among them, to cleanse it. In short, there is an old saying, Divide, and
impera; and I think, another, no ways inferior, Vis unita, fortior; I am sure
it is true in experience; he that would pluck off a Horses Tail, must do it,
hair by hair; and he that would shake a Faggot in pieces, must first pull out
some considerable Stick, or cut the Band.

Disadvantages that have attended the laying by the right Heir.
I come now, to the disadvantages, or inconveniences, that have attended the
laying by the right Heir. Revolts, Usurpation, and Exclusion differ in term and
sound, but are the same in effect, and (which they hold in common) never wanted
their Embroils: The revolt of the Ten Tribes from Rehoboam was the forerunner
of the Captivity; Revolt of the 10 Tribes.
for having drein'd and weakened themselves with intestine War, what wonder if
(like the Frog, and Mouse in the Fable) they became a prey to the next offerer?
The Senate of Rome excluded Nero, but mist their aim; for one part of the Army
set up Galba; another, Otho against him; a third, Vitellius against Otho; a
fourth, Vespasian against Vitellius; still bickering, and beating one another
to pieces, until Vespasian brought all into one hand again. Harold usurped on
Edgar Atheling, and what was the effect of it? but that it opened William the
Conqueror a passage to the Kingdom, and gave both encouragement, and success to
the enterprise. In like manner those more prosperous Usurpations of William
Rufus, and Henry the First, upon their elder Brother Robert. King Stephen, on
Maude the Daughter of Henry the First, and her Son (afterward) Henry the
Second. King John, on his Nephew Arthur. Henry the Fourth on Richard the
Second, and Richard the Third, on Edward the Fifth; were they not founded in
Blood, and defended with more? and therefore he that shall bring them in
precedent, had as good save a ramble abroad, and instance, At home.
in O. Cromwell at home. In short, the Exclusion of our King Edward the Third,
Son and Heir of Isabella, Daughter and Heiress of France (under pretense of a
Salique Law) occasioned the loss of their best men, Our loss of France.
and Kingdom also: and did not we half lose it again, on the same account, by
Henry 4. his Usurping on Richard 2? It is true, Henry 5. recovered it again,
but his Son Henry 6. almost as soon lost it, by the civil Broils between him,
and Richard Duke of York, (slain at Wakefield) which yet ended not, till his
Son Edw. 4. had recovered the Possession. And what fruit (I pray) did we reap
of those Wars? or rather, were they not such, as of which the Poet speaks?
Bella geri placuit, nullos habitura triumphos! Lucan.
How much better then is it, by learning from other men's harms, to keep the
beaten road, with safety, than upon every new notion, to entangle our selves in
those passes, wherein, so many before us, have lost their way. And especially,
having the light of an Act of Parliament, directing and telling us, 25 H. 8.22.
That the ambiguity of several Titles, pretended to the Crown, then not so
perfectly declared, but that men might expound them to every ones sinister
affection, and sense, contrary to the right legality of the Succession, and
Posterity of the Lawful Kings, and Emperors of this Realm, had been the cause
of that great effusion, and destruction of man's Blood: And what can any man
expect, but that the same cause will again produce the same effects; and the
like Asterism, the like Revolutions.

To draw toward an end: It is the advice of our Savior, Matthew. 7.12.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye, even so to them, for
this is the Law, and the Prophets. Would any one (think ye) submit, to be
brained by a Billet, albeit in amends it were said to his Heir, the like shall
never be done to your self? especially, when the same hand, that did the one,
cannot promise, for any that shall come after it: To one, Plutarch in vita
Lycur.
praying Lycurgus, to settle a popular State in Lacedaemon, that the basest
might have the same Authority, as the highest: Begin (quoth he) to do it it, in
thy own house, first: I know not of what Spirit other men are, but if there be
such a one to be found, let him throw the first stone. And yet who knows, but
there may be somewhat more than we see? Is there no old grudg? No -- Manet alta
mente repostum? No -- Spreti injuria? Is it all pure Religion, and undefiled:
All dry, downright conscience? No biass? No interest? No self in the case?
it is very well: John 12.6.
Judas made a charitable motion for the Poor, yet it might have seemed better,
had he not carried the Bag, tho he headed no Party.

In short: Commines says, He is to be esteemed a good Prince, whose Virtues
are not over-ballanc'd by his Vices: And the Persians never condemned any man
(tho convicted) till his former life, had been weighed by the same Balance,
and found wanting. To apply it: I skill not to flatter, even the dead; and yet
a moral justice is due to the living: or, our Savior had never said, Luke 10.7.
The laborer is worthy of his hire; and Solomon, Prove. 3.27.
Withhold it not. Is not his Royal Highness the Son of that King, whom our late
Parliaments have so often declared a Martyr? and the only Brother (and as yet,
indisputable Heir) of this King, who has forgiven so much, and (to speak once
for all) Crimes greater than every thing, but the mercy that forgave them? And
what could the world have designed him more, than what the eepectation of his
mighty Birth must (by course of Nature) have given him? Even the new phrase,
acknowledges it; The Presumptive Heir of three Imperial Crowns: and yet during
the Banishment of the Royal Family, who served with more Courage Abroad? And
since their happy Restoration, what Private Person made more Honorable Hazards
at Home? When yet he had many things to fear, and nothing to desire, but the
Peace and Honor of the Kingdom: I need not far for instance, of what meets us
every where: Witness for all, Lord Chancellors Speech to the Parliament at
Oxon, 10. October. 65.
that memorable 3. of June, 1665. in which great Action (with the loss of one
single Ship) he destroyed and took 18 of the Dutch Ships of War, whereof half,
were the best they had; and touching which, a late learned Judge of the Kingdom
of Ireland, thus Epigrammatically accosted his Majesty: Ad Regem, etc.
Oliver Jones Esquire second Justice of his Majesty's chief place in Ireland.
Subdidit Arctoum tribus olim classibus aequor
Edgarus? At vestrae pars quota laudis erit!
Obsessum Maris Imperium, felicior armis,
Asseris, and Batavas conteris (ultor) opes.
Euge! triumphato da jura perennia Ponto:
Jam scit cui Domino pareat unda Maris.
And must he after all this be smothered in his own Perfumes? Must those
Glories he reapt from the Enemy, serve him only as so many Garlands to a
destined Sacrifice? And because he has deserved too much, will nothing but an
Ostracism pay off his Debentures? Let every man lay his hand on his breast, and
once more make the case his own; and then, I doubt not, but he will walk up to
the thing he startled at, and by giving himself a distinct view of what
(before) frightened, be the more easily persuaded into his senses, and shame
his fear: And I press it the rather, in that his Royal Highness (I have it from
a Noble hand, of too much Honor to falsify) has so often declared, That were
it in his power to effect it, he would rather cut off his Arm, than make the
least alteration in the Religion, or Law of the Kingdom, as it is now
established: And if Truth be sacred with private men, how much more must it be
with a Prince? when, whoever wounds it, to save himself, does but take a blow
on his head, to save his hilt.

To draw to an end; Has any man for companies sake been persuaded out of his
way, what dishonor is it if he comply with the advice of the Angel to Hagar,
Genesis 16.9.
Return, and submit; or that other of our Savior to the Lawyer tempting him,
Luke 10.37.
Go, and do thou likewise: and then he will the more unbiastly determine,
whether Religion, or Monarchy, be the point in question, and what these
murmurings against the Heir mean, if they carry not under 'em, a design on the
Inheritance: for, let the pretenses be what other they please, even the best
Virtues may be suspected, when they become ostentations; and therefore, when
men shall mask their Conspiracies with the name of Public Good; pretend
Conscience, against Duty; love to their Country, whereby to chalk a way to
their own Ambition; zeal to Religion, to cover their own wildfire, they may (I
say) be suspected, as made use of, rather to purchase a Principality on Earth,
than the Kingdom of Heaven; in as much as such courses, have been ever
condemned, by the same Religion they would pretend to defend.

Upon the whole matter: What the pretenses of the late times ended in, we have
most of us seen, and what influence they yet held on our own, we had ere this
felt, had not God been more merciful, in the discovery of the late horrid
Association, and Conspiracy, against the lives of his Sacred Majesty, and his
Royal Brother: Who would not swear they were of the same batch? for they agreed
in substance, however otherwise, they might differ in circumstance: both (like
Sampson's Foxes) were set upon destruction, tho they drew the firebrarnds a
contrary way. Those of 1641. did their work by degrees, Nemo repent fuit
turpissimus -- One Party, murdered our late Sovereign, as a King, before the
other, murdered him, as a man; tho each yet, as deep in the guilt, as the other;
for, Qui vult media ad finem, vult etiam, and ipsum finem; He that wills the
means con^^ucing to the end, wills also the end it self: These of this present,
have seen that error, and thus far repented it to his Son, That they laid the
Ax to the root of the Tree, and took up the advice of Abishai to David (when
they had found Saul sleeping. 1 Samuel 26.^.
) Let me smite him even to the earth at once, and I will not smite him the
second time: But, God has been once more seen in the Mountain; They are sunk in
the Pit they made, in the Net which they hid, is their own foot taken: And
therefore, to the numerous congratulations on this happy delivery, I Will close
all with that of Barclay, (...). l. 3.
Vicimus O tandem non inaudita piorum
Vota Deis! Nunc, alma salus, nunc, secula curat
Jupiter: Omnis Io superum domus! omnis honores
Ara ferat; nullaeque vacent a front Coronae.
Which I have thus adventured to Translate, as more agreeable to the present
sense, than any useless dwelling on the Letter: We have overcome! nor were our
Prayers in vain;
We Are once more safe; and Heaven, proves Heaven again:
Your Organ Temples! Deck your Altars round!
Hallow the Threshold! Let the Posts be Crowned!


FINIS.

