A True Copy of a Paper written by Capt. Tho. Walcott in Newgate, after his
Condemnation, and delivered to his Son, immediately before his Execution.
AS to my Religion, I Believe in Three Persons, and but one God, (Viz.) Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, I Expect and Hope to be Saved by the Merits and
Righteousness of Jesus Christ, without the Hope of any Advantage by any Merits
or Righteousness of my own; and I Believe that the Scriptures of the Old and
New Testament, are and ought to be the Rule of my Faith, and their Direction
the Method of my Worship of God, that no Council, Conclave of Cardinals, or
Power upon Earth whatsoever, has any Authority to set up the Precepts of Men
and their Traditions, and to make them of equal Validity and Authority with the
Scripture, and Word of God. That they were not writ according to the Will of
Man, but Holy Men of God writ them as they were Inspired by the Holy Ghost. I
Believe that as Christ is the Head of his Church, so he is their Lawgiver: It
was not because the Jews rejected Christ and Crucified him, that he rejected
them, but because they rejected the Gospel, as appears by the Three Thousand
that God by Peter Converted at one Sermon, who were pricked in their Hearts,
convinced in their Consciences of their great Guilt in Crucifying the Lord of
Life, insomuch that they Cry out, Men and Brethren what shall we do, and that
daily they were added to the Church. Christ says, If he had not Come and
Spoken to them, they had not had Sin. It is a dreadful thing to reject the
Gospel, by reason thereof the Jews saw not the things that belonged to their
Peace, until they were hid from their Eyes. And it is as dreadful a thing to
Continue in a Sinful Course of Life; until the Lord wholly withdraw his
Spirit, who has said that his Spirit shall not always st^i^e with Man, and
that it is not every one that Cries Lord! Lord! shall Enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven.

Then I d^^i^^ Leave to speak a word as to my Death and the Occasion of it, the
wages of Sin is Death; had not Adam Sinned, he and his Posterity had no^ Dyed.
It is also said to be the King of Terrors. But it is only so to those that ar^
Terr^ved with a Tetrifying Conscience, that have the Arrows of the Almig^^y
sti^king in them, powerful Convictions of their Evils, but see no Hopes, nor
have any Assurance of Pardon. Christ takes away the Terror and Horror of
Conscience for the Guilt of Sin, from those that are his; he has overcome
Death for them, and will overcome it in them. And to those whom the Sting of
Death is taken away by Christ, it is no difficult task to Dye, for they are with
St. Paul, able to say, To Live is Christ, but to Dye is Gain, they have not
only got unto Christ, but into Christ, and so come to have Communion and
Fellowship with the Father, and the Son. Except we be in Christ as the Branch
is in the Vine, we are not Christians indeed, nor are we able to Believe a
Right, we may get the Notions of the Promisei of the Gospel into our Heads, but
witout the Spirit of God applies them to our Hearts, we cannot Believe aright:
And this was the Case of poor Francis Spira. Christ says, he that Believes in
him, though he were Dead, yet shall he Live. And that whosoever Lives and
Believes im him, he shall never Dye. So that Death is no such Terrifying Thing
to those that Christ will make it Easy to, but ever remember Faith is the Gift
of God.

Then as to the present Occasion of my Death, I cannot blame the Judges, and
Jury, nor the King's Counsel, I can only blame some Men that were much Guiltier
than I, who Combined together to Swear me out of my Life, thereby to Save their
own; and that they might do it effectually, Contrive an Untruth, Affirming that
I made it a Scruple of Conscience to have a Hand in Killing of the King, or to
Imbrue my Hands in his Blood; But was so Generous as to Undertake the Charging
of the Guards, whilst another did it, and to the end another might do it. Now I
Appeal to all that know me, how probable this is, add whether they believe me
so very a Sot, that I should not understand, that Engaging with the Guards to
prevent their Preserving the King, were the same thing as if I had Killed
Himself. But however, by their Swearing against me, they have Secured their own
Lives and Estates, so that my Blood is the Price of theirs.

I Confess I was so Unfortunate and Unhappy, as to be Envited by Colonel John
Rumsey, one of the Witnesses against me, to some Meetings, were some things
were Discoursed in order to the Asserting our Liberties and Properties as
English Men, which were looked upon to be Violated and Invaded. But it was he
and Mr. West were the great Promoters of those Meetings, and had them before I
camn into England: Mt. West when I lay Sick of the Gout, and could not go to
themt would frequently Visit me, and still his Discourse would be of Lopping
the Two Sparks, meaning the King and the Duke, and propose that by all means
they should be Killed at a Playhouse, and then he said they would Dye in their
Calling. He bought Arms to do it with, without any Direction, Knowledae or
Privity of mine. He was most impatiently Eager of having it done, but more
especially at a Playhouse. I never saw the Arms, nor the Men that were to do
it, though they said they had Fifty Men in a readiness to that end, I told them
the Killing of the King would carry such a blemish and stain with it, as would
descend to Posterity. That I had Eight Children. That I was not willing they
should be blemished with it, and withal, That I was Confident, whoever did it,
the Duke of Monmouth would Punish them for it, if it were but to Vindicate
himself from having any hand in it. And now I desire to forgive all the World,
and that from the very bottom of my Heart. even Mr. Tho. Shepherd that
Betrayed me, and the Gentlemen that were Witnesses against me, but withal do
most earnestly desire there may be some Remarks set upon them, and that it may
be observed whether their End is Peace, and that they Dye the Common Death of
all Men. For Perjury is certainly a very great and crying Sin, not that I say
they were Perjured in every thing, nor do I believe Mr. Shepherd intended what
he has done, when he Envited Mr. Ferguson out of Holland, who possibly might
have waid there until now, had not he importuned him to come into England, in
order to his being Engaged and Concerned in the Work which he Transacted in
London, and was chiefly about ever since his return, and that by Mr. Shepherd's
Approbation, Assistance, Contrivance and Allowance. He likewise daclared in
the presence of several, that he did not know of any one of the English in
Ireland, Concerned in any Plot or Design against the King.

In the last place I desire Leave to give my Friends one word of Advice, which
has been often given me, though I have not been so happy as to take, and that
is never to hear any man speak that that yoe would not have repeated, for there
is no Faith in Man, to Man whatever there is in Man, to God, either the Tears
of a Wife, or the Concern of a Family of little helpless Children, or something
or other will tempt and provoke Men to betray one another. When God has a Work
to do, he will not want Instruments, for he can make them, neither will he want
a way to do it in. And now I most heartily desire, and my Prayers to the
Almighty is, That this may be the last Blood spilt upon this Account.

I know Acts of Indulgenee and Mercy in the King would make him sit much easier
in his Government, and cause his Subject to sit much easier under it. And that
the Lord may incline his Heart to Mercy, ought to be the Prayer of every good
Man, I presume most men know what has happened, and what has been the
Occasion of our present Calamities, what the Provocations of one hand were, or
the Necessities and Sufferings of the other, I will not intermeddle with,
resolving to use my utmost endeavor to make my Peace and Reconciliation with
my God, that it is impossible for me to make with Men; And to make it my hearty
Prayer to that Great God, before whom I helieve I shall in a little time
appear, that H^ will stanch, stanch Lord this Issue of Blood, and find out some
other way to Preserve these Kingdoms in Unity and Peace, to the Honor and
Glory of his Great Name, and to the Eternal Comfort of his poor People. Amen,
Amen.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Goodwin, at the Maidenhead against St. Dunstan's
Church in Fleet Street. 1683.


