Cultus Evangelicus: Or, a brief DISCOURSE Concerning the SPIRITUALITY AND
SIMPLICITY OF New Testament WORSHIP.

Whit. op. t. 1. l. 9. cont. Dur. de Sophism. p. 226. Itaque nunc ut vides non
tantum Judaicae ceremoniae, quas ipse Deus praescripsit, sed alias etiam
universas, quas homo quisquam tradidit, and docuit, guales vestrae omnes sunt,
apertissime prohibentur.

LONDON, Printed for Eliz. Calvert at the Sign of the black spread Eagle in
Duck-Lane, 1667.

Cultus Evangelicus: OR, NEW TESTAMENT WORSHIP.
JOH. 4. 23, 24. But the hour comes and now is, when the true Worshippers
shall Worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeks such to
worship him. God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in
spirit and in truth.
IN the former. part of this Chapter we have the famous dialogue that passed
betwixt the Lord Jesus, and the Woman of Samaria, the occasion whereof was
this. Our blessed Savior did with unwearied care and industry lay out himself
for the gaining and winning of souls, and the bringing of them to the obedience
of his Father. He sought not so much how to make himself great, as how to make
others good. He made it his business to rescue the poor sapsed and degenerated
sons of men out of the paws of Satan, whom he saw hurrying them away toward
destruction: and reduce them into a state of peace and safety. And though he
met with great opposition herein (the dragon and his angels, Rev. 12. 7.
with united force, and inflamed rage banding against him) yet, as was
foretold, Isa. 53. 10, 11.
the pleasure of the Lord did prosper in his hand; and he saw of the travel of
his soul; Mat. 4. 25.
the people following him in great multitudes from Galilee, and from Decapolis,
and from Jerusalem, and from Judaea, and from beyond Jordan, admiring his
wisdom, and speaking well of his name. Which the envious Pharisees (that
viperous brood, Mat. 3. 7.
impatient of whatever tended to the Eclipsing of their own authority, and
esteem) taking notice of, laid their heads together against him: and without
having any respect to the divine Majesty that shone in his countenance, the
innocence of his person, holiness of his life, or eminency of his works,
consulted how they might destroy him. Such was their prodigious unthankfulness,
and unworthiness, that the more love he manifested to them, the more hatred
they showed to him. The more he appeared for them, the more they appeared
against him. The more he labored to save them, the more they labored to slay
him; thereby giving him occasion to complain of them, as David once did of his
enemies, they rewarded me evil for good. Psalm. 35. 12.
And he being aware of their bloody design, departs from amongst them; and
being on his way, he comes to Sychar a City of Samaria (it is the same with
that Shechem, and Sichem so often mentioned in the Old Testament, where
Joshuah, Josh. 24. 1.
and Eleazar the High Priest held the first Council for the abolishing of
strange Worship) and so he leaves the proud, self-admiring Pharisees that dealt
so unworthily with him, and goes and opens the treasures of grace and love to
the despised Samaritans: thereby verifying that sacred Oracle, Mat. 11. 25
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto babes.

Now at this Sychar, to which our Savior came, there was a Well called Jacobs
Well. For, we read in the history of the Patriarchs, that when Jacob came to
Shalem a City of Shechem, Genesis 33. 18.
he bought a parcel of Land, of the Children of Hamor and there erected an
Altar: and then (in all probability) made this well, which continued till our
Saviors time, being called by the name of Jacobs Well. Consentaneum vero cum
eo loci habitarit etiam plures puteos fodisse, In loc.
Contzen the Jesuit thinks that when Jacob was at this place, he did not only
make this, but many Wells. Whether this be true or no, does not appear, but
this is evident, that if when he was at this place, he made many Wells, either
this only of them all remained till our Saviors time, or else was in a way of
peculiar eminency, called Jacobs Well.

It was about the sixth hour, that is, about Noon, when our Savior came to
this Well. He was weary with his tedious Journey, which had lasted him, as may
be computed, two or three days, and here he sits down to rest him and refresh
him. And the Disciples being gone into the City for provision, he continues
there alone. Presently there comes a Woman of Samaria to draw Water: and he
being willing to make use of all occasions of doing good, enters into discourse
with her; which continued so long, till she perceived there was more than
ordinary worth in him; till she saw he was a Prophet. And having such an
opportunity, she presently starts that great question so much controverted
betwixt the Jews and Samaritans about the place of Worship. Whether she did it
out of Womanish loquacity, or to pass away the time, or to satisfy conscience,
appears not, but this is evident, that she did it.

Now the Question it self was this; Whether Garizim where the Samaritans
Sacrificed, or Jerusalem where the Jews Sacrificed, were the true place of
Worship? On the one hand, Joseph Antiq. Judaic. l. 11. c. 8. Graecol. p. 382.
the Samaritans held, that Garizim was it; on the other hand, the Jews held,
that Jerusalem was it. The occasion of this difference (as diverse authors show)
happened thus. The Samaritans were the offspring of those Nations, Epiphan. t.
t. l. 1. haeres. 14. p. 30. Ed. Paris.
whom Salmanazar King of Assyria, placed in the Cities of Samaria, after he had
carried the ten Tribes captive; and at their coming thither, being Pagans, they
worshipped not the God of Israel, Cunaeus de Rep. Hebr. l. 2. c. 16. p. (mihi)
208. 2 Kings 17. 25.
but the gods of the Nations from whence they came. Hereupon, the Lord provoked
with their Idolatry, sends Lions amongst them, which molested and slew them.
And they apprehending it to be, because they worshipped not the God of the
land, they sent to the King of Assyria, and informed him how things stood. Upon
that, he sends them one of the captive Priests, who came and taught them how
they should fear the Lord; and so, to make sure work, they worshipped both the
God of Israel, and their own God too. And thus it continued t^ll toward the
end of the Persian Monarchy; at which time Manasses brother to Jaddus the High
priest of those Jews that were returned from Babylon, did contrary to the Law
of Moses, Deuteronomy. 7. 3.
which forbad contracting of Matrimony with the foreign Nations, Marry Nicazo
daughter to Sanballat the Horonite, then governor of Samaria; for which fact
Jaddus his brother and the other Jews, were exceedingly incensed against him,
and expelled him from Jerusalem. Upon this, he betakes himself to Sanballat his
Father-in-law, who courteously entertains him; and not only so, but upon
Alexander's the Great; overcoming the Persians, he obtains leave of him to
build a Temple at Garizim, and there he places this Manasses his Son-in-law, to
perform the Office of High Priest. Now this was very injurious to the Jews and
begat great confusion. For, if any had eaten unlawful meats, trangressed the
Sabbath, married strange Wives, or the like, and were censured and ejected as
unclean by the Jews, they could presently run to Samaria, and there be
received. And this produced a woeful, and irreconcilable schism betwixt those
two people, insomuch that they lived in perpetual discord. The hatred betwixt
them was so great, that they held it unlawful to eat or drink with one another.
Vid. Seldom de Iure Not. l. 2 c. 5. p. 177. Ed. Nov. Joh. 4. 9.
Hence that saying of this Woman to our Savior, How is it that thou being a
Jew, ask drink of me, which am a Woman of Samaria? Nay such was the hatred
of the Jews to the Samaritans, that though they granted leave to all Nations in
the World, to become Proselytes to their religion, yet would they not grant it
to them. Witness that solemn form of excommunication, termed excommunicatio in
secreto nominis tetragrammati, said to be uttered against them by Ezra, and
Nehemiah. They assembled the whole Congregation (says my Author) into the
Temple of the Lord, and brought 300 Priests, Drusius de trib. sectis l. 3. c.
11. p. 135.
300 Trumpets, and 300 books of the Law, with as many boys. And when they
sounded their Trumpets, and the Levites sang, they cursed the Samaritans by all
the sorts of excommunication, in the mystery of the name Jehovah, and in the
Decalogue, and with the curse both of the inferior and superior house of
judgment, that no Israelite should eat the bread of a Samaritan (whence they
say, he who eats bread of a Samaritan, is as he who eats Swines flesh) and
let no Samaritan be a proselyte in Israel, neither let them have any part in
the resurrection of the dead.

And as the Jews did thus prosecute their cause against the Samaritans with
much heat and confidence, so likewise did the Samaritans theirs, against them.
Though they had the worse of it, yet were they no less peremptory, and steadfast
in their way than the former, being ready upon all occasions to maintain their
opinion and dispute for it. Witness the carriage of the Woman in this place:
she does not barely propound the question to our Savior, and then wait to hear
how he would determine it, but stands up and reasons with him about it. Our
Fathers (says she) worshipped in this Mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem
is the place where men ought to Worship. Now our Savior in answer to this
great question, and for the composing of this long difference of no less than
400 years continuance, tells her, that the time was approaching wherein the
Worship of God should be confined neither to Garizim nor Jerusalem; yet by the
way lets her know, there was a great deal of difference betwixt the Worship of
the Samaritans and the Jews: Ye Worship (says he) ye know not what, we know
what we Worship. There was no comparison betwixt the Worship of the Samaritans
and the Jews. The Jews might miss it in the manner of their Worship, but the
Samaritans did not only miss it in that, but likewise in the object of it, for
they worshipped they knew not what. But in opposition both to the Worship of
the Samaritans and the Jews, he tells her, that the hour comes and now is,
when the true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in spirit and in truth, etc.
Which words imply as much as if he had said; the question which thou now
propoundest to me, and has been disputed so long, with so much heat amongst
you, is now of small moment; for God is about not only to alter the place but
the manner of his Worship.

As he will not have his Worship limited either to Garizim or Jerusalem, so
neither will he have it limited to the mode either of the one place or the
other, but will be worshipped after another manner: and the manner wherein he
will be Worshipped is spiritual and simple; they that Worship him, must Worship
him in spirit and in truth.

And thus I have, with what brevity I could conveniently, led you down to the
words of the Text, and given you an account of the author, and occasion of
them. To make any Analysis or division of them is needless, and* therefore
without any further stay, I shall draw from them this point; Doct.
That it is the duty of the sons of men in these days of the Gospel to Worship
God in spirit and in truth. Though all Christians, nay all Nations agree that
there is a God, and that he is to be Worshipped, yet they do not agree about
the manner of it. Some will have him to be Worshipped one way, and some
another, according as their light and principles lead them. Some will have him
to be Worshipped immediately, others mediately or remotely. Some, with slaying
of beasts, and bloody sacrifices; others, in a spiritual and simple manner,
without any such ado. Some, in the use of external rites and shadows; others
without them. Now our Savior, who came from his Fathers bosom, and most
perfectly understood his will, undertakes the determining of this controversy,
and shows after what manner he would have men to Worship him, They that Worship
(says he) must Worship him in spirit and in truth.

The point lies so visibly in the Text, that I need not send you to other
places of Scripture, to show you the truth of it, and therefore, I shall not
spend time in that. The Method I shall observe in prosecuting it, is this. 1. I
shall show what is meant by Worship. 2. What, by spirit. 3. What, by truth. 4.
The reasons of both branches, that is to say, wherefore, we must worship God in
spirit, and wherefore, in truth. 5. I shall lay down one or two cautions. And
6. come to the Uses; all which I shall dispatch with plainness and brevity.

1. I shall show what is meant by Worship. The word in the Original is (...),
(...) est more catellorum ad pedes alicujus tanquam domini totum se prosternere
subjectionis gratia. Vol. 2. de Secund. praecept. p. 567. Genesis 17. 3. Ruth. 2.
^^. Simplex (...). ex (...) osculari significat, amo^is aut hono is causa.
Exerc. in Genesis 33. 3. Job. 31. 27, 28.
concerning the extraction, and derivation whereof the Etymologists are not
agreed. Zanchy thinks it is derived of (...), which signifies a Dog, and that it
is a Metaphor taken from spaniels, that use in subjection to their masters, to
couch upon the ground before them. And that which renders it somewhat more
probable, is, that the Hebrew Words (...) and (...) which signify to worship,
do also signify to fall down, or lie prostrate; as also that the Jews both in
their civil and religious worship used to do so. However, others are against
this derivation, and assign another. Rivet thinks it is derived of (...), which
signifies to kiss; and that which renders this more probable, is that kissing
has been a very ancient symbol of adoration. Witness that of Job, If my mouth
(says he) has kissed my hand, this were an iniquity to be punished by the
judge, for I should have denied the God that is above. A bare kissing the hand
he cannot mean, for that we may reckon amongst those actions that are
indifferent, neither good nor bad; but he means such a kissing of the hand, as
was a ceremony belonging to idolatrous worship. Solent cultores solis and luna
hac ceremonia etc. in loc.
The Heathenish Nations (as Estius observes) Worshipped the Sun and Moon; and
when they saw either of them clearly shining forth, they stretched out their
hands toward them, and then laid them upon their mouths and kissed them:
thereby signifying that if they could have got to them, they would have kissed
them, as they did their hands. Their manner was, that if they could have access
to their idols, they kissed them; if not, they kissed their hands in token of
worshipful reverence toward them. So that Job, by these words intimates thus
much: that, if he had done as his Heathenish Neighbors did; if he had
relinquished the true God, and played the Idolater, as they did, then he had
deserved punishment indeed. And in other places of Scripture we find
Worshipping set forth by the same phrase. God tells the Prophet Elijah, who
thought himself alone, 1 Kings 19. 18.
the only true worshipper, that he had seven thousand that had not bowed unto,
nor kissed Baal. Hos. 13 2.
And the Prophet Hosea, complaining of the wickedness of the Israelites,
amongst other things that he charges them with, this is one, that they said Let
the men that sacrifice kiss the Calves. Whereby it appears, that this
heathenish Ceremony did not keep it self among the barbarous Nations, where it
was hatched, but crept amongst the Israelites with whom it sound too much
entertainment. And the same Rivet, thinks David alludes to this custom, Non
persuadet vir doctus, etc. Exercit. in Genesis 41. 40.
when he says, He means Drusius who thought otherwise. Psalm. 2. 12.
Kiss the Son lest he be angry. Notwithstanding this, that (...) which is used
to denote worship, is derived from (...), is more than I dare affirm. In the
derivations of words, though sometimes the descent be obvious, and afford
light, yet many times it is very obscure and uncertain; and in such cases we
must be cautious, what stress we lay on them. Whether this (...) come from
(...) or (...), I leave to every one to judge: there be learned men on both
sides.

Let us now from the Name, pass to the thing denoted by it. The worship set
forth by this (...), is twofold: it is either civil or religious. Civil worship
is reverent behavior toward men, whereby we testify our respect to them,
proportionably to the eminency we behold in them. Though I call it civil, yet I
do not so speak, Honor omnis qui a religione imperatur, aut religione suadente
exhibetur alicui, dictur, aliquando religiosus. Amesius de Consc. l. 4. c. 1.
p. 161.
as if I thought it not at all religious, (for (as a judicious author well
observes) it is commanded by God who is the author of religion, and it has
some analogy with the worship which is more properly religious) but for that
the object (from which acts do usually receive their names) is civil. But to go
on; the respect testified by this kind of worship, is commonly expressed in the
incurvation or bowing of the body. So Abraham, upon his meeting the three
Angels, bowed himself toward the ground. And upon his treating with the
children of Heth, about a burial place for his wife he bows himself to them.
Genesis 18. 2* 23. 7.
The word used in both places by the Septuagint is the same with this in the
Text. What we use to say of grace in reference to Nature, that it does not
destroy but rectify it, the like we may say of it in reference to civility: it
does not destroy it in men, but rectify and regulate it; teaching them to whom
to show it, in what manner, and in what degree. It is so far from being an
enemy to civility, that it greatly promotes it; it subdues the Nabalism and
churlishness of men's natures, takes away the gall and bitterness of them, and
makes them kind and pleasing. Turn over the histories of all Nations and ages,
and you shall not meet with any persons, of more condiscending, obliging, sweet
deportment, than such as have been most eminent for grace and holiness. Witness
Abraham in this place; he was a great Lord, and a mighty Prince, and yet how
submissively and courteously does he carry himself to these children of Heth,
who were his inferiors in many respects? This being so, what shall we think of
a generation of men amongst us, that having renounced, and as it were,
protested against the common tokens of civility, carry themselves before
Magistrates and others to whom they owe obeisance, like a company of barbarians
that never knew what civility meant, making a conscience of putting off the
hat, calling a man master, and the like? But no marvel; for if it be religion
that teaches men manners, as certainly it is, we may not wonder that having
laid aside religion, they have also laid aside their manners. This is civil
worship; but it is not this kind of worship the Text speaks of, and therefore I
shall say no more of that.

Religious worship is devout behavior toward God, whereby we acknowledge his
Sovereignty over us, and the dueness of our obedience to him, appearing before
him, and waiting upon him, in the way he has appointed in his Word. This David
speaks of when he says, O come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel
before the Lord our Maker. Psalm. 95. 6.
And this our Savior speaks of when he says, they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit and in truth. Now this worship belongs not to either
Angels or Saints, their images, relics, or any such thing, but to the Lord
only, whose it is, and from whom we may not alienate it. Hence that of our
Savior in another place, Mat. 4. 10.
thou shall (...). Orat. 3. Cont. Arian* Index expurg. Sandoval. in Athanas.
Class. 2. Cultus qui Deo debetur, eam debet habere rationem ut non modo gradu
sed specie etiam, ab omni alio cultu diversus sit. Camero in Heb. 1. 6. p. 381.
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. He speaks not of a
civil worship, or reverence, for therewith we both may and ought to serve
others, but of a religious worship or reverence, which God has reserved as a
prerogative peculiar to himself. Agreeable hereunto is that of Athanasius, God
alone is to be worshipped. Which words are so point blank against the
proceedings of the Papists, that their inquisition at Madrid lighting on them
in one of his Index's, expunged and put them out. Religious worship is of a far
other nature than civil is; it differs from it, not only gradually, as the
reverence we give to the King differs from that we give to one of his judges,
or Ministers of state, but specifically or in kind. As all acts are to be
suited to, so they are to be denominated from their objects, and to bear
appellations and titles agreeable to them. Now the objects of these two sorts
of worship differ as much as may be. Tantum distat veneratio sacra and civilis
a religiosa non gradu tantummodo sed and speci^, imo plusquam specie. Mede de
venerat. Sacra. cap. 1. p. 43. Vid. etiam Cham. Ep. Jes. p. 32. ad Co^on.
The object of the one, is the Creature, the object of the other, is the
Creator. The object of the one, is humane and finite, the object of the other,
is divine and infinite. And the worship we give them must be answerable. When
we worship the creature, we must do it, with apprehensions and affections
becoming the creature; and when we worship the Creator, we must do it with
apprehensions, and affections becoming the Creator. When we appear before men
and do reverence to them, we must do it with apprehensions of eminency, but
such as is created, imperfect, and finite; but when we appear before God, and
do reverence to him, we must do it with apprehensions of eminency, and that,
such as is uncreated, perfect, and infinite. There are two dangerous rocks, we
are apt to dash our selves upon; the one is, the ascribing to the creature the
perfections of God, by conceiving of him and carrying our selves toward him as
God; and the other is, the ascribing to God the imperfections of the creature,
conceiving of him and carrying our selves toward him as a creature. Now to
give to the creature the Prerogative of God, and to charge upon God the defects
of the creature, are equally absurd and dangerous. It must therefore be our
care that our worship be suitable to the object to which it is tendered. That
is fit for the Creator that is not fit for the creature; and that is fit for
the creature, that is not fit for the Creator. In our worshipping the creature
we must take heed of going too far; and in our worshipping the Creator, we must
take heed of falling short. As God would not have us give to him the honor he
has allowed the creature, so neither will he have us to give the creature that
honor he has reserved for himself; but we must give unto Caesar, the things
that are Caesar's, Matthew. 22. 21.
and unto God the things that are Gods. If we neglect to worship man, we offer
violence to the commandments of the second table; if God, then we offer
violence to the commandments of the first. To worship God and not man is to
overthrow that beautiful and comely order he has established in the world; and
to worship man and not God is to deny him that natural right that belongs to
him, and prefer his own creature before him, which must needs be a sin of a
very heinous nature. We must see therefore, that we worship both man and God:
man with the worshhip belonging to him, and God with the worship belonging to
him; which what it is more particularly, is the next thing I am to speak of.

2. I am to show what is meant by worshipping God in spirit. For the better
understanding whereof, let us first enquire what is meant by the simple term,
spirit. For, if it be a true rule, that the way to find out the meaning of a
complex term is first to take it asunder, and seek out the meaning of the
simple terms included in it, then the way to find out the meaning of the
worshipping God in spirit, is first to take the clause asunder, and seek out
the meaning of the simple term, spirit. We cannot tell what is meant by
worshipping God in spirit, till we have first found out what is meant by spirit,
and when we know that, we may easily know the other. Now the word (...) or
spirit is (...), a word of various significations, too many here to be reckoned
up. It is a word that the holy Ghost has made use of to express the highest
and eminentest beings in the world. There is not any intelligent being
whatsoever, but it is applied to it. John 4. 24.
Sometimes its spoken of God, considered both essentially and personally. Romans
8. 11.
Sometimes of angels both good and bad. Heb. 1. 14.
Sometimes of the soul of man, 1 Kings 22. 21.
and that not only vital but rational, Luke 8. 55.
as it comprehends the understanding, Eccl. 12 7.
conscience, heart, will, affections, and all the powers thereof. And in this
last sense, that is, as it is put for the reasonable soul, it uses to be taken
when it is mentioned with the service and duty that we owe to God. Though the
sacred Penmen put it for several things, yet when they join it with our duty
to God, they mean by it the reasonable soul, which as it is the interior, so
it is the superior, nobler, and better part of man, whereby only he is capable
of knowing God, understanding his will, and doing him service. Witness these
passages; God is my witness whom I serve with my spirit. And, Romans 1. 9.
I will pray with the spirit. 1 Cor. 14. 15.
And, Ephesians. 6. 18.
praying always, with all prayer, and supplication in the spirit. And so our
Savior uses the word in this place, by spirit he means the reasonable soul, or
inner man, as it stands in opposition to the body or outward man. The meaning
then, of worshipping God in spirit is this; that we must not worship him only
with the body, or outward man, as heathens and hypocrites use to do, but with
the soul or inner man, which is that which he in all holy addresses mainly
looks after. This I might have been larger on, but I shall have occasion to say
somewhat of it under the next particular.

3. I am to show you the meaning of worshipping God in truth. And of this
passage I may say as Maldonate did of another; Nescio an facilior fuisset locus
si nemo eum exposuisset in Luc. 11. 11.
perhaps it had been easier, had not men obscured it by their expositions.
Having perused several writers upon it, I find them very different in their
apprehensions concerning it. Such of their opinions as are most remarkable, I
shall give you an account of, and then recommend to you that which I take to be
the true and genuine sense of it.

1. Some think that by spirit in this place, we are to understand the third
person in the Trinity, and by truth the second; and that to worship God in
spirit, and in truth, is to worship the Father in the Son, and the Son in the
Holy Ghost, which is to worship the whole Trinity. This way goes Athanasius;
but as Tolet the Jesuit says truly, Epist. ad Serapion.
it is difficult to accommodate this to the context. Had this been our Saviors
meaning, he should rather have said, Difficile est haec accommodare huic
contextui. in Loc.
they that worship him, must worship him in truth and in spirit, than as it is
here in spirit and in truth. But the mistake is evident, and therefore I need
to say no more of it.

2. Others think, to worship God in spirit and in truth are one and the same
thing; that to worship him in spirit, is to worship him in truth; and to
worship him in truth, is to worship in spirit; and so they will have the one to
be an exposition of the other. And they say to worship him in spirit, and in
truth, is not to worship him under a visible representation or similitude, as
if he were a material substance or body. For, the Samaritans worshipped him
under the image of a dove, and circumcised their children in the name thereof.
And so they will have our Saviors words to imply as much as if he had answered
the woman thus. Thou inquire of me concerning the true place of worship,
whether it be mount Garizim or Jerusalem, which is a thing now not very
material, for as much as the time is at hand, that the worship of God shall be
confined to neither of them. But there is a greater difference betwixt us then
that of place, which thou take no notice of, and that is about the object of
worship; ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship. q. d. ye worship
the true God as we do, but ye worship him under a visible similitude, whereby
it appears ye know him not; but the hour comes and now is, that the true
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth, etc. That is, they
shall not worship him under any visible shape as you do, but shall conceive of
him as he is, namely a spirit. This was the opinion of our learned country man
Mr. Mede. Diatrib. in loc.
But notwithstanding the respect I bear to the author, and his excellent works,
I conceive this is none of our Saviors meaning. For 1. how will it be proved
that the Samaritans worshipped God under the similitude of a dove? L'empereur a
great master in critical learning, Not. ad Benjam. Judelensem. p. 170.
denies it. And Cunaeus does not only acquit them from this pretended idolatry
of the Dove, De Repub.
but from all Idolatry whatsoever. Heb. l. 2. c. 16. p. 273.
He grants that they did formerly live in idolatry, but withal says that they
wholly renounced it, and that before the time of Sanballat, following the
religion prescribed by Moses. 2. Grant they did worship God as is alleged
under the shape of a Dove, yet the antithesis or opposition in the words will
not admit this to be the sense of them. For, our Savior does not set the
worshipping of God in spirit and in truth only in opposition to the worship of
the Samaritans, but also of the Jews, who conceived of God as a spirit, and so
worshipped him. Had he insisted only on the worship of the Samaritans, and set
worshipping God in spirit and in truth, only in opposition to their worship,
then this sense had carried more probability along with it; but it is evident
that this worshipping God in spirit and in truth stands in opposition as well
to the Jewish as the Samaritan worship, and therefore this cannot be the
meaning of them.

3. Others think by worshipping God in spirit, Voi quid sit (...) totidem
sciunt quot sunt qui quid, sit spiritualiterorare, non ore tenus tantum,
intelligunt. Exercit in loc.
we are to understand the worshipping of him not only with the outward, but the
inner man, and by worshipping him in truth, the worshipping him in
righteousness; telling us that (...) and (...). truth, and righteousness, are
used promiscuously. Those (say they) worship in righteousness, that worship in
truth, and those worship in truth, that worship in righteousness. Thus
Heinsius. But this seems not to be the sense; For, though it be very true, that
to worship God in spirit, is to worship him with the inner man, and that (...),
and (...) are put sometimes the one for the other; yet this sense agrees not
with the adversative, which we are to have great respect to, as yielding much
light to the finding out the meaning of the words. Our Savior tells the woman,
ye worship ye know not what, we know what we worship, -- but (says he) the
hour comes and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
spirit and in truth. By which adversative it appears, Haec verba manifest
significant dominum loqui de adoratione nova, quae antea non erat and quae
initium haberet a Christo. t 3. de missa. l. 1. c. 11.
that the worshipping God in spirit and in truth is a worshipping of him in
such a way, as is different both from that of the Samaritans and the Jews. And
so far Bellarmine is in the right when he says, these words manifestly
signify, that our Savior spoke of a new way of worship, which was not before,
and which would have its beginning from him.

But according to this opinion, the worshipping God in spirit and in truth, is
not different from all former worship; in particular, not from that of the
Jews, for though many of them were hypocritical and profane, yet were there
some amongst them that worshipped God with the inner man, and in righteousness.
To go no further, Luke 1. 6:
we read of Zachary and Elizabeth, who were both righteous before God, walking
in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless. It is not against
the abuse of a lawful worship that our Savior speaks, but against the worship
it self according to its institution, which he would have laid aside, and
another kind of worship of his own appointment, substituted in the room of it.

4. Others think that worshipping God in spirit is here set in opposition to
the carnal, external worship of the Jews; and worshipping him in truth to the
fictitious, false worship of the Samaritans. And so they will have the words of
our Savior to amount to thus much: both Jews and Samaritans worship the
Father, the one at one place, and the other at another; The one in a carnal
way, the other in a false way: but the time is at hand, that both the one and
the other shall worship him after another manner. The Jews laying aside their
carnal worship, Illud in spiritu excludit cultum Dei tantummodo corporalem etc.
in loc.
shall worship him in spirit, and the Samaritans, laying aside their false
worship, shall worship him in truth. And this sense Pererius, with other
Jesuits, gives of the words. But, not to repeat what I have already alleged,
which shows this cannot be the meaning, I see no reason, wherefore spirit
should be restrained to the carnal external worship of the Jews, and truth to
the fictitious, false worship of the Samaritans. For, there was want of spirit,
not only in the worship of the Jews, but also of the Samaritans; and there was
want of truth, not only in the worship of the Samaritans, but also of the Jews.
I understand not therefore how this limitation may be justified.

5. Others think to worship God in spirit, is to worship him with the inner
man; and to worship him in truth, is to worship him without the use of such
ceremonies as were types of things to come; Not without the use of all
ceremonies, but only such as were shadows of things to come. They say, the Jews
and Samaritans before the coming of Christ, worshipped God with bloody
Sacrifices, and with many rites and ordinances depending thereon; which
prefigured some thing to come, but Christ being come that was prefigured by
them, he lets the woman know that this kind of worship should cease, and that
God would be worshipped after another manner, sc. in spirit and in truth. As if
he had said, God will not now be worshipped in the types of things expected,
but according to the verity of what is already exhibited. After this manner
speak Maldonate and others. But I understand not wherefore we should restrain
the words only to the exclusion of such ceremonies as are figures of things to
come. Spiritus corporeo oppon tur loco, veritas figuris, etc. in loc.
They are a plain assertion of the spirituality and simplicity of Gospel
worship, which will consist no better with other ceremonies, than such as are
shaddows of things to come. Should we worship God in the use of as many
ceremonies as the Jews did, though they were not figures of things to come, but
of things past or present, yet our worship would be no more in spirit and in
truth than theirs. Besides, it is to be observed, that Christ at his coming,
did not only abrogate such ceremonies as were typical, and shadowed forth
things to come, but such as by their signification taught moral duties. I could
instance in several ceremonies, that were no more typical than the ceremonies
in these times contended for, be: and yet Christ at his coming abolished them,
and caused them to be laid aside, removing every thing that might hinder the
simplicity of that administration he intended to put his Church under. And
therefore there is no more warrant for the institution, observation, or
imposition of other ceremonies, than for those which are typical, unless they
are such as Christ himself has appointed. But hereby we see what hard shift
superstitious men will make, before they will yield to the abolishing of those
burdensome and sinful innovations they have introduced into the worship of God,
to the woeful depraveing thereof, and hindering us of that blessing that
otherwise we might expect upon it. Yet, notwithstanding all their heat, and
tenaciousness, they will grant us this, that from these words of our Savior,
we may infer the abrogation of the Jewish ceremonies, and that concession is
sufficient for our purpose. Let those that would have new ones, produce their
warrant for them. Let them show but as good authority for the institution and
observation of them, as we can do for the abolition and abrogation of these,
and we will join with them. Without question had it been the mind of Christ
that his Church under the Gospel, should have worshipped him in the use of
ceremonies, In Evangelica lege nulla sacramentalia (id est ceremoniae
sacramentorum) sunt instituta a Christo Domino, etc. in 12 q. 108. a. 2.
he would either have kept up the old ones, or else when he abolished them, he
would have instituted new; but herein (setting out what I shall hereafter
except) he is altogether silent. And with this agrees that of Medina; In the
evangelical law (says he) there were no sacramentals (that is, ceremonies
belonging to sacraments) instituted of our Lord Christ because of the dignity
and excellency of our sacraments, which are so precious, that although they
were presented to us naked without the props of ceremonies, they would yet be
worthy of all veneration. Now he being faithful in his house, and ready to
prescribe every thing that might tend to the orderly government and welfare
thereof, and yet being silent herein, may satisfy us, it was his pleasure,
that such kind of worship should cease.

6. Others think to worship God in spirit, is to worship him with the inner
man; and to worship him in truth, is to worship him not only without the use of
such ceremonies as typifie things to come, but all other ceremonies whatsoever
(saving those of divine appointment) whether they typifie things to come, or
things past, or present. And so they will have the words of our Savior to the
woman, to imply as much as if he had said thus. You that are Samaritans,
worship the Father at Garizim, and the Jews at Jerusalem, and both of you
(besides your Temples wherein you celebrate your sacred mysteries) have many
types and figures, many shadows and ceremonies; but know, that now the time of
this kind of worship is expired: God will have his Church under a new
administration, and will be worshipped after another manner; He has for many
hundred years been worshipped by you at Garizim, and by the Jews at Jerusalem,
and by both of you, in the use of many rites and ceremonies, but the hour
comes and now is when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit
and in truth, etc. And this sense, as it agrees best with the context, so it is
that which the most learned, judicious and orthodox writers both ancient and
modern give of the words. Eusebius has a very remarkable passage. Disputing
against the Jews, and mentioning many eminent persons of the old Testament that
worshipped God (...), such as Melchisedeck, Noah, Enoch, Abram, Joseph, Job,
and Moses himself in his younger years, he says, (...). Demonst. Evang. l. 1.
c. 6. p 19.
it is manifest that those blessed men and friends of God did not worship in
any certain determinate place, neither by symbols and types, but as our Savior
and Lord has said, in spirit and in truth. The substance of what he says is
this; that in the days of the Old Testament, there were several choice
persons, famous in their generations, that worshipped God without the use of
symbols and types, and that at the coming of Christ, that kind of worship
spread throughout all nations, according as the Prophets had foretold. His
words are not to be restrained only to such symbols and types as prefigure
things to come (though I believe he aims at such too, because he writes
against the Jews, most of whose symbols and types were of that nature) but to
be extended to such symbols and types as signify things either past or
present. For the better conceiving whereof, you are to note that these words
(...) and (...), are ordinarily put, not only for figures of things to come,
but for the signa, indicia, similitudines, imagines, figurae, or exempla of
things whether past or present. Briefly, his design is to hold forth to the
Jews that the worship of those eminent persons before the Law, was plain and
simple, and that the Law (whereby another kind of worship was established) is
abrogated, and that it being abrogated, it ought to be so now. Hereupon he
labors to persuade them to lay aside their ceremonies, Ita exponunt has
particulas, etc. t. 3. de Miss. l. 1. c. 11.
bring back the Worship of God to its ancient spirituality and simplicity, and
to serve him in that way which their renowned ancestors had formerly done, with
happy success.

And that spirit is set in opposition to what is carnal or outward: Omnium hic
opinionum probalissima est, quae communis est, maxim Originis, etc. in loc.
Vel hoc uno verbo omnis Ceremoniarum usus sublatus est, in loc. Voluit Deus una
lege abominari, and abjici voluit quicquid istis populis placuisset. In Levit.
18. 3, 4. Et cum vellet suas significationes in vestibus. etc. Epist. Calvin.
49 p. 106.
and truth to what is ceremonial or figurative, is the opinion of diverse others
of the Ancients, as the Jesuits themselves confess. Bellarmine says, its the
opinion of Chrysostom, Cyril, Euthymius. Maldonate goes further, and says it
was not only the opinion of them, but of Origin, Tertullian, Hilary, Procopius,
and Theophylact likewise. And of the same persuasion are writers of a latter
time. Bucer says that even by this one* word, all use of Ceremonies is taken
away. Pelican writing on a Levitical law, against the Jews symbolizing with
Idolaters, speaks after this manner, God by this one law would have them cast
away and abhor what ever had pleased the Gentiles: much more care ought
Christians to have of this, who being taught to worship God in spirit and
truth, ought first and last to have abhorred the idle, unreasonable, and
deceitful forms and rites of Idolaters. And Farel writing to Calvin about a
popish fellow whose name was Carolus, says thus; when Carolus would obtrude
his significations in garments, and other Magic like signs, we opposed, that
Christ has taught us a purer manner of worshipping the Father, in spirit and
truth, without shadows. And Gualther speaking of these words of our Saviors,
says, Docet ceremonias simul, omnes jam nunc oportere and abroga^e, proinde
posthac nulla de illis concertatione opus esse. in loc.
he teaches that all ceremonies ought now together to be laid aside, and that
henceforth there needs no disputing about them. And with these agree Calvin,
Beza, Pareus, Chemnitius, Illyricus, Melancton, Musculus, Piscator, Rolloc,
Gomarus, Grotius, and the whole stream of Protestant Writers. I had collected
their words and set them down, but finding that they took up more room, than in
so small a tract may well be spared, I thought it convenient to lay them by.
Those that have a mind to peruse them, may have recourse to their Commentaries*
and Annotations on the Text, and there find them. They do for the most part so
distinguish, as that they set spirit in opposition to what is carnal,
corporeal, external; and truth to what is figurative, ritual, and ceremonial;
but they do not all, I confess, precisely observe that distinction, yet they do
all from hence declare against the use of Ceremonies in New Testament worship;
not only against the use of Jewish Ceremonies, but others likewise. I know
some* of them (as well as the Ancients before them) speak with reference to the
Jewish and Samaritan Ceremonies (and so without question, our Savior did too;
for what other, carrying the least color of authority or reason, were there
then for him to speak against?) but yet not so, as if they thought those were
the only ceremonies that fell under our Saviors censure. That they never
thought the Jewish and Samaritan Ceremonies, were the only ceremonies condemned
by our Savior, appears in this, that they allege this place against the
Papists, and their Ceremonies, accounting it a good and solid argument against
them. Besides such as have commented upon it, and so have taken occasion to
urge it against them, Panstrat. t. 3. l. 20. c. 6. sect. 22, 26. p. 756, 757.
De Praejud. Eccl. Romans c. 29. p. 580. Loc. com. de Resurrect. p. 252. Spiritus
and veritas opponitur hypocrisi and vanitati quorundam Judaeorum and omnium
Samaritanorum potius quam figuris, etc. in loc.
. Chamier, Camero, Bucan, with many more, in writings of another nature,
improve it against them. Now if it be a good argument against the Ceremonies of
the Papists, why may it not likewise be so against the Ceremonies of others,
who have derived them from them? Indeed Contzen the Jesuit, says that spirit
and truth are here opposed to hypocrisy, and the vanity of certain of the
Jews, and all the Samaritans, rather than to figures; but herein he is not only
contradicted by the body of Protestant writers, but by his own friends,
Bonaventure, Jansenius, nay Ribera and others of his own order, in what they
have writ on the place. In a word, our Savior well foreknew not only how loath
the Jews and Samaritans would be to part with those Ceremonies, which they had
so long made use of, but likewise how prone others in after-ages would be to a
Ceremonious, superstitious, pompous Worship, and therefore saw it needful to
speak, not only against the Ceremonies of the Samaritans and Jews in
particular, but also, all Ceremonies in general; and this he does in these
words, They that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in truth.

4. I am now to give you the grounds of the point, and show you wherefore it is
the duty of the sons of men in these days of the Gospel to worship God in
spirit and in truth; And I shall first speak of worshipping him in spirit. Now
they ought to do that for these Reasons.

1. Because it is the will and pleasure of God whom they are to worship, Dei
voluntas est ratio rationum, nec tantum recta sed regula. Bonavent. in sent. l.
1. did. 41. q. 2.
that they should so do. Qui in omnibus causam inquirere velit abyssum
scrutatur and abysso profundius quid, quia voluntas Dei causa causarum est.
Mornaeus de verit. Relig. Christ. chap. 12. p. 203.
And this sure, Omnium causarum loco debet esse nobis voluntas Dei revelata.
Amesius Bell. Enerv. t. 3. p. 277.
to all those that know any thing what a deity means, is a sufficient reason.
The will of God (says the Seraphick Doctor) is the reason of reasons, and not
only right, but the rule of our proceedings. And latter writers speak to the
same purpose. As his power is unlimited and his wisdom infinite, so his
authority is supreme, and his freedom absolute, and therefore he may both do
what he will himself; and appoint what he will have us to do, and it is not for
such worms as we are, either to resist, or censure him. Earthly Potentates we
may censure, for they are under Law themselves as well as we, but it is not so
with God; he is not under any Law, save the Law of his own most holy and
righteous will, in the choice and determination whereof we stand bound, by
virtue both of that natural and professed allegiance we owe to him, under the
harshest appointments and distastfullest occurrences to acquiesce and rest
satisfied. He needs not the advice or help of any of his creatures whether
Angels or men to assist him in the management of his affairs. He made the world
without them, redeemed his Church without them, and he knows how to govern it
without them. And the reason wherefore he does this, and not that, and appoints
this, and not that, is not any natural necessity, or debility that is in him,
for he is all-sufficient, but it is his own pleasure. I may say in this case as
our Savior did in the like: (...) Luke 10 21.
Even so O Father, because it seemed good in thy sight; or as it is in the
original, because it was thy good pleasure. Now that it is the will and
pleasure of God, that we should worship him in spirit, is evident. And now
Israel (says he) what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 10. 12.
to walk in all his ways and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul? He does not only require us to serve him,
but to serve him with the heart, and not only with the heart in an indefinite
way, but with every part of it. The heart is a thing he stands so much on, that
he will not endure we should withhold it, or any part of it from him. He will
either have it, or nothing; and he will either have all of it, or none of it.
Psalm. 51. 17.
The sacrifices of God (says David) are a broken spirit, a broken and a
contrite heart O God, thou will not despise. What an expression is this? were
no sacrifices, the sacrifices of God but this? were all other sacrifice, of
men? No, but though other sacrifices, were his sacrifices, appointed and owned
by him, yet this was his sacrifice in a way of eminency, Plurali numero usus
est, quo melius exprimeret paenitentiae sacrificium pro omnibus unum sufficere.
Calvin. in loc.
and in a peculiar manner. This is the sacrifice he principally calls for,
looks after, accepts of, and promises his blessing to. He does not say (...)
but (...), not sacrifice, but sacrifices, to intimate to us that this one
sacrifice is instead of all other sacrifices. And with this doctrine of the
old testament agrees that of the new. We must (says Paul) do the will of God,
from the heart.

This phrase from the heart, does not here stand in opposition to, with the
heart, as sometimes it does, but in coincidency with it. He does not mean we
must serve him from something else, and not the heart, but from the heart and
nothing else. He would have our service to be cordial, sincere, hearty service,
free from that abominable hypocrisy and formality, that attends the
performances of unsanctified, carnal, graceless men. But that God would have us
to worship him in spirit, I need not go so far for proof of; the very text
shows it. Such (says Christ) the Father seeks to worship him; thereby
intimating that he does not only allow of such kind of worship, but require it,
expect it, and take complacency in it.

2. Because to worship God in spirit is more agreeable and suitable to his
nature than other kind of worship. Sutableness is desirable in every thing, and
therefore should not be neglected in the servcie of God. As we would have him
to furnish us with suitable mercies, so we should yield to him suitable service.
Now to worship God in spirit suits better with his nature, than other worship
does. He is not made up of matter and form, subject and accident, act and
power, or the like ingredients, proper to created beings, but is a most simple
essence. He consists not of a gross, corporal substance like the Heathen Idols
made of silver and gold, Psalm. 134. 15.
that have mouths and speak not, eyes and see not, ears and hear not, but is a
most pure spirit, as void of matter, as he is of either sin, or mortality.
Hence that of the Prophet, to whom will ye liken God; Isa. 40. 18.
or what likenss will ye compare unto him? Romans 1. 23.
And the Apostle upbraids the Gentiles for their Anthropomorphitism, in that
they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds, and fourfooted beasts, and creeping things. Yet
were there some amongst them that took him to be a spirit, Plut. Vit. number. ante
med.
and so taught. Numa following the doctrine of Pythagoras, forbade the Romans
to believe that God had any form or likenss either of man or beast. And upon
this consideration, they used no pictures or images of him, accounting it
sacrilege, to represent Heavenly things by earthly forms. And with this
doctrine of the ancient Romans, agrees that of the modern. Nec Deus ipse qui
intelligitur a nobis alio modo intelligi potest nisi men's soluta quaedam and
libera, segregata ab omni concretione mortali. t. 4. Tusc. quest. l. 1. n. 54.
p. 127.
Witness that of the famous Tully; Neither can God himself (says he) who is
understood of us, be understood any other way, than as a mind loosed and free,
segregated from all mortal concretion. What Is this, but in a Periphrasis, to
tell us, that he is a spirit? And if he be a spirit, then to worship him in
spirit, must needs be more proper than to do it in another way. After this
manner our Savior himself reasons; God is a spirit, and they that worship him,
must worship him in spirit. It is Argumentum a conjugatis, and implies as much
as if he had said, God is a spirit, and therefore they that worship him, must
worship him in spirit. For though the illative, or rational particle, be not
expressed, yet it is evidently employed; and therefore we must not look upon the
words as a bare precept only, requiring us to worship God in spirit, but also
as a rational argument, to induce us to it. And indeed, what can be more
rational than, that if God be a spirit, we should worship him in spirit? For,
if it be reasonable that since men have bodies, we should reverence them with
the body, it must then needs be reasonable that since God is a spirit, we
should worship him with the spirit.

3. Because to Worship God in spirit, is the most excellent kind of worship. As
it is such worship as agrees both with his will and nature, so it has a
peculiar excellency in it, above all other worship, and that in respect of the
efficient or subject, from whence it proceeds, which is the inner man, or
reasonable soul. And what a rare and excellent piece that is, is worthy the pen
of an Angel to describe. It is not a thing of such mean and homely extraction
as the body made up of earth, water, and other elements, ready to tumble into
the grave, not and putrify, every day; it is of a more divine and generous
descent, and of a more refined and immortal nature, endued with several noble,
Nec inepte eam ob causam cum creatore suo confertur* vid. Maimonid. de Fundam.
cap. 4. p. 47. De Verit. Relig. Christ. cap. 15. p. 284, 287, 291.
and useful faculties, each of them capable of performing excellent operations
and services. It is the candle of the Lord, a Celestial spark, a beam of light,
darfed down from God out of Heaven. The Jewish Rabbi's have such an high esteem
of it, that they compare it in diverse respects to God himself. And not only
they, but Plato, Tully, Seneca, Epictetus and other Heathens that dealt but
with principles of Philosophy, and could fee no further then the dimm eye of
Nature would carry them, have (as Morney, shows out of their writings) many
notable passages concerning it. They say it came from God, is a kin to him, of
the same offspring with him; and that it is like him, and must never die, but
return to him again. And indeed the excellencies of it are so many and so great
that its no easy matter to set them forth. It is that which exalts a man above
a beast, and qualifies him for high and noble services. It makes him fit to
stand before Princes, sit upon the throne of government, converse with Angels,
serve his maker, and enjoy communion with him. Man is the beauty and glory of
this lower world, and the soul is the beauty and glory of man. It is the
fairest flower in all the reasonable creature, the jewel in the Cabinet, the
diamond in the ring, and so precious that it is of more worth than all the
riches of the Indies, nay than all the World. According to that of our Savior;
what is a man profited, Mat. 16. 26.
if he shall gain the whole world and lose his own soul? or what shall a man
give in exchange for his soul? Hence it is that wise men, who understand
somewhat of the nature of it, Psalm. 22. 20.
set such an high value upon it. David calls it his darling. Deliver (says he)
my soul from the sword, my darling from the power of the dog. The word here
rendered darling, is (...), which signifies my only one, and so is rendered by
Pagnine and others. Whereby it appears, he valued his soul so much, that he
regarded nothing else besides it. Nay he was so choice and tender of it, that
he would trust it with none but God, and therefore commends it to him. Psalm.
31. 5.
Into thine hands (says he in another place) I commit my spirit: He looked
upon the worth of it as so great, and the welfare of it as so much concerning
him, that he thought none fit to be trusted with it but God, and therefore
passing by all others, both men and angels, he commits it only to him. He
esteemed not any place safe enough, but the Cabinet of Gods gracious
providence, wherein he locks up the souls of all his servants; and therefore he
commits it to him, to be preserved and kept by him. And hence it is likewise
that God himself makes such account of it, and stands so much on it, calling
for it from every person, and looking for it in every duty; Prove. 23. 26.
My son (says he) give me thy heart. He does not say, thy body, thy head, or
thy hand, but thy heart. He stands not so much upon those things, as he does
upon the heart. That he looks for in every ordinance and in every performance.
And hence it is likewise that Satan aims so much at it, laying all the baits he
can to ensnare it, mattering neither one thing, Job 1. 7.
nor other, 1 Pet. 5. 8.
so he can but gain it. He goes about like a roaring lion, ranges up and down,
compasses Sea and Land, and all to make a prey of souls. Other Lions prey upon
bodies, but he preys upon souls. Now all these things bespeak the excellency of
the soul. Were not the nature of it very precious, neither man, nor God, nor
Satan would make such account of it. And by how much the soul is more
excellent, by so much the worship performed by it, is the more excellent. By
how much the soul is more excellent than the body, by so much the worship of
the soul is more excellent than that of the body. Lanctantius speaking of the
excellency of the Christian religion above that of the Heathens, Illic nihil
exigitur aliud quam sanguis pecudum, and fumus, inepta libatio; hic bona men's,
purum pectus, innocens vita. De Justit. l. 5. cap. 20. p. 219.
says, go amongst them, and there is nothing but the blood of beasts, a little
smoke, and foolish sacrificing, but with us there is a good mind, a pure heart,
and an innocent life. The one was outward, the other inward; the one consisted
in killing and sacrificing of beasts; the other in purity of heart and
innocence of life. And without doubt a pure heart, and an innocent life are of
higher price with God, than the most splendid, glittering, outward worship
whatsoever. And some of the heathens themselves thought no less, as appears by
that of Tully; Cultus Deorum est optimus, idemque castissimus, atque
sanctissimus, plenissimusque pietatis, ut eos semper pura, integra, incorrupita
and mente and voce veneremur t. 4. de Not. Deor. 1. 2. n. 53. p. 226.
the most excellent, pure, holy, and pious worship of the gods (says he) is
that we should serve them with a pure, sincere and upright mind and voice. Now
if the spirit be the most excellent part of man and worshipping in spirit, be
the most excellent kind of worship, then certainly it belongs to God, and ought
to be rendered to him. For, as he is the donor and Lord of all we have, so he
is worthy of, and looks for whatever is most excellent from us. If the
firstborn he the most excellent, he looks for that; if our first-fruit be most
excellent, he looks for that; and if there be a male in our flock, he looks for
that: and will not take it well if he be denied. Since then, worshipping him in
spirit, is the most excellent kind of worship, Exodus 22. 29.
we may well make account he expects it from us.

4. Because till we worship him in spirit, Mic. 7. 1.
we worship him in vain. Mal. 1. 14.
Though a man spend never so much time and treasure in worshipping God, yet if
his spirit engage not in it, all is to no purpose. Though he should with the
Heathen offer whole Hecatombs of sacrifices, yet if his spirit concur not in
the work, all would be ineffectual. This the Scripturs is most clear in;
witness that of the Prophet: Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, Mic. 6. 6,
7, 8.
and bow my self before the high God? shall I come before him with burnt
offerings, with Calves of a year old? will the Lord be pleased with thousands
of Rams, or with ten thousands of Rivers of Oil? shall I give my firstborn for
my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul? He has showed
thee O man what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. The people were
convinced that it was their duty to please God, but they knew not how to do it.
They thought great and costly Sacrifices, of Calves, Rams, Oil, and such like
things would have done it; but the Prophet teaches them another lesson: he lets
them know, that was not the way, and withal shows them, there was something
else, which they minded not, that was more acceptable to him than any such
matters, and that was justice, mercy, and humble walking. These he shows were
far more pleasing to God than all those Ceremonious and costly Sacrifices they
kept such a stir with, and put so much confidence it. Both the Israelites and
jews, in the time of their degeneracy were much in external sacrifices and
services; Hos. 6. 4.
and what were they better for it? O Ephraim (says God) What shall I do unto
thee? for your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew, it goes
away. What is emptier than the morning cloud, and what is lighter than the
early dew? a blast of wind dispels the one, Alludit ad Israelitarum, and
Judaeorum justitiam quae tota fita erat in externis sacrificiis and Ceremoniis
Zanch. in loc.
and a beam of the Sun exhales the other. How came it to pass then, that the
goodness of Ephraim and Judah had no more substance and solidity in it? why,
because they rested in their external services and performances, not regarding
in the mean time, that which they should mainly have looked after. Nay, God
does not only make light account of unspiritual services, but he rejects and
abhors them as things abominable; Bring (says he) no more vain oblations,
incense is an abomination to me. Isa. 1. 13.
Though the Sacrifices they offered him, were of his own appointment, and
typified the death of his Son who was so dear to him, yet in regard they
proceeded not from the heart, but were tendered to him in an hypocritical way,
he refuses to receive them, speaks of them under terms of highest dislike and
disdain, tells them plainly they were hateful and loathsome to him. And he
does not only reject and abhor such kind of service, but severely punishes it.
Isa. 29. 13, 14.
For as much (says he) as this people draw near me with their mouth; and with
their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far froms me, and their
fear toward me is taught by the precept of men: therefore, behold, I will
proceed to do a mavelous work amongst this people, even a mavelous work,
and a wonder, for the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid. And this truth the modern
Jews, though a people very prone to rest in outward services, do confess and
own in an eminent manner. Buxtorf says, that upon the very walls of their
Synagogue, De Abbrev. p. 186.
they have this sentence written, Prayer without the intention of the mind, is
like the body without the soul. And Cappellus tells us that in their
Euchologium, or prayer book, Spicileg. p. 64.
they have this passage to the same purpose; Where withal shall I come before
his face, but with my spirit, for nothing is more precious to a man than his
soul? And the Papists too, for all their peregrinations, processions, images,
and gaudy stuff, speak after the same manner. Eum (sc. cultum) requirit qui
polior est, and qui prorsus necessarius, and sine quo, corporalis cultus inutil
is est, and inanis. Vit. Number. p. 62.
Estius writing upon the Text, says, Our Savior requires that kind of worship
which is most excellent, and which is altogether necessary, and without which
bodily worship is unprofitable and vain. Nay the wiser sort of the very
Heathens own it. Plutarch says, Its incredible that the gods delight in the
outward beauty of creatures. And if he held that the gods delight not in the
outward beauty of creatures, we may fairly conclude he also held, that they
delight not in the outward dress of services, when there is nothing of inward
affection and devotion. It appears then not only from Scripture (the sentence
whereof, is of it self sufficient in all matters of this nature) but from the
confessions of those very sects that are likeliest to think otherwise, that God
is to be worshipped with the inner man as well as with the outward, and that
the services of the latter without the former are vain and ineffectual; and
therefore it concerns us if we should worship him in an acceptable, successful
way, to engage the one in it, as well as the other.

And thus I have given you the reasons of the former branch of the Doctrine,
showing you wherefore the sons of men ought in these days of the Gospel to
worship God in spirit; not that I think it is so their duty, to do it now, as
that it was not their duty to do it in the days of the Law, or that he did not
require it, or expect it then, or that many did not then do it, but that he
requires it and looks for it now in a peculiar way, affording greater means to
enable them to it, now, than he did then. Paul in that famous Sermon of his to
the Athenians, says, Act. 17. 30.
Now God commands all men every where to repent; not that he did not command
them to do it before, for he did it all along both by his Prophets and his
Providence; but that now he commanded them to do it in a more especial manner,
presenting to them greater incentives, and laying before them stronger motives
to do it. And the like may be said in the present case.

I shall now proceed to the latter branch of the Doctrine, and show you
wherefore the sons of men ought in these days of the Gospel to worship God in
truth. The reasons thereof are these;

1. Because God himself has ordained and appointed them to worship him in that
way. And were there nothing else, this fingle reason were sufficient, not only
to warrant their doing of it, but incite them to it. For, as he may justly
challenge worship from us, so he may justly prescribe what way he will be
worshipped by us. His Church is his Kingdom, and it belongs to him to make laws
for his own Kingdom, and set down what way his subjects therein shall express
their respect to him, and serve him. It is not for us to set down ways of
worship our selves, but to observe the way that he in his word has set down
for us. And the way that he therein has set down for us, is this, that we do
it in truth, that is, without the use of Ceremonies. If you inquire after the
part wherewith you are mainly to serve him, he tells you, You must do it in
spirit; and if you inquire after the external mode or dress, he tells you, You
must do it in truth, not in a gaudy, pompous manner, but in a way of holy
simplicity and plainness. This is the way that he has appointed, and he would
have us in all cases, how difficult, and strange soever they be, to look upon
his appointment as a sufficient ground for us to proceed upon. It was a
difficult task that Joshuah was to undertake, when he was to succeed Moses in
the government and conduct of Israel, and to lead them over Jordan among the
Canaanites, whom he was to dispossess and drive out before them; yet God would
have him to look upon his command as a sufficient ground for him to undertake
the business. Arise (says he) go over Jordan, Josh. 1. 2, 9.
thou and all thy people, into the Land which I give unto them; have not I
commanded thee? q. d. Though the difficulties thou art to encounter with be
great, and the dangers that lie before thee be many, yet surely at my command
thou may venture upon the work; why, know for thy encouragement, that I have
commanded thee. Nay the very Heathens had such apprehensions of God, that they
thought there was no neglecting of his commands, but that they ought by all
means to be observed and obeyed. Ezra 7. 23.
Whatsoever (says Artaxerxes) is commanded by the God of Heaven, let it be
diligently done. We may dispure of cases before God determine them, but when he
has once passed sentence, all disputings must cease. Till his command come
forth, we are at liberty, and may take which way we please, but when that is
once out, then our liberty ceases, and we must take that way only that he
therein chalks out for us. Then we must turn all our disputings and contests
into silent submission; and all our inquiries and opinions into cheerful
obedience. If then, God has appointed us to worship him in truth, as it
plainly appears by the Text he has, then we ought without any disputing or
drawing back to do it.

2. That the Scriptures may be fulfilled. The Scriptures are not only
doctrinal, but prophetical; they do not only contain precepts of holy living,
but predictions of things to come to pass in aftertimes. As God has therein
set down whatever he would have us to do, so he has there set down, much of
what he himself will do. And amongst other things he has declared he would do,
this is one, that he would put his Church in the days of the New Testament,
under a spiritual administration, wherein he will not have her worship him as
in times past, in the use of shadows and ceremonies, but in a more plain and
simple manner, even in truth. Behold the days come (says the Lord) that I
will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, Jer. 31. 31.
and with the house of Judah. Upon our violation of the covenant of works, God
was pleased to grant forth a Covenant of grace, promising therein pardon and
salvation to the penitent and believing. And this covenant he thought fit to
have dispensed under a double administration, that of Moses, and that of
Christ. The former he appointed to be carried on in a way of types and figures,
agreeable to the state of the church in the Old Testament; the latter, in a way
of spirituality and simplicity, agreeable to the state of the Church in the
New. And this it is that the Prophet relates to, in this place, when he speaks
of a new Covenant. For, we must not think that the Covenant Israel was under in
the time of the Old Testament, and the Covenant we are under now, in the time
of the New, are two seral Covenants, essentially and substantially different,
but one and the same Covenant, passing under two distinct administrations; the
former of which was typical and ceremonious, the latter plain and simple. The
covenant that they were under then, and we are under now, differ no more than
one and the same person differs from himself in several habits or dresses
Briefly, the words of the Prophet imply as much as if he had said, in the days
of the New Testament when Jesus Christ the bridegroom of the Church shall come
down from Heaven to her, she shall put on new vestments, go in a new garb, and
serve him in a new manner, not in that ceremonious, puerile dress she was in
before, but in a more plain and grave habit, even in truth. And with this
agrees that which God spoke by a Prophet of a latter standing; Mal. 1. 11.
in every place (says he) incense shall be offered to my name, and a pure
offering. Its usual with the sacred penmen (as the Papists themselves who
allege this place for the Sacrifice of the Mass, Vid Rainol. his Conf. with
Heart. c. 4. divis, 4. p. 473.
confess) to speak of Gospel Ordinances and duties under legal terms; and so
this Prophet does in this place. By incense and offering, he means not such as
the ceremonial law required, and as the Jews in the Old Testament in conformity
thereunto, used, (he well knew that such things upon the death of Christ the
great Sacrifice were to be laid aside) but he means somewhat of a more
spiritual nature, having analogy or agreement therewith, as prayer,
thanksgiving, and the like, which are our Gospel incense and offering, and
which we are to tender to God in these days, as they did their bloody
Sacrifices, and such like matters in those: of this there is no doubt; all the
question is, what is meant by this attribute (...), pure: and wherein the
purity of Gospel incense and offering does consist. See Mr. Mede Diat. in loc.
Some think pure denotes the spirituality of the service, which is not to be
celebrated as the Jews and Gentiles was, modo corporuli, by slaying of Beasts
and such like work, but in a spiritual manner, by putting up of prayers, giving
of thanks, singing of Psalms, with other duties of that nature. Others think,
it denotes conscientiam offerentis, the good Conscience of the offerer, not
polluted with misapprehensions, unbelief, hypocrisrie, as the Consciences of
both Jews and Gentiles were, but sound, believing, and upright. Others
(restraining the words to the Sacrament of the Eucharist) think it denotes rem
significatam, or the thing represented in it, which is Jesus Christ, who is a
sacrifice, not like one of the Jews, corrupt and polluted, but immaculate, and
perfect, without spot or blemish. But the first seems to be most probable, and
therefore is embraced not only by Justin Martyr, and Tertullian among the
ancients (as the above mentioned Author confesses) but likewise by the ablest
and soundest modern writers. A Lapide mentions it as the common opinion of the
Protestants; Calvinus and haercties qui negant omne sacrificium legis novae
proprie dictum, accipiunt oblationem mysticam, etc. in. loc.
Calvin (says he) and the heretics, who deny all sacrifice under the Gospel,
properly so called, take offering mystically, that is to say, for the worship
of God by faith, hope, charity, prayer, invocation, praise, and pious works,
especially those of mercy, alms, and conversion of souls. And he confesses
that Clarius and Vatablus were of the same mind. The sense then, of the Prophet
we may take to be this, that the Church of God in the days of the
New Testament is to worship him in a more pure, spiritual, inward manner then
heretofore. Though the worship she yielded to him in the time of the Old
Testament was of Divine institution, yet was it not so pure as this here
foretold, because it was attended with, and wrapped up in so many outward
ceremonies. Her worship then was a mixed kind of worship, partly consisting of
outward ceremonies, and partly of inward devotion; but the Prophet here
foretells, that when the time of reformation should come, she should serve him
after another manner; that she should then offer him a pure offering. Calvin
makes this place parallel with the Text, Dicit nune in Evangelio simplicem
veritatem and nudam doceri, etc. in loc.
looking upon it as a prophecy of the spirituality and simplicity of Gospel
service, which is not to be folded up as the legal was, in rites and
ceremonies, but to be carried on in a grave and plain manner. To be short, as
our Savior in the Text sets truth in opposition to ceremonies, so does the
Prophet in this place set pure: both of them holding forth this truth, that God
would have his Church in these days of the Gospel to worship him without the
use of them. Now if it be true, that the Scriptures have foretold, that God
would put his Church in the days of the Gospel under a spiritual
administration, and have her to worship him in truth, then we ought all to do
it. We must not only take notice of prophecies, but (so far as the keeping of
our places, and callings will permit) contribute our assiftance toward the
fulfilling of them. God often joins the accomplishment of his prophecies, and
the performance of our duty together, so that the one is done, in, and with the
other. And thus it is in this case; and therefore if we would see him
accomplish the one, we must betake our selves to the performance of the other.
We must not (as many do) get prophecies into our minds, and then stand gazing
to see what will be done, but we must out of a true zeal to the name of God
which is concerned therein, do what we can to help them to the birth. God
foretells in the forementioned places, that all shall know him and call upon
him; now we must not only wait to see these things accomplished, but we must
endeavor in the places wherein we are, that they may be accomplished. So he
does in like manner foretell, that his people in the New Testament shall
worship him in truth, that is, without Ceremonies; now we must not stand
looking about us to see what others will do, and do nothing our selves, but we
must put to our helping hand, and do what we can toward the promoting and
furtherance of the work.

3. Because the time designed by God for our worshipping of him in truth is
come. As the time designed by him for his peoples worshipping him in the use of
Ceremonies is expired, so the time designed by him for their worshipping him in
truth is come. That he once allowed, nay commanded them to worship him with
ceremonies is granted, but that administration was not to be perpetual, but
temporary; it was not to continue always, but (as some of the Jewish Rabbi's
themselves confess) to abide for a certain season, Vid. Maimonid. de Fund. cap.
9. p. 121.
and then to be laid aside. But choose what they say, Paul is very clear in it;
The Law (says he) was our School master, to bring us unto Christ, that we
might be justified by faith. Gal. 3. 24, 25.
But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. By faith
he means not actus animae, or that grace whereby we are justified, but tempus
Evangelii, or the days of the New Testament, in which there is no necessity,
of such Ceremonies as the Church before the coming of the Messiah stood in need
of. The Ceremonial Law was no other than Evangelium velatum, or Gospel with a
mask, or veil upon it, directing to, and pointing at Christ in all the parts of
it. Amongst all those rites that they used, there was not one, but it had its
signification, and there were very few of them, but they did in some degree, or
other, referr the Jews to Christ, and Preach him to them. We must not think
that all those ceremonies God appointed them were empty ciphers, signifying
nothing (that were to reproach both his wisdom and goodness) no, they served as
so many stars to light them in those dark times to their expected Messiah, who
was typified by them. And herewith agrees that speech of a worthy and elegant
Author; Mr. Boil of the style of Script. p. 82.
The Ceremonial Law (says he) was like the manger to the Shepherds, holding
forth the infant Jesus wrapped in his swaddling clothes. But that you may
further see that the ceremonious administration was not to be perpetual but
only for a season, the same Apostle tells us, that the Church was under it,
Gal. 4. 2.
till the time appointed of the Father; and what time is that? why, time of the
Gospel, in which such an administration is both unnecessary and unreasonable.
And, as if this were not sufficient, Heb. 9. 10:
he tells us in another book, that the legal ordinances were imposed on the
Jews only till the (...), or time of reformation, that is, the coming of
Christ, who was ordained by God to reform the Church. In the absence of the Sun
the Stars give us light, but when it rises, they disappear; so, before the
coming of Christ, God taught the Jews by the ceremonies, but when he was come,
he appointed them to be laid aside. Then it was that the day of the Gospel
administration brake forth, Cant. 2 17
and the shaddows of the morning fled away.

That we may conceive of this matter more distinctly and truly, Triplex earum
periodus Necessario observanda: quarum prima suit necessitatis: secund a,
indifferenatia; tertia, abstinentiae, etc. Spanh. Syntag* part. 1. disput. 24
de Conseq. sect. 6. p. 345.
let us here note that the three is a thereefold period of time, to which the
ceremonies may in different respects be referred. There was a time when they
were necessary and requisite; a time when they were indifferent and tolerable;
and a time when they became unlawful and sinful. They were necessary, from
the time of their institution to the death of Christ, which they were appointed
to prefigure. Though Christ came to abolish them, Luke 2. 21. Mat. 5. 23.
yet he did not do it till the time of his death, because till then there was
nse for them. That he did not abolish them upon his birth, appears by his
Parents circumcising him, and offering for him according to the Law. And that
he did not abolish them upon his preaching, appears by the directions he gives
to such as brought their gifts to the Altar; by his commanding the Leper to
show him self to the Priest, and offer the gift that Moses commanded; Mat. 8.
4. Luke 22. 15.
and by his celebrating the Paschal Supper with his Discipler.

They were indifferent from the time of his death, till the destruction of the
Temple, which was it self the grand ceremony, and fear of the rest. That they
were not then necessary, does abundantly appear by the discourses of Paul
touching their abrogation, some passages whereof I gave even now; as also, by
his public disowning the Jewish Priesthood. When the Jews blamed him for
reviling Ananias, Acts 23. 5. saying revilest thou Gods High Priest? he
answered, I wist not brethren, that he was the High Priest. q d. You look upon
him as Gods High Priest, and own him for such, Non noveram quod sit sacerdos,
suppeditari capite adb 8. ubi docet Apostolus non ultra in terris sed in coelis
quaerndum (...), etc. Cloppenb. Schol. Sacrif. p. 153. Rev. 8. 3. Act. 16. 3.
18. 18. 21. 24.
but I know no such thing. The time was, when your Priesthood was of divine
institution, and I owned it as such: but now the case is otherwise; Jesus
Christ has now taken that office wholly upon himself, being set down at his
Fathers right hand, where having a Golden Censer and much incense in it, he
offers it with the prayers of all Saints, upon the golden Altar which is before
the Throne. That they were not then sinful, appears by his circumcising of
Timothy, shaving his head after the manner of the Nazarites, purifying himself
according to the Law. These things at that time he accounted indifferent, and
for the advantage of the Gospel he conformed to them. Had the Apostles
immediately upon the death of Christ, utterly renounced the Ceremonies, and
thrown them out of the Church, it would in all probability have been a great
hinderance to the Gospel, especially as to the Jews, who had such a settled
esteem of them; and therefore in point of prudence, and for the furtherance of
the Gospel (which they were to use all lawful means to promote) they took
another course; they did not as soon as ever they saw Christ Crucified, run into
the Temple, and pull all to piece, but they first proved the Ceremonial Law
abrogated, and that the use thereof was not necessary but indifferent: and when
they saw that took, and that the Gospel had got some footing; and also
perceived that some pressed the observation of the Ceremonies to a bad end,
Ceremoniae veteres co tempore non quidem obligabant amplius; cum tamen templum
nondum esset destructum, and illud temnpus hoaeest-concederetur earum
sepulturaa, erant observationis liberae. Jo. Crocius AntiWeigel. part 2. p. 156.
they boldly protested against them, and asserted their own liberty. Besides,
though the Apostles were not ignorant that the ceremonies were only of positive
and temporary right, and that they did in law expire and dye with Christ, yet
they withal knew that they were originally of divine institution and had been
long used by the Jewish Church with much benefit; and therefore they took
themselves bound to give them decent and honorable burial.

They became unlawful upon the destruction of the Temple, and so they have been
from that time till this, and so they will remain till the end of the world.
Josephus tells us that a little before the utter destruction of Jerusalem, the
Priests on the day of Pentecost, going into the inner Temple, to offer their
accustomed Sacrifice, they at first felt the place move and tremble, and
afterward heard a Voice saying, Let us depart hence. And he likewise tells us
a little after, De Bell. Jud. 1. 7. c. 12, 13. Joh. 11. 50.
that the Priests being taken, and desiring Titus to spare theie lives, he
(being moved, as it were, by a divine impulse, as Caiaphas was before him)
answered, that it was fit, that they should perish with the Temple. Grotius
speaking on the Text, of the abolishing of the ceremonial Law, faith, it was
first done at the publication of Christian liberty, called the time of
reformation; afterward, by the destruction of the two temples, that at
Garizim, the other at Jerusalem. It did doubtless de jure, or in law expire,
Factum hot primum quidem publicatione Christianae libertatiis, quod tempus
correctionis dicitur, etc. Matthew. 27. 51.
at the death of Christ as the renting of the veil of the Temple signified,
but it did not de facto, actually, or as to all use of it, expire till the
destruction of the Temple it self. But since that time it has utterly ceased,
the Church of Christ having all along disclaimed it with the worship,
sacrifices, and all the rites and ordinances, pertaining to it. The Apostle
John speaking of her, Rev. 12. 1.
with relation to her condition about the time of Constantine, See Mr. Mede in
loc. Prove. 1. 9.
presents her to us in a glorious and triumphant state, clothed with the Sun,
having the Moon under her feet, and on her head a Crown of twelve stars; all
which seems to bespeak her utter renouncing of Judaism. She stands shining, not
with legal righteousness, but with the righteousness of Jesus Christ. She uses
not the ceremonial ordinances here denoted by Moon (in regard, several of them
depended on it, and were in other respects like it) but looking on them as
beggarly elements, she treads them under her feet. She professes not the
doctrine of the twelve tribes, as formerly she did, but of the twelve Apostles,
which she wears as an ornament of grace, to her head, and chains about her
neck. And after this manner she has carried her self all along, rejecting the
Jewish paedagogy as antiquated, and out of date, never to be used more by her,
save to mind her of her former state, and Gods dealings with her therein. I
know there are some Christian Churches, Brerewoods enq. p. 153. 156, 165.
that make use of some of the Jewish rites at this day. The Ethiopians (as also
the Jacobites, Egyptians, Habassines and others) to baptism join circumcision;
yet do they not do it upon a sacramental, but political account, that by that
mark they may be distinguished from other Nations to be the seed of Abram. And
there are some of our reformed Divines that would excuse them, but others
condemn them of superstition, and lay down very weighty arguments against their
practice in this particular. And it is not so considerable what some particular
Churches do, See Dr. Morton and Dr. John Burgess in, Amesius his Fresh Suit.
part 1. p. 107. Rivet is clear against it. Id illicitum esse, etiam alii ex
eadem schol recte sentiunt, etc. Synops. Pur. Theol. disp. 35. sect. 26. p.
448. So likewise Cloppenb. dannanda est illorum superstitio. Spicil. p. 209.
as what the universal does; or what a corrupt Church does, as what those do
that are more reformed and pure; or what any Church does without warrant from
the word, as what it does by it. It is evident from what I have alleged out of
Scripture, that the ceremonial law is utterly abolished, and the ancient Church
took it to be so; if therefore any endeavor whether directly or indirectly to
revive or keep it up, it is little as to matter of argument to be heeded. And
so much for proof of this particular, that the time designed by God, for his
peoples worshipping him in the use of ceremonies (particularly of the Jewish)
is expired. As for those that would have others, let them show their warrant
for them; but of that I shall perhaps speak hereafter.

4. Because the worshipping of God in truth is such a kind of worship as is
more proper for, and does better become the Church in these days of the
Gospel, than other kind of worship. We must distinguish of times; that
administration that may fit the Church at one time, may not at another. To have
worshipped God without the use of ceremonies, would not have fitted her in the
time of the old Testament; and to worship him with the use of them, will not
fit her in the time of the New. The Apostle compares the Church of the
Old Testament to an infant, and shows how God furnished her with such an
administration as became her infancy; Gal. 4. 1.
intimating withal, that now in the time of the New Testament she is come to
more maturity and perfection, and that thereupon he has pur her under a new
administration, even such a one as is suitable unto it. That there is much
difference betwixt the administration, (...).
the Church was under in the time of the Old Testament, and that she is now
under, in the time of the New, is evident to all. Eusebius speaking of the
Mosaical Law, calls it the tutor or guardian of puerile and imperfect souls.
Heretofore God appointed his Church the use of such types and figures. as might
help her to some apprehensions and conceptions of future things, but the day
spring from on high having visited her, Demonst. Evang. l. 1. c. 6. p. 16.
she is now in such a condition that she needs not those rudiments that
formerly she did; and it is greatly injurious to her for any to attempt the
reducing her back to the use of them. She does not now look at Christ through
the Window, or behold him through the lattess; she does not now see him with
his veil upon him, Cant. 2. 9. 2 Cor. 3. 18.
as she did in times past, but does all with open face, behold, as in a glass
his glory, and is changed thereby into the same image from glory to glory.
Those things therefore that formerly were an help to her, would now be an
hinderance; and those things that formerly were an ornament, would now be a
blemish. That garb may become a person when he is a child, that will not when
he is a man. Joseph's coat of many colors might become him while he was a
child or youth, Genesis 37. 4. 41. 41.
but not when we was a man, and ruler of all the Land of Egypt. When I was
(says the Apostle) a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I
thought as a child, but when I became a man, I put away childish things. Thus
it is with the Church: she has her progressions and periods, as well as every
single person; 1 Cor. 13. 11.
and that garment which became her in her minority, will not at all become her,
or suit with her, Epist. 5. ad Marcel.
now she is in a grown state. Augustine, illustrates this by a very fit
similitude; There was (says he) a youth that being diseased, addressed himself
to Vindecianus the Physician, who gave him a Medicine fit for his age, and
cured him. A good while after, the youth being become a man, be fell into the
same disease again, and applies the receipt he used before; but it agreed not
then with him. Here upon be betook himself to his Physicain telling him he
wondered, he would give him such Physic as would hurt him. The Physican
demands of him, when he gave him that Physic? he told him when he was a youth,
at which time it cured him, whereas it was now likely to kill him. The
Physician replied, that the physic proved not good, because it was not taken
at his command; that that which was wholesome to him being a youth, was now
deadly to him being of age. The like we may say of the Church: when she was in
her youth, a ceremonious, pompous administration appointed her by God, was
proper for her and whole some, but now she being come to age (and God nowhere
appointing it her) it would be mortal and deadly. And what if after all this I
bring you a famous heathen that by the very light of nature gives suffrage for
us in this point? Hear then what Plato says, Men ought of worship God, not
counterfeiting with shadows, but pursuing virtue in truth. Had not the man
lived before our Savior, I should have thought he had fetched this truth from
him, as well as he did many others from Moses; but he dyed so long before his
time, that we may take it for granted, it was the naked suggestion of the light
of nature, (...). In Epinomid.
which teaches, it is fitter for us to worship God in a plain simple way, than
with figures and shadows. And so much for the reasons also of this second
branch.

5. Having thus dispatched the reasons of the point, I shall now for preventig
of mistakes, lay down some cautions or limitations; and I shall confine my self
to these two.

1. Though it be the duty of the Sons of men to worship God in spirit, or with
the inner man, yet we must not understand this (as some have dangerously done)
to the prejudice, or exclusion of worshipping him with the body or outward man.
Such was the sottishness of that raving impostor Hen. Nicholas, that he taught,
that all ordinances, hearing, See his Epist. to the daughters of Warwick. sect.
5, 7, 10.
preaching, Scripture learning, baptism, the Lords Supper; all confessions of
Christ before men, all externalls in religion, were things of no worth,
indifferent, free, trivial, laid on us by no law of God. This, I confess, is
doctrine likely for that wild head of his to devise, and that blasphemous
tongue of his to utter, but far different from what the Holy Ghost dictaed to
the Prophets and Apostles. As God would not have us to worship him with the
body only, so neither would he have us to worship him with the soul only, but
with soul and body both together. He is maker and Lord, both of the one, and
the other, and therefore he expects to be worshipped with the one, as well as
with the other. When he calls so much for our worshipping him in spirit, he
does not thereby exclude, or discharge us from worshipping him with the body;
he never intended any such thing. He calls upon us indeed, to worship him with
the spirit principally, but not only. Thus the Saints of old, (acted and guided
by the Holy Ghost) ever understood him, and therefore did not only employ their
spirits in worshipping him, Act. 20. 36. Joh. 11. 41. Psalm. 77. 1. 134. 2. Luke
18. 13.
but their bodies also. To instance in the duty of prayer; therein they bowed
their knees, lifted up their eyes, voice, hands; smote upon their breasts, and
the like; thereby teaching us, that when we employ our selves in the worship of
God, we must not only engage the soul, but the body likewise. Treatise of
Religions. part. 2. p. 138.
And Amyrald (who writes against such quodlibetick spirits) tells us, that
there never was any Nation, that thought it enough to serve God in thought
only, without making demonstrations of their devotion, by gestures, and
external actions. And though bodily exercise as it is single, and divided from
the spirit, does (as the Apostle says) profit little, 1 Timothy 4. 8.
yet when it joins with it, it profits much. It assists the spirit, elevates
the heart, inflames the affections, excites to devotion, and makes us far more
lively in the service of God, than otherwise we should be. What difference is
there commonly in the intention of men's affections, betwixt their praying only
inwardly in the spirit, and outwardly with the voice? what deadness and
straitness do usually attend the one, and what life and enlargement the other?
Hence we find that the ancient Christians, when they set upon the service of
God, did on purpose take in the body to assist the soul, and further their
devotion in it. Witness that of Augustine: by words Vertis and aliis signis ad
augendum desiderium sanctum nos ipsos acrius excitamus. Ep. 121. Adjungitur vox
tali oratione, etc. 22. q 83. ^. ^2. c.
(says he) and other signs we greatly excite our selves to increase holy
desire. And upon this and such like grounds, Aquinas teaches, that prayer,
though secret, may be vocal; or, that in our closet-performances, when we have
no spectators but God and Angels, we may use the voice. Anatomists say, there
are certain strings that come from the heart to the tongue, so that the
agitation and motion of the tongue, does stir and shake the heart, and thereby
awaken and affect it, rendering it more vigorous and lively in its present
services. If therefore, when we are waiting upon God in secret, we find our
hearts dead and liveless, we may make use of the tongue, for the quickening of
them, and rendering them more fit, for the enjoyment of communion with him, and
better carrying on of his service. The truth is, such is the indisposition of
our hearts to good, that they are apt, like Eutichus, Acts. 29. 9.
to drop asleep in the service of God, and therefore we have need of something
to awaken them; and if we find the voice will do it, we may use it. If we find
them lively and in good frame, and fit for the service we are about, we may
then spare it, and pray as Hannah did, 1 Samuel 1. 13.
in her heart; but if otherwise, we may, and ought to use it. This I speak of
the duty of prayer, and that prayer which is secret; the use of the voice is
also necessary when one prays in the person of many, as the Master in his
family, or the Minister in the Congregation. Those that are to join with them,
are to know what Petitions they make, and say Amen to them, which they cannot
do, except they use the voice. And as the voice is thus to be used in the
worship of God, so must other parts of the body, as the occasion serves, and
the nature of the duty requires. And this is the common Doctrine of
Protestants; and therefore it is an unworthy slander of Maldonate the Jesuit,
Adorare, interpretantur sola^ fide adorare in loc. Psalm. 120. 3.
that the Calvinists interpret worshipping in spirit, a worshipping with faith
alone, as if they were Solifidians, and against all external services. Now what
shall be done to thee thou false tongue, sharp arrows of the Almighty and coals
of Juniper? This is even as true, as that the Devil ran away with Luther, that
Calvin dyed blaspheming, that Beza recanted, that Junius had a cloven foot.
Nay, this is as true as that their St. Patrick caused the stolen Sheep to bleat
in the belly of him that had eaten it, that St. Lupus shut the Devil all night
up in a Tanckard, that St. Dunstan held him fast by the nose with a pair of
Tongs, that St. Dominick made him hold him the Candle till he burnt his
fingers, with abundance of such ridiculous, childish fables, which yet their
deluded vulgar, take to be as true as the Gospel it self. Let any man that has
eyes but read Calvin himself on the Text, Omnibus seculis fide, precibus,
gratiarum action, puritate cordis, vitae innocentia coli Deus voluit.
and he shall find him speaking not only for faith and purity of heart, but
likewise for prayer, giving of thanks and innocence of life. Nay their own
Cajetan has spoken as much, if not more, upon this Text for internal worship,
than Calvin has done. In spirit, that is, (says he) not in the Mount, not in
Jerusalem, In spiritu] non in monte, non Hier solymis, non in loco aliquo, etc.
not in any place, not with temporal worship, not with the tongue, but with
inward worship consisting in spirit, that is, in the mind, as it bears the
office of the spirit, and lays out it self in spiritual matters. What if
Calvin had said all this, then the angry Jesuit would sure have opened his
mouth indeed. But we may not wonder that the Jesuits carry it thus toward us.
Their friend Jarrigius has told us what kind of dealing we are to expect from
them. Answer to the Calumnies of Beauses. p. 30.
It is (says he, speaking to one of them) your ordinary custom, according to
the secret and mysterious rules of the society, to impose things upon the
pastors of the reformed Churches, in your injurious and treacherous
refutations, and make the world believe they say what never came into their
thoughts. A Jesuits tongue then, is no slander; but no more of this.

2. Though it be our duty in these days of the Gospel to worship God in truth
or without the use of Ceremonies, yet we do not understand this to the
exclusion,

1. Of such Ceremonies as are of divine institution. When Christ abolished the
Jewish and Samaritan Ceremonies, he instead thereof instituted some of another
nature, that were to continue. Of this sort are water in Baptism, bread and
wine in the Supper, Primum omnium constat in ceremoniaarum albo esse
sacramenta, etc. Panstrat. t. 4. de sacrament. l. 1. c. 10. sect. 2. p. 19. Nec
vero fidem habeat Caesarea Majestas his qui ut odia contra nos inflamment miras
calumnias spargunt, etc August. Conf. art 21. p. 40.
with the several actions pertaining to them. That these are Ceremonies, both
Papists and Protestants (as Chamier shows) grant; and that they are of divine
institution, none but infidels will deny. And these ceremonies (notwithstanding
what has been said) we willingly own and observe, and both desire and
endeavor that others may do the like. And therefore the Papists, as they wrong
us in the former case, so they do in this, telling the world that we are
against all Ceremonies whatsoever. This was it that occasioned that request of
the Lutherans to the Emperor Charles the fifth at the Diet in Augusta: Let not
(say they) your imperial Majesty give credit to those, who, that they may the
better render us odious, disperse strange calumnies against us. They give it
out that we abolish all ceremonies, and all good manners in the Churches. These
things are notoriously false; we do not only preserve such ceremonies as are of
divine institution with highest respect, but that we might increase the
reverence of them, have also taken away certain late abuses, which have by the
corruption of the times been brought in, without any certain authority,
contrary to Scripture, contrary to the ancient canons, contrary to the example
of the ancient Church. So far they. We think it meet to distinguish betwixt the
institutions of God, and the inventions of men; as for the former, we readily
embrace them* as for the latter, we utterly renounce, and disclaim them.

2. Neither (...) understand it to the exclusion of such circumstances, as are
necessary to the solemn and decent carrying on of the worship of God. As our
Savior* notwithstanding what he says in the Text, allows us the use of the
ceremonies above mentioned, so he does likewise, the use of such circumstances,
as are requisite to the orderly management of his service. The main things
belonging to his service, God himself has determined, as what ordinances he
will have used, what discipline he will have exercised, what officers he will
have employed, and what duties he will have performed; and these must by all
means be kept sacred and inviolable. It lies not in the power of Church, State,
or any humane authority whatsoever, to reverse or alter all, or any thing
thereof; nay it were intolerable presumption, so much as to attempt it. What
presumption then is the Church of Rome guilty of, that forbids so many things
that God allows and commands; and allows and commands so many things that he
forbids? therein (like their predecessors the Scribes and Pharisees) making the
commandment of God of none effect by their tradition. Mat. 15. 6.


Other things there are that be of less moment, as the proper modes and
circumstances wherewith the forementioned institutions are to be carried on;
and these he has not determined himself, but left to the prudence of the
Church, in the choice and determination whereof, she is to steer her course by
those general rules, the Holy Ghost has set down in Scripture, for the guiding
her in this matter. To have set down particular directions for every individual
case that occurs and varies every day would have been in endless matter, Leges
a me edentur non perfectae: nam esset infinitum. Cicero. t. 2. de Legib. l. 2.
p. 326.
and have swelled our rule, that now lies in a narrow compass, to no less than
a stupendous voluminousness; and therefore the Holy Ghost waving that, as both
a needless and unprofitable work, gave us only particular directions for
fundamentals, and general directions, De rebus ad gubernationem Ecclesiae
pertinentibus Apostoli certos quosdam canones tradiderunt quos ordine
subjiciemus, etc. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 7. (Ed. Basil.) p. 407. ad 418.
for circumstantials, impowring and appointing the Church, to accommodate and
apply them to particular cases so as might tend most to the advantage and
furtherance of the Gospel, and her own edification and benefit. To tell you
what and how many these directions be, would be a work too great for this
place. Those who have a mind to know them, may have recourse to the
Centuriators of Magdenburg, who have with much diligence and exactness,
collected and digested them in the very words of the Scripture, into an entire
systeme of Canons or rules of Church Government. I shall only instance in those
noted words of the Apostle to the Church of Corinth. Let all things (says he)
be done to edifying. 1 Cor. 14. 26. 40. (...). p. 52.
And, let all things be done decently and in order. Clemens Romanns who was his
fellow labourer, and wrote an Epistle to the same place, has a passage to the
same purpose. We ought (says he) to do all things in order. That is to say, in
order to the due carrying on of Gods worship, we must make choice of a fit
time, convenient place, decent habit, suitable gesture, and such proper
utensils as the nature of the ordinance, and service we are about call for,
laboring by all means to avoid irreverence, disorder and scandal. But whiles
we are improving these and such like expressions, for a liberty in this kind,
we must take heed of stretching them too far, and going beyond our bounds, lest
we fall into the tents of the Philistines. It was through this passage that
superstition wound in her head, and afterward introduced the whole fardle of
humane inventions. It is through this gap that light and sensual men have
brought their innovations and vanities into the worship of God, to the great
prejudice of religion, and reproach of the Christian cause. For whiles they
pretend to do it for edifying, they do little less than subvert the very
worship of God it self, presenting him with a company of childish, foolish
ceremonies instead of inward devotion, managing the work that should be carried
on with so much seriousness, spirituality and simplicity, as if it were a mere
sport or play, ordained on purpose for the gratifying of the flesh. And whiles
they pretend to do it for decency and order, they beget little else than
disorder and confusion.

I know very well, that many amongst us who make the Scripture like the Materia
prima, and draw quidlibet ex quolibet, put great confidence in this place of
the Apostle, touching decency and order, urging it upon all occasions in
defense of the Ceremonies. Dr. Burgess treading the steps of Hosius, Eckius,
and other Papists, who urge it for their Sacramentals, makes great account of
it, telling us, it is the only place for the Churches Power, in constituting
Ecclesiastical Ceremonies; Bradshaw modest disc. of Cerem. p. 5. Ames. Fresh
Suit. part 2. p. 51.
but how little it makes either for him, or them, diverse learned men have at
large showed. And the thing is of it self evident; for 1. The Apostle speaks
not of constituting, or making any New matters, but of the due disposal and
managing of such things as were already made. 2. We must understand him of such
things as he in that place discourses of, which occasioned this his advice, and
those were not Ceremonies, but mere Circumstances of Order. He requires, that
he that speaks in the Church, speak in a known tongue, so as he may be
understood; that the Prophets when they prophecy, do it (...), one by one,
submitting themselves to the judgment of others; that the women in Religious
Assemblies, keep silence, and the like; and what is all this to mystical,
doctrinal Ceremonies? 3. He propounds a Rule, by which these, and such like
matters, must be regulated; let all things (says he) be done, (...), according
to order; and what is this (...) or Order, but that which he himself in this
place prescribes?

But to return where I was; that Christ in Circumstantials has left his Church
some power, is granted; but she must take heed lest in the exercising of it,
she go beyond her limits. As she must take heed of neglecting those
conveniences, tha^ he does allow her, so she must likewise take heed of
transgressing her bounds, and going too far; and that both as to the nature and
number of her constitutions. As to the nature of them, she must (if she expect
to be obeyed) take heed of framing such things as are liable to just exception,
and imposing them on her members with rigor and severity. Christ has dealt
tenderly with her, and it may not become her to deal austerely and harshly with
them. As they, on the one hand must remember to show her filial respect, beware
of contemning her Authority, and not but upon very weighty grounds reject what
she recommends to them; so, she on the other hand, Davenant de Jud. Cont. c.
26. p. 145. Grotius de Im^. c. 8. sect. 8. p. 86.
must take heed of provoking them to wrath, or showing her self cruel,
remembering her Authority (as some of her wisest Sons have told us) is not
coercive, but directive, not imperative, but declarative. And if it so fall
out, that some of them refuse to close with, or obey any or all of her
injunctions, she must not presently interpret it, a perverse obstinacy against
her (whiles they are known to be sound in all fundamentals, of holy lives, and
peaceable spirits) but fear of offending God, whom above all (as she her self
has taught them) they must labor to please, suspecting not only their
affection and fidelity to her, but the equity of her impositions on them,
considering her self to be fallible, and liable to mistakes, as whole
multitudes of repealed Canons do abundantly show.

And in reference to the number of her constitutions, she must take heed of
transgressing her bounds that way; she must beware of breaking forth into an
unbridled licentiousness, as the Church of Rome has done, making her members
groan and sigh under the multitude of her decrees and impositions. As she must
take care that those things she frames be requisite and necessary (at least
innocent and lawful) so she must take care they be few in their number, Christi
praesentia, quantum in se est, Ecclesiam spoliant quicunque eam gravant
immodica ceremoniarum turba. Calvin. in Joh. 4. 23.
lest they become burdensome, and take her members of higer and greater
matters. And when her constitutions are warrantable both in respect of the
nature, and number of them, it is our duty to close with them, and we should
greatly offend if we should refuse to do it. So long as her determinations in
particular cases be consonant to the general Rules she is to walk by, we must
by no means deny our obedience. But if she make such constitutions as are
unwarrantable for the nature, or number of them, or both, and impose them on us
with rigor, Hos. 2. 2. (...) Judicate matrem, judicate. Vulg. Contendite, cum
ma^re vestra, cantendite. Pagn.
she must not think it much if we disobey her; nay, if (according to the
authority granted us, and the trust reposed in us) we stand up for our own
liberty fit in Judgment upon her, and plead with her. And so much for the
Cautions, as also the doctrinal part of this Discourse.

6. I am now in the last place, in pursuance of the propounded Method, to give
you the Uses of the point.

And 1. May be for Information, to teach us these two particulars. 1. Use I.
That the Catholic Church is invisible. Amongst other points disputed betwixt
us, and the Papists, this is one, Whether the Catholic Church be invisible? we
say it is, they say it is not. Dr. Whitaker (to mention no more) has learnedly
and judiciously discussed this point; and amongst other Texts, which he urges
for confutation of them, Si ea sola sit vera Christi Catholica Ecclesia quae
spiritu and veritate Deum colit and veneratur, tum Ecclesia Catholica est
invisibilis, etc. t. 1. Controv. 2. q. 2. de Eccles. p. 461.
this I am now upon, is one. His Argument runs thus; If that only (says he) be
the true Catholic Church of Christ, that does worship and serve God in spirit
and in truth, then the Catholic Church is invisible; but the former is true,
and therefore so is the latter. And indeed the consequence is evident; for such
as the worship is, such is the Church. If the Worship be invisible, so is the
Church. If we see not who they are that worship God in spirit and in truth, we
neither see which is the true Church; for, that is (...) Worship Christ has
appointed, and does enable that Society which is his true Church, to worship
him with. Were the Church a body merely politic, like other incorporated
Societies, the Papists might upon better grounds, tell us, it is as visible as
the Commonwealth of the Venetians, or the Kingdom of France, or Spain, but it
is not so; it is, as the Apostle calls it, (...), a spiritual house, standing
on a spiritual foundation, made up of spiritual materials, and governed after a
spiritual manner. 1 Pet. 2. 5.
Or were it a body merely Physical, they might on better grounds plead for its
Visibility, but it is not so: it is a mystical body, and a spiritual body. Now
that which is spiritual, is not the object of sense, but faith, 1 Cor. 15. 44.
Heb. 11. 1.
which is the evidence of things not seen. The Church therefore being thus
spiritual, is not visible to the Eye, but credible (if I may so speak) to the
Mind. Hence that passage in the Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Chruch;
intimating, its certain there is an holy Catholic Church, but withal, that its
invisible. Indeed, in respect of its accidental and external form, it is
visible, Videmus eum c^tum hominum qui est Ecclesia sed quod ille caetus sit
ipsa vera Christi Ecclesia, non videmus. t. 2. l. 3. c. 15. de Eccles. milit.
and as visible as other Societies; but in respect of its essential and inward
form, which is that which gives it its being, and is mainly to be looked after,
it is altogether invisible. To know who they be that profess, as Church Members,
is easy, but to know who they be that believe, worship, and live as such, is
not so. And thus much Bellarmine grants; and what is this but to grant us all we
contend for, and say as we do?

2. That a ceremonious Worship in the days of the Gospel, is utterly unlawful
and unwarrantable, contrary to the will of God, the design of Christ, and the
nature of the dispensation he has put his Church under. Novas figuras velumb
as ullas in Ec clesiam invehere nefariam esse audaciam, etc. In loc.
This is Beza's inference. To introduce (says he) new Figures, or any Shaddows
into the Church, we affirm out of the Word of God (who does so expressly condemn
all Will Worship, and in times past prohibited the bringing of strange Fire to
his Altar) is wicked audaciousness. If it belong to God to prescribe his own
Worship, and he has been pleased in his word to do it, therein telling us that
he will be worshipped in spirit and in truth, (that is, as you have heard, with
the inner man, and in simplicity, without the use of (ceremonies) then to
introduce and set up a ceremonious Worship, must needs be wicked audaciousness.
It is no less then an affronting his Majesty, a contemning his Authority, a
resisting of his Will, and so no doubt will be interpreted by him. Had he only
commanded us to worship him in general, and left the specification or manner of
it to us, then we had been free, and might have worshipped him either one way
or other, either with Ceremonies, or without, as our own inclinations had
carried us. But after he has not only called upon us to worship him, but has
determined the manner of his Worship, and said plainly, This kind of Worship
does best suit with me, this kind of Woship I will have, this kind of Worship I
seek after; for us to go and set up another kind of Worship of our own heads,
and offer that to him, what is it but to mock him? What is it but to tell him
he shall not be worshipped as he will, but as we will, than which, what can be
greater impudence?

The second Use may be for Reprehension, to reprove two sorts of Persons.

1. Such as worship God, Use II.
but not in spirit. There are many that think if they do but worship him with
the outward man, they need not trouble themselves about the inner; if they do
but present and engage their Bodies in the work, it matters not what they do
with their Spirits. Though they hear that God is a Spirit, and would have
spiritual Worship, that he prefers it above all other Worship, nay, that all
other Worship is vain without it, yet when they approach to him, they present
him with their Bodies, but withold their Spirits. Thus the Worshippers of
Baal used to carry themselves; 1 King. 18. 26, 28.
witness Ahabs Prophets, of whom the Scripture testifies, that when (upon that
famous contest betwixt Elijah, and them) they prayed to Baal) they cried aloud,
leaped upon the Altar, cut themselves after their manner, with Knives and
Lances, till the blood gushed out upon them. They laid not out themselves in
ardency of holy affection, or spiritual importunity, but in shouting and making
a noise, thinking (according to the manner of the Heathens) that they should be
heard for their much speaking. And when that would not do, Mat. 6. 7.
they leap and cut themselves, hoping thereby to stir up their careless sleepy
Deity to audience.

But it is not Heathens only, that have contented themselves with outside
Worship: Others that either did or might have known better, have done the like.
Thus the Jews carried themselves, as appears by that sad complaint of God by
the Prophet Isaiah: This People (says he) draw near to me with their mouth,
Isa 29: 13
and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart far from me.
They worshipped God with the outward man, with the incurvation of the Body, but
not with the inner man, not with the heart. Though they had heard much of the
Omnisciency of God, his indignation against Hypocrisy, his calling for the
heart, and the vanity and detestableness of all services without it, yet did
they withold it from him. And thus the Scribes and Pharisees behaved
themselves in after times, as appears by our Savior, who complains of them in
these very words of the Prophet Isaiah, Mat. 15. 7, 8.
which I have now recited: Ye Hypocrites (says he) Well did Esaias prophecy of
you, saying, This People draws nigh unto me with their mouth, and honors
me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. That which God looks most
after, that they kept furthest from him, that which would have been most
acceptable, that they were lothest to part with. They made a great ado about
their outward actions, and looked that they were acurate and decent, and in the
mean time their hearts which he called for, they withheld from him.

And the Papists, though they arose too late to be mentioned in Scripture, yet
are (as all know) notorious for their vanity, both as to their Doctrine and
Practice, in this particular. As to their Doctrine, hear what the Jesuits
(that Society of Angels, that flight of Phoenixes, as they style themselves)
teach. Mist. of Jes. p. 51, 123, 134.
Among other rare Maxims, which they have framed to facilitate the exercise of
holy things, take these instead of many. They say it is enough to be bodily
present at the Mass, Additionals, p. 82.
though a man be absent as to the mind; provided he behave himself with a
certain external reverence: That a man fulfills the Precept of hearing Mass,
even though he have not the intention to hear it: That when two Persons say
over their Breviaries at the same time, they may repeat each of them his Verse
at the same time, not troubling themselves about any thing of attention, to
what they do, because it is not any way necessary. Nay, in order to Peoples
obtaining of Heaven (because they will not perhaps be at the trouble of any
active Devotions) they let them know, it is sufficient for them to have always a
pair of Beads about the arms, after the manner of a Bracelet, or to have a
Rosary about them, or some Picture of the Virgin. These are strange Maxims
(you would think) yet are they delivered to us by no meaner men, than Gaspar
Hurtado, Vasquez, Caramuel, and such like. And if we leave them, and go to the
Papal Chair, the pretended seat of Apostolical Wisdom and infallibility, what
liberal Indulgences does his Holiness grant upon most frivolous and childish
grounds? In the Chruch of St. Eusebius at Rome, Pet. Du Moulin Confut. of
Purgatory c. 1. p. 8, 9.
they have (as a good Author tells us) seven thousand four hundred fifty and
four Quarentines of days of very Pardon. for such as shall bring thither any
honest offering, and afford (as the words of the Bull do run) manus
porrigentibus adjutriees, their helping hands to such as seek to them. In the
Church of St. Mary-deliver-us-from-the-pains-of-hell, (for that is the Churches
name) there are daily granted eleven thousand years of indulgence to such as
shall bring an honest offering; that is to say, shall give (not to the poor
indeed, but) to the rich Monks. In the Church of St. Praxede, you have daily
twelve thousand years of very Pardon, and as many Quarentines of days, with the
remission of the third part of your sins, in such manner, that visiting the
Church three days in a row, you shall purchase plenary pardon of all your sins,
and six and thirty thousand years by provision, besides the Quarentines, which
the Popes have since increased, to sixscore thousand years for every day. Sir
Edw. Sandys Europ. Spec. p. 23.
And another Author of eminent note, who was amongst them, tells us, that Pope
John the twentieth, that he might make things yet more easy, granted forth an
Indulgence, that every inclining of the head at the Name of Jesus, should get
twenty years pardon. And Hassenmallerus informs us, That being in Rome,
Cardinal Farnsey's Notary gave him an Image blessed by Pope Pius the Fifth,
Vid. Cham. Epist. Jes. p. 116.
in which were inscribed these words; He that on the feasts of the blessed
Virgin Mary, falling down before this Image, thrice says his Paternoster, and
Ave-Maria, gains two thousand years Indulgence: and he who devoutly worships it
every day, gains twelve thousand years Indulgence.

Thus you see what encouragement those that pass for Guides and Leaders amongst
them, give their people, to rest in external services. What their practice then
is, they being generally so Ignorant and Carnal as they are, you may. (had you
nothing of your own Observation, or common same to inform you) easily imagine.

But we need not travel so far from home for instances of this nature: there
are many, even among our selves that stand deeply guilty of this sin, serving
God sometimes with their Bodies, but seldom or never with their Souls. There
are many amongst us of such a frame, that if they do but observe the Bell, come
together into the presence of God at the hour of Prayer, and there abide a
while with their Bodies, though their Souls are at the ends of the earth, they
think they have done all that is commanded, and may expect a blessing. They
think if they can but follow the Calendar, go over their Divine Offices (as
they call them) stand up, kneel down, cringe, bow, and answer in their turns,
they have (choose where the heart is all this while) done God good service. But
alas, what is all this to the purpose? What Is all this in comparison of what God
requires? What Is all this in comparison of one serious, hearty, humble prayer,
accompanied with ture contrition, and lively faith? Constantinus Copronimus,
the Eastern Emperor was wont to say, Quid sine pectore corpus? what is the body
without the soul? What are stately Cathedrals, melodious Music, costly
Hangings, rich Vtensils, gaudy Vestments, and all the gestures and postures
imaginable, without a praying heart? Though our Worship be never so splendid
and pompous, decked with the most exquisite humane ornaments, yet unless the
heart engage in it, it is in vain, nay odious and abominable. It is to be
wished then, that men would stand less upon matters of this nature, and look
more after the heart.

2. Such as worship God but not in truth. Many are of such a temper, that they
know not how to worship him, unless it be in a ceremonious way. They have so
inured themselves to Ceremonies, and taken such affection to them, that they
scarcely know how to do any thing in the service of God without them: so that
take away them, and you serve them as Jacob did Laban: you take away their
gods, and with them, Genesis 31. 30.
their worship, happiness, and all at once. Though they hear over and over
again, that God has declared against such kind of worship, told them, that it
is not pleasing to him, that the time of it is expired, and the like, yet they
are not satisfied, but they must, and will have it. And herein they much
aggravate their sin, that not conrenting themselves with those Ceremonies,
which are of divine institution (whereof I gave you account before) they frame
others of their own heads, which they do not only equal with, but prefer before
them. Thus the Scribes and Pharisees; as if all those Ceremonies God appointed
by Moses had been too few, they must have some of their own, which they were
very exact (choose what became of the other) in the observation of. What a stir
did they keep about washing of hands, Mark 7. 4.
cups, pots, brazen vessels, tables, and such like things, which they did not
only use themselves, but impose on others, and that with so much zeal and
rigor, that they were ready to quarrel with Christ's Disciples, because they
did not do, as they did? And what ado likewise did they make with their
Phylacteries and fringes? not contenting themselves with those prescribed by
God, Numb. 15. 38, 39.
they would have greater, such as would be more seen, and with a louder voice
proclaim their zeal and sanctity. They made broad (says the Evangelist) their
Phylacteries, and enlarged the borders of their garments. They thought those
appointed by the Law were too little, Mat. 23. 5.
and did not sufficiently bespeak their good affection and devotion (which they
desired all might take notice of, and admire them for) and therefore they made
them such as would be seen further, and speak louder, and these they wore with
much pride and ostentation.

And in this ceremonious, superstitious humor, the Papists imitate them to the
life. As they imitate them in their Hypocrisy, so they do likewise in their
superstition. Mundus oneratus est constitutionibus humanis, oneratus est
opinionibus and dogmatibus scholasticis, tyrannide fratrum mendicantium, etc.
Vol. Epist. l. 12 Epist. ad Card. Mogunt.
Hence that serious complaint of Erasmus; The world (says he) is laden with
humane constitutions; it is laden with the opinions and doctrines of the
Schoolmen, with the tyranny of the mendicant Friars, who though they are the
Vassals of the Sea of Rome, are yes so potent and numerous, that they are
formidable to the very Pope, and Kings themselves. Jerusalem it self, when she
was under the paedagogical Administration, and when the Ceremonial Law was at
the height, had not more Ceremonies than Rome has at this day. There was not a
Ceremony among the Jews, which they have not either in the same kind, p. 422.
Neque illic minor est umbrarum densitas quam fuit olim sub Judaismo. Calvin. in
Joh. 4. 23. Nihil fuit inter omnes Ceremonias Judaicas cui non simile and
aequivalens aliquid inplerisque, and ejusdem generis multa plura reperiantur
inter Pontificios, etc. Ames. Bell. Enerv. t. 1. p. 257.
or somewhat equivalent to. Nay, as if that were not sufficient, they have
taken up many used by the Heathens, which the Jews had not, nor any thing like
them.

And how far many amongst us, that pretend to be come out of Babylon, and to
have cast of communion with her, do symbolize with them, I need not tell you.
Now what manifest disobeying, nay, presumptuous contradicting is this of Jesus
Christ? Will he have the Law of Ceremonies abrogated, and will men (and such
too as pretend to be his obedient servants) have it continued? Does he say, God
must be worshipped without Ceremonies? and do they say, he shall be worshipped
with them? What Is this but a thrusting themselves into his Throne, an invading
of his Authority, and a laying hold on his Sovereignty and Dominion? What Is
this but to charge him with insufficiency, and say, he is unfit to govern the
Church, or be the Head of it? And is this the respect they have for him? Is
this the thanks they give him for their Redemption: for his saving them from
the curse of the Moral- Law, and yoke of the Ceremonial? Who would ever think
that any that carry the names of Christians, and desire the setting up of his
Kingdom and Government, should deal thus unworthily with him? Either he is our
Lord, of not; fnot, why do we profess he is? if he be, why do we not obey him?

The third Use may be for Exhortation, Use III.
to persuade all to worship God in spirit and in truth. This is the Worship God
himself has prescribed, and by his Son propounded to us, and therefore let us
all, without any disputing or drawing back, close with it.

1. Let us worship him in spirit. When ever we come into his presence, let us
beware we leave not our spirits behind us;let us be sure we take them along with
us, and engage them in the work. What ever service or duty we set upon, let us
be sure to employ our spirits in it. Let thine heart (says God) keep my
Commandments. Prove. 3. 1.
The heart is the thing he chiefly calls for, expects, and eyes in all our
performances; and therefore when ever we address our selves to him, let us be
sure to bring our hearts along with us, present them to him, and keep them in
order, whiles they are before him. When we go into his presence to sanctify
his name, and humble our selves, 1 Pet. 3. 15.
let us do it with the heart. When we pray unto him, praise him, 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
Isa. 26. 9. Psalm. 9. 1. Col. 3. 16. 1 Chronicles. 30. 19.
sing Psalms, let us do it with the heart. When we read or hear his Word,
receive the Sacrament, or celebrate any other Ordinance; let us do it with the
heart. One grain of heart-service, is of more account with him than Mountains
of all other services whatsoever. He would rather have one bleeding heart
offered to him upon the Altar of his Sons Merits, than many thousands of Oxen
upon Altars of Stone. He is more pleased with the sighs of a contrite heart,
than the costliest incense that ever was presented to him. The heart is the
thing he has pitched upon, and he will either have it or nothing. He stands so
much upon it in all our sacrifices, that though other things be mean, yet if
that be there, to animate and put life into them, he will accept of them; and
if other things be never so costly, and that be wanting, he will not endure
them. Set the heart aside, Isa. 66. 3.
and he that kills an Ox, is as if he slew a man: He that sacrifices a
Lamb, as if he cut off a Dogs neck: He that offers an oblation, as if he
offered Swines blood: He that burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol. Alas,
men mistake the nature of Religion, imagining it consists in that it does not.
They look to their outward actions, and keep a great stir about them, whereas
he regards them not any further than the heart concurs with them. What cares he
for the expression of the tongue, lifting up the eyes, smiting the breast,
bowing the knees, or any such outward actions? he matters them not a jot
further than the heart joins with them. What cares he for a man's making a good
Profession, unless he have good affection; for his speaking like an Angel,
unless he mean accordingly; for his seeming to be holy; unless he be so indeed?
What cares he for a man's outward engaging in the common duties of Religion,
while he inwardly hates them; for his giving him the knee in prayer, while he
denies him the heart; for his hearing the word while he does not believe it?
What cares he for his sitting with Christ at the Sacrament, while he has a
design to betray him? for his going in Pilgrimage to his Sepulcher, while he
daily crucifies him at home; for his wearing hair-cloath on his back, while he
nourishes Pride and Hypocrisy in his soul? Do you care for a man that smiles
in your face, and speaks you fair, but inwardly hates you, and plots your
ruin? No more does God care for a man's specious pretenses, unless his heart be
with him. If therefore you would worship God regularly, acceptably,
comfortably, see that you worship him in spirit.

Now that I may the better evince to you the reasonableness of this worshipping
God in spirit, and provoke you to it, I shall offer to your thoughts these
following Queries.

1. Whether has not God propriety in your souls, as well as in your bodies?
Did not he make the one, as well as the other? Did not he redeem the one, as
well as the other? Has he not furnished you with proper and suitable supplies
for the one as well as the other? Nay, have not you solemnly resigned to him
the one, as well as the other? If you have, with what color or show of reason,
can you withold from him the one, any more than the other? If we consult the
Scripture, we shall find, that though God challenge a propriety both in soul
and body, yet he challenges a propriety in the former in an especial manner,
Psalm. 24. 4.
calling it his soul. That has not (says he) lift up my soul to vanity. In
the Original, according to the Kethib, or Line, it is, as our translation
renders it. (...) his soul, but according to the Keri, or Marginal correction,
it is (...) my soul; God thereby intimating that the soul is his, and that in a
peculiar manner, as a thing that he has title to in many respect. But if you
think this not clear enough, hear what he says in another place. Ezekiel. 18. 4.
All souls (says he) are in me. All Souls! yes, and all bodies too; but souls
are his in an eminent way. Every soul in the world is his, made by him, under
his eye, and at his disposal. The souls of Parents and Children, rich and poor,
Princes and people, are all his. Now, if the soul, as well as the body be Gods,
what more equal, than that you should at his command worship him with it? were
it your own, you might withold it, but being his, and that too, which he
mainly respects, and looks after, you cannot without guilt of high injustice do
it.

2. Whether is he not worthy of your souls, and the best service you are
capable of doing him with them? Though the soul be (as you have heard) an
excellent being, yet sure if it were far better than it is, it were not too
good for him. What, did he not think it too good to bestow it on you, and that
before it was tainted with the least spot of sin, and will you think it now too
good for him? Nay, did he not think his own Son, with all the blessings of the
Covenant of Grace too good for you, and yet will you think your Souls too good
for him, and withold them from joining with your Bodies in his Worship? There
is not a Soul, no nor an Angel in Heaven, that thinks himself too good to be
employed in his service, but is ready to undertake the meanest Office for him;
and shall we poor Mortals think our selves, or any thing belonging to us, too
good to be laid out for him? By no means. We should rather say, Come Lord, here
is my Soul, take it to thy self, and use it as thou will. It is indeed my
Darling, but were it ten thousand times better and dearer to me than it is, I
should not think it too good for thee. Such as it is, it is thine; Oh that it
were better for thee!

3. Whether should you not let him have that in your Worship, which he judges
and measures all by? That you ought without question to do, and consequently
you ought to let him have the heart, for that he reckons all by. Solomon says
of a man, Prove. 23. 7.
As he thinks in his heart, so is he; that is, both in himself, and in Gods
account: As God finds his heart, so he esteems of him; if he find it good, he
esteems him good; and if he finds it bad, he esteems him bad. And as he esteems
of every man by his heart, so he esteems of his service by it. If the heart be
in it, he accounts it good, and if the heart be not in it, he accounts it bad.
Let a man but give God his heart, and he over-looks other infirmities, and if
he deny him that, let him do never so much, it is all lost labor. The Scripture
affords instances of both: On the one hand, 1 King. 15. 14.
Asa, though a good King, missed it in many things: he executed not the Law
upon his idolatrous Mother, removed not the high places, and the like; yet
because his heart was right, God accepted him. On the other hand, Jehu, though
a bad King, did many good Works; 2 King. 10. 31.
destroyed Ababs house, slew the Worshippers of Baal, with other good service;
yet because his heart was not right, all was in vain. The Jesuits indeed, as
if they were resolved to make themselves the laughing-stocks, as well as the
hatred of all good Christians, speak so lightly of the Souls engaging in the
service of God, as if it were indifferent whether a man understand what he
does, Vid. Becan. t. 3. c. 8. q. 1 sect. 10.
or not; nay, whether he do it by himself or by another. Hence they use, as a
learned Writer of our own tells us, Jesuitis est in more aleae lusu interse
contendere, etc. Ames. Bell. Enerv. t. 2. p. 23 4.
to cast the Die which shall say Prayer for the other. Whether such Devotion as
this be proper, or like to find acceptance, let any one that has but one grain
of a Christian Spirit left him, judge.

4. Whether do you not employ your Souls in far meaner and lower Offices than
the service of God? When you go forth into the World, do not you take them
along with you? When you go out into your Shops, into the Market, into the
Fields. have you not them with you? Do you not use their assistance in every
Bargain, advise with them in every Business, and do what ever you do with their
concurrence? Do not you make them Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, cause
them to attend on every vain and frivolous undertaking, and prostitute them to
the very Dunghils? Nay, do you not vex and grieve them with anxious and thorny
Cares, about the poorest and basest matters, insomuch that you sometimes make
them weary of their Habitations, and long to be divorced from them? And will
you thus employ your Heaven-born Souls, innobled with such rare and excellent
faculties in things of this nature, and yet think them too good to be employed
in the service of God, wherein the glorious Angels themselves so much delight?
What Is this but most wretchedly to debase your selves, and provoke God that
gave you your Souls, to tear them away from you?

5. Whether would you not have God to let you have his heart in all that he
does for you? When he bestows upon you Corn, and Wine, and suchlike benefits,
would you not that he should do it with his Heart, without designs of
dereliction or obduration? Would you be content that whiles he stretches forth
his hand of bounty, and fills your mouths with his outward blessings, he should
in the mean time withold his heart from you? Genesis 4. 14.
Alas, what did it avail Cain to be Adam's firstborn, and Heir of all the
World, when God would not own him? Or what did it avail Esau to be the first
born of the wealthy Isaac, and elder Brother to the Princely Jacob, Genesis 16. 13
when the Lord hates him? Upon these and suchlike confiderations, I cannot but
think but you would have God, whatever he does for you, to let you have his
heart with it. Every good man says, Lord, whatever thou do for me, let me
have thy heart with it: Though thou give me the Bread of Adversity, and the
Water of Affliction, yet let me have thy heart with it: Though I have never so
little from thee, let me have thy heart in it. Now what you would that God
should do to you, the same do ye to him. If ye would that he should let you
have his heart in what he does for you, let him have yours, in what you do for
him.

6. Whether would you not have your service accepted of God? If you would not,
what do you tender it for? Do you think it worth the while to mock him, or that
you may do it with safety: If you would have your service accepted, then engage
your hearts in it: for, assure your selves, do what you will, all is in vain
without it. Simon Magus believed, was baptized, continued with Philip, and
wondered at the Miracles and Signs which were done; and what was he the better
for all this? Act. 8. 21.
Thou have neither part nor lot (says Peter) in this matter; for thy heart is
not right in the sight of God: Observe here how far this man went; he
acknowledged the truth of the Gospel, received the Seal of the Covenant,
associates himself with the Servants of Christ, (which others were afraid to
do) is affected with their wonders, desires ability to do the like, and that so
earnestly that he offers money for it; but his heart is not right, and that
mars all. Had it been right, though he had done less, it would have been
enough; but that being wrong, though he did more, it was too little. Faith and
Holiness are so necessary to the acceptance both of our Persons and Services,
that without them all is in vain. Herein the Scripture is most plain: For one
and the same Apostle shows that without the former it is impossible to please
God, Heb. 11. 6. 12. 14.
and without the latter it is impossible to see him. Now this being so, be sure
when ever you present your selves before the Lord, to have your hearts and
affections with you, and engage them in his service, 1 Cor. 15. 58.
and then your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord, as the labor of
Hypocrites, and all such painted Sepulchers, is; but then you shall make your
way prosperous, Josh. 1. 8.
and then you shall have good success.

2. Let Us worship God in Truth. Whiles Jews, Pagans, Optarim omniaquam
simplicissime fieri, etc. P. Martyr, Ep. Amico cuid. in Angl. p. 1127. Col. 2.
8.
and such as symbolize with them, do contrary to his Command, worship him in
the use of Rites and Ceremonies, let us in obedience to it, worship him in
truth. Let Us beware lest any man spoil us through Philosophy and vain deceit,
after the Tradition of men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after
Christ. The Jewish Ceremonies, which we are mainly to look after, as having
been once of Divine Institution, were crucified (as you have already heard)
with Christ, and died with him; and the Christian Church did after a time
decently (as it were) interr them, and lay them in their grave; and let not us
now offer to dig them up again. This in Augustines account were no less than to
offer violence to the Diceased; Non esset pius funeris deductor sed impius
sepulturae violator. Ep. 119.
than which, what can be more inhumane and barbarous? Though there was a time
when they were salutaria exercitia, wholesome and useful Rudiments, yet now its
not so; now they are no better than foetida cadavera, filthy Carcases; fitter
with those mentioned by the Prophet, Isa. 65. 4.
to remain among the graves, and lodge in the monuments, than abide among the
living; and therefore let us not own them, or have any thing to do with them.
God ordained in the Levitical Law (which was the Jews Ritual) that if any man
touched a dead Body, Numb. 19. 16.
he should be unclean. If then their Ceremonies are dead, let us beware of
touching them, lest we become unclean. And as for other Ceremonies, which are
of latter date, and humane institution: let us take heed likewise how we own
them, or have any thing to do with them. I may say of the one sort and the
other, as Solomon did in another case, Pro. 20. 10
Both of them are alike Abomination to the Lord. The former once were lawful,
but now are unlawful; the latter never were lawful, nor ever will be lawful;
and therefore as we desire to keep our selves pure, let us abstain from both of
them, and utterly renounce and disclaim them.

Now that I may the better hold forth to you the necessity of worshipping God
in Truth, and the unwarrantableness of worshipping him in the use of
Ceremonies, I shall offer to you these following Queries.

1. Whether is there so much as one word or syllable in all the holy Scriptures
for any such kind of Worship? If you are Christians, you take the Writings of
the Prophets and Apostles for the Word of God; and if you are Protestants, you
take them for a complete and perfect Rule of Divine and Religious Worship. The
Holy Ghost has there declared both to whom such kind of Worship belongs, and
the manner wherein it is to be performed. If therefore you will act regularly,
and do nothing but what is just and warrantable, show us by what Prophet or
Apostle he has allowed you to worship in the use of Ceremonies. In the old
Testament he foretells the abolishing and ceasing of Them. Dan. 9. 27. Cant. 2.
17.
The Church of those times being afflicted with the burden of them, prays for
support till the time of their ceasing should come. Christ no sooner sets upon
preaching, Mat. 11. 28 15. 3.
but he invites People from them, justifies them in the refusal of them; and
afterward laying down his Life to redeem them from them, Col. 2. 14.
he blots out the handwriting of Ordinances that was against them, takes it out
of the way, and nails it to his cross. The Apostles, Act. 15. 28.
Elders and Brethren at Jerusalem, directed by the Holy Ghost, who sat
President amongst them, decreed against them. And as if all this were too
little, Paul who had once such esteem and Zeal for the Rites and Traditions of
his Fathers, speaks of them with words of greatest contempt and indignation;
calls them all to naught, Heb. 9. 10.
terms them carnal Ordinances, Rudiments of the World, Col. 1. 8.
beggarly Elements, and the like. Gal. 4 9.
Thus I have showed you that both Prophets and Apostles speak much against
Ceremonies, do you now show where they speak any thing for them.

2. Whether if the holy Scriptures have nothing at all for them, is it not
apparent superstition to institute them, or worship God in the use of them? If
Tertullian be not mistaken, it is: Those Ceremonies (says he) are vain, which
are used without any Authority of Divine or Apostolical Command, and are to be
accounted superstitious; and even therefore to be repressed, Sed quoniam unum
aliquod attigimus vacuae observations, non pigebit catera quoque denotare
quibus merito vanitas ex probranda, siquidem sine ullius aut Dominici, aut
Apostolici praecepti auctoritate fiunt. Hujusmodi enim non religioni sed
superstitioni deputantur, etc. De Orar. cap. 12. p. 23. Ed. Pam. Superstitio
vitium est Religioni appositum secundum excessum, etc. 22. q. 92. a. 1. c. Acts
17. 22. Mark. 7. 5, 6, 7. Col. 2. 20. Gal. 4. 10.
because they make us in some sort like the Gentiles. And if Zanchy, Vrsin,
Viret with other Orthodox and learned writers on the second commandment, are
not mistaken, it clearly falls within the compass of it. Nay, if the very
descriptions that the schoolmen give of superstition may pass, it stands justly
chargeable with it. Aquinas places it in the excess of religion, as when a man
gives divine worship either to him, it belongs not to, or in that way, it ought
not to be given. And speaking of four kinds of superstition, he places the
first in the giving of worship to the true God, modo tamen indebito, but after
an undue manner. It consists not only in the worshipping of a strange deity,
but in the worshipping of the true Deity in a strange manner, such as he has
not appointed. He that adds institutions to his institutions, nay so much as a
ceremony to the ceremonies, he has appointed, is guilty of it. And therefore
as the Athenians were guilty of it in their ignorant worsh^pping of their
unknown God, so likewise were some both of the ancient Jews and Christians; the
former in their washing of hands before meat; the latter in their abstaining
from certain meats, and observing of days. And what a great sin it is to be
guilty of it, we may gather from Gods proceedings against Saul upon his
miscarriage in the business of the Amallkites. For the injury they offered to
the Israelites when they came from Egypt, 1 Samuel 15. 3.
the Lord appoints Saul to go and destroy them, both man and woman, infant and
suckling, ox and sheep, camel and ass. And he accordingly went against them
and smote them, but did not fully observe his commission; for, to say nothing
of other things, he spared the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the
fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good. And this he did (if he himself
say true, and we do not find that Samuel charges him with falsehood in it) that
he might sacrifice them to the Lord in Gilgal. Saul then, out of a
superstitious humor would offer that to God which he would not have offered to
him. And what is the issue of it? why, he is so incensed against him for it, that
he takes him and devests him of his royal ornaments, deposes him from being
King, and casts him out of his favor for ever.

Saul committed several miscarriages before, but God was not so displeased with
any of them as he was with this. We do not find that he ever smiled upon him,
or owned him after this time. Now if it be superstition, to do that in the
worship of God that he has not appointed, and such a dangerous thing to be
guilty of it, you had best consider before you go any further whether you may
either lawfully, or safely use such Ceremonies in his worship as he has not
appointed, but have been devised by men.

3. Whether should you not imitate the primitive Church? If ever the Church
were worthy of imitation, Vid. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 32. gr.
it was during her primitive state. Then, as Egesippus shows, she was a pure
and incorrupted Virgin. So she continued for somewhat above an hundred years
after our Saviors time; so long she remained free from those superstitions and
errors that after, like a mighty flood, brake in upon her. Now during this
space of her Virgin purity, whether had she any of those Ceremonies that at
this time are, with so much heat, contended for, amongst us? The learned Camero
(to mention no more) is peremptory in the negative. Consideremus quaeso
primitivam illam Ecclesiam, etc. De Eccl. Rom c. 10. p. 560.
Besides (says he) water in baptism, bread and wine in the Lords Supper,
imposition of hands, and anointing of the sick, she had not any ceremonies at
all. Christians then contented themselves with the institutions of Christ, and
rejoiced in the liberty wherewith he had set them free, without troubling
themselves or others, with the devising or imposing of any humane rites or
ordinances.

4. Whether ought you not to maintain your Christian liberty? you think you
ought to maintain your civil liberties, and will venture at law all you have,
before you will let them go: and ought you not to make as great account of your
Christian, and spiritual liberty, as of your civil? I am sure Paul did. Though
he were a man of a most peaceable, condescending spirit, yet herein he was
resolute. 1 Cor. 6. 12.
All things (says he) are lawful to me, but I will not be brought under the
power of any. And the same path he went in himself, the same he persuades
others to go. Be ye not (says he) the servants of men. 1 Cor. 7. 23.
When he speaks of civil matters, then he does all he can to stir them up to
yielding and complying, laboring to prevent lawsuits and the evils that
attend them. 1 Cor. 6. 5, 6, 7.
Is it so (says he) that there is not a wise man amongst you, no not one that
shall be able to judge between his brethren? But brother goes to law with
brother, and that before the unbelievers. Now therefore there is utterly a
fault among you, because ye go to law one with another: why do ye not rather
take wrong? why do ye not rather suffer your selves to be defrauded? This is
his language as to civil matters: therein he uses all his art, and interest, to
persuade them to mutual submission and forbearance, advising them rather to
recede from their own rights, and suffer themselves to be defrauded, than to
engage in vexatious lawsuits, to the dishonor of the Gospel. But when he
comes to speak of spiritual matters concerning their Christian liberty, he
discourses after another manner. Therein he will have them to be steadfast and
unmovable, not inslaving themselves to the wills of men, or becoming their
servants. What it is to be the servants of men Ambrose tells us. Servi hominum
sunt, qui humanis se subjiciunt superstitionibus. In 1 Cor. 7. 23.
They are the servants of men (says he) that subject themselves to humane
superstitions. Doubtless, as God will call you to an account for his word and
ordinances, so he will for your Christian liberty, and therefore it concerns
you to take heed how you let it go.

5. Whether should you not so far as lawfully you may hold communion with the
best reformed Churches? without question it is the will of Christ, that you
should so do. If there be one Church more Orthodox and holy than another you
should endeavor communion with it. And if so, how can you imagine it lawful,
to worship God in the use of those Ceremonies, which the best reformed Churches
have declared against and abolished, as not only unnecessary and burdensome,
but superstitious and scandalous? not to trouble you with instances of their
dislike and utter renouncing of them (whereof you may see plenty in others)
Suartez mentions it as the common doctrine of Protestants, Putant isti n^n
licere Deum color al^o cultu nisi illo qui in scriptkris nobis praeceptus. m.
3. t. 3. disp. 15. sect. 2. Heretici hujus tomporis dicunt omnem ceremoniam and
omnem cultum a Deo info non praeceptum seu in Evangelio non contentum
superstitionem esse, etc. De Relig. vol. 1. Tract. 3. l. 2. c. 1.
that it is unlawful to worship God with any other worship, than that which is
commanded in the Scriptures. And that you may not think he speaks with
reference only to the substance of worship, hear what he says in another
place. The heretics (says he) of our time, say that every Ceremony, and every
kind of worship that is not commanded by God himself, or is not contained in
the Gospel, is superstition: yea, they call it idolatry. And if the Protestant
Churches profess such doctrine, and act accordingly, and that without sin, how
can you without sin separate from them? how will you free your selves from the
charge of schism, which is an evil so much condemned by Christ, and prejudicial
to the honor and welfare of his Church?

6. Whether leaving both the practice of the primitive Christians, and the
communion of the best reformed Churches, and you lawfully go and comply with
Idolaters in the use of those things, they have grossly abused in their profane
mysteries? Herein the Scripture is very plain. Lev. 18. 3.
After the doings (says God) of the land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt shall ye
not do: and after the doings of the land of Canaan whither I bring you, shall
ye not do: neither shall ye walk in their ordinances. And in another place:
Deuteronomy. 12. 29, 30.
When the Lord thy God shall cut of the nations from before thee, whither thou
go to possess them, and thou succeedest them, and dwell in their land:
take heed to thy self, that thou be not snared by following them, after that
they be destroyed from before thee; and that thou inquire not after their Gods
saying how did these Nations serve their Gods? even so will I do likewise. As
God would have us to stand in a close union to him, and one another, so he
would have us to stand at the utmost distance from idolaters. And upon this
ground the ancients declined the use of many things though in themselves
lawful, because they were used and abused by Idolaters. Tertullian would not
have his Christian soldier, to go with a Laurel upon his head, and that
because the heathens used to do so. And Bishop Jewel has several other
instances of the same nature. And ought not we in these days to detest
idolatry and avoid communion with such as are guilty of it, Defense of his
Apol. part 3. c. 5. div. 1. p. 346.
as well as the servants of God have done in former days? Is it not as odious
to him, and ought it not to be resisted by us, as much now, as ever? If
therefore the ceremonies imposed be such as had their birth amongst idolatrous
pagans, and other enemies to God and his truth, and have been not only used,
but notoriously abused by them, how can you without apparent guilt make use of
them? And thus I have given you the Quaere's, I thought good to offer to you,
both concerning the worshipping of God merely with the outward man, and the
worshipping of him in the use of ceremonies; consider of them and deal
faithfully.

I shall now in the last place, acquaint you with the common impediments of
worshipping God in spirit and in truth; and show you whence it is that men are
so ganerally averse to worship him that way. And in pursuance of the method
propounded to my self, I shall first speak of those that concern the
worshipping of him in spirit; and they are these.

1. Their misapprehensions of God, his nature, essence, and will. I have told
you already, that God is a most pure and simple being, and would have worship
suitable thereunto; but men are apt to think otherwise of him. They are apt to
think he is a being clothed with such gross matter as we poor mortals, that
dwell in tabernacles of clay, carry about with us, and that he would have such
kind of worship, and accordingly they give it to him. Psalm. 78. 41.
They limit the holy one of Israel; they measure him by themselves, his
properties by theirs, and his will by theirs, and think what pleases them,
pleases him. Psalm. 50. 21.
Thou thoughest (says God) that I was altogether such an one as thy self. Now
this is a most unreasonable and unjustifiable thing; for what proportion is
there betwixt that which is infinite, and that which is fiuite; bewixt a most
spiritual and simple being, and a soul attended with impotent and carnal
passions, and clothed with gross and sinful matter, still drawing it to
objects and pleasures suitable to it self? none at all. Isa. 55. 8, 9.
My thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your ways, my ways, says the
Lord. For as the Heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than
your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts. If the thoughts and ways of a
man are so far above the thoughts and ways of a beast, which yet is his fellow
creature, made of the same elements with him, how far must the thoughts and
ways of God, needs be above the thoughts and ways of man? We must not measure
the nature and will of God by ours (that is an unsafe way) but by what he has
revealed of himself in his word, wherein, he has made known both his nature
and will to us, and set down what he will have us to do. And therefore since he
has therein declared he will be worshipped in spirit, we must without
consulting with flesh and blood worship him that way.

2. The secret and close enmity that is in them to all divine and spiritual
matters. Though they are endued with reasonable souls, and are thereby capable
of conversing with God, and holding intercourse with Heaven, yet through the
miserable depravation that has seifed upon their natures, they are utterly
averse to it, and all spiritual services. Romans 8. 9.
The carnal mind (says Paul) is enmity against God. Carnal men have carnal
minds, and are for carnal things, and have in them an enmity to God, Christ,
and all spiritual services. By how much any service is more spiritual, by so
much they are the more at enmity with it. They would rather be dealing with
carnal matters though never so base, than things spiritual though never so
precious and excellent. They would rather with the filthy Swine, embrace a
dunghill, than with the glorious angels, hehold the face of God. The reasonable
soul, instead of exercising its authority over the sensitive powers, and
holding them in subjection, does captivate and inslave it self to them. Instead
of sublimating and raising them up to high and eminent services, it indulges
them in their brutish and boundless extravagancies, to the utter indisposing
both of it self and them to all spiritual and holy undertakings. For the cure
hereof, we must pray hard to God that he would subdue this enmity of our souls,
stir up the several faculties thereof to the discharge of their proper
functions, and cause us to delight in his truth and ways.

3. Their immersing and drowning their souls in the though (...) cares of
worldly matters. The world has ever since the transgression in Eden, and the
depravation of our natures thereby, been an enemy to God and his kingdom. It
does not only entice the hearts of the sons of men from him, but does utterly
indispose them for the right serving of him. They let out their hearts so much
upon it, are so far in love with it, and so eager in the pursuit of it that
when they come to set upon the serving of him, they cannot get them off it.
They can no more remove them, than they can remove mountains. Or if they can go
so far, as to hale them into the presence of God, yet if Heaven it self lay
upon it, they cannot keep them one hour there. when a man has been all the
week long busy about the world, how unfit is he upon the Sabbath day to do any
thing for God? what a multitude of matters has he then to review and exercise
his thoughts upon? He has ground which he has purchased to view, Luke 14. 18.
and oxen which he has bought to try, and multitudes of other matters to look
after. He can perhaps make shift at the close of the week to loose his hands
from the world, but he cannot loose his heart from it. They are easily taken
off it, but his heart is not so. That goes and takes a view of all the ear has
heard, the tongue has spoken, and the hand has done, and passes a judgment
upon them all, weighing how far they were managed to his credit, and advantage,
and how far not. And herein he is so intent that he cannot spare his heart one
hour, no, nor one quarter of an hour, for God. (...) is so common that there is
not a man that deals much in the World, but his heart will Echo to what I say,
and readily assent to it. If therefore we would serve God with our hearts, we
must first disintangle them from the world, keep them at a further distance
from it, and free them from that miserable vassalage and bondage, they daily
(to the unspeakable debasing of them) lie in, to it.

4. Their forgetting that Gods eye is upon them, viewing and taking notice of
all they do. They look after the eyes of men, take care to keep their
miscarriages from being discerned by them: and so secure their reputation with
them; and in the mean time, they forget that there is an all seeing eye upon
them, that observes all the treacheries, backslidings, wanderings of their
inconstant hearts, and weighs every of their actions with all the circumstances
belonging to them, in a most righteous and unerring balance. And what greater
folly can there be than this? shall we stand in awe of men, and not of God?
shall we prefer their esteem, and acceptance with them, before the esteem of
God, and acceptance with him? Is it God that we are to serve, or men? Is it he
that must sit in judgment upon us or they? Is it he that must reward us or
they? If it be he that must do it, then lets henceforth have respect to his
eye, and see that our services be pleasing to him, choose whether they please
men or no. 1 Cor. 4. 3.
With me (says Paul) it is a very small thing that I should be judged of you,
or of man's judgment. Alas, what will it avail us, to have them think well of
us, when he thinks ill? what will it profit us to be acquitted by them, and
condemned by him, or to be owned by them and rejected by him?

5. Their security, and want of care, and watchfulness over themselves. Though
they know their souls are treacherous and deceitful, and that they are apt to
backslide, and give them the slip in the service of God, yet they will not be
got to watch over them, but set them at liberty, letting them rove and wander
up and down whither they please. Though they know they have deceived them a
thousand times, to the losing the benefit of many a precious ordinance and
duty, whereby they might have been edified and furthered in the way of God, yet
they still trust to them, letting them take their liberty and do what ever they
please. Now this is a very unwise course, and can lead to nothing but
destruction and ruin. We must remember what kind of souls we have; they are
not innocent but sinful; not prone to holy undertakings, but greatly averse to
them; not faithful, but treacherous; and therefore, if we will have them to
engage in the service of God, we must watch over them, and look to them. When
ever we set upon duties, we must inquire after them, call them home from their
accustomed wanderings: and when we have them, we must mind them of what we are
going about; and with all the art, and skill we can, urge them with the
solemnness and importance of the business, giving them no rest until we have
brought them into an awful and holy frame, and fitted them for the work of
God. And when we have engaged them in the work, that we may the better keep
them to it, we must set a guard upon them, and carefully watch all the back
doors, and secret passages, through which they use to steal away from us. And
when ever we see them begin to stir, we must presently resist and restrain
them, accounting that which is done without them, is vain, and to no purpose.
As Masters stand over their idle and unfaithful Servants, to keep them to their
work, so must we stand over our Souls, to keep them steadfast and lively in the
Duties we have in hand, that so we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and
godly fear, because he is a consuming Fire. Heb. 12. 28, 29.


6. Their spiritual slothfulness and lothness to take pains with their Souls.
They are convinced that they ought to worship God in spirit, and that such kind
of Worship is the likeliest to please him; but rather than they will be at the
pains to bring themselves to it, they will let it alone, and worship him that way
that is less difficult, choose whether it please him or no. They find that to
take their thoughts and affections off their usual objects, gather them
together, engage them in the service of God, and there keep them close to it,
is a business that requires some pains; which rather than they will take, they will
come with their Bodies alone into his presence, and present them to him,
leaving their Souls behind them, as diligent in the pursuit of secular matters
as ever. Or if they do bring their Souls with them, yet they do not keep them
with them. They have their company no longer than the Servants that attend on
them; they bring them to their seats, and there leave them. For the redressing
of this Evil, we must call to mind the equity and necessity of the Souls
engaging and concurring with us in the service of God; and consider, that
whatever we do without them signifies just nothing. And hereupon we must
exercise all the Authority we have over them, use all the Interest we have in
them, follow them from place to place, and not let them rest till we have
prevailed with them to accompany us into his presence, and join with us in the
several duties we are to perform.

Having thus spoken of the several Impediments that concern the worshipping of
God in spirit, I shall now proceed to those that concern the worshipping him in
truth, and shall therewith conclude this present discourse.

1. Is Satan, who does all he can to keep men from worshipping God in that
simple, plain way that he has appointed; stirring them up to worship him in a
ceremonious superstitious manner, which he well knows will be so far from being
acceptable to God, or advantageous to them, that it will rather draw down his
wrath upon them. He has disobeyed God himself, and would have them to do so
too. He is become an Enemy to God himself, and would have them to be so
likewise. He has undone himself, and does all he can to bring them into the
same condition. When we were in happiness, be never rested till he had got us
out of it, and now we are out of it, he does all he can, to keep us from it. As
it was he that persuaded our first Parents to eat of the forbidden fruit, 2
Cor. 11. 3 1 Chronicles: 21. 1. Luke 22. 3. Act. 5. 3. Mat. 13. 39 1 These. 2. 8
Ephesians. 2 2.
so it was he that persuaded David to number Israel, Judas, to betray Christ,
Ananias and Saphira, to lie to the holy Ghost. It was he that sowed the tares
among the Wheat, hindered Paul from going to the Thessalonians; and it is he
that works in the Children of Disobedience. He does all he can to draw men to
downright Atheism; but if he cannot bring them to that, he labors to draw
them to idolatry and superstition. If he can, he will keep them from worshipping
God at all; but if he cannot prevail with them to go so far, he then labors to
keep them from worshipping him after the right manner. If he can, he will keep
them from doing so much as God requires; but if he cannot persuade them to
that, he then labors to draw them to more. If he can, he will persuade them to
deny the authority and truth of the Scriptures; but if he cannot get them to
that, he will urge them to deny their sufficiency and perfection; and hereby he
makes way for the bringing in of humane Inventions, Traditions, Ceremonies, and
any thing that superstitious heads have a mind of. Calvin lays it down as an
undoubted truth, Verum quidem est nihil abhominibus mali perpetrari quo non eos
incitet Satan.
That there is not any evil perpetrated by men, to which they are not incited
by Satan. And he himself confesses that he goes to and fro in the earth, and
walks up and down in it. And for what end does he this? Not to take the air,
for he needs it not; or if he did, he might do it in a narrower compass; nor to
acquaint himself with the World, In Joh. 13. 2.
for he knows it well enough already; Job 1. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 8.
but he does it for another end, and that is, as the Apostle shows, to seek out
whom he may devour: and herein he is so diligent and unwearied, that he
compasses Sea and Land to make one Proselyte. Mat. 23. 15
And that he may the better carry on this his infernal design, he observes the
several Constitutions, Dispositions, and Interests of men, and accordingly lays
his baits for them. One, he sees inclined to Unbelief and Atheism, and tempts
him to that; another, to Profaneness and Debauchery, and tempts him to that;
another, to Idolatry and Superstition, and tempts him to that. The Jews were a
People extremely addicted to Idolatry and Superstition, and he being aware of
it, lays hold on all opportunities and means to provoke them to it. Hence we
find that when Moses was dead, and God appointed Michael the Archangel to take
his Body and bury it in some secret place, out of the way, Satan stands up, and
resists him. He well knew that if the Israelites had but known where the Body
of so great a Prophet had sain, they would with little ado have been drawn to
worship it; and therefore when he saw the Angel going to interr it, and lay it
out of the way, he withstands him, and disputes with him. The one was not more
forward to suppress and prevent an occasion of Idolatry, than the other was to
promote and further it. The Book called Petoreth Mosche, or The passage of
Moses out of this Life, describes this strife which was betwixt them. Whether
the Book be Apocryphal or no, I leave to others to judge; but the thing it self
is not, for the Apostle Jude mentions it. Jude 9.


The Scripture in like manner tells us that both Jews and Gentiles sacrificed
to Devils: And who stirred them up to such kind of wild Sacrifice, Psalm. 106.
37.
but the Devil? 1 Cor. 10. 20.
Men would never be transported with such inhumane fury, and barbarous Devotion
as to cut and lance themselves, and sacrifice their Sons and Daughters, did not
Satan, who reigns in their hearts, and keeps under those Principles of Nature
that are in them, provoke them to it. What work he makes among the poor
Indians, and what stratagems and devices he uses, that he may draw those poor
ignorant Souls to worship him as God, and prevail with them to give to him that
honor that belongs to God, and what it is that puts him upon it, with other
matters of that nature, Hist. Ind. l. 5. c. 1.
Acosta and others show. And the time was, when he carried on his work in these
Nations with a full career, prevailing upon all to yield homage to him. And
though upon the breaking forth of the Gospel (of the sound whereof he was
impatient) he removed his Court, and betook himself into the barbarous Nations,
where he might manage his Affairs with less contradiction and more security,
yet he has not altogether left us. Though he appear not so openly as in times
past, nor so audaciously as to solicit to the plain worshipping of Idols; yet
he is still, though more privately, and in a way less liable to suspicion,
carrying on his design amongst us. Some, he draws to Profaneness, others to
Superstition; some to contemn Ordinances, others to corrupt them. If he can, he
keeps men from the House of God, but if he cannot do that, he follows them
thither, and there makes them either careless or superstitious. When therefore
we find our selves averse to worship God in that plain, simple manner he has
required, and carried forth with a desire of humane Ceremonies and Inventions,
let us suspect Satan is dealing with us. When it is once come to this, That we
prefer two or three humane, needless, indifferent Ceremonies, attended with
such circumstances as render them loathsome, before the Peace of the Church,
Preaching of the Word, and Saving of Souls, we may well fear he is at work in
us. He is an invisible Agent, a secret Promoter, one that plays in the dark;
and therefore though we see no external appearance, yet let us not upon that
account, conclude our selves free from him. He may be busy at work within us,
when we think he is far enough from us.

2. Is Sensuality, or an inordinate affecting of sensual things, or an
over-readiness to gratify humor, and please the senses. There is scarcely any
thing that does render a man more averse to worship God in simplicity, and
carry him away after an external, pompous, ceremonious Worship, than
sensuallity, or an affecting of sensual things. By how much any man is more
sensual, by so much he is the more for a ceremonious Worship. And so on the
other hand, by how much any man is more spiritual, by so much he is the more
for a spiritual, simple Worship. According to that of the Apostle, They that
are after the Flesh, do mind the things of the Flesh; but they that are after
the Spirit, the things of the Spirit. Romans 8. 5.
The Israelites were a carnal, sensual People, and what was the issue of it?
Why, they must have such gods as they might see going before them. Exodus 32. 1
They had a God before, and one that had done great things, insomuch that one
would have thought that if ever People were contented and pleased with a God,
they should have been contented and pleased with him. But here was the ground
of their dislike, that he was a Spirit, and therefore being weary of him, they
call to Aaron to make them other kind of Gods, even such as they might behold
with their Eyes, and see going before them: Not that they thought a God could
be made, or that Aaron could do it, or that that Calf which he made, was the
God that brought them up out of Egypt; but they would have some visible
representation and similitude of that God, which they might see, and do worship
to him by. As Children delight in Babies and gay Clothes, so do carnal men in
sensual matters. Homo absque Religion is exercitio non facile ulla quiet frui
potest, etc. Tract. de Praejud. Eccles. Romans Cap. 10. p. 561.
And with this agrees that of Camero: Man (says he) cannot easily enjoy any
rest without the exercise of Religion, and therefore does still affect some
show of Piety; but in this he errs, That being corporeal; he only delights in
things external and corporeal; being carnal only in things that are carnal:
Therefore by how much Religion is the more external and corporeal, by so much
the more it does please him; and by how much it is the more internal and
spiritual, by so much it does the more displease him. Hereby you see what it is
in this Learned Man's Judgment that makes men so in love with a ceremonious
Worship; it is their sensuality, or affectation of external corporeal things.
And indeed, who are more eager for a ceremonious Worship, than the most vain
and sensual Persons?

The renowned Du Plessis, Myster. Iniq. (Ed. lat. fol.) p. 122.
speaking of the times succeeding the sixth century, says, from hence forward
you shall find the histories stuffed only with relations of material edifices,
oratories, images, marbles, incrustations, overlayings with gold, and such
like, which the worser sort of men were ever most spendfull in. What place more
profane and vicious than Rome? It is, in the language of the Holy Ghost
himself, the very mother of harlots, and abominations of the Earth; and yet
what place is there in the world that dotes more upon ceremonies than it? And
if we come amongst our selves, who are greater sticklers for them, Rev. 17. 5.
than those that are most addicted to sensuality? It is it that makes men in
love with stately altars, gaudy vestments, Organs and such like matters. Had
they but crucified the flesh and got the mastery over their senses, Astutiam
suadendi, non potentiam cogendi habet. August. in Psalm 91. Ex part ipsius
potentlae voluntas nullo mode potest moveri nisi a Deo. Aquin. 1. q. p. 106. a.
2: c.
they would care little for such things, but till that be done, they will stand
for them. It is not Satan only that keeps them from the right worshipping of
God, but it is the vitiousness and naughtiness of their natures, that also does
it. Were their natures right, his attempts would be to little purpose. He might
strike fire long enough, before there would be any burning, did they not find
him tinder. What he does (as the stream of writers shows) is not by co-action
but persuasion; not by constraining but alluring. He may come and lay the
forbidden fruit before us, and suggest that its good for food, and that its
pleasant, Potest quidem Satan propositis objectis allicere appetitus, aut
alteratione humorum corporis turbare phantasiam, voluntatem vero cogere non
potest. Molin. Anat. cap. 3. sect. 19. p. 24.
and to be desired to make one wise, Consilium dare is potuit, cogere non
potuit. Vossius These. de Peccat. Adami. these. 4. p. 31.
and that upon eating of it, our eyes shall be opened, and we shall be as Gods,
but he cannot compel us to eat of it. He has indeed better access to the
faculties, can draw nearer to them, and propounds things with more subtilty and
advantage than men can, but he can no more compel than they: and therefore he
does not so much as attempt to do it; he goes another way to work, Voluntatem
direct impellere, efficaciterques movere minime potest. Tilen. Syntag. de mal.
Ang. sect. 32. p. 164. Judge. 4. 18.
and that is by soliciting. He deals with us as Jael with Sisera; he invites us
into his tent, and there gives us milk to drink, and covers us with a mantle:
and then takes his nail and strikes it through our temples. For correcting
therefore of this evil, we must watch over the sensitive powers, check their
extravagant motions, and bring them into captivity to the obedience of Christ.
Whiles Babylon arrayes her self in purple and scarlet color, and decks her
self with gold and precious stones, and holds a cup in her hand, let us
mortify our earthly members, and crucify the flesh, and then our condition
will be far more secure than now it is. Were our sensual powers mortified and
spiritualized, and our wills resolute and peremptory in resisting Satan's
assaults, all he could do would be fruitless and ineffectuall!

3. Is prejudice, or a precipitant, preposterous judgment, that men have
against it. They proceed not fairly and as they ought to do, with this
worshipping God in truth; they allow it not a fair trial, that is, first hear
and then give judgment; but they first give judgment, and then will not
endure to hear it. They either upon no grounds at all, or else such as are very
light and unwarrantable take up a prejudice and disaffection to it, and then
they are hardly won to it; nay they are hardly kept from persecuting it. Though
Abab confessed Micaiah was a Prophet of the Lord, and one by whom they might
enquire, of him; yet having taken up a prejudice against him, he hates and
persecutes him. 1 Kings 22. 8.
And so it is in this case; though men, if they will but look with
Scripture-eyes, cannot but see this worshipping God in truth is of divine
institution, yet many of them having someway, or other taken up a prejudice
against it, they do not only refuse to close with it, but hate and persecute it.

Now the grounds on which they proceed, and build their prejudice are commonly
such as these. Mark. 1. 27.


1. They think worshipping God in truth, is but a new kind of worship, Act. 17.
19. Ethnici specie novitatis primos Christianos in odium adducebant and
antiquitatis suae monumenta, non superbe minus quam falso ostentabant. De
Prejud. Eccl. Romans cap. 15. p. 565.
of small standing, invented the other day, destitute of that antiquity, that
ceremonious worship is attended with. It has been an usual thing for the
enemies of the truth, to charge it with Novelty. The Jews charged the doctrine
of Christ; and the Athenians, the doctrine of Paul with it. And Camero tells us
out of Symmachus that the heathens objected it against the primitive
Christians, accounting their religion as no better than a mere innovation, and
thereupon insulted over them. But we must not look upon every thing new, that
every one takes to be so. The Scriptures contain not only the ancient Canons
but the ancient records of the Church; and if we search them we shall find that
though a ceremonious worship was in the Church for some ages, yet it was not so
from the beginning. When we would know the ancientness of the privileges of a
College or any other society, we presently run ad fundationis tabulas, to the
records or writings, wherein those privileges are set down. And so we are to
do in this case; If we would know the ancrentness of this worshipping God in
truth, we must go to the holy Scripture, and there we shall find an account of
it. It will tell us, it is ancienter than any kind of worship whatsoever.
Perhaps, you think it is a new kind of worship invented by a company of precise
persons addicted to singularity and novelty in these late times, but herein you
are much mistaken; For, it is not only the worship instituted by Christ
himself, and practiced by the primitive Church but the worship that was used
(as you have heard before out of Eusebius) by Melchisedeck. Noah, Enoch, and
other ancient Patriarchs that lived in the beginning of the world, and served
God acceptably without any of those ceremonies that so many in these days keep
such a stir about. See Dr. Sam. Bolton fully on this in his Arraignment of
Errors. p. 145.
We shall desire no more for the determining of the present controversy, but
that we may go back to the beginning, and try our worship by the ancientest
Churches, both of the Old and New Testament. If we do not make it to appear
that this kind of worship was used by both of them, and that before any other,
we will never plead for it more.

2. They allege that they are unaccustomed to it: They say it is such a kind
of worship as neither they nor their fathers have been used to, and this they
look upon as matter of just exception. Their fathers have served God in a
ceremonious way, and they hitherto have done so too and therefore think it is
not fit now to change. Though customs are never so bad, yet when men have once
used themselves to them, they know not how to leave them. According to that of
the Prophet, Jer. 13. 23. Vincere consuetudinem dura est pugna. Aug. in Psalm
30.
can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, then may ye do
good; that are accustomed to do evil. Its a very hard thing for men to leave
those ways that they were born and brought up in, and that they have been
accustomed to. This is it that hinders Jews from turning Christians, Papists
from turning Protestants, and many Protestants from that purity they should,
and otherwise might attain to. Amongst other articles that the Jews put in
against Stephan and Paul, Acts 6. 14. 21. 21.
this was one, that they preached against their customs. Joh. 4. 20.
And this very thing the woman of Samaria urges to our Savior; Our Fathers
(says she) worshipped in this mountain. And no doubt. it was the common
argument used by the Samaritans against the Jews. By fathers, she means not
here immediate predecessors (that had been a filly plea) but those ancient
patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph and others, Montagu in his Acts and
Mon. of the Church in the old t. c. 7. sect. 135. p. 469,
who (as some think) did at some time or other, worship upon that hill; the
three first, when they sojourned in the land of Canaan, and the last, when he
went up out of Egypt, to bury his fathers body in the Cave of Macpelah. Now the
Samaritans having this conceit in their heads, thought (notwithstanding all
that God had done about his worship since the days of those Patriarchs) that
this was a sufficient proof that Garizim was the place of worship. In like
manner Symmachus tells us, the faith of so many ages is to be kept, Symmach.
Epist. l. 10. Ep. 54. August. Ep. 48. ad Vincentium.
and the Parents are to be followed of us, that happily followed theirs. And
the Donatists used the same plea; its hard (say they) for us to leave the
tradition of our Parents. Thus do many prefer the occasional acts of some good
men, and customs taken up therefrom, before the express institution of God in
his word. For the correcting of which error, we must remember that God made
not the practices or customs of men the rule of our proceedings (he was so far
from that, Jer. 10. 3. Ezekiel. 20. 18.
that he every where declares against them and diswades us from them) but the
holy Scriptures, 1 Pet. 4. 2, 3. Mat. 5. 21, 27, 33, 38, 43.
and with them we must consult. And therefore we must take our worship to them,
and measure it by them; if it be according to them we must retain it though it
seem never so new; and if it be not according to them, we must reject it,
though it seem never so old. If it be according to them, it is not want of
custom that can make it bad; and if it be not according to them, it is not
length of custom that can make it good. And yet how few amongst us can render
any other reason for the cermonies under dispute, but that learned and holy
men, martyrs and others that were their ancestors used them before them? And
what a poor reason is this? Because men are learned and holy are they therefore
infallible! Or because they might use ceremonies in their times while the sun
was low, and reformation in the birth, may we do it in our times when the sun
is in its meridian height; and reformation out of those dangers of abortion, it
labored under before? Is it not reason that as they resormed according to the
light and advantages of their times, we should also reform according to the
light and advantages of ours? Had those renowned worthies that began the
reformation, and sealed it with their blood, argued as we do, and stuck in the
steps of their ancestors as we do in ours, where had the reformation been? But
we so far weigh what they did not, that we forget what they did. We urge what
they retained, not what they laid aside. The truth is, notwithstanding all the
esteem and reverence we pretend to have for them, we so far come short of them,
that I know not whether, they are more to be admired for their zeal, or we
abhorred for our lukewarmness. God does not only look that we should know as
much as our ancestors, but that we should know more, not only that we should be
as good as they, but that we should be better. And had we but followed their
example, religion had been in greater glory, and the worship of God in another
kind of dress than now it is.

3. They think its not so decent as a ceremonious worship is. They say the
worship of God should be decent, but that this is undecent. One of them tells
us, that without the Ceremonies, Dr. Gauden in the life of Mr. Hooker. p 27.
as a good face without hair en its head, the reformed religion would have
appeared bald, and uncomely. Belike then, religion all along in our Saviors
time and the Apostles and those pure ages following, crowned with so many
glorious martyrs, was but as a bald head, uncomely and illfavoured. And yet if
it were so, how as none of the burning and shining lights of those ages, took
no notice of it? Comeliness was respected and endeavored then, as well as now:
and yet we read of no such observations and ceremonies so much as once used or
named by them, which by the men of this generation are looked upon as the only
ornaments of religion and preservatives of comeliness. In consideration
whereof, I think I may upon good grounds, say to them, as Paul to the men of
Athens; I perceive that in all things, ye are too superstitious. Its not the
reformed religion (uncomely, Act. 17. 22.
as this Doctor suggests, without ceremonies,) that is to be blamed but he and
suchlike Teachers, who know not how to distinguish betwixt comely and
uncomely. Seneca tells of Harpastes, Harpasten uxoris meae fatuam, scis
Haereditarium onus in domo mea reman: fisse, etc. Epist. 50. p. 609.
his Wives Fool, that though she were blind, yet she would not be persuaded of
it, but cried out against the House, and laid the blame upon it, saying it was
dark; she blamed not the blindness of her own Eyes, but the darkness of the
House; and faith he, That which we laugh at in her, we are guilty of our
selves: Sure I am, that what he says is true in the present case; it is not
the Worship of God as instituted by him, without the garnish of humane
Ceremonies, that is uncomely, or to be blamed, but it is the blindness of men's
Eyes that cannot distinguish betwixt comely and uncomely.

4. They think it is not so edifying as a ceremonious Worship is. They say it
does not awaken the affections, quicken the spirit, and excite to Devotion, so
as a ceremonious Worship does. But did Christ judge it to be edifying, and will
men now come after him, and say it is unedifying? Did not he know what would
tend most to the promoting of his own Work, and the carrying on of his own
Design and Interest? Will men be wiser than Christ? Will they adventure to
censure his proceedings, examine his determinations, and rectify his
appointments? Will they take upon them to find fault with his Institutions, and
supply the defects of them with their own Inventions? This makes me think of
that of Zophar, Job 11. 12:
Vain man would be wise, though he be born like a wild Asses Colt. For one man
to censure and find fault with the performances of another, is both common and
justifiable; but for a man to censure and find fault with his Maker, is
intolerable insolency. As we must not think that God is like to us, so neither
must we think that we are like to him. The foolishness of God (says the
Apostle) is wiser than men. i Cor. 1. 25
Even that which proud self-conceited vain men do count but foolishness, has
in it more wisdom than they can comprehend. And so on the other hand, that
which men count highest Wisdom, is but mere folly: What they count a polishing,
he counts a polluting. If (says he) thou make me an Altar of stone, thou shall
not make it of hewn stone, Exodus 20. 25.
for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it: What they count
beautiful, he counts abominable: That which is highly esteemed amongst men
(says Christ) is abominable in the sight of God. Luke 16. 15
What they count edifying, he counts unedifying and destructive. The Scribes
and Pharisees no doubt looked upon washing of hands before meat, as both a
decent and an edifying Ceremony; but he looked otherwise upon it: Mat. 15. 9.
Nos ipsi hoc experimu^ cum intramus Basilicas ornat as etc. t. 3. de Sacram. in
Genesis l. 2. c. 31.
In vain (says he) do they worship me, teaching for Doctrines the Commandments
of men. Bellarmine telling us how the Ceremonies do conserve nourish and in
crease holy affection and devotion, says, This we know by experience, when we
enter into the stately Cathedrals, beautified and adorned with Crosses, Images,
and flaming Lamps, we most easily conceive Devotion. But we must distinguish
betwixt the contentments of the sensitive powers, and the devotion of the
reasonable Soul. We may upon good grounds suspect that this Devotion which he
says is wrought in them upon the sight of such things, is rather the former
than the latter: For it is not the art or skill of man, that can devise or make
things to edify, but the institution and concurrence of God, in whose hands
all our Souls are, that must do it. It is not their adorning, or beautifying
them, that can make them furtherances of Devotion, but his sanctifying them to
such a purpose, and blessing us in the use of them. The most apt and proper
means without his blessing, will be ineffectual, and the most improbable and
unlikely with it, Dan. 1. 15. Itaque id sunt Ceremoniae Religioni quod sal
carnibu^, etc.
will prevail: A little Pulse and Water with his blessing, nourishes better
than all the dainties of the Emperors Court without it. But the Jesuit goes
on, and tells us, That what Salt is to Flesh, that Ceremonies are to Religion.
To say no more, have not these men dainty stomachs, when they must have sauce
to such savoury Food? Are they not better fed than taught, when Angels Food
will not down, unless dipped in the sauce of humane Ceremonies? Is not the Word
of God it self sweeter than the honey or the honey Comb? And are not the
Sacraments of themselves a Psalm. 19. 10
feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the lees, Isa. 25. 6.
of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the lees well refined? And must they
have sauce to these? Were their appetites like those of the Apostles and
Primitive Christians, and other of their fellow servants, they would make shift
to get down such food without the Salt of Ceremonies; and it were just with God
to take it from them, and make them fast, until they have better stomachs. If
notwithstanding all this, the Worship and Ordinances of Christ in their
spirituality and simplicity will not down with them, but they must needs have
the sauce of Ceremonies, let them go on and take their course, Psalm. 141. 4.
but (as the Scripture says) let not us eat of their dainties. And so much for
the grounds on which men proceed, and build their prejudice against Worshipping
God in truth.

4. Is a worldly temporizing frame of spirit, whereby they suit themselves and
their proceedings to the times and places wherein they live, doing not that
which God requires, and tends to the honor and furtherance of Religion, but
that which carnal Policy suggests, and tends to the promoting of their worldly
interest. They prostitute themselves to sublunary influences, and suffer
themselves to be acted and governed by them; ever steering their course that
way that promises most gain and safety, choose whether it be the way of God,
yea or no. They do not, like good and righteous men, (...) Laert. in ejus vit.
p. 3 88.
keep their Consciences at one, but turn them, as Diogenes did his Tub, still
upon the Sun. Of this kind of spirit was Alcibiades, who transformed himself
into all manner of shapes good or bad, that the several times, places and
conditions wherein he was, called for; insomuch that he exceeded (as my Author
says) the Cameleon it self. Plut. in ejus vit. p. 203. Ed. Paris.
In Sparta, he was painful and abstemious; in Ionia, idle and voluptuous; in
Thrace, he was ever drinking and riding; in Persia, magnificent and fumptuous;
still observing the mode of the place where he was, and conforming to it. And
of this spirit was Ecebolus; in the time of Constantius, (...) Socrat. Hist.
Eccl. l. 3. c. 11. Evag. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 13, etc.
he owned the Christian Religion; in the time of Julian, he disclaimed it; and
in the time of Jovinian he returned to it again; and so as the Historian says,
He was light and inconstant from first to last. And of this spirit was Petrus
Mongus Bishop of Alexandria; first he was of the Orthodox Faith, then a
Condemner of it, after an Aopprover of it, and after that a Condemner of it.
And of this spirit are many of the present Age. both in this and other Nations.
Some in France were of Opinion that it is meet for a man to accommodate himself
to that manner of serving God which is received by custom, or authorized by the
Magistrate, every one in his respective Country, without much solicitousness
and inquiry whether it be Christian, or Jewish, Treatise concerning Religion,
Preface, p. 3.
Pagan, or Mohammedan. And this was it that put Amyrald (as he himself shows)
upon writing of that excellent Treatise of Religions, wherein he solidly
refutes that atheistical and profane conceit. And there are too many amongst us
that in compliance with Hobb's licentious Principles, will rather be of any
Religion the Magistrate shall set up, or worship God any way he shall appoint,
than expose themselves to a little censure and trouble. If the States under
whom they live will have them to be Protestants, they will be Protestants; and if
they will have them to be Papists, they will be Papists. If they will have them to
worship God without Ceremonies, they will worship him without them; and if they will
have them to worship him with them, they will worship him with them. To be short,
they will be as to matter of Religion, whatever their Governors will have them to
be, and do whatever they will have them to do; thereby giving the world to
understand that they are not made, as the Marquess of Winchester said, ex
Quercu, but ex Salice; not of Oak, Ut Vestitum sic sententiam babeas; aliam
domesticam, aliam forensem. t. 4. de fin. bon. l. 2. n. 64. Romans 12. 2.
but of Willow. A man may say to one of them, as Tully did to the man in his
time: As is the Garment, so is thy Opinion; thou have one for home, and another
for abroad. Now this is a most unworthy and base frame of spirit, and a most
wicked and sinful practice, savouring rather of Atheism than of true Piety, or
any Christian zeal. It is quite contrary to the express Command of God, who
forbids Conformity to the World: It is quite contrary to the honor,
importance, and security of Religion, that calls for our utmost Zeal,
Seriousness, and Exactness; it is quite contrary to that solemn Oath we entered
into at our Baptism, whereby we engaged to forsake the World, and keep Gods
holy Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our Lives: It is quite
contrary to the practice of the faithful Servants of God in all Ages of the
World: The Righteous (says Job) shall hold on his way, Job 17. 9. Pro more and
consuetudine passim poni omnibus hebraizantibus notum est. De Dien Animadv. in
Psalm. 50. 23. p. 345.
and he that has clean hands shall be stronger and stronger: The work (...)
signifies such a way as is distinct from other ways, and such a course as is
different from that which others take; and this the righteous man walks in
steadfastly and constantly. Notwithstanding the paucity of those that join with
him, and the numerousness of those that separate from him, yet he holds on in
his way; notwithstanding all the flouts and taunts that he meets with from the
Sons of Belial, for his holy singularity and preciseness; yet he does not like
the Weather give again, but stands his ground and holds on his way. To go no
further, how fixed and stable was Job himself, in the midst of those shaking
Providence that befell him? Though God rent and tore him all to pieces, yet he
remained still the same: Till I die (says he) I will not remove my Integrity
from me; Job 27. 5.
q. d. Though I have lost my Children, and Estate, and Friends, yet I have
retained my Integrity, and that I am resolved to take with me to my Grave; as
naked as I am, I have one thing still, that is, my Integrity, and choose what
befalls me, I am resolved to keep that: Though Satan should offer me all he
has taken from me in exchange of it, yet would I not part with it; though he
should offer me as many Kingdoms as I have boyles in this diseased Body, yet I
would not let it go: As my Soul is the glory of my Body, so is my Integrity the
glory of my Soul; and therefore whatever becomes of me, I Will not part with it:
I Will sooner suffer the Blood to be pressed out of my veins, and the Soul out of
my Body, than my Integrity out of my Soul. And how bravely did the primitive
Christians carry themselves as to this matter? Pliny writing to Trajan,
declares to him that such was their Zeal and Courage in the behalf of their
God, Quorum nihil cogi posse dicuntur, qui sunt revera Christiani. Epist. l.
10. Ep. 97. p. 316.
that nothing could stir them from it; neither the imperious checks of the
potent Emperors, nor the soft language of the eloquent Orators, could draw
them from the Faith, but they steadfastly owned it, and constantly persevered in
the defense of it.

5. Is sinful moderation, Tanta barbary est ut pacem non intelligant. Florus
Hist rerum Romans l. 4. c. 12. p. 403. Audito tantum nomine pacis obit. Morn.
Mist p. 593. Plut. vit. Camil. p. 151. 2 Samuel 18. 5.
or over much love of peace. As there are some that with the Sarmatians are so
ignorant and barbarous that they know not what peace means, and others that
with Pope Sixtus, so at enmity with it, that they dye at the name of it; so
there are others so in love with it, that they exceed in their esteem of it;
insomuch that with the Romans they are ready to build Temples and Altars to it,
and sacrifice truth, purity, holiness and all to it. Even amongst those that
profess Christianity and seem to bear respect to the truth, some are of such a
lukewarm, complying spirit, that they will appear for it no further than they may
do it with the maintenance of peace. Though they see the truth arraigned,
condemned, and led away to be crucified, yet rather than they will occasion any
stir, by seeking to rescue it, they will let it go. They make peace their darling,
and thereupon when they see any occasion of difference arising, they cry out as
David did of his Son, 2 Samuel 18. 5.
deal gently with the young man Absalom. They would have all to deal tenderly
with it, but as for truth, which is the light and glory of Israel, they care
not what becomes of it. They have great care and pity of peace, but little or
none for truth. Though they see the ahomination of desolation stand in the holy
place; though they see the worship of God corrupted, his ordinances polluted,
his word trampled under foot, the discipline of the Church utterly perverted,
the Ministers and servants of God every where reproached and persecuted, and
religion it self made the scorn of the multitude, yet rather than they will have
an hand in the disturbing of the peace, they will not so much as open their mouths
against it. Rather than they will have the noise of an hammer in the Temple,
they will see the pillars, walls, with all the strength and glory of it, fall to
the ground, and become a ruinous heap. Brutus lays it to the charge of Tully,
Plut. Vit. Brut. P. 994.
that he was afraid of a civil war, but not of a shameful peace. And so we may
lay it to the charge of these men; they would rather sit down under the
greatest impurities and corruptions, than open their mouths to speak against
them. Nay many are so far from that true zeal, and masculine courage, they
should have for the truth, that they do not only refuse to appear for it
themselves, but in veigh against such as do; representing them not only as
foolish, hypocritical, precise, proud, but as schismatical, seditious,
factious; as persons against order, and government, against good laws and
customs; as disturbers and troublers of the peace. 1 King 18. 17.
Ahab counted Elijah the troubler of Israel. And Haman laid it to the charge of
the Jews that they were Esther 3. 8.
disobedient to the Kings laws. And the adversaries of Jerusalem, Ezra 4. 15.
told Artaxerxes that it was a rebellious City, hurtful unto Kings and
Provinces. And the unbelieving Jews at Thessalonica, did as much for the
Apostles; they said they were the men that turned the world upside down. And
Tertullus calls Paul a pestilent fellow and a mover of sedition. And the
Jansenian tells of the Jesuits, Acts 17. 6. 24. 5. Additionals to the Mystery
of Jesuit. p. 140, 141.
that after they have disturbed the peace of the Church by their horrid
doctrines which tend to the destruction of the precepts of Jesus Christ, they
make it their business to accuse those who endeavor the re-establishment of
them, as disturbers of the Churches peace. After they have put things into
disorder on all sides by the publication of their detestable morality, they
treat as breakers of the public peace, those whole consciences will not suffer
them to comply with their designs; and who cannot edunre that those Pharisees
of the New Law, as they have called themselves, should establish their humane
traditions upon the ruins of the Divine. Thus he. This is the reward the
ungrateful world gives the servants of Christ, for their zeal and faithfulness
in his cause. Instead of encouraging them and joining with them, they load them
with the ignominious and hateful terms of rebellion and turbulency, laboring
thereby to make them odious, and frustrate their blessed endeavors.

Now this lukewarm frame of spirit, God does every where declare against, and
condemn, calling upon his servants to be courageous in his cause, to quit
themselves like men, and to contend for the faith he has delivered to them.
And they according to the trust reposed in them have done it, to the hazarding
of all near and dear to them. What a peaceable man was Moses? how apt to bear
wrongs? how loath to revenge? he was the meekest man upon the face of the earth.
Numb. 12. 3.
Yet how exact and punctual was he in the cause of God? When the Israelites
were about to come out of Egypt, and Pharaoh would have had them to have left
their flocks and herds behind them, Moses tells him to his face, Exodus 10. 26.
Our cattle also shall go with us, there shall not an hoof be left behind. Had
Moses lived in our days, what censures and reproaches would this action have
brought upon him? what, not obey the King? not observe his royal commands, and
that in those things as undoubtedly fall under his cognizance and authority?
what, not leave an hoof at his appointment! what disloyalty and irreligiousness
is this? Act. 22. 22.
Away with such a fellow from the earth, for it is not fit that he should live.
This no doubt would have been the language of many amongst us, against this
faithful servant of God. But we must not measure the proceedings of good men,
by the foolish, partial judgments of carnal ones, who would rather see the
interest of God and his Kingdom perish and come to nothing, than expose
themselves to the least hazard in preserving it.

To this example of Moses, we may add that of Paul; What a peaceable man was
he? who ever loved peace more, desired it more, preached it more, wrote for it
more, or endeavored it more then he? yet would not he give place to the false
Apostles by subjection, no, not for an hour. What, Gal. 2. 5.
not for an hour? who in such a juncture of things would not have born much
longer? but he would not do it: he would not lie for God, or use any indirect,
base means for the bringing about of his design.

And if we come to aftertimes, we find the orthodox Christians carried
themselves after the same manner. They would rather hazard all, then part with
one syllable, nay one letter of that name wherein the divinity and honor of
Christ was concerned. When the Arrians desired them to admit one word, Theodor.
Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 18, 19*
nay but one letter more into their Creed, that is, to use (...), instead of
(...), promising that if they would do it, they would be at peace with them,
yet they would not do it. And we read likewise of Basil, Id. l. 4. c. 17.
that when the Prefect asked him for a time to obey, and not suffer so many
Churches to be troubled for a small subtilty of opinions, he told him, that
those who are instructed in the holy oracles are not suffered to alter one
syllable of divine determinations, but for them are to endure (if called to it)
all kinds of death.

Nay we may learn this lesson from the very enemies of the truth themselves.
For, when Cassander taught that Princes ought to find out some way of peace
betwixt the Catholics, Lutherans and Calvinists, and in the mean time to allow
every one his own faith: t. 2. de Laicis l. 3. c. 19.
Bellarmine was much displeased, and blamed him for it; alleging that the
holy fathers taught we must not only keep the articles of the Creed inviolable,
but all other dogmata fidei, or points in religion, though they seem but small.
And, See his Letter to Blackwell in K. James his works. p. 261.
writing to Blackwell, Archpriest here in England about the Oath of
Allegiance, he thus courts him, and his party. I suppose (says he) there are
not wanting amongst you, those who say, they are but subtilties of opinions,
that are contained in the Oath that is offered to the Catholics, and that you
are not to strive against the Kings authority for such a little matter. But
there are not wanting also amongst you, holy men like unto Basil the great, who
will openly avow, that the very least syllable of Gods divine truth, is not to
be corrupted though many torments were to be endured, and death it self set
before you. Now if Papists thus stand so much on their minuta dogmata, why
should not we? If they oppose the Cassandrian reconciliation, its sure time for
us to do it. If they refuse to close with us because we observe not the
presumptions of men, we may sure well refuse to close with them, when they
observe not the institutions of God.

6. Is fear of suffering. Sin and wickedness long ago got to such an height in
the world, and the spirit of Cain and Esau, works so furiously in the men of
this age, that its become dangerous to worship God in the way he has
appointed. And such is the timeronsness and faint-heartedness of many
professing religion, that rather than they will suffer for him, they will forsake the
worship he has set up, and close with that which is set up by men. While the
Sun shines, the way is fair, and the coasts are clear, they cry up religion to
the clouds, and are ready upon all occasions to say, 2 King. 10. 16.
come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord; but when storms arise, and
troubles approach, they begin to consult, Cont. Appion. l. 2. verse. fin.
Socratis Carcerem times ideoque patrocinium veritatis suscipere non audes. De
Orig. Error. c. 3.
not how they may glorify God by suffering, but how they may provide for their
own safety. Plato knew much of God, but (as Josephus shows) durst not set it
down for fear of the people. And Lactantius charges the same upon Tully: Thou
dare not (says he) undertake the patronage of the truth for fear of the
prison of Socrates. And Augustine. does as much for Seneca; Colebat quod
reprehendebat, agebat quod arguebat, quod culpabat adorabot. De Civit. l. 6. c.
10.
he spends a whole chapter, in showing how he held the truth in
unrighteousness: telling us how he reverenced that which he reproved, did that
which he condemned, and worshipped that which he found fault with. Though these
wise men saw the vanity of the heathenish Deities, and the worship that was
given to them, and looked upon them as utterly unworthy of respect, from wise
and sober men, nay secretly scorned and derided them, yet would they not openly
declare against them, and that for fear of the people, who so much doted on
them.

And not only they, but diverse others who lived in places of greater light,
have shrunk from the truth, and declined the maintaining of it, merely upon the
account of suffering. Matthew. 19. 22.
The young man our Savior had to deal with, that had gone so far in religion,
and made such a show of respect to him, no sooner hears talk of parting with
his estate for him, but he bids him farewell. He comes to Christ with so much
seeming zeal, as if he wanted nothing, but a little instruction to make him
perfect, and fit him for the Kingdom of Heaven. He bears it out, as if he had
been ready to have laid himself, and all he had down at the feet of Christ, but
the issue shows he meant no such thing; he no sooner hears that he was like to
cost him so dear, but he presently turns his back upon him, and leaves him.
Like a young traveller undertaking a voyage, he is confident at the first, but
being come to the water side, and there beholding the unruliness of the waves,
and what dangers the angry visage of the boiling Seas threatens him with, his
countenance presently falls, and he becomes another man. Whiles our Savior
speaks to him of things in general, he has his answer ready, but when he
descends so far as to require him to sell what he had, and give it to the poor,
then he has no more to say; then he shows whether it was Christ or the world,
that lay next his heart.

In like manner Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimatheu, were men that loved Christ,
John 3. 2. 19. 38.
and believed his doctrine, yet were so fearful of bringing themselves into
trouble, that they durst not publicly own him; for the Evangelist tells us,
that the one of them came to him by night, and the other secretly. They were
great men, and by their open testimony, might have done much good, but they
were so fearful of being called in question, Mark. 14. 50.
and of having a stir made about it, Ad hoc imbre, qui subito supersusus mi^a
felicitate Persicos arcus corruperat, etc. Florus hist. rerum Romans l. 2. c. 8.
p. 185.
that they came to him at such times, when they might not be taken notice of.

But to leave them, how shamefully did the Apostles themselves miscarry in this
particular? when the multitude came to apprehend Christ, they all forsook him
and fled. As the rain wet and weakened the Persian bows, so afflictions, and
discouragements, do often damp the spirits of good men, and cool their zeal to
Christ and his cause. Thus it happened to the Disciples; the swords and staves of
the multitude, frighted them away from Christ, and made them forsake him, and
flee. Some are of opinion, that they did not sin, in forsaking him, thinking
those words of his to the soldiers, John 18. 8.
if ye seek me, let these go their way, discharged them, from attending on him.
But I conceive they sinned in it, and that very grossly; For, 1. The Evangelist
expresses this act of theirs by the term forsaking, which I can hardly think he
would have done, had it not been sinful. 2. It was against their express
promise, Dr. Jo. Rainold. Conf. with Heart. chapter 3. div. 1. p. 97. Haec
discipulorum fuga, non suit leve quoddam peocatillum sed grave delictum. Harm.
Evang. c. 4. in loc. Moribus lapsi sunt quum a Juda proditum Christum
deseruerunt. These. 1. p. 76.
whereby they all of them obliged themselves to own him and cleave to him,
though it cost them never so dear. This promise (says a man of rare learning)
as it was made by all the Apostles. so it was broken by them all. 3. Thereby
they much dishonored Christ and his cause, rejoyed such as were his enemies,
and hardened them against him. What might better serve their malicious
purposes, as an argument against him, th^n that his own very followers, forlook
and disowned him. 4. Several writers of eminent note interpret it an act of
very much cowardice and weakness. Gerhard says, this flight of theirs, was not
a slight matter, but a great offense. And the Author whom I mentioned before,
reckons it amongst their errors in manners. As for the words alleged for
their dismission, though they obliged the Soldiers to let them go, yet did
they not disoblige the Disciples from following him, or justify their cowardly
forsaking him.

Summer birds, when Winter comes, hide themselves in hollow trees, and so did
these I have mentioned; and so do all temporizing formalists, that prefer a
little worldly trash before the Glory of God, and a good Conscience. So long as
the Sun shines on Jerusalem, they own it, and every man says he was born
there; but when a cloud is over it, Psalm. 87. 5.
then they disown it, and are ready to cry with the children of Edom, raze it,
raze it, even to the foundation thereof. Psalm. 137. 7.
Now this is a most unworthy and sinful course, with greatest indignation to
be abhorred, and with greatest, care to be avoided by all such as are true
hearted to Religion, and that desire that Christ's Kingdom may come, and be set
up in the world. What greater disgrace can men do to Religion, than for every
show^ of rain that falls, run away from it, and forsake it? what kind of
thoughts will those that are without, have of Religion, when they see us make
so light of it? They Will think its a poor kind of Religion, when it is not worthy
to be suffered for. What will they take it to be, but a mere fable, when they
consider it speaks of such great matters, and yet see we will not endure the
least hardship for it? Apostasy is a sin highly dishonorable to God, and
prejudicial to the truth, and therefore God complains of, upbraids, and
declares his displeasure against a people when they shrink back upon the sight
of approaching troubles, and refuse to suffer for him. He long ago laid it to
the charge of the Jews, that they were not valiant for the Truth. Jer. 9. 3.
Valiant, they were, as any people in the World, but not for the Truth. They
were courageous for themselves, but cowardly for God. And this was an
aggravation of their Cowardice; for this showed it proceeded not from any
natural imbecility of the affections, but from want of true Piety, which if
they had had, they would have been as valiant for him as they were for
themselves. And what by one Prophet he lays to the charge of the Jews, he does
by another lay to the charge of the Israelites; Ephraim (says he) is like a
silly Dove without heart. Hos. 7. 11.
At other times Ephraim had spirit enough, but when he was to engage for God,
then he had no heart. And thus it is with many amongst us: they have heart
enough for themselves, but none for God. If they see their Names, Estates, or
carnal Interest, any way touched, they are all on a fire, and ready to be burnt
up with the flames or their own zeal: but they can see the Name, Truth, and
Interest of God assaulted and torn all to pieces, and never stir. In their own
matters, they are as if they were all heart, but in the Cause of God, they are
as if (with Ephraim) they had no heart at all. Oh it is sad that men should have
an heart for themselves, and none for God; that they should have courage in
their own Cause, and none in his. This God takes unkindly, and will severely
punish.

Though God call us sometimes to suffer for him, yet we need not think much at
it, for he promises us ample recompense; he engages that whatever we suffer for
him in our Names, Enjoyments, Relations, Friends, Liberty, or any other thing,
he will abundantly make us amends. Verily (says Christ) I say unto you, Mat.
19. 28, 29.
That ye which have followed me in the Regeneration, when the Son of man shall
sit in the Throne of his glory, ye shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the
twelve Tribes of Israel: And everyone that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren,
or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for my Names
sake, shall receive an hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting Life.
Suffering then, for Christ and Religion, is rather a kind of gainful
Merchandise, than any real loss. Who ever counted it loss, to part with a sum
of money upon good security, to receive it again at such a time with due
Interest? why, this is the Condition of the Servants of God. He is so well
pleased with their Sufferings, that he ingages to make up whatever they lose
upon his account. He assures them that whatever they part with for him, they
shall have it repayed to them, an hundred times over; and surely that is good
interest. But yet, lest that should not be thought enough, he tells them, that
in the end they shall inherit everlasting Life. And upon these and suchlike
grounds, the Servants of God have in all Ages stood up in the defense of
Religion, and his true Worship, notwithstanding all the miseries they thereby
rendered themselves liable to suffer. Though the Enemies of God and his Truth,
inflicted on them the greatest tortures, the Devil, with all his malice and
subtilty, could help them to invent, yet they entertained them cheerfully, and
endured them patiently; and not only so, but rejoiced in them, as Ensigns of
highest honor, praising God, that he would make use of them to suffer for his
Name, and bear witness to his oppressed Truth. Nay, sometimes they were acted
by such a spirit of heroic Zeal, that they desired Sufferings, and put
themselves upon them. When the Prefect urged Basil to comply with the Emperor,
and threatened him with death, if he denied: Socrat. Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 26.
gr.
he gave him this resolute and stout answer, Thou threatnest me with death
(says he) and I would it would fall out so well on my side, that I might lay
down this carcass of mine in the Quarrel of Christ, and in the defense of his
Truth, who is my Head and Captain. And when the Prefect pressed him to remember
himself, and obey the Emperor, he rejecting all, told him, Gaudco toto cord
mihi pro optima causa inferri mala, neque dignus sum tanta vexatione. Ep. ad
Spalat. fol. 287.
What I am to day, the same thou shall find me to morrow. And in like manner
Luther professed to Spalatine, That he rejoiced with all his heart that God
called him to suffer for so good a Cause, acknowledging himself unworthy of
such a favor. To these, were it needful, I might add the Examples of
multitudes more of blessed Saints, who cheerfully hazarded all for Christ while
they were on Earth, and now are receiving their Reward with him in Heaven: But
the case is so well known, that none except such who are strangers in Israel,
can be ignorant of it, and therefore I shall forbear.

Now things being thus, what shall we think of those that make temporal
impunity and outward safety, their very Rule, aiming at it in all their
Designs, and framing all their Proceedings in a way of subserviency to it? They
will either continue in their present Religion, or part with it; either be of
one way, or another, so they may but sleep in a whole skin, and preserve
themselves from trouble. They will dishonor God, venture their Souls, or do
any thing rather than expose themselves to danger. If Providence call them to
suffer for the Truth, they will find out an hundred unheard of, impertinent silly
distinctions, but they will evade it. When ever their Souls upon any Convictions
begin to talk of Suffering, they presently take them and rebuke them, saying as
Peter to Christ, Mat. 16. 22.
Be it far from thee, this shall not be unto thee. Certainly such persons as
these are an offense to Christ, and savor not the things that be of God, but
the things that be of Men.

And thus I have showed you, both the impediments, that hinder men from
worshipping God in Spirit, and those likewise, that hinder them from
worshipping him in Truth. Let us now see how far we are concerned in them; how
far they, or any of them, stand in our way, and accordingly let us get them
removed. The worshipping of God in spirit and in truth, is the Worship he would
have; this he will only accept of, and this he will only reward: and therefore
let us be sure to worship him with this kind of Worship, not suffering our
selves by any endeavors, or means whatsoever to be taken off it. It is but a
while, and Jesus Christ who instituted this Worship, will come again and
vindicate it against all that oppose it. It is but a while, and he will come to
his Temple, Joh. 2. 15.
whip out the Buyers and Sellers, and purge it from the impurities and
defilements, that cleave unto it. It is but a while, and he will call all
Nations down into the Valley of Decision, and there he will plead with the
Troublers of his Church, and such as have muddied the Waters of his Sanctuary,
and polluted those Silver Streams with their sinful mixtures, and then it will
appear whether the outward ceremonious worshipping of God, or the worshipping
of him in spirit and in truth, be the true Worship.

In the mean time, lets keep close to God, study our duty, and both cheerfully
and constantly (notwithstanding all the troubles we may thereby expose our
selves to) persist in the performance of it. Though men frown upon us, and
threaten us with Censures, Imprisonment, Banishment, Confiscation, and all the
evil humane might and cruelty can do us; yet let us not be moved, but count our
selves happy we have an opportunity to do, or suffer any thing whereby we may
testify our respect to so good a cause. Whose is all we have but Gods? and for
what end did he put it into our hands, but that we should lay it out for him?
As therefore the primitive Christians sold their Lands and Houses, brought the
prices thereof, and laid them down at the Apostles feet; So let us bring our
Estates, Act. 3. 35.
Enjoyments, Liberties, Lives, and all we have, and lay it down at the feet of
Christ, being willing to sacrifice all, so we may but further his opposed
Interest, and bear witness to his despised Truth.

Bucer in an Epistle to Calvin, tells him, Supersint and qui velint libenter
redimere, vita sua Reipublicae pristinam colendi Christi libertatem. Ep. 96. p.
(mihi) 203.
That there were some that would willingly redeem to the Commonwealth, the
ancient liberty of worshipping Christ with their very lives. True Grace and
Christian Zeal, are of an heroic nature, ready to endure any thing for Christ,
his Worship, and Truth. If therefore we will evidence our Grace to be true, and
our Zeal to be Christian, we must be willing to suffer. It is a vanity to think
of passing to Heaven without suffering; the Saints have hitherto found the way
thither paved with troubles, and we may not think of finding it otherwise now.
Constantine the Great, as piously as wittily, told Acesius the Novatian, that
if he would not take up with Persecution, Socrat: Hist. Eccl. li. 1. c. 10. gr.
and such like dealing, he must provide him a Ladder, and climb alone to
Heaven. Unless we will either be content without Heaven, or find some other way
to it, than the Saints have yet found, we must look for troubles. They have
been found in the way of Heaven hitherto, and so they will be to the end of the
World. If then, we will go the way of Heaven, let us make account to meet with
them, and prepare for them; and when they fall upon us, let us with all holy
submission, and Christian cheerfulness undergo them. In a word, whatever comes
of it, whether Prosperity or Adversity, Liberty or Bonds, Life or Death, since
God has made it our Duty, let us make it our Practice, to worship him in
Spirit and in Truth.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the Margent: Page 18. for Judel, read Tudel; p. 27. f. and abrogare, r.
abrogari, and; p. 36. after fumus, add and.

In the Book: P. 37. l. 30. for it, r. in. p 40. l. 1. for should, r. would. p.
63. l. 4. for tradtion, r. tradition p. 64. l. 13. for call, r. calls. p. 67.
l. 15. for higer, r. higher.


