FIRE IN THE BUSH.

THE SPIRIT BVRNING, NOT CONSuming, but purging Mankind. OR, The great Battle
of God Almighty, between Michaell the Seed of Life, and the great red Dragon,
the Curse fought within the Spirit of Man.

With several other Declarations, and Testimonies of the Power of Life.

By JERRARD WINSTANLY.

The righteous Law a government will give to whole mankind,
How he should govern all the Earth, and therein true peace find;
This government is Reason pure, who will fill man with Love,
And wording Justice; without deeds, is judged by this Dove.
LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at the
Black-Spread-Eagle, at the West end of Paul's. 1650.

TO All the several Societies of people, called Churches, in the Presbyterian,
Independent, or any other form of Profession, in the service of God.
BRethren, and fellow members of Mankind; This following declaration of the
word of Life was a free gift to me from the Father himself; And I received it
not from men; when I had writ it, I was moved to send it to you immediately;
but I delayed it by almost a fortnight, and thought not of it; then one night
as I waked out of sleep, the voice was in my very heart and mouth, ready to
come forth; go send it to the Churches; Thereupon I was filled with great Love
to you, my heart panting with love toward you, pitying your condition; in
that there is a great striving, as it were for life among you, and yet you lie
under the power of death and bondage, and knows not, or at least does not
actually hold forth that you know, that spirit which in words you seem to
profess.

You speak and preach of the life of Love; But you have not the power of it;
your verbal profession, without the pure righteous action, shows you generally
to be outlandish men, of several Nations, under the government of darkness,
and that you are not yet the true Inhabitants of the Land of Love. Before you
live you must die, and before you be bound up into one universal body, all
your particular bodies and societies must be torn to pieces; for the true
Light is coming now once more, not only to shake the Earth, that is, Moses
worship, but Heaven also; That which you call Gospell-worship, and the Kingdom
without shall fall, that so the Kingdom within may be established; for all
your particular Churches are like the enclosures of Land which hedges in some
to be heirs of Life, and hedges out others; one saying Christ is here with
them; Another saying no: but he is there with them; but truly brethren, you
shall see and find, that Christ who is the universal power of Love is not
confined to parties, or private chambers; but he is the power of Life, Light,
and Truth, now rising up to fill the Earth, Mankind with himself.

Well, I have obeyed the voice; and I have sent this to you, with a heart free
and full of love toward you; Some of you will receive this with gentleness;
others will be offended; To some it will be refreshing, but others will storm,
and prepare war against it; And the Ishmaelites they will scoff; but be it
so: yet my Armor is tried, I am sure it will keep off the blow.

You shall find I speak of the Garden of Eden, which is the spirit of man,
not the spirit of Beasts. And in that Garden there are weeds and herbs. The
weeds are these. Self-love, Pride, Envy; Covetousness after riches, honors,
pleasures, Imagination, thinking he cannot live in peace, unless he enjoy this
or that outward object; And sometimes the joy of envy when he obtaines his
end; and sometime the sorrow of Covetousness when he is crossed, rules as King
in the Garden. And the stinking weeds over-spreads the sweet flowers and
herbs, which are the lights of the spirit of truth.

There is likewise the most venomous weed called Hypocrisy, attended with
evil surmising, grudgings, speaking and promising, nay, swearing one thing,
yet doing another, inventing much show of holiness to compass his selfish
ends; and while he rules King, as he does rule at this day; he is assisted with
vain glory, fear of being disthroned, opp^essing others, unmercifull;
careless of former promises and engagements; persecuting those who does such
things as he promised and vowed to do, whilst he was a servant, and such like.

And as you may call those by the name of weeds; so likewise you may call them
outlandish men; for they are not the true native Inhabitants of the heart, but
strangers to the righreous spirit. And all these with their fellows make up
but one power of darkness, Devil, or Father of lies. And this power is the
night time of mankind, or the absence of the Son of righteousness from the
heart. This power is the reprobate which the word of life has rejected, this
shall never enter into true rest; this is the wicked man, or Dragon in you,
which causes all wars and sortowes; and the son that causes shame; the
son of bondage, which must not abide in the heart for ever, but must be cast
out.

Therefore, so long as you labor under this selfish, dark, imaginary power,
you are strangers to the Son of righteousness; If this dark power bear sway
in you; it is he whom you profess, and it is he whom you call God, and Christ;
for that power that you hold forth in your actions, is the spirit you profess;
If your actions be full of self love, as you may know it by your hasty anger,
when your Religion is questioned, and by your snappish bitterness against
those that differs from you; then this dark power is he you worship.

There is likewise in the garden of Eden (man's heart) sweet flowers and herbs;
As Joy, Peace, Love, humility, selfe-denyall, patience, sincerity, truth, or
equity. These are the true inhabitants in the righteous Land; and all these
make up but one power, or body, which is the seed or Tree of Life in you. And
this power is the daytime of Mankind, or the presence of the Son of
righteousness in the heart; This power is the Elect, the Son of the Father
in whom he delights; this Son shall live for ever in rest, peace, and in the
power of eternal life; This is the righteous man, this is Michaell, the Seed
Christ, or blessing.

Therefore, consider what spirit you profess, and live not in darkness any
longer; Babes and sucklings do see, and can say, that in your established
forms you worship, and profess you know not what; you say one thing and do
another; you make God and Christ a very cheat to the world, as if he were all
words and no deeds; Indeed your king Hypocrisy is so; But the King of
righteousness which your established forms has, and do dishonor before the
Nations is not so; and you all must and shall be torn in pieces, and
scattered, and shamed; for your excessive pride, covetousness, hardness of
heart, self-love, and hypocrisy, and your verbal profession shall be loathed
by all, and be cast out, as stinking, imaginary ^ung of false-hearted ones, who
professes Love in words, and in actions deny Love; but lifts up the Devil and
covetousness and bondage.

If you truly own Christ, you will cheerfully hold forth the restoring spirit
in your actions; Christ the Anointing spirit does not enslave any, but comes to
set all free; he comes not to destroy but to save; he comes not to put
sackcloath and mourning weeds upon mankind, but to pull them off and to wipe
away all tears.

So long as the Earth is entangled, and appropriated into particular hands, and
kept there by the power of the sword; as it is, and your profession holds it
up, so long the Creation lies under bondage; And the Devil, who is the power
of covetousness, or murderer, does rule, and is the God, whom you generally
profess; for you acknowledge Christ in words, and the Dragon in your actions;
and so hypocrisy reigns King in the Earth at this very day.

But if any of you will truly acknowledge Christ, now in the end of your days,
come join hands and hearts together, and set the Earth free; nothing now
stands in the way of Englishmen; but inward covetousness; Be not like the Rats
and Mise, that draws the treasures of the Earth into your holes to look upon,
whilst your fellow members, to whom it belongs as well as to you, by the Law
of Creation do starve for want; But you have no warrant from the Law of
Righteousness so to do; whenever you lock up the treasure of the Earth, and
desires more then food and raiment, you do evil.

When you know the Son within, as you can talk much of him without, then the
Son will set you free; and truly he is coming on a maine, to break down
all your pinfoulds, and to lay all open to the Common; the rough ways he will
make smooth, and crooked ways strait; and level mountains and valleys.

And covetous, proud Self-love, and ruling and teaching hypocrisy shall tie
up, or restrain his spirit no longer; for the voice is gone out, freedom,
freedom, freedom: he that has ears to hear, let him hear, he that is
filthy, let him be filthy still, till he be cast out as dung and unsavory
salt; And so I leave this with you, as I was commanded, and bid you farewell.

Being a friend to Love, wading through the bondage of the world JERRARD
WINSTANLY.

The Matters contained in the following DISCOURSE.
What the Garden of Eden is. Chap. 1. What the tree of Knowledge of good and
evil is. 2. What the Tree of Life is. 3. What the Serpent is. 4. What the
living Soul (Man) is, that is called very good 5. What the Curse is, that
does defile the man. 6. What the blessing is that restores him again. 7. What
these four Beasts are; whose burdning powers, as that bondage which the
Creation groans under, waiting to be delivered from. 8. What are the Time,
Times, and dividing of time in the spirit of Mankind, which man posses through
before he sits down in true rest. 9. How man is tempted, and when he is said
to fall by temptation 10. How Christ was tempted, and by whom, and how he
overcame the tempter. 11. What the Kingdom without is, which is called the
Devils. 12. What the Kingdom of Heaven is within, which is called Christ's
Kingdom. 13.
With diverse other testimonies of like Nature.

FIRE IN THE BUSH. The Spirit burning, not consuming, but purging Mankind.
CHAP. I. What the Garden of Eden is.
THE whole Creation of fire* water, Earth and Air; and all the varieties of
bodies made up thereof, is the clothing of God: so that all things, that is A
substantial being, looked upon in the lump, is the fulness of him, that
fills all with himself, he is in all things, and by him all things consist.

And this God, or almighty Ruler, is universal Love strength and life,; And as
he begets and brings forth every thing, in their degree and kind: so he is the
Restorer of all things, from that defilement, death and sorrow, which they fall
into, and the alone deliverer from the oppressing power, preserving every one
in peace; Therefore he is called the Lord God, Almighty; for he is the only,
and alone living spirit, which dwells every where, and can do, what he will.

And of all those bodies, that are called Creatures; or the clothing of God,
Mankind is the chief. And because the Father or spirit of all things,
manifests himself in mankind, in life strength, and wisdom more then in any
other creature, therefore mankind is made the Lord of all; And the whole Earth
is this: The Lords.

For when all things were produced, and appeared very good in the liking, and
content of the creating spirit: The word of Command, was to whole mankind (not
^o one or a few single branches of mankind) do thou take possession, over the
fish, foul, Beast; and do thou till the Earth; and do thou multiply and
fill the Earth: And no part or branch of mankind is shut out by him from this
employment.

For as the great Earth, and the inferior creatures therein are as the Commons
Forests, and delights of God in the out Coasts of the Creation; Even so
Mankind, The living Earth is the very Garden of Eden, wherein that spirit of
Love, did walk, and delight himself principally, as being the Head and Lord
of all the rest.

In this Garden are five Rivers. Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, Smelling, Feeling;
which we in our age of the world, call five Senses; And these five water
springs, do refresh and preserve the whole Creation, both of the out coasts,
and of the Garden.

In this Garden* Mankind, and in every branch of him, there is a Tree of
knowledge, of good and evil, called Imagination; and the Tree of Life, called
universal Love, or pure knowledge in the power.

When Mankind, or the living soul feeds upon, or delights himself in the
fruit of that tree of good and evil, which is selfish, unwarranted, and
unexperienced Imagination, which is his weakness and disease: then he looses
his honor and strength, and falls from his dominion* Lordship, and becomes
like the Beasts of the field, void of understanding; For the Lord of so great
and vast a body as the Creation is, must know all things clearly, as they be,
and not by blind Imagination, that leads mankind sometimes astray, as well as
sometimes in the right way.

When mankind is guided by Imagination, he runs a great hazard upon life and
death; This power is he, that calls good evil, and evil good. This knows not
the crea^^rg Spirit in inward feeling; but does fancy him to be sometimes one
thing sometimes another; and still dwells in the dark Chamber of uncertainty.

And while Mankind eats of this Tree, and delights himself here, he is
driven out of the Ga^den, that is, out of himself, he enjoyes not himself he
knows not himself; he lives without the true God, or ruler, and is like the
Beasts of the field, who live upon objects without them; And does not enjoy the
Kingdom within himself; but seeks after a Kingdom and peace without him: as
the Beasts do.

This Imagination is he that fills you with fears, doubts, troubles, evil
surmisings and grudges, he it is that stirs up wars and divisions; he makes
you lust after every thing you see, or hear of, and promises delight to you,
in the enjoyment; as in riches, places of Government, pleasures, society of
strange women: and when you have all these, which you think or imagine to have
content in, presently troubles follow the heels thereof; and you see your
self naked and are ashamed.

So that the selfish imaginary power within you, is the power of darkness; The
father of lies, the deceiver, the destroyer, and the Serpent that twists about
every thing within your self, and so leads you astray from the right way of
life and peace. And the whole world of mankind, generally at this day, through
all the nations of the world, is eating of this Tree of knowledge, of good and
evil, and are cast out of themselves, and know not the power that rules in
them; and so are ignorant of their God; This is the fullness of the Beasts
time, it is his last period; all places, persons, and things stink with his
imaginary power of darkness in teaching, and ruling: therefore it is that
fullness of time, in which the Restorer of all things will come, to deliver,
the Creation from that bondage and curse, and draw up all things to live in
him, who is the true life, rest, and Light of all things.

For in the midst of this Garden likewise, there is the Tree of Life, who is
this blessing, or restoring power, called universal Love, or pure knowledge,
which when mankind by experience begins to eat thereof, or to delight himself
herein, preferring this Kingdom and Law within, which is Christ, before the
Kingdom and Law, that lies in objects without, which is the devil:

Then man is drawn up into himself again; or new Jerusalem, which is the
spirit of truth, comes down to Earth, to fetch Earth up to live in that life,
that is a life above objects; even to live in the enjoyment of Christ, the
righteous spirit within himself, and to tread the earthly life, that lies in
objects without, under foot; This is the life, that will bring in true
community; and destroy murdering propriety. Now mankind enters into the garden
of Gods rest, and lives for ever, he enjoyes his Kingdom, and the word within
himself he knows sin and sorrow no more; for all tears now, which blind
Imagination brought upon him, are wiped away; And man is in peace.

This Tree of Life I say, is universal Love, which our age calls righteous
Conscience, or pure Reason; or the Seed of life that lies under the clods of
Earth, which in his time is now rising up to bruise the Serpents head, and to
cast that imaginary murderer out of the Creation.

This Seed is he, that leads mankind into Truth, making every one to seek the
preservation and peace of others, as of themselves; This teaches man inwardly
to know the nature and necessity of every body, and to administer to every body
accordingly. This was the Father in Jesus Christ, who let him see what was in
man; This was that Godhead that dwelt bodily in Christ, reconciling the world
to himself, and so making peace: when this almighty power of Life rules King
of righteousness within; then Satan, or outward objects, shall find nothing
in you to close with him, when he temp^s. This is the Kingdom of Heaven
within, and the white stone, with the new name written therein, which no man
knows the glory, beauty, life, peace, and largeness of, but they which have
it.

This power is not a selfe-Lover; But the universal Lover; This will have all
saved, that is, will have all live in peace and rest. This Tree of life is full
of humility, sincerity, patience* tenderness, moderation. Reason, Wisdom,
Truth, Righteousness, Chastit^e Joy, Peace, Liberty, yea full of the well
springs of sweet life.

This is the blessing of Abraham, the promised Seed, that remains within, as a
servant for a time, times, and dividing of time; then he is to arise and cast
out the Dragon, and to purge out that drossie, imaginary power, that is crept
in to defile the Creation; And so properly he is called the restorer, Savior,
Redeemer, yea and the true and faithful Leveller.

And when this tree of Life is fed upon and delighted in, (by the five Senses,
which is the Creation, Mankind, or the living Soul.) Then these five Rivers
are called pure Rivers of the waters of life; for the life of truth and peace
is in them, and they are the sweet conveyers of the waters, or breathings of
life, from one to another through the whole body: and so bringing all into a
onenes, to be of one heart and one mind; And there is but one God and King in
all, and among all, who is Michael our Prince of peace.

And the whole Creation now, will laugh in righteousness, for there will be no
murmuring or complaining heard in all the mountain of the Lord.

For this I can say, when this tree of Life begins to rule within a particular
heart; he casts out sorrow, fears, inward presssures; he subdues muttering,
surmising, heart rising; he kills Envy, pride, vainglory, unclean lust; in
one word, he casts the wicked man out, and takes possession of his own house
and Temple himself. (The heart.) and sets it down in peace, so that the heart
shall sit singing, where are all my enemies become? they are sunk, they are
gone, as if I never had any. All bondage within is gone, sighing and sorrowing
is done away; my heart now indeed is a Land of Righteousness, full of life,
light, and fruit of peace and truth: Hallelujah: praise, honor and glory to
him that s^ts upon the throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

And as there is this change and alteration wrought within a particular body;
and all the power, Authority and government of Imagination is plucked up, and
cast out, and a New Kingdom wherein dwells righteousness is set up:

Even so, as this restoring spirit spreads himself in variety of bodies, and
he will spread; for he is the vine, teach^ng, and ruling every one, till at
le^g ^^^e whole creation is brought into the unity of him^^^f^; so that That
saying is fulfilled, you shall be a^l taught of God, and I will be your God, I
the one spirit of Love; and you, the whole body of mankind shall be my people.

Then that great reformation, and restoration spoken of* shall be made
manifest in the Nations of the world; then those pluckings up, shakings down,
tearing to pieces of all rule, power and Authority, shall be known what it is;
that so Christ alone may be exalted in that day of his power.

For now Mankind every where, shall be made to speak and act purely according
to the life and necessity of every body, and every business; and keep his
dominion and Lordship; And all inferior creatures shall stand in awe of, and
reverence and love man. And the wisdom and Love in man, shall preserve all
others in safety and peace.

CAAP. II. What the Tree of Knowledge of Good and evil is.
But when Imagination is fed upon, and delighted in, as it is at this day
amongst most people; This is he that puts all out of order, he corrupts the
five Senses, and makes mankind walk disorderly, and to tear and devour
members of his own kind, just like the Beast of the field, and to differ
nothing from them: the Beasts, they prey and devour one another; so does
imaginary man, fights, makes wars, kills, robs, destroys, and wastes one
another. This is the reign of the Beast, and yet he would be called a God,
though he be the murderer; well, thou art and still shall be called a God; But
thou art the God of the world, that runs round, and when thou art brought to
where thou beganst, then thy days are done, thou must dye, And the voice is
pronounced, it is done, time shall be to thee no more; And thou shall be
destroyed without hand, that is, without sword or weapons; which is the rock
of d^fence; for Christ will consume thee, by the word of his mouth, and by the
brightness of his commi^g.

Well, this Imaginary power is the dark side of the cloud; This is the Son
of the mother Earth mankind, which causes shame; This is the curse* the
Serpent, the Devil, and his power has filled the Creation, and is the burden
it groans under; This is the power of darkness.

And he would be as God, knowing good and evil, therefore the Almighty power
of Life, affords him a time, times, and dividing of time to rule in mankind.
And while he rules he fills all creatures with sorrow and slavery, and so in
the end of his appointed time he is proved a Devil, and not the true God, the
destroyer and murderer, and not the Savior. The curse and not the blessing of
the Creation, the power of darkness, and not the power of Light,

This is the darkness, that has covered the Earth, and the curse that
destroys all things, this is he that calls light darkness, and darkness
light, good evil, and evil good; and while this power rules in mankind,
mankind is in prison and bondage within himself, and sees no Light.

And under this power of Imagination the whole government of the world amongst
the sons of men is built; all Nations are under this Kingdom of darkness;
the frame of this worldly government, is the Devils proper Kingdom; And the
power of the sword fighting and killing, cannot throw down his Kingdom, but
set it up in more power; B^t that power that must destroy the dark Kingdom, is
a power contrary to him; And that is, Love and patience. Live in this life; and
thou killst the Devil, and shakest his Kingdom about his ears. This power of
Love and patience, acted with a cheerful life, kills Imagination.

Indeed Imagination is that God, which generally every one worships and ownes;
and in the matter* they worship a lie, the Devil and mere nothing; This is he
that makes every one wise in his own conceit; that makes men, Envy, censure,
and dest^oy one another; and to take pleasure in none but what pleases self.
This Imagination fears where no fear is: he rises up to destroy others, for
fear, least others destroy him: he will oppress others, least others oppress
him; and fears he shall be in want hereafter; therefore he takes by violence,
that which others have labored for. And, so he beats the even ground before
him, like a blind man, that imagines that hill or block lies in his way.

And though this dark power be a God, or mighty ruler in mankind; yet as soon
as he appeared to rule, the true Light appears to break his peace; as soon as
Imagination began to sit upon the throne* (Man's heart*) The seed of Life began
to cast him out, and to take his Kingdom from him; So that this is the great
battle of God Alm^ghty; Light fights against darkness, universal Love
fights against selfish power; Life against death; True knowledge against
imaginary thoughts.

These two powers are Michaell and the Dragon, and this battle is fought in
Heaven, (that is, in mankind, in the garden of Eden) where God principally
resolves to set up his throne of righteous government, it is not sought in the
spirit of Beasts; but in Heaven in the spirit of Mankind, who is the Lord. And
this battle in our age of the world, grows hotter and sharper then formerly;
for we are under the dividing of time, which is the last period of the Beasts
reign; And he will strive hardest now.

But it will be in vain, he must loose his Kingdom; for the Lamb will cast
the Dragon out, and bring all into Peace; then every thing shall appe^re naked,
and bare before the Lord of the whole Earth, and all Imaginary coverings shall
be taken off every where.

Now the end of all societies of Churches, preaching, praying, Ordinances,
should be to find out this darkness, and to cast it out; And to worship the
Father in Spirit and truth; And so to advance the Blessing, or the Son in
whom the Father is well pleased. That so mankind might cease speaking and
acting from thoughts and Imagination, and may come to speak and act purely, as
the truth was in Jesus, he being the supreme Lord of the Earth.

This, you Preachers, and Professors, is, or at least should be the end of your
profession; And if you come short of this, you loose all your pains, and will
be ranked among imaginary Hypocrites, that worship they know not what, but as
their fancy ^ells them; And that is neither better nor worse, but the Devil
which you worship.

Therefore if man would live purely, to the honor of that spirit in him, which
is called the Seed; he is then to know, what spirit is it, that rules in him,
and to act from it, for that spirit that rules is the God, whether it be
Imagination, or whether it be the light of life, which is universal Love.

This is the shame and misery of our age, That every one professes Christ and
the spirit, and they will preach of and pray to the Spirit; And yet they know
not inwardly, by what spirit or inward power they are ruled; Every one looks
upon a God and a ruler without him, as the Beast of the field does, few sees
their Ruler within; These have lost their dominion and Lordship, and they live
under the curse, and are blind in their Imagination, and are ignorant of the
ways of truth.

These are cast out of the Garden, they live out of themselves upon the Earth;
they live upon riches, honors-pleasures, Ministe^s Lawyers, Armies wife,
children, Ordinances, customs, and all outward forms of worship, or in that
beastly community with women; now adays cried up by the lust of the flesh; yea
upon any thing without them, which they imagine good: take away these and they
dye, they know not how to govern themselves, nor others; these have lost their
Dominion and Lordship; their Kingdom is without, and their peace is placed
upon perishing things, and as they vanish, so does their peace and their
Kingdom.

For they have no peace nor Kingdom within; God and they have no sweet
Communion together; the living soul and the creating Spirit are not one, but
divided; the one looking after a Kingdom without him; the other drawing him to
look and wait for a Kingdom within him, which moth and rust does not
corrupt* and thieves cannot break through and steal; this is a Kingdom that
will abide; the outward Kingdom must be taken from you.

They that live upon outward object^ are filled with inward trouble, and
pierced through with many sorrows; slavish fear within them keeps the way of
the tree of life; they dare not live in the life of free community, or
universal Love; least others jeare, hate, and trouble them; or least they come
to want food and raiment; for Imagination thinks, if they love and succor
others, ye^ others will not love them again; These know not the Spirit, they
live without upon the Earth, upon objects, under that dark power, called
unbelief.

But when man lives in the life of universal Love, then God walks and
delights himself in his garden mankind; and man who is the living soul,
consisting of he^ring, seeing, t^sting, smelling, feeling, has sweet content
and communion, with that ruling spirit of love* righteousness and peace
within, and this is Christ's Kingdom, or the day of the Lord within.

While m^nkinde lives out of himself, feeding his imaginary fancy upon
outward perishing objects; then the creating Spirit, and the living soul are
at variance, and opposition; the Spirit would have man live within himself,
and take delight in Love, humility, patience, chastity, wisdom Justice* and
all such sweet smelling spices that rules in the heart, leading forth the body
to act accordingly; for this is the Anointing in him, that teaches man all
things, and leads him into all truth.

But imaginary man, he cannot live within himself; this is madness and
foolishness to him, he must run abroad for delight and content his seness
altogether in outward objects and strives with greediness after outward
contents: And jeeres, laughes, hates, and persecutes the Spirit, calling him
madness, blasphemys confusion, and that will destroy all government and order;
which Imagination has set up in the world. And this now is the hot time of the
day: God, or the creating Spirit takes no delight, to walk in his garden while
it is so hot an opposition, between him and dark flesh.

But when Mankind begins to look within himself, and sees his pride, Envy,
Covetousness, Lust of the flesh, anger, hypocrisy, and nothing but darkness
and discontent; and begins to say with himself; oh what have I done, how am I
fallen? all outward content in objects flies away, and I am left naked, and
wants Light, life, and rest within.

Oh that I could see and feel Love, humility, chastity, sincerity, truth,
wisdom, contentedness, and peace live and rule in power in me: Then I should
rejoice abundantly, in the enjoyment of my my self, within my self; though
all other outward contentments in objects were taken away; though I were poor
without, yet if I were rich within, I could rejoice: if I were in prison,
without, If I were in freedom within, I could rejoice; if all my outward
friends and objects forsook me; yet if I had familiar friendship, with that
sweet Spirit within I should have peace enough: No life like to the life
within; This Kingdom within is excellent, and full of glory; the outward
Kingdom and peace is a deceiver, it forsakes a man in his misery; but the
inward Kingdom never fails a man, in life nor death: Oh that I did enjoy this
Kingdom within.

This now is the cool of the day; And the heat of opposition between flesh
and Spirit begins to decline; flesh sees his folly, and grows very weary
thereof; the patience of the spirit is honored by the flesh. And that
righteous Ruler, (God*) The Seed and tree of Life, begins to walk in this
cool of the day, with delight, in the middle of the garden; (Man's heart) the
sweet breathings of that pure spirit is now entertained, and fallen Earth begins
to see himself naked, and to acknowledge his nakedness before the spirit, and
is ashamed.

And declares how he came by his nakedness; Even by embracing objects, and
seeking a Kingdom without himself; his covetous heart closing with that
imaginary conceit, promised him much delight; but like a subtle Serpent, he
has deceived him: And now the Seed begins to work, to bruise the Serpents
head, and man begins to look upward, toward the life of the Spirit within,
which he sees now is a life above the life of Earthly objects.

Well, says the Spirit, to this shattered Earth: Thou see thy self naked,
and thou see the Serpent that deceived thee; and thou art now separated from
me; thou lockdest for peace and rest without, and thou art deceived; Thou art
afraid to look within, because thy conscience, the Light, that is within thee,
which is my self, condemns thee; And this fear is the fruit of thy
Imagination; thou fearst where there is no cause of fear; Thou lookedst for
good to come from objects without; but behold sorrow, thou thoughtst, Oh that
if thou had lost outward objects, thou could have had no inward joy; But
thou see now, how Imagination, that Serpent has deceived thee, oh thou
living foul; how art thou fallen?

But the seed of all things, which is my self, will bruise that Serpents head,
and I will restore thee again; I am thy Redeemer, and besides me there is none.

But yet the Battle between Michaell, that Seed, and the Dragon, that
Imaginary power is not ended, it begins again to be fought in heaven, that is,
within the garden mankind; and the day grows hot again, flesh and spirit
does begin a fresh to oppose each other sharply.

For Imagination begins to tell the soul; If thou enjoyst not fulness of all
objects, thou will want and starve for food, and so presently fear of poverty
takes the throne and reigns; and fear bids thee go; get what thou can, by
hook or by crook, least thou want, and perish, and die miserably.

Thou see how full of hardness of heart and deceit every man is; each one
seeking to save himself; And if thou want food and raiment, Love and Life
within, will not preserve thy body from misery,

Then thou see the treachery of men beset thee, poverty threatening thee, thy
body weak, thy mind distempered with fear and care what to do, and how to
live; Some laughs at thee, others cheats thee, yea, such as seem to profess
the same spirit, thou strivest for, are most bitter against thee; and they
look after objects more then the inward life, for who more covetous, and hard
then they; And will thou be alone? yea, thou art alone, where is any one that
ownes, or tenders thee.

Well, says the soul, this is an evil time; and then says Imaginary fear,
filling the soul with sorrow, oh that this body had never been borne, I would
I had dyed in the womb; If this be the happiness of a man, I would I had been
a Bird, a Beast, or some other creature. While I had no care of doing rightly,
I could live, I had friends, I had peace; But since I began to do as* I would
be done by: friends now stands a far off; every body hates me, and I am open
to all misrey; does righteousness bring thee to this, oh miserable wretch?

This now is a battle of another nature, then the former was; for in the first
battle, the Imaginary flesh was lofty and stout, and full of presumption,
self-conceit, scoffs, jeeres Envy, vaporing, and secret subtilty, laughing
in his sleave as we say, at the ways of the Spirit of Life.

But now he is in another temper, he is furnished with the weapons of slavish
fear, evil surmising, sense of misery, sometimes angry, sometimes ready to
despair, and to curse the day of his birth, his soul takes pleasure in
nothing without, and yet has no peace within.

And in this battle likewise, God and man* flesh and spirit are separated,
there is no sweet agreement; The selfish Imagination would be a God still, and
fight strongly to keep the tottering kingdom, and will not leave off till the
Spirit of burning ^ who is consuming fire, Even God himself; come and fire
Imagination out of all his strong holds, and with a strong power redeem the
imprisoned Earth from his presumptuous and dispairing bondage.

Though there was a parley before, between flesh and spirit; the man and his
righteous God; In the cool of the day, while the living Earth saw himself a
little naked, and was under a little sense of trouble, and fear, yet the
Serpent (Im (...)) is not conquered by a sle^ght parley; but by a stronger
contest; for after this parley within himself, man is cast out of himself,
that is, out of the garden, to seek content in outward objects; as in riches
friends, wife, children, and the like; and then the battle grows hot again.

For if our true peace and rest, lie in objects and in a Law without, as
Imagination would have it, then the Spirit is not within the Creation, but
without; And if so, then there may be places found, where the Spirit is not,
and then God is not every where, and so, the words of Jesus Christ were not
true, when he said, the Kingdom of Heaven is within you; and the word is nigh
you, even in your mouth and in your heart; and as the Apostle said, God the
Father is above all, and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4.6.

But the Spirit is within; for the Creation is his clothing; God was in Christ,
reconciling the world (or fallen Earth to himself, he was not without him in
objects, offering peace; but he was within, drawing him from the deceitfulness
of objects that fades away, to look for rest and peace only within, therefore
it is said, Christ is our rest, that is, the Anointing within is our rest, who
teaches us all things, and le^ds us into all truth.

And by this Relation; you see here is the living soul, mankind; then here is
the fall of mankind; Then here is the rising or restoring of Mankind.

And that which has by Imagination, or Judas Ministry been held sorth to us,
to be without us, as Adam; the Serpent, the Garden, the Tree of Knowledge, of
Good and evil; and the Tree of Life; and the fall of Man, and promise of
redemption, all to be without; yet all these are within the heart of man
clearly.

And whether there was any such outward things or no, it matters not much, if
thou see all within, this will be thy life.

Therefore in this which follows, I shall write of these three particulars.

The Living Soul, which is pure nature, that was called very good.

Then the Serpent, or curse, which is the Imaginary power of darkness, or man's
fall.

Then the Seed of life* the blessing, called the restoring power, delivering
mankind from that bondage, and setting him down in rest and peace within
himself.

CHAP. III. What the Tree of Life is.
ANd when Mankind begins to enter into himself again, and to enjoy rest, and
peace, and Life within, which is the resurrection of Christ; then woe, woe woe,
to the imaginary power* that rules the world, he shall be shaken with terror,
and fall, and burst a sunder, for this is Judas and the Pharisees that have
killed Christ all along.

But now Christ, or the Anointing* is, arising up in sons and daughters, they
must dye: Therefore, whatsoever government is set up by Imagination, shall be
thrown down; For every plant, which my heavenly Father has not planted,
shall be rooted out.

Surely then there is a fourfold power, much Idolized, and doted upon by
covetous flesh, which must be shaken to pieces; And woe, woe, woe, to the
Inhabitants of the Earth, to those that live in, or are the upholders of those
powers.

The first is the Imaginary, teaching power, called hearsay, book, studying,
University, Divinity, which indeed is Judas Ministry, for this cries hayle
Master, to the Spirit, and seems to kiss him in Love, in outward show, by
preaching of him, and by long prayers to him; But betrays him into the hand of
the selfish power.

This power or ministry, must destroy himself, as Judas did; and so he does,
for the divisions within the public Ministry makes him burst asunder; and all
his inward bowels, of Covetousness, Pride, selfe-seeking, evil surmisings,
gruding, hypocrisy, seeking to please men more then the righteous power* and
all their close envy; is discovered.

Then secondly, The Imaginary Kingly power, who by the power of the sword, and
successive con^uests (...) one part of Mankind, to rule (...); p^e^ending to
keep the Creation in (...) yet proves a selfe-upholder; By murder and (...)
others under foo^ this power takes ease* honor, falnesse of the Earth to
himself by ^he sword, and rules over the labors and bodies of others at his
will and prerogative.

Thus power m^st be shaken to pieces.

Therefore you Kings and Monarchs, and State rulers, that upholds kingly
Authority in your hands come in, and kiss the Son betimes; it is not long,
before he will more gloriously appear, to shake terribly the Nations, not
England only, but all Nations; for the dominion of Christ is to reach from East
to West, from North to South; and of his Kingdom there shall be no end.

Thirdly, the imaginary Judicature, called the Law of Justice; which indeed is
but the declarative will of Conquerours, how they will have their Subjects be
ruled; And this pretends to keep all in peace, and yet it is the very support
of Envy, hardness of heart, and unrighteous covetousness; Therefore woe to
you Lawyers, that binds heavy burdens upon men's shoulders, which you your
selves will not touch with the least of your fingers.

Fourthly, buying and selling of the Earth, with the fruits of the Earth; This
is an Imaginary Art, to fetch in content from without, and breeds discontent,
and divides the creation, and makes mankind, to imprison, enslave, and destroy
one another.

These four imaginary selfish powers, are to be shaken to pieces at the
resurrection of Christ; For these are they, that all the time, times, and
dividing of time of the Beasts Reign; put Christ to death; And these are they
which Christ will destroy, by the brightness of his coming, and by the word
of his mouth.

Therefore woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabitants of the Earth whose delight, peace,
and life lies in, and upon objects without them; and are strangers to the
spirit within them.

These four powers are the four Beasts, which Daniel saw rise up out of the
Sea. Dan. 7.3. etc. And this Sea is the bulk and body of mankind, which is
that Sea, and waters, upon which the Spirit of God is said sometimes to move;
for out of Mankind arises all that darkness and Tyranny that oppresses it
self; And though these Beasts appear diverse, one from another, yet they are
all one in their power; for Imaginary-selfe ruling in man's heart, is the Father
that created and bred them all.

The first Beast which Daniell saw rise up out of the deceived heart of
mankind, was like a Lion; and had Eagles wings: And this is Kingly power,
which takes the Sword, and makes way to rule over others thereby, dividing the
Creation, one part from another; setting up the Conqueror to rule, making the
conquered a slave; giving the Earth to some, denying the Earth to others; And
his Eagles wings betokens his swiftness, to ride on horse back, or march on
foot quick, from place to place, conquering and to conquer.

The Imaginary selfishnesse, created this power, to burden and oppress the
Creation, which was the work of the righteous Spirit.

Yet Daniell saw this Beast lifted up from the Earth, and made to stand upon
the feet like a man, and a man's heart was given to it, that is, This Power
should be the Image of true Magistracy, and while the Beastly power of
Self-love rules in the hearts of mankind; this Kingly power should be the
preserver of the meek in spirit, and so help the woman.

And when the time comes for Christ to reign, this Beast shall deliver up his
Crown, Scepter, Authority, and government unto Christ, and lay all down at
his feet, Rev. 4.9. etc.

The second Beast was like a Bear; And this is the power of the selfish Laws,
which is full of covetousness, and of a Beare-like tearing and devouring
nature; and he had three ribs in the mouth, which are these,

First, the power of Prisons, whereby he kills and devoures.

Secondly, the power of whiping, banishment, and confiscation of goods, whereby
he kills.

Thirdly, the power of hanging, pressing, burning, martering; whereby he kills,
and devoures much flesh, for take these three ribs out of the mouth of the Law,
or Innes of Court trade, and that Beast has no power, but dies.

The third Beast was like a Leopard, spotty; and this is the thieving Art of
buying and selling, the Earth with her fruits one to another. Imaginary selfish
Covetousness created this Beast likewise; And this Beast had four wings;
Policy, Hypocrisy, Self-Love, and hardness of Heart; for this Beast is a true
self-Lover, to get the Earth to himself, to lock it up in Chests and barnes,
though others starve for want.

And this Beast had four heads, that guides him, and upholds him in his ways.

The first is the power of the sword fighting for it.

Secondly, the power of the Law, enslaving others to it.

Thirdly, the power of the covetous Imaginary Clergy, preaching it up, and
drawing the people to wander after him.

Fourthly, the power of a blind deceived Heart, overawed with fear of men,
and a conceit that it is a righteous Art; And this Beast had dominion to rule.

The fourth Beast is the Imaginary Clergy-Power, which indeed is Judas; and
this is more terrible and dreadful then the rest; and though he come last, yet
indeed he is the Father* that begot the other; All these Beasts, they differ in
shape, and yet they agree all in one oppressing power, supporting one another;
one cannot live without another; and yet they seem to persecute one another;
and if one truly die, all dies.

What is the reason? only this; they show hereby, that either alone, or
altogether, they are the curse and plague upon the Creation, and is the cause
of all sorrows and tears, amongst mankind; for they devour abundantly, and
yet they rise out of the Sea, even from the body of deceived, covetous, dark,
powered mankind, in the night time of that world.

These four Beasts are all very fruitful; for from them, as from four
Fountains or Monarchs, springs up diverse heads and horns; that is, several
spreadings forth, of selfish tyrannical Power, whereby the Creation is oppressed
and burdened; and these reign in power, while propriety rules as King; but
when righteous community rises, which is the blessing, then they all fall, and
are shaken to pieces.

The Creation, will never be in quiet, peace, till these four Beasts, with all
their heads and horns, the variety of their branching powers do run into the
Sea again, and be swallowed up in those waters; that is, into Mankind, who
shall be abundantly enlightened; and Light-Life, and truth shall mightily
overflow, as the waters of the Seas over the Earth; and all those Beasts with
their self-will powers, shall sink like mudd, to the bottom, and their place
shall be seen no more.

These are the herds of swine, that must perish in the waters.

This work Christ will bring to pass, at his more glorious appearance, he
will consume the mystery of iniquity, by the brightness of his coming. You
Angels of the Lord, who are the Lights of the Earth, speak aloud, roar out,
and spare not, power out the appointed plagues upon the Beast, in this her
hypocritical, dividing of time.

These are the four Beasts, or selfish Beastly powers, that rise up out of the
Sea, to oppress, burden, and destroy universal Love, and there return back
into the Sea, will be the rising up of Love, who is the Son of
righteousness, causing daylight.

The kingly Power, he took the sword to kill and conquer; and to lift up
self, to be the Ruler; for all Laws of the Nations are Laws made by the will
of this murderer, kingly power.

And this Beast shall be thrown down by his own power; for out of the
Serpents root shall come forth a Cocatrise, that shall devour the body. I
wonder not to see the Midianites destroy one another; He that takes the sword
shall perish with the sword. This kingly power fighting, is the Army of the
Midianites.

Therefore, where you see Army against Army; It is but the kingly power
divided, tearing, and devouring it self; for as he rises by his own sword,
so he shall fall by his own sword, as the Midianites did; they sheathed their
swords one in another bowels, while Israel looked on, and at last took the
spoil:

So shall kingly power do in his several governments by the sword; they shall
dash one against another; Time shall dash against times, and times shall dash
against the dividing of time; and the divisions in the dividing of time shall
destroy him; till the Creation be cleansed of these plagues; and that curse
which has destroyed the Earth, shall now in the period of time, destroy
himself.

And this makes way for Christ, the universal Love, to take the Kingdom, and
the dominion of the whole Earth.

Therefore you soldiers, you may see the end o^ your trade, it is a destroyer*
and shall be destroye^ by it self, and surely you shall find no true peace
herein; No, no; there is no peace and rest but i^ Christ the Savior; your
trade upholds the murderer, or the Devil.

Now the other three Beasts; who, are Clergy Law, and Buying and Selling; these
rise up by craft; supported by the kingly power; And the chief Beast is the
Clergy, he bred all the other; He is a King, understanding dark sayings, and
he shall by craft deceive many; the other Beasts are this Beasts sons, he bred
them.

For this teaching Art, first bids mankind, to look abroad, for a teacher and
a ruler* and to look abroad for Justice and content; and when he had deceived
them, so to do: then he put mankind upon buying and selling, of the Earth and
her fruits, and so by that means the Creation is divided, and Mankind is put
upon an Art to cheat, and burden himself; for the Earth ought to remain a
standing portion to them, and their children successively, by the righteous Law
of Creation.

Then this teaching Art found out the Law; calling it the Law of Justice; a
very good name, to cover his knavery; for he is a mighty Beast with great
teeth, and is a mighty devourer of men; he eats up all, that comes within his
power; for this Proverb is true, go to Law, and none shall get but the Lawyer.
The Law is the Fox, poor men are the geesse; he pulls of their feathers, and
feeds upon them.

These four Beasts are the Fountains of Tyranny to the Creation, they are of
a fruitful generation; one begetting diverse Beasts; that are of mighty
devouring natures; But the most dreadful and terrible Beast, is the Clergy
Power; for though the other three raised him up by action; yet this Imaginary
learned Beast raised them up by policy; for self ends.

For this stamped the other under foot, says Daniell; And is not this true?
has not the Clergy ruled over kingly Power, Law, and buying and selling, and
brought all under his Command? for at the first, he was only a teaching Power,
and then it was a Beast, differing from the rest, yet he stamped them under
foot, and all the other had their strength and succor from him, by his
teaching and imaginary instruction.

Out of this teaching Beast rise up ten horns; or the branching forth of his
strength in ten particulars; Five fighting against the powers of the Creation,
Hearing, Seeing, Tasting, Smelling, Feeling, which is called the body of the
living soul, that is, very good.

And five fighting against the powers of righteousness, which is
Understanding, Will, Affection, Joy, and Peace; which is called the Seed, and
making war against him; and so darking Heaven and Earth.

This is he, that restraines the liberty of the outward man, not suffering him
to have a free enjoyment of his portion in the Earth; making such actions to be
sin, which the righteous creating Spirit made not a sin.

And he restraines thereby the liberty of the Inward man; not suffering him to
act in the liberty of himself; for he makes a man a sinner for a word, and so
he sweeps the Stars of Heaven down with his tail, he darkens Heaven and
Earth, and defiles body and mind.

For so long as I must not act, according to the freedom of my own spirit and
power within me; but must be guided by others without me, and punished for such
actions, which others in the ruling Chare do, in a higher nature then I do; I
am then in bondage, and my eyes are put out.

And this is the Covenant, that the outward teaching power, makes with the
branches of Mankind, to put out their own eyes, to see by others; telling
them none can see, but scholars: so that this fourth Beast, is more dreadful
then the other three; for it stamps the other three under foot, and rules over
all.

And out of the ten horns of this Beast, rise up another little horn; and
this is the dominion and rule, which the teaching power takes up, called
Ecclesiastical* power; and this little horn was raised, by a power that was
not his own; for the kingly power puts that dominion and rule into his hands;
While he remained only a teaching power, he stamped the other under him, and
overawed others by his deceitful words.

But now he has got a power to rule, called Ecclesiastical power, which is
the extract of selfish righteousness, from the seeming righteousness of the
four Beasts into one ruling power, and by this, which was little in the
beginning; There were three of the first horns plucked up; that is:

Kingly Power, Law, and buying and selling; for the Little horn, or ruling
Clergy lifted up himself above all these, and made these uncover and fall to
him; he had dominion and power over all these, and these were in subjection,
and afraid, and bowed to him; He by his teaching lifted up these, and these by
their acting, lifted up him to rule; and he by his ruling treads these under
his proud covetous feet.

And this is he* who is said to be a King of a fierce countenance;
understanding, dark saying, that is mighty, but not by his own power, and he
shall by craft and power destroy many; his rising was in the latter days, when
transgressions were come to the full; when people were most blind, by his
outward teaching; then they easily receive him to be the outward ruler over
their souls; for now the Sea being bemuddied, that is, mankind being mightily
deceived, he by his learned policy, rises up out of that deceived Sea, for all
the peeple wandered after him, though he sore oppressed them* Dan. 8.23. Rev.
13.3.

And as the sword, which is not his power, lifted him up and supports him, by
forcing the people to pay him tithes; for the Law of the Magistrate forces the
people to pay them.

And he being lifted up, he made war with the Saints, and overcame them, for a
time, times, and dividing of time; But as he was lifted up by others power,
through his own craft; Even so he shall be destroyed again, without hand; the
Sword shall not destroy him, he shall be discovered in all his oppressing,
hypocritical, bewitching knavery, by the light and wisdom of the Spirit of
Truth, that shall rise up out of the Sea of mankind likewise, appearing in
sons and daughters of righteousness, in the latter days.

As Paul said, Christ shall destroy him by the word of his mouth, and by the
brightness of his coming, Dan. 7.26. etc. 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.

When Christ the Anointing spirit rises up, and inlightens mankind, then in his
light, they shall see the deceit and falsehood of this Beast, that has deceived
all the world; and shall fall off from him, and leave him naked and bare; and
if he will teach and rule, let him show his power over the Beasts; for the
people will all look up to God, to be taught and governed by him.

The discovery of the fullness, and foulness of this Beast, throws down all
the rest likewise; for when mankind begins to fall off from one part of the
beastly power, he will fall from all, for they all depend one upon another,

Kingly power depends upon the Law, and upon buying and selling; and these
three depend upon the Clergy, to bewitch the people to conform; and all of
them depend upon Kingly power by his force, to compel subjection from those
that will not be bewitched.

But when mankind once sees, that his teacher and ruler is within him; then
what need is there of a teacher and ruler without; they will easily cast off
their burden.

Therefore woe, woe, woe, to the Inhabitants of the Earth; when Christ rises in
power, and b^gins to come in glory with his aints. This discovery is coming on
apace.

Therefore you Soldiers, and you great Pow^rs of the Earth, you need not
fear, that the Levellers will conquer you by the sword; I do not mean the
fighting Levellers, for they be your selves; but I mean Christ levelling; who
fights against you, by the sword of Love, patience and truth; for whosoever
takes the Iron sword to fight against you, are your own sons, that fights
against you; ^o^ Christ came not to destroy, but to save; But Antichrist, whose
power you are, came not to save, but to destroy.

Therefore, if there be any amongst you, that count truth and peace precious,
take the Spirits advice, and come out of Babylon, dwell no longer in the Courts
and ways of Imaginary confusion; come into truth, Light, and Liberty, and be
at p^ace.

When Christ comes, and is glorified with thousand thousands attending upon
him, they shall not be clothed with devouring instruments, like Dragons, b^t
be clothed with Love, Righteousness and Peace, like Lambs; And at his
appearing said Daniell, the Beast was slain; and his body given to the burning
flame; that is, all the Imaginary selfish Power, that made people run abroad
for a Teacher, and a Ruler, was all cast into the fire of pure Light, and was
consumed in that unquenchable flame; Even destroyed by the brightness of
Christ's coming, as darkness vanishes when Light comes in. Dan. 7.11.

He that has Ears to hear, Let him hear what the Spirit speaks.

CHAP. IV. What the Serpent is.
IF this be true, It will destroy all government, and all our Ministry and
religion?

I answer, it is very true; for all government and Ministry, that is lifted up
by Imagination, is to be thrown down, and plucked up: That Christ alone may
be exalted in the day of his power. And you have Scripture for it; Then comes
the end, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father,
when he shall have put down all rule, and all Authority, and all power; for
he must reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet,

1 Cor. 15.24.

Look back into Ages past, and see, what overturnings, and pluckings up there
has been of the Authority, power, and government of Nations; Every government
standing his period; for when it was universally proved a Devil, a destroyer,
and waster: then it was throne down.

And this casting down, plucking up, and wars in the Nations shall be till
Christ, The Law of universal Love comes to reign; and then he shall settle
all in peace, and be the true restorer.

You oppressing powers of the world, who think God has blessed you, because
you sit down in that Chair of Government, out of which the former Tyrants are
gone: Do you remember this? your overturning, overturning, overturning, is
come on to you, as well as to your fellow break-promises, that are gone before;
You that pretend to be saviors of the people, and to seek the peace of the
whole Nation; and yet serve your selves upon the peoples ruins, not regarding
the cry of the poor, sur^ly you must have your overturnings too.

For such a Government, as preserves part, and destroys another part of the
Creation, is not the power of Christ, but of Antichrist; That Government that
gives liberty to the Gentry to have all the Earth, and shuts out the poor
Commoners from enjoying any part: ruling by the tyrannical Law of Conquest
over brethren; this is the Government of imaginary, selfe-seeking Antichrist;
And every plant which my heavenly Father has not planted, shall be rooted out.

This man will have n^ government some will say.

I answer, you run too fast; True Government is that I long for to see, I wait
till the power, Authority, and government of the King of righteousness rule
over all, for as yet the power and dominion of the Prince of darkness rules
every where, and that is the government, which must be thrown down.

But government is called Magistracy, and all Magistracy is of God.

I Answer, Magistracy is a good name, and the mystery of iniquity, has not
only got this name, but many other excellent names: to be set upon the head of
his blacknes of darkness, that under a good name he may go undiscovered, and
he puts bad names upon things that are excellent.

Therefore let us see, whether Imaginary government, that divides part of
mankind to enjoy the Earth, and the other part not to enjoy the Earth, is
worthy of the name, Magistracy; No, no; such a dividing, self loving power is
an enemy to Magistracy.

For Magistracy has two excellent principles in his nature, which the dark
selfish government is an enemy to.

First Magistracy signifies a great Light, as much as to say, greater Light of
Love, greater Light of Humility, greater Light of Reason, greater Light of
Truth, keeping promise and covenant; greater Light of Peace, and tenderness of
heart, greater Light of boldness, in a cause that is universally righteous.

And where this power, Authority and government rules, this is pure
Magistracy, and it is the Life and power of Christ.

Secondly, Magistracy signifies the greatest Band, that ties the Creation
together in p^ace, and this band is universal Love; for this Love streams out
to preserve all, and de^pis^s none; This is the unity of the Spirit, and the
band of p^ac^; this is pur^ Maj^stie indeed, that ^ies people t^gether in Love;
And this is the power Authority, and government of Christ; The love of Christ
in us, constraines all men to do his will.

Now l^oke and see, is the Magistracy of the Nations lik^ this? Is it a light
of pure excellency and universal Love above others? does it tie the Creation
together, in the unity of s^i^it, and band of peace? we cannot say it does, or
if any say it does, then I Will answer.

What means then the lowing of the Oxen, and bleating of the Sheep? what
means such complaints, that those that sit in the Chair of Magistracy, are
covenant, promise, and oathes-breakers, and are self^-Lovers; Lovers of honor,
mo^eys and ease, and regard not the c^ies of the oppressed? They favor the
rich for reward, and despise and slight the poor. They give the Earth to
some, and deny the Earth others, by reason whereof murmurings, and divisions
multiply, and so uphold the slavish Law of conquests.

Now judge: Is such a Magistracy as this the greatest Light? does this tie the
Creation together in the unity of spirit and band of peace? surely as yet, the
mystery of iniquity sports himself, uncontrouled under this excellent name
or covering, called Magistracy; but the babes and sucklings will draw off his
veil, and show all his nakedness and shame him.

If you would find true Majesty indeed, go among the poor despised ones of
the Earth; for there Christ dwells, and there you shall see, Light and Love
shine in Majesty indeed, rising up to unite the Creation indeed, into the
unity of spirit, and band of peace; the blessing of the Lord is am^ngst the
poor, and the covetous, scoffing, covenant-b^eaking, thieves and murderers,
that crowd themselves under the name Magistracy, shall be sent empty away.

These great ones are too stately houses for Christ to dwell in; he takes up
his abode in a manger, Inn, and amongst the poor in spirit, and despised ones
of the Earth.

Secondly, Imaginary Ministry and Religion is to be plucked up, as unsavorie
salt; and this is the learned public Ministry of the world; for this
Ministry is set up by craft and covetousness, how to draw the Earth, and the
labors of men into the Clergies hands; These men make themselves ministers, as
a man teaches birds to speak; But they do not stay till Christ make them, for
that will be too long for them to wait, the rich Benefices will be all taken up.

This Ministry having learned other men's words, by their long education in
their University Schools, takes upon them to interpret other men's words and
writings, and this imaginary study of theirs, they call pure Doctrine, and
tells the people it is pure Religion to come and hear their Sermon, and to
give them Tithes, or a la^ge maintenance for so doing.

But this is a false Prophet, he runs before he be sent; Study and Imagination
was never appointed, and sent of Christ to be a Minister for him, this is
Antichrists Ministry.

For when Christ sent out his Disciples to preach, he says, that which you
have heard and seen, go preach; and says Paul, we cannot but speak the
things which we have heard and seen from the Father; But the University
public Ministry runs before he be sent; they take up another man's message,
and carries abroad other men's words, or studies or imagines a meaning; and this
is their ministry; This is not to preach the truth, as it was in Jesus, purely
and experimentally, as they received it of the Father, but as they receive it
from man, and by man.

The Scriptures of the Bible were written by the experimental hand of
Shepherds, Husbandmen, Fishermen, and such inferior men of the world; And the
University learned ones have got these men's writings; and flourish^s their
plain language over with their dark interpretation, and glosses, as if it
were too hard for ordinary men now to understand them; and thereby they deceive
the simple, and makes a prey of the poor, and cosens them of the Earth, and of
the tenth of their labors.

And because those men's writings are taking with the world, therefore these
learned ones shuts out the true Penmen in whom the Spirit dwells, and says
now, such Mecanicks must not meddle with spiritual things; And so by covetous
policy, in opposition to the ^ig^teous spirit, they engrosse other men's
ex^erimentall spiritual teachings to themselves; as if it were their ow^e by
University or School learning succession. Pope l^ke Nay just the Pope.

And by their ^lacknesse of darkness, in their Schoole-learning, they have
d^awne a veil over the truth; And Light by them is hid from the world; for the
plain t^u^h is, this Imaginary ministry is neither better nor worse, but
plain unmasked Judas. And the snappish bitter profession, that cries it up, is
the unmasked murdering Scribes, and Pharisees.

The one betrays Christ, the spirit of righteousness with a kiss, pretending
a great deal of Love to the Spirit, by preaching and praying, to a God
without, they know not where, nor what he is.

The other kills him, and will not suffer him to appear in the world; for
these snappish professors calls every thing blasphemy, unless they approve of
it, still tying the Spir^t to themselves; saying, Lo, here is Christ in this
man, and lo, there is Christ in that man.

But Christ is the Light of Life, spread abroad, and he is now rising in
Husbandmen, Shepherds* Fishermen; And by these he first takes off the black
interpretation, hat the imaginary learned Scholars by their studies have
defiled the Scriptures of old with, and restores them to their own genuine,
and pure Light.

And then to discover his appearance in sons and daughters, in a fuller
measure, the poor despised ones shall be honored first in the work; and from
this ^ust, the blessing shall arise to cover the whole Earth with peace, and
with the knowledge of the Lord.

For this is the vine that shall overspread the Earth, and shall be confi^^d no
longer within a College, or private University Chamber, or under a covetous,
proud, black gown, that would always be speaking words: but fall off when
people begins to act their words.

When Jesus Christ the Son of man was upon Earth, in that one person, he
could very seldom speak but the hypocritical snappish Pharisees were either
si^^n^, and watched to trap him in his speech, ^ob^i^g him into bondage; or
else with open mouth they cried out, he is a blasphemer, a Devil, and a friend
of Publicans and sinners, condemning him, because he was no scholar, How knows
this man l^ters seeing he never learned.

And have not the Pharisees of our age, who are the imaginary bi^t^r
professors, the same subtlety and language? And as they of old sought to kill
Christ; so these end^avour to suppress him, and will not suffer him to arise
in sons and daughters; though the Scripture declare it, which they make such
a strict profession of, as if they would not loose one letter.

These professors will st^ll ^onfi^e Christ to a private chamber, and to
p^^^icular ^odies, and restrain him, who is the ^^iversall power of Love and
peace. They own a^m in w^rds, but they deny him in power; they worship God at
a distance, not knowing where he is, nor what they worship; And they call this
^lasphem^e, to s^^ Christ is in you, thoug^ the Scriptures which they profess
say the same. Know you not that Christ is in you; And the Kingdom of Heaven is
in you; And they that worship the Father, must worship him in spirit within,
and in truth of action without, and fulfilling the Law and the Prophets. Love
your enemies, and do as you would be done by, in actions and not in words only.

CHAP. V. What the living Soul (Man) is, that is called very g^^d.
IN the body of mankind, and indeed, in every single body, there are three
particulars necessary to be known, without which no man can know himself, let
him say what he will.

The first is the Creature, or the living Soul* which before the curse defil^s
it, is very good, and this was the Image of God, (or of the righteous spirit)
in flesh, or first Adam; And this living soul is the heaven, in which the
^attell is fought between the curse and the blessing: Micaell and the Dragon;
And this living soul is the wax fi^ted to receive, either the impression of
the curse, and so prove disobedient to righteousness, or the impression of the
blessing, and so prove obedient to righteousness.

Secondly, there is the mystery of iniquity, or the power of deceit, and this
is the God of the world, or Prince of darkness; that deceives the liv^ng ^oule
first, and takes possession, and this in one man is the Image, or rather nature
of that one power of darkness, or Devil that is spread abroad through the
Creation, to cover over, or keep down the blessing, or Seed of Life from
rising.

Thirdly, the Life of God, or of the righteous spirit rising up in the living
soul, and casting the curse or power of darkness out, and bringing Mankind
into peace; and this is the second Adam, or the Lord from Heaven.

Now this living soul Mankind is a Beast, and the King of Beasts; for the
life of the five Senses only is the life of the Beast; And this Beast in every
one, as well as in the whole, is to reign for a time, times, and dividing of
time, before mankind ca^ b^ united to the life of the righteous God, and made
one with that one spirit of universal Love. As Jesus Christ prayed, Father, I
pray that they may be one in us, as thou oh Father art one in me, and I in
thee, they were not united yet.

The Image of God in flesh dyed, and was put out by darkness; But the Seed, or
spirit of true life rising up from under that darkness, dies no more, but
lives for ever; This spirit is the tree of Life.

Therefore, you that say you know but one power, be not deceived; for if this
one power of righteousness, which is the tree of Life rule in you, then you
are new creatures indeed, you are one with the Father and the Son; And th^n
you shall know death no more: that is, you shall not live ^^ opposition to the
spirit of righteousness no more, neither in thought, word, nor deed; And then
all sorrow and tears shall fly away likewise, and you shall be at rest, which
is the day of the Lord, or the Light or day time of Mankind. Darkness is now
swallowed up and gone.

But if selfish actions, and selfish Principles live in their strength in you
still; if Imagination be Ruler, truly then, that one power is but the power of
darkness, to whom you are in bondage, and you are not yet past the combat,
the Dragon is not yet cast out, and you must know a fuller resurrection, before
you can sit down in peace.

Some of you have g^t a speech; That those that see two powers within
themselves, of darkness and Light, Love and Envy, sorrow and comfort striving
together, sees with two eyes: (...) you may say, you see every thing and power
(...) a single eye, and nothing you see evil, but (...) ^^^gs and actions are
good, and as they must (...).

Surely this is well, if you become all of you tha^ sp^^k^ these words, to eat
of that Tree of (...); for my part I Will not condemn you, I can r^jo^ce to see
the Resurrection of Christ in any, but I must watch some of you, to see if your
conversations be so universally filled with Love, as shall make the dark world
startle; and then I ca^ say of a truth, Christ is risen indeed in you.

If your own eye be dark, that is, if darkness rule your whole body; then
all the actions of your body toward others are in darkness, and builders up
of selfishnesse, which is the one power you yet live in.

But if your eye be truly single, and full of Light, then the Light power
wholly rules in you, and the actions of your outward man will be full of Light,
and Life, and Love, toward every single branch of the whole Creation.

But some may say, explain these three particulars in mankind, that we may
know them distinctly, one from another. I Answer, I shall readily do it.

The first particular is the living Soul, or that estate of simple plain
heartedness, which has the Life of the five Senses only only, and by that
Life preserves that single body, or proprieties.

But the Life of the Spirit, in sound reason lives not yet in the Senses; for
pure Reason lives llke a corn or wheat, under the clods of Earth, or Beast,
and is not yet risen up to rule as King.

This plain hearted state is set in the midst of many objects, tempting him
like the Serpent; and it is open ^o many crosses, and tears, like the tender
grass, that is soon bruised by the foot of the ox; it has not the true rest
of Christ in it, though there be much rest and peace in it; for it is
changeable.

This is such a state, that though there be Self-love, yet there is no hatred
toward others in it, but a quiet content to let others live too. As a child,
though he love himself (the propriety of a Beast so to do) yet he envies not
others; for Envy, Pride, Covetousness, Hypocrisy, rash murdering, anger,
has not yet defiled the Earth. The man is plain, honest hearted, even
Innocent Aam.

Like Nathanaell in whom there was no guile, and yet Nathana^ll knew not
Christ, that Anoyn^ing spirit as yet ruled not as King in him; for he was open
to temptation, and change, and many tears.

Like Peter, a man of the same plain hearted temper, full of Love to Christ
and others; yet selfish, he was without guile, and was loving, without
knowledge, therefore open to temptation, and change, and tears.

Now, though Christ Commended Nathanael, and prayed for Peter, that his faith
or strength might not fail him, yet they were both strangers to the Spirit,
which was given them afterward.

And as Christ told his Disciples, I have chosen you twelve, and one of you is
a Devil; that is, eleven of you are plain, honest, simpl^ hearts, in whom
there is no guile; you have sincerely in love to me, forsaken all your ^riends,
and riches to follow me: so that Covetousness does not reign, Imagination
does not fright you, with what shall we eat, and what shall we drink, and
wherewith shall be clothed hereafter? As they they themselves said, M^ster, we
have forsaken all to follow thee, and what shall we have etc?

So that here is no subtlety, but down right simplicity without guile, and
these are like wax, prepared for any stamp.

But now Judas the twelfth man was a Devil, he was defiled and fallen by
temptation, that is, he was one that followed Christ for self ends; not
simply, like most preachers, and covetous, bitter hearted Professors, that will
covenant before hand, what they must have before they foll^w Christ; And when
they hear they must part with all to follow Christ, then they are sorrowful.
This is Judas, a Devil, the power of covetousness, the curse that has
defiled mankind, and he strives to spread himself, that he may defile all. But
Christ who is the blessing appears to destroy this curse.

And when plain hearted Peter told Christ, that though all forsook him; yet
he would not; alas, says Christ, Peter, thou art plain hearted, and thou
know not the wiles of the tempter; thou will be overcome and made to deny
me, I know thy strength; for I that am the light and life of the world, do not
yet live in thee; Thou art a down right living Soul, a plain innocent
harmless man; but thou art not yet Anointed, nor cannot be, till I be gone
from you; And then I Will send you the comforter, that shall lead you into all
truth, and abide with you for ever.

Therefore, when I am taken from you, stay you quiet at Jerusalem, till you
receive power from on high, which is the Fathers promise to you, and that power
ruling in you, shall keep you from being overcome by temptation.

And you see Peter's strength proved weakness, though there was simple hearted
innocence in Peter's love to Christ's body; yet his love was changeable; for
when the trial came, Peter denied Christ.

And this plain heartedness is the first time of the Beast, or self, which
is full of peace, while a man is in it; but it is a state like wax, flexible
and easy to take any impression.

Therefore the two powers of Light and Darkness, Christ and the Devil;
strives who shall rule in this living soul first; And these two powers are
Jacob and Esau, flesh and spirit, struggling within the womb of the living
Earth, who shall rule first; And darkness first prevails, and rules within,
enslaves* and causes sorrow, and through his deceit, draws the man to seek
content in objects without. But then follows Christ the restoring power, and
delivers the living soul again from that bondage, and sets him down in
himself, which is the rest and strength of Love unchangeable, who does cast
out all fear.

Now while the dark power rules; the man is as Judas, a Devil, a betrayer of
Christ, therefore when Christ begins to redeem; he kills that darkness, and
brings mankind back, to that plain hearted estate of simplicity, in which
the Devil found the man when he deceived him; and makes him meek, humble,
flexible* loving* plain hearted, without guile, free from Envy, like the
state of a little child; Except a man be borne again, and become as a little
child, he cannot enter into heaven; that is, into peace; The power of the
Devil must first be cast out, before Christ will appear to sit down in rest.

This plain hearted estate is that which Paul spoke of; A man must first
become a fool, that he he may be wise; that is, void of guile, or
hypocritical deceit, which the power of darkness is full of; and these are
the foolish things of the world, whereby God will destroy the imaginary wise.

This plain heartedness without envy or guile, is the Virgine-state of
Mankind; And this Virgin is she that must bear a son, and call his name
Emanuell, God with us.

This chaste Virgine-state, that has no outward Lover, and that is not
defiled, but cleansed from deformity, is this Virgin chaste state, in whom the
Son of righteousness will arise, and take the man into union with himself;
he rules as King, and Mankind, the living soul is freely subject with delight.

So that this Innocence, or plain heartedness in man, was not an estate
6000. year ago only; But every branch of mankind passes through it, etc.
first is defiled by imaginary covetousness, and thereby is made a Devil; and
then he is delivered from that darkness, by Christ the restorer, and by him
made one with the Father and the Son.

In one word* then, the innocence of mankind, which is the Image of God, is
plain heartedness without guile, quiet, patient, chaste, loving, without envy:
yet through weakness is flexible, and open to temptation and change; This is
the living soul, which God breathed the breath of life into; This is the
Garden of Eden, it is the spirits house or mansion, and in the body of Mankind
the spirit has many mansions or dwelling places; this is the field or heaven,
wherein Michaell and the Dragon fights the great battle of God Almighty.

Many men live in their innocence longer then others* some are tempted sooner
then others, but all must be tempted, and tried by the evil one; that so way
may be made for Christ to show his power; for the Office of Christ, the
blessing, is to restore and deliver from death and bondage, and to set man
down in life and unchangeable rest.

Therefore temptations and falling from innocence must be, that so man may be
drawn up into the life and strength of the righteous God, or ruler* from whom
he shall never fall again; this is the mystery of God, God manifest in the
flesh, or righteousness ruling King in man.

So that this innocent estate is the Image of God, but not the strength and
life of God; It is wise, but not wisdom it self; it is just but not justice;
it is loving, but not Love it self. It rejoices, but it is not Joy it self;
It is patient, but not Patience it self; It is chaste, yet not Chastity; It is
plain hearted without guile, yet not sincerity it self; It is filled with
rest and peace, while he injoyes himself within, and does not make a league
with Satan, or outward objects; for then he falls and meets with sorrow.

Therefore he is said to be made in the Image of God, because this Innocence
is an estate very good, and there is no evil in it; yet it is changeable,
subject to be overcome by temptation.

But now God, or the righteous spirit is unchangeable; for he is Wisdom,
Justice, Love, Patience, Sincerity, Chastity, Joy, and Peace it self, nor
cannot be overcome, by any temptation.

And this is the mystery and wisdom of God, to let that innocent nature of
man fall, and be defiled by his own invention; that so, he may declare his
power, in redeeming him from that defilement, and in taking him up into unity
of the Godhead, to remain in that fountain of Life and rest, and never to be
deceived again; and this is a redemption indeed; not only to deliver from
bondage, but likewise to destroy the tempter; that he shall never appear to
draw man into bondage again; this is the work of the Lamb, and the mystery
of God. This work is that which makes us to have fellowship with the Father,
and his Son Jesus Christ; This work puts those so^g^ of praise and
halalujahs into our mouths and hearts, to him that sits upon the throne, and to
the Lamb for evermore.

This is the first est^te of mankind, or the living soul in his innocenc^e,
and you need not look back six thousand yeare^ to find it; for every sing^e
man and wom^n passes through it; and when the restorer rises up, they shall be
able to say, this is truth.

The second est^te of mankind, is the time of the curse, while he re^g^es,
which is the power of darkness, or Dragon, that deceives the plain hearted,
simple man; making him to covet after content in objects without him, and to
look for a God without, and so fills him with anger, envy, hypocrisy,
vexation, grief; and brings him into bondage within himself. Now this curse
reigns in these three particulats.

In the lust of the Eye; In the lust of the Flesh, and in pride of Life.

The lust of the eye is covetousness, after any object the man sees thinking
within himself, that if he can obtain such and such objects, he shall be at
rest and filled with delight; And this is an unsatisfied roving Lust, and is a
selfe-lover, hurting others; for this Lust of the eye, would draw all to it
self; and leave all others naked; and when he cannot enjoy those objects; Then
Envy and anger arises* vexes, frets and torments the man mightily; But if he
obtains, he rejoices; but his joy is the joy of envy, which does perish
again, and ends in vexation.

The second is the Lust of the flesh; And this is an excessive, or immoderate
degree of covetousness, which does waste and consume the objects that his eye
lusted after, not to preserve mankind, or his body, but to satisfy excessive
Beastly desire; he eats and drinks excessively; clothes himself vain
gloriously, or runs into the immoderate use of women; And so those objects
which are for the preservation and delight of Mankind, he immoderately uses,
and by his excess, destroys himself and them too.

The third is the pride of Life, and this is the very height of covetousness,
called vain glory, or secret pride of heart, lifting up himself above others,
making others bow to him; looking upon himself as a God above others, who
indeed are his equals, vexing and fretting, and ready to kill them if any
refuse to give him that honor he would have. Hamons proud heart is mightily
troubled, if Mordecay will not bow, This is the pride of Life.

As Nebuchadnezar said, is not this great Babell which I have built for the
glory of my Majesty? so lifting up himself above others; this is the power of
pride; But now humility stays, and lets others lift him up.

Look through the whole body of darkness and every branch of him may be
applied to one of these heads.

And while these Lusts rule; the whole body of darkness reigns as King in the
man; As Envy, Pride, Covetousness, evil surmisings, hypocrisy, unclean lust
of the flesh, Gluttony, Drunkenness; And the man has lost his Innocence, and
is become a Devil; he is a prisoner to his lusts, and is in bondage within
himself; he enjoys nothing with sweet content.

For let him have what he would have, still he is unsatisfied* and discontent
dwells in his heart upon every cross; he lives without God in the world, and
feeds upon husks like the swyne: that is, his delight reaches to outward things
only; to riches, honors, pleasures, and women, they are the husks he feeds on,
which dies and rots; take these away, and he has lost his Kingdom; And in
this deceived estate, mankind is a complete Devil, and is become a very
decree of himself and others, as experience makes it appear.

The third estate of Mankind, is the day of Christ, or the rising up, and
reign of the blessing, which is the restoring power, delivering mankind from
this bondage of Lust, and subduing this power of darkness, and drawing
mankind into union with the Father, making all things new, and so making peace.

And this he does, first, by bringing mankind back again, to his estate of
Innocence and plain heartedness, and so in the eye of the world is a fool,
before he be made wise.

Then secondly he rises up in power and glory, and makes man one with himself,
and sets him down in rest never to fall again.

CHAP. VI. What the Curse is, that does defile the Man.
EVery branch of Mankind, is under one of these three estates, First, either
in his Innocence; or secondly, under the power of the Curse; or thirdly, under
Grace; or the power of the blessing. Now, no man has, or can have true peace,
till he be able to see this clear distinction within himself; he that sees
nothing but one power, nor never saw any other but one power in him, that man
as yet is a slave to the Devil, But he that has seen the two powers, to
oppose each other within him, and then at last the blessing prevails, and
casts the other murderer out, and sits down* and rules King of righteousness,
and Prince of Peace. This is Heaven, and he that sees this one power of
righteousness and peace rule, and sees the other quite fallen; this man now is
come to eat of the Tree of Life, and shall live for ever; and is truly entered
into the one power, or new Jerusalem.

Whosoever lives in this life, his actions will be actions of peace,
preservation* Love and life to all. But if there appear actions of darkness
in any, whereby any part of the Creation is capable of destruction by those
actions; truly then, that one power in that man is but the curse* which may be
called the Power likewise; but it is but the one power of darkness.

When a man sees the darkness rule in others, and in himself; he sees
himself in bondage, and is troubled; Now the Seed begins to arise, to bruise
the Serpents head.

Lots righteous soul, or the pure Creation; man, as he is more or less
restored from bondage, he is grieved to see the bad conversation of the wicked
power, as he rules in himself and others; And there are many Lots at this day,
whose righteous soul is grieved, to see how the Devil and curse rules and
destroys the Earth. The Devil rules the world; Imaginary selfe-loving
Covetousness rules the King in the Earth; It is seen plain, and he goes on
boldly without fear; hardness of heart rises apace, proud murdering flesh
grows secure, though his Judgment be near at hand.

Stand still, and you shall see the downfall of Pharaoh and his company. As
there are time, times, and dividing of times alloted to the reign of the
Beast, in outward Government; which is first the power of Magistracy, meddling
with matters of Conscience, in restraining or punishing, before the universal
Bishop was raised; this is the first time.

Then the time of universal Bishop, till reformed Episcopacy came in, this is
the second time; Then the time of reformed Episcopacie, till the variety of
Independent and Presbyterian Churches, or State-Government came in; is the
third time, and these two latter are called times.

And now England is under the dividing of time, and it is a forerunner to the
rest of the Nations, and this is the Image of the Beast; and this is the
variety of Churches, and differences in Religion, that is amongst men; every
one pleading his privilege, or else it is called the dividing of time, in
regard the Government of the Land is taken out of the hands of one man, and put
into the hands of many; this is the dividing of time, or the half day of the
Beast, in respect of outward government.

Even so there are time, times* and dividing of time within the heart of man,
which is the occasion of that outward division of times.

The first time is the state of simple plain heartedness, or Innocence; when
the five Senses acts in their own light, which is the pure light of a Beast,
but knows not the power of the Seed, or of the creating spirit; but is a
stranger to the spirit, and yet this state is the Image of the spirit; for this
is wise, and loving, and just,; but not Wisdom Love, and Justice it self; and
being tempted, it breaks out into folly, envy, and unjustice, and this is the
first time of the Beasts reign within a man.

Then the pleasure of sin enters, or a league is made between that living
Earth and outward objects, and the man being deceived, looks altogether
without him for good, for pleasure and for content, and follows all the
pleasures of his five Senses with greediness; and here he would be a ruler,
and some body over others; and in this estate man does what he will, and his
heart never smites him for it; he can lie, and cheat, and whore, and oppress
others, and thinks all is good, for nothing troubles him; this is the state of
prodigality or presumption. And this is Esau, the hairy man's Kingdom; And this
is the first step of his fall, eating the Aple.

Then there follows a time of trouble of mind, arising for that pleasure of
selfe-seeking delight, and this is called trouble for misspent time, whereby he
meets with many rubs in his good name, in his health of body, and in his
outward livelihood amongst fellow creatures, and now he begins to rebate of his
wildness and follow; and the Beast or sensitive power begins to be a little
tamer, and more moderate; yet Covetousness (that Beast) reigns still, and
that with more force within, yet this is a cooler time of the day then the
former was, for he begins to consider what he does; yet here is no rest, and
this is the third time, and so these two latter degrees makes times; this is
the second step of his fall.

Then comes in the dividing of time, within a man* and this is, when the Law in
the members fights against the Law of the mind; when a man sees his folly and
the bondage of his nature, he sees himself a prisoner to his Lusts, and this
light in him strives against darkness in him; he sees Pride striveing against
Humility, Envy against Love, contentedness against anger, uncleanness of
flesh against chastity, sorrow against comfort, and so cries out, Oh wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death, or bondage to
which I am ^ slave? this is the third step of man's darkness.

Well, this is the dividing of time within thee; this (...) the time of the
battle within thee, between Michaell the Prince of Peace, and the red Dragon,
the selfish, imaginary, covetous, murdering power, there is no quiet rest in
this estate neither; nay, this dividing of time is the sharpest and hottest
time.

And now one step further in the first degree of time, and then the man enters
into rest; And this is, when the Seed, or blessing in thee kills that Serpent,
and casts him out, and takes possession of thee, and rules in righteousness in
thee; for now all enemies are subdued under the Anoyntings feet, and he now
delivers up the Kingdom to his Father, who is the one spirit of righteousness
and peace, in whom there is no sorrow; And this God, or Almighty ruler, becomes
all in all, the alone King in that living Soul, or Earth; or the five living
Senses.

Now this spirit of freedom being rising up in some already, in part, assures
the Creation, and gives those bodies as pledges, that he will rise up in the
whole* and restore all mankind to himself.

And thus those three particulars in mankind is considered; first, the pure
creation of the Living soul; the single life of the five Senses, which is
called the Earth. Oh Earth, Earth, Earth, etc.

Secondly, the curse that has taken mankind, or this living Earth prisoner;
and this is the power of darkness, called sin or bondage, and this is called
likewise flesh, or carnal man; If you by the Spirit mortisie the deeds of the
flesh you shall live.

Now the created flesh is not to be mortified, or killed by us, but preserved;
therefore the curse therein is called flesh, and deeds of the flesh, because it
is a mere selfish power, that would have ease, and honor, and would be
counted a God, and would rule over all, to the enslaving of all to himself;
this is the reprobate, that shall have no peace, for all peace shall be taken
from this flesh.

Thirdly, the blessing, who is the seed of Life, or Christ, the righteous and
rational spirit; arising up to rule, and treading unreasonablenesse under his
feet, this is the restorer, or Savior of the captived, or the imprisoned
Earth, which sets mankind free from bondage within himself.

And when this power rises up to rule, he does not rule to enslave others to
him by the murdering sword, but he draws all men in Love to him; and the
union and communion of Love by him is established, in, and among the Creation.

And thus you see there are time, times, and dividing of time within the heart;
and though you become to the dividing of time, yet you are not come to the
Mount of God, to true rest, till dividing of time run his course likewise.

But yet here is great comfort to burdened souls, that lies groaning under the
darkness of this divideing of time within them, and that are mightily oppressed
by men that rules in darkness, and oppression over them; To you I say rejoice,
your Redeemer is come, he rides upon the clouds, and he will speedily appear
for your deliverance, as he has done for some of your brethren already, who
are witnesses, that he is rising and spreading himself in the Earth, casting
out death, hell, and bondage, and establishing life, peace, and liberty in
mankind, and in the whole creation.

Therefore whatsoever your condition is, murmur not at it, but wait, he that
is come to others will come to you, and not tarry; His power and name is Love,
and he will conquer all by Love and patience; And the sons of strangers and
enemies shall come and fall down to him, and say, thou art the alone,
righteous power; take thee our Crowns, Scepters, Swords, do thou rule, for
thou art worthy.

This is the day of Sions glory; This is the everlasting fire, that is
unquenchable; this is the powerful day of the Lord; this is the Lamb that was
slave, and is now risen again; This is the well beloved son of the Father,
in whom he delights; This is the promised Seed, the blessing of the whole
Earth, who has been hinted at, and pointed at by Prophecy, but never fully
manifested in the whole creation.

But now he begins to appear, to draw all men after him, to cast out the
curse, and to set the Creation in peace; therefore thou weeping soul, cast off
this sackcloth, and mourning weeds, thy redeemer is come, and he calls thee to
follow him, acting love and patience.

This power of Christ takes away all peace from the flesh, and will not suffer
any part of the creation to lie under a false peace any longer; And we see that
while he appears but weakly, how the peace of covetous flesh is disturbed, and
filled with much murmuring against the Light.

Oh say men, if this power of universal love be advanced; this will destroy
all propriety, and all trading, and bring every thing into confusion. It is
true, he shall be advanced for that end, to confound the wisdom and power, and
peace of the flesh, that the Creation may be ^o longer deceived, but now at
length may come into him, and rest quiet for ever.

Oh says Imaginary, covetous, proud, selfe-seeking flesh; If I take not the
sword, to restrain the unrulinesse of mankind; we shall not live one by
another; But his intent is not in Love to peace, but that he may rule over all
himself, and beat down others under him; And indeed this power is the cause
of all wars; for if this murdering selfe-honouring power were once cast out;
Love would live in peace, and know war, division and sorrow no more.

CHAP. VII. What the blessing is that restores him again.
But how came man's fall in at the first? I Answer. The outward objects of
riches, honors, being set before the living soul, Imaginary covetousesse,
which is the absence of the true Light, moves the man to close with those
objects, and to seek content without him; and through this dark night power,
wars, divisions, and discontent arises in mankind, to tear and devour it
self; and so it is said to mankind, that his destruction is of himself; And
the misery of mankind came in by these degrees.

First, when whole mankind walked in singleness and simplicity each to other;
Some bodies were more strong then others, as the elder brother was stronger
then the younger, and the stronger did work for the weaker, and the whole Earth
was common to all without exception; But this singleness and simplicity was
subject to corruption and change; And the change came in thus.

The stronger, or elder brother seeing the outward objects before him,
thereupon imagines, and says, why should I that do all the work, be such a
servant to these that do least work, and be equal with them? It is fit I
should have some larger part of the Earth then they, and be in some more
esteem then others, and that they should acknowledge me in some degree above
them.

This Imagination is the Serpent that deceives the man; and as lust is thus
conceived within, and the heart, or the living Soul consenting to these
imaginary inventions, presently death is brought forth, and Mankind falls from
single simplicity to be full of divisions, and one member of Mankind is
separated from another, which before were all one, and looked upon each other
as all one.

This is the first step of the fall, consent within being moved by outward
objects of pleasure, riches, and honor for one to be above another; whereas it
was the honor of the elder to help the younger, and not to tread him down.

Secondly, it breaks forth into outward action; for this imaginary invention,
in the elder brother moves him to set about, to enclose parcells of the Earth
into several divisions, and calls those enclosures proper or peculiar to
himself, and that the younger, or weaker brother should lay no claim to it,
and the younger brother lets it go so; and presently their nakedness
appears, that is, the imaginary covetousness of the heart is uncovered, and
said open to the view hereby.

This dividing of the Earth into parcells, was long before it grew a strong
settled custom; for plain heartedness did much oppose the growth of this
imaginary covetousness, or Serpent; for when contention began to arise amongst
Abraham's servants and Lots, about the Earth; one side would have so much, and
the other side so much; Well, said single hearted Abraham, let there be no
strife between us, for we are brethren; Let us spread farther; and so the one
went East, and the other West, and gave more room in the Earth each to other,
and then they were quiet; this is the first breaking forth into action, to make
division.

Then next to this* mankind began to buy and sell these enclosures of Land,
one of another, which the creating spirit of righteousness gave them no
command to do; for by reason of this bargaining, the younger, or weaker
brother is more forcibly shut out of the Earth, and so here is a foundation
laid* to steal the Earth by craft, and to murder one another by the sword.

For now says the Buyer, this parcel of Land is mine, I have paid the fruit
of my labors for it, to be properly my own. But the younger brother comes in*
and says, the land is our portion by creation as well as yours, and we give no
consent to be shut out; therefore what authority had you to buy, or the other
to sell; by thus doing you ^hea^ us, and cast us out of the Earth; And from
hence now divisions and wars begins to arise be^weene the brothers.

And so the elder brother Cain kills the younger brother Abel; Cain was subtle
and covetous, and Abel single hearted, and molested Cain, and opposed him in
his selfe-seeking Principle, or imaginary invention, to raise himself to be
above others; thereupon anger arises in Cain, and he kills his brother, and
removes him out of the way, though Conscience tormented him afterward for it.

And by this murdering power, over-awing one another, the cheating Art of
buying and selling, and of dividing the Land into parcells, prevails amongst
mankind; till at last Moses was raised, who was the perfectest man in his
time, and he seeing mankind was run into this division.

He endeavors to keep peace, and to prevent war and bloodshed, he makes a Law,
wherein there was much equity between man and man, called ten Commandments,
wherein every man is limited in his own propriety; so that if another coveted
his Neighbors wife, Land, house, or servant, it was his sin, and was to be
accursed or punished, by a general consent of all the people; And they all
said Amen to this Law; and said they would observe it, and do it.

Yet says Moses, though this be a Law, settling peace for the present; yet I am
not he that shall restore you to your first singleness and Innocence; for a
Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up like me, that shall do that restoring
work; and him shall you hear; and he shall deliver Jacob from his sin, and
Israel from his transgression.

And here he points out Christ* who is the power of universal Love; and tells
them that whosoever will not hear the voice of that restoring Prophet* shall
be cut off from amongst the people.

And yet this buying and selling, and Moses Law of equity to preserve peace,
was part of the fall, for it could not keep them in peace together, but still
mankind did molest one another, and rise higher in divisions, and sell to
further contention, Covetousness, and Pride amongst themselves.

The stronger brother goes further in his imaginary ambitious invention, and
makes war against the younger, or weaker brother, and takes their enclosures
by force from them; and either kills them or turns them out of the Land, which
they had bestowed labor upon; and so did break Moses Law, which said, thou
shall not kill, thou shall not steal.

And now divisions, and enmity is risen to the height, and the power of the
Sword is the very strength of the curse, and is the murderer* for this takes
not away propriety from others, by labor, or by buying and selling; but by
cruel violence and force, casting down one, setting up another by force, and
now Mankind is in the extremity of division.

And they that enjoy the land* they or their fathers got it by the Sword, and
they keep possession by the Sword, and no man regards the Law of righteous
Creation, or of Moses Law of Equity; for every man seeks himself, and thinks
it equity for others to regard him, and is offended at those that do not
regard him; and the whole Earth is filled with this devouring self-righteousnes.

Therefore high time for the great Prophet, which Moses spoke of to arise, to
restore fallen man, or else no flesh shall be saved; for one is bent to destroy
another; And all is for the Earth who shall enjoy it.

And does not the nakedness of man appear very manif^st, that some parties
are truly like Dives, that fares deliciously every day, goes in rich apparel,
silk, and gold upon their clothes; Chests full of silver, houses full of
corn* and other fruits of the Earth; And yet sees others starve for want
before their faces; And these very rich men notwitstanding makes a profession
of Christ, as though they were his servants; Oh does not these men openly
declare their hypocrisy, and discovers their own nakedness, that all the
world may see, that they are proud, covetous, envious, and the power of
darkness it self, and so op^n enemies and traitors to Christ; All the title
they have to their Land is by the power of the sword. Did Jesus Christ do so?
Oh no, No; he was universal Love; and bids every one do as they would be done
by.

This power of the sword does not only kill and rob, but by his Laws made and
upheld by his power; he hedges the weak out of the Earth, and either starves
them, or else forces them through poverty to take from others, and then hangs
them for so doing.

They that have the greatest power of the sword in their hands, do kill, and
take away the labors of others, and say it is righteous; but if a weaker hand
does but take from others to supply necessaries, the other calls this
unrighteous, and hangs them for it; surely the King of righteousness is not so
partial a God, as to call one and the same action good in his hand, that is
the stronger and bad, in his hand that is the weaker brother.

No, no; This is the righteousness of the man of sin; this is the
righteousness of the Scribes, Pharisees, and Judas, that counts every thing
righteous that pleases them, and every thing unrighteous that displeases them;
This is the extremity of the curse, and yet this is the Law that every one, now
adays dotes upon; when the plain truth is, the Law of propriety is the
shameful nakedness of Mankind, and as far from the Law of Christ, as light
from darkness.

And yet Soldiers and Lawyers, and all that cry up this power of propriety,
which is both brought in, and upheld by the murdering sword, would be called
Saints and members of Christ.

Truly you are all deceived, you are members and actors of the curse, which is
the destruction and bondage of the Creation; you are that power that hedges
some into the Earth, and hedges others out, and takes to your selves by the
power of the killing sword; A liberty to rule over the labors and persons of
your fellow creatures, who are flesh of your flesh, and bone of your bone; And
you do the very same things, in a higher degree and nature, for which you hang
other men for, punishing others for such actions as you call sin, and yet you
live in the daily action your selves; taking the Earth from the weaker brother,
and so killing him by poverty or prison all day long.

Now this enmity that bro^ght in this division; first of enclosing; then of
buying and selling, then of killing one another for the Earth, is the curse
within of imaginary covetousness, and it was bred by the presentment of
outward objects, tempting the five Senses, or the living Soul.

And all the strivings that is in Mankind, is for the Earth, who shall have
it; whether some particular persons shall have it, and the rest have none, or
whether the Earth shall be a common treasury to all without respect of persons.

And this is the battle, that is fought between the two powers, which is
propriety on the one hand, called the Devil, or covetousness, or community on
the other hand, called Christ, or universal Love. And as Christ does cast
covetousness out of the heart, so propriety is cast out from amongst men, and
mankind will not only become single hearted again, but will walk in the
light of pure Reason and Love, and never fall again into divisions, but shall
be so acquainted with the wyles of Satan, that he shall utterly reject, and
abhor his imaginary inticement; As Jesus Christ rejected the temptation of
objects; And that Satan, or tempter without prevailed not, because the
Anointing was in him, that was stronger then flesh.

Now this same power in man, that causes divisions and war is called by some
men the state of nature, which every man brings into the world with him.

But this Law of darkness in the members is not the state of Nature; for
nature, or the living soul is in bondage to it, and groans under it, waiting
to be delivered from it, and is glad to hear of a Savior.

Look upon a child that is newborn, or till he grows up to some few
years, he is innocent, harmless, humble, patient, gentle, easy to be
entreated, not envious; And this is Adam, or mankind in his Innocence; and
this continues till outward objects entice him to pleasure or seek content
without him; And when he consents, or suffers the imaginary Covetousness
within to close with the objects. Th^n he falls, and is taken captive, and
falls lower and lower.

First, into the slavery of that power of lusts within, leading him forth to
act all manner of selfishnesse, with greediness to the destruction of others.

And then falls from this delight into trouble of mind, and touch of
Conscience, and inward torment, and so falls deeper and deeper into Hell, till
the Seed or blessing rise up in him to work deliverance, and then carry him
back again, and lead him into the ways of truth.

And thus we see how mankind came to fall from his innocence; and that was by
closing to outward objects for content, with inward imaginary Covetousness, to
find life in those objects without him.

And man's recovery will be to reject outward objects; and to close with the
spirit of truth, life, and peace within, preferring this Kingdom within,
before the outward Kingdom.

It is said that Christ was tempted in all things, like as we are tempted. Now
how are we tempted? but by presentment of outward objects before us, and when
the life of the five Senses closes therewith, thinking to find content
therefrom, we are deceived, and so fall from innocence.

As for example, if objects of riches be laid before me, and my inward
covetousness close therewith, I fall; or if the beauty of the female sex be
set before me, If my inward lust close therewith excessively, running after
variety of strange flesh, I fall.

But if covetousness and lust be killed, or does not breath in me, then,
though those objects be tendered to me, I reject them; and so I fall not; And
now Satan or the tempter, which are the outward objects finds nothing in me.

And thus it was said of Jesus Christ, that when the Tempter came to him he
found nothing in him, that is, Jesus Christ had not an imaginary covetous power
in him, to seek a Kingdom, or happiness without himself, in those objects
of pleasure, riches, and honors of the world, but preferred the Kingdom
within him before that without him.

And so he was said to have no sin, because there was nothing in him that
consented to the temptation without; he made use of outward objects in
moderation, for the safety and peace of his body, but desired nothing in
excess, or immoderately.

The power of darkness which is Covetousness, and Imagination which is the
devouring Dragon, had no place in Heaven, that is, in him; for the Dragon was
cast out, and the Godhead did dwell bodily in him, in the fullness of
righteousness and peace.

Now I desire any man to show by experience, any other Devil, or dark power,
then these two, that is* The objects without, and the powers of the curse
within, joining in consent together, to enslave the Earth, or the living Soul,
which is the innocence of the five Senses.

While these two join together, and meet in consent, Mankind enters into
sorrow, and has true rest.

But when the power of Lust is killed within, by the blessing, or the seed
rising up, then outward objects troubles not, nor enslaves the man. For then a
man is content with his present condition, and seeks for a Kingdom within,
which moth and rust cannot corrupt, nor thieves break through and steal; If
he have riches, he dotes not upon them, he knows not how to use them; If he be
poor, he is quiet and content; If he be at liberty he is content, if in prison
he is content.

So then kill Covetousness, or that imaginary darkness within; And the Devil
is killed when the Tempter comes, he shall find nothing in you; he that is
free within, is moved to excess, or unrationall action by no outward object;
but he that is nor free within, is moved by every object.

And this is the Reason why many people are so angry, and bitter, and flies
upon their neighbors with reviling, and reproachful words, or envious
actions, because they are slaves to their flesh; they are in bondage within,
they know not liberty; It is the night time with them, the son of Love,
righteousness, and peace is not yet risen up in them.

Therefore they that are at liberty within, in whom the Seed is risen to rule,
do conquer all enemies by Love and patience, and make use of any outward
object with moderation, and knows no excess.

The powers of the curse, he subdues others by the murdering sword, and thereby
enslaves others to him; as we see the government of all Nations is this, and
the dark power in every man's heart is this; which indeed is the Devils
Kingdom that yet rules.

But now the blessing, he subdues his enemies by Love, and saves, and gives
life and freedom to his enemies; he first brings mankind back to pure
creation, and then rises up, and rules King of righteousness within, and so
keeps the man, that the curse never enslaves him again, and so he puts the man
into a better condition then he was in before.

This Seed or Christ then is to be seen within, to save you from the curse
within, to free you from bondage within; he is no Savior that stands at a
distance; therefore your public Ministers bewitches you, by telling you of a
Savior at a distance.

The enmity which bu^dens you is within, Even the Law of your members that wars
against the law of your mind; so that the members are the creature; And that
curse wars within them, and so troubles and enslaves the members.

Therefore your Savior must be a power within you, to deliver you from that
bondage within; the outward Christ, or the outward God, are but men Saviors,
such as Moses, Joshua, and Judges were, and such as Kings are, and these Gods
sometimes proves Devils. Surely such Preachers as tells you your God and
Savior is without, they know not the spirit, they are servants to the curse,
their Kingdom is all without, and therefore would have you to seek for a
Kingdom without that lies in objects; for that Kingdom of Christ within they
know not.

And here I shall end with this question. What are the greatest sins in the
world? I answer. These two; First for a man to lock up the treasuries of the
Earth in Chests and houses; and suffer it to rust or moulder, while others
starve for want to whom it belongs, and it belongs to all; This is the greatest
sin against universal Love; this is the destroying sin, this is Achans
sin; this is the action of Covetousness.

The second sin is like to this, and is the same in nature with the other;
And this is for any man, or men, first to take the Earth by the power of the
murdering sword from others; and then by the Laws of their own making, do
hang, or put to death any who takes the fruits of the Earth to supply his
necessaries, from places or persons* where there is more then can be made use
of by that particular family, where it is hoorded up.

And he said, son of man, see thou what they do? Thou shall see greater
abominations.

Ezekiel. 8.6. FINIS.

