The memorial of the just shall not rot of the Just shall not Rot. Or a Short
COLLECTION OF Some of the letters of that faithful Servant of the Lord William
Wilson, WHO Departed this life the tenth day of the fifth Month 1682 at his
own House at Longdale-Chappelsteel in the County of Westmoreland. TOGETHER
With several Testimonies Concerning his faithfulness in his day. UNTO Which is
added a brief account of some of the buffetings, Imprisonments, and spoiling of
goods he patiently suffered for his Testimonies sake.

Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, he shall be as Mount Sion: that
cannot be moved. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott in George-Yard in
Lombard Street, MDCLXXXV.

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 1. for lay r. laid, l. 26. f. into r. to, f. men r. me, p. 7. l. 1.
after (...) l. 5. f.; r. had, p. 12. l. 15. f. with r. in the, p. 13. l. 12.
after that r. (...) f. direct r. directs, l. 32. after that r. it, p. 14. l. 9.
f. sin r. seen, l, 18. f. they r. (...) l. last f. all r. his, p. 22. l. 2.
blot out W. W. p. 24. l. 12. f. the from r. thee from, (...) 38 dele as, p. 38.
l. 1. f. though r. through, p. 34. l. 30. f. his r. is, p. 34. l. 17. r. (...)
their, l. 25. f. your r. you, p. 37. l. 17. f. conetenous r. covetous, p. 38.
dele the 4 (...) 40. l. 24. after not put at, p. 42. l. 20. f. Prioners r.
Prisoner, p. 43. l. 17. r. Testimony, p. 53. l. 15. f. mortal r. immortal, l.
21. f. have r. hear, l. 26. f. messuge r. message, l. 34. f. of r. for, p. 56.
l. 3. dele out, p. 56 l 3 f hoest r honest l. 12. dele believers, l. 16. f.
casting r. causing. There are several other mistakes which the Reader is
desired to correct.

To the Reader.
FRiend whoever thou art that reads the ensuing Treatise, may understand that
there are only a few of the Letters and Epistles, which have since his decease
been found in loose papers; and that many Heavenly Exhortations to friends,
which he wrote in his day, are lost; and but only as it were a few of many here
inserted, for although he was born and educated very meanly in this dark corner
of the Earth, and had very little Humane Learning, only he could Read English,
and (...) little, yet but slowly; and was by his Trade and occupation a (...)
the Lord was pleased to call him (as he did Fishermen and (...) of old) into
his Heavenly work and Ministry, to bear (...) to his Name in many parts of
this Nation, and also Scotland (...) places; and he was a faithful man, and was
given up to do (...) work, and always had a word of Exhortation to the People
that he met with, or had to do withal: so what thou here sinds presented to thy
view, did not proceed from any Humane Education or wisdom of Man, but only what
the Lord was pleased to reveal in him by his Spirit, and so is not worded with
high Scholastic words, but even homely words and plain Country speech, being
always a man of a very lowly meek Spirit, and easy to be entreated; and being
he had little Humane Learning is the reason why both time and place of some of
his Writings is not taken notice of: And this I have to say concerning him
(being one who has several times joined with him as in Arbitration, to end
differences between man and man) that he was a very upright honest man, and I
never found him any way biased by any for whom be was concerned, but always
was at work to seek out the truth and ground of every thing in difference, and
would never countenance deceit, or such as had a mind to wrangle, but did
always reprove and discountenance such as he found had a mind of Suits and
Controversies; and commonly when he was appointed in such matters he had good
success, and seldom missed of his desired end, for he was a lover of Peace, and
sought it often with all his might, and was also an encourager of those that
sought peace, and loved to love in quiet, though he would not have bowed a
finger of his hand to satisfy the will of man, contrary to what was manifested
in him, either in payment of Tithes or Priest Salaried or when he was brought
before Magistrates and Rulers for the Exercise of his Conscience to wards God,
and for the blessed Truths sake which he professed, and also was and now is a
true Pofessor of, and has received a Crown of Glory with the God of Truth,
whose faithful servant and true warri ur he was, and his Bow always abode in
its perfect strength, to shoot an Arrow at all manner of deceit and
hypocrisy, though to the hazard of his outward man, by the violent hands of
wicked and unreasonable men, yet the Lord was always his deliverer, who now
has taken him to his Eternal rest, and removed all weights and burdens from
his shoulders and tears from his Eyes, for that he always suffered with those
who were sufferers for Truths Testimony, and was often made willing to put his
Shoulder under another burden, and has often given ease to such as were heavy
laden, by lending a hand of help; and though I had not the happiness to be
with him in the time of his Sickness, save only the space of one hour the
morning before he departed, in which time he often said he had no trouble upon
him, although he was very weak, yet he walked several times over the slower
with me, and also a little out of door, saying, his peace far exceeded his
pain, though he felt himself very weak, and in a few hours after he sweetly
departed this life, the tenth day of the fifth Month in the year 1682. and is
entered into everlasting Joy and blessedness with his God, and has received an
inheritance in that Kingdom that shall never have end; where many who are yet
in this body who have been refreshed by him in his day, have true unity with
his Spirit, and in remembrance of him can glorify and praise, and give thanks
unto his God who is over all and worthy of praise and thansgiving for ever.

His Wives Testimony Concerning her Dear Husband, William Wilson.
A Living Test money I have to give, Concerning my Dear Husband. He was a dear
and tender Husband over me, and that is the cause of my Sorrowing for the loss
of his outward Body; yet I can truly say, I have peace and true unity with his
Spirit, as I ever had when we lived together. Blessed and praised be the Name
of the Lord for evermore, who joined us together in his Heavenly fear and pure
unspotted love, and was our guider on our way both inwardly and outwardly, and
in that same love that the Lord joined us together in, we lived in the same
till the Lord was pleased to take him from me who is worthy of his own;
although it be a hard Exercise to me many a time now in my old age to part with
so Dear a Husband, but all is but a reasonable sacrifice for the Lord who is
the preserver of our Souls, that live in obedience unto his Will. And this I
can truly say, and that to my great Comfort, that when the Lord was pleased to
call him from me upon the Truths Account, whether in England or Scotland I
never was his hindrance; but was freely willing to give him up to the service
that the Lord had called him unto, for I have often bidden him take no care for
any thing he left behind, but have said perform thy journey as thou sees the
Lord makes thy way; which I know he did and that with faithfulness, and that is
his everlasting joy, and my great comfort, though I be left behind him in this
World; but my desire and ^^eathing is to the Lord, to preserve me and my two
Daughters in his heavenly way to our lives end, as he did my dear Husband who
laid down his body as an innocent Lamb, Saying, often times, I have not served
the Lord unfruitfully, and also said I have no trouble upon me, and I am very
sensible that all is well with him, for he was a peaceable man to the very
latter end of his days; Blessed and praised be the name of the Lord for
evermore, who has received him unto his everlasting joy and felicity for
evermore

The 17th of the 11th. Month, 1682. Dorothy Wilson.

His Daughter Rebecca's Testimony concerning her Father.
THis is my Testimony concerning my dear and well beloved Father William
Wilson, he was a dear and tender Father toward me, and that is the cause of my
Shedding of tears many times, but it is not without hope; for I am Satisfied
with many more, who knew his Life and Conversation, that he is entered into
everlasting joy and felicity for evermore with his Maker. And this I can truly
say to my daily comfort, he was a true director of Me and my Sister on the
Spiritual Journey even Sion wards, which he himself did travel on daily, and
did bear a faithful Testimony for, to the end of his days, both in England and
other Nations; where the Lord was pleased to call him: tho through trials and
hardships, but he thought all little enough for the Lord and his holy truths
sake, Oh blessed and praised be the name of the Lord for evermore! for I can
truly say my Father was raised up in a spiritual sense toward us his Family,
when he took his journey toward London; and in much tenderness exhorted us
with tears, to keep in the true fear of the Lord that his name might be
glorified by us, with many more good and heavenly Exortations to us on this
manner, which was his last Testimony to us: for he lived but two nights and one
day after he came home from London, and his outward body was much Spent, but he
was in a Sweet and heavenly frame of Spirit, to his last breath; and often said
his peace was far above his pain. And so lay down his head in peace where none
can make him afraid; Oh Lord God of Infinite love which has broken my heart
unto tenderness before thee, thou have been a Husband to my Mother, and Father
to Me and my Sister! Oh Lord carry us on in thy heavenly way as thou did my
Father, that thy name may be glorified by us in our little measures, for it is
the desire of my heart above all things to live in thy true fear that I may
inherit the Crown of life as my Father does! Blessed and praised be thy holy
name for evermore says my Soul.

The 17th of the 11th Month, 82. Rebecca Wilson.

Ruth Wilsons Testimony concerning her Father.
THis is my Testimony concerning my dear and faithful Father William Wilson,
who was a dear and tender Father over me, which is the cause of my great
lamentation when I heard of his decease; for I was gone to Kendal to live, and
did never see him alive after he took his Journey toward London, which was
very hard for me to bear, and went near my very life, but in the Consideration
of his holy and pure life that he lived in, I am satisfied (with many that did
know him) that he is in everlasting Joy and Eternity. Blessed and praised be
the name of the Lord for ever, for he was ever instructing me on in that
heavenly way that he himself traveled; into his latter end, and encouraging
men in the way of the Lord often; saying, to my Sister and Me, it would be the
best portion that ever we could enjoy, which we know now to be very true.
Blessed and praised be the name of the Lord for ever, who has made us sensible
witnesses of it in our little measures, and I desire at the Lords hand that I
with many more may be preserved in the true fear of the Lord to my lacter end,
for I know my dear Father did often travel in Spirit for us his family, when he
was far separated from us outwardly, sometimes in his Journey upon truths
account, and sometimes in his imprisonment for conscence sake; and the Lord was
with him in every needful time, and now he was pleased to take him out of this
troublesome world, into his everlasting joy, where he has laid down his head
in peace where none can make him afraid; and the desire of my heart is, that I
with my Mother and Sister may truly wait upon the Lord that we may know him to
be as a Father unto the Fatherless, and as a husband unto the desolate Widow,
for he is a strong Tower unto the upright in heart, and a sure hiding place
unto all his little ones; O blessed and praised be his Holy Name for ever and
evermore, says my Spirit.

Ruth Wilson.

William Rawes his Testimony concerning Will. Wilson.
COncerning our dear friend and brother William Wilson, I have this Testimony
to bear for him in true remembrance of him, he was a man of a Meek and quiet
Spirit, which with the Lord is of great price; he had also a good gift to
declare the truth, and was full of zeal and heavenly courage, in the which he
performed the same. Also he was a good example and pattern in his life and
Conversation unto us, by the which he preached truth unto us, as well as by his
words; for he himself lived according to what he taught us: for he was adorned
with gravity, and walked before us in humility; yea, he had a blamless
conversation and was unspotted from the World, so that his presence as well as
his words, was a strengthening and a comfort to the upright and honest-hearted,
he was a man that did suffer much for truth's sake, both imprisonment often,
and spoil of goods which he took joyfully, knowing that in Heaven he had a
better, and more enduring substance, he patiently endured all; saying, he had
counted the cost before he began to build, the Lord was his upholder in all
hardships. And by his powerful arm did support him in all trials and exercises
that he met with, Blessed be the name of the Lord for ever, he did so worthyly
walk in his life time obedient unto the grace of God, which appeared in his
heart; that when it pleased the Lord to visit him with sickness, the Lord made
it casie unto him, that he many times did say, greater was his peace then his
pain, peace did far out balance his pain, and said, I have not served the Lord
for naught, and very quietly took his sickness. Saying, he was well contented
whatsoever way the Lord was pleased, he was as a Dove harmless, and as a Lamb
Innocent also waited he upon the Lord until his change did come: which when the
time came, that he no longer might live in that Body, he prepared was to meet
the Bridegroom, and an admittance into the Bridegroom's Chamber was found,
where I know he is at rest and peace for ever more with the Lord.

O Happy art thou dear William.
Happy and Blessed of the Lord art thou for ever.
Blessed art thou that is dead in the Lord.
Thou shall rest from thy labor, and thy works do follow thee.
Amongst the Angels bright shall thou shine.
In Heaven's joy to remain for ever.
Where thou a Crown of life have obtained.
A Diadem most, bright shall thou wear.
It was this thou labored for here.
It is obtained now by thee in Heaven where it was sure there laid up for thee,
till thou thy Testimony had finished.
Now rejoice thou dear friend and brother.
In heaven's Glory shall thou shine for ever.
William Rawes.

Thomas Atkinson his Testimony concerning Will. Wilson
ANd this same Will. Wilson was a man endued with Heavenly and divine
Knowledge, which the Lord had given him; and was made able to divide the word
aright to every condition; he had milk for the babes to nourish them withal;
and stronger food for men of strength to go on with boldness, in the Lords
work. And for temporal affairs both for himself and others, who made use of
him, he was so honest, true, and faithful in his dealings, that none could
justly lay any thing to his charge; in this state he both lived and dyed as to
the World; but the remembrance of him will remain for ages and generations yet
to come, I had good experience of himself many years, and therefore I can give
my Testimony for him, that he was an honest faithful man, although his body be
gone the way of all flesh.

Thomas Atkinson.

William Walker his Testimony concerning Will. Wilson.
THis is my Testimony concerning my dear friend late deceased, which the Lord
has taken away from among us; and is received into everlasting rest with the
Father, where peace and joy is for evermore enjoyed. This Testimony I have to
bear and to leave upon record for him this day, that his labor and travail was
for the good of all, for he being one that often frequented my Fathers house,
and he was made instrumental in the hand of the Lord, in that family when we
were young in years for in the remembrance of him, my heart, and soul, and
spirit is even broken many times within me, so that many a time my Spirit
cannot but mourn within me, for want of such a dear friend: though not as one
without hope, being well satisfied that his soul is in everlasting felicity,
where true rest and peace with the Lord for ever more.

And further this Testimony I have to bear for him, that he was a man that was
truly willing to labor with his hands in the creation, and that always; a
tender regard over his family, for this I can truly say, for him that it was
his greatest joy that his children should be kept in the fear of the Lord, in
which the living God has had a regard to answer, for whom my Soul and Spirit
on their behalf, can truly at this time give unto God the praise to whom all
true praises belongs, for ever and for evermore, says my Soul.

William Walker.

Michael Wilsons Testimony concerning his Brother William Wilson.
WIlliam Wilson being my natural Brother, and by trade a Tailor, and I when
young being his Apprentice as well as his Brother, can in Reallity and truth
give this Testimony concerning him, who before his convincement he was one that
sought the Lord to the utmost of his understanding then, and for disputing
about the things of God and the Scriptures, he was behind few of the Professors
of those times, and was one that walked as Circumspectly as the most part of
them did. Being zealous in his way yet still some thing there was in him
unsatisfied, which the Lord in his own due time did satisfy, and by his living
and eternal power did raise to bear a Testimony for him, unto which Testimony
vaised by the Lord in his heart; he was obedient and willing to be led and
guided, which led him into the way of God, which is light, for Christ said, who
is the way to God, I am the light of the world, he that follows me shall not
abide in darkness but shall have the light of life. In which light he came to
see that a profession of the truth made not a Christian, but a possession of
it; and also in it he came to see deceit both in Priests and Professors, who
talked of the way of the Lord but walked in the way of error; preaching,
praying, and singing, for gifts and rewards; having more regard for the fleece
then for the flock, seeking their gain from their Quarters, having lofty
Spirits and proud and haughty looks, loving to go in long Robes that they may
be taken notice of; sitting in the highest Rooms of feasts and having the
Chiefest places in the Synagogues and loving salutations in the market places,
and to be called master, even Lording over people; against which my dear Friend
and Brother was several times moved, by the living power of God to try and
declare, and in his holy light did testify against them, who had got on Sheeps
Clothing, but inwardly was Ravening wolves; for which he was cruelly handled
at several Steeplehouses, both by Priests and People; as for instance.

When we went to work one time at a House where was one Charles Crow a Priest,
who came into the Room where we were working, who walked a while to and fro in
the Room (with a Book in his hand somewhat larger then a pocket Bible) unto
whom my Brother moderately said, Charles, thou have a great toil in getting thy
lesson, at which words the Priest in a rage came and took him by the hair of
his head (where he was upon an high form, sitting before the table) and pulled
him down to the ground, panching him with his feet and knocking him on the head
with the Book; which knocking some Women in another Room heard, and came at
that time and prevented the Priest from doing any further harm.

And also at another time being one feast day in the Morning, we were in his
house at Langdal Chapel style, who then felt the Lord to move upon his spirit
that he should go to Eshdal Steeple house in the County of Cumberland (at which
place he was Cruelly handled a few weeks, before by one Priest Parker) yet
notwithstanding he was willing to go (who witnessed that saying my people shall
be a willing people in the day of my power, said the Lord.)

And we went from his house within a Quarter of the ninth hour, and we were in
Eshdal Steeple-house within a quarter after ten -- between which places it
being nine Miles and upwards of very rough way, and Priest Fogo being there,
soon after we went in; he went into the Pulpit during which time my brother
stood silent. And when he had done, my brother spoke some words to the people
concerning the Priest, sayings, and doings, which made the Priest to rage. And
some of his hearers standing up being officers, would have put my Brother
forth; but the Priest said, let him alone: then they sat down again very
willingly expecting to hear a discourse between them, but instead thereof the
Priest came to him and took him by the Hair of his Head, and by the same pulled
him to the ground, and drew him out of the Steeple-House, while the Priest was
thus exercised, I said unto the people, mind the fruits of your Priest, the
Scripture says, lay violent hands on no man; which the Priest hearing came to
me and in his rage and cruelty abused me in the beholding; of which acts of
Cruelty done to us the people was many of them set against the Priest, which he
perceiving got away home, and then my brother had good service among the people
a pretty while, but within a few months after, the Priest met with a sharp
reproof for his Cruelty when he was riding over some sands, accompanied with
several people, he fell into a quick-sand and was immediately drowned, a just
judgment of a persecutor.

And this in short is a true Testimony of some of the fruits of the Priests;
whom he in the light of the Lord went to reprove who made a great talk of
Christ and Christianity; yet notwithstanding proved as Cruel as the beasts of
prey, tearing wolves though covered with lambs skin. And at several houses up
and down the Country where we wrought, he met with many envious spirits who
also were great talkers of God and Christ and the Scriptures, and the way to
God; but walked in their own wills and ways and would not bow nor bend unto
Christ the light and way to God, they were climbed up so high in their
imaginations, and strengthened themselves in their self righteousness, and came
forth in the strength of the power of darkness to oppose the Truth and light of
God which he bore Testimony unto; yet in the name of the Lord he stopped the
mouths of many gainsayers, and in the wisdom of. God that was with him he
caught the wise and crafty in their own snare.

And in a holy zeal and heavenly courage, and living demonstration of the
spirit of truth, he declared the way of the Lord and his Exhortation was unto
us, who in some measure were turned to it, that we should walk in the same; and
in it watch against that dark Envious proud haughty Spirit which lay near to
draw from it and to do well and keep low in Gods holy fear, and to deny our
selves and take up the daily Cross to our own wills, and to be faithful in that
little appearance of Light and Truth which we had already received; and then
the Lord would make known more unto us whose words many of us now are come to
witness, Blessed be the name of the Lord for evermore.

And this Testimony I have to bear concerning my dear Brother, and it lives in
many and shall not dye, that he was an Innocent man and lived in the fear of
God, and diligently sought the Exaltation of his holy way; and his delight was
to labor and travel that people might be gathered into the same and walk
therein, that in their day and time they might be an honor unto God, for which
end he made them, and they who in this age do declare for the same and seeks to
worship him in his own ordained way, do meet with many hardships and cruel
persecutions as did the faithful Servants of the Lord in former ages; and as
also did this innocent man. But the Lord was near unto him in every strait, and
was unto him a present help in every needful time, and in a living sense of his
eternal power, did in time of his sickness declare several sweet and heavenly
Exhortations; and also saying, I know it will be well with me: I have not
served the Lord for naught, his presence I feel with me, and also said my love
is generally to friends; and standing upon the floor between two Friends with
difficulty of breathing, said, Oh, that every one would mind the Lord that they
might reap life, and then he sat down and like a Harmless dove left this life;
and so drew breath no more.

JOHN DIXON'S Testimony concerning William Willson.
I Being a Neighbor unto W. W. therefore have had a certain knowledge of him,
being many times conversant with him, though at the time of his Convincement I
was but young in years; and before his Convincement when I learnt at School I
had this knowledge of him, that in those times he was one that diligently
sought the Lord to the utmost of his understanding; And that with the chiefest
of professors in those times, he was one that took great pains in going from
one professing Priest to another, and for disputing about the things of God and
the Scriptures, was behind few of them. Yet still there was something
unsatisfied in him, notwithstanding the great and high profession, then made
until his mind was turned to the Lord, who by his holy and heavenly Light and
glorious power, did shine into his heart, by which Light he came to receive the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. And this Heavenly
treasure he had in his earthen vessel, and willingly he attributed the
excellency of the power thereof unto God, to whom it did belong being truly
subject thereunto; for he was a man that had made self then of little or no
Reputation, therefore did the Lord exalt him and give him Wisdom, Courage, and
Boldness, and that in the sight of his Enemies to the Confounding of them, and
raising the witness of God in many.

For soon after his Conversion, he was moved by the living power of God, to cry
against deceit, iniquity, oppression, and transgression, which abounded both in
Priests and people; and was cruelly handled at several Steeple Houses often by
the Priests and sometimes by the people for the Lord from whom nothing can be
hid he knows, and many peopel did see how that one Priest Parker of Eshdal in
the County of Cumberland, because this faithful and obedient servant by and
through the Motion of the Divine Spirit of God; did exhort people to mind that
of God in their consciences, and to turn to that holy Light and Law which he
has put in their inwards Parts; that by the same they might come to know the
will of God and do it. I say, because of these and such like words the Priest
in a cruel rage did beat and wound him, and with one of his Crutches did break
his Head, and caused the blood to run down his Shoulders and Back; and being a
lame man caused his Horse to be brought, upon which he mounted, and in the
sight of the people did upon Williams bare head break his Staff in three
pieces, which made the people cry fie upon such merciless work. So when the
Priest had made an end of his savage dealing, he set forwards to go home, but
before he got thither he met with a reproof for his Cruelty, (from him who
rewards every one according to the deeds done with body whether they be good or
evil) for he stroke him with sickness, so that he never came more at the
Steeple-House; during the time of which sickness he was very loathsome, for he
stinked above the ground, and was even made an example by him, who safely keeps
his obedient ones from being devoured by the beasis of Prey; who alone is
worthy to be glorified for ever more.

And so the Lord God of life, light, and power, who knows how to declare and to
wrok both immediately and instrumentally, who is never wanting unto his
faithful and obedient Servants, who truly depend upon his holy divine Spirit; a
measure of which he has freely given to all mankind to be their instructor and
leader into all Truth, and they are blessed and for ever happy who are
instructed and led thereby, and are truly and really given up thereunto,
though they may meet with many difficulties and troubles as did this faithful
Man, W. W. but out of them all the Lord delivered him, and in his holy power
gave him dominion; and in the Authority of the same sent him into Germany to
bear a Testimony against the wickedness of the wicked, and against the
ungodliness of the ungodly, warning the wicked to turn from his wicked ways,
and the ungodly from their ungodly thoughts, unto the light of God in their
hearts; and to the holy Measure of his divine Spirit in their inward parts, for
which he suffered great hardship in the city of Hambrough, and in Germany and
other places thereaways, both by Sea and by Land.

And after he had finished his service which he had to bear for the Lord in
those parts, the God of Light brought him back again into his own native
Country and outward habitation, where he was a good instrument in the hand of
the Lord, both to the gathering and encouraging of many in and to the way of
the Lord, both in Declaration and also in life and Conversation. For as he
taught so he lived in humility dread and fear before the Lord, being a good
favor both in them that did believe, and also in them that not believe;
reaching forth his hand daily for the good of all, truly delighting in the way
of the Lord, rising early and walking late for the honor of the same, and
durst not bow, bend, nor honor, no haughty nor proud losty mind: because
thereof he as well as many others of our dear friends have suffered great
hardship, for they that fear the Lord know right well, and that by good
experience its the humble that God teaches, and he direct the meek and the
lowly in the right way; which way our dear friend W. W. was very bold to
declare unto many, and that in a living demonstration of the Spirit of Truth,
which is the most excellent teacher and teaches to declare the way of God
aright, for without a harkening and giving up to be led and guided by it. None
can declare of the way of God aright, nor perform their duty unto him,
therefore its the concern of all to mind the measure or manifestation of the
Spirit or grace of God, which is freely given to all that they may profit
therewith, and those that truly comes to profit therewith, they are often pusht
at by them who do not mind it; insomuch that is come to pass in our day as it
was in the day of the Prophet, he that now departs from iniquity, becomes a
prey to them who rebel against the Light, Grace, or Spirit, of the Lord.

And though this faithful warrier and servant of the Lord, did faithfully
suffer persecution in his own native Land near his outward habitation; yet
still the Lord preserved him having more for him to go through, for it pleased
the Lord to send him into Scotland several times there to declare his message
freely, which was, that God is light and in him is no Darkness at all; and so
if possible to turn their minds from darkness to light, from Satan's power unto
the power of the Lord; unto which power every Soul ought to be subject, and in
the same to live and dwell and have their being: so shall it be well with them
when the time comes that they must lay down this earthly Tabernacle, and must
go hence and be no more sin: for the Prophet said, All flesh is grass and the
glory of it, as the flower of the grass withers, and the flower thereof
fades away, but the word of the Lord endures for ever.

And the last time that this faithful Soldier of Christ (who fought under his
banner) was in Scotland, he was moved by the Spirit of the Lord to travel into
the remote parts thereof (where many times he was in jeopardie of his life)
there to declare unto them the way of the Lord freely, for freely he had
received therefore freely he did give, as do all they Ministers of Christ Jesus
who is come to learn of him, and to obey his command: who commanded his
Ministers, saying, freely ye have received freely give. And in these far and
remote parts the Lord God of life and power (of whom he had freely received)
was not a wanting unto him: but was a present help in every needful time, and
was always near to preserve his obedient traveller, until he had finished his
Testimony which freely he had received from the Lord to bear in these remote
places, and then the Lord God almighty of life and power, who was his leader
thither, and his instructor there, was his protector back again: at whose
coming his Relations, Friends, and Neighbors was very glad; for though many
had pusht at him and envied him, looking and often expecting for his ruin and
Inprisonment, several of them did then stand in need of him, for the Lord blessed
his labor every way, and made him able and willing to help them in several of
their necessities; for his hand was always open to the needful, and his
delight was to do good to them that had done ill to him, for indeed he overcame
evil with that which was good. So that they that formerly had been his enemies,
was made to say William Wilson is an honest Man, for he walked circumspectly as
those that are redeemed by the Lord, seeking by all means to bring honor to
the way of the Lord and to exalt the same over all the by-ways set up in the
fallen wisdom of man for the way of the Lord is a spiritual way, and his
worship a spiritual worship; for all that truly worships him, it must be in
Spirit and in Truth. And not in forms traditions and outward observations, as
lo hear and lo there in this tradition; and that observation which many have
made a great stir about, and been fitting up in their own wills and ways, being
degenerated from the Spirit of the Lord in which he is only alone worshipped.

And because this faithful servant and Minister of the Lord did often cry
against those that taught for Doctrine the commandments of men, being ignorant
of the cammand of the Lord in themselves, therefore he was often by them haled
to prison and Cruelly handled as was hinted before. And several times sued for
tithe, for John Ambross in the year 1682. did exhibit a bill in the Exchequer
against him and several other of his friends, because they could not give him
tithe for his cure, who in his bill of complaint to the said court affirmed,
that he was their Curate; but it has pleased the Lord to provide a better
place for him. Then John Ambross intended or sought for him, for his intentions
was (if his unreasonable ends was not answered) to put him in some prison or
dungeon, or such like place, or else to ruinate him in his estate; and so its
come to pass in our day and we are living witnesses of the words of the Prophet
of the Lord, concerning those that deceive people, and caused them to err and
bite with their Teeth; and cry peace, and he that puts not into their mouths
they even prepare war against him, Micah. 3.5.

And this is that cure they Minister unto those who cannot put into their
Mouths, who in the light of the Lord has seen their deceit, and can in reality
and truth give this certain Testimony that they are Curates of no value, for
those that have been feeding such Curates, and have been living under their
cure Twenty, Thirty, Forty, or Fifty Years; many of them has as great reason
to cry at this day, as they had the first day they went to them, no Health in
us, no Health in us.

And therefore all has great need to walk in the spirit of the Lord, that in
the same they may pray unto him, and say, from such Biters, Preparers of War,
and Curates, Good Lord deliver us.

And from such Curates, God almighty has delivered his faithful servant
William Wilson, and placed him where they cannot touch him with their War, nor
come near him with all their sharp Instruments, nor wound him with their Darts,
nor bruise him with their Blows. The good Curate who freely gives his Cure,
who is indeed a Physician of value, who heals all that come unto him and does
depend upon him; he alone has taken care for him and given him rest from his
labors, for the Lord has an eye to them that have an eye to him, and he draws
near to them that draws near to him; and he is a true preserver of them that
depend upon him and singly desire to walk in his way. Which way this faithful
man William Wilson had a tender regard unto, who above all things desired that
he might be preserved in the same, and be in his day and time an honor to the
same, and in reality and truth so he was; and for it he had a delight day and
night to labor and travel, and was in his journey and travel for the renown of
the same, when the Lord of life and power was pleased to visit him with
sickness, which he took very patiently earnestly; desiring of the Lord to turn
him which way he thought best, and to bring him to his Wife and Children.

And according to his desire, God almighty whom he served in reality of heart,
who had been with his saithful traveller and delivered him in many straits and
dangers, was at this time near unto him, and strengthen his outward man
(according as he desired) and brought him to his Wife and Children and outward
habitation, where several came to visit him, unto whom he said, it will be well
with me what way soever the Lord be pleased to order me. And the third day
after he came home he was taken out of the Body, during which time he set his
House in order, and several sweet and Heavenly exhortations he left among his
Familly, and within half an hour before his departure he walked over the Floor
between another Friend and me, who said, my love is generally to Friends, and
then after a little space with great difficulty of breathing he uttered these
expressions, Oh, that every one would mind the Lord that they might reap life,
which being spoken like a harmless Dove, he sat down in his Chair and soon
after drew breath no more.

William Rigg's Testimony Concerning William Wilson.
THis testimony have I to give for our dear Friend William Wilson, that he was
an innocent Man; a lover of truth and righteousness, and not only so, but a
walker therein for by his honest and upright life and Conversation, he was a
preacher of righteousness unto many as well as by Word and Doctrine, which he
was a labourer in for many years; not only in this Land but in more remote
parts of the World beyond the Sea; and the Lord was with him, and his power and
presence did go along with him: and the Lord made him instrumental in his hand
for the good of many, for it was the joy of his heart to see truth prosper, and
that many might come to enjoy that precious Pearl and Jewel of great worth the
Kingdom of God in them, which consists in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy
in the Holy Ghost which he was made a living witness of. And his testimony was
living and powerful to the teaching of the witness of God in many, not only by
word and Doctrine, but also by life and Conversation, (as I said before)
whereby he reached the best part in all Men with whom he was Concerned, or
where ever he was ordered to go, so that all were forced to confess that he was
an honest Man, for he was of a lowly, meek, and Condescending Spirit unto the
meanest Capacities whereby he got the love of many, and he confirmed and scaled
his Testimony not only by doing uprightly, but also by suffering the spoiling
of his goods and imprisonment of his body, and also by blows, wounds, and
cruel usage by inhumane and unreasonable Men, counting nothing too hard to
suffer for the testimony of Jesus, and for the love of him who had satisfied
his Soul, he was seeking the truth in its purity and glory which he did
receive, and did continue faithful to the Lord in what he had received of him,
even until the day of his departure out of the body, so that his memorial is
blessed and he has left a sweet smelling savor behind him, and the sweet
unity of his life, and the blessed fellowship of his Spirit lives and remains
with us; and as he lived an innocent life so was his latter end comfortable. It
was not my happiness to see him in his sickness, yet I had the Relation by
several honest Friends that he was in a sweet and heavenly frame of Spirit, and
when he was asked how he did, he would have said he was well, for my pain said
be cannot mount so high but my peace is above it; but I hope further account of
this will be given by some that were eye and ear witnesses, well, tho his body
be gone to its place and his Spirit to God that gave it, and is entered into
his rest with the Lord, and is Crowned with an immortal Crown of life and glory
which was laid up for him, and not for him only, but for all them that love the
appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, yet the unity of his life lives in my
heart and I have fellowship with him in Spirit; and even at the time of the
writing of this Testimony, my heart is made glad: and my Soul is sweetly
refreshed in the remembrance of the blessed seasons which we have had together,
for many of them is fresh in my remembrance, and I do remember his Exhortation
was often to Friends to keep in the unity of the Spirit; for said he, it is of
a longer extent then we, it will live and remain when we are gone, of the truth
of which I am made a living Witness glory to God for ever. And so I desire unto
the Lord God of Righeousness and Truth, that all the gathered sheep of my
Heavenly Fathers fold, may be preserved from the Ravenous Beasts of Prey; and
that we my all be kept faithful in our Testimony for the Lord, while we have a
day that we may lie down our heads in peace with the Lord; as do I steadfastly
believe our dear Friend and Brother William Wilson has done.

By a lover of Truth and Righteousness, William Rigg.

James Pask 's Testimony concerning William Wilson.
WIlliam Wilson was truly a Man of God who did much good, and was a Pillar in
the House of God in his Generation; he did not gad abroad to change his way, or
go out from the pure way of God: but steadfastly keep and walked in it all his
days after he came to know it, he was a man of love to God, and his people
that is good, and knew well how to choose the good and refuse the evil;
unblamable in holiness and served the living and true God saithfully, his rest
is glorious, and his reward great in Heaven with the Lord God and the Lamb for
ever and ever. For his labor of love and service in the Church of God, which
very much he desired the welfare and prosperity of, he overcome by the blood of
the lamb, and the word of his Testimony which he held who loved not his life to
the death. I cannot but think of him and lament for the Churches loss
thereabouts, of such a tender overseer of such a Friend and saithful Brother;
and for his Widow and Childrens loss of such a Husband and Father so careful
for their good, so loving and tender to them: I desire they all may be
contented and rest satisfied in the will of the Lord; in which he is gone to
his eternal rest from us all as to visible appearance, but that spirit of God
in which he walked, still we enjoy to our great comfort in all our
tribulations, I knew him well Five and Twenty Years, he was ever very dear and
near to me; we traveled through Scotland together many years since, where we
patiently endured what exercises, perils, and troubles we then met with; having
a good and Estectual service for the Lord God in that Nation which after we had
truly performed, we returned in peace and Gods favor. In the pure love of God
was I moved to give this Testimony on the behalf of this my late dear Brother,
and companion in the work of the Lord; who is fallen asleep and taken up his
everlasting Rest in Christ Jesus who lives and Reigns for ever and evermore.

James Pask

WILLIAM WILSON was arrested with several more of his Friends, and had before
Justice Fleeming, and Justice Kirby, only for meeting together in Gods name and
fear, for which he the said W. W. with several other friends was sent to
Lancaster-Castle where he had the Oath of Alleagance tendered to him, upon the
refusal of which he was sent to prison again, and there remained several
months, who soon after the Assizes (his fidelity being made known to the King)
was released and set free from that bondage.

William Wilson, who for conscience sake could not pay Six pence or Seven pence
a year to Priest Ambross, Parson of Grovenor; was by him sued in the Exchequer
court and run to a writ of Rebellion, and by virtue of the same arested and
cast into Prison several Months, during which time he wrote several letters to
Dorothy his Wife, and Friends, Coppies of some of them is as follows.

Dear Wife, I received thine from Ambleside, and has heard of thee since by B.
B. and J. W. and its satisfaction to me that I hear of thine and my Childrens
Health and welfare. And I long to see that opportunity that thou might come to
see me, but dear Wife, I do not at all desire it till thou can well, for
Alas! I know that thou has over much traveling up and down about thy needful
affairs; but the Lord will order as he sees good, and all will be well in his
due time: we have had true experience of Gods love to us, and therefore we may
speak, for we can tell of his goodness toward us, and may believe in the same.
For there is no doubtfulness in our cause, for he knows our hearts and the
end of all our doings and sufferings, and therefore he will deliver in his
season and that is to be waited for with us all, thee and me and all that knows
the Lord, for he that will not spare to reprove Kings for the sakes of his
anointed, of which anointing we have all received a measure of, he will not
spare an old Hireling Priest who are in the steps of following after the wages
of unrighteousness, and greedily seeking his Prey, and even devouring the poor
if it were possible; will not the Lord hear for the sake of his own? Ye, he
will hear and be revenged even for the sake of his dearly beloved and Anointed,
whom the Devil nor all Agents can never prevail against the Lord, will hear
the cry of his own and plead the cause of the innocent, and release the
distressed, and set his own life and power at liberty; which lies groaning
under the burden of oppression, where it must not lie, the Lord has spoken and
therefore he will deliver, he has stricken and he will strike, and by his
strokes we are healed; he has wrought, and he will work and who can hinder: if
the wicked have his prey for his season, yet the Lord will bring him to his
end; but Gods prosperity and truth shall never have an end neither in this
World nor in the World to come.

Therefore my dear and loving Wife, whom God has given me and not man, we may
well be content and wait with much patience the Lords time in all things,
knowing that it has been our best time; we can never call to mind the things
that are past since we knew this truth of God, but we have had comfort therein,
and I can never desire it otherwise if I should be restrained of the liberty of
my body all the days of my life.

Thine W. W.

Dear and loving Wife
I Have nothing to write unto thee as yet, but only the remembrance of my
unfeigned love unto thee and my Children, hoping you are in Health as I am at
this preesnt I praise the Lord of Heaven and Earth, for it is reasonable well
with me every way I bless the Lord for it, and desire to know how it is with
thee; tho indeed it goes near me to ask how things is with thee, because I
cannot help thee; and that is my heaviness sometimes. But the Lord will in due
time plead my Innocent cause who knows the uprightness of my heart; and that
one hair of my head shall not uphold the false profits ways nor the hirelings
wages, who says and does not, I have been often assaulted to have it paid for
me, but my uprighteousness is known to the Lord and I cannot dissemble with my
God, but this is a Mystery to the World, and therefore they cannot receive it
but unto thee my loving Wife is it given to understand. And therefore am I much
comforted, and the Lord preserve thee and my little Children in the true fear
of God, for our way is not to look out, and therefore I can inwardly beseech
the Lord for you all, thy dear and loving Husband, W. W.

My love to all our Family Kendal the 14th of the 10th Month, 1672. Will.
Wilson.

My Dear Friends and Brethren, who are like to be fellow sufferers with me in
this case, of not yielding to satisfy the will of this unreasonable man; who
is persecuting us for not paying him tithes or reckonings as he calls them.
TO all you my faithful Friends, this is the word of advice unto you all, that
you see and examine your selves well, and see how ye stand in Gods
righteousness; that so my Dear Friends your sufferings may never become your
burden, but that your establishment may be felt in Gods Righteousness with you
all; for my friends, you had better never have put your hand to this plow then
to look back, therefore my friends examine well your own selves, how you are
minded in this concern, for the Lord knows my heart. I wish you all well (...)
the honor of Gods truth as mine own heart, and therefore I would not have any
of you all to go one step further then you feel the suffering seed of God
Almighty, to bear you up in your pure blessed minds that sees over all the
sufferings that can happen in this present world. For indeed Friends, in this
estate God will plead our cause and our suffering with him, will bring a
reigning with him, and in this state friends you must look over Wife and
Children which is near and dear unto you all, but Gods righteousness is more
then all and will bear you out over all and through all, for the Lord alone
will be your help, and no man shall need to plead our cause, but he will appear
for us in his due time, when he says it is enough, who shall be able to say
Nay. Therefore my friends feel your hearts, purified from all double mindedness
that single in God righteousness, you may be found and so will his holy seed
reign in your hearts, and Gods blessing will be upon your Children, that so you
need not fear the want of any good thing unto them nor your Wifes the beloved
of your Bosoms under God; and therefore Friends in singleness of heart, as
having a sense of your Conditions, I write these lines unto you for the
bettering of your establishment in Gods Righteousness, where you will never be
made afraid to appear for the Lord; and bear a single Testimony for his name
and truth upon Earth, for truly Friends, this is the feeling of my heart, and
the full bent of my mind, that if one hair of my head would serve in
consideration of this task, I could not give it, I believe I shall not be a
Hypocrite; I would not be found out of Gods Righteousness doing mine own will,
but even the will of him that has called me that his power might be more made
manifest. And therefore friends, was this word of Exhortation the more in my
heart unto you all, that you might truly feel your own selves in that which
will carry through, or else as I said it were better never to step further then
to faint by the way, but hoping you are furnished with that heavenly spirit of
life, that will carry through to the end as need requries; I take leave with
you all and rest your loving Brother

William Wilson.

And Friends,
LOok not back into Egypt for help, for it is in vain, neither have we need so
to do; for the Lord is our helper therefore we need not fear what man can do
unto us; for Friends, I dare not look out at any thing of any hand, for if I do
I am afraid, and Gods witness would be against me, and would be heavier then a
thousand such as Ambrose the Priest could be, and therefore that you eye and
mind the Lord above all hireling Priests, is the advice of your Friend and
Brother.

Will. Wilson.

William Wilson being moved of and by the living power of God to travel into
the North, or remote parts of Scotland, to declare what the Lord did then; and
there immediately reveal unto him, during the time of which travail he wrote
several letters into England to his Wife, Coppies of which is as follows.

Dear Wife,
IN the living truth of the Lord Jesus Christ, does the bowels of my unsained
love, salute thee in the unseparable life, does my dearest love reach unto thee
in the unchangeable life of holiness, where we cannot forget each other; dear
heart my life is often powered out before the Lord in consideration of thee my
dear love, the Lord thy God who has separated the from thy Mothers womb, and
has in measure brought thee to be of the womb of eternity; where thou may
feel the invisible sense of Gods eternal love toward thee and thy Dear
Children, and he cannot forget his own that is without question. Can thou
forget the Children of thy Womb? its possible thou may, but the Lord cannot
forget his Children whom he has called to forsake all and follow him; his
daily blessings cannot but attend such every day that comes over their heads.
Dear love, My life is with thee in the Lords presence, but my Body is at
Aberdeen at this present with the. My good Friends, where I feel their care is
over me, and my companion that walks with me, Oh pray that we may walk worthy,
or else all is in vain! O we have need to be watchful against that old nature
that would be ready to leaven into the old lump again! and reckon that Gods
Truth may be holden there; but it is not so, our God is of purer eyes then to
behold iniquity, it is the old man must be put off, and Christ Jesus the new
man must be put on which follows after Righteousness. And this is that alone
that seasons our hearts with grace, and preserves our minds in his fear and in
his true love we are kept; which loves one another and thinks no evil but bears
one another in love, exhorts one another in love, and gathers into unity one
with another, that the Devil cannot get any power to hurt or scatter us from
God nor one from another, and in this are we known to be of God, if we love one
another: that so God who for Christ's sake has showed his love unto you, may be
glorified and honored by you. And thus much at present I feel to write unto
you, even the Lord Love that is large unto us, that our daily prayers may be to
be kept in it to his glory and praise for ever; my dear Wife, thou know my
love is dear unto Friends, thou must let it be so remembered unto all our
Meeting; Dear Wife, I say little of my return as yet, but the Lords will be
done, that is my whole desire; for I am many miles from the end of my Journey,
whether I hope I shall attain unto in Gods time: I am not hasty but rather
desires to be of use or service amongst Friends as I go. For this first day I
hope to be at Allan, at a meeting where many has of late as they say have a
desire to hear, it is about twelve miles beyond Aberdeen; on the third day
after a meeting of Friends at another place, and then on my journey as God
makes way and, in the mean time think it not long, but solace thy self in the
singleness of heart with the Lord, who will ever be as an Husband unto thee,
and to my Children as a Father; and inperfect sense of the same, and in dear
love with thee and all men living upon Earth. I take leave with thee, and rest
and remain thine in the Lord while I am

William Wilson.

From Aberdeen in the North of Scotland the 25th of the 5th Month, 1673. Now my
dear and loving Wife,
I Can write some encouraging lines unto thee, whereby I hope to the Lord that
sent me away from thee, that by his powerful assistance I may see thee again
ere it be long; for the Lord has pleased to set me as free from the North end
of Scotland to come home again to thee and my Children, as he did set me free
from you to God, and did visit his seed in that remote part of the Earth, and
the Isles thereabout: where his witness lies slain in many, though not wholly
dead in others though in great bondage; but the Lords power is the same there
as it was with us at the beginning; and he is able to raise up even those that
are dead, and bring to life those that are staggering: and release his own out
of Captivity though it may seem to be through many straits, and difficulties,
his arm is not shortened, and it must be stretched forth to his own praise. Dear
Wife, it is fourteen years since a Friend was here amongst this people, and as
I said unto thee, it was the very day and time for me to go, as thou know I
said unto thee before I left thee. I could not deferr the time any longer, for
this was the very year and time, and I was the man that was to go; and so dear
Wife having accomplished my end in the name of God, I can return in great
peace, for at this present I feel no other; for my end in all things is Gods
Glory and my Souls Peace, as thou knows right well, I have never sought my self
in those things, and so as I saw before hand has much come to pass, for my
partner as I said to thee when I spoke through Faith was such a one as feared
not the face of any man that did appear against God, and we have sound of all
sorts, but the Lords blessed truth was set over all heads, and all Priests and
people: we need not much to relate that now. And I have been pretty well
preserved in Health only a little in the Isle of Stromy I was aguish a little,
but I kept over it as well as I could, and mended again in three or four days.
I have thought often, O that I had but one word how thou were and my Children!
but I see not how that can be, and therefore I can wish in pationce, hoping all
is well. Dear Wife, I have written to thee since I came from home six times
before this, whether thou have received them or not; the last was from Aberdeen
six weeks before this, but I can say little of writing more before I come,
though it may be a month or more yet, or I can get home if all be well: but as
to that I leave it to the Lord, thou may be glad that the Lord has preserved
us amongst the untoward Generation, and set us safe again amongst them that
believe.

I hear that dear G. F. is come again into England, my heart is glad of the
happy return; let my dear love be minded to all Friends in General of all
meetings round about as thou lights with any of them, thou must not expect my
coming hastily or I cannot travel hard, but I am very well both as to body and
mind, if any write to London let me be minded to our Friends that went to
London, so with my love that never changes I rest

from Awbonthy the 5th day of the 7th month in Scotland, 1673. W. W.

A Copy of an Account of some of the sufferings of William Wilson (which
account was found amongst his Papers written with his own hands) since the
Restoration of King CHARLES the II as follows.
IN the year 1660 on the 22th day of the 7th Month; I was arrested with a
Warrant from Justice Braithwait of Ambleside, by T. D. Constable of Langdal
upon information made by John Tomson Priest of Grasmire in Westmerland, for
speaking some words to the people in Gods fear, and bidding them mind their
teacher, so at the next Sessions I was fined by Justice Fleeming and the rest
of the Justices in one hundred Marks, and committed into the Goal at Kindal
until payment was made, as the tenure of the Mittimus did run; and so remaining
in prison a while until the first Sessions next after. At which time the same
Justices sent for me, who tendered me the Oath of Allegiance, and because for
Conscience sake I could not swear, was sent to prison again, there to remain
till I took the Oath and paid the fine of an hundred Marks as aforesaid,
although in the year 1648. I had suffered the loss of all I had (saving my
life) for the King as I made it appear, yet I remained in prison above half a
year, and then was set free by the Kings act of indulgence.

In the year 1662. in the 10th month I was committed to prison at Lancaster
with many more of my Friends by Warrant from Justice Fleeming and William
Kirby, for meeting together to worship God in Spirit and in Truth; where at the
next following Sessions, I had the Oath tendered me again by these said
Justices and others; and because I durst not swear, was committed to prison
where I remained Twenty weeks.

In the year 1665. I was arrested by warrant from Justice Fleeming and Justice
Braithwait, for meeting with my Friends the 5th of the 9th Month at the house
of Reignal Holme for which I was imprisoned one Month in Kendal, in the year
1670. I was fined in twenty pounds by virtue of an act made to prevent
Seditious Conventicles by Justice Fleeming and Justice Phillipson, for speaking
a few words of Truth in soberness in our peaceable meeting (to Justice
Phillipsons man who was turned informer) for which I had taken from me two Cows
worth five pound, one Horse worth forty Shillings, and Oate meal worth ten
Shillings.

And again, for speaking in a meeting at Fieldhead near Hanks-head, I was fined
in twenty pounds for which my goods was spoiled by William Satterthwait
Constable, James Harrison Warden, and William Groves overseer, all of Landal.

In the year 1673. for not paying six pence or seven pence in the year to
Parson Ambross Priest of Grasmire for tithe, I was arrested with an Exchequer
process, called a commission of Rebellion and cast into Prison at Kendal, where
I continued sixteen weeks and then set free by the Jailer, being three weeks
after the writ was not of date.

But these are small matters, in consideration of what the God of my Life has
led one through since I knew his glorious Truth before the King came in; for
many a time have I suffered cruel Mockings, Stackings, Stoneing, Buffitings,
Beatings, and Knockings by the hirelings, Priests and rude People; and all for
desiring the good of their Souls, and that they might turn to the God of Light
in whom there is no darkness at all, and so come out of darkness that they
might have the light of life,

William Wolson.

An Epistle General, or a token of my Love and care in my measure of the
Heavenly Father of Glory, of Peace and of Love to all friends in their
meetings, as it is Judged meet and Convenient to be read.
IN the grace of God and love of the heavenly Father which has visited us in
this acceptable day, of his abounding mercy I greet you all, in the Virgin
love and state of the pure Church of God which he has called and gathered
together in our day and age, glory to his Name for ever: who has found us
worthy to be members of the same; and his eternal love and tender merties it
even unto us day by day, and time after time, in our heavenly Meetings, which
he has gathered us into, that we may wait upon him in, and think upon his Holy
Name. Blessed for ever be his name, he has set us in a holy state and brought
us into a deep sense of his pure love which runs freely among us from day to
day, and keeps all the careful and upright in heart unto himself; and they
glorify his holy name, and all the careless and disordered persons does
dishonor his most holy and blessed Name, and this will be their shame and
great condemnation. But the glory of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall
be revealed in the upright hearted, and carefully minded Men, and Women, Sons,
and Daughters, of the preclous life and seed of God, which is risen amongst us
in this our day and time of Gods love and heavenly visitations unto us, who
keeps the good order and state of the pure Church; but unto them who rebelle
against the spirit and regards not the good order and state of the pure Church;
unto such will the Lord appear and be angry with them if they do not amond, and
have a greater regard unto his most Holy Name and Place and Spirit; which would
cause them not to err not depart from the good order and Spirit of God unto the
which they are called, therefore my Friends, Brethren, and Sisters, in the name
of the Lord of Hosts, I charge and warn you all, that you keep to that of God
in you all, and that will keep you all in the remembrance of the beginning, and
let you all see the good order and state of the true Church, in God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God the light of the World; in whom we are
all to walk, to move, and have our being. So remember my Friends, how careful
you all were at the first, and tender at the beginning; and troubled at that
which was out of order, and your Spirits grieved and could not well bear the
things that some will now allow, and be ready in defense thereof to say, Alas!
Friends were weak at the first, but we are more able to hear or to bear things
now, which were a great offense or trouble then; Alas! my friends the Lord was
near unto us then, and did uphold us in our weakness, and was with us in all
out undergoings, and did uphold us on every hand; and none could open their
Mouths against his harmless Lambs, but the Lord was sufficient in them to shut
it again. But now my Friends, they have many things to lay to the charge of
some Friends who frequently comes to our Meetings, and yet they find them in
the Customs of the World, (and not after Christ) yea in very blameable and most
reproveable fashions of the world, which the Apostle forbids, and says,
Fashion not your selves like unto this world, for the Fashions thereof passes
away; and some in being too conformable in drinking too much at Alehouses, and
taking of Tobacco amongst them, which is an evil savor unto the Lord, and that
which your Spirits could not bear at the first. Alas! Friends have you lost
your first love, or is your tender zeal departed from you; and also the common
payment of tithes or such like dues so called is to much upheld among some of
you; which all is convinced of to be Jewish and Antichristian, and many of our
dear Friends that suffer for not paying of them is occasioned the more to
suffer, though the unfaithfulness of those who do pay, or suffer it to be done,
as they in all parts of the Nation, who gathers tithes is ready to blash poor
harmless Friends in the face with; and this is one thing the Lord is greatly
offended with, who is able to preserve uphold and deliver the faithful (and yet
all go under his name this does occasion his grief) and furthermore my Friends
the Lord is grieved with some. Slackening their Zeal in your Meetings, and
being so heavisome when you are met together to wait upon the Lord, then do
some let in the careless mind, and so loses their pure zeal; and deadness and
drowsiness comesover and burdens the seed of God in others, and does hurt in
your Meetings, and occasions the world to open their Mouths against us; and
this is a great evil, and does cause the Lord to be angry with us, and is
pitiful over those that suffers by them. And this is out of the good order and
state of the true Church, and a great spot in some families; Oh Friends! Have
you not Houses to eat and to drink in, and are they not also to sleep in? Oh my
Friends! think of those things, it is Gods free love to you to tell you of your
faults, who is found faulty herein; that thereby you may amend and renew your
strength in the Lord, who is able to give you strength and power over all these
things, and will do it to all who is willing and obedient to the cross of
Christ. Oh my Friends! I cannot forbear but I must tell you of one thing, which
as I thought I was in a Meeting, and as I thought we were but heavisome and not
as we should all of us have been, and there was among us as little Child of
about six years old, and she began to cry and weep bitterly, yea very sore, and
I did behold the little Child, and I saw that here weeping was of God, and she
cried sore, so that I prayed earnestly to God in my heart, for the little Child
that she might speak if ought troubled her Spirit concerning Gods Church and
People; and immediately the little Child spoke and said, Friends should not
sleep in their Meetings, and immediately I awoak and saw the state of the true
Church and the disorder that was among Friends, and the little Child was a
Virgin and in the state of the true Church, and without spot and blameless in
the sight of God; the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who is able to present
us all perfect without spot or wrinkle in the sight of our God, who has called
us all to repentance and newness of life, in which the Lord God of Eternal life
keep you all my Friends, Brethren, and Sisters in the Lord.

Your Friend and Brother in my measure of God W. W

An Epistle to Friends of Haukeshead Meeting.
DEar Friends, Brethren and Sisters in the Church of the first born, and of the
Royal Seed of the most high God, grace, mercy, and peace be multiplied among
you, to whom God has revealed what he has determined and is now manifesting
in this day of his power, that every one of you in the Light and life might
stand single, out and over the snares of those whom God is laying aside as the
broken reeds of Aegrpt; that his own name might be trusted in, and his mighty
arm alone felt and seen in leading and preserving his people to his Glory. Oh!
my Friends my desire is much for you, that you be kept faithful in the Lord.
Oh! I say that I am glad when I read you near me in the life of God, a top of
all this world and its Ways, and its Love, and Fellowship, and Fashions, and
Customs which all, perish with the using; but my Friends dwell in that which
seperates and puts a difference between you and the World; to wit, the light
that Judges the World, and has given you clearly to see the just Condemnation
of the World because of its evil deeds. So let your Fellowship be in the Light
my Dear Friends, and live dear and near one with another and one to another,
that so the world by you daily may be judged, and feel your daily Separation
from any thing that you see to be evil; and be not persuaded by any means of
fleshly reasoning or consultation with flesh and blood, which cannot inherit
the Kingdom of God, but draws out into the Kingdom of this World; and so breads
your peace with God. Oh! my Friends feel daily your clearing up by the Truth,
and your freedom from the in tanglements of the World, that you may feel how
the Lord does set you upon his most holy Hill, that you may shine as lights
unto the World. For this end has the Lord called and chosen us that we may
dwell and abide in his Light, and show forth his praise unto the World; and his
glorious works unto the ends of the Earth. And I may say again I am with you in
the Lord, whom I feel and find faithful: my life is raised with you out of the
dust, and set a top of the world and the things of the world with you; my
friend of God read me near you in the life of God, but, Oh! it would be sad to
me to feel any of you, with whom I have had Union in the Lord by his Spirit, to
be degenerated and drawn aside by the love of this present World, and the wiles
of the Enemies: which will be presented in this time of trial by persuading to
stay at home or rest a while until the heat of prosecution be over, as it has
done some already in some places, which when they appear in the face of the
truth it will be their shame, because they have harkned to the deceit of their
hearts, and not unto the truth as it is in Jesus; which never makes ashamed but
bears the Cross and dispises the shame and runs the tace with patience because
of the joy that is set before them. So my beloved Brethren and Sisters, let
nothing persuade you to fly the Cross at any time lest you should lose your
Crown of courage and boldness, and so be covered with shame and contempt,
neither let any that do fly the Cross at any time be your example; but rather
draw them into the fellowship and love of the cross again, by your example of
faithfulness and obedience, and by your not giving heed to seducing Spirits,
but persevering on in the Gospel of the Kingdom of Patience; bearing them as
Children who be weak and tender among you. But that which is hard and would not
obey the Gospel is for the hammer, and for the Sword of Gods Spirit, that it
may be broken down, and all made as a plain before him; and serve him in true
feer with a perfect love and upright heart, out of all forms, shows or forms of
Godliness; in the true power and senceableness of the pure holy life, which he
has raised up in us, to bear his heavenly Image under his heavenly banner,
which is love: under which we are to make wair in much patience in this day of
Battle, wherein they are fighting against us with a cause, and we cannot resist
them, with Sword nor with Spear, but in patience suffer under them all during
the Lords time, in which I rest and bid you all farewell,

This was as a part of my dear love to you my Friends, because I wish you well,
William Wilson.

DEar friends that suffer in Carlisle Prison for non payment of Tyths, or
otherwise in bearing a pure Testimony for the Holy God of eternal life unto you
is my dear love, and the tender Salutation of my life, ye sufferers for the
Lord, do it with thearfulness of heart, in the tenderness of your Spirits,
toward the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has sent a light into the
world, to lighten the blind Eyes, and be the Glory of his People, in the midst
of Tribulations, Persecutions or sufferings, and friends I know that you are
not unsensible of the eternal love of God which is more in this day, then the
whole world, blessed be his holy name for ever, friends its no marvel that you
suffer persecution for Righteousness sake, seeing the hard heartedness and
cruelty that is in the world through unbelief and hardness of heart, amongst
the sons and daughters of men, who in these days have set themselves against
the Lord, and against his anointed, his People and chosen ones, whom God has
gathered, and not men, therefore friends of the same flock etc sheep of his
foald, be you gathered together in the Lord, and feel his daily love over all,
and above all your Persecuters and heads of your Enemies, in the daly Cross and
power of the righteous God of Heaven and Earth who gives you dominion over all
in his power and authority to stand in the day of Trial during the Lords time
(unto the time of God over all; who is to be waited on above all, blessed for
ever, who has called you and us for that very purpose, that we may wait upon
his name, and feel his strength and blessed presence and loving power, in
which, friends you may have boldness with good Courage to testify of his name,
unto all the world in your sufferings, and in your Conversation, as the Lord
makes way in your heart for the glory of his truth and the honor of his
eternal name, which is become great amongst us, and is the strong Tower of the
righteous, and safe hyding place of his people in the Storms and in the
Tempest, he his the sure stay of all them that trusts in him and stands to him
in all Trials and trouble whatsoever: The Lord kindles up his own Spirit in
them and riases up his own Seed, which he has blessed, to magnify his mercys
over all, and Rejoice in the hearts of his called ones, and gathered ones, to
place his name among in this day of his living truth, in which he is much made
manifest by the valor of his Power which raigns in his Saints and faithful
Servants, to the glory of his name, and counts the present sufferings of this
life nothing, to the glory that shall be revealed, oh the endless love of God
that is manifested in our hearts, is it past expressing with my tongue, or
relating with my pen, but this is my pure satisfaction, that you know the Lord,
and is sensible men of his eternal truth, which is able to fill your hearts
with praises unto God, and rejoice in the midst of trouble, and make you
willing to lay down your lives for his sake, if he should require it, for his
Testimony is true you know, and can seal to it, in your sufferings with the
rest of many more of your Brethren and Sisters, fellow Sufferers in this day
who Witnesses their lives raised through, sufferings, who rejoices that they
are found worthy, not being weary nor thinking time long, but waits with much
patience the Lords time, and some of our friends is released already in laying
down their bodies in this their present sufferings for the Lord, which they did
I believe in much joy of heart, a lightsomness of mind, to the preaching of the
truth of God, and incouragment of friends in the truth, who rejoices with the
faithful over all to the praise and glory of his name for ever, and friends
here is Copies of two Papers that were set upon their Corpses, as they were had
to then burial places, and after spread abroad in the Country, and sent up and
down amongst friends, and you may send Copies of them, and you may see Service
for them amongst friends or others, if it be into Northumberland or in
Scotland, as you see way made there, may beservice in sending them abroad, so I
rest your dear friend in the eternal truth of God and a sufferer for the same
because I cannot swear.

Willam Wilson.

TO all you who say your are the Seed of Abraham, Abraham believed God and so
was found Righteous, and all you that say you are of the same Seed, and not in
the same belief, I say you are not the Children of Abraham, did not the God of
Israel promise by Moses, (whom you say you believe) that he would raise up a
Prophet, like unto him, and him the people should hear in all things, and they
that would not here that Prophet, should be cut of from among the People, so to
you who are called Jews was I moved to write these few lines, and to exhort you
to that Prophet whom God promised to raise, and I witness him raised, and the
government is laid on him; and of his dominion there shall be no end, and so to
him I exort you all, he is near to you even in your hearts and in your
Consciences teaching you to deny all that is contrary to the God of Israel, did
not Moses say that the word is nigh thee in thy heart and in thy mouth to do
it, People this word become flesh and dwelt among us, and this flesh was
Crucified but the word lives and abides forever, in which the Lord is
worshipped and all other worships is Abomnable unto him, does he not say he is
weary with the Sacrifices, yea truly people he is wearyed with them, for his
delight is in his Elected one, does not the God of Isreal say behold my Servant
whom I uphold, my Elect in whom my Soul delights, I put my Spirit upon him,
and he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles, verily people he is Judging
the secrets of all hearts both of Jews and Gentiles so again I exhort you all
to turn your minds to within, and see if the light will not judge righteously
for the God of Isreal, and will show you plainly that he was a true Prophet
whom your Fathers believed not, and to this Prophet must you come, before you
know the God of Isreal even this word which is nigh in your mouth and in your
hearts, so none of you be ashamed to stoop, to this word which is nigh, did not
the God of Isreal say that though the Children of Isreal were as the Sand of
the Sea, yet a remnant was to be saved so see which of you is of that remnant
and what you are saved from, for they who are saved are saved from sin and made
clean by this word of Life, but them who lives in sin and uncleaness, are
neither Children of Abraham, no Servants to the God of Isreal, but are a
dishonor to the God of Isreal, as also many are who profess Christ in words,
and lives not in the life of Christ, such are a dishonor to his name and his
woe, is upon them, but do not you stumble at them, for their destruction is of
themselves, for though they be proud or liars, or coveteous, they have not so
learned of him, for no such thing was found in him but the Light in you judges
and condemns these things in both them and you, and so to this we exhort you
all which teaches truth in the inward parts and this is it the Lord requires.

W. W.

We desire you English men to read this Paper.
ALL people repent and turn to the Lord God the Creator of all things in whose
power we stand witnesses against all manner of evil, as it does appear, and
reproves it as we are moved of the Lord and for this cause are we hated of the
world, but we marvel not, for it hated him even Christ Jesus who is the Light
of the world which lights every man that comes into the world, and this
Light is in you all, reproving you for sin, and every evil work, and all that
is willing to be guided by it, it leads out of the vanities of the world, and
not to Fashion our selves like unto this world, and herein do we become a prey
to the wicked and a gazing stock to the Nations in this day of the Lord, but we
have found him faithful, that promises in obediance to him we shall eat the
good of the Land, and now we know him made manifest in the flesh destroying he
works of the Devil, and giving victory over the world and the Lusts thereof,
and truly people this is in love to all your Souls to whom it may come to be
read, and to this turn your minds, that would redeem your Souls out of death,
the Light of Christ which Comprehends all them that live in wickedness be
they never so high or low; it searches the heart and tries the reins, and is
a sure witness for God, and Condemns all the proud and wanton ones and the high
and lofty ones, and will bring them down to the ground, and this has been
revealed by his Son to us, and we are bold to declare is among you, that God
may be clear in all his judgments, for he is just in all his doings and has
not brought destruction upon any without warning them aforehand, so prize your
time you know not your hour, and make no mock at sin, nor scorn not the Lords
doings, it is of his own good will that he has revealed these things unto
babes and sucklings, and hid them from the Eyes of the wise and prudent, and
thus do we witness in our measures and do return him praise to whom all praise
and honor does belong and he will not give it to any other, and he has
ordained the foolish things of this world to confound the wisdom of the wise
and to bring to naught the understanding of the prudent, and all that would be
wife let them first become Fools that they may grow wise, for the wisdom of
God is fool shness to the world, and man's wisdom must be destroyed before ever
he know the wisdom of God, (for man by wisdom knows nor God), for what as may
be known of God is manifest in you, and so friends to the Light of Christ Jesus
the only Son of God (the Father of life) turn your minds, and with it search
your selves honestly and see how ye stand justified in the sight of God, and
aproved in his Light, which does never aprove of any evil but condmns all
unrighteousness, in whomsover it does arise, yea the very thoughts and intent
of your hearts are seen in this Light, and comprehended, so all be warned and
take heed how ye despise them who are sent of the Lord singlely and simplely to
fore-warn you of the evil to come though they be never so simple; yet faithful
to him who has called, and is willing to wait in his council, not fearing
what man does unto us, but are willing to suffer any thing for righteousness
sake knowing that sufferings was ever the Saints portion, whosoever killed them
thought they did God service, therefore take heed to the Light, and see what
you do, for we are not ashamed to bear our Testimony for Jesus before any, for
it is Truth and that never makes ashamed, and our lives is not in our own
hands, neither dare we fly from the Lords Conucil, to feed the wisdom of man
but to that of God in you all, do we hope to be made manifest, though it is
cross to the first nature at present, yet upon your beds consider and in the
Light examine whether you did see us act or speak any thing that was not of the
truth, and we desire to be convinced of it by Scripture otherwise be ashamed to
speak against us, if you find us not according to the Scriptures, nay glory to
God, it is for no evil you can hate us, but because we cannot follow to the
same excess of Riot, therefore you speak evil of us; now to that of God in you
all let it judge between you and us, whether you do not love a drunkard better
then be that reproves him, ye or nay, or a swearer or liar, or a conereous,
profane, proud Persons, or they who are in the Fashiens of the world which is
vain, better then them who are redeemed out of them, and stands witnesses
against them, yea or nay, all these are works of darkness which the Children of
God have no fellowship with but are to reprove them, has the God of this world
so far blinded your Eyes that you cannot see these to be the works of the
Devil; and is not this a dishonor to our Nation, that such cursed fruit as
pride and haughtyness, lightness and vainness as does appear in many of you
should be brought out of it, (to wit our Nation) think it not strange if the
Lord smite you with a curse for these things, nor count us not deceivers
because we cannot speak peace to you for there is no peace to the wicked faith
our God, and is it not adishenour to our Nation that so many of you should be
comed out of it, having not the love of God in you may read Christ's own words
on John 5th and 41, 42, 43, and 44. the verses. O blush and be ashamed that you
would lay the dishonor of our Nation upon those who are innocent and harmless
fearing to dishonor God, who has power over us all, therefore repent and turn
to the Lord God of life and Light least sudden destruction come upon you, and
this in love to all your Souls whether you will hear or forbear.

R. H. W. W.

Here follows a Letter written to Captain Loaler whin he was in Kendal in
Westmoreland with his Soldiers written in the behalf of Regnal Walker and
George Benson, who had Well packs to Kendal and was sent into visit him in
Prisen.
To the Priests.
ALL you Priests and great Scholars who is in your Tongues of humane Learning,
and is proud of it, take heed to your selves that you set not your Hebrew,
Greek and Latin above the head Christ Jesus the Son of God, who is the life
and the power of God, and so make a God to your selves, of your great learning,
which is humane and can never give the knowledge of God, for Pilat who
delivered Christ to be Crucified of the Jews, caused Hebrew, Greek and Latin
to be set over Christ's Head, take head, I say unto you, you proud Scholars that
you do not so, for the Lord is greived with your Pride and Presumtion of
Tongues, which may be cut of in a moment, and when you dye your Tongues dies
with you, but the pure living God endures for ever, so you send Scholars and
foolish Priests, who is making to your selves a God after your own way, and
will not have him after his own way, which is Christ within manifested in the
flesh, destroying the Devils work now in People; as he did great Miracles in
the days of his Flesh among the Jews, but they could not believe then, no more
then ye can believe that he is now made manifest in sinful flesh, destroying
the Devils work in the flesh, that all through him might be saved from the
Devils work, which is sin and wickedness; would you separate God from poor
ignorant People, that would believe in the light of his Son in their own
hearts, and confine him to your great Schools of Humane Learning, that none can
know the way of God but you; alas for you, for all your Tongues of humane
Learning, you are no nearer knowing of Christ now in this dispensation of
revealing himself in man, then Pilat was that delivered him up to the Jews in
that day and time, and you are worse then he, for he did it not willful, but
would have let him go; So see where your Hebrew, Greek and Latin is, while you
are ignorant of Christ the true Light, that lights every man that comes into
the world; here the poor, blind and ignorant may have the benefit of Chirst, as
they believe in the light that gives the true knowledge of God whom to know is
life, and that never dies, and here is none shut out of knowing God; I say the
Lord shuts none out, as you would do with your Scholarship if you could, but
the Lord is risen, and he did arise in the days past to confound the wisdom of
the wife, and bring to naught the undrstanding of the Prudent, he is setting up
his Son to Reign in the hearts of his People that believes in his name, and
they are not ashamed to confess his name before the men of this generation, who
seems mighty in their day, but the Lord is blasting the wisdom of man, and has
said it shall not rule over his People, for they have been a pray over long to
their Mouths, that have said the Lord says, when he has never spoken to them;
therefore this I say unto you foolish and not wise, who is proud of your
Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and thinks that God cannot be known in any other way
then your teaching of him, you are deceived, for God will not be mocked by you,
for he is setting up his Son to Reign a top of all that ever has been set a
top of him, either in this time or in times past.

W. W.

Here follows several Letters that were written to those in Authority when he
was Prisoner in Lancaster Goal for not Swearing.
To the Judges of the Assise at Lancaster.
JUdge or Judges I desire them or you to read this little Note, and then
consider the poor man's state, that suffers for the Lord God eternal, and his
holy Truth, as it is in Jesus, and dare not disobey his Comands manifestest in
his heart, that he may do them wheresoever he be, and obey his sayings, who
says, Swear not at all, but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, whatsoever
is more than these comes of evil, and the same Christ commands to do the
truth, and to speak the truth from my heart wheresoever I be, in all places and
at all times, in the which I desire that I may be kept faithful to the end,
that I may live in peace with my eternal God of Heaven and of Earth, and follow
peace with all men, that be upon the face of the whole Earth, for the Lord God
has called me to peace, and out of wars and strife; Although in the year 1648.
I was in wars for the King, and did remain with faithfulness unto the end, till
we were not a Party able to stand any longer, and took leave of my Captain, who
did bid me shift for my self, which was but sorrowful to me, and that night was
I taken Prisoner, and stripped to the Shirt from my back, and that Night had like
to been starved to death, and afterward sed in Prison with a penny a day, and
shamefully used in Prison, and had not left to my back, that any would have
given me a penny for, and much more then this did I suffer for the Kings
service, which I might have escaped all them, if I would have taken up Arms
with the other Party then; and have betrayed my friend, which thing my heart
stood against, and truly friends I must relate much concerning my sufferings,
with a heavy heart, because of so little regard that was taken of me, and my
poor coming home, nor never gave me a penny pay to this day, neverheless I
freely wish that you and all men knew the reality and truth of my heart to the
King and all his true Subjects much more might I write but would not be tedious
in writing very much; I am a poor man and has a small Family whose mentenance
depends only on my labors, by which I did mentain them well, but now I cannot
because I am here in Prison for my Conscience sake, because I cannot swear but
stands in obediance to Christ's Commands, my Allegiance to the King stands in
Faithfullness and truth, which I hope I shall reman into the end, so I desire
that I might have free liberty to live at home and Labor for my Family.

William Wilson a poor man and means well.

One to the Justices and Magistrates.
FRiends, Friends that be in Authority a few words from a Prisoner of yours,
Christ says Swear not all, this is Christ's Command, Swear not at all, and they
that loves me keeps my sayings, says Christ (mark) and be not offended at any
of his Servants which keeps his saying, and cannot swear at all, but lets their
comunication be yea, yea, nay, nay, for what as is more comes of evil as says
Christ, Matt. 5. Truly friends my heart is turned toward God with many more
of my brethern in this the day of our God, and we cannot Swear at all for we
have learned obediance unto his Doctrine and therefore we are willing to keep
his sayings, whatever we suffer by man for friends consider I shall put my case
with the rest of my brethrens who be of the same Faith, to your own selves to
judge: Christ he says Swear not at all, and you say you must Swear, so whether
it be better to obey God or man Judge ye, likewise the Apostle James says to
his brethren above all things my breathren Swear not at all least you sall into
Condemnation Jam. 5, but you say Swear or else you shall go to Prison, consider
this friends and Judge Charitably, whether is to be obeyed now if sufferings
must be, we these to suffer for Christ sayings rather then for much sayings,
for if we do not Swear we must fall into Prison, and if we do Swear we are sure
to fall into Condemnation (mark that), but it is better for us to obey God
then man man so we cannot Swear at all whatever we suffer, I hope we shall not
break our peace with God for pleasing men, for we know the Lords care is over
them that fear him and he will visit for these things; So take heed how you
cause us to suffer, for not swearing counting it a breach of your Law, for us
to keep Christ own sayings, that is offended in any of you to see us wear our
own hats on our heads, and to here us speak Gods truth plainly from our hearts,
without swearing, was ever any of Gods people offended at these things, or
caused any to suffer for not swearing, consider friends and take heed how you
oppress tender Consciences and cast into Prison them that cannot Swear for
Conscience sake, and lets Swearers have their Liberty; for I am one willing to
suffer for not swearing rather then to deny Christ, because I love and obey the
Lord Jesus Christ which says Swear not at all.

William Wilson Servant of the same Lord.

One to Justice Fleming of Rydale.
OH Justice Fleming that ever this report should be sounded in our Ears, that
within thy Libertys such spoiling should be amongst thy Neighbors, we never had
the like in our Parish, nor never expected that our own Justice should have
made such work, as set men of spoiling true men's goods; who themselves dare not
spoil nor do any hurt to any man upon the face of of the whole Earth, because
of their Conscience toward the God of Heaven, which is appeared in these
latter days, and is come and has taken up his abode with them and keeps them
unto himself, out of all spoiling again when they are spoiled of their Clothes
and of Horses and their goods which they had honestly gotten by their hard
labor and industry and has learned to live peaceably amongst their
Neighbors, and a godly life in Christ Jesus who says learn of me; but not to
spoil true men's goods, who for Conscience sake cannot Swear nor break of
their, godly Meetings which God has set up and not man; therefore consider and
call in the spoylers from spoiling of true men thy Neighbors, who have none in
the Earth to plead their cause but gives themselves up to God, and all they
have to suffer for his sake, having received the earnest of the Spirit, and the
assurance of etern I life from which they never intend to fly, for all that
ever mortal man can do unto them in this case, for it is in matter of holy
worship to our God which all the spoylers in the world is out of, and all
ungodly men an truths gainsayers which be in these latter days and though many
Fools and Bablers that is applauded in these latter days for their fooliry and
their fordness Jaging and waging in the streats like fools in a play, the Lord
hates such who fears not him that has made them, but walks in wickedness
making a mock at sin, and sporting themselves against the Lord and them that
fear his name; of which sort I am one and am not ashamed to confess his name
among men though it be to my great loss, and hinderance in this world, as all
my neighbors can tell and my wife and little children knows the want of me, as
thine may do of thee in time for ought I know, which I do not desire more then
I desire my own should want me, but if thou knew what it were I believe thou
would not be so hard hearted and my friend Willam Grave is lying at the point
of Death and this day one Prioner is lying dead and its a wonder and a mercy of
God I am not so to, and many more of us you have casten into Prison, and not
one of you that comes to visit us, but we may rather think you wish us all
dead, as thy brother Willam did babbling below a man and much more a Captain,
and thy Cozen Will. Kirby reported the night you had done that wicked act of
casting us all into Prison, that you had, had an honorable Bench, and that
thou was such a man as was not in many parts (and your whole service had almost
been taken up about the Quakers) and you had hall'd the Fox and stayed his
Hambrough Quaker from traveling, or the like words to that purpose, which is
below a man or manhood to vant of Casting men into Prison, it irkes my heart
that ever men should be so Foolish, as to do as you have done with us, in
sending us as thou sent us, and its thought caused the death of two and the
sickness of others, it make the Country cry out shame, shame, and indeed it
vexes me that my Country man should loose his honor in being so, hard against
poor Quakers as many calls us and had gained it so in other things, as I have
heard thy name honored among men where I have been both for carrage and
understanding so Justice Fleming consider and let men of tender Consciences
have their liberty as others does in other places, and be not so hard of the
Lords people Even who are engaiged to meet together fearing the Lord, as says
the Scriptures they that seared the Lord met often together and spoke often one
unto another, and the Lord harkered and heard, it and a book of rememberance
was written for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his name, as we are
Witnesses of is those days, (though we be hated of men not knowing the
Scriptures) and as we have believed Christ and the Scriptures so do we keep his
commands, who says he that loves me keeps my sayings, who says Swear not at
all, and in obediance to this very thing we stand, who suffers here in
Lancaster Castle because we cannot Swear nor break the Commands of Christ;
which if we should it were a shame to us, and below our honor and Scollarship
which we have learned in Christ that never Swear, and so taught his Disciple
who sufferred for his Doctrine in their days, as we do more in our days, with
much Joy of heart that we are counted worthy to suffer for his sake and bear
our Testimony to all the world, that God is true and every man a liar who does
not truth, and so remains in his sins which truth sets free from, and so we
trample upon those things which is below; if we bear our Testomony unto death,
as some of our friends and brethren have already done in these nasty holes and
stinking Prisons, where men may easily get their death; I could gladly find to
be with thee that we might reason together upon the things of which so greatly
does concern our everlasting peace and honor in the Lord, which is far above
all the honor in this world in my Eye, it is above the hat and knee, which men
may throw in the mire and where lies it then; but that honor which is from
above is placed in the heart, and is there to remain for ever; and if it were
about other things as matters concerning the Kings service I could relate unto
thee my sufferings to be great, as to me, and none of you took care for me
then: I might then do as I could for you; and I have sufferred since in Clivers
days for that service, and I was in Prison for my Conscience sake at Carlisle
and that unjustly too, what is it I am born to do to suffer still and that
unjustly too both then for the King, and now by his friends and never had as
much as a penny pay to this day, cannot that I believe was was Casten and
gathered in their days for me, as Edward Benson of Hyclose and John Midlefel of
Langdale knew them: but the times turned so their minds turned, and kept what
they had for ought I know, and little regarded my Imprisonment and poor coming
home which made me think it of my self, being so poor; and knew not how to mend
it when others mocked at me and I might have gotten away as they did which
showed their Lovalty to the King to be but small, when mine was made manifest,
so I think it were little enough if I had my pay now to help me in Prison, and
I hope pity will now in thy heart toward toward my Wife and little Children,
that they may not want or else what Charity lives with thee, so its for my
Religion that I suffer here, which I love to reason for with Ministers or
Magistrates or any men that fears God of Heaven, and loves the Seriptures which
is useful to desid. Controversies about Religion, and this is the thing that is
settled in my heart, and my desire is that I may labor in the fear of the Lord
and not be chargable to any man, and live a Godly life, and lay open wickedness
and deceit to the view of the whole world, as the eternal God move it in my
heart, unto whom I stand in obediance, and dare not swear at all; Thy friend
and Neighbor Willam Wilson and a lover of thy souls and everlasting peace, and
if I could Swear I should take that Oath as soon as any that you set much by.

Lancaster Castle the 9th of the 12th Month, 1663.
A Letter to Edward Stanley of Dalegarth in Eshdale.
EDward Stanley I desire the read this paper over to the end with patience if
thou can.

E. S. thy ungodly deeds shows thee forth to be an ill example amongst thy
Neighbors, and they that fears not God learns at thee, and loves thy evil
deed, and thy ungodly ways is a strength to to those that fears not God, but
with thy self would not have God nor good men to live among you, but strives
with strength and cruelty to shut the Contry of them, that fears the Lord and
worships his most holy name, which ungodly men and cursed Swearers is not fit
to name, the Lord remembers all thy doings that thou have done against his
people that fears his name and he will not forgit thy cruel doings that thou
did unto John Gunson his wife and little Children and James Stanton and his
Innocent life in which he lives unto God and dare not be offenced in Christ
for all the world, if thy weight had been ten times greater then that thou have
already laid on him, he has so truly learned Christ; Oh the Lowing of John
Gunsons Beasts when he caused their Ears to be cut off, shall rise up in
Judgment against thee, and the harmless Sheep thou took from James Stanton,
shall plead his innocent cause and condemn the to thy face, and every Fleece of
Wool thou took from him, shall cry out against thee, and all their goods thou
so evilly got shall do thee nor thine no good, and they shall live and praise
the Lord, when thou shall fear and shame to hear of thy ungodly deeds, the very
name of God shall fear thy Soul, and good men thou shall shun, and Hills and
Mountains shall thee fly; O whether will thou run, we are not afraid to Worship
God, his Truth will bear us out, it is no other thing we suffer for, and
therefore we are stout, and does not fear the loss of all that ever we possess,
the Lord will plead our harmless cause, and will deliver us;

And all our Foes will scattered be as dust upon a Hill,
When he will gather his Lambs that does his holy will;
Remember how thou went about to do his People wrong,
Who in his fear together met, though not contemning long,
The Lord considered well their cause, and knew the need they had,
And brought them home again in time, which made the needful glad,
And therefore we are not to fear the worst that man can do,
For serving of so good a God that will consider so:
I have believed the God of heaven that makes all mankind,
And do not fear to worship him who ever be left behind;
Consider well the Poor man's state, that lives near to thee,
And do him good if that thou can it will thy comfort be,
For he would do to thee no harm, I fully do believe,
Nor wrong the things belongs to thee, whatever one would him give,
Or say to him in such case, the Lord has taught him so,
To Pray for him that Persecutes, and pardon every Foe.
The Poor man's name is Nicholas Tyson, I belive thou have nothing against him
but for his worship to God, and God is without respect of persons, for
whosoever fears him and works righteousness, is accepted of him, and he will
remember all those things that is done against those harmless people, and will
clear their cause, and their oppressors shall not go free; for they are written
where they can never be blotted out by the power and cunning sleights of men;
and it grieves many good men's hearts, that ever such unreasonable men should
bear the name of Christians, that work such wicked works for ungodly gain, and
use the Kings name for a cover: wickedly did thou work, and evil will be the
end of it, if thou look not to it in time, the Lords decree is gone out against
injustice and ungodly deeds that is done against his People, that he has
promised to preserve, and deliver out of all their troubles, though they suffer
for the trial of their Faith, therefore Repent for thou must come to Judgment
and an account must thou give, and how can thou appear before the Lord in
those things, that makes thee shame before men, the world cries out of thee and
says it will never be forgotten, it deserves to be posted up in the Markets
and Steplehouses, when seven years is come and gone, the Lord abhors thy
doings, it stinks in his Nostrils, but the poor innocent sufferers is a sweet
smell in his sight, this is in love to thy Soul, that thou may remember thy
evil deeds done and past, that thou may learn Repentance in due time, before
it be too late, for the Lord wills not the death of a Sinner, but rather that
he would turn from his wickedness and live; Thy friend and lover of thy Soul,
Willam Wilson.

Written in the 9th Month 1664. with my own hand.
A Letter to John Ambrose Priest of Gaissiner in the County of Westmoreland.
JO. Ambrose will thou remember thy Prisoner, that thou have in Prison for the
Lords cause, and not for any due debt I owe thee, for if thou were a Minister
of Christ thou would ask me none, and as thou art not a Minister of Christ I
owe thee none, therefore let me forth of Prison, that I may go at liberty and
do my service, as its required at my hand, or else let it fall on thy own neck,
and then it will be to heavy for the to bear, yea, and all that will take thy
part. This I write unto thee, that I may let thee know that thou have the Lords
Servant in thy hand, (and will not let me go,) for not paying thee Wages that
does me no service nor work, but the first work thou does to me is sending me
to Prison, a work we never read of in all the Scriptures, that all the men of
God that ever we read on did cast men into Prison for their Bellys, but if thou will not let me out do as thou will, and let the Lord do as he will, for I am
well content; but I must remember thee of the evil work which thou has done, in
casting me into Prison from my Wife and Childred, but the Lord will Plead my
cause and set me at liberty; when thou and all unrighteousness shall be made
fast for ever, therefore remember what I have told thee, and do good while thou
may, for thy time will spend and thy Repentance prove too late, let me not lie
here while thou is feeding and feasting thy self, but remember the Widow and
Fatherless, as it were Fatherless Children thou have made by casting me into
Prison from them, and will not let them have their right the Lord allows them,
this must stand upon thy head thou unrighteous man, if thou will not let me go
as the Lord requires it of thee, for he has more for me to do then thou knows
on, therefore say not but thou art warned from the Lord before thy evil day
come upon thee, which will overtake thee as a Theif in the Night, and come upon
thee as an armed man, when there is none to deliver thee; so send thy Letter to
fetch me forth if thou will, if thou will not, do even as thou will, So I leave
thee,

William Wilson.

JO. Amborse I am here in Prison upon thy account for about six pence or seven
pence by the year, which I should never have refused to pay to thee if I were
convinced that thou were one of Christ's Ministers, but as I am persuaded that
thou art not, I rather choose to suffer for the non payment of it, then to pay
it contrary to that of God in mine own Conscience; thou had better have taken a
Cow or a Horse form my Wife and Childred, then have cast me into Prison from
them, the Lord will hear their cry of Oppression, more for want of me, then for
the want of either Cow or Horse, and I would wish thee for the good of thy own
Soul to let me out again, that I may work for my Living, and it will be more
honor to thee among men, and less condemnation before the Lord, if thou have
any respect either to old or young, Wife or Children, hear their cry for want
of me their Father, which if thou will not, I doubt not but the Lord will hear
their cry, and deliver when thou can not resist, and in the undaunted Spirit
of God I can rest and wait with much patience, who am thy friend and lover,
though I have a little tasted of thy Envy, yet I desire the welfare of thy
Soul, if possible the Lord may grant it.

Kendal the 29th of the 9th Month, 1672. William Wilson.

Here follows two short Letters to John Kirby, in the behalf of two friends
imprisoned by him for Tyths.
JO. Kirby I can do no less then let thee know that we remember these two
friends of ours, which thou ungodlyly have cast into Prison for non payment of
Tyths, and not only we the friends of the Lord, but even the Lord himself does
remember them, with many more of his dear Children, who suffers for the same
Holy Testimony, for whose sakes the Lord of Glory will plead with their
Adversarys by Fire and Sword, the Lord has spoken it by me, and that thou is
one of them that the Lord will plead with for the sakes of his Servants George
Benson and Richard Walker, their wives and little Children who is daily
mourning for the loss of their natural fathers, whom the Lord of life and Glory
is as Subject to hear as they are to mourn, and have said; Ah, ah, I will ease
me of mine Adversarys I will be avenged of mine oppressors, I will be known
that I am the Lord notwithstanding my Enemies who promise themselves ease and
peace when they have done the Devils work by casting into Prison, as it is said
the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison, but the Lord remembers these
things and will not forget his Servants whom he has chosen to place his name
among, who stands faithful unto him them will he deliver one way or other, we
need not look how the Lord knows what way makes most for his Glory, as I
remember the death of Oliver Atherton that sweet Martyr for the Lord in bearing
the same Testimony who the same night before he dyed, sang praises to the Lord
in a most heavenly manner as many Witnesses can testify, because he suffered
this lingering Marterdom for the Lord of Glory who ended the tenth, and
redeemed him out of the ninth, as it is written in the declaration of his death
that was set upon his Corpse, as he was carried home to his family to be buried,
as the Countess of Darby could witness who was his great Aversary and
Prosecuter into Prison, who dyed her self about six weeks after and then all
the rest were released as by the providence of the Lord whom they suffered for:
And then they who we made as Widows and fatherless, for a time were eased of
their sufferings, as these who are now as poor Widows and fatherless Children
may die in due Season (as the Lord sees good) whom thou have made through thy
Jewish custom of taking tenths, though in that day it was lawful for the Jews
yet I never read in Scriptures that they sued at Law for them as thou do,
nor received them for that end as thou do, nor made Widows nor fatherless
Children as thou do nor laid men in Prison for them as thou does; nor when
one Law would not serve went to another as thou have done, nor never gave
Goalers strict charge over them as some of you have done, but the Lord will
revenge for these things, to whom we leave it for I will repay it says the
Lord and this was I moved to write by the God of my life unto thee or whom it
may concern in the behalf of my brethren and their wives and little Children,
who cannot do as much for themselves, that thou may consider their cases, who
suffers for the Lord and dare not pay Tyths for pleasing man, and thereby
offend God, who has brought them to make a good Confession of his name before
men, and is not ashamed of their Christian duty to God, who has redeemed them
out of the ninths, and left them Witnesses against the tenths for his names
sake, Glory to the Lord for ever.

VV. W.

A short Letter to the Priests and their hearers.
FRiends Christ Jesus who said he is the way of truth and the life, John 1.
says also, he is Light of the world and whosoever believes in him shall not
abide in darkeness but shall have the Light of life, John 8.12. So truly
friends this is the Light of Christ Jesus which shows you sin, and what is
evil in you, and this is that which is not of the world neither can the world
receive it; for the whole world lies in wickedness, but this of God to which
we speak does never consent unto wickedness, but reproves all manner of evil
whatsoever, and shows you that you should not wrong one another but do to all
men as ye would they should do to you, friends this is the way of truth, and to
speak the truth one to another, this will stand in the Light, which is the
truth, and truly if you love God you will love the Light, for God is Light, and
of Purer Eyes then to behold iniquity, and a measure of the Spirit is given to
every one of you by manifestation, to profit withal so every one search
honestly your own hearts, and see how you have profited with it, for truly an
acount must you give of your deeds done (in) your bodies whether they be good
or evil; now all evil is manifest to be of the Devil as lying, swearing, theft,
drunkenness, desembling, deceiving, with the rest of all ungodly actions,
therefore repent and forsake your sins and return from the evil of your doings,
for the Lord wills not the death of a sinner, but rather that you would return
from your wickedness and live to serve him alone in that which is holy and just
and good, for to live in sin, and lusts of uncleaness, is death and
destruction, and dear people strive to enter in at the staite gate which
leads to life, and few there be that find it, but wide is the way and broad
is the gate that leads to destruction, and many there be that find it; so I
dearly exhort you all to read your conditions honestly and see how you stand
justified in the Light, of the Son of God, and your time all to prize and turn
to the Light, while you have the Light reproving you for sin in Secret when as
no mortal Eye does behold, and by believing and obeying it: it will lead you
out of darkness and this is the true Teacher and near unto every one of you all
and cannot be removed into a corner but is present with us and you at all
times, and in all places, and sees the very thoughts and intents of the heart,
and no other way is to the Father but by the Son who is the true Light that
lights every man that comes into the world and this is in love to all your
Souls, let him that reads understand, and you that teaches others, whether
you are taught your selves of him, who is the true teacher Christ Jesus.
Secondly, and whether they that are taught of him, are taught to settle
themselves at one certain place for so much a year, as can agreed betwixt
partys. Thirdly, whether they that be so are not of that sort that Esaiah
says, seeks their gain from their Quarter, and the hireling that Christ says
flies. Fourthly, whether they be not of that sort that stands praying in the
Sinagogue, has upermost places in the Assemblys, and is called of men Master.
Fifthly, whether they have not men's Persons in admiration because of advantage,
and reverenceth, honor one of anothor and calls men Masters. Sixly, whether
these be not of the same generation that Jermiah says, steal the words from
their neightbour. and says, the Lord says, when the Lord has not spoken to
them Sevenly, whether these be not in the way of Canan, envy and Balaum seeing
after gifts and rewards.

W. W.

Letter from Scotland to friends about Kendal in Westmoreland.
DEAR friends in and about Kendal these may signify to you all who is desirous
to hear of me that I am well blessed be the Lord for the same, and my heart
affcted with the deaar love of God unto you my true friends, with whom I have
fellowship in the heavenly Union and Comfortable Spirit of our eternal God, who
is present with us at all times and places, who cannot be separated from his
own, from his own life in his people, who has chosen him for their way, and
for their life, and cannot live without him who is life, the Lord of hosts is
his name; he is my life and my daily food, my Soul satisfier, and the refresher
of my bowels and inward part, where the world knows me not, and therefore they
Judge me like unto themselves: But my friends with you whom God has called and
chosen, to place his name among is my blessed fellowship and communion in the
Light of his heavenly Son Christ Jesus who has made choice of us without
respect of Persons; O my dear (...) may all be continued in faithfulness and
rightness of heart, unto him in fear, to walk while we have one day to spend;
my friends feal Gods to love you as at the first, and yours to him as at the
beginning and so shall the truth never become as an old thing nor you in the
least measure dye to it, my dear friends its far from me to stand up to teach
or instruct any of you but as the Lord has freely made me pertaker and sharer
with you of his devine heavenly love, I cannot but in the remembrance of the
same return you an answer of the continuance of his love to my Soul, that you
thereby may be remembered of the same, that we may feel one another in the
everlasting love that can never decay, nor never be forgetten by them that
loves God and the blessed and pure appearance of his Son Christ Jesus the Light
of the world, my friends since I parted with you I have been in the furthest
part of all Scotland, as to the Maineland, and have had good service there for
the Lord, for people, was very willing to hear the truth and inclined in words
very much, but you know the old agents that was ever ready to stir up help and
Instruments against the true Light the now shines (to wit the Priests) of this
generation but all will fail them, its God must be Gloryfied, the Priests
worship will come to an end, they have had worship enough, its God must now be
worshipped, he will not give his Glory to another, and likewise in the Isle of
Stormy where a door was open for us, and our Testimony received with much
gladness, and we kindly entertained for a little space while we had freedom;
and so returned and leaves the work to God; and we were also in the Isles of
Ortners in the Town of Kirkway where there is a very like people in the Lords
time but Bishops and Priests have Lordly power over poor people, and keeps them
much in Bondage, but they have a very great sight into the ways of all sorts of
professions, and the true Light discovers them all: And so my dear friends who
have made full proof of the Light of the Lord Jesus Christ in you own hearts:
you it is that can give a Testimony of the same for while man be not come into
full obediance of the Light, he never knows the true ground nor benefit of the
same, and so with my dear love to you all as if I named you all I take leave
and rests your friend in the Lord according to my measure.

William Wilson.

FRiends I could well have found to have written to you ear this but being so
far distant, I could not see how it could be safely conveyed, neither was I
very free till I saw something of my return, which is now pretty large for we
are at this present, come within about fourteen or fifteen miles of Aberdeen,
and so as God permits after visiting friends in my way I hope to the Lord to
see you with comfort ere long; be sure to let my wife and friends of Haukshead
Meeting here from you, or else send them these lines on a Second day with my
love to them all.

From Auworthy the fifth day of the seventh Month, 1673. William Wilson.

YOU that usurp Authority over poor people, and bears rule by your means, the
day of the Lord hasten upon you which will strip you naked and bare, and reward
you according to your works, and then where will your Authority be you Rulers
and Magistrates who Rules not according to the just Law of God, but according
to your own wills, the Lord will justly recompense his wrath and vengence upon
your unrighteousness, you corupt members and fruitless trees which plead for
sin and imperfection, and here you uphold the Devils Kingdom who raigns in sin,
and here you are found Enemies to God and his righteousness, and I am a witness
for the living God, against you all who acts contrary to the just Law of God,
and bears Testimony to his name, who is the Author and finisher of my faith,
and perfects his own work and cleanses from all sin by his blood, all that walk
in the Light, as he is in the Light; but you who walk in darkness has not this
hope neither that faith which purifies the heart, but are going on in the broad
way, professing God and Christ with your mouth, Prosecutes the life and power,
as did the same generation in all ages past; halling, beating, scoffing,
scorning, and shuting into Prison them that did confess his name, and declared
against all deceit operly, against all sin and evil as they were moved, but
the Lord will be avenged for these things therefore have to Repentance and
amend your lives, for the Kingdom of God is at hand.

William Wilson.

ALL people that desires to serve the living God in newness of life must of
necessity turn your minds into the Light of his Son Christ Jesus, in your own
hearts, for that is he that gives the true knowledge of God whom to know is
life eternal, and this is he whom God has sent into the world to be a Light to
lighten all people, that through him they might believe and be saved for he is
the Savior of his people from their sins, so people whatsoever makes manifest
sin is Light and whatsoever is reprovable is reproved with the light, for the
light proves the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, and this is
he that sets up true Judgment in the heart and gives, thee to descern between
the good and the evil, and lets the sea the thoughts of thy heart in which thou
do behold thy State how thou stands approved unto God, and this is near thee
and will never deceive thee, and as thou finds thy obediance unto God, and
walking in the Light of his Son, which never consents to the evil of thy
doings, so shall thou find Gods power and Spirit beating witness, with thy
Spirit, that thou art a Son of God guided by the Spirit of God, and cannot
fulfill the lusts of the Flesh and this must every one come to witness, whoever
comes to witness the Lord Jesus Christ to be their Savior, who is the Savior
of his people from their sins, for while man and woman lives in their sin they
are dead while they leive, and all dutys, performances and prayers, to and
professions of God and Christ is no more then if they cut off a dogs neck or
offered up Swins blood, for the works of man are a vain thing, while he knows
not the works of the Devil destroyed in him: that he may know God to work all
his works in him, and through him, to his own praise and Glory for ever: and
the heart of man, can never be upright unto God, while in the old nature with
old Adam in the fall which brought death upon all men; and in that state man
cannot stand up for the Lord as a living witness against sin, and wickedness,
and all unrighteousness of men, because he remains in death: for all his duties
and performances in that nature, is without God and without Christ, in the
world, and man in the Flesh cannot please God so people as I have said, you
that loves and desires to serve the true and living God must come to the Light
of his Son in your hearts, and be willing to be taught of him, who tells you
plainly you should not lie, nor swear an oath, nor do to any but as you your
selves would be done by, and hear you may know a learning of Christ, the good
Teacher and Bishop of your Souls, and this is in love to you all who desires
singly after God, for none else can receive it.

given forth in Scotland by R. R. and, William Wilson.

A Letter sent to Justice Willam Kirby from Lancaster Gaol, 1663.
WIllam Kirby the whole cause of my being imprisoned is laid upon thee, for thy
Cozen Fleming said it was because he was informed that I was as a traveller,
which I heard thee say with my own Ears and made answer in the open Sessions,
and if this be the cause as I am informed, its shamful that I should be
imprisoned for traveling the Lords business, six or seven veirs since which
was when I saw thee in Hambrough, it would but be a shame to thee that I should
publish this abroad concerning thee, that I should be cast into Prison for this
which was past six or seven years since being change of government, since and
an act of Indulgence, since an Act of Grace, if it had been a Transgression in
those days, thou ought not to punish me for it now, I believe no Laws in the
Land will bear thee out to do it, for I believe your act is for them that
departs from their house or habitation and meets together to the terrisying of
the Kings Subjects which I should be loath to do, being the Kings friend as was
manifested in the year forty eight, both by my continuance with the longest in
his service, here and suffering imprisonment and the loss of all that I had and
more, as I can make it appear by my neighbors after I got home, and there was
none of the Kings friends that then took any care of me, then I might have been
starved for them then, as I am Prisoner by them now; and I have as good reason
to have this in my mind now by which I had like to have lost my life, and lost
all I had for obediance to the King: as thou to have my travel for the Lord
into Hambrough in thy mind, where my brother and I was used like dogs,
sometimes by the dogs nature in many of our English men, which we found
therein, pride and haughtyness which the Lord will abase and bring to naught
when we shall be exalted for our abediance unto God, and testifying of his
eternal truth which shall never dye, and of which we shall never be ashamed
when ungodly sinners and wicked men shall be consounded and brought to naught,
therefore consider if envy have rested in thy mind to do we a mischief ever
since that time, it is a wicked deed of thee, and thou had need to amend it and
shortly to; least the Lord should cut thee off before the time and then it
would be too late to remember this my friend; And I brought a good message
into the City of Hambrought and that unto you that did understand my Language
but you did receive our message but badly, and entreated the Lords Servants
with many dangers, as we daily found among you in the streets, and in your
English Church, as my body found by your unreasonable blows, and thrusting by
you English men, the like was never received among the Dutch by us, but our God
delivered us then as he will do now to our great comfort, and our eternal
Peace, in that we were found faithful in his work, and did never shrink to any
one of you, whom we found out of the way of God, in wildness, wickedness,
lightness and vanity, lustfulness, pleasure and pride of life, which things we
boldly bare our Testimonys against in the Faith, Fear and Power of the Eternal
God of Heaven and Earth, which did preserve us; and will preserve us, as we in
his Faith abide, for whose Faith and Testimony I suffer in Prison now in
Lancaster Castle, without any just cause or breach of any Law, that should have
exposed me so imprisonment, but only thy Imformation to Justice Fleming of my
traveling, as it is to me related, therefore the cause of my writing is, that
thou may take care and oversight of my Wife and Children, which thou have
caused to be left desolate, by staying me in Prison from them, and when Justice
Fleming was willing that I should have a little Liberty from the Jailer, and
would join with the in any thing thou did, as his Brother Roger wrote unto
thee, then thou did write that the Jailer might let me have some liberty, but
it most be upon his own account, for thou would not meddle in the thing which
rather caused my streightning then otherways; and also Thomas Watters of
Bootle, whose time might ill be taken up in lying here, his Wife being near
down lying, and having little help about her, a little liberty at this time
might do him much good, so consider and let not the ery of innocent Children
fall upon thy head, least thou come to be dealt with as thou deal'st with us,
in keeping us them from helping of them in their time of need, and we fear thou
will be but a bad friend to them in need, therefore let one line or two be
under thy hand to the Jailer (if thou would have us do good to our Familys) as
some others have done before thee, and then it may be well accepted of, so to
that of God I leave thee, which never wrought evil nor never will work evil,
thy Friend and a Traveller for the Lord and his Truth, Will. Wilson a sufferer
also for the same, its not this slip out of thy mind; but it was even a shame
thou should send so many of thy hoest Neighbors to Prison, like Vagabonds from
Constable to Constable, as not caring for us, but sent us away to Prison, where
I believe it caused the death of two of us, and the third was very near the
point of death, if he yet recover, and thou would not come to see us, till thou
came to work wickedness against us, as many hundreds can witness for us, by
Fining of some, and partially singling me out, and put the Oath to me, which
has not sworn this many years, nor never shall I fully believe in my heart,
neither for nor against any man, for I have learned Christ and am a Christian,
and cannot swear at all, though thou have wickedly separated me from my Wife
and Children, which I maintained well with my labor, and kept them from
charge; so now see thou to that, and inquire of them how they can live without
me and my maintenance, and let thy Warrant be as strong for the relieving of
them, in manner as I did, as it was for carrying me to Prison, and in giving
the Jailer charge over me in the Sessions for not swearing, and so break
Christ's commends, which thing is a shame to thee, when it will be a honor unto
me, likewise a poor man of Bootle for coming over to Swarthmore Meeting, thou
proffered him the Oath, and caused him to stay in Prison from his Wife and
Children, which is an ungodly deed of thee and the rest that did it: So
consider this, and either let us go to live at home, or take care for our Wives
and Children, seeing thou have power to cast us into Prison, surely thou have
power to look to our Charge we have lest behind us, and think not that it is
far to look to Bootle, for there is need for the man I know,

Thy friend Willam Wilson

A Letter to William Wilson Priest of Windermer in the County of Westmoreland.
IN the weighty consideration of the service God has laid on his Servants to
make his name known in the Earth, throughout the whole world, and to declare
his love and kindness unto the Sons and Daughters of men who are in the fallen
State and does not know the work of God in the new Creation Regeneration and
Restoration whereby man is restored up to God again, out of the fallen State in
which all men have had a place, and being from God in the fall, and without God
in sin and iniquity which has made the great separation, and being at a
distant from the living God.

Therefore with pity unto thy Soul Willam Wilson, who is now placed in
VVindermer to Preach unto people there do I speak, and also desire thee to
beware and take heed what thou do against the Lord and his people, whom he
has raised up by his Power and they must bear Testimony to his Holy Name,
which is but little known, and much less regarded by a profane people, whose
Lives and Conversations is not conversant with the great God of Heaven and
Earth, as they ought to be, neither has their being with him as they should
therefore was a necessity upon us to declare his blessed Truth unto Gods
witness in man, that they might come to hear and understand the things that
belong to their everlasting peace, to their mortal Souls, and this is all (and
ever was all) the end we have or ever had, in meeting; So were the place of
your worship, that we whom God has revealed his Son in, may not smother him,
neither strangle him the womb, but must let his mouth be open, who has right
to speak, who speaks from Heaven, whose voice we have heard, and shape we have
seen, and cannot but declare his love to all men on the face of the whole
Earth, that they may have, and see, and understand, and not be Ignorant of the
things of God, but have the knowledge of him whom to know is life, and this is
the Substance in short of what has lain upon us this many years, even unto the
Souls of people, that we may be clear of their blood, and our God in his
Judging whether they will hear or forbear, this is our message and Service, we
ow to our God, and duty unto his people, as all people are his by Creation, and
of right his Son should Reign in them; So we leave the work unto the Lord, who
can work and none can hinder who has the hearts of people in his disposing,
and can turn them as he pleases and this is he whom we own, and in whose name
we trust, whatever we suffer for the same, we are freely given up as into the
hands of a faithful Creator, who is God over all blessed of ever and for
evermore; So now I say unto thee, William Wilson who is called of men Master
and born up by an outward power without, and has them to back and uphold thee,
and is yet dark and ignorant of the power of God within, which is the higher
power, even God to dwell in us, and walk in us according to his promise of old,
which is made good to us in our age, and we must confess Christ before men, who
is Gods righteousness and Gods great power and Salvation unto lost man, and as
I said before, he must not be smothered in the Womb, but must have his liberty
to speak in his people.

And if thou take this ill, out and call it a provocation or disturbance, and
so do evil and entreat his people evil, for their work and Service, the Lord
will reward the there after. Therefore this is the pity was in my heart at the
moving to write this unto thee, that as thou art provoked to wrath and fury, as
was plainly seen in thee, who would not let God Messengers declare their
message, and deliver unto people what God had to say by them, who may be might
never have had the like upon them there again, but caused them abusively to be
halled out of our peaceable Meeting; So I say take heed believes that thou do
not provoke the Lord our God to Anger and sore displeasure against thee, even
for so doing, for the Lord will take notice of those things, and reward every
man according to his works be they good or be they evil, therefore I say let
things alone and do not provoke the Lord to Anger, by thy casting them to
suffer, but rather seek to turn away his wrath, while it is kindled but a
little, and this is part of what arose in my mind unto thee, to aquaint thee
with, and inform thee of, and advise thee to, whether thou will hear or
forbear, it is in pity to thy Soul, and for the preventing of further trouble
thereof, which will not be easily taken away if thou persist herein, and do
evil to those people; So say not afterward that thou was not warned, for in
plain words from the mouth of thy friend, thou art warned, as well as the
people, by one whose life is given up unto God in my measure, to serve the
living God in my day, nor doubting nor fearing what man can do unto me, for my
heavenly Testimony that God has given me to bear in this blessed day of his
love, which is offered unto all mankind upon the face of the whole Earth, so
the woe and trouble will be unto them that seeks to stop the Current of his love
from running freely, as from Vessel to Vessel, that as we have freely received,
we may freely give, so this is all at present as a gentle warning in love unto
thee, to prevent the danger that may come by doing of evil to thy Neighbors,
which thou ought to love, as thy self, or else thou art guilty of the breach of
Gods Commandment, and does the things thou ought not to do therefore I say
again, be warned who is a lover of thy Immortal Soul, whose name is known unto
the world to be.

William Wilson of Longdalechappellsteel.


