THE LOYAL Martyrology, OR Brief Catalogues and Characters of the most Eminent
Persons who Suffered for their Conscience during the late times of Rebellion,
either by Death, Imprisonment, Banishment, or Sequestration; Together with
those who were Slain in the Kings Service.

AS ALSO, Dregs of Treachery: With the Catalogue and Characters of those
Regicides who Sat as Judges on our late Dread Sovereign of ever Blessed Memory;
with others of that Gang, most Eminent for Villainy.

For encouragement to Virtue, and determent from Vice.

By William Winstanley.

Rebellion is as the Sin of Witchcraft.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb, for Edward Thomas at the Adam and Eve in
Little Britain, 1665.

ON THE FRONTISPIECE.
O What a glorious sight do I behold,
Apples of Silver Pictured thus in Gold;
Immortal Hero's, who of life bereaven,
Are now become bright fixed Stars of Heaven.
The first of all this Glorious Company
King 1 Charles presents himself unto your eye,
Like Phoebus glistering in the Morning tide,
Surrounded with Brave Hero's on each side.
Under him 2 Strafford that Great Pro-toto-Martyr,
On each side Loyal 3 Derby, Gallant Arthur
Lord 4 Capell, three such Peers we may conclude
For to be Stars of the first Magnitude.
Brave 5 Lucas, and Stout 6 Lisle, whose Gallant Worth
Deserves a Golden Pen to set them forth;
Undaunted 7 Morris, 8 Penruddock, and 9 Grove,
Stout 10 Andrews, who deserved all Peoples love,
Brave 11 Gerard, 12 Benbow, 13 Burleigh, 14 Pitcher, 15 Poyer
Who for their Country did their best devoyer;
16 Fetherstonhaugh, 17 Hamilton, 18 Holland's Earl,
19 Blackburn, 20 Benson, 21 Bushel, each a Pearl
Of Valourous Loyalty; 22 Ashton well skilled in Wars,
Kind 32 Slingsby, 24 Symkins, all stout Sons of Mars;
Who for King Charles his Cause so strongly stood,
And sealed their Love to it with their dearest blood.
Next view great 25 Laud, whose worth does strike me dumb,
The Reverend 26 Hewyt, England's Chrysostom;
Grave 27 Beaumont, and Religious 28 Vowel, who
With 29 Love for Loyalty their Lives forgo.
Learned 30 Levens Glory of his Family,
Well skilled in Law, practiced in Loyalty.
Next view that unmatchless Hero, Gallant 31 Hide,
32 Yeomans and 33 Bowcher, who at Bristol died;
34 Tomkins and 35 Challoner of Active Spirits,
36 Kniveton, 37 Gibbons, 38 Kensy, men whose merits*
With those foregoing Hero's raised them High,
Whilst Traitors live Infam'd in Hystory.
THE LOYAL MARTYROLOGY
Printed for Edward Thomas 1665.



To the Honorable Sir John Robinson, Knight and Baronet; His Majesty's
Lieutenant of the Tower of LONDON.
SIR,
TWo Things have Emboldened me to Dedicate this Book unto You; The First is
your known Loyalty, and Integrity to the Royal Cause, which has made Your Name
as Conspicuous as the Sun in the Firmament in a serene day, not only since the
Happy Restoration of his Sacred Majesty, but in those Times of Rebellion when
Loyalty was accounted a Crime of the Highest Nature, which as it made you one
of Those Loyal Confessors, that by your Sufferings have indeared your Memory to
all Posterity; so no doubt, had not that Gangreen of Rebellion been the sooner
cut off, your Eminent Parts would by those bloody Regicides, who were Enemies
to Worth and Loyalty, have brought you into the Number of These Royal Martyrs
who laid down their Lives in Defense of Gods Laws, and his Annointed's Cause,
of both which you were so Gallant an Assertor. The Second is the Relation you
had to that Reverend Martyr, Archbishop Laud, who laid down his Life in
Defense of the Church, and is now involved in that Glorious Company who
Suffered for the Testimony of a Good Conscience, of whose Worth and Abilities
to speak, were to show the light of the Sun by a candle; Daigne Sir, to Accept
this Mite of Acknowledgement of Your Worth, from him who Subscribes himself,

Your Most Humbly Devoted Servant, William Winstanley.

THE PREFACE TO THE Reader.
WHat sad Effects the Miseries and Calamities of a Civil War does produce, this
Nation cannot but be sensible of, and our late Times do sufficiently evidence;
How all things were turned topsie turvy, Religion subverted by Rebellion, Truth
trodden down by Treason, the Gown giving place to the Corslet, and the Law
overawed by the Sword. How under pretense of a Reformation, all things were
turned into Confusion; The Law (which should be the Rule and Direction whereby
to walk) made useless, or at least like unto a Spiders Webb through which those
Rebellious Bug-bears could with ease break out, but the poor Caveliers were
ensnared in the same. How under a pretense of the breach of our Fundamental
Laws, they Murdered diverse Gallant Persons, when they themselves committed the
greatest breaches on it, by riding over the Royal Power of the King, putting
down the Bishops, and the Book of Common Prayer, Usurping the Militia,
Counterfeiting the great Seal, Seizing on the Kings Forts, Ports, Shipping,
Castles, and all his Revenue; Raising Rumors, putting out Declarations, and
giving out words to alienate the Peoples Affections from their Sovereign;
Sessing Soldiers upon the People of the Kingdom without their Consent; making
Judges, Justices, and Sheriffs contrary to the Kings mind, breaking all Law
themselves, and Governing the Land by Newfound Ordinances of their own,
imposing several Taxes on the People by ways never before known in this
Kingdom; namely Contributions, Sequestrations, Meal-Money, Sale of Plundered
Goods, Loans, Collections upon their Fast-Dayes; new Imposition upon
Merchandises, Guards maintained at the charge of Private Men, Compositions,
Sale of Bishops Lands, with diverse other strange Impositions, all wracked from
the People to maintain them in their Rebellious Pride; But had they stayed
here, their crimes had been the more inexcusable, but they proceeded to the
Murder of their King, and that under a pretense of Justice, a Crime so great,
that History cannot show a parallel, that people professing themselves
Christians, Protestants, yea the most Reformed of all the Protestants, should
in the face of the whole World, in the Metropolis of the Kingdom, under a
formal show of Justice, Condemn the most Pious, Prudent and Gracious Prince
then living in the whole World, contrary to the Word of God, the Laws of the
Land, the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiancy, it was a matter of Wonder and
Astonishment, not only to all Good and Godly Christians, but even to the very
Turks and Pagans.

Now notwithstanding their specious pretenses of Religion and Liberty, who can
be so blind as not plainly to see that the main drift of their pretenses was
only to Tyrannize over the People, and to wallow in all manner of Pleasure and
Epicurisme; for how notoriously debauched were some of the Chief of those Grand
Reformers; such as Gregory Clement, Henry Martin, Hugh Peter's, etc. Besides
their Covetousness, which was so unmeasurably great, that some Wise Men have
wondered the Kingdom could be able to pay so much Money as has been Collected
from them in a year, and yet for all those immeasurable Taxes, the Soldiers,
and Navy unpaid, that money going toward the Raising of their Poor Kindred,
many of themselves, (if not the greatest part) before those Times, of so little
Account and Esteem, that they could not Write Gentleman.

Then that their Pride and Ambition was as great as their Covetousness, is
easy to be discerned; for after that Horrid Murder of his Sacred Majesty, How
did those Cocks of the Game peck at one another? Cromwell's Ambition never
stinting until such time he had attained the end of his Desires, Resolving to
sit in the Seat of Sovereignty, although he waded to the same in Blood and
Perjury; and thereupon turned out his Rebellious Masters, which he might the
more easily do, their Horrid Actions having made them so notoriously odious to
all sorts of People, who rejoiced at their Downfall.

Now though Cromwell were so Bloody a Tyrant, that People might have prayed for
his Life, with the same intent as the Sicilian Old Woman did for the Life of
Dionisius, For fear that the Devil should come after, for no other could
parallel him; Yet he being dead, we find other's Pride and Ambition as high as
his, such striving amongst themselves to get into the Seat of Sovereignty,
until they thrust one another off of the Cushion, and by their Divisions made
a ready way (next to the Providence of Almighty God) for the Restoration of
his Sacred Majesty: So that we see what ever was pretended of Religion,
Liberty, and such like fine Devices, the main End of their Designs, was, Pride,
Envy, Covetousness and Ambition.

Against those Wicked Persons and Practices, how many Gallant Men Opposed
Themselves both in their Lives and Estates? The Chief of whom we have given you
an Account of in this Book, which we have Divided into Three Centuries, or
Catalogues; The First of which are those Loyal Martyrs, who suffered under a
Formal kind of Justice, in which (as in the rest) we have observed the Order of
Time, and not of Dignity; Some perhaps may Object against Two or Three Persons
therein mentioned; such as Duke Hamilton, Master Love, etc. as having the
Presbyterian Interest inter-woven with the Royal Account, but certainly the
main end of their Designs was Loyalty, as they manifested at the time of their
deaths; and therefore may deservedly challenge a place in that Catalogue. In
the Second Place, You have an Account of the most Eminent Commanders and
Officers who were Slain in the Kings Service, Sealing their Love to that Cause
with their dearest Bloods, and Manfully Fighting, died in the Bed of Honor; If
we have over-slipped any of Extraordinary Eminency (for it is impossible to
mention every one) We desire to be better Informed by their Friends or
Acquaintance, and upon a Second Edition, we shall endeavor to do them Right
according to their Deserts. In the Third Rank, We have placed the Royal
Confessors, such as Suffered in the Kings Cause by Imprisonment, Sequestration,
Banishment, etc. Of which We have mentioned but only some few of the most
Eminent, the Total Arising to such a Vast Number as would Pose Arithmetic to
reckon them up.

To These Worthies We have in the Second Place Adjoined a Catalogue of the
Unworthies, or Brief Characters of the most Notorious Regicides, and Others of
that Gang, who were the Chief Authors and Abetters of all Those Miseries and
Calamities, which so long a Time Afflicted this Nation, that as the One may be
an Encouragement to Virtue and Loyalty, so the Other may Deter Men from Vice
and Villainy; This is the sum of our Design, which if it find Kind Acceptance
it shall Encourage me to a further Enlargement thereof; If otherwise, yet this
shall be my Comfort, that I have Discharged my Duty, and shown my Self to be,

A True Lover of His King and Country, W.W.

The Names of the Martyrs according as they are Figured in the Frontispiece;
with the Page wherein to find their several Histories.
I. King Charles Page 16 II. E. of Strafford Page 1 III. E. of Derby Page 33
IV. Lord Capel Page 24 V. Sir Charles Lucas Page 13 VI. Sir George Lisle Page
14 VII. Col. Morris Page 27 VIII. Col. Penruddock Page 36 IX. Col. Grove Page
ibid X. Col. Eus. Andrews Page 29 XI. Col* Gerard Page 34 XII. Col. Benbow Page
ibid XIII. Cap. Burleigh Page 12 XIV. Col. Pitcher Page 14 XV. Col. Poyer Page
15 XVI. Sir T. Fetherstonh. Page 34 XVII. D. Hamilton Page 21 XVIII. E. of
Holland Page 23 XIX. Cor. Blackburn Page 28 XX. Mr. Benson Page 30 XXI. Cap.
Bushel Page 32 XXII. Col. Ashton Page 40 XXIII. Sir Hen. Slingsby Page 38 XXIV.
Cap. Symkins Page 34 XXV. Arch B. Laud Page 9 XXVI. Dr. Hewyt Page 39 XXVII.
Mr. Beaumont Page 27 XXVIII. Mr. Vowel Page 35 XXIX. Mr. Love Page 32 XXX. Dr.
Levens Page 28 XXXI. Sir Hen. Hide Page 30 XXXII. Mr. Yeomans Page 5 XXXIII.
Mr. Bowcher Page ibid XXXIV. Mr. Tomkins Page 7 XXXV. Mr. Challoner Page ibid
XXXVI. Mr. Kniveton Page 9 XXXVII. Mr. Gibbons Page 32 XXXVIII. Mr. Kensy Page
37 XXXIX. Mr. Lucas Page ibid XL. Mr. Betly Page 40 XLI. Mr. Stacy, Page 41
The Loyal Martyrologie. OR, A Brief Historical Relation, and Character of all
those Persons that were Murdered by Color of any Sentence during the late
Rebellion.
I.
THomas Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, and Lord Deputy of Ireland, a most Wise,
Prudent, and Honorable Statesman; Descended from the Illustrious Family of
the Wentworths in Yorkshire, and Educated according to the Greatness of his
Birth: He was at first a great stickler against the Prerogative, until allured
by Court-Preferment he turned Royalist, being by King Charles the First, for
his great Parts made Baron Wentworth of Raby, and employed in diverse Offices
of Trust, which he discharged with great Honor and Faithfulness; So thus his
Deserts soon mounted him from one degree of Honor to another; till at last, he
was made Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, in which Government he exceeded all that
went before him, in the Careful Management of the Affairs of that Realm,
Reclaiming the Irish from many of their Barbarous Customs, and reducing them
to the English civility, suppressing their Out-Lawes and Tories, and bringing
them to perfect, entire Obedience to the Kings Authority and Laws. He much
advanced the Protestant Religion, and settled a constant Revenue for the Clergy
of that Kingdom, and made so good a procedure in what he undertook, that had
not those Disloyal Times of Confusion fallen out, no doubt he had attained his
Ends, and settled that Kingdom in a most flourishing condition.

The Scotch War (being the Prologue to all our late Troubles) breaking out, he
was sent for out of Ireland, to Advise with the King about those Troubles,
which so unpreparedly had surprised him; To which work he Contributed his Head,
Hands and Purse, advancing by subscription Twenty Thousand Pound, as a Copy
for the rest of the Nobility to write after: In this Expedition he was made
Lieutenant General, and was very eager to Fight with the Scots; But the English
being defeated at Newborn, and Petitions succeeding for an accommodation, a
Cessation followed, and soon after that, a Parliament, which was Summoned by
the Advice of this Earl, and the Archbishop of Canterbury; where the very
first thing of Consequence that was done, was a Charge of High Treason
Exhibited against this Earl by the House of Commons, consisting of Twenty
Eight Articles, whereupon, he was Sequestered from sitting as a Peer, and soon
after committed to the Usher of the Black Rod, and so to the Tower. His Trial
quickly after ensued, which was done with great Solemnity in Westminster Hall,
the Earl of Arundal being Lord High Steward: The substance of his Articles
were, That he had Endeavored to subvert the Fundamental Laws and Governments
of England and Ireland: That he had done ill Offices betwixt the King and the
Scots, and betwixt the King and his Subjects of this Kingdom: That he had
Advised the King to bring up the Army out of the North, and overawe the
Parliament: And that he had informed his Majesty that he had an Army of Ten
Thousand Men in Ireland, ready to be Transported for the same Service: His
Accusers* were Pym, St. John's, Whitlock, Sir Walter Earls, Serjant Glyn,
Maynard, Stroud, Mr. Seldom, Hambden, etc. But the Earl defended himself so
Bravely and Learnedly, that the Lords, Conscious of his Innocence, would not
find the Bill; Wherefore the Commons seeing they could not speed that way, drew
up a Bill of Attainder, and presented it to the Lords, declaring the matter of
Fact to have been sufficiently proved, and that as to Law, he had incurred the
Censure of Treason; But the Lords adjudged this a strange way of Proceeding,
unsuitable to their own Safety, and against Common Justice; Whereupon the
Londoners came down in Tumults, stopped the Lords Coaches, menacing to post up
the Names of those who favored him under the Title of Straffordians, and with
an impetuous Cry of Justice, frighted many of the Peers to assent to the Bill;
so hard a task had his Blood-thirsty Enemies to bereave him of his Life, which
yet notwithstanding passed but by the plurality of Seven Voices against him.

But the hardest matter was to get the Kings assent, who very much declined it,
and in a set Speech, cleared the Earl from any design of Treason, or
consulting to any Arbitrary Government; But being over-perswaded by the dangers
that were represented as inevitable consequents of his refusal; but principally
being desired by the Earl himself to satisfy the Parliament, though with his
own blood; His Majesty after Advise with the Bishops, signed that Fatal Bill,
which afterward proved the Axe against his own Life.

Thus fell this Noble Earl, being one of the Chief Pillars and Basis of this
Nation, without whose Ruin the Grandees of the Faction knew it a hard matter
to Effect or Accomplish any thing; such an Absolute, Rare, Honest and Loyal
Masterpiece of Reason and Prudence, as this present Age* saw not, and well
will it be for the next, if it may compare and parallel him. He was Beheaded
May 12. 1641. being the Pro-to-Martyr of the Late Times.

II, and III.
MAster Robert Yeomans, and Master George Bowcher, two Worthy Loyal Citizens of
Bristol, of good Esteem, Plentiful Estates and known Integrity; Master Yeomans
was Sheriff of that City in the Year 1642. being but the year before his
Execrable Murder. Master George Bowcher was an Able, Pious, Loyal Gentleman,
whom his very Enemies confessed to be a Religious Man. These Two Loyal Persons,
seeing the miserable condition of those Places where the Rebels Ruled; Entered
into a Consultation with some others, how to deliver the City of Bristol into
Prince Ruperts hands; and thereupon it was resolved, that upon Monday, March 7.
1642. Prince Rupert with some Forces should draw down toward the City, whilst
they within would Seize the Courts of Guard, and open the Gates, and by Ringing
St. John's, and St. Michaels Bells, give him notice thereof; Accordingly Prince
Rupert came by Five of the Clock the same morning, expecting the Signal; but
the Confederacy being discovered, those Two Gallant Gentlemen, with some others
were apprehended; and after Eleven Weeks hard Imprisonment, brought to their
Trial at a Council of War, where by Fiennes the Governor, and others of that
Gang, they were Condemned to Dye; and soon after, notwithstanding the King, and
his Generals Mandates, and Threats of Retaliation, having with great patience
endured the Scorns, and Barbarous Insultations of the Enemy, who continually
pursued them with Threats and Revilings; they were on May 30. 1643. barbarously
murdered; Master Yeomans professing at his death, That if he had more lives,
he would sacrifice them all to his Sovereign in that way. And Master Bowcher in
his last Speech, exhorted all those who had set their hands to the Plow,
(meaning the defense of the Kings Cause) not to be terrified by their
Sufferings, and therefore to withdraw. Their bodies were afterward decently
Enterred in the same City, whose Names shall be had in everlasting remembrance,
whilst those who murdered them shall rot and perish in infamy.

IV, and V.
MAster Tomkins, and Master Chaloner, the one Clark of the Queens Council, the
other a Linnen-Draper in Cornhill, two persons of Eminent Loyalty and
Integrity, who seeing the whole Kingdom running to ruin by the Seditious
practices of the Rebels, procured a Commission from the King; the design
whereof was, that they should Seize into their Custody the Kings Children, some
Members of Parliament, the Lord Mayor, and Committee of the Militia, all the
City Outworks and Forts, the Tower of London, and all the Magazines; then to
let in the Kings Army to Surpize the City, to destroy all Opposers; and this
grounded upon refusal of paying of Taxes imposed without Authority.

This Commission was brought to London by the Lady Aubigney, Wife to that
Gallant Lord, who died of his wounds at Edgehill, and upon receipt thereof,
several Meetings and Conferences were held in order to the promoting thereof,
which was chiefly prosecuted by those two Loyal Persons, who made such progress
therein, that the business was brought into some form; but so many being
concerned in it, through the Treachery of some, it came to the Parliaments
ears; whereupon those two Gentlemen amongst others were Apprehended, and
Arraigned before a Council of War at Guild Hall, and there Sentenced to be
Hanged for this Heinous Crime of Loyalty, which accordingly was Executed near
their own doors, July 5. 1643.

VI.
MAster Daniel Kniveton, formerly a Haberdasher in Fleetstreet, afterward a
Messenger to his late Sacred Majesty, by whom he was sent to London to signify
the King's Pleasure, That the Term of Michaelmas should be prorogued; which
Message he delivered to the Judges at Westminster Hall, and for performance of
his Duty, was by those who had quite forgotten all Allegiance and Duty,
apprehended for a Spy, and contrary to the Universal Custom, and Honorable
Practice of all Nations, (which gives security, and free liberty of passage to
all such Persons) Tried before a Council of War, held at Essex House, where he
was as unjustly Condemned to be Hanged, and according to that inhumane
Sentence, barbarously Murdered by those Bloody Rebels, Novem. 27. 1643.

VII.
WIlliam Laud, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, a Pious, Learned, Orthodox
Prelate, of whom (as one observes) It would trouble Plutarch if he were alive
to find out a fit parallel with whom to match him. This Reverend Bishop was
born at Reading, extracted from an Honest and well Reputed Parentage, his
Father being a Wealthy Cloathier of that Town; from which place (having
attained to Learning answerable thereto) he was Trans-planted to St. John's
College in Oxford, where with great Credit and Estimation he passed through
all the Honorable Employments of his College, so that his Worth came to be
taken special Notice of, preferring him first to be Chaplain to the Earl of
Devon-shire, and Proctor of the University. Soon after from Bachelour of
Divinity he proceeded to Doctor, and became Chaplain to Doctor Neal Bishop of
Rochester, afterward Translated to York, who for his great Abilities preferred
him to King James; so that now having cast Anchor at Court, the Haven of Hope,
he was by that Bountiful King first made Prebend of Bugden and Westminster,
next Dean of Gloucester, and Archdeacon of Huntington, then President of his
own College, and not long after Bishop of St. David's.

King James dying, his Son King Charles took him into more especial Favor,
bestowing on him the Bishopric of Bath and Wells, made him Dean of his
Chapel, and one of his Privy Council; then Bishop of London, and Chancellor of
Oxford, and last of all, Archbishop of Canterbury.

As he grew thus High in the Kings Favor, so (as it is common with Princes
Favorites) was he high in disgust with the People; for being a Prelate who
stood stiffly for the strict observation of the Rites of the Church of England,
which then by the growing Power of Non-Conformists were every where termed
Innovations; by this means Episcopacy was by many Traduced, and diverse Libells
scattered up and down against that Sacred Function, wherein (as being most
Eminent) he was sure to bear the greatest burden, falsely reporting him
inclining to Popery, notwithstanding his firmness in the Protestant Religion,
witnessed, by that Book of his against Fisher the Jesuit, an unanswerable
Work, which like a hammer has beaten all the Romish Arguments into pieces, and
of which they will never clear themselves, brag and vapor what they please.

Yet notwithstanding this his great Learning, Prudence, Zeal, Humility, and
other Graces wherewith he was stored, though he had done nothing worthy of
Death, or Bonds, yet in the beginning of our Dissentions, when the mad fury of
blind zeal, like an impetuous torrent bore down all before it; This Reverend
Prelate was committed to the Black-Rod, and from thence to the Tower, where he
remained four years before any Charge was brought against him, afterward he
was several times brought to the Bar of the House of Commons, where
notwithstanding his Innocence and Integrity appeared transparent, yet being
parties Witnesses, and Judges too, they Voted him Guilty, and January 10. 1644.
he was wickedly Murdered on Towerhill; In whom was verified that presage of
King James, No Bishop, No King; Monarchy soon after falling in the death of
that blessed Martyr King Charles.

VIII.
ANd Captain Burleigh, a Gentleman of the Isle of Wight, who after those wicked
Votes of Non-Address, and that the King was a Prisoner in the said Island, he
Beat a Drum, intending to gather a Force sufficient to Rescue him from his
Imprisonment, but was quickly seized and suppressed by Hamond, who sent him over
to Winchester, where by a special Commission of Oyer and Terminer, he was
Arraigned and Tried, and by a pact-Jury brought in Guilty of High Treason, and
accordingly barbarously Murdered, Feb. 10. 1647.

IX, and X.
SIr Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle, those Gemini of Valor, Honor, and
exact Loyalty, who gallantly Served the King during the time of Rebellion;
being without any partiality of affection declared by those that knew them; one
of them the best for Horse-Service, and the other for the Infantry that ever
Commanded in their Quality in the Kings Armies. These two Gallant Hero's, when
there was some hopes given of his Majesty's Restitution by the Rising of
several Counties, they likewise put to their helping hand, and joined with
them, maintaining the City of Colchester for the space of Thirteen Weeks
against a Potent Enemy satiated with Victories, and supplied with fresh and
continual Recruits; having in that time eaten up most of the Horses in the
Town, together with the Dogs and Cats, and whatsoever else could afford them
Nourishment, though most reluctant to Nature; yet notwithstanding this Gallant
Opposition, with the Miseries they endured, upon the Surrender of the Town, the
Enemy out of hatred to them for their signal Valor and Loyalty inhumanely
butchered them in cold blood, August the 30. 1648.

XI.
MAjor Pitcher, a Valiant Loyal Gentleman who out of his sense of the King and
Kingdoms Misery, and a deep apprehension of the sad Consequences thereof,
Engaged in Arms for the Restitution of his Sacred Majesty, being one of those,
who with so much Valor, and Magnanimity Defended Pembroke against Cromwell,
and his Army of Janissaries for the space of three months; but no hopes of
Relief appearing, after a most gallant Defense they Rendered themselves upon
Articles, by which he was To depart the Kingdom for Three Years, and not to
Return upon pain of Death: But he well hoping there might be further occasion
of Service to his Majesty, by reason the strange Actions of the Men at
Westminster had rendered them so odious to the generality of the People; He
therefore (accounting it base to Desert his Prince when so great help
required,) stayed at London, in expectation, as I said, of some further
Service; but being betrayed by some ignominious wretches, was Apprehended, and
Condemned by a Council of War, who seldom quitted any whom they thought might
be able to do them a mischief, and according to that wicked Sentence, he was as
barbarously Murdered, being shot to death against St. Faith's door, December
29. 1648.

XII.
COlonel Poyer, who with Major General Langhorne, and Colonel Powel, took up
Arms for the King in Wales, in detestation of those bloody Votes of
Non-Addresses by the Faction at Westminster; But it pleased God not to succeed
that Enterprise, being defeated at St. Fagons by Colonel Horton, whereupon they
Retreated with the broken remains of their Army to the Town of Pembroke, which
they Fortified, and Valiantly Defended for the space of Three Months, against
Horton and Cromwell, who with a great Power was come in to their Recruit; But
wanting Necessaries, and hopeless of Relief, Valor was forced to condescend to
what Barbarity should propound, which was to Render at Mercy; the effect
whereof was, according to the Order of a Council of War, That the three
Colonels should draw Lotts for their Lives, which fell upon him, and thereupon
he was shot to death in Covent Garden.

XIII.
CHarles the I. of Blessed Memory, the most Glorious Martyr of this late Age,
the exact pattern of Piety, Patience and Prudence, who in the manner of his
Sufferings, came the nearest to our Savior of any we have read or heard of;
whose Christian Virtues and Patience in Afflictions will be had in Everlasting
Remembrance; Whose History being so exactly delivered by several Learned Pens,
and his Divine Thoughts so Heavenly set forth in His (...) and other rare
Pieces of his own Writing; we shall therefore take no further a prospect of
Him, then from that barbarous and execrable Murder, which to the horror and
astonishment of all good Men, and to the great shame of the Christian World,
was most impiously committed on him, and that in as brief a method as we can.

After that it had so pleased God for the sins of the Nation, that the Kings
Armies were all Overthrown, and He Himself a Prisoner under their merciless
hands, several Endeavors having been used for his Restoration, which also
proved fruitless, Cromwell, Ireton, and diverse others of that Antimonarchial
Faction, who resolved to Enrich themselves, though with the Ruin of the
Kingdom, and the loss of their own Souls; By a Violent, and Treasonable Force
Seized upon diverse Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament, such as they
thought had any Courage or Honesty to Vote according to their Consciences, and
neglect their wild Diabolical proposals; leaving only Fifty or Sixty
Schismatics of their own Engaged Party, such as had made a prey of the
Commonwealth to Enrich Themselves and their Faction. These Offalls of a
Parliament quickly Voted down the Kingly Office, and House of Peers, and that
the Supreme Authority was in the People, and in the House of Commons, as their
Representative, and to bring the King to Capital Punishment before a new
invented, Illegal, mixed Court (consisting of Engaged Persons) Erected for that
purpose, having Foundation neither by Prescription nor Law: These proceedings
though contrary to Law, Sense, and Religion, yet being backed by an Army, they
went on in their most wicked Design; and to show that they were as devoy'd of
Grace, as without, shame, they kept a Mock-Fast, where Hugh Peter's that
Pulpit-Buffon Acted a Sermon before them, the subject whereof was, Moses
leading the Israelites out of Egypt; which he applied to the Leaders of the
Army, covering his eyes with his hands, and laying down his head on the
Cushion, and such other antic gestures, as moved the People unto laughter, so
audaciously impudent were they as to delight in their abominable wickedness.
Soon after was that accursed High Court of Justice Erected, before which
Audacious Traitors, his Majesty was often brought, who refused to hear the King
speak of Reason, but contrary to all Law, Reason, Religion, Honesty, Oaths of
Allegiance, and Supremacy, several Votes, Declarations, Remonstrances,
Protestations, and Covenants, He was by the mouth of that Grand Murdering
Rebel, Bradshaw, Sentenced to be Beheaded, the rest of those Miscreant Traitors
by standing up, assenting to the same; and so not being admitted to reply, he
was by their Guards hurried away; the Soldiers as he passed along (in
imitation, or being set on by their Rebellious Masters, that they might not be
much behind them in Villainy) scoffing and reviling Him, casting the smoke of
their Tobacco (a thing odious to Him) in his face, and strewing the Pipes in
his way, one more insolent then the rest, spitting in his face; the Soldiers
all along as he passed, Crying out, Justice, Justice, Execution, Execution; to
whom his Majesty only said, Alas poor Souls, for a piece of Money, they would
do so for their Commanders.

From the time of that bloodly Sentence, to the time of his execrable Murder,
how barbarously the Soldiers continued their insolences to him, and how base
and brutish they were in their carriage, would almost exceed belief of a
rational man, not suffering him to rest in his Chamber, but thrusting in,
smoking their Tobacco, and disturbing him in his Privacy, abusing those that
seemed to show any respect, or even compasion to him: But through all those
Trials, and Barbarous Affronts, he passed with such a calm, and even temper,
that he let nothing fall unbeseeming his former Majesty, and Magnanimity, but
despite of their malice proved himself a Glorious Conqueror.

When that fatal day was come, which they had appointed for his Glorious
Martyrdom, he was brought from his Palace of St. James's to White Hall,
marching on foot through the Park, being Guarded by a Regiment of Foot
Soldiers, with their Colors flying and Drums beating, the Guards marching a
slow pace, he bid them go faster, saying, That he now went before them to
strive for a Heavenly Crown, with less solitude then he had often Encouraged
his Soldiers to fight for an Earthly Diadem. After he had come to the Chamber
appointed for him in White Hall, he spent that little remnant of time he had to
live in Devotion, and received the blessed Sacrament from the hands of the
Bishop of London, who was Licensed to attend on him, from which he received
great Spiritual comfort; continuing at his Devotions till about Twelve a Clock,
when he eat a bit of Bread, and drank a glass of Clarret, returning to his
Devotions again, when about an hour after, he was brought on the Scaffold,
attended by the foresaid Bishop, where with a Christian Courage and Resolution
He finished his Glorious Martyrdom, which at the falling of his Body, mounted
his Soul to Heaven, in whose bliss-full Mansions he now sings Hallelujahs for
ever.

Thus this Noble Prince (sanctified by many Afflictions) after he had escaped
Pistol, Poison, and Pestilent Air, (which means the Regicides had designed to
take him away by, during his restraint) could not escape the more venomous
tongues of Lawyers, and Petty-Foggers, Bradshaw, Cook, Dorislau, etc. We shall
conclude our Discourse of Him with this Epitaph made by a Loyal Person. Within
this Sacred Vault does lie,
The Quintessence of Majesty,
Which being set, more Glorious Shines,
The best of Kings, best of Divines;
Britains shame, and Britains glory,
Mirror of Princes, complete Story,
Of Royalty; One so exact
That the Elixars of praise detract;
These are fair shaddows, but to endure
He Is drawn to the life in's Pourtracture,
If such another Piece you would see,
Angels must Limn it out, or He.


XIV.
NOw next in order should we proceed to Duke Hamilton, Earl of Cambridge, who
though of another Nation, yet being a Peer of this, and dying by Sentence of
their Illegal High Court of Injustice, we cannot without injustice leave him
out of this Catalogue. It is indeed confessed by most, that the Kings Interest
was but Collateral, and though his Actions and Promises at his Trial in hopes
of life, may seem evidently to confirm the same, yet in his last words (and
words of dying men do carry great force with them) he did Evidence a real Love
and Affection to that Cause. This Duke was General over the Scotch Forces that
came into England when the King was a Prisoner in the Isle of Wight, the cause
of their coming being contained in a Declaration which they brought along with
them, consisting of five heads; 1. That the King be forthwith brought to
London, to Treat in Person with the Two Houses of Parliament. 2. That all those
who had a hand in, or contrived the carrying of the King away from Holmby, be
condignly punished. 3. That the Army be Disbanded. 4. That Presbitery be
settled. 5. That the Members of Parliament who were forcibly secluded from the
Houses, may be restored. But these Demands were answered with Fire and Bullet,
the Duke and his great Army totally defeated by Cromwell, and Himself taken
Prisoner by Colonel Wait, and being now in their hands, they thought to make
good use of him, to cajole and fish out what great Ones, Members of both
Houses, the City, and Clergy had a hand in his Undertaking; It being more then
suspected that he had such Invitation, to which purpose he was exceedingly
importuned by Cromwell, the Lord Gray of Grooby, Colonel Wait, and Hugh
Peter's, who promised him they would not much obstruct his pretended Plea of
Quarter from Lambert upon Articles; Nay Peter's avouched Quarter so given, for
which Hamilton gave him Thanks and Money, and Peter's in consideration thereof,
prayed for him openly, as his Lord and Patron, still feeding him with hopes, If
he would impeach their Opposites: but when they could not extort it from him,
the Scene was soon altered, they which smiled on him before, then frowned; and
being at his Trial, asked what he could say for himself; he pleaded Quarter,
and vouched Peter's Testimony; but that wretched Priest, with a brazen face
renounced the same, saying, He now remembered no such matter, but that the Army
scorned to give Quarter to Him, or any of his Nation: whereupon he was
Condemned to the Block, which Sentence was Executed upon him, March 9. 1648.

XV.
HEnry Earl of Holland, a special Favorite of King Charles the I. in the
beginning of his Reign, though afterward when the long Parliament began to
sit, that Religion became the Bone of Contention, he sided with them: But
afterward perceiving that they made Religion only a cloak to cover their
Rebellion, he deserted them, and took up Arms for the Royal Interest; together
with the Duke of Buckingham, the Lord Francis Villers's Brother, the Earl of
Peterburgh, and some others: But they no sooner Rose, but were Encountered by
the Parliaments more Numerous Forces, by whom they were Defeated, and the Earl
(the next day) taken Prisoner, being afterward brought to his Trial before
those Lawless Regicides; he was by them Condemned, together with my Lord Capel,
and Duke Hamilton, and suffered on the same Scaffold, the aforesaid 9. of
March, 1648.

XVI.
ARthur Lord Capel Baron of Hadham, a most Noble, Heroic, Gallant Peer,
Eminently Famous for his Charity, and other Rare Endowments; whose Noble
Virtues fill the Trumpet of Fame to all Posterity. This Noble Lord was Son and
Heir to Sir Henry Capel of Hadham-Hall in Hartford-shire, well known for his
Bountiful House, and diffusive Charity to the Poor, which some, Eminous of good
works in others, because they will practice none themselves, have bespattered
with the Name of Popery; which as they set forth only the speakers malice, so
were they no hinderance to this Noble Lord when as he came to possess that Vast
Estate, to tread in the same steps his Father, and Honorable Predecessors had
done.

His great Parts, and Deserts, Advanced him from the Degree of Knighthood,
(the ancient Dignity of his Family) to Baron Capel of Hadham, (his Son being
since by our Gracious Soveragn Created Earl of Essex,) a little before the
time the Earl of Strafford received his Trial, whose giving his Vote to that
Bill, was in his conscientious Judgment of himself his Original Condemnation,
in foro Caeli.

During the time of Rebellion, and those unhappy Differences betwixt the King
and Parliament, none more Constant and Loyal to his Majesty then He; Assisting
him in all that he could both in Head, Hand, and Purse, and was by Him for his
singular Wisdom, and Prudence appointed Counselor unto the Prince, whom he
left not till the Disbanding the Lord Hoptons Army in Cornwall, being then
dismissed with an Honorable Character from that discerning Prince. But long had
he not continued here at home, when some fresh hopes appearing of his Majesty's
Restoration to his former Authority, by the Rising of several Parties for the
King, he resolved to set his helping hand thereto, and joining with those
Valiant Sons of Mars, Sir Charles Lucas, etc. was together with them Besieged
in Colchester, which for Thirteen Weeks they Valiantly Defended, Enduring and
Suffering almost all Extremities imaginable; at last they were forced to yield,
upon Articles of Quarter for Life, in which this Noble Lord was included; yet
notwithstanding all Articles, he was sent up Prisoner to London, and committed
to the Tower, from whence he endeavored an Escape, and had effected it, had he
not been betrayed by one Jones a Waterman, a second Banister; soon after he was
brought to their bloody Slaughterhouse, nicknamed by them a Court of Justice,
whereby those Enemies of Honor and Loyalty, he was Condemned, and March 9.
aforesaid, brought to the Scaffold, where he resolutely afferted his own
Actions, his dead Masters Cause, and his present Sovereigns Rights,
recommending him to the People, as the great Example of True English Worth, and
the only Hope of the distracted Kingdom; and so like a True Christian Hero
suffered the pains of the Axe, sealing his Glorious Cause with his last breath
and blood.

XVII.
MAster Beaumont, a Reverend Divine, belonging to the Garrison of Pomfract, who
for his Loyal Endeavors toward the Restoration of his Majesty, in holding
Correspondency in Ciphers with some Active Royalists, was by those Murdering
Miscreants, who spared none, either for their Age or Function, most barbarously
murdered, Feb. 15. 1648.

XVIII.
COlonel John Morris, a Gentleman of an Undaunted Courage; and Resolution, bred
up in the Earl of Straffords's House, where he was taught his Duty to God, and
Obedience to his King, whom he Faithfully Served in that time of Rebellion;
being that Gallant Person that Surprised Pomfract Castle, which he Valiantly
Defended even to the very pinch of Extremity; and was for his Valor and
Loyalty (being suspected by them to be one of those that sent Rainsbrough's
Ghost to trace the Infernal Shades) most inhumanly butchered by those Scelerate
Villainies, at the City of York, August 23. 1649.

XIX.
COronet Michael Blackburn, Emiently Famous for his Loyalty, and Faithful
Service to his Sovereign; being also taken at Pomfract Castle, and likewise
suspected for Rainsbrough's death; he was therefore by those sworn Foes to true
Valor, basely murdered at York, August 23. aforesaid.

XX.
DOctor Levens, Doctor of the Civil Law, a Gentleman well Descended, of an
Ancient Family in Oxfordshire, who at the first beginning of these Uncivil
Wars, exchanged his Gown for a Sword, and Valiantly Served his Majesty during
that Rebellion, till the Surrender of Oxford, being one that was concluded in
the Articles of that Capitulation. After the death of that blessed Martyr, he
Engaged for his Son, our present Sovereign, having Commission from Him for the
Raising of Forces, and blank Commissions for diverse Officers; but whiles he
was in pursuance of the Design, he was discovered, and being brought before
them stoutly stood in his justification, Telling them he was no way ashamed of
his Cause, but that he would justify it with his Dearest Life; And though they
gave him some fallacious hopes of Life, if he would reveal those Parties
Engaged with him, yet would not those offers prevail on his more Noble Spirit,
wherefore he was by them condemned, and according to their bloody Sentence
Executed over against the Exchange in Cornhill, July 18. 1650.

XXI.
COlonel Eusebius Andrews, a Gentleman of a most sincere Life and Conversation,
by Profession a Counselor of Grays Inn, who out of his Duty to God, and the
King; took part with his Majesty, constantly adhereing to the Royal Cause,
being Secretary to the Renowned Lord Capel, whose Worth and Excellency being
envied by Cromwell, he was by his Emissaries brought into a Plott, as they
called it, and then by them betrayed; the chief Agent therein being one
Bernards, formerly his Major, who with one Pitts were suborned by Bradshaw, and
Sir Henry Mildmay to swear against him; So that notwithstanding the Colonel
notably defended himself, and by an accurate Legal Plea proved the Unlawfulness
and Authority of their High Court of Justice, yet was he by those blood-sucking
Canniballs Sentenced as a Traitor, having only the favor of altering the
manner of his Execution, which was the Axe on Tower Hill, where he died like
other Martyrs before him, full of joy and blessed hope, Aug. 22. 1650.

XXII.
MAster Benson, formerly a Retainer to Sir John Gell, having a Command under
him during the time Sir John had the unhappiness to serve the Parliament; but
having rectified his judgment, and desirous by some Eminent Service to his
Majesty, to balance his former mistakes, he was by the aforesaid Bernard
Trapan'd in the same business with Colonel Andrews, and suffered under their
merciless cruelty, October 7. 1650.

XXIII.
SIr Henry Hide, Brother to the Earl of Clarendon, Lord High Chancellor of
England now living; a Gentleman of Excellent parts for Navigation, who being
sent by his present Majesty an Internuncio to the Grand Signior in matters of
concernment, for the good of his Merchant Subjects; The Rebels by their Agents
so wrought upon the Vizier, that he basely and unworthily sent him into
England, where having remained for some time in the Tower, he was brought
before their monstrous High Court of Justice, where his Crimes were aggravated
with imputations of his design of seizing those Merchant Estates there, and
affronting Sir Thomas Bendish the old Resident there with his New Commission.
To which although Sir Henry made a Learned Defense, yet was all in vain to
those who resolved beforehand to dispatch him, and only Heard him in way of
form; wherefore he was by their Blood-Thirsty Court Sentenced to be Beheaded,
which death he suffered against the Old Exchange in Cornhill, March 4. 1650.
courageously asserting his Masters Cause, and so rendering his Soul to God, is
justly inscribed into the Roll of Martyrs.

XXIV.
CAptain Brown Bushel, an expert Seaman, who was Captain of a Man of War, and
had some kind of Command in Scarborough, which he delivered to Sir Hugh Chomley
then revolted in the year 1643. from the Parliament, and being Prisoner at Hull
for the same, had been Exchanged by Hotham (then winding about to his
Allegiance.) This Captain Bushel was for the same committed to custody in 1648.
and being detained Prisoner about Three Years, now their hand was in for
shedding of blood, he was by those inhumane Rebels murdered, April 29. 1651.

XXV, and XXVI.
MAster Love, and Master Gibbons, who though they dyed upon the Presbyterian
Account, which abated much the luster of their Sufferings, yet dying in
opposition to Tyranny, and upon the Account of his Majesty's Restoration,
deserve to be had in perpetual remembrance. They were charged with High Treason
against the State, for holding correspondency with the King and his Party, and
supplied them with money, contrary to an Act of Parliament in that case
provided; for which they were by those bloody Regicides condemned, and lost
their heads on Tower Hill, August 20. 1651.

XXVII.
JAmes Earl of Derby, the flower of English Fidelity, a most Honorable,
Heroic, Gallant Peer, whose Prudence and Valor were always Assistant to his
Royal Master; and whose Superlative Virtues of Liberality and Bounty made him
Loved and Honored of all sorts of People; He having ventured his Life and
Large Estate in the continual Service of his Royal Masters, from which he in
the least never deviated. Upon his Majesty's March out of Scotland, he Raised
what Forces he could to his Assistance, but was first unfortunatly defeated at
Wigan in Lancashire, from whence he fled to the King at Worcester; where also
that Royal Army being overcome by Cromwells* Numerous Forces, he unfortunatly
fell into their hands, and suffered under their inhumane, merciless, execrable
Tyranny, resigning up his Soul into the hands of his Maker, October 15. 1651.

XXVIII.
CAptain Symkins, who for carrying the Kings Letter of Invitation to Sir Thomas
Midleton, was by a Court-Marshal held at Chester, Condemned, and accordingly
Executed by those incorrigable Rebels, October 1651.

XXIX.
SIr Timothy Fetherston-haugh, a Valiant Gentleman, who Engaging with the Noble
Earl of Derby in the Service of his Sovereign, was defeated at Wigan in
Lancashire, and suffered by those obdurate Rebels, Octo. 22. 1651.

XXX.
COlonel Benbow, who for his Loyalty and superlative Valor, was by those
blood-thirsty Regicides, much about the same time shot to death at Shrewsbury.

XXXI.
COlonel John Gerard, a Gentleman of good Account, whose Family have been very
Eminent for their Loyalty; upon a pretended Plot of Assassinating Cromwell, was
with diverse others committed to Prison, and Tried before their High Court of
Injustice, where though there were little appearance of the Truth thereof, (but
some few words extorted by fear, besides the confession of their own Agent;)
yet was he by bloody Lisle the President, Condemned, and lost his head on
Tower Hill, July 10. 1654.

XXXII.
MAster Peter Vowel, Schoolmaster of the Free School at Islington, against
whom they had suborned a blind Minister, whom this worthy Martyr had sustained
and fed; they having received from him some words, that Master Vowel should
say, as, That if the Tyrant were removed, or otherways laid aside, the Royal
Interest would be gladly Embraced, and without any difficulty Reassumed to its
Authority. These cursed Caiphases more enlarged; with addition of several
circumstances; and though the said Minister at his Trial denied and disowned
the said words, yet they making for their purpose (O impudence without
president!) he was by the mouth of Frontless Lisle condemned to death, and
according to that unjust Sentence, Executed at Charing Cross, where with a
Roman spirit* tempered with Christian patience, he suffered Martyrdom, off,
from a stool fetched from their Guard, his innocence appearing so transparent
that the adjacent Neighbors refused to lend any thing toward his death. These
Two Gentlemen were the first that suffered under the Tyrannical Government of
Oliver Cromwell, whose Five Years Usurpation was cemented all along with a
sacrifice of Loyal blood, as the Walls of Babylon were said to be mortur'd.

XXXIII, and XXXIV.
COlonel Penruddock, and Colonel Groves, two Valiant Gentlemen who had
constantly and faithfully served his late Majesty, and now with several other
Gentlemen of good Account, Joined in an Assosiation to free the Land from the
Slavery they endured under that Abominable Tyrant Cromwell, and to restore his
Sacred Majesty. To this purpose about some Two Hundred of them Rose in the
West, and Entered the City of Salisbury, at such time as the Judges, Rolls and
Nicholls were there in Circute, whose Horses they Seized, and Declared the
Cause of this their Appearance; and having now Increased their Numbers to Four
Hundred, they marched thence to Blundeford, where Colonel Penrudock himself
Proclaimed the King in the Marketplace; from thence they marched more Westward
toward Devon-shire, and Corn-Wall, but their numbers decreasing, they were at
last at South-Molton in Devon-shire, set upon by a strong party of Horse, under
the Command of Captain Crook, where being over-powred, they submitted upon
Articles of quarter for life, which Crook afterward basely denied when they
were Tried at Salisbury; by which Treachery these two gallant Gentlemen were
for their Loyal Undertakings condemned, and wickedly murdered May 16. 1655.

XXXV.
JOhn Lucas, a Mercer of very good Estate in Hungerford, who joining with these
gallant Royalists in their Attempts for Restoring the King, staying in the Town
when he might have escaped, unluckily fell into their hands, by whom he was
Sentenced, and lost his head.

XXXVI. etc.
MAster Kensey, Master Thorp, John Friar, and John Lawrence, Persons of good
esteem and credit in the West-country, who likewise joining with Colonel
Penrudock, and those other gallant persons we formerly mentioned, were for this
their Loyalty, barbarously murdered by those insolent Rebels at Salisbury;
besides Eleven more (whose Names we cannot yet attain to) who upon the same
account were by those Rebels murdered at Exeter, May 1655.

XXXVII.
SIr Henry Slingsby, a Knight of good repute in Yorkshire, and who for his
Loyalty was seldom out of trouble during all the time of Rebellion; having been
a Prisoner in Hull off and on ever since that fatal Fight at Worcester, he
being now weary of this long restraint, and perceived so to be by some of the
Officers of that Garrison, they ( viz.) Major Waterhouse, Captain Overton, and
one Lieutenant Thompson, to hook him in, cast out some disgustal words against
their Sultan Cromwell, mixing thereto some Overtures of their good will to the
King, and the Rendition of the Place to him, if he could procure a Commission
for them from his Majesty. The Loyal Gentleman gladly Embraced a proffer of
such Concernment, and made use of an Old Commission he had by him; But they
having now brought him into their snare, sent him up a Prisoner to London,
where at his Trial they were Witnesses against him; for being brought to
Cromwell's slaughterhouse ecleaped a High Court of Justice, where bloody
Lisle* sat President, he was by those monsters of Nature condemned, and
wickedly murdered, June 8. 1658.

XXXVIII.
DOctor John Hewyt, a Reverend Divine of the Primitive stamp and temper, who
taught the People both by Life and Doctrine, whose Excellent Parts, and known
Loyalty, was two grand motives to the insatiable thirst of Cromwell to desire
to taste his blood. To this purpose a Plott must be invented of Firing the City,
and I know not what, whereof the Reverend Doctor was accused, and though his
innocence appeared as transparent as the Sun in the most serene sky, yet being
ignorant of the formalities of the Law, (though none more knowing in the
Gospel) he was taken, or surprised for a mute, and by the mouth of that
audacious and bloody Regicide, Frontless Lisle, condemned, and on the same
Scaffold with Sir Henry Slingsby Beheaded, rendering his Soul into the hands of
his Creator; the aforesaid 8. of June, 1658.

XXXIX.
COlonel Edward Ashton, a Valiant Loyal Person, whom Cromwell, acting Nero's
part who set Rome on fire, and then punished the Christians for doing it; So
this crafty blood-sucker having devized a Plott against their lives, laid to
their charge, that they would fire the City; and having by Imprisonment, and
other sinister ends prevailed on some to accuse others, notwithstanding their
innocence, were condemned; amongst others this gallant Colonel suffered by
their barbarous inhumanity, July 2. 1648.

XL.
MAster John Betley, a young man of Excellent Parts, who being trappan'd by the
Tyrants Emissaries about the aforesaid Plott, was by the bloody Sentence of
their High Court of Injustice condemned to be hanged, and accordingly was
Executed in Cheapside the aforesaid 2 of July, where he made a solemn
protestation of his Innocence, at whose death happened a thing something
strangely remarkable, for having hung almost a quarter of an hour, he pulled
off his cap with his own hands, so loath was the Soul to depart from that
gallant body, which had it not been thus snatched away by this untimely death,
might have lived to have done his King and Country gallant service, and have
been a special Ornament to the City wherein he lived.

XLI.
MAster Edward Stacy, who for the same counterfeit Plott, was two days after
murdered over against the Exchange in Cornhill, being the last man that
suffered under the bloody Tyranny of Cromwell,who had taken such large draughts
of loyal blood, and who himself expired not long after.

Thus have we given you a brief Narrative of those worthy Martyrs who suffered
under color of Sentence by Law during that time Rebellion was Rampant; many
others might be added to this Catalogue, whose Names and Qualities we cannot
yet attain unto, and who dying in opposition to Tyranny, and upon the account
of Law and Loyalty, deserve to be had in everlasting remembrance; My desire
therefore will be to those of their Relations concerned in it, such timely
notice might be given of them before a Second Edition of this Book, that their
memories might have the right belonging to them, to the encouragement of others
in persisting in Loyalty, and to the dread and terror of Traitors and
Regicides, who shall dare to lift up their hand against the Lords anointed.

We shall next add only a short account of some Loyal Persons murdered in
Scotland by the same pretense of Law, to show that the men of the Kirk,
notwithstanding their great pretensions of Loyalty, were not much behind the
Independent gang, but drove the same trade, and exercised the utmost of their
cruelty, upon the most stoutest asserters of the Kings Cause.

I.
COlonel Nathaniel Gordon, a Gentleman of exquisite valor, who accompanied the
Noble Marquess of Montross, in all dangers and difficulties; his constant
Fidelity rendered him odious to the Covenanting-gang, who having him in their
hands, most basely murdered him at St. Johnstons, 1647.

II.
SIr Robert Spotswood, whose Worth and Learning would have preserved him from
the hands of his most barbarous Enemies, but those of his own Nation; He was a
Gentleman of most polite and deep learning, especially in the Oriental
Languages; and was for his extraordinary parts, made the Kings Secretary of
Scotland, in the place of the Earl of Lanerick; His great Endowments and large
Abilities for what he undertook accelerated his end, dying with a Noble and
Christian courage, breathing his last with these words, Jesu have mercy on me,
and gather my soul with those that have run before me in this Race.

III.
MAster Andrew Guthrey, Son to the Bishop of Murrory, a Loyal Gentleman, and
therefore rendered the more obnoxious to the Kirk-men, those great pretenders of
dutiful affection to the King; a strange riddle, to love the Master, and
murder his Servants! this gallant person was by them barbarously murdered,
the aforesaid year, 1647.

IV.
MAster William Murrey, Brother to the Earl of Tullibardin, one whose hopeful
Spring promised a flourishing fruitful Harvest; who in his Youth performed
wonders, and gave undeniable proofs of what he would have proved afterward,
had he not been thus basely cut off in the prime of his strength, at Nineteen
years of age. He most magnanimously, and courageously encountered death,
behaving himself with such a Christian carriage, and contempt of death, as he
said, His End would prove the greatest Honor of his Family.

These four Gentlemen all Sacrificed their lives in defense of their Sovereign,
and dyed Royal Martyrs at St, Johnstons, the year of our Lord, 1647. aforesaid.

V.
THe Renowned, and ever Glorious Marquess of Montross, the Honor of Chevalry,
and pattern of true Magnanimity; whose glorious exploits were such, and so
great, as would pose Antiquity with all her feigned Hero's to find his
parallel; of whom we shall give you the more larger account, and show you how
barbarously they used this gallant Worthy.

He at first sided with the Covenanters against his Majesty; their specious
pretenses carrying a fairer gloss then his green years could so soon look into;
but reason quickly rectified his Judgment, and he perceived that those fair
shows, were but painted clothes on purpose to catch the simple; yet would he
not so soon on the sudden decline, but endeavored in his Revolt to have done
his Majesty an Excellent Piece of Service, by bringing that Army to him which
was under his Command; but being disappointed, he endeavored to display his
Loyalty another way: The King having then few friends in Scotland, but such as
were so over-awed by the Convenanters, they durst not show themselves; the
Noble Marquess obtained a Commission from the King, to be Governor of
Scotland, whither he went, attended only by two, Master William Rollock, and
Master Sibbalds; and through many danger^ came at last to his Cousin Master
Patrick Graham in the Sheriff-dome of Perth, where he stayed but a while, but
went into the High-Lands, the Earl of Antrim having promised to send him
sufficient Supplies out of Ireland, as a stock to begin with; which he
performed though very defficient in the Number; some One Thousand One Hundred
only coming over; however having some little addition under the Lord Kilpont,
and the Earl of Perths Son, he resolved not to lie idle, but with a bold
Courage to find out the Army of the Covenanters, then gathered together under
the Earl of Tullyburn, and other Scotch Lords in Perth-shire, where at
Tepper-Moor he set upon them, and though not equal to his Enemies in number,
yet so exceeding them in Valor, that he obtained of them a Glorious Victory,
which he might well ascribe to Providence, for his Soldiers wanting
Ammunition, were supplied by the stones which lay thick on the ground whereon
they fought, to their very great advantage. Here he killed no less then Two
Thousand of his Enemies, whereupon the City of Perth opened her gates, and
yielded to the Conqueror.

This Victory obtained, he Marches into Argyles Country, one whose Actions has
since rendered him deservedly infamous; here he made a miserable havoc, minding
utterly to break the spirits of that People who were so surely Engaged to
Argyle's side. To withstand and repress this so dangerous an Enemy, the
Covenanters soon Raised another Army, under the Earl of Seaforth, and the
Marquess of Argyle, whose Forces being divided, he sets upon that Party under
Argyle first, which he totally Routed, killing One Thousand Five Hundred on the
Place; soon after he Defeated the other Army, being newly put under the Command
of Colonel Hurry; then offers battle to Bayley, who declined to Fight without
great advantage; whereupon he marches after Hurry, who was now Recruited, and
at Alderne sets upon him, discomfits him, killing One Thousand Eight Hundred,
and dispersing the rest.

Then next with his Victorious Army he goes to seek for Bailey, to whom was
joined the Earl of Lindsey, and joining battle with them at Alesford-Hills,
gives them a total Rout, but not without the loss of some of his own men,
whereof the Lord Gourdon deserves to be had in everlasting remembrance; then
with an uncontrollable march he goes to St. Johnstons, putting the Parliament
(who there satt) into a great fright; from thence he goes into the Low-Lands,
to Encounter with Bailey, who was again Recruited with another Army by the Kirk.

At Kilsith both Armies met, where betwixt them was fought a very bloody
Battle, which continued doubtful for a good space; but Victory at length
crowned the head of Montross, almost Six Thousand of his Enemies falling in
that Fight; nor were the effects thereof less profitable to him then the
Victory it self; for hereupon almost all Places of Strength yielded to him,
even as far as Edinburgh; the Nobility and Gentry every where readily Assisted
him, and acknowledged him for their Rightful Governor.

But what Estate on Earth is long permanent? How soon may a serene sky be
shadowed with clouds? Whiles Montross was now as he thought almost secure, most
part of his Army returning home, he expecting Aid from the King under the Lord
Digby*Leshly being called out of England by the Scottish Estates, made such
have, that he fell upon Montross at Philips-haugh, almost before his Scouts
could give him Intelligence, and there Routed him, he hardly escaping with his
life, being forced to cut his way through his Enemies, and with a poor
remainder of his Army fly into the High-Lands, where he began anew to Levy
Forces; but the fortune of the King failing every where, he was the next year
Ordered by the King (then in the Scotts Custody) to Disband and Depart the
Kingdom, which notwithstanding he knew it would be prejudicial to the Kings
Proceedings, yet least he should be guilty of disobedience in himself, which he
punished in others, he willingly condescend thereunto.

From thence he betook himself to the Court of France, where he was proffered
High Preferment, which he waved, his Noble Spirit more aiming at his own
Princes Service, desiring nothing more then to revenge the blood of his
murdered Master on the heads of those that had so perfidiously sold him; To
this purpose, after some long delays, (being stoutly opposed by Duke Hamilton,
and the Earls of Lauderdale and Calendar) he at last obtained a Commission
from the King for an adventure into Scotland; and in order to that Expedition,
was furnished with four Ships from the Duke of Holstein; some supplies from the
King of Denmark* and Fifteen Hundred Arms from the Queen of Sweden, with some
few Horses under General King, and alittle neat Frigot for his own Conveyance;
some moneys also were disburst to him, which being Entrusted to Colonel Ogelby,
were by him basely Squandred away, to the great prejudice of the design.

With these small preparations did he precipitate himself into inevitable
Ruin, it being judged a desperate Action with so small a Force to attempt so
mighty a business; but his cross fate hurrying him to destruction, fearing (as
is supposed) he should have an express* command to desist from his purpose, the
King and the Scots coming near to an Agreement; he therefore to prevent all
such Commands, sends over two Ships with a third part of his men before, which
by storm of weather in those dangerous Seas were lost, with all the Men and
Arms, nothing saved; Yet nothing terrified with this Success, he sends out a
send Party, who making a more prosperous Voyage, landed at Orkney, and entered
the Island without any resistance, he himself following not long after,
attended with several persons of Note, whose valor had made them Eminently
Famous in those Parts.

From thence he soon Transports to Cathness, which is the furthest land to the
North-West of Scotland; but the People instead of coming in to him, fled away
in heaps, many of them not stopping till they came to the Chief City of
Edinburgh, where the Parliament were then sitting, who being Alarmed with this
sudden Invasion, ordered Colonel Stranglan with a Choice Party to march
against him, Leshley and Holborn, with more Numerous Forces following after;
The Marquess marched very slowly, but hearing of the Enemies approach, he
endeavored the gaining of a Pass of great Advantage, whereupon both Armies
came to Engage, and after some short fight the Marquess was Defeated; Two
Hundred of his Men Killed, and about One Thousand Two Hundred Taken, very few
Escaping; amongst other things, was taken a Standard he had caused to be made
of Excellent Work-man-ship, being the Portract of the late King beheaded, with
this Motto, Judge and Revenge my Cause O Lord. He himself escaped from the
Battle, and in a High-Landers habit kept himself from being discovered three or
four days; but being destitute both of Meat and Drink, and no great
probability of escaping, he at last discovered himself to the Lord Aston, who
had formerly been one of his Followers, hoping to find friendship at his
hands, but contrary to expectation was by him made a Prisoner, being greedy of
the Reward, promised to his Apprehender by the Council of State. Being thus in
the Custody of his mortal Enemies, from whom he could expect nothing but the
worst of Cruelties, yet carried he himself with a singular constancy, and in a
manner careless of his own condition; no object, though never so endeared to
him, could alter his Resolution, or cause the least expression from him, which
was not suitable to the greatness of his Spirit, and the fame of his former
Actions.

And that the World might see what Justice he was like to expect from them,
before his coming to Edinburgh, this Sentence was drawn up against him.

That he should be hanged on a Gibbet at the Cross in Edinburgh until he died,
his History and Declaration being tied about his neck, and to hang three hours
in public view of all the people; after which he should be Beheaded and
Quartered; his head to be fixed upon the Prisonhouse of Edinburgh, and his
Legs and Arms over the Gates of the Cities of Sterling, Glascow, Perth,
alias St. Johns-Town, and Aberdeen; And in case he repented (whereby the
Sentence of Excommunication may be taken off by the Church) the bulk of his
Body should be buried in the Gray-Fryars, if not, in the Borrow-Moor (a Place
like Tyburn.)

Which Sentence was Executed upon him with as much shame and ignominy as they
could possibly devise, not only in the Sentence it is self, but also in the
preparatives unto it; for coming to Edinburgh, he was met by some Officers, and
the Executioner in his Livery Coat, into whose hands he was delivered; there
being prepared for his reception a high seat in fashion of a Chariot, upon each
side of which were holes, through which a cord being drawn, and crossing his
breast and arms, bound him fast down in the Chair: This done, the Executioner
(according to command) took off the Marquesses Hat, and put on him his own
Bonnet, and then mounting his fore-horse in this ridiculous bravery began to
drive toward the Toll-booth; the people all the way he went shedding abundance
of tears to see so Noble and Magnanimious a spirit become the object of his
Enemies Triumph; But the implacable Ministry having him now at their mercy,
could never be satisfied with his calamities, but reviled him with all the
spiteful ignominious words they could devise; and being asked why they could
not be satisfied but by such base handling him? They replied, They knew no
other way to humble him, and bring him home to God.

May the 21 being come, the fatal day appointed for his Execution, he was
brought to the Scaffold in a Scarlet Cloack, richly laced with Gold lace; He
came along the Streets with as great State, and as much Majesty, as if he had
been marching in the Head of an Army; insomuch that his very Enemies
acknowledged him to be the gallantest Person in the World; when he was come to
the Gibbet, which was built of a prodigious height; he was by the Scotch Clergy
(in regard of his Excommunication) desired to pray apart, to whom he said, I
have already poured out my soul before the Lord, who knows my heart, and into
whose hands I have commended my Spirit, and he has been pleased to return to
me a full assurance of peace in Jesus Christ my Redeemer; and therefore if you
will not join with me in prayer, my reiterating it again will be both
scandalous to you and me. After which words he closed his eyes, and holding up
his hands, stood a good while at his inward Devotions; afterward he called for
the Executioner and gave him money, and then preparing himself to receive the
outward Ceremonies of Death; there was brought unto him his History and
Declaration, hanging in a cord, which was put about his neck, which he
cheerfully received, saying, Though it had pleased his Sacred Majesty, that now
is, to make him one of the Knights of the most Honorable Order of the Garter,
yet he did not think himself more Honored by the Garter, then by that Cord and
Book, which he would embrace about his neck with as much joy and content, as
ever he did the Garter, or a Chain of Gold; and therefore desired them to tie
them about him as they pleased, telling them, That what they thought was for
his Disgrace, he took to be his greatest Honor.

This being done, and his Arms tied, he asked the Officers, If they had any
more Dishonor (as they conceived it) to put upon him, he was ready to accept
it; and so with an undaunted Courage mounted the top of that prodigious Gibbet,
where having commended his soul to God, he patiently underwent the Execution of
their inveterate malice.

Thus fell this Worthy Hero, by a most malicious and barbarous sort of cruelty,
his Head and Quarters being disposed of according to that wicked Sentence
pronounced against him, though afterward, (viz.) May 11. 1661. they found a
more Honorable Burial, being taken down from the Gates of those four distant
Cities, and with great State and Solemnity Interred with a Funeral becoming his
Family, and his own personal Renown and Glory. To conclude this Story, he was
one of the Noblest, Gallantest Persons that age brought forth; a Captain whose
unexampled Atchievments have Famed a History, which were its Volumn ten times
bigger, would yet be disproportioned to the due praises of this matchless Hero;
the day of his Martyrdom was May the 21. 1650.

To the Immortal Memory of those Worthy Martyrs who laid down their lives in
Opposition to Tyranny, and Defense of the Ancient Fundamental Laws of this
Nation.
Hail Worthy Martyrs of the Royal Cause,
Who stoutly stood up in Defense of Laws;
And when the Land was sick of their own good,
To cure the same offered their dearest blood;
These were the Royal Martyrs of this age,
Who against the Rebellion Rampant durst Engage;
Whose Noble Virtues, and Illustrious Worth,
Spite of their Foes base Cruelty brake forth;
And with their Souls did unto Heaven aspire,
Making the World their Virtues to admire;
Thus what their Foes by Barbarous Cruelty
Sought to depress, was raised far more high;
As Jems in the dark do cast a brighter ray,
Then when obstructed by the rival day;
So did the luster of their worth appear,
Brake through those clouds, and shines transparent clear:
Thus did they pass by Rebels bloody hand
Through the Red Sea, unto the promised Land,
There with the Blessed Saints to be partaker,
And Hallilujahs sing unto their Maker:
There rest blessed Souls amongst that happy Quire,
Whilst we your Noble Virtues do admire;
And that your Names with Sacred Veneration,
Do live Renowned for ever in this Nation.
A Catalogue of the most Eminent Persons Slain in his Majesty's Service, in
Opposition to Tyranny, and Defense of the Fundamental Laws.
I. COrnet Porter, Son to Master Endimeon Porter of the Bedchamber, Slain at
Newborn upon Tine, against the Scots, upon their Rebellious Invasion of
England, August 27. 1639.

II. The Lord Aubigney, Father to the most Illustrious Charles Duke of
Richmond, who so Valiantly behaved himself at the Battle of Edgehill, where he
was mortally wounded, of which wounds he died at Abington, and was buried at
Christ-Church in Oxford.

III. The Earl of Lyndsey General of the Field at Edgehill, where he behaved
Himself like a Valiant Soldier, and Expert Commander, was at the said Battle
unfortunately Slain, October 23. 1642.

IV. Sir Edmond Varney, the Kings Standard Bearer, at Edgehill, who Valiantly
Fighting was Slain under it; and the Standard being taken by one Chambers,
Essex's Secretary, was Rescured by Sir John Smith, whom the King after the
Battle Knighted.

V. Colonel Munro, a Scotch Man, a man of Eminent Valor, Slain also at the
same Battle.

VI. Spencer Earl of Northampton, a most Magnanimous Asserter of the Kings
Cause, who Besieged Leichfield; Sir William Breerton, and Sir John Gell, with
Three Thousand Men came to relieve it; against whom the Earl Opposed,
obtaining of them a Glorious Victory, though with the price of his own life;
for Valiantly Fighting, whether by disadvantage of the ground (being full of
Conney-Burroughs) or born down by the Enemies, is uncertain, he was un-horst,
and refusing Quarter, was killed by a private unlucky hand, March 19. 1642.

VII. Earl of Denbigh, a Gentleman of much Worth and Excellency, unfortunately
slain at the taking of Birmingham by Prince Rupert, April the 3. 1643.

VIII. Sir Bevil Greenvil, a Gentleman whose Gallant Parts, and Active Service
for his Royal Master, deserves to be had in everlasting remembrance; He
Engaging with Sir Ralph Hopton, and other Eminent Cavaliers, against Sir
William Waller, at a place called Landsdown, in his full Cariere of Victory was
unfortunately killed, to the great loss of his Majesty, and unspeakable grief
of all true Lovers of Heroic Valor.

IX. Master Leak, Son to my Lord Deincourt, now Earl of Scours-dale, Master
Barker, Colonel Wall, Captain James, Captain Cholwel, and Master Busturd, all
Valiant Persons, who in the Service of his Majesty at the same Fight at
Landsdown died in the bed of honor.

X. Marquess de Vieu Ville, who in the Fight at Auborn-chase behaved himself
most Gallantly, and Valiantly Fighting was there slain, Septem. 1643.

XI. Earl of Carnarvan, a Nobleman of as great Spirit and Affection to the
Kings Service as any, who at Newbery Battle, Sept. 19. 1643. giving a desparate
Charge to the Enemies Horse, under the Command of Sir Philip Stapleton, Routed
them, and pursuing them to their Foot was unhappily shot in the Head of his
Troops, whose loss was deservedly lamented by all Valiant Spirits, and to whose
memory more Public memory is due, then a private Enterment in Jesus College
in Oxford.

XII. Earl of Sunderland, and Viscount Faulkland, persons of Superlative Worth
and Honor, who in the just Defense of his Majesty, and the Laws, was slain at
the foresaid Battle of Newbery, and that close by the Kings Person, whose Cause
they had so stoutly maintained.

XIII. Lord Viscount Faulkland, a Person whose Worth cannot be forgotten, and
whose Excellent Parts speaks him better then any Elogy I can bestow upon him,
to the great grief of Learned Men, slain at Newbery, Septem. 17. 1643.

XIV. Sir Henry Howard, and Sir Savile, Men of Extraordinary Worth, and Merit,
who at the Battle of Adderton-heath by their Valor gained the Victory, but
lost their own Lives, and were Enterred together in York Minster.

XV. The Earl of Kingston, Father to the Marquess of Dorchester now living,
who being unhappily surprised by some Forces of the Lord Willoughbies, about
Gainsbrough, he being a Person of great Quality, and of much concernment to the
Kings Affairs; they resolved to send him to Hull in a Pinnace; In the way
thither, Colonel Cavendish, Brother to the Earl of Devonshire, with a Party,
pursued the Pinnace to a shallow, which she could not pass, demanding her, and
the Earls Surrender, which being refused, a Drake was discharged, which
unfortunately killed the said Earl and one of his Servants being placed on
purpose on the Deck, to deter the Royalists from shooting; whereupon they
presently struck sail, and yielded; but with a just revenge, were all
sacrificed to to the Ghost of that most Noble Loyal Peer.

XVI. Colonel Charles Cavendish aforesaid, who quickly after the deserved death
of those murdering Rebels, was set upon by a great Party under Colonel White
a Lincolnshire Gentleman, who with those Forces came to relieve the Boat, or
recover it if taken: Whereupon a sharp Encounter ensued betwixt them, but the
Royalists being over-pour'd, the Valiant Colonel was forced to take the Trent
with his Horse, which swam him safe to the other side, but there stuck in the
Owze and Mud; but as soon as he could get a shore off his Horses back, the
Enemy was come to him round by the Ford, and seeing him desparately wounded
offered him Quarter, which he magnanimously refusing, throwing his blood
amongst them, which he wipe't off his face, was by them killed outright upon
the place.

XVII. The Lord Grandison, who in the Service of his Majesty was wounded at
Bristol, of which wounds he shortly after died.

XVIII. Sir Ingram Hopton, Sir George Bolit, and Lieutenant Colonel Markham,
men whose Names deserve to be recorded in the Book of Fame, who in a sharp and
sore conflict against the Earl of Manchester's Forces, near Horn-Castle in
Lincolnshire, valiantly fighting were unfortunately slain.

XIX. John Lord Stuart, second Brother to the Duke of Richmond, a most Gallant
Heroic Person, slain in the Battle between Hopton and Waller, on Cheriton-Down
Fight, March 29. 1644.

XX. Sir John Smith, Colonel Sandys, and Colonel Scot, Persons of great Worth
and Eminency, whose valourous minds scorned danger, and who hated no man so
much as a Coward: These Gallant Sons of Mars, were slain at the foresaid Fight
on Cheriton-Down, whose valiant Names succeeding Ages shall mention with honor.

XXI. Colonel Manning, slain also at the foresaid Fight, a Gallant Person,
only unhappy in this, in being Father to that Captain Manning, who betrayed
the Kings Council to Cromwell, while he resided at Colin, for which he was shot
to death in the Duke of Newburghs Country.

XXII. The Lord Carry, Sir Thomas Motham, and Sir William Lampton, who in that
great Fight betwixt Prince Rupert, and the Parliamentarians at Maston Moor,
July 2. 1644. wherein above Eight Thousand lost their Lives, and was indeed the
Greatest of all the War; in this so memorable a Battle, those* Three Honored
Persons lost their Lives, sealing the love they bore to the Kings Side with
their dearest bloods.

XXIII. Sir William Wentworth, Sir Charles Slingsby, Sir Francis Dane, who
Engaging in Defense of his Majesty's Cause, were slain in that great and
unfortunate fight at Maston Moor.

XXIV. Lieutenant Colonel Smith, and Captain Boteler, who at the Raising of
Banbury Siege, lost their lives to purchase to themselves an Honorable Name.

XXV. Sir John Digby, whose very Family carries Loyalty in the Name of it,
wounded at Langport in the County of Somerset, of which wounds he shortly after
died.

XXVI. Colonel Mine, an Active Loyal Person, who Commanded a Regiment of English
which he brought with him out of Ireland; who Engaging with Massey in
Gloster-shire, valiantly performed the Office of an Excellent Soldier, and
Expert Commander, both in Rallying his Men, bringing them up, and keeping them
from the Rout; but being over-mastered in number, he was there slain, dying in
the bed of Honor.

XXVII. Colonel Sir William St. Ledger, Lieutenant Colonel Topping, and
Lieutenant Colonel Leake, who in the second Battlel at Newbery* valiantly
fighting lost their lives, making good that ground in their death, which in
their life they had undertook to keep; accompanying those Soldiers in their
deaths, whom in their lives they had Commanded with so much Gallantry.

XXVIII. Colonel Gage, the flower of Chevialry, and pattern of true
Magnanimity, who to hinder the daily Excursions of the Abington Forces under
the Command of Major General Brown, resolved to build a Fort at Culham Bride,
to repress the boldness of those Forces who were constantly out thereabouts
upon Designs; In the attempt thereof, the Abington Forces under Colonel Brown
Sally out, to obstruct so dangerous an obstacle to their Erruption, Engaging
with the Royalists, though with little hopes of prevailing, till an unlucky
shot wounded Colonel Gage in the head, of which he dyed as soon as he came to
Oxford, a great loss to the Royal Interest.

XXIX. Colonel St. George, who at the storming of the City of Leicester in a
Bravery and Gallantry of Courage, ventering upon the mouth of the Cannon, was
slain with a great shot.

XXX. Colonel Tailor, an Eminent Commander under Prince Rupert, who at the
Siege thereof by Sir Thomas Fairfax, was in its Defense mortally wounded.

XXXI. Sir Richard Crane, a great friend and familiar with Prince Rupert, who
in a Sally upon the Enemies was unfortunately slain.

XXXII. The thrice Noble Lord Bernard Stuart Earl of Leichfield, the last of
the three Illustrious Brothers of the Duke of Richmond late deceased; who
constantly adheiring to the King both in Weal and Woe, never left him for the
greatest Danger or Extremity; for after the fatal fight at Naseby, the King
with a flying Army intending for the relief of Chester, was set upon by General
Poyntz at Routon-Heath, where happened a very sharp, sore fight, wherein this
Noble Lord gallantly fighting in Defense of his Royal Master, was unfortunely
killed, Sept. 24. 1645.

XXXIII. Sir Francis Carnaby, and Sir Richard Hutton, men of stout and
magnanimous carriage, who feared not death in his nearest approaches, those two
valiant Hero's were slain at Sherbon fight in Yorkshire, October 25. 1645.
being in their march toward the Marquess of Montross.

XXXIV. Major Cufaud, an Officer in Basing House, which so long and valiantly
held out against the numerous assaults of a Potent Enemy, and who at last of
all would hear of no Terms of surrender; but being stormed, and with great loss
of the assailants Entered, this valiant Major after a stout resistance, not
dreading death, was by the hands of his Enemies there slain.

XXXV. Doctor Griffiths Daughter, who though a Female, yet of a Masculine
spirit, and for her Loyalty deserving a large share amongst those Notable
Hero's slain in the Kings service; this Amazonian Lady (whose praise cannot be
sufficiently celebrated) in the foresaid storm at Basing House, was by the
barbarity of the Enemies killed, and shamefully left naked; a trophy of their
Baseness, and her own eternal Renown and Honor.

XXXVI. Master Gerard, the Author of that Elabourate Herbal which bears his
Name, to whom succeeding Ages must confess themselves indebted; this gallant
Gentleman Renowned for Arts and Arms, was likewise at the storming of that
House unfortunately slain; a great loss to succeeding Ages.

XXXVII. Sir Thomas Dallison, and Sir Richard Cave, who in that unfortunate
Battle at Naseby, sealed their Affection to the Kings Cause with their dearest
bloods.

XXXVIII. Sir Nicholas Fortescu a Knight of Malta (see the justness of the
Kings Cause, which invited Strangers from so far Countries to take his Part,)
was slain in Lancashire, in defense of the Royal Cause.

XXXIX. Sir Troilus Turbervil, Captain Lieutenant of the Kings Life Guard,
slain at his Majesty's marching from Newark to Oxford.

XL. Major Threave, and Captain Fry, two Persons of Eminent Valor under the
Lord Hopton, who when King Charle's Moon began to waine, yet stoutly stood up
in their Sovereigns Defense, and at Torington, valiantly fighting against the
Fairfaxians, who came to storm the Town, were there slain, dying in the bed of
honor.

XLI. Colonel Stanhop, Governor of Shelford House, who being summoned to
surrender the same by Major General Poynz, with a gallant resolution refused
the same; whereupon the Enemy storming, and being overpowered, he was slain,
whilst he valiantly strived to make good that place he had undertaken to keep.

XLII. Sir Nicholas Kemish, an Eminent Cavaleir, whose Worth and Gallantry
cannot be sufficiently mentioned; This Loyal Knight, after such time the Juncto
at Westminster had made those Destructive Votes of No further Addresses to the
King, and began to reject him in words, as they had done formerly in deeds;
some hopes being given of Aid for his Majesty, Langhorn, Poyer, and Powell,
having an Army under them, to near the number of Eight Thousand, declaring for
the King: Sir John Owen also having Risen in North Wales with a good Force;
This gallant Knight put to his helping hand, and surprised Chepstow-Castle; but
providence having decreed that deliverance should come to the English Nation by
a more mild way then the Sword; those Forces under the Three Colonels were
utterly Routed; Sir John Owen suppressed and taken Prisoner, and the Castle of
Chepstow stormed and taken by Colonel Eure, where this Renowned Knight for his
Gallant Loyalty, was by the barbarous Enemy slain in cold blood.

XLIII. The Lord Francis Villers, Brother to the Duke of Buckingham, who with
the said Duke, the Earl of Holland, and other Noble Personages, Rose in Arms
for the Restoration of his Sacred Majesty at Kingston in Surry, but being set
upon by Sir Michael Livesy, with other of the Parliament Forces, this Active
Spark of Valor, being too far Engaged by his Mettalsome Courage, was taken
Prisoner, and refusing Quarter, was basely killed by a mean and rude hand, with
whose fall fell the Courage of all the other, he being a person of Excellent
Parts, and of Valor far above his years.

XLIV. Sir (...) Compton, a Gentleman of known Worth and Loyalty, who Engaging
with those Noble Hero's, Sir Charles Lucas, Lord Capel, etc. for the Restoring
the King, and the Laws to their Right, whose Authority was then trampled upon
by the Juncto at Westminster; This Gallant Gentleman upon a sally out against
the Fairfaxians, that besieged the Town, valiantly fighting, was by a bullet
(which differenceth not a Loyal Person from a Rebel) shot, and wounded, whereof
he died, July 1648.

XLV. Sir William Vaughan, whose Valor and Fidelity were often approved in his
Majesty's Service, he was slain at the siege of Dublin serving under the thrice
Renowned Marquess of Ormond.

XLVI. Sir Arthur Aston, a Person whose Experience, Courage, and approved
Fidelity rendered him worthy of the highest Trust and Command; This worthy
Gentleman was Governor of Drogheda when Cromwell with his Army of Janisaries
besieged it; valiantly defending the Place committed to his Charge, giving
Cromwell two notable Repulses, and doubtless had given a good account of his
Command, had not Colonel Wall's Regiment upon the unfortunate loss of their
Colonel, in the third Assault been so unhappily dismayed, as to listen, (before
any need was) unto the Enemy offering them Quarter, and admitted them in upon
those Terms; betraying thereby both themselves, and all their Fellow Soldiers,
to the insatiable Cruelty of that Monster of Nature, Cromwell, who gaining the
Place, most inhumanely put them all to the sword.

XLVII. Sir Edmond Varney* a Gentleman whose worth made him alike beloved and
admired; his faithful service being often approved in Defense of his Majesty,
this gallant Gentleman, whose merits rendered him odious to Cromwell, was one of
those who by that bloody Cutthroat was butchered at Drogheda.

XLVIII. Col. Warren, Col. Fleming Col. Brin, Lieutenant Colonel Finglass, and
Major Tempest, all Active Sparks of Valor, whose Heroic Acts had purchased to
them a spreading Fame, and whose supereminent valor marked them out to
slaughter from the hand of that wicked (though fortunate) General Oliver
Cromwell, at Drogheda aforesaid.

XLIX. Colonel Hamond a Kentish Gentleman, and firm Royalist, who was a
Colchesterian, and suffered for his Loyalty a sharp Imprisonment at Windsor;
afterward serving his Royal Master in Ireland, at the Castle of Garran, lost
his life against Cromwell and his Conquering Army.

L. Captain Goff, a person of eminent valor, who under the Marquess of
Clanrickard in the Royal Cause, valiantly fighting, was unfortunately killed.

LI. Sir John Brown, a Major General of the Scots at such time as his present
Majesty was amongst them, who with a Party of Scots Encountering with Lambert
in Fife, was there wounded, of which he quickly after died.

LII. The Lord Widrington, an Eminent, and Loyal Person, who after the Kings
march to Worcester, together with that ever Renowned Lord, the Earl of Derby,
and other Eminent Hero's, gathered Forces together in Lancashire to oppose the
Rebels Army, which like an impetuous torrent were flowing after the Royal
Party, and having gathered together about Twelve Hundred Men, marched upon a
design to fall upon Cromwells own Regiment then Quartering upon their march in
Lancaster, when in the nick of time, in comes Lilburn with Ten Troops of Horse
sent by the General from York upon that very Service, having with them Two
Regiments of Cheshire Foot, and other additional Forces of Horse. Those gallant
Royalists notwithstanding cheerfully resolved to fight with Lilburn, and
accordingly charged him so furiously, that they totally Routed their first
Troop, and with a gallant bravery entered their Body so far, that they began to
run; but fresh reserves coming in, they were forced to retreat, being sorely
annoyed with the Muskets; yet notwithstanding this repulse, they renewed their
charge again, and were in great probability of obtaining a glorious Victory,
when another supply resisted the torrent of their valor, and left deep
impressions thereof in the death of many gallant Royalists, amongst whom this
Noble Hero was one, who there died in the bed of Honor, August 25. 1651.

LIII. Major General Sir Thomas Tilsely, a Gentleman of such Heroic Parts,
that envy her self must commend him to be the pattern of true Chivalry and
Mirror of Loyalty; So Great and Excellent were his Endowments, that had he
lived in former Ages, his Valourous Atchievments, would have quite shaded many
of those who then passed for illustrious Hero's, he was also slain in that
fatal defeat whereof we spoke of last.

LIVE. Colonel Matthew Boynton, Sir Francis Gamul, Lieutenant Colonel Gallyard,
and Major Trollop, and Chester, Men of approved Worth and Loyalty, whose
gallantry appeared the more conspicuous, Engaging in such a time when there was
almost a general defection of Loyalty; These valiant Hero's Engaging with the
foresaid Earl of Derby, being overpowered by Lilburn's numerous Forces,
gallantly fighting, were slain at Wiggan, August 25. 1651. dying there in the
bed of Honor, and leaving to posterity a Noble Character of their Worth and
Virtues.

LV. Duke Hamilton, unfortunately wounded in the Fight at Worcester, of which
wounds he shortly after died.

LVI. Colonel Morgan, a Gallant Gentleman, who Engaged with Sir George Booth,
for a Free Parliament, and to un-yoak the Nation from the slavery of those
bloody Canniballs at Westminster, who intended to have perpetuated themselves
in their Tyranny; This magnanimous Loyal Person, valiantly fighting against
Lambert's numerous Forces, which like a violent Torrent overpowered them; after
a gallant defense, and defiance of his Enemies, was there mortally wounded, and
soon after died, being the last man whose blood was shed in War against those
wicked Tyrants; the Kings Restoration happening quickly after.

And in the next place we should come to speak of those who suffered in their
Estate for their Loyalty; those gallant Confessors, to whom nothing was more
common then Imprisonment and Sequestration; but should we reckon them all up,
it would make a Volume as big as Foxes Martyrologie, and tire the brain of the
most sedulous Reader; not any one Rich Cavilier that escaped their clutches; a
great Estate being enough to make them guilty of the most heinous Crimes, and
how ever their Bodies sped, their Purses were sure to pay for it; Goldsmiths
and Haberdashers Hall was their Exchequer, as the High Court of Justice was
their Shambles; The Good Old Cause devoured more then Bell and the Dragon, and
it was their main Policy to be maintained by their Enemies Estates; Take
therefore here a Brief Catalogue of the most Eminent Sufferers, reserving those
of a lesser magnitude to be recorded by more voluminous Historians.

A brief Catalogue of the most Eminent of those Loyal Confessors, who Suffered
by Imprisonment, Banishment, or Estate, for the Cause of his Sacred Majesty.
And that no Occasion may be taken at this Catalogue for matter of Precedence,
as nominating the most Eminent Sufferers in the first place, we will (as near
as we can) observe the order of time, and begin first with:

I. THe Lord Finch of Fordwich, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; a Person whose
Abilities, and Loyalty to his Sacred Majesty rendered him obnoxious to the
unruly rabble; and therefore upon their Arbitrary Proceedings against the Life
of the most Noble Earl of Strafford, he wisely withdrew himself away in time,
before Popular Fury had seized on him, against which Beast; Innocence would not
then give Protection. He lived in Banishment and Exile from his Native Country
for Sixteen years, and then returned with more Credit and Honor then he was
forced from it, dying in the Love, and good Opinion of all Honest People; His
Faithful Service to his Sovereign being all the Charge and Accusation they had
against him.

II. Master Secretary Windebanck, a person of approved Worth and Loyalty,
against whom the darts of Popular Fury were in those times of Distraction
especially aimed at, which to avoid, he pursued the same course with the Lord
Finch, and died in the time of his absence abroad.

III. The Right Reverend Father in God, Matthew Lord Bishop of Ely, who with
Eleven more of that Sacred Function, were committed to the Tower in the year of
our Lord, 1641. The pretensions against them being the same with the Accomplices
of Korah, Ye take too much upon you ye Sons of Levi, when their Adversaries
intentions was, to take all; for though the grave Rabbis of that prevailing
Faction buzzed into the Peoples ears, that their Quarrel was against the
Litturgy, against Ceremonies and the like a yet their after-Actions made it
plainly appear, that it was more against Bishops Lands; and that the Wealth of
the Clergy was more in their aim, then the Weal the Subjects; and the Riches
of the Prelates more indifferent to those strict Disciplinaries, then a
Reverend decency in holy performances. Eighteen years did this Reverend Father
suffer Imprisonment in the Tower, having in all that time no Charge exhibited
against him; but in the end of the year, 1659. he was restored to his liberty
by the means of the Renowned Duke of Albemarle, and is since Re-established in
his former Diocese, to the Honor and Support of this restored Church.

IV. Religious Doctor Featly, one most Eminent for Learning and Piety, to whom
this Church is much indebted for his grave accurate defenses of its Doctrine
and Discipline, a man of excellent Endowments, and surpassing Knowledge, being
a Divine of the Primitive stamp and temper, when the Church by lowliness of
spirit did flourish in high examples; yet could not this his singular Piety,
eminent Learning; nor those other extraordinary Gifts with which he was
Endowed, privilege him from the protection of a Prison, being by an Order of
Parliament committed to Peter-House, where he languished in much pain and
misery about a year and a half; and was afterward (sickness increasing)
through much importunity removed to Chelsey College, as a more wholesome Air;
but he was so far spent by their barbarous misusage of him, that within three
weeks after his coming thither, he died.

V. Sir Robert Heath, Lord Chief Justice of England, a person much Honored for
his Integrity and Moderation, and as conspicuous for his constant Loyalty, as
the Sun in the Firmament in a serene day. His constant approved service to the
King had rendered him so odious to the Rebels at Westminster, that he was by
them excepted from mercy; wherefore toward the expiration of the War, he
abandoned his Country, and fled into France, where living in great greef and
anxiety of mind to behold the Ruins of his King and Country, he fell into a
Disease, and died thereof at Caen in Normandy, not long after the Kings death.

VI. Judge Bartlet, whose innocence defied their threats, and like a rock stood
in opposition against that torrent of Rebellion; but yet was forced at last to
yield to their Tyranny in his Body, though his Mind they could not conquer; He
was the first of that Reverend Robe that was committed, against whom was
brought a Charge, fuller of malice then truth, and which his integrity made
them ashamed of a further prosecution: Thus we see (by the Imprisonment of this
Reverend Judge, and others) that the pretense of our Grand Reformers, was to
put out the eyes of the Law, that the Subjects might see the clearer.

VII. That heart of Oak, and Pillar of the Law, Judge Jenkins, one of his
Majesty's Justices in Wales, whose Annagram is, David Jenkins, Kains did Envy.
He was for some misdemeanors of Loyalty, brought to the Bar in Chancery, where
he denied the Authority of the Court, because their Seal was contrary to Law,
as well as their Commissioners; and so baffled those puny Judges, that instead
of a further prosecution there, they committed him Prisoner to the Tower, where
he gave further Demonstrations of his Loyalty, by publishing several Presidents
and Statutes, wherein he proved them Rebels and Traitors, and owned the same
again at other Bars: So that he did more mischief to the Enemies of the Royal
Cause with his Pen, then their best Regiment could do with their Swords. He
used his utmost endeavor to set the Parliament and Army at ods, thereby to
promote the Kings Cause, according to that well known maxim, Divide and
Conquer, defying them and their threats, and asserting the King and the Laws
against their Usurpation. He was kept a close Prisoner a long time in the
Tower, where wearied of him by his indefatigable industry in the Kings Cause,
he was removed from thence to Windsor, where he continued in the same quality,
and of the same mind, till without thanks to them he was permitted the liberty
of the Town; and has survived to see the Return of Majesty, the Restoration
of the Laws, and the Liberty of the Subjects restored to them again in as ample
a manner as it was before.

VIII. That Valiant, Loyal Son of Mary, Sir Ralph, afterward Lord Hopton,
whose Courage and Prudence in the management of the Kings Affairs, (for whom he
Commanded in the West) did gain him the approbation of an Expert Captain, and
Gallant Commander, having his Endeavors Crowned with many notable Successes.
After his Disbanding in Cornwall (Rebellion then flourishing with a high hand)
he took shipping with the Prince, our now Gracious Sovereign, and with him
Sailed into the Island of Scilly, and from thence into the Realm of France,
following the Kings hard fortune in his Peregrinations, till death in the end
put a period to his Travells, and after a Troublesome life, he found a quiet
Grave at the City of Paris in France.

IX. Master Secretary, Sir Edward Nicholas, who constantly and faithfully
adhered to his Majesty from the beginning of his Troubles, being a great Prop
to the Royal Cause, by his Prudent Counsels, and Great Abilities in the
Management of the most Difficult Affairs; and afterward continued the same
Service and Office to our present Sovereign, in all his Troubles and
Negotiations abroad, having with great Faithfulness and Prudency Managed that
Employment all along, to the happy Effect of his Majesty's Glorious Restitution.

X. Sir Edward Hide, since the Right Honorable Earl of Clarendon, and Lord
Chancellor to his present Majesty, of whose Worth and Abilities to speak, were
to cry out; the Sun shine; by whose Counsels the late King had in special
Esteem, and therefore made him his bosom, Favorite, which caused such a
hatred against him by the Faction at Westminster, as excluded him out of their
Spurious Act of Mercy: But escaping their merciless cruelty by a timely
avoidance of the Land, through his prudent carriage of Affairs, together with
the providencial mercy of God, he survived to see those Enemies of Monarchy,
and Regal Government brought to a Just Trial, and himself advanced to such a
pitch of Honor, as to see the Laws Administered in their right form, and the
Subject to enjoy the just privileges of them.

XI. The Lord Wilnot, afterward by King Charles the Second made Earl of
Rochester, being Raised thereunto by his superlative Deserts, not only by his
Valor which shone transcendent clear at Round-way-down near the Devizes; but
also in his (prudent carriage in that grand Affair, concerning the Kingdoms
happiness, in his Majesty's Miraculous Escape from Worcester; He died a little
before the Kings Restitution, not surviving to participate of those Grandeurs,
whereof his Abilities would have made him a deserved Sharer.

XII. The Right Reverend Doctor Shelden, whose Deserts and Sufferings advanced
him upon the Restoration of his Majesty to be Lord Bishop of London, since by
the death of Doctor Juxon, (as none more able to supply his place) to the
Archbishopric of Canterbury, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, of
whose Abilities to speak, were to show the light of the Sun by a Candle; Let it
suffice, that his very Name is enough to strike Envy dead, and to put to
silence the most obstinate Heretic, and riged Schismatic upon the face of the
whole Earth.

XIII. The Religiously Loyal Doctor Hammond, a constant assertor of our
English Liturgy, and one whose Abilities rendered him dear to King Charles the
Martyr; to whom Imprisonment was no stranger, during the time Rebellion was
Rampant, expecting every day for his Loyalty to have been transported, yet
would never yield nor deviate from those ways wherein Conscience ascertained
him he was in the right, though not the predominate side.

XIV. Sir Marmaduke Langdale, afterward Lord Langdale, whose Abilities in
Martial Affairs, would in the time of Paganism have deified him the God of
Battle, though in our times his constant Loyalty had rendered him to a higher
pitch of Honor, being deservedly accounted a Pylot for all Noble and Gallant
Spirits whereby to direct and steer their Course.

XV. Master Roger L' Strange, of whose Worth and Abilities to speak would to an
Intelligible Reader appear superfluous, like the labors of him who writ a
whole Volumn in the praise of Hercules whom no man dispraised. This Loyal
Gentleman for his Endeavors of Reducing Linn to their Obedience to his
Majesty, suffered the utmost malice of a prevailing Faction, even to
Condemnation, besides a long Imprisonment in Newgate; Yet could not their
Tyranny so much depress his Spirits, but his Pen was still a constant Assertor
of the Royal Cause; in which he continued his best endeavors, unto, and until
the happy Restoration of his Sacred Majesty, by whom he is looked upon as one
of the Agents of his Restoration.

XVI. The Right Honorable the Earl of Norwich, a Gentleman of such Worth and
Abilities, that this mite will signify nothing to those Rare and Excellent
gifts both of Learning and* Wisdom, wherewith he was Adorned.

XVII. Sir John Stowel, a Somersetshire Gentleman, whose Loyalty rendered him
so sufficiently Famous, that Envy it is self cannot but grant him a prime place
with those Glorious Confessors who suffered under the Barbarous Tyrannies of
the Rump, in the Cause of that Blessed Martyr, King Charles, who so constantly
and vigourously adhered to the King during the War, until the Surrender of
Exeter, where was good Articles granted, upon which he came to London to make
composition for his Vast Estate then under Sequestration; but contrary to the
Capitulation agreed upon at Exeter, the Committee at Gold-Smiths-Hall (those
Horse-leeches of the Nation) tendered him the Negative Oath before he could
have any admission to Compound; to which unjust and perfidious dealing he
pleaded the benefit of the said Articles, who (good Conscientious Men)
committed him first to the Serjant at Arms, and from thence to Newgate, where
having remained a long time, he was at last brought to their High Court of
Injustice, where he very hardly escaped with life; his great Estate amounting
to Seven or Eight Thousand pound per Annum, making him liable to any Treason
those Incorrigible Traitors could suggest against him; he was from thence
remanded to the Tower, but has since survived to enjoy again his own Estate,
and to see many of those Hanged, who would have used their utmost spite for
the Enjoyment of his great Estate.

XVIII. Sir John Berkenhead, a Gentleman whose Worth and Deserts are too high
for me to deliniate; He was a constant Assertor of his Majesty's Cause in its
lowest Extremities, and suffered for the same several Imprisonments; I shall
speak no more in his Commendation, whose own Pen has so sufficiently displayed
its self, that he who is ignorant thereof, must plead ignorance both to Wit and
Learning.

XIX. Doctor Barwick, a Reverend Orthodox Divine, who for his Loyalty was by an
Order of the Long Parliament committed Prisoner to the Tower, where he lay
until such time he was near famished, when Colonel West the then Lieutenant of
the Tower, permitted him his liberty on Parol to render himself at a prefixed
time soon after, which he accordingly performed; after the Lievtenants death,
his Wife gained him his Conge, and set him at perfect Freedom, there being
nothing of Accusation against him, for it was the method of those Tyrants to
bury Men in their Prisons, until their Estates and Healths were quite
exhausted, if they had nothing against them which would presently reach their
Lives. This Reverend Doctor survived to see the flourishing again of
Episcopacy, and was by his Sacred Majesty made Dean of St. Paul's, in which
place he continued till the month of October, 1664. when (like Abraham) he was
gathered to his Fathers a good man, and full of days.

XX. The Valiant Earl of Cleaveland, a person whose Worth and Honor cannot be
forgotten so long as living Annals shall inform posterity of the miseries of
our Civil Wars; This Loyal Earl, as he gave undoubted Testimonies all along
the War, of his unfeigned Fidelity to the Royal Cause, so particularly at
Worcester, where he was in Obedience to his Majesty's commands; suffering a
tedious and cruel Imprisonment by those Barbarous Rebels, for the Testimonies
of his Affection to his Royal Sovereign.

XXI. The Lord Gerard, now Captain of his Majesty's Life Guard, who all along
the War bore a part in the calamities and misfortunes of the Kings Adventures,
never forsaking the Royal Interest in its lowest ebb of Fortune, which he has
survived to see it restored again to its former resplendant Majesty.

XXII. Sir John Owen, that undaunted piece of Welsh Loyalty, whose endeavors
for the King in that Country, were truly Honorable, though not crowned with
that success as such a Cause merrited. This Loyal Gentleman, was at their High
Court of Injustice condemned to death, together with Duke Hamilton, Lord Capel,
etc. but by the mercy of the Parliament, (rare and wonderful) he was Reprieved.

XXIII. The Earl of Norwich, the Lord Loughborough, Sir Bernard Gascoigne,
Colonel Far, etc. these Heroic Persons were all Engaged in the Design at
Colchester, where having suffered a sharp and bitter Siege, after the rendition
of the Town, they had by the barbarity of those Rebels all of them suffered
death, had not some of them made their escapes, and the rest give in such Pleas
as would have freed them out of the hands of the most bloody Cannibals in the
world.

XXIV. Should I next go about to enumerate all those Excellent Persons who were
forced out of their Fellowships, and other Collegiate Emoluments in both
Universities, it would be a Task too large for so small a Volumne; -- A work so
great,
Would make Olympus bearing Atlas sweat.
Such barbarity being used toward them, as may make Posterity to tremble at
the thought of it, I shall therefore pass over that sad story and beadroll,
desiring to be excused, though I give not to every person a due Character for
their Loyalty in Suffering.

XXV. Should I next mention the calamity of the Loyal and Orthodox Clergy,
which they underwent in general, by that bloody and cruel Edict of Oliver,
which by restriction of their Function, nay their particular abilities,
permitting them not so much as to keep a School, taking thereby clearly away
from them all hopes of sustentation and maintenance of life; this might better
be expressed by sighs and tears, then by pen and paper.

XXVI. Next I might make a record of that black Bill and List against several
of the Nobility and Gentry, which passed against them for an Act of Parliament,
by which their Estates were forfeited for Loyalty, and appointed to be sold by
Trustees of their Nomination; thus though they could not come at to eat the
bird, they would be sure to pluck off all his feathers.

XXVII. In the next place, the Martyred City of Worcester, the scene of ruined
Loyalty deserves to be had in everlasting remembrance, each Citizen whereof
might be transcribed into this Register, as being all sufferers for the Royal
Cause, to which they constantly adhered during all the time of the War, and
would not yield at last without a particular Order from his Majesty; and with
the same resolution of Loyalty did they Entertain King Charles the Second in
fifty one, whom they proclaimed with great solemnity, and in that Fatal Defeat
suffered deeply with him being plundered by the insatiable covetousness of the
Soldiers of what ever was worth the carrying away; yet in that desparate
exigency (such was their love to the Royal Cause) that as if their own
sufferings had been nothing, at the Rebels entrance, the streets resounded
with the peoples cries, Oh! save the King, save the King; amongst which number
of Royal Sufferers; Master Soles, the honest Mayor deserves a particular
remembrance, for whom a Gallows was set up for him at his own door, and from
which he as narrowly escaped.

XXVIII. Next for the Honor of the City of London, we find Sir Abraham
Reynoldson, who so gallantly refused to Proclaim the Act for abolishing Kingly
Government, and was for the same committed to the Tower; Sir John Gaire,
Alderman Adams, Sir James Bunce, who suffered much in their Vast. Estates, and
Major General Brown, who endured a sharp and tedious Imprisonment.

XXIX. The Honorable Colonel John Russel, Brother to the Earl of Bedford, a
person of unfeigned Fidelity and Gallantry, who served his Majesty in his
Armies during all the War, and was a constant sufferer for him all along
afterward in the Usurpers Prisons, being upon the least occasion of fear, sure
to be one of the first that was secured, and so continued tossed from one
custody to another, till such time as his Majesty's Happy Return.

XXX. The Right Honorable the Lord Bellasis, who partaking in the same Cause,
suffered in the very same predicament, being no where more resident or constant
then in their custody, and so jealous were they over him, that he could not go
or travel any where, without a Pass, or safe Conduct from the next Officer to
the place of his abode; which restriction continued for many years together,
being besides continually in danger of being trappanned out of his Life, by the
Wiles and Snares of his Treacherous Enemies.

XXXI. Colonel John and William Ashburnham, those Gemini of Loyal Fidelity, the
former so well known in our Annalls for the conveying the King away from
Oxford; both signally famous for their endeavors in the Royal Cause, never
free from trouble and molestation of the Regicides, whose guilty consciences
(like Ismael) thought every man's hand to be against them. These Loyal Brothers
were in conclusion sent by them to remote Castles and Islands, and there
debarred of any intercourse or correspondence with their Friends; so inhumanely
barbarous were those bloody Rebels; that when they could not by any show of
Justice deprive them of their lives, they would immure them up in Walls of
stone, and debar them of all means which should in the least make life
comfortable unto them.

XXXII. Air Humphry Bennet, an Eminent Royalist, formerly a Brigadier in the
Kings Army, who at that time of Colonel Penruddocks Rising at Salisbury, being
of that Country, was seized and secured as a Partaker and Confederate with him,
and for the same committed Prisoner to the Tower of London, where he remained
near Three years, and then was brought before their High Court of Justice,
which was Erected for the Trial of Sir Henry Slingsby, etc. but their Charge
not taking as they would have had it, after some few days attendance, he was
superseded from his Trial, and remitted again to his confinement; but the
return of Majesty put a period to his Troubles, and advanced him to be one of
the Secretaries of State.

XXXIII. The Right Honorable, John Lord Viscount Mordant, Brother to the Earl
of Peterborough, an active Person against the Tyrannies of the Rump, and that
Monster of Nature, Oliver Cromwell, being really Engaged in several Designs
against him, for which he hardly escaped with his life, being acquitted but by
one saving voice; After the death of that Tyrant, he still labored
indefatigably in the Kings business, being as busy against the Rump, as before
against the Protector, for which he was by Proclamation commanded to render
himself by a prefixed time, or be reputed a Traitor, but was by providence
preserved out of their hands, and has since seen some of them suffer the same
death designed for him; He is now Governor of Windsor Castle.

XXXIV. Sir Thomas Woodcock, who Engaging in the same Design with my Lord
Mordant, was by the Regicides intended for the slaughter; but he so wisely
managed his Defense at their Bar of Injustice, that he escaped their clutches,
being fairly acquitted by those bloody Justices.

XXXV. Master Christopher Pitts, a Loyal Noble Gentleman, who was apprehended
upon the same business of my Lord Mordant, and committed Prisoner to Newgate,
where after Examination, having not found enough against him to take away his
life, they would have made use of him as a Witness against his Associates, but
his Noble Spirit scorning such baseness, refused so to do, whereupon after many
vain threats and menaces, he was by their High Court condemned to perpetual
Imprisonment, and Fined One Thousand Pound, all which his gallant spirit
willingly submitted to, rather then to be guilty of his Friends blood, though a
kind of forcible necessity would have seemed to some a sufficient warrant for
such an action. He continued after Oliver's death a Prisoner, (though with more
freedom then was allowed him by that Tyrannical Sentence) until by the happy
restoration of his Majesty, he commenced his Freedom with that of the
Kingdoms.

XXXVI. Master William Garrent, who for the same business was Tried before that
accursed High Court, who would have no doubt designed him for the slaughter,
but that they failed in their Evidence, of which it was thought they relied on
Master Pitts, he was with much ado acquitted, and soon after set at liberty.

XXXVII. Henry Friar, John Sumner, and Oliver Allen, who were all Three
condemned at the aforesaid Court of Justice, the first of them being brought to
suffer in West-Smithfield, where in the rounds a Gibbet was Erected, but being
upon the Ladder, and ready to dye, a Reprieve was produced, and he carried back
again to the Tower, from whence not long after he was dismissed; the other two
were likewise drawn on Hurdles, the one to Bishopsgate, and the other to Grace
Church-street, the places appointed for their Execution, but were both there
reprieved, and soon after freed.

XXXVIII. The most Noble Marquess of Winchester, Newcastle, and Worcester,
Hero's, whose Deserts require a better Character then I am able to bestow upon
them, and their Memories a more durable Register, then this Little Breviary,
having endured all the discommodities of those wretched times amongst them (
Viz.) Imprisonment, Banishment, Distress, Diprivation of Estates, and all those
other Miseries an Insulting Enemy could lay upon them, for the Duty they owed
to God and their King, and the preservation of a Good Conscience.

XXXIX. The Right Honorable Earls of Oxford and Northampton, the Lord
Herbert, etc. who suffered Imprisonment in the Tower, upon suspicion of a
Rising, from which afterward for want of good; Proof they were released.

XL. Sir George Booth, now Lord Delamere, who to free his Country from those
Insulting Tyrannies of the Rump, appeared in Arms against them in Cheshire,
and was Proclaimed Traitor, together with Major General Egerton, Colonel
Warden, and Sir Thomas Midleton, but being defeated by Lambert's more numerous
Forces, he fled in a disguise to Newport-Pagnel in Bedford-shire, where he was
discovered, seized on, and sent Prisoner to the Tower of London, his Estate
ordered to be sequestered and sold, and preparations made for his Trial, which
had it gone on, he would no doubt have paid for it with his Life; but as when
Thieves fall out, true men speed the better, so the divisions betwixt that
remaining scum at Westminster, and their Commander Lambert, through the Prudence
and Loyalty of Noble General Monk, brought in the readmission of the secluded
Members, by whom he was restored to his Liberty and Estate.

XLI. Sir Thomas Middleton, a Gentleman who had attempted much to the
Restoration of his Majesty, being Engaged in the same business with Sir George
Booth, after the Defeat he was forced to flee, being sure to have suffered
deeply had he fallen into their hands; He left Chirk Castle, his stately
Mansion to be defended by his Sonns, which soon after was rendered to Colonel
Zanchy; but the happy Revolution aforesaid, restored his Estate again to him,
and he to the free and peaceable possession thereof.

But should I go about to Ennumerate all those Persons that suffered by
Sequestrations, Plunderings, and Rapines, my Task were infinite; I shall
therefore refer every particular of those sufferers to that great and general
day of Account, when their Enemies shall receive the reward of their Fraud and
Violence, and Themselves a just recompense for all their Sufferings.

The Names and Characters of those Persons who Sat as Judges, and Sentenced our
late Dread Sovereign, Charles the First of Glorious Memory, and how Gods
Vengeance overtook many of them for their Bloody, Barbarous Cruelty.
I. JOhn Bradshaw, President of the most Notorious Villainy that was ever Acted
on the Theater of this World; a Cheshire Man born, but hateful to his Country,
that it should be the Production of so Vile a Viper, more hateful to those of
the Long Robe, Acting the Highest Wickedness, and most Selerate Parricide that
ever was committed; more abominable to his Name, but most odious of all to the
Nation; who two Terms before the perpetration of that horrid murder of the
King, took the Solemn Oath of Allegiance as a Serjant at Law, being Advanced to
that Dignity from the Scolding and Railing of Guild Hall London, to Act the
Highest piece of Impudence against his Pious and Gracious Sovereign; which he
performed with such dexterity, as showed him to be a Grand Masterpiece in
Villainy: But afterward grew conscious (as to the safety of his body) of his
Fact, when Oliver taking upon him the Supreme Power, the very Name of a Single
Person frighting him above measures; But otherwise he was so canteriz'd as to
the salvation of his Soul, that he remained, and so departed this Life in a
most damnably dangerous obstinacy, and maintenance of that Horrid Fact, either
presuming there was no High Court of Justice in Heaven, or else, in
desperation, judging he was judged already. The rewards of this most unparaleld
Parracide, which no doubt were the motives to this Villainy, was the Presidency
of their Council of State; the Lord Cottington's Estate, and the Duchy of
Lancaster, with some advance money before hand (like his Predecessor Judas) for
his undertaking. This Scelerate Villain dyed in his bed, at such time as
Lambert and his Committee of Safty were Acting the Jack Puddings on the English
Theater, which by the Impes and Abetters of his Treason was Commented on with
great Advantage; and indeed was by others taken as a note of admiration, that
so blood-guilty a Person should descend the Grave so quietly, since according
to the Poet; Few Traitors do unto their Graves descend,
Without sierce slaughter, and a bloody end.


But we must in this look upon the good Providence of God, who by removing this
wicked Wretch, and other implacable Enemies of our Sovereign, thereby made way
by an Easy hand (which otherwise might have been dyed in blood) to the
Restoration of him to his Kingdom, and his People to the Enjoyment of their
Laws, Liberty, and Religion. He was Buried in Westminster Abbey, but that
Ground being too Holy to retain such a one as had been the Death of the Father
of the Church, he was removed from thence, and thrown under the Gallows, a
receptacle more fit for such a Scelerate Villain.

II. Oliver Cromwell, an English Monster, the Center of Mischief, a shame to the
British Chronicle, a blot to Gentility, a pattern for Tyranny, Murder and
Hypocrisy, whose horrid Treasons will scarce gain credit of posterity, and
whose bloody Tyranny will quite drown the Names of Nero, Domitian, Caligula,
etc. This wicked Monster, was the main Engine of all their Diabolical
Proceedings, the Primum mobile, by which those other Sons of Mischief moved,
the weight which set all the wheels of their bloody machinations a going: He
was born at Huntington, the year of our Lord, 1599. Descended from an Ancient
and Worshipful Family, unhappy only in this, that such a wicked Science
should proceed from so good a Stock; His Grandfather, Sir Henry Cromwell, was
a Gentleman highly Honored both in Coutt, and Country, and died with such love
that he had many weeping eyes attendant to his Grave, leaving behind him Five
Sons, Oliver, Henry, Robert, Richard, and Philip; This Oliver was Son to the
third Son Robert, and received his Name from Sir Oliver Cromwell his Uncle, at
such time as he was received into the bosom of the Church by her Rites and
Ceremonies, both which he afterward most impiously and profanely rent and tore
asunder, acting such horrid vallainies under the name of Providence, that
Posterity may with some reason doubt how any one could commit such horrid Acts
under the notion of Religious Principles; He having at last attained to the
height of his Ambition, ( viz.) the Superiority over the Three Kingdoms, and
for Five years space, wallowed in the blood of many Gallant and Heroic
Persons, he at last descended (though unwillingly) to his Grave; but Divine
vengiance (which would not suffer the blood, that so impiously and traitorously
was spilt by his procurement) pursued this wicked Miscreant, and would not let
him Enjoy the Privilege of a Grave; He being dug out of the ground, where a
sumptious Monument was Erected for him, and from thence ( January 30. the day
whereon they Erected that execrable Murder on our late dread Sovereign) drawn
in a Cart to the Red Lion in Holborn, and thence on a Sledge to Tyburn, where
being pulled out off his Coffin, he with Bradshaw and Ireton were hanged at the
several Angles of that Triple Tree, which though to some it may seem
preposterous to hang Cromwell thus without Examination, yet they must know
withal, this was not done without a President.

III. Henry Ireton, Commissary General of Horse; an Active Villain against his
Sacred Majesty; Cromwell's second in all Mischief, who Espoused his Daughter as
well as his Lesigns, and whose Ambition and Tyranny would if he had lived, no
doubt have made him more Notoriously Eminent; He was a maine Instrument in the
Barbarous Murder of Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle; a great fomenter
of all our Troubles, and who gave as undeniable proofs of his blood-thirsty
Tyranny as the best of them all. A Man of great Parts and Abilities, but
nature'd to Mischief, and the evil of those Times he was born to make worse,
and most prodigiously infamous; no Man came suited with so great Capacity to the
Overthrow of the Government, reckoning his Impiety, or rather vizzarded Piety
unto his Endowments. He died of the Plague at Limbrick in Ireland, November the
27. 1651. from whence his Carcass was conveyed into England, and in great Pomp
brought to London, where it lay for a time in great State at Somerset House,
which was all hung with black, and a Scutchion over the Gate, with this Motto,
Dulce est pro Patria Mori. How suitable to him that Countryman best told, who
Englished it in these words; It is good for his Country that he is dead.
February 6. following, He was with Great Magnificence Interred in Henry the
Seventh's Chapel at Westminster, but has since found a more fitting and
deserved Sepulcher; his Carcass being with Cromwell's and Bradshaw's, as they
were Trine in mischief, so buried under the Triple Tree Tyburn, Anno 1660.

IV. Sir Hardress Waller, a Soldier of Fortune, and in Charity judged not to
be of such a premeditated malice as the rest, though by the current of Times
drawn to Act with the highest in Mischief; He was at the first a Cavalier in
Opinion, but with the more gainfuller times turned Presbyterian, then
afterward upon the new module, when Presbytery began to decline, he became a
strong Independent; where finding the uncontrollable sweetness of Pay, and
minding Profit more then Conscience, he still grew more hardened in his Lawless
practices, finding more likeliness of greater spoils in the destruction of
Monarchy; He was one of those Committees to consider of the Time and Place for
his Majesty's Execution, and Acted all along with them in their Murtherous
Counsels, having for his share in the price of blood, a Command afterward in
Ireland, where he continued till such time as the Happy Revolution of Affairs,
brought Monarchy again to stand on its feet, when he surrendered himself, and
upon his Trial showed much reluctance and grief for his Crimes; He still lives
by the Mercy of the King, a condemned man, Prisoner in the Isle of Wight.

V. Colonel Valentine Walton of small Extract, or Remarque, till such time as
made notoriously famous for Villainy: He was by Marriage Cromwell's Brother in
Law, who upon that account by his Authority and Command in the Parliament,
preferred him to be Governor of Linn, and Bashaw of the Isle of Ely, which
place he had stongly Fortefied as a safe Retreat for Cromwell, if before he had
completed his damnable Designs, he should have been forced to have gone
thither. Upon the Change of the Times, when Royalty began to grow splendid, he
ran away ( the wicked flees when no man pursues) and has hitherto escaped
the hands of Justice.

VI. Colonel Thomas Harrison, the Son of a Butcher at Newcastle under line in
Staffordshire, at first a Servant to one Master Hulker an Attorney; But finding
the Law begun to be trod under foot, he betook himself to the Army, the more
hopefuller way of preferment; where by his Preaching, and such like
Sanctimonious ways of proceeding, when the Army made a gain of Godliness, he
came to be a Major, and being of a pragmaticall daring spirit, was by the
influence of Cromwell preferred to be a Colonel; and the Custody of the Kings
Person when taken from the Isle of Wight committed unto him, which he according
to his Butchery Nature, most irreverently abused, by no less saucy behavior
then Treasonable Speeches of blacking the King, etc. He was afterward the
great Captain and Ringleader of all the Schismatiques, especially
Fifth-Monarchy-Men, and such as traded in Enthusiasmes, in whose Love and
especial Opinion he dyed, being expectedly Executed at the place where once
stood Charing Cross, October 14. 1660. His Head was set upon a Pole on the top
of the South-East end of Westminster Hall, and his Quarters Exposed to Public
View upon some of the City Gates.

VII. Colonel Edward Whaley, Descended from a Family in Nottingham-shire, and
bound Apprentice to a Woollen-Draper, which trade he followed for a while, but
falling into decay, left the Ell and took up the Spear; and during all the time
of our Troubles was very industriously Active, rising by degrees till he came
at last to be Comissiary General of the Horse; He was a Man of a daring Spirit,
and resolute to perform what ever he undertook; Crafty withal, and Covetous,
having not where-withall otherwise to maintain his Ambition; to which we may
add his Perfidiousness, betraying the King at Hampton Court under pretense of
Affection, the worst kind of perfidy; and having thus juggled him whither they
would have him, he made no scruple to join with others in his horrid Murder;
upon the turn of the Times he likewise fled to prevent the stroke of Justice
worthily due to his Deserts.

VIII. Colonel Thomas Pride, a Brewer; at first a Dray-man, but at the
beginning of the Wars, contrary to David who left the Sword to take up the
Sling, he forsook the Sling and took up the Sword; and though an Ignorant,
Illiterate Fellow, scarce fit to carry gutts to a a Bear, (whose destruction
he performed at Paris Garden) yet being of a resolute Courage, and the blind
goddess Crowning him with success, he was thought fit to partake with Cromwell,
and to venture on that prime and daring Act of Garbelling the Parliament for
him; and having thus Acted that which carried a show of Law and Justice, there
was little thoughts he would fear to venture on the Highest of Treasons, being
a prime Agent in the Murder of the King, Acting with as much Impudence and
Brutishness as any of them all: He died before his Majesty's Return, escaping
thereby a more shameful and ignominious death.

IX. Colonel Isaac Ewer, Descended from an Ancient and Worshipful Family in
Yorkshire, but the Patrimony thereof being in the wave, to recruit his Decaying
Fortunes, he betook himself to the Wealthiest Side, and added much to the Ruin
of Monarchy; having gained a great proficency in their Destructive Principles;
so that he feared not to Act the Highest Villainy, being cloaked under a vail of
Religion; He was thought fit (because of his Birth) to be the Kings Guardian
from the Isle of Wight, and afterward one of his Judges, where he gave his
hand against his Sacred Sovereign, adding to his other Crimes that most
Execrable sin of Murder: He likewise died before his Majesty's Return, robbing
thereby Squire Dun of his due.

X. Thomas Lord Gray of Grooby, Son to the Earl of Stamford, who becoming a
Colonel in the Army, grew infected with their Destructive Principles, and
contrary to Honor, Acted with them in their odious Designs, having his hand in
the Murder of the King, the Fountain and Source of all Honor, from whence
others are derived. In regard of the Honor of his Family, he escapes a Mention
or Condemnation for this Crime, as well as for some others: He dyed before his
Majesty's Happy Restoration.

XI. William Lord Mounson, a sordid Fellow, of Destructive Principles, and
therefore a fit Companion to Act the Horridest Villainies; being for Debt a long
time a Prisoner, but by his Fellow Regicides fetched out to Act with them in
their Lawless Courses: After the Return of his Majesty, he was for his
Treasonable Practices, together with Sir Henry Mildmay, and Master Robert
Wallop brought to the Bar at the House of Commons, where their Estates were
Declared Confiscate, and they degraged from all Titles and Arms of Gentility,
and further Sentenced to be drawn from the Tower through the City of London
upon Sledges, with Halters about their Necks, and so back again to the Tower,
there to suffer perpetual Imprisonment; which Sentence was accordingly Executed
upon them, January 30. 1661.

XII. Sir John Danvers Knight, Brother to that Loyal and Noble Peer the Earl
of Danby, who for his Fidelity to his Sovereign, was by the Rebels Voted a
Delinquent; the covetousness after which Estate, drew in this Knight to partake
with them in their horrid Actions, swallowing thereby his Name and Honor in
this Whirle-pool of Confusion and Royal Blood: He deceased before his Majesty's
Return.

XIII. Sir Thomas Malverer, a Yorkshire Knight, whose Family had been raised
to that Honor by the Two last Kings, which to a Noble Spirit should have been
the more oblidging; but great Benefits cause Ingratitude, and Covetousness to
have wherewithal to live answerable to his Title, wickedly prompted him for
the equalling of it, to consent to the Murder of him from whence his Honor
was Derived; He also died before his Majesty's happy restoration.

XIV. Sir John Bourcher, another Independent Yorkshire Knight, who making a
gain of Godliness, under the pretense thereof Acted the most horrid Villainies,
having God in their mouth, and the Devil in their heart; Like Watermen,
looking one way, and rowing another; being sure always when they had the
fear pretenses, they were then hatching the foulest Impieties. This Man that
he might not be out of the way when occasion should serve, diligently dined at
Hell; and to complete his other wicked Actions, consented to the Murder of his
Sovereign: He likewise dyed before his Majesty's Return.

XV. Isaac Pennington, a busy stickler of the Faction, and a Grand Agent in
the perpetration of all our late Troubles; He was by the Faction continued Lord
Mayor of London for Two Years together, though contrary to the Kings Express
Command from Oxford; by his Authority in the City he contributed largely to the
maintenance of Rebellion, and added much fuel to that fire of Desention
betwixt the King and Parliament; and yet notwithstanding, he was a great sharer
in the spoil of his Country; He broke twice, what being got over the Devil's
back, being spent under his belly; and thinking to make good his broken
Fortunes joined with them in the Murder of his Sovereign; After his Majesty's
Happy Restoration, he surrendered himself according to Proclamation, and at his
Trial pleaded Ignorance, and no Malice, and that he signed not the Warrant; yet
was it made apparent that his Crimes were of a crimson dye; but by the Kings
Clemency his Execution was respited, and died a natural death in the Tower of
London.

XVI. Henry Martin, Son of Sir Henry Martin, Judge of the Prerogative Court; a
most Wicked, Lewd, Vicious; and Infamous Person, whose Actions have rendered
him odious to all Posterity: He first spoke Treason against the King and his
Family in the House of Commons, and was in Complement Committed and Suspended
for a while, proving afterward a Grand Actor in the Highest of Treasons, being
one of the Chief of the Caball in taking away the life of the King; ordering
the Charge against him to go in the Name of The Commons in Parliament
Assembled, and the Good People of England: After his Majesty's Return, he
surrendered himself according to Proclamation, using many dilatory evasions at
his Trial; afterward being brought to the Bar of the House of Lords to Answer
why Judgment should not be Executed upon him, he replied, That he understood
the Proclamation extended to favor of life upon rendering himself; and withal
added, That he never obeyed any of his Majesty's Proclamations before but this,
and hoped that he should not be Hanged for taking the Kings Word now.

XVII. William Purefoy, a Warwickshire Gentleman, once Governor of Coventry,
a busy Fellow in their Leger-de-main Jugglings, and a great Zealot against
Crosses, as Superstitious, and Crowns as Superfluous; This his blind Zeal,
together with his Covetousness after Church, and Crown Lands, made him not
scruple to embrue his hands in the blood of his Prince; but lived not to
receive the just reward of such horrid Villainy, dying before his Majesty's
Return.

XVIII. Colonel John Berkstead, a Man at first of a despicable Fortune, keeping
a sorry Goldsmiths Shop in the Strand; but having learned a little
City-Souldiery, was made Captain of a Foot-Company under Colonel Ven at
Windsor; and being in Active Person, by Success of Rebellion was made Governor
of Reading, and continued always a fast Friend to Oliver Cromwell in all his
wicked Consultations and Purposes; joining with him in that horrid Murder of
the King, for which, and other his Services to him, he was by Oliver made
Lieutenant of the Tower, where by Extortion and Cruelty he gained a great mass
of Wealth; but when Loyalty began again to be Predominant, his guilty
Conscience hurried him beyond Sea, lurking a good while in some parts of
Germany under feigned Names; but divine vengance soon found him out, for He,
Colonel Okey, and Miles Corbet, having resided for some time in the City of
Hannow, about the beginning of March they came to Delf in Holland, appointing
their Wives to meet them there; but Sir George Downing his Majesty's Resident
at the Hague, having information thereof, they were luckily surprised, and sent
into England; and having remained Prisoners some while in the Tower, were
brought to the Kings Bench-Bar, and there demanded what they could say for
themselves, why they should not dye according to Law, the Act of Attainder
being then read unto them; to which they Alleged, they were not the same
persons mentioned therein; but it being proved by Witnesses, Sentence of death
was pronounced against them, and on Saturday, April 19. 1662. they were
Executed at Tyburn; the Head of this Grand Regicide being set on a Pole on
Traitors Gate in the Tower.

XIX. John Blakeston, a Fellow who would not be idle when there was any thing
to do, especially of Profit: He was at first a Shopkeeper in Newcastle, when
according to the time he was a Rigid Presbyterian, and while the Scots were
there, chosen a Burgess for that Town; but the Market of Independency being up,
he turned with the Tide, and (like Judas) for the lucre of money, consented to
the Murder of his Royal Master; but enjoyed the gain of his Impiety not long,
dying before the return of his Majesty, when (without the greater Clemency) he
might have received a reward more agreeable to his deserts.

XX. Gilbert Millington, a Lawyer, who contrary to all Law sided with those
bloody Regicides against his Lawful Sovereign; He was a constant Chairman of
the Committee for Plundered Ministers, by which Trade he filled his Coffers,
the sweets of which Employment set his teeth on edge, and sharpened him to that
cruel attempt upon his Sovereigns Life: Upon the Kings return he surrendered
himself according to Proclamation, and at his Trial confessed the Fact, and the
guilt of it, and was favored with an acceptance of it from the Court.

XXI. Thomas Chaloner, one who had Traveled far in the World, and returned
home poisoned with that Jesuitical Doctrine of King-killing, which he here put
in practice, being the great Speech-Maker against the King, his Family, and
Government, and a great stickler for their New Utopian Commonwealth, but upon
his Majesty's Return, fled the Land, his Actions being so bad as would not
endure the Touchstone.

XXII. Sir William Constable, a Yorkshire Knight, whose Prodigality brought
him to sell his Patrimony in the beginning of the late Troubles, to Sir
Marmaduke Langdale, which he afterward regained for nothing, when that Lord
was for his Loyalty Voted a Delinquent, and his Estate at the dispose of
Rebels, who carved fat shares unto themselves: He had a principal hand in the
Kings death, for which Parricide, and other his Treasonable Practices, he was
by the Saints of the new stamp, made Governor of Gloucester, and a great
Commander in the North: He died before his Majesty's return.

XXIII. Edmond Ludlow, a Person much endeared to the Fanatics, who by several
gradations in the Parliament and Army, came at last to be a Lieutenant General,
and one of the Chief Commissioners for Ireland: His Father before him uttered
Treasonable words against the King in the House of Commons, Anno 1643. no
marvel then if the Father were a Rebel, that the Son should prove a Traitor,
since most commonly to what the Parents are affected, the Children prove
addicted: Upon his Majesty's return, fearing the reward of his deserts, he fled
the Land, like his predecessor Caine, living a Vagabond from place to place,
fearing every one that he meets should slay him.

XXIV. Colonel John Hutchinson, who by Cromwell and his prevailing Faction was
overawed to Sign his Majesty's Execution; but by a timely repentance,
bewailing with tears the heinousness of his Offense, he obtained Pardon; being
only discharged the House of Commons, and all future Trusts, and Fined a years
Profit of his Estate to the King.

XXV. Sir Michael Livesey, a Kentish Knight, whose plague he was, being
Plunder-Master-General of that County for many years, toward the repairing of
his broken Estate: He was a very Active Person during the Progress of the whole
War, and as nimbly ran away upon the Kings return, making good that Proverb,
That one pair of legs was worth two pair of hands.

XXVI. Robert Titchburn, born in London, of good Extraction, by Trade a
Linnen-Draper, coming by degrees to be Mayor thereof, whose Counsels he is said
to betray to the Rump; Hope of Preferment, and want of Grace, drew him in to be
one of the Infamous Tryars of his Sovereign: At his Majesty's return he
surrendered himself according to Proclamation, and at his Trial showed much
penitency for his Offenses, declaring with much candor his sin, and ignorance
of the atrocity of the crime; protested his Inability of contrivance, his raw
years, and unskilfulness in the Laws; Saying, He would rather have gone into a
hot Oven, then into that business if he had known the depth of it; instancing
That Paul was a Persecutor, and found mercy, and hoped that he should find the
like: He was with the other Regicides condemned, but by the Kings Great
Clemency, Execution of Justice was respited on him.

XXVII. Owen Roe, formerly a Silkman in London, and being an Eminent
Independent, had a Command of the Militia conferred on him; by the Advice of
the Devil and Cromwell, he came to have a hand in shedding the Kings blood; for
which after his Majesty's return he was condemned; but pleading his reluctance
to the Kings Sentence, and begging pardon for his Offense, which he affirmed
was not of malice, he was by the Kings Favor Reprieved.

XXVIII. Robert Lilburn, a great Enemy to Bishops, though come from the
Bishopprick of Durham; He was Brother to John Lilburn the great Trouble-World,
who was always opposite to the Predominate Power; This Robert Lilburn to raise
his Fortunes sided with Cromwell, who would never suffer them to want
Preferment that were thorow-paced to his Interests; By him he was advanced to
be a Colonel of Horse, a little before the Kings Murder; and therefore he
thought he could do no less in civility then requite him with having a hand in
it, and so ran fearlesly into the danger of it: He still lives by the Kings
clemency a condemned man in the Tower of London.

XXIX. Adrian Scroop, a Colonel of Horse, a Person very Active against the
Kings Parties in 1648. and as violent in the taking away his Majesty's Life,
and Honor in their pretended High Court of Justice; which he so little
repented of, that after his Majesty's return, in an accidental conferrence with
Sir Richard Brown, he seemed rather to allow and approve of it, by saying, Many
people did not think it such a heinous matter, or that, some be of one mind,
and some be of another. He was upon a fair Trial condemned to dye, and
accordingly Executed on the Rayled place where Charing Cross once stood, Octo.
the 17. 1660.

XXX. Richard Dean, a Fellow of mean Extraction, being at first a Hoymans
Servant in Ipswich, and at the beginning of the Wars to raise his despicable
fortunes betook him to the Army, and was a matross in the train of Artillery,
from whence he rose to be a Captain, and was first Famous at the Siege of
Exeter; and being a cross Fellow fit for any mischief, one who cared not to
build his own hopes though on a general ruin, was thought fit to be one of
Cromwell's Accomplices in the Murder of his Sovereign: He was afterward made one
of the Generals at Sea against the Dutch, and was slain with a Cannon Bullet,
being shot almost off in the middle, as he stood close by General Monk, June 2.
1653.

XXXI. Colonel John Okey, at first a Stoker in a Brew House, then a Chandler
near Bishopsgate, where having lived a while, he betook himself to the Army,
the Haven of Hope for all Aspiring Minds, where in a short space he passed
through the several commands to that of a Colonel; and being of a daring spirit,
he was by the Artifice of Cromwell bewitched into the patner-ship of that
accursed Murder of his Majesty. Upon his Majesty's return he fled the Land,
but divine vengeance pursuing him, he was with Colonel Barkstead, and Miles
Corbet taken in Holland, and sent over into England, where at the Kings Bench
Bar, they were Arraigned, and Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered,
which was Executed on the other two, and their Quarters exposed on the City
Gates; but his Majesty was graciously pleased out of regard to Colonel Okey's
Christian, and Dutiful carriage, to return his Quarters to his Friends to be
Interred. He dyed with more penitency, and greater reluctance then those of his
Fellow-Regicides, who suffered in October 1660. acknowledging the Kings Power
as of God, and exhorting others to the like: He was a Person that for his
Valor, and other good Qualities was pitied by all men, for his being so
blinded, and ensnared in this crime to his destruction.

XXXII. John Hewson, who from a Cobbler rose by degrees to be a Colonel, and
though a Person of no Parts either in Body or Mind, yet made by Cromwell one of
his Pageant Lords: He was a Fellow fit for any mischief, and capable of nothing
else; a sordid lump of Ignorance and Impiety, and therefore the more fit to
share in Cromwell's Designs, and to Act in that Horrid Murder of his Majesty:
Upon the turn of the Times, he ran away for fear of Squire Dun, and (by report)
is since dead, and buried at Amsterdam.

XXXIII. William Goffe, bound an Apprentice to a Salter, but run away e're he
had served out his time, and betook himself to the Army, where by his boldness
and pretended Piety, he came to be taken notice of by the Grandees in
Rebellion, who liking his temper, preferred him to serve themselves in that
Horrid Murder of his Sacred Majesty: He likewise betook himself to his heels
at the restoration of our Sovereign, being of the opinion of Caine, That his
Crimes was too great to be forgiven.

XXXIV. Cornelius Holland, a Monster in Nature, once Servant to Sir Henry Vane,
who preferred him to the Green-cloath in the Kings Household; of base
conditions, as well as extraction; His Father was a poor man, and dyed a
Prisoner in the Fleet, but he himself by his Ingatitude and Disloyalty made a
ladder of mischief to climb up to Riches, and so thrived by Rebellion that he
got a vast Estate, and (like Herostratus) grew very Eminent for Villainies, the
chief of which was the Murder of the King, in which he had a principal hand,
and *for which upon his Majesty's return he fled the Land, fearing (belike) he
should become a spectacle to men, hanging betwixt the Earth and Heaven.

XXXV. John Carew, Brother to that Loyal Knight, Sir Alexander Carew, beheaded
by the prevalency of Rebellion in An. 1644. This Person being a rank
Fifth-Monarchist, was a great Enemy to all Earthly Government and Power,
expecting Christ to come Personally and Reign amongst them; and therefore they
would have no King, but King Jesus, which made him to join with those other
Infamous Regicides in the Murder of his Sovereign, being deluded thus by the
impulses of Satan for those of the spirit. At his Trial he rambled into a wild
discourse of the fear of God, and the Authority of the Parliament by which he
Acted, that he declined it at first, but being put in the Act for Trial, could
not disobey the Lord, nor the Parliament: He was condemned to be Hanged, Drawn
and Quartered, which was accordingly Executed upon him October 15. 1660. His
quarters should have been exposed on the City Gates; but upon intercession to
his Majesty, his Body was ordered to be buried.

XXXVI. Colonel John Jones, a Weltch Saint, who in the night of Rebellion, grew
from a Mushromp to a Stately Cedar; He was at first a Serving-Man, but that
kind of life not serving his turn, he set up the gain-fuller trade of a
Committee-man, and thrived exceedingly in that Barren Country; and being a
person of known Abilities for the ruining a Kingdom, he was chosen a recruit
for the Long Parliament, and inprocess of time Married one of Cromwell's
Sisters, who (as one writes) had as many Females to bestow as a Cardinal; This
alliance (being prone enough of himself otherwise) brought him in to have a
hand in the Kings Murder; and in fine brought, him to the Gallows, being
Executed October 17. 1660.

XXXVII. Peregrine Pelham, a Yorkshire Tike, whose Abominable Treasons helped
to verify that Proverb, From the cold North, all ill comes forth. He was for a
while a kind of Governor of Hull after Hotham, where being Endoctrinated in
Machivillian Principles, he came to London to put them in Execution, being one
of the Judges that Sat and Sentenced the late King, and died before his
Majesty's Restoration.

XXXVIII. Thomas Wogan, a recruit likewise to the Long Parliament, who was as
active to contribute toward the ruin of the Kingdom as the chiefest of them
all, and as forward as the rest to destoy the King, to become himself one of
the Princes in the Anarchy; but upon the change of the Times he betook him to
his heels, and (accompanied with a guilty, conscience) wander about to save a
wretched Carcass out of the Hangmans hands.

XXXIX. Francis Allen, once a Goldsmiths in Fleet Street, whose first Rice was
from the Placket, and by Marrying his Mistress, of her Servant became her
Master; being thus leapt into a pretty Estate, he was chosen a recruit for the
Long Parliament, where he improved, his time to the most gainful advantage,
getting to be one of the Treasurers at War, a Customer, and (as if that were
not enough) had Crone House given him, and held it in Capite Regis: These gifts
made him not to stick to join with them in the Murder of the King, and after
to enjoy a part of the profit of their Parricide, being made one of the
Committees for the Sale of his Majesty's Lands; but lived not long to possess
the fruits of his wickedness, dying before his Majesty's Happy Restoration.

XL. Daniel Blagrave, of a small but competent Fortune, sufficient to have
maintained him without being guilty of this great Offense; but he was resolved
to get Riches, although he swam to them in blood* and being chosen a recruit to
the Long Parliament for Reading in Bark-shire, in hopes to be partaker with
them in the spoil of the Kingdom; He joined with them in the Murder of the
King: But upon the turn of the Times betook him to his heels, the best refuge
as he thought for one in his condition.

XLI. John Moor, formerly Colonel of the Guards, and had the benefit of all
passes from London, the profit whereof endeared him to their Side, and made him
join with them in the Horrid Murder of his Sovereign; He dyed before his
Majesty's Return.

XLII. William Say Esquire, a Member of the Long Robe, and a well practiced,
but ill councelled Lawyer, who being foysted in as one of the illegal recruites
of the Long Parliament, exercised his Abilities to the greater mischief, having
now power joined to his will to Act what the Devil should prompt him to; and
therefore feared not to become one of the Murderers of his Majesty, and
afterward to join with the rest of those Regicides to help forwards the ruin
of the Kingdom; He was by them chosen their Speaker, when Lenthall for Ten
days together was sick of the Sullens upon the approach of General Monk: But
upon the Return of the King, was, non est inventus, betaking him to his heels,
for fear he should have had a Habeas Corpus to have removed his body from
Newgate to Tyburn.

XLIII. Francis Lascels, a Yorkshire Man, who being nominated one of the
King's Judges, Sat once, but neither Sentenced nor Signed those Accursed
Warrants for the Murder of the King; He was Fined a years Profit of his Estate
to his Majesty, and discharged the House of Commons, and all future Trusts.

XLIV. James Challoner Esquire, who for sitting in that pretended High Court of
Justice, was with some others deprived of their Estates by Act of Parliament,
and ordered to be drawn to Tyburn in Sledges, with Ropes about their Necks, as
Traitors are used, and so back again to the Tower, their to be Imprisoned
during their natural lives; but before the Execution of this Sentence he died
in the Tower.

XLV. Gregory Clement, a lustful Goat, who being a monied Merchant, Purchased
himself a place in Parliament, that he might the more freely, and with the
greater Authority exercise his notorious debaucheries, which were so vulgarly
known, that his fellow Villains could not but upon pretense of honesty discard
him their company. He contributed largely to the destruction of his Sovereign;
for he who fears not to Commit Adultery, will not stick out to do Murder; He
received afterward the reward of his Treasons, being hanged drawn and
quartered, October. 17. 1660. His Head set upon London Bridge, and his Quarters
on the Gates of the City.

XLVI. Sir Gregory Norton, One whose means was not answerable to his Title,
being one of the Pensioners to the King, who ungratefully for the lucre of
money joined also in the Kings murder, and had by his fellow Regicides for his
Service, as good as given Richmond Manner and House: He died before his
Majesty's Return.

XLVII. John Venn, A broken Silk-man in Cheap Side, who to recruit his Fortunes
took part with the Strongest Side, carrying as great a pretense to Religion as
the best, it being the Stalking Horse in those Times for them who meant to ride
in the Chair of Preferment: He was at the beginning of the War made Governor
of Windsor Castle, and had other Places of great Profit bestowed on him; this
drew him on to Act in the Murder of his Sacred Majesty, though afterward
stricken with the horror thereof; He is said desparately to have hanged
himself, certain it is, he died very strangely and suddenly, though the
certainty thereof was by his friends smoothered up as much as they could.

XLVIII. Thomas Andrews, a Linnen-Draper in Cheap Side, but thinking the Trade
of Rebellion more gainful, he resolved not to stand out, having so fit an
opportunity for him to come into Play, and so got to be a Treasurer for the
Guild Hall Plate, and a Receiver for the Army, whereby he got great sums of
money to himself, which so Encouraged him in Treason, that he feared not to Sit
and Sentence his Sovereign, and afterward (Alderman Reynoldson, Lord Mayor of
London refusing to Proclaim the Act for Abolishing Kingly Government) he being
Elected Lord Mayor in his Place, Proclaimed the said Act in Great State: He
died just upon the Revolution of the Times, and very narrowly prevented Justice.

XLIX. Anthony Stapley, a Sussex Gentleman, Colonel and Governor of
Chichester, who by partaking with those Blood-Thirsty Regicides, grew infected,
and was strangely wrought into this Wicked Conspiracy: He likewise died before
the Kings return.

L. Thomas Horton, one of so mean and unknown a Quality, that his Pedigree is
not to be found, unless we should derive it from Judas that Prince of Traitors:
He so thrived by the Wars, that he was chosen a recruit to the Long Parliament,
and was one of those that dipped his hands in his Royal Sovereigns blood: He also
died before the Kings return.

LI. John Lisle, Of a good Family in the Isle of Wight, whose Father died there
during the Treaty, being possessed of a fair Patrimony in the said Isle, this
his ungracious degenerate Son, whom he bred up a Lawyer, taking part with those
Bloody Regicides, proved in process of time as bad as the worst of them, and
arrived to the very height of Cruelty and Impiety, for having once washed his
hands in his Sovereigns blood, he feared not to Act any Murder whatsoever,
becoming President to all the High Courts of Justice during the Usurpation, by
whose Sanguinous violence fell many Gallant and Heroic Spirits; for reward of
which his cruelties, he was made one of the Commissioners of the New Great
Seal, and Master of Saint Crosses, a Place only fit for a Divine, worth Eight
Hundred Pound per Annum: He fled upon the return of the King, but divine
vegeance (which will not suffer the sin of Murher to go unpunished) found him
out, and at Genuah by Three disguised Irishmen he received the reward of his
deserts, though not in so Legal a way as could be wished, they being forced to
Kill whom they could not bring away, by reason of the strong Guards he had
about him; a shame to those Places which professing Christianity, yet will give
harbor to such wicked, abominable Villans.

LII. John Dixwell, A recruit likewise of the Long Parliament for Dover, of
which Castle he was Colonel and Governor; and therefore so far oblidged to
them for his Promotion, that in requital of their Favors, he joined with them
in the Murder of his Majesty; but fearing the reward of his Treachery, upon
the Kings return, he quitted the Land, which too long had groaned under the
weight of so hateful a Regicide.

LIII. Miles Corbet, A stain to his Family, of very good Reputation in Norfolk;
He was one of the male-contented Members of the former Parliament* with Sir
John Elliot, and Others, and being chosen a Burgess for Yarmouth in the Long
Parliament; finding the Times fit for his purpose, he resolved to wreak his
malice upon the King and was a principal Instrument to help forward the ensuing
calamities; and having raised himself by others ruins, to retain what be had
so wickedly got, and in hopes of greater Preferment, he joined likewise in the
murder of the King, for which he was rewarded with several great Places in
England and Ireland, where he was in effect Lord Chancellor, but long enjoyed
he not that Honor, for upon his Majesty's return, he with Berkstead and Okey
privately sneaked into Germany, where having remained a while, they returned to
Delf in Holland, intending under feigned Names to visit their Wives there; but
divine vengeance which never sleeps, found them out, and by the vigelance of
Sir George Downing his Majesty's Resident at the Hague, they were apprehended,
which made Corbet to purge upwards and downwards in a very strange manner,
being afterward sent into England, they were at the Kings-Bench-Bar Arraigned
and Condemned, and according to Sentence, Hanged, Drawn and Quartered, April 2.
1662. where now Corbets Head over-looks the Thames on London Bridge, and his
Quarters exposed to the view of the beholders on the City Gates.

LIVE. Simon Meyne, a Buckingham-shire Man, of a good Estate, but being of a
covetous disposition, he endeavored to enlarge it though by indirect means,
getting two good Trades for that purpose ( viz.) a Committee and a
Sequestrator, to which we may add a third, being chosen an Illegal recruit in
the Long Parliament, and now having his hand in, thought it no great matter to
assist in taking away the Kings Life: At his Majesty's return he surrendered
himself according to Proclamation, and at his Trial pleaded Ignorance and no
Malice, but his crimes were found to be of so crimson a dye, that Sentence of
death was passed on him, however Execution of that Sentence was respited, since
which time he died a natural death in the Tower.

LV. John Alured, A Soldier of Fortune* who to climb the higher on the blind
Goddesses wheel, dipped his hands in the Kings blood, and was for his Villainy
promoted to be a Colonel: He died just defore his Majesty's restitution, or
else it might have been his Fortune to have been preferred to the Gallows.

LVI. Henry Smith, One who had a fair Estate in Leichestershire, and was a kind
of a Lawyer, but understood it so little, that quite contrary to all Law, he
joined with those Regicides in condemning the King, and for reward of his
Villainy had a Six Clarks Place in Chancery bestowed on him: He was thought to
be drawn into this business by the Artifice of others, more then his own
inclination; and therefore at his Majesty's return he surrendered himself
according to Proclamation, and remains a Prisoner in the Tower.

LVII. Humphry Edwards, A Member of the Long Parliament, which bred Monsters of
more savage Natures then either Egypt or Africa; This Fellow for being denied
by the King a Preferment he was not worthy of, grew discontented, which
ranckled and fester'd him into this malicious Parricide: He died before his
Majesty's return.

LVIII. John Fry, A High-shooe blade in Dorset-shire, but being active in
mischief, was made a Committee-man, and afterward chosen a recruit to the Long
Parliament; You may judge of the Man by his Principles, being an Arrian in
Print, who deny the Divinity of our Savior Christ; No wonder then if he who
wrote against the King of Heaven, would fear to act against his Earthly Prince;
He lived not long after the Horrid murder of his Majesty, the divine vengeance
cutting him off from acting any further mischief against the Royal Party.

LIX. Edmond Harvey, One who was brought in to have a hand in that fatal
business of the Kings Murder: He rendered himself upon his Majesty's
Restitution according to Proclamation, and at his Trial pleaded Ignorance and
no Malice, for that he Signed not, though he was present at Sentence; then he
proved by Witness his reluctance of Conscience, his Endeavors with a few
others to Adjourn the Court upon the Kings motion, and that he resolved to have
no more to do with them, etc. He was with the other Regicides condemned, but
Execution respited, and remains now a Prisoner in the Tower.

LX. Thomas Scot, One who though he came not in play at first, yet plied his
business so, that he was not behind hand, the forwardest in mischief; His
Original was a Brewers Clark, then next a Country Attorney, and by countenance
of the Grandees, chosen a recruit for the Borough of Wickam in
Buckingham-shire: He was a thorow-paced Regicide, and so gloried that he had a
hand in the Murder of the King, that he desired it might be inscribed on his
Tomb, Here lies Thomas Scot one of the Kings Judges; though it might more
properly be written on the Gallows at Charing Cross where he was Hanged, Here
lies Thomas Scot one of the Kings Murderers; His Gutts was said to make the
Hangman maw-sick, and that the stench of of his body when he was Quartered,
far exceeded the stink of the most loathsome Carrion, to the great endangering
of the Hangmans health.

LXI. William Cawley, A Brewer of Chichester, and returned a recruit for the
Long Parliament, whose Trade as it is maintained by the sins of the People, so
he could not but for Trades-sake to concur with his Brethren in the Murder of
the King, ( viz.) Oliver Cromwell, Thomas Pride, Thomas Scot, etc. But fearing
his Treason would cost him hot water, upon return of the King he fled the Land,
and lives disguised for to preserve his hated life.

LXII. John Downs, A Citizen of London, a Colonel in the Army, and a recruit to
the Long Parliament; He was by menaces and threats engaged in this fatal
business of Trying the King; and being checked in Conscience of the wickedness
thereof, endeavored to have opposed the violence that carried it, saying in
the Court, Have we hearts of stone, or are we men? And desired the King
according to his request might be heard by the Parliament, but was overborn,
his Allegiance and Conscience, by that wicked Machivillian Oliver Cromwell, and
so contrary to the dictates of his Conscience consented to that Execrable
Murder: He surrendered himself, was condemned, and lives by the special Mercy
of the King and Parliament.

LXIII. Thomas Hammond, Born of a very Good Family, his Father was Physician to
Prince Henry, his Brother Doctor Henry Hamond, the beloved Chaplain of King
Charles; This degenerate Son most Ungratefully and Disloyally was the Kings
Jailer in the Isle of Wight, and verified that sad Presage and Oracle of the
King, That there are but few steps between the Prisons and Graves of Princes.
He died before his Majesty's return.

LXIV. Vincent Potter, A Mushroom Member of the Long Parliament, brought in by
their Illegal recruits; His Pedigree, as well as his good Actions are very
obscure and unknown; being only Famous for the Infamous Murder of the King:
After his Majesty's return he rendered himself, confessed his Guilt, had
Judgment, but by his Majesty's clemency his Execution was respited

LXV. Augustine Garland, A recruit of the Long Parliament for the Borough of
Quinburough in Kent, as yare a blade as the worst of them all at the spoil of
the Kingdom, the notority of whose Crimes are so public as not to be hid; He
was at first a kind of Lawyer, which he horribly perverted, was Chairman of
the Committee that drew up the pretended Act for the Kings Trial, and after Sat
as one of his Judges, and Signed that bloody* Warrant for his Execution; He was
shrewdly suspected to be the man that spit in the Kings Face at his Trial,
though after the Kings restitution when he came to be Tried himself, he
vehemently denied it, wishing no favor from God if he was guilty of that
inhumanity: He is still a Prisoner in the Tower, and lives by the clemency of
the King and Parliament.

LXVI. Colonel George Fleetwood, A Buckingham-shire Gentleman, Son to Sir Miles
Fleetwood Master of the Kings Court of Wards, and had two Brothers of very
different conditions the one Sir William Fleetwood a very Loyal and Honest
Gentleman, the other, Charles Fleetwood, a very Knave and Fool: He surrendered
himself after the Kings return, and at his Trial pleaded not guilty, but soon
waved that Plea, and with many tears besought mercy: He is now a Prisoner in
the Tower.

LXVII. Colonel James Temple, A Sussex Man, not so much Famous for his Valor
as his Villainy, being Remarkable for nothing but this horrible business of the
Kings Murder, for which he came into the Pack to have a share in the spoil;
He is now a Prisoner, and lives by the Kings Favor and Clemency.

LXVIII. Peter Temple, Another of the same Gang, Simeon and Levi, Brethren in
Iniquity; He was at first a Linnen-Draper, Apprentice in Fryday-street, but his
Elder Brother dying, he forsook his Trade, and was possessed of an Estate of some
Four Hundred Pounds a Year in Leichestershire, and being a Person well affected
to the Cause, was as a recruit chosen Burgess for that Country-Town, as
Colleague to Sir Arther Hazelrig, that Furious Northern blast. He was made a
Captain of a Troop of Horse, and besides was a great Committee-man, yet was he
a person of very weak parts, and easy to be led to Act any thing to which the
hope of Profit called him, yet (as ill gotten goods never prosper) so he
thrived not, notwithstanding his gainful Trade, but was Fooled by Oliver into
the snare, as he often afterward confessed the same.

LXIX. Thomas Wait, A Rutland-shire man, who from a very mean beginning came to
be Governor of Burleigh, and was by the influence of the Army chosen a recruit
to the Long Parliament, by which means he became engaged to their Interests and
Designs, joining with them in the Murder of his Majesty: He is now a Prisoner
under Sentence of death, which by the Kings clemency is hitherto respited.

Thus have you a Catalogue of Sixty Nine of those Notorious Regicides which Sat
and Sentenced the King, a Crime of so High a Nature as will almost startle the
belief of Posterity, that Men professing themselves to be Christians, should
under a pretense of Religion and Justice, Murder so Good and Pious a Prince,
one whom envy its self could not but confess to be beyond Parallel, and whom
Cook, one of his inveterate enemies, confessed to be a most Virtuous, most
Innocent, most Religious King, and every way most fit for the Government. The
Reader may also consider, that though many otherwise well meaning men were
drawn in at first to further their Designs, yet the mean persons that were his
Judges and Murderers, were generally mean and desparate persons, such as were
lifted up by Ambition, Sacrilege, Covetousness, and Success, and had no other
ways to Rise but by others Ruins, in the Downfall of the King, Nobility and
Gentry: But God would not suffer the Lamented and Barbarous Death of this
Prince to pass unrevenged, nor his own Sacred Name to be Blasphemed, many of
those desparate Wretches making Him the Author and Maintainer of their Impiety,
arguing from the Success, the Goodness of their Cause, although they might
plainly perceive that when God had made use of them as his Rod to correct his
Children, he then threw it into the fire.

We shall next give you a Catalogue of some other Accessaries notoriously
Guilty in this Horrid Murder, and how Divine Vengeance found them out,
rewarding them according to the fruits of their Works.
I. JOhn Cook, the Solicitor of that High Court of Injustice, a man of great
Parts, had he not employed them to foul purposes; He was a Gray's Inn Gentleman,
but in a poor and wanting condition, before he undertook this most Scelerate
piece of Service; His indigency by some charitable opinions being the greatest
motive that induced him unto it, and so did it not out of Malice, but Avarice,
as he himself Alleged at his Trial; Thus we see what a narrow Fortune, and
the streights of Debt, and the Devils wide World, and vast Preferments can
tempt a man to: After this horrid Paricide, he was by his Fellow Regicides
greatly Advanced, especially in Ireland, of which he was made Lord Chancellor,
and from whence after his Majesty's return he was sent into England to be Tried
his for his Treasons, which was done accordingly at Justice-Hall in the
Old Bailey, where he showed very much respect and reverence to the Court,
behaving himself to the removal of that prejudice which the Generality had of
him, as of a Monster. He was for his Horrid Treasons Condemned to be Hanged,
Drawn, and Quartered, which was accordingly Executed upon him, October 16.
1660. at the Place where Charing Cross formerly stood; His Head was set on a
Pole on the North-East end of Westminster Hall, and his Quarters on the Gates
of the City.

II. Hugh Peter's, An Antique in Religion, the shame of the Clergy, a Pulpit
Buffoon, Oliver's Chaplain and Jester, to tell Stories, and make the People
laugh; a most Seditious abominable Fellow, the Trumpet to this Pagantry High
Court of Justice, and the most unparalled Ecclesiastic in all Stories and
Times; Who like Doctor Shaw in the time of King Richard the Third (but more
shameless) was employed to cry down the King, and to cry up the Protector; He
was a principal in the Cabal for the Murder of the King, whose Death he
contrived in five several places, ( viz.) at Ware, Windsor, Coleman-street, the
Painted-Chamber, and Bradshaws House, comparing the King in his Sermon to
Barrabas, and in another, the Text whereof was to Bind Kings in Chains, etc. He
declared that there was an Act of Gods own making, That they that spilt man's
blood by man should their blood be spilt, and that out of that Law, neither the
King, nor Prince, nor Prince Rupert, nor none of that Rabble were excepted.
Upon the return of the King, being conscious of his own guilt, he hid his head,
but his lurking place was found out, and he taken in the Borough of Southwark,
where at first he denied his Name, but being brought before Sir John Robinson
then made Lieutenant of the Tower, he was known, and acknowledged himself,
where he was kept Prisoner till such time as his Trial, which was October 13.
1660. at which time it is very remarkable, that this Person, who by his
Function as a Priest had most dishonored God in Preaching, and pressing this
Particide, making use of his Holy Writ to this wicked purpose, had then nothing
to say, but to cavil at the Witnesses, and that he was sorry to hear of his
carriage toward the King (we may believe him) but he had no malice toward
him, but was merely Engaged in the Army; He was condemned together with Cook,
and with him October 16. Drawn on Two Hurdles to Execution, where the miserable
Wretch had not a word to say for himself, or to God, of whom he said he was
abandoned: He that was so nimble and quick in all projects in this nature
before, was now like a Sot or a Fool, playing and toying with the straw in the
Sledge as he went to Execution, nay, so stupid was he, that the Hangman was
forced to use more then ordinary strength to throw him off the Ladder; being
almost hanged dead, he was cut down and Quartered, his Head set upon
London Bridge, and his Quarters exposed upon the tops of some of the City Gates.

III. Daniel Axtell, who at first kept a Country Pedling-shop in Bedford-shire,
and was double diligent in running after Seditious Persons, who then vented
Treason in Pulpits; and believing their Doctrine for current, obeyed the Call
(as he called it) of those blind Guides, and went forth a small*Officer to
fight against the Mighty; His great Industry in their Service, brought him
after many Traverses, to be a Lieutenant Colonel; and employed by Cromwell out
of Favor to him as he said (though the Devil could not have done him a greater
Discourtesie) to be Captain of the Guard at the Kings Trial, where to show his
Complacency to their Commands, he made his Janissaries by blows and threats, to
cry out Justice, and Execution; much more blood had he contracted to his guilt,
(though none comparable to this) in Ireland, and had as the reward of his
Villainies, gotten a pretty foul Estate; but wickedness seldom prospers long,
upon the Kings return, he was one of those Persons exempted by the Parliament
out of the Act of Indemnity, and for his Treasons brought to a Trial at
Justice-Hall in the Old Baily, where notwithstanding, he pleaded for himself
with more Art and Cunningness then was imagined to be found in him, yet were
his Crimes so Notorious as not to be covered with such Fig Leaves; He was
therefore by the Jury found Guilty, and Sentenced to be Hanged, Drawn, and
Quartered, which was accordingly Executed on him at Tyburn, October the 19.
1660. His Head fixed on a Pole at the furthest end of Westminster Hall, and his
Quarters a spectacle on the City Gates.

IV. Doctor Dorislaus, A Dutch Schoolmaster, who for some misdemeanors fled
his Country, and here became Civillian, afterward a professor in the
University of Oxford, where being disappointed of his Ambitious Expectations,
the War then on foot, he became the Parliaments Judge Advocate in their Army,
by which he much bettered his broken Fortunes, and became a great Associate of
Sir Henry Mildmay's, (who though raised by the King, was one of his greatest
Enemies,) who promoted him to that business of drawing up a Charge against the
King, the Horrid Nature thereof being such, that no Englishman durst find, or
make a way to such an Illegal, and unprecedented business. After the
perpetration of that horrid Murder, he was looked upon by the Regicides for his
Abilities, as a fit person to be sent over as an Envoy to his Countrymen, to
prosecute the Designs of the Faction, which would carry the better face, being
managed by one of their own Subjects: He Arrived there in May, with great Pomp
and Attendance, in his Coach with Six Horses before, and Vengeance behind; for
the first night, as he was at Supper there, one Colonel Whitford a Scotch-man,
with some Twelve other Caveliers, disdaining the King should be affronted by
the impudent boldness of such an Audacious Traitor,) entered his Lodging, and
with a broad Sword cleft his Head and killed him, having by a mistake wounded
another Dutchman for him at their first coming in; and having done the deed,
they quietly departed, it not being known (but privately) for a long time after
who did it.

To this we may adjoyn that of Aschams, another great confident of the
Regicides, who being sent their Envoy to Spain, some little while after, was
served in the same manner at his Arrival at Madrid, in his Inn, by one Sparks,
and some other English Royalists upon the same score; Sparks having done the
deed, fled to the Venetian Ambassadors for shelter, but judging that not
secure enough, he betook himself to Sanctuary, from whence he was by the
cunning Don, to curry Favor with the English Regicides, then dreadful to his
Plate-Trade, taken thence, and with great pity, and disdain, at the meanness
of the Spaniard, was Executed for the same.

V. Daniel Broughton, A Clark bred up amongst the Committees of War, where he
became so Principled, as he was judged fit, and preferred to be Chief Scribe to
this Pharasaicall Murtherous Crew of the High Court of Justice; for which
Guilt, upon his Majesty's Return, immagining his Crime too great to be
forgiven, he ran away, and in Foreign Countries disguised hides his hated head.

VI. Edward Dendy, Serjant at Arms to the said cursed Court, who had before
outed his Father from the Employment of the Mace; no marvel then, that such a
Rebel to his Father, should prove a Parricide to his Prince; He likewise fled
the Land upon his Majesty's Return, to preserve his forfeited life from the
Hangman.

VII, and VIII. Sir Henry Mildmay, and Master Robert Wallop, who had Sat as
Judges in that High Court of Justice, although not Sentenced nor Signed to the
Warrant for his Execution; The first of these was one who had been raised by
his Majesty, though most ungratefully (the worst of Vices) he Acted with a high
hand against him; but divine Vengeance at last overtook him, and the Iron hand
of Justice delivered him to the punishment (though not so great as his deserts)
due to that grand Impiety, January 30. 1661. They were on Sledges drawn from
the Tower of London, through the City, with Halters about their necks to
Tyburn, where having threaded that triple Tree, they returned in the same
Equipage back to the Tower, there to suffer perpetual Imprisonment, their
Estates Confiscated, and they Degraded from all Titles and Arms of Gentility.

Sir James Harrington was to have suffered the like punishment, but he having
his Liberty upon Bail from the Serjant at Arms, gave them the slip, and most
unworthily left his Bail in the lurch. Phelps also one of the Clarks of that
Court, was marked out for this Punishment, but not Sentenced.

IX. Master Thomas Hoyle, an Alderman, and Burgess of York, a great Rumper, and
Enemy to Regal Government, who the same day Twelve Month that the King was
Beheaded, and as near as possibly could be judged about the very same hour of
the day* hanged himself; Which day the Regicides Celebrated in most Solemn
manner, in commemoration of their lately recovered Liberty, from the Laws, by
the Murder of the King: But this was such a signal remark mark of the Just
Judgment and Vengeance of God upon that detestable Fact, and their no less
abominable mockery of him as the Author thereof in this their Irreligious
observation of that Fatal Providence, as they razed this Festival out of their
Calendar, which was attended with so ill an Omen.

X. One Lockier, an Active Agitator and Leveller in the Army, who had a
principal hand in Seizing and Bringing the King to his Death; He was afterward
by them of his own Gang (the Divine Vengeance so ordering it) condemned for a
Mutiny in Bishopsgate-Street, a shot to death in St. Pauls*Church-Yard, being
buried by some of his own Party with great Solemnity in the New Churchyard,
London.

XI. Sir Thomas Martin, A Knight of Cambridge-shire, a great stickler for the
Times, and a sworn Enemy of the Royalists; who having been a Hunting in
Holmby-Park, at the opening of a Deer he was desired (together with some other
Gentlemen) to wash his hands in the Deeres blood, No (said he) I had rather
wash my hands in the blood of the Young King of Scots; but observe the
punishment that attended this Impious wish, as he was riding home the same
Evening, his Horse threw him, in which fall he pitched on his head, mortally
brake his Scull and Shoulder, and died shortly after of those wounds.

XII. Sir Henry Holcroft, A grand Pillar of the Independent Faction, a
Committee Gentleman, and one who Acted very strenuously for the Rump, hoping to
be a great sharer in the spoil of the Kingdom; but Man proposes, and God
disposes, for it pleased the Lord that he fell into a sore Disease, bleeding
abundantly at the nose and mouth, and at last fell to a strong vomitting up of
gobbetts of blood at his mouth, and such abundance of blood flowed with mighty
violence at his nose, that in a most sad manner he departed this life, in one
of the extream-fits thereof.

XIII. To these we may add Colonel Rainsbrough, a prime stickler for the Power
at Westminster, and a desparate Enemy against the King, who though he was
killed before the Horrid Murder of his Majesty, yet the manner of his Death
being so remarkable, is not to be passed over in silence. He being turned out
of the Navy by the Seamen, went with a strong Party to the Reducing of
Pontefract, then Besieged by Sir Edward Rhodes, and the County Forces, and took
up his Quarters at an Inn in Doncaster, where having his Soldiers about him,
and in as great security (as he though) as might be, some Caveliers from
Pontefract under a pretense of delivering him a Letter from Cromwell, entered
his Inn, and would have only taken him Prisoner, and carried him into their
Leaguer, but he refusing, they pistolled him in his Chamber, and returned back
again untouched, a very strange, yet gallant Adventure.

XIV. One Marston, a great Leveller and Agitator in the Army, a sort of People
suspected many of them, and that rationally for Jesuits, who were as good at
wicked Plots and Contrivances, as either Cromwell, or Ireton, or the chief of
those Catalines and as accomplished for Execution, having such Lawless, yet most
Powerful Indemnity not only to protect them, but to shroud their other
Conspiracies for themselves either against Church or State. He was one of those
that had a principal hand in Burford business, and being thought to be
discontented against their New Fangled Government, was by the Regicides Ordered
to be taken into Custody; But those Messengers sent for him, found it a matter
of more difficulty then they were aware of, for coming to his Lodging in
Aldersgate Street, and sending him word to come down to them, he resolving not
to be taken, with a Stilletto killed two of them outright, and sorely wounding
the third, escaped; but afterward was re-taken, being terribly wounded in his
endeavoring to escape; when he was Arraigned at the Sessions House in the Old
Baily, and Condemned to be Hanged, which was accordingly Executed on him,
preventing thereby another more milder kind of Death, which must necessarily
have ensued not long after by reason of his wounds.

XV. Sir Henry Vane, the Proteus of the Times, a mere hodge-podge of Religion,
one composed only of Treason and Ingratitude, whose Offenses were of so
crimson a die, that he was excepted out of the Act of Indemnity, and having
remained a Prisoner for a good space, first in the Tower of London, and
afterward in the Isle of Scilly; He was at last for his manifold Treasons
Arraigned at the Kings Bench-Bar before the Lord Chief Justice, Foster, for
Immagining, and Compassing the Kings Death, and for Taking upon him, and
Usurping the Government; To which he Pleaded the Authority of the Parliament,
Justified it, and put the Court to a great deal of needless trouble, and
impertinent repetitions, but disowned his meddling or making with the Kings
Death; but the notority of his crimes were so apparent, and obvious to the
whole World, that he was Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered; but
through the intercession of some of his Friends who had deserved well in the
Kings Service, his Sentence was mittigated to a Beheading only, which was
Executed on him June the 14. 1662. on the Scaffold at Tower Hill, (where the
Earl of Strafford first bled by his, and his Fathers Treachery;) At the time
of his Execution he ran out into Treasonable Discourses, but was stopped in his
carreir, and after two or three fruitless warnings, his Notes endeavored to be
taken from him, which to prevent, he tore them in pieces, and in great passion
not to be suffered to proceed in that Traytorous way, he submitted his Neck
unto the Block.

Come we in the next place to speak of those who were Executed for committing
of Treason after his Majesty's Happy Restoration, and Setlement in his Throne
again; where we shall find Traitors of so Desparate and Sanguine a disposition,
as scarcely to be paralleld in former Ages; Men who though of different Tenets,
and and who like Hydra's heads seemed to look several ways, yet cemented
together in the tail, wherein lies the sting, being Enemies to all Civil
Government, and whatsoever was decent, either in Church or State.

And first of that bloody Attempt of Venner and his Mirmidons, which strange
and unparalleld Action will afford the Truest Light and Judgment of that
Fanatique, and desparate opinion of Chilianisme, and make after Ages to admire,
that a handful of wild-brain'd People should dare to undertake such an Attempt
against Metropolis of the Kingdom, which a well Governed Potent Army would not
without good advice be driven unto.

This Venner, a Wine-Cooper by Trade, with several others of his Gang, who were
strongly persuaded that now was the Time come for Christ Personally to Reign
upon Earth; having had several Meetings at Bell-Alley in Coleman-Street, where
it was agreed amongst them, that the Powers of the Earth were to be Destroyed,
and King Jesus alone to be set Up; Venner Preaching to them to this purpose
(alluding to that of the Psalmist) That one of them should chase a Hundred, and
a Hundred put Ten Thousand to flight; Assuring them also, That no Weapons
formed against them should prosper, nor hair of their head be touched. January
6. 1660. They took Arms, and in the dusk of the Evening came to St. Paul's
Churchyard, where they mustered their small Party, and placed Centinals for
the time, where an Innocent Person coming by accidentally, being by them asked
whom he was for, and he answering according to the usual mode, For God, and
King Charles, they immediately shot him, which Action soon Allarum'd the City,
and some Parties of the Trained Bands marched against them, but their strength
being too great for those few Files, they without control marched along to
Aldersgate, where the Constable being but weakly attended, was forced to let
them out again; Here they Declared themselves for King Jesus, and those of
their Friends whose Quarters were upon the Gates: From thence they proceeded to
Beech-lane, where a Head-borough opposing them, they shot and killed him, and
so with all have marched to Cane-Wood, where for a while they remained; But the
City having Intelligence thereof, sent out a Party of Horse and Foot, which
took about Thirty of them, and brought them before the General, who sent them
Prisoners to the Gate House.

January the 9. after some Encouragement and Assurance of Victory from their
Chieftain Venner, they again assumed their first Enterprise, and no sooner were
the Watches and Guards removed, but they made their appearance at Bishopsgate,
which they passed, and came into the City without opposition as far as
Threadneedle-street, with such a confident resoluteness, that a Party of the
Trained Bands designed to Watch that day, being sent out to follow them, were
forced to Retreat to their Main-Guard, when the whole Body advancing toward
them, they retreated into Bishopsgate-street, where some of them took into an
Alehouse at the sign of the Helmet, where they maintained a sharp Dispute,
two of them being Killed, and two Taken, and as many Killed and Wounded of the
Trained Bands. The next News of them was at Colledge-Hill, from whence they
marched up into Cheap Side, and so into Wood-street, as far as the Counter,
where Venner who Headed them, being Armed with a Murrion on his head, and a
Halbert in his hand, commanded the Prisoners to be let out, or else he told
them they were but dead men; But before he could accomplish his designs, they
were charged by the Lifeguard, whom they put to the Retreat, but they being
seconded by two Companies of the Trained Bands, the Dispute was very sharp and
desparate, until at last Venner being knocked down, and Tuffnel and Crag two of
their prime Teachers fled, they began to give ground, and betook themselves to
flight by several ways, the greatest part of them went down Wood-street, and
so to Criplegate, firing in the Rear at a Trained Band of Yellow who closely
pursued them; at last they took in at the Blew Anchor Alehouse by the Postern,
which House they maintained with much desparate courage, and would not hear of
any Terms of Yielding; soon after came Lieutenant Colonel Cox with his Company
and surrounded all places about it, and then some of the Soldiers got up upon
the Tilings of the next House, which they cast down, and fired into the
uppermost Room where the Rebels were, yet were they so desparately bent in
their wickedness, that even then they refused Quarter, until a File of
Musketeers got up the Stairs, and having shot down the door, entered upon
them, six of them being killed, and another wounded, yet one of them still
refused Quarter, who being knocked down with the But end of a Musket, was
afterward shot; the rest yielded, who being demanded, why they craved not
Quarter before, Answered, They durst not for fear their own Fellows should
shoot them, of such a desparate resolution was the temper of their Spirits.

In this Rebellious Insurrection were slain alike of both sides, Twenty Two of
the Kings Liege People, and Twenty Two of the Traitors. Twenty One more besides
were taken, whose Names were as follows, ( viz.) Thomas Venner, their Chief
Ringleader, the Captain of this Rebellious Rout; The Second to Venner were one
Tuffnel a Carpenter living in Grays-Inn-lane, a desparate Fellow, who after He
and his Party were forced over the Houses through More-lane, they fled into the
Fields, and he having four or five Pistolls about him, discharged them all
before he could be got down; but at last he was so mortally wounded, that they
brought him in a Chair to Newgate, and so they sent him to Christ-Church
Hospital, where after three days space he dyed of his wounds, and was carried
into Christ-Church-Yard, for to be viewed, to see if any body would own him;
but a hole being dug the Blew Coat Boys covered him with the Earth, and he
was never further looked after. The next was Roger Hodgkins, a Button-Sellor in
St. Clements Lane near Lumbard street; Giles Pritcherd, a Cow-keeper, Leonard
Gowler, Jonas Allen, John Pym, William Orsingham, William Ashton, Stephen Fall,
John Smith, William Corbet, John Dod, John Elestone, Thomas Harris, John
Gardener, Robert Bradley, Richard Marten, John Patshall, Robert Hopkins, and
John Wells. These Twenty and One were all brought to the Bar together, Tuffnel
excepted; (their Trial succeeding soon after their Desparate Engagement) where
the wounded Men had Chairs allowed them to sit down in, and after the
Indictment was read, which was laid both to Treason and Murder; Thomas Venner
was first called, who being asked Guilty or not Guilty, ran out into a wild
Discourse about his Conversation in New England, and concerning the Fifth
Monarchy, and the Testimony within him above these Twenty years. He confessed,
He was in the late Rising, but was not Guilty of Treason, intending not to
Leavy War against the King; and again ran out into impertinent Stories and
Discourses as before; but being pressed by the Court to Answer to his
Indictment, he pleaded Not Guilty, and for his Trial put himself upon God and
the Country. In the like manner all the rest used many rambling diversions from
the business, but at last pleaded to their Indictments: Whereupon the Witnesses
were sworn, who made it appear, that Venner, Tuffnel, and Crag, (the two last
being killed in the business) Did several times persuade their Congregation to
take up Arms for King Jesus, against the Powers of the Earth, (which were his
Majesty, the Duke of York, the General, etc.) That they were to Kill all that
opposed them: That they had been Praying and Preaching, but not Acting for God:
That they Armed themselves at their Meeting House in Coleman-street, with
Blunder-busses, Muskets, etc. Marten, Hopkins, Wells, and Patshall, the
Witnesses being not so clear against them, were acquitted by the Jury, the
other Sixteen were found Guilty, and being brought to the Bar, were demanded to
show cause why Sentence of Death should not pass upon them? which they not
doing, they were all Sixteen Condemned to be Hanged, Drawn, and Quartered. The
Lord Chief Justice Foster charging Venner with the blood of his Accomplices, by
his Seduction and Leading of them, he Answered, He did not; to which the
Witnesses being produced again, he blasphemously evaded it with this quible,
and said, It was not He, but Jesus that Led Them.

According to the Sentence pronounced on them January 19. 1661. Venner and
Hodgkings (both desparately wounded in the Rebellion, and as yet uncured) were
Drawn on Sledges from Newgate through Cheap Side, over against their Meeting
House in Swan-Alley in Coleman-street, where they were Executed according to
the Sentence pronounced against them. Venner (according to the nature of most
desparate Traitors) vindicating Himself and his Fact, being confident he said,
That the time was at hand when other judgment would be, reflecting much upon
the Government: But if the one was mad, the other raved, Hodgkins in way of
Praying, Calling down Vengeance from Heaven upon the King, the Judges, and the
City of London; nor would he leave, until the Hangman by the Sheriff's order
turned him off the Ladder; so that as they lived in a mad Religion, they died
as madly in the same: Their Quarters were set upon the Four Gates of the City,
by the late Executed Regicides, whose quarrel and revenge they undertook, in
this desparate attempt, and their Heads upon Poles as lovingly by some of them
on London Bridge.

The same day Giles Pritchard, a Cow-keeper, and another of them were Executed
in Cheap Side, and on the Monday following, being the 21. of Ian. Nine more of
them were Executed at five several places, ( viz.) Two at the West end of St.
Paul's, Two at the Bull and Mouth in St. Martins, Two at Beech-lane, Two at the
Royal Exchange, and One a notable Fellow named Leonard Gowler at Bishopsgate.
They all (especially the last) obstinately persisted in their Error, only a
young man who was Hanged in Redcross-street, did relent and repent of his sin,
and the blood he had spilt, but yet could not be persuaded out of his opinion
of Chilianisme.

Thus this desparate attempt ended in a halter, and their Declaration called A
door of Hope opened, proved to be a trap door, to draw silly souls to
destruction. I shall here add those Verses made under Venners picture, as being
pertinent to this purpose, and so take my leave of them. His Helmet was a Crown
by Revelation,
His Halbert was a Scepter for the Nation;
So the Fifth Monarchy anew is graced,
King Venner next to John a Leydon placed.


To these we may add one John James, a Small-cole-man by Trade, a rank Fifth
Monarchist, and one who had been engaged in Venners business, but was absent, or
had saved himself the last day they broke out; yet notwithstanding that fair
warning, departed not from his malice, but continued his Meetings and
Conventicles with others of his desparate Crew, amongst whom he was a principal
Rabby or Teacher. This man, as Venner had done before him, and as was couched
in their Declaration, flew out into several Traytorous Speeches and Invectives
against the Kings Person, Government, and Family, which being overheard by
some Neighbors living near, James was seized upon, and carried before a
Justice, who committed him to Newgate, and the next Term was brought to a
Trial at the Kings Bench-Bar, where the words were proved against him, and he
convicted and condemned as a Traitor. November 27. 1661. He was drawn on a
Sledge from Newgate to Tyburn, some of his Sect throwing themselves into the
same Sledge, and embracing him, so highly opinionated were they of this their
silly though bold Seducer. At the Gallows he denied the words, but owned and
avowed his Chilianisme, and the Personal Reign of Christ, and with the usual
confidence of his Party resolutely died. His Quarters were disposed of by his
Majesty's Orders, and his Head fixed upon a Pole in White-Chappel, near to
their Meeting House, for an Example to his Fellows.

Yet could not the ill success of these discourage others from Plots against
his Majesty, but still new Treasons was hatched by the Rebellious Spirits of
one Captain Baker, a New England man, and great acquaintance of Hugh Peter's,
who preferred him to be one of Olivers Pensioners; with him was engaged one
George Phillips a Serjant in the Colonels Company of the White Regiment, Thomas
Tongue a distiller of Strong Waters, Francis Stubbs a Cheese-monger, James Hide
Gunner, John Selly Compass-maker, and Nathaniel Gibbs Felt-maker. Their Plot
was against the Sacred Life of the King, the Duke of York, General Monk, and
Sir Richard Brown, and generally the Bishops, the Nobility, Gentry and
Commonalty, that were not of their opinion, and assisted them not: Their
Commander in Chief was to be Ludlow, and one Colonel Danvers, Master Nigh,
Master Lockyer, Lieutenant Strange; the Captains, Spencer and Taverner were
favorable to the Design; Their Councils was carried on by Six, who never sat
twice in a Place, nor could be known to any two; Deal Castle in Kent, and
Windsor was promised to be theirs. This Treasonable Plot was by one Hill (who
was endeavored to be drawn into it by Captain Baker) discovered to Sir Richard
Brown, with the Names of the Conspirators, who were for the same apprehended,
and December 11. 1662. brought to a Trial, where being by plain Evidence
convicted, they were condemned, and December 22. Four of them, ( viz.)
Phillips, Tongue, Gibbs and Stubbs were Executed, and their Heads set upon
several Poles, two on each Tower Hill, the nearest place to the Tower.
Afterward February the 20. one Gibbs, Brother of the aforesaid Nathaniel, who
fled, and was re-taken, was sent to the Sessions House in the Old Baily, and
with the said Captain Baker condemned for the former Treason, and both of them
Executed at Tyburn.

To these might be added the Intended Rebellion in Yorkshire, and some other
of the Northern Counties, by some desparate Fanatics, for which diverse of them
were Executed at York, and elsewhere; but we shall wave our Discourse of them,
and conclude with the Execution of some Notorious Scotch Traitors.

And first of the Marquess of Argyle, one who was a desparate Enemy to the Old
King all along, a chief Contriver and Fomenter of that Destructive Covenant,
the Ignis Fatuus of that Nation, which the Scots believed (as the Trojans did
by their Image of Pallas) came from Heaven; a greater Sider with Cromwell, and
one who had carried himself very undutifully and irreverently to his Majesty,
at what time he was amongst them in Scotland; yet notwithstanding all these
insolences, upon the Kings Restitution with great confidence he came up to
London, hoping to have obtained his pardon for all those base Treasons he had
so covertly Acted in that Kingdom, and that his Majesty according to his
Gracious Inclination would have past by all his Offenses; But such was the
general hatred and detestation of that People toward him, especially of the
Nobility, that by the Kings Order he was committed to the Tower, and from
thence, not long after in order to his Trial conveyed to Edinburgh in Scotland,
where he was brought to account for all his abominable Treasons, and
notwithstanding he cunningly defended himself, and pleaded the Kings Pardon,
and the Treaties in 1650. and 1651. yet was there such Crimes of a later date,
(besides the never to be forgotten Treachery of Selling King Charles the First
to the English) as justly condemned him, whereupon June the 1. 1661. He was
accordingly Beheaded with the Maiden, for so is the Axe called in Scotland; At
his death he very much justified the Covenant, that Scottish Witch, which
consisted of 666 words, the number of the Beast in the Revelation, and which
cost almost as many Thousand Men's lives as there were words contained in the
same.

Near unto the same time, Master James Guthery, a prime Remonstrator, and a
violent Adversary to the King in his Lieutenant the Marquess of Montross,
together with one Captain Giffan a Runnegado to Cromwell, were by Sentence and
Decree of Parliament hanged at Edinburgh; so far (to use the words of an
Elegant Author writing upon these Affairs) the Laws, and a suffering sense of
the Miseries and Reproaches that Nation lay under by these Men, and their
Partisans Guilt, did now prevail against the Dominion of the Kirk, which had
Enslaved and Enchanted the whole Mass of that People.

We shall conclude all with the Lord Warreston, a wicked Knave, a Committee of
Safety Man, notoriously Infamous for his Treason in Scotland, and a fugitive
there; who being Proclaimed a Rebel and Traitor, was taken and secured in
France, and sent over hither, where having remained some time in the Tower, he
was conveyed into Scotland, and there Tried, Condemned, and Executed according
to Law, 1662.

Ecclesiastes, 10.20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, for a bird in
the Air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.


The Contents.
The Loyal Martyrs Murdered in Scotland.
1 COl. Nathan. Gordon 42 2 Sr. Robert Spotswood 43 3 Mr. Andrew Guthrey ib. 4
Mr. Will. Murrey. 44 5 Marquess of Montross idem
The Loyal Persons slain in his Majesty's Service.
1 COronet Porter 57 2 Lord Aubigney 58 3 Earl of Lindsey idem 4 Sir Edw.
Varney idem 5 Col. Munro idem 6 Earl of Northampton idem 7 Earl of Denbigh 59
8 Sir Bevill Greenvil idem 9 Mr. Leake idem 10 Mar. de Vieu Ville idem 11 Earl
of Carnarvan 60 12 Earl of Sunderland idem 13 Lord Fauckland idem 14 Sir Hen.
Howard idem 15 Earl of Kingston 61 16 Col. Cavendish idem 17 Lord Grandison 62
18 Sr. Ingram Hopton idem 19 Lord Stuart idem 20 Sir John Smith 63 21 Col.
Manning idem 22 Lord Carey idem 23 Sr. W. Wentworth 64 24 L. Col. Smith idem 25
Sr. John Digby idem 26 Col. Mine idem 27 Sr. W. St. Ledger idem 28 Col. Gage 65
29 Col. St. George idem 30 Col. Tailor idem 31 Sr. Rich. Crane 66 32 Earl of
Leichfield idem 33 Sr. Fr. Carnaby idem 34 Major Cufaud idem 35 Mrs Griffith 67
36 Mr. Gerard idem 37 St. Tho. Dalison idem 38 Sr. N. Fortescu 68 39 Sr. T.
Turbervil idem 40 Major Threave idem 41 Col. Stanhop idem 42 Sr. N. Kemish idem
43 Lord Villers 69 44 Sr. Compton 70 45 Sr. W. Vaughan idem 46 Sr. Art. Aston
idem 47 Sr. Edw. Varney 71 48 Col. Warren idem 49 Col. Hammond 72 50 Cap. Goffe
idem 51 Sr. John Brown idem 52 Lord Widrington idem 53 Sr. Tho. Tilsely 73 54
Col. Boynton 74 55 Duke Hamilton idem 56 Col. Morgan idem
The Loyal Confessors.
1 LOrd Finch 76 2 Secret. Windebanck 77 3 Bishop of Ely idem 4 Dr. Featly 78 5
Sr. Robert Heath 79 6 Judge Bartlet idem 7 Judge Jenkins 80 8 Lord Hopton 81 9
Sr. Ed. Nicholas 82 10 Earl of Clarendon idem 11 Lord Wilmot 83 12 Dr. Sheldon
84 13 Dr. Hammond idem 14 Sir Marm. Landale idem 15 Mr. To. Le Strange 85 16
Earl of Norwich idem 17 Sir John Stowell 86 18 Sir John Berkinhead 87 19 Dr.
Barwick idem 20 Earl of Cleaveland 88 21 Lord Gerard idem 22 Sir John Owen 89
23 L. Loughborough idem 28 Sir A. Reynoldson 92 29 Col. Russel idem 30 Lord
Bellacis idem 31 Col. Ashbornhan 93 32 Sir Hum. Bennet idem 33 L. Mordant 94 34
Sir Tho. Woodcock 95 35 Mr. Chr. Pits idem 36 Mr. W. Garrant 96 37 Henry Friar
idem 38 Marq. Winchester 97 39 Earl of Oxford idem 40 Sir Geo. Booth idem 41
Sir Tho. Midleton 98
The Kings Judges.
1 JOhn Bradshaw 99 2 Oliver Cromwell 102 3 Henry Ireton 104 4 Har. Waller 105
5 Col. Walton 106 6 Thomas Harrison 107 7 Col. Ed. Whaley 108 8 Col Tho. Pride
idem 9 Col. Isaac Ewer 109 10 The Lord Gray 110 11 Lord Munson idem 12 Sir I.
Danvers 111 13 Sir Tho. Maleverer idem 14 Sir Io. Bourcher 112 15 Isaac
Pennington idem 16 Henry Martin 113 17 Will. Purefoy 114 18 Col. Berkstead idem
19 John Blakeston 116 20 Gilbert Millington idem 21 Tho. Chaloner 117 22 Sir W.
Constable idem 23 Edmond Ludlow 118 24 Col. Hutchinson idem 25 Sir Micha.
Lieusie 119 26 Robert Titchburn idem 27 Owen Row 120 28 Robert Lilburn idem 29
Adrian Scroop 112 30 Richard Dean idem 31 Col. Okey 122 32 John Hewson 123 33
William Goffe idem 34 Cornel. Holland 124 35 John Carew idem 36 John Jones 125
37 Per. Pelham 126 38 Thomas Wogan idem 39 Fran. Allen idem 40 Dan. Blagrave
127 41 John Moor 128 42 Will. Say idem 43 Franc. Lascels 129 44 Ja. Chaloner
idem 45 Gregory Clement idem 46 Sir G* Norton 130 47 John Ven idem 48 Thom.
Andrews 131 49 (...) Stapely idem 50 Tho. Horton idem 51 John Lisle 132 52 John
Dixwell 133 53 Miles Corbet idem 54 Simon Meyne 134 55 John Allured 135 56
Henry Smith idem 57 Humphry Edwards 136 58 John Fry idem 59 Ed. Harvey 137 60
Tho. Scot idem 61 William Cawley 138 62 John Downs idem 63 Thomas Hammond 139
64 Vincent Porter idem 65 Augustine Garland 140 66 George Fleetwood idem 67
James Temple 141 68 Peter Temple idem 69 Thomas Wait. 14^
Accessory Regicides.
1 John Cook 144 2 Hugh Peter's 145 3 Daniel Axtel 147 4 Dr. Daurislaws 149 5
Da. Broughton 150 6 Edw. Dendy 151 7 Sr. Hen. Mildmay idem 8 Robert Wallop idem
9 Tho. Hoyle 152 10 Lockier 153 11 Sir Tho. Martin id. 12 Sir Hen. Holcroft 154
13 Col. Rainsbrough idem 14 (...) Marston 155 15 Sir Hen. Vane 156
Traitors Executed since his Majesty's return.
1 Tho. Venner etc. 158 2 John James 167 3 Cap. Baker, etc. 169 4 The Rebels in
Yorkshire 170 5 Marq. of Argyle idem 6 James Guthery 172 7 Lord Warreston idem
FINIS.

