THE Danger of Tolerating LEVELLERS In a Civil State: OR, An Historical
Narration of the dangerous pernicious practices and opinions, wherewith SAMVEL
GORTON and his Levelling Accomplices so much disturbed and molested the
several Plantations in NEW ENGLAND; (Parallel to the positions and proceedings
of the present Levellers in OLD-ENGLAND.). Wherein their several Errors
dangerous and very destructive to the peace both of Church and State, their
carriage and reviling language against Magistracy and all Civil power, and
their blasphemous speeches against the holy things of God: TOGETHER, With the
Course that was there taken for suppressing them, are fully set forth: With a
Satisfactory Answer to their Complaints made to the PARLIAMENT: By Edw. Winslow
of Plymouth in New England.

London, Printed by Rich. Cotes for John Bellamy at the three Golden Lions in
Cornhill, near the Royal Exchange, 1649.

The Contents.
THe Magistrates proceedings at Boston in New England, against Samuel Gorton
and his Accomplices page 1. The first Letter of Samuel Gorton and his
Accomplices to the Magistrates of Boston in New England p. 9. The second Letter
of Samuel Gorton and his Accomplices to the Magistrates of Boston in
New England. p. 28. Certain observations collected out of both their Letters,
containing their reproachful Speeches of the government and Magistrates of the
Massachusetts. p. 38. Their reviling language against Magistracy it self, and
all Civil power. p. 43. Their blasphemous speeches against the holy things of
God. p. 47. The sum of the presentment of Samuel Gorton, at Portsmouth in Road
Island, by the grand Jury. p. 54. Mr. Roger Williams his Letter unto Mr.
Winthrop concerning Samuel Gorton. p. 55. A Letter from the Inhabitants of
Providence against Gorton and his Accomplices. p. 56. The true Cause of Gortons
sufferings in New England. p. 66. The ground of a War like to ensue. p. 71.
Gortons abuse of Mr. Cotton, and Mr. Ward answered. p. 76. A false Gloss of
State service discovered. p. 80. Gorton Preached against Magistracy, and yet
accepts it in his own person. p. 83. The ground or Cause of our first planting
in New England p. 88. The Church at Leyden, and the Churches in New England,
hold Communion with the Reformed Churches. p. 93. New-Englands practice toward
them that differ from them in Religion. p. 100.
A TRVE RELATION OF THE Proceedings of the Governor and Company of the
Massachusetts in New: England, against Samuel Gorton and his Accomplices; with
the grounds and reasons thereof, examined and allowed by their General Court
holden at Boston in November, 1646.
SAMVEL GORTON lived sometime at Plymouth, where his behavior was so turbulent
and offensive both to the Magistrates and others, as they were necessitated to
drive him out of their Jurisdiction. From thence he went to Roade-Island,
where he began to raise sedition, and to make a party against the Authority
there; for which he was apprehended and whipped, and so sent away. From thence
(with some others whom he had gathered to his part) ^ee removed to Providence,
where Mr. Roger Williams then lived. He (with some others) opposed his sitting
down there as an Inhabitant, only in regard of his present distress, they
gave way for his abode for a time. But being once housed, he soon drew so
great a party to him, as it was beyond the power of Mr. Williams and his party
to drive them out, or to rule them there; so as both parties came armed into
the field each against other, and had fought it out, had not Mr. Williams used
means for pacification. Hereupon many of the chief of Providence sent
messengers with a Letter to the Governor and Council of the Massachusetts,
desiring aid against Gorton and his company; but they were answered, that not
being within our Jurisdiction nor consederation we had no ground to interpose
in their quarrels. Soon after some of those men tendered themselves and their
lands to come under our Government, and were received.

There live near to Providence two small Indian Sachims called Pumham and
Socononoco, who though they are as free as the great Sachim o^ the
Nanohigganset: Yet Myantonimo the then Sachim of of Nanoligganset (being a very
proud and stern man) kept them in great awe. This poor Sachim Pumham had a
large parcel of land near Providence, very convenient for plantation, which
Gorton and his company (being now about 13, or 14.) taking notice of, and
fearing they should not be able to keep their power long where they were, dealt
with Myantonimo for this parcel of land, promising him a good parcel of
Wampam for it. And because they knew that Pamham was the true owner of it, they
dealt with him also; but he refusing to sell it (for he dwelt upon it, or very
near to it) they caused Myantonimo to send for him, and having drawn a Writing
purporting the sale thereof for a certain consideration to be given to both
of them, Myantonimo signed it, and he for fear of Myantonimo set his mark to
it also, not knowing what it was. But when Gorton tendered him the consideration
for it, he utterly refused it, it being the Indians manner not to account any
thing sold, till the party have received the thing it is sold for.

But upon this colorable title Gorton and his company enter upon the land, and
build some houses, and withal much wrong the Indians with their cattle, and
having Myantonimo their friend, behave themselves very insolently toward the
poor Indians, who (having no friends or means to relieve themselves) came and
tendered themselves and their lands to the government of the Massachusetts, who
(by order of the Court) gave notice thereof to Myantonimo, and appointed him to
come or send to the next Court at Boston, to show his title or interest (if he
had any) to the said Pumham and Socono^oco or their lands. At the time
appointed he came, and pretended that they were his vassalls, but it appeared
clearly both by a w^lting from Mr. Williams, and the testimony of some other
English in those parts, and of diverse other Indians no way related to them,
that they were free Sachims; so as Myantonimo having nothing to reply, the
Court received the two Indian Sachims with their subjects and lands under the
government and protection of the Massachusetts; and upon that writ to our
neighbors of Providence, intimating the same to them, and advising Gorton and
his company, that if they had any just title to the lands they possessed, they
should come, or send some for them to show the same to the Court, and offered
them safe conduct. This letter from the Court they took in great disdain, and
returned scornful and menacing answers by word of mouth, and a good time after
they wrote a letter to the Court full of reproach and blasphemies, not only
against the Magistrates, but against the Churches and Ordinances, as by the
Copy thereof hereafter following will appear. Notwithstanding these
provocations and daily wrongs offered to those few English their neighbors
(who had formerly submitted themselves to our Government) we sat still near
half a year, and before we attempted any thing against them, we advised with
the Commissioners of the united Colonies, who (upon testimony of their insolent
and injurious courses, and perusal of the letter they sent to us) left them to
us to proceed according to Justice. Whereupon the Court sent again to them by
two of their members, who carried letters (to require and persuade them to come
and give satisfaction,) and a safe Conduct withal; but they entertained those
Messengers as they had done the former, threatening to whip one, whom they
took along with them; and sent us word, that if we had any thing to say to
them, we should come to them, and we should have justice there, and that if
we came with force, they would meet us half the way. Our messengers returning
with these scornful answers, the Court resolved to send some force to fetch
them in; and in the mean time there came a second letter from them; (the Copy
whereof is hereafter also set down) but before we sent forth our soldiers,
we wrote to them to this effect: Viz. That although the injuries and
provocations we had endured from them were very grievous, yet that our Justice
and moderation might appear to all men, we had condescended so far to their
own proposition, as we would send some Commissioners to them, to hear their
answers and allegations, and if thereupon they would give us such satisfaction
as should be just, we would leave them in peace; if otherwise, we would
right our selves by force of Arms: And signified withal, that we would send
a sufficient guard with our Commissioners; for seeing they would not trust
themselves with us upon our safe conduct, we had no reason to trust any of
ours with them upon their bare courtesy. Accordingly about a week after we
sent three Commissioners, and 40 Musketeers with them, with instructions,
first to speak and treat with them, and to require satisfaction according to
Justice, and if it were denied, then to take them by force, and bring them
prisoners to Boston; and to take with all so much of their substance as should
satisfy our charges. By the way as they went they met with another letter from
them, letting them know, that they feared them not, but were prepared for them:
And accordingly they had fortified themselves in one house (some 12 of them)
and had lined the walls with earth (^usket proof) and had made Flanckers, and
provided victuals, etc. to endure a siege. So that when our Commissi^ners came
to the place, they would admit no parley. But after a while, by the mediation of
some of their neighbors, they were content to parley, and offered to refer
the cause to Arbitrators, so as some of them might be of Providence, or of
Road Island. Our Commissioners were content to send to us to know our minds
about it, and in the mean time sat still. Such of the Court as could meet,
returned answer that their Proposition was neither seasonable nor reasonable,
nor could it be safe or honorable for us to accept thereof: 1 Because they
would never offer nor hearken to any terms of agreement before our soldiers
had them in their power. 2 Because the ground of their Proposition was false,
for we were not parties (as they pretended) but equal Judges between the
Indians and others who were complainants, and themselves, (and yet in a case of
war, parties may be Judges.) 3 They were no State, or Body politic, but a
few fugitives living without Law or Government, and so not honorable for us to
join with them in such a way of reference. 4 The parties whom they would
refer it unto, were such as had been rejected by us, and all the Governments
in the Country, and so not likely to be equal to us, nor able to judge of the
cause: and their blasphemous and reproachful writings, etc. were not matters
fit to be composed by Arbi^ement, (being deeply criminal) but either to be
purged away by repentance and public satisfaction, or else by public
punishment. For these and other reasons, the Commissioners were required to
proceed according to their Instructions. And thereupon they entrenched
themselves about the house, and in few days forced them to yield, and so
brought them to Boston, where they were kept in prison till the Court sat, and
had their diet from the Cooks (as good meat and drink as the Town afforded.)
The next Lords day they refused to go to the Church assembly, except they
might have liberty to speak there, as occasion should be. They were answered
by some of the Magistrates that it appertained to the Elders to order the
affairs of the Church, but they might presuppose they should not be denied
such liberty, speaking words of truth and soberness. So in the afternoon they
came, and were placed in a convenient seat before the Elders. Mr. Cotton the
Teacher taught then (in his ordinary course) out of Acts 19. of Demetrius
speech for Diana her silver shrine. After Sermon Gorton desired leave to
speak, which being granted, he took occasion from the Sermon to speak to
this effect, That in the Church now there was nothing but Christ, so that all
our Ordinances, Ministers, and Sacraments, etc. were but men's inventions, for
show and po^p, and no other then those silver shrines of Diana. He said also,
that if Christ lives eternally, then he died eternally, and other speeches of
like kind. And indeed it appears both by his speeches and letters, that it
was his opinion, that Christ was incarnate in Adam, and was that image of God,
wherein Adam was created; and that the chief work and merit lay in his
Inanition, when he became such a thing, so mean, etc. and that his being borne
after of the Virgin Mary, and suffering, etc. was but a manifestation of his
suffering, etc. in Adam. Another of them said that the Sabbath was Christ, and
so was borne of the Virgin Mary. They called Magistracy among Christians an
Idol; yet they did acknowledge a Magistracy in the world to be subjected to as
an Ordinance of God, but only as natural; as the father over his wife and
children, and an hereditary Prince over his subjects.

Their first appearance before the Court was upon the Lecture day at Boston,
before a very great Assembly, where first the Governor declared the cause and
manner of all the proceedings against them, and their Letters were openly read,
and they had liberty to object, and anwers were given, as follows:

First, to their plea, That they were not within our Jurisdiction; it was
answered: 1 If they were not within ours, yet they were within the Jurisdiction
of one of our confederates, who had referred them to us. 2 If they were within
no Jurisdiction, then was there none to complain to for redress of our
injuries in way of ordinary Justice, and then we had no way of relief but by
force of Arms.

Secondly, to their plea Of persecution for their Conscience, etc. It was
answered, that we did not meddle with them for their opinions, otherwise then
they had given us occasion, by their own Letters and free speeches amongstus,
for we wrote to them about civil Controversies only, and gave them no
occasion to vent their blasphemies and revilings against the Ordinances of
Religion set up with us.

Thirdly, for their title to the Indians lands: we had diverse times desired
them to make it appear; but they always refused, even to our Commissioners,
whom (according to their own motion) we sent last to them: and since they
were in prison, we offered them to send for any witnesses they would name to
us for that end, but this also they refused. So that our title (by the Indians
surrender) appears good, and having regained possession, we need not question
them any further about that.

Their Letters being read and their Subscriptions acknowledged, they were
demanded severally if they would maintain those things which were contained
therein. Their answer was, that they would, in that sense they wrote them, and
so were returned to prison. The next day they were brought before the Court
severally to be examined upon particulars, (many of the Elders being desired to
be present) because they had said they could give a good interpretation of
every part of their Letters. But the interpretation they gave being contrary to
the words, they were demanded if they would then retract those words, so
plainly different from their pretended meanings. But this they refused to do,
saying, that then they should deny the Truth; for instance in one or two. Their
Letters were directed, one of them, To their Neighbors of the Massachusetts:
and the other, To the great honored Idol General of the Massachusetts, and by
a messenger of their own delivered to our Governor, and many passages in both
Letters particularly applied to our Courts, our Magistrates, our Elders, etc.
and yet upon their examinations about their meanings in their reproachful
passages, they answered that they meant them, of the corrupt estate of mankind
in general, and not of us. So, whereas in their Letter they charged it upon
us, as an error that we teach, That Christ dyed Actually only, when he
suffered under Pontius Pilate; and before, only in Types, etc. upon their
examination they said, that their meaning was, that his death was actual to
the faith of the Fathers under the Law, (which is in effect the same which we
hold:) Yet they would not retract their words they had written. The Elders
conferred many hours with them before the Court, and by occasion there of they
discovered diverse blasphemous opinions, which they maintained, we will instance
one which was mentioned before, delivered by Gort^n, viz. that the Image of God
wherein Adam was created, was Christ; and Adams loosing that Image was the
death of Christ, and the restoring of that Image in the Regeneration, was the
resurrection of Christ: and so the death of him that was borne of the Virgin
Mary was but a manifestation of the former. Master William Tompson one of the
Elders had spent some time with them before in the prison about the opinions
which they held forth, and they had professed their agreement with him (for
substance) in every point, so as he came to the Court with a purpose to speak
in their behalf, but when he heard themselves discover thus upon their public
examinations, he showed how he had been deluded by them, For they excel the
Jesuits in the art of equivocation, and regard not how false they speak, to
all other men's apprehensions, so they keep to the rules of their own secret
intentions. Being asked why they spoke against the Ordinances of the Ministry,
Sacraments, etc. seeing the Scripture allows them? They answered that they
were ordained only for the time of Nonage, but after the Revelation was
written, they were to cease, because we find no mention* of them in that book.

They were unlearned men, the ablest of them could not write true english, no
not in common words, yet they would take upon them to interpret the most
difficult places of Scripture, and wrest them any way to serve their own
turn. As for instance, Mr. Cotton pressing Gorton with that in Act. 10. Who
can forbid water, why these should not be baptized. etc. He interpreted thus,
who can deny but these h^ve been baptized, s^eing they have received the Holy
Ghost, etc. so he allowed them to have been baptized. This shift he was put
to, that he might maintain his opinion, viz: that such as have been baptized
with the Holy Ghost, need not the baptism of water. Diverse days were spent
both by the Court and the Elders in laboring to bring them to repentance, but
all in vain. They continued obstinate. Whereupon they agreed to sentence them,
but first they brought them in public before a great Assembly, and there (out
of their Letters and Speeches) they laid upon them this charge, viz. they were
found to be blasphemous enemies of the true Religion of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and of all his holy Ordinances, and likewise of all Civil Government among his
people, and particularly within this jurisdiction. Then they were demanded, if
they did acknowledge this charge to be just, and would submit to it, or what
exception they had against it? They answered, they did not acknowledge it to be
just, but they fell into some cavilling speeches, so they were returned unto
prison again. Being in prison they behaved themselves insolently toward their
keeper, and spoke evil of the Magistrates, so as the keeper was forced to
threaten them with Irons, to keep them quiet.

After all means used to reclaim them, and not prevailing, they were brought
before the Court to receive their sentence, which was this. Gorton and six more
of them, were to be sent to several towns, there to be kept to work for
their livings, and to wear an Iron chain upon one leg, and not to depart the
limits of the Town, nor by word or writing to maintain any of their
blasphemous or wicked errors upon pain of death, except in conference with
any of the Elders, or any other allowed by some Magistrate to confer with
them; and this to continue during the pleasure of the Court. Three of the
Company (because they had not their hands to the Letters) were set at liberty,
two of them upon a small ransom as prisoners taken in war, and the other,
freely, for that he was amongst them in his Masters house, where they were
taken; a fourth being found to be a plain ignorant young man was discharged
also, only enjoined to abide a time in one of our Towns, but he went away
and returned no more, contrary to his promise. There were two other who were
brought in after; (but not by force) the one of them disclaiming to have any
hand in the Letters, was discharged presently; the other was kept a while in
prison, and after upon his submission etc. was released.

Gor^on and the other fix remained in the several Towns all that Winter; and
then in regard of their wives and children (who were like to be much distressed
by their husbands absence) they were set at liberty, and banished upon pain of
death if they were found in any part of our jurisdiction.

After the Court had passed sentence upon them for their confinement, we sent
to fetch so many of their Cattle, as might defray the charges they had put us
to, which amounted to about one hundred and sixty pounds, but the Cattle came
not to so much, for we left every of them a part for the support of their
families, and some of them had no Cattle at all.

The Letters follow*

Mooshawset November: 20, 1642.
To our Neighbors of the Massachusetts.
Whereas we lately received an irregular note, professing its form from the
Massachusetts, with four men's names subscribed thereunto, as principal authors
of it, of the chief amongst you; We could not easily give credit to the truth
thereof, not only because the conveyers of it unto us, are known to be men,
whose constant and professed acts are worse, then the counterfeiting of men's
hands; but also, because we thought that men of your parts and profession,
would never have prostrated their wisdom to such an act. But considering that
causlesse enmity you have against us; the proof whereof, every occasion brings
forth; We cannot but conclude, that no act so ill which that ancient mother
will not bring forth her seed unto. For we know very well, that it is the name
of Christ called upon us, which you strive against; Thence it is that you stand
on tip-toe, to stretch your selves beyond your bounds, to seek occasion
against us; (So) as you might hide your sin with Adam, bearing the world in
hand; it is not your desire to contend with us; But some civil breach in our
courses, which you only seek to redress. Whereas neither you, nor any (in
way of truth) can find wherewith, to bring us under the Censure of a
disorderly course of walking amongst men: And as for the way of that ancient
spirit of accusation of the brethren, we weigh it not, knowing him to be a
liar, (or in the abstract, a lie) from the beginning, yea and the father of it
also, which thing you cannot know, though it were told unto you.

Whereas you say, Robert Cole, William Arnauld with others, have put themselves
under the Government and protection of your Jurisdiction, which is the occasion
you have now got to contend; we wish your words were verified, that they were
not elsewhere to be found, being nothing but the shame of Religion, Disquiet,
and Disturbance of the place where they are. For, we know neither the one nor
the other, with all their associates and Confederates, have power to enlarge
the bounds, by King Charles limited unto you.

Behold therefore in this your act, a Map of your spiritual estate, (to use
your own phrase) for we know that the Spirituality of your Churches, is the
Civility of your Commonweal, and the Civility of your Comonwealth, is the
spirituality of your Churches, the wisdom of man, being the whole
accomplishment of them both; of which Tree, you delight daily to eat (finding
it fair and beautiful) to gain Conformity with your maker. In these your
Dissembling subjects; grossly profane amongst us, but full of the spirit of
your purity, when they are with you, you may remember the brand your selves
have set upon some of them, the Cause whereof was never yet removed, though it
abide not upon their back; Nor yet the Cause of your Commitment of them unto
Satan according unto your Law, for if that were removed, you should do them
wrong, in not resuming your vomit into its former Concoction again; Nor are we
ignorant of those disgraceful terms they use, and give out against you,
behind your backs, their submission therefore can be to no other end, but to
satisfy their own lusts, not only conceived, but in violent motion, against
their Neighbors, who never offered the least wrong unto them, only the
proposition of Amity, is object sufficient, for these men's enmity.

Even so the passions of sin, which are by the Law, having force in your
Members; you going about with great labor and industry to satisfy them by
your submission unto the word of God, in your Fasting, and feasting, in
Contributing, and treasuring, in retiredness for Study, and bowing of the
backs of the poor, going forth in labor to maintain it, and in the spirit
of that hireling, raising up, your whole structure and edifice, in all which
you bring forth nothing but fruit unto death, some laboring for a price to
give for the keeping of their souls, in peace and safe estate and Condition,
and some to have their bodies furnished with riches, honor and ease, and
further then the Lord Jesus agrees with these, you mind him not, nay you
renounce and reject him, and with these (according to your Acceptance and
practice) he holds no Correspondency at all, being the Consultation and
operation of that his only adversary, man being that which you depend upon,
and not the Lord, Crying o^t in way of Elevation, and aplauding his ministers,
when in the mean time, you know not what, nor who they are, professing them
under a mediate Call of Christ, though formerly, they have been Called
immediately by him, herby showing your selves to be those, that destroy the
Sacred ordinance of God: For if you make Christ to be that to day, in stateing
his ministers; which he was not yesterday, and that in the time of the Gospel
also, (to speak acording to your Law) to be found in them both, you therein
affirm, that he has been that to his ministers, which now he is not, and to
make the Son of God to have been that which now he is not, is to make a
Nullitie of him, not to be at all, for he is the Lord that changes not, no not
a shadow thereof is found in him, so that you plainly Crucify unto your
selves, the Lord of glory, and put him to an open shame* So that as you know
not, how Christ, conversing with his father in heven, is found on the earth,
amongst the true worshippers, no more do you know, how in his conversing with
Nicodemus on the earth, he concludes himself to be in heaven, with his father.
On this foundation hangs the whole building of your Doctrine, concerning the
sufferings of Christ, you Annihilate the Cros^, then the which, the Saints have
no other Consolation: and prepare no better a place then Purgatory, for the
honorable fathers of our Lord: For you conclude, that Christ dyed in the
Decree, and purpose God, in the time of the Law, but actually only when he
hanged on the Cross in the days of Herod and Pontius Pilate, that he was
crucified in the ^^pes and shadows of the law, but in the truth, and
substance, when he appeared borne of the Virgin Mary: So must you also
conclude that the fathers under the law, were only saved, in purpose and
Decree, in Type and shadow, but actually and substantially only at the Coming
of Christ in the flesh: therefore deal plainly with those that depend upon
you for instruction (as your Ancestors in the papacy have don) and proclaim
a place of purgatory, provided for them in the mean, without which, your
Doctrine has no foundation. For if you raise up a shadow, without a
substance, and the substance of him that dwells in light, without a shadow,
you play the part of Wisards, or Necromancers, not the part of true
Naturalists, in the things of the Kingdom of god.

So that as far as these men are from being honorable and loyal subjects,
so far are you from being voluntaries in the Day of Gods power, and from
yielding subjection unto the Beauties of holiness. Such also is your professed
Rule, and Government, in the things that concern the Kingdom of our God, they
are infinitely beyond, and out of the Reach of that Spirit which is gone out
amongst you, the Capacity whereof can no ways comprehend, the breadth of the
land of Emanuel, nor en^reth it within the Vale, Therefore it cannot know those
Cherubims of glory, neither can it h^re the voice of that lively Oracle,
speaking only from off the covering Mercy-seate, and not elsewhere to be
heard; We speak not but what we know, these things are out of its
Jurisdiction; Therefore dumb in telling Justice, nor speaks it any of that
Righteousness and glory, comprysed in another circuit, then ever you were yet
made Lords of: Long therefore may you boast, of your Jurisdiction before ever
you attain unto a Iurisprudentia, in these things.

In that you tell us we offer you wrong, by a pretended purchase: you are as
much mistaken in the purchase, as in the wrong, For it is right that we are
about to do, neither is our purchase a pretense, but precedentiall, not only
in this Civil respect, but may also admonish all men, to take heed, how they
depend upon false and self-seeking interpreters, when both themselves, and they
that have the vision, are ignorant of the Contract, and Covenant of God. Thence
it is, that you teach, that the spouse of Christ, upon Contract with her Lord,
may conceive the seed of immortality, and bring forth fruit unto God, when as
yet the day of marriage, that great Feastivitie, and solemnization, of the
Consolations of God, is not yet comne, witness your prorogation thereof, if
not to the Descension of Christ from heaven unto the earth, to Reign certain
years, yet to the Calling of the Jews, whom ye your selves are, according to
the flesh, and to the destruction of that Man of sin whom ye so stoutly
maintain, What is this, but to proclaim unto all the world, that Audacious
spirit of whoredoms, professing Conception and bringing forth before the
Nuptial day?

In that you conclude your Clyents Right to arise out of four years
possession, we have no such order, if you mean the Right of Conquest, (only
held in that tenure) the true owners were never yet subdued, for that is the
right they expect to enjoy by you, for some of them committed part of their
supposed right unto us, professing it was, that they might have help, to enjoy
the rest; But when they saw, we would not be Abetters unto them without, much
less contrary unto Covenant, then they fly unto you for help, Their
possession, being a mere intrusion, as all the Natives know and ever
exclaymed against them for the same, And so may our Countrymen also, whose eyes
are not dazzled with envy, and ears open to Lies, as we know yours are, else
you had heard both sides speak, before you had Judged.

But we profess right held, according to no such interest, but upon the ground
of Covenant only, known in its nature; In the parties 'twixt whom it is
plight, In the possesser, and the possessed, with the nature of all fruit
arising from their accord and concurrencie, together with their Distinct,
Harmonicall, Reciprocal, and Joint properties, and operations of them both:
Such is the tenure we hold, and maintain, before men and Angels, and oppose
it against man and Devil, Not in taking up unto our selves, certain offices
and officers which we can teach children to be, and to perform, and from
thence presently to conclude, the possession of the Kingdom, Crying out our
peace offerings are upon us, this Day we have paid our vows. But when that
Dark cloud descended upon the Tabernacle, becomes the light, and glory of all
Israel (there being nothing acknowledged amongst them, but what arises out
thence) then, and then only, are the orders, as also the men of Israel,
deriv^d from the true fountain, which no tongue can confess, but it is
salvation, and then, not else, is the heritage of our Lord in possession, yea,
even the wayless wilderness knows, how to afford them an habitation, which had
its being before the hills and mountains were borne: which men begin to fly
unto for refuge, to hide them from the presence of the Lamb: this is a
possession, which no man can intrude himself into: it is only Covenanted
withim, through an enlightened eye, and boared ear, which man performs not,
nor can it be received from him.

For we know that Cloud of thick darkness, that hides and covers the whole
frame and fabric of the work of God, to be the cle^ring and evidencing of
every point and particular thereof: yea to us, It is even that cloud of witness,
which testifies unto us, they like works to appear, when ever the world has
occasion to make use of us.

Never does it shine but in the night, never is it dark to Israel but in the
day, but in the one, and the other, the only glory and sastie of all the
tribes: but how, you know not, nor can you with all your libraries, give the
interpretation thereof, but have lost it in the wilderness, and accordingly,
have made the whole way, and will of our Lord, the ouldnesse of the letter,
both to your selves, and to all that have an ear to lissen unto you; Thence it
is that the day of Lord, is a day of Darkness and Gloominess unto you, but of
Joy and gladness unto us; yea, it lifts up our head only, and then is our
salvation near; For we know the worthies of David doubled about the bed of
Solomon, which expel all fear in the night, handling the sword with sucess,
making the adversaries nothing but meat to feed upon, so that the time of your
fears is the time of our Courage and Conquest, for when you fear error,
schism, Rents and Confusions in Church and ^late, then do we know the
Messenger of the Covenant, the Lord whom We seek is speeding his passage into
his holy temple: For who (under the terrors of your spirit) may abide his
Coming, he being like a refiners fire, and Fullers soap.?

In that you invite us unto your Courts to fetch your equal balanced justice,
upon this ground, that you are becomne one with our adversaries, and that, both
in what they have, and what they are, and we know them to be such, as profess
the day of the Lord an unhallowed thing. Now, if we have our opponant, to
prefer his action against us, and not only so, but to be our Counsel, our
Jurie, and our Judge, for so it must be, if you be one with them (as you
affirm) we know before hand, how our Cause will be ended, and see the scale
of your equal Justice turned already, before we have laid our Cause therein,
and cannot but admire, to see you carried so contrary to your own received
principles: For you know not how to find Christ as a Ruling and teaching Elder
both in one person, therefore he is not Complete amongst you by your own law,
except in several persons, and you may thank tradition, else you know no more
how to find both a king and a priest in him, and yet in your way of making
tender of your Justice unto us you know how to become one with our adversaries
(so) as if we deal with them, we deal with you, and if we have to do with
you, we have to do with them also, yea further, we know, that the chief
amongst you, have professed we are not worthy to live; and that if some of us
were amongst you, we should hardly see the place of our abode any more; Now
that they have brooded upon their law, to take away life, they must much more
bring it up, in taking away all means of life, Witness our prohibition, that no
powder should besould unto us for our money, and that in a time when you could
not think your selves safe, in all your own, self provision and worldly
furniture, except you disarmed a company of poor Indians, whom Aaron your
Leviticall Sacrificer has made Naked, as he does all those which triumph in a
Calf, though the most costly and beautiful, that the Jewels and eare-rings of
Learning, either in Language, or art, can possibly bring forth: your own
amazements upon mere Rumors, may testify the truth hereof; so then; we are
Judged by your law before our Cause be hard, or our selves brought forth under
the liberties of it, which thing is well pleasing unto us, to have our
Condition conformed unto Moses the man of God, who was dead in Pharaohs
account, before he was brought forth, and so it was with Christ our lord, in
the days of Herod also, who is our life (at which you strike) and makes all
things, yea, Death it self, lively, and advantageous unto us.

We cannot but wonder, that you should read the Scripture, and not find them
fulfilled, in, and amongst your selves, when as they appear so apparently,
that he that runs may read them* what think you of Herod, when the Lord had
delivered Peter out of prison, and released him of those bonds, and brought him
from that thraldom, which he had so Cruelly imposed upon him, to gain the
favor of the Jews, and that by a power supereminent, transcending the bounds
of his authority, and by a wisdom surpassing the Depth of his Counsel, and
policy, to find out, together with his soldiers and Champions, he presently
goes down to Ces^rea, and Hero^ i^ angry with them of Tyrus and Sidon,
(thumomachon) a heavy Friend, or has a secret grudg or perturbation of mind,
manifested in an outreaching, and circumventing policy, to subdue them unto
himself, that he might Rule over them: Finding himself fall short of power and
policy, to subject the word of God in the messinger of it, to satisfy his own
lusts, in his lordship over it, he pursues with all egarnesse to make himself a
god, by Reigning over the bodies and estates of men; yea, though they be but
such, as Tyru^ and Sidon, can afford unto him, to make subjects of, and when
they come unto him with one accord to make offer of themselves, in yielding to
his affectionate and political project, he sitting upon the Judgment seat,
in his Royal apparel, making his oration, of what power he has to protect
them, what wisdom and Counsel, to minister Justice and righteousuess unto them
(which office belongs only unto the Lord) the people with a shout crying out,
the voice of god and not of man, the truth and substance of which Cry is, this
is the ordinance of god and not of man, immediately the angel of the Lord
smites him, and he that ever acknowledged himself, to be a worm, and no man
upon the earth, Consumes and eats up all his pomp and glory, even as those,
whom you account the Shame and Contempt of the people, shall (through that
angel of the Covenant) waste and bring to naught all those Rhetorical,
(though earthly) Orations that are made amongst you, by your so Learned,
studious, and experienced Clerks: take for illustration of your estate as
above, the speech of your alderman Oliver, in case of committing Francis
Hutchinson to prison; one of your Churchmembers wondering that brother Winthrop
would do it before the Church had dealt with him, Brother, faith he, why; he
is thy god man.

Lend your eye yet farther, to parallel your practice personated in Pylate and
the people, when Pylat offers Jesus unto the people to be judged, they
profess, they have such a law, as puts no man to Death: they are all for mercy
and forgiveness, when they are out of the Judgment hall, but let Pylat enter in
thither; and then, nothing but Crucify him, Crucify him; be their
accusations, and witnesses, never so false: even so, in your dealings with men,
in way of your Jewish brother hood, your law is all for mercy, to Redress,
reform, and for preservation, both of soul and body; Do but enter into the
Common hall, and then, as Pylat asked (am I a Jew?) so do you, Do I sit, or
speak here, as a brother? I tro not, I am now in a higher sphere, then that
(though they be acknowledged coheirs with Christ) can ataine unto, therefore if
witness be brought in, and Oath taken, though never so untrue, your consciences
are purged by law, and your power must have tribute paid unto it, so far as
men's Names, to be branded with infamy, estates, depryving women and children
of things necessary, and precious lives of men can extend themselves, to
contribute any thing thereunto; so that the professed mercy, and Clemency of
your law, to exercise censures only for amendment of life, and recoverie, comes
unto this issue, as much as in you lies, to send both soul and body down unto
hell for ever without redress, and all hope of recovery.

But your hour, and the power of Darkness, is known what it is, either to
have men's persons in admiration because of advantage; or else, to seek all
occasions against them, to brand them with all manner of reproach, and
ignominy, but for the truth, taught daily in the Temple, you know not how to
streatch out your hand, or exercise your ministry againstil, left it become
leprous, and you take it back again with loss, when it appears dried and
withered.

And wherefore reason ye amongst your selves, saying, we exercise the power
of your ministrations against none but such as are Delinquents, whereby we
clear the innocent, and establish peace in all our borders?

We demand, what think you of those two witnesses, prophesying in Sackcloth, a
thousand two hundredth and threescore Days: those two olive trees, and two
candlestickes, standing before the God of the earth? are thesegu ltie and vile
persons, out of whose hands (by the power of your ministries) you are
delivering and releasing the world? then indeed are your ways justifiable: But
if these be the Just, Chosen, and peculiar friends of God, yea such, as
without which, his truth and Righteousness are not justified, his wisdom, and
holiness maintained and upheld in the world, in point of salvation by Christ,
then are your ways wicked, and to be abhorred; for in your professed Course,
you are they, by whom these are ^laine, and put to Death, and all your glory is
to keep their Corpse unburied in your streets, and yet you know not what you
are doing, no more then you know what these witnesses are, whom you are
altogether ignorant of, for your Libraries never saw them, and you see not but
by their eyes, for these are two, and never more, nor yet less, yea ever the
same, they are olive trees, else no witnesses, and also Candlesticks, else both
the former fail, yea, are not at all. We must tell you what these are, else
we cannot declare how you kill them, for it is not our intent to open unto you
the house of the treasures, the silver and the gold, and the spices, and the
precious ointment, nor the house of our armor, because you take all as
execrable, and put all to a profane use that comes from us; but these two
witnesses are the life and death of our Lord Jesus; or, in the true language of
heaven also, the strength and the weakness of Christ, for he was crucified
through weakness, but he lives by the power of God: this is the word of the
Lord in Zerubbabel, Not by an army, nor by power, and so deprives him of all
strength, but by aspirit, that the greatest mountain, or loftiest hill in the
world cannot stand before, but becomes a plain, which with facility and ease
he passes upon; thence it is that he does not only lay the top or the head
stone of all, but also the lowest in the foundation, and then only is the
voice of shouting heard, Grace, grace in the house for ever; and then does the
day of small things become the day of joy and triumph, yea, of parting the rich
spoils and prey of all the world, for then he that does but turn and lift up
his eyes he cannot look besides that great flying book of the Curse that is
gone forth over the whole earth.

Without these two witnesses jointly uttering themselves in every particular
Scripture undertaken to be divulged by any, no evidence nor testimony of God
is given, or brought in at all, but a mere refuge of lies for the souls of
men to betake themselves unto; without these two pipes of the olive trees
emptying themselves into the bowl of the candlesticks, no unction nor oil at
all is found in them, and that being wanting the light of the Sanctuary is gone
out; so that the light appearing amongst you is only the light of Bala^m,
whose eye was open, which you may read either S^et^um or Sethum, for that
opening is nothing else but the shutting up of the holy things of God, so that
in seeing you see not, but communicate only in the light of that beast, who
puts the witnesses to death, as Balaam did in the sight of that dumb beast of
his whose eyes were opened to see the angel before him; so that while you
think it is our wisdom to stoop unto you for light, we never come amongst
you but see our selves in a regiment of gross and palpable darkness, and
discern you very plainly, how you scrabble upon the wall to find the door of
Lots house, and cannot. As also how you toil your selves to climb up into the
sheepfold, another, yea, so many other ways, and have no fight nor discerning
of us the Door, at all, by the which whosoever enters, becomes a true feeder
of the flock of God; yea, none enters in thereat, but the true Shepherd
himself.

Most impious it is to put to death two such Noble witnesses, that have power
to shut heaven that it rain not in the days of their prophesying; to turn
the waters into blood, and to smite the earth with all manner of plagues as often
as they will, whom that spirit that is amongst you kills on this wise, the life
or power of the son of God, as above, which is infinite, not admitting of
circumscription or containment, for the heaven of heavens cannot contain him,
yet have you not dared to graspe and inviron that power in the heavens, and
therefore have resolved and concluded that he only rules upon the earth in
these days by his Deputies, Lievtenants, and Vicegerents, whereby you limit,
and so destroy the holy One of Israel; for give him that in one time, or place,
which afterward, or elsewhere you deny him, and you make a nullity of him unto
your selves, and in so doing, you kill that other witness, namely, the death
or weakness of the Lord Jesus: for you must have man to be honorable,
learned, wise, experienced, and of good report, else they may not rule among
you; yea and these things are of man, and by man, as appears, in that they
only officiate so, as man may disanull and take it away again; witness your
change of officers, constantly speaking for us herein; thus have you slain
also the death or theweaknesse of Christ, who professes himself to be a worm
and no man, the shame and contempt of the people; and these faith full and true
witnesses thus slain, you must of necessity deny burial, and keep them both
in open view in your streets, or other wise all your pomp and glory falls to
the dust whence it came, and on which it feeds. Nor can you send your presents
one to another of your acts of Justice, power to protect, wealth, honor, and
friends where with you gratify each other; and where these are thus slain,
and their corpse lie in open view, none of the gentiles, peoples, tongues, and
kindreds suffering their carcasses to be put in graves, there is that great
City which spiritually is Sodom and Egypt, where our Lord is crucified; but
after there days and an half, the spirit of life from God shall enter into
them, and they shall stand up upon their feet to the terror of you all: Nor do
you think that we only inveigh against the great ones of this world for thus
doing, for we know that the basest peasant has the same spirit with the
greatest Princes of this world, and the greatest of the Princes of this world,
has the very same spirit wherewith the basest peasant has laid himself open
in the view of all men: these we say, are the two witnesses if you can receive
it, and what a dishonor is it to trade so much by means of witnesses, and yet
not know what a true witness is? which if you did, you durst not attempt the
things you do, whereby you cast reproach upon all the world, in that you
profess your selves a choice people picked out of it, and yet go on, in such
practices as you do, maintaining them as your only glory. Our Lord gives you
in charge not to swear at all, but it is your dignity to bring men to your
seats of Justice with nothing but oaths in their mouths, why do you not
balance the scriptures in this point? viz.

It has been said of old, Thou shall not committ adultery, but I say unto
you, he that looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed adultery
with her in his heart already: so also it has been said of old, Thou shall
not forswear thy self, but I say unto you, swear not at all: so that if it be
adultery, to look to lust, it is also forswearing a man's self, to swear at
all; if the one be adultery, the other is perjury, if one be admitted in some
cases, the other also, so that in preaching the toleration, nay the duty of an
oath, you preach the toleration, yea the duty of adultery it self; So that our
Lord plainly evinceth unto all men's consciences, not only the guilt but the
folly and madness of the oath of man, showing how far it is, either from
investing into place, or demonstrating Causes, so that he that concludes upon
honor, and power, received from the oath of man, or upon knowledge and
bouldness, to judge in a cause, from that testimony without the which he could
not have it, is as vain in his thoughts, as if he should herupon conclude, I
have now altered the frame of heaven, which is no less stable then the throne
of the great God, or demolished the earth, which is as firm as his footstool
for ever, or made a fraction in the orders of Jerusalem, that choice and
peculiar City of the great King, whose institutions no mortal breath can
entrench upon, or to profess his authority and skill to be such, whereby he
can make a hair of his head black or white, cause his age to wax old as does
a garment, or renew it with the Eagle at his pleasure, hereby does man (in this
point of swearing) profess his folly to be such, that he is become not
onely-vaine in his imaginations, but unto that pride and usurpation therein, as
to intrude himself into the prerogative royal of his Maker.

So that however you boast of the Ordinances of God, yet he tells you there is
no more then yea, yea, and nay, nay, in them, for what is once nay, is ever nay
in the Ordination of Christ, and what is once yea, is ever yea with him, and
according to his account however man reckons, whose account shall be called
over again, what is once curse, is ever the curse, and what is once the
principality and power of Christ, is ever the principality and power of Christ,
as that which is once the principality and power of Darkness, is ever the
same, what hands soever it comes into for manifestation: measure your kingdom
whether it be eternal, and your Jurisdiction whether it be illimited, for he
has given (him) the heathen for his inheritance, the utmost parts of the earth
for his possession, and a kingdom of less extent he professes not, nor can
he approve or acknowledge any that do, no more then light can approve of
darkness, or the Lord Jehovah of the Lord Ba^l.

Be wise therefore, and bethink your selves while it is called to day, harden
not your hearts, as though you would make your selves Meriba nothing but strife
and contention against the Lord, rather kiss the son (if it be possible)
lest his wrath be kindled and you perish from the way for ever, O blessed
only they, that hope in him.

So that he which professes on this wife, it is yea, I am a pastor, but it
was nay, at such a time I was none, he renounceth that spirit of the true
pastor, yet only feeder of Israel, professing only that spirit that pusheth
the weak with the horn, and pudleth with his feet the waters where the flock
of God should drink. He with whom it is yea, I am a Ruler, but it was nay
when I was none at all, renounceth that spirit of him that rules in
righteousness, professing the spirit of him that rules according to the god of
this world, that Prince of the power of the Air, who is now working so
effectually in the children of disobedience. So also he with whom it is yea, I
am a Captain, or chief slaughter-man, but it was nay, time was I was none at
all, renounceth that victory and slaughter made by the Captain and
High Priest of our profession, (who as he is a Lamb slain from the
beginning, his victory and slaughter must be of the same antiquity,)
professing himself to be a chief slaughter-man, or super^^uous Giant, made
in that host of the Philistims, standing in readiness to come out, to defy
the host of the living God: yea, it is evident, that whatsoever is more then
yea, yea, and nay, nay, not settlingeach upon its Base, whereon it stands for
ever without control, but can remove, create, or make void offices and
officers at their pleasure, is of that evil, or not of Jesus, the salvation of
his people, but of Shedim that waster and destroyer of mankind for ever: know
therefore that it is the oath of God which confirms and makes good his
Covenant and promise unto a thousand generations: and it is the oath of man,
which is the bond and obligation of that league and agreement made with death
and hell for ever; be ye assured it is not the tabernacle of witness which you
have amongst you, brought in by Jesus into the possession of the Gentiles, but
it is Siccuth your King, or the tabernacle of Mol^ck, the star of your God
Remphan, figures which you have made unto your selves, which you have taken up,
and are bearing so stoutly upon your shoulders. Now to tell you what an oath
according to God is, that the scriptures are delivered upon no other ground or
terms of certainty, where ever they are divolged, is a thing out of your
jurisdiction, you cannot discern or judge of it, therefore according to our
word above, we leave it as a parable unto you, as all the holy word of our God
is, as your conversation in all points, as in this, daily declares.

In a word, when we have to do in your jurisdiction, we know what it is to
submit to the wise dispensations of our God, when you have to do amongst us,
in the liberties he has given unto us, we doubt not, but you shall find him
judge amongst us, beyond and above any cause or thing you can propose unto us;
And let that suffice you, and know, that you cannot maintain a jurisdiction,
but you must reject all inroades upon other men's privileges, and so do we.

In the mean time, we shall (as we think good) be calling over again some
matters that you have taken up and had the handling of them amongst you, to see
what justice or equity we find has been exercised in them, and redress
them accordingly: for we profess right unto all men, and not to do any
violence at all, as you in your prescript threaten to do to us, for we have
learned how to discipline our children, or servants, without offering violence
unto them, even so do we know how to deal with our deboist, rude, nay
inhumane Neighbors, (or if you will, Nabals) without doing violence, but
rather rendering unto them that which is their due.

Nor shall we deprive a witness of his modest testimony for the outcries,
and clamours of such a one as ill bred apostatized Arnauld that fellonious
Hog-killer, being the party to be testified against, or for the oath of any
interested in the cause, nor shall we be forward to come so far, to find
your work upon your request, till we know you to bear another mind, then
others of your Neighbors do, with whom we have had to do in this country,
whose pretended and devised Laws we have stooped under, to the robbing and
spoiling of our goods, the livelihood of our wives and children, thinking they
had labored, (though groping in great darkness) to bring forth the truth, in
the rights and equity of things, but finding them to be a company of gross
dissembling hypocrites, that under the pretense of Law and Religion, have done
nothing else, but gone about to establish themselves in ways to maintain
their own vicious lusts, we renounce their Diabolical practice, being such
as have denied in their public Courts, that the laws of our Native Country
should be named amongst them, yea those ancient statute laws, casting us into
most base nastie and insufferable places of imprisonment for speaking according
to the language of them, in the mean while, breaking open our house in a
violent way of hostility (abusing our wives and our little ones) to take from
us the volumes wherein they are preserved, thinking thereby to keep us
ignorant of the courses they are resolved to run, that so the viciosity of
their own wills might be a law unto them, yea they have endeavored, and that
in public expressions, that a man being accused by them, should not have
liberty to answer for himself in open Court. Dealings of like nature we find
in the place whereof you style us your neighbors, (on whose unbridled malice,
we find a higher then you putting a curb) and yet in your account and
reckoning we are the parties that still are doing the wrong, and must bear
the guilt in your most mature sentence, in whomsoever the spot arises and
abides. But the God of vengeance (unto whom our cause is referred, never
having our protector and Judge to seek) will show himself in our deliverance
out of the hands of you all, yea all the house of that Ish^osheth and
Mephibusheth, nor will he fail us to utter and make known his strength
(wherein we stand) to serve in our age, and to minister in our Course, to day
and to morrow, and on the third day, can none deprive us of perfection, for he
has taught us to know what it is to walk to day, and tomorrow, and the day
following also, when a perishing estate cannot arise out of Jerusalem, though
she be the only one, (yea, none but she) that kills the Prophets, and stones
them that are sent unto her.

Behold ye that are looking after, and foretelling so much of the coming of
Christ, driving the day before you still for certain years, which some (you
say) shall attain unto, and unto the day of death for therest, You blind
guides, as your fathers have ever done, so do ye. Behold we say, when ever
he appears, your house (which ye so glory in) shall be left unto you
desolate, it shall be turned into nothing but desolation and confusion, for
Babel is its name; Nor shall you see him to your comfort in the glory of his
kingdom, until you can say, Blessed is he that comes in the name of the
Lord, when the authority and power of man appears to be the building of Babel
unto you, and the name and authority of God only, to be that, wherein the
blessing con^ists, and that in such wise also, as is nothing but a way of
reproach, in the eyes of all the world, that a King should ride into his chief
City, so strangely furnished, upon an Ass borrowed, her furniture old,
overworn garments, and accompanied with none but poor, mean, excommunicated
persons, such as your Elders, Scribes, Pharisees, Lawyers, and all your
credible persons among you, make full account they are not only accursed by,
but also destitute and void of all law, when you can find Hosanna in the
highest, arising out of such contempt and shame, then, and then only shall you
sing unto him with comfort. In the mean time acknowledge your portion, which
is to trust and stay your selves on the name of man, and in his beauty to
delight and glory, which shall fade as a leaf, and like the grass shall
wither when it is fitting it self for the oven, such is man whose breath is in
his nostrills, and the son of sorry man, in whom you delight to trust, his
power and his policy brings forth nothing else, but as you shall see and hear
in the Country from whence we are brought. We are not ignorant of those
shameful lies and falsities gone out against us, and the daily wresting of our
words, to cast contempt upon us, thinking to bow down our backs under
ignominy and reproach; Neither of those straits and difficulties they have
cast us upon, in the things which concern this present life, to the taking
away of the lives of many, if our God had not been seen beyond and above what
their thoughts could reach unto (as their own confession has witnessed,)
doing it in such a way of painted hypocrisy and false gloss unto the eye of
the world, that we might seem unto it self-executioners. We RESOLVE therefore
to follow our employments, and to carry and behave our selves as formerly we
have done (and no otherwise) for we have wronged no man, unless with hard
labor, to provide for our families, and suffering of gross, idle, and idol
droanes to take our labor out of the mouths, and from off the backs of our
little ones, to lordaneit over us.

So that if any any shall go about to disturb or annoy us henceforth in our
employments and liberties, which God has, or shall put into our hands, that
can claim no interest in us but by these courses; what their business is, we
know by proof sufficient, to be nothing else but that ancient errand of
Nimrod, that rebellious hunter after the precious life; which errand of his
shall be no more delivered unto us in that covert cruelty, and dissembling way
of hypocrisy, but in direct and open terms of tyranny, we will not be
dealt with as before, we speak in the Name of our God, we will not; For if
any shall disturb us, as above, secret hypocrites shall become open Tyrants,
and their laws appear to be nothing else but mere lusts in the eyes of all
the world.

And wherefore do you murmr among your selves at this saying, thinking it is
not a Christian expression? it is because you are ignorant of the cross of our
Lord Jesus, not knowing what it is: Therefore it is, that while you inveigh
against such as set up a Statue of wood and stone, to bow down unto it, and
are so vain, (...) cross the air, (to use your own expression) upon the
face of infants, when they sprinkle them with water to as great purpose: And in
the mean time you preach and set up Seghnirim for your cross, whom you fall
down unto so willingly, and lest you let the word pass without exposition of
it unto all, it signifies, Horror and fear, which is the cross you hold and
teach, and by and through which you think to be saved, which is a name given
by our Lord unto the Devil himself, as our English translate it, and the Lord
never gives name, as an empty title, but according to the nature of the thing
named; so that if he speak, I have said ye are gods, of any besides
himself, it is to declare, that there is not only the name, but the very
nature of the god of this world, and therefore he says, they shall ^ie, even
as Adam, which aspired and usurped the place of God, and fall also as one of
the Princes, even as one of those princes of Midian, whose carcasses became
dung for the earth; and he that gives that title unto any but the true God
(that made heaven and earth) in any other sense but as it declares a flat
opposition against God, is re-acting that ancient spirit of the serpent, if ye
eat, you shall be as gods, to judge of good and evil, for which all men are
set up in that kind; even so, while you tell the people, that by sorrow,
compunction, and anxiety, and trouble of mind, they communicate in the
sufferings of Christ, out of which condition their comfort is to flow, is
nothing else but to conclude the son of God to be belial, yea, to affirm him
to be Seghnirim himself; this does he receive at your hands in your
ministries, for all your fawning upon him with a kiss; so that if you will
know how far you are from communicating in the death of Christ, take it in
this parable, verily, as far as the weakness of God is stronger then man.

Countrymen, for we cannot but call you so, though we find your carriage
toward us to be so far worse then these Indians, we advise you to take
things together, and what God has joined, let none dare to put asunder: So
that if you be ashamed of the cross in Baptism, be ashamed of the Baptism
also, for such as the cross is, such is the Baptism, therefore your ancestors
go beyond you in that, to join crossing of the air, and sprinkling with the
element of water together, but where ever Baptism according to the word of
Christ is, there is the cross of Christ also, they can no more be separated,
then his scepter and kingdom can, for where the one is, there is the other
also, and as they are coincident, so are they co-apparant; So that if ever you
see the baptism of Christ truly in use, and exercised upon any, you do as
truly see that party partaking and communicating with the cross and sufferings
of the Lord^Jesus Christ, and to see persons in such estate, and to conclude
that afterward they may be worthy of censure, yea possibly unto an anathema
maranatha, is nothing else but to conclude a total and final falling away
from the grace of God, as your fathers have done before you; for no grace
greater then the cross of our Lord Jesus.

Behold therefore you despisers, the vanity and abomination of all your
baptismes, how prejudicial they are to the cross of Christ: be ashamed and
return in time, or he shall be a swift witness against you for ever, when
your repentance shall come too late; but you think the cross of Christ is
not, but only in bowing the back under every burden, and cringing and
crouching unto the lust of every man, otherwise his Shebett is not fit, nor
suiteth it at all with your Regiment, unless so servile, that every man may
serve his own lusts of him, to get wealth and honor, friends and allies, by
setting bounds and limits unto the holy Word of God; some in the way of one
device, and some according to another, and be that will not either walk as a
dumb beast, (worse then Bala^ms Ass) and say nothing, or else give a sense of
the holy writings to maintain the devised platform, if mercy must be used,
not to hang and burn, yet banishment is ready waiting upon them; therefore
shall you know by the Rod of his power that comes out of Sion, that he will
be Ruler, even in the midst of his enemies.

Per us whom you style your neighbors of Providence, you have said it,
Providence is our Hold, the neighborhood of the Samaritan we profess. And
for the lookings on, and turnings aside of your Priests and Levites, without
either unction, or bowels of compassion, all those slain and wounded in soul
amongst you, finding no remedy, do plainly testify unto all men the nature of
your travailes and neighborhood what it is, that neither the oil of those two
olive trees, nor the fatness of that vine, which makes glad God and man, is
conversant amongst you; your speech to us in general, not using our names,
whereas we know, it is particulars you aim at, gives us plainly to see, the
word AElem revived and living in you, as it stands with its coherence in Psalm
58.

John Wickes Randall Howldon Rohert Potter Samuel Gorton John Green Francis
Weston Richard Carder Richard Waterman Nicholas Power John Warner William
Waddell



From our Neck: Curo* September 15. 1643.
TO the great and honored Idol General, now set up in the Massachusetts, whose
pretended equity in distribution of Justice unto the souls and bodies of men,
is nothing else but a mere device of man, according to the ancient customs and
sleights of Satan, transforming himself into an angel of Light, to subject and
make slaves of that species or kind that God has honored with his own
Image, read Dan* 3. Chap* wherein (if it be not like Lots love unto the
Sodomites) you may see, the visage or countenance of the State, for we know
the sound of all the music, from the highest note of wind-instruments,
sounding, or set up by the breath or voices of men, (to have dominion and rule
as though there were no God in heaven or in earth but they, to do right unto
the sons of men) unto the lowest tones of the stringed instruments,
subjecting themselves to hand or skill of the devised ministrations of men, as
though God had made man to be a vassal to his own species or kind, for he
may as well be a slave to his belly, and make it his God, as to any thing that
man can bring forth, yea, even in his best perfection, who can lay claim to no
title or term of honor but what the dust, rottenness, and putrefaction can
afford, for that of right belongs solely to our Lord Christ. Woe therefore
unto the world, because of the Idols thereof; for Idols must needs beset up,
but woe unto them by whom they are erected.

Out of the abovesaid principles, which is the kindome of darkness and of the
devil; you have writ another Note unto us, to add to your fomer pride and
folly, telling us again, you have taken Pumham, with others into your
Jurisdiction and Government, and that upon good grounds (as you say:) you might
have done well to have proved your self Christians, before you had mingled
your selves with the heathen, that so your children might have known how to
put a distinction betwixt yours and them in after times, but we perceive that
to be too hard a work for your selves to perform, even in time present. But
if you will communicate Justice and Government with that Indian, we advise you
to keep him amongst your selves, where he, and you may perform that worthy
work: Yet upon a better ground, we can inform you, that he may not expect
former courtesies from us, for now by your Note, we are resolved of his breach
of Covenant with us, in this his seeking and subjection unto you, which
formerly he has always denied; let him and you know therefore, that he is
to make other provision for his planting of corn he^eafter, than upon
Mshawom^t, for we will not harbor amongst us any such fawning, lying, and
cadaverous person as he is, after knowledge of him, as now in part you have
given unto us, only he shall have liberty sufficient to take away his corn,
habitation, or any of his implements, so be it he pass away in peace and
quiet, which might in no case be admitted, if it were so that we lived by
blood, as you do, either through incision of the nose, division of the ear
from the head, stigmatize upon the back, suffocation of the veins, through
extremity of cold, by your banishments in the winter, or strangled in the flesh
with a halter. But we know our course, professing the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, renouncing that of darkness and the devil, wherein you
delight to trust, for without the practice of these things, you cannot kiss
your hand, bless the Idol, nor profess your vows and offerings to be paid
and performed. O ye generation of vipers, who has fore^ warned you, or fore^
stalled your minds with this, but Satan himself, that the practice of these
things is to fly from the wrath to come; Whereas the very exercise and
performance of them, is nothing else but the vengeance and wrath of God upon
you already, in that mankind, so harmonically made in the Image of God, is in
the exercises of the kingdom, become the torturer and tormentor, yea the
executioner of it self, whilst those of you that are of the same stock and
stem, work out, yea, and that curiously, through the law of your minds, the
death and destruction of one another; when as, in the mean time, the same
nature or subsistence, in the way of our Lord Jesus, saves both it self and
others. You tell us of complaint^ made by the Indians, of unjust dealings and
injuries done unto them, why do they not make them known to us, they never
complained to us of any thing done unto this day, but they had satisfaction to
the full, according to their own mind, for often we know, in what they
express unto us, although our wrongs insufferable done by them lie still in
the deck, for we know very well, we have plenty of causeless adversaries,
wanting no malice that Satan can inject, therefore we suffer much, that in the
perfection and height of their plots, they may receive the greater rebuke and
shame for their baseness, in the eyes of all the world.

To which end we have not only committed our condition unto writings, but
them also into the hands and custody of such friends, from whom they shall not
be taken by any, or by all the governments of this Country, as formerly they
have been, that so our wrongs might not appear; therefore never pick a
quarrel against us in these things, for we know all your styles and devices,
that being you now want such as old malicious Arnauld, one of your low stringed
instruments, to exercise his fidle amongst us, and we are void of your
benediction also, sprung out of the same stock to make rents and divisions for
you to enter to gain honor unto your selves in having patients to heal,
though they lie never so long under your hands, your chirurgerie must be
thought never the worse. Wanting these or such like of the English, to betray
the liberties, God has given us into your hands, now you work by your
coadjutors, these accursed Indians; but you are deceived in us, we are not a
Cope fitted for your so eager appetite, no otherwise, then if you take it down
it shall prove unto you a Cope of trembling, either making you vomit out your
own eternal shame, or else to burst in sunder with your fellow confessor for
air, Judas Iscariot.

For Mr. Winthrop and his Copartner Parker, may not think to lay our purchased
plantation to their Island so near adjoining, for they come too late in that
point, though Be^^dick has reported that My^ntohimo, one of the Sachims, of
whom we bought it, should lose his head for selling his right thereof to us.

As also a minister affirmed that Mr. Winthrop should say to him, that we
should either be subjected unto you, or else removed hence, though it should
cost Blood. Know therefore, that our lives are set apart already for the case
we have in hand, so we will lose nothing but what is put apart aforehand,
bethink your selves therefore what you should gain by fetching of them, in
case it were in your power, for our loss should be nothing at all.

For we are resolved, that according as you put forth your selves toward us,
so shall you find us transformed to answer you. If you put forth your hand to
us as countrymen, ours are in readiness for you: If you exercise the pen,
accordingly do we become a ready writer; If your sword be drawn, ours is
girt upon our thigh; If you present a gun, make haste to give the first fire:
for we are come to put fire upon the earth, and it is our desire to have it
speedily kindled.

For your pursuit of us, still, to come your Courts, to receive your parcells
of Justice, undoubtedly either God has blinded your eyes that you see not our
answer formerly given in that point, or else you are most audacious to urge it
upon us again; also you may take notice that we take it in more disdain then
you could do, in case we should importune you (yea) the chief amongst you, to
come up to us, and be employed according to our pleasure, in such works as
we thought good to set you about; and for your grant of freedom unto us to
come down to you, and return in safety, we cannot sufficiently vilife this
your verbal and perfunctory offer, knowing very well, according to the verdict
of your own conscience, that what wrongs soever are passed amongst us since
our coming into this Country, you have been the violent agents, and we the
patients. To fear therefore to come amongst you as such as have done wrong,
the cause vanishes in us, so must the effect also. And to fear to come unto
you as tyrants, which your grant must necessarily implies, we cannot, knowing
that he which is with us, is stronger then he which is with you.

Also the earth is the Lords and the fulness thereof, and when, and where he
shall call we will go, but not at the will and lust of sorry men to play
their parts with us at their pleasure, as formerly they have done, and as it is
apparent you desire to do, for if your lusts prevailed not over you in that
kind, you might wall think that we have better employments then to trot to
the Massachusetts upon the report of a lying Indian, or English either, as your
factors and ordinary hackni^s do.

But know this Oyee -- that so long as we behave our selves as men, walking in
the name of our God, where ever we have occasion to come, if any mortal man
whose breath is in his nostrils, dares to call us into question, we dare to
give an answer to him, or them, nor shall we fail through God, to give
testimony even in his conscience of the hope that is in us, whether his
question may concern the rice or succession either of Priest or Peer, In the
meanetime we sit in safety under the cloudy pillar, while the Nations roar and
make a noise about us, and though you may look upon us with the unopened eye
of E^iahs servant, thinking us as nothing to those that are against us, yet
wherever the cloud rests, we know the Lords return to the many thousands of
Israel.

In that you say our freedom granted to come to you, takes away all excuse
from us, we freely retort it upon your selves to ^ make excuses, whose Laws
and proceedings with the souls and bodies of men, is nothing else but a
continued art (like the horse in the mill) of accusing and excusing, which you
do by circumstances and conjectures, as all the fathers have done before you,
the Diviners and Necromancers of the world, who are gone to their own place
and have their reward; But for the true nature, rise, and distribution of
things as they are indeed and shall remain and abide as a law firm and stable
forever, we say and can make it good, you know nothing at all, therefore such
as can delight themselves in preaching, professing, and executing of such
things, as must end as the brute beasts do, nay take them away for present and
they have lost their honor, religion, as also their God, let such we say,
know themselves to be that beast and false prophet, no man of God at all. In
the mean time we look not on the things that are seen, but on the things
that are not seen, knowing the one are temporary, the other eternal. Nor do
we think the better of any man for being invested into places or things that
will in time wax old as does a garment, neither judge we the worse of any man
for the want of them: for if we should we must condemn the Lord Christ, as so
many do at this day.

We demand when we may expect some of you to come to us, to answer and give
satisfaction for some of these foul and inhumane wrongs you have done, not to
the Indians, but to us your country men: not to bring in a Catalogue, as we
might, take this one particular abuse you are now acting; in that you abet, and
back these base Indians to abusesus. Indeed Pumham is an aspiring person, as
becomes a Prince of his profession, for having crept into one of our neighbors
houses, in the absence of the people, and fell oniously rifled the same, he
was taken coming out again at the Chimney-top: Soccononoco also has entered
in like manner into one of our houses ^ith diverse of his companions, and
breaking open a chest, did steal out diverse parcels of goods, some part
whereof, as some of his companions have affirmed, are in his custody at this
time. Yet we stand still to see to what good issue you will bring your
proceedings with these persons, by whom you are so honorably attended in the
Court general, as you call it, and would honor us also, to come three or
fourscore miles to stand by you and them; we could tell you also that it is
nothing with these fellows to send our cattle out of the woods with arrows in
their sides, as at this present it appears in one even now so come home, and
it is well they come home at all, for sometimes their wigwams can receive them,
and we have nothing of them at all; yea they can domineere over our wives and
children in our houses, when we are abroad about our necessary occasions,
sometimes throwing stones, to the endangering of their lives, and sometimes
violently taking our goods, making us to run for it if we will have it, and
if we speak to them to amend their manners, they can presently vaunt it out,
that the Massachusetts is all one with them, let the Villainy they do be what
it will, they think themselves secure, for they look to be upheld by you in
whatever they do, if you be stronger then them which they have to deal
withal, and they look with the same eye your selves do, thinking the
multitude will bear down all, and persuade themselves (as well as they may)
that you tolerate and maintain them in other of their daily practices, as
lying, Sabbath-breaking, taking of many wives, gross whoredoms, and
fornications, so you will do also, in their stealing, abusing of our Children,
and the like, for you have your diligent ledgers amongst them that inculcate
daily upon this, how hateful we are unto you, calling us by other names of
their own devising, bearing them in hand, we are not English men, and
therefore the object of envy of all that are about us, and that if we have any
thing to do with you, the very naming our persons shall cast our case be it
what it will, as it is too evident by the case depending between Willi^m
Arnauld and John Warner, that no sooner was the name of Mr. Gorton mentioned
amongst you, but Mr. Dudley disdainefully asking, is this one, joined to
Gorton, and Mr. Winthrop unjustly upon the same speech, refused the oath of the
witness calling him knight of the post: are these the ways and persons you
trade by toward us? are these the people you honor your selves withal? the
Lord shall lay such honor in the dust, and bow down your backs with shame
and sorrow to the grave, and declare such to be Apostatisers from the truth,
and falsifiers of the word of God only to please men, and serve their own
lusts, that can give thanks in their public Congregations for their unity
with such gross abominations as these. We must needs ask you another
question from a Sermon now preached amongst you, namely how that blood
relisheth you have sucked formerly from us, by casting us upon straights above
our strength, that, have not been exercised in such kind of labors, no more
then the best of you in former times in removing us from our former
conveniences, to the taking away of the lives of some of us, when you are about
your dis^ed up dainties, having turned the juice of a poor silly Grape that
perishes in the use of it, into the blood of our Lord Jesus by the cunning
skill of your Magicians, which does make mad and drunk so many in the world,
and yet a little sleep makes them their own men again, so can it heal and
pacify the consciences at present, but the least hand of God returns the
fears and terror again, let our blood we say present it self together
herewith, you hypocrites when will you answer such cases as these, and we do
hereby promise unto you, that we will never look man in the face if you have
not a fairer hearing then ever we had amongst you, or can ever expect; And be
it known to you all, that we are your own Countrymen, whatever you report of
us, though the Lord has taught us a language you never spoake, neither can you
hear it, and that is the cause of your alienation from us; for as you have
mouths and speak not, so have you ears and hear not; so we leave you to the
judgment and arraignment of God Almighty. The joint act, not of the Court
General, but of the peculiar fellowship, now abiding upon Mshawomet.

Randall Holden,
This they owned in Court though only Holdens hand were to it.
Postscriptum.
WE need not put a seal unto this our warrant, no more then you did to
yours. The Lord has added one to our hands, in the very conclusion of it, in
that effusion of blood, and horrible Massacre, now made at the Dutch
plantation, of our loving Countrymen, women, and children, which is nothing
else, but the complete figure in a short epitomie of what we have writ,
summed up in one entire act, and lest you should make it part of your
justification, as you do all such like acts, provided they be not upon your
own backs, concluding them to be greater sinners then your selves, we tell
you (nay) but except you repent, you shall likewise perish.

For we ask you who was the cause of Mistress Hutchinson her departure from
amongst you, was it voluntary? No, she changed her phrases according to the
dictates of your tutors, and confessed her mistakes, that so she might give
you content to abide amongst you, yet did you expel her and cast her away; no
less are you the original of her removal from Aquethneck, for when she saw
her children could not come down amongst you, no not to confer with you in
your own way of brotherhood; but be clapped up, and detained by so long
imprisonment, rumors also being noised, that the Island should be brought
under your Government, which if it should, she was fearful of their lives,
or else to act against the plain verdict of their own conscience, having had
so great and apparent proof of your dealings before, as also the Island being
at such divisions within it self, some earnestly de^iring it should be
delivered into your hands, professing their unity with you, others denied it,
professing their dissent and division from you, though for what themselves know
not, but only their abominable pride to exercise the like tyranny.

From these and such like workings having their original in you, she gathered
unto her self and took up this fiction, (with the rest of her friends) that
the Dutch plantation was the City of refuge, as she had gathered like things
from your doctrines before, when she seemed to hold out some certain glimpses
or glances of light, more then appeared elsewhere whilst there was such to
approve it, in whom there might be some hope to exalt the instruments thereof,
higher then could be expected from others, but you know very well you could
never rest nor be at quiet, till you had put it under a Bushel, idest,
bounded and measured the infinite and immense word of God, according to your
own shallow, humane, and carnal capacities, which, howsoever may get the
highest seats in your Synagogues, Synods, and Jewish Synedrions, yet shall it
never enter into the kingdom of God to be a doorekeeper there. Do not
therefore beguile your selves in crying out against the errors of those so
miserably fallen, for they are no other things which they held but branches of
the same root your selves so stoutly stand upon, but know this that now the axe
is laid to the root of the tree, whereof you are a part, and every tree that
brings not forth fruit according to the law of that good things, which the
father knows, how to give to those that ask it, shall be cut down, and cast
it into the fire: Neither do you fill up your speeches or tales, (we mean
your Sermons) but that we affect not the Idolizing of words, no more then of
persons or places. For your selves know the word is no more but a bruit or
talk, as you know also your great and terrible word Magistrate, is no more in
its original, then Masterly, or Masterlesse, which has no great luster in our
ordinary acceptance. Therefore we look to find and enjoy the substance, and
let the ceremony of these things, like vapors vanish away, though they gather
themselves into clouds, without any water at all in them, the Lord is in the
mean time a dew unto Israel, and makes him to grow like a lilly, casting out
his roots and branches as Lebanon.

We say, fill not up your talk as your manner is, crying, that she went out
without ordinances, for God can raise up out of that stone, which you have
already rejected, as children, so also ministers and ordinances unto Abraham:
You may remember also, that every people and poor plantation, formerly fleeced
by you, cannot reach unto the hire of one of your Levites, nor fetch in, one
such Dove as you send abroad into our native Country, to carry and bring you
news.

Nor can you charge them in that point, for it was for protection or government
she went; And however, hire, in other respects, yet the price of a wife, and
safety of his own life adjoined, carried a Minister along with them of the
same rise and breeding together with your own, to add unto the blood so
savagely and causelessly spilt, with a company of such as you take pleasure to
protect, for they are all of one spirit, if they have not hands in the same
act; we say their death is causeless, for we have heard them affirm that she
would never heave up a hand, no nor move a tongue against any that persecuted
or troubled them, but only endeavor to save themselves by flight, not
perceiving the nature and end of persecution, neither of that antichristian
opposition and tyranny, the issue whereof declares it self in this so^ and
lamentable.




Note, good Reader, that I had order to publish these two Letters of his, as
well literatim as verbatim, but because their Orthography was so bad, as it
would scarce have been understood, I left it to be corrected by the Printer,
but no word to be changed: And the reason of the word here left out, is,
because it was worn out, and so soyled in the original as we could not read
it, and thought good rather to leave it a blanck, then to put in a word of our
own that was not theirs.

In the next place, I present thee here with certain Observations collected
out of both their Letters, by a godly and reverend Divine, whereby the Reader
may the better understand them, and indeed try the spirits of these men,
whether they be of God or no. Now these his Observations are ranked into three
Heads: Viz.

First, their reproachful and reviling speeches of the Government and
Magistrates of the Massachusetts, which in Gortons Book he pretends so much to
honor, because their Government is derived from the State of England; and
therefore I desire thee to take the better notice of it.

The second Head of his Observations directs thee to their reviling language,
not only against that particular Government, and the Magistrates of it, but
against Magistracy it self, and all Civil power.

And in his third Head, thou art directed to take notice of their blasphemous
speeches against the holy things of God. All which because they are of great
concernment, I beseech the Reader to take a little pains to compare them with
Mr. Gortons and his Companies Letters.

Certain Observations collected out of both their LETTERS.
I. Their reproachful and reviling Speeches of the Government and Magistrates
of the Massachusetts.
1.THey say our Magistrates did lay their Wisdom prostrate, Page 9.
in sending Letters to them, which they scornfully call an irregular Note.

2. That they bare them causlesse enmity, the proof whereof every occasion
brings forth.

3. They flily call them the seed of the ancient mother; i. of the enmity of
the Devil.

4. That they know it is the name of Christ called upon them, against which our
Magistrates do strive.

5 That they go about to hide their sin, as Adam, bearing the world in hand,
that they desire not to contend, but to redress something in point of Civil
peace.

6 That they stand on tip-toe to stretch themselves beyond their bounds, to
seek occasion against them.

7 That those who accuse them, are accusers of the Brethren, Satan being a
liar, and the father of it; which thing our Magistrates cannot know though they
be told of it.

8 That this act of theirs to treat about their land, Page 10.
is a map of their spiritual estate.

9 That they delight daily to eat of the forbidden fruit (which they call man's
wisdom) out of which our Churches and Commonwealth is formed) to gain
conformity with their maker.

10 They scorn at their purity and godliness, telling them that Cole and
Arnold their dissembling subjects, are full of the spirit of their purity.

11 They do not say plainly that our Magistrates are dogs, but compare them to
dogs in resuming their vomit into its former concoction, by receiving Cole and
Arnold under our jurisdiction.

12 That the whole structure and edifice among us ( i. the Churches and
Commonwealth) is raised up in the spirit of an hireling, and that by
submission to the Word of God in fasting, feast-sting, retiredness for study,
contributing, treasuring ( i. for Church uses in several Churches) they do
nothing else but bring forth fruit unto death.

13 That farther then the Lord Jesus agrees with riches, honor and ease, our
Magistrates mind him not, nay, renounce, and reject him.

14 That they plainly crucify Christ, Page 11.
and put him to an open shame, which the Apostle, Hebr. 6. applies to the worst
of men, who commit the unpardonable sin, and for whom men are not to pray.

15 That our Magistrates are as far from yielding subjection to Page 12.
Christ, as Cole and Arnold from being honorable and loyall-subjects, whom
they call the shame of Religion, the disturbance and disquiet of the place,
dissembling subjects, Page 10. as also deboist, rude, inhumane Nabals, il-bred,
apostatised persons, and fellonious, Page 23. with many such like speeches.

16 That the things of Gods kingdom are infinitely beyond the reach of their
spirit, nor can they hear the lively Oracle, and therefore are dumb in telling
Justice.

17 That the Magistrates are Jews according to the flesh, and stout
maintainers of the man of Sin.

18 That they know our Magistrates eyes are dazzled with envy, Page 13.
and their ears open to lies.

19 That they judge them before their cause be heard. Page 15.


20 That in inviting them to their Courts for their equal-ballanced Justice (as
they scornfully call it) they thereby strike at Christ their life.

21 That our Magistrates are like Herod, whom God smote with Page 16.
worms, for seeking by an out-reaching and circumventing policy to subdue
Tyrus and Sidon, and like Pontius Pilate, and the people who out of the
Judgment hall are all for mercy, but in it nothing but crucify him, be their
accusations, and witnesses never so false, so (say they) in your dealings with
men in way of the Jewish brotherhood, your law is all for mercy, to redress,
reform, for preservation of soul and body, do but enter into the
Common Hall, then if witnesses be but brought in, and oath taken though never
so untrue, your Consciences are purged by law, and your power must have tribute
paid it, so far as to brand men's names with infamy, and deprive women and
children of things necessary.

22 That the professed clemency and mercy of their law, is as much as in them
lies, to send both soul and body down to Sheol ( i. the grave and hell) for
ever, without redress and all hope of recovery.

23 That their hour and power of darkness is known, what it is either to
have men's persons in admiration because of advantage, or else to seek all
occasions against them, with all manner of reproach and ignominy.

24 That their ways are wicked, Page 17.
and to be abhorred, because in their professed course the two witnesses are
slain by them, and put to death; and that all their glory is to keep their
corpse unburied; and these two witnesses are the life and death of the Lord
Jesus.

25 That the light appearing among them, Page 18.
is nothing but the light of Balaam, so that in seeing, they see not, but
communicate only in the light of that Beast who put the witnesses to death.

26 They tell our Magistrates, that they never come amongst them, but they see
themselves in a regiment of gross and palpable darkness, and discern you to
scrabble on the wall for the door of Lots house.

27. That they know not what a true witness is. Page 19.


28 That the whole Word of God is a parable to them, Page 22, 23.
as their conversation in all points daily declare it.

29 That they will not come near our Magistrates, until they know they bear
another mind from their neighbors, whom they call robbers, gross dissembling
hypocrites, who do nothing but go about to establish such ways as may
maintain their own vicious lusts, whose laws are pretended and devised, and
whose practices (they say) they renounce as diabolical.

30 Ye blind guides (say they to our Magistrates) as your fathers Page 24.
have ever done, so do you.

31 You set up Segnirim (i. as themselves interpret) fear and Page 25.
horror, or the devil, by, and for the which you hope to be saved.

32 That their carriage toward them, Page 26.
is far worse then that of the Indians, whom themselves cry out of to be
thieves and robbers; Page 32.

33 That they are despisers; Behold (say they) ye despisers, the vanity and
abominations of all your baptismes.

34 Ye think (say they) that the cross of Christ is nothing but bowing down
the back to every burden, and cringing and crouching to the lust of every man.

35 They call the general Court, Page 28.
the great Idol General, whose pretended equity in distributing Justice is a
mere device of man according to the sleights of Satan.

36 They tell the Court, that out of the kingdom of darkness and the devil,
they had writ another Note to add to their former pride and folly.

37 For taking Pumham and Sachanonoco (Indian Sachims) under their protection;
they tell the Court they might have done well to have proved themselves
Christians before they had mixed themselves with the heathen; but this was too
hard for them to do.

38 They advise the Court (in scorn) to keep the Indian with them, Page 29.
where he and they might perform that worthy work of distributing Justice.

39 They tell the Court that they live by blood.

40 They tell the Court, they renounce the kingdom of darkness, and the devil,
wherein the Court delights to trust.

41 They call the Court, Oye generation of Vipers.

42 They tell the Court, Page 30, 31.
they are not a cup fit for their appetite, but a cup of trembling either to
make them vomit up their own eternal shame, or else to make them burst
asunder with their fellow confessor Judas Iscariot.

43 That the Court is either blind or audacious in desiring them to come for
their parc^lls of Justice, and that they disdain to come to them.

44. They profess they cannot sufficiently vilify the promise of the Court,
that they shall come down to them and return in safety; which they call a
verbal and perfunctory offer.

45 They tell the Court, that if their lusts had not prevailed over them, they
might think they had better employment then to trot to Massachusetts as their
factors, and ordinary hackney^ do.

46 They tell the Court that their laws and proceedings with Page 32.
the souls and bodies of men, is nothing else but a continued act of accusing
and excusing (like the horse in the mill) which (say they) you do by
circumstances and conjectures, as also your fathers have done before you, the
Diviners and Necromancers of this world, who are gone to their own place, and
have their reward.

47 They accuse our Magistrates for maintaining Indians in Page 33.
their lying, sabbath-breaking, gross whoredoms, stealing, etc.

48 That they are hypocrites, Page 34.
having eyes and see not, ears and hear not, mouths and speak not.

Now had these men returned a rational answer, it might have been meet perhaps
by a few marginall Notes to have returned some short Reply; but both their
Letters being fraught with little else then mere raylings, and reproachful
language, it may be sufficient thus to present them in one view together, that
so the wise and prudent may take a taste of their spirits, and learn from what
fire it is that their tongues are thus highly inflamed. If our Courts and
Magistrates had been in any thing to blame, what a fair and easy way had it
been to have first convinced them, before they had thus bitterly reviled them;
but thus to cut and shave, and cast all this filth in their faces without proof
or reason, argues a bold and insolent spirit fitted to make combustions and
confusions in the place where they live. If indeed the Magistrates had given
them any sore provocations of returning ill language, there might have been
some excuse, but alas, all the cause that can be given of most of this ill
language, is nothing but writing friendly unto them, to send some from
themselves to clear up the differences between them and the Indians, and to
show their just title to the land they possessed; if they had kept this flood
within their own banks, or been but moderate in revilings, it might have been
winkt at; but to fly out into such extremity on so small provocation against
their betters, so as to call them Idols, blind-guides, despisers, generation
of vipers, such as crucify Christ, men that serve their own lusts,
hypocrites, the seed of the Devil, Necromancers, Judasses, men that live by
blood, robbers and thieves, men without mercy, among whom Justice is dumb,
delighting in the kingdom of darkness and the devil, like Herod and Pilate
in administering Justice, whose eyes are dazzled with envy, and ears open to
lies, s^out maintainers of the man of Sin, whose ways are wicked, and to be
abhorred; worse then Indians, like dogs, etc. This language speaks loud to
what Country they belong, and of what race they come.

II. Their reviling Language not only against the Magistrates and Government
here in particular, but also against Magistracy it self, and all Civil power.
IF any shall say for them (as themselves now for their own advantage do)
that this ill language is directed only against our particular Government and
Magistrates, but not against all Civil power it self, the contrary may appear
(notwithstanding their dark language, under which sometimes they seek to
conceal it) in these particulars.

I They expressly affirm that the Office to minister Justice, Page 16.
belongs only to the Lord: and that therefore (from their instance of Herod)
men make themselves Gods, (which themselves interpret to be only from the God
of this world, and to be in flat opposition against God, Page 26.) by ruling
over the bodies and estates of men; and that the people receiving Herod to
Government, and crying out that this was the ordinance of God, and not of man,
that he was immediately smit^en of God for it: As also they tell us, p. 26.
that to set up men to Judge of good and evil, for which all men are set up in
that kind; that this is re-acting that ancient spirit of the Serpent, If ye
eat, ye shall be as Gods.

Now this strikes at all Magistracy, for if the office of ministering justice
and righteousness belongs to God only, then not unto any man, for that is to
make Gods of men; and if to judge between good and evil be to act over
again the ancient spirit of the Serpent, then it is not only unlawful, but
diabolical, to make Judges of what is right and wrong, good or evil by any
man.

If it be objected, is it possible that any men should be so grossly blind and
wicked, as to abolish all ministration of Justice and righteousness?

Answ. 1. These men seem to acknowledge some way of ministering Justice, but
the mystery lies in that word Office, they would have no man set up in the
Office of Magistracy, distinguished from other men, but would have such a power
common to the Brethren, so that a man may judge as a brother, but not as an
Officer, and therefore they slily justify him, who called one of our chief
Magistrates in the open face of the Court, Brother, and condemn all our
Magistrates, because every man does not sit there to judge as a Brother, Page
16. and their reason seems to be drawn from this, because that to be a
Brother, and consequently a co^eire with Christ, is a higher sphere then to be
a Civil Officer, as their own words intimate, Page 16. Now the rule is evident
a quatenus ad omne, that if ministration of Justice and judgment belongs to no
officer, but to a man as a Brother, then to every Brother, and if ^o every
Brother, whether rich of poor, ignorant or learned, then every Christian in a
Commonwealth must be King, and Judge, and Sheriff, and Captain, and
Parliament man, and Ruler, and that not only in New England, but in Old, and
not only in Old, but in all the Christian world; down with all Officers from
their Rule, and set up every Brother for to Rule, which the godly^wise may
easily discern to be the establishment of all confusion, and the setting up
of Anarchy worse then the greatest Tyranny.

2. Although these may bear the world in hand that they allow ministration of
Justice and righteousness by men as Brethren, yet some Cakes of these men's
dough have been so far leavened and sowred against all Civil power, as that
in our Public Courts, being demanded how murderers, thieves, and adulterers
should be punished if there should be no Civil power coercive, they openly
and roundly answered before many witnesses, that such persons must be left to
the judgment of God, both which not long after God himself sat Judge upon,
being suddenly and barbarously slain by the bloody Indians in the Dutch
plantation.

First, Page 18, 19.
they exclaim against us for choosing men that are honorable, learned, wise,
experienced, and of good report, or else they may not rule among us, and this,
they say, is of man, and by man, and putting the second witness to death, viz.
the death or weakness of Christ, or in plain English, it is a killing of
Christ.

Now however the application is made unto our Civil State, yet it manifestly
strikes at all Civil States in the world, who shall choose any Officers for
rule and government, and administering of Justice, although they be never so
honorable, learned, wise, experienced, and of good report, and consequently
most fit for government; and that in so choosing them they do put Christ
himself to death. So that these men still harp on that string to have every man
judge as a Brother, whether honorable or not honorable, whether wise or
foolish, whether of good report or evil report, otherwise Christ weakness is
slain.

3. They affirm that they who can create, Page 22.
make void, and remove offices and officers at their pleasure, are of that
evil one, ( i. the devil) and not of Jesus Christ, but of Shedim that waster
and destroyer of mankind for ever. Their proof is from that monstrous
interpretation of Yea, yea, and Nay, nay, and they instance not only in
Church Officers, but in Common-wealth-officers, whether Rulers or Captains.
Their words are these, viz. He with whom it is yea, I am a Ruler, but it was
nay when I was none at all, renounceth the spirit of him that rules in
righteousness, professing the spirit of him that is Prince of the power of the
air, who is working now so effectually in the children of disobedience; so
also he with whom it is yea, I am captain, or chief-slaughter-man, but it was
nay, time was that I was none at all, renounceth the victory and slaughter made
by the Captain and High Priest of our profession, professing himself to be a
superfluous Giant made in the host of the Philistims, to defy the host of the
living God.

By which speeches it is evident that they do not only oppose, Civil officers
chosen amongst us here, but all such as are chosen Rulers, Captains, and
Officers at any time, in any place, and were not so before; and such they say
are of the Devil the destroyer of man.

4 They say men limit, and so destroy the holy one of Israel, Page 18.
whose life is infinite, and without circumscription and containment (as they
call it) if men acknowledge that Christ rules on earth only by his Deputies,
Litvtenants, and Vicegerents, ( i. by persons invested with Civil authority
and office, for so they are called by Orthodox Divines) and therefore they say
that his putting Christ to death, when only wise, and honorable, and learned,
and experienced, and men of good report, are chosen to rule, because they would
have the Power to rule common to all Christians, but as for the office of rule
to be peculiar to none, and therefore Page 24. they tell us that none shall
see Christ come into his kingdom with comfort, until the authority and power
of man appears to be as the building of Babel, and the name and authority of
God only to be that wherein the blessing consists; meaning that it is
Babylonish building which God misliked, and confounded, for any man in office
to rule and govern, because this is to limit the power and life of Christ
(which is in every brother as well as in any officer) and so to kill the life
of Christ; so that if any of them say that* although they distaste officers, as
Kings and others by election, yet not such as are so by hereditary succession,
they are but words to suit their own ends for a time, and to delude others,
for if it be limiting the holy One of Israel, a circumscribing and so
destroying the life of Christ which is infinite, for to make him rule by his
Deputies and Vicegerents on earth, then not only Kings and Princes, whether by
election or no, but all other civil officers must be abandoned, because the
life and power of Christ is limited in successive as well as in elective
Princes, in inferior as well as in superior governors, who are Christ's
Deputies, and Vicegerents, and therefore called Romans 13. 4. the Ministers of
God either for good or terror.

5. They call our general Court the Idol general, Page 28.
which is nothing else but a device of man by the sleight of Satan to subject
and make slaves of that species or kind which God has honored with his own
Image, and they do not only speak thus of our Courts as Idols, but they cry
out woe unto the world because of the Idols thereof, for Idols must needs be
set up, but woe be unto them by whom they are erected, and their reason
reaches to all civil power, (for say they) a man may be as well a slave to
his belly, and make that his god, as be a vassal to his own species, or
kind, or to any thing that man can bring forth even in his best perfection.

There are other evidences of their corrupt mind herein from other passages in
their letters which they speak under more obscure clouds and allegories, but
these may be a sufficient witness against them before men and angels, that
they abandon all civil authority, although for to serve their own turns of
others or their own lusts, they say they do not: the Apostle Jude long since,
tells us of such persons expressly who despise Dominion and speak evil of
Dignities, 1. They do not only despise these or those particular persons or
states that are invested with Dominion; but they despise Dominion it self and
Dignities themselves, and would have all that power abandoned, whom he calls
v. 8. filthy dreamers, defiling the flesh, murmurers and complainers walking
after their own lusts, their mouths speaking great swelling words, v. 16. And
that it may yet more fully appear that these men do abandon all civil
authority, (although this secret they will not impart unto all, but rather
profess the contrary) there is extant to be shown if need were, the writings
between a prudent man in this Country, and one of the chief, and most
understanding of this peculiar fellowship (as they style themselves) wherein
he does stoutly maintain these three assertions, 1. That there are no
Ordinances, 2. That there are no relations neither in the Commonwealth
between rulers and subjects, nor in the Church between officers and brethren,
nor in the families between husband and wife, master and servant, father and
son. 3. That there are no inherent graces in Christians. By which principles
the world may see what these men go about, viz. as much as in them lies to
bring in a disorder and confusion in all states and families, and to open the
sluice to all violence, injustice, and wickedness, by not only abandoning, but
reproaching and revilingall civil rule and authority upon earth, which they
therefore scornefully call a mere device of man, Idols, to be of the Devil,
the destroyer of mankind, and to be a crucifying of Christ in his life and
death, and all this when honorable, wise, learned, experienced, well reported
persons are chosen and invested with Civil power, whom therefore they would
not have maintained, and to whom it is as unlawful to administer any oath for
the ending of civil differences, as to lust after a woman to commit adultery,
Page 20.

III. Their blasphemous speeches against the holy things of God.
1. AGainst the Churches, Page 26.
they call them devised platformes Page 26. and that the wisdom of men is the
whole accomplishment (or that which gives the whole being) of Churches and
Commonwealth. Page 10.

2. Against the calling of Ministers, Page 11.
they say, that to make their calling mediate and not immediate, is to make a
nullity of Christ, and to crucify Christ, and to put him to an open shame, and
that such Ministers are Magicians, Page 34.

Now this reflects upon all the O^dinances and ordinary Officers and Ministers
of Christ, that either are or have been in the Church at any time, for
although the offices be immediately from Christ, yet their call to exercise
this office has been ever accounted mediate.

3. Against the word of God, Page 36.
they call the Sermons of God^ Ministers tales, or lies and falsehoods, now had
they thus spoken upon proof against any particular Sermons, or persons, the
accused might have spoken for themselves, but indifferently to revile all
Sermons as tales or forgeries, the doctrine generally taught here amongst us,
being no other then that which Paul preached at Ephesus for three years space
and upwards, viz, repentance toward God, and faith toward the Lord Jesus,
Act. 20. being also no other then what agrees generally with the harmony of
confessions of all reformed Churches: to call these tales is a word which the
Lord Jesus will certainly remember, unless they repent; the Sermons of the
Apostles of Christ, as well as the doctrine of all reformed Churches, being
reproached hereby.

4. Against the Sacraments: Page 26.
as for baptism they do not only make the baptizing of Infants as abominable
as the cross, but all our baptismes, behold (say they) the vanity and
abomination of all your baptismes, and they do not mean all those baptismes
which are in use amongst us, but in any Churches of the world at this day; for
they acknowledge no other baptism then that which is spiritual, and hence
they say, that when ever you see the baptism of Christ truly in use according
to the word of God, you do as truly see that party partaking and communicating
with the cross and sufferings of Christ, for these are coaparant, now
communicating in Christ's sufferings in their meaning is only spiritual, and
so is therefore all baptismes. 2. As for the Lords supper scarce a greater
heap of blasphemies in fewer words can come from the mouth of man against that
blessed Ordinance, wherein Christ is so manifestly and sweetly present, for
they call it your disht up dainties, turning the juice of a silly grape that
perishes in the use ofit, into the blood of the Lord Jesus, by the cunning
skill of your Magicians, which does make mad and drunk so many in the world.

5. Against repentance and humiliation for sin, Page 26.
they speak somewhat obscurely, but they that know them may soon understand
Ex. 1. page
their meaning, They say out of the forbidden ^^uire i. e. man's wisdom our
Churches and Commonwealth is formed* 2. That the whole edifice amongst us is
raised up in the spirit of an hireling* 3. That by submission to the word of
God in fasting, feasting, retiredness for study, contributing, treasuring, i.
e. for Church uses so much in several Churches, they do nothing but bring
forth fruit unto death.
which if it be this, that in a way of compunction and sorrow for sin, a
Christian is not to seek for consolation and comfort from Christ, and to
affirm that this is to make the son of God Belial and Segniri^, the Devil
himself, (as they interpret it) then it is most gross blasphemy against not
only the preaching, but practice of repentance and godly sorrow, for which the
Apostle rejoiced to see in the Corinthians, chapter 7 v. 9. 10. and which James and
Peter command and commend, James 4 v. 9. 10. 1 Peter 5. v* 6. and which way not
so much Moses in the law but Christ in the Gospel has sanctified to find
pardon of sin 1 John 1. 9.

6. Against Christ Jesus himself: they condemn our doctrine for affirming
that Jesus Christ actually dyed and suffered only in the days of Herod, and
Puntius Pilate, when he hanged on the Cross, and that he was crucified in
truth and substance only when he appeared borne of the Virgin Mary: and for
this doctrine we are condemned as Wisards and Necromancers.

Now what is this but to overthrow not only the being of Christ in the flesh,
making him no other then such an one as actually suffered from the beginning of
the world, and shall do to the end of it, but also overthrowing all faith and
hope of salvation in the messiah who was incarnate in the days of Herod and
Pilate, and in his death and sufferings, and that one perfect offering, then
once for all Heb. 10. 14. The reader may therefore be pleased to take notice
that Page 11.
being asked in open Court what was that Christ who was borne of the Virgin and
suffered under Pilate? one of them answered that he was a semblance, picture,
or a shadow of what was and is done actually and substantially in Christians;
and hence the meaning of the words may be gathered Page 11. which otherwise
the wise reader may think to be nonsense. viz. that they are Wisards and
Necromancers who raise a shadow without a substance ( viz. to make Christ to
be slain in types since the world began) or who raise the substance of him
who dwells in light without a shadow, (making no more of Christ but a semblance
and shadow, as themselves call it) for further explication of which they
affirmed in open Court that as the Image of God in Adam was Christ, (for God
they said had but one Image) so the loss of this Image by man was the death of
Christ, and therefore it is no wonder if they deny Christ to dye actually only
when crucified under Pontius Pilate because man sinned actually (which they
make to be Christ's death) long before; mean while the reader may take notice
with a holy astonishment and horror of the heavy curse of God in blinding
these bold men with such a palpable and gross spirit of delusion and mad
phrenfies, who will make man's sin and fall, which is the cause of perdition
of men, to be the cause of the Salvation of man, for so Christ's death is which
they blasphemously make man's sin to be.

For further proof that they make little use of Christ and his death, then as
has been said, their own interpretation of the slaying of the two witnesses,
Page 17. 18. seems to confirm, for they make these two witnesses the life
and the death of Christ in men, the life of Christ they call his strength, and
the death of Christ they call his weakness, viz. as it is, and appears in
weak, foolish, ignorant, unexperienced, and ill-reported of men, and therefore
they blame us for killing of Christ's death (for it seems it is such a death as
may be killed) in that we choose honorable, wise, learned men, and of good
report to place of rule, excluding others.

Now some of these blasphemies might have been the better borne if they had let
Christ and his death alone, and his word alone, but to call the holy word and
Sermons of Salvation tales, the Sacrament an abomination, madding and making
drunk the world, to call the Ministers of Christ who dispense Word and
Sacraments, Necromancers and Magicians, and they who hold and believe him to
be the Messiah and Christ who suffered under Pilate, Wisards, and all this in
cool blood, in the open face of the Court, obstinately refusing to alter a
title of what they had writ, let the world judge if ever Antichrist that beast
spoken of Rev. 13. 5, 6. did ever speak greater blasphemies against God, his
name, and tabernacle, and whether such men deserve to live, that live thus to
blaspheme; may not such civil states that tolerate such, fear that sentence
of God against them as was pronounced against Ahab for letting blasphemous
Benhada^ escap with his life, thy life for his life? however men's charity may
enlarge it felse this way, yet let wisdom preserve us and make the
wisehearted wary of such impostors, who want not their wiles to say and unsay,
as may best suit their advantage, for they can hold forth at some time and to
some persons, wholesome and orthodox truths and bear them in hand that this is
all that they hold, but they have depths of abomination to give to drink when
they see their seasons, in such golden cups; they have hidden secrets, which
their young Proselytes shall not presently see, much less others; for so they
tell us Page 17. that it is not their purpose to open to every one the house of
their treasures, the silver and gold, and spices, and precious ointment, nor
the house of their armor, because they may take them all as execrable and put
them to a profane use, nor can every spirit comprehend the breadth of the land
of Emanuel, (as they call it Page 12.) nor know the Cherubims of glory, nor the
voice of the oracle from the Mercy-seate: and indeed their uncouth, tumorous
and swelling words (as Jude calls them Jude 16.) like swellings, and tumors of
the flesh, are the undoubted signs of a secret and seducing humor, whereby
they are fit to deceive the simple and infect the strong, if men be not
watchful.

The Publisher to the Reader.
THE reason wherefore nothing is answered to the great charge in his voluminous
Postscript, is because it has been answered already by a former treatise
printed: but more especially because many of the friends, children and kindred
of the dead are in good esteem with us, whom I am loath to grieve.

But since by course thou art next to cast thine eye Gentle Reader upon the
sum of a Presentment which the Court at Road Island received from their Grand
Jewry being present when Samu^l Gorton had so much abused their Government in
the face of the Country, yea in open Court, their own eyes and ears bearing
witness thereunto, they I say presented these abuses to the Court, as such
which they conceived ought not to be borne without ruin to their Government,
and therefore besought the bench to think of some one punishment for examples
sake as well as otherwise to be inflicted o^ the Delinquent.

And therefore that thou may see the occasion thereof, take notice that an
ancient woman having a Cow going in the field where Samuel Gorton had some
land. This woman fetching out her Cow, Gortons servant maid fell violently upon
the woman beating and notoriously abusing her by tearing her hair about her,
whereupon the old woman complaining to the Deputy Governor of the place, he
sends for the maid, and upon hearing the cause, bound her over to the Court.
The time being come and the Court set, Gorton appears himself in the defense
of his maid, and would not suffer his maid to appear or make answer, but said
expressly she should not appear, and that if they had any thing against her
they should proceed with him. And though he was lovingly dissuaded by some of
the Bench not to engage himself but let his maid appear* yet he refused: but
when he could not be prevailed with, the action was called and witnesses
produced, sworn, and examined: which being done, he moved for another
witness to be called, which he persuaded himself and the Bench was an
honest woman and would speak the truth. Now she being sworn, said, Mr.
Gorton, I can speak nothing will help your maid. And indeed her whole
testimony was against her and for the old woman's cause, whereupon he openly
said, Take heed thou wicked woman, the earth does not open and swallow thee up.
And then he demanded of the Court if he should have equity and justice in his
cause or no? To which was answered, if he had either plea or evidence to
produce in his maids cause it should be heard. Then he nominated one Weeks
who could say something to it. Weeks was called and required to take his oath
before he spoke; at which Gorton and Weeks both of them jeered and laughed
and told the Court they were skilled in Idols, and that was one, and stood
stoutly a long time to makeit good. Hereupon some of the Court put him in mind
how they had forewarned him of such carriages fearing he would fall into some
extremes. At length the Governor gathering up the sum of what was
witnessed, commends it to the Jewry. At which time Gorton said, the Court had
perverted Justice and wrested the witnesses, with very many high and
reproachful terms; and in the midst of his violence throwing his hands about,
he touched the Deputy Governor with his handkerchiefe buttons about his ears
(who it seems sat at a Table with his back toward him) whereupon the Deputy
said, what will you fall about my ears? To which Gorton* answered I know not
whether you have any ears or no? and if you have, I know not where they stand;
but I will not touch them with a pair of Tongues. The Governor often calling
upon the Jewry to attend the Cause, was as often interrupted by him. Where upon
many of their Freemen being present, desired the Court they would not suffer
such insolences, professing they were troubled the Court had borne with them
so long. For which in brief, he was committed, but when the Governor bade
the Marshall take him away; he bade take away Coddington, which was their
Governors name: a thing I thought meet to explain, lest thou should not
understand it by the Heads of the Presentment here following, abusing all and
every particular of the Magistrates with opprobrious terms. But note when he
was committed upon his mutinous and seditious speeches, Weeks, Holden, etc.
his abettors, stopped the way with such insolency, as the Governor was forced
to rise from the Bench, to help forward the Command with his person, in
clearing the way, put Weeks in the stocks, and was forced to command a guard
of armed men to preserve themselves and the peace of the place: And this they
did because of some foregoing jealousies; and now taking occasion to search
the houses of that party that adhered to him, they found many of their pieces
laden with bullet: and by means hereof they were forced to continue their
guard, whilst upon their banishment they were forced from the Island.

And however it were enough for a Book alone to relate all the particulars of
his insolent carriage, yet take notice only of two or three particulars: ^
When he was censured to be whipped and banished, he appealed to England; they
asked to whom? He said with a loud voice, To King Charles. They told him, he
should first have his punishment, and then afterward he might complain. To
which he replied, take notice I appeal to King Charles, C^^lv, or Selah; the
party who was present told me he could not tell which, but that word was
spoken with an extraordinary high and loud voice.

A second thing to be observed, was, that after he had been so deservedly
whipped, some of his faction said, Now Christ Jesus had suffered.

And thirdly, although the weather was very cold, the Governor going away
after execution of Justice upon him, yet he ran a ^^od way after the Governor,
drawing a chain after one of his ^gs, the upper part of his body being still
naked, and told him, He had but lent him this, and he should surely have it
again. All this I had from a man of very good repute, who then lived with them,
and was an eye and ea^e witness to all these proceedings.

In the next place take notice good Reader, that when he went from hence well
whipped, as before, and entered upon his banishment, the place he went to (in a
sharp season) was a Town called Providence, where Mr. Roger Williams, and
diverse others lived, who in regard of the season, entertained them with much
humane courtesy, but the Gortonians, answered all like AEsops snake, as thou
may read by the several Letters of the chief Inhabitants of that place, by a
notorious faction there also by them raised, to the great distraction and
amazement of the Inhabitants, as appears by their doleful complaints in
their own Letters, a true Copy whereof I present unto thee.

The sum of the Presentment of Samuel Gorton at Portsmouth in Roade-Island, by
the Grand Jury.
FIrst, that Samuel Gorton certain days before his appearance at this Court,
said, the Government was such as was not to be subjected unto, forasmch as it
had not a true derivation, because it was altered from what it first was.

2 That Samuel Gorton contumeliously reproached the Magistrates calling them
Just Asses.

3 That the said Gorton reproachfully called the Judges, or some of the
Justices on the Bench (corrupt Judges) in open Court.

4 That the said Gorton questioned the Court for making him to wait on them
two days formerly, and that now he would know whether he should be tried in
an hostile way, or by Law, or in sobriety.

5 The said Gorton alleged in open Court, that he looked at the Magistrates
as Lawyers, and called Mr. Easton, Lawyer Easton.

6 The said Gorton charged the Deputy Governor to be an Abeeter of a Riot,
Assault, or Battery, and professed that he would not touch him, no not with a
pair of tongues: Moreover he said, I know not whether thou have any ears, or
no: as also, I think thou know not where thy ears stand, and charged him to
be a man unfit to make a Warrant.

7 The said Gorton charged the Bench for wresting witness, in this expression,
I profess you wrest witness.

8 The said Gorton called a Freeman in open Count (saucy Boy, and
Jack-an-Apes;) and said, the woman that was upon her oath, would not speak
against her mother, although she were damned where she stood.

9 The said Gorton affirmed that Mr. Easton behaved himself not like a Judge,
and that himself was charged either basely or falsely.

10 The said Gorton said to the Bench, Ye intrude Oaths, and go about to catch
me.

11 The said Gorton being reproved for his miscarriage, help up his hand, and
with extremity of speech shook his hand at them, insomuch that the Freemen
present said, He threatens the Court.

12 The said Gorton charged the Court with acting the second part of Plymouth
Magistrates, who, as he said, condemned him in the Chimney corner, ere they
heard him speak.

13 The said Gorton in open Court did profess to maintain the quarrel of
another being his Maidservant.

14 The said Gorton being commanded to prison, imperiously resisted the
authority, and made open Proclamation, saying, take away Coddington, and carry
him to prison; the Governor said again, all you that own the King, take away
Gorton and carry him to prison; Gorton replied, all you that own the King, take
away Coddington, and carry him to prison.

William Dyre Secretary.

Mr. Roger Williams his Letter unto Mr. VVinthrop, concerning Samuel Gorton.
Providence 8. 1st. 1640.
MAster Gorton having foully abused high and low at Aqutdnick, is now
bewitching and bemadding poor Providence, both with his unclean and foul
censures of all the Ministers of this Country, (for which my self have in
Christ's name withstood him) and also denying all visible and external
Ordinance in depth of Familisme, against which I have a little disputed and
written, and shall (the most High assisting) to death: As Paul said of Asia, I
of Providence (almost) All suck in his poison, as at first they did at
Aquednick. Some few and my self withstand his Inhabitation, and
Towne-priviledges, without confession and reformation of his uncivil and
inhumane practices at Portsmouth: Yet the tide is too strong against us, and I
fear (if the framer of Hearts help not) it will force me to little Patience,
a little Isle next to your Prudence. Jehovah himself be pleased to be a
Sanctuary to all whose hearts are perfect with him; In him I desire unfainedly
to be

Your Worships true and affectionate Roger Williams.

Providence this 17. of November, Anno 1641.
To the Honored Governor of Massachusett, together with the Worshipful
Assistants, and our loving Neighbors there.
We the Inhabitants of the Town abovesaid, having fair occasions, counted it
meet and necessary to give you true intelligence of the insolent and riotous
carriages of Samuel Gorton and his company, which came from the Island of
Aquednick; which continue still as sojourners amongst us; together with John
Green, and Francis Weston, two which have this long time stood in opposition
against us, and against the fairest and most just and honest ways of
proceedings in order and Government, that we could rightly and truly use, for
the peaceable preservation and quiet subsistence of our selves and families, or
any that should have fair occasion to go out or come in amongst us. Also six
or seven of our Townsmen which were in peaceable Covenants with us, which now
by their declamations do cut themselves off from us, and jointly under their
hands have openly proclaimed, to take party with the aforementioned Companies, and
so intend for ought we can gather, to have no manner of honest order, or
government either over them or amongst them, as their writings, words, and
actions do most plainly show. It would be tedious to relate the numberless
number of their upbraiding taunts, assaults, and threats, and violent kind of
carriage daily practiced against all that either with care or counsel seek to
prevent or withstand their lewd licentious courses. Yet in brief to commit
some few of them to your moderate Judgments, lest we our selves should be
deemed some way blinded in the occurrences of things, here is a true Copy of
their Writing enclosed, which Francis Weston gave us the 13. of this present
Month, they having also set up a Copy of the same on a tree in the street, in
stead of satisfaction for fifteen pounds, which by way of arbitration of eight
men orderly chosen, and all causes and reasons that could be found, daily and
truly examined, and considered jointly together, when he the said Francis
Weston was found liableto pay, or make satisfacton in Cattle or Commodities,
but on the 15. of this present month, when we went orderly, openly, and in a
warrantable way to attach some of the said Francis Westons Cattle, to drive
them to the Pound, to make him, if it were possible, to make satisfaction:
which Samuel Gorton and his company getting notice of, came and quarrelled with
us in the street, and made a tumultuons Hubbub; and although for our parts we
had beforehand most principally armed our selves with patience, peaceably to
suffer as much injury, as could possibly be^ born, to avoid all shedding of
blood, yet some few drops of blood were shed on either side: And after the
tumult was partly appeased, and that we went on orderly into the Corne-field,
to drive the said Cattle, the said Fran^is Weston came furiously running with a
flayle in his hand, and cried out, Help Sirs, help sirs, they are going to
steal my cattle, and so continued crying ^ll Randall Holden, John Green, and
some others came running and made a great o^tcry, and hollowing and crying,
Thieves, thieves, stealing cattle, stealing cattle, and so the whole number of
their desperate company came riotously running, and so with much striving in
driving, hurried away the cattle, and then presumptuously answered, they had
made a rescue, and that such should be their practice if any men at any time,
in any case attach any thing that is theirs. And fully to relate the least part
of their such like words and actions, the time and paper would scarce be
profitably spent, neither need we to advise your discretions what is likely to
be the sad events of these disorders, if their bloody currents be not either
stopped, or turned some other way. For it is plain to us, that if men should
continue to resist all manner of order, and orderly answering one of another in
different cases, they will suddenly practice, not only cunningly to detain
things one from another, but, openly in public, justly or unjustly, according
to their own wills disorderly take what they can come by; first pleading
necessity, or to maintain wife and family; but afterward boldly to maintain
licentious lust, like savage brute beasts, they will put no manner of
difference between houses, goods, lands, wives, lives, blood, nor any thing
will be precious in their eyes: If it may therefore please you of gentle
courtesy, and for the preservation of humanity and mankind, to consider our
condition, and lend us a neighbour-like helping hand, and send us such
assistance (our necessity urging us to be trouble some unto you) to help us
to bring them to satisfaction, and ease us of our burden of them, at your
discretions; we shall evermore own it as a deed of great charity, and take it
very thankfully, and diligently labor in the best measure we can, and
constantly practice to requite your loving kindness, if you should have
occasion to command us, or any of us in any lawful design: And if it shall
please you to send us any speedy answer, we shall take it very kindly, and be
ready and willing to satisfy the Messengers, and ever remain

Your loving Neighbors, and respective Friends Ioshuah Winsor Benedict Arnold
William Mean William Hawkings Robert West William Field William Harris William
Wickenden William Reinolds Thomas Harris Tho. Hopkins mark Hugh Bennit William
Carpenter,


Providence the 25. of the 3. month, 1641.
To the rest of the five Men appointed to manage the affairs of our Town
aforesaid,
These are further to give you to understand; Viz. That

I Do not only approve of what my neighbors before me have written and
directed their Reasons^ to a serious consideration with us, concerning Samuel
Gorton and his Company: but this much I say also, that it is evident and may
easily be proved, that the said Samuel Gorton nor his Company are not fit
persons to be received in, and made members of such a body, in so weak a
state as our Town is in at present.

My Reasons are, Viz.

First, Samuel Gorton having showed himself a railing and turbulent person,
not only in and against those states of Government from whence he came, as is
to be proved; but also here in this Town since he have sojourned here;
Witness his proud challenge, and his upbraiding accusations in his vilifying
and opprobrious terms of, and against one of our Combination most wrathfully
and shamelesly reviling him, and disturbing of him, and meddling with him, who
was employed and busied in other private occasions, having no just cause so to
revile and abuse him, saying also to him (and that of another state) in a base
manner, they were like swine that held out their Nose to suck his blood, and
that now he and the rest of his Company would go and wallow in it also; which
are indeed words unsufferable; and also despitefully calling him Boy, as though
he would have challenged the field of him, in such an inhumane behavior as
becomes not a man that should be thought to be fit by any reasonable men to be
received into such a poor weak state as we are in at present.

Secondly, another of his Company, one who is much in esteem with him, who
openly in a scornful and deriding manner, seeing one of the five men that was
chosen by the Town, and betrusted in the Town affairs, coming toward him
in the street, he asked of one that stood by him, who that was, the other
answered him, it was one of the five men appointed for managing of our Town
affairs, or the like: Yea, said he, He looks like one of the five, which
words import not only a scorning and deriding of his person of whom then he
spoke, but also a despising and scorning of our Civil State, as it were
trampling it under foot, as they had done by other States before they came
hither, who were of greater strength then we are; for which cause I cannot see
such persons to be fit to be received into such a State as our Town is.

Thirdly, I cannot find these men to be reasonable men in their suite unto
the Town, to be received in as Townsmen, seeing they have already had a plain
denial of their request, and that by the consent of the major part of the
Town, or very near, etc. and are yet unanswerable; and also that they seeing
that their coming to our Town, has brought the Town into a hurry, almost
the one half against the other, in which estate no Town or City can well
stand or subsist; which declares plainly unto us, that their intent is not
good, but that their abode so long here amongst us, is in hope to get the
victory over one part of the Town, but specially of those that laid the first
foundation of the place, and bought it even almost with the loss of their
lives, and their whole estates, and afterward to trample them under their
feet, as some of their words hold forth, or else to drive them out into the
same condition, to seek out a new Providence, and to buy it with the like
hardness as they first bought this place; these, and many other like reasons
that may be showed, declare that they are not fit persons to be received into
our mean and weak State.

Fourthly, and seeing he who is so well known to be the ring leader unto the
breach of peace, that have been so notoriously evil to be a trouble of Civil
States where he has lived, that are of far greater force then we are of,
specially that State who have their Commission and Authority from the Higher
Powers; what may we then expect if he could get himself in with, and amongst
so many as we see are daily ready to tread us under their feet, and his, whom
he calls friends, etc. Surely, first a breach of our civil peace, and next a
ruin of all such as are not of his side, as their daily practice does declare;
Ergo, they are not fit persons to be received into our Town, etc.

Object. If it be objected, as some have blasphemously said, that we are
per^ecutors, and do persecute the Saints, in not receiving of them into our
Towne-fellowship, etc.

Answ. To this I answer, there cannot be proved the least show of any
persecution of those persons, either by us, or by any other amongst us to our
knowledge. For 1 they have quiet abode amongst us, none molesting or troubling
of them, nor any thing they have. 2 It cannot be proved but by their own
relation, the which has been disproved; that they were sent out from those
places from whence they came for Religion, neither are they meddled with here
for any such matter, but rather that they themselves in their bravery are more
ready to meddle with others. 3 They themselves and others of their followers,
have rather been troublers and persecutors of the Saints of God that lived here
before they came, and do but wait their opportunity to make themselves
manifest in that they intend; Ergo, it cannot be truly said of any, that any
persecution is offered by us unto them, if it could possibly be said of them
that they are Saints.

Obj. But if it be further objected, that we do not give them the liberty of
men, neither do we afford them the bowels of mercy, to give them the means
of livelihood amongst us, as some have said.

Answ. To this I say; 1 there is no State but in the first place will seek to
preserve its own safety and peace. 2 We cannot give land to any person by
virtue of our combination, except we first receive them into our state of
combination, the which we cannot do with them for our own and others
peace-sake, etc. 3 Whereas their necessity have been so much pleaded, it is not
known that ever they sought to find out a place where they might accommodate
themselves, and live by themselves, with their friends, and such as will follow
after them, where they may use their liberty to live without order or
control, and not to trouble us, that have taken the same course as we have
done for our safety and peace, which they do not approve nor like of, but
rather like beasts in the shape of men to do what they shall think fit in
their own eyes, and will not be governed by any State. And seeing they do
but here linger out the time in hope to get the day to make up their
pennyworths in advantage upon us, we have just cause to hear the complaints of
so many of our Neighbors that live in the Town orderly amongst us, and have
brought in their complaints, with many reasons against them, and not to admit
them, but answer them as unfit persons to be received into our mean State,
etc.

Now if these Reasons and much more which have been truly said of them, do not
satisfy you, and the rest of our neighbors, but that they must be received
into our Towne-state, even unto our utter overthrow, etc. then according to the
order agreed upon by the Town, I do first offer my house and land within the
liberty of the Town unto the Town to buy it of me, or else I may, and shall
take liberty to sell it to whom I may for mine advantage, etc.

William Arnold*

A PARTICVLAR ANSWER TO THE Manifold Slanders and abominable Falsehoods
contained in a Book, called Simplicities defense against Seven-headed Policy:
Wherein Samuel Gorton is proved a disturber of Civil Societies, desperately
dangerous to his Countrymen the English in New-Engl. and notoriously
slanderous in what he has Printed of them.
WHEN first I entertained the desires of the Country to come over to answer
the complaints of Samuel Gorton, etc. and to render a reason of the just and
righteous proceedings of the Country of New-Engl. in the several parts of it,
against him being a common disturber of the peace of all Societies where he
came, witness New-Plymouth, 2 Roade-Island, 3 Providence, and lastly the
Massachusetts, Sam. Gorton common dist^^^^er of the Civ^^^ peace in all th^^
Societies he (...) there lived i^^^
being the most eminent; I little thought then to have appeared in print: but
coming into England, and finding a Book written by Mr. Gorton called
Simpli^ities defense against Seven-headed policy: or, A true complaint of a
peaceable people, being part of the English in New-Engl. made unto the State of
Old-England, against cruel persecutors united in Church Government in those
parts. I then conceived my self bound in duty to take off the many gross and
public scandalls held forth therein, to the great amazement of many tender
consciences in the Kingdom, who are not acquainted with his proud and turbulent
carriage, nor see the Lion under his Lambeskinne coat of simplicity and peace.
The Lord knows how unwilling I was personally to engage: and I trust he will
also guide me in answering his book, as I shall be far from bitterness:
it is true, time was when his person was precious in mine eyes, and therefore I
hope and desire only to make a righteous and just defense to the many unworthy
things by him boldly, ignorantly, proudly, and falsely published to the great
dishonor of God in wronging and scandalizing his Churches, which the Lord
Jesus Christ will not leave unpunished.

I know the world is full of controversies and it is my great grief to see my
dear native Country so engaged in them, especially one godly person against
another. It Is my present comfort I come not to accuse any; but to defend
New England against the injurious complaints of Samuel Gorton, etc. but as it
comes to pass oftentimes that men wound others unavoidably in defending their
persons from the violent assaults of such as draw upon them, which otherwise
they would never have done: so if Mr. Gorton receive any such hurt (which is
unavoidable) he becomes an accessory thereunto: by forcing me to defend the
Country, without which I should be unfaithful.

I know the world is too full of books of this kind, and therefore however I
am unfitted of many things I have and could procure at home would well become a
relation of the late and present state of New England, yet I shall now only
with as great brevity as may be give answer to such injurious complaints as
he makes of us. And however his Title, Preface, and every leaf of his book
may be justly found fault with, I shall clearly answer to matters of fact,
such as he charge the several Governments withal, so as any indifferent
Reader may easily discern how grossly we are abused, and how just and
righteous censures were against him for disturbing the civil peace of all
societies where he came, in such a manner as no Government could possibly
bear: and for the blasphemies for which he was proceeded against at
Massachusetts, they fell in occasionally by his own means without any
circumstance leading thereunto.

And first whereas he accuses us in the first page of his book to go over
to suppress heretics. Page 1.
It Is well known we went thither for no such end laid down by us, but to
enjoy those liberties the Lord Jesus Christ had left unto his Church to avoid
the Episcopal tyranny, and the heavy burdens they imposed, to which
sufferings the kingdom by this ever to be honored Parliament have and do
bear witness to, as religious and just. And that we might also hold forth
that truth and ancient way of God wherein we walk, which Mr. Gorton calls
heresy. Next in the same Page he charge us with affection of Titles, etc.
To which I answer, either we must live without Government, or if we have
Governors we must give them we call such Titles as are suitable to their
offices and places they bear in Church and Commonwealth, as Governors and
Assistants, Pastors, Teachers, Rulers, Deacons, etc. these are our highest
Titles we give.

In his second page he charge the Massachusetts to unite with other Colenies
to the end they might bathe themselves in blood and feed themselves fat with
the lives of their brethren, etc. Page 2.
This is a notorious slander. It Is true that the Massachusetts new Plymouth,
Cone^^^^ut, and New Haven, I mean the several Colonies there entered into a
civil combination, and are called by the name of the United Colonies, and this
was occasioned by a general conspiracy of the Indians against the body of the
English there seated, together with the distracted condition of England, from
whom we could expect no help at that time. But Mr. Gortan and his company fell
at that time into more then ordinary familiarity with the Nanohigganset
Indians, who were the principal contrivers of the Villainy; who where they could
not draw others to them by for^e or flattery, they did it by large gifts, etc.
as I could prove by many testimonies of the Indians, many hundred miles asunder
from each other, in which design had not the finger of God in much mercy
prevented, I had been the first ^^d fallen; which I forbear to relate here,
being what I now do, is but an answer to his invective*

Next in the same page he tells us at his landing how ^ee found his (...) men
at great variance at Boston in point of Religion; But had not he helped to
blow the bellows the flame might never have been so great. And whereas he
said that Mr. Williams was banished thence for differing from us being a man of
good report, etc. In answer, 1. take notice, I know that Mr. Williams (though a
man lovely in his carriage, and whom I trust the Lord will yet recall) held
forth in those times the unlawfulness of our Letters Patents from the King,
etc. would not allow the Colors of our Nation, denied the lawfulness of a
public oath a being needless to the Saint^, and a profanation of Gods name
to tender it to the wicked, etc. And truly I never heard but he was dealt with
for these and such like points: however I am sorry for the love I bear to him
and his, I am forced to mention it, but God calls me at this ^ime to take off
these aspersions.

In page 3. he mentions the proc^edings of the Massachusetts against Mr. John
Wheel wright etc. Had it been the will of God I would those differences had
never been But the maine difference was about a Petition by way of
Remonstrance, which the Government took very offensive: But Mr. (...) and they
are reconciled, he having given satisfaction, etc. In the same page he wrongs
the doctrine of our Churches, which is well known to be sound. But whereas
he tells us in the same page of denying cohabitation, and of ^hippings,
confinement, imprisonment, chains, fines, banishment. I confess all these
things befell him, and most justly: for he was bound to the good behavior at
Plymouth and brook his bonds in the face of the Court, whipped and banished at
Road Island for mutiny and sedition in the open Court there: also at
Providence as factious there though his party grew greater then Mr. William^
his better party, as appears by his and their sad letters to the Government of
the Massachuset for help and advice; and afterward banished the Massachusetts:
all which appears in another place of this book, and the just causes of their
proceedings annexed there unto. Lastly in this page he tells us of his hardship
diverse nights together, that himself and the rest of his mutinous companions,
as Weeks, Holden, etc. endured, which was just with God and man, for extreme
evils must have extreme r^medies, and yet it is well known it is not a full days
journey from Road Island to Pr^vidence. And whereas a stranger would think
he was then forced to go to Nauhiga^setBay amongst the Indians, he went not
from Providence till they were as weary of these Muti^eeres as either Plymouth
or Road Island had been before them.

And because he often mentions the hard measure he received at Plymouth,
still carrying it on as if difference in Religion had been the ground of it: I
thought g^^d here to give the Reader to understand what was the ground of his
^roubles there, that so all men may know what Religion this (...) is of: for
the tree is best known by its fruit. The first complaint that came against
him for which he was brought before authority, was by Mr. Ralph Smith a
Minister, who being of G^rtons acquaintance received him with his family into
his house, with much humanity and Christian respect, promising him as free use
of it as himself, etc. but Mr. Gorton becoming troublesome, (after means
used to remove the offenses taken by Mr. Smith, but to no purpose, growing
still more insolent) Mr. Smith desired him to provide elsewhere for himself:
but Gorton refused, saying, he had as good interest in the house as Mr. Smith
had. And when he was brought before Authority, stood s^outly to maintain it
to our amasement. But was ordered to depart and provide other ways by a time
appointed. And not long after there coming a woman of his acquaintance to
Plymouth, diverse came to the Governor with complaints against her, being a
stranger, for unworthy and offensive speeches and carriages used by her.
Whereupon the Governor sent to her to know her business, etc. and commanded
her departure, and ordered the Seaman that brought her, to return her to the
place from whence she came, at his next passage thither. But G^rton said she
should not go, for he had occasion to employ her, etc. Hereupon the Governor
(it being in the time of a Court) sent for him, and because he had hid her,
stood in justification of his practiseand refused to obey the command of the
Court (who seconded the Governors order.) He was committed till he could
procure sureties for his good behavior till the next Court which was a
general Court, and there to answer to this contempt. The time being come and
the Court set, ^orten was called; But the Governor being wearied with speech
to other causes, r^quested one of his Assistants who was present at his
commitment and privy to the whole cause to declare the same. This Assistant no
sooner stood up to show the Country the cause of his bonds in the great affront
he had given the Government, but G^rt^^ stretching out his hand toward his
face said with a loud voice, If Satan will accuse the brethren, let ^im come
down from Iehoshuabs right hand and stand here, And that done, in a seditious
manner turned himself to the people and said, with his arms spread abroad*
Ye see good people how ye are abused! Stand for your liberty; And let them
not be parties and judges, with many other opprobrious speeches of that kind.
Hereupon diverse Elders of Churches being present, desiring leave of the
Governor to speak, complaining of his seditious carriage, and requested the
Court not to suffer these abuses, but to inflict condign punishment. And yet
notwithstanding all we did to him was but to take the forfeiture of his
foresaid bonds for his good behavior. Nay being but low and poor in his
estate, we took not above eight or ten pounds of it, lest it might lie too
heavy upon his wife and children. But he must either get new sureties for the
behavior till the next general Court, or such time as he departed the
Government, or lie in orison till he could: now he knowing his outrageous
passions which he could not restrain, procured suretles, but immediately left
Plimoutb and went to Road Island, where upon complaint of our persecutions he
found present relief there: yet soon afterward he abused them in a greater
measure and had heavier yet too light a punishment inflicted on (...) and all
for breach of the civil peace and notorious contempt of Authority without the
least mention of any points of Religion on the Governments part, but as before.

And whereas in page 4. Mr. Gorten further accuses us that they were deprived
and taken away from their quiet possessions, etc. Such was his carriage at
Plymouth and Providence at his first settling as neither of the Governments
durst admit or receive him into cohabitation, but refused him as a pest to all
societies. Again in the same page he accuses Massachusetts and Plymouth to
have denied them to be in our Government, but when we perceived the place to
be a refuge for such as were oppressed then, etc. It Is true that Plymouth gave
way to Mr. Williams and his company to fit down at Providence and have never
molested them to this day, but refused Gorton and Weeks, etc. upon Weeks his
solicitation when I was at Providence for the reasons before mentioned, etc.
And for those particular relations he makes of Robert Cole, William Arnold, and
Benedict his son, I wave, as not being so well acquainted with their cases,
but see he writes with a venomous pen; only take notice he would make it a
great crime in them to trade on the Sabbath (as it is) when himself at that
time denied the sanctification of it.

In page 5. he complains that powder was traded to the Indians and denied to
them, Answ. If it were traded to the Indians, for my part I approve it not, it
being against the express law of the Country, and a large penalty annexed: but
there was good reason to refuse it to them which held such familiarity with
Malignant Indians especially during the time of their confederacy against u^.

In page 6. he speaks as if he had been under some censure of the
Massachusetts at the time of the warrant there by him specified, how truly
copied I know not: but am sure at this time he was personally under no censure
of theirs.

In page 7. he accuses Magistrates and Ministers for bringing in all the
accusations that came in against them. Who but public persons should take
notice of public insolences? And as for Mr. Collens his story I am a
stranger to, but believe it is misreported as well as others.

In page 8, he manifests he durst not live under a foreign Prince, meaning
the Dutch, having never been false to his King and Country, etc. with many
ignorant swelling words; as if it were treason to ones Prince to live under a
foreign State though an Ally. And in the same page he would lay the death of
Mistress Hutchenson who was mother in law to Mr. Collens, on us: although they
went from Road Island which is not under the Massachusetts where she had lived
some years after her remove from the Bay, and not from the Massachusetts to the
Dutch of her own accord where they were cut off by the Indians.

In page 9. he shows how they bought lands of Myantonimo Prince of those
parts. Answ. 1. He was not the Prince of that part as was proved publicly at
Massachusetts himself being present. 2. He had no proper right in it, as is
showed at large elsewhere.

In the same page he begins a large letter full of railing blasphemies which
continues to page 31. and however it be not exactly set down as it was sent,
yet I admire at Gods providence, for he is fallen into the snare he laid, this
being brought against him to accuse him of blasphemy, before a Committee of
Parliament, who called in his book, and referred him to the House, etc. but I
forbear to show his folly here, which is referred to another place and his
wickedness discovered therein.

In page 32. he says the Government of the Massachusetts had no show of any
thing against them but Religion, and yet the whole carried on in his own way
as well as what we now print, shows it was in the right of two Indian
Sachims, namely P^mham and Socononoco, who placing themselves under the
protection of the Massachusetts complained of violence offered them by Mr.
Gorton and his company; it being our manner both in Capitals and Criminals to
dot them the like justice we do one to another, wherein walking by the same
rules of righteousness toward them, they have the less cause to take offense
at us.

From page 33. forward, are many Letters which I cannot believe al is in them,
and therefore remain jealous of his sincerity in Printing them.

In page 37. he holds forth conversion to be the ground of the Massachusetts
sending to them, now to that end, says he, they sent a Minister. It Is true,
there was a gracious young man one Mr. Ioh. Bulkley then a Student, but in no
ministry, went to teach to the Company they sent to guard their own
Commissioners, and to bring in Gorton if need required: but I dare not believe
what he affirms. And for the Copy of a Letter he fathers upon the
Commissioners sent by the Government of the Massachuset; I conclude it is rather
set down upon memory then right, because of some attestations I have by me to
make use on elsewhere, which seem to hold forth the contrarry, and so I do
not credit it.

In page 38, and 39. he relates how their wives were frighted at men's
presenting their muskets at them, etc. and suffering such hardships as
occasioned death, etc. Which must also be false, for honest men have deposed
there was no such presentment, and that their wives came freely and familiarly
to them, both before and after they were taken. So also he affirms our men
would allow of no parley but private, or else they would dispatch them in a
quarter of an hour, which I will never believe, because I know the men to be
men fearing God, and durst not proceed as he relates it.

In page* 40, and 41. he also taxes the Commissioners and soldiers with breach
of Covenants in time of treaty, as, breaking open their houses, desks, killing
their cattle, etc. All which is false, for oath is made to the contrary, which
I shall make use of before my Lord of Warwick Governor in chief, and the rest
of the honorable Committee for foraign Plantations in due time and place, that
whereas they were by agreement to have two houses for their company being about
40 men, they made use of but one, nor did any of these things laid to their
charge.

In page 45. he would make Pumham and Socononoco, the natural subjects of
Myantonimo their Prince; but this was disproved. And in the same page, he
says, the Magistrates suggested to the people as though there were fear of
some combination between the Indians and them, Answ. I dare not say you had a
hand in the depth of their conspiracy: but this I think you dare not deny,
that Weeks one of your stoutest Champions, lent Myantonimo an Armor, in which
he was taken in battle against Vncus, who was under the protection of the
English united Colonies: for which Vncus put him to death; and in your own book
you hold forth more familiarity then becomes you.

But here it will be necessary for me to show you the ground of this war.
There was a people called by the name of the Pecoats, being a stout warlike
people, who had been at war with the Nanohiggansets many years, and were too
strong for them; so also were they at some distance of affection with this
Vncus, who was Sachim of a people called the Mohegans, near the head of a
River falls into the sea at Pecoat, The chief Sachim of this people of
Pecoat, was called Tatobam, a stout man. The Nanohiggansets and these strove
who should be greatest. This Tatobam envied the English, and was the first
stirrer and contriver of this general Plot, that they might all join together
to destroy the English; but the Nanohiggansets refused to join with them,
knowing if that were once done, the next ruin must be their own. Afterward
having subdued many small peoples, and one as great as themselves, and and some
English planting more near then the body of our Plantations, though without
wrong to him, or any of them, he cut off Captain Stone his Bark and Company,
and after this killed diverse straggling English. This st^rred up the English to
take revenge: The Nano^ggans^ts and Vncus, Sachim of the Moheges seeing this,
because it was against their common Enemy, offered their service to join with
the English: the Nanohiggansets did no considerable service in comparison of
the Moheges, who did as much as could be expected, but the Nanohiggansets
rather gathered up the spoil, to the great offense of the English and Moheges,
seldom engaging in any fight. The English killed and destroyed this people
utterly, so that those that were left remaining utterly deserted the Country,
and the English won it, and are now possessed of it. After this victory,
Myantonim^ Sachim or Lord of the Nanobiggansets, and Vncus Lord of the Moheges,
manifested no good blood toward each other; the English at Hartford where the
Government for Coneetacut is held, hearing of it, got them together, and made a
peace and threefold Covenant between the Government of Coneetacut,
Nanchigganset, and Mohege, which was signed by the Governor of Coneetacut,
Myantonim^ Sachim of Nanohigganset, and Vncus Sachim of M^hegan. The Covenants
rant to this purpose, To confirm their League between the English and them,
and either to other, and to hold forth a league of perpetual peace between
them. And in case any difference should arise between them. And in case any
difference should arise between these two Indian Sachims, or their people, the
party offended should complain to the Governor of Coneetacut, who was to
mediate and to determine the controversy between his two friends and their
people: And in case the injury were great, and the party wronging would not
stand to the foresaid award and determination, then it should not only be
lawful for the wronged to right himself by force of Arms, but for the
English party also to assist the innocent in that kind. And to this they all
firmed as before.

The Nanohigganset Sachim never regarded this Covenant, the Mohege Sachim ever
faithfully observed it. But Myantonimo of Nanohigganset had thoughts now to
prosecute the P^coats design, and to destroy the English, (the Pecoets Nation
being rooted out by Gods just judgment as before) and travels far and near
to draw all the Indians in the Country into this horrid confederacy with him;
but this Vncus would not be won, though he would have taken his daughter in
marriage, but ever acquainted the English with his working. At length an
inferior Sachim, subordinate to Nanobigganset affronts him and his men, he
complains to the English, they send to this inferior Sachim, he sleights
their admonition, goes on his course; whereupon the other demands leave to make
war upon him, not requiring any aid. Still the English forewarne the other
party of the evil they were like to bring upon themselves; till at length they
profess they have had peace enough, and now it is time to war, Whereupon the
English give way to Vncus to revenge himself, he does it* the other are
beaten. Now Myantonimo he prepares an Army of above 1000 men, and comes upon a
sudden upon Vncus without any respect to Covenants, and took Vncus at
advantage, not with above 300 men; by which means they beset him every way in
his Fort, which stands upon a point of Land between two Rivers. Myantonimo so
dispersed his men to prevent their flight, as Vncus making a desperate salley
with almost his full force, routed the other, slew near upon an hundred, and
forced them to fly: But Mr. Weckes one of Samuel Gortons company (as I am
credibly informed) lending the Great Sachim a complete Armor; and having it on
in the fight, was not able to fly so fast as his men, and was taken by this
means. Yet such was Vncus respect still to the English, as he kept him till
he sent to the English, viz. to the Right Wo^shipfull George Fenwicke Esquire,
to know what he should do with him, who lived next to him, He wished him to
follow their own Custom, and to deal with him, as if he had not advised
with him, or there were no English in the land to advise withal. Hereupon he
resolved to have killed him forthwith, according to their Custom. But no
sooner were the Nanohiggansets got home, who had lost diverse Sachims,
Captains, and chief men in this fight, but they send to Mr. Gorton, etc who
sent a Note to Vncus, with a command by the bearer, that they put him not to
death, but use him kindly and return him. This the Messenger either said or
they supposed came from the Massachusetts Governor, and did much daunt Vn^us
and his men: but to clear up all, they advised with the Gent. of Co^eetacut,
who wished him to keep him prisoner, and to advise with the Commissioners of
the United Colonies whereof they were part, whose meeting would be ere long by
course at the Massachusetts: which counsel he followed, and entreated the
Governor of Coneetacut (Myantonimo also desiring it) to keep him safe for him
till then, whereupon he was brought to Hartford: And many gifts were sent to
the prisoner; which he bestowed like himself, some on him that took him, some
on Vncus, some on his wife, some on Vncus brother being a great Captain, and
some on others where he had received kindnesses, and this was all the ransom
was paid, there being not so much as a ransom proposed by the Nanobiggansets,
nor set down by Vncus. But he advising with the Commissioners, they
considering how many ways besides open hostility he had sought the life of
Vncus, by poison, secret murder, witchcraft, etc. advised him to put him to
death, there being no safety for him whilst he lived, being so restless in
his practice against his life; and therefore wished Vncus to proceed with him
according to their own Custom toward prisoners of War, which is to put
them to death; according to which advice he proceeded, knowing now that none of
the Engl. would intercede for him. And hereupon Vncus went to Hartsord and
demanded his prisoner, and led him to an house of his own, out of the limits
of the English, and there killed him, where was an English man or two by to
prevent their accustomed cruelties, in cutting off not only the head and hands
of their prisoners when they are dead, and make bracelets of the ^ore-joints of
their fingers, etc. but to torture them whilst living with most inhumane
cruelties. After this, the Nanohiggansets would war upon him in revenge of
his death; we forbade them, and at our next meeting of Commissioners to
consult about the Weal public of the United Colonies, in regard the
Nanohiggansets pleaded they had taken a ransom for his life, and his life
also, which the other denied; We sent for Vncus, and sent to the great Sachims
of Nanohigganset to come also, or appear by Commissioners; but they sent four
Commissioners with full authority to treat, where we found neither ransom,
nor color of ransom in the least measure. And so a truce was agreed on, and
if Vncus brake it, we were then freed from our engagement to defend him any
further, for they desired no more: And if the Nanohiggansets broke it, then it
should be lawful for us the United Colonies to take part with him, etc. But
the truth is, though before they had so near neighbors of the English, as
Gorton, etc. and till Myantonimo's Government, as they were the most in number,
and most peaceable of all the Indians, yet now they were changed, as if they
had not been the people, and had their Tutors, Secretaries, and promptors to
suggest their greatness and our weakness to them, as his Book witnesses, in
such manner as I am confident if the Gortonians (for I take the phrase from his
own Book here, never hearing it before) be suffered to live so near them, it
will be our ruin, or these Indians (which we desire not) in short time. I
thought good to insert this Narration thus briefly, that the Reader might
understand the ground of his many charges, calling God to witness I know not
the least falsehood related in it, but many things for brevities sake omitted
worthy a history; but I am now about an answer, not an history, and therefore
thus brief. But to return.

In page 47. see how he scoffs at the Sabbath as if there were no other ground
for our religious observation of it, then Mr. Cottons judgment. And in page
48. he is full of many scoffs, as if he and his Gortonians would not, nor did
shoot at all, when as I have oath to prove they shot also at the other, but the
truth is, I heard some say that their powder was so dampe and moist as they
could not without great difficulty discharge a piece, which I well believe
might be the reason they shot no more then they did.

In page 49. he charge Captain Cook with breach of Articles: And yet I
have it attested upon oath, that there were none agreed on; only they desired
they might not go bound; which was easily assented to, they behaving
themselves quietly. And for their cattle, I never heard the number to be so
great by far; but asking the Governor of the Massachusetts about them, he
professed they did not amount to half their charges. And if any ask by what
authority they went out of their own Government to do such an act? Know that
his former seditious and turbulent carriage in all parts where he came, as
Plymouth, Roade-Island, a place of greatest liberty, Providence that place
which relieved him in that his so great extremity, and his so desperate close
with so dangerous and potent enemies, and at such a time of Conspiracy by the
same Indians, together with the wrongs done to the Indians, and English under
the protection of that Government of the Massachusetts, who complained and
desired relief; together with his notoriou^ contempt of all Civil Government,
as well as that particular, and his blasphemies against God needlessly
manifested in his proud letters to them, one whereof he has printed, and the
other I have herewith published for him. All these considered, you shall see
hereby cause enough, why they proceeded against him as a common enemy of the
Country. And as such an one, the said Commissioners being then met together at
Massachusetts by course, for the Weal of the whole, upon just complaint ordered
and thought meet that the Government of the Massachusetts should call them to
account, and proceed with them so far as stood with righteousness and
justice: And by their declaration thou may easily see they went no further,
for they refusing safe conduct to come to answer to the matters against them,
forced them upon this charge needlessly, which they made them bear part of as
before. So that here is cause enough besides blasphemy for their proceeding with
them I suppose.

In page 51. he charge New-Engl. Ministers to pray in the streets: but take
notice I have been there these 26 years, and better, but never heard of such a
practice, till I now read it in his Book.

In page 52. he says, the Governor to satisfy the people, said, we were
apprehended for diverse gross opinions, etc. Answ. You may see in the last
Section but one there was cause enough. And yet for Opinions, let me tell you
that you held, That that Image of God after which man was created was Christ;
and that when Adam fell Christ was slain, etc. And as for your opinion
concerning Churches, Mr. Williams by way of sad complaint told me, you denied
any true Churches of Christ to be in the world: also Baptism it self, and the
Lords Supper, Sabbath, Magistracy as it was an ordinance used amongst
Christians. And for the Lords Supper, that it is but a spell, the Ministers
Necromancers, and the Communicants drunk with the juice of the grape, etc. And
for this last passage here mentioned, the Reader shall have it at large in a
second Letter sent by him and his companions to the Government of the
Massachusetts, concealed by himself in his Book, though he pretends to have
printed all, etc.

In page 53. as he abuses others, so Mr. Cotton and Mr. Ward, in affirming
that Mr. Ward put himself into a passion, and stirred up Carder to recant,
etc. as being no discredit to him, because Mr. Cotton ordinarily preached that
publicly once a year, which the next year he recants, etc. But Mr. Ward
being in Town, a man well known and reputed, I showed him the Book, and he
gave me thanks, and returned this answer to it verbatim:

Samuel Gorton having made me a Margent note in the 53 page of his Book, I
hold my self called to make this answer to it; I cannot call to mind that ever
I knew or spoke with such a man as Richard Carder, nor that ever I had any
speech with any prisoner at a window, nor should I need it in New England,
where there is liberty enough given for conference with prisoners in more free
and convenient places. This I remember, that one Robert Potter Who went in the
same Ship with me into New England, and expressing by the way so much honesty
and godliness as gained my good opinion and affection toward him: I hearing
that he was affected with Samuel Gortons blasphemous conceits and carriages,
and therefore now imprisoned with him, I went to visit him, and having free
speech with him in the open prison yard, who shedding many tears might happily
move me to express my affection to him, which Samuel Gorton calls passion:
After some debate about his new opinions, I remember I used a speech to him to
this effect: That he should do well and wisely to make such acknowledgement
of his errors as his conscience would permit; telling him that Mr. Cotton Whom
he had so much reverenced in Old England and New, had given him a godly
example in that kind, by a public acknowledgement upon a solemn Fast day
with many tears; That in the time when errors were so stirring, God leaving
him for a time, he fell into a spiritual slumber; and had it not been for the
watchfulness of his brethren the Elders, etc. he might have slept on; and
blessed God very cordially for awakening him, and was very thankful to his
Brethren, for their watchfulness over him, and faithfulness toward him:
wherein he bonoured God not a little, and greatly rejoiced the bearts of his
bearers; and therefore it would be no shame for him to do the like.

Concerning Mr. Cotton, were I worthy, I would presume to speak that now of
him, which I have said more then many times of him elsewhere, That I hold him
such an eminent Worthy of Christ, as very few others have attained unto him;
and that I hold my self not worthy to wipe his slippers for matters of grace,
learning, and industry in the work of God.

For the Author Samuel Gorton, my self and others far more judicious, take
him to be a man whose spirit is stark drunk with blasphemies and
insolences, a corrupter of the Truth, and a disturber of the Peace where ever
he comes; Iiutreat him to read Titus 1. 13. with an humble bea^^ and that is
the greatest harm I wish him.

N. W.


Thus much of the Answer and testimony of that Reverend and Grave Divine,
wherein the Reader may see how Mr. Gorton abuses all men, by casting mire and
dirt in the faces of our best deserving Instruments.

In page 54. he accuses Mr. Wilson and Mr. Cotton for stirring up the people
against them, etc. Answ. What they pressed in their Sermons, I was not present
to hear; but this I can affirm, that from the time of their liberty to my
departure from New England, which is not much above two months, I have heard
many precious godly men affirm, that Sam. Gorton and his company needlessly in
their writings and conference belched out such blasphemy as they thought God
was offended with the Country for giving them the liberty they had. And that
you may the better see his carriage, (it being the manner of the Country to
let their prisoners come to hear the Word preached) Mr. Gorton, etc. being
there after Mr. Cotton had ended his Sermon on a Sabbath day, asked leave to
speak, which Mr. Cotton assenting to, the Governor being present gave him
leave, where with a loud voice before the whole Congregation being very great,
he declared, That the Ministry of the Word, Sacraments, Censures, and other
Ordinances of Religion in the hands of Ministers, are like the silver Shrines
of Diana in the hands of the cra^tsmen of Ephesus etc. And if the truth of this
be questioned, I have testimony upon Oath to make it good.

In page 55, 56, 57. many things might be excepted against, as in p. 55. his
great respect manifested to that government, because derived from the State of
England, which what it was thou may largely see in certain Observations of a
godly Divine annexed hereunto, upon his own two contemptuous and blasphemous
Letters, or rather Books, wherein are 48 several aspersions cast on them,
Secondly, his appealing, page 56. from their Justice when their Charter
enjoynes none.

In page 50, and 57, the Questions as he has set them down, and the relation
about the time allowed him to give his answer; I question whether he have dealt
fairly therein, because he is so often found faulty.

To pass by his Answer, and his large explanation of himself, page 58. and
come to 59. etc and so the rest of his Answers to the Questions to 64. I
answer, though I know not whether he do right as he states things; yet this
I know, being attested by reverend persons, That he then maintained, that God
made man after ^is own image; and that God (...) but one image, and that is
Christ; and this was the Incarnation of Christ, his exinanition by which we are
saved. And when it was objected, we are not saved by the incarnation of
Christ, but by the death of Christ. True, says he, therefore Adam fell, and
so destroyed Gods image, and that was the death of Christ. When it was objected
again, Adams fall was not our salvation, but condemnation, but the death of
Christ was our salvation: and therefore Adams fall could not be the death of
Christ. He would by no means either revoke or explain his speech (though
much urged thereunto) to agree with the principles of Christian Religion. Being
further demanded what he then thought of that Christ in whom we believe, borne
of the Virgin Mary, and who suffered under Pontius Pilate? He answered, That
that Christ was a shadow, and but a resemblance of what is done in ^^e and
every true Christian. And now judge good Reader, whether this be like what he
mentions, or whether it were a trifle not worthy the mentioning: But if he
will be so unfaithful as to omit it, I dare not.

As for his censure, page ^4, I know not whether it be right set down; and so
the charge, page 65. wherein I dare say he wrongeth the Ministers, in saying,
They stirred up the people to famish them.

As for his long and tedious Letter to Mr. Green, from page 66 to 74. I pass
it by, as he says Mr. Green did. But in 74. he would make it an aspersion
upon Mr. Endec^t for saying that God had stirred them up to go out of their
own jurisdiction to fete^ them from their (...) places. Take notice as it is
literally within the line of Plymouth Government in their Grant, yet the
Indians before mentioned having subjected themselves to the Massachusetts, the
Commissioners for Plymouth as well as those for Con^etacu^, and New Haven, upon
the manifold complaints and reasons before mentioned, being met together at
their ordinary time and place appointed and ordered it should be so, as
appears by the copy of their act.

At a meeting of the Commissioners for the United Colonies of New England
holden at B^^ston the seventh of September 1643.
Where as complaints have been made against Samuel Gorton and his company, and
some of them weighty and of great consequence; And where as the said Gorton and
the rest have been formerly sent for, and now lately by the general Court of
the Massachusetts with a safe conduct both for their coming and re^^rne, that
they might give answer and satisfaction where in they have done wrong. If yet
they shall stubbornely refuse, the Commissioners for the United Colonies think
fit that the Magistrates in the Massachusetts proceed against them according to
what they shall find just; and the rest of the Jurisdictions will approve and
concur in what shall be so warrantably done, as if their Commissioners had
been present at the conclusions, provided that this conclusion do not
prejudice the Government of Plymouth in any right they can justly claim unto
any Tract or Tracts, etc.

By which Order it appears they were stirred up and allowed by Plymouth it
self as well as the rest, as before, to send for and deal with as indeed the
common disturbers of the peace of the Country.

And whereas in page 76. He complains of the Governors last order for
breaking the order of Court, yet take it as he relates it and any understanding
man will easily see on the other side the same lease that they still were bound
to the rest of the Articles at their confinement, which they were now in a high
way to break* And for that little Island called Road Island they were forced
to shelter in, take notice it is 30 miles about, very fruitful, and plentifully
abounding with all manner of food the Country affords, and has two Towns
besides many great Farms well stocked in the same.

In page 79. He complains of us for calling them Gortoniant, and so the
Indians calling them Gortonoges and not Englishmen, with many affected ^oppish
vanities, phrases and terms I never heard on before, and yet have lived in
New England from the beginning, being now above 26 years. I wish he study
not, nor affect these things, but I much fear it.

In page 80. He tells a tale of a tub, of Myantonimo's being slain as he
marched, which is false, for he was put to death, and in an house, but not
upon a march. And is it to be wondered at, that two English were present to
see the manner of their proceeding in so weighty a cause as one Prince putting
another his perfidious enemy and captive to death, especially when they were
required by the Commissioners to forbear their accustomed torments and to give
him honorable burial, which they did and had thanks returned by the
Nanhiggansets for those particulars. Now if any would know how it was done? It
was only at one blow with an hatchet on the side of the head as he walked
easily in the room (expecting no less) which fully dispatched him at once.
And thus mnch for answer to this charge.

To let pass page 81. what he says about Myantonimo's death as being
answered before, and come to page 82. etc. where he mentions a consultation
held amongst the Indians to put themselves under the subjection of the State of
England, etc. Answ. We heard indeed of this desperate plot by this unfaithful
people, who had been in Covenant with the several Governments long before,
but never observed any one Article farther then it might further their own
design which was to be absolute Lords of the Country though with the ruin of
us all. And t^^ly had he not published this and the following discourse we
could never have proved it though we heard of it both from English and
Indians. And however Myantonimo dyed, yet the plot lives and continues to
this day. Now though I dare not say, nor do I think they join with them in
aiming at the ruin of all the English, yet they join with them in many of
their Councels, contri^e their sturdy answers by writings, and become their
Secretaries. Who knows not that they cannot write? and who knows not their
own answers from those that come under your hands? And if the State of England
(which God defend) should establish your and their joint propositions: then
were their plot accomplished: for they might and would work freely our ruin
when as we might not take up arms against them, but by virtue of warrant or
writ from hence procured upon our complaints here, which also would be six
months, in ordinary course in procuring and returning, when as in one of these
all our throats might be cut, and those hopeful beginnings so much favored
by our gracious God hitherto in a high way to be overthrown. Indeed we heard
further, and for my part I believe it, that for the better accomplishment
hereof, Samuel Gorton and some of his company had persuaded the Nanohiggansets
to send the King a very large Present of Beaver and otter skins which they
should bring in, and accordingly did: but withal the English reporter says,
that if he could find favor with the Parliament, then he would rest there:
but if they frowned on him, he doubted not to but obtain what was meet from
the King. But the times would not suffer him to publish this also, else I see
we should have had all: and this take notice of, That (as the same report
testified) at his departure he* wished them by no means to war with us the
United Colonies, but compound though it cost them never so dear, but assured
them at his return he would come strengthened with such authority and so many
of his friends as that the Nanobiggansets and themselves should not need to
fear any thing the rest of the English could do. And that we heard these
things from credible restimony and are not feigned by me, I take the searcher
of the heart to witness, yea say further that I believe them to be true.

His glorious seeming well-de^erving acts follow in page 82. etc. to 89. but
note that Weeks, Holden, and Warner, (though I least know the last, but am
sure for the other two) were his strong Assistants in his former seditious and
mutinous carriages both at Road Island and Providence, and therefore fit
Commissioners as he terms them, for the accomplishing such a design. And in
page 85. note first, their compliance with the Nanohiggansets, and his false
relation in saying Myantonimo's ransom was taken and his life also, which is
most false, as I made appear in my former relation. And for the Kings being
our and their Judge, as in page 86. Know the Indians care no more for the King
then they do for us, whom they would destroy if they could.

And in page 88. take notice of the Gortonists complying and joining with them,
first, by calling them their fellow subjects, and secondly, speaking of the
Ma^kquagges (whom we ordinarily call Mo-(...)) as being the most fierce and
warlike people in the Country, where (says be) we are furnished with 3700
Guns, men expert in the use of them, etc. Now these indeed at the Switzers
serve for hire. And the Nanohiggansets being rich have hired them to assist
them in their war. But though the Gartomists it seems are interested with
the Nanohiggansets in their strength against us, yet are they neither so many
men not have so many arms, but have too many and are very expert in them: being
continually supplied by the French and Dutch, whose aim is chiefly at the
trade of Furs, and hereby not only rob us of that should help to maintain
our plantations which are growing up into a Nation, but furnish the Indians
with all manner of arms, which I would to God, and humbly beseech this High
Court of Parliament to take into serious consideration, and treat with their
several Ambassadors about it, as a thing unreasonable in it self, and such as
has been pernicious to French and Dutch, and may be destructive to them and
us, if some due course be not taken, But to return from my humble request to
the State, to my answer to Samuel Gorton; although this be a most unworthy
vaunt of his, yet I trust the State will make such use of it as never to suffer
this desperate crew to live so near our malicious enemies the Nanohigans* and
that they will not only countenance the sentence of the Massachus. Government
against them, but hinder the said Gortons return thither, by sorbidding him to
set foot on that land of New England he has filled with so many troubles in
all the parts where he has been.

In page 91. He taxes ^lim^uth to join with the Massachusetts to frustrate
their Government by virtue of their new Charter, It Is true, we would have had
the Massachusetts to have the seat, and rendered a reason to the State of their
proceedings, knowing as before that Mr. Gortons journey was for evil and not
for good: but they being then taken up with more weighty concernments neglected
it: but Plymouth did then petition the right honorable Robert Earl of
Warwick the Governor in chief of the English plantations in America and the
rest of that ^^nourable Committee joined in Commission with him, that we might
enjoy our ancient limits of Government granted in our letters Patent, and
withal showed that their Charter for the limits of it now granted, was
contained within our line of Government: and trust I shall now receive answer.
It Is true also that we sent Mr. John Brown furnished with these following
instruction to signify to all that were interessed in that new erected
Government as follows by Commission given at New Plymouth, Nov. 8. 1644.

1. That a great part of their supposed Government is within the line of the
Government of New Plymouth.

2. That we assuredh knew that this ever to he honored House of Parliament
would not, nor will when they shall know of it, take from us the most ancient
Plantation, any part of the line of our Government formerly granted; it being
contrary to their Principles.

3. To forbid them and all and every of them to exercise any authority or power
of Government within the limits of our Letters Patents.

4. To certify them that Coweeset is not only within said limits, but that
the Sachim thereof and his sons have taken protection of his our Government.
And therefore to forbid them to cuter upon any part of his or their lands
without due order and leave from our Government.

Now these instructions were signed by the Governor. And Mr. Brown going to
Road Island for this end came very seasonable when a public meeting was
appointed for your new Magistrates and people, (but as he reported, for a most
vile end; viz. to take into consideration a new disposal of the lands formerly
given out, as if some had too much and some too little, and for no respect of
persons, and their estates was to be laid aside.) And here note that Mr.
Coddington, Mr. Briuton, etc that we at Plymouth had special eye to, when we
commended them thither, abhorred their course, abstained from their meetings,
looked upon themselves as persons in great danger, and bemoaned their condition
to diverse their friends, being now overwhelmed with cares and fears what would
be the issue of things. And note that now also Mr. Samuel Gorton that before
had suffered so much by authority for his evil doing, and was come to deny it
and preach against it, being now by these Inhabitants called to place, accepts
it, and became a Magistrate amongst them, etc. But whereas he intimates, as if
Mr. Brown had only done his message (according to his instructions) in a
private way from house to house, therein he wrongs him: for he did it
publicly in the place of their Assembly, who were so daunted at it as they
brake up, and did no act intended for that day, as he related it: but some
would have had him imprisoned, others punished, others sent to the Dutch and so
for England. Yea Mr. Gorton himself told Mr. Brownes son that his father had
done that which he deserved to die for, and were he in any other place it
would cost him his life. So fit for Government were these men, as to judge a
peaceable claim of right without any further disturbance or stir made should
thus deserve, Neither indeed have we further stirred then as before, ever
resolving to rest in the determination of the right honorable the Governor in
chie^e and the rest of his honorable Assistants of that Committee be trusted
with the affairs of the Foreign English Plantations, assuring our selves
what ever might proceed either from misinformation or want of due knowledge
what was formerly done, would be rectified upon the first information and
complaint made: Such were our thoughts of them, and the justice we expected,
and still hope to receive from them. And thus much for answer to that complaint.

In page 92. He lays another gross aspersion upon us, in saying, There was
distance and alienation of affection between Plymouth and the Massachusetts at
their first coming, each thinking I am holier then thou: and as if we were
new united on purpose to scatter them. The world knows this to be most false.
Never people agreed better, maintaining both religious and civil Communion
with each other, and helping and being helpful one to another^ upon all
occasions: which is so well known, as if he had not more then ordinary
boldness he durst not affirme^it. Nor came the men of Plymouth* from
Amsierdam as he reports but Leyden, a people that many of that Church of
Amsterdam would hardly allow communion withal: but his pen is no slander, at
least will not be where this answer shall follow it. And for his relation of
the manner of the Indians mourning for their Prince his death; Truly had he
dyed a natural death, it is their manner not only so to mourn for their great
Sachims which are Princes, but for ordinary men, women and children as he well
knows or might know.

Ia page 93. He further complains of Plymouth and Massachusetts for offering to
go out against the Nanohiggansets to cut them off by the sword. And so
complains also of Captain Standish etc. Answ. I told you before how the
Commissioners for the United Colonies meeting at Hartford by course, whose
meeting always begins the first Thursday in September. sent for both the
Nanohiggansets and vncus, who appeared, and a league agreed on: but the
Nanohiggansets broke again, and warred upon vncus needlessly. The United
Colonies admonished them again and again: and after no admonition nor
persuasions would serve, we were then forced to call the Commissioners
together at an extraordinary season on purpose, who finding it meet to take up
Arms in the behalf of vncus our Confederate, whom by the agreement of the
Nanohiggansets sundry times, at diverse meetings we were bound, and it was made
lawful to do. Hereupon the Commissioners agreeing as before, sent out their
Warrants to their several and special Governments, and accordingly Forces
were raised at a days warning. But before this, in stead of hearkening to
righteous Counsel, they threatened also the English, saying, they would make
heaps of our dead bodies and cattle, as high as their houses, burn our
habitations, make spoil of our goods, and used our Messengers very
discurteously, etc. And for Captain Standish, this I heard him relate, that
being at the place of Rendezvouze, before the Massachusetts Forces came,
observing that some of the Inhabitants of Providence received the Indians into
their houses familiarly, who had put themselves also into a posture of Arms,
and the place within a mile of Secunck or Rhehoboth where Captain Standish
lay; he sent to Providence, and required them to lay aside their neutrality,
and either declare themselves on the one side or other: For the war being
once begun, he would not bear with their carriage in entertaining,
furnishing, and relieving the common enemy, but would disarm them, etc. And
whether necessity put him not upon this course, or no, let the Reader judge.

And for the five hundred pound, it is true their hearts failed to see Plymouth
Forces appear, and Massachus. both Horse and Foot upon their march on the one
side their Country, under Mr. Edw. Gibbons who was chosen General of the
United Colonies, with the help of Wo^samequis^, whose constancy to Plymouth is
well known, and Pumham and Secononoco with reference to Massachusetts with all
their men, attending the English word of command. And on the other side their
Country the forces of Cone^tacut Ne^haven, with all the strength of Vncus,
waiting but for the word from the Commissioners to fall on. Now I say they were
daun^ed especially because it came so suddenly upon them, wanting Mr. Gorton
and his friends who were not yet come; Hereupon they resolved to go to the
Commissioners to Massachus and compound, and did sign new Articles to observe
the peace not only with the United Colonies but with Vncus, Woosamequin,
Pumham, and Socononoco, and other our Confederates, including all the English
in the land, to make satisfaction for wrongs to Vncus, and to pay five hundred
pounds to the united Colonies, for the charge they put us to, which indeed
would not near make it good, if they had paid it; but as at other times, so
now, not with standing their Hostages, they abused us grossly, first sending
^al^e persons^ secondly, breaking all other their Covenants, and came at last
to a resolution, they would rather give the money (which is a Beade, as current
as coin in all that part of America, of their own making) to the Mowhakes at
once, to cut us off, then to pay it according to Covenant.

And thus contrary to my resolution, I see a necessity of more large answers
then I intended; and indeed other wife I should speak riddles, and not satisfy
the Reader. Although were it an History, I have many remarkable passages which
here for brevity sake I must omit. And if any think we do needlessly engage in
the troubles between the Indians? ^, Let them know if we should not here and
there keep correspondency with some of them, they would soon join all
together against us. 2. The quarrall between Vncus and Nanohigganset, arose
upon his cleaving to us: For the great Sachim Myantonimo would have married
Vncus daughter, and since Pessachus that succeeded him would have married
Woosamequins daughter, and all in policy to take them off from us; so that
indeed we are necessitated to it. And 3. we are not out of hope in time to
bring them to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, as will appear by a small
Treat^se of that kind. But this one thing I desire the Reader to take notice
of, that when that great Prince Myantonimo he so much admires, had offered
violence to Woosamequin (who was under the protection of Plymouth) and missing
his person, returned only with the plunder of his goods: Upon Woosamequins
complaint to Plymouth, that Government alone, it being before the Union, sent
Captain Standish with a few men, not above 20. who sent a message over the Bay
of Salt water which parts Woosamequin from them, Either to make restitution of
his goods so injuriously taken, or else to expect him to fetch them with a
vengeance to their co^t. Hereupon they sent over every particular that could
be demanded, even to a wooden dish, and salved up all again; but this was
before any malignant English sat down so near them, and held counsel with
them, before they had violated our persons to them, reported us to be base and
low, out of favor with the King and State, etc. things very unworthy,
abominable to be named, but that in defending the abused Governments of the
Country, I am forced to dang such strokes at these proud and turbulent enemies
of the Country.

Next in page 94. that he relates of Mr. Williams; viz, the messengers taking
him with them that were sent to the Nanohiggansets, in that troublesome time,
viz. being one cast out of the Church (Mr. Cotton should preach) It was all one
to take counsel of a witch, and that those that did it were worthy to die.
Upon which Mr. Wilbour one of the messengers was ready to die, says he, for
fear he should have been hanged. This I cannot believe for these two Reasons:
1. Because all men that know Mr. Cotton, know his moderation, wisdom and piety
to be such, as such an expression was not like to drop from him. 2. The
strictest Government in New-Engl. that I know, takes no advantage in the law at
a man's person for being excommunicated; insomuch as if he have an office, he
holds it nevertheless, and this, I know practiced, and therefore his relation
unlike. But that the Messengers were directed to another for their interpreter
I know, and that some took offense at their^ practice I know also, but upon
different grounds, which I forbear to mention, being now to answer Mr. Gorton,
and not Mr. Williams.

In page 93. which is the last page in his Book that I shall need to make
answer to, and the thing he there brings against us is an answer to a doctrine
one of their wives should hear delivered at Massachusetts when she came to
visit them, from Matthew. 24. 29. and alluding to Hebr. 12. 26, 27. briefly this
doctrine there delivered, should make the doctrine of the Apostles and the
Churches in their times to be (...) darkness^ That the Ministry of the
Apostles was and should be removel, etc. which I desire the Reader to turn to;
but be assured through Gods mercy, by means of the late Bishop of
Canterburies persecutions of the godly here, we are so excellently furnished
with shining Lights of the Gospel, as no such blasphemous trash as this could
be there delivered, and so many able hearers, as if it should have been
delivered by any, the Lord withdrawing his presence from him, it would have
been forthwith excepted against and published to the world. But I am confident
if such a thing were there heard, it was either from one of their own company,
or disciples made by them. And therefore I will pass by the answer also, as
not concerning any difference between him and us, and so the rest of his
writings to that end, and could wish that N^rcissus-like he were not so much
in love with his own shadow, lest it prove his ruin; there needing no other
matter against him then his own words and writings to render him odious to the
State here, as well as to New England from whence he came.

AND now that I have finished what I conceive necessary concerning Mr. Gortons
scandalous and slanderous Books, let me briefly answer some objections that I
often meet withal against the Country of New England. The first that I meet
with is, concerning the rise and foundation of our New England Plantations; It
being alleged (though upon a great mistake by a late Writer) that division or
disagreement in the Church of Leyden, was the occasion, nay cause of the first
Plantation in New England; for says the Author, or to this effect, when they
could no longer agree together, the one part went to New England, and began the
Plantation at Plymouth, which he makes the mother, as it were, of the rest of
the Churches, as if the foundation of our New England Plantations had been laid
upon division or separation, then which nothing is more untrue: For I persuade
my self, never people upon earth lived more lovingly together, and parted more
sweetly then we the Church at Leyden did, not rashly in a distracted humor,
but upon joint and serious deliberation, often seeking the mind of God by
fasti^g and prayer, whose gracious presence we not only found with us, but his
blessing upon us from that time to this instant, to the indignation of our
adversaries, the admiration of strangers, and the exceeding consolation of our
selves, to see such effects of our prayers and tears before our pilgrimage
here be ended. And therefore briefly take notice of the true cause of it.

It Is true, that that poor persecuted flock of Christ, by the malice and power
of the late Hiera^chy were (...) L^yden in Holland, there to bear witness in
their (...) to the Kingly Office of Christ Jesus in his Church: and there lived
together ten years under the United States, with much peace and liberty: But
our Reverend Pastor Mr. John Robinson of late memory, and our grave Elder Mr.
William Brewster, (now both at rest with the Lord) considering sidering amongst
many other inconveniences, how hard the Country was where we lived, how many
spent their estate in it, and were forced to return for England; how grievous
to live from under the protection of the State of England; how like we were to
lose our language, and our name of English; how little good we did, or were
like to do to the Dutch in reforming the Sabbath; how unable there to give such
education to our children, as we our selves had received, etc. They, I say,
our of their Christian care of the flock of Christ committed to them conceived,
if Godwould be pleased to discover some place unto us (though in America) and
give us so much favor with the King and State of England, as to have their
protection there, where we might enjoy the like liberty, and where the Lord
favoring our endeavors by his blessing, we might exemplarily show our tender
Countrymen by our example (no less burdened then our selves) where they
might live, and comfortably sub^^iet and enjoy the like liberties with us,
being freed from Antichristian bondage, keep their names and Nation, and not
only be a means to enlarge the Dominions of our State, but the Church of
Christ also, if the Lord have a people amongst the Natives whither he should
bring us, etc. Hereby in their grave Wisdoms they thought we might more
glorify God, do more good to our Country, better provide for our posterity,
and live to be more refreshed by our labors, the^ ever we could do in
Holland where we were.

Now these their private thoughts upon mature deliberation they imparted to the
Brethren of the Congregation, which after much private discussion came to
public agitation, till at the length the Lord was solemnly sought in the
Congregation by fasting and prayer to direct us, who moving our hearts more and
more to the work, we sent some of good abilities over into England to see
what favor or acceptance such a thing might find with the King. These also
found God going along with them, and got Sir Edwin Sands a religious Gentleman
then living, to stir in it, who procured Sir Robert Nawnton then principal
Secretary of State to King James of famous memory, to move his Majesty by a
private motion to give way to such a people (who could not so comfortably live
under the Government of another State) to enjoy their liberty of Conscience
under his gracious protection in America, where they would endeavor the
advancement of his Majesty's Dominions, and the enlargement of the Gospel by
all due means. This his Majesty said was a good and honest motion, and asking
what prosits might arise in the part we intended (for our eye was upon the
most Northern parts of Virginia) 'twas answered, Fishing. To which he replied
with his ordinary asseveration, So God have my Soul it is an honest Trade,
'twas the Aposties own calling, etc. But afterward he told Sir Robert
Na^^ton, (who took all occasions to further it) that we should confer with the
Bishops of Canterbury and London, etc. Whereupon we were advised to persist
upon his first approbation, and not to entangle our selves with them* which
caused our Agents to repair to the Virginia Company, w^o in their Court
demanded our ends of going; which being related, they said the thing was of
God, and granted a large Patent, and one of them lent us 300 l. gratis for
three years, which was repaid.

Our Agents returning, we further sought the Lord by a public and solemn
Fast, for his gracious guidance. And hereupon we came to this resolution, that
it was best for one part of the Church to go at first, and the other to slay,
viz. the youngest and strongest part to go. Secondly, they that went should
freely offer themselves. Thirdly, if the major part went, the Pastor to go
with them; if not, the Elder only. Fourthly, if the Lord should srowne upon
our proceedings, then those that went to return, and the Brethren that
remained still there, to assist and be helpful to them, but if God should be
pleased to favor them that went, then they also should endeavor to help over
such as were poor and ancient, and willing to come; these things being agreed,
the major part stayed, and the Pastor with them for the present, but all
intended (except a very few, who had rather we would have stayed) to follow
after. The minor part, with Mr. Brews^er their Elder, resolved to enter upon
this great work (but take notice the difference of number was not great;) And
when the Ship was ready to carry us away, the Brethren that stayed having
again solemnly sought the Lord with us, and for us, and we further engaging
our selves mutually as before; they, I say, that stayed at Leyden feasted us
that were to go at our Pastors house being large, where we refreshed our
selves after our tears, with singing of Psalms, making joyful melody in our
hearts, as well as with the voice, there being many of the Congregation very
expert in Music; and indeed it was the sweetest melody that ever mine ears
heard. After this they accompanied us to Delphs Haven, where we were to
imbarque, and there feasted us again; and after prayer performed by our
Pastor, where a ^^ood of tears was poured out, they accompanied us to the
Ship, but were not able to speak one to another for the abundance of sorrow to
part: but we only going aboard (the Ship lying to the Key) and ready to set
sail, the wind being fair) we gave them a v^lley of small shot, and three
pieces of Ordinance, and so lifting up our hands to each other, and our hearts
for each other to the Lord our God, we departed, and found his presence with us
in the midst of our manifold straits he carried us through. And if any doubt
this relation, the Dutch, as I hear, at Delphs Haven preserve the memory of it
to this day, and will inform them.

But falling with Cape Cod which is in New England, and standing to the
Southward for the place we intended, we met with many dangers, and the
Mariners put back into the Harbou^ of the Cape, which was the 11. of November,
1620, where considering Winter was come, the Seas dangerous, the season cold,
the winds high, and being well furnished for a Plantation, we entered upon
discovery, and settled at Plymouth, where God being pleased to preserve and
enable us, we that went, were at a Thousand pounds charge in sending for our
Brethren that were behind, and in providing there for them till they could
reap a crop of their own labors. And so good Reader, I have given thee a
true and faithful account, though very brief, of our proceedings, wherein
thou see how a late Writer, and those that informed him^, have wronged our
enterprise* And truly what I have written, is far short of what it was,
omitting for brevity sake many circumstances, as the large offer^ the Dutch
offered us, either to have removed into Zealand, and there lived with them: or
if we would go on such adventures, to go under them to Hudsons River (where
they have since a great plantation, etc.) and how they would freely have
transported us, and furnished every family with cattle, etc. Also the English
Merchants that joined with us in this expedition, whom we since bought out,
which is fitter for an History, then an answer to such an Objection, (and I
trust will be accomplished in good time.) By all which the Reader may see there
was no breach between us that went, and the brethren that stayed, but such love
as indeed is seldom found on earth.

And for the many plantations that come ^ver to us upon notice of Gods blessing
upon us, whereas it is falsely said, they took Plymouth for their president as
fast as they came. It Is true I con^esse that some of the chief of them advised
with us (coming over to be freed from the burden some ceremonies then imposed
in England) how they should do to fall upon a right platform of worship, and
desired to that end since God had honored us to lay the foundation of a
Commonweal, and to settle a Church in it, (...) show them whereupon our
practice was grounded; and if they found upon due search it was built upon the
Word, they should be willing to take up what was of God. We accordingly showed
them the Primitive practice for our warrant, taken out of the Acts of the
Apostles, and the Epistles written to the several Churches by the said
Apostles together with the Commandments of Christ the Lord in the Gospel, and
other our warrants for every particular we did from the book of God. Which
being by them well weighed and considered, they also entered into Covenant with
God and one with another to walk in all his ways revealed, or as they should
be made known unto them, and to worship him according to his will revealed in
his written word only, etc. So that here also thou may see they set not the
Church at Plymouth before them for example, but the Primitive Churches were and
are their and our mutual patterns and examples, which are only worthy to be
^ollowed, having the blessed Apostles amongst them which were sent immediately
by Christ himself and enabled and guided by the unerring Spirit of God. And
truly this is a patternesit to b^e followed of all that fear God, and no man
or men to be followed further then they follow Christ and them.

Having thus briefly showed that the foundation of our New England Plantations
was not laid upon Schism, division, or Separation, but upon love, peace, and
holiness; yea, such love and mutual care of the Church of Leyden for the
spreading of the Gospel, the welfare of each other, and their posterities to
succeeding generations, as is seldom found on earth: And having showed also
that the Primitive Churches are the only pattern which the Churches of Christ
in New England have in their eye, not following Luther, Calvin, Knoxe,
Ai^worth, Robinson, Amies, or any other, further then they follow Christ and
his Apostles; I am earnestly requested to clear up another gross mistake
which caused many, and still does, to judge the harder of New England, and the
Churches there, because (say they) The Church of Plymouth which went first from
Leyden, were Schismatics, Bromnists, rigid Separatists, etc. having Mr.
Robinson for their Pastor, who-made, and to the last prosessed separation from
other the Churches of Christ, etc. And the rest of the Churches in New England
holding communion with that Church, are to be reputed such as they are.

For an^were to this aspersion, First, he that knew Mr. Robinson, either by his
Doctrine daily taught, or has read his Apology published not long before his
death, or knew the practice of that Church of Christ under his government, or
was acquainted with the wholesome counsel he gave that part of the Church which
went for New England at their departure and afterward, might easily resolve the
doubt, and take off the aspersion.

For his Doctrine, ^ living three years under his Ministry, before we began
the work of Plantation in New England; It was always against separation from
any the Churches of Christ, professing and holding communion both with the
French and Dutch Churches, yea, tendering it to the Scots also, as I shall make
appear more particularly anon. Ever holding forth how wary persons ought to
be in separating from a Church, and that till Christ the Lord departed wholly
from it, man ought not to leave it, only to bear witness against the
corruption that was in it. But if any object, he separated from the Church of
England, and wrote largely against it; I acknowledge he wrote largely against
it, but yet let me tell you, he allowed hearing the godly Ministers preach and
pray in the public Assamblies; yea, he allowed private communion not only
with them, but all that were faithful in Christ Jesus in the Kingdom and else
where upon all occasions; yea, honored them for the power of godliness above
all other the professors of Religion in the world, nay, I may truly say, his
spirit cleaved unto them, being so well acquainted with the integrity of their
hearts, and care to walk blameless in their lives, which was no small motive
to him to persuade us to remove from Holland, where we might probably not
only continue English, but have and maintain such sweet communion with the
godly of that Nation, as through Gods great mercy we enjoy this day.

It Is true, I confess he was more rigid in his course and way at first, then
toward his latter end; for his study was peace and union so far as might agree
with faith and a good conscience; and for schi^^^ and division, there was
nothing in the world more hateful to him: But for the government of the Church
of England, as it was in the Episcopal way, the Liturgy and stinted prayers of
the Church then; yea, the constitution of it as National, and so consequently
the corrupt communion of the unworthy with the worthy receivers of the Lords
Supper, these things were never approved of him, but witnessed against to his
death, and are by the Church over which he was to this day. And if the Lord
would be pleased to stir up the hearts of those, in whom (under him) the power
of Reformation lies, to reform that abuse, that a distinction might once be put
between the precious and the vile, particular Churches might be gathered by the
powerful preaching of the Word, those only admitted into communion, whose
hearts the Lord persuades to submit unto the Iron rod of the Gospel; O how
sweet then would the communion of the Churches be! How through the Reformation!
How easy would the differences be reconciled between the Presbyterian and
Independent way! How would the God of peace which commands love and good
agreement smile upon this Nation! How would the subtle underminers of it be
disappointed, and the faithful provoked to sing songs of praise and
thanksgiving! Nay, how would the God of order be glorified in such orderly
walking of the Saints! And as they have fought together for the liberties of
the Kingdom, Eccle^iasticall and Civil; so may they join together in the
preservation of them (which otherwise, it is to be ^eared will not long
continue) and in the praises of our God who has been so good to his poor
distressed ones, whom he has delivered, and whom he will deliver out of all
their troubles. But I have made too great a digression, and must return.

In the next place I should speak of Mr. Robinsons Apology, wherein he makes a
brief defense against many adversaries, etc. But because it is both in Latin
and English, of small price, and easy to be had, I shall for bear to write
of it, and only refer the Reader to it, for the differences between his
congregation, and other the Reformed Churches.

The next thing I would have the Reader take notice of, is, that however the
church of Leyden differed in some particulars, yet made no Schism or
separation from the Reformed Churches, but held communion with them
occasionally: For we ever placed a large* difference. between those that
grounded their practice upon the Word of God (tho differing from us in the
exposition or understanding of it) and those that hated such Reformers and
Reformation, and went on in Antichristian opposition to it, and persecution of
it, as the late Lord Bishops did, who would not in deed and truth (whatever
their pretenses were) that Christ should rule over them. But as they often
stretched out their hands against the saints; so God has withered the Arm of
their power, thrown them down from their high and lofty sea^s, and slain the
chief of their persons, as well as the Hierarchy, that he might become an
example to all those that rise against God in his Sabbath, in the preaching of
his Word, in his Saints, in the purity of his Ordinances, And I heartily desire
that others may hear and fear withal.

As for the Dutch, it was usual for our Members that understood the language,
and lived in, or occasionally came over to London, to communicate with them, as
one John Ienny a Brewer long did, his wife and family, etc. and without any
offense to the Church: So also for any that had occasion to travel into any
other part of the Netherlands they daily did the like: And our Pastor Mr.
Robinson in the time when Arminianisme prevailed so much, at the request of the
most Orthodox Divines, as Poliander, Festus, Homlius, etc. disputed daily
against Episcopius (in the Academy at Leyden) and others the grand champions of
that error* and had as good respect amongst them, as any of their own Divines;
Insomuch as when God took him away from them and us by death, the University,
and Ministers of the City accompanied him to his grave with all their
accustomed solemnities; bewayling the great loss that not only that
particular Church had, whereof he was Pastor; but some of the chief of them
sadly affirmed, that all the Churches of Christ sustained a loss by the death
of that worthy Instrument of the Gospel I could instance also diverse of their
members that understood the English tongue, and betook themselves to the
communion of our Church, went with us to New England, as Godbert Godbertson,
etc. Yea, at this very instant, another called Moses Symonson, because a child
of one that was in communion with the Du^ch Church at Leyden, is admitted into
Church Fellowship at Plymouth in New England, and his children also to Baptism,
as well as our own, and other D^etch also in communion at Salem, etc.

And for the French Churches th^^ we held, and do hold communion with them,
take notice of our practice at Leyden, viz. that one Samuel Terry was received
from the French Church there, into communion with us; also the wife of Francis
Cook being a Walloone, holds communion with the Church at Plymouth, as she
came from the French, to this day, be virtue of communion of Churches; There is
also one Philip Delanoy born of French parents, came to us from L^yden to
New-Plymouth, who coming to age of discerning, demanded also communion with
us, and proving himself to be come of such parents as were in full communion
with the French Churches, was here upon admitted by the Church of Plymouth; and
after upon his removal of habitation to D^xburrow where M. Ralph Partridge is
Pastor of the Church; and upon Letters of recommendation from the Church at
Plymouth, he was also admitted into fellowship with the Church at Duxburrow,
being six miles distant from Plymouth; and so I dare say, if his occasions lead
him, may from Church to church throughout New England. For the truth is, the
Dutch and French Churches either of them being a people distinct from the
world, and gathered into an holy communion, and not National Churches, nay, so
far from it, as I verily believe the sixth person is not of the Church, the
difference is so small (if moderately pondered, between them and us) as we dare
not for the world deny communion with them.

And for the Church of Scotland, however we have had least occasion offered to
hold communion with them; yet thus much I can and do affirm, that a godly
Divine coming over to Leyden in Holland, where a Book was printed, (...)
1619* as I take it, showing the nullity of Perth, Assembled, whom we judged to
be the Author of it, and hidden in Holland for a season to avoid the rage of
those evil times (whose name I have forgotten;) This man being very conversant
with our Pastor Mr. Robinson, and using to come to hear him on the Sabbath,
after Sermon-ended, the Church being to partake in the Lords Supper, this
Minister stood up and desired he might, without offense, stay and see the
manner of his administration, ^and our participation in that Ordinance; To
which our Pastor answered in these very words, or to this effect, Reverend Sir,
you may not only stay to behold us, but par^k with us, if you please, for we
acknowledge the Churches of Scotland to be the Churches of Christ, etc. The
Minister also replied to this purpose, if not also in the same words* That for
his part he could comfortable partake with the Church, and willingly would,
but that it is possible some of his brethren of Scotland might take offense at
his act; which he desired to avoid in regard of the opinion the English
Churches which they held communion withal had of us: However he rendered
thanks to Mr. Robinson, and desired in that respect to be only a spectator of
us. These things I was earnestly requested to publish to the world by some of
the godly Presbyterian party, who apprehend the world to be ignorant of our
proceedings, conceiving in charity that if they had been known, some late
Writers and Preacher would never have written and spoke of us as they did, and
still do as they have occasion: But what they ignorantly judge, write, or
speak of us, I trust the Lord in mercy will pass by.

In the next place, for the wholesome counsel Mr. Robinson gav^ that part of
the Church whereof he was pastor, at their departure from him to begin the
great work of Plantation in New England, amongst other wholesome Instructions
and Exhortations, he used these expressions, or to the same purpose; We are
now ere long to part asunder, and the Lord knows whether ever he should live
to see our faces again: but whether the Lord had appointed it or not, he
charged us before God and his blessed Angels, to follow him no further then he
followed Christ, And if God should reveal any thing to us by any other
instrument of his, to be as ready to receive it, as ever we were to receive any
truth by his Ministry: For he was very confident the Lord had more truth and
light yet to break forth out of his holy Word. He took occasion also miserably
to bewail the state and condition of the Reformed Churches, who were come to a
period in Religion, and would go no further then the instruments of their
Reformation: As for example, the Lutherans they could not be drawn to go
beyond what Luther saw, for whatever part of Gods will he had further imparted
and revealed to Calvin, they will rather die them embrace it. And so also,
says he, you see the Calvinists, they stick where he left them: A misery much
to be lamented; For though they were precious shining lights in their times,
yet God had not revealed his whole will to them: And were they now living,
says he, they would be as ready and willing to embrace further light, as
that they had received. Here also he put us in mind of our Church Covenant (at
least that part of it) whereby we promise and covenant with God and one with
another, to receive whatsoever light or truth shall be made known to us from
his written Word: but withal exhorted us to take heed what we received for
truth, and well to examine and compare, and weigh it with other Scriptures of
truth, before we received it; For, says he, It is not possible the Christian
world should come so l^tely cut of such thick Antichristian darkness, and that
full perfection of knowledge should break forth at once.

Another thing he commended to us, was, that we should use all means to
avoid and shake off the name of Brownist, being a mere nickname and brand to
make Religion odious, and the professors of it to the Christian world; and to
that end, said he, I should be glad if some godly Minister would go over with
you, or come to you, before my coming; For, said he, there will be no
difference between the unconformable Ministers and you, when they come to the
practice of the Ordinances out of the Kingdom: And so advised us by all means
to endeavor to close with the godly party of the Kingdom of England, and
rather to study union then division; viz. how near we might possibly, without
sin close with them, then in the least measure to affect division or separation
from them. And be not loath to take another Pastor or Teacher, says he, for
that flock that has two shepherds is not endangered, but secured by it. Many
other things there were of great and weighty consequence which he commended to
us, but these things I thought good to relate, at the request of some
well-willers to the peace and good agreement of the godly, (so distracted at
present about the settling of Church Government in the Kingdom of England) that
so both sides may truly see what this poor despised Church of Christ now at
New-Plymouth in New England, but formerly at Leyden in Holland, was and is; how
far they were and still are from separation from the Churches of Christ,
especially those that are Reformed.

It Is true, we profess and desire to practice a separation from the world, and
the works of the world, which are works of the flesh, such as the Apostle
speaks of, Ephesians. 5. 19, 20, 21. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. and Ephesians. 2. 11, 12.
And as the Churches of Christ are all Saints by calling, so wedesire to see the
grace of God shining forth, (at least seemingly, leaving secret things to God)
in all we admit into church fellowship with us, and to keep off such as openly
wallow in the mire of their sins, that neither the holy things of God, nor the
communion of the Saints may be leavened or polluted thereby. And if any joining
to us formerly, either when we lived at Leyden in Holland, or since we came to
New England, have with the manifestation of their faith and profession of
holiness held forth therewith separation from the Church of England, I have
diverse times, both in the one place, and the other, heard either Mr. Robinson
our Pastor, or Mr. Brewster our Elder stop them forthwith, showing them that
we required no such things at their hands, but only to hold ^orth faith in
Christ Jesus, holiness in the fear of God, and submission to every Ordinance
and appointment of God, leaving the Church of England to themselves, and to the
Lord before whom they should stand or fall, and to whom we ought to pray to
reform what was amiss amongst them. Now this Reformation we have lived to see
performed and brought about by the mighty power of God, this day in a good
measure, and I hope the Lord Jesus will perfect his work of Reformation, till
all be according to the good pleasure of his will. By all which I desire the
Reader to take notice of our former and present practice notwithstanding all
the injurious and scandalous taunting reports are passed on us. And if these
things will not satisfy, but we must still suffer reproach, and others for
our sakes, because they and we thus walk, our practice being for ought we
know, wholly grounded on the written Word, without any addition or humane
invention known to us, taking our pattern from the Primitive Churches, as
they were regulated by the blessed Apostles in their own days, who were
taught and instructed by the Lord Jesus Christ, and had the unerring and
all-knowing Spirit of God to bring to their remembrance the things they had
heard: I say, if we must still suffer such reproach, notwithstanding our
charity toward them who will notbe in charity with us; Gods will be done.

The next aspersion cast upon us, is, that we will not suffer any that differ
from us never so little to reside or cohabite with us; no nor the Presbyterian
Government which differs so little from us. To which I answer, our practice
witnesses the contrary. For it is well known that Mr. Parker and Mr. Noyce who
are Ministers of the Church at N^wberry are in that way and so known so far
as a single Congregation can be exercised in it; yet never had the least
molestation or disturbance, and have and find as good respect from Magistrates
and people as other Elders in the Congregationall or Primitive way. It Is known
also that Mr. Hubbard the Minister at Hengam has declared himself for that
way: nay which is more then ever I heard of the other two, he refuses to
baptize no children that are tendered to him (although this liberty stands not
upon a Presbyterian bottom) and yet the Civil State never molested him for
it: only coming to a Synod held in the Country the last year, which the
Magistrates called, requesting the Churches to send their Elders and such other
as might be able to hold forth the light of-God from his written word in case
of some doubts which did arise in the Country: I say he coming the last
sitting of the Assembly which was adjourned to the eighth of June next, was in
all meekness and love requested to be present and hold forth his light he
went by in baptizing all that were brought to him, hereby waving the practice
of the Churches; which he promising to take into consideration they rested in
his answer. So also it is well known, that before these unhappy troubles arose in
England and Scotland, there were diverse Gentlemen of Scotland that groaned
under the heavy pressaries of those times, wrote to New England to know whether
they might freely be suffered to exercise their Presbyteriall government
amongst us. And it was answered affimatively they might: and they sending over
a Gentleman to take a view of some fit place; A River called Meromeck near
Ipswich and Newberry aforesaid, was showed their Agent, which he well liked,
and where we have since four towns settled, and more may be for ought I
know, so that there they might have had a complete Presbytery and whither they
intended to have come: but meeting with manifold crosses being half Seas
through they gave over their intendments, and as I have heard these were many of
the Gentlemen that first fell upon the late Covenant in Scotland: by all which
will easily appear how we are here wronged by many; and the harder measure as
we hear imposed upon our brethren for our sakes, nay pretending our example
of their president. And last of all, not long before I came away certain
discontented persons in open Court of the Massachusetts, demanding that liberty,
it was freely and as openly tendered to them; showing their former practices by
me mentioned: but willed not to expect that we should provide them Ministers
etc. for the same, but getting such themselves they might exercise the
Presbyterian Government at their liberty, walking peaceably toward us as we
trusted we should do toward them. So that if our brethren here shall be
restrained they walking peaceably, the example must not be taken from us, but
arise (...) some other principle.

But it will not be objected though you deal thus with the Presbyterian way,
yet you have a severe law against Ana^aptists, yea one was whipped at
Massachusetts for his Religion? and your law banisheth them? Answ. It Is true,
the Massachusetts Government have such a law as to banish, but not to whip in
that kind. And certain men desiring some mitigation of it; It was answered in
my hearing. It Is true, we have a severe law, but we never did or will execute
the rigor of it upon any, and have men living amongst us, nay some in our
Churches of that judgment, and as long as they carry themselves peaceably as
hitherto they do, we will leave them to God, our selves having performed the
duty of brethren to them. And whereas there was one whipped amongst us; it is true
we knew his judgment what it was: but had he not carried himself so
contemptuously toward the Authority God has betrusted us with in an high
exemplary measure, we had never so censured him: and therefore he may thank
himself who suffered as an evil doer in that respect. But the reason wherefore
we are loath either to repeal or alter the law, is, Because we would have it
remain in force to bear witness against their judgment and practice which
we conceive them to be erroneous.

And yet nevertheless said the Governor to those preferred the request, you
may tell our friends in England, whither ye are some of you going, since the
motion proceeds from such as we know move it in love to us, we will
seriously take it into consideration at our next General Court. So that thou
may perceive good Reader that the worst is spoken of things in that kind.

Furthermore in the Government of Plymouth, to our great grief, not only the
Pastor of a Congregation waveth the administration of baptism to Infants, but
diverse of his Congregation are fallen with him, and yet all the means the
civil power has taken against him and them, is to stir up our Elders to
give meeting and see if by godly conference they may be able to convince and
reclaim him, as in mercy once before they had done by Gods blessing upon their
labors. Only at the foresaid Synod, two were ordered to write to him in the
name of the Assembly, and to request his presence at their next meeting
aforesaid to hold forth his light he goes by in waving the practice of the
Churches; with promise if it be light, to walk by it: but if it appear
otherwise, then they trust he will return again to the unity of practice
with them. And for the other two Governments of Coneetacut and Newhaven, if
either have any law in force against them, or so much as need of a law in that
kind, it is more then I have heard on.

For our parts (I mean the Churches of New-Engl.) we are confident through Gods
mercy, the way of God in which we walk, and according to which we perform our
Worship and service to Him, concurreth with those Rules our blessed Savior
has left upon record by the Evangelists and Apostles, and is agreeable with
the practice of those Primitive Churches mentioned in the Acts, and regulated
by the same Apostles, as appears not only in that Evangelicall Histiory, but
in their Epistles to the several Churches there mentioned; yet nevertheless
if any through tenderness of Conscience be otherwise minded, to such we never
turn a dease eat, nor become rigorous, though we have the stream of Authority
on our sides. Nay, if in the use of all means we cannot reclaim them, knowing
the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to
be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hypocrisy, and the fruit of righteousness is son in peace, of them that make
peace, according to James 3. 17, 18. And if any differing from us be
answerable to this Rule in their lives and conversations, we do not exercise
the Civil sword against them. But for such as Gorton and his company, whose
wisdom seems not to be from above, as appears in that it is full of
envyings, strife, confusion, am. 3. 15, 16. being therein such as the Apostle
Jude speaks on, v. 8. viz. earthly, sensual, devilish, who v. 16. despise
dominion, and speak evil of dignities. These v. 12, 13. are murmurers,
complayners, walkers alter their own lusts, and their mouth speaks great
swelling words, being clouds without water, carried about of winds, trees whose
fruit withers, without fruit, twice dead, plucked up by the roots, raging
waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, wandering stars, to whom
(without repentance, which I much desire to see, or hear of in him, if it may
stand with the will of God) is reserved the blackness of darkness for ever.
These I say are to be proceeded with by another rule, and not to be borne: who
suffer as evil doors, and area shame to Religion which they profess in word,
but deny in their lives and conversations. These every tender conscience
abhors, and will justify and assist the higher Powers God has ordained,
against such carnal Gospellers, who hear not the sword in vain, Romans 13. but
execute Gods vengeance on such: for the Civil Magistrate is the Minister of
God, a Revenger to execute wrath on him that does evil. And therefore a broad
difference is to be put between such evil doers, and those tender consciences
who follow the ^ight of Gods Word in their own perswassions, (though judged
erroneous by the places where they live) so long as their waliking is
answerable to the rules of the Gospel, by preserving peace, and holding forth
holiness in their conversations amongst men.

Thus much I thought good to signify, because we of New England are said to be
so often propounded for an example. And if any will take us for a president, I
desire they may really know what we do, rather then what others ignorantly or
maliciously report of us, assuring my self that none will ever be losers by
following us so far as we follow Christ: Which that we may do, and our
posterities after us the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and our Father,
accept in Christ what is according to him, discover, pardon, and reform what is
amisie amongst us; and guide us and them by the assistance of the holy Ghost
for time to time, till time shall be no more; that the Lord our God may still
delight to dwell amongst his Plantations and Churches there by his gracious
presence, and may go on blessing to bless them with heavenly blessings in
these earthly places, that so by his blessing they may not only grow up to a
Nation, but become exemplary for good unto others. And let all that wish well to
Sion say Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
In the title of p. 9, etc. 1037* in stead, of the Magistrates of Boston in
New-Engl. r. of Massachusetts in New England; p. 11. l* 27. for purpose God, r.
purpose of God; p. 14 for day of, r. day of the; p. 30 l. 17. for Cope, r, cup;
also l. 18 for cope, r. cup; also l. 21 for Judas, r. as Judas; p. 32. l, 3.
leave out to; p. 54. l. 10, for by, r* in; p. 67. l. 37. for complaining, r.
complained; p. 79. l. 26. for with as indeed, r* with them as; p. 83. l. 23.
for and, put (p. 85. 16. for whom, r. which.


