TO The most Excellent Majesty OF JAMES the IId. By the Grace of God OF
ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE and IRELAND KING.

Defender of the Faith, etc.

This Book of the Ground: Platt's General and Particular Prospects of all the
Parts of his MAIESTY'S ROYAL Palace of Audley End;

Is most humbly pesented and dedicated by his MAJESTY'S Most Loyal Subject and
Servant Henry Winstanley, Clarke of the WORKS of the said Palace, AND THAT AT
NEWMARKET.

ground-plan of the principal court of the royal palace of Audley End THE
PRINCIPAL COURT
the Principal entry Lodge the little Hall the little kitchen Cloister A
Tarrice Cloister Lodge




ground-plan of the innermost court of the royal palace of Audley End THE
INNERMOST COURT
The great Hall The Screene Pantry Pantry Celler Celler Celler Part of the
Celler Garden Celler Part of the Bouling green Chapple A Cloister Part of the
Mount Garden Still Room




general ground-plan of the royal palace of Audley End A general Ground Plat of
ye Royal Palace of Audley End and Offices and gardens belonging to it.
by Hen: Winstanley Clarke of his Majesty's Works there
The Mount garden Cherry garden Cherry garden A Bridge the Road to the Towns
The Bouling green the Innermost Court The Principal Court the Wilderness the
Celler Garden the great kitchen the Wood yard The Court Yard A Walk of Trees A
Bridge The River the great Pond the brewhouse yard the store yard A Pond A
Bridge The River the Stables the Stable Yard The Barnes The way to Walden the
brewhouse garden the Keepers lodge A Pond The great Road




general view of the royal palace of Audley End A General Prospect of the Royal
Palace of Audlyene
H Winstanley at Littelbury fecit


view of the entry of the royal palace of Audley End The Entry of the Royal
Palace of Audlyend.
H. Winstanley al Littelbury fecit.


view of the north side of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End
The North Side of the great court (on the Left hand Ingoeing in.
H. Winstanley at Littellbury fecit.


view of the south side of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End
The Prospect of the south side of the great Court (being on the right hand in
going in.
H. Winstanley at Littalbury fecit


view of the east side of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End The
East Side of the great Court (being the fore Side of the great Hall.
H. Winstanley at Littellbury fecit.


view of the exit of the royal palace of Audley End The prospect of the Goeing
out of the Palace.
H. Winstanley at Littellbury fecit


full view of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End A full Prospect
of the Great Court of Audlyene.
H Winstanlay at Littelbury fecit


view of the side of the innermost court of the royal palace of Audley End The
Prospect of the Side of the Innermost court. The opposet side is the same.
H. Winstanley al Littelbury fecit.


view of the south side of the little court of the royal palace of Audley End
The Prospect of the south Side of the little Court.
H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit


view of the innermost court facing the back of the hall of the royal palace of
Audley End The Prospect of the Innermost court Toward the Back of the hall.
H. Winstanley at Littellbury fecit


a full view of the innermost court of the royal palace of Audley End A full
Prospect of the Innermost Court.
H Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.


view of the back of the great court of the royal palace of Audley End The
Backside of the great Court Toward the Mount-garden.
H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.


view of the back side of the innermost court of the royal palace of Audley End
The Back side of the Inner-most (or little) Court Toward the Mount garden.
H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.


general view from the mount garden of the royal palace of Audley End A General
Prospect of the Royal Palace of Audlyene Seen srom the Mount-Garden
H. Winstanley at Littelbury Fecit


view of the back of the great court in the direction of the wood-yard of the
royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the Backside of the great Court
toward the Wood-yard.
H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.


view of the back of the innermost court in the direction of the wilderness of
the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of the Backside of the jnnermost
Court toward the Wildernest.
H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit


view of the bowling-green of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of
the Bowling-greene side (being the backside next the Park.


view of the bowling-green of the royal palace of Audley End The Prospect of
the Bowling-greene side (being the backside next the Park.
H Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.


view of the stables of the royal palace of Audley End The Stables of Audley End


view of the back of the stables of the royal palace of Audley End The Back of
the Stables


general view of the royal palace of Audley End A GENERAL PROSPECT OF THE ROYAL
PALACE OF AVDLYENE


view of the royal palace at Audley End A. The Principal Entry. B. The great
Court. C. The great Hall. D. The jnnermost Court. E. The long Gallery. F. The
Mount garden. G. The Celler-garden (or Wilderness. H. The Kitchen. I. The great
Pond. K. Saffron-Walden. L. The ParK.


H. Winstanley at Littelbury fecit.



