A Winding Sheet FOR THE Anabaptists and Quakers; OR The Death and Burial of
their Fanatic Doctrines.

Being a Discovery of their dangerous Designs, wicked practices, and malicious
Endeavors, to subvert all Civil Government, both in Church and State.

As also, the strong Bulwark, and Banners of Loyalty; for all Loyal Subjects,
against the Fanatic Gunpowder Reformations, within these His gracious
Majesty's Realms, and Dominion.

Likewise, a Christian Summons to all persons whatsoever, to submit to the
Church of England, and cheerfully to comply with the Rites and Cetemonies of
the Worship of God, commended to, and required of us, by such Reverend
persons, delegated to that end, by our gracious Sovereign Lord King Charles,
whom God long preserve, being the Defender of the Faith.

And the Laws, Orders, and Statutes for the punishing all Anabaptists and
Sectaries that shall presume to meet, and disturb the Ministers in their
public Congregations.

Ordered to be Published throughout the several Countyes in England and Wales.

LONDON, Printed for G. Horton, and are to be sold at the Royal Elchange in
Cornhill.

A Winding Sheet For the ANABAPTISTS, etc.
IS it not to be admired that so many worthy and learned Divines, for some
years past, should be so much metamorphiz'd, as to deny their Mother Church of
England, and the purity of it, who so transparently flourished in the days of
the never to be forgotten Queen Elizabeth, blessed King James, our late
glorious Martyr King Charles the first; and now blessed be God, under our
Gracious Sovereign King Charles the second; and shall they dare to represent
themselves Serpents amongst innocent Doves? such Monuments of these, are not
without the Calculation of time, when we consider the faction they arose from,
whose chief Rise was disorder, and the whole Kingdom made a rude Chaos of
Confusion; there was no beauty in the Holy Temple, 'twas converted into a Den
of Thieves; nay, which is worse, if possible, a Stable for Horses, which forced
an Italian to vent this bitter speech, seeing that famous Cathedral of St.
Paul's so much abused, and the beauty thereof so much defaced, Horses and men
(said he) amongst you English, serve God alike now adays, the Surplice was
turned into Scotch-Cloth, and the white sheet of Penance into the stool of
Repentance.

I am persuaded there was not one of a hundred, at the first, that gave their
consent for the utter abolishing of the Divine Service Book; and true it is, it
may well be so termed, when we consider what Reverend and Ancient Fathers they
were, that had a hand in the composing and contriving of it, being endued with
Gods holy and blessed Spirit, and laying down their lives to ride in Chariots
of fire, to maintain that worthy Book; which some giddy-headed Sectaries, since
the beginning of our late unnatural Wars, so much despised, renting and tearing
of it in pieces, like so many Bedlams, and mere time-servers, blown about with
every blast of light doctrine, that will be Anabaptist to day, a Brownist to
morrow, and in a word any thing the next day. O lamentable! what times did we
then live in? when the Church was without true discipline, Gods Laws quite
taken from us, no Lords Prayer allowed, but Master Separate to do as his
fickle brain served him, the Sacrament of the Lords Suppe^ not administered
once in half a year, and when it was delivered wonderful out of order it
was; the Sacrament of Baptism celebrated as any would have it that was in fee
with Master Parson; the dead body buried with five or six words at the most; no
decency in the Churches, no manners nor order, forgetting that God is the God
of order. I do not speak against praying by the Spirit, for I know that Gods
people always prayed as they felt their wants; but for poor ignorant people
who have not the spirit of prayer, what provision were made for them? the
answer is, Just none. What shall become of them? Your answer must be, you must
leave them to Gods mercy. But I and many more would have thought you had some
charity in you, but in leaving poor ignorant people quite without any way to
know God or his will, I think you have done worse then the superstitious
Papist ever did to the Heathen where they conquered. Was there ever any
Kingdom in the Christian world that flourished more for almost fourscore
years, then this Kingdom did all the reign of queen Elizabeth, King James,
and sixteen years of our glorious Martyred King Charles his reign?

As for the order of reading the Old and New Testament once a year, what a
comfort must it needs be to those who can not read? What an excellent order is
that of reading David's Psalms once a month, in due place and order, which is
not to be parellel'd by any Reformed church in the Christian world, with many
other excellent passages of great note and worth. But now that a company of
shuttle-brain'd fellows, who for their understanding and knowledge can scarce
hold argument with a Schoole-boy, that these I say must have that good Book
quite taken away as a great Idol in the Church, what a kind of madness is it
let all wise men judge. I do not write so much in the applause of the Book of
common Prayer, so to magnify it, as to put down preaching, and to ease some
Ministers of their pains in studying, no, my earnest desire is that there may
be praying with the whole congregation together, and preaching too; that the
Word may be taught plentifully among the poor people; and that we which are
the inhabitants of England may go hand in hand, that God may have his due
praise and glory among us; and you with us may ^ive God his due praise and
honor both together: which God in his mercy ^rant; and that we may sit
together every man under his owe Vine and ^^gtree. And to you the Brethren of
the Separation, which have the spirit so much at command, and know Gods Word so
well that you need no teacher, take from you the exposition of the ancient
Fathers, and other men's works, which you so much despise, and then take the
bare Bible and fall to expounding the Scriptures, and I dare pawn my life for
six pence you shall have as good nonsense as you would desire to hear. Go
back, go back, thou foolish man or woman, whatsoever thou art, and return to
thy mother the Church of England, who first brought thee up to know God in
Christ, and come out of these puddles, and lightheaded fooleries, and know he
that takes hold of the Plough, and looks back, is unmeet for the Kingdom of
God.

And as touching Episcopacy, it is of venerable Antiquity in the Church, having
its rise in the Apostles time; in proof of which, we can give no better
Evidence, then the Catalogue of Bishops, who begin from the Age, in which the
Apostles lived: And shall any man deny his assent, to such grave Authority? so
unanimously conspiring in matter of Fact, without incurring the guilt of
singular irreverence, and pertenacy. Mark the wotds of St. Ierom, in his Ep.
85. The Presbyters of Alexandria, ever since St. Mark the Evangelist, having
chosen one from amongst themselves, and exalted him to a higher place, styled
him Bishop, for it is observable, that St. Mark died in the eighth year of Nero,
about the year of our Lord, 62. Whose Successors, (St. John the Apostle yet
living) was Amianus; to him succeeded Abilius; to Abilius, Certo. After the
death of St. James, Simon succeed him in the Bishopric of Jerusalem. After St.
Peter's departure, Linos, Anacletus, and Clement; or (as some) St. Peter yet
living, sat in the Episcopal Chair of Rome: as Evodius, and Ignatius did at
Antioch. A Record of such Antiquity, confirmed by Ignatius, the Disciple of St.
John, cannot be refuted by any, save such only, who have no faith for any thing
that themselves saw not: and may as well deny, that ever there was a Philip of
Spain, or Lewis of France, or Henry King of England; as that the persons
beforementioned were Bishops of their respective Sees.

Thus have you an account of these Governors in the Church (the Reverend
Bishops) in respect of the great and external things of the splender and purity
of the Church; now a word of their Mission, even from the Holy Ghost, in
respect of the internal preaching, and Administering Sacraments, Ordaining,
Binding, and Loosing, and such like, Since then prelacy is not contrary to the
Scriptures; since the Church Catholic has embraceed and received it; since it
is of very Reveren^ Antiquity, and approved of by Divine Right; this, one would
think^ should be enough to prepare a Room for it in the heart of any pious an^
(...) ^^^ugh to beget in us a Reverend esteem of the Calli^^^ of Bishops, to
work in us a cheerful submission to, and ready compliance with the Rites and
Ceremonies in the worship of God, commended to, and required of us, by such
persons, delegated to that end by our gracious Sovereign, whom God long
preserve, being Defender of the Faith. And for the better reconciling this
Order, to the affections of some men, give me leave to add a word, or two, viz.
First, the Convenience, and Expediency, of Conformity, and Agreement between
the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government. There is such an affinity between
these two, that in Commonwealths, where the Government is by many, they always
commend the Affairs of the Church to the Clergy, or Presbytery; but where the
Government is Monarchical in the State, Episcopacy in the Church is only
conformable to it; Presbytery no way comporting with Monarchy. Hence that
Proverbial saying, No Bishop, No King. A saying that may be ^asily derided, but
not so easily refuted. Our late sad experiences have engraven it in such
Capital Characters, upon the understanding of all sober, and unprejudiced
persons, that it will not easily be defaced. Secondly, the utility and
advantages that redound to the Church by Episcopacy; I might entertain you
(upon this Head) with the unanimous consent of all Historians; but I shall
select his testimony only, who, of all the Ancients had the least affection for
Bishops, St. Ierom. ( ad Tit. c. 1.) It is universally decreed, that, for the
prevention of Schisms, and differencies, one chosen out of the Presbyters, be
set over the rest. And again, The safety of the Church, consists in the dignity
of the High Priest, that is, the Bishop, to whom, if there be not a peculiar
power, distinct from all others, annexed, there will be as many Schisms as
Priests in the Church.

Our own Chronicles tells us, that King Edward the Elder, by constituting five
new Bishops, stopped an Inundation of Paganism, ready to break in on the West
for want of Pastors. And that excellent Order of the Lords and Commons
Assembled in Parliament, in the year, 1646. put a great stop to the licentious
Anabaptists in those days: for taking into consideration, that diverse
Sectaries, had disturbed the Ministers in their public Exercises, both in
England and Wales, to the great disturbance of the public peace, and
disparagement of the Laws, Statutes, and Government of this Realm, Ordered,
That the Constables, and Headboroughs within the several Parishes in the
Countyes of Eng^^nd and Wales, should arrest the Bodies of all and every such
person and persons as aforesaid, who should disturb any Minister in Holy
Or^rers, whilst he was in the place or places of exercising his public
Cal^ing, by speaking to him, or using unreverent gesture or actions; and to
carry the Bodies of such offenders before some Justice of Peace of the same
County, to be proceeded against according to the Laws of this Kingdom. And
since the happy Restoration of our gracious and dread Sovereign, excellent
Laws have been enacted, for the preventing of disorders, and unwarrantable
meetings; but, like a Stiff-necked people, and perverse Generation, they
refused to submit to Regal Authority; so that had not his Royal Majesty, with
the Advice and consent of his great Council, put forth their hands to restrain
them, in a short time, probably, they might have grown so numerous, as to have
diffused their poison throughout these his Majestyes Realms and Dominions; for
indeed, many of them were as pestiferous in their Doctrine, as dangerous in
their seduction; and so ought of all men to be avoided. But many of them now
are sensible of their erroneous ways, and reduced from their former practices;
others have engaged to live conformable to the present Laws; and some, through
their great infidelity and obstinacy, remain as yet in several Goals.

But to return to the Antiquity of the Church; If any man question, or doubt of
the Utility of this Reverend Order, let him look back upon the Torrent of
Confusion Heresy and Blasphemy, that brake in upon us, while these Banks were
by violent hands thrown down; and they will find, that the extirpation of
Episcopacy in these Kingdoms, is the first born of the Popes desires; that,
which his soul longs for, as for the first ripe fruit, you know the Apologue,
how the Wolves would make peace with the Sheep, upon the condition they would
hang up all their Dogs. Let but Episcopacy and the Liturgy be abolished, and
the Papists, I assure you, shall promise peace upon any terms. Since therefore
through the goodness of God, and his Majesty's gracious Resolution, the
Reverend Bishops are restored to the Church, and sent (...) Governors by the
King, if you be Members of this Spiritual House you must submit to their
directions, and Injunctions in all Rites, Ceremonies, and Circumstances of
Religion, which leads me to this Inference, that he who shall pretend to take
one, or a few Bricks out of the Wall, because they are not well burnt, that the
persons of that persw^sion and importunity, would, if they had power, to their
Wills, t^^^ leave to pluck them out one by one, till they left no Wall at all.

I hope the persons in Authority 'over us have learned (by a de^^ bought
Experience) to take heed of Root, and Branch-men; and not (...) consent to pull
down the whole Fabric, because a Window, or Chim^^^ (...) it may be a Tile
only, is misplaced.

It is an unpardonable Error in any, to think, that the Act of Reformation,
consists in the taking away things, together with the abuse of the^ (if any be)
for, that cannot be said to be Reformed, which is made N^w. Reformation is
(properly) Repetitio vel restitutio facti antiqui, The Repetition or
restitution of an a^ient Custom. Thus, let our Liturgy, (if it stand in any
need) be reformed; but God of his Mercy grant, that neither our Liturgy, nor
the Administratours of it, fall again under a Gunpowder-Reformation.

It is said of Rome, that she never understood what Cato was aright, till she
had lost him (Catonem non intellexit civitas, nisi cum perdidit) the loss we
sustained through the abolishing our Liturgy (by that Ordinance, which was
discharged against it) will have (I hope) such an impression upon the Spirits
of all those, that have good will for the Church of Engeland, that it will not
(for the time to come) be an easy matter for those, that rise up against it, to
cast it down a second time. To prevent which.

1. Do not provoke God through your want of Diligence, in assembling your
selves together, to deliver up the Liturgy, into the hands of violent men,
skilful to destroy. If the God of heaven once perceive (by your negligence in
frequenting it) that it is a matter of Indifferency to you, whether you enjoy
it, or enjoy it not, he will have a just occasion Administered, to take that
from you, upon which you set so little value.

2. Let your Ardour and Fervency in performing this prescribed Service testify
to God, Angels, and Men, that your Souls are delighted ^ith it: that it is not
the labor of your Lips only, but the devout ^reathings of your pious Souls.
If you do thus, God will delight to ^stablish it, and make it appear, that it
is a Plant of your Heavenly Fa^^er's Planting, which no mortal hand shall be
able to pluck up.

And, if any person (to conclude) be offended at it, because it is an^^^nt or
solemn, or sober, or charitable; you may be sorry for their weak^^ss, and
labor to inform them: but be sure you choose rather, to dis^^^se one, or a few
peevish Servants in the Family; then to offend the ^^ole Hous-hould, and
incur the displeasure of the great Master of (...)word House, God himself.

FINIS.

