TRUTH Lifting up its head above SCANDALS.

Wherein is declared What God Christ Father Son Holy Ghost Scriptures Gospel
Prayer Ordinances of God
are.

By GERRARD WINSTANLY.

Professors of all forms, behold the Bridgroom is in coming; your profession
will be tried to purpose, your hypocricy shall be hid no longer. You shall feed
no longer upon the Oil that was in other men's Lamps (the Scriptures) for now
it is required that every one have Oil in his own Lamp, even the pure
testimony of truth, within himself. For he that wants this; though he have the
report of it in his book: he shall not enter with the Bridegroom into the
chamber of peace.

LONDON Printed in the year 1649.

TO THE Scholars of Oxford and Cambridge, and to all that call themselves
Ministers of the Gospel in City and Country.
SIRS,
YOu are the men that stand up, assuming the power to your selves to teach the
People the mystery of the Spirit, and that you are the only men sent of him
for that office: therefore you are called spiritual men, or men that are all
spirit.

Many differences you see about spiritual things, arises up daily amongst the
people; it does not belong to you to make parties; but to judge of these
differences, with a moderate and meek spirit between people and people; you are
not to suffer flesh or selfish distemper to break forth from you; a hasty rash
spirit cannot judge any thing.

There are only these two roots, from whence these differences spring up, that
is, either from the Spirit that made all things, or from humane flesh, which is
the Creature that is gone astray; and he that walks after the flesh, denies the
Spirit.

Now if you be spiritual, as you say, you are to judge of these differences,
and declare what is of the Spirit, that it may stand; and what is of the flesh
that it may be trod under foot; that so the Lord alone, that made flesh, may be
exalted above flesh, in the day of his power, that does begin to shine forth.
The rule that you judge by, you say are the Scriptures of Prophets, Apostles
and ancient writers; if so, then you are not spiritual, or all spirit; neither
have you the alone privilege to judge; for the People having the Scriptures,
may judge by them as well as you.

If you say no, the People cannot judge, because they know not the original: I
answer, neither do you know the original; though by your learning you may be
able to translate a writing out of Hebrew or Greek into our mother tongue,
English; but to say this is the original Scripture you cannot: for those very
Copies which the Prophets and Apostles writ, are not to be seen in your
Universities.

You say you have the just Copies of their writings; you do not know that but
as your Fathers have told you; which may be as well false as true, if you have
no better ground then tradition. You say that the interpretation of Scripture
into our mother tongue is according to the mind of the spirit; you cannot tell
that neither, unless you were able to say, that those who did ^nterpret those
writings, had had the same testimony of Spirit, as the penmen of Scriptures
had; for it is the Spirit within that must prove those copies to be true: now
you know that there are many translations and interpretations, which differ
much one from another; which of them must the People take to be truest; seeing
you yourselves are at loss?

One company of you says, this translation is the truth; and then the People
must be forced to follow you: lo, here is Christ, says the Prelates; another
company of yours says, such a translation is the truest; and then the People
must be forced to follow them: as this halfe-day of the Beast, cry, lo here is
Christ,

First, here* in the Pres^ytery; then there in the Independency: and thus you
lead the People like horses by the noses; and ride upon them at your pleasure*
from one form and custom to another, and so quite from the Spirit.

You press the People with much violence, to maintain the Gospel: the People
demands, What is the Gospel? You say, it is the Scriptures. The People replies
again; How can these Scriptures be called the everlasting Gospel, seeing it is
torn in pieces daily amongst your selves, by various translations, inferences
and conclusions; one pressing this, another that; and the People are lost in
the midst of your waters?

If you say, you can judge by the Spirit, why, then you have not the alone
privilege to judge neither; for the Spirit is not confined to your
Universities; but it spreads from East to West, and enlightens sons and
daughters in all parts.

If you say, that visions and revelations are ceased, and that the Spirit and
Scriptures are still together; then you err mightily in spending constructions
upon the Scriptures, which is a revelation; and does not rather leave the
Scriptures to their own genuine language, that People may read the very lettter
without alteration.

Two things, as you are Scripture men, you must judge of. First, what is the
Gospel. Secondly, what is the report or declaration of the Gospel. I declare
positively what I know; do you take the Scriptures and disprove me if you can.
First, The Gospel is the Spirit that ruled in the Prophets and Apostles, which
testified to them, that in the later days the same Spirit should be poured out
upon all flesh. Secondly, then their writings is not the Spirit; but a report
or declaration of that law and testimony which was within them.

Now the Spirit spreading it self from East to West, from North to South, in
sons and daughters, is everlasting, and never dies; but is still everlasting,
and rising higher and higher in manifesting himself in and to mankind.

But now the declaration of the Spirit, being but words gone out of the mouth,
may be, and daily are corrupted by the subtilty of imaginary flesh; it is the
Spirit within every man that tries all things: words cannot try all things: he
that speaks from the flesh; shall of the flesh reap corruption; shall taste of
misery that flesh brings upon himself: but he that speaks from the Spirit,
shall of the Spirit reap life: or he that preaches the Gospel, shall live of
the Gospel; that is, he that speaks from the Spirit, shall have inward peace,
life, and liberty from the Spirit, in the midst of all worldly straights, he
shall not want life and peace within.

You will say, what of all this? I answer, it is matter of the greatest
concernment; your Pulpit wrings against Errors: The People cries what are those
errors? You answer, that there are a company of men ro^ up that denies God and
Christ, and the Scriptures, and the Gospel, and prayer, and all Ordinances; and
yet yo^ have not considered with a meek spirit what these men say; but cry then
down without trial: is this spiritual judging.

Well, matters of this nature, are to be judged with a wary and moderate
spirit; covetous rashness can judge of nothing. I my self being branded by
some of your mouths, as guilty of horrid blasphemy, for denying all these, as
you say though you cannot prove it, was drawn forth by the Spirit to write what
here follows; which I leave to the spiritual men all the world over to judge.

Whether you your selves, be not the very men that do deny God, Scriptures and
Ordinances of God; and that turns the tr^thes of the Spirit into a lie; by
leaving the letter, and walking in your own inferences; and so by holding forth
spiritual things by that imagination of the flesh, and not by the law and
testimony of the Spirit within; and let them likewise judge whether those men
you count such blasphemers; be not those men that does advance God, Christ,
Scriptures and Ordinances, in the spirituality of them.

When the Apostolical gifts ceased, which was to speak from an inward
testimony of what they heard and saw; as the Father did will it should cease
for a time, times and half time; or forty two months; then began the false
Christ's and false Prophets to arise, that speak from tradition of what they had
read in Books; expounding those writings from their imaginary thoughts; getting
a power from the Magistrate to protect them; and to punish such as speak from
the testimony of Christ within them, which flesh is willin^ to oppose.

And then the flesh began to be advanced above the Spirit, from the time that
the universal Bishop was raised, to this very hour; and so in every
government; which imagination has set up since that time false Christ's, and
false Prophets have arose from your Schools, and have filled the Earth with
darkness; so that now when the King of righteousness begins to arise, and
fill the earth with his light; the Earth grows mad and full of rage: but
though flesh be angry; assure your selves Christ will take the Kingdom, and
rule in flesh. And here I rest,

A servant to the Faher; Gerrard Winstanly.
Oct. 16. 1648.
To the gentle Reader.
DEAR friend it is slandero usly reported (by reason whereof some of you may be
troubled to hear) that Chamberlain the Redding man, called after the flesh,
William Everard; does hold blasphemous opinions: as to deny God, and Christ,
and Scriptures, and prayer; and they call him a deceiver, and many ^ilt by
names; and upon this report of the raging multitude (some that call themselves
Ministers, and some common people) the Bailiffs of Kingston have put him in
prison, as he came through their Town and took a nights lodging; and has kept
him there this week, upon these supposed scandals.

Now I was moved to write what here follows, as a vindication of the man and
my self, being slandered as well as he (by some of the Ministers) having been
in his company; that all the world may judge of his and my inn^cency in these
particular scandals; and that it may appear, as it will upon trial, that the
parish Ministers themselves, and every one that follows their way of worship;
does turn the Scriptures into a lie, by leaving the old letter that the
Apostles writ; and new moulding those Scriptures into their own language;
walking according to their own inferences and conjectures thereupon; and by
holding forth God and Christ to be at a distance from men; they are the only
men that deny God and Christ and Scriptures, and Ordinances, walking in the
practice of their own invention, to which ignorant flesh closes without
examination: and so the greatest thieves cry, stop thief first.

And here I shall add one word as an account wherefore I use the word Reason,
instead of the word God, in my writings, as you shall meet mithall: If I demand
of you, who made all things? And your answer God. If I demand what is God? You
answer the spiritual power; that as he made; so he governs and preserves all
things; so that the sum of all is this, God is the chief Maker or Governor, and
this maker and governor is God: Now I am lost in this wheel that runs round,
and lies under darkness.

But if you demand of me, why I say Reason did make, and does govern and
preserve all things: I answer, Reason is that living power of light that is in
all things; it is the salt that savours all things; it is the fire that burns
up dross, and so restores what is corrupted; and preserves what is pure; he is
the Lord our righteousness.

It lies in the bottom of love, of justice, of wisdom; for if the Spirit
Reason did not uphold and moderate these, they would be madness; nay, they
could not be called by them names; for Reason guids them in order, and leads
them to their right end, which is not to preserve a part, but the whole
creation.

But is man's reason that which you call God? I answer, man's reasoning is a
creature which fl^ws from that Spirit to this end, to draw up man into
himself: it is but a candle lighted by that soul, and this light shining
through flesh, is darkened by the imagination of flesh; so that many times men
act contrary to reason, though they think they act according to reason.

By that light of Reason that is in man, he may see a sutablenesse in many
things, but not in all things; for the reason that acts in another man, may see
a weakness of reason that asts in me: but now the Spirit Reason, which I call
God, the Maker and Ruler of all things, is that spiritual power, that guids
all men's reasoning in right order, and to a right end: for the Spirit Reason,
does not preserve one creature and destroy onother; as many times men's
reasonings does, being blind by the imagination of the flesh: but it has a
regard to the whole creation; and knits every creature together into a
oneness; making every creature to be an upholder of his fellow; and so every
one is an assistant to preserve ^he whole: and the nearer that man's reasoning
comes to ^his, the more spiritual they are; the farther off they be, the more
selfish and fleshy they be.

Now this word Reason is not the alone name of this spiritual power: but every
one may give him a name according to that spiritual Power that they feel and
see rules in them, carrying them forth in actions to preserve their fellow
creatures as well as themselves.

Therefore some may call him King of righteousness, and Prince of peace: some
may call him Love, and the like: but I can, and I do call him Reason; because
I see him to be that living powerful light that is in righteousness, making
righteousness to be righteousness; or justice to be justice; or love to be
love: for without this modera^er and ruler, they would be madness; nay, the
selfewillednesse of the flesh; and not that which we call them.

Lastly, I am made to change the name from God to Reason; because I have been
held under darkness by that word, as I see many people are; and likewise that
people may rest no longer upon words without knowledge; but hereafter may look
after that spiritual power; and know what it is that rules them, and which
does rule in and over all, and which they call their God and Governor or
preserver. And this I hope will be a sufficient account why I alter the word:
what here follows may give more light into the thing.

Gerrard Winstanly.
Read and judge; let flesh be silent; let the Spirit be honored.



TRUTH LIFTING UP HIS HEAD ABOVE SCANDALS.
I Have said, That whosoever worships God by hearsay, as others tells them,
knows not what God is from light within himself; or that thinks God is in the
heavens above the skies; and so prays to that God which he imagines to be
there and every where: but from any testimony within, he knows not how, nor
where; this man worships his own imagination, which is the Devil.

But he that is a true worshipper, must know who God is, and how he is to be
wor^hipped, from the power of light shining in him, if ever he have true peace.

And from hence a report is raised, and is frequent in the mouths of the
teachers; That I deny God; And therefore, First, I shall give account what I
see and know is to be; and let the understanding in heart judge me.

Qu. What is God?


Ans. I answer, He is the incomprehensible spirit, Reason; who as he willed
that the Creation should flow out of him: so he governes the whole Creation in
righteousness, peace and moderation: And from hence he is called, The Lord,
because there is none above him: And he is called, The Father, because as the
whole creation came out of him, so he is the life of the whole creation, by
whom every creature does subsist.


Qu. When can a man call the Father his God?


Ans. When he feels and sees, by experience, that the spirit which made the
flesh, does govern and rule King in his flesh: And so can say, I rejoice to
feel and see my flesh made subject to the spirit of righteousness.


Qu. But may not a man call him God, till he have this experience?


Ans. No: For if he do, he lies, and there is no truth in him; for whatsoever
rules as King in his flesh, that is his God. As for example; If pride, envy,
frowardness, hypocrisy, uncleanesse, fear of men more then fear of God, or
covetousness; If all, or any one of these, rule and govern thee, either all,
or any one of these is thy God, and so thou worships the flesh, and that Devil
is thy God. And the spirit of righteousness is not thy God, for thou do not
yet submit unto him.


Qu. But I hope that the Father is my Governor: and therefore may I not call
him God?


Ans. Hope without ground is the hope of the hypocrite; thou can not call him
God, till thou be able in pure experience to ^ay, Thy flesh is subject to him;
for if thy knowledge be no more but Imagination or ^houghts, it is of the
Devil, and not of the ^ather: or if thy knowledge be merely from what thou
have read or heard from others, it ^ of the flesh, not of the spirit.


Qu. When then may I call him God, or the might Governor, and do not descend
my self?


Ans. When thou art, by that spirit, made ^ see him, rule and govern, not
only in ^ee, but in the whole creation: so that thou ^e^s and sees, that the
spiritual power that ^^vernes in thee, has a community in thee ^^th the whole
globe; and thou art made subject to that spirit of righteousness, peace,
meekness and love, who does subject all things to himself, and brings all
things into a one-nesse. Now thou may call him God warrantably, for thou
know him to be the mighty governor: And that the government of the whole
creation is upon the shoulders of that spirit, to which thou art ma^e
experimentally subject.

Wait upon him till he teach thee. All that read do not understand: the
spirit only sees truth, and lives in it.


Qu. But how shall I know the spirit of the Father, so that I may call him God?


Ans. The spirit of the Father is pure Reason: which as he made, so he knits
the whole creation together into a one-nesse of life and moderation; every
creature sweetly in love lending their hands to preserve each other, and so
upholds the whole fabrique.


Qu. Where does this Reason dwell, which yo^ call Father and Lord of all?


Ans. He dwells in every creature, according to the nature and being of the
creature but supreamely in man Therefore man i^ called a Rational creature,
and the well-beloved son of the Father, because by hi^ creation, he is to live
in the light of Reason But when he acts unrighteously, he lives without Reason;
and so contrary to his creation as a man. But when he acts righteously, then he
lives in Reason, and Reason in him; and so according to his creation, to the
honor of his Maker.


Qu. Give some example, how Reason made and governes the creation?


Ans. Take these among many; and yet you shall find, that the further you dive
into Reason, the more incomprehensible he will appear; for he is infinite in
wisdom, and mighty in power, past finding out by flesh, till the flesh be made
to see light in his light.

The clouds send down rain, and there is great undeniable reason in i^ for
otherwise the earth could not bring f^^^^ grass and fruit. The earth sends
forth g^^sse, or else cattle could not be preserved. The cattle feed upon the
grass, and there is Reason in it, for else man could not be preserved. The
Sun gives his light and heat, or else the creation could not subsist. So
that the mighty power, Reason, has made these to give life and preservation
one to another.

Reason makes a man to live moderately and peaceably with all; he makes a man
just and righteous in all his actings; he kills frowardness, envy and pride in
a man: and why? where lies the Reason? Because this man stands in need of
others, and others stand in need of him; and therefore makes a man to do as he
would be done unto. Indeed Reason is of such a mighty power, that when he rules
King in the flesh, he governes all things in righteousness, and there is no
complainings or cryings out against oppression.

There is nothing but unreasonablenesse in all the powers of the flesh; as in
coveteousnesse, pride, envy, and the like; and hereby the flesh brings misery
and ruin upon it self. But pure and perfect Reason makes every thing to sing
and rejoice in righteousness: When this King reigns the City is glad.


Qu. What Reason is there that I should have such temptations within, and
afflictions without?


Ans. Reason sees it fit you should be befitted by your own lusts, which you
have chose to delight in; that hereby you being inwardly tormented and shamed,
you may be drawn to own and submit to the spirit, that gives peace and
liberty; and so for ever after hate the motions of the flesh.


Qu. But what reason is there, that other men should oppress me?


Ans. Still to let you see your own unrighteousness to others; therefore
other unrighteous men are suffered to deal unrighteously with you, to let you
see, that the ways of unrighteousness brings nothing but pain; and when you
are brought to this, the spirit which has been slighted by you, is now owned
and honored.

Secondly, Reason suffers the flesh of other men to tyrannize over you for a
time; that in the day, when he will sit upon the throne, all flesh may be
silent before him, and confess his Justice to be righteous upon them, for
their unrighteousness one to another.

Now Reason suffers all these things to be, that the flesh may forsake
himself; he seeing in Reasons light, that he being nothing but envy and misery
to himself; and so may return to the spirit, and submit thereunto; in whom
his life and peace lies.


Qu. And what is the end that Reason has in all this?


Ans. To destroy the powers of the flesh; which leads creatures into diverse
ways of opposition one against another, and to bring all into pure experience
of that sweet rest and peace that is in the unity of himself, the one spirit.


Qu. Is Reason to be seen in every creature?


Ans. Yes.


Qu. What Reason is to be seen in a Horse?


Ans. Reason carries him along to eat his meat, that he may do work for the
use of man.


Qu. But the horse does not know this Reason that rules him?


Ans. No: Neither has any creature that privilege to see and know that Reason
rules him, but man. Therefore he is said to be, the Lord of creatures, because
he knows how to govern them by reason that is within himself.


Qu. But all men do not see and know Reason to rule in them?


Ans. No: Therefore some are called unreasonable men; and though they are in
the shape of men, yet their actings are like their horses, and they know the
spirit that rules them, no more then their horses.

But now when a man knows, that this King of righteousness, Reason, does
dwell in him, and rule in him; to which all the powers of his flesh are made
subject, which indeed is Christ dwelling in the flesh. Now he may be said to be
a perfect man, for he acts like a man, righteously: and so as the Father lives
in him, he lives in the Father.


Qu. Who is he that calls men to an account for their unrighteousness?


Ans. It is the mighty spirit, Reason, who is King of righteousness and King
of peace; wherefore art thou proud, says Reason? Wherefore art thou covetous?
Wherefore art thou envious and bitter spirited against thy fellow creatures?
Wherefore art thou unclean?


Ans. The Flesh answers, It is to please my self.


Qu. Reason answers, Did thou make thy self, that thou should live to thy
self? Or did not I the Lord make thee to live unto me? I tell you when Reason
puts these questions to the heart, the heart will be struck dead.


Qu. What is it to walk righteously, or in the sight of Reason?


An. First, When a man lives in all acts of love to his fellow creatures;
feeding the hungry; clothing the naked; relieving the oppressed; seeking the
preservation of others as well as himself; looking upon himself as a fellow
creature (though he be Lord of all creatures) to all other creatures of all
kinds; and so doing to them, as he would have them do to him; to this end,
that the Creation may be upheld and kept together by the spirit of love,
tenderness and oneness, and that no creature may complain of any act of
unrighteousness and oppression from him.

Secondly, when a man lives in the knowledge and love of the Father, seeing the
Father in every creature, and so loves, delights, obeyes, and honors the
Spirit which he sees in the creature, and so acts rightly toward that creature
in whom he sees the spirit of the Father for to rest, according to its measure.

And whereas before he exercised outward senses to follow creatures; now he
lives in the exercise of his spiritual senses, and he does rightly, and he
knows wherefore; for his soul now sees, feels, tastes, smells and hears the
Father spiritually in all things, and so does all things in love and cheerful
obedience to the Spirit, that discovers all things to him inwardly; whereby he
is made able to do acts of righteousness outwardly.

This man that is thus drawn up, knows what it is to live in community with
the Globe; and to live in community with the Spirit of the Globe

In the next place, I said that Jesus Christ at a distance from thee, will not
save thee; and that it is not the humane flesh, but the Spirit in that body,
that is the Savior, and the Seed, that must bruise the Serpents head in
mankind. And hence they say I deny Christ. Therefore I shall give account here
unto by these questions.


Qu. What is Jesus Christ?

I answer, He is a man taken up to live wholly in the Father; or a meek spirit
drawn up to live in the light of Reason. And here note two things.

1. That Jesus Christ that dyed at Jerusalem by the hands of the Jews, he was
the first in whom the Father did appear bodily to dwell in; and that humane
body was the Lamb that answered all the types of Moses Law: But that body
took its name from the spirit that dwelt within it.


Qu. What was that Spirit?


Ans. He was the spirit of meekness and humility, which saved humane flesh
from all distempers that arises from pride or covetuousnesse, and this is the
Child Jesus, a Savior; for he destroys the covetuousnesse and pride in flesh,
and frees the creature from all distempring fears and passions; and rules King,
in meekness and quiet humility.

2. He was the spirit of the Father; that lived in the ex^rcise and use of all
the spiritual senses; and therefore as the Father was said to live in him, so
he was said to live in the Father.


Qu. But shall not that humane body of Christ save me by his death?


Ans, The Spirit in that humane body is the Savior: The flesh profits nothing:
the patient death of that humane body, declares the exellent power of the
Spirit within it to be the alone Savior of humane flesh from the curse and
power of darkness, that works and rules in it, and so has taken it prisoner.

And therefore when the same Anointing or Spirit that was sent down into that
body; is sent down into yours, changing your vile bodies and making them like
that glorious body, killing all the cursed powers in the flesh; making your
flesh subject to the Spirit; now you are become one with Christ, and with the
Father, which is your salvation.


Qu. But shall I not look upon that body, which was called Jesus Christ, and
expect salvation from him?


Ans. Jesus Christ at a distance from thee, will never save thee; but a Christ
within is thy Savior: and therefore Paul after he had looked upon the Lamb
along time; that is looked upon Christ at a distance from himself, he saw that
would bring him no peace; therefore says he, Though I have known Christ after
the flesh, yet henceforth know I him no more: for now the mystery of God, that
has been kept secret from ages and generations past, is in these last days
revealed, which is, Christ in you the pope of glory.


Qu. But was not that body killed, laid in the earth, and raised again from the
dead, and ascended up to the Father into Heaven?


Ans. He was killed by the curse that ruled in the Jews, and was laid in the
earth; here was the wisdom and power of the Father seen, that though all the
powers of hell, or covetous, proud flesh did combine together, to oppress, and
then to kill a body, wherein he himself dwelt bodily; yet they could not
distemper him, for he was still patient, and he was not heard to complain.


Qu. Wherein was his wisdom and power seen in this?


Ans. Hereby he gives testimony to the World, that it is he himself that is
the Seed that bruises the Serpents head, that is, in mankind: for his spirit
being so powerful in flesh; kills the spirit of venom that is in flesh; and
that body being laid in the earth purifieth the earth and purges it from that
curse that man had filled it with by his unrighteousness; and so his spirit
does spirit the Earth in righteousness.


Q. Did man fill the Earth with poison and the curse?


A. Yea, after he refused to live after the Spirit his Maker; and made joyce to
live upon the objects of the Creation, he then dyed and corrupted, and fell
into all venomous and stinking unrighteousness: and as his body went to the
earth, he did still poison and corrupt the earth, and caused it to bring forth
poisonous Vipers, Todes and Serpents, and Thorns and Briars.

For the curse being first falen upon mankind, through man it fell upon the
other creatures, and the Earth was cursed for his fake; and the poison of man's
unrighteous body, dunging the Earth, filled the grass and herbs with strong
unsavory spirits, that flowed from him, whereby the cattle feeding, comes to
be made bitter spirited, and mad one against another.

For the Air and Earth is all poisoned, and the curse dwells in both, through
man's unrighteousness; he that should have kept within order, being made Lord
of creatures, he put the Creation out of order, by forsaking his Maker, and by
acting according to the flesh. Now this mighty spiritual man, of righteousness
Jesus Christ, does purify humane flesh again; and so, restoring the head first,
does new spirit the Creation, and brings all into order again; taking away the
bitterness and curse, and making the whole Creation to be of one heart and one
Spirit.


Q. But it is said that his body rose again and ascended up through the clouds
into the skies, which is called Heaven, or place of Glory, where the Father
dwells?


A. This speech has blinded the understandings of many; for the Father is not
confined to any one particular place; for he is in every place, and in every
creature; and where He dwells in clear manifestations, there is Heaven; and
the higher manifestations the higher Heavens.

Now the body of Christ is where the Father is, in the earth, purifying the
Earth; and his Spirit is entered into the whole creation, which is the heavenly
glory, where the Father dwells; which is a glory above the flesh, and where he
rules King and Lord, in and over all the Creation, purging out all strong
spirited powers that causes sorrow; and bringing all into the unity of that one
Spirit, himself. So that this Jesus Christ or mighty man that saves us, is not
in one particular place: but every where.

And this certainly to me is very clear, That whereas the Apostles saw Christ
arise and ascend, and were witnesses of his Resurrection, it was only a
declaration in vision to them, of the Spirits rising up: for death and hell, and
darkness, and sorrow, could not hold him under; he saw no corruption; for as
soon as that one body, in which he was confined, for a time was laid low; he
rose presently up again in the bodies of the Apostles, and so began to spread
in the Earth; and when his set time is expired, that the Beast, or flesh shall
reign no more: Then he will spread himself in sons and daughters from East to
West, from North to South; and never cease increasing till this vine has
filled the Earth.

And truly this is great comfort to me, that envy could not kill that Spirit;
but though it killed that body, through an appointed permission; yet the spirit
rose up, and showed himself, and went to his Father; that is, entered into the
Creation, to purge it from the curse; and to spread himself in sons and
daughters of the Earth; that by him their flesh being made subject, and saved
from the curse, might by him become one with him and with his Father; that is,
become one in spirit with him, and enjoy communion with the Spirit that is in
the whole Globe.


Qu. But how shall I know that Christ dwells in ^e?


Ans. It is the testimony of the Spirit it self that must give you
satisfaction: for that which is a testimony within me, is not ^ours till the
same Spirit make it yours: therefore you are to wait with a quiet and ^umble
spirit, till the Father be pleased to ^each you, and manifest himself to you,
and then you shall know, what I speak, I ^peake not of my self; but what I
have re^eived from the Father.


Qu. You seem to say, that the body of Christ ^as laid in the earth and remains
there: but the ^criptures say, that he saw no corruption; how does ^is agree?


Ans. His body was laid in the Earth, as ^ther dead bodies of men are; but it
lay not ^n the Earth as other dead bodies do; for other dead bodies lay there
corrupting the Creation: but he rose up and purified the Creation; death or
curse could not hold his ^ody under its power.


Qu. What do you mean by Creation in this ^nce?


Answ. I mean fire, water, earth and air, ^f which four elements the whole
creation is made, and mankind is made up of them all. Now when the first man
fell, he corrupted the whole creation, fire water, earth and air, and still as
the branches of his body went to the earth, the creation was more and more
corrupted, by the multiplicities of bodies, that still saw corruption, for none
rose up above the curse, but all lay under it. Now when the body of Jesus
Christ went to the earth, that body likewise being made of fire, water, earth
and air, he purified the whole creation, and rose up, and saw no corruption as
others did.


Quest. But how can he be said to be laid in the earth and remain there, and
yet rise up out of it purifying the creation?


Answ. As his body was laid, by the hands of his enemies, in the earth as dead
carrion, as they thought, like one of themselves, when they die: but his body
corrupted not the creation, but rose up above corruption, purging it out.


Qu. Explain your meaning?


Ans. His body; being made of the four Elements, which were corrupted by man in
whom they all dwelt: they are restored again, from that bondage of corruption
by the body of Christ, in whom they all dwelt likewise: As thus; his breath
rose up above the corruption of the Air, purifying the Air; his moisture rose
up above the corruption of the waters, purifying the water; his heat and warmth
rose up above the corruption of the fire, cleansing the fire: and his flesh and
bones, rose up above the corruption of the earth and stones, purifying of them;
and so he spreading himself in the body of the Creation took of the curse: so
that the foundation of restoration of all things was laid in and by him; which
when it is manifested then man kind shall see the glory of it; and till that
time, the whole Creation groaneth and travelleth in pain, waiting for the
manifestation of the Sons of God.


Q. I but the Apostles saw him after he was risen, and touched him, and saw him
ascend upwards?


Ans. The declaration of Scripture, does point out the mystery of Christ's
spiritual ^ising, and the exaltation of his spiritual power over the flesh,
and over the corruption that is in the Creation: for the whole Scriptures are
but a report of spiritual my^teries, held forth to the eye of flesh in ^ords;
but to be seen in the substantial ^atter of them by the eye of the Spirit;
and therefore the Apostle might well say, they saw and touched Christ; for
their very bodies and minds were changed, and made like to his glorious body,
for they were made new creatures, and were raised up above corruption; which
was no other, but Christ rising up in them, and lifting up himself in their
fight and feeling above the flesh.


Quest. Why then I perceive that as the body of the first man was a
representation of the whole Creation, and did corrupt it; so the body of Christ
was a representation of the whole Creation, and restores it from corruption,
and brings all into the unity of the Father again?


Ans. This is very true; for in this particular lies the mystery of the Fall,
and the restoration of all things again.


Q. But whither went the Spirit of Christ?


Ans. To his Father; that is, entered into the spirit of the whole Creation;
into that Spirit that breathed all forth of himself, and that governs all by
himself; which is Reason; and so is become one with him; and being lifted up
will draw the whole Creation to the spirit of onenes with himself, and with
his Father. As a bucket of water first taken out of the Sea, and standing alone
for a time, is afterward powered into the Sea again, and becomes one with the
Sea. And this is the Seed that comes to bruise the Serpents head; and when his
work was done in that one particular person, he returned back again to his
Father; from whence he came; and now sends down his Spirit, and draws up
Sons and daughters; yea, the whole Creation into himself.

And truly this is great comfort to me, that whereas formerly there was not a
man found that could remove the curse; but every one still increased the curse:
now there is a man found that has killed the curse in part; and the virtue of
that sweet ointment shall cleanse the whole; and this work is now breaking
out; for the Father will make the Creation to know it by experience, and it
shall be hid no longer. And this points out the mystery of the first Adam and
the second Adam; or the first Man and second Man, which the Father, Reason, was
pleased should spring up in mankind.


Q. What do you mean by the first Adam, or first man?


Ans. He is a preparer, to hold forth three names or titles of the one perfect
power of darkness, and yet a son that Reason has brought forth: But this son
is said to be of the earth, earthy; for he is a son that feeds, lives and
delights himself altogether in and upon the objects of the earth; endeavourin
to make himself a Lord over his fellow creatures; in unrighteousness seeking
to advance himself, though it be to others ruin; and this man has lift up
his heel against his Maker, and knows him not.


Qu. Is this Adam one single person or branch of humane flesh?


Ans. Every particular branch of mankind, living upon the objects of the
creation, and rejecting their maker, are the lineage or generation of the first
man: yea, being bound up all together, they make up but the one first Adam.


Qu. Declare more plain what this first man is?


Ans. He is that mighty power of flesh, that leads flesh to live upon it
self, and not to live upon its maker: it follows the way of the flesh with
greediness, and jeeres and ejects the spirit. And this is called a mighty man,
because he being to act his part in the great world first, as Father Reason,
will have it. He has drawn all flesh into disobedience to the spirit. And
this Adam has been very fruitful; he has filled the earth with himself, and
covered all with his darkness. For look upon every man and woman in the
world, that lives upon the ob^ects of the creation, and not upon the spirit in
the creation, and they are but branches of the first man; and then put them all
together into one lump, and they make up still, but the first man perfect; an
earthy man, that knows not the spirit: and therefore when you see a man wholly
delighting himself in the enjoyment of fellow creatures, you may call him
truly Adam, or the first man.


Qu. What is the spirit in the Creation?


Ans. It is a meek and loving spirit, liveing in the light and strength of
reason, holding up the whole creation in a oneness of sweet compliency in
every creature, according to its place and office.


Qu. What are those three names of one perfect power of darkness, that the
first man Adam was a preparer of?


Ans. First, The King of darkness, or aspiring power of the flesh, that lifts
up his heel against his Maker, but yet lies within, and acts not.

Secondly, The beastly son that arises up from that rebelling power, and that
is, Man, that holds forth this rebellion to fellow creatures; for now rebellion
is broke out, and Reasons law is violated; the creatures flesh seeks to honor
it self, and has forsaken his Maker: here is the Father and the Son of
darkness.

Thirdly, When the whole earth is filled with this disobedience, so that you
cannot meet with a branch of mankind; but he lives upon the objects of the
creation, and not upon the spirit. This makes the first man perfect in
darkness, and the whole world is filled with unclean breathing. Here is
Father, Son, and unclean spirit, or King, and Beast, and bottomless pit:
Three names, but one power of darkness, filling the earth, and corrupting the
creation more and more. All this is but the first man, that Reason would have
to govern the earth.


Qu. Why does the Father suffer this first man to fill the earth so abundantly
with unrighteousness?


Ans. For two reasons; First, That mankind may see, that though it spring up
to an innumerable multitude of sons and daughters, all living upon creature
objects, not upon the spirit, are but still the one first man, that wearied out
himself in vain, and finds no true peace thereby.

Secondly, That the second man may have the more glory, when in the fullness of
time he shall come, and pull the Kingdom out of the first man's hand, and tread
him under foot, and rule righteously in flesh himself. Yea, and to begin this
great work, when all ^he nations of the earth are filled with the wit and
strength of the first man, who fights against the rising up of the Second man
with violence: and therefore is it said, when the Son of man comes; shall he
find faith on earth? No: he must bring it along with him, and new spirit the
creation.


Qu. What? Are all troubles, sins and sorrows, the work of the first man?


Ans. Two things are to be observed in the first man; First, his revolt from
the spirit, in making choice to live upon the creation, and not upon the
spirit: and hereby now the law of Reason is broke. And this is one thing, that
such as are of the generation of the first man's flesh does do.

Secondly, Note the misery that this first man flesh does bring upon himself:
by so doing, he pulls crosses and sorrows within upon himself, and troubles
without: for his unrighteous breath corrupts the air, and raises hurtful
winds and weather; and his unrighteous flesh corrupts the earth, and causes it
to send forth hurtful crops, and poisonous Vipers: these are the fruits of his
earthy choice and labors; and therefore when you see misery in the world, then
say, this is the fruit of living upon the creatures, and not upon the spirit.

Well, From the beginning to this day, Reason has suffered the first man to
reign, and to fill the earth: therefore is it said, The first man is of the
earth, earthy; and he fills the earth, as one bean, multiplying every year,
fills the earth with that grain; which is but the multiplication of it self.

Adam, or first man, is looked upon in a threefold sense.

First, Adam, or first man, that went astray from his Maker, which lived upon
earth many thousand years ago, which the eyes of every man is upon.

Secondly, Every man and woman that live upon the objects of the creation, and
not in and upon the spirit that made the creation, is a son and daughter of
the first man; and being put altogether, make up but the one first man: so that
we may see Adam every day before our eyes walking up and down the street.

But Thirdly, I see the two Adams in every man: The first Adam has his time to
rule first in me; when the chief powers in me, leads me forth to look after
objects, and to delight in them, more then in the spirit. And this first man
must act his part in me, till the fullness of time come, that the Father is
pleased, that the second Adam, Christ, shall come and take the Kingdom out of
his hand, and deliver me from his bondage, and so rule King of righteousness
for ever after in me.


Qu. What is the second man, or second Adam?


Ans. He is a preparer likewise, to hold forth three clear names in one perfect
power of life; who is called, the well-beloved Son; for this Son is said to be
the Lord from heaven; or a mighty man, governing the earth in righteousness
from the strength of pure Reason; not placing his delight upon the objects of
the creation, as the first man did. But upon the enjoyment of that mighty power
that made the creation, and that upheld it by himself.


Qu. Is this second man one single person?


Ans. First, This second man is a meek spirit, drawn up to live in the light
and strength of pure Reason.

Now as the first man, ruling in flesh, drew mankind from his maker, so this
second man, ruling in flesh, draws mankind back again to his maker. And this
second man is called a man anointed, or mankind living in the light and
strength of pure Reason, the essential Father. And so the whole bulk of
mankind, when they shall be drawn up to live in the unity of the one spirit,
is the second man, and every son and daughter of this spirit, is of the lynage
of the second man.


Qu. But shall this second man fill the earth, as the first man did?


Answ. Yes, Reason has so determined that as the first man filled the earth
with unrighteousness, and corrupted all: So this second shall take the Kingdom
in the latter days, and reign King of righteousness in flesh, and spread as
far in restoring al things, as the first man corrupted all things.


Q. But has this second man never ruled the earth?


Answ. He has appeared in the earth, but the first man having a limited time
given him by the Father, would never let him ris^ up to rule, but still pressed
him down by persecution or death; he did never generally rule over the earth,
as the first man has done, but has still been as a servant.


Qu. But is his time now to come to rule the earth and fill it with himself?


Answ. Yes: and shall have as large a privilege to sill the earth, as the
first man had surely; and he will change times and custom^, and fill the earth
with a new law, wherein dwells righteousness and peace. And justice, and judgment
shall be the upholders of his kingdom. And he shall fill the earth with himself,
as a corn of wheat multiplying every year, fills the earth with that grain, so
that all live in the light, and strength of pure Reason, in righteousness are
but the sons and daughters of the second man: And being looked upon in the
bulk, they being made to be all of one heart and one spirit. They are but the
second man still, that fills all, and is in all; though they overspread the
earth. And this is the generation of the second man, or second Adam: mankind
living in and upon his maker from the power within himself.


Qu. What are those three names, which this second man declares to be one
perfect power of life?

First, the Father Reason, that made all things before the creation was brought
forth he was not known. Secondly, the Son, and this is that part of the
creation that holds him purely forth to the view of others. Now truth begins to
shine, and Reason begins to be honored by an humane body; so that here is
Father and Son. Thirdly, when the whole earth is filled with the one spirit;
this makes the second man perfect, for corruption and curse is removed; and the
whole earth is filled with holy breathing; all acting and living in
righteousness. And this is Jesus Christ the second man.

They say I deny the Gospel, and the doctrine of it; and hereunto I give this
account.


Qu. What is the Gospel?


Ans. It is the Father himself, that is, the Word, and glad tidings, that
speaks peace inwardly to poor souls.


Qu. But are not the writings of the Apostles and Prophets, the Gospel?


Ans. These writings are the report or declaration of the Gospel; which are to
cease, when the Lord himself, who is the everlaststing Gospel, does manifest
himself to rule in the flesh of sons and daughters.


Qu. But did not Paul say, This is the word of the Gospel, which we preach;
and so left those words in writing?


Ans. It is true, his writings are the word of it, or the report of it; but it
is not the thing it self: for when it was reported, that the Father would
dwell in the flesh, and destroy the Serpent: this report savoured sweet: But
when man comes to see, and feel, and know, that the Father dwells and rules in
him; This is far more sweet: This is to enjoy the Gospel himself: The word
of life within, and this shall never cease, but endures for ever.


Qu. But how do you know, that this is the Gospel?


Ans. I know it by the testimony that is within my self, and by the sweet,
peaceable and soule-satisfying rest, that I have, through communion, with the
spirit; The Lord our righteousness; In the midst of the mad rage of the world.

Secondly, For satisfaction to the world. I desire all men to take the Record,
and search those Scriptures, for they are they that do testify of the truth
hereof, as well as they testified of Christ, after the flesh, to be the Lamb.
And this is the mystery and testimony of the Scriptures: The spirit dwelling
and ruling in flesh.

The declaration or report of words out of the mouth or pen of men, shall
cease; but the spirit endures for ever; from whence those words were breathed:
as when I have the thing promised, the word of the promise ceases.


Qu. What is the lively testimony or appearance of the everlasting Gospel to
dwell in flesh?


Ans. I answer; Justice and Judgment are the two witnesses, or the manifest
appearance of the spirit; or the pure light of Reason, teaching a man both to
know what is righteous, and to do righteously: And when these two rule in man,
then is flesh subject to ^he spirit.


Qu. But I have heard men say, That the Scrip^ures are not only the word of
God, but God himself: for the word and spirit go together; as, I the
beginning was the Word; and, The Word was God.


Ans. If that very written word were God himself, truly God then would
mightily be torn in pieces every day, by the bad interpretations of imaginary
flesh.

But I answer; The spirit himself is the Word; This is the power that took
flesh and dwelt amongst us. And the Scriptures are the testimony of those men,
to whom this secret was revealed: by which testimony within, they were made
able to give,

First, A report, that such a mystery, as God manifest in the flesh, should
break forth and appear in the world, in a child that should be borne of a
Virgin; and so all the writings of the Prophets foretold the coming of the
man-child, the Messiah, The Lamb of God. And so when the Pharisees told Christ
he was a deceiver.

He answered, I am he; and unless that you believe that I am he, you shall dye
in your sins: and search the Scriptures of the Prophets, and you shall see,
that they tes^ifie of me, that I am the Messiah; the Man-child; the Lamb, that
am to answer all Moses types; and the Prophet, whom the Father has sent; For I
came not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me.

Secondly, The writings of the Apostles do justify the Prophets, and declare
posi^ively, this is the Christ; the Son of the Father, well-beloved: we ate and
drank with ^im; we saw him and heard him, and were ^ye-witnesses, that the
Rulers of the Jews ^lew him, and that the spirit raised him from ^he death.


Qu. But do the Apostles writings report no ^ore but this?


Ans. Yes; As they declared, when they ^aw and heard how the spirit dwelt
bodily ^ that humane flesh, or single man, Jesus Christ: So they have declared,
by the same ^estimony, that the same spirit that ruled in ^im, should in the
latter days be poured out upon sons and daughters; and shall spread ^ the
earth like the shining of the Sun from ^ast to West.

And this is that which this mouth and ^en of mine do testify of to all that
hear ^ee: that the same spirit that has layne ^id under flesh, like a corn
of wheat for an ^ppointed time, under the clods of earth, is ^ow sprung out,
and begins to grow up a ^uitfull vine, which shall never decay, but ^ shall
increase, till he has filled the earth. ^his is the Kingdom of God within
man. This is the grain of mustard seed, which is little in the beginning, but
shall become a mighty tree. This is the fire, that shall dry and burn up all
the dross of man's work, and turn all things into his own nature* This is
that spirit which is broke out, that will bring mankind into one heart, an^
one mind: For, assure your selves, I know what I speak. The Thorn bush is
burning but the Vine is flourishing. The Ashes of the Thorn bush is laid at
the root and feet o^ the Vine, and it grows abundantly.

Now search the Scriptures for this likewise, for they do testify of the
sending o^ the spirit into the flesh of sons and daughters: and they testify
of the utter destruction of the man of sin, the flesh, with all* hi^ curse,
power inwardly and outwardly. Now he that does jeere the spirit, or denies tha^
the spirit shall come and rule in flesh in son^ and daughters, as he did in
that one man, Jesus Christ, is an Antichrist, and a Traitor to the Father, let
him be whom he will.

Therefore le^rne to put a difference between the Report, and the thing
Reported of. The spirit that made flesh is he that is reported of. The writings
and words of Saints is the report. These reports being taken hold of, by
corrupt flesh that would rule, are blemished by various translations,
interpretations and constructions, that King flesh makes; ^ut those sons and
daughters in whom the spirit rests, cannot be deceived, but judges ^ll things.

They say, I deny the doctrine of the Gos^ell: I shall give this account to
that.


Q. What is the doctrine of the Gospel of Jesus Christ?


Ans. What Jesus Christ is, I have showed before: The doctrine or report of him
is ^his: That mankind shall be by him re^onciled to his Maker, and be made one
in spirit with him: that is, that the curse shall ^e removed, and the power of
it killed and consumed. And that created flesh, by that mighty power, the man
of truth, should be made subject to the spirit that made it; so that the
spirit, which is the Father, may be^ome all in all, the chief ruler in flesh.

And truly this is but according to the ^urrent of the whole Scripture; that in
the ^ay of Christ, every one shall be made of one ^eart and one spirit; that
is, all shall be ^rought in, to acknowledge the Father, to ^bey him, walk
humbly before him, and ^ive in peace and love in him. This is the ^octrine of
Christ and the Gospel. This is ^lad tidings to hear of. But when you are ^ade
to enjoy this doctrine as yours, then you shall know what it is to know the
Son* and what it is to be set free by the Son therefore wait upon the Father,
till he mak^ forth himself in you.


Qu. I wait, that is true, but I must use the means?


Answ. That which you call means does harden your hearts, and blind your eyes,
i^ shuts you out from sweet enjoyment; tha^ is, to run after men for teachings,
I speak^ not rashly, I speak what I know, and yo^ shall find before your
souls taste of tru^ peace, that whosoever takes those Scriptures* and makes
exposition upon them, from their imagination, and ^els you that is the wor^ of
God, and has seen nothing: That they are the false Christ's and false Prophets,
an^ their way of teaching is mere deceit both to your souls, and to your
purses; for now in this day of Christ which is begun, and which will have a
greater appearance ere long in the great world; Men must speak their own
experienced words, and must not speak thoughts.

For thoughts, and studies, and imagination of flesh, are the men that are
found gathering sticks upon this sabbath day, and these are stoned to death by
the Power that is arising in some already; and shall be stoned to death in all;
that the Lord alone may be exalte in this day of his Power.


Qu. Must I use no means at all, or what means must I use?


An. These 3 first; let your chief endeavor be to act according to your
creation: that is, to do as you would be done unto, by all creatures, as I
have showed; and I Will tell you, this is as needful a gospel doctrine to be
practiced as any I know for the present; for I Will assure you, the world is at
such a pass, yea, and among imaginary professors especially, that I know not
who I can say is a sincere hearted friend; so that I am sure the son of man
at his coming finds no faith in earth, neither in my flesh, nor in the flesh of
other, he brings it with him, and gives it to us.

Secondly, wait upon the Father with a meek spirit for his teaching. And you
shall find it a very hard thing to perform these ^wo means: for the flesh is
both very un^ighteous to seek it self, and it is very hasty ^o have all
knowledge, peace, and experience ^n a sudden; its so proud and hasty, it will
^ot wait.

Thirdly, if you would hear other men ^peak, you may do two things; First,
read ^he record, and there see what the testimony of the Apostles and Prophets,
your fellow servants were; but do not alter their words, by forceing a meaning,
till the Father teach you.

Secondly, if you would hear, then acquaint your selves with such, as can
speak from a testimony within: for as they received what they have from the
pure teachings of the Father: so this second hand teaching will be pure
teaching to you; but be sure you do not prefer this second hand teaching before
the first: for now the everlasting word and gospel must reveal himself to you,
or else you cannot be satisfied.

I have now discharged my service to the Father, in this declaration: remember
what is told you, despise not the Fathers means, by preferring the way and
means of the flesh, above the ways of the Father.

They say, I deny the Scriptures, because I say, that the Scriptures were not
appointed for a rule to the world to walk by, without the spirit; but were the
testimony of the Father in those men that writ them, for the comfort and
benefit of those that are drawn up into communion with the same spirit: And to
this I shall give this account.


Qu. What is the Law and Testimony which if a man speak not according to it, it
is because there is no light in him?


An. This Law and Testimony to which I must have recourse for my comfort, is
not the words or writings of other men without me; But the spirit of the Father
in me, teaching me to know him by experience; and when I can speak purely what
I do see and hear from the Father; this is the Law and Testimony within me,
from which I speak, and if I speak not from this Law within, I have no
knowledge in me.


Qu. But are not the Scriptures, the Law and Testimony of the Father?


Answ. It was the Law and Testimony of the spirit which rested in and upon the
Prophets and Apostles, for they writ what they saw in vision, and they spoke
what they heard by voice, speaking to them spiritually.


Qu. But are not those Scriptures the Law and Testimony for people to walk by
in these days?


Answ. No: For this is to walk by the eyes of other men, and the spirit is not
so scanty, that a dozen or 20 pair of eyes shall serve the whole world; but
every son and daughter as they are called children of light, have light
within themselves: The same spirit that fills one, fills all; and makes the whole
number of them, according to their several measures, to be of one heart and
one mind.


Qu. But may not men take these Scriptures, and spend construction upon them;
and hold forth those constructions to others, as perfect light, by way of
office?


An. I answer no: neither reason nor Scripture allows any man to speak any
words, but what he knows positively to be truth. And he that spends
constructions thereupon, speaking from his imagination, he speaks from the
flesh and devil, and so he makes himself to be a traitor to the father,
inholding forth that to be truth which is no truth. And a thief, robber, and
unrighteous dealer with the Prophets and Apostles: First, in taking their words
as his own: and secondly, in expounding their meaning, and so putting his own
meaning upon their words.

But yet he that has the same spirit, may speak the same word, where the
Father has given him the same sight and experience: for no man can safely tell
another, this is a positive truth of God, till he have the same testimonial
experience within himself as the penmen of Scripture had: and this I am sure
all that stand up to teach by way of office have not; therefore it is clear,
that the power that sets up such teachers is not from the Father; commanding,
but from the flesh; being suffered by the Father for a time, that when he comes
to throw down his enemies, flesh may be shamed, and he honored.

That man that cannot speak the testimony of the Father, no other way, but from
his book as he reads, or from the mouth of another what he hears: as the
public teachers do speak by hearsay and not from experience, and so declares
himself to be a false Christ, a false prophet, that runs to teach others,
before he have any discovery of God within himself.


Qu. But are not the Scriptures the truths of God?


An. Yes, for they declare, that the spirit was the mighty governor of the
flesh of those that writ them, and so the truths of God the great governor in
the pure experience of those penmen.

And I shall demand of you how you know that these Scriptures are the word of
God, in the sense you call them: but the testimony of the spirit within your
selves, I say, there is no way to know but by the spirit himself; seeing there
are so many expositions upon them, which without doubt has varied the copies:
if it were possible to see those very writings from the prophets and Apostles
own pen: which is not to be seen.

But when the spirit comes in he must, nay he does and will declare his own
meaning. And so the spiritual man judges all things, and he himself is judged
of no man: he can judge the flesh, and pass righteous judgment, because he
sees and knows wh^t the flesh is. The flesh cannot judge him, for if he do,
it is not righteous judging, but rash censure.


Qu. What use is to be made of the Scriptures?


An. First, they are, or may be kept as a record of such truths as were writ
not from imagination of flesh, but from pure experience, and teachings of the
Father. Secondly, we are taught thereby to wait upon the Father with a meek
and obedient spirit, till he teach us, and feed us with sincere milk, as he
taught them, that wrote these Scriptures.

Thirdly, when I look into that record of experimental testimony, and find a
suitable agreement between them, and the feeling of light within my own soul,
now my joy is fulfilled. And every man and woman may declare what they have
received, and so become preachers one to another.

For the Scriptures does but declare the sending down of the spirit and how he
shall rule in the earth in the latter days: but they do not declare every
particular measure and beam of the spirits ruling, for this the sons and
daughters are to declare, by their particular experiences, as they are drawn up.


Qu. But when I read the Scriptures and finds a persuasion in my heart, that
they are true, may I not own them as a truth, and speak them as a truth; and
speak them to others?


An. You may deliver the same words you read which you are persuaded of, but
to pass construction and the meaning, by way of office teaching others; this
you cannot do. There is an imaginary persuasion grounded upon thoughts, or as
he conceives; but this is a sandy foundation, and deceives all the world.
Secondly, there is an experimental persuasion, grounded upon sight and feeling
of the spirit of truth, ruling king within him; and this is the rock that will
never fayl.


Qu. But did not the Apostles and Christ take texts of Scripture, and expound
them, as Philip did to the Eunuch, and Christ from the 61 Esaias?


An. They did not preach and expound any text customarily, as the parish gods
do: but such particular Scriptures as the oportune time and occasion served, to
declare Christ to be the lamb of God, or the great prophet which the Father
promised to send.

So that all the Scriptures of the ancient prophets, which they spoke from, was
only to make it appear that the Messiah was come: but they did not preach in
settled parishes, forcing the people by the hand of the magistrate, to come and
hear them, and give them a maintenance for so doing, under pain of punishment;
the Scriptures knows no such custom or way to be used: therefore whosoever
lives in such a practice, denies the Scripture, and are enemies to Jesus Christ.

But now if any one take Scriptures, that speak of the spirits ruling in flesh,
and so proves the truth of the Scripture by his own testimony or witness
within himself; this may be done, but for any other way of expounding
Scripture I know none, neither will, nor does the Scripture warrant any other,
but what advances the spirit and throws down the flesh, by the speakers own
experience.


Qu. But may not the powers of a land compel their people, some to preach, and
others to hear Scriptures expounded as the manner is in England?


An. I answer, That power that compels is the little horn, or dragon,
wheresoever it sits; and that expounding is a flat denial of those Scriptures,
and treason against the spirit, liberty is to be given to every one in the case
for the kingdom of Christ has an interest herein.

Lands and Kingdoms are most commonly governed more by the wisdom of the
flesh, then of the spirit: and why? because the spirit gave that power into the
hand of flesh for a certain time, and when the flesh is judged for his action,
the Lord will condemn him for his unrighteous, cruel self-seeking and
oppressing government over his lambs and sheep.

The Powers of the Land punished Christ and his Apostles for holding forth
their testimony of the Father which was within them; but they did not compel
any to hear them, or to follow them: it is an ^asyer thing for magistrates to
be breaking forth against such as speak from a pure testimony, then against
such as speak from imaginary studies of the flesh, both in regard of the powers
of the flesh within them, blinding their eyes, and because of so many envious
spirits against truth, that will be flattering the magistrate, and telling him
tales of slander on purpose to incense him against the sincere hearted in the
land, because they hate them, through ignorance that is in them; not knowing
the Majesty of the Lord that is in his servants, whom they despise.


Qu. What must the powers of a Land do then in the matters of Religion, as
they call it?


An. First, they must suffer every one that will quietly to keep the record in
their houses, or to rerd it, or speak of it one to another, and they that find
their own experience to suite therewith, speaking from a pure testimony, and
walks in all acts of righteousness toward his fellow creatures. It is the
charge which the Father has put into the hand of the Magistrate, to protect
these from their oppression of unreasonable men.

Secondly, if any man walk unrighteously toward his fellow creature in civil
matters: the Powers of a land must punish him, according to the nature of his
offense, and so to be a terror to all unrighteousness.


Qu. But what if the Powers of a Land command some of their people to hold
forth the scriptures to the rest, and they be willing to obey?


An. If they do, they can command their servants only to read them, and to
such people as are willing to hear them read, but they cannot command their
servants to spend constructions thereupon, neither can they force the people to
come to hear those constructions; but must leave both parties at liberty:
neither can they force the people to give the tenths of their increase, for a
yearly maintenance to those servants: neither can those servants say, we speak
truths, and what differs from our constructions are errors; and so call upon
the Magistrate their master, to punish such, whom they brand for heretics; for
all these things deny the scriptures: and is contrary to the spirit of the
Father: and do tie his hands, and hinder the setting up of pure service, and
sow emnity to the Fathers own way of teaching.

They say, I deny Father, Son and Holy Ghost, but wherefore they raise such a
scandal I cannot tell; yet hereof I shall give this account.


Qu. What is Father, Son and Holy Ghost?


Answ. These are three names given to the one Spirit; As first, the Father, he
is the spirit Reason; out of whom the creation of heaven and earth, with every
branch of it proceeded. The Spirit in whom all things lay before there was any
manifestation appeared visible: and this is called the siery orb, or spirit of
burning, that will try all men's works, of what nature they be.

Secondly, the Son is the light and declaration of the Father, to the creation,
after it was come forth: and here first note, that every creature in its place,
and stature, is a son to the Father; because every single creature do
demonstrate his maker to the view of his fellow creature, every one as a
candlestick, holding forth the Father by the light that is in it self, for
indeed the light that is in it, is the Father himself, and the Father shows
forth himself to the creation: by every particular parcel of the creation, but
these are but dark or weak shining Suns, Suns over which the clouds are much
spread

But now perfect man, is the Son of the Father, in perfect glory, for when the
Father rules and shines in him bodily, then he can declare the Father by all
his senses, to the c^eation, which no other creature can do but he.

Therefore man is called the supreme creature, and he can call the spirit, Lord;
because he sees and hears, feels, smells and tastes, that he who is the spirit
of gentleness, uniting all together in love, and sweet compliancie, does
govern the whole creation, and subjects all the flesh under him, and makes it
serviceable. Now tha^ man that is not humble and subject to the spirit his
maker, he is a Sun under a dark eclipse; he has the form of the Son indeed
that has no ^rightnesse in him, he is not the well belo^ed Son. So you see
here is the Father and ^he Son both in one person and spirit.

Now thirdly, the Holy Ghost is a man in whom the Father dwells bodily, which
is, E^manuel, God with us, and in and by whom ^he Father does manifest his
power in do^ng great works. And he is said to be holy, because the darkness of
the flesh is subdued under the feet of the spirit, and the spirit ^ules in
flesh over all his enemies.

And he is called, the Go-host, or the ^rength of heaven; living and walking in
^esh as an host or army of men, are called, the ^rength of a land, and going up
and down or the defense of the land, against all ene^ies; so I say, perfect man
has the strength ^f the Father dwelling bodily in him. And ^ne man thus drawn
up, is as an host of ^en, or a strong army, or a Go-host, going ^r traveling
among enemies, and subduing them under his feet, by the power of the spirit
that is in him.

And thus did the man Jesus Christ, tread ^ll enemies powerfully under foot,
and ^ranke not, he was a Go-host, or a traveling army of mighty strength, which
way sover he went; the spirit dwelt in him without measure. And the particular
Saints likewise, as they are drawn up into the Father they have this term
given them, that on shall chase a hundred, and a hundred put t^ thousand to
flight; this declares they a^ go-hosts, or armies of mighty strength.

Now he that sins against the Father or the the Son, in the former sense of
Sonship ^ I said* shall be forgiven, and here he speak^ of creatures one
trespassing against another and in so doing sins against the Father, the is,
the light in them. And here flesh m^ possibly walk in ways of opposition to
the Father, as he shines forth in creatures, or ^ he shines forth out of man
weakly; but ^ that sins against that body in whom the F^ther dwells bodily,
shall not be forgiven.

A man may sin against other sons and ^ forgiven; but he that sins against this
bel^ved son, this holy Ghost, this strength ^ the Father, shall never be
forgiven.

By the word, He, or whosoever does sin^ is not meant here the creature man,
but the man of sin, or powerful serpent within the flesh: for this strong
wicked man fights against the strength of heaven, this would n^ have the spirit
to dwell in flesh bodily; and why because he himself would dwell there, and wou^^
have the spirit to be under his proud feet therefore there is an irreconcilable
difference between the man of sin, the serpent, and the man of righteousness the
Spirit, both striving to dwell in man, but the spirit will prove the stronger.


Qu. But if it must only be the cursed one in me that shall be destroyed, I Will
live as I list, I shall be saved?


An. Know this, that this body of sin and the flesh is so nearly wrapped each
in other, that before the spirit has parted them, thou shall roar in
bitterness and wish thou had never been borne; and the more familiarity thou
have had with thy cursed lust, the sharper will thy torments be; the found^r
cannot burn away the dross, but must burn the gold too in the fire.


Qu. But if you take it Spirit; Father, Son and holy Spirit, and leave the word
Ghost out, as to be a declaration of the Father, as some say?


Answ. Then the Spirit does declare holy breathing, as when man was first made,
his maker breathed into him the breath of life, and man became a living soul:
so that the spirit in the man is, the life and breath of God in the man, and so
a holy spirit.

And in this sense likewise the man of sin, the powers of the curse in man
seek to de^troy the light, life and breathing of God in man; but he must be
destroyed under the feet of the spirit, who will dwell himself in his own
house, which house is man.


Qu. But how came in that distinction of holy Spirit, and of unclean spirit;
which are phrases often used?


Answ. Before man rejected the spirit his maker, the spirit was his breath and
life. And he lived in the spirit treading the objects of the creation under his
feet in comparison, but after that man began to look after the objects of the
earth, delighting himself to live upon or among fellow creatures more then the
spirit. And so chose to himself another livelihood and protection, then his
master; then his breath or power that guided him, became mixed and turned
unclean.


Qu. Unfold your meaning in this a little more?


Answ. The spirit made the flesh to be his house to dwell in, and set man in
the midst of the creation, as a lord to govern the creature, which while he
governed according to the light of his maker within him, he did al^ in
righteousness; but when he fell off, and delighted to follow the lusts of his
eye, the lusts of his heart, and guidance of the flesh, then he governed al in
unrighteousness, and so pulling death and curse upon himself, and upon the
earth.

For the spirit that made all creatures, did know that man as he was flesh,
would be looking after fellow creatures, and take delight in the creation more
then in the spirit of the creation; who was his maker that dwelt within, and
lay covered from the eyes of flesh.

Therefore Reason the essential Father, gave this Law, that in that day, that
man left off to own his maker that dwelt within him, and to suck delight from
the creation, he should then die, or be cast into a condition to live below the
spirit that is to live upon the creature, and not upon the spirit; And the
spirit would suffer himself thus for a time to be trod under foot, til the
fullness of time came, that he would rise up like seed of wheat, from under
those dark and heavy clods of fleshy earth, and so himself, the seed out of
whom all things came would bruise the serpents head, that powerful proves that
was in flesh to look after objects without him, rather then into the spirit
within him.


Qu. Why then you seem to say, that the Law which Reason gives occasioned man
to fall?


Answ. Very true, for if there had been no Law, there had been no
transgression, if there had been no binding law of reason to require him to
cleave only to his maker, and to eye and own him principally; then he had not
done evil though he had placed his delight in the objects of the earth, his
fellow creatures.

For note here, it is one thing to live in and upon the spirit, and another
thing to fleight the spirit, and to live in and upon the creation, that came
out or forth of the spirit.


Qu. I entreat you to tell me what you mean by the Spirit?


Answ. The Spirit is the alone being of himself, that gave a being to
whatsoever we see and hear, for whatsoever you see or hear, is but the
breathings forth or declaration of an infinite being that was before them; as
the words of a man's mouth are the declaration of the spirit or power within;
and are created by the spirit, and so hold forth as a creature to the creation.

And therefore the Spirit is called, the Father, the King, the mighty God or
Governor, Jehovah, Elohim, the Lord, and the like. Now he is called the Lord,
because he is the power that rules in and over the whole globe of heaven and
earth, for they are all governed by this one spirit.


Qu. But is death and darkness made by this one Spirit likewise?


Answ. The one spirit made light and drrknesse, as in the great body of night
and day, so in the little body man; for that power of darkness that dwells in
humane flesh, and which leads the creature captive into complainings, and
sorrow was made by the Spirit; by these words, In the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall die. As well as he made that power of light, liberty, and
life; by those words, Live; yea, I say, Live.


Qu. I pray explain this a little more?


An. After the Spirit had made the creation, and mankind to govern it. Now
Reason would manifest himself to this creation by the works of his own hands,
therefore let any man stand alone to the Law of Reason his Maker, to see
whether he would stick to the one spirit, and live in him, or cleave to the
creatures, and live in them; and man rejected the spirit, and cleaved to the
creature; and so by virtue of the Law, cast himself under the power of death
and darkness, which was the curse, that Reason inflicted.

And thereupon the spirit within man being a prisoner to the flesh, or devil:
As Reason would have it so for a time, that when he comes to arise up in flesh,
like a corn of wheat from under the clods of the earth: the creation may then
come to know the spirit that is within it, is the mighty Power, and that all the
creation being rested upon, is still but weakness, and cannot give true Rest,
that so the Father alone may be all in all.


Qu. What is the devil?


Answ. The flesh of man within, and the objects of the creation without, is the
devil; under which the spirit within is for a tim^ buried and lies silent; and
while man is subject to his flesh, or to the objects before him* he is carried
away prisoner under the power of darkness; for let him go from creatur^ to
creature, all are too weak to work hi^ peace, or let him have all the desires
of hi^ flesh satisfied, even that delight brings pai^ and sorrow, no true peace.


Qu. And why is the flesh of man within, a^ objects without, called the devil.


Answ. Because when it is King it leads the spirit of man into darkness; yea,
into utter darkness and sorrow far from light, li^ and true peace; for it
draws men to live upon the creation, and to reject the spirit. The is that you
call the serpent which tempte^ Adam.


Qu. How do you mean, make it more clear?


Answ. The flesh of man having lifted ^ his heel against the Spirit within,
which was his Maker, seeks life and contentment, from objects without in the
globe, not from the Spirit Reason that dwells within, and that holds altogether
by the Power. As for example; covetous flesh delights in the enjoyment of
riches or creatures; pride of the flesh delights in the enjoyment of the sight
of the eye, or inward delights placed upon visible objects.

Now the man lives in, and upon the creation, not in and upon the Spirit in the
creation; and though he say that the Father is his God, yet he lies, for he is
led and ruled by the flesh, which is the devil, or father of lies which throws
the man into vexation and sorrow every foot, for if his covetousness, pride,
and lusts be satisfied, he has peace; but this is the peace of the flesh, or
devil; and let his covetousness or pride be crossed, and then he is filled with
vexation; which is hell or darkness, even the torments of the flesh or devil.

And the Law of Reason suffered the flesh thus to fall and to weary out himself
in his own folly, that when the Spirit is pleased to break forth and manifest
himself to rule in flesh, then man may see his wise flesh has nothing that is
good in all his selfish actings; but that the spirit that brought it forth, is
the mighty Power.

And when the Fathers time is come to manifest himself to any one, he will then
dispell the darkness, which by his Law he made, and will set the creature free
from the bondage of that darkness, burn up all those thorns and briars that
flesh has brought to terrify it self; and will take up the creature into his
own liberty and life; And then the Spirit shall be all in all: whereas the
flesh generally living up on objects is all in all, or chief ruler in every
man.


Qu. What is it to live in the Spirit?


Answ. When flesh is made to see, and to be subject to the spirit that brought
it forth, and is guided by the light of Reason and righteousness, that might
tie power ruling it. And not led away like a bear by the nose, by every object
before his eyes, which the flesh lusts after to enjoy, and places contentment
in.

They slander me, And say, I deny Prayer: And to this I shall give this account.


Qu. What is Prayer?


Answ. Prayer is of a threefold nature; First, it is to pay the king of
righteousness his due; and that is for every man to act according to
the-creation of a man, which is to righteously to all fellow creatures, he
being the lord of the creatures.

As first, to do righteously to his own body, in taking food moderately, for
the preservation of the health of it, and not to be excessive in drunkenness
and gluttony; and not to give away to the unclean lusts of the flesh, which
tends to the destruction of himself; for if the Spirit, Reason, within a man
let the flesh alone, and does not govern and moderate it in righteousness, it
will destroy it self in a short time: let the flesh walk in Reasons law of
moderation and righteousness, and it shall be preserved from heart breaking
sorrows.

Secondly, act righteousness to all fellow creatures, till the ground
according to Reason; use the labor of your cattle with Reason; follow your
course of trading in righteousness, as Reason requires; do to men and women,
as you would have them do to you; and by so doing you shall live as Reasonable
creatures, you shall act according to the creation of a man, and so pay the
King of Righteousness his due; for when you hold forth him in your
conversation, to the view of others, you honor him, you glorify his name, and
give him thanks: and this is one part of prayer.


Qu. Thus the heathen walked according to the light of nature, but Christians
must live above nature?


Answ. Then English Christians are in a lower and worser condition, then the
heathens, for they do not so much. Men that are guided by principles, of fair
dealing void of deceit, knows not this day how to live, but he will be cheated
and cosoned; and is this life of Christians (for all England is so called)
above the life of the heathens? Surely the life of the heathens shall rise up
in judgment against you, from the greatest to the least. But let me tell you,
that that man whosoever he be, that is not careful to look into the light of
his nature, and follow the rules of that light, to do as he would be don unto,
shall never come to see the Spirit, that made and that dwells in nature, which
is the Father of the whole creation. And if you know not him, then I pray tell
me what God you worship or pray to?

But secondly, Prayer lies in the Reasonings of the heart, as thus: Ask this
question within thy self; Is covetousness the name of the Lord, or the name
of the flesh? the answer within thee will be, it is the name of the flesh, not
the name of the Lord; now if thou walk in covetousness, how can thou be said
to honor the Lord by thy words in prayer, when thou honor the name of the
flesh, in thy practice.

And so is pride, is envy, is rash anger, is hypocrisy, is self-will, is
unmercifull cruelty, is zeal without knowledge, is uncleanness; the name of
the flesh, or the name of the Lord; thy own heart will give answer, they be
the name of the flesh, not the name of the Lord, and thou lives in the practice
and power of those lusts; and gives the Lord a few customary words, and thinks
his service lies in them. I will have thee to know that the time is now
breaking forth; yea, it is began, that they that worship the Father shall
worship him in spirit and truth, and not in lip labor and custom, according to
the imagination of flesh.


Qu. What is the name of the Lord? then I propound this question within thy
heart.


Answ. The name of the Lord, is Love, joy, peace, meekness obedience,
self-denial, chastafie, humility, mercifulness, Reason.

Now he that is drawn up thus to Reason within himself, and to see himself,
this man is praying continually, and calling upon the name of the Lord
continually, whatsoever he does, whatsoever he thinks, which way soever he
goes, he shall have still fresh occasions thus to be reasoning within himself;
and this reasoning will do two things.

First, it will strike the heart dead; when thou come to see that for all thy
praying in words, yet thou art at a loss, for thou honor the name of the
flesh in practice, and only worships the Lord with wind, like the way of the
world; your servant Sir; when he could kill him in his heart: when these things
comes home to thee, thou will be struck dead, and thy mouth be stopped; and
this is a great power that stops the rage of flesh.

Secondly, this way of prayer or calling upon the name of the Lord will kill
thy distempers as they arise, and will keep thy heart in peace, this I know, if
thou will believe another testimony, for now the name of the flesh is spied
out, and the poison of it killed; for when once Reason begins to enlighten
thee, he will be thy keeper. The name of the Lord likewise is hereby advanced;
first, within thy self, thou fear and tremblest before him. Secondly,
outwardly thou art moved to act righteousness to others, from the savor of
this sweet ointment.

Now that man does not live less or more in the practice of those two rules
laid down; did never pray in all his life, though he use the words of prayer
every day.

Words and actions going together are the declaration of a sincere heart; but
words in prayer, without acting according to creation as the general practice
is, are declarations of hypocritical and deceived flesh: let his profession be
what it will be.

Therefore professors look to your selves, both priests and people, there is
light broke out that will lay open the hypocrisy of your private actings to
the view of the whole creation, and you shall not cover your shame, do all you
can. Thus much for the second part in prayer.

Thirdly, prayer lies in words or utterance, but this is the remotest part of
prayer. Now words among men should be the declaration of the heart among men,
but oftentimes they are not; for men have good words many times in prayer,
which they have got by tradition, which their hearts are strangers to; and so
they draw nigh God with their lips, but their hearts are removed: and this
hypocritical darkness has at this day overspread pulpit worship, and almost
all family worship. But our God has left us a remnant on earth, whose hearts
wait upon him, or else we had been as S^dom, here in England before this day.


Quest. But when shall I use or speak words in prayer?


Ans. When the power of the Spirit within does give words to the mouth to
utter; for he that speaks words before the Lord, and not from his power,
speaks he knows not what, and his prayer is the vain babbling of the heathen,
that thinks to be heard, for their much speaking.


Qu. We all know that without the heart words of prayer are nothing, and there
is no man that makes conscience of his ways, dares speak, unless he feel his
heart upright?


Answ, This is the language in professors mouths, but they neither know nor
practice their own words; for let me tell you, and your heart shall bear
witness, that I speak truly, that many times when you are put upon it to
pray, as you call it, you find your self empty of words, now you will not wait
upon the Father till he give words of knowledge; but the pride of the flesh
will put you on, and force words out of your mouth though they appear full of
confusion to your selves, and likewise to the standers by: and tells you, what
will others think of thee, if thou neglect to pray or preach as thou have been
accustomed; and so shame of men within thee, puts thee upon speaking a
multitude of confused words before the Lord. But Reason tells thee, when thou
comes before the Lord, let thy words be few and faithful.


Qu. But must I use no words at all in prayer?


Answ. I tell thee when the power within thee gives words to thy mouth to
utter, then speak, and thou can not but speak; but he that speaks before the
Lord, whatsoever he be, learned, or unlearned, before he has received power
from on high, that man offers the sacrifice of a fool, not considering what he
does.

Well, thou have now heard what prayer is, both in the heart, and in the mouth,
and in the hand. These words shall not die, they are sincere milk which once a
wearied soul did suck from the Fathers own breasts of love, and wherein he now
walks, and finds true rest in the Father; they are words of truth and
soberness.

Therefore though thou go on in thy customary way of praying words in the
pulpit, and in families, yet know, that thou art left without excuse, and thou
shall be brought before the King, and condemned for thy hypocrisy, to the
shame and torment of thy whole man.

Lastly, they say, I deny the ordinances of God, and that I live above all
Ordinances, which is my pride: Hereunto I shall give this account.

First, that I do walk in the daily practice of such Ordinances of God, as
Reason and Scriptures do warrant.

Secondly, that the Clergy and professors of England, in their public
worships do practice their own inventions, which neither Reason, nor
Scripture, does warrant; and yet they call them Gods Ordinances; by which
practice they are the men that deny God and Christ, and turn the Scriptures
into a lie.

First, then the Ordinances of God, which Reason and Scripture does warrant,
and in which I daily walk in, are these.

First, I pray continually, calling upon the name of the Lord, in the manner I
declare before; and for that search these Scriptures, and let Reason be judge.
Eccl. 5.1.2. 1. Cor. 14.15. Esaias. 29.13. Psa. 66.18. Mat. 6.5.6* 2. Cor. 13.5.
Psalm. 4.5. Act. 1.4.8. Psalm. 52.9. Gal. 5.19.22.

Secondly, I speak to others as accasion ^ tendered, from the restimony within
m^selfe, of what I have heard and seen and received from the Father, and let
Reason b^ judge. Act. 4.20. 1 Cor. 11.23. Act. 8.30. Ps. 51.12.13. Act. 2.14.
Mat. 5.1, etc. Luke 4.21. Ioh ^.11.

Thirdly, It is my endeavor and practice, to do to others as I would have
them do to me; for this is to act according to the crea^ion of a man, the chief
Ordinance; let Reason be judge. Mat. 7.12. Romans 12.20. Mat. 25.^5. Esaias.
1.16.17 etc. 1 John 3.17. Romans 14.^0. Deuteronomy. 1.16. Esaias. 33.15, 16.

Fourthly, if I have knowledge, peace, or any good, I rejoice to see the Father
breath^ng forth love, in the strength I receive there from: I am ready as
occasion is tendered, to out forth my hand to refresh others, and ^ereby I give
the Father thanks. And if I want any of those refreshments my self, my heart
frets not, but is quiet, and made to wait upon the Father patiently, till he
give me such things I want, in his own time. Psa. 9.14. Act. 15.31. Luke 22.32.
Psalm. 123.2. Zeph. 3.8. Gal. 5.5. Esaias. 8.17.

Fifthly, I can, without grudging, suffer others to walk to that measure of
knowledge they have received, though it differ from mine; yet holding forth my
light with tenderness to such as I see of meek spirits; and can without
rashness (for I know what I speak) condemn, where I see a heart lifted up in
pride, waiting upon the Father, til he destroy the Serpent, and then make us
all of one heart, and one spirit. Romans 12.10. 1 Peter 4.10. Psalm. 37.7. John.
7.34. 1 Cor. 6.2. Romans 14.5.12.

Sixthly, I do and can break bread, with any in whom I see but the least
measure of the Father rising up; that is, I can eat and drink with them in
any house, where I me^t with them, speaking of the things of the Father to
them, and hearing them speak to me; for this is to break bread, from house to
house, in singleness of heart; this is the communion of Saints in that
particular; let Reason judge. Act. 2.46. Judge. 13.15. Genesis 18 4.5. Joh. 21.5,
etc. Act. 16.34.

Seventhly, for Baptism, I have gone through the ordinance of dipping, which the
letter of the Scripture does warrant, yet I do not press any one thereunto;
but bid every one to wait upon the Father, till he teach and persuade, and
then their submitting will b^ found; for I see now that it is not the material
water, but the water of life; that is the spirit, in which souls is to be
dipped, and s^ drawn up into the one spirit* and all the^ outward customs and
forms are to cease and pass away. Mat. 3.15.16. Act. 8.38. Jo^ 3.22, 23. 1
Cor. 12.13. Joh. 4.21, etc. 1 Cor. 13.^

Eighthly, that Sabbath which I observe, is the day of Christ, wherein he is
manifesting his power to save me from the curse; and so my soul is continually
breathing forth, what I receive from him. I feel his power, in this day of his
power, subduing the powers of my flesh more and more under me, and fil^ing me
with himself. In whom I rest, and ^ind sweet contentment; and this is the
Anti^ipe of Moses seventh day. Heb. 4.3. Esaias. 2.^1. Psalm. 110.3. John 8.56.
Revel. 19.6. Mat. 11.28.

They that will observe Gods Ordinances, must walk in the light of pure Reason,
or according to the command or example of Reasons Scripturs, in the very letter
of them, without making inferences or constructions; ^or he that gives liberty
to do so, gives liber^y to alter the Scriptures.

But what I have declared here, and what practice, to me is the light of pure
Reason, ^ho is the judge of all; and according to ^xample and command of
Scriptures in the ^etter; therefore I own the Scripture and Ordinances of God
in the spiritual power of ^^em, letting them shine in their own luster ^ot
mixing my own conjectures with them. Now observe, those Ordinances, which
neither Reason, nor Scripture does warrant, and which you walk in, calling
them Gods Ordinances.

First, you use words of prayer by custom, observing days, and times, and
seasons, and places, whether ye have the power of prayer in you; yea, or no;
witness your set forms, or the confusion that is in your extempore prayers;
read these Scriptures, and let Reason judge whether this be a service with the
whole heart. Gal. 4.10.11. Mat. 6.5. Lu. 18.10. John 4.21, etc. Esaias. 29.13.

Secondly, you preach not occasionally from the testimony within your selves,
but customarily from your imaginary studies, of what you have heard and read
from others* and make a trade of it, to get a living by ^ but you say, you are
commanded to preach because Paul bid Timothy to preach in season and out of
season; this does not concern yo^ to take up preaching to make it a trade prove
your command within your self, o^ else you have no warrant from the Spirit s^
to do, though you be learned in all the la^guages under the Sun, if you run
before yo^ be sent. Eze. 13.3. Jer. 23.21.30, etc. Jo^ 10.12. Dan. 8.23, etc,
John 3.11. Micah. ^ 11, 12.

Thirdly, you use words of prayer, before and after sermon, a custom the
Scriptures ownes not; read the Record, and let Reason judge, whether you find
the power of prayer so customarily in you, or whether it be not covetousnes in
you to get a temporal living that stirs you up to use this trade; and gross
ignorance in the people to consent with you, and the vain babbling of the
heathens. Mat. 5.1. Acts 2.14. John 8, etc. Acts 13.9.

Fourthly, your preaching is exposition of words and texts, a custom that
Christ and his Apostles never used nor commanded; indeed Christ did expound the
61 of Esaias, but it was upon occasion, to give forth his testimony, that he was
the Messiah, he made not a trade of it customarily to get a living by. Mica.
3.5. Zacha. 13.4, 5. Act. 13.9. Act. 7.2. Acts. 21.40.

Fifthly, you petition the magistrate to compel the people to come to hear you
pray and preach, or if you do not petition, yet your ancestors have done it:
And you allow of such a compulsion, and never tell the magistrate of his evil
in so doing. A forcing power, which Christ and his Apostles never practiced;
indeed they did foretell the rising up of his power, which Daniel calls the
little horn. Dan. 8.23, 24.25. Luke 11.47, 48. Mat. 15.6. Luke 9.50.53, etc.
Rev. 13.6. Rev. 17.2. Mat. 24.26, 27. Romans 14.5.12.

Sixthly, you call a parish (which is so called and made for civil good sake) a
Church, and all that lives within the boun of that parish, you say, are bound
to maintain one of you, that stands up to teach them, what you have read and
heard from others; telling them, you speak from God, when your own souls
knows you lie; for you speak other men's words not your own experience; but
your lies now shall be covered no longer. Nay, you say, if the people refuse to
give you tithes, you tell the Magistrate, it is his duty to force them, all
which is not warrantable, neither from Reason nor Scripture. Mica. 3.5. Ier.
23.21. Ezekiel. 13.7. Luke 9.54, etc. Heb. 7.12.

Seventhly, you say and practice, that the first day of the week is the Sabbath
day, and so making use of the Magistrates power, endeavor to compel the
people to keep that day after the manner of the Jewish tipe, merely to uphold
your own trade; a practice which the writings of the New Testament warrants
not; for the keeping of that first day, was not a forced business, but a
voluntary act of love among themselves, having a ^ast of the day of Christ, the
Antitipe of Moses seventh day. John 20.19. Psalm. 110.3. Esaias 2.11.

Eighthly, you say and practice, that breaking bread and drinking wine in a
mixed company, if they be al parishioners, al sitting either afraid or ashamed
one of another in a slavish bondage, none to speak, but one of you, is the
breaking of bread which the Apostles did practice: But neither Reason nor
Scripture does warrant your practice, for it is a mere table gesture, eating
and drinking in love and sweet communion one with another from house to house:
Read Act. 2.46. Ier. 18.4, 5.

Ninthly, you sprinkle children, and call that the baptism of Christ, a
practice which there is not the least command or example in Scripture to
warrant; yet you do it, for it mightily deceives the people, and moves them to
uphold your trade. Acts 8.13. 1 Cor. 12.13.

Tenthly, you assume the office of preaching the Gospel, because you are bred
up in humane learning, which the Scriptures does not countenanee in the least;
and while you do it, you persecute the Gospel it self, which is the Lord, or
Spirit within; and you tear in pieces the declarations of the Gospel, which is
the Scriptures, by your various expositions, and so all you do, is but to
trouble the children, and to throw dirt upon their food. Moses a shepherd;
Amos a fruit gatherer; Apostles fishermen; Christ a carpenter; such as the
Lord made preachers, not such as made themselves preachers, that had biggest
purses.

Thus I have given a taste of my own practice, and if the priests, who say they
own the the Scriptures, and they say, I deny the Scriptures and Gods
Ordinances; therefore let all men judge between us, whether is in the fault,
and let truth hereafter be owned and practiced.

They that practice any way of worship which neither Reason nor Scripture
warrants, do deny the Scriptures.

But the Ministers of England, and such as follow them in the practice of
praying, preaching; sprinkling children, breaking bread, sabbaths, Church
societies, and Ministers maintenance, as they practice in their customary way
of performances, which they call Gods ordinances; has neither Reason nor
Scripture to warrant them.

Therefore you that call your selves Ministers, are the men that deny the
Scriptures and Gods ordinances, setting up your own inferences and
constructions above the Scriptures, leaving the ancient letter which the
Apostles and Prophets writ, and set up a new molded way of Ordinances of your
own framing, by inferences and conjectures. And by thus new moulding the
Scriptures, you deny God, and Christ, the one Spirit, from whence the
Scriptures were breathed.

Let the Record be searched without drawing inferences from it, and let all
judge. Let us speak the Scripture words, not force a meaning, least we speak
contrary to the mind or spirit of them.

Well, all that I shall say, is this; let all men cease spending constructions
upon the Scriptures, and leave the pure Scriptures to shine in their own
luster, not mixing imaginary inferences with them; they were the declarations
of truth in the Prophets and Apostles.

And let us leave the pure teachings of the Father in every man, to conjoyn
themselves with those Scriptures, and then there will be no jarring, but a
sweet harmony of peace and love, between the experience of every man and those
Scriptures.


FINIS.
LEave of your trade, ye proud Priests then,
and trouble not the Spirit:
By forcing sense, from the Saints words,
if ye would life inherit.
Let every one speak what he knows,
and utter what is received:
And let not any soul by you,
hereafter be deceived.
For you as traitors to our God,
have stood to justify:
That your constructions are all truths,
and other lights a lie.
Your fleshy learning ye have owned,
as sound divine, and good:
Though you by that in ages still,
have shed the childrens blood.
But know ye now, the time is come,
for truth to spread all over:
And he will tread you down apace,
and all your lies discover.
Leave off therefore I say, betimes,
and stoop unto our God:
If ye would life, and peace enjoy,
with them that know the Lord.
Poscript.
IF Reason, King, do rule in thee,
There Is truth, and peace, and clemency:
No rash distemper will there be,
No filthy lusts, but chastity.
In all thy actions to behold,
Just dealing, love, as pure as gold.
When Reason rules in whole mankind,
Nothing but peace, will all men find:
Their hearts he makes both meek, and kind,
And troublesome thoughts he throws behind.
For he is truth, and love, and peace,
Makes wars and lewdness for to cease.
He makes no prisons for the poor,
He does condemn and judge the whore:
He makes all men to sin no more,
As they have done in times before;
But restores all to what has been,
And heales the creature of his sin.
And why do men so clamor then,
Against this powerful King in men.
FINIS.

