Historical Rarities. etc.
2 A Costermongers Daughter ye comes be Sultanes to ye grand Seigiuar: p 65
1 Andri: Battles delivernce in his voyage to ye River of plate P: 1
3 The history of a famous Woman Captain: viz Joan of arc: p 177
4 Almansor a pleasant story of a Spanish Doh: p 185.
5 A Notable Combat between a Knight. and Esquire in K. Richard. 2 time P. 264.
6 The fiery Irruption of mount Aetna: p. 287.


HISTORICAL RARITIES AND CURIOUS Observations DOMESTIC and FOREIGN.

Containing Fifty three several Remarks; viz. 1. The miraculous and strange
Adventures and Deliverances of one Andrew Battle of Leigh in Essex. 2. A
strange Deliverance of an Englishman from a Desolate Island near Scotland,
wherein he had long continued in extreme Penury and Misery. 3. A strange
Adventure of some Englishmen in the recovery of their own Freedom, and a Ship
called the Exchange of Bristol, from the Turkish Pirates of Algiers. 4. A
notable Story of Edgar King of England, and how he was revenged on him that
circumvented him. 5. The Story of Mackbeth King of Scotland. 6. Of a
Costermongers Daughter that came to be Sultaness to the Grand Seignior of
Constantinople. 7. Historical Observations out of several Authors. 8. A
Description of Greenland and the Inhabitants thereof. 9. Several Varieties of
the West Indies. 10. Several Rarities of diverse Countries. 11. Of a mirthful
Custom used at Dunmow in Essex. 12. Of what we find in credible Authors
concerning Guy Earl of Warwick. 13. The Life of St. Patrick the Irish Apostle.
14. The Murder of Duffe King of Scotland, and how miraculously it came to be
discovered. 15. The Cruelty of Albovine King of Lombardy to his Queen Rosamond,
and how she was revenged of him. 16. The Miseries of enforced Marriage,
exemplified in a Story of a Knight in Warwickshire, who was murdered by his
own Lady. With Thirty seven more several Histories, very pleasant and
delightful.

Collected out of Approved Authors, By William Winstanley, Author of England's
Worthies.

London, Printed for Rowland Reynolds, next door to the Middle Exchange in the
Strand. 1684.

To the Noble and Generous, THE Pattern and Patron of Laudable Endeavors, Sir
THOMAS MIDDLETON, Of Stansted Montfichet, Knight.
Honored Sir,
TWO things have emboldened me to dedicate this Book unto you, the one is, your
known Abilities to approve or reject what is good or bad in Histories, wherein
your Judgment appears as sound and clear as the Sun is perspicuous in a serene
day; so that we may say of you, as the Romanists in other things, of their
Archpriest, that you are therein infallible. The other drift of my ambition in
this Dedication is, to make a public expression of the Love and Service I bear
to your self and Noble Family, which for many Ages has flourished in honor
and best repute; and which caused you to be chosen one of the Senators of this
flourishing Kingdom. To these I might add a third, that under your worthy
Patronage others might be profited thereby, especially two sorts of People;
First, those who have not money to buy great Volumes, and by that means are
destitute of helps from such Books which should conduce to a general knowledge
of History; and then most Volumes treating only of one continued subject,
without the help of a great many, they cannot attain to a perfection in the
general. Secondly, for those who have not time to peruse such voluminous
Authors, herein may they he instructed with the marrow and quintessence of what
others more largely treat of, like a little Watch, showing the time of the day
as well as a great Clock. I suppose it needless to treat of the benefit and
pleasure of these miscellaneous Histories, since variety gives the greatest
pleasure to most sorts of People; When does the Earth appear in its greatest
glory, but in the month of May, when Lady Flora has diaper'd the Meads with
variety of flowers? Our Comedies would not give such general content, were they
composed of one continued Subject, and not intermixed with several Humors.
History is the mirror for us to look in, which represents to us, things past
as if they were present, and enables us to make a rational conjecture of things
to come. In brief, there is nothing compleats a Gentleman so much as the
knowledge of History, nor no kind of History so much as these miscellaneous
Discourses. Deign Sir, to accept hereof as a mite of accknowledgment of the
respests born to your worthy self, by,

Your humbly devoted Servant William Winstanley.

The PREFACE TO THE READER.
ONE calls History the Workmistress of Experience, and Mother of Prudence; It
is the general Treasury of times past, present, and a lively pattern of things
to come; It is that which reinforces Antiquity from her ruins, and makes the
gray head of Time white again. History (says Sir Walter Raleigh) makes us
acquainted with our dead Ancestors, delivering us their Memory and Fame; out of
it we gather a Policy no less otherwise than Eternal, by the comparison and
application of other men's fore-past Miseries with our own like Errors and ill
Deservings. Skill in History makes a Young Man to be Ancient without Wrinkles
or gray Hairs, when ignorant Age is contemned and despised. Learning is such a
precious Jewel, that it was highly honored even among the Heathens themselves.
Polybius that wrote the Roman History, and their Wars with the Carthaginians,
was honored with a Statue on a high Pillar at Megalopolis. Pompey the Great
honored Theophanes the Historian with the Privileges of the City of Rome. The
Emperor Tacitus commanded the History of Tacitus to be placed in all
Libraries; and lest it should perish, he caused it every Year to be written ten
times over. Titus Vespasian bestowed great Wealth and Honors on Josephus the
Jewish Historian, notwithstanding he had before been his deadly Enemy, and
caused his Statue to be erected at Rome. Nay, that Enemy to all Goodness, even
Julian the Apostate, had a Statue made for Aurelius Victor, the Roman
Historiographer. Thus you see what a high esteem the Heathens had for their
Historians; and shall we that have more Knowledge be more barbarous? We read of
Alphonsus, King of Arragon, that he commanded the Musicians from his presence,
saying, He heard a better Harmony out of Livy. And what greater delight can any
man have, than sitting in safety to read of the dangers of other men; of which
in this Volume you have an example of Tom Coriat; what indefatigable pains did
he take, what miseries undergo, what extreme wants sustain, for the viewing
Foreign Countries and their Rarities, of which he might have had as good a
description at home. Is it not therefore better, and at a far cheaper rate, to
buy the Experience of others, then to try them our selves; for they that travel
for to veiw Curiosities pay dearly for their Experience, but they who read
Histories enjoy the experience of all that lived before, which is far greater
and much cheaper. It is History that gives us a veiw of all Places and Times,
by that we see with other men's eyes, and hear with their ears But in your
reading have a great care in the choice of your Authors, avoiding such as be
either false or impertinent, which to a judicious eye is easily discernable:
for some I have known (otherwise ingenious enough) apt to believe idle
Romances, and Poetical Fictions, for Historical Varieties. Not but that
ingenious Romances and and vvitty Fables may be read, and profitably too; but
to avoid such rude ones as Huon of Bourdeaux, Four Sons of Amon, Fortunatus,
Chimon of England, and such like, lest you be brought into the belief of Don
Quixot, which that Satirical Romance does sufficiently whip.

Indeed it were to be wished, that such rude depraved Books were utterly
abolished, or restrained at least from Youth of both kinds, for preventing of
fantastical Impressions, they being as deep taking as either the Juice of Malt
or the Vine; of the effects of the which last I shall here insert a short
Story. A Gentleman being soundly doz'd, had the Charity of his Conquerors to
buttress him up from the Inn to his Chamber, where laying him on his Bed, he
took quiet Repose for two or three hours; after he awakes intolerable dry, and
inflamed in the Throat, roared out, and knocks (supposing he had been at the Inn,
not in his Chamber) for the Tapster, whom loudly and often he called for,
crying, I burn, I burn, Cans you Rogue; and impatient of delay, threatens to
fetch him with another Allarum; which suddenly he puts in Execution, and storms
his own glass Windows so furiously with Bedstaves, old Shoes, and the like
Weapons, that he made a Breach big enough, out of which he might have thrown
the Room after. In like manner, what Impressions Books of that nature have made
upon some much studious in them, is sufficiently known, who will believe no
otherwise but that they are true, and for this only reason, Because they are
Printed.

As for my own Undertakings in this following Work I shall neither extenuate
nor extol; in the Composure thereof I have endeavored to collect nothing but
what is rare, and not vulgarly known, nor made use of any Authors for my
Authority, but what I take to be of unquestionable Credit and Estimation.
Indeed it was designed and drawn out for a far larger Volume, had not the
Bookseller's Interest overswayed me to publish no more at this time; however,
your kind Acceptance of this will engage us very suddenly to contrive the rest
in a Second Part, it being already fitted and prepared for the Press.

I hope this will not pass without a general Acceptance, I having in my time
writ above seven score Books, some of them very considerable, and all which
(excepting one) passing with a general Approbation; and that one also, how
ever, sold with some Gain. I must confess, I have had my Juvenile Excursions,
and my Loyal Intentions, by writing in defense of the Old King's Cause, is
sufficiently known: I am now (by some time) past the Meridian of my Years, and
shall for the future write nothing but what may be for the Benefit of my
Country, and that they may be known as I am,

A True Lover of Ingenuity, W. WINSTANLEY.

THE TABLE.
THE miraculous and strange Adventures and Deliverances of one Andrew Battle of
Leigh in Essex. Page 1.

A strange Deliverance of an Englishman from a desolate Island near to
Scotland, wherein he had long continued in extreme penury and misery. 16.

A strange Adventure of some Englishmen in the recovery of their own Freedom,
and a Ship called the Exchange of Bristol, from the Turkish Pirates of Argier;
published by John Rawlins.

A remarkable Story of eight men left in Greenland, Anno Christi 1630. with a
relation of their strange preservation. 43.

A notable Story of Edgar King of England, and how he was revenged on him that
circumvented him. 54.

The Story of Mackbeth King of Scotland. 59.

Of a Costermongers Daughter that came to be Sultaness to the Grand Seignior of
Constantinople.

Historical Observations out of several Authors. 71.

How they baptize, marry, and bury in Russia. 82.

The Life, Manners, and Customs of the Samoits, a People inhabiting Nova
Zembla. 89.

A Description of Groenland, and the Inhabitants thereof. 92.

Several Varieties of the West Indies. 96.

Of the Tortoises in the West Indies. 103.

Several Rarities of diverse Countries. 105.

Of a mirthful Custom formerly used at Dunmow in Essex. 109.

Of what we find in credible Authors concerning Guy Earl of Warwick. 111.

The Life of St. Patrick the Irish Apostle. 120.

A mavelous preservation of the Protestants in Ireland in the time of Queen
Mary, by a merry accident. 126.

The murder of Duffe King of Scotland, and how miraculously it came to be
discovered. 127.

The Cruelty of Albovine King of Lombardy to his Queen Rosamond, and how she
was revenged of him. 134.

The miseries of insorced Marriage, exemplified in a story of a Knight in
Warwickshire murdered by his own Lady. 138.

A remarkable story of the occasion of the Danes invading England, and of their
murdering St. Edmund. 141.

Histories of Parents crossing the affections of their Children, and the sad
effects thereof. 149.

Observations upon Kings of several Nations. 153.

A strange change of Religion of the two Dr. Reynolds. 160.

Why the Fish called Tunny is not sold in Venice. 161.

Of Machamut, a Moorish King, of a poisonous nature. 163.

A notable Imposture of Margaret Ulmer. 164.

Of People long lived, who have had their Teeth and excrements of Hair renewed.
167.

An Example of Divine Vengeance pursuing sinners. 170.

Of two famous Virago 's, Joan of Arc, and Catarina d' Arcuso. 177.

That the Italians are very revengeful, an Example. 183.

Spanish pride exemplified in a story. 185.

A mirthful conceit of Philip Duke of Burgundy. 188.

Memorials of Thomas Coriat. 189.

The reason inducing Mahometans to often prayer, exemplified by a story. 208.

A strange murder in the time of K. James. 210.

The Custom of Lapland for the marrying their Daughters. 213.

Of Spirits or Devils, and that they have had Carnal knowledge of people. 214.

The Life and Actions of the Impostor Mahomet, according to their Saracenical
opinion of him. 223.

The Talmud of the Jews, their Dreams, etc. 239.

The opinion of the Chinese concerning the people of the World after the
Flood. 244.

A strange Relation of Ferdinand Mendes Pinto a Portugal, which he saw in his
Journey in China. 245.

The Letter of Agbarus Prince of the Edesseans, to our Savior, with his
Answer, taken out of Eusebius. 249.

The conversion of a Thief by St. John the Apostle, taken out of the same
Eusebius. 254.

The Conspiracy of Earl Gowry to have murdered King James in Scotland, An.
1600. 257.

A notable Combat betwixt a Knight and an Esquire in the time of King Richard
the Second. 264.

Of such another Combat fought in France. 269.

A remarkable piece of Justice done by the Emperor Rodulphus. 270.

Of the great Friendship betwixt Damon and Pithias, two Pythagorean
Philosophers. 271.

Another of Christian Friendship. 272.

The admirable love and affection betwixt Titus and Gisippus, two Noble Young
men, the one of Rome, the other of Athens. 273.

Of Mount Aetna, and the fiery irruption there in the year 1669. 287.

HISTORIES AND OBSERVATIONS Domestic and Foreign.
The miraculous and strange Adventures and Deliverances of one Andrew Battle of
Leigh in Essex.
IN the Year of our Lord 1589, one Andrew Battle of Leigh in Essex, accompanied
with Abraham Cock of Lime-house, and accommodated with two Pinnaces of 50 Tuns
apiece; intending a Voyage to the River of Plate, upon the Coast of Brasil,
were much necessitated for Victuals: so that returning Northwards upon the Isle
of S. Sebastian, going on Land, he, with four others, were taken Prisoners by
certain Negro's belonging to the Portugals, who sent him to Angola in Africa,
where he continued in their Service several years; when desirous of freedom, he
attempted an Escape in a Holland Ship, but being discovered, he was clapped in
Prison for two months, and then banished to the Fort of Massangano, where he
lived a miserable life for the space of six years.

But this nothing daunting his Resolution, he, with ten other banished men,
practiced an Escape, having gotten a Canoo for that purpose, and furnished with
Muskets, Powder, and Shot, wandering in great misery several days through the
extremity of Heat, and want of Victuals and Water, being forced diverse times to
make their way through their Opposers with Musket shot; yet e're they could
get into a place of security, the Captain of the City from whence they came
overtook them, to whom they were forced to yield, and being carried back again,
for their welcome home were clapped up in Prison, with Collars of Iron, and great
Bolts upon their Legs.

After three months hard Imprisonment, he, with four hundred more banished
Portugals, were by Proclamation for ever destined to the Wars; and accordingly
he served in many bloody Fights, where, whosoever gained, all that fell to his
share was only Penury, Hardship, Wounds, and Scars.

Having thus had his share in Land Service, he, with sixty more Soldiers, were
sent in a Frigate with Commodities to Bahia de Tare, twelve degrees Southward,
to trade with the Savages; and having made a prosperous Voyage, were sent out
the second time to the Morro, or Cliff of Benguala, where they lighted into the
hands of the Gaga's, a most warlike People, and the greatest Canibals or
Man-eaters in the world; yet by reason of their Commodities, and for that they
helped the Gaga's against their Enemies, they in five months space made three
gainful Voyages from thence to the City of San Paulo, but coming the fourth
time the Gaga's were gone up far higher into the Country.

Being loath to return without Trade, they determined that fifty of their
Company should follow them, and the rest stay with their Ship in the Bay of
Benguala. Amongst those fifty was Andrew Battle one, who marching up the
Country, were by a great Negro Lord detained, whilst such time as the Gaga's
were gone clear away into another Land. Then did he force them to march with
him against his Enemies, until he had clean destroyed them. Nor would he then
suffer them to depart, but upon promise to come again, and leave one of their
company in pawn with him until their return.

Hereupon it was determined to draw Lots who should stay, but upon further
thoughts, they agreed amongst themselves to leave the Englishman, and to shift
for themselves, fearing to be all detained Captives. So Battle was fain to stay
per force, having with him a Musket, Powder, and Shot, they promising the
Negro Lord to come again in two months for his redemption. But that time
expired, and none of them returning, the Chief of the Town would have put
Battle to death, and in order thereto stripped him naked, and were ready to cut
off his Head, when one of the chief amongst them interposing, his Execution was
deferred upon hopes of the Portugals coming, and he set loose to walk at
liberty.

But finding no security of his life amongst them, he resolved to run away to
the Camp of the Gaga's; and having traveled a whole night, the next day he
came to a great Town called Cushil, which stood in a mighty overgrown Thicket,
the People whereof great and small came round about him to wonder at him,
having never seen a White Man before. Here he sound some of the great Gaga's
Men, with whom he went to their Camp, at a place called Calicausamba.

The Captain of the Gaga's welcomed him kindly, continuing in that place for
four months together, with great abundance and plenty of Cattle, Corn, Wine,
and Oil, and great triumphing, drinking, dancing, and banqueting with Man's
flesh; for (as I told you before) these Gaga's are the greatest Canibals or
Man-eaters in the world. Their Captain warreth all by Enchantment, and takes
the Devils counsel in all his Exploits. Such of his Soldiers as are
faint-hearted, and turn their backs to the Enemy, are presently condemned and
killed for Cowards, and their Bodies eaten. They neither sow, nor plant, nor
bring up any Cattle more than they take by Wars. When they take any Town, they
keep the Boys and Girls of thirteen or fourteen years of age as their own
Children; but the Men and Women they kill and eat. These little Boys they train
up in the Wars, and hang a Collar about their Necks for a disgrace, which is
never taken off till he proves himself a Man, and brings his Enemy's Head to
the General; and then it is taken off, and he is a Freeman, and is called Gonzo
or Soldier. This makes them desperate, and forward to be free, and counted
Men.

When their chief Captain undertaketh any great Enterprise against the
Inhabitants of any Country, he makes a solemn Sacrifice to the Devil in the
morning before the Sun rises. He sits upon a Stool, having on each side of
him a Man Witch; then he has forty or fifty Women which stand round about him,
holding in each hand a wild Horses Tail, wherewith they do flourish and sing.
Behind them are great store of Drums and other Instruments, which always play.
In the midst of them is a great Fire, upon the Fire an Earthen Pot with white
Powders, wherewith the Men-witches do paint him on the Forehead, Temples, and
thwart the Breast and Belly, with long Ceremonies and Enchanting Terms. Thus he
continues till Sun is down; then the Witches bring him his Weapon, which is
fashioned like a Hatchet, and put it into his Hand, bidding him be strong
against his Enemies, for his Mokiso (which is the Devil) is with him. Presently
there is a Man-child brought, which forthwith he kills; then are four Men
also brought before him, two whereof as it happens he presently strikes and
kills, the other two he commands to be killed without the Fort.

When they bury the dead, they make a Vault in the ground, and a Seat for him
to sit; the dead has his Hair newly embroydered, his Body washed and anointed
with sweet Powders. He has all his best Robes put on, and is brought between
two men to his Grave, and set in his Seat as though he were alive. He has two
of his Wives set with him, with their Arms broken, and then they cover the
Vault on the top. These People are very kind one to another in their health,
but in their sickness they do abhor one another, and will shun their company.

At the end of four months the Gaga's decamped, marching through diverse
Countries, destroying all wheresoever they came. In this condition continued
Andrew Battle amongst them for the space of above a year and a half, being
highly esteemed of the great Gaga, because with his Musket he had killed
diverse of the Negroes, his Enemies. At last they coming within three days
journey of Massangano, where the Portugals had their Fort aforementioned, he
made means to get thither again with some Merchant Negroes, that came to the
Camp to buy Slaves.

At that time there was a new Governor come to Massangano, named Sienor Juan
Continho, who brought Authority to conquer the Mines or Mountains of Cambamba;
and to perform that Service, the King of Spain had given him seven years
Customs of all the Slaves and Goods that were carried thence to the
West Indies, Brasil, or whithersoever. This Gentleman was so bountiful at his
coming, that his Fame was spread through all Congo, and many Mulatoes and
Negroes came voluntarily to serve him. And being some six months in the City,
he marched to the Outaba of Tomb, and there shipped his Soldiers in Pinnaces,
and went up the River Coanza, and landed at the Outaba of Songo, sixty miles
from the Sea. This Songo is next to Demba, where the Salt Mines be. In this
place there is such store of Salt, that most parts of the Country are perfect
clear Salt, without any earth or filth in it; and it is some three foot under
the Earth as it were Ice. They cut it out in Stones of a yard long, and it is
carried up into the Country, being the best Commodity that a man can carry to
buy any thing whatsoever.

From thence the Governor sent a Pinnace to Messangano, for all the best
Soldiers that were there; so the Captain of that Castle sent Battle down
amongst a hundred Soldiers more, whom the Governor kindly entertained, and
made him a Sergeant of a Portugal Company. Here he continued with them two
years, acting very valiantly in diverse bloody Battles, against several Potent
Lords that opposed the Portugals; during which time the Governor died, and
another Captain was substituted in his room, who was so cruel to his Soldiers,
that all his Voluntary men left him, and by these means he could go no further.
At this time there came news by the Jesuits, that Elizabeth Queen of England
was dead, and that King James, her Successor, had made Peace with Spain;
whereupon he made a Petition to the Governor, who granted him License to go
into his own Country; and so he departed with the Governor and his Train to
the City of S. Paul.

After six months stay about some necessary businesses, he prepared for his
Journey homewards: but the Governor denied his Promise, and instead of
permitting him to come into England, commanded him within two days to provide
himself to go to the Wars again. Battle startled at his perfidiousness,
resolved to try one bout more for his deliverance; so the same night he
departed from the City, with two Negro Boys that he had, which carried his
Musket, six pounds of Powder, a hundred Bullets, and that little Provision of
Victuals which he could make. In the morning he was some twenty miles from the
City, up along the River Bengo; there he stayed certain days, and then passed
Bengo, and came to the River Dande, being to the Northwards. Here he was
cruelly put to his shifts, being forced to live a month in a Wood betwixt the
foresaid Rivers for fear of a Pursuit. From thence he went to the Lake of
Casausa; about this Lake he stayed six months, and lived only upon dried
Flesh, as Buffeloes, Deer, Mokokes, Impolanca's, and Roe-bucks, and other sorts
which he killed with his Musket, and dried the flesh as the Savages do, upon
an Hurdle three foot from the ground, making underneath it a great Fire, and
laying upon the flesh green Boughs, which keep the smoke and heat of the Fire
down, and dry it. He made his Fire with two little Sticks, as the Savages use
to do. Sometimes for variety he fed on Guinney Wheat, which his Negro Boy would
get of the Inhabitants for pieces of dried flesh. In this manner he lived six
months with dried Flesh and Fish, and seeing no end of his misery, he wrought
means to get away, which he effected after this manner.

About the Lake are many little Islands, full of Trees called Memba, which are
as light as Cork, and as soft; of these Trees he built a Gingado, with a Knife
he had of the Savages, in the fashion of a Boat, nailed with wooden Pegs, and
railed round about because the Sea should not wash him out; and with a Blanket
that he had made a Sail, and prepared three Oars to row withal. The Lake was
eight miles over, and issued out into the River Bengo; so he entered into his
Gingado with his two Negro Boys, and rowed into the River Bengo, coming down
with the Current twelve Leagues to the Bar: Here he was in great danger,
because the Sea was great; and being over the Bar, he rowed into the Sea, and
then sailed before the wind along the Coast, which he knew very well, minding to
go to the Kingdom of Longo, which is toward the North. Being that night at Sea,
the next day he saw a Pinnace come before the wind, which came from the City,
and was bound to San Thome; being come near him, he found the Master was his
great Friend, for they had been Mates together, who for pity sake took him in
and his two Boys, and set them on shore in the Port of Longo, where he was well
entertained of the King, because he killed him Deer and Fowls with his Musket.

Here he continued the space of three years, during which time, he took a
Survey of the Country, the Nature of the People, their Rites and Manners; all
which he delivered to Posterity in writing as follows.

Here is great store of Palm-Cloaths of sundry sorts, which is their
Merchandise; and great store of Victuals, Flesh, Hens, Fish, Wine, Oil, and
Corn. Here is also very fine Logwood, which they use to dye withal; (it is the
Root of the Logwood which is the best;) and Molangos of Copper. Here is
likewise great store of Elephants Teeth, but they sell none in the
Marketplace. The King has ten great Houses, and is never certain to be found
but in the Afternoon, when he comes to sit, and then he keeps always one
House; the House is very long, and at twelve of the clock it is full of
Noblemen; they sit upon Carpets on the ground; the House is always full of
People till midnight. The last King Gembe never used to speak in the day, but
always in the night; but this King speaks in the day: howbeit he spends
most of the day with his Wives. And when the King comes in, he goes to the
upper end of the House, where he has his Seat, as it were a Throne; and when
the King is set, they clap their hands and salute him, saying in their
Language, Byam Pemba, Ampola, Moneya, Quesinge.

On the South side of the Kings Houses he has a Circuit or Village, where his
Wives dwell; and in this Circuit no man may come on pain of death. He has in
this place an hundred and fifty Wives or more; and if any man be taken within
this Circuit, if he be with a Woman, or do but speak to her, they be both
brought into the Marketplace, and their Heads be cut off, their Bodies
quartered, and lie one day in the Streets. The last King Gymbe had four hundred
Children by his Women.

When the King drinks he has a Cup of Wine brought, and he that brings it
has a Bell in his Hand, and as soon as he has delivered the Cup to the King,
he turns his Face from him and ringeth the Bell; then all that be there fall
down upon their Faces, and rise not till the King have drunk. And this is very
dangerous for any Stranger that knows not the fashions; for if any sees the
King drink, he is presently killed whatsoever he be. There was a Boy of twelve
years old, which was the Kings Son; this Boy chanced to come unadvisedly when
his Father was a drinking; presently the King commanded he should be well
apparelled, and Victuals prepared; so the Youth did eat and drink; afterward
the King commanded that he should be cut in quarters, and carried about the
City, with Proclamation that he saw the King drink. Likewise for the Kings
Diet, when it is Dinnertime, there is a House on purpose where he always
eats, and there his Diet is set upon a Bensa, like a Table; then he goes in
and has the door shut, and when he has eaten he knocks and comes out, so
that none see the King eat nor drink; for it is their belief, that if he be
seen eating or drinking he shall presently die.

This King is so honored as though he were a God amongst them, and is called
Sambe and Pongo, that is, God: and they believe that he can give them Rain when
he lists; so once a year, when it is time to rain, which is in December, the
People come to beg it, and bring their Gifts to the King, for none come empty.
Then he appoints the day, and all the Lords far and near come to that Feast,
with all their Troops as they go in the Wars: and when all the Troops of Men be
before the King, the greatest Lord comes forth with his Bow and Arrows, and
shows his skill with his Weapons, and then he has a merry Conceit or Jest
that he speaks before the King, and kneeleth at his feet, and then the King
thanketh him for his Love, and in like manner they do all. The King sits
abroad in a great place, and has a Carpet spread upon the ground which is some
fifteen Fathoms about, of fine Eufacks, which are wrought like Velvet, and upon
the Carpet his Seat, which is a Fathom from the ground. Then he commands his
Dembes to strike up, which are Drums so great that they cannot carry them. He
has also eight Pongos, which are his Waits, made of the greatest Elephants
Teeth, and are hollowed and scraped light, which play also; so that with the
Drums and Waits they make a Hellish noise. After they have sported and showed
the King pleasure, he arises and stands upon his Throne, and taking a Bow
and Arrows into his Hand, shoots to the Sky; and that day there is a great
rejoicing, because sometimes they have Rain, which when it happens is a great
Confirmation of their Folly.

Here is sometimes born in this Country White Children, which is very rare
among them, for their Parents are Negroes; and when any of them are born, they
are presented unto the King, and are called Dondoes. These are as white as any
white man, and are made the Kings Witches, being brought up in Witchcraft, and
always wait on the King. There is no man that dares meddle with these Dondoes;
if they go to the Market, they may take what they list, for all men stand in
awe of them: the King of Longo has four of them.

This King is also a Witch, and believes in two Idols which are in Longo; the
one is called Mokisso a Longo, the other is called Checocke. This last is a
little black Image, and stands in a little House at a Village that is called
Kinga, which stands in the Landing-place of Longo. The House of Checocke
stands in the Highway, where all that go by clap their hands, which is the
courtesy of the Country. Those that be Craftsmen, as Fishermen, Hunters, and
Witches, do offer to this Idol that they may have good luck. This Checocke does
sometimes in the night come and haunt some of his best beloved; sometimes a
Man, sometimes a Boy or a Woman, and then they befrantick for the space of
three hours; whatsoever the frantic Person speaks, that they think is the
will of Checocke, making a great Feast and Dancing at his House.

There is another Mokisso, which is also in Ringa, and it is called Gomberi; it
is the name of a Woman, and is in an house where an old Witch dwells, and she
is called Ganga Gomberi, which is, the Priest of Gomberi. Here once a year is a
Feast made, and Ganga Gomberi speaks under the ground; and this is a common
thing every year. I have asked the Negroes what it was, and they told me, it is
a strong Mokisso that is come to abide with Chacocke.

There is a place two Leagues from the Town of Longo called Longeri, where all
their Kings be buried; and it is compassed round about with Elephants Teeth
pitched in the ground as it were a Pale, being ten Roods in compass.

These People will suffer no white man to be buried in their Land; and if any
Stranger or Portugal come thither to trade, and chance to die, he is carried in
a Boat two miles from the shore, and cast into the Sea* There was once a
Portugal Gentleman that came to trade with them, and had his House on shore;
thi^ Gentleman died, and was buried four months: tha^ year it did not rain so
soon as it was wont, which begins about December; so that they lacked Rain
some two months. Then their Mokisso told them, that the Christian which was
buried must be taken out of the Earth and cast into the Sea, and so he was
taken up and cast into the Sea, and within three days it rained, which made
them have a great belief in the Devil.

Nineteen Leagues from Longo is the Province of Mayombe, which is all Woods and
Groves, so overgrown that a man may travel twenty days in the shadow without
any Sun or Heat. Here is no kind of Corn or Grain, nor any kind of tame Cattle
nor Hens, so that the People live only upon Plantans, and Roots of sundry
sorts very good, and Nuts. But they have great store of Elephants flesh, which
they highly esteem; also they have many kinds of wild Beasts, and great store
of Fish. The Woods are so covered with Baboons, Monkeys, Apes, and Parrots,
that it will fear any man to travel in them alone. Here is also two kinds of
Monsters, which are common in these Woods, and very dangerous; the greatest of
these two Monsters is called Pongo in their Language, and the lesser is called
Eugeco. This Pongo is in all proportion like a man, but more like a Giant in
stature, for he is very tall and has a Man's face, hollow cyed, with long Hair
upon his Brows. His Face and Ears are without Hair, as also his Hands; his Body
is full of Hair, but not very thick, and it is of a Dunnish color. He
differs not from a Man but in his Legs, for they have no Calf. He goes
always upon his Legs, and carries his Hands clasped on the nape of his Neck
when he goes upon the ground. They sleep in the Trees, and build shelters for
the Rain. They feed upon Fruit that they find in the Woods, and upon Nuts, for
they eat no kind of Flesh. They cannot speak, and have no understanding more
than a Beast. The People of the Country, when they travel in the Woods, make
Fires where they sleep in the nights, and in the morning when they are gone the
Pongoes will come and sit about the Fire till it goes out, for they have no
understanding to lay the Wood together. They go many in company, and kill
diverse Negroes that travel in the Woods. Many times they fall upon the
Elephants, which come to feed where they be, and so beat them with their
clubbed Fifts and pieces of Wood, that they will run roaring away from them.
These Pongoes are never taken alive, because they are so strong that ten men
cannot hold one of them; but yet they take many of their young ones, for the
young Pongo hangs on his Mothers Belly, with his Hands fast clasped about
her; so that when any of the Country people do kill the Female with their
poisoned Arrows, they easily take the young one so hanging about her. When they
die among themselves, they cover the dead with great heaps of Boughs and Wood,
which is commonly found in the Forest. One of these Pongoes took a Negro Boy of
the Authors, which lived a month with them, for they hurt not those which they
surprise at unawares, except they look on them, which he avoided. He said their
height was like a Man's, but their bigness twice as great.

The Morombes use to hunt with their Country Dogs, and kill many kinds of
little Beasts, and great store of Pheasants. But their Dogs be dumb, and cannot
bark at all; they hang wooden Clappers about their Necks, and follow them by
the rattling of their Clappers. The Huntsmen have Petes, which they whistle
their Dogs withal. The European Dogs are highly esteemed there because they do
bark, one of them having been sold up in the Country for 30 l.

In the Town of Mani-Mayombe is a Fe^isso or Idol called Maramba, and it
stands in a high Basket made like a Hive, and over it a great House. This is
their House of Religion, for they believe only in him, and keep his Laws,
carrying his Relics always with them. They are for the most part Witches, and
use their Witchcraft for hunting and killing of Elephants, Fishing, helping of
Sick and Lame men, and to forecast Journies, whether they shall speed well or
evil. By this Maramba are all Thefts and Murders tried, for in this Country
they use to bewitch one another to death; therefore when any dies, their
Neighbors are brought before Maramba; and if it be a great man that dies, the
whole Town comes to swear. The Order is, when they come before Maramba, to
kneel and clasp the Idol in their Arms, and to say, Emeno, eyge bembet Maramba;
that is, I come to be tried, O Maramba. And if any of them be guilty, they fall
down stark dead for ever. The same way of Trial also they have for any other
matter.

In this Country of Mayombe did Battle continue the space of twelve months,
going from thence to Mani-kesock; North-east of which place live a kind of
little people called Matimbas, which are no bigger than Boys of twelve years
old, but very thick, and live only upon Flesh, which they kill in the Woods
with their Bows and Darts. Several other places in Angola did he also see; at
last, desirous to return to his Native Country, he embarked and arrived safely
in England, where he lived a long time after, leaving in writing behind him at
his death, the Relation of these his Miraculous Travels and Deliverances.

A strange Deliverance of an Englishman from a Desolate Island near to
Scotland, wherein he had long continued in extreme penury and misery.
IN the Year 1616, a Flemming named Pickman, who was well known in England and
Holland, for his Art and dexterity in getting out of the Sea the great Guns of
that Spanish Fleet, which was forced upon the Coasts of Scotland and Ireland in
the Year 1588. This man coming from Dronthem in Norway, in a Vessel laden with
Boards, was overtaken by a Calm, during which, the Current carried him upon a
Rock or little Island, toward the Extremities of Scotland, where he was in
some danger to have been cast away. To avoid a Wrack, he commanded some of his
men to go into the Shallop, and to tow off the Ship. They having done so, would
needs go up into a certain Rock to look for Birds Eggs: But as soon as they
were got up into it, they at some distance, perceived a man, whence they
imagined that there were others lurking thereabouts, and that this man had made
his escape thither from some Pirates, who if not prevented, might surprise their
Ship: and therefore they made all the haste they could to their Shallop, and so
returned to their Ship. But the Calm continuing, and the Current of the Sea
still driving them upon the Island, they were forced to get into the Longboat,
and to tow her off again. The man whom they had seen before, was in the mean
time come to the Brink of the Island, and made signs with his hands lifted up,
and sometimes falling on his knees, and joining his hands together, begging and
crying to them for relief. At first they made some difficulty to go to him, but
at last, being overcome by his lamentable signs, they went nearer the Island,
where they saw something that was more like a Ghost then a living Person; a
Body stark naked, black and hairy, a meager and deformed countenance, with
hollow and distorted eyes, which raised such compassion in them, that they
assayed to take him into the Boat. But the Rock was so steepy thereabouts, that
it was impossible for them to land: whereupon they went about the Island, and
came at last to a flat shore, where they took the man aboard. They found
nothing at all in the Island, neither Grass nor Tree, nor ought else from which
a man could procure any subsistence, nor any shelter, but the ruins of a Boat,
wherewith he had made a kind of Hut, under which he might lie down and shelter
himself against the injuries of Wind and Weather.

No sooner were they gotten to the Ship, but there arose a Wind, that drove
them off from the Island; observing this Providence, they were the more
inquisitive to know of this man what he was, and by what means he came unto
that uninhabitable place? Hereunto the man answered;

I am an Englishman, that about a year ago, was to pass in the ordinary
Passage-Boat from England to Dublin in Ireland; but by the way we were taken by
a French Pyrate, who being immediately forced by a Tempest which presently
arose, to let our Boat go, we were three of us in it, left to the mercy of the
Wind and Waves, which carried us between Ireland and Scotland into the main
Sea: In the mean time we had neither Food nor Drink, but only some Sugar in the
Boat: upon this we lived, and drank our own Urine, till our Bodies were so
dried up, that we could make no more: whereupon, one of our company being quite
spent, died, whom we heaved overboard; and a while after, a second was grown
so feeble, that he laid himself along in the Boat, ready to yield up the Ghost.
But in this extremity, it pleased God that I kenned this Island afar off, and
thereupon encouraged the dying man to rouse up himself with hopes of Life: and
accordingly, upon this good news, he raised himself up, and by and by our Boat
was cast upon this Island, and split against a Rock.

Now were we in a more wretched condition, than if being swallowed up by the
Sea, we had been delivered out of the extremities we were now in for want of
Meat and Drink. Yet the Lord was pleased to make some Provision for us; for on
the Island we took some Sea-mews, which we did eat raw: we found also in the
holes of the Rocks, upon the Seaside, some Eggs: and thus had we (through
God's good Providence) wherewithal to subsist, as much as would keep us from
starving: but what we thought most insupportable, was thirst, in regard that
the place afforded no fresh water, but what fell from the Clouds, and was left
in certain Pits, which Time had made in the Rock. Neither could we have this at
all seasons, by reason that the Rock being small and lying low, in stormy
weather the Waves dashed over it, and filled the Pits with Salt Water.

When they came first upon the Island, about the midst of it, they found two
long Stones pitched in the ground, and a third laid upon them, like a Table,
which they judged to have been so placed by some Fishermen, to dry their Fish
upon, and under this they lay in the Nights, till with some Boards of their
Boat they made a kind of a Hut to be a shelter for them. In this Condition they
lived together for the space of about six Weeks, comforting one another, and
finding some ease in their common Calamity; till at last, one of them being
left alone, the Burden became almost insupportable: for, one day awaking in the
morning, he missed his Fellow, and getting up, he went calling and seeking all
the Island about for him: but, when he could by no means find him, he fell into
such despair, that he often resolved to have cast himself down into the Sea, and
so to put a final period to that Affliction, whereof he had endured but the one
half, whilst he had a Friend that divided it with him. What became of his
Comrade he could not guess; whether Despair forced him to that extremity, or
whether getting up in the Night, not fully awake, he fell into the Sea; but
rather thought that thorough Carelessness he fell from the Rock as he was
looking for Birds Eggs, for he had discerned no Distraction in him, neither
could he imagine that he should on a sudden fall into that Despair, against
which he had so fortified himself by frequent and fervent Prayer. And his loss
did so affect the Survivor, that he often took his Beer, with a purpose to have
leaped from the Rocks into the Sea; yet still his Conscience stopped him,
suggesting to him, that if he did it he should be utterly damned for his
Self-murder.

Another Affliction also befell him, which was this: His only Knife, wherewith
he cut up the Sea Dogs and Sea Mews, having a bloody Cloth about it, was
carried away (as he thought) by some Fowl of Prey, so that not being able to
kill any more, he was reduced to this Extremity, with much difficulty to get
out of the Boards of his Hut, a great Nail, which he made shift so to sharpen
upon the Stones, that it served him instead of a Knife. When Winter came on, he
endured the greatest Misery imaginable; for, many times the Rock and his Hut
were so covered with Snow that it was not possible for him to go abroad to
provide his Food; which Extremity put him upon this Invention; He put out a
little Stick at the Crevice of his Hut, and baiting it with a little Sea Dogs
Fat, by that means he got some Sea Mews, which he took with his hand from under
the Snow, and so kept himself from starving: in this sad and solitary Condition
he lived for about cleven Months, expecting therein to end his days, when God's
gracious Providence sent this Ship thither, which delivered him out of the
greatest Misery that ever Man was in. The Master of the Ship commiserating his
deplorable Condition, treated him so well, that within a few days he was quite
another Creature; and afterward he set him a shore at Derry in Ireland, and
some time after saw him at Dublin, where such as heard what had happened unto
him, gave him Money wherewithal to return into his Native Country of England.

A strange Adventure of some English -men in the recovery of their own Freedom,
and a Ship called the Exchange of Bristol, from the Turkish Pirates of Argier:
Published by John Rawlins one of the Actors thereof.
IN the Year 1621, the first of November, there was one John Rawlins, born in
Rochester, and dwelling three and twenty Years in Plymouth, employed to the
Straight of Gibralter, by Mr. Richard and Stephen Treviles, Merchants of
Plymouth, and fraighted in a Bark called the Nicholas of Plymouth, of the
burden of forty Tun, which had also in her Company another Ship of Plymouth,
called the George Bonaventure, of seventy Tun Burden or thereabout; which by
reason of her Greatness beyond the other, I will name the Admiral, and John
Rawlin's Bark shall (if you please) be the Vice Admiral. These two, according
to the time of the Year, had a fair Passage, and by the eighteenth of the same
month came to a place at the entering of the Streights, named Trafflagar; but
the next morning, being in the sight of Gibralter, at the very Mouth of the
Streights, the Watch descryed five Sail of Ships, who as it seemed, used all
the means they could to come near us; and we (as we had cause) used the same
means to go as far from them: yet did their Admiral take in both his Topsails,
that either we might not suspect them, or that his own Company might come up
the closer together: at last, perceiving us Christians, they fell from Devices
to apparent discovery of Hostility, and making out against us; we again
suspecting them Pirates, took our course to escape from them, and made all the
Sail we possibly could for Terriff or Gibralter: but all we could do could not
prevent their approach; for suddenly one of them came right over against us to
Wind-ward, and so fell upon our Quarter; another came upon our Luffe, and so
threatened us there, and at last all five chased us, making great speed to
surprise us.

Their Admiral was called Callfater, having upon her main Top-Sail two
top-gallant Sails, one above another. But whereas we thought them all five to
be Turkish Ships of War, we afterward understood, that two of them were their
Prizes, the one a small Ship of London, the other of the West-Country, that
came out of the Quactath laden with Figs, and other Merchandise, but now
subject to the Fortune of the Sea, and the Captivity of Pirates. But to our
business; three of these Ships got much upon us, and so much, that e're half
the day was spent, the Admiral, who was the best Sailer, fetched up the George
Bonaventure, and made Booty of it. The Vice Admiral again being nearest unto
the lesser Bark, whereof John Rawlins was Master, showed him the force of a
stronger Arm, and by his Turkish Name, called Villa-Rise, commanded him in like
sort to strike his Sails, and submit to his Mercy; which not to be gain-sayed
nor prevented was quickly done: and so Rawlins with his Bark was taken,
although the Rear-Admiral, being the worst Sailer of the three, called
Reggiprise, came not in till all was done.

The same day, before night, the Admiral, either loath to pester himself with
too much Company, or ignorant of the Commodity was to be made by the Sale of
English Prisoners, or daring not to trust them in his Company, for fear of
Mutinies, and exciting others to Rebellion; set twelve Persons who were in the
George Bonaventure on the Land, and diverse other English whom he had taken
before, to try their Fortunes in an unknown Country. But Villa-Rise, the
Vice Admiral, that had taken John Rawlins, would not so dispense with his Men,
but commanded him and five more of his Company to be brought aboard his Ship,
leaving in his Bark three men and his Boy, with thirteen Turks and Moors, who
were questionless suffic'ent to over-master the other, and direct the Bark to
Harbor. Thus they sailed directly for Argier; but the Night following followed
them with a great Tempest and foul Weather, which ended not without some effect
of a Storm: for they lost the sight of Rawlins's Bark called the Nicholas, and
in a manner lost themselves, though they seemed safe a Shipboard, by fearful
conjecturing what should become of us: at last, by the 22 of the same month,
they (or we, choose you whether) arrived at Argier, and came in Safety within
the Mould, but found not our other Bark there; nay, though we earnestly
enquired after the same, yet heard we nothing to our Satisfaction; but much
matter was ministered to our Discomfort and Amazement. For, although the
Captain and our Overseers were loath we should have any Conference with our
Country men, yet did we adventure to inform our selves of the present Affairs
both of the Town and the Shipping: so that finding many English at work in
other Ships, they spared not to tell us the danger we were in, and the
mischiefs we must needs incur, as being sure if we were not used like Slaves,
to be sold as Slaves: for there had been five hundred brought into the Market
for the same purpose, and above a hundred handsome Youths compelled to turn
Turks, or made subject to more vile Prostitutions, and all English: yet, like
good Christians, they bid us be of good cheer, and comfort our selves in this,
that God's Trials were gentle Purgations, and these Crosses were but to cleanse
the Dross from the Gold, and bring us out of the Fire again more clear and
lovely. Yet I must needs confess, that they afforded us Reason for this
Cruelty, as if they determined to be revenged of our last attempt to fire their
Ships in the Mould; and therefore protested to spare none whom they could
surprise and take alive, but either to sell them for Money, or torment them to
serve their own Turns. Now their Customs and Usages in both these was in this
manner.

First, concerning the first, The Bashaw had the over-seeing of all Prisoners,
who were presented unto him at their first coming into the Harbor, and so
chose one out of every eight for a Present or Fee to himself: the rest were
rated by the Captains, and so sent to the market to be sold; whereat, if either
there were repining, or any withdrawing back, then certain Moors and Officers
attended either to beat you forward, or thrust you into the sides with Goads.
And this was the manner of the selling of Slaves.

Secondly, concerning their enforcing them either to turn Turks, or to attend
their Filthiness and Impieties, although it would make a Christians Heart bleed
to hear of the same, yet must the Truth not be hid, nor the Terror left untold.
They commonly lay them on their naked Backs or Bellies, beating them so long
till they bleed at the Nose and Mouth, and if yet they continue constant, then
they strike the Teeth out of their Heads, pinch them by their Tongues, and use
many other sort of Tortures to convert them; nay, many times they lay them
their whole length in the Ground, like a Grave, and so cover them with Boards,
threatening to starve them if they will not turn; and so many, even for fear of
Torment and Death, make their Tongues betray their Hearts to a most fearful
Wickedness, and so are circumcised with new Names, and brought to confess a new
Religion. Others again, I must confess, who never knew any God but their own
sensual Lusts and Pleasures, thought that any Religion would serve their Turns,
and so for Preferment or Wealth very voluntarily renounced their Faith, and
became Renegadoes in despite of any Counsel which seemed to intercept them.
And this was the first News we encountered with at our coming first to Argier.

The 26 of the same month, John Rawlins his Bark with his other three Men and a
Boy, came safe into the Mould, and so were put all together to be carried
before the Bashaw, but that they took the Owners Servant, and Rawlins's Boy,
and by Force and Torment compelled them to turn Turks; then were they in all
seven English, besides John Rawlins, of whom the Bashaw took one, and sent the
rest to their Captains, who set a Valuation upon them, and so the Soldiers
hunted us like Dogs into the Market, where, as men sell Hacknies in England, we
were tossed up and down to see who would give most for us; and although we had
heavy Hearts, and looked with sad Countenances, yet many came to behold us,
sometimes taking us by the Hand, sometimes turning us round about, sometimes
feeling our Brawns and naked Arms; and so beholding our Prices written in our
Breast, they bargained for us accordingly, and at last we were all sold, and
the Soldiers returned with the Money to their Captains.

John Rawlins was the last who was sold, by reason of his lame hand, and bought
by the Captain that took him, even that Dog Villa Rise, who better informing
himself of his Skill fit to be a Pilot, and his Experience to be an Over-seer,
bought him and his Carpenter at very easy Rates: for, as we afterward
understood by diverse English Renegadoes, he paid for Rawlins but one hundred
and fifty Dooblets, which make of English Money seven Pounds ten Shillings.
Thus was he and his Carpenter with diverse other Slaves, sent into his Ship to
work, and employed about such Affairs as belonged to the wellrigging and
preparing the same. But the villainous Turks perceiving his lame hand, and that
he could not perform so much as other Slaves, quickly complained to their
Patron, who as quickly apprehended the Inconvenience; whereupon he sent for him
the next day, and told him he was unserviceable for his present purpose, and
therefore unless he could procure him fifteen pound of the English there for
his Ransom, he would send him up into the Country, where he should never see
Christendom again, and endure the Extremity of a miserable Banishment.

But see how God works all for the best, for the good of his Servants, and
confounds the presumption of Tyrants, frustrating their Purposes, to make his
Wonders known to the Sons of Men, and relieves his People when they least think
of Succor and Releasment. Whilst John Rawlins was thus terrified with the
dogged Answer of Villa-Rise, the Exchange of Bristol, a Ship formerly surprised
by the Pirates, lay all unrigged in the Harbor; till at last, one John
Goodale, an English Turk, with his Confederates, understanding she was a good
Sailer, and might be made a proper Man of War, bought her from the Turks that
took her, and prepared her for their own purpose. Now the Captain that set them
on work was also an English Renegado, by the name of Rametham Rise, but by his
Christian Name Henry Chandler, who resolved to make Goodale Master over her;
and because they were both English Turks, having the Command notwithstanding of
many Moors and Turks, they concluded to have all English Slaves to go in her,
and for their Gunners English and Dutch Renegadoes; and so they agreed with the
Patrons of nine English and one French Slave for their Ransoms, who were
presently employed to rig and furnish the Ship for a Man of War: while they
were thus busied, two of John Rawlins's Men, who were taken with him, were also
taken up to serve in this Man of War, their names James Roe and John Davies,
the one dwelling in Plymouth, and the other in Foy, where the Commander of the
Ship was also born; by which occasion they came acquainted, so that both the
Captain and the Master promised them good Usage, upon the good Service they
should perform in the Voyage; and withal demanded of him if he knew of any
English man to be bought that could serve them as a Pilot, both to direct them
out of Harbor, and conduct them in their Voyage: for in Truth neither was the
Captain a Mariner, nor any Turk in her of Sufficiency to dispose of her
thorough the Streights in security, nor oppose any Enemy that should hold it
out bravely against them. Davies quickly replied, that as far as he understood,
Villa-Rise would sell John Rawlins, his Master and Commander of the Bark which
was taken, a man sufficient every way for Sea Affairs, being of great
Resolution and good Experience; and for all he had a lame hand, yet had he a
sound Heart and noble Courage for any Adventure.

When the Captain understood thus much, he employed Davies to search for
Rawlins, who at last lighting upon him, asked if the Turk would sell him?
Rawlins suddenly answered, that by reason of his lame hand he was willing to
part with him; but because he had disbursed Money for him he would gain
something by him, and so prized me at three hundred Dooblets, which amounts
to fifteen pounds English; which I must procure, or incur sorer Indurances.
When Davies had certified thus much, the Turks a Shipboard conferred about the
matter, and the Master, whose Christian Name was John Goodale, joined with two
Turks who were consorted with him, and disbursed a hundred Dooblets a piece and
so bought him of Villa-Rise, sending him into the said Ship called the Exchange
of Bristol, as well to supervise what had been done, as to order what was left
undone, but especially to fit the Sails, and to accommodate the Ship; all which
Rawlins was very careful and indulgent in, not yet thinking of any peculiar
Plot of Deliverance, more than a general desire to be freed from this Turkish
Slavery and Abuses.

By the seventh of January the Ship was prepared with twelve good cast Pieces,
and all manner of Munition and Provision which belonged to such a purpose, and
the same day haled out of the Mould of Argier, with this Company, and in this
manner.

There were in her sixty three Turks and Moors, nine English Slaves, and one
French, four Hollanders that were Freemen, to whom the Turks promised one
Prise or other, and so to return to Holland; or, if they were disposed to go
back again for Argier, they should have great Reward, and no Enforcement
offered, but continue as they would, both their Religion and Customs: and for
their Gunners they had two of our Soldiers, one English and one Dutch
Renegado; and thus much for the Company. For the manner of setting out, it was
as usual as in other Ships, but that the Turks delighted in the ostentous
bravery of their Streamers, Banners, and Topsails; the Ship being a handsome
Ship, and well built for any Purpose. The Slaves and English were employed
under Hatches about the Ordnance, and other works of Order and accomodating of
themselves: all which, John Rawlins marked, as supposing it an intolerable
Slavery to take such Pains, and be subject to such Dangers, and still to enrich
other Men, and maintain their voluptuous Filthiness and Lives, returning
themselves as Slaves, and living worse than their Dogs amongst them. Whereupon,
he burst out into these or such like abrupt Speeches, O hellish Slavery to be
thus subject to Dogs! Oh! God strengthen my Heart and Hand, and something shall
be done to ease us of these Mischiefs, and deliver us from these cruel
Mahumetan Dogs. The other Slaves pitying his Distraction (as they thought) bad
him speak softly lest they should all fare the worse for his Distemperature;
the worse, (quoth Rawlins) what can be worse? I will either attempt my
Deliverance at one time or another, or perish in the Enterprise: but, if you
would be contented to hearken after a Release, and join with me in the Action,
I would not doubt of facilitating the same, and show you a way to make your
Credits thrive by some work of Amazement, and augment your Glory in purchasing
your Liberty. I prithee be quiet (said they again) and think not of
Impossibilities: yet, if you can but open such a door of Reason and
Probability, that we be not condemned for desperate and distracted Persons, in
pulling the Sun as it were out of the Firmament, we can but sacrifice our
Lives, and you may be sure of Secrecy and Taciturnity.

The fifteenth of January, the morning Water brought us near Cape de Gatt, hard
by the Shore, we having in our Company a small Turkish Ship of War that
followed us out of Argier the next day, and now joining with us, gave us notice
of seven small Vessels, six of them being Sattees, and one Pollack, who very
quickly appeared in sight, and so we made toward them: but having more
advantage of the Pollack than the rest, and loath to lose all, we both fetched
her up, and brought her past hope of Recovery; which when she perceived, rather
than she would voluntarily come into the Slavery of these Mahumetans, she ran
her self a shore, and so all the men forsook her; we still followed as near as
we durst, and for fear of splitting, let fall our Anchors, making out both our
Boats, wherein were many Musketeers, and some English and Dutch Renegadoes,
who came aboard home at their Conge, and found three Pieces of Ordnance, and
four Murderers; but they strait-way threw them all overboard to lighten the
Ship, and so they got her off, being laden with Hides, and Logwood for dying,
and presently sent her to Argier, taking nine Turks and one English Slave out
of one Ship, and six out of the less, which we thought sufficient to man her.

In the rifling of this Catelaynia our Turks fell at variance one with another,
and in such a manner, that we divided our selves, the less Ship returned to
Argier, and our Exchange took the opportunity of the Wind, and plied out of the
Streights, which rejoiced John Rawlins very much, as resolving on some
Stratagem when opportunity should serve: in the mean while the Turks began to
murmur, and would not willingly go into the Mar Granada, as the Phrase is
amongst them, notwithstanding the Moors being very superstitious, were
contented to be directed by their Hoshea, who with us signifies a Witch, and
is of great Account and Reputation amongst them, as not going in any great
Vessel to Sea without one, and observing whatsoever he concludes out of his
Divination: The Ceremonies he uses are many, and when they come into the
Ocean, every second or third Night he makes his Conjuration; he begins and
ends with Prayer, using many Characters, and calling upon God by diverse
Names, yet at this time all that he did consisted in these Particulars.

Upon the sight of two great Ships, and as we were afraid, chasing us, being
supposed to be Spanish men of War, a great silence is commanded in the Ship,
and when all is done, the Company gives as great a Shreik, the Captain still
coming to John Rawlins, and sometimes making him take in all his Sails, and
sometimes causing him to hoyse them all out, as the Witch finds by his Book
and Presages: then have they two Arrows and a Curtle-axe, lying upon a Pillow
naked; the Arrows are one for the Turks and the other for the Christians; then
the Witch reads, and the Captain or some other takes the Arrows in their
hand by the Heads, and if the Arrow for the Christians comes over the head of
the Arrow for the Turks, then do they advance their Sails, and will not endure
the Fight whatsoever they see: but if the Arrow of the Turks is found, in the
opening of the hand, upon the Arrow of the Christians, then will they stay and
encounter with any Ship whatsoever; the Curtle-axe is taken up by some Child
that is innocent, or rather ignorant of the Ceremony, and so laid down again;
then do they observe whether the same side is uppermost which lay before, and
so proceed accordingly.

They also observe Lunaticks and Changelings, and the Conjurer writes down
their Sayings in a Book, grovelling on the Ground, as if he whispered to the
Devil to tell him the Truth, and so expounds the Letter as it were by
Inspiration. Many other foolish Rites they have, whereon they do dote as
foolishly.

Whilst he was busied, and made Demonstration that all was finished, the People
in the Ship gave a great Shout, and cried out, a Sail, a Sail, which at last
was discovered to be another Man of War of Turks; for he made toward us, and
sent his Boat aboard us, to whom our Captain complained, that being becalmed by
the Southern Cape, and having made no Voyage, the Turks denied to go any
farther Northwards; but the Captain resolved not to return to Argier, except he
could obtain some prize worthy his endurances, but rather to go to Salle and
sell his Christians to victual his Ship; which the other Captain apprehended
for his honor, and so persuaded the Turks to be obedient unto him; whereupon
followed a Pacification amongst us, and so that Turk took his course for the
Streights, and we put up Northward, expecting the good hour of some beneficial
Booty.

All this while our Slavery continued, and the Turks with insulting Tyranny set
us still on work in all base and servile actions, adding stripes and inhumane
revilings, even in our greatest labor; whereupon John Rawlins resolved to
obtain his Liberty, and surprise the Ship, providing Ropes, with broad spikes
of Iron, and all the Iron Crows, with which he knew a way, upon consent of the
rest, to ram up, or tie fast their Scuttles, Gratings, and Cabbins; yea, to
shut up the Captain himself, with all his Consorts, and so to handle the
matter, that upon the Watchword given, the English being Masters of the
Gun-room, Ordnance, and Powder, they would either blow them into the Air, or
kill them as they adventured to come down one by one, if they should by any
chance open their Cabbins. But because he would proceed the better in his
Enterprise, as he had somewhat abruptly discovered himself to the nine English
Slaves, so he kept the same distance with the four Hollanders, that were
freemen; till finding them coming somewhat toward him, he acquainted them with
the whole Conspiracy, and they, affecting the Plot, offered the Adventure of
their Lives in the business: then very warily he undermined the English
Renegado, which was the Gunner, and three more, his Associates, who at first
seemed to retract: Last of all were brought in the Dutch Renegadoes, who were
also in the Gunner-room, for always there lay twelve there, five Christians,
and seven English and Dutch Turks; so that when another Motion had settled
their Resolutions, and John Rawlins his Constancy had put new Life as it were
in the matter, the four Hollanders very honestly, according to their Promise,
sounded the Dutch Renegadoes, who with easy Persuasion gave their Consent to
so brave an Enterprise; whereupon John Rawlins not caring whether the English
Gunners would yield or no, resolved in the Captain's morning Watch to make the
Attempt. But, you must understand, that where the English Slaves lay, there
hung up always four or five Crows of Iron, being still under the Carriages of
the Pieces; and when the time approached, being very dark, because John Rawlins
would have his Crow of Iron ready, as other things were, and other men prepared
in their several places; in taking it out of the Carriage, by chance it hit on
the side of the Piece, making such a noise, that the Soldiers hearing it
awaked the Turks, and bid them come down; whereupon, the Boat-swain of the
Turks descended with a Candle, and presently searched all the Slaves places,
making much ado of the matter; but finding neither Hatchet nor Hammer, nor any
thing else to move suspicion of the Enterprise, more than the Crow of Iron,
which lay slipped down under the Carriages of the Pieces, they went quietly up
again, and certified the Captain what had chanced, who satisfied himself that
it was a common thing to have a Crow of Iron slip from his place. But by this
occasion we made stay of our Attempt, yet were resolved to take another or a
better opportunity.

For we sailed still more Northward, and Rawlins had more time to tamper with
his Gunners, and the rest of the English Renegadoes, who very willingly, when
they considered the matter, and perpended the Reasons, gave way unto the
Project, and with a kind of Joy seemed to entertain the Motives; only they made
a stop at the first Onset who should begin the Enterprise, which was no way fit
for them to do, because they were no Slaves, but Renegadoes, and so had always
beneficial Entertainment amongst them; but when it was once put in practice
they would be sure not to fail them, but venture their Lives for God and their
Country. But once again he is disappointed, and a suspicious Accident brought
him to recollect his Spirits anew, and study on the danger of the Enterprise:
thus it was; After the Renegado Gunner had protested Secrecy by all that might
induce a man to bestow some Belief upon him, he presently went up the Scuttle,
but stayed not aloft a quarter of an hour, nay, he came sooner down, and in the
Gunner-room sat by Rawlins, who tarried for him where he left him; he was no
sooner placed, and entered into some Conference, but there entered into the
place a furious Turk, with his Knife drawn, and presented it to Rawlins's Body,
who verily supposed he intended to kill him, as suspicious that the Gunner had
discovered something; whereat Rawlins was much moved, and so hastily asked what
the matter meant, or whether he would kill him or no? Observing his
Countenance, and according to the nature of Jealousy, conceiting that his
color had a passage of Change, whereby his suspicious Heart condemned him for
a Traitor; but that at more leisure he swear the contrary, and afterward proved
faithful and industrious in the Enterprise: and for the present he answered
Rawlins in this manner, No Master, be not afraid, I think he does but jest:
with that John Rawlins gave back a little, and drew out his Knife, stepping
also to the Gunner's Sheath and taking out his, whereby he had two Knives to
one, which when the Turk perceived, he threw down his Knife saying he did but
jest with him. But (as I said) when the Gunner perceived Rawlins took it so
ill, he whispered something in his Ear, that at last satisfied him, calling
Heaven to witness, that he never spoke word of the Enterprise, nor ever would,
either to the prejudice of the Business or danger of his Person;
notwithstanding, Rawlins kept the Knives in his Sleeves all night, and was
troubled for that he had made so many acquainted with an Action of such
Importance; but the next day, when he perceived the Coast clear, and that there
was no cause of further fear, he somewhat comforted himself.

All this while Rawlins drew the Captain to lie for the Northern Cape, assuring
him, that thereby he should not miss Purchase, which accordingly fell out as a
Wish would have it; but his Drift was, in truth, to draw him from any Supply or
Second of Turks, if God should give way to their Enterprise or success to their
Victory; yet for the present, (the sixth of February) being twelve Leagues from
the Cape, we descryed a Sail, and presently took the advantage of the Wind in
chasing her, and at last fetched her up, making her strike all her Sails,
whereby we knew her to be a Bark belonging to Tor Bay near Dartmouth, that came
from Aucrare laden with Salt: 'ere we had fully dispatched, it chanced to be
foul Weather, so that we could not, or at least would not make out our Boat,
but caused the Master of the Bark to let down his, and come aboard with his
Company, being in the Bark but nine Men and one Boy; and so the Master leaving
his Mate with two Men in the same, came himself with five Men and the Boy unto
us; whereupon, our Turkish Captain sent ten Turks to man her, amongst whom were
two Dutch and one English Renegado, who were of our Confederacy, and acquainted
with the Business.

But when Rawlins saw this partition of his Friends, before they could hoyse
out their Boat for the Bark, he made means to speak with them, and told them
plainly, that he would prosecute the matter either that Night or the next, and
therefore whatsoever came of it they should acquaint the English with his
Resolution, and make toward England, bearing up the Helm while the Turks
slept, and suspected no such matter; for by God's Grace, in his first Watch
about Midnight, he would show them a Light by which they might understand that
the Enterprise was begun, or at least in a good forwardness for the Execution:
and so the Boat was let down, and they came to the Bark of Tor Bay, where the
Master's Mate being left (as before you have heard) quickly apprehended the
matter, and heard the Discourse with Amazement; but time was precious, and not
to be spent in disputing or casting of Doubts, whether the Turks that were with
them were able to master them or no, being seven to six, considering they had
the Helm of the Ship, and the Turks being Soldiers and ignorant in Sea
Affairs, could not discover whether they went to Argier or no; or if they did,
they resolved by Rawlins's Example to cut their Throats, or cast them
overboard: and so I leave them to make use of the Renegado's Instructions, and
return to Rawlins again.

The Master of the Bark of Tor-Bay, and his Company, were quickly searched, and
as quickly pillaged, and dismissed to the Liberty of the Ship, whereby Rawlins
had leisure to entertain him with the lamentable News of their Extremities, and
in a Word, of every particular which was befitting to the purpose: yea, he told
him, that that Night he should lose the sight of them, for they would make the
Helm for England, and he would that Night and evermore pray for their good
Success and safe Deliverance.

When the Master of Tor-Bay Bark had heard him out, and that his Company were
Partakers of his Story, they became all silent, not either diffident of his
Discourse, or afraid of the Attempt, but resolved to assist him: yet to show
himself an understanding man, he damanded of Rawlins what Weapons he had, and
in what manner he would execute the Business? To which he answered, that he had
Ropes and Iron-Hooks to make fast the Scuttels, Gratings, and Cabbins; he had
also in the Gunner-room two Curtle-Axes, and the Slaves had five Crows of Iron
before them; besides, in the scuffling they made no question of some of the
Soldiers Weapons: then for the manner, he told them they were sure of the
Ordnance, the Gunner-room, and the Powder, and so blocking them up, would
either kill them as they came down, or turn the Ordnance against the Cabbins,
or blow them into the Air by one Stratagem or other: and thus were they
contented on all sides, and resolved to the Enterprise.

The next Morning, being the 7th day of February, the Prize of Tor-Bay was not
to be seen or found; whereat the Captain began to storm and swear, commanding
Rawlins to search the Seas up and down for her, who bestowed all that day in
the business, but to little purpose: whereupon, when the Humor was spent, the
Captain pacified himself, as conceiting he should sure find her at Argier; but
by the Permission of the Ruler of all Actions, that Argier was England, and all
his Wickedness frustrated: for Rawlins being now startled least he should
return in this humor for the Streights, the eighth of February went down into
the Hold, and finding a great deal of Water below, told the Captain of the
same; adding, that it did not come to the Pump, which he did very politickly,
that he might remove the Ordnance; for, when the Captain asked him the reason,
he told him the Ship was too far after the Head; then he commanded to use the
best means he could to bring her in order: sure then, quoth Rawlins, we must
quit our Cables, and bring four Pieces of Ordnance after, and that would bring
the Water to the Pump, which was presently put in practice: so the Pieces being
usually made fast thwart the Ship, we brought two of them with their Mouths
right before the Biticle, and because the Renegado Flemmings would not begin,
it was thus concluded; that the Ship having three Decks, we that did belong to
the Gunner-room should be all there, and break up the lower Deck; the English
Slaves, who always lay in the middle Deck, should do the like, and vvatch the
Scuttels: Rawlins himself prevailed with the Gunner for so much Powder as
should prime the Pieces, and so told them all there was no better Watchword
nor means to begin, than upon the Report of the Piece to make a Cry and Shriek,
for God and King James, and St. George for England.

When all things were prepared, and every man resolved, as knovving what he
had to do, and the hour when it should happen to be two in the Afternoon:
Rawlins advised the Master Gunner to speak to the Captain that the Soldiers
might attend on the Poop, which would bring the Ship after; to which, the
Captain was very vvilling; and upon the Gunner's Information, the Soldiers
got themselves to the Poop, to the number of twenty, and five or six went into
the Captains Cabin, where always lay diverse Curtle-axes, and some Targets,
and so we fell to work to pump the Water, and carried the matter fairly till
the next day, which was spent as the former, being the ninth of February, and
as God must have the Praise, so the Triumph of our Victory.

For by that time all things were prepared, and the Soldiers got upon the
Poop, as the day before; to avoid Suspicion, all that did belong to the
Gunner-room went down, and the Slaves in the middle Deck attended their
Business, so that we may cast up our Account in this manner, first, nine
English Slaves besides John Rawlins, five of the Tor-Bay men, and one Boy; four
English Renegadoes, and two French, and two Hollanders, in all four and
twenty and a Boy; so that lifting up our Hearts and Hands to God for the
success of the Business, we were wonderfully encouraged, and settled our selves
till the report of the Piece gave us warning of the Enterprise. Now you must
consider, that in this Company were two of Rawlins's Men, James Roe and John
Davies, whom he brought out of England, and whom the Fortune of the Sea
brought into the same Predicament with their Master. These were employed
about Noon to prepare their Matches, whilst all the Turks, or at least most of
them, stood on the Poop, to weigh down the Ship as it were, to bring the Water
forvvard to the Pump; the one brought his Match lighted between two Spoons, the
other brought his in a little piece of a Can; and so in the Name of God, the
Turks and Moors being placed as you have heard, and five and forty in number:
Rawlins having proined the Touch-holes, James Roe gave Fire to one of the
Pieces, about two of the Clock in the Afternoon, and the Confederates upon
the Warning shouted most cheerfully. The Report of the Piece did tear and break
down all the Biticle, and Compasses, and the Noise of the Slaves made all the
Soldiers amazed at the matter, till seeing the Quarter of the Ship rent, and
feeling the whole Body to shake under them: understanding the Ship was
surprised, and the Attempt tended to their utter Destruction, never Bear robbed
of her Whelps, was so fell and mad; for they not only called us Dogs, and
cried out Usance de Lamair, which is as much as to say, the Fortune of the
Wars, but attempted to tear up the Plancks, setting on work Hammers, Hatchets,
Knives, the Oars of the Boat, the Boat-hook, their Curtle-Axes, and what else
came to hand, besides Stones and Bricks in the Cook Room; all which, they threw
amongst us, attempting still to break up the Hatches and Boards of the
Steering, not desisting from their former Execrations and horrible Blasphemies
and Revilings.

When John Rawlins perceived them so violent, and understood how the Slaves had
cleared the Decks of all the Turks and Moors beneath, he set a Guard upon the
Powder, and charged their own Muskets against them, killing them from diverse
scout holes, both before and behind, and so lessened their number, to the joy
of all our hearts; whereupon they cried out, and called for the Pilot, and so
Rawlins, with some to guard him, went to them, and understood them by their
kneeling, that they cried for mercy, and to have their Lives saved, and they
would come down, which he bade them do, and so they were taken one by one and
bound, yea killed with their own Curtle-axes; which when the rest perceived,
they called us English Dogs, and reviled us with many opprobrious terms, some
leaping overboard, crying, it was the chance of War; some were manacled, and
so thrown overboard, and some were slain and mangled with the Curtle-axes,
till the Ship was well cleared, and our selves assured of the Victory.

At the first report of our Piece, and hurly-burly in the Decks, the Captain
was writing in his Cabin, and hearing the noise, thought it some strange
accident, and so came out with his Curtle-Axe in his hand, presuming by his
Authority to pacify the mischief; But when he cast his eyes upon us, and saw
that we were like to surprise the Ship, he threw down his Curtle-Axe, and
begged us to save his Life; intimating unto Rawlins how he had redeemed him
from Villa-Rise, and ever since admitted him to a place of Command in the Ship,
besides honest usage in the whole course of the Voyage. All which Rawlins
confessed, and at last condescended to Mercy, and brought the Captain and five
more into England. The Captain was called Ramtham-Rise, but his Christian name
was Henry Chandler, and, as they say, a Chandlers Son in Southwark, John
Good-ale was also an English Turk, Richard Clark, in Turkish, Jafar; George
Cook, Ramdam; John Brown, Mamme; William Winter, Mustapha: besides all the
Slaves and Hollanders, with other Renegadoes, who were willing to be reconciled
to their true Savior, as being formerly seduced with the hopes of Riches,
Honor, Preferment, and such like devilish Baits, to catch the Souls of mortal
Men, and entangle Frailty in the Tarriers of horrible Abuses, and imposturing
Deceit.

When all was done, and the Ship cleared of the dead Bodies, John Rawlins
assembled his men together, and with one Consent gave the Praise unto God,
using the accustomed Service on Shipboard, and for want of Books lifted up
their Voices to God, as he put into their Hearts, or renewed their Memories;
then did they sing a Psalm; and last of all, embraced one another for playing
the Men in such a Deliverance, whereby our Fear was turned into Joy, and
trembling Hearts exhilerated, that we had escaped such inevitable Dangers, and
especially the Slavery and terror of Bondage, worse than Death it self. The
same Night we washed our Ship, put every thing in as good Order as we could,
repairing the broken Quarter, set up the Biticle, and bore up the Helm for
England; where, by God's Grace and good guiding, we arrived at Plymouth the
thirteenth of February, and were welcomed like the recovery of the lost Sheep,
or as you read of a loving Mother that runs with Embraces to entertain her
Son from a long Voyage, and escape of many Dangers.

As for the Bark that came from Tor-Bay, the next day after they left us (as
you have heard) the three Renegadoes acquainted the Master's Mate and the two
English in her, with Rawlins's Determination, and that they themselves would be
true to them, and assist them in any Enterprise; then if the worst came there
were but seven to six: but, as it fell out, they had a more easy Passage than
Turmoyl or Manslaughter; for, they made the Turks believe the Wind was come
fair, and that they were sailing to Argier, till they came within sight of
England? which one of them amongst the rest discovered, saying plainly, that
that Land was not Cape Vincent: Yes, says he that was at the Helm, and you
will be contented, and go down into the Hold, and trim the Salt over to
Wind-ward, whereby the Ship may bear full Sail; you shall know and see more to
morrow: whereupon five of them went down very orderly, the Renegadoes feigning
themselves asleep, who presently start up, and with the help of the two
English, nailed down the Hatches, whereat the principal amongst them much
repined, and began to grow into Choler and Rage, had it not quickly been
over-passed; for one of them stepped to him and dashed out his Brains: the rest
were brought to Excester, and there put in Goal, where they continued until
Justice was executed upon them.

A remarkable Story of eight Men left in Greenland, Anno Christi, 1630. with a
Relation of their strange Preservation until the Ship's Return.
IN the Year of our Lord, 1630. May the first, the Muscovy Merchants of London
sent a Ship called the Salutation of London, for Green-land, which arrived
there in Safety the eleventh of June following, together with two other Ships;
all which were commanded by Captain William Goodler. The Ship wherein the
Captain was, stayed at Bell-sound; this of the Salutation, at the Fore-land;
and the Captain meeting with store of Whales, quickly made a great Voyage, and
so sent for the Salutation, to take in part of his Train-Oyl. By the way as
they went to him, meeting with cross Winds, the Master set eight of his Men on
shore to kill some Venison, in a place where there used to be good store. These
Men taking with them a Brace of Dogs, a Snap-hance, two Lances, and a
Tinder-box, went on shore, and that day they laid fourteen good Deer upon the
Ground; and then being weary, and the Night coming on, they betook themselves
to rest, intending the next day to make an end of their Hunting, and to return
to their Ship; but the next day proved foggy, and there was much Ice between
the Shore and the Ship, and the Wind coming Southerly, the Ship was fain to
stand so far off into the Sea to be clear of the Ice, that they lost the sight
of her; and the Weather growing thicker and thicker they thought fit to hunt
along the Shore to Green-Harbour, and there to stay aboard the Ship, till their
own Ship should come into the Port.

In this passage they killed eight Deer more, and so having laden their Shallop
with Venison, they kept on their course to Green-Harbour; But when they came
thither, they found, to their great astonishment, that the Ship was departed.
Being thus frustrated of their expectation, and having but three days to the
uttermost expiration of their limited time for their departure out of that
Country, they thought it their best course to make all speed possible to
Bell-sound to their Captain: and lest delay should prove dangerous, they
lightened their Shallop by heaving their Venizon overboard into the Sea; and
so they hasted all they might, and that night got half way; but the dark Fog
increasing, they were forced to come in a point of Land till the next day at
noon: At which time, the weather being clearer, they hasted forward; but having
no Compass to direct their Course by, they wandered up and down so long till the
Ships were departed. This filled them with fear and astonishment, knowing that
neither Christian nor Heathen had ever inhabited those desolate Climates: yea,
they had heard that the Merchants had endeavored, with profers of great
Rewards, and of sufficient Furniture, and provision of all things necessary, to
hire some to undertake to winter in those Parts, but could never meet with any
that would adventure their Lives to so hazardous an undertaking. They had heard
also, that the Company of Muscovy Merchants had once procured the Reprieve of
some Malefactors, condemned to death here in England, unto whom they promised
Pardon, together with Rewards, and provision of Clothes, Victuals, and all
other necessaries, if they would stay one Winter there; but when they came
thither, and took a view of the desolateness of the place, they conceived such
horror and fear in their hearts, chose rather to return for England, and there
to satisfy the Law with the loss of their Lives, than to stay in so desolate
and darksome a Country. They remembered also, a more terrible Example of nine
good and able men left there formerly by the same Master that had now left
them, who all died miserably upon the place; and whose Bodies were fearfully
disfigured by the savage Bears and hungry Foxes, which are the only Inhabitants
of that comfortless Country. All which made them like amazed men to stand one
looking upon another, every one foreseeing the future calamities both of
himself and of his Fellows: and that which much increased their horror, was,
their want of all necessary Provision for the Life of man, having neither
Clothes to keep them warm, nothing for shift, not Food to prevent the miseries
of cruel Famine, nor a House wherein to shroud themselves from the extremity of
Cold.

But after a space, knowing that Delay in Extremities is the Mother of all
Danger, they began to conceive Hope out of the depth of Despair; and therefore
they consulted together of the likeliest course for their preservation in that
place: and resolved upon the opportunity of the next fair Weather to go to
Green-Harbor to kill some Venison for part of their Winter Provision; which
accordingly they did, but found not so many Deer as they expected; yet the
first day they killed seven, and four Bears to boot, which they also intended
to eat: The next day they killed six Deer more; and as they returned they
killed six more; and then the Weather proving foul and cold, they laded their
Shallop with the Deer and Bears; and finding another Shallop left there, as
usually they do from Year to Year, they laded it with Graves of Whales that had
been boiled there that Year; and so dividing themselves into those two
Shallops, they took the first opportunity of returning to Bell-sound, to their
Tent, where they intended to take up their Rest for the Winter.

But in their Passage, the Night coming on, and the Wind blowing hard, they
were forced to stay in the midst way, at Bottel Cove, for that Night; there
they fastened their Shallops one to another, and casting out their Anchor, they
left them riding in the Cove.

But here again, for the Trial of their Patience, and to teach them to rely
more upon God's Providence than upon any outward means of their own, this
Mischance befell them; The Wind blowing hard into the Cove, and their Anchor
coming home, their Shallop sunk into the Sea, and so wet all their Provision,
and some of it they found swimming up and down by the Shore. The Sight hereof
wonderfully troubled them, to see the best part of their Provision, the only
hope of their Lives under God, in danger either utterly to be lost, or to be
spoiled by the Seawater, for which they had taken such Pains, and run so many
Adventures in the getting of it: and in this their Misery they saw but one
Remedy, and that was a desperate one; viz. to run into the Highwrote Sea to
their Shallops, to save the remainder of their Provisions, now ready to be
washed away by the Billows: this they did, and by main force drew the Shallops
to the Shore, then they went along by the Sea side to gather up such of their
Provisions as was swimming up and down; and when the Weather proved fair, they
went on to Bell-sound, where being arrived, they took out their Provision, and
viewed the great Tent which was built of Timber and Boards, and covered with
Flemmish Tyles; the use of it was for the Coopers to work, and lodge in whilst
they made Casks for the putting up of the Train Oil; and they resolved to build
another smaller Tent within that for their Habitation; and accordingly taking
down a lesser Tent that stood near to it, wherein the Land-men lay whilst they
made their Oil, they fetched their Materials from thence, both Boards, Posts,
and Rafters, and from the Chimneys of the Furnaces they took a thousand Bricks;
they found also four Hogsheads of Lime, which mingled with Sand from the Shore,
made good Mortar; but the Weather was grown so extreme cold, that they were
fain to make two Fires on both sides to keep their Mortar from freezing: then
they raised a Wall of one Brick thickness against the inner Planks of the side
of the Tent; but by that they had walled two sides of their House, their Bricks
failed, so that they were forced to build the other two sides of Boards, which
being nailed on both sides the Posts, they were hollow between, which they
filled up with Sand, that made it so tight, that the least breath of Air could
not possibly annoy them. The length of their Tent was 20 foot, and the breadth
16; their Chimney was the breadth of a Deal-board, and four foot high; they
seiled it with boards five or six times double, that no Wind could possibly get
thorough: the Door they made as close as they could, and lined it with a Bed
that they found there, which came over both the opening and shutting of it;
they made no Windows, having no Light but what came thorough the Chimney; then
set they up four Cabins, quartering themselves two and two in a Cabin; their
Beds were the Deer Skins dried, which was a warm and comfortable Lodging for
them in their Distress. Their next Care was for firing; and finding seven old
Shallops which were unserviceable, they brake them up, and stowed them over the
Beams in the great Tent to make it the warmer, and to keep the Snow from
driving thorough the Tyles into the Tent: and by this time the cold increasing,
and scarce having any day at all, they staved some empty Cask, and brake two
old Coolers (wherein they cooled their Oil) providing whatsoever firing they
could, without prejudice to the next Years Voyage: yet considering the small
quantity of Fuel, the Extremity of Cold, and the long time of their Abode, they
husbanded it as thriftily as possibly they could.

Having thus fitted every thing in the best manner they were able, on the
twelfth of September looking out into the Sound, they espied two Sea Horses,
lying asleep on a piece of Ice, whereupon, taking up an old Harping-iron, they
hasted to them, and first slew the old one and then the young one: and so
bringing them ashore, they flayed them, roasted, and eat them. Not long after,
they killed another; but the Nights and cold Weather increasing on them, and
they viewing their Provision, found it too small by half; whereupon they
stinted themselves to one reasonable meal a day, and agreed to fast Wednesdays
and Fridays, excepting from the Graves, or Fritters of the Whale, (which was a
very loathsome meat) of which they allowed themselves sufficient for their
present hunger: at which Diet they continued about three Months.

Having finished whatever they could invent for their Preservation, they found
that all their Clothes and Shoes were torn; to repair which, they had this new
device; of Rope-yarn they made thread, and of Whale-bones Needles, to sew their
clothes withal: But October the tenth, the Nights being grown very long, and
the Cold so violent, that all the Sea was frozen over, and they having nothing
now to exercise their minds upon, were troubled with a thousand imaginations;
sometimes they bewailed their absence from their Wives and Children, thinking
what grief it would be to them to hear of their miscarriage: then thought they
of their Parents, and what a cutting corrosive it would be to them to hear of
their untimely deaths, etc. and being thus tormented in their minds with fear
and grief, and pinched in their Bodies with hunger and cold, the hideous
monster of Desperation presented his ugliest shape unto them: But thinking it
not best to give way to grief and fear, they doubled their Prayers to Almighty
God for strength and Patience in their miseries, by whose Assistance, they
shook off their former Thoughts, and cheared up themselves to use the best
means for their Preservation.

Then, for the better husbanding of their Venison and lengthning of their
fiering, they thought best to roast every day half a Deer, and to stow it in
Hogsheads, which accordingly they did, leaving so much raw as would serve to
roast every Sabbath Day a Quarter, etc. And when this was over, they began
again to think of their ensuing Misery, which they found much aggravated, by
reason their Whale-Fritters, after they had been drenched in the Sea Water,
lying close together, were grown moldy and spoiled; and again surveying their
Bear and Venison, they found that it would not afford them five Meals a Week,
whereupon they were fain to cut off one Meal more; so that for three months
after, four days in the Week they fed upon the unsavory, moldy
Whale-Fritters, and the other three they feasted with Bear and Venison: But
besides the want of Meat, they now began to want Light, so that all their Meals
were Suppers; for from the fourteenth of October to the third of February, they
never saw the Sun, so much as peep above the Horizon; but the Moon, when not
obscured with Clouds, they always saw shining as bright as in England; all
which darksome time, they could not certainly tell when it should be day and
when night.

In the beginning of this Darkness they sought some means to preserve Light,
and finding a piece of Sheet-lead, and some Oil in the Coopers Tents, and
Rope-yarn, they made a Lamp, which they kept continually burning, and was a
great Comfort to them in their extremity: and indeed, Comfort was much wanting
to them; for, in the beginning of January the Weather was so vehement cold,
that it raised Blisters on their Flesh as if they had been burnt with Fire, and
if at any time they touched Iron it would stick to their Fingers like
Bird-lime; if they went out a doors to fetch in a little Water, it would so
pinch them, that they were sore as if they had been beaten. In the beginning of
Winter, with Pick-axes breaking the Ice daily, they got some Water on the Sea
Shore; but, after the tenth of January they had none but Snow-Water which they
melted with hot Irons, which was their only Drink till the twentieth of May
following.

By the last of January the Days were seven or eight Hours long, and then
viewing their Victuals again, they found that it would not last above six Weeks
longer, which made them fear further Famine; but they had recourse to God, who
they knew could supply them beyond their Hopes.

Looking out on a bright day, they saw a great she Bear with her Cub, coming
toward their Tent; whereupon, arming themselves with their Lances, they went
forth, and staid her coming; she soon cast her greedy Eyes upon them, and
hoping to devour them, hasted toward them; but, with their Lances they gave
her such an hearty Welcome, that she tumbled upon the ground, biting the Snow
for Anger: the Cub seeing this escaped by Flight: The Weather was so extreme
cold, that they were fain presently to retire into the Tent, and having warmed
themselves, they drew in the dead Bear, wherewith they dined merrily, and this
Bear served them twenty days; only this mischance they had, eating her Liver,
it made their Skin peel off. When she was spent, they yet feared that their
Venison would not hold out till the Fleet came from England; but God sent many
Bears to their Tents, by times, at least forty, whereof they killed seven; one
of which was exceeding great, at least six foot high; so that their Food
increasing they kept not themselves to such short Commons, but often eat two or
three meals a day, which much increased their Strength.

By this, the cheerful days lengthened so fast, that several sorts of Fowl
resorted thither: March the sixteenth, one of their Mastiffs went abroad which
they never saw after. Upon the coming of the Fowls, the Foxes, which all Winter
had kept their Buroughs under the Rocks, came abroad to seek for their
Livings; whereupon they set up Traps, which they baited with the Skin of these
Fowls; by which means, they caught, at times, fifty Foxes; all which they
roasted, and found to be good Meat: then taking the Bear-skins, laying the
fleshy side upwards, and making Springs of Whale-bone, they caught about sixty
Fowls, as big as Pigeons.

May the first the Weather began to be pretty warm, so that they went abroad to
seek for Provision, but nothing they could find for many days; till at length
they met with abundance of Willocks Eggs, of which they carried home thirty,
intending the next day to stock themselves with Abundance more; but that day
proved so cold that they could not stir out of their Tent. The same day there
came two Ships of Hull into the Sound, who knowing that some men had been left
there the Year before, being very desirous to know whether they were dead or
alive, the Master manned forth a Shallop to go as near the Shore as they could,
and so over the Ice to the Tent; when these men came near unto it they haled
them with the usual Word at Sea, crying Hey, to which one of them in the Tent
answered again Hoe; which sudden Answer almost amazed them all: but perceiving
them to be the very men left there, with joyful Hearts they embraced one
another; and so coming into the Tent, they showed the Hull-men the courtesy of
the House, giving them some Venison which was roasted four months before, and a
Cup of cold Water, which, for Novelty sake, they kindly accepted of.

After a little Discourse, these eight men resolved to leave their Tent, and to
go with them to their Ship, where they were welcomed after the heartiest and
kindest English manner; and so they staid with them till the London Fleet came,
which was three days after; at which time, they went aboard the Admiral, in
which Captain William Goodler was, who made them very welcome, and gave order
that they should have any thing which was in the Ship that might do them good:
he gave them Apparel also, to the value of twenty pounds, so that after
fourteen days refreshment they grew all perfectly well; but, when some of them
went to their own Master that had left them there, he fell foul upon them,
calling them Run-a-ways, with other harsh Terms, far enough from the Civility
of an honest man. Thus they continued in the Fleet until the 20th of August, at
which time, with joyful Hearts, they set Sail through the foaming Ocean; and
though sometimes crossed with contrary Winds, yet at last they came safely to
an Anchor, in the River of Thames, and the Muscovy Merchants dealt very well by
them. The Names of those eight Men thus left in Green-land.

William Fakely, Gunner; Edward Pelham, Gunner's Mate, that wrote this Story;
John Wise and Robert Goodfellow, Seamen; Thomas Ayers, Whale-cutter, Henry Bet,
Cooper; John Daws and Richard Kellet, Land-men.

A notable Story of Edgar, King of England, how he was, by his chief Favorite,
circumvented of the fair Lady Elfrida, and how afterward the King was revenged
of him for the same.
THis Edgar, surnamed the Peaceable, the thirtieth Monarch of the English men,
was a Prince endowed with a great many Virtues, and as many Vices; and of all
Vices, most to Lasciviousness, of which the Chronicles relate many Examples: we
shall only instance in one, which, for the variety of the matter, deserves to
be recorded unto Posterity.

Fames lavish Report of beauteous Elfrida (the Paragon of her Sex, and Wonder
of Nature) the only Daughter of Ordgarus, Duke of Devonshire, sounded so loud
in those Western parts, that the Echo thereof was heard into King Edgar's
Court, and entered his Ears, which ever lay open to give his Eyes the Scope of
Desire, and his wanton thoughts the Reins of Will: to try the Truth whereof, he
secretly sent his Minion or Favorite, Earl Ethelwold of East-Anglia, who well
could judge of Beauty, and knew the Diet of the King, with Commission, that if
the Pearl proved so orient it should be seized for Edgar's own wearing, who
meant to make her his Queen, and Ordgarus the Father of a King.

Ethelwood a jolly young Gallant, posted into Devonshire, and guest-wise
visited Duke Ordgarus his Court; where seeing the Lady surpassing the Report,
blamed Fame's oversight for sounding her Praise in so base and leaden a
Trumpet; and wholly surprised with her Love himself, began to woo the Virgin,
yea, and with her Father's good liking, so as the King would give his Assent.
Earl Ethelwold returning, related, that the Maid indeed was fair, but yet her
Beauty much augmented by babbling Reports, and neither her Feature or Parts any
wise befitting a King. Edgar mistrusting no Rival in his Love, nor dreaming
false Fellowship in Wooing, did, with a slight Thought, pass over Elfrida, and
pitched his Affections the faster another way. Earl Ethelwold following the
Game now on Foot, desired Edgar's Assistance to bring it to a stand, pretending
not so much for any liking to the Lady as to raise his own Fortunes by being
her Father's Heir; to which the King yielded, and (ignorant of what had passed)
solicited Ordgarus in the behalf of his Minion Ethelwold. The Duke, glad to be
shrouded under the favor of such a Favorite, willingly consented, and his
Daughters Destiny's assured to Earl Ethelwold.

The Marriage solemnized, and the Fruits thereof a short time enjoyed, the Fame
of her Beauty began to be spread, and that with a larger Epithet than formerly
it had been: whereupon, Edgar much doubting of double dealing, laid his Angle
fair to catch this great Gull; and bearing no show of wrong or suspect, invited
himself to hunt in his Parks; and forthwith repairing into those parts, did not
a little grace his old Servant, to the great Joy of Ordgarus the Duke. But,
Ethelwold mistrusting the cause of his coming, thought by one Policy to
disappoint another; and therefore revealing the truth to his Wife, how in his
Proceedings he had wronged her Beauty and deceived his Sovereign, requested her
loving assistance to save now his endangered Life, which lay in her power: and
of the means he thus advises.

Like as (said he) the richest Diamond, rough and uncut, yields neither sparkle
nor esteem of great Price; nor the Gold unburnished gives better Luster than
the base Brass; so Beauty and Feature, clad in mean Array, is either slightly
looked at with an unfixed Eye, or is wholly unregarded, and held of no Worth;
for according to the Proverb, Cloth is the Man and Man is the Wretch: then to
prevent the thing that I fear, and is likely to prove my present Ruin, and thy
last Wrack, conceal thy great Beauty from King Edgar's Eye, and give him
Entertainment in thy meanest Attires; let them (I pray thee) for a time be the
nightly Curtains drawn about our new nuptial Bed, and the daily Clouds to hide
thy splendant Sun from his sharp and too too piercing sight, whose Vigor and
Rays will soon set his waxen Wings on Fire, that ready are to melt at a far
softer Heat. Pitch (thou see) defiles the hand, and we are forbid to give
occasion of Evil: veil then thy Fairness with the Scaffs of Deformity from his
over-lavish and unmastered Eye; for the fairest Face draws ever the Gaze, if
not the Attempts; and Natures Endowments are as the Bush for the Wine, which
being immoderately taken does surfeit the Sense, and is again cast up with as
loathing a Taste. Of these Dregs drunk Amnon, after his fill of fair Thamer;
Herod of Miramy; and Aeneas of Dido; yea, and not to seek Examples far off,
King Edgar's variation in his unstedfast motion does easily bewray it self;
for, could either holy Wolfhield, beautiful Ethelfled, or the wanton Wench of
Andover, keep the Needle of his Compass certain at one Point? Nothing less, but
it was still led by the Lodestone of his ever mutable and turning Affections.
But thou will say he is religious, and by founding of Monasteries has expiated
those Sins: Indeed many are built, for which, Time and Posterities must thank
holy Dunstan, from whose Devotion those good Deeds have sprung. But, is thy
Person holier than sacred Wolfhield's? Thy Birth and Beauty greater than
Ethelfled's, the white, Daughter also to a Duke? The former, of an holy Votary,
he made the Sink of his Pollution; and the later is branded to all Ages by the
hateful Name of a Concubine, and her Son, among us, esteemed for a Bastard.
These should be motives to all beauteous and virtuous Ladies, not to sell their
Honors at so low and too-late repented a price. Neither think (sweet Countess)
that thy Husband is jealous, or suspects thy Constancy, which I know is great,
and thy self wholly complete with all honorable Virtues; but yet consider, I
pray thee, that thou art but young and may easily be caught, especially of
him that is so old a Master of the Game: neither persuade thy self of such
Strength as is able to hold out so great an Assault; for, Men are mighty, but a
King is much more. I know thou art wise, and enough has been said, only let me
add this, That Evil Beginnings have never good Ends. And so with a kind Kiss,
hoping he had won his Wife to his Will, prepared with the first to welcome King
Edgar.

Lady Elfrida thus left to her self, began seriously to think upon this Curtain
Sermon, whose Text she distasted, being taken out of an over-worn and
threadbare Cloath-Proverb, as though her Fortunes had been wholly residing, and
altogether consisting in her Parentage and Apparel, but nothing at all in any
parts of her self; whereas Women commonly are more proud of their seeming
inward Perfections than of any outward Ornaments whatsoever: so that Disdain
taking Possession of her Heart, she breathed forth her Discontent in these
Words.

Has my Beauty (said she) been courted of a King, famoused by Report, compared
with Hellen's, and now must it be hid? Must I falsify and belie Nature's
Bounties, mine own Value, and all men's Reports, only to save his Credit who
has impaired mine, and belyed my Worth? And must I needs defoul my self to be
his only fair Foul, that has kept me from the State and Seat of a Queen? I
know the Name of a Countess is great, and the Wife of an Earl is honorable,
yet no more than Birth and Endowments have assigned for me, had my Beauty and
Parts been far less than they are. He warns me of the end when his own
beginnings were with Treachery; tells me the Examples of others but observes
none himself: He is not jealous, forsooth, and yet I must not look out; I am
his Fair, but others Pitch, Fire, Wine, Bush, and what not? Not so holy as
Wolfhield, not so white as Ethelfled, and yet that I am must now be made far
worse than it is. I would men knew the heat of that Cheek wherein Beauty is
blazed, then would they, with less Suspect, suffer our Faces unmasked to take
Air of their Eyes, and we no whit condemnable for showing that which cannot be
hid, neither in me shall, become of it what will; for, should my Husband
miscarry thereby, yet were I unblameable, since it is no Deccit to deceive the
Deceiver.

Having taken upon her this Resolution, to be a right Woman, and like a true
Daughter of Eve, desiring nothing more than the thing forbidden, she made
preparation to put it in Practice: Her Body she endulced with the sweetest
Balms, displayed her Hair, and bespangled it with Pearls, bestrewed her Breasts
with Rubies and Diamonds, rich Jewels like Stars depended at her Neck, and her
other Ornaments every way alike, costly and suitable, so that she seemed the
Paragon of Nature, and appeared rather like an Angel than an earthly Creature.
Being thus accoutered with all the additions of Art, to beautify Nature, she
attended the Approach and Entrance of the King; whom with such fair Obeisance
and seemly Grace she received, that Edgar's greedy Eye presently collecting the
illustrious Rays of her shining Beauty, became a burning-glass to his Heart,
and the Sparkles of her fair Eyes falling into the Train of his Love, set all
his Senses on Fire: yet dissembling his Passions, he passed on to his Game,
where having the false Ethelwood at Advantage, he ran him thorough with a
Javelin; and having thereby made fair Elfrida a Widow, he soon after took her
to be his Wife, on whom he begat a Son who was afterward King of England,
known by the name of Ethelred the Unready.

The Story of Mackbeth, King of Scotland.
ABout the Year of our Lord, 1040. one Duncan was King of Scotland, who being
of a soft, gentle Nature, unapt for Warlike Exercises, and to govern so
robustious and rough a People as the Scots; he therefore, in all matters of
Importance, employed two of the principal of his Nobles, Mackbeth and Banquho.
These two traveling together toward Fores, whereas the King then lay, they
went sporting by the way together, without other Company saving only
themselves; as they thus journeyed thorough the Woods and Fields, suddenly, in
the midst of a Launde, there met them three Women, in strange and antic
Apparel, resembling Creatures of an elder World; whom when they attentively
beheld, wondering much at such an uncouth sight, the first of them spoke and
said, All hail Mackbeth, Thane of Glammis: (Thane was a Title unto which that
of Earl afterward succeeded; and he had newly entered into that Dignity of
Glammis by the Death of his Father who was Thane thereof;) the second of them
said, Hail Mackbeth Thane of Cawder; and the third coming up to him, said, All
hail Mackbeth that hereafter shall be King of Scotland. This is unequal dealing
said Banquho, to give my Friend all the Honors, and none unto me; yes, (says
the first of them) we promise greater Benefits unto thee, than unto him, for he
shall reign indeed, but with an unlucky end; neither shall he leave any Issue
behind him to succeed in his place; where contrarily, thou indeed shall not
reign at all, but of thee those shall be born which shall govern the Scottish
Kingdom by long Order of continual Descent: and having said these Words, they
immediately vanished out of their sight.

This strange Apparition was reputed at the first but some vain fantastical
Illusion by Mackbeth and Banquho; insomuch, that Banquho would oftentimes, in
jest, call Mackbeth King of Scotland, and Mackbeth again would call him in
sport likewise, the Father of many Kings. But afterward, upon more serious
Consideration, the common Opinion was, that these Women were the Weird Sisters,
viz. the Goddesses of Destiny; or else some Nymphs or Fairies, endowed with
knowledge of Prophecy by their Necromantical Science, because every thing came
to pass as they had spoken.

For, soon after their Arrival at Court, the Thane of Cawder being condemned of
Treason against the King, his Title, Lands, Livings, and Offices, were given,
of the King's Liberality, unto Mackbeth.

The same Night at Supper Banquho jested with him, and said, Now Mackbeth thou
have obtained those things which the two former Sisters promised, there
remains only for thee to purchase that which the third said should come to
pass. Encouraged thus by Banquho's Words, but more by assurance of his helping
hand, he resolved not to be wanting to himself to fulfill the Prophecy of the
third Weird; his Wife also encouraging him much to the Attempt being very
ambitious, and burning with unquenchable desire to bear the name of a Queen.

Hereupon, to put his disloyal Thoughts into Execution, he murders the King;
and by reason of his Command among the Soldiers and common People, he
succeeded in his Throne, and was crowned at Scone, the usual place for the
Coronation of their Kings: and being thus invested in the Regal Chair, he, for
a while used great Justice and Liberality amongst his Subjects, whereby he
gained the Affections both of the Nobles and Common People.

But, as commonly those who make a Ladder of Mischief to climb up to Promotion,
are ever jealous of those who may prejudice their unjust Titles, so he calling
to Mind the Prediction given to his Companion Banquho, whom hereupon suspecting
as his Supplanter, he caused to be killed, together with his whole Kindred,
Fleance his Son only, with much difficulty, escaping into Wales. Glad he was
now that he was freed from this Fear, but yet, for his further Security, he
built a strong Castle on the top of an high Hill called Dunsinane, ten miles
from Perth, on such a proud height, that standing there aloft, a man might
behold well near all the Countries of Angus, Fife, Stermond, and Ernedale, as
it were lying underneath him, making this his ordinary Seat; yet could not his
guilty Conscience be still secure; but, upon new Fears consulting with certain
Wizards about his future Estate, was told by one, that he should never be
overcome till Bername Wood (which was some few miles distant) did come to
Dunsinane Castle; and by another, that he should never be slain by any Man born
of a Woman. Secure then as he thought, he omitted no kind of Libidiousness or
Cruelty, putting to Death many of his Nobles upon slight pretenses, thereby to
get their Estates into his hands. Mackduffe, Thane of Fise seeing no end of his
Cruelty, posted into England to Malcomne Cammore, a Prince of the Royal Blood,
persuading him to take upon him the Crown of Scotland, and to free his Country
from so detestable a Tyrant; and so far he prevailed, that Malcomne, with
Syword, Earl of Northumberland, and ten thousand well appointed Soldiers,
marched into Scotland, to whom joined some few Patriots which had not yet felt
the Tyrants Sword. These marching with as much Privacy as so great an Army
could be capable of, came one Night to Bermane Wood, and early in the Morning
marched, every Man bearing a Bough in his hand the better to keep them from
Discovery, toward Dunsinane Castle, which they presently took by Scalado.
Mackbeth escaping, was pursued, over-taken, and urged to fight by Mackduffe, to
whom the Tyrant half in Scorn replied, that in vain he attempted his death, for
it was his Destiny never to be slain by any man born of a Woman; now then is
thy fatal Hour come, said Mackduffe, for I was never born of a Woman, but
violently cut out of my Mothers Belly, she dying before her Delivery; which
Words so daunted the Tyrant, though otherwise a man of good Performance, that
he was easily slain, and Malcolmne Cammore, the true Heir of the Crown, seated
in the Throne.

In the mean time, whilst these things were acting, Fleance the Son of Banquho
so thrived in Wales, that he grew into great favor and estimation with the
Prince of that Country, and into such familiarity with his Daughter, that she,
of courtesy, in the end, suffered him to get her with Child; which being once
understood, her Father the Prince conceived such hateful displeasure toward
Fleance, that he finally slew him, and held his Daughter in most vile state of
servitude, for that she had consented to be on this wise deflowred by a
Stranger.

At the last yet she was delivered of a Son, named Walter, who within few years
proved a Man of greater Courage and Valiancy than any other had commonly been
found, although he had no better bringing up than (by his Grandfathers
Appointment) amongst the baser sort of People. Howbeit he showed ever, even
from his Infancy, that there reigned in him a certain stoutness of Stomach,
ready to attempt high Enterprises. It chanced, that falling out with one of his
Companions, after many taunting Words which passed betwixt them, the other, to
his Reproach, objected that he was Illegitimate; wherewith being sore kindled,
in his raging Fury he ran upon him and slew him out of hand; then was he glad
to flee out of Wales: and coming into Scotland to seek some Friendship there,
he happened into the Company of such English men as were come thither with
Queen Margaret, the Sister of Edgar Atheling, who was married to Malcolme; and
now he behaved himself so soberly in all his Demeanor, that within a while he
was highly esteemed amongst them.

Not long after, by such means attaining to the degree of high Reputation, he
was sent with a great Power of Men into the Western Isles, into Galloway and
other parts of the Realm, to deliver the same of the Tyranny and injurious
Oppression there exercised by diverse misgoverned Persons; which Enterprise,
according to his Commission, he atcheived with such prudent Policy and
Manhood, that immediately upon his Return to the Court he was made Lord
Steward of Scotland; from which Office the name of Steward became as the
Surname of all his Posterity. From this Walter descended that Robert Steward,
who was after, in Right of his Wife, King of Scotland; since which time, there
was successively nine Sovereigns of that Name in Scotland, and three in
England, King James, King Charles the First, and King Charles the Second.

And may the Providence above so nourish,
That Name in England may for ever flourish.
Of a Costermonger 's Daughter of London; how, after many strange Adventures,
she came at last to be chief Sultaness to the Grand Seignior of Constantinople.
OF all the Passions which possess the Spirits of Men, there is none which
yields such variety of Admiration and Wonder as those of Love; of which, I
shall give you herein a most notable Example, scarcely to be paralleled in any
of our Romantic Stories, did not we know the Power of Beauty, how it subdues
far beyond the Sword, by conquering the Conquerours, and making all things
subject to it.

In our Metropolitan City of London, there lived a Costermonger, who had only
one Daughter, but she the Paragon of Nature, of an admirable Beauty; and
thereto was added such Excellencies of inward Qualifications, as made her to be
desired in Marriage by many young Gallants and other wealthy Citizens: But
Love, that knows no Laws nor Limitations, had settled her Affections upon a
young Page, whose smooth Tongue and complacent Carriage had fettered her Heart
in Cupid's Chains; he also seeming so amorously bent to her, as if he saw with
no other Eyes but what she bestowed upon him, nor thought no other Thoughts but
what she inspired.

But under this green Grass of Dissimulation lay lurking the Serpent of
Ingratitude and Deceit; for this innocent Maid mistrusting no Evil, as
intending none, was by the sly Insinuations of that Deceiver, whose Love was
Lucre, and Faith Falsehood, under Pretense of seeing some Friends, carried on
Board of a Barbados Ship, where this wicked Wretch (O Grief to hear) for
twenty Pounds most villanously sold her to be a Slave. Thus the Cat having
played a while with the Mouse, at last devours her; thus the innocent Lamb is,
by the Wiles of the Fox, betrayed to her own Destruction.

This wicked Wretch having received his Money, departs home with the Reward
of Iniquity, the whilst the Ship set Sail from Graves-end, manned with
fourscore tall Men, and the Wind standing fair, they smoothly glide along the
Thames, and enter into that vast Gulf, the boundless Ocean; but the Heavens
being angry for the forcible carrying away of this innocent Virgin, sent forth
such a violent Tempest on the Sea, as made the stoutest Spirit of them all to
tremble; for they had not sailed far, when there arose a foggy Mist from out
the Seas, so that the clearness of the Skies might not be seen for the darkness
of the Air, dreadful Flashes of Lightning seemed to have set the Seas on Fire,
and terrible Vollies of Thunder threatened the shaking of the Heavens, and
sundring of the Earth; Showers of Rain poured down amain, which, with the
Impetuosity of the Winds, caused Showers of Tears to trickle down the Cheeks of
the stoutest Spirits there, who all of them now expected no other but to be
devoured in that merciless Element of Water: the beautiful Virgin, who before
had wished all ill both to the Master of the Ship, as also to the Mariners, for
carrying her thus away against her Will, now, as heartily prayed for their
Welfare; knowing, if they miscarried she were lost, if they failed she were
cast away. Twelve hours did the Wind and Seas contend thus together for the
Destruction of this Vessel, tossing her about like Fortunes Tennis-ball,
tearing her Masts in Pieces, and making her Tackling unserviceable; when at
last the Skies began to clear, and the Winds to cease the violence of their
raging, which cheared up their drooping Spirits, hoping now all danger was
past; but Fortune, that is constant in nothing but Inconstancy, soon made them
to see their Error, and that they were now entering into the hands of more
violent Enemies than Storms and Tempests; for, being by the Fury of the Seas
brought upon the Coast of Barbary, they were espied by a Turkish man of War,
belonging to Tunis, a Receptacle of Pirates under the Protection of the Grand
Seignior, who presently seized upon this stately Vessel, altogether now
disabled for Resistance; and having boarded her, secured her Goods, carrying
all the Persons thereof into the Town; who (according to the Custom of that
place) were immediately committed to Prison.

Now were the Saylors in their Dumps, knowing their Lot was perpetual Slavery:
but the lovely Maid, in whom Beauty sat triumphant, though lately shaded with
the Clouds of Fear, began to pluck up her Spirits, knowing that she had not
worsened her Condition, but changed her Masters; and this gave her great
Content, to see those unto whom she was lately so subject, now to partake of
the same Lot with her; so that those Roses which before seemed to die in her
Cheeks now revived; each several Beauty resumed their former Estates, so that
she soon appeared to those dark African Inhabitants, a Sun upon Earth, and
rather an immortal Goddess than an earthly Creature.

The Fame of her Beauty had soon filled the Ears of the Inhabitants of Tunis,
who in multitudes came flocking to the Prison to behold her; amongst others was
the Governor of the Town, who was so stricken with Admiration at the
Perfection of her Excellencies, that he could not choose but break forth into
these Words:

O Mahomet, what do I behold! A Beauty able to tempt a Hermit from his Cell,
and make gray Hairs to become young again: Who can look on her and not admire!
Who can admire and not love, nay rather adore such great Virtues! for, can we
think Nature would not put her best Jewels into so rich a Casket! Certainly so
smooth a Forehead, diamond Eyes, rosy Cheeks, coral Lips, alabaster Neck, so
well featured a Body, was not ordained for Captivity, but rather to be embraced
by a mighty Monarch! I will therefore send her as a Present unto my Master, the
mighty Ottoman, unto whom, I know she cannot but be welcome, as one that
exceeds in Nature's Endowments the choicest Beauties in all his Seraglio.

Accordingly, in pursuance of his intended Purpose, he takes the lovely Damsel
out of Prison, treats her nobly, and clothes her gorgeously; who, not willing
to hide those Lustres wherewith she had captivated the Eyes of those
Mahumetans, employs her utmost Skill, with the bravery of Apparel, to add to
those Perfections of Nature. In the mean time, a Messenger is dispatched to the
Grand Seignior's Court, to certify him of the beautiful Prize which was coming
to him; the Governor, with his Charge, following more leisurely after. When
they put forth to Sea, it is said, that the Fishes danced and leaped about
their Ship, and though it was a Serene time and very calm Weather, yet the
Billows rose up gently, as it were to behold her Face; and having seen it, sunk
down again, as it were in Obeisance to her.

They having arrived at Constantinople, and word thereof brought to the Grand
Seignior, he straight gave order for her Reception, which was (indeed) very
magnificent, more like the Offspring of some mighty Potentate than a poor
Costermonger's Daughter, being attended by several Bashaws, Cadies, Mudressies,
Chiansies, and Sansiacks, with a great number of Saffies, Calsies, Hogies and
Nupies, after whom followed a strong Guard of Janisaries, who altogether
attended her to the Seraglio, where she was received by the Aga of the Women,
and not long after visited by the Grand Seignior himself; who beholding her
exquisite Beauty, having never seen such peerless Perfections before; as if
Nature herein had imitated Apelles, to draw the several Excellencies of all
Women into one Piece, he stood as it were, wrapped into Admiration for a time;
at last, recovering the use of his Speech, he thus accosted her:

Most peerless Lady, whose heavenly Beauty has captivated my Heart, and of a
Conqueror made me thy Slave, thou shining like a Star of the first Magnitude
in Beauties Horizon; well do thou deserve to be the Queen of my Affections,
whom Nature has already crowned with such transcendent Prerogatives: Know
then, that I bid thee heartily welcome (rare English Damsel) and for those
Excellencies which I do see in thee I will prefer thee before all the Women in
my Seraglio, making thee Empress of all my Domions, as thou art already of my
Heart.

Now, though Women naturally do love to hear themselves praised, especially by
great men, yet the sight to Majesty in so mighty a Prince, did raise a modest
Bashfulness inher, and bespread her Cheeks with a Vermillion Tincture: Silence
for a while possessed her Lips; at last, recollecting her self, with an humble
Obeisance she returned this Answer.

Great Sir, how much I am bound to your Goodness, my Heart is as little able to
conceive as my Tongue to express; for which, though I cannot in the least make
you Satisfaction (my Means being so infinitely below my Will) yet shall not my
Endeavors be at any time wanting wherewith to serve you in what may stand with
my Honor.

Gracious Lady (replied the Grand Seignior) the only thing I desire of you, is,
your real Affection, more worth to me than Crowns or Scepters: it is not your
Portion, but Person, that I sue for; and though I might have compelled you by
Constraint, yet I rather seek to win you by Love; for, forced Affection is but
feigned, and that Music of Marriage is but a jarring Melody where Hearts are
not joined together as well as hands.

Worthy Prince (answered the lovely Maid) should I deny so great Honor, I
might justly be taxed of Folly in the highest degree: If therefore (dread Sir)
there be any thing in me worthy to be loved, yours I am, the highest of my
Ambition being only to be entitled your Servant in it is largest Latitude.

Being thus agreed, with reciprocal Joy on both sides, next day was the
Marriage solemnized in one of the principal Mosches of the City: the Rites and
Ceremonies were performed by the Mufti, in his Pontificalibus. She was most
gorgeously attired at that time, the Jewels that she wore being estimated at
five thousand Pounds: and that the Joy might be the more universal, the Grand
Seignior distributed amongst the Janisaries an hundred thousand Sultanies.

The next day the Grand Seignior sitting in the Divano, with the Beglerbegs of
Greece and Natolia, together with several Bassas, Sansiacks, and other high
Ministers of State, the beautiful Lady was by a general Decree ordained chief
Sultaness of all the Turkish Dominions, and so to be honored of all the
People, notwithstanding the former Custom, that she who bore the first Son to
the Emperor had only that Title conferred on her. She was also made free at
that time, a great Honor amongst the Turks, and immediately was by the Title
of Sultaness proclaimed all over the City of Constantinople.

The Proverb says, Give a Maid Luck and throw
Her in the Sea, she will thrive where e're she go.
Stones being thrown hard against the ground, do by
The force of that their Fall mount up on high.
Historical Observations out of several Authors.
AT such time as the Tartars began to reign, and were first known in the World,
there were four Brethren, the eldest of which, Mongu, reigned in Sedia. These
purposing to subdue the World, went one to the East, another to the North, to
the South a third, which was Vlan, and the other to the West. This Vlan having
an Army of an hundred thousand Horse, besides Foot, fought against the Caliph
of Baldach, a great City in the Confines of Tartaria, whom he overcame, and
took both him and his City, wherein he found infinite store of Treasure; at
which, he greatly wondering, sent for the Caliph, whom he sharply reproved, that
having so much Treasure, he would not therewith provide himself of Soldiers
for his Defense; and therefore, commanded that he should be enclosed in that
Tower where his Treasure was, without any other Sustenance, so long as he
lived. This (say the Historians of that time) seemed a just Judgment from our
Lord Jesus Christ on him: for he, in the year 1225. seeking to convert the
Christians to Mahomet, and taking advantage on that place of the Gospel, that
he which has Faith as much as a grain of Mustardseed should be able to remove
Mountains; He convented all the Christians, Nestorians, and Jacobites, and
propounded to them in ten days to remove certain Mountains, or turn Mahometans,
or be slain, as not having one man amongst them which had the least Faith. They
therefore continued eight days in Prayer: after which, a certain Shoo-maker, by
Revelation to a Biship, was designed to perform it. This Shoo-maker, once
tempted to Lust by sight of a young Woman, in putting on her Shoo, zealously
had fulfilled that of the Gospel, and literally had put out his right Eye: he
now, on the day appointed, with other Christians, following the Cross, and
lifting his hands to Heaven, prayed to God to have Mercy on his People; and
then with a loud Voice commanded the Mountain, in the Name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, to remove, which presently, with great Terror to the Caliph and
all his People, was effected. And that day was for a long time after kept holy,
with fasting also on the Evening.

In Draugiana, a Province of Persia, near unto a City called Mulebet, lived a
seditious Persian, named Aladine, commonly called the old man of the mountain;
he had, in a pleasant Valley betwixt two Mountains, very high, made a goodly
Garden, furnished with the best Trees and Fruits he could find, adorned with
diverse Palaces and Houses of Pleasure, beautified with Gold Works, Pictures,
and Furnitures of Silk. There, diverse Pipes, answering diverse parts of these
Palaces, were seen to run Wine, Milk, Honey, and clear Water. In them he had
placed goodly Damsels, skilful in Songs, and Instruments of Music and Dancing,
and to make Sports and Delights unto men, whatsoever they could imagine. They
were also fairly attired in Gold and Silk, and were seen to go continually
sporting in the Garden and Palaces. This Place thus furnished with Delights,
he had made in imitation of Mahomet, who had promised such a sensual Paradise
to his devout Followers; the entrance into which he fortified with a strong
Castle called Tigado. Hither he brought all the lusty Youths he could light on,
casting them into Prison, where they endured much Sorrovv and Woe. And when
he thought good, he caused a certain Drink to be given them, which cast them
into a dead sleep: then he caused them to be carried into diverse Chambers of
the said Palaces, where they saw the things aforesaid as soon as they awaked;
each of them having those Damsels to minister Meats and excellent Drinks, and
all varieties of Pleasures to them, insomuch, that the Fools thought themselves
to be in Paradise indeed. Having enjoyed this Happiness a whole day, they were
in a like Sleep conveyed to their Irons again; after which, he caused them to
be brought into his Presence, and questioned where they had been; which
answered, by your Grace, in Paradise, and recounted all the Particulars before
mentioned. Then the old man answered, this is the Commandment of our Prophet,
That whosoever defends his Lord, he makes him enter into Paradise: and if ye
will be obedient to me, and hazard your Lives in my Quarrel, ye shall have this
Grace. This so animated them, that they swore to be obedient to his Commands;
and he was thought happy whom the old man would command any thing, though it
cost him his Life; so that other Lords, and his Enemies, were slain by these
his Assassines, which exposed themselves to all Dangers, and contemned their
Lives. These men the Italians call Assassines, (whence we use the Phrase to
Assassinate) the name importing as much as Thieves or Cutthroats: such a one
was he who murdered the Count of Tripolis, in the Wars for the Holy Land; and
such a one was he, who so desperately wounded our Edward the First, at the
Siege of Acon, with a poisoned Knife, whose Venom could by no means be
assuaged, till his virtuous Wife (proposing herein a most rare Example of
conjugal Love) sucked out the Poison, which her love made sweet to her delicate
Palate; so sovereign a Medicine is a Wife's Tongue, anointed with the Virtue
of lovely Affection: and indeed, it is no wonder that Love should do Wonders
which is it self a Wonder. This Aladine thus playing the Tyrant, and robbing
all which passed that way; Vlan, in the Year 1262. sent and besieged his
Castle, which, after three years Siege, they took, slew him, and ruined his
Paradise, not being able, for want of Victuals, to hold out longer.

Paulus Venetus reports, that in a City called Samarchan, subject to the
Nephew of the Great Cham of Tartary, the Brother of the Great Cham, named
Zagatai, governed that Country; who being persuaded to become a Christian, the
Christians, thorough his Favor, built a Church, in honor of St. John Baptist,
with such Cunning, that the whole Roof thereof was supported by one Pillar in
the midst; under which, was set a square Stone, which by favor of their Lord,
was taken from a Building of the Saracens. Zagathai's Son succeeded after his
Death in the Kingdom, but not in the Faith; from whom, the Saracens obtained,
that the Christians should be compelled to restore that Stone: and when they
offered a sufficient valuable Price, the Saracens refused to receive any other
Composition than the Stone; but the Pillar lifted up it self, that the Saracens
might take away their Stone, and so continued.

About the Year of our Lord 400. one Agilmond was King of the Lombards,
inhabiting Pannonia, now called Hungary. This King one morning going a hunting,
as he was riding by a Fish Pond he spied seven Children sprawling for Life,
which one (as says Paulus Diaconus) or (it may be) many Harlots had been
delivered of, and most barbarously thrown into the Water. The King amazed at
this Spectacle, put his Boar-spear or Hunting-pole among them; one of the
Children's hands fastened to the Spear, and the King softly drawing back his
Hand, wafted the Child to the Shore. This Boy he named Lamissus, from Lama,
which in their Language signified a Fish Pond. He was in the King's Court
carefully brought up, where there appeared in him such Tokens of Virtue and
Courage, that after the Death of Agilmond, he was by the Lombards chosen to
succeed him.

In the time of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, Anno 1161. Beatrix the
Emperor's Wife, coming to see the City of Millain in Italy, was, by the
irreverent People, first imprisoned, and then most barbarously handled; for,
they placed her on a Mule, with her Face toward the Tail, which she was
compelled to use instead of a Bridle: and, when they had thus shown her to all
the Town, they brought her to a Gate and kicked her out. To revenge this Wrong,
the Emperor besieged and forced the Town, and adjudged all the People to die,
save such as would undergo this Ransom: Between the Buttocks of a skittish
Mule a bunch of Figs was fastened; and such as would live, must, with their
hands bound behind, run after the Mule, till, with their Teeth, they had
snatched out one or more of the Figs. This Condition, besides the hazard of
many a sound Kick, was by most accepted and performed. Since which time, the
Italians, when they intend to scoff or disgrace one, use to put their Thumb
between two of their Fingers, and say, Ecco, la fico; which is counted a
Disgrace answerable to our English Custom, of making Horns to that Man whom we
suspect to be a Cuckold.

Giraldus Cambriensis, who wrote an History of Ireland, reports, that in his
time, in the North of England, a knot of Youngsters took a Nap in the fields.
As one of them lay snorting with his Mouth gaping, as though he would have
caught Flies, it happened that a Snake or Adder slipped into his Mouth, and
glided down into his Belly, where harboring it self, it began to roam up and
down, and to feed on the young man's Entrails. The Patient being sore
distracted, and above measure tormented with the biting pangs of this greedy
Guest, incessantly prayed to God, that if it stood with his gracious Will,
either wholly to bereave him of his Life, or else of his unspeakable mercy to
ease him of his Pain. The Worm would never cease from gnawing the Patient's
Carcass, but when he had taken his repast; and his Meat was no sooner digested,
than it would give a fresh onset in boring his Guts. Diverse Remedies were
sought, as Medicines, Pilgrimages to Saints, but all could not prevail. Being
at length schooled by the grave Advice of some sage and expert Father, who
willed him to make his speedy repair to Ireland, where neither Snake nor Adder
would live. He presently thereupon would tract no time, but busked himself over
Sea, and arrived in Ireland. He had no sooner drank of the Water of that
Island, and eaten of the Victuals thereof, but forthwith he killed the Snake,
avoided it downward, and so being lusty and lively, he returned into England.

When David Bruce was King of Scotland, in the beginning of his Reign, for the
better proof of exercising Justice among them that coveted to live by truth,
and to have more ready occasion to punish others that meant the contrary; he
commanded that Saddles and Bridles, with all other such Instruments and Stuff
as pertained to Husbandry, should be left abroad both day and night without the
doors: and if it chanced that any of them were stolen or taken away, the
Sheriff of the Shire should either cause the same to be restored again, or else
to pay for it out of his own Purse. During the time, whilst such strait
punishment was executed against Offenders, it fortuned that a Carle of the
Country, because he durst not steal other men's goods, stole his own
Plow-Irons, that he might have the value of them recompensed to him by the
Sheriff: but such diligence was used in the search and trial who had the
Plow-Irons, that finally the truth came to light; whereupon for his crafty
falsehood, the Party guilty was hanged, as he had well deserved.

Heliogabalus being chosen Emperor of Rome, assumed the name of Antonine. His
Apparel was extreme brave and gorgeous, and yet he never wore one Garment
twice. His Shoos were embellished with Diamonds, and Oriental Pearls of the
greatest price. His Seats were strewed with Musk and Amber. His Beds were
covered with Cloth of Gold, tissued on Purple, and embossed with Gems of
inestimable value. His Way was strewed with filings of Gold and Silver. His
Vessels, even of basest use, were of the purest Gold. His Lamps burned with
precious Balms and Gums of India and Arabia. His Fish Ponds were filled with
Rose Water. His Ships, in their Theatrical Sea Fights, floated in Rivers of
Wine. His Baths, most magnificently built, when he had once used them, were
pulled down, and new built. His Plate was of refined massy Gold; but never
served twice to his Table. His Rings and Jewels infinitely rich, yet never worn
twice. His Concubines numberless, yet never lain with twice. Every Supper in
his Court cost a thousand pound Sterling. When he lay near to the Sea, he would
eat no Fish, when he was farthest in the Continent, he would eat no Flesh.
Whole meals were furnished with Tongues of singing Birds, and Brains of the
rarest Creatures. All Asia, Europe, and Africa, with the adjacent Islands; in a
word, the whole Globe of Earth and Sea (whereof he was Lord Paramount) was not
able to fill this Gulf. In his Progresses he was attended with six hundred
Chariots, fraught with Concubines, Catamites, and Panders: for whom he built a
Seraglio in his Court, where himself (in the Habit of a Courtezan) used to make
solemn Speeches unto them, terming them his brave Fellow Soldiers, and
Companions in Arms. He caused to be gathered in Rome ten thousand weight of
Spiders, ten thousand Mice, and a thousand Pole-cats, which he exhibited to the
Roman Peers and People in a Public Show and Solemnity, professing that now he
perfectly understood how mighty a City Rome was. Lastly, he summoned a
Parliament of Women, to consult about Tires, Fashions, Dresses, Tinctures, and
the like weighty and important Affairs.

In the Province of Chamul, belonging to the Cham of Tartaria, the Inhabitants
are Idolaters, have a peculiar Language, and seem to be born for no other
purpose but to apply themselves to Sporting, Singing, Dancing, Writing and
Reading after their fashion, playing on Instruments, and to give themselves to
delight. When any Traveller passing by, turns into any man's House for
entertainment, the Master of the Family receives him with great Joy, and
commands his Wife and all the Family, that they, as long as he will abide
with them, obey him in all things. In the mean space, he departs, not to
return so long as the Guest remains in his House: and mean while he lies
with the Wife, Daughter, and the rest, as with his own Wives. The Women of that
Country are beautiful, and ready to obey all those Commandments of their
Husbands, who are so besotted with this folly, that they think it a glorious
thing for them, and acceptable to their Idols, for which they prosper with
plenty of all things. Mangu Can having heard of this Folly, commanded them to
observe this detestable Custom no longer; which they did about three Years, and
then seeing not their wonted Fertility, and troubled with some domestical
Crosses, sent Ambassadors to the Cham, and earnestly entreated that he would
revoke so grievous an Edict, and not abolish that Tradition which they had
received from their Elders. The Cham answered, Seeing you desire your Reproach
and Shame, (...) it be granted you; go and do herein after your wont. The
Messengers returning with this Answer, brought great Joy to all the People.
This Custom is observed in that Country to this day.

In another Province, called Tebeth, likewise under the Great Cham, they had a
Custom, that no Man married a Wife who was a Virgin: for, when Travelers and
Strangers, coming from other parts, pass thorough this Country, and pitch their
Pavillions, the Women of that place having marriageable Daughters, bring them
unto Strangers, desiring them to take them, and enjoy their Company as long as
they remain there: thus the prettier are chosen, and the rest return home
sorrowful. And when they will depart, they are not suffered to carry any away
with them, but faithfully restore them to their Parents: the Maiden also
requires some Toy or small Present of him who has defloured her, which she
may show as an Argument and Proof of her deflouring. And she that has been
loved, and abused of most men, and shall have many such Favors and Toys to
show to her Wooers, is accounted more noble, and may more easily and honorably
be married: and when she will go gallantly attired, she hangs all her Lovers
Favors about her Neck, and the more acceptable she was to many, of so much the
more Honor is she adjudged worthy. But, when they are once married to
Husbands, they are now no more suffered to be coupled with strange men: and the
men of this Country are very wary that they offend not one another in this
matter.

In China, such there as be imprisoned for Debt, lie there until it be paid;
the Taissu, or head Officer of that place, calling him many times before him by
virtue of his Office; who understanding the cause wherefore they do not pay
their Debts, appoints them a certain time to do it, within the Compass
whereof, if they discharge not their Debts, being Debtors indeed, then they be
whipped, and condemned to perpetual Imprisonment: If the Creditors be many, and
one is to be paid before another, they do contrary to our manner, pay him first
of whom they last borrowed, and so ordinarily the rest, in such sort, that the
first Lenders be the last Receivers. The same order is kept in paying Legacies;
the last named receives his Portion first.

In the same Country, all such Thieves as are taken, are carried to Prison from
one place to another, in a Chest, upon men's Shoulders, hired therefore by the
King: the Chest is six handfuls high; the Prisoner sits therein upon a
Bench, the Cover of the Chest is two Boards, amidst them both, a Pillory-like
hole for the Prisoner's Neck; there sits he, with his head without the
Chest, and the rest of his Body within, not able to move or to turn his Head
this way or that way, nor to pluck it in; the Necessities of Nature he voideth
at a hole in the bottom of the Chest; the Meat he eats is put into his Mouth
by others. There abides he day and night during his whole Journey: if happily
his Porters stumble, or the Chest do jog, or be set down carelessly, it turns to
such great Pains unto him, that all such Motions are near as bad as a hanging.

The Emperors of Russia, to show their Sovereignty in their Exactions for
Money, have used very strange Cavillations. One of them, named Ivan Vasilowich
sent into Permia for certain Loads of Cedar Wood, whereof, he knew that none
grew in that Country: The Inhabitants returned answer they could find none
there; whereupon, he assessed their Country in 12000 Rubbels or Marks, as if
they concealed the Commodity of purpose. Again, he sent to the City of Mosko,
to provide for him a Colpack or Measure full of live Fleas, for a Medicine.
They returned Answer, that the thing was impossible; and if they could get
them, yet they could not measure them for leaping out: whereupon, he praved, or
beat out of their Skins 7000 Rubbles for a Mulct. By like Cavillation he
extorted from his Nobility 30000 Rubbles, because he missed of his Game when he
went a hunting for the Hare; as if their Hunting and murdering of Hares had
been the cause of it.

How they Baptize, Marry, and Bury in Russia.
When any Child is born, it is not baptized till the next Sunday, and if it
chance that it be not baptized then, it must tarry until the second Sunday
after the Birth; and it is lawful for them to take as many Godfathers and
Godmothers as they will; the more the better.

When they go to the Church, the Midwife goes fore-most, carrying the Child,
and the Godfathers and Godmothers follow into the midst of the Church, where
there is a small Table ready set, and on it an earthen Pot full of warm Water,
about which the Godfathers and Godmothers with the Child settle themselves:
then the Clark gives to every one of them a small Wax-candle, burning; then
comes the Priest, and begins to say certain words, which the Godfathers
and Godmothers must answer word for word; among which, one is, that the Child
shall forsake the Devil, and as that name is pronounced, they must all spit at
the word as often as it is repeated. Then he blesses the Water which is in the
Pot, and does breathe over it; then he takes all the Candles which the Gossips
have, and holding them all in one hand, lets part of them drop into the
Water, and then gives every one his Candle again; and when the Water is
sanctified, he takes the Child and holds it in a small Tub, and one of the
Godfathers takes the Pot with warm Water and pours it all upon the Child's
Head. After this, he anointeth the Ears and Eyes with Spittle, and makes
certain Crosses with Oil upon the Back, Head, and Breast of the Child; then
taking the Child in his Arms, carries it to the Images of St. Nicholas and our
Lady, etc. and speaks unto the Images, desiring them to take charge of the
Child, that he may live, and believe as a Christian Man or Woman ought to do,
with many other words. Then coming back from the Images, he takes a pair of
Shears and clippeth the young and tender hairs of the Child's head in three or
four places, and then delivers the Child; whereunto every one of the
Godfathers and Godmothers lay a hand: then the Priest charge them, that the
Child be brought up in the Faith and Fear of God and Christ, and that it be
instructed to cringe and bow to the Images, and so they make an end. Then one
of the Godfathers must hang a Cross about the Neck of the Child, which he must
always wear.

Their way of marrying.
First, when there is Love between the Parties, the Man sends unto the Woman
a small Chest or Box, wherein is a Whip, Needels, Thread, Silk, Linen Cloth,
Shears, and such like Necessaries as she shall occupy when she is a Wife, and
perhaps sends therewithal Raisins, Figs, or some such things, giving her to
understand, that if she do offend, she must be beaten with the Whip; and by the
Needels, Thread, Cloth, etc. that she should apply herself diligently to sew,
and do such things as she could best do; and by the Raisins or Fruits, he
means, if she do well, no good thing shall be withdrawn from her, nor be too
dear for her: and she sends unto him a Shirt, Hand-kerchiefs, or some such
things of her own making.

When they are agreed, and the day of Marriage appointed when they shall go
toward the Church, the Bride will in no wise consent to go out of the House,
but resists and striveth with them that would have her out, and feigneth her
self to weep; yet in the end two Women get her out, and lead her toward the
Church, her Face being covered close, because of her dissimulation, that it
should not be openly perceived: for she makes a great noise, as though she
were sobbing and weeping, until she come at the Church, and then her Face is
uncovered. The Man comes after, among other of his Friends, and they carry
with them to Church a great Pot of Wine or Mead; then the Priest coupleth them
together much after our Order, one promising to love and serve the other during
their Lives together, etc. which being done, they begin to drink, and first the
Woman drinks to the Man, and when he has drank he lets the Cup fall to
the Ground, hasting immediately to tread upon it, and so does she, and whether
of them tread first upon it must have the Victory, and be Master at all times
after; which commonly happens to the Man, for he is readiest to set his Foot
upon it, because he lets it fall himself. Then they go home again, the
Woman's Face being uncovered. The Boys in the Streets cry out, and make a noise
in the mean time with very dishonest Words.

When they come home, the Wife is set at the upper end of the Table, and the
Husband next unto her: they fall then to drinking till they be all drunk; they
perchance have a Minstrel or two, and two naked men which led her from the
Church, dance naked a long time before all the Company. When they are weary of
drinking, the Bride and the Bridegroom get them to Bed; for it is in the
Evening always when any of them is married: and when they are going to Bed, the
Bridegroom puts certain Money, both Gold and Silver if he have it, into one
of his Boots, and then sitting down in the Chamber, crossing his Legs, then the
Bride must pluck off one of his Boots, which she will, and if she happen on the
Boot wherein the money is, she has not only the money for her Labor, but is
also at such choice, as she need not ever, from that day forth, to pull off his
Boots; but, if she miss the Boot wherein the money is, she does not only lose
the money, but is also bound, from that day forwards, to pull off his Boots
continually.

Then they continue in drinking and making good Cheer three days following,
being accompanied with certain of their Friends; and during the same three
days, he is called a Duke and she a Duchess, although they be very poor
Persons. One common Rule is amongst them, if the Woman be not beaten with the
Whip once a Week she will not be good, and therefore they look for it orderly;
and the Women say, that if their Husbands did not beat them they should not
love them. It is reported of a German Shoo-maker, who traveling into this
Country, and here marrying a Widow, used her with all Kindness that a Woman
could (as he thought) desire, yet did not she seem content; at last learning
where the Fault was, and that his not beating her was the cause of her
Pensiveness, he took such a Vein in cudgelling her sides, that in the end the
Hangman was fain to break his Neck for his Labor.

Of their manner of Burial.
When any Man or Woman dies, they stretch him out, and put a new pair of Shoos
on his Feet, because he has a great Journey to go, and a Penny in his Mouth to
bear his Charges by the way; then do they wind him in a Sheet as we do, but
they forget not to put a Testimony in his right hand, which the Priest gives
him, to restifie to St. Nicholas, whom they deem to be the Porter of Heaven,
that he died a Christian Man or Woman. And they put the Corse always in a
Coffin of Wood, although the Party be very poor: and when they go toward the
Church, the Friends and Kinsmen of the Party deceased, carry in their Hands
small Wax Candles, weeping, and howling, and making much Lamentation. They that
be hanged, or beheaded, or such like, have no Testimony with them; how they are
received into Heaven it is a Wonder, without their Pasport.

Of their Priests in Muscovia.
For their Priests, it is lawful to marry for the first time; but, if the first
Wife die, he cannot take a second but he must lose his Priesthood, and his
Living withal: the Reason they make out of that place of St. Paul to Timothy,
1. 3, 2. not rightly understood: thinking that to be spoken of diverse Wives
successively that the Apostle speaks of at one and the same time. If he will
needs marry again after his first Wife is dead, he is no longer called Papa,
but Rospapa, or Priest quondam. This makes the Priests to make much of their
Wives, who are accounted as the Matrons, and of best Reputation among the Women
of the Parish.

For the Stipend of the Priest, their manner is not to pay him any tenths of
Corn, or ought else; but he must stand at the Devotion of the People of his
Parish, and make up the Incomes toward his Maintenance so well as he can, by
Offerings, Shrists, Marriages, Burials, Dirges, and prayers for the Dead and
the Living; (which they call Molitua) for besides their Public Service within
their Churches, their manner is, for every private Man to have a Prayer said
for him by the Priest, upon any occasion of Business whatsoever, whether he
ride, go, sail, plough, or whatsoever he does else; which is not framed
according to the occasion of his Business, but at Random, being some of the
ordinary and usual Church-prayers; and this is thought to be more holy and
effectual, if it be repeated by the Priest's Mouth, rather than by his own.
They have a Custom besides, to solemnize the Saints day that is Patron to their
Church, once every Year; what time all the Neighbors of their Country and
Parishes about, come in to hear Prayers said to that Saint for themselves and
their Friends, and so make an Offering to the Priest for his Pains: This
Offering may yield them some ten pounds a Year, more or less, as the Patron or
Saint of that Church is of Credit and Estimation among them. The manner is, on
this day, (which they keep Anniversary for the Priest) to hire diverse of his
Neighbour-Priests to help him, as having more Dishes to dress for the Saint
than he can well turn his hand unto. They use besides to visit their
Parishioners Houses with holy Water and Perfume, commonly once a Quarter; and
so having sprinkled and becensed the good Man and his Wife, with the rest of
their Household and Household Stuff, they receive some Devotion, more or less, as
the man is of Ability. This and the rest laid altogether, may make up for the
Priest, toward his maintenance, about thirty or forty Marks a Year; whereof,
he pays the tenth part to the Bishop of the Diocese.

The Manner of making Friars in Muscovia.
First, the Abbot strippeth him of all his Secular or ordinary Apparel; then he
puts upon him, next to his Skin, a white Flannel Shirt, with a long Garment
over it down to the Ground, girded unto him with a broad Leather Belt. His
uppermost Garment is a Weed of Garras or Say, for color and fashion much like
to the upper Weed of a Chimney-Sweeper: then is his Crown shorn a hand
breadth, or more, close to the very Skin; and these, or like Words pronounced
by the Abbot, whilst he clippeth his Hair: As these Hairs are clipped off, and
taken from thy Head, so now we take thee, and separate thee clean from the
World and worldly things, etc. This done, he anointeth his Crown with Oil, and
puts on his Cool, and so takes him in among the Fraternity. They vow
perpetual Chastity, and Abstinence from Flesh.

The Life, Manner, and Customs of the Samoits, a People inhabiting near
Nova-Zembla.
IN their Journey, their upper Coat is called a Park, which is for the most
part of Deer-skin, and some of white Fox or Wolverin, which they wear the Hair
or Fur outward; under that they have another Coat, which is called a Mallek,
made of young Fawn Skins, or Hare Skins, or Swan Skins; very soft and well
dressed; a Cap of Bever, double, and close to their Heads, with two Flaps for
their Ears, tied under their Chin, a Pair of Breeches of Deer-skin, with the
Hair inwards; upon their Feet they have Socks or Stockings of Deer-skin, the
Hair to their Skin, upon that long Boots, which they call Penyes, made of the
Legs of Deer skins; thus apparelled, they sit upon the Sleds cross-legged, with
a Deer-skin under them; two Deer being yoaked to a Sled, they will run with
such Swiftness, and so long continue, as is not to be believed, except to those
that have seen the same; for, riding Post, they will ride without Rest or Sleep
two hundred miles in four and twenty hours, but with their Argish or Stuff,
thirty miles in twelve hours; their Women usually do guide their Argish, which
is ten Sleds, and to every Sled a Buck, all made fast one after another; the
Men in the way do provide Wood for firing, and do hunt for all manner of Beasts
and Fowl, which the Women dress. It is the Woman's Labor to set up the Choom or
Tent, making one place therein always holy, which the Woman must not set her
Foot into, neither go about the Tent round, which if they chance to do, they
will presently remove all, for fear of the Wolf or Bear, which they say would
devour them if they did not remove. Their Tent or Choom is made in this manner;
first, they set up long Firr-poles, then they have six Quarters double of
Deer-skins, which being set up, they throw Snow round about the Edges a Yard
thickness, leaving the top open for to vent Smoke, making a Fire in the middle,
spreading Deer-skins, upon which they lie; in which manner, it is altogether as
warm as the Stones in Russia: they have no Towns, neither any certain place of
abode, but with their Deer they travel from place to place, where they find the
best Moss, on which their Deer feed.

Their Wives they buy for Deer, and will have, if he have ability, four or five
Wives, with whom he lies by turn every Night several; he is the richest man
that has most Deer or Daughters, selling them to any that will give most for
them. In their Marriage, having agreed of Price, they use not great Ceremonies,
only they make a Feast to their Friends, after which, the Woman is brought to
the Man that has bought her, she being hung with many Iron Rings and Brazen
Bells, all departing out of the Tent, save they two, till the next morning, and
then he departs; but, if he be one of Wealth, they will continue their Feast
seven days. It falls out many times, that after they have had their Wives
half a Year or a Year, they will turn them back to their Friends, taking their
Deers again, paying for the charge of the Feast, which is always to be made at
her Fathers charge, and losing the increase of his Deer.

They have no knowledge of the true God, but worship Blocks and Images of the
Devil, unto which they will strangle tame Deer, rubbing the Blood on the Idols,
and eating the Meat themselves. When a rich man dies, because he shall not
travel on foot, his Friends will kill three Deer to draw him in the new World,
and they will strangle a Slave to tend on him. The Deer they kill in this
manner, to serve the dead man; they make a Stake sharp, which they thrust into
the Beasts Fundament, with many Howlings and Cryings, till they be dead: the
Master, with the Slave, they bury; the Deer they eat as well raw as boiled or
roast, although they use all three. If a young Child dye under fourteen of
their Years, which is seven of ours, they do hang it by the Neck on some Tree,
saying, it must fly to Heaven.

If any Controversy be, which cannot be decided, or the Truth known, then one
of the two betwixt whom the Controversy is, must be sworn, which is in this
manner; they will make an Image of a Man in Snow, bringing a Wolf's Nose, and
delivering a Sword to him that must swear, he rehearsing by name all his
Friends, desiring that they might all be cut in Pieces in that manner as he
does cut that Image of Snow. Then he himself does cut the Image of Snow all to
pieces with the Sword; then after, the Wolves Nose being laid before him, he
desires that the Wolf may destroy all his tame Deer, and that he may never more
take or kill any wild Deer after that if he speak not the Truth: so cutting the
Wolf's Nose in pieces, there is no more to be said of that Controversy.

When they would know any thing to come, they send for their Priest or Witch to
converse with the Devil, sitting in one side of the Tent, having before his
Face a piece of an old Shirt of Mayl, hung with Bells and pieces of Brass; in
his right hand a great Tabor made with a Wolves skin, beating upon the same
with a Hares foot, making a very doleful sound, with singing and calling for
the Devil to answer his Demand; which being ended, they strangle a Deer for a
Sacrifice, making merry with the Flesh.

The Women be very hard of Nature; for, at their Childbearing, the Husband
must play the Midwife; and being delivered, the Child is washed with cold
Water or Snow, and the next day the Woman is able to conduct her Argish or Sled.

A Description of Groen-land, and the Inhabitants thereof: by an Eyewitness,
Anno 1612.
THE North-west part of Groen-land is an exceeding high Land to the Sea-ward,
and almost nothing but Mountains, which are wonderful high all within the Land,
as far as we could perceive: they are all of Stone, some of one color, and
some of another, and all glistering as though they were of rich Value, but
indeed they are not worth any thing. There are some Rocks in those Mountains
which are exceeding pure Stone, finer and whiter than Alabaster. The sides of
these Mountains are covered with Snow for the most part, especially the
North-sides; and the North-sides of the Valleys having a kind of Moss, and in
some places Grass, with a little Branch running all along the Ground bearing a
little black Berry. There are few or no Trees growing, as far as we could
perceive, but in one place, some forty miles within the Land, in a River, which
we called Ball's River; there I saw on the South Side of an high Mountain,
which we went up, and found (as it were) a young Grove of small Wood, some of
it six or seven Foot high, like a Coppice in England, that had been some two or
three Years cut: and this was the most Wood that we saw growing in this
Country, being some of it a kind of Willow, Juniper, and such like.

We found in many places much Angelica; we suppose the People eat the Roots
thereof for some Causes, for we have seen them have many of them in their
Boats. There are great Store of Foxes in the Islands, and in the Main, of
sundry colors: and there are a kind of Hares as white as Snow, with their Hair
or Fur very long.

Also there be Deer, but they are most commonly up within the Main very far,
because the People do so much hunt them that come near the Sea: I saw at one
time seven of them together, which were all that we did see in the Country; but
our men have bought diverse Coats of the People, made of Deers skins, and have
bought of their Horns also; besides, we have diverse times seen the Footsteps
of some Beasts, whose Foot was bigger than the Foot of a great Ox.
Furthermore, the Inhabitants have a kind of Dogs, which they keep at their
Houses and Tents, which Dogs, are almost like unto Wolves, living by Fish, as
the Foxes do: but one thing is very strange, as I thought, for the Pizzles of
both Dogs and Foxes are Bone.

The People, all the Summer time, use nothing but fishing, drying their Fish
and Seals-flesh upon the Rocks, for their Winter Provision. Every one, both Man
and Woman, have each of them a Boat made with long small pieces of Firr-wood,
covered with Seals-skins very well dressed, and sewed so well with Sinews or
Guts, that no Water can pierce them thorough, being some of them above twenty
foot long, and not past two foot or two foot and an half broad, in form of a
Weaver's Shuttle, and so light, that a man may carry many of them at once for
the weight. In these Boats they will row so swiftly, that it is almost
incredible: for no Ship in the World is able to keep way with them, although
she have never so good a Gale of Wind: and yet they use but one Oar, who
sitting in the middle of their Boat, and holding their Oar in the middle, being
broad at each end like our Oars, will at an Instant go backward and forward as
they please.

We could not particularly learn their Rites or Ceremonies; but, generally,
they worship the Sun, as chief Author of their Felicity. At their first
Approach unto us they used with their hands to point up to the Sun, and to
strike upon their Breasts, crying Ilyont; as who would say, I mean no harm;
which they will do very often, and will not come near you until you do the
like, and then they will come without any fear at all.

They bury their Dead in the out-Islands, near the Seaside. Their manner of
Burial is this; Upon the tops of the Hills they gather a Company of Stones
together, and make thereof a hollow Cave or Grave, of the length and breadth of
the Body which they intend to bury, laying the Stones somewhat close like a
Wall, that neither Foxes, nor other such Beasts, may devout the Bodies,
covering them with broad Stones, showing afar off like a Pile of Stones. And
near to this Grave where the Body lies is another, wherein they bury his Bow
and Arrows, with his Darts, and all his other Provision, which he used while he
was living. He is buried in all his Apparel, and the coldness of the Climate
does keep the Body from smelling and stinking, although it lie above the Ground.

They eat all their Food raw, and use no Fire to dress their Victuals, as far
as we could perceive. Also, we have seen them drink the Salt water at our Ships
side; but, whether it be usual or no I cannot tell. Although they dress not
their Meat with Fire, yet they use Fire for other things, as to warm them, and
the like.

Diverse of our Men were of Opinion, that they were Man-eaters, and would have
devoured us if they could have caught us; but I do not think they would; for if
they had been so minded, they might at one time have caught our Cook and two
other with him, as they were filling of Water at an Island a great way from our
Ship. These three (I say) were in the Ships Boat, without either Musket, or any
other Weapon, whenas a great Company of the Savages came rowing unto them, with
their Darts and other Furniture, which they never go without, and stood looking
into the Boat for Nails, or any old Iron, which they greedily desire, while our
men were in such a fear that they knew not what to do. At length, our Cook
remembered that he had some old Iron in his Pocket, and gave each of them some,
as far as it would go, with his Key of his Chest, and presently they all
departed, without offering any harm at all. But this I speak not that I would
have men to trust them, or to go among them unprovided of Weapons; for, by so
doing, they may chance to forfeit their Life for their foolhardiness.

Several Varieties of the West Indies.
OVideos in his fifteenth Book and first Chapter says, That in the Year 1520.
the City of St. Domingo in Hispaniola, was almost dishabited by a great Army of
Ants; as in Spain a City was dispeopled by Conies; in Thessaly another City was
destroyed by Rats; amongst the Atariotaes one by Frogs; and the Minutines by
Fleas; Amitle in Italy by Serpents; and another part thereof by Sparrows; as
were diverse places of Africa often by Locusts: so can the great God arm the
least Creatures to the destruction of proud vainglorious Man. And this Misery
so perplexed the Spaniards, that they sought as strange a Remedy as was the
Disease; which was, to choose some Saint for their Patron against the Ants.
Alexander Geraldine, the Bishop, having sung a solemn and Pontificial Mass,
after the Consecration and Elevation of the Sacrament, and devout Prayers made
by him and the People, opened a Book, in which was a Catalogue of the Saints,
by lot to choose some he or she Saint whom God should please to appoint their
Advocate against that Calamity; and the Lot fell upon St. Saturnine, whose
Feast is on the 29th of November: after which, the Ant-damage (says Ovideos)
became more tolerable, and by little and little diminished, by God's Mercy, and
Intercession of that Saint.

The same Author reports, That going from the Gulf of Ovotigua to Panama, two
hundred Leagues Eastward, near the Mouth of the Gulf, he saw a Fish, or great
Water-monster, which at times lifted it self right up above the Water so far,
that the Head and both the Arms might be seen, which seemed higher than their
Carvel and all her Masts. Thus did she rise and fall diverse times, beating the
Water strongly, and not casting any Water out of her Mouth: a younger or lesser
of the same kind did likewise swim a little distance from the greater. To
Ovideos Judgment, each Arm seemed five and twenty foot long, and as big as a
Butt or Pipe; the Head fourteen or fifteen foot high, and much more in breadth;
and the rest of the Body larger. That of her which appeared above Water was
above five times the height of a mean man, which makes five and twenty Paces.
She seemed to disport her self at a Tempest, which suddenly arose to their
purpose, and brought them in few days to Panama.

The Indians of Brasil are of a mavelous quick Sight; for at a League off
they see any thing, and in the same manner hear; they guess very right, ruling
themselves by the Sun; they go to all parts they list, 200 or 300 Leagues
thorough thick Woods, and miss not one Jot; they travel much, and always
running a Gallop, especially with some Charges; no Horse is able to hold out
with them: they are great Archers, and so certain, that no Bird can escape them
be it never so little, or any Vermin of the Woods; and there is no more, but if
they will shoot an Arrow thorough the Eye of a Bird or Man or hit any other
thing, be it never so small, they do it with great Facility and with their own
Safety. They are great Fishers and Swimmer, they fear no Sea nor Waves,
continue a day and a night swiming, and the fame they do rowing, and sometimes
without Meat. They use also for Weapons, Swords of Wood, and enterlay the ends
of them with Palmtree of sundry Colors, and set Plumes on them of diverse
colors, chiefly in their Feasts and Slaughters; and these Swords are very
cruel, for they make no Wound, but bruise and break a Man's Head without having
any Remedy of Cure.

Near to the River of the Amazons is a place called Etvora, that is to say, the
Stone-house, a very strong thing, for it is a great huge Rock, and it has an
Entrance like a great Door within it, as any Hall in England: The Indians say,
that there St. Thomas did preach to their Forefathers. Hard by stands a
Stone as big as four great Canons, and it stands upon the ground upon four
Stones little bigger than a man's Finger, like Sticks; the Indians say it was a
Miracle which the Saint showed them, and that that Stone had been Wood.
Likewise, by the Seaside there are great Rocks, upon which, are store of Prints
of the footing of bare Feet, all which Prints are of one Bigness; they say they
are the print of the Footsteps of that Saint, when standing upon the Rocks he
called to the Fishes of the Sea, and they heard him.

At the Antillus in Brasil they have a Bird, which, for the rareness and
strangeness thereof, deserves to be had in Remembrance. It is the finest Bird
that can be imagined; it has a Cap on his Head to which no proper Color can
be given; for, on whatsoever side ye look on it it shows red, green, black,
and more Colors, all very fine and shining; and the Breast is so fair, that on
whatsoever side ye take it it shows all the Colors, especially a yellow more
finer than Gold: the Body is gray; it has a very long Bill, and the Tongue
twice the length of the Bill; they are very swift in Flight, and in their
Flight they make a noise like the Be; and they rather seem Bees in their
Swiftness than Birds, for they always feed flying, without sitting on a Tree,
even as the Bees do fly sucking the Honey from the Flowers. They have two
beginnings of their Generation; some are hatched of Eggs like other Birds,
others of little Bubles, and it is a thing to be noted, a little Buble to begin
to convert it self into this little Bird, for at one Instant it is a Buble and
a Bird, and so converts it self into this most fair Bird, a wonderful thing,
and unknown to the Philosophers, seeing one living Creature, without
Corruption, is converted into another.

Also, in this Country of Brasil, a certain Tree grows in the Fields, and the
Main of the Bay, in dry places where no Water is, very great and broad; it has
certain Holes in the Branches, as long as an Arm, that are full of Water, that
in Winter nor Summer never runs over, neither is it known whence this Water
comes; and drink as many or drink few of it, it is always at the same stay;
and so it serves not only for a Fountain, but also for a great main River: and
it happens five hundred Persons to come to the Foot of it, and there is
harbor for them all; they drink and wash all that they will, and they never
want Water; it is very savory and clear, and a great Remedy for them that
travel into the Main, when they can find no other Water.

John Lerius, a Frenchman, who lived in Brasil for some time, writes, That
the Barbarians much wondered to see Frenchmen and other Strangers, coming far
off, from remote Countries, to take so much Pains to carry back their Ships
laden with Brasil or Red Wood; and therefore, one of the ancientest of them
questioned him in this manner concerning that matter: What means it that you
Mair and Peros, (that is Frenchmen and Portugals) come so far to fetch Wood?
Does your Country yield you no Wood for the Fire? Then said I, It yields
Fuel surely, and that in great Plenty, but not of that kind of Trees, such as
yours are; especially Brasil, which our men carry from hence, not to burn, as
you suppose, but for to dye. Here he presently excepting, But have you (said
he) need of so great plenty of that Wood? yea surely, (said I) for seeing even
one Merchant with us possesses more Scarlet Clothes, more Knives and Scissers,
and more Looking glasses (alleging known and familiar Examples unto him) than
all those which were ever brought hither unto you, he only will buy all the
Brasil, to the end that many Ships might return laden from hence. Ah! (says
the Barbarian) you tell me strange and wonderful things. Then presently
remembering what he had heard, he proceeded to demand further Questions of me.
But, says he, That great rich Man, of whom you make Report, does he not die?
He dies, said I, as also other men do. Who then (said he) is Heir of those
Goods which this man leaves when he dies? His Children, said I, if he have
any: if he have none, his Brethren, Sisters, or his next Kindred. When I had
said this, Surely (says that my discreet old Fellow) hereby I easily perceive,
that you Mair (that is, Frenchmen) are notable Fools: for what needs you so
greatly to tire and turmoil your selves in sailing over the Sea, in passing
whereof (as being here arrived you report to us) you sustain so many Miseries?
Is it forsooth, that you might get riches for your Children, or living
Kinsfolk? Is not the Earth which has nourished us, sufficient also to maintain
them? We surely have both Children and Kinsfolk, and them, as you see, we love
dearly; but seeing we confidently hope, that it shall come to pass that after
our death, the same Earth which nourished us, shall also relieve and cherish
them, therein we repose our selves, and rest content.

One of these Islands, on the South-part of the Streights, is called Baldivia,
which took its name of a Spanish Captain so called, whom afterward the Indians
took Prisoner; and it is said, they inquired of him the reason why he came to
molest them, and to take their Country from them, having no Title or Right
thereunto? He answered, to get Gold: which the Barbarians understanding, caused
Gold to be molten, and poured down his Throat, saying, Gold was thy desire,
glut thee with it.

When the Spaniards first began to inhabit the West Indies, Sancta Domingo was
an Island as full of Indians as any place of that bigness in all America; but
by the cruelty of the Spaniards, in their excessive labor in the Mines, they
were most of them destroyed, which labor was so grievous, that many of the
surviving Indians would rather kill themselves than endure it. It happened on a
time, that a Spaniard called certain of them to go work in the Mines, which
rather than they would do, they proffered to lay violent hands on themselves;
which the Spaniard perceiving, he said unto them, Seeing you will rather hang
your selves than to go and work, I will likewise hang my self and go with you,
because I will make you work in the other World: but the Indians hearing this,
said, We will willingly work with you, because you shall not go with us; so
unwilling they were of the Spaniards company: so that of all the Inhabitants of
this Island, there was none escaped Death but only these few, which was by the
means of this Spaniard, or else they would have hanged themselves also.

The cruelty of the Spaniards to the Indians of Peru was so extraordinary
great, that those silly People would not believe that the Spaniards were born
into the World like other men, supposing, that so fierce and cruel a Creature
could not be procreated of Man and Woman. They called them therefore
Viracochie, that is, Sea-froth: as if they thence had received their Original.
Nor can any alter this their Opinion, so deeply rooted, saying, The Winds
overthrow Trees and Houses, Fire burns them, but these Viracochie devour all
things, insatiably seeking Gold and Silver, which as soon as they have gotten,
they play away at Dice, War, kill one another, rob, blaspheme, wickedly
forswear and deny God, never speak truth; and us they have spoiled of our
Country and Fortunes: and therefore they cursed the Sea, which brought to the
Land so fierce and dreadful an Issue.

Before the Spaniards conquered Peru, the Tribute which the poor People were
tied to pay to their Juca's or Kings, was, on certain days to give him so many
Pipes of Lice, so to acknowledge subjection, and keep themselves clean.

Of the Tortoises in the West Indies.
The Tortoise is reasonable toothsom, and wholesome Meat, of such largeness, that
one of them will make a dozen Messes, appointing six to every Mess. It is such
a kind of Meat as a man can neither absolutely call Fish nor Flesh; keeping
most in the Water, and feeding upon Sea-grass, like an Heifer, in the bottom of
the Coves and Bays, and laying their Eggs (of which we should find five
hundred at a time in the opening of a she-one) in the Sand by the Shoar-side
and so covering them close, leave them to the hatching of the Sun: like the
Monati at St. Dominick, which made the Spanish Friars (at their first arrival)
make some scruple to eat them on a Friday, because in color and taste the
Flesh is like to Morsels of Veal. Concerning the laying of their Eggs, and the
hatching of their Young, Peter Martyr writes thus in his Decads of the Ocean:
At such time as the heat of Nature moves them to generation, they come forth
of the Sea, and making a deep Pit in the Sand, they lay three or four hundred
Eggs therein; when they have thus emptied their Bag of Conception, they put as
much of the same again into the Pit as may satisfy to cover the Eggs, and so
resort again to the Sea, nothing careful of their succession. At the day
appointed of Nature to the procreation of these Creatures, there creeps out a
multitude of Tortoises, as it were Pismires out of an Ant-hill, and this only
by the heat of the Sun, without any help of their Parents. Their Eggs are as
big Goose-Eggs, and themselves, grown to Perfection, bigger than great round
Targets.

The Indians of Virginia, at the first coming of the English thither, were so
simple and ignorant, that having surprised some Gunpowder from the English,
their King caused it to be sown, thinking it would grow up and increase, as did
Corn and other Seeds.

Throughout all the Mountains, either of the Islands, or firm Land of Nova
Hispania, Carthagena, etc. there are infinite numbers of Monkeys, which are a
kind of Apes, but very different, in that they have a Tail, a very long one.
And amongst them there are some kinds which are thrice, yea four times bigger
than the ordinary; some are all black, some bay, some gray, and some spotted.
Their agility and manner of leaping is admirable, for that they seem to have
Reason and Discourse to go upon Trees, wherein they seem to imitate Birds. My
Author, going from Nombre de Dios to Panama, saw in Capira one of these Monkeys
leap from one Tree to another, which was on the other side of a River, making
him much to wonder. They leap where they list, winding their Tails about a
Branch to shake it; and when they will leap farther than they can at once, they
use a pretty device, tying themselves by the Tails one of another, and by this
means make, as it were, a Chain of many: then do they lanch themselves forth,
and the first, helped by the force of the rest, takes hold where he list, and
so hangs to a Bough, and helps all the rest till they be gotten up. It were
long to report the Fooleries, Tricks, Traverses, and pleasant Sports they make
when they are taught, which seem not to come from brute Beasts, but from a
man-like understanding. The same Author saw one in Carthagena, in the
Governors House, so taught, as the things he did seemed incredible: They sent
him to the Tavern for Wine, putting the Pot in one hand and the Money in the
other; and they could not possibly get the Money out of his hand before he had
his Pot full of Wine. If any Children met him in the street, and threw any
stones at him, he would set his Pot down on the one side, and cast stones
against the Children, till he had assured his way, then would he return to
carry home his Pot: and which is more, although he were a good Bibber of Wine,
yet would he never touch it until leave was given him. They told him moreover,
that if he saw any Women painted, he would fall upon them, pull off their
Attire, and would seek to bite them.

Several Rarities of diverse Countries.
THe Coco-tree is one of the most admirable Rarities in the whole World, which
Mr. Herbert in his Travels thus describes. The Tree that bears the Coco is
strait and lofty, without any Branches save at the very top, where it spreads
its beautiful plumes, and Nuts like Pearls or Pendants adorning them. It is
good Timber for Canoes, Masts, Anchors: the leaves for Tents or Thatching: the
Rind for Sails, Matteresses, Cables, and Linen: the Shells for Furniture, the
Meat for Victualling. The Nut is covered with a thick rind, equal in bigness to
a Cabbage. The Shell is like the Skull of a man, or rather a Deaths-head; the
Eyes, Nose and Mouth being easily discerned: within it is contained a quart of
sweet and excellent Liquor, like new White Wind, but far more aromatic tasted:
The Meat or Kernel is better relished than our Filberds, and is enough to
satisfy the Appetite of two reasonable men.

-- the Indian Nut alone
Is Clothing, Meat, and Trencher, Drink and Can,
Boat, Cable, Sail, Mast, Needle, all in one.
The Divine Du Bartas has celebrated its praises unto the Life, in these
Verses, translated by Joshua Sylvester.

The Indian Isles most admirable be
In those rare Fruits, called Coco's commonly;
The which alone far richer wonder yields,
Than all our Groves, Meads, Gardens, Orchards, Fields.
What would thou drink? the wounded leaves drop Wine?
Lack'st thou fine Linen? dress the tender Rine.
Dress it like Flax, spin it, then weave it well,
It shall thy Cambrick and thy Lawn excel.
Long'st thou for Butter? bite the pulpous part,
For never better came to any Mart.
Do need good Oil? then bolt it to and fro,
And passing Oil it soon becomes so.
Or Vinegar? to whet thine Appetite;
Why Sun it well, and it will sharply bite.
Or want thou Sugar? steep the same a stound,
And sweeter Sugar is not to be found.
It Is what you will, or will be what you would,
Should Midas touch it, sure it would be Gold.
And God, all good, to crown our Life with Bays,
The Earth with Plenty, and his Name with Praise;
Had done enough, if he had made no more
But this one Plant, so full of choicest store;
Save that the World (where one thing breeds satiety)
Could not be fair without so great Variety.
Sir James Lancaster, in his East India Voyage, in the Isle of Sombrero, found
on the Sea Sands a young Twig growing up to a Tree, and offering to pluck up
the same, it shrunk down into the Ground; and when it was by Strength pulled
up, a great Worm was the Root of it; and as the Tree grows in greatness the
Worm diminishes. This Tree plucked up, the Leaves and Pill stripped off, by
that time it is dried, is turned into a hard Stone. So that this Worm was twice
transformed into different Natures after a wondrous manner.

In Aethiopia is a Lake of that poisonous Nature, that whosoever drinks of
the Water of it either falls immediately mad, or is for a long time troubled
with an extreme Drowziness; as says Ovid,

Aethiopesque Lacus; quos si quis faucibus hausit,
Aut furit, aut patitur mirum gravitate soporem.
Who does not know the Ethiopian Lake,
Whose Waters he that drinks his Thirst to slake;
Either grows mad, or does his Soul oppress
With an unheard of heavy Drowziness.
The Persians have a very great Aversion for Swine, and conceive they have
especially Reason for it, following the Example of the Jews; and to that
purpose, tell a ridiculous and obscene Story, which they take out of the
Alcoran, and relate, That one day the Apostles entreated our Savior to tell
them after what manner Noah lived in the Ark during the Deluge: but our
Savior, without saying a Word to them, having taken a handful of Dirt, made
the Figure of a Man with it, cast it upon the ground, and said to it, rise up
in the name of the Father; immediately there started up an old Man, all white,
whom our Savior asked, Who art thou? He made answer, I am Japhet the Son of
Noah. Our Savior asked him whether he were so white when he died; whereunto he
answered, that he was not, but that he became so just that moment, out of the
fear he was in to appear before God, as believing he had been raised up to come
to the last Judgment. Upon that, Jesus Christ commanded him to acquaint the
Apostles with all that had been done in the Ark; Japhet obeyed, and told them,
among other things, that one day the Ark being so full of Dirt at that place
where the house of Ease stood, that Noah fearing it might take in Water there,
thought fit to consult God in that Extremity. The Divine Answer was, that he
should send an Elephant to the said common House, and that of the Dung of that
Creature and Man's mixed together, there was immediately engendered a Swine,
which so turned up that heap of Ordure with his Snowt, that the Ark went very
even. This nasty Creature having filled it is Nostrils with Filth, sneez'd very
violently; by means of which sneezing, there came out a Rat, which put Noah
into greater Perplexity than before; insomuch, that to be delivered out of
these Troubles he addressed himself once more to God, and asked him what he
should do in that unhappy Conjuncture. The Answer was, that God commanded him
to strike the Lion upon the Head with a Wand, and that he being thereby put
into a Fury, fell a roaring so loud, that out of his Nostrils there came out a
Cat, which immediately pursued the Rat. Now Noah knowing that he was to
continue forty Years in the Ark, separated the Males from the Females, out of a
fear, that the several Species multiplying, the Ark would not be able to
contain them, and that they might want Meat. Of all Creatures, only the Dog had
the Freedom allowed him to stay with the Bitch at the bottom of the Ark; one
day the Cat having observed that those Creatures had the liberty to do what all
the rest were denied, went and made her Complaints to Noah, who reproaching
them with what they had done, the Dog would not acknowledge the Fact. But, word
was so often brought to Noah of the Dogs Transgression, that he desired God to
make known the Truth of it by an infallible Proof, and that afterward, the Dog
desirous to line the Bitch, became fastened to her; wherewith the Cat having
acquainted Noah, they were taken in the Fact, and found guilty of having lied
before. Thence it comes, that ever since that time, Dogs have been so fastened
in the Act of Generation, and have an inveterate Fewd against Cats.

Of a mirthful Custom, formerly used at Dunmow in Essex.
FOrmerly there was a Priory at this Dunmow, founded (says Speed) by Juga, a
noble Lady, Anno 1111. for black Nuns; but it seems afterward the Property
thereof was altered into a Male Monastery; the mortified men wherein were
mirthful sometimes, as it appeared; for, if any Person, from any part of
England, came thither, and humbly kneeling on two Stones at the Church-door,
before the Prior or Covent, he might demand at his own Pleasure a Gammon or
Flitch of Bacon, upon the solemn taking of the ensuing Oath.

You shall swear by the Custom of our Confession,
That you never made any Nuptial Transgression
Since you were married, Man or Wife,
By household Brawls or contentious Strife;
Or otherwise, in Bed or at Board
Offended each other in deed or word;
Or, since the Parish-Clark said Amen
Wished your selves unmarried again;
Or, in a Twelvemonth and a Day
Repented not in Thought any way;
But continued true and in desire,
As when you joined hands in holy Quire.
If to these Conditions, without all fear,
Of your own Accord you will freely swear,
A Gammon of Bacon you shall receive,
And bear it hence with Love and good Leave
For, this is our Custom, at Dunmow well known;
Though the Sport be ours, the Bacon's your own
The Party or Pilgrim for Bacon was to take his Oath before the Prior, the
Covent, and the whole Town, humbly acknowledging in the Churchyard, upon two
hard Stones, which some say are yet to be seen in the Priory Churchyard: his
Oath was administered with such long Process, and such solemn singing over him,
as doubtless must make his Pilgrimage, as I may term it, painful. After this,
he was taken upon men's Shoulders, and carried, first about the Priory
Churchyard, and after thorough the Town, with all the Friars and Brethren, and
all the Towns-folk, young and old following him, with Shouts and Acclamations,
and with his Bacon before him, and in such manner he was sent home with his
Bacon; of which, I find some had a Gammon, and others had a Flitch; for proof
whereof, I have found out the Record of the House, and the Names of the several
Persons that at several times had it. There was one Stephen Samuel of Little
Easton in the County of Essex, Husbandman, that came to the Priory of Dunmow,
on our Lady Day, in the seventh year of King Edward the Fourth, and required a
Gammon of Bacon, and was sworn before Roger Rulcot then Prior, and the Covent
of that place, as also before the multitude of other Neighbors; and there was
a Gammon of Bacon delivered unto him. Also one Richard Wright of Badesnorth,
near the City of Norwich, in the County of Norfolk, came and required of the
Bacon of Dunmow, on the 17 day of April in the twenty third year of the Reign
of Henry the sixth; and, according to the form of the Charter, was sworn before
John Canon Prior of the place, the Covent, and many other Neighbors, and there
was delivered unto him a Flitch of Bacon. Hereby appears it was given
according to Charter or Donation by some conceited Benefactor, to the House;
and it was not to be doubted, but at such a time the bordering Towns and
Villages would resort, and be Partakers of their Sport, and laugh to scorn the
poor Men's pains.

Also it is to be remembered, that in the Year of our Lord 1510. upon Monday,
being the eighth day of September, in the second year of King Henry the Eighth,
that Thomas Lee of Coxal in Essex, was sworn before John Tailor the Prior of
the House, and the Covent, as also before a Multitude of other Neighbors; and
there was delivered unto him a Gammon of Bacon.

Of what we find in credible Authors concerning the famous Guy, Earl of Warwick.
THIS Guy was Son unto one Siward, Baron of Wallingford, who married unto
Felicia, sole Daughter and Heiress of Rohand, the first we read of the Saxon
Race that was Earl of Warwick, and in her Right became Earl of that Earldom;
who, for his Valor, has ever since been, and yet is so famous, that the
Vulgar are of Opinion he was a Man of more than an ordinary Stature; and the
Welsh taking notice of his brave Exploits will needs have him to be descended
from British Parentage.

Soon after his Marriage with Felicia aforesaid, being now pretty well stricken
in Years, he went on Pilgrimage to the Holy Land, where he abode for some
space; during which time, viz. Anno 926. in the third Year of King Athelstane,
the Danes having invaded England, cruelly wasted the Countries where they
marched, so that there was scarce a Town or Castle that they had not burnt or
destroyed, almost as far as Winchester; and hearing that the King with his
Nobles then was in that City consulting about some timely means to prevent the
utter loss of all, they sent Messengers to him, proposing, that either he would
forthwith resign his Crown to the Danish Generals, viz. Aulafe and Govelaph, or
submit to hold this Realm of them, doing Homage and Fealty, and paying Tribute
according to their Appointment; or lastly, that the whole Dispute for the
Kingdom should be determined in a single Combat, by two Champions, for both
sides; this being added by Aulafe, that if in that Duel King Athelstane's
Champion had the Victory, he would presently depart the Land with his Army; but
otherwise, without any more ado it should wholly belong to the Danes.

Of which Proposals, King Athelstane accepted the last; and calling together
his Nobles, offered that Province (viz. Hantshire) for a reward to him that
should conquer the Danish Champion called Colbrand; and to the end that God
would direct him in the choice of one to undertake this Combat, he enjoined a
Fast for three days, in which, with earnest Prayers and abundant Tears; he
besought his Favor: but in this choice the English were exceedingly
astonished, forasmuch as one Herand a most valiant and hardy Knight of this
Nation, was then beyond Sea, seeking after Reynburn, the Son of his Lord and
Master Earl Guy, that had been stolen away by Merchants of a Foreign Country,
in his Infancy; as also, that Earl Rohand, Guy's Father-in-law, the most
valiant of a thousand, was dead; and also Guy himself (as we said before) was
gone in Pilgrimage to the Holy Land. But it so fell out, that God being moved
with the sorrowful Tears and Intercessions of the English, sent a good Angel to
comfort the King, as he lay upon his Bed, the very Night of the Nativity of St.
John Baptist, directing that he should rise early on the Morrow, taking two
Bishops with him, and get up to the top of the North-gate of that City, staying
there till the hour of Prime, and then should he see diverse poor People and
Pilgrims enter thereat; amongst which, there would be a personable Man in a
Pilgrim's Habit, barefooted, with his Head uncovered, and upon it a Chaplet of
white Roses, and that he should entreat him, for the love of Jesus Christ, the
devotion of his Pilgrimage, and the preservation of all England, to undertake
the Combat, for he should conquer the mighty Colebrand, and deliver his Realm
from the Danish Servitude. Whereupon, King Athelstane, with fervent Zeal,
hasted betimes in the Morning to Mass, and sent for the Archbishop of
Canterbury, with the Bishop of Chichester, to whom he related his Vision,
taking them along to the Gate assigned.

About this time it happened that our famous Guy, returning from his
Pilgrimage, landed at Portsmouth; and being there advertised of Sir Herand's
Absence, as also of Earl Rohand's Death, together with the great distress that
the King and his Nobles were then in, hasted toward Winchester immediately,
and coming at night to an Hospital, but little distant from the North-gate of
that City (in which place afterward the Hospital in honor of the Holy Cross,
was founded) where he rested himself, and on the next morning went with other
poor people to the City Gate; to which place the King being come for the
purpose before specified, and espying one neatly clad in a white short sleeved
Gown, reaching to the mid-leg, with a Garland of Roses upon his Head, and a
large Staff in his Hand, but looking wan, and much macerated by reason of his
traveling barefoot, and his Beard grown to a very great length, he concluded
that the same was the Man described to him by that Angel; and being full of Joy
told those that were there with him as much.

The Palmer (for so was he at that time called) taking notice of the King and
Bishops, put off his Chaplet, and reverently saluting them, entered the Gate;
whereupon, the King hasted down, and laying hold of his Coat, tendered him
Entertainment, with desire to hear some News; but the Palmer returning humble
Thanks, answered, that the Hour to take up his Lodging was not yet come, for
that he intended first to visit the Churches of that City, and there offer up
his Prayers unto God, but afterward seek some Food for to refresh himself
withal; which being done, he purposed to depart thence, and perform such
Penance as he was to do for his Sins. Whereunto the King replied, the reason
why we have here stayed, has been only to wait upon your coming; for it is the
Will of God, that you must encounter with that wicked Colebrand the Saracen,
for the Safeguard of us and all the English Nation, and Freedom thereof, from
the Yoke of Slavery; for Olaus King of Denmark, and Golanus of Norway, have
besieged us here almost a Twelvemonth; and now we have concluded a Truce, upon
Condition that we must find a Man to undergo the Combat with Colebrand their
Champion; and in case our Champion shall overcome him, they are forthwith to
quit the Land, without doing Injury to any, and not disturb this Realm any
more: therefore we do desire you, for the love of Christ our Savior, and for
the Pardon of your own Sins, that you will heartily undertake this Duel against
that cursed Pagan, for the cause of God's Church and Christian Religion. To
whom the Palmer answered, O my Lord the King, you may easily see that I am not
in any Condition to take upon me this fight, being feebled and weakened with
daily Travel: Alas! where are your stout and hardy Soldiers, who had wont to
be in great Esteem with you?

Ah! quoth the King, some of them are dead, and some of them are gone to the
Holy Land, but not yet returned: I had one valiant Knight which was Earl of
Warwick, called Guy, and he had a courageous Servant, named Sir Herand de
Ardene, would to God I had him here, for then should this Duel be soon
undertaken, and the War finished: And as he spoke these Words, the Tears fell
from his Eyes; whereat the Palmer being very sorrowful, besought him to sorbear
further grieving, assuring him, that for the love of Christ Jesus, and the
Blessed Virgin, as also for the honor of God's Holy Church, and for the Soul
of Guy, and Herand his Companion, he would in the fear of God undergo the
Combat. Then did they bring him into the City, and to the Church, with ringing
of Bells, and Te Deum was begun with cheerful Voices; and entertained him with
Meat and Drink, as also with bathing, putting Apparel upon him, and for the
space of three Weeks cheared him up with the best Refreshments.

After which, when the day appointed for that Duel was come, the Palmer rose
early, and heard three Masses, the first of the Holy Ghost, the second of the
Blessed Trinity, and the third of the Holy Cross; which being ended, he
forthwith armed himself with the King's best Harness, and girt the Sword of
Constantine the Great about him; and taking St. Maurice his Lance in his hand,
got up on the King's best Courser, being accounted, of all that beheld him, the
most proper and well-appointed Knight that ever they saw. From thence rode he
through the midst of the City, toward the place assigned for the Combat,
which was in a Valley called Chiltecumbe, where he waited for Colebrand, who
shortly after came so weightily harnessed, that his Horse could scarcely carry
him, and before him a Cart loaded with Danish Axes, great Clubs with knobs of
Iron, squared bars of Steel, and Iron Hooks to pull his Adversary to him; and
so soon as he saw the Palmer make toward him, calling loudly, he bad him get
off his Horse and cast himself down with Submission; but, the Palmer arming
himself with the sign of the Cross, and commending himself to God, put Spurs to
his Horse to meet the Giant. This Battle is thus described by the Poet:

Here Colebrand forward made, and soon the Christian Knight
Encounters him again with equal Power and Might;
Whereas, betwixt them two might easily have been seen
Such Blows, in public Throngs, as used, had they been,
Of many there the least might many men have slain;
Which none but they could strike, nor none but they sustain.
Sir Guy in the first Encounter peirced the Giants Shield so far that his own
Lance broke into Shivers, which so enraged the Giant, that he bore up fiercely
toward the Palmer, and smote his Horse with such Strength, that he cut off his
Head. The Palmer therefore being dis-mounted, nimbly, and with great Courage,
directed his Blow at the Giants Helmet; but, by reason of his height, could
reach no farther than his Shoulder. Then Colebrand smote at the Palmer with a
square bar of Steel, but he seeing his Danger, interposed his Shield, which
bore off the Blow, and on a sudden, did so vigorously lay at the corner of the
Gyant's Target, that his Club, bossed with Iron, fell to the ground, which,
whilst he stretched out his Arm to take up, the Palmer with his Sword cut off
his Hand; whereupon the Danes grew much dismayed, and on the other side was
there as great rejoicing by King Athelstane and the English; and yet
notwithstanding did Colebrand hold out the Combat till the Evening of that
day, that by losing so much Blood he fainted, so that Guy with all his strength
fetching a blow, cut off his Head. The other valiant Exploits of Guy are thus
in few Lines expressed by the Poet:

He for dear Phillis name, and Country to advance,
Left Warwick's wealthy Seat, and sailing into France,
At Tilt, from his proud Steed, Duke Otton threw to ground,
And with the invalued Prize of Blanch the beauteous crowned;
(The Almaine Emperor's Heir) high Acts did there atcheive,
And Lorain he again did valiantly relieve.
Then in the Soldans Blood his worthy Sword imbrued;
And next, in single Fight great Amarant subdued.
'Twas his Herculean Hand which happily destroyed
That Dragon which so long Northumberland annoyed;
And slew that cruel Boar which waste our Wood-lands laid,
Whose Tusks turned up our Tilths, and Dens in Meddows made,
Whose Shoulder Blade remains at Coventry till now:
And afterward did quell that monstrous fearful Cow,
The Passengers, that used, from Dunsmore to affright:
Of all our English yet the most renowned Knight.
But to return where we left: Guy having thus happily obtained the Victory,
occasioned the Danes with great Confusion to hasten away; and the valiant Guy,
to give thanks unto God, repairing forthwith to the Cathedral, where he was
honorably received with solemn Procession, by the Clergy and others, and
offered his Weapon to God and the Patron of that Church before the high-Altar,
which, my Author says, even to his time, was kept in the Vestry there, and
called by the name of Colbrand's Axe, but, this being done, reassumed his
Pilgrims Habit. Whereupon, the King became most importunate with him to
discover his Name, but he utterly refused so to do, except to himself, and that
upon his Oath not to reveal it; unto which Condition the King assenting, they
walked out alone in a Bye-path to a certain Cross, at some distance from the
City: and as soon as they came thither, humbly bowing himself to the King, and
saying, that he was Guy, Earl of Warwick, the King embraced him in his Arms,
kissed him, and promised him large Rewards if he would live in his Court; but
he, with much Thankfulness, refusing to receive any, besought the King that he
would not disclose what he had said, in regard his Resolution was to continue
in that Pilgrims state; and so they there parted with Tears.

From whence, the Earl bent his Course toward Warwick; and coming thither not
known of any, for three days together took Alms at the hands of his own Lady,
as one of those twelve poor People unto which she daily gave Relief her self,
for the Safety of him and her, and the Health of both their Souls. And having
rendered thanks to her, he repaired to an Hermit that resided amongst the shady
Woods hard by, desiring, by Conference with him, to receive some Spiritual
Comfort, where he abode with that holy Man till his Death, and then succeeded
him in that Cell, and continued the same course of Life for the space of two
Years after; but then discerning Death to approach, he sent to his Lady their
Wedding Ring, by a trusty Servant, wishing her to take care of his Burial;
adding also, that when she came she should find him lying dead in the Chapel,
before the Altar; and moreover, that within fifteen days after, she her self
should depart this Life. Whereupon, she came accordingly, and brought with her
the Bishop of the Diocese, as also many of the Clergy and other People; and
finding his Body there did honorably interr it in that Hermitage, and was her
self afterward buried by him, leaving her paternal Inheritance to Reynburn her
only Son. Which departure of our famous Guy happened in the Year of our Lord,
929. and of his own Age the 70.

The Life of St. Patrick the Irish Apostle.
SAint Patrick was born in the Marches between England and Scotland, in a Town
by the Seaside, named Eiburn, whose Fathers name was called Calphurnius, a
Deacon, and Son to a Priest; his Mother, named Couches, was Sister to St.
Martin, that famous Bishop of Tours in France. Patrick of a child was brought
up in Learning, and well instructed in the Faith, being much given to Devotion.
The Irish-men, (in those days) assisted with some Scots and Picts, were become
arch-Pirates, greatly disquieting the Seas about the Coasts of Britain, and
used to sack little small Villages that lay scatteringly along the shore, and
would lead away the Inhabitants captive home into their Country. And, as it
chanced, Patrick being a Lad of sixteen years old, and a Scholar then in
Secular Learning; was taken among others, and became Slave to an Irish Lord,
called Macbuaine, from whom (after the term of six years) he redeemed himself
with a piece of Gold, which he found in a Clod of Earth that the Swine had
newly turned up, as he followed them in the time of his Captivity, being
appointed by his Master to take charge of them, and keep them.

And as Affliction (commonly) makes men Religious, the regard of his former
Education had stamped in him such remorse and humility, that being thenceforth
weaned from the World, he betook himself to Contemplation, ever lamenting the
want of Grace and Truth in that Island, and alluring one of that Nation to bear
him company, for exercise sake, he departed thence, and got him into France,
ever having in his mind a desire to see the Conversion of the Irish People,
whose Babes yet unborn, seemed to him in his dreaming, from forth their Mothers
Wombs to call for Christendom.

In this purpose he sought out his Uncle Martin, by whose means he was placed
with Germanus the Bishop of Auxerre, continuing with him as Scholar or Disciple
for the space of forty Years; all which time, he bestowed in the study of Holy
Scriptures, Prayers, and such godly Excercises. Afterward being renowned
thorough the Latin Church, for his Wisdom, Virtue, and Learning, he went to
Rome, bearing Letters with him in his Commendation from the French Bishops unto
Pope Celestine, to whom he uttered his whole Mind and Secret Vow, which long
before he had conceived as touching Ireland. Celestine invested him Archbishop
and Primate of the whole Island, set him forward with all Favor he could,
bringing him and his Disciples onward to their Country.

In the twenty third Year of the Emperor Theodosius the younger, being the
year of our Lord 430, Patrick landed in Ireland, and because he spoke the
Tongue perfectly, and withal being a reverend Personage in the eyes of all Men,
many listened and gave ear to his preaching. And the rather, because (as some
Writers have recorded) he confirmed his Doctrine with diverse Miracles, of
which, that called St. Patricks Purgatory is most remarkable, the description
of which, out of Giraldus Cambrensis, an eminent Irish Author, take as
follows.

In the Parts of Ulster (says he) there is a Pool or Lake which environeth an
Island, in the one part whereof there stands a Church, much enlightened with
the brightsome recourse of Angels: the other part is ugly, and ghastly, as it
were a Bedlam, allotted to the visible Assemblies of horrible and grisly Bugs.
This part of the Island contains nine Caves, and if any dare be so hardy as
to take his lodging a Night in one of them, strait these Spirits claw him by
the back, and tug him so ruggedly, and toss him so crabbedly, that now and then
they make him more frank of his Bum than of his Tongue; a payment correspondent
to his entertainment. This place is called St. Patrick's Purgatory, of the
Inhabitants; for when St. Patrick labored the Conversion of the People of
Ulster, by setting before their eyes in great heat of Spirit, the Creation of
the World, the Fall of our Progenitors, the Redemption of man by the blessed
and precious blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, the certainty of Death, the
Immortality of the Soul, the general Resurrection, the day of Judgment, the
Joys of Heaven, the Pains of Hell; how that at length every man, small and
great, young and old, rich and poor, King and Keisar, Potentate and Pesant,
must either, through God's gracious mercy, be exalted to the one, to flourish
in perpetual Felicity; or through his unsearchable Justice, tumbled down to the
other, to be tormented in eternal misery. These and the like grave and weighty
Sentences, wherewith he was abundantly stored, so far sunk into their Hearts,
as they seemed very flexible in condescending to his Doctrine, so that some
proof of his strange preaching could have been verified; whereupon, without
farther delay, they spoke to the Prelate after this manner. Sir, As we like of
your preaching, so we dislike not of our Liberty; you tell us of many gew gaws,
and strange Dreams, you would have us to abandon Infidelity, to cage up our
Liberty, to bridle our Pleasure; for which you promise us for our toil and
labor, a Place to us, as unknown, so as yet uncertain. You sermon to us of a
Dungeon appointed for Offenders and Miscreants; indeed if we could find that to
be true, we should the sooner be weaned from the sweet nipple of our Liberty,
and frame our selves plyant to the Will of that God that you reveal unto us.

St. Patrick considering that these silly Souls were (as all carnal ones for
the most part are) more to be terrified from Infidelity through the Pains of
Hell, than allured to Christianity by the Joys of Heaven, most heartily
besought God, for the Honor and Glory of his Divine Name, to give some evident
token of the matter they so importunately required. Finally, by the especial
direction of God, he found in the North-edge of Ulster a desolate corner,
hemmed in round, and in the middle thereof a Pit, where he built a Church; at
the East end of which was a door which led to a Closet of Stone, like to a long
Oven, which was called St. Patrick's Purgatory, for that the People for several
Ages after resorted thither to do Penance, reporting at their return strange
Visions of Pain and Bliss appearing unto them; and this is the Cave which the
Inhabitants in these days call Ellan u' Frugadory, that is, the Isle of
Purgatory, and St. Patrick's Purgatory, and is by the Irish had in great
Veneration to this day.

Those that repaired to this place for Devotionsake, used to continue therein
twenty four hours, sometimes with Ghostly meditations, and otherwhiles with
dread for the Conscience of their Deserts, when they said they saw a plain
resemblance of their own Faults and Virtues, with the horror thereunto
belonging; the one so terrible, the other so joyous, that they verily deemed
themselves for the time to have had a sight of Heaven and Hell. The Revelation
of Men, (St. Patrick yet living) were kept written within the adjoining Abbey
for many Ages after. Now when any Person was disposed to enter, (for the Door
was always kept fast shut up) he repaired first to the Archbishop, who cast
before him the Perils and Dangers belonging thereunto, because it was known
that diverse entering into that Cave, were never seen to return back: but if the
Party were fully resolved, he recommended him to the Prior, who in like manner
would exhort him to choose some other kind of Penance, and not to hazard such a
danger. If notwithstanding he found the party fully bent, he conducted him to
the Church, injoyning him to begin with Prayer, and Fast of fifteen days
together, or so long as in discretion could be endured; That time expired, if
yet he persevered in his purpose, the whole Convent accompanied him with solemn
Procession and Benediction to the Mouth of the Cave, where they let him in, and
so barred up the door till the next morning; and then with like Ceremonies they
waited his return; if he were seen no more, they fasted and prayed fifteen days
after.

But to return to St. Patrick; what with his Doctrine and the Holiness of his
Life, he won many to embrace Christianity, so that the better part of the
Kingdom were converted to the Faith of Christ; for; Laigerius Son to Nealus the
great Monarch, although he received not the Gospel himself, yet permitted all
that would, to embrace it: but, because he refused to be baptized and apply to
his Doctrine, the Bishop denounced against him a Curse from God accordingly,
but yet tempered with Mercy and Judgment; as thus, That during his Life he
should be victorious; but after him, neither should the Kingdom stand, nor his
Lineage inherit. Thence he took his way to Conil Lord of Connaught, who
honorably received him, and was converted, with all his People, sending him
afterward to his Brother Logan, King of Leinster, whom he also converted. In
Munster he found great Friendship, by the means of an Earl there named Davis,
who honored him highly, and gave him a dewlling place in the East-Angle of
Armagh, called Sorta, where he erected many Cells and Monasteries, both for
religious Men and Women. He traveled thirty years in preaching thorough the
Land, planting Bishops and Priests in convenient places, whose Learning and
Conversation, by the especial Grace and Favor of God, established the Faith in
that rude Nation: other thirty years he spent in his Province of Armagh, among
his Brethren placed in those Houses of Religion, which by his means were
founded. So he lived in all about 122 Years, and then he dyed; being after his
Death canonized for a Saint, and had in such venerable Esteem in his Country,
that in Controversies and solemn Protestations they were accustomed to swear by
St. Patrick's Staff, which Oath they feared more to break than if they had
sworn by the Holy Evangelists. His See also of Armagh, was, by reason of him,
had in such honorable Estimation in old time, that not only Bishops and
Priests, but Kings also and Princes, were (in general) subject to the
Metropolitan thereof in all Obedience, and to his Government alone. After his
Death rose as great difference for his Sepulcher, as was for Homer amongst them
of Greece; they of Down challenged his Grave to be with them, upon certain
Verses written on a Tomb, which ascribes Patrick, Bridget, and Columbe to be
buried therein; they of Armagh lay claim by the Warrant of St. Bernard, who
says, that Patrick in his Life time there ruled, and after Death there rested;
Glassenbury in England, by ancient Records, will have his Body interred with
them; and Scotland avoucheth his Birth to be at Glasco, and Bones to rest at
Kirk-Patrick with them: thus is his Burial place left dubious, such striving
there is for the Interment of honorable Persons; as it happened to St. Telion,
a famous Bishop of Landaff in Wales, at whose Burial, it is said, that three
places did strive to have the interring of his Body; Pen-allum, where his
Ancestors were buried; Lanfolio naur, where he dyed; and Landaff, his Episcopal
See: Now after Prayer to God to appease this Contention, in the place where
they had left him, there appeared suddenly three Hearses, with three Bodies so
like as no Man could discern the right, and so every one taking one, they were
all well pleased.

A mavelous Preservation of the Protestants in Ireland in the time of Queen
Mary, by a merry Accident.
ABout the third Year of the Reign of Queen Mary, a Pursevant was sent with a
Commission into Ireland, to empower some eminent Persons to proceed with Fire
and Faggot against poor Protestants. It happened by divine Providence, this
Pursevant, at Chester, lodged in the House of a Protestant Innkeeper, who
having gotten some Inkling of the matter, secretly stole his Commission out of
his Cloak-bag, and put the Knave of Clubs in the room thereof. Some Weeks
after, he appeared before the Lords of the Privy Council at Dublin, whereof
Bishop Coren, Archbishop of Dublin, was then a Principal; but, instead of a
Commission he produced a Card, which so incensed them, that they caused him to
be committed to Prison for such an Affront, as done on design to deride them.
Here he lay for some Months, till with much ado, at last he got his
Enlargement. Then over he returned for England, and quickly getting his
Commission renewed, makes with all speed for Ireland again; but before his
Arrival there, he was prevented with the News of Queen Mary's Death: and so the
Lives of many, and the Liberties of more poor Servants of God were preserved.

Of the horrid Murder of Duffe, King of Scotland, and how miraculously it came
to be discovered.
THis Duffe began his Reign over Scotland about the Year of our Lord 968. being
a Prince of an upright Justice, and one who would not favor Offenses in any
Person whatsoever. This his zeal of Justice was by his Subjects (to whom former
Kings had let loose the Reins of Government) termed Severity: so that the
Nobles being restrained from insulting and making Slaves of the Commonalty,
brake forth into several Insurrections, especially in Murray-land, who all rose
up against the King, unless it were the Castle of Fores, of which one Donwald
was Governor. These Rebels seeing they could not prevail upon the King by
force, hired certain Witches to bewitch him to Death: these things being
murmured amongst the People, and at last coming to the King's Ear, who then lay
sick of a languishing Disease, and could take no rest day nor night, he sent
two men into Murray-land, to discover, if they could, the Truth of the
Business: These men dissembling the cause of their Journey, did so effectually
pursue the same, that they were received into the Castle of Fores in the dark
of the Night, and declared unto Donwald the cause of their coming; requiring
his Aid for the Accomplishment of the King's pleasure. The Soldiers which lay
there in Garrison, had an inkling that there was some such matter in hand, as
was talked of amongst the People, by reason that one of them kept as Concubine,
a young Woman, which was Daughter to one of the Witches, as his Paramour, who
told him the whole manner used by her Mother and other her Companions, with the
Intent also which was to make away the King. The Soldier having learned this
of his Leman, told the same to his Fellows, who made report thereof to Donwald,
and he showed it to the Kings Messengers, and therevvith sent for the young
Damsel which the Soldier kept, as then being within the Castle, and caused her
upon strict Examination to confess the whole matter, as she had seen and knew:
whereupon, learning by her Confession, in what House in the Town it was where
they practiced their hellish Mystery, he sent forth Soldiers about the midst
of the Night, who breaking into the House, found one of the Witches, roasting
upon a wooden Broach, an Image of Wax at the Fire, resembling in each Feature
the King's Person, devised as is to be thought, by Craft and Art of the Devil:
another of them sat reciting certain Words of Enchantment, and still basted
the Image with a certain Liquor very busily. The Soldiers finding them
occupied in this wise, took them, together with the Image, and led them into
the Castle, where being strictly examined for what purpose they went about such
manner of Enchantment; they answered, to the end to make away the King: for as
the Image did waste before the Fire, so did the Body of the King break forth in
sweat; and as for the words of Enchantment, they served to keep him still
waking from Sleep, so that as the Wax ever melted, so did the Kings Flesh, by
which means it should have come to pass, that when the Wax were once clean
consumed, the Death of the King should immediately follow. So were they taught
by the Devil, and hired by the Nobles of Murray-land to do the same. The
standers by, that heard such an abominable tale told by the Witches, strait
ways brake the Image, and caused the Witches (according as they had well
deserved) to be burnt to death. It is said, that the King, at the very same
time that these things were a doing in the Castle of Fores, slept that night
without any Sweat breaking forth upon him at all; and being thus restored to
his Strength, and certified what the Rebels of Murray-land had done, he raised
an Army, and with the same marched against them, pursuing them thence unto
Rosse, and from Rosse into Cathnesse where apprehending several of them, he
brought them back to the Castle of Fores, and there caused them to be hanged on
diverse Gallowses and Gibbets. Amongst those that were thus executed, were some
Gentlemen of note, near of Kin unto Donwald the Captain of the Castle, for
whose lives he much interceded to the King; but receiving from him a flat
denial, he conceived such an inward malice to his Sovereign, and being further
instigated by his Wife, that he never left off till he found means to murder
him: which was brought to pass in this wise;

The King tarrying some time in that Country, was accustomed to lie most
commonly within the same Castle, having a special Trust in Donwald, as a man
whom he never suspected; but, Donwald not forgetting the Reproach which his
Lineage had sustained, by the Execution of those his Kinsmen, carried a
sorrowful Countenance amongst his Family; which his Wife perceiving, ceased not
to travel with him till she understood what the cause was of his Displeasure;
which when she had learned by his own Relation, she, as one that bare no less
malice in her Heart toward the King, for the like cause, on her behalf, than
her Husband did for his Friends, counseled him (since the King oftentimes used
to lodge in the Castle without any Guard about him, other than the Garrison
thereof, which were wholly at his Command) to devise some ways to rid him of
his Life. Donwald thus by her persuaded, (as he must needs go whom the Devil
drives) determined to follow her Advice: and the Night before the King was to
depart, he being brought to Bed by two of his Chamberlains, those Chamberlains
were invited by Donwald and his Wife to a Supper or Collation; whereat they sat
up so long, till they had charged their Stomachs with such full Gorges, that
their Heads were no sooner got to the Pillow, but a sleep they were so fast,
that a man might have removed the Chamber over them rather than to have
awakened them out of their drunken Sleep. These Chamberlains thus secured,
Donwald called to four of his Servants whom he had made privy to his purpose,
and declared to them which way they should work the Feat, who, according to
his Instructions, entered the Chamber wherein the King lay, immediately before
the Cocks crowing, where they cut his Throat as he lay sleeping, without any
bustling at all; which having done, by a Postern Gate they conveyed the dead
Body into the Fields, and throwing it upon a Horse provided ready for that
purpose, conveyed it to a place distant about two miles from the Castle,
whereby ran a little River, where they stayed, and got certain Laborers to
help them to turn the Course thereof, and diging a deep hole in the Channel,
they bury the Body in the same; and having turned the Water into the right
Course again, they flew those whose Help they had used therein, and thereupon
fled into Orkney.

Donwald, about the time that the Murder was a doing, got him amongst them
that kept the Watch, and so continued in Company with them all the residue of
the Night: but, in the Morning, when the noise was raised in the King's
Chamber, how the King was slain, his Body conveyed away, and the Bed all
bewrayed with Blood, he, with the Watch, ran thither as though he had known
nothing of the matter; where finding Cakes of Blood on the Bed, and on the
Floor, and about the sides of it, he forthwith slew the Chamberlains, as
guilty of that heinous Murder; and then like a Madman running to and fro, he
ransacked every Corner within the Castle, pretending to have seen if he might
have found either the Body, or any of the Murderers hid in any privy place;
but at the length, coming to the Postern Gate, and finding it open, he burdened
the Chamberlains, whom he had slain, with all the fault, they having the keys
of the Gates committed to their keeping all the Night.

It is said, that after this heinous Murder thus committed, there appeared no
Sun by Day, nor Moon by Night, for the space of six Months together, in any
part of the Realm, but still was the Sky covered with continual Clouds, and
sometimes such out-ragious Winds arose, with Lightnings and Tempests, that the
People were in great fear of a general Destruction.

In the mean time, the Scots crowned Culene, Prince of Cumberland, their King;
who resolving to punish the Murderers of his Predecessor, marched with an
Army into Murray-land; the Inhabitants of which Country hearing of his
Approach, and the cause of his coming, were stricken with exceeding fear: but
namely, Donwald being guilty in Conscience, doubted if he were put to Torture
he should be enforced to confess the Truth; whereupon, without making his Wife
privy to his Departure, or any other of his Family, save a few such as he took
with him, he secretly got him to the Mouth of the River of Spey, where finding
a Ship ready, he went aboard the same, purposing to have fled his ways by Sea
into Norway. But, by this his Flight he detected himself; for, King Culene
being hereof advertised, imagined assuredly that Donwald must needs be the
Author of this horrid Murder, and thereupon passed over Spey Water, and taking
the Castle of Fores, slew all that he found therein, and put the House to Sack
and Fire. Donwald's Wife, with his three Daughters, were taken alive, for so
was the King's Command to whosoever should light on them; they being had to the
Rack, the Mother upon Examination, confessed the whole matter, how by her
Procurement chiefly, her Husband was moved to cause the Deed to be done, who
they were that by his Commandment did it, and in what place they had buried the
Body. The King, with the Residue, for that Night rested themselves, and in the
Morning took order for Provision of all things necessary to take up the Body of
King Duffe, and then to convey it unto Colmekill, there to be buried amongst
his Predecessors. But, as they were preparing thereunto, word came that the
Traitor Donwald was by Shipwreck cast upon the Shore, within four miles of the
Castle, as though he were by God's Provision brought back into his own Country,
to suffer worthy Punishment for his Demerits. Hereupon the King sent a Band of
men to fetch him unto him, who were scarcely returned when likewise came in
diverse Lords of Rosse, bringing with them Donwald's four Servants, which (as
before is said) did execute the Murder. Thus all the Offenders being brought
together unto the place where the Murder was both contrived and executed, they
were arreigned, condemned, and put to Death: being first scourged by the
Hangman, then bowelled, their Entrails being thrown into the Fire and burnt;
the other parts of their Bodies were cut into Quarters, and set upon the Gates
and highest Towers of the chiefest Cities of the Realm.

Next they proceed to take up the Body of King Duffe; which, notwithstanding it
had lain six Months under the Ground, was nothing empaired in Color, or
otherwise, but was found as whole and found as though it had been yet alive,
the Scars of the Wounds only excepted. But which is more strange, no sooner was
the Body brought above the ground, but the Air began to clear up, and the Sun
break forth, shining more brighter than it had been seen afore-time to any of
the Beholders Remembrance: but that which was most strange of all, was the
sight of abundance of Flowers, which sprung forth over all the Fields
immediately thereupon, clean contrary to the Time and Season of the Year. Not
long after there was a Bridge made over the Water, in the same place where the
Body had been buried; and a Village builded at the one end of the Bridge,
called Killflos, that is, the Church of Flowers, taking that name of the Wonder
that happened at the removing of the King's Body. Afterward was there in the
same place built a most magnificent Abbey, together with a very fair Church;
which in the general decay of Abbeys felt also it is Fate, being nothing of it
left now, but only it is remembrance in History.

Of the Cruelty which Albovine, King of Lombardy, used to his Queen Rosamond;
and by what means she was revenged on him; with her miserable end.
THE first King of the Longobards which conquered that part of Italy since from
them called Lombardy, was named Albovine, a Man of great Spirit, and very
valiant in Actions of War. He conquered in Battle, Cunmond, King of the
Girpides, and causing his Head to be smitten off, made a drinking Cup thereof,
wherein he used to drink in Triumph of his Conquest and Victory. Rosamond,
Daughter to this King, a very beautiful Damsel, he took to Wife, and being one
day over merry in Verona, he compelled her to drink out of her Fathers Skull;
whereat she conceived such high displeasure, that the entire Love which she had
formerly borne him, was converted into deadly Hatred, with an absolute
resolution to kill him, in revenge of this disgrace. And to assist her in this
determination, she conferred with a Gentleman named Hermigilde, who told her,
that to the execution of such an important Business, she should require the aid
of a Valiant Knight in the Court, called Paradine, which instantly she did, but
he would not yield thereto, because he took it to be too horrid a Treason.
Finding her hope therein frustrated, and fearing lest her intent would be
discovered, but ambitious to accomplish her Enterprise, being advertized by
Hermigilde that Paradine dearly affected one of her attending Ladies, she
devised thereby to effect her purpose. Being acquainted with the secret resort
where Paradine and his Lover met together, she found some other Employment for
the Lady, and made use of her place for the time, prostituting her Honor to
satisfy her Revenge; Paradine keeping her there company a long time, imagining
no other, but that it was the Mistress of his Affections.

The Queen, who spent all this while in soft whispers and dalliance, not using
any one word whereby she might be discovered, perceiving opportunity so aptly
to fit her, spoke thus unto him; Know thou, Paradine, who it is that keeps
thee Company? Full well, (quoth he) with my Mistress, and then named her. Thou
lie (false Traitor) replied the Queen, I am Rosamond, thy Sovereigns Wife,
whom thou have dared to abuse in this manner, and dye thou must by the just
Wrath of Albovine, except thou save thy Life by killing him: advise thee
therefore whether his Life or thine own be dearest unto thee. When Paradine
considered his dangerous estate, without any means or escape, he resolved to
kill the King: and for his better furtherance therein, both he, the Queen, and
Hermigilde took counsel together, contriving his Murder in this manner.

The King used to Sleep in the heat of the day, when all else avoided the
Chamber except the Queen. Now he being a King of Courage and high Resolution,
ever slept like a Soldier, with his Sword girded about him; which, at this
intended time of Treason, the Queen had tied so fast in the Scabbard, as he
could by no means help himself therewith. Paradine and Hermigilde waiting the
hour, which was upon the Queens coming forth, they entered, and for all their
treading the King heard them, and started from his Bed: when he saw two men
armed with Weapons, a sudden fury possessed his Spirit, perceiving their
intentions were against him, he sought to defend himself with his Weapon; which
failing him by the aforesaid means of the Queen, and they with their Weapons
every where striking at him and wounding him, he caught up a Stool, and
therewith defended himself for a Space; till in the end they deprived him of
Life, without any noise heard, or any suspicion of Murder.

The King being thus Dead, all was carried with a smooth Countenance;
Hermigilde possessed himself of the Palace, intending to make the Queen his
Wife, as immediately he did. But notwitstanding all their close packing, the
Lombards not long after came to the knowledge of their Kings Death, and in what
manner he was murdered, which so incensed them that they purposed severely to
revenge the same. This being notified to Rosamond and her accomplices, she packed
up most of her Jewels and Royal Treasure, and fled away thence, carrying with
them Alvisinda Daughter to King Albovine, by his first Wife, and hasted with
all the speed they could to Ravenna, where then governed a Lieutenant of the
Empire named Longinus, who kept that place for Tiberius, Son to the Emperor
Constantine of Constantinople, by whom they were courteously entertained.

Not long had they been there, but Longinus became enamoured on Rosamond, and
therefore partly to enjoy her Love, partly to possess that Mess of Money and
Jewels which she brought with her, and partly by her faction to raise a
beneficial War against the Lombards, he persuaded her to procure the Death of
Hermigilde, and take him to her Husband; to which he found her very tractable:
for, she having lost all love and fear of God, respect of Woman-hood, and
dreadless of the shame of Men, coveting withal to advance the down-faln estate,
by marrying with the Emperors Lieutenant; gave to Hermigilde an empoysoned
Potion at his coming forth of his Bath, persuading him that it was most
Sovereign for his Health; by which persuasion, he drank a good part thereof:
but when he found it to afflict his Body, so as he plainly perceived himself to
be poisoned; drawing forth his Sword, in extremity of Rage, he compelled
Rosamond to drink up all the rest that remained in the Cup. So that at one
instant time they were both justly requited for the Death of Albovine. Tidings
hereof being brought to the Lieutenant Longinus, he caused the young Lady
Alvisinda to be seized on, and sent her, with all her Jewels and Treasure to
the Emperor Tiberius at Constantinople, with Paradine also, as a Prisoner, who
for reward of his former Treason to his Sovereign, had his eyes pulled forth;
after which, he lived but a while, and then dyed most miserably.

The miseries of inforted Marriage; exemplified in a story of a Knight in
Warwickshire, Murdered by his own Lady.
IN the days of Queen Mary, there lived at Shirford in Warwickshire, one Sr.
Walter Smith, Knight, who being grown an Aged Man, at the death of his first
Wife, considering of a Marriage for Richard his Son and Heir, then at Man's
Estate, to that end made his mind known to Mr. Thomas Chetwyn, of Ingestre in
Staffordshire (a Gentleman of an ancient Family and a fair Estate) who
entertaining the motion in behalf of Dorothy, one of his Daughters, was
contented to give 500 pound Portion with her. But no sooner had the old Knight
seen the young Lady, then that he became a Suitor for himself, being so
captivated with her Beauty, that he tendered as much for her besides a good
Jointure, as he should have received in case the Match had gone on for his Son.
Which liberal Offer so wrought upon Mr. Chetwyn, as that with sparing not for
arguments, to persuade his Daughter to accept of Sr. Walter for her Husband,
adding to his persuasions something of Menaces, that at length, with much
unwillingness, she consented thereunto. Whereupon the Marriage ensued
accordingly; but with what a tragique Issue, will quickly be seen: for it was
not long 'ere that her affections wandering after younger men, she gave
entertainment to one Mr. William Robinson (then of Drayton-Basset, a young
Gentleman of twenty two years of age) Son to George Robinson, a rich Mercer of
London; and grew so impatient at all Impediments which might hinder her full
Enjoyment of him, that she rested not till she had contrived a way to be rid of
her Husband. For which purpose, corrupting her waiting Gentlewoman, and a Groom
of the Stable, she resolved by their help, and the assistance of Robinson, to
strangle him in his Bed, appointing the time and manner how it should be
effected. And though Robinson failed in coming on the designed Night (perhaps
thorough a dismal Apprehension of so horrid a Fact) she no whit staggered in
her Resolutions: for, watching her Husband till he was fallen asleep, she then
let in those Assassinates before specified, and casting a long Towel about his
Neck, caused the Groom to lie upon him to keep him from struggling, whilst her
self and the Maid straining the Towel, stopped his Breath.

It seems the good old Gentleman little thought that this his Lady had acted
therein; for, when they first cast the Towel about his Neck, he cried out, help
Doll help: but, having thus dispatched the Work, they carried him into another
Room where a Close-stool was placed, upon which they set him; and, after an
hour, that the Maid and Groom were silently got away, to palliate the business,
she made an Outcry in the House, wringing her hands, pulling her Hair, and
weeping extremely; with pretense, that missing him for some time out of Bed,
she went to see what the matter was, and found him accidentally on the
Close-stool in that Posture: which subtle and feigned Shows of Sorrow she
acted so to the Life, as prevented all suspicion of his violent Death. And not
long after, went to London, setting so high a value upon her Beauty, that
Robinson, her former Darling, (perhaps for not keeping touch with her, as
before is related) became estranged. But, within two Years following, it so
happened, that this woeful deed of Darkness was brought to light, and that by the
means of the Groom one of the Actors thereof, above specified; who being
entertained a Servant with Mr. Richard Smith, Son and Heir to the murdered
Knight, and attending him to Coventry with diverse other Servants, his guilty
Conscience which had oftentimes before flew in his Face, made him become so
sensible of his Villainy, and being in his Cups, (a bad cause of a good effect)
that out of good Nature he took his Master aside, and upon his Knees, humbly
desiring Forgiveness of him for the Murder of his Father, made him acquainted
with all the Circumstances belonging thereunto; which, though it struck in Mr.
Smith a great Amazement and Abhorrency of the Fact, yet discreetly he gave him
good Words, but privately commanded some other of his Servants to have an
especial Eye on him, that he might not escape when he had slept and better
considered what might be the Issue thereof; but notwithstanding this strict
Charge, those careless Servants, either not knowing the horridness of his Fact,
or out of love to his Person, suffered him to escape, and that on one of his
Master's best Horses; who being thus mounted, hasted presently into Wales,
attempting to go beyond Sea; but being hindered by contrary Winds, after three
Essays to launch out, was so happily pursued by Mr. Smith, who spared for no
cost in sending to several Ports, that he was apprehended and brought Prisoner
to Warwick, as was also, about the same time, the Lady and her Gentlewoman, who
notwithstanding the Circumstances before recited, did all of them, with great
Boldness deny the Fact; the Groom to his other Wickedness most impudently
charging Mr. Smith endeavor of corrupting him to accuse the Lady (his
Mother-in-law) falsely, to the end he might possess her Jointure: but
afterward, upon his Arraignment, he was so smitten at apprehension of that
load of guilt which lay upon him, that he publicly acknowledged it, and
stoutly justified what he had so said, to be true, to the Face of the Lady and
her Maid; who at first, with a great deal of Confidence, pleaded their
Innocence: but at last, seeing each particular Circumstance so clearly
discovered and avowed, they both confessed the Fact; for which, having Judgment
to dye, the Lady was burnt at a Stake, near the Hermitage on Wolvey Heath
(toward the side of Shirford Lordship) where the Country People to this day
show the place; and the Groom, with the Maid, suffered Death at Warwick. This
was on May 15. in the third Year of Queen Mary's Reign.

A remarkable Story of the occasion which made the Danes first to invade
England: and of their murdering St. Edmund.
AT such time as the West Saxons had gotten the Sway of the whole Heptarchy,
there reigned under them, in the Kingdom of Northumberland, as Viceroy, one
Osbright; who, as he followed his disport in Hunting, came to the House of a
Nobleman, named Beorn Bocador, whose Lady, of passing Feature, (in his Absence)
gave him honorable Entertainment, and entreated both himself and Train to
repose themselves there a while after their wearisom Delights. The Viceroy
already ensnared with her Beauty, accepted her courteous offer, not so much to
taste her Meats as to surfeit his Eyes with her rare Beauty, and lasciviously to
dote in his own Affections. The Dinner ended, and all ready to depart, (as
though some weighty matters were to be handled) he commanded an Avoidance from
the Presence, and taking the Lady into a withdrawing Chamber, under pretense of
secret Conference, greatly tending to the Advancement of her Lord and self,
most unnobly, being not able to prevail by smooth Persuasions, did by force
violate her constant Chastity: which Dishonor thus received, and her Mind
distracted, like to Thamar's, at her Husbands Return, all ashamed to behold his
Face, whose Bed had so been wronged, with floods of Tears she thus set open the
Sluices of her Passions.

Had thy Fortunes accorded to thy own Desert, or thy Choice proceeded as by Vow
was obliged, then had no stain of Blemish touched thine Honor, nor cause of
Suspicion once approached thy Thought; nor had my self been my self, these
blushing Cheeks had not invited thy sharp peircing Eye to look into my guilty
and defiled Breast, which ow thou may see disfurnished of Honor, and the
Closet of pure Chastity broken up; only the Heart and Soul is clean, yet fears
the Tincture of this polluted Cask, and would have passage (by thy revenging
hand) from this loathsome Prison and filthy Trunk. I must confess our Sex is
weak, and accompanied with many Faults, yet none excusable, how small soever;
much less the greatest, which Shame does follow and inward Guilt continually
attend: Yours is created more inviolable and firm, by whose Constancy, as our
flexible Weakness is guarded, so our true Honors by your just Arms should be
protected. O Beorn! Beorn! (for Husband I dare not call thee) revenge therefore
my Wrongs, that am now made thy Shame, and Scandal of my Sex, upon that hideous
Monster, nay incarnate Devil, Osbright, (O that very name like Poison corrupts
my Breath, and I want Words to deplore my Grief!) who has no Law but his Lust,
nor measure of his Actions but his Power, nor privilege for his loathsome Life
but his Greatness, whilst we with a self Fear, and servile Flattery, mask our
Baseness with crowching Obedience, and bear the Wrongs of his most vile
Adulteries. Thou yet art free from such dejected and degenerate Thoughts, nor
have thou smoothed him in his wicked and ever-working Devices; be still thy
self then, and truly noble as thou art. It may be, for his place thou owe him
respect; but what? therewith the loss of Honor? Thine Affection, but not thy
Bed; thy Love, but not thy beloved; yet have thou lost at once all these, and
he thy only Bereaver; thou wast my Stay whilst I stayed by thee, and now being
down, revenge my Fall. The Instinct of Nature does pity our Weakness, the Law
of Nations does maintain our Honor, and the Sword of Knighthood is sworn by
to be unsheathed for our just Defense; much more the link of Wedlock claims it,
which has locked two Hearts in one: But alas! that Ward is broken, and I am
thy Shame, who might have been thy Honor. Revenge thy self therefore on him
and me, else shall this hand let out the Ghost that shall still attend thee
with Acclamations till thou revenge my stained Blood.

Beorn, who was not used to be welcomed home in such a Dialect, much amazed at
his Wives Maladies, with gentle Words drew from her the Particulars of her
inward Grief, who revealed (as well as Shame, Tears, and Sobs, would suffer)
the manner of the deed, still urging Revenge for the Wrong. Beorn touched thus
to the Quick, (to pacify his distressed Wife) did not a little dissemble his
Wrath; and excusing the Fact with the Power of a Prince, that might command,
and her own Weakness, unable to resist the Strength of a man, commended much
her Love and Constancy; and alleging his Wrongs to be equal with hers, (if not
greater) in regard of their Sex, willed her to set her string to his Tune, till
fit opportunity would serve to strike: but she distasting that sweet Consort,
wrested her Passion into so high a Strain, that nothing could be heard but
Revenge and Blood.

Beorn thus instigated by the continual Cries of his Wife, whose Rape already
of it self had given sufficient cause of Wrath; first consulting with his
nearest Friends, was offered their Assistance against that wicked and libidious
Prince, and then repairing to his Court, in the presence of them all, made
known his unsufferable Wrongs, resigning into his Hands all such Services and
Possessions as he did hold of him, and with utter defiance departed, threatening
his Death.

This done, he took shipping, and sailed into Denmark, where he had great
Friends, as having his bringing up there before, and is reported to have been
allianced unto the Danish Blood: so coming to Godorick, King of that Country,
made his Case known, instantly desiring his Aid against the Villainy of Osbright.

Goderick, glad to have some Quarrel to invade England, levied an Army with all
speed, and, preparation made for all things necessary, sends forth Inguar and
Hubba, two Brethren, to command in chief over an innumerable Multitude of his
Danes; which two, he thought at this time the fittest for the attempt, not only
for their good Conduct and approved Valor, but also, for that he knew them to
be, on particular Motives (which usually more affect than does a common Cause)
implacably enraged against the English, on an occasion unfortunately happening,
but most lamentably pursued; which came to pass in manner as follows.

A Danish Nobleman of Royal Extraction, named Lothbroke, (which is in English
no other than Leather-Breech) the Father to the two Brothers Inguar and Hubba;
being upon the shore, his Hawk, in flying the Game, fell into the Sea, which to
recover, he entered a little Skiff or Cock-boat, nothing foreseeing the danger
that immediately did ensue; for, a sudden Tempest arising, carried the Boat
into the Deep, and drove him upon the Coast of Norfolk, where he came to land
at the Port called Rodham; but see his Fortune, no sooner had he escaped one
danger but he fell into another; for, the People there took him for a Spy, and
as such a one, presently sent him to Edmund, then King of that Province: but in
his Answers he sufficiently cleared that Suspicion, and also declaring his
Birth and Misfortune, was honorably entertained in the Court of that
East Angles King, whom Edmund much esteemed for his other good Parts: but, for
his dexterity and expertness in Hawking, held him in special regard; insomuch,
that his Faulkner, named Berick, envying the good parts of Lothbroke, as being
endued with none himself, he therefore conceived such deadly hatred and malice
thereat, as having him at advantage alone in a Wood, he cowardly murdered him,
and hid his dead Body in a Bush.

But Lothbroke, whose noble Parts had made him eminent, was soon missed, and
diligent Inquisition being made, could not be found; until his Spaniel, which
would not forsake his dead Master's Corpse, came fawningly unto the King, as
seeming to beg Revenge of so bloody an Act, which he did more than once; and at
length being observed, and followed by the Trace, the dead Body was found, and
Bericke demonstrated to be the Murderer; and on sufficient Evidence convicted
for the same: his Judgment being, to be put into Lothbroke's Boat, and that
without either Tackle or Oar, as he therein arrived, and so left to the Seas
Mercy, to be saved by Destiny, or swallowed up by just desert. But behold the
Event; the Boat returned to the same place, and upon the same Coast arrived
from whence it had been driven; where being known to be Lothbroke's Boat,
Bericke was laid hands on; who to free himself from the punishment of his
butcherly Fact, added Treason to Murder, laying it to the charge of innocent
King Edmund, saying, that the King had put him to death in the Country of
Norfolk.

This was thought sufficiently worthy of Revenge, to which Goderick's Quarrel
being added, did very much inflame the Courages of Inguar and Hubba, the two
Sons of the murdered Prince, who thereupon having their Army in readiness, set
forth to Sea; and first arriving at Holderness, burned up the Country, and
without Mercy massacred all before them, sparing neither Sex, Calling, nor Age;
and surprising York, which Osbright had taken for his Refuge, there slew that
lustful Prince, with all his Forces, making thereby good that Saying of the
Poet.

Those whose Delights are in the Cyprian Game,
Warming themselves in Lusts alluring Flame,
And wallowing in that Sin, their Lives do spend,
Do seldom to the Grave in Peace descend.
Afterward, the two furious Brethren marched with their Army into Norfolk,
where they sent this Message unto King Edmund; That Inguar the most victorious
Prince, dread both by Sea and Land, having subdued diverse Countries unto his
Subjection, and now arrived in those Parts, where he meant to Winter, charged
Edmund to divide with him his Riches, and to become his Vassal aend Servant.
The King being stricken into Astonishment at this strange and unexpected
Message, consulted with his Counsel what to do therein; where one of his
Bishops (then his Secretary, and a principal man) used Persuasions to him to
yield, for preventing greater mischief; who notwithstanding returned this
Answer: Go tell thy Lord, that Edmund the Christian King, for the love of this
temporal Life, will not subject himself to a Heathen and Pagan Duke.

Inguar and Hubba herewith exasperated, with the furious Troops of their Danes
pursued the King to Thetford, and from thence to his Castle of Framingham,
where he, pitying the terrible Slaughter of his People, yielded himself to
their Persecutions; who, because he would not deny Christ and the Christian
Faith, those Pagans first beat him with Bats, then scourged him with Whips, he
still calling upon the name of Jesus; for rage whereof, they bound him to a
Stake, and with their Arrows shot him to death; and cutting off his Head,
contemptuously threw it into a Bush. Of which Head, we have a Monkish Story,
written by the Author of their English Martyrology; for which, the Author does
very well deserve the Whet-stone; viz. That when St. Edmund was murdered by
the Danes, the Christians seeking his Corpse, were lost in a Wood, when calling
one to another, Where art? Where art? Where art? the martyred Head answered,
Here, Here, Here. However, God forbid that these Monkish Lies should make us
under-value this worthy King and Martyr, thus cruelly tortured to Death, which
by an old Author is thus accurately expressed:

Utque cruore suo Gallos Dionysius ornat,
Graecos Demetrius, gloria quisque suis;
Sic nos Edmundus nulli virtute secundus,
Lux patet, and patriae gloria magna suae.
Sceptra manum, diadema caput, sua purpura corpus
Ornat ei, sed plus vincula, mucro, cruor.
As Denis by his Death adorneth France,
Demetrius, Greece; each Credit to his place;
So Edmund's Luster does our Land advance,
Who with his Virtues does his Country grace.
Scepter, Crown, Robe, his Hand, Head, Corpse, renowns,
More famous for his Bonds, his Blood, his Wounds.
And of these his Sufferings another Poet of middle time, thus versifies of him:

Jam loca vulneribus desunt, nec dum furiosis
Tela, sed hyberna grandine plura volant.
Though now no place was left for Wounds, yet Arrows did not fail; These
furious Wretches, still they fly thicker than Winter Hail.

His Shirt was kept at the Abbey of Bury, for a precious Relick, which Monks,
also bragged that they had certain Drops of St. Stephen's Blood (thou can
not, O Reader, but believe it) which sprung from him at such time as he was
stoned; and some of the Coals with which St. Lawrence was broiled.

Some few notable Histories of Parents crossing the Affections of their
Children, and the sad Effects attended thereon.
IN Verona, a famous City in Italy, lived a young Gentlewoman named Julietta,
of the noble House of the Montesches, or Montacutes; her Father being not
willing that she should marry, when both the decency of Time, and aptness of
her Years, made tender of themselves; therefore (in her fairest Flower) she
espoused her self, unknown to her Parents, to a Gentleman's Son of another
House and Family, called the Capelets, whose Name was Romeo, those two Families
being mortal Enemies one to the other. This Marriage sorted unto the lamentable
Death of both the Lovers, as you shall briefly hear in this manner. They being
secretly married by the hand of a Cordelier or Franciscan Friar, a man most
expert in the Secrets of Nature, who took great Compassion on their earnest
reciprocal Affection, and daily Torments between them endured. It happened, on
a certain day, that an Uncle to Julietta, in regard of the inveterate Hatred
betwixt the two Families, drew upon Romeo, who (in defending himself) slew the
said Uncle; whereupon he was banished, or (at the least) enforced to be absent
from Verona. The woeful Gentlewoman having made her moan unto the honest minded
Friar, under the shadow of Confession, concerning the irksome absence of her
best esteemed Friend; he gave her advice to receive a little Potion when she
went to Bed, which should cause her to sleep for more than thirty hours, so
that she should be verily supposed to be dead. She boldly adventured on his
Counsel, and her Parents imagining her to be dead indeed, caused her to be
buried in the Tomb or Vault belonging to the House of her Predecessors.

From thence the Friar purposed to fetch her at a certain hour of the Night,
and to conduct her, (in the Habit of a Novice) to banished Romeo, who lived in
a Land of another Jurisdiction, yet not far distant from the City: all this was
possible and easy to be performed; for it was and is a common Custom there,
not to bury deceased Bodies in Graves, as it is observed among us, but in
Grotts or vaulted Caves. While these things were framing themselves, according
to premeditated purpose, it fortuned, that a Servant belonging to Romeo came to
Verona, to bring Letters of Recommendation to Julietta; and being returned back
to his Master, reported the certain Tidings of her Death, and that himself was
present at her interring. Romeo, confounded with Grief and extremity of
Passions, found the means (in a disguised Habit) before the shutting up of
Verona Gates, to enter the City. In the dead time of the Night also he
compassed his Intent, entering the Church with a lighted Torch in his hand,
having opened the doors by the help of his Servant, and also the Tomb wherein
she lay enclosed. Then commanding the absence of his Servant, he entered into
the Vault; and after infinite Kisses bestowed by him on Julietta, whom he
verily conceited to be dead, he drank a most deadly Poison, which he had bought
of a needy Apothecary, and which immediately fell to Operation, so slept he
(for ever) by the body of Julietta. Now after her Drink had wrought his full
Power, she awaked; and by means of the burning Torch, perceiving her Romeo to
be quite dead, she was thereat greatly enraged with Grief, so that snatching a
Poniard that hung at his Girdle, she therewith desperately slew her self. Not
long after, the Friar, knowing the time expired for the waking of Julietta,
came likewise to the Vault; but when he beheld that tragic woeful Spectacle,
let his Sorrow be censured by such as are able to judge of the same. On the
morrow after, the death of these two Lovers was discovered, and all matters
rehearsed by Friar Lawrence (for so was the Cordelier named) to the great Grief
and Admiration of every one that heard it.

Another History of as sad effects take as follows. In the City of Rome, not
long while since, there was a young Maiden (named Lucretia, Daughter to a rich
Merchant) secretly espoused to a young man, called Paulo, Son also to another
Merchant, the two Fathers being vowed Enemies, and both alike envious of each
others Fortune. The Father of Paulo perceiving how fast aged Years came
stealing on him, determined a marriage for his Son, acquainting him therewith;
that he had made choice of one meet for him, commanding him also to fashion
himself to good liking thereof, because he would have it accomplished within
very few days. The Son deferred it off so long as well he could; yet to declare
some Obedience to his Father, he craved Respite to consider thereof: but in the
mean while, it was generally noised thorough the City of Rome, that Paulo must
be married unto another. This News coming to the Ears of Lucretia, she
dissembled her inward conceived Displeasure, verily imagining the matter to be
already done. Paulo coming (as oftentimes he did) when fit time favored him,
to visit his Lucretia, in the night time, so jocund and merry as at no time
more: after accustomed Kindnesses passed between them, Paulo fell into a very
sound Sleep; Lucretia beholding him in that fearless Estate, with a great Knife
she gave him so many Stabs and deep Wounds, both in the Breast and Belly, that
she deprived him of his Life, and afterward committed the like Violence on her
self. This Act, so full of Sorrow and sad Mischance, came to the Ear of Pope
Paulus the Fourth, who would not allow them to have Christian Burial; but a
Learned Divine, a Jacobine by Religion, made so excellent an Oration to the
Pope against the unkind Parents of the deceased Lovers, that Obsequies were
granted, and Burial given them: and an aged Woman, a Servant to Lucretia, who
had been the means of their private Marriage, was (by Authority of Justice)
burned alive, because she had not advertised the Parents thereof.

A third Story, as dismal as the two former, here follows. Damoiselle
Geneviefue, Daughter unto Monsieur Megrelim, a Gentleman in ordinary in the
Court of Francis the second, King of France, espoused her self by Word only,
and without Knowledge of any in her Fathers House, to one that was
Schoolmaster unto her Brethren, named Medard, a Picar by Nation, born in Laon,
a young man, of passable Handsomness, and of indifferent Knowledge for his
time, being about twenty three years old. After some space, being thus
contracted, she found her self to be with Child; and fearing the Displeasure of
her Parents, especially of her Mother, who was a very severe Woman, she forsook
her Father's House and the goodly City of Paris, accompanied with none but her
Troth-plighted Husband the Schoolmaster. Traveling thorough the Country, they
made their stay in a great Borough Town of Champaign, where likewise he became
Schoolmaster, taking great Pains to supply their Necessities. Within some few
Months after their residing there, Medard died; and she, five days after the
death of her Husband, one Evening, after Supper, in a public place, declared
to all such as gave Favor to her, the whole History of their fore-passed Love,
her Marriage by promise, her Extraction, want of Government, and the Injury
done by her to her Servants, desiring (very heartily) Pardon both of God and
them: so feigning as if she intended to go to Bed with her young Infant, which
was about six Weeks old, she went and hanged her self that Night, on a Beam-end
of a poor Cottage which they had taken upon hire.

Certain Observations upon Kings of several Nations.
A Menophis, one of the Kings of Egypt, being blind, was assured by some of his
Wizards, that if he washed his Eyes with the Urine of a Woman which had never
known any but her own Husband, he should be restored to his Sight. After a long
Search and many vain Trials, he met with one whose Water cured him; whom he
took to Wife: and causing all the rest whom he had made Trial of to be brought
together to a Town called Gleba Rubra, he set the said Town on Fire, and burnt
both it and all the Women therein assembled.

Sesostris, another King of Egypt, was a Prince of so great Wealth and
Substance, that he brought in Subjection all his neighboring Kings, whom he
compelled in turns to draw his Chariot. It happened, that one of these
unfortunate Princes cast his Eye many times on the Coach-wheels; and being by
Sesostris demanded the cause of his so doing, he replied, that the falling of
that Spoke lowest which but just before was in the height of the Wheel, put him
in mind of the Instability of Fortune; which the King considering of, would
never afterward be so drawn in his Chariot: And indeed, he found the same
quickly after to be true, by woeful Experience; for, leading his Army against
the Scythians, whom in conceit he had already conquered, he found himself
deceived in his Expectation. These Scythians marvelled that a King of so great
Revenues would wage War against a Nation so poor, with whom the Fight would be
doubtful, the Victory unprofitable, but to be vanquished a perpetual Infamy and
Disgrace: so joining Battles, Sesostris was discomfited, and pursued even to
his own home by the Enemy, learning him by that to moderate his Prosperity, and
to beware of Fortunes Instability.

Charles the second King of Navarr, was a Prince much given to Voluptuousness,
and sensual Pleasure, which so wasted his Spirits, that in his old Age he fell
into a kind of Lethargy: to comfort his benumbed Joints he was bound and sowed
up naked in a Sheet, steeped in boiling Aquavitae. The Chyrurgion having made
an end of sowing him, and wanting a Knife to cut off the Thread, took a Wax
Candle that stood lighted by him, but the Flame running down by the Thread,
caught hold on the Sheet; which (according to the nature of Aquavitae) burned
with that Vehemence, that the miserable King ended his days in the Fire.

Ewen the third also, King of Scotland, was a Prince much addicted, or rather
wholly given over to Lasciviousness; insomuch, that he made a Law that himself
and his Successors should have the Maidenhead, or first Nights lodging with
every Woman whose Husband held Land immediately from the Crown; and the Lords
and Gentlemen, of all those whose Husbands were their Tenants or Homagers. This
was, it seems, the Knights Service which men held their Estates by; and
continued in force till the days of Malcolm Conmor, who marrying Margaret,
Sister to our King Edgar Atheling, at her Request abolished the same; and
ordained, that the Tenants, by way of Commutation, should pay unto their Lords
a Mark in Money; which Tribute, the Historians of that Nation say is still in
force.

Roderick the last King of the Goths in Spain, had for the Governor of one of
his Provinces an honorable Person named Count Julian, whom he sent upon an
Embassy to the Moors of Africa, and in the mean time defloured his Daughter
Cana; which the Father took in such indignation, that he procured the Moors
(amongst whom he had gotten much credit) to come over into Spain. This request
they performed, under the Conduct of Musa and Tariffe; and having made a full
Conquest, subjected it to the Great Caliphs, or Mohammedan Emperors. It is
recorded, that at the first coming of Tariffe into Spain, a poor Woman of the
Country, being willingly taken Prisoner, fell down at his feet, kissed them,
and told him, that she had heard her Father, (who was lettered) say, that Spain
should be conquered by a People, whose General should have a Mole on his right
shoulder, and in whom one of his hands should be longer than the other. He, to
animate his Soldiers against the next encounter, uncloathed himself, and
showed the mark, which so encouraged them, that they now doubted not the
Victory. Roderick had in his Army 130000 Foot, and 25000 Horse: Tariffe had
30000 Horse, and 180000 Foot. The Battle continued seven days together, from
morning to night; at last the Moors were victorious. What became of King
Roderick was never known; his Soldiers took one arrayed in the Kings Apparel,
whom, upon examination, they found to be a Shepherd, with whom the King, after
the Discomfiture, had changed clothes. It is recorded also in Rodericus
Toletanus, that before the coming of those Saracens, King Roderick, upon hope
of some Treasure, did open a part of the Palace, of long time forbidden to be
touched, but found nothing but Pictures which resembled the Moors, with a
Prophecy, that whenever the Palace was there opened, the People there
resembled should overcome Spain: and so it happened.

By this former Example, you may see the sad effects of Lust, to which we may
add another of like nature.

Ireland formerly was divided into five Provinces, or petty Kingdoms; namely,
Munster, Connaght, Ulster, Meth, and Leinster. These petty Kings being divided
amongst themselves, became all of them a Prey to Turgesius King of the
Norweigians, who having conquered them, reigned as King. One of these petty
Princes, Omo Caghlen, King of Meth, had a Daughter of renowned Beauty, whom
Turgesius demanded of her Father to serve his Lusts: and he, seeming willing to
condescend to the motion, as if his Blood would be honored thereby, told him,
That besides his Daughter, he had at his disposing many others of more
exquisite Beauties, which should all be ready at command. Turgesius mistrusting
nothing, greedily swallowed this Bait, and desired him with all speed to effect
this meeting, which he promised soon to do; whereupon this politic Prince,
attired in the Habits of Women, a company of young Gentlemen, who durst, for
the common Liberty, adventure their several Lives, and conducted them to the
Tyrant's Bedchamber. And they, according to the directions given them (when
for that little modesty sake he had in him, he had commanded all his Attendants
to avoid the Room) assaulted him, now ready for, and expecting more kind
embraces, and left him dead in the place. The Methian King had by this time
acquainted diverse of the better sort with his Plot, all which, upon a sign
given, rush into the Palace, and put to death all the Norwegians, and other
Attendants of the Tyrant, and so recovered again their former Liberty.

John, King of England, notwithstanding he lived in continual Trouble, yet bent
his Mind to Love and Lasciviousness, attempting the Chastity of the Lady
Matilda, Daughter to the Lord Fitz-Waters; who being as averse to his Desires
as Water to Fire, he banishes her Father and several of her Friends, seizing
upon their large Estates; whereupon she flies, and takes upon her a Monastic
Habit in the Monastery of Little Dunmow in Essex, where he still prosecuted his
Suit; but finding her more contrary to his Desires than ever, he sent a
Messenger unto her, who (because she would not agree to his wicked motion) he
poisoned a boiled or potched Egg against she was hungry, and gave it unto her,
whereof she died. Anno 1213. It happened, that the next Year, King John being
then in France with a great Army, that a Truce was taken betwixt the two Kings,
for the term of five years; and a River or Arm of the Sea being betwixt either
Host, there was a Knight in the English Camp that cried to them of the other
side, willing some one of their Knights to come and Just a Course or two with
him; whereupon, without stay, the Lord Fitz-Water, being on the French part,
made himself ready, ferried over, and getting on Horseback, showed himself
ready to the Face of the Challenger, whom at the first Course he struck so
hard with his great Spear, that Horse and Man fell to the ground; and when his
Spear was broken, he went back again to the King of France: which King John
seeing, by God's Tooth, quoth he, (that was his usual Oath) he were a King
indeed that had such a Knight. The Friends of the Lord Fitz-Water hearing these
Words, kneeled down, and said, O King, it is your Knight, it is Robert
Fitz-Water; whereupon, the next day he was sent for, and restored to the King's
Favor, living in all affluence of Riches and Honor, the space of sixteen
Years afterward. His Father, Walter Fitz-Water, with his Wife Matilda, do lie
interred in Little Dunmow Chancel, under a very fair Monument, though by some
Ruins of the Roof falling upon it the Legs of their Effigies were lately
broken off; there Grandchild Matilda also, in these our late times of
Rebellion, had the Head of her Effigies stricken off as a monument of
Superstition; but since, by the care of my worthy Friend Mr. Burre, who lives
in the Priory, it is restored to the Body again, Anno 1680.

Richard the First, King of England, being employed in his Wars against Philip
King of France, one Fulco a French Priest came unto him, telling him he had
three very bad Daughters, which he wished him to bestow away from him in
Marriage, or else God's Wrath would attend him; when the King denied he had
any Daughter, yes (quoth the Priest) thou cherishest three Daughters, Pride,
Covetousness, and Leachery. The King, apprehensive of his meaning, called his
Lords there attending, and said, my Lords, This Hypocrite has found that I
have three Daughters, Pride, Covetousness, and Leachery, which he would have me
bestovv forth in Marriage; and therefore (if any such I have) I have found out
most fit Husbands for them all. My Pride I bequeath to the haughty Templers and
Hospitalers, who are as proud as Lucifer himself; my Covetousness I give to the
Monks of the Cisteaux Order, for they covet the Devil and all; but for my
Leachery, I can bestow it no where better than on the Priests and Prelates of
our Times, for therein have they their most Felicity.

King William Rufus was much noted to be a very covetous Prince, and yet we
find in the Chronicles a Story of him which denotes to the contrary; namely,
how that when two Monks, whose Abbot was lately dead, repaired to his Coutt,
and each in large Offers out-vied and over-bad the other, to succeed in the
Abbacy; a third Monk, very sober, and poor in show, accompanying them in their
Business, stood by; whom the King asked what he would give to be made Abbot?
Nothing, said the Monk; for I entered my Profession to be poor, and hitherto
have been, little esteeming the Pomp or Riches of the World: then thou art the
Man, (replied the King) and shall be their Abbot, more worthy in thy Poverty
than they for their Price; and so conferring on him that high Honor, checked
the others to their open Infamy and Reproach.

Another Example of the same King, touching his Pride, take as follows. His
Chamberlain bringing him a pair of new Hose, and he demanding the Price, was
answered, that they cost three Shillings; Away base Fellow (quoth he) are these
beseeming a King? Bring me of a Mark Price: his Servant went, but brought him
another pair of no greater Cost, but told him that they were of the Rate
appointed: wherewith the King was very well pleased.

A strange Change of Religion of the two Dr. Reinolds.
These two Brothers, the one named William, the other John; William was at
first a Protestant of the Church of England, and John trained up in Popery
beyond the Seas. William, out of an honest Zeal to reduce his Brother to this
Church, made a Journey to him; where, on a Conference betwixt them, it so fell
out, that John being overcome by his Brothers Arguments, returned into England,
where he became one of the more strict or rigid sort of the English
Protestants: and William being convinced by the Reasons of his Brother John,
staid beyond the Seas, where he proved a very violent and virulent Papist. Of
which strange Accident, Dr. Alabaster, who had made Trial of both Religions,
and amongst many notable Whimzies had some fine Abilities, made this following
Epigram.

Bella inter geminos plusquam Civilia fratres,
Traxerat ambiguus Religionis apex.
Ille Reformatae fidei pro partibus instat;
Iste Reformandum denegat esse fidem,
Propositis causae rationibus, alterutrinque
Concurrere pares, and cecidere pares.
Quod fuit in verbis, Fratrem capit alteruterque;
Quod fuit in fatis, perdit uterque fidem.
Captivi gemini sine captivante fuerant,
Et victor victi transuga castra petit.
Quod genus hoc pugnae est, ubi victus gaudet uterque
Et tamen alteruter se superasse dolet.
Thus Englished by Dr. Heylin.

In points of Faith, some undetermined Jars,
Betwixt two Brothers kindled Civil Wars:
One for the Churches Reformation stood,
The other thought no Reformation good.
The Points proposed, they traversed the Field
With equal Skill, and both together yield.
As they desired, his Brother each subdues,
Yet such their Fate, that each his Faith did lose:
Both Captives, none the Prisoners thence to guide;
The Victor flying to the vanquished side.
Both joy'd in being conquered, (strange to say)
And yet both mourned because both won the day.
Why the Fish called Tunny is not suffered to be sold at Venice.
THE Story goes, How the Genoa's having seized on a part of Venice, and driven
the Venetians into their Houses, a Woman running to a Window to behold the
Tumult, by chance threw down a Mortar of Brass, which lighting upon the head of
their General, struck him dead to the Earth: whereupon discomfited, the Genoa's
retired in such haste, that they left a number of their men behind them; who
saved themselves for a time by mingling with the Venetians, being not to be
distinguished by Habit, Language, Favor, nor Behavior. At length, all
generally were commanded to ascend an high Tower, where (not unlike as the
Gileadites served the Ephramites) a Sheep being set before them they were
compelled to name it: so being distinguished, (the Name differing in their
Dialect) they were thrown down headlong. The Genoa's having after taken
certain of their Galleys, wherein were the Prime of their Gentry, in Revenge of
that Cruelty, caused them to be cut in pieces and dressed like Tunny, nailing
their hands to the bottom with Scedules of Time containing their Names, and so
sent it thither to be sold; who bought, and had almost devoured it all before
it was discovered. And indeed it is said that this Tunny does in taste much
resemble Flesh, as also in color and solidity; so as it is reported how
certain Merchants being bound to serve the French Army at the Siege of Naples,
with so many Tun of Tunny, and not able to perform it, hearing of a late fought
Battle in Barbary, repaired to the place, and supplied the quantity with man's
Flesh, dressed in the same manner; which proved so over-high a feeding (most
easily converting into the like) that their Bodies broke forth into loathsome
Ulcers, and from that Infection the Disease that takes from them the name. And
Scalliger in his 181 Exercise upon Cardan, and the 19 Section, does also
affirm, that it proceeded not originally from the Impurity of Women, but from
Contraction; and that the Spaniards did first transport these rare Wares from
the Indians, as common among them as the Measels amongst us, and equally
contagious: which seems to confirm the former Assertion, they having been
Man-eaters for the most part.

Of Machamut a Moorish King, of a poisonous Nature.
MR. Purchase in his Pilgrimage relates of one Machamut, a Moorish King, who
deserves mention for one thing, wherein the Sun has scarce beheld his like.
He so accustomed himself to Poisons, that no day passed wherein he took not
some, for else he himself had dyed, (says my Author) as it fares with Amsian
or Opium, the use whereof kills such as never took it, and the Disease such
as have; and beyond that which we read of Mithridates, in the like Practice.
His Nature was transformed into so venmous an Habit, that if he did mean to put
any of his Nobles to Death, he would cause them to be set naked before him; and
chewing certain Fruits in his Mouth, which they call Chofolos and Tambolos,
with Lime made of Shells, by spitting upon him, in one half hour deprived him
of Life: if a Fly sat upon his hand it would presently fall off dead. Neither
was his Love to be preferred to his Hatred, or with Women was his Dealing less
deadly; for, he had three or four thousand Concubines, of whom none lived to
see a second Sun, after he had carnally known them. His Mustachos (or Hair of
his upper Lip) was so long, that he bound it upon his Head, as Women do with an
Hair-lace; and his Beard was white, reaching to his Waste. Every day when he
arose, and when he dined, fifty Elephants were brought into the Palace to do
him reverence on their Knees, accompanied with Trumpets and other Music.

Caelius Rhodiginus mentions the like of a Maid thus nourished with Poisons;
her Spittle (and other Humors coming from her) being deadly: such also as lay
with her carnally, presently dying. Avicenna has also a like Example of a man,
whose Nature, infected with a stronger Venom, poisoned other venomous
Creatures, if any did bite him. And when a great Serpent was brought for Trial,
he had by the biting thereof a two days Fever, but the Serpent died; the other
did not harm him.

A notable Imposture of one Margaret Ulmer, at Elsing in Germany.
ABout the Year of our Lord 1545. there was one Margaret Ulmer, the Daughter of
John Ulmer, a single Woman, who thorough grievous Sickness, and extremity of
Pain, had her Belly so exceedingly swelled, that it over-shadowed her Face, and
in compass was more than ten hands breadth: she said that she fed diverse living
Creatures in her Belly, yet neither did she eat nor drink, but took only some
Apothecaries Confections, and used the smell of Herbs and Flowers. There was
heard by those that stood by the Bed where she lay, the Voices of diverse living
Creatures; as, the crowing of Cocks, the cackling of Hens, the gagling of
Geese, the barking of Dogs, the bleating of Sheep, the braying of Asses, the
grunting of Swine, the bellowing of Cattle, and the neighing of Horses. She
voided Serpents and Worms of a mavelous greatness, about fifty in number.
When the Report hereof was spread abroad, not only in the Towns and Villages
adjoining, but almost thorough all Germany, multitudes resorted to the place to
see the Miracle, and beheld the Maid with no less Wonder then Compassion, who
also gave her much Money. The advice of diverse Physicians and Chyrurgions was
asked; and at last the Physicians of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and of
Ferdinand King of the Romans, and of Hungary, came thither, accompanied with
diverse Noblemen and Gentlemen, who notwithstanding found no deceit therein.
Thus she continued for the space of almost four years. Her Torments seemed to
increase more and more upon her. At last the chief Magistrate of the City sent
for her Parents, and asked them whether they desired to have their Daughter
delivered from so great Torments, by the Physicians making incision into her
Belly? Her Father being a plain man, answered: that he was willing to leave his
Daughter to God's Providence, and to lawful Remedies of Physicians. But the
Mother (being guilty of the Deceit) said, that she would not have them to
attempt any thing to the endangering of her daughters life; adding moreover,
that she would pray that God's Vengeance might light upon them, if her Daughter
miscarried under their hands.

Yet some were sent to the Maid, to mind her, that they had many times craved
help of Physicians, that now there was a proffer made of their help, who, by
God's assistance, might either wholly free her from her Distemper, or, at
least, assuage the violence of it: But she (being instructed of her Mother)
answered, That she, with a willing mind, would patiently suffer what it should
please God to inflict upon her: that she desired not any Physic; but that as
for the space of four years she had undergone the extremity of her Pains, so
she was still willing to bear the Cross which God had laid upon her, till it
pleased him to remove it; hoping that she should still be as able to bear the
violence of her Disease as hitherto she had been. But the Magistrate of Elsing,
being better pleased with her Father's Answer, sent a Dr. of Physic, with two
Chirurgions, and a Midwife, to search the Maidens Belly by Incision. These came
to her, and searching her Belly, found it stuffed with Clouts very cunningly,
and with Pillows, and such like Materials, with diverse Hoops, wherewith her
Belly was made round, she crying out all the while; and when all these were
removed, they saw the Maiden stark naked, with as well a compact, and as fair a
Body as might be. When now the Deceit was discovered, the Parents, with the
Daughter, and all they which were accessory (with whom in the Night, whilst
others slept, she made good cheer) were carried to Prison, and afterward put
to the Rack. The counterfeit Belly was brought to the Townhouse, and there
showed to the Burgo-masters; and the Maids Mother was found to be a Witch, who,
by the Devils help, had caused those strange noises, which seemed to proceed
out of the Maids Belly; and upon strict examination, she confessed, that she
had done all these things by the Devils persuasion and help, for Gain-sake, all
these four years; for which she was condemned by the Judge, had first her Neck
broke, and afterward was openly burned: The Daughter had her Cheek burned
through with an hot iron, and was condemned to perpetual Imprisonment. The
Father (who took his Oath that he was deceived by his Wife and Daughter, even
till that day wherein this wicked Fact was discovered) was acquitted, and
freely dismissed: the other Accessories were banished, and some of them that
were most guilty, were otherwise punished.

Of People long-lived, who have had their Teeth and Excrements of Hair renewed.
MR. Purchase in his Pilgrimage relates, that whilst the Portugals were busy
in building a Fort in the Kingdom of Decan, belonging to Asia, that there came
a certain Bengalan to the Governor, which had lived, as he affirmed, three
hundred thirty five years. The old men of the Country testified, that they had
heard their Ancestors speak of his great Age, and himself had a Son fourscore
and ten years old, and not at all Book-learned, yet was a speaking Chronicle of
those passed Times. His Teeth had sometimes fallen out, others growing in their
places; and his Beard, after it had been very hoary, by degrees returned into
his former blackness. About an hundred years before that time, he had altered
his Pagan Religion into the Arabian or Moorish. For this his Miraculous age,
the Sultans of Cambaya had allowed him a Stipend to live on, the continuance of
which he sought, and did obtain of the Portugals.

Friar Joano dos Santos, tells a Story of one who was alive Anno 1605, of whom
the Bishop of Cochin had sent men to inquire, who by diligent search found that
he was then 380 years old, and had married eight times; the Father of many
Generations. They said his Teeth had thrice fallen out, and were thrice
renewed; his hair thrice hoary, and as often black again. He could tell of
nineteen successive Kings which reigned in Horan his native Country in Bengala.
He was also born a Gentile and after turned Moor, and hoped (he said) to dye a
Christian, rejoicing to see a Picture of St Francis, saying (as the Friar tells
us) such a man, when he was twenty five years old, had foretold him that long
life.

Nic-di Conti says he saw a Bramane three hundred years old.

But to come nearer to our home, Mr. Morison reports of the Irish Countess of
Desmond, that she lived to the age of a hundred and forty Years, being able to
go on foot four or five miles to the Market Town, and using weekly so to do in
her last Years: and not many years before she died she had all her Teeth
renewed.

He also tells of one Jemings a Carpenter, in Beverly, a Town of Holdernes in
England, whom the men of those Parts reported to have lived a hundred and
twenty years, and that he married a young Woman some few years before his
death, by whom (being of good Fame) he had four Children; and that his eldest
Son by his first Wife, then living, was a hundred years old or thereabouts, but
was so decrepid, as he was rather taken for the Father than the Son.

King James going a Progress into Hereford-shire, the ingenious Sergeant Hoskin
gave him an Entertainment, where he provided ten aged People to dance the
Morris before him, all of them making up more than a thousand years; so that
what was wanting in one was supplied in another. A Nest of Nestors (says Mr.
Fuller) not to be found in another place.

In the Year 1634. Thomas Earl of Arundel (a great Lover of Antiquities in all
kinds) brought out of the Country, unto King Charles the First, an old man
named Thomas Parre, Son of John Parre, born at Alberbury, in the Parish of
Winnington in Shrop-shire, who lived to be above a hundred and fifty Years of
Age, verifying his Anagram.

Thomas Parre.
Most rare hap.
He was born in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, 1483. and toward his
latter end slept away most part of his time; being thus charactered by an
Eyewitness of him.

From Head to Heel, his Body had all over,
A quick-set, thick-set, natural hairy Cover.
Having been at Westminster about two Months, change of Air and Diet (better in
it self, but worse for him) with the trouble of many Visitants or Spectators
rather, are conceived to have accelerated his Death; which happened November the
15. 1634. and was buried in the Abbey Church at Westminster, all present at his
Burial, doing Homage to this aged Thomas de temporibus.

There was (if not still) living in Northumberland a Scottish Minister named
Michael Vivan, a Person who may give just matter of Admiration both to the
present and future Ages; as by the perusing of this ensuing Letter may appear:
written by a Person of Quality to Dr. Fuller, and by him inserted into his
England's Worthies.

THere is an Acquaintance of mine, and a Friend of yours, who certified me of
your desire of being satisfied of the truth of that Relation I made concerning
the old Minister in the North. It fortuned in my Journey to Scotland, I lay at
Alnwick in Northumberland, one Sunday, by the way; and understanding from the
Host of the House where I lodged, that this Minister lived within three miles
of that place, I took my Horse after Dinner, and rid thither to hear him
preach, for my own satisfaction. I found him in the Desk, where he read unto us
some part of the Common Prayer, some of Holy David's Psalms, and two Chapters,
one out of the Old, the other out of the New Testament, without the use of
Spectacles: The Bible out of which he read the Chapters was a very small
printed Bible. He went afterward into his Pulpit, where he prayed and preached
unto us about an hour and half. His Text was, Seek you the Kingdom of God, and
all hings shall be added unto you. In my poor Judgment, he made an excellent
good Sermon, and went clearly through without the help of any Notes. After
Sermon, I went with him to his House, where I proposed these several following
Questions to him. Whether it was true the Book reported of him, concerning his
Hair? whether or no he had a new set of Teeth come? whether or no his Eyesight
ever failed him? and whether, in any measure, he found his strength renewed
unto him? He answered me distinctly to all these, and told me, he understood
the News-book reported his Hair to become a dark brown again, but that is
false; he took his Cap off, and showed me it; It is come again like a Child's,
but rather flaxen, than either brown or gray. For his Teeth, he has three come
within these two years, not yet at their Perfection; while he bred them he was
very ill. Forty years since he could not read the biggest print without
Spectacles, and now (he blesses God) there is no print so small but he can
read without them. For his strength, he thinks himself as strong now as he has
been these twenty years. Not long since, he walked to Alnwick to dinner, and
back again, six North-Countrey miles. He is now an hundred and ten years of
age, and ever since last May, a hearty Body, very cheerful, but stoops much He
had five Children, after he was eighty years of age, four of them lusty Lasses,
now living with him, the other died lately; his Wife yet hardly fifty years of
age. He writes himself Machel Vivan, he is a Scottish-man, born near Aberdeen.
I forget the Towns name where he is now Pastor, he has been there fifty years.

Windsor, 28 Sept. 1657. Your assured loving Friend THOMAS ATKIN.


An Example of Divine Vengeance pursuing Sinners.
IN the Year 1614. ten Englishmen having received the Sentence of Death for
their several Crimes, at the Sessions House at the Old-Bayly in London, had
their Execution respited by the entreaty of the East India Merchants, upon
Condition that they should be all banished to Souldania-Bay, to the end (if
they could find any peaceable abode there) they might discover something
advantageous to their Trade: and this was accordingly done. But two of them,
when they came thither, were taken thence, and carried on the Voyage: one whose
Surname was Duffield, by Sir Thomas Row, that Year sent Ambassador to the
Great Mogol; that Fellow thus redeemed from a most sad Banishment, was
afterward brought back again into England by that noble Gentleman, and here,
being entrusted by him, stole some of his Plate, and run away: another was
carried on the Voyage likewise, but what became of him afterward is not known:
so that there remained eight, which were there left with some Ammunition and
Victual, with a small Boat to carry them to and from a very little uninhabited
Island lying in the very mouth of that Bay, a place for their retreat and
safety from the Natives on the Main. The Island called Pen-guin Island,
probably so named at first by some Welsh-man, in whose Language, Pen-guin
signifies a White-head; and there are many great lazy Fowls upon and about this
Island, with great cole black Bodies, and very white Heads, called Pen-guins.
The chief man of the eight there left, was sir-named Cross, who took upon him
the name of Captain Cross. He was formerly Yeoman of the Guard to King James:
but having had his Hand in Blood twice or thrice, by men slain by him in
several Duels, and now being condemned to die with the rest, upon very great
Suit made for him he was hither banished with them; whither the Justice of
Almighty God was dispatched after him, as it were in a Whirlwind, and followed
him close at the very heels, and over-took him, and left him not till he had
paid dear for that Blood he had formerly spilt. This Cross was a very stout and
a very resolute man, who quarrelling with, and abusing the Natives, and
engaging himself far amongst them, immediately after, himself, with the rest
were left in that place, many of these Savages being got together, fell upon
him, and with their Darts thrown, and Arrows shot at him, stuck his Body so
full of them, as if he had been larded with Darts and Arrows, making him look
like the Figure of the man in the Almanac, that seems to be wounded in every
part; or like that man described by Lucan, Totum pro vulnere corpus, who was
all Wound, where Blood touched Blood; a just Retaliation of God for his Cruelty
showed unto others. The other seven, the rest of these miserable Banditi, who
were there with Cross, recovered their Boat, and got off the Shore, without any
great hurt; and so rowing to their Island, the Waves running high, they split
their Boat at their landing, which engaged them to keep in that place, they
having now no possible means left to stir thence: And which made their
Condition, whilst they were in it, extremely miserable, it was a place wherein
grew never a Tree, neither for Sustenance, or Shelter, or Shade, nor any thing
beside to help sustain Nature; a place that had never a drop of fresh Water in
it, but what the showers left in the holes of the Rocks. And besides all this,
there were a very great number of Snakes in that Island, so many of those
venomous Worms, that a man could not tread safely in the long Grass which grew
in it, for fear of them. And all these put together, must needs make that place
beyond measure uncomfortable to these most wretched men. To this may be added,
their want of Provision, having nothing but dry Biscuit, and no great quantity
of that; so that they lived with hungry Bellies, without any place fit for
Repose, without any quiet Rest, for they could not choose but sleep in fear
continually. And what outward Condition could make men more miserable than
this? Yet notwithstanding all they suffered, these seven vile Wretches all
lived to be made Examples afterward of Divine Justice: for after they had
continued in, and endured this sad place for the space of five or six Months,
and they were grown all even almost mad, by reason of their several pressing
Wants and Extremities, it pleased God by Providence to bring an English Ship
into that Road, returning for England: four of these seven men being impatient
of any more hours stay there, immediately after that Ship was come in, made a
Float with the ruins of their split Boat, which they had saved together, and
with other Wood which they had gotten thither, and with ravell'd and untwisted
Boat-ropes, fastened, as well as they could, all together, (for there are no
such sudden Teachers and Instructors as Extremities are.) These four got upon
the Float, which they had thus prepared, and poizing it as well as they could
by their several weights, hoped by the benefit of their Oars, and strength of
the Tide (that then ran quick toward the Ship newly arrived) they might recover
it; but this their Expectation failed them: for, it being late in the day when
they made this Attempt, and they not discovered by the Ship which then road a
good way up in the Bay, before they could come up near unto her, the Tide
returned, and so carried them back into the Main Sea, where they all miserably
perished. The day following, the Ship sent a Boat to the Island, which took
those three, yet surviving, into her, as the other four might have been, if
they could but have exercised their Patience for one Night longer. These
Survivers coming aboard the Ship, related all that had befallen to their
Fellows: but these three, notwithstanding all their former Miseries, when they
were taken into the Ship, behaved themselves so lewdly as they returned
homewards, that they were often put into the Bilbowes, or Ship-stocks, and
otherwise many times punished for their great and several Misdemeanors. At
last the Ship being safely arrived into the Downs, she had not been there at an
Anchor above three Hours, but these three Villains got on shore, and had not
been a shore above three Hours, but they took a Purse, and a very few hours
after were apprehended, and all taken for that Fact; and suddenly after that,
their very foul Story being related to the Lord Chief Justice, and they looked
upon as men altogether incorrigible, and incapable of Amendment by lesser
Corrections, by his Special Warrant were executed upon their former
Condemnation, (for which they were banished not to return hither again, but
never pardoned) near Sandwich in Kent, where they committed the Robbery.

As for the People which inhabit this Bay of Souldania, the Sun shines not upon
any Nation in the whole World more barbarous than they; Beasts in the skins of
Men, rather than Men in the skins of Beasts, (with which they are partly
clothed:) as may appear by their Ignorance, Language, Habit, Diet, with other
things which make them most brutish.

First, for God, the great God of Heaven and Earth, whom generally all the
People in the World, Heathens, Mahometans, Jews as well as Christians, do
confess; they acknowledge none. For their Speech, it is an inarticulate noise
rather than Language, like the clucking of Hens, or gabling of Turkies; when
they walk, they go in rank one after the other, as Kine in Summer many times
do, when they come home to the Pail; or as Wild-Geese fly in Ranks, and as they
fly make a noise; so these walking together, gabble from the first to the last
in the Company, as if all spoke, but none answered. Their Habits are their
Sheeps-skins undrest, thonged together, which cover their bodies to the middle,
with a little flap of the same Skin tied before them, being naked downward, and
when it is cold, keep the woolly, when hotter weather, the fleshy side of those
Skins next to their Bodies. Their Ornaments and Jewels, are Bullocks or
Sheeps-guts, full of Excrement, about their Necks: and therefore when any
strangers buy their Cattle, and kill them, they will beg again their Guts to
adorn themselves. And at other times, when hunger pincheth them, they will sit
down upon some Hillock, and shaking out some of that filthy pudding out of the
Guts they wear about their Necks, bowing and bringing their Mouths to their
Hands, almost as low as their Knees, like hungry Dogs gnaw and eat the
raw-guts. The Women, as the men, are thus adorned, thus habited, and so dieted.
And (by they way) they carry their sucking Infants under their Skins, upon
their Backs, and their Breasts hanging down like Bag-pipes, they put up with
their hands to their Children, that they may suck them over their shoulders.
Both Sexes make coverings for their Heads, like to Skull-caps, with Cow Dung,
and such like filth, mingled with a little stinking grease, with which they
likewise besmear their Faces, which makes their company unsufferable, if they
get the Wind of you. Yet notwithstanding all this their brutishness, they are
so cunning, and have their Cattle at such command, that when Seamen had bought
any of their Bullocks, (which they would sell for pieces of Brass, Iron-hoops,
or such trifles) if they did not presently knock them down, they would with a
Call make them presently run to them again, and then there is no getting them
out of their hands, by new buying them, so that oftentimes they sell one Beast
two or three times over.

And now that these People will be hardly brought to leave their brutishness,
may appear by this Story. About three years before those wretched Persons were
carried thither, that we spoke of before, it happened that one of the
East India Company's Ships returning thence, and arriving at this Harbor,
after a little stay, when she was ready to set sail for England, and having
then two of those Savages aboard, her Commander resolved to bring them both
home with him, thinking that when they had got some English here, they might
discover something of their Country, which could not be known before. These
poor wretches being thus brought away, very much against both their minds, one
of them (merely out of extreme fullenness, though he was very well used) died
shortly after they put to Sea; the other, who called himself Cooree, lived, and
was brought to London, and there kept for the space of six months, in Sir
Thomas Smith's House (then Governor of the East India Company) where he had
good Diet, good Clothes, good Lodging, with all other fitting Accommodations:
Now one would think that this Wretch might have conceived his present, compared
with his former condition, an Heaven upon Earth: but he did not so, though he
had to his good Entertainment made for him a Chain of bright Brass, an Armor,
Breast, Back, and Headpiece, with a Buckler of Brass, his beloved Metal, and
which his Contrymen esteemed far above Gold, yet all this contented him not;
for never any seemed to be more weary of ill usage, than he was of Courtesies,
none ever more desirous to return home to his Country than he: For when he had
learned a little of our Language, he would daily lie upon the Ground, and cry
very often thus, in broken English, Cooree home go, Souldania go home go. And
not long after when he had his desire, and was returned home, he had no sooner
set footing on his own shore, but presently he threw away his Clothes, his
Linen, with all other Covering, and got his Sheepskins upon his back, Guts
about his neck, and his Cow-turd Cap upon his head. Thus you see what manner of
Life they affect, the name of Cleanliness not being known amongst them. And for
their Religion, Cooree being asked by the Minister of the Ship, who was their
God? he, lifting up his hands, in his bad English said thus; England God, great
God; Souldania no God. And so much for Souldania.

Of two famous Virago's, the one a French-woman, called Joan of Arc, or, La
Pucelle de Dieu, the other a Biscainer, called Catarina d' Arcuso.
JOAN of Arc, was Daughter to one James of Arc, dwelling in Domremy, near
Vaucaleurs in France; in her younger years, she tended Sheep under her Father,
at which time France groaned under the Victorious Arms of the English, John
Duke of Bedford being then Regent thereof, in the minority of our King Henry
the sixth, who was crowned King of France in Paris, the principal City. Charles
the seventh having little left to him of that spacious Kingdom but only the
Title. He being at this Exigent, this young Maid, then about eighteen years of
age, presented her self unto him at Chinon, bidding him not to faint, but
constantly affirmed, that God had sent her to deliver the Realm of France from
the English yoke, and restore him to the fullness of his Fortunes. At first, it
seems, she was not much credited, (though judged to be set on by the Nobles)
but when the Wise of both sorts, as well Clerks as Soldiers, had sifted her
with manifold Questions, she continuing in her first Speech so steadfastly,
uttering nothing (says Serres) but that which was modest, chaste, and holy,
that honor and faith were given to her Sayings. An old Woman directed her. She
soon armed her self like a man, and required to have that Sword which hung in
St. Katharines Church of Fierebois in Tourain. This demand increased their
admiration of her, for such a Sword was found among the old Donaries, or Votive
Tokens of that Church. Thus warlikely arrayed, she rides to Blois, where Forces
and fresh Victuals lay for the Relief of Orleans, then closely besieged, and
ready to yield unto the English: She joining with the Admiral and Marshal of
France, they entered the City in despite of the Besiegers.

This greatly encouraged the fainting French; Joan, the Maid of God, (so
Superstition had now entitled her) having thus fortunately begun, writes this
Letter to the English General before the City.

King of England, Do reason to the King of Heaven, for his Blood Royal, yield
up to the Virgin the Keys of all the good Cities which you have forced. She is
come from Heaven to reclaim the Blood Royal, and is ready to make a Peace, if
you be ready to do reason: Yield therefore, and pay what you have taken. King
of England, I am the chief of this War: wherefore I encounter your men in
France, I will chase them, will they or no. If they will obey, I will take them
to mercy. The Virgin comes from Heaven to drive you out of France. If you will
not obey, she will cause so great a stir as the like has not been this
thousand years in France. And believe certainly, that the King of Heaven will
send to her, and her good men of Arms, more force than you can have. Go in Gods
name into your Country, be not obstinate, for you shall not hold France of the
King of Heaven, the Son of St. Mary, but Charles shall enjoy it, the King and
lawful Heir to whom God has given it. He shall enter Paris with a goodly
Train. You William de la Pole Earl of Suffolk, John Lord Talbot, Thomas Lord
Scales, Lieutenants to the Duke of Bedford, and you Duke of Bedford, terming
your self Regent of the Realm of France, spare innocent Blood, and leave
Orleans in liberty. If you do not reason to them whom you have wronged, the
French will do the goodliest Exploit that ever was done in Christendom.
Understand these News of God and the Virgin.


This Letter was entertained by the English with laughter, and Joan reputed no
better than a Bedlam, or Enchantress. Yet however thus disesteemed, by her
Encouragements and Conduct, the English had Orleans plucked out of their hopes,
and with much loss were driven to raise the Siege. Joan her self was wounded at
one Sally, in which she led, being shot through the Arm with an Arrow. Judge
what she esteemed of that hurt, when she used these admirable and terrible
words, This is a Favor, let us go on; they cannot escape the hand of God; nay,
in all Adventures she was one, and fore-most. In memory of this admirable
Deliverance, they of that City erected a Monument, where Charles the seventh,
King of France, and Joan, the Martial Maid, were represented kneeling in
Armor, elevating their eyes and hands to Heaven, in sign of thanks and
acknowledgment of so great a benefit.

Still the Martial Maid goes on victoriously; she and the Duke of Alanzon
recover Jergeaux from the Earl of Suffolk, forcing it by Assault, slaying one
of the Earl's Brothers, and taking the Earl himself Prisoner; and, having their
numbers augmented, encounter the Lord Talbot (that terror of France) at a
Village called Patay, whom they discomfit, and slew of the English above a
thousand. The Lords, Talbot, the glory of the English, Scales, Hungerford, and
Sir Thomas Rampestone were taken Prisoners. These Losses shook the whole
Fabric of the English greatness in France, and caused the Revolt of many Towns
to King Charles, who, encouraged by these Successes, marches into Champaigne,
where, by composition, he takes the Cities of Troys and Auxerre; Chalons and
Rheims yield themselves; in which last, according to the Maids direction, he
was solemnly crowned King.

But now, our Martial Maids good Fortune having ascended the Meridian, began to
decline; for though by her subtle practices King Charles was possessed of the
Town of St Dennis, a neighbor to Paris, then in possession of the English, she
with the Duke of Alanzon, going with their Forces to attempt it, the English
gave them so rough an Encounter, that Joan her self was wounded, and the rest,
with much slaughter, driven to fall off. Afterward, attempting to raise the
Siege of Champaigne, ingirt by the English, she with some Forces entered in; but
soon after sallying out, their Troops were beaten, and Joan her self taken
Prisoner by John of Luxemburgh, a Burgundian Knight, who, for the value of ten
thousand pound Turnois, and three hundred Crowns yearly Rent, delivered her to
the Regent, and he to the Bishop of Beauvoirs, in whose Diocese she was taken;
by whom, being legally examined, she was, for Sorcery, Bloodshed, and
unnatural use of man-like Apparel, condemned to dye; yet notwithstanding, upon
her solemn abjuring of such her lewd Practices, was pardoned her Life; till
again perjuriously relapsing, though acknowledging her self a Strumpet, and
feigning her self to be with Child, she deservedly underwent that Punishment
which she sought to delay, being burnt to death at the City of Roan.

Many sundry Opinions were conceived of this Woman, some judging her
miraculously raised up by God for the good of France; others, that she was but
a mere Impostor. We will suspend our Judgment herein, and refer you to the
Epitaph which we find thus written on her.

Here lies Joan of Arc, the which
Some count Saint, and some count Witch:
Some count man, and something more,
Some count Maid, and some a Whore:
Her Life's in question, wrong or right,
Her Death's in doubt, by Laws or Might:
Oh, Innocence! take heed of it,
How thou too near to Guilt do sit.
(Mean time France a Wonder saw,
A Woman rule, against Salique Law)
But, Reader, be content to stay
Thy Censure till the Judgment-day,
Then shall thou know, and not before,
Whether Saint, Witch, Man, Maid, or Whore.
Of Catarina d' Arcuso.
CAtarina d' Arcuso was born in Biscay in Spain, and was in her Childhood bred
up in a Monastery of Biscay, her own Country, where she wore a Nuns Habit; but
repenting of that Life before she made Profession, she went away; and fancying
to live like a man, fled disguized from her Father's House, and went to the
Court of Spain, where, for some time, she served in the Habit of a Page;
Afterward, she was minded to go to Sevil, and from thence to the West Indies,
where, at first she served as a Manservant to certain Merchants, but within a
little while, upon occasion of a quarrel which befell her, she was fain to fly,
and betook her self to the Life of a Soldier, being naturally much inclined to
Arms, and Martial Affairs. This course she followed a great while in those
Parts, being engaged in several Actions, wherein she always gave good account
of her self as a Soldier; as also in sundry civil Quarrels, so that she got
the repute of a gallant man; but because she wanted a Beard, they believed and
called her Eunuch. Among other Battles, she was in a dangerous one, wherein,
her Company being routed, and the Ensign left to the Enemies, she effected by
her valor, that she staid her Companions flight, re-incourag'd them against
the Enemies, and leading them on valorously, recovered the lost Ensign with her
own hand, killing him that had taken it; for which Service, she remained
Ensign-bearer of that Company. At length, Suspicions arising that she was a
Woman, the matter came to be discovered, in a great Quarrel which she had;
wherein, after many proofs of her Courage, she was mortally wounded, and to
save her self from the Court of Justice, which persecuted her, she was
constrained to put her self into the Bishop's hands; to whom she confessed the
former passages of her Life, saying, that she was a Woman, and what she had
done was not out of any evil end, but only through an inclination which she had
to a Military Life; and for proof hereof, she desired the Bishop he would cause
her to be searched, which was accordingly done, and the Matrons and Midwives
found her a Woman. The Bishop put her into a Monastery, and because 'twas known
she had been a Nun, but doubtful whether she was professed or no, he kept her
there till certainty came from her own Country that she was not: Wherefore,
being set at liberty, and unwilling to become a Nun, but rather inclined to a
Military Life, she returned into Spain, where, petitioning the King for a
Reward of her Military Service, (her case being examined, as the custom is, in
the Council, and by the way of Justice) she obtained of the King eight hundred
Crowns of yearly Revenue, there in the Indies, being styled in the Patents L'
Alfiere, or Ensign-bearer, and having Liberty given her to live as a man, and
to serve in the Wars in any of the Kings Dominions, without molestation.
Hereupon she came into Italy, running several Adventures by the way, to beseech
the Pope for some favors in reference to her course of Life, which, by the
mediation of many principal Persons, she did obtain: and where my Author (Peter
della Valle) did both behold and discourse with her, she being then aged
betwixt thirty five or forty years; of a large and portly stature for a Woman,
wearing clothes and a Sword after the Spanish manner. What became of her
afterward, I am ignorant of, only thus far of her passed Life, out of the
foresaid Peter della Valle, in his Travels to the East Indies, page 318, 319.

That the Italians are very revengeful; an Example out of Howel 's History of
Naples.
IN the ancient City of Nocera, there were three young Noblemen, called
Conrado, Cesare, and Alexandro, the eldest was Prince of the Place. Now there
was, and is still in Nocera, a strong Castle, where the Prince Conrado had a
Garrison, whereof he made a Confident of his Captain, and Keeper of the Castle;
The Prince most of his time kept in his Country House, and his Brothers also;
but sometimes he would come and lie some days in his Castle. It fortuned, that
his Captain having a comely Woman to his Wife, the Prince fell in love with
her, and never left till he enjoyed her, which he had done often to the
knowledge of her Husband, who, upon occasion thereof, was still hammering in
his head how to be revenged of him, which at last he brought to pass on this
wise. The Prince being at his Countrey-house, the Captain sent him word that
there were two wild Boars discovered in the Forest hard by, therefore if he
and his two Brothers would come such a day with their Dogs, he doubted not but
they should find very Princely sport; so Conrado came with his second Brother,
Cesare, but Alexander could not come till two days after. Against their
coming, the Captain had provided a fitting Supper for the Prince and his
Brother, who had brought another Nobleman with him to partake of the Sport;
the Prince and the said Nobleman lodged in the Castle, but Cesare lay in the
Town. The Captain was wonderful officious to attend the Prince to his Chamber,
but having confederated with the chiefest of the Garrison, in the dead of the
Night they rushed into the Chamber, and the first thing they did, they chopped
off his Genitories, then his head, which they put to stand on a Window, and
quartered the rest of his Body. This being done very sisilently, in the morning
betimes they sent in the Prince his name for his second Brother to come in all
haste; who being come, the Captain waited on him to his Brother's Chamber,
where the first object he beheld was Conrado's head upon a Window, and his
Members quartered, and strewn up and down the room: Ah! said Cesare, Is this
the wild Boar you writ of? Yes, answered the Captain, but I writ to you of two;
so they fell upon him also, and made the like Sacrifice of Revenge upon him.
This being done, the Captain barred up the Gates, and going upon the Walls of
the Castle, he sent for the chief of the Town, and made a Speech unto them, in
what slavery they lived under Conrado, therefore if ever they desired liberty,
there was a fair opportunity offered now, because he had Conrado in his
custody, and he could do with him what he pleased. But the Citizens would
hearken to no such motion, but sent speedy word to Alexander, the younger
Brother, who coming with some Country Forces, the City joined with them, and
beleaguered the Castle. The Captain finding his case to be desperate, takes his
Wife first on a high Turret, and hurled her down amongst them, then his
Children, and afterward murdered himself, in the Eye of all the City.

Spanish Pride exemplified, in a Story taken out of Sir Thomas Row's Voyage to
East India.
ABout the Year 1616, there came to the English Factory at Surat (where Sir
Thomas Row's Chaplain then was) a most valiant Portugal, (if you will believe
all what he related to them of himself) for he told them he was by birth an
Hidalgo, which signifies in Spanish, the Son of some body, or no ordinary man,
but a Gentleman of Spain, and that he came from thence as a Companion to the
King of Spain's Viceroy, sent to Goa, and himself was called the Knight of the
Golden Rapier, though to outward appearance his Person promised little Valor,
being quantus tantus, tantillus, (says my Author) a very poor little dwarfish
man. But he told them, that suddenly after his coming to Goa, he was honorably
invited into the Field, there to fight a single Combat with a very gallant man
of that place, but he soon left him there dead: and having done so, the
Viceroy prevented him with a Pardon for that Fact before he asked it, but
willing him withal, now he had been sufficiently tried, to confine his Rapier
to it is Scabbard. Then he told them further, that he could not long after live
quietly there, but was provoked again by a Man of high Resolution, unto a
second Encounter, when he had the like Success as before, in killing his
Adversary. The Viceroy now was very angry with him; but, upon much Entreaty,
as he said, pardoned him a second time: upon the receipt of which Favor, he
told them, that he was then resolved to throw away his Rapier, to get into a
Religious House, and there to remain the residue of his days a Convertado or
Penitent: but the Viceroy could not be long without his Company, and therefore
to gain it, restored him again into his former Favor; but for himself, he was
still so unhappy (the fame of his great Valor being spread abroad) as that he
could not long enjoy that Peace and Quiet which he now so much desired, but
received a third Challenge from a very gallant and very valiant man, as he
described him, a man big enough to beat a Goliath; and then further told them,
that his Honor was ever more dear to him than his Life, and therefore
notwithstanding the loss of the Viceroy's Favor, and what else might happen,
he entered the Lists with him; and though he found him the stoutest Adversary
that ever he opposed, yet after a long Conflict this little Knight killed that
great Giant, and left him dead there likewise: which done, he (not daring to
return any more to Goa) told them, that he came naked out of the Field as they
saw him, with no Ornaments about him, (as my Author assures us) either fit to
make him a Viceroy's Companion, or any Weapon fit to dub him Knight of the
Golden Rapier.

When this Rhodomantadist had ended his perilous Story, it being Dinnertime,
the Merchants bid him to sit down with them and eat, which he did, laying about
him more valiantly than ever he had done before in the Field, giving the Meat
many a Cut, and eating as if he had been more than half starved. This was more
savory Victuals than that which his Fellow Rhodomantadist spoke of, when he
said, Go to my Cook, and tell him, it is my Command, that he spit me
immediately a dozen and half of Demicanon, larded with Pikes, Muskets, and
Halberds, which I have taken from my Enemies in pitched Battles; and let there
be the Bandileers of a Foot-Company to hang about instead of Sawsages: having
done this, let him put over the Grid-iron, and broil me three or four dozen of
Carbines, with a score or two of Pocket Pistols, fried with Brimstone, and
Saltpeter Sauce. And it seems such kind of Victuals as this was for a good
space the Diet of our Spanish Soldier, notwithstanding his being an Hidalgo,
and Knight of the Golden Rapier.

There he continued with them for some few days, but after, when his Hunger was
well satisfied and his Spirits refreshed, he began to take some Exception
against his place at the Table, because he eat at the lower end thereof;
saying, that the Company there were but Factors Servants, but he was a
Gentleman, and therefore his due place was higher at the Board; but then
correcting himself, he said, that it was not to be much considered where he
sat, for his place made the upper end of the Table wherever he was placed;
thus you see, according to our English Proverb, he had a proud Heart and a
Beggar's Purse: but not long after, this Don Quixot being weary of his stay
with them, having a greatmind to ramble further, told the Company, that he
being an Hidalgo, it was very dishonorable for him to take Entertainment upon
the terms he had it, and therefore desired them to make a little Purse for him,
on which he would live as long as he could, and then creep into some desert
place, and there repent and dye; which his Request the Merchants granted, and
so departed this Knight Errant, being seen half a year after at the Mogol's
Court: no doubt but when his Money was spent, and hunger pinching him, put his
Wits upon the Tenter-hooks to provide for his Belly, which otherwise than by
Industry does but

Delude the Throat by swallowing empty Fare,
And for affected Food devour the Air;
So dream of Feasts, and with an idle Jaw,
Do with their Teeth fantastically chaw.
A mirthful Conceit of Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy.
THIS Duke, at the Marriage of Elionara, Sister to the King of Portugal, at
Bruges in Flanders, which was solemnized in the deep of Winter, whenas, by
reason of unseasonable Weather, he could neither hawk nor hunt, and was now
tired with Cards, Dice, etc. and such other domestical Sports, or to see Ladies
dance; with some of his Courtiers, he would in the Evening walk disguised all
about the Town. It so fortuned, as he was walking late one Night, he found a
Country-Fellow dead drunk, snorting on a Bulk; he caused his Followers to bring
him to his Palace, and there stripped him of his old Clothes, and attired him
after the Court Fashion; when he waked, he and they were ready to attend upon
his Excellency, persuading him he was some great Duke. The poor Fellow admiring
how he came thither, was served in state all the day long: After Supper he saw
them dance, heard Music, and the rest of those Court-like Pleasures; but late
at night, when he was well tipled, and again fast asleep, they put on his old
Clothes, and so conveyed him to the place where they first found him. Now the
Fellow had not made them so good sport the day before, as he did when he
returned to himself; all the Jest was, to see how he looked upon it. In
conclusion, after some little Admiration, the poor man told his Friends he had
seen a Vision, constantly believed it, would not otherwise be persuaded, and so
the Jest ended.

Memorials of Thomas Coriat, the famous Odcombian Traveller.
MR. Thomas Coriat was born at Odcombe, nigh Evil in Somersetshire, and bred
at Oxford, where he attained to admirable fluency in the Greek Tongue: he was a
Man in his Time, Notus nimis omnibus, very sufficiently known; one who seemed
to carry Folly in his Face, the shape of his Head being like a Sugar Loaf
inverted, with the little end before: but such as conceived him Fool ad duo,
and something else ad december, were utterly mistaken; for he drove on no Design,
cared for Coin and Counters alike; so contented with what was present, that he
accounted those men guilty of Superfluity who had more Suits and Shirts than
Bodies, seldom putting off either till they were ready to go away from him.
Noble Prince Henry, King James his Son, allowed him a Pension, and kept him for
his Servant; Sweetmeats and Coriat made up the last Course at all
Court-Entertainments: indeed he was the Courtiers Anvil to try their Wits upon,
and sometimes this Anvil returned the Hammers as hard Knocks as it received,
his Bluntness repaying their Abusiveness.

He being addicted to travel, took a Journey into several places of Europe, and
at his Return made a Book thereof, known by the name of Coriat's Crudities,
printed about the year 1611. being ushered into the World by very many Copies
of excellent Verses, made by the Wits of those times, which made one to say,
that the Porch was more worth than the Palace, the Preface of other men's
mockcommending Verses than the Book it self; however, they did very much
advantage and improve, if not enforce the Sale thereof, doing themselves much
more Honor than him whom they undertook to commend in their several
Encomiasticks. Now because the Book is very scarce, and hard to come by, I
shall give you a Copy of one of their Encomiums, (there being about sixty in
all) by which you may give a guess at the rest.

To the no less learned than wise and discreet Gentleman, Mr. Thomas Coriat, in
some few Months Travels born and brought up to what you see, viz. To be the
delight of a world of noble Wits, to be a shame to all Authors, as the Gout and
Quartane Fever have been to all Physicians. This plain Song sends Christopher
Brook, his poor Friend, to attend the Descant of his famous Book, thorough all
Hands, Tongues, Arts, Trades, Mysteries, and Occupations, whatsoever.

THE subtle Greek, Ulysses, needs must travel
Ten years sorsooth, over much Sand and Gravel,
And many Cities see, and Manners know,
Before there could be writ a Book or two
Of his Adventures; and he traveled still
(Else there are Liars) sore against his Will:
But this rare English-Latin-Grecian,
Of Orators and Authors, the Black Swan,
A voluntary Journey undertook
Of scarce six Months, and yet has writ a Book
Bigger than Homer's, and (though writ in Prose)
As full of Poetry, spite of Homer's Nose.
If he lived now, that in Darius Casket
Placed the poor Iliads, he had bought a Basket
Of richer stuff to intomb thy Volume large,
Which thou (O noble Tom) at thine own charge
Art pleased to print; but thou need'st not repent
Of this thy bitter cost; for thy brave Precedent
Great Caesar is, who penned his own Gests,
And (as some write) recited them at Feasts:
And at's own Charge had printed them they say,
If printing had been used at that day.
The Press has spent the three for one you got
At your Return; What Is that? Poor thing God wot:
Manure this Land still with such Books, my Friend,
And you shall be paid for it in the end;
For I (methinks) see how men strive to carry
This jovial Journal into each Library:
And we, e're long, shall well perceive your Wit,
(Grave learned Bodley) by your placing it.
Therefore lanch forth, great Book, like Ship of Fame,
The Hopewel of Odcombe thou shall have to name.
Explicit Christopherus Brook Eboracensis. Amongst others that writ
mock-commendatory Verses of this Book of Crudities, was John Tailor the
Water-Poet, which, though of the same nature with the other, yet gave great
offense to Mr. Coriat, complaining of him therefore to King James. The Verses
were these:

What matters for the place I first came from,
I am no Dunce-comb, Cox-comb, Odcombe Tom,
Nor am I like a Wool-pack cramb'd with Greek,
Venus in Venice minded to go seek;
And at my back-return to write a Volume
In memory of my Wits Gargantua Column;
The choicest Wits would never so adore me,
Nor like so many Lacquies run before me:
But, honest Tom, I envy not thy state,
There Is nothing in thee worthy of my hate;
Yet I confess thou have an excellent Wit,
But that an idle Brain does harbor it.
Fool thou it at the Court, I on the Thames,
So farewell Odcombe Tom: God bless King James.
Afterward Tailor wrote a Book, called Laugh and be fat; wherein he
paraphrased upon all those Gentlemen that had written on Mr. Coriat's Book;
which Book, by the Command of King James, he procured to be burnt; and
afterward adding more Complaints against Tailor, to the King, his Majesty was
pleased to tell him, that when the Lords of his Honorable Privy Council had
leisure, and nothing else to do, then they should hear and determine the
Differences betwixt Mr. Coriat the Scholar, and John Tailor the Sculler.
Whereupon, Tailor wrote these following Verses to the King.

Most mighty Monarch of this famous Isle,
(Upon the Knees of my submissive mind)
I beg thou will be graciously inclined
To read these Lines my rustic Pen compile.
Know (Royal Sir) Tom Coriat works the wile,
Your high Displeasure on my Head to bring;
And well I wot, the Sot, his Words can file,
In hope my Fortunes headlong down to fling.
The King whose Wisdom through the World did
Did hear the cause of two offending Harlots; (ring,
So I beseech thee (great) Great Britain's King,
To do the like for two contending Varlets.
A brace of Knaves your Majesty implores
To hear their Suits, as Solomon heard Whores.
But to return to more serious matters: Mr. Coriat being desirous to see the
most remote parts of the Earth, in the Year 1612. he shipped himself from London
for Constantinople; where being arrived, he took special notice of all things
there most observable. In this place (as indeed in all places wherever he
came, for his facetious Conceits) he found very great Respect and Encouragement
from Sir Paul Pinder, then and there Ambassador, to whose House he had free and
welcome Access whenever he pleased: being there for some time, he took his
opportunities to view diverse parts in Grecia, and in the Hellespont, as those
two famous Castles of Sestos and Abydos, so celebrated of old by the famous
Musaeus, for the Habitations of Hero and Leander. He also saw what yet remains
of the Ruins of renowned Troy,

So rich, so powerful, that so proudly stood,
That could for ten years space spend so much blood,
Now prostrate, only her old Ruins shows,
And Tombs that famous Ancestors enclose.
The very Ruins of that place being now almost gone to Ruin; the most
remarkable thing there yet remaining, is part of an exceeding great House,
which is continued by Tradition to have been sometimes a part of the famous
Palace of great King Priamus.

From Smyrna he found a passage to Alexandria in Egyyt, where he observed what
remains of the once famed Pyramids, with the other rarities of that famous
Country; which having viewed, he, with one Englishman more, found a Pass by
Sea to Joppa in the Land of Judaea, and not above twenty miles distant from
Jerusalem; whither, accompanied with diverse others, he went, and found it a
very solitary, rocky, uncomfortable way, full of Danger, by reason of the wild
Arabs, who keep about those Passages to make poor Travelers their Prey and
Spoil. But they came safe to Jerusalem, now inhabited by Turks, by them called
Cutts, which signifies Holy; where he was courteously received by the Father
Guardian of the Convent of Franciscan Friars that keep their residence in
Jerusalem, and by some of them were met at the Gate of the City, where they
were compelled by the Turkish Soldiers who keep those Gates, to redeem their
Heads by paying each of them the value of five Shillings, before they could
have admittance into that place; which they had no sooner entered, but they
were presently carried by those Franciscans which met them, to their Convent;
and then the first thing they did to or for them, they washed their Feet, then
set some comfortable Refection before them, and after went in Procession about
a little Cloister they had, praising God that he had brought in Safety those
two Votaries (as they called them) to visit that holy place. A day or two after
they accompanied them to Bethlehem, the place of our Blessed Savior's Birth,
about five English miles distant from Jerusalem; and in the way betwixt these
two places, showed them a Rock, on which, (as they said) the Blessed Virgin sat
down, as she went on a time betwixt Jerusalem and Bethlehem, to give her Babe
suck; and, that the Rock might not feel hard under her, it yielded (as they
told them) to her Body like a Cushion, and that Impression made by her so
sitting remains unto this Day; and is most devoutly kissed by Votaries as
they pass up and down. After this they returning back, were showed all that was
to be seen in and about Jerusalem, as Mount Calvary, (where our Blessed Savior
suffered) that Hill being now enclosed within the Walls of Jerusalem. They
undertook also to show them the place wherein our Blessed Savior was buried;
and after that, upon Mount Olivet, the very place whence he after ascended;
where, upon a Rock there was an Impression of the former part of two Feet, such
as is seen in soft Earth when a man lifts up his Body to leap thence; and these
Franciscans confidently affirmed, and seemed undoubtedly to believe, that it
was as they showed and told them.

At Jerusalem this our Traveller had made upon the Wrist of his left Arm, the
Arms of Jerusalem, a Cross crossed, or Crosslets; and on the Wrist of his
right, a single Cross, made like that which our Blessed Savior suffered on;
and on the sides the Stem or Tree of that Cross these Words written, Via,
Veritas, Vita, some of the Letters being put on the one side of that Stem or
Tree, and some of them on the other; and at the foot of that Cross three Nails,
to signify those which fastened our Savior unto it: All these Impressions were
made by sharp Needles bound together, that pierced only the skin, and then a
black Powder put into the places so pierced, which became presently indelible
Characters, to continue with him so long as his Flesh should be covered with
skin; and they were done upon his Arms so artificially as if they had been
drawn by some accurate Pencil upon Parchment. This poor man would pride himself
very much in the beholding of these Characters, and seeing them, would often
speak those Words of St. Paul to the Galatians, Gal. 6. 17. (far besides the
Apostles meaning) I bear in my Body the marks of the Lord Jesus.

And now having seen what he desired in and about Jerusalem, after his Repast
the Shot came to pay, Money to recompense the Courtesy of the Franciscans, who
being very poor, are unable to entertain People without such Requitals, which
he and his Comrade willingly gave, as having had a good Pennyworth of
Eyesight.

From hence they took their way to take a view of the Dead Sea, so called,
either because the Water therein is still, and moves not; or because no living
Creature is in it, suffocating Birds that fly over it with the Poison of the
ascending Vapors.

-- A name of Right
Imposed, in that to all Birds opposite,
Which when those Air's swift Passengers over fly,
Forgetful of their Wings they fall from high
With out-stretch'd Necks --
Hence they went to have a sight of the River Jordan, which discharges it self
into that most uncomfortable Lake; and from hence they journeyed North-East
thorough those ten Tribes, (which for the Sin of Solomon were rent from his Son
Rehoboam) till they came to Mount Libanus, thence back to Sidon, from whence
they got a Passage by Sea to Alexandretta, now called Scandaroon, where his
English Companion left him, and turned his Face toward England; but our
Greek-travelling-Thomas still coveting to see more of the World, presently took
his way toward Aleppo in Syria, about seventy miles or more distant from
Scandaroon. Here he being kindly received by the English Consul, stayed a time
to gain the Company of a Caravan, which consists of a great mixed multitude of
People from diverse parts, which get and keep together, traveling those parts,
for fear of the Incursions and Violences by Thieves and Murderers, which they
would undoubtedly meet withal if they traveled single, or but few together:
with these he set forwards to that City anciently called Nineveh in Assyria,
which we find in the Prophecy of Jonah was sometimes a great and excellent City
of three days Journey, Jonah 3. 3. but now so exceedingly lessened and lodged
in Obscurity, that Passengers cannot say of it, This was Nineveh, which has
now it is old Name changed, and is called Mozel. From hence they journeyed to
Babylon in Chaldaea, situated upon the River Euphrates, once likewise so
great, that Aristotle called it a Country, not a City; but now it is very much
contracted, and is called Bagdat. From this place they proceeded thorough both
the Armenia's, where he saw the Mountain Ararat, where the Ark of Noah rested
after the Flood, Genesis 8. From hence they went forward toward the Kingdom of
Persia, to Uzspahan, the usual place of Residence for that great King, then
called Sha Abbas, or King Abbas, a victorious Monarch, and though of a bloody
and tyrannick Disposition, yet very kind and respectful to the English. Next
they went to Seras, anciently called Sushan, where the great King Ahasuerus
kept his Royal and most magnificent Court; as you may read in Esther 1. From
hence (for you must think his Shoos were made of running Leather) he journeyed
to Candahor, the first Province North-East under the Subjection of the Great
Mogol, and so to Lahore, the chiefest City but one belonging to that great
Empire, and afterward to Agra, the Mogol's Metropolis or chief City.

And here it is very observable, that from Lahore to Agra, it is 400 English
miles, and that the Country betwixt both these great Cities is rich, being a
pleasant and flat Campania; and the Road-way on both sides all this long
distance, planted with great Trees, which are all the year clothed with
Leaves, exceeding beneficial unto Travelers, for the Shade they afford them in
those hot Climes. This very much extended length of way 'twixt these two
places, is called by Travelers the Long walk, very full of Villages and Towns
for Passengers every where to find Provision.

At Agra our Traveller made an Halt, being there lovingly received in the
English Factory, where he stayed till he had gotten, to his Turkish and
Morisco, or Arabian Languages, some good Knowledge in the Persian, and Indostan
Tongues, in which Study he was always very apt, and in little time showed much
Proficiency. The first of these two, the Persian, is the more quaint; the
other, the Indian, the vulgar Language spoken in East India: in both these he
suddenly got such a Knowledge and Mastery, that it did exceedingly afterward
advantage him in his Travels up and down the Mogol's Territory; he wearing
always the Habit of that Nation, and speaking their Language.

In the first of these, viz. the Persian Tongue, he terwards made an Oration to
the Great Mogol; which, for the rareness of the Language, and the honor of our
great perambulating Traveller, we have transcribed verbatim, as follows.

HAzaret Aallum pennah salamet, fooker Daruces ve tehaungeshta hustam kemia
emadam azwellagets door, ganne az mulk Inglizan: ke kessanaion pethee mushacas
cardand ke wellagets, mazcoor der akers magrub bood, ke mader hamma iezzaerts
dunmast. Sabebbe amadane mari mia boosti char cheez ast an valbe dedane
mobarreckdeedars. Hazaret ke seete caramat ba hamma Trankestan reesedast ooba
tamam mulk. Musulmanan der sheenedan awsaffe. Hazaret daveeda amadam be deedane
astane akdus musharaf geshtam duum bray deedane feelhay Hazaret, kin chumn
iauooar der heech mulk ne dedam sen in bray deedane mamwer daryaee shumma
Gauga, ke Serdare hamma daryaha dumiest. Chaharum even ast, keyer fermawne
alishaion amayet fermayand, ke betwanam der wellayetts Uzbeck raftan ba Shahre
Samarcand, bray zeerat cardan cabbre mobarrec Saheb crawncah awsaffe tang oo
mosacheere oo der tamam aallum, meshoor ast belkder wellagotte uzber eencader
meshoor neest chunan che der mulc Inglisan ast digr, bishare eshteeac daram be
dedane mobarrec mesare Saheb crawnca bray even Saheb, The own samanche foeheer
de shabr stambol boodam, ycaieb cohuu amarat deedam dermean yecush bung nasdec
shaht mascoor coia che padshaw, Eezawiawn che numesh Manuel bood che Saheb
crawnca cush mehmannec aseem carda bood, baad as gristane Sulteri Baiasestra
iange aseem che shuda bood nos dec shahere Bursa, coimache Saheb crawn Sultan
Baiasetra de Zenicera tellaio bestand, oo der cases nahadond even char chees
meera as mulche man ium baneed ta mia, as mulc Room oo Arrac peeada geshta, as
door der even mulc reseedum, che char hasorr pharsang raw dared, beshare derd oo
mohuet casheedam che heech ches der even dunmia even cader mohuet ne casheedast
bray deedune mobarrec dedaret Hasereret awn roos chee be tacte shaugh ne
shaughee musharaf fermoodand.

The same in English.

LOrd Protector of the World, all hail to you. I am a poor Traveller and
World-seer, which am come hither from a far Country, namely England, which
ancient Historians thought to have been situated in the farthest Bounds of the
West, and which is the Queen of all the Islands in the World. The cause of my
coming hither is for four Respects: first, to see the blessed face of your
Majesty, whose wonderful Fame has resounded over all Europe and the Mohammedan
Countries; when I heard of the fame of your Majesty, I hastened hither with
speed, and traveled very cheerfully to see your glorious Court; secondly, to
see your Majesty's Elephants, which kind of Beasts I have not seen in any other
Country; thirdly, to see your famous River Ganges, which is the Captain of all
the Rivers of the World: the fourth is this, to entreat your Majesty that you
would vouchsafe to grant me your gracious Pass, that I may travel into the
Country of Tartaria, to the City of Sarmacand, to visit the blessed Sepulcher
of the Lord of the Corners, (viz. Tamberlain) whose Fame, by reason of his Wars
and Victories, is published over the whole World; perhaps he is not altogether
so famous in his own Country of Tartaria as in England. Moreover, I have a
great desire to see the blessed Tomb of the Lord of the Corners for this cause,
for that when I was at Constantinople I saw a notable old Building in a
pleasant Garden near the said City, where the Christian Emperor that was
called Emanuel made a sumptuous great Banquet to the Lord of the Corners, after
he had taken Sultan Bajazet in Fetters of Gold, and put him in a Cage of Iron.
These four causes moved me to come out of my Native Country thus far, having
traveled on foot through Turkey and Persia; so far have I traced the World into
this Country, that my Pilgrimage has accomplished three thousand miles,
wherein I have sustained much labor and toil, the like whereof no mortal man
in this World did ever perform, to see the blessed Face of your Majesty, since
the first day that you were inaugurated in your glorious Monarchal Throne.

In answer to this Oration, the Mogol told him, that concerning his Travel to
the City of Samarcand, he was not able to do him any good, because there was no
great Amity betwixt the Tartarian Princes and himself; so that his commendatory
Letters would do him no good: also he added, that the Tartars did so deadly
hate all Christians, that they would certainly kill him when he came into
their Country. So that he earnestly dissuaded him from the Journey if he loved
his Life and Welfare; and at last concluded his Discourse with him by a Sum of
Money that he threw down from a Windovv out of which he looked, into a Sheet
tied up by the four Corners, and hanging very near the Ground, a hundred
Roopas, which amounts to the value of twelve pounds and ten Shillings of our
English Money, the Mogol looking upon him as a Derveese, Votary or Pilgrim,
(for so he called him) and such as bear that name in that Country, seem not
much to care for Money; and that was the Reason (as was supposed) that he
gave him not a more plentiful Revvard.

However, this Money was very welcome to Mr. Coriat at that time, for (as he
wrote in a Letter to his Mother) he had then but twenty shillings sterling left
in his purse, by reason (as he wrote) of a mischance he had in one of the Turks
Cities, called Emert, in the Country of Mesopotamia, where a miscreant Turk
stripped him of almost all his Moneys. So that you see our Pilgrim or
World-seer was oftentimes put hard to his shifts, such straights did his
curiosity of seeing bring him often unto, and all for the itch of a little
Fame, which engaged him to the undertakings of those very hard, long, and
dangerous Travels. For he was a man of a very coveting Eye, that could never be
satisfied with seeing, as Solomon says, Eccles. 1. 8. though he had seen very
much, and some were persuaded that he took as much content in seeing, as many
others in the enjoying of great and rare things.

He was a man that had got the mastery of many hard Languages, as, besides the
Latin and Greek which he brought out of England with him, he attained to the
Persian, Arabic, and Indostan Tongues, in which last he was so perfect, that
when at Agra, he lodged at Sir Thomas Row's, the Ambassadour's house, where
there was a Woman, a Laundress belonging to the House, that was so
tongue-valiant, that she would sometimes scold, brawl, and rail from the
Sunrising to the Sunset; one day he undertook her in her own Language, and by
eight of the clock in the morning he so silenced her, that she had not one word
more to speak. Now had he had Wisdom to husband and manage these Languages, as
he had sklil to speak them, he had deserved more Fame in his Generation. But
his knowledge and high seize in several Languages made him not a little
ignorant of himself, he being so covetous, so ambitious of praise, that he
would hear and endure more of it than he could in any measure deserve, being
like a Ship that has too much Sail, and too little Ballast; yet, had he not
fallen into the smart hands of the Wits of those times, he might have passed
better, since many thousands more (and therefore he was not alone in this) have
entered into strange attempts to be talked of.

Now, as he was very ambitious of Fame, so the least seeming undervaluing did
much trouble him; as when, upon a time, one Mr. Richard Steel a Merchant, and
Servant to the East India Company, came from Surat to Mandoa, the place then of
the Mogol's residence, where Mr. Coriat then was with the English Ambassador.
This Merchant had not long before traveled over Land from East India through
Persia, and so to Constantinople, and so for England, who, in his Travel
homeward, had met with Tom Coriat as he was journeying toward East India; Mr.
Steel then told him, that when he was in England, King James (then living)
enquired after him, and when he had certified the King of his meeting him on
the way, the King replied, Is that Foolyet living? which when our Pilgrim
heard, it seemed to trouble him very much, because the King spoke no more nor
no better of him, saying, That Kings would speak of poor men what they pleased.

At another time, when he was ready to depart from Agra, Sir Thomas Row gave
him a Letter, and in that a Bill to receive ten Pounds at Aleppo, when he
should return thither; The Letter was directed to one Mr. Libbaeus Chapman,
there Consul at that time, in which, that which concerned our Traveller was
thus: Mr. Chapman, when you shall hand these Letters, I desite you to receive
the Bearer of them, Mr. Thomas Coriat, with Courtesy, for you shall find him a
very honest poor Wretch; and farther, I must entreat you to furnish him with
ten pounds, which shall be repayed, etc. Our Pilgrim liked the Gift well, but
the Language by which he should receive it, did not at all content him, telling
the Ambassadour's Chaplain, That his Lord had even spoiled his Coursie in the
carriage thereof; so that if he had been a very Fool indeed, he could have said
very little less of him than he did, to write Honest poor wretch! and to say no
more of him, was to say as much as nothing. And furthermore, he then told the
Chaplain, that when he was formerly undertaking his Journey to Venice, a Person
of Honor wrote thus in his behalf unto Sir Henry Wootton, then and there
Ambassador: My Lord, Good wine needs no Bush, neither a worthy man Letters
Commendatory, because whithersoever he comes he is his own Epistle, etc. There
(said he) was some Language on my behalf, but now for my Lord to write nothing
of me by way of Commendation, but Honest poor wretch, is rather to trouble me,
than to please me with his Favor. And therefore afterward his Letter was
phras'd up to his mind. By which may be seen, how tender he was to be touched
in any thing that might in the least measure disparage him. O what pains this
poor man undertook to make himself a Subject for present and after Discourse!
being troubled for nothing at the present, unless with the fear of not living
to reap the fruit he was so ambitious of in all his undertakings.

Now for his Religion, that he was a true Christian Protestant, not tainted
with traveling those Pagan and Mohammedan Countries, may appear by these two
Examples. In each great City where there is a Concourse of People, their
Mosquits or Mohammedan Churches, at the four corners of them, have high and
round, but small Turrets, which are made open with Lights every way, that a man
in them may be easily seen and heard. Now their Moolaas, or devout Priests, do
five times every day ascend unto the tops of those high Turrets, whence they
proclaim, as loudly as they can possibly speak, their Prophet Mahomet thus in
Arabian, La alla illa alla, Mahomet Resul-alla, that is, There is no God but
one God, and Mahomet the Messenger from God. Upon a time, Tom Coriat, when
their Moolaa was to cry as aforesaid, he got upon an high place directly
opposite to one of those Priests, and contradicted him thus; La alla illa alla,
Hasaret Eesa Benalla, that is, No God, but one God, and the Lord Christ the Son
of God; and farther added, that Mahomet was an Impostor, and all this he spoke
in their own Language, as loud as possibly he could, in the ears of many
Mahometans that heard it. But whether (Circumstances considered) the zeal or
discretion of our Pilgrim were more here to be commended, I leave to the
judgment of the Reader. No doubt but had this bold attempt of his been acted in
many other places of Asia, it would have cost him his Life, with as much
torture as cruelty could have invented. But he was here taken for a Madman,
and so let alone.

Happily the rather, because every one there has liberty to profess his own
Religion freely, and, if he please, may argue against theirs, without fear of
an Inquisition; as this our Pilgrim did at another time with a Moolaa, who had
called him Giaur, that is, Infidel, or false Believer; which Mr. Coriat took in
such Dudgeon, that he made a Speech to him as follows.

Mr. Coriat's Speech to a Mohammedan.

But I pray thee tell me, thou Mohammedan, do thou in sadness call me Giaur?
That I do (quoth he.) Then, quoth I, in very sober sadness I retort that
shameful word in thy Throat, and tell thee plainly; that I am a Musulman, and
thou art a Giaur: for by that Arab word Musulman thou do understand that
which cannot properly be applied to a Mohammedan, but only to a Christian; so
that I do consequently infer, that there are two kinds of Musulmen, the one an
Ortho-musulman, that is, a true Musulman, which is a Christian, and the other a
Pseudo-musulman, that is, a false Musulman, which is a Mohammedan. What thy
Mahomet was, from whom thou do derive thy Religion, assure thy self I know
better than any one of the Mahometans amongst many Millions: yea all the
particular Circumstances of his Life and Death, his Nation, his Parentage, his
driving Camels thorough Egypt, Syria, and Palestina, the marriage of his
Mistress, by whose Death he raised himself from a very base and contemptible
Estate, to great Honor and Riches; his manner of cozening the sottish People
of Arabia, partly by a tame Pidgeon that did fly to his Ear for meat, and
partly by a tame Bull that he fed by hand every day; with the rest of his
Actions both in Peace and War; I know as well as if I had lived in his time, or
had been one of his Neighbors in Mecha; the Truth whereof if thou did know
as well, I am persuaded thou would spit in the face of thy Alcoran, and
trample it under thy Feet, and bury it under a Jakes; a Book of that strange
and weak matter, that I my self (as meanly as thou do see me attired now)
have already written two better Books, (God be thanked) and will hereafter this
(by God's gracious Permission) write another better and truer: yea I would have
thee know (thou Mohammedan) that in that renowned Kingdom of England, where I
was born, Learning does so flourish, that there are many thousand Boys of
sixteen years of Age, that are able to make a more learned Book than thy
Alcoran: neither was it (as thou and the rest of you Mahometans do generally
believe) composed wholly by Mahomet, for he was of so dull a Wit he was not
able to make it without the help of another, namely, a certain Renegado Monk of
Constantinople, called. Sergis: so that his Alcoran was like an Arrow drawn out
of the Quiver of another man. I perceive thou do wonder to see me so much
inflamed with Anger, but I would have thee consider, it is not without great
cause I am so moved: for, what greater Indignity can there be offered to a
Christian which is an Artho-musulman than to be called Giaur by a Giaur, etc.

By this which has been said, you may perceive our Coriat thus distinguished,
that himself was the Orthodox Musulman or true Believer. The Moolaa the
Pseudo-Musulman or false true Believer, a distinction which must needs make an
Intelligent Reader to smile. It also shows what an opinion he had of his former
writings, and (how if he had returned) what a bustle he would have made in the
World with another Volume, but death prevented him; for, having left it Thomas
Row the English Ambassador at Mandoa, he went to Surat, where he was
overkindly used by some of the English, who gave him Sack, which they had
brought from England, he calling for it as soon as he first heard of it, and
crying, Sack, Sack! is there such a thing as Sack? I pray you give me some
Sack, and drinking of it, though moderately (for he was a very temperate man)
it increased his Flux which he had then upon him; and this caused him within a
few days after his very tedious and troublesome Travels, (for he went most on
foot) at this place to come to his journeys end; for here he overtook Death,
December, 1617. and was buried under a little Monument, like one of those
usually made in our Churchyards, upon whom a joking Wit made this Epitaph.

Here lies the Wonder of the English Nation,
Within the bosom of old Tellus maw,
For fruitless Travel, and for strange Relation,
He past and repast all thy eyes e're saw.
Odcomb produced him, many Nations fed him,
And worlds of Writers through the World have spread him.
The reason inducing the Mahometans to often Prayer, exemplified by a Story.
IN a great City where Mahomet was zealously professed; there lived (say they)
a devout Musulman, who for many years together spent his whole day in the
Mosquit, or Church; in the mean time, he minding not the World at all, became
so poor that he had nothing left to buy bread for his Family; yet
notwithstanding his poor condition, he was resolved still to ply his Devotions:
and in a morning (when he perceived that there was nothing at all left for the
further subsistence of himself and household) took a solemn leave of his Wife
and Children, resolving for his part to go and pray and dye in the Mosquit,
leaving his Family (if no relief came) to famish at home. But that very day he
put on this resolution, there came to his house in his absence a very beautiful
young Man (as he appeared to be) who brought and gave unto his Wife a very good
quantity of Gold bound up in a white Napkin, telling her, that God had now
remembered her Husband, and sent him his pay for his constant pains taken in his
Devotion; withal charging her not to send for her Husband; for though he had
taken such a solemn leave of her that morning, yet he would come home again to
her that Night; and so he departed from her. The Woman presently bought in some
necessaries for her house (for they had eaten up all before) and further made
some good provision for her Husband against his coming home in the evening,
(for so he did) and finding all his Family very cheerful and merry, his Wife
presently told him, that there had been such a one there (as before described)
and left so much Gold behind him, with that forementioned message delivered
with it. Her Husband presently replied, that it was the Angel Gabriel sent from
God, (for the Mahometans speak much of that Angel) and he further added, that
himself had nothing to bring home unto her but a little Grett or Sand, which he
took up in his way homeward, and bound it in his Girdle; which he presently
opening to show her, it was all turned into precious Stones, which amounted
unto a very great value in Money; the seventh part of which, as of his Gold
likewise, he presently gave to the poor: for (say they) Musulmen are very
charitable, and infer, that if we do not neglect God, God will not forget us;
but when we stand most in need of help will supply us. Unto which conclusion we
may all subscribe, leaving the Premises which are laid down in this Story unto
those that dare believe them.

Of a strange Murder, related by Sanderson in his History of King James.
IN the Year of our Lord 1618. there lived a man at Perin in Cornwall, who had
been blessed with an ample Possession and fruitful Issue, unhappy only in a
younger Son, who taking Liberty from his Father's Bounty; joined with a Crew
like himself; who, weary of the Land, went roving to Sea, and in a small
Vessel, Southward made Prize of all whom they could master; and so increased
in Wealth, Number, and Strength, that in the Streights they adventured upon a
Turk's Man of War, where they got a great Booty; but their Powder by mischance
taking Fire, our Gallant trusting to his skilful swimming, got to shore upon
the Isle of Rhodes, with the best of his Jewels about him; where, after a
while, offering some of them to sale to a Jew, he knew them to be the
Governor's of Algier; whereupon, he was apprehended, and for a Pirate
condemned to the Galleys amongst other Christians; whose miserable Slavery made
them use their Wits to recover their former Liberty; and accordingly, watching
their opportunity, they slew some of their Officers, and valiantly released
themselves. After which, this young man got aboard an English Ship, and came
safe to London, where his former Misery, and some skill that he had gotten that
way, preferred him to be Servant to a Surgeon, who, after a while, sent him
to the East Indies: there, by his Diligence and Industry, he got Money, with
which he returned home: and longing to see his Native Country, Cornwall, in a
small Ship from London he sailed Westward; but, e're he attained his Port, he
was cast away upon that Coast, where once more his excellent skill in swimming
brought him safe to shore; but then, having been fifteen years absent, he
understood that his Father was much decayed in his Estate, and had retired
himself to live privately in a place not far off, being indeed in Debt and
Danger.

His Sister he finds married to a Mercer, a meaner Match than her Birth
promised: to her he at first appeared as a poor Stranger; but, after a while,
privately reveals himself to her, showing her what Jewels and Gold he had
concealed in a Bow-case about him; and concluded, that the next day he intended
to appear to his Parents, yet to keep his Disguise till she and her Husband
should come thither to make their common Joy complete.

Being come to his Parents, his humble Behavior, suitable to his poor Suit of
Clothes, melted the old Couple into so much Compassion, as to give him shelter
from the cold Season, under their outward Roof: and by degrees, his Stories of
his Travelings and Sufferings, told with much Passion to the aged People, made
him their Guest so long by the Kitchen Fire, that the Husband bad them Good
Night, and went to Bed; and soon after, his true Stories working Compassion in
the weaker Vessel, she wept, and so did he; but withal, he taking pity of her
Tears, comforted her with a piece of Gold, which gave her Assurance that he
deserved a Lodging, which she afforded him, and to which she brought him; and
being in Bed, he showed her his Wealth, which was girded about him, a very
indiscreet Act; for, by revealing his Wealth, and concealing who he was, he
wrought his own utter Destruction.

For, the old Woman, being tempted with the golden Bait that she had received,
and greedily thirsting after the enjoyment of the rest, she went to her
Husband, and awaking him, presented him with this News, and her Contrivance
what farther to do; and though, with horrid Apprehensions, he often refused, yet
her pewling Eloquence (Eve's Enchantments) moved him at last to consent, and to
rise to be Master of all that Wealth, by murdering the Owner thereof; which
accordingly they did, and withal, covered the Corpse with Clothes, till
opportunity served for their carrying it away.

The early Morning hastens the Sister to her Fathers House, where, with signs
of great Joy, she enquires for a Sailer that should lodge there the last Night.
The old Folk at first denied that they had seen any such, till she told them
that he was her Brother, and lost Brother, which she knew assuredly by a Scar
upon his Arm, cut with a Sword in his Youth, and that they were resolved to
meet there the next Morning and be merry.

The Father hearing this, hastily run up into the Room, and finding the mark as
his Daughter had told him, with horrid regret of this monstrous Murder of his
own Son, with the same Knife wherewith he had killed him, he cut his own
Throat. The Mother anon after going up to consult with her Husband what to do,
in a strange manner beholding them both weltring in Blood; wild and aghast,
finding the Instrument at hand, readily rips up her own Belly, till the Guts
tumbled out.

The Daughter, wondering at their delay in returning, seeks about for them,
whom she found out too soon; and with the sad sight of this bloody Scene, being
overcome with sudden Horror and Amazement for this deluge of Destruction, she
sunk down, and died. The Names of these Parties were concealed, in favor of
some Neighbors of Repute and Kin to the Family.

The Custom of Lapland for the marrying of their Daughters.
IT is Death in Lapland to marry a Maid without her Parents or Friends Consent;
wherefore, if one bear affection to a young Maid, upon the breaking thereof to
her Friends, the fashion is, that a day is appointed for their Friends to meet,
to behold the two young Parties to run a Race together. The Maid is allowed in
starting the advantage of a third part of the Race, so that it is impossible,
except willing of her self, that she should ever be overtaken. If the Maid
overrun her Suitor, the matter is ended, he must never have her, it being
penal for the man again to renew the motion of Marriage. But, if the Virgin
has an Affection for him, though at the first running hard, to try the Truth of
his Love, she will (without Atalanta's golden Balls to retard her speed)
pretend some Casualty, and make a voluntary hault before she comes to the
Mark, or end of the Race. Thus none are compelled to marry against their own
Wills; and this is the cause that in this poor Country the married People are
richer in their own Contentment than in other Lands, where so many forced
Matches make feigned Love, and cause real Unhappiness.

Of Spirits or Devils, and that they have had carnal Knowledge of People.
PHilostratus, in his fourth Book de vita Apollonii, relates of one Menippus
Lycius, a young Man 25 years of Age, that going betwixt Cenchreas and Corinth,
met a Phantasm in the Habit of a fair Gentlewoman, which taking him by the
Hand, carried him home to her House, in the Suburbs of Corinth, and told him
she was a Phoenician by Birth, and if he would tarry with her, he should hear
her sing and play, and drink such Wine as never any drank, and no man should
molest him; but she, being fair and lovely, would live and die with him that
was fair and lovely to behold. The young man, a Philosopher, otherwise stayed
and discreet, able to moderate his Passions, though not this of Love, tarried
with her a while to his great Content, and at last married her; to whose
Wedding, among other Guests, came Apollonius, who, by some probable
Conjectures, found her out to be a Serpent, a Lamia, and that all her Furniture
was like Tantalus's Gold described by Homer, no Substance, but mere Illusions.
When she saw her self descried, she wept, and desired Apollonius to be silent,
but he would not be moved; and thereupon she, Plate, House, and all that was in
it, vanished in an instant. Multi factum cognovere, quod in media Gracia gestum
fit. Many thousands took notice of this Fast, for it was done in the midst of
Greece.

Sabine, in his Comment on the tenth of Ovid's Metamorphosis, at the Tale of
Orphaeus, tells us of a Gentleman of Bavaria, that for many Months together
bewailed the loss of his dear Wife; at length the Devil, in her Habit, came and
comforted him, and told him, because he was so importunate for her, that she
would come and live with him again, on that condition he would be new married,
never swear and blaspheme as he used formerly to do; for if he did she should
be gone. He vowed it, married, and lived with her, she brought him Children,
and governed his House, but was still pale and sad, and so continued, till one
day falling out with him, he fell a swearing; she vanished thereupon, and was
never after seen. This Story (says he) I have heard from Persons of good
Credit, which told him that the Duke of Bavaria did tell it for a certainty to
the Duke of Saxony.

Florilegus, an honest Historian of our own Nation, tells us, that in Anno
1058. a young Gentleman of Rome, the same day that he was married, after
Dinner, with the Bride and his Friends, went a walking into the Fields, and
toward Evening to the Tennis Gourt, to recreate themselves; whilst he played,
he put his Ring upon the Finger of the Statue of Venus, which was there by made
in Brass: After he had sufficiently played, and now made an end of his Sport,
he came to fetch his Ring, but Venus had bowed her Finger in, and he could not
get it off; whereupon, loath to make his Company tarry at present, there left
it, intending to fetch it the next day, or at some more convenient time, went
thence to Supper, and so to Bed. In the night, when he should come to perform
those Nuptial Rites, Venus steps between him and his Wife, (unseen or felt of
her) and told him that she was his Wife, that he had betrothed himself unto her
by that Ring, which he put upon her Finger: she troubled him for some following
Nights. He not knowing how to help himself, made his moan to one Palumbus, a
learned Magician in those days, who gave him a Letter, and bid him at such a
time of the Night, in such a cross-way, at the Towns-end, where old Saturn
would pass by with his Associates in Procession, as commonly he did, deliver
that Script with his own hands to Saturn himself: the young man, of a bold
Spirit, accordingly did it; and when the old Fiend had read it, he called Venus
to him, who rode before him, and commanded her to deliver his Ring, which
forthwith she did, and so the Gentleman was freed.

Hector Boethius, the Scottish Historian, writes, that in the Year, 1480. it
chanced, as a Scottish Ship departed out of the Forth toward Flanders, there
rose a wonderful great Tempest of Wind and Weather, so out-ragious, that the
Master of the Ship, with other the Mariners, wondered not a little what the
matter meant, to see such Weather that time of the Year, for it was about the
midst of Summer. At length, when the furious rage of the Winds still increased,
in such wise that all those within the Ship looked for present Death, there was
a Woman underneath the Hatches, called unto them above, and willed them to
throw her into the Sea, that all the residue, by God's Grace might yet be
saved; and thereupon told them, how she had been haunted a long time with a
Spirit, daily coming unto her, in man's Likeness, and that even as then, he was
with her using his filthy Pleasure, after the manner of carnal Copulation. In
the Ship there chanced also to be a Priest, who, by the Master's appointment,
going down to this Woman, and finding her like a most wretched and desperate
Person, lamenting her great Misfortune and miserable Estate, used such wholesome
Admonitions and comfortable Advertisements, willing her to repent and hope for
Mercy at the hands of Almighty God, that at length she seeming right penitent
for her grievous Offenses committed, and fetching sundry Sighs, even from the
bottom of her Heart, being witness (as should appear) of the same; there issued
forth of the Pump of the Ship, a foul and evil favored black Cloud, with a
mighty terrible Noise, Flame, Smoke, and Stink, which presently fell into the
Sea; and suddenly thereupon the Tempest ceased, and the Ship passing in quiet
the residue of her Journey, arrived in safety at the place whither she was
bound.

Not long before the hap hereof, there was in like manner a young man dwelling
in Gareoth, within a Village there, not passing fourteen miles from Aberdeen,
right fair and comely of Shape, who declared by way of Complaint, unto the
Bishop of that Diocese, how there was a Spirit which haunted him in the shape
of a Woman, so fair and beautiful a thing, that he never saw the like, the
which would come into his Chamber a Nights, and with pleasant Enticements
allure him to have to do with her, and that by no manner of means he could be
rid of her. The Bishop, like a wise Man, advised him to remove into some other
Country, and to give himself to Fasting and Prayer, so to avoid his hands of
that wicked Spirit. The Young man following the Bishop's Counsel, within few
days was delivered from further Temptation.

About the same time also, there was in the Country of Mar a young Gentlewoman
of excellent Beauty, and Daughter unto a Nobleman there, refusing sundry
wealthy Marriages offered to her by her Father, and other Friends. At length
she proved with Child; and being rigorously compelled by her Patents to tell
who was the Father, she confessed, that a certain young man used nightly to
come unto her, and keep her Company, and sometimes in the day also; but how, or
from whence he came, or by what means he went away, she was not able to
declare. Her Parents not greatly crediting her Words, laid diligent Watch to
understand what he was that had defiled their House; and within three days
after, upon signification given by one of the Maidens that the Fornicator was
at that very Instant with their Daughter, incontinently thereupon, making fast
the doors, they enter the Chamber with a great many of Torches and Lights,
where they find in their Daughter's Arms a foul monstrous thing, right
horrible to behold. Here a number coming hastily in, to behold this evil
favored sight; amongst other, there was a Priest of right honest Life, who
seeing some of them running their ways for fear, began to recite the beginning
of St. John's Gospel; and coming to these Words, Verbum caro factum est,
suddenly the wicked Spirit, making a terrible roaring Noise, flevv his vvays,
taking the Roof of the Chamber with him, the Hangings and Coverings of the Bed
being also burned therewith. The Gentlewoman was yet preserved, and within
three or four days after, was delivered of such a misshapen thing, as the like
before had not been seen; which the Midwives, and Women present at her Labor,
to avoid the dishonor of her House, immediately burned in a great Fire made in
the Chamber for the same intent.

John Major, in the Life of John the Monk, that lived in the days of
Theodosius, commends this Monk to have been a Man of singular Continency, and
of a most austere Life: but one Night by chance the Devil came to his Cell, in
the habit of a young Market-Wench, that had lost her way, and desired, for
God's sake, some Lodging with him. The old man let her in, and after some
common Conference of her mishap, she began to inveigle him with lascivious Talk
and Jests, to play with his Beard, to kiss him, and do worse, till at last she
overcame him. As he went to address himself to that business, she vanished on a
sudden, and the Devils in the Air laughed him to Scorn.

We shall conclude this Discourse with a Story of a later date, how that in a
small Village, in one of the Northern Islands, there dwelt an ancient Boor and
his Wife, who had but one Child, and that a Daughter, whom they looked upon as
the staff of their declining Age; she was just entered into her nineteenth
Year, and gave great hopes of proving an excellent Woman, being very saving,
industrious, and handsome; which good Qualities, had invited most of the
young men of her Rank throughout the Country, to take particular notice of her,
and list themselves her Servants. But she, like a discreet Maid, still checked
her roving Fancy, and was deaf to all their flattering Courtship, resolving to
entertain no Addresses which should not be authorized by her Parents
Approbation; and well had it been she had never suffered her self to be
divorced from that Resolution: for so it chanced, that within a while after,
the Devil came in the Likeness of a man, and took up his Lodging within two or
three doors of her Father's House, pretending his Business was to look after
some Debts he had owing him not far from thence: he was a Person of a proper
Stature, meagre Visage, large sparling Eyes, long Hair, but curling, and
exceeding black; he generally went in Boots, (perhaps to conceal his cloven
feet) and though his Habit was but ordinary, he appeared very full of Money,
which made his Landlord very sweet upon him; and the more to oblige him, there
happening a Wedding in that Town within few days after his Arrival, his Host
would needs carry this his strange Guest with him to it; though it was observed
he could by no means be got into the Church where the Nuptial Rites were
solemnized; but as soon as they came home to Dinner, he was as busy and as
merry as the joviallest of them. And here it was that the fatal Acquaintance
between him and Margaretta (for so was the Maiden called) unhappily first
begun. That time allowing a greater Liberty of Discourse to the younger sort
(amongst whom commonly one Wedding is the begetter of another) furnished our
black Stranger with the larger opportunity to court this innocent Maid to her
destruction. To repeat the particular Complements he used, we purposely omit,
lest we should injure the Devils Eloquence by our Courser Rhetoric; suffice it
to know, his devilish Courtship was so charming as to raise an unknown Passion
in her Virgin Breast, who so far doated on his Company, as to be sorry when all
the Companies breaking up obliged them to part; so that being come home, and
after some time got into her Chamber, she makes her unready, but not without a
thousand kind Thoughts on this Stranger she had left, whom at last (just as she
was going into her Bed) she saw come into the Chamber; you may easily imagine
her not a little surprised at so strange an Adventure, knowing all the Doors
fast locked, and no body up but her self: but he soon superseded both her Fears
and Wonder, by telling her in submissive Language, that he came out of pure
love ^o have a little free discourse with her, and that he had an Art to open
any Lock without Noise or Discovery. Then beginning to talk amorously, and
having wantonized a while, he told her at last in plain Terms, he was resolved
to lie with her that Night; Merry Company before, and his Dalliances now, had
raised such a Springtide in her Veins, that after a few faint formal Denials
to gratify her Modesty, she consents: but, no sooner were they in Bed, but her
Ears were courted with the most excellent Music in the World, which so
captivated the Spirits of this ensnared Damsel, that she suffered him for many
Nights together to enjoy his beastly Pleasures with her, without being taken
notice of by any: but no Eyesight so sharp and piercing as that of Jealousy;
some of her former Sweethearts observing her kind Looks in the daytime to this
Stranger, and finding themselves wholly out of Favor, conclude he was the man
that supplanted them in their Affection, for which they vow Revenge; and four
of them joined together, armed with trusty Back-Swords, way-lay him one Evening
in the Fields, who no sooner comes up to them, but these valiant Heroes fell
all four upon him at once with their dead-doing Bilboes; but they do but Duel a
Shadow, though they see him plainly they cannot reach him, and their mighty
Strokes are lost in insignificant cleaving down the empty Air; on the other
side, though they behold him only single, yet they feel more than a hundred
Flails, belabouring them so severely, till their Backs seem Brawn, and their
Heads Jelly, which obliged them to cry out for Quarter, which he very
generously (to show that he was a Devil of Honor) grants, but withal tells
them, they must undergo a further small Penance for their Presumption; saying
this, he ties their Hands behind them, and letting down their Breeches, whips
them with Rods of Holly and Nettles intermixed, till the Crimson Gore in
Streams flowed down their Posteriors; then having fast pined the hinder lap of
their Shirts to their Shoulders, with their Hands bound, and Breeches about
their Heels, as aforesaid, he dismissed them; who rambling all Night they knew
not whither, found themselves in the morning hard by the Village, where they
me^ two Wenches going a milking, amazed and ready to run away seeing them in
that ridiculous Posture these, with much Rhetoric, and some Tears, they
entreat to loose them, which the hard-hearted Sluts, ready to be-piss
themselves with laughing, refusing they are forced to march on into the middle
of the Village, and there too they could not get unbound till they had made an
ingenious Confession how they came thus pickled.

At another time, a Miller, living in that Village took some occasion to fall
out with our Stranger upbraiding him as an idle Fellow, and one that having no
Employment, was very fit to serve in the Wars: the Stranger replied little, but
told him he should be even with him for his Sawsiness before he slept;
accordingly, the Miller and his Family were no sooner got to Bed, but he heard
his Mill set going very furiously, whereupon, getting up to se^ what the matter
was, he found a whole Cart-load of Office-Marmalade brought to be ground, and
thrown into his Hopper and Bynns. At this unexpected Sight poor Dusty-Pell
began to swear, an^ wished a thousand Tun of Devils damn the Autho^ of this
Roguery; when lo! on a sudden, as a Punishment for his Profaneness, as he went
to shut down the Mill, he is taken up, and duck'd above forty times over head
and Ears in the Stream, and then his Toll-dish, full of the before mentioned
Frankincense, clapped so fast on his Head, that it could not be got off for
above two days.

For these, and some other extravagant Pranks that he played, he was at last
carried before a Justice, in whose Presence he was no sooner come, but there
was heard all about the House a hideous Noise, as of hissing of Serpents,
whilst he fell into such a loud excessive Laughter, that he made the whole
House to shake; which fit of Mirth being over, the Magistrate demanded of him
what Countryman he was? to which he replied, that he was an Inhabitant of
another World, and only a Sojourner in this: as he spoke which words, the Room
seemed full for almost half an hour of fiery Flashes, accompanied with a most
dreadful Clap of Thunder, in which he vanished away, and was never seen after.

The Birth, Life, and Actions of the Impostor Mahomet, according to their
Saracenical Story of him.
THEY have written a Book of the Generation of Mahomet, to this effect: The
Book of the Generation of Mahomet (you see they would Ape the Genealogy of our
Savior) the Messenger of God, from Adam and Eve, to the time when God brought
him forth, (permitted him for the Sins of his People,) gracious, perfect, and
fit for himself. When as Rabachbar had learned out of the Scriptures, and by
Astrology, (together with a little Witchcraft) that this Prophet should be
born to the World, he heard, That there was a man born in Jeseras, a City of
Arabia, having all such Marks and Tokens as he had sore-seen by the Prophecies,
(and his Witchcraft,) viz. A spot on his Forehead, a print between his
Shoulders, (and the Brand of Lucifer:) to satisfy his Desire he went thither
to see; where finding those Tokens fulfilled in young Mahomet, he thereupon
expounded the dark mystery of his far-fetched Light, learned of his Master
Rabelnedi, (and his Master the Devil) in this manner. When Adam was newly
created, as he stood up, his Brain shaked and made a noise, as the Leaves do
which are shaken with the Wind; whereat Adam wondering, (how could he do
otherwise) God said unto him, The Sound which thou have heard, it is the sign
of the Prophets and Messengers of my Commandments; take heed therefore that
thou commit the Seed of Light only to worthy Loins, and to a clean Womb. And
this light of Mahomet (put into a dark Lanthorn) that should be born, shined
from the face of Adam, as the Sun or Moon at the Full. And when he had begotten
Seth, that Light passed instantly from the face of Adam into the face of Eve,
insomuch, that the Birds of the Air, and Beasts of the Earth, wondered at her
Beauty: yea, the Angels every day saluted her, and brought her Odours out of
Paradise, till she brought forth Seth alone, having before at every burden
brought forth a Brother and a Sister.

Seth inherited this Light, which remained between Heaven and Earth, the Angels
thereby ascending and descending upon Seth, and crying always, Rejoice thou
Earth, worthy of the Light of Mahomet, on him be Prayer and Salvation of God.
Adam drawing near to his end, declared unto him, by his Testament, the mystery
of that Light, and the Genealogy of the Prophets. Then descended Gabriel,
attended with threescore and ten thousand Angels, bearing every one of them a
white Leaf and a Pen, which signed the writing, for the continuance of the
Order of the Prophetical generation. Seth received this writing, and was
clothed with a double red Garment, shining as the Sun, and as soft as the
Violetflower.

From him it passed by succession to Noah and Sem: then to Abraham, at whose
Birth two Lights from the East and West (meeting in the midst) lightened the
whole World: and the Angels were heard singing. That it was the Light of the
Prophet Mahomet, who should be born of his Seed, whose Word should be in the
Virtue of God. This Light (say they) passed from Abraham to the Face of Hagar,
being with Child, and after to Ismael: and God told him, That the Soul of
Mahomet, in the beginning of the Creation, was mingled with his, and that his
Name in Heaven (though he were never like to come there) should be Asmet, in
Earth Mahomet, in Paradise Abualtrazim. At this Sarah grieved, until three
Angels comforted her with the Promise of Isaac. From Ismael it removed to
Keidar his Son, who was endued with seven gifts, viz. Sound, Courageous, Fair,
Swift, Just, a Hunter, and an Archer. This Keidar married Nulia of the Land of
Isaac; but, being warned by an Oracle, he took to wife Algadira, an Arabian;
and after, by Divine warning, carried the chest of this Light to Jacob. Then
was Hamel born to him, and received the same Light; in which succeeded
Thebicht, Hamiessa, Adeth, Adnue, Adue, Machat, Nizar, Musar, Aliez, Madraca,
Horeima, Knieua, Anofra, Melic, Falhrem, Luie, Galiben, Rab, Murran, Cudai,
Abdamenef, Hesim, a man by Divine testimony free of all uncleanness, (and that
was more than Mahomet was himself.) To him did all Kings offer their Daughters
in marriage, and among the rest Constantine, which he refused, and married
Seline the Daughter of Zeit, and had by her Abdulmatalib, whose Light caused
Rain in drought. To him an Elephant prostrated himself, and said with man's
voice, (thou can not, O Reader, but believe it) Salvation be on you, and on
the Light that shines out of your Reins. Dignity, Fame, Honor, and Victory be
on you; and that there should proceed from him a King greater than all the
Kings of the Earth. Another time, as he slept on the stone which was placed by
Abraham, in his Oratory at Mecca, he dreamed of a Chain reaching East and West,
and to Heaven, and to the Depth, which was presently converted into a
flourishing Herb. Noah and Abraham presented themselves Interpreters of this
Dream. Abdalla his Son, the Father of Mahomet, had a Tutor given unto him to
defend him from his Enemies, who seemed a man, but was none. He was preserved
from the lying in wait of the Jews, by threescore and ten Angels, which seemed
men. He wedded Ermina; and therefore two hundred Women perished for his Love;
some hanging, some burning themselves. (But if this be the effects of Love,
Heavens send that I may dote on nothing, but upon Canary, powdered Beef and
Mustard.

When the prescribed time was come, in the Month Dulheia, on a Friday night,
God bad Aridunan to open the Gates of Paradise, that the innermost of his
Secrets might be manifested; for it pleases me (says he) this Night, to
transport the Light of my Prophet from the reins of Abdalla into the Womb of
Ermina, and that it come into the World. This being done, as Abdalla, the Judge
and Lord of the Arabians, went into the House of Prayer, he perceived a great
Light to lighten from his House up toward Heaven, and presently died. On the
twelfth day of Rab, on a Tuesday Mahomet was born, circumcised, and all
Frolic; And then all Idols fell and became Black: All Kingdoms were destroyed,
and not one stood upright. Lucifer was cast into the bottom of the Sea, and in
forty days could not get out, ('it was wonder he was not drowned in all that
while) but then he called to his Fellows, and told them that Mahomet was born
with the Power of the Sword, who would take away all their Power. The same also
God caused to be proclaimed in Heaven and Earth. His Mother said, that she was
delivered of him without pain, and Angelical Birds came to nourish the Child,
and a man clothed in white presented him with three Keys, like to Pearls, which
he took, and these forsooth were, the Key of Victory, the Key of the Law, and
the Key of Prophecy, and with these Keys he did pick-lock the Hearts of all his
Followers.) After came three Persons with shining Faces, presenting him a
Cauldron of Emeralds, with four handles, which Mahomet accepted (can you blame
him) as a sign of his Rule over all the World. The Birds, Clouds, Winds,
Angels, contended for the Nourishment of the Child, (there was old striving for
a thing of nothing) but the cause was determined by Heavenly Voice, affirming,
that he should not be taken from the hands of men. An Ass also almost famished
worshipped him, (and since many more Asses have done the like) and receiving
him on her back, became Herald to this new Prophet, with man's voice proclaiming
the worthiness of her carriage. Three men carried him up into a Mountain: of
which one opened him from the Breast unto the Navel, and washed his Entrails
with Snow: the second cleaved his heart in the midst, and took out of it a
black grain, saying, that it was the Portion of the Devil. The third made him
whole again. Seraphin nourished him three years, and Gabriel nine and twenty,
who gave unto him, in the fortieth year of his Age, the Law, and carried him to
Heaven, (you cannot choose but believe it) for this his Journey is related by
Friar Richard, sometimes a Student in the University of Baldach, Chap. 14. and
is as true a story as that of the Friar and the Boy.

Now as concerning his going up to Heaven, there is several relations of it
(and all alike true.) In La vita Mahometi it is said, that Mahomet went up to
Heaven with the Angel Gabriel in a shining ladder, where the Stairs hung by
Chains of Gold, as big as Mount Notho by Medina. Another says, that Gabriel,
with threescore and ten pair of Wings, came to Mahomet, in the Chamber of
Aissa, his best beloved Wife, and said, that God would have him to visit him
where he is, and brought with him the Beast Elmparac, or Alborach, of nature
between a Mule and an Ass. This Beast told Mahomet (for Asses then could speak
as well as those that believed in Mahomet) that he would not take him on his
back till he had prayed to God for him. His steps were so far as one could see,
(for he was swister by half then Paccolet or Pegasus;) so that in the twinkling
of an eye he had brought Mahomet to Jerusalem. Then Gabriel, with his Girdle,
tied the Beast to a Rock, and carried Mahomet on his shoulders into Heaven,
where he knocked, and the Porter opened. Others say, that it was not Gabriel,
but another Angel, that carried him up to Heaven; and that Gabriel, being
Porter there, let him in; so that varying so much in their reports, you may
well conclude he never came thither. But, as their story lies, we will go on
with it. In the first Heaven (say they) he saw Angels of the shape of all
Creatures, praying for the Creatures of their shapes, and a Cock so great, that
standing upon the Moon, his Coxcomb reached into the Imperial Heaven, many
millions of miles Altitude; and when this mighty Chanticleer crowed, all the
Cocks upon earth re-ecchoed him. Then he brought him to the second Heaven,
which was a Journey of five hundred years, wherein was Noah; and this Heaven
was of Gold. The third was of Pearls, wherein was Abraham, and the huge huge
Angel of Death, with his Book and Pen in Hand, writing the Times and men's
Lives; (which fatal opinions make them hardy.) In the fourth, he beheld an
infinite company of Angels, whereof every one was a thousand times bigger then
the Globe of the earth; (exactly to an inch) each of them had ten thousand
Heads, every head threescore and ten thousand tongues, and every tongue praised
God in seven hundred thousand several Languages. Amongst other of these Angels
(says he) was one named Phatyr, or the Angel of mercy, who was of that immense
greatness, that every step he trod was twelve times more than the distance
betwixt the Poles. This Angel (said he) had a Quill or Pen of orient Pearl, of
such a length (never a Scrivener in London has the like) that an excellent
Arabian Courser could hardly reach to the end of it in five hundred years
continual galloping; with this Pen (says he) does God record all things past,
present, and to come, in such a mysterious Character, that none but He and
Seraphael can understand it; with this Quill were written all the hundred and
four Holy Books; viz. the ten which Adam received, Seth fifty, Enoch thirty,
and Abraham the Remainder: this Pen forsooth, also writ Moses Law, David's
Psalms, Christ's Gospel, and Mahomet's Alcoran. The fifth Heaven of Diamond,
and in it Moses; the sixth of Ruby, and in it John Baptist; in the seventh
Heaven he saw the Throne of God supported by seven Angels, each of them so
great, that a Faulcon, with incessant flying, could scarce in a thousand Years
reach the distance of one Eye from another; fourteen everlasting burning
Candles hung about the Throne, whose length (according to Mahomet's measure)
was as much as a Horse could run in five hundred Years. There (says this
Blasphemer) did he see the Almighty, who bid him welcome, and stroked him on
the Face with his hand, which was a thousand times colder than Ice. Here
Mahomet for shame of his own Baseness, blushed, (a thing he never did for
lying) and sweat six drops, which he wiped from his Brow, and threw into
Paradise, where one became a Rose, another a Grain of Rice, and the other four
became four Learned Men, viz. Armet, Sembelin, Almamed Moler-zed, and
Seh-nassin. Then returning to his Elmparac, or Mule, he rode back to his house
at Mecha; all this was done in the tenth part of the Night: but when he was
requested to do thus much in the Peoples sight, he answered, Praised be God, I
am a man, and an Apostle.

The Book Asear (says Bellonius) tells further, That in his Journey Mahomet
heard a Woman's Voice, crying, Mahomet, Mahomet, but he held his Peace;
afterward another called him, but he gave no Answer. Mahomet asked the Angel
who they were? He answered, That the one was she which published the Jews Law,
and if he had answered her, all his Disciples should have been Jews: the other
was she which delivered the Gospel, whom if he had answered all his Followers
had been Christians.

Now, who would think People should be so credulous to believe such antic
Stories: but his other Opinions were full as ridiculous; as concerning the Day
of Judgment, that he should paint it out by a great and fearful Duel betwixt
him and Death, who being overcome, shall be so enraged, that he shall destroy
all the World presently; and being armed in flaming Brass, shall sound his
Trumpet to each Quarter of the World, whose affrighting Noise shall make all
Creatures to give up the Ghost; yea, the very Angels also shall die; as also
Adriel, who wrapping his iron Wings about him, shall strangle himself with such
a hideous Noise as is not to be imagined.

Then shall ensue a terrible Earthquake, and a violent shower of parching
Brimstone, which shall turn the World into a disordered Chaos, in which
Condition it shall remain the space of forty days; when God shall take it in
his Fist, and say, Where are now the Haughty Princes, the Cruel Tyrants,
Lascivious Wantons, and Covetous Muck-worms of the Earth? Then will he rain
down Mercy for forty Days and Nights together incessantly, which shall reduce
the World again into a flourishing Condition. Then shall the Angel Seraphiel
take a Golden Trumpet in his hand, of length five hundred Years Travel from one
end to another; with which he shall give such a Sound, as shall revive again
both Angels and Men, who shall reassume their former Estate: after this,
Michael the Archangel comes with a mighty Balance, and poises every man's
Actions in either Scale; those whose good Deeds outweigh their evil, are put
on the right hand, the other on the left; then is every man laden with his
Sins in a Satchel, and hung about his Neck, with which they pass on a narrow
weak Bridge over the Mouth of Hell: now, those that be heavy laden break the
Bridge and fall therein; but such as have but few Sins pass over securely. On
the other side of the Bridge stands Mahomet, who shall be transformed into the
shape of a mighty Ram, full of Locks and long Fleeces of Wool, in which all his
Sectaries, like Fleas, shall shroud themselves; then will he jump into
Paradise, and so convey them all thither.

Paradise he described to be as many miles about as there be Attomes in the
Sun, and that it is enclosed with a Wall of ninety times refined Gold, ten
thousand miles high, and three thousand thick, having seven Gates to enter in
at, and is divided into seven spacious Gardens, and those sub-divided into
seventy times seven several places of Delight. In this place he promises to his
Mussel-men or true Believers, all sensual Pleasures and Delights imaginable;
namely, That they should have Garments of Silk, with all sorts of Colors,
Bracelets of Gold and Amber; Parlours and Banquetting-houses upon Floods and
Rivers, Vessels of Gold and Silver, Angels serving them, bringing, in Gold and
Silver Flaggons, Milk and Wine; curious Lodgings rarely furnished, Cushions,
Pillows, and Down-beds, most beautiful Women to accompany them, Maidens and
Virgins with twinkling Eyes, Gardens and Orchards with Arbors, Fountains,
Springs, and all manner of pleasant Fruit, Rivers of Milk, Honey, and spiced
Wine, all manner of sweet Odours, Perfumes, and fragrant Scents, yea,
whatsoever the Flesh shall desire to have. In this Paradise (says Mahomet)
there is a Table of Diamond seven hundred thousand days Journey long; (does not
he, think you, deserve the Whetstone) this is for men to feast upon, sitting on
Chairs of Gold and Pearl. Gabriel, the Porter of Paradise, has seventy
thousand Keys which belong to his Office, and every Key is seven thousand miles
long, (questionless he must be very strong, or else those Keys must needs tire
him.) Here (says the Alcoran) men shall tumble in all manner of Pleasure,
reposing upon fair Beds lined with Crimson, there shall they gather the Fruits
of the Garden to their Contentment; there shall they enjoy the Company of fair
and beautiful Damsels, whose Hairs be Threads of Gold, their Eyes of Diamonds,
as big as the Moon, their Lips of Cherries, their Teeth of Pearl, their Tongues
of Rubies, their Cheeks of Coral, their Noses of Jaspar, (very rich Girls)
their Foreheads of Saphyr, their Eyes exceeding black, and Bodies exceeding
white, round faced, sweet as Musk, amorous, and very beautiful all over; there
shall they spend the time with these Virgins in pleasant Arbors, who being
enjoyed, shall have their Virginities again renewed as often as lost. In the
midst of this delightful place (says he) is a very high spreading Tree, higher
than all the Mountains in the World, were they heaped one upon another, and so
broad that it shadeth all Paradise. The Trunk of this extraordinary rare Tree
is all of Diamond, the leaves of Ophirian Gold, and the Boughs of Jett; each
Leaf has an Antic Shape, having on one side growing the Name of God, and on
the other that of Mahomet.

Nor were his ridiculous Fopperies of Hell less than the other; namely, that it
was the Navel of the World, compassed with a large high Wall of attractive
Adamant, having seven Gates of flaming Brass to enter in at; that it was
divided into several Cells or Dungeons, whereof some were more loathsome and
fuller of Torments than others, which are prepared for those Souls who have
highest transgressed. Some of these Caves (says he) are so deep, that a
Millstone in a thousand years cannot attain to the bottom, and other places
are without Bottom: In the descent of these deep Caves or Dungeons, are placed
sharp Pikes and Swords, to wound and torment the Souls that move there. These
Dungeons are full of flaming Oil and Brimstone, which strikes such a Terror,
that the very Devils themselves do howl, screetch, and rage there beyond
measure: other Dungeons be full of Serpents, Toads, and all manner of venomous
and noisome Creatures that can be imagined. Here shall the Wicked eat of the
Fruit of the Tree Zacon, which, being in their guts, shall flame like Sulphur;
they shall drink boiling water, and every day of new Torments shall have
alteration. Some Rivers (says he) be full of Crocodiles, others so cold as
makes them gnash and chatter, others boil with violence of heat; yet (says the
Alcoran) shall not these pains endure for ever; for after so many thousand
years, when each Soul has suffered according to the demerits of the Sins which
he has committed, then shall they be delivered by Mahomet; (yea his Charity is
so great, that he will deliver the Devils also) first, changing their
affrighting shapes into others more tolerable, and then by washing them in a
River flowing out of Paradise called Alcanser, they shall become whiter than
the driven Snow, and from thence forward Sing Lala Hillulaes unto Mahomet. And
this is that he delivers of Hell, whose description he might the better give,
as being the place of his proper residence.

His Doctrine of Angels was, that they were either good or bad, yet both
subject to death; the good, as consisting of Flame, because Lucifer, an Angel,
by Ambition was cast out of Paradise; the bad Angels are imprisoned in Dogs,
Swine, Toads, Wolves, Bears, Tigers, etc. After the Judgment-day they must be
tormented in Hell some Millions of years, and afterward be delivered by
Mahomet, and received into Paradise; but as for the Women, poor Souls! be they
never so good, they have the Gates shut against them; yet are consigned to a
Mansion without, where they shall live happily, as wicked Women to another
place, repleat with all dolor and misery.

As absurd and ridiculous were his opinions concerning our Savior Christ, as
that the Virgin Mary conceived him by smelling to a Rose, presented to her by
the Angel Gabriel, and that he was born out of her Breasts; also that she was
free from Original Sin, and the Temptations of the Devil. Christ is called in
the Alcoran, the Breath and Word of God, said to know the Secrets of Hearts, to
raise the dead to life, cure diseases, restore sight to the Blind, and speech
to the Dumb, and that his Disciples wrought Miracles by his Virtue. Yet visit
they not his Sepulcher in their Pilgrimages, (not thinking him to have died) as
generally bruted; for being (as they say) led toward the Place of Execution,
God, not permitting so base a People to put to death so holy a Prophet, did
assume him into Heaven: when mist, and sought by the Soldiers in the throng,
they laid hold of one of the Judges that had condemned him, who resembled him
much in favor and proportion, telling him that he should not escape from them
again; and so not believing whatsoever he said, did Execute him in his Room.
They sharply punish all such as blaspheme him; and say that he shall return to
Judgment about forty years before the Worlds ending; and that at the last day
the Righteous shall enter into Heaven, the Jews under the Banner of Moses, the
Christians under the Banner of Christ, and the Saracens under his Banner.

Having with these and the like odd whimzies, patched up his Alcoran, to give
it the better credit, that the People might imagine it to come from Heaven, he
devised this cunning way; He secretly caused a wild Ass to be taken and bound,
his Alcoran being fairly written about his Neck; then, as he preached unto the
People, he pretended a sudden Rapture, of some extraordinary thing that was
revealed to him from above, and with a loud voice spoke to the People, Ye have
desired a Law, behold God has sent you a Law from Heaven; go to such a Desert,
there shall ye find an Ass, and a Book tied about his Neck, which will direct
you in the ways which God has commanded. Thereupon the People run in great
haste (and as they could do no other) found it according as he had said; so
with great Pomp they bring back the Ass with the Book about his neck, suitable
to the Bearer; and now (as thoroughly convinced) they give great Honor to this
their new Prophet.

Thus were these silly Souls deluded by this cunning Impostor to embrace a
brutish, sensual Religion; but fleshly People will have a fleshly Religion,
and a fleshly Paradise to inhabit: But like Prophet, like People, and like
Religion, for Mahomet himself was such a fleshly Fellow, that in glorying of
his Strength, he boasted, that he had known his eleven Wives successively in
one hour, and permitting, by his impure Law, to his followers, to take unto
them four Wives, (though they be nigh of Kin) yea five, marrying them Virgins;
and to take besides as many of them which they have bought and taken Captives,
as their ability will serve to maintain. These were his sensual brutish baits
to catch the credulous inconsiderate Multitude; but his devices are so
ridiculous, that a wise man cannot choose but smile at his conceits in Pleasure:
this indeed has made many of the most serious of them to mislike his
inventions and sensual delights. Amongst the rest, hear Avicena, one of his own
Sect; Mahomet (says he) has given us a Law, which shows the perfection of
felicity to consist in those things which concern the Body; whereas the Wise
and Sages of old had a greater desire to express the felicity of the Soul then
of the Body; as for the bodily felicity, though it were granted them, yet they
regarded it not, nor esteemed it, in comparison of the felicity which the Soul
requires.

Mahomet had also in him a spice of the transmigration of Souls from one Body
unto another, by which means he devised how a Camel might pass through the Eye
of a Needle; the Soul of a Sinner for Purgation entering first into the Body of
a Camel, then of a lesser Beast, and finally of a little Worm, which should
creep through the eye of a Needle, and so become perfect.

The Saracens, his Followers, esteem Rice as a great Delicacy, by reason of
their Tradition that it came of Mahomet's Sweat; for say they, when Mahomet
compassed the Throne of God in Paradise, God turned and looked on him, which
made the modest Prophet sweat, and wiping it off with his finger, six drops
fell out of Paradise; one whereof produced the Rose, the second Rice, the other
four his four Associates.

Concerning the Death of this Impostor there is several Opinions: The Book of
the Policy of the Turkish Empire, says, That he was poisoned by one of his
Disciples called Albunor, to make. Trial of his boasting Prophecy, That he
would rise again within three days after his Death. This Albunor after coming
to see him, found his body torn in pieces, and devoured of Dogs; whereupon,
gathering together the Bones that remained into a Coffin, he caused them to be
buried. Mr. Smith, in his Gods Arrows against Atheists, says, That sitting up
late one Evening in his Palace, and having taken his fill of Wine, wherein one
of his Companions had poured some Poison, felt his wonted Sickness approaching,
and made haste forth, saying, He must needs depart to confer with the Angel
Gabriel, and go aside, lest his glorious Presence should be an occasion of
their Deaths: forth he went, and remembering that a soft place was best for his
Falling Sickness, down he fell upon a Dunghill, grovelling along with great Pain,
foming at the Mouth, and gnashing his Teeth. The Swine came about the Dunghill,
fell upon him, wounded him sore, and had eaten him up had not his Wife and
others of his House heard the noise of the Hogs, and rescued the false Prophet;
however, he died fourteen days after.

His Death happened in the sixty third Year of his Age, and in the eleventh
after his Hegira or Flight, dying at Medina, and was buried there, in the Grave
of Avisee his Wife; Here is a stately Temple and huge, erected with elegant and
magnificent Structures, daily increased and adorned by the Costs of the
Othomans, and Gifts of other Princes. Within this Building is a Chapel not
persectly square, covered with a goodly Roof, under which is the Urn of Stone
called Hagiar Monauar, sometimes belonging to Avisee aforesaid. This is all
covered with Gold and Silk, and compassed about with Iron Grates gilded: within
this, which shines with Gold and Gems, Mahomet's Carcass was placed, and not
lifted up by force of Lodestone or other Art, but that stone Urn lies on the
ground.

The Musulman Pilgrims, after their return from Mecha, visit this Temple,
because Mahomet, yet living, was wont to say, That he would, for him which
should visit his Tomb, as well as if he had visited him living, intercede with
God for a life full of Pleasures. Therefore do they throng thither with great
veneration, kiss and embrace the grates, (for none have access to the Urn of
Stone) and many for love of this Place, leave their Country, yea, some madly
put out their Eyes to see no Worldly thing after, and there spend the rest of
their days. So zealous are these sottish People in this sensual, senceless,
irreligious Religion.

Of the Talmud of the Jews, their Dreams concerning Adam, etc.
THIS Talmud says, that Adam's Body was made of the Earth of Babylon, his Head
of the Land of Israel, his other members of other Parts of the World; so R.
Meir thought he was compact of the Earth, gathered out of the whole Earth, as
it is written, Thine eyes did see my Substance; now it is elsewhere written,
The eyes of the Lord are over all the Earth. There are twelve hours of the Day,
says R. Aha, in the first whereof, the Earth of Adam, or earthly matter was
gathered: in the second, the Trunk of his Body fashioned; in the third, his
Members stretched forth: in the fourth, his Soul infused: in the fifth, he
stood upon his Feet: in the sixth, he gave Names to the Creatures: in the
seventh, Eve was given him in Marriage: in the eighth, they ascended the Bed
two, and descended four: in the ninth, he received the Precept, which in the
tenth he brake, and therefore was judged in the eleventh: and in the twelfth
was cast out of Paradise: as it is written, Man continued not one night in
honor. The Stature of Adam, was from one End of the World to the other, and
for his Transgression, the Creator, by laying on his Hand, lessened him: for
before, says R. Eleazar, with his Hand he reached (a reacher indeed) the very
Eirmament: His Language was Syriack, or Aramitish, says R. Juda, and, as
Raschlakis adds, the Creator showed him all Generations, and the wise men in
them. His sin, after Jehuda, was Heresy; R. Jsaac thinks the nourishing his
foreskin.

They farther tell, that he was an Hermaphrodite, a Man-woman, having both
Sexes, and a double Body; the Female part joined at the Shoulders and back
parts to the Male, their Countenances turned from each other. This they prove
by Moses his words, So God created Man in his Image, Male and Female created he
them, and he called their name ADAM. Yet after this, is mention of Adam's
solitariness, and forming of Eve out of his side, that is, cutting the Female
Part from the Male, and so fitting them to Generation. Thus does Leo Hebraeus
reconcile the Fable of Pluto's Androgynus, with Moses's narration, out of which
he thinks it borrowed. For, as he tells, that Jupiter in the first forming
of Mankind, made them such Androgini, with two Bodies of two Sexes, joined in
the Breast, divided for their Pride, the Navil still remaining as a Scar of the
wound then made: so with little difference is this their Interpretation of
Moses.

As ridiculous and extravagant are their Opinions about their Women's
Conceptions and Travel, and of one Lilich a she Devil, which should kill their
children; to prevent which, they have diverse expedients, which take out of
their own Writings, as follows. When a Jewish Woman is great with Child, and
near her Time, her Chamber is furnished with necessaries; and then some holy
and devout Man (if any such may be had) with Chalk makes a Circular Line
round, and in the Chamber upon all the walls, and writes on the Door, and
within and without on every wall, and about the Bed in Hebrew Letters, Adam,
Chama, Chuts, Lilich, or (after the Jewish pronuntiation) Lilis. Hereby they
signify their desire, that if a woman shall be delivered of a Son, God may one
Day give him a Wife like to Eve, and not a shrew like Lilis. This Word Lilis is
read in the Prophet Isaiah 34. 14. interpreted a Scritch-Owl; but the Jews seem
to mean by it a devilish Spectrum in Woman's shape, that uses to slay or carry
away Children, which are on the eighth Day to be circumcifed. Elias Levita
writes, that he has read that a hundred and twenty years Adam contained
himself from his wife Eve, and in that space there came to him Devils, which
conceived of him, whence were engendered Devils and Spirits, Faries and Goblins:
and there were four Devils, Mothers, or Dams of them, Lilith, Nuemah, Ogereth,
and Machalath. Thus is it read in Ben Sira, When God had made Adam, and saw it
was not good for him to be alone, he made him a Woman of the Earth, like unto
him, and called her Lilis. These disagree for Superiority, not suffering
Caesarve priorem Pompeiusve Parem: Lilis (made of the same mould) would not be
underling, and Adam would not endure her his equal. Lilis seeing no hope of
agreement, uttered that sacred word Jehovah, with the Cabalistical
interpretation thereof, and presently did fly into the Air. Adam plaining his
case, God sent three Angels after her, viz. Senot, Sensenoi, Saumangeleph,
either to bring her back, or to denounce unto her, that a hundred of her
Children should dye in a day. These overtook her over the troublesome Sea
(where one day the Egyptians should be drowned) and did their message to her:
she refusing to obey, they threatened her drowning: but she besought them to let
her alone, because she was created to vex and kill Children on the eighth day,
if they were men; if women Children, on the twentieth day: They nevertheless
forcing her to go, Lilis swear to them, that whenever she should find the
name or figure of those Angels, written or painted on Schedule, Parchment, or
any thing, she would do Infants no harm, and that she would not refuse that
punishment, to lose an hundred Children in a day. And for this cause do they
write these names on a Scroll of Parchment, and hang them on their Infants
necks. Thus far Ben Sira.

In their Chambers always is found such a scroll or painting: and the names of
the Angels of Health (this office they ascribe to them) are written over the
Chamber Door. In their Book Brandspiegel, Printed at Cracovia, 1597. is showed
the authority of this History, collected by their wise men out of those words,
Genesis 1. 27. Male and female created he them, compared with the forming of Eve
of a Rib in the next Chapter, saying, That Lilis the former was divorced from
Adam for her pride, which she conceived, because she was not made of Earth as
well as he; and God gave him another flesh of his flesh; and concerning her, R.
Moses tells, that Samael the Devil came riding upon a Serpent, which was as big
as a Camel, and cast water upon her, and deceived her.

When any Jewish Woman is in travel, she must not send for a Christian Midwife,
except no Jewish can be gotten: and then the Jewish Women must be very thick
about her, for fear of negligence or injury. And if she be happily delivered of
a Son, there is exceeding joy through all the house, and the Father presently
makes festival provision against the Circumcision on the eighth day. In the
mean time ten Persons are invited, neither more nor fewer, which are all past
thirteen Years of Age: The night after her delivery, seven of the invited
Parties, and some others sometimes, meet at the Child's house, and make there
great cheer and sport all Night, Diceing, Drinking, Fabling, so to solace the
Mother, that she should not grieve too much for the Child's Circumcision.

Of the Opinion of the Chinesses concerning the peopling of the World after the
Flood.
THAT after the waters of Heaven had overflowed the Earth, so that all mankind
was drowned by an universal Deluge; God seeing that the World would be
desolate, and no body to inhabit it, he sent the Goddess Amida, the chief Lady
of Honor to his Wife Nacapiran, from the Heaven of the Moon, that she might
repair the loss of drowned mankind, and that when the Goddess having set her
feet upon a Land whence the waters were withdrawn, called Calemphuy, she was
changed all into Gold, and in that manner standing upright with her face
looking up unto Heaven, she sweat out at her armpits a great number of
Children, namely Males out of the right, and Females out of the left, having no
other place about her body whence she might bring them forth, as other Women of
the World have, who have sinned, and that for a chastisement of their sin, God
by the order of Nature has subjected them to a misery full of corruption and
filthiness, for to show how odious unto him the sin was that had been committed
against him. The Goddess Amida having thus brought forth these Creatures, which
they affirm were thirty three thousand three hundred thirty and three, two
parts of them Females, and the other Males, for so say they the World was to be
repaired, she remained so feeble and faint with this delivery (how could she do
otherwise) having no body to assist her at her need, that she fell down dead in
the place, for which cause the Moon at that time in memory of this death of
hers, whereat she was infinitely grieved, put her self into mourning, which
mourning they affirm to be those black spots we ordinarily behold in her face,
occasioned indeed by the shadow of the Earth, and that when there shall be so
many Years run out, as the Goddess Amida brought forth Children, which were, as
I have delivered, thirty three thousand three hundred thirty and three, then
the Moon will put off her mourning, and afterward be as clear as the Day.

A strange and wonderful Relation of Ferdinand Mendez Pinto a Portugal, which
he saw in his Journey in China.
AFTER the Relation of many and diverse things, we came (says he) to a Town
anciently called Cohilonza, that is, the flower of the field, and had in former
times been in very great prosperity; but about a hundred forty and two years
before, a certain stranger chanced to come thither, being as it seems an holy
man, although the Bonzes (which are their Priests) said, he was a Sorcerer, by
reason of the wonders he did, having raised up five dead men, and wrought many
other miracles, whereat all men were exceedingly astonished; and that having
diverse times disputed with the Priests, he had so shamed and confounded them,
as fearing to deal any more with him, they incensed the Inhabitants against
him, and persuaded them to put him to death, affirming that otherwise God would
consume them with fire from Heaven: whereupon all the Townsmen went unto the
House of a poor Weaver, where he lodged, and killing the Weaver, with his Sons,
and two Sons in law of his, that would have defended him, the Holy man came
forth to h^em, and reprehending them for this uproar, he old them amongst other
things, That the God of the Law whereby they were to be saved, was called Jesus
Christ, who came down from Heaven to the Earth, for to become a man, and that
it was needful he should dye for men, and that with the price of his precious
blood, which he shed for sinners upon the Cross, God was satisfied in his
Justice, and that giving him the charge of Heaven and Earth, he had promised
him, that whosoever professed his Law with faith and good works should be
saved, and have everlasting life; and withal, that the Gods whom the Bonzes
served and adored with sacrifices of blood, were false, and Idols, wherewith
the Devils deceived them. Hereat the Priests entered into so great a fury, that
they called unto the People, saying, Cursed be he that brings not wood and fire
for to burn him, which was presently put in execution by them, and the fire
beginning exceedingly to rage, the Holy man said certain Prayers, by virtue
whereof the fire incontinently went out, wherewith the People being amazed,
cried out, saying, Doubtless the God of this man is most mighty, and worthy to
be adored throughout the whole world; which one of the Bonzes hearing, who was
Ringleader of this mutiny, and seeing the Townsmen retire away in
consideration of that they had beheld, he threw a stone at the Holy man,
saying, They which do not as I do, may the Serpent of the night ingulf them
into Hell fire. At these words all the other Bonzes did the like, so that he
was presently knocked down dead with the stones they flung at him,
vvhereupon they cast him into the River, which most prodgiously staid his
course from running down, and so continued for the space of five days together
that the Body lay in it: by means of this wonder many embraced the Law of that
Holy man, whereof there are a great number yet remaining in that Country.
Whilst the Chinesses (says he) were relating this story to us, we arrived at a
point of Land, where going to double the Cape, we descried a little place
environed with Trees, in the midst whereof was a great Cross of stone, very
well made, to which we going, prostrated our selves before it with Tears in our
Eyes. The People of the Village beholding us in this posture, came to us, and
kneeling down also, with their hands lift up to Heaven, they said, Christo
Jesu, Jesu Christo, Maria micamuidan late impone model; which in our Tongue
signifies, Jesus Christ, Jesus Christ, Mary always a Virgin conceived him,
brought him forth, and a Virgin still remained; whereto we weeping, answered,
that they spoke the very truth; Then they asked us if we were Christians, we
told them we were; which as soon as they understood, they carried us home to
their houses, where they entertained us with great affection; Now all these
were Christians, and descended of the Weaver in whose House the Holy Man was
lodged; of whom demanding, whether that which the Chinesses had told us was
true; they showed us a Book that contained the whole History thereof at large,
with many other wonders wrought by that holy man, who they say was named
Matthew Escandel, and that he was an Hermit of Mount Sinai, being an Hungarian
by Nation, and born in a place called Buda: The same Book also related, that
nine days after this Saint was buried, the said Town of Cohilonza, where he was
murdered, began to tremble in such sort, as all the People thereof in a mighty
fright, ran out into the Fields, and there continued in their Tents, not daring
to return unto their Houses, for they cried out all with one common consent,
The Blood of this Stranger craves Vengeance for the unjust death the Bonzes
have given him, because he preached the Truth unto us. But the Bonzes rebuked
and told them, that they committed a great Sin in saying so; nevertheless, they
willed them to be of good cheer, for they would go all to Quiay Tiguarem, God
of the Night, and request him to command the Earth to be quiet, otherwise they
would offer him no more Sacrifices: Immediately whereupon, all the Bonzes went
accordingly in procession to the said Idol, which was the chiefest in the Town,
but none of the People durst follow them, for fear of some Earthquake, which
the very next night, about eleven of the Clock, as these devilish Monsters
were making their Sacrifices, with odoriferous Perfumes, and other Ceremonies
accustomed amongst them, increased so terribly, that by the Lord's permission,
and for a just punishment of their wickedness, it quite overthrew all the
Temples, Houses, and other Edifices of the Town to the ground, wherewith all
the Bonzes were killed, not so much as one escaped alive, being in number 4000,
as the Book delivers. Wherein it is further said, that afterward the Earth
opening, such abundance of Water came forth, as it clean overwhelmed and
drowned the whole Town, so that it became a great Lake, above a hundred fathom
deep; moreover, they recounted many other very strange particulars unto us, and
also how ever since that time the place was named Fiunganorsee, that is, the
Chastisement of Heaven, whereas before it was called Cohilonzaa, which
signifies the Flower of the Field, as we have declared before.

The History of Agbarus Prince of the Edesseans, his Epistle to our Savior,
with our Savior's Answer, taken out of Eusebius, lib. 1. cap. 14.
AFter that the Divinity of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was made manifest
unto all men, thorough the working of Miracles, he drew unto him an innumerable
sort of Strangers, far distant from Judaea, afflicted with sundry diseases, and
every sort of Malady, hoping to recover their Health, of which number King
Agbarus, Governor of the famous Nations inhabiting beyond the River Euphrates,
grievously diseased in Body, incurable by the cunning of Men, hearing the
renowned fame of Jesus, and the wonderful Works which he wrought agreeable unto
the same, published of all men; made petition unto him by Letters, requiring
deliverance from this disease: Jesus (though not presently) yielding unto his
Petition, vouchsafed to answer him by an Epistle, that shortly he would send
one of his Disciples, which should cure his Disease, promising withal, that he
should not only cure his Disease, but as many as belonged unto him, which
promise not long after he performed, for after his Resurrection from the dead,
and Ascension into Heaven, Thomas, one of the twelve Apostles, sent his Brother
Thaddaeus, accounted among the seventy Disciples of Christ, by Divine
inspiration, unto the City Edessa, to be a Preacher and Evangelist of the
Doctrine of Christ, by whom all things which concerned the promise of our
Savior were performed. The Reader has an approved Testimony of these things
in writing, taken out of the recorded Monuments of the Princely City Edessa:
for there are found enrolled in their public Registry, things of Antiquity,
and which were done about Agbarus's time, yea, and preserved unto this day.
There is no reason to the contrary, but that we may heat the Letters
themselves, copied out of the Registry, and translated by us out of the Syrian
Tongue.

The Epistle of Agbarus to our Savior.
AGbarus Governor of Edessa, unto Jesu, the good Savior, showing himself in
Jerusalem, sends greeting. I have heard of thee, and thy Cures, which thou
have done without Medicines and Herbs; for, as the report goes, thou make
the Blind to see, the Lame to go, the Lepers thou cleansest, soul Spirits and
Devils thou castest out; the long diseased thou restorest to health, and
raisest the dead to life. When that I heard these things of thee, I imagined
with my self one of these two things; either thou art a God come from Heaven,
and do those things; or the Son of God that bring such things to pass:
wherefore by these my Letters I beseech thee, to take the Pains to come unto
me, and that thou will cure this my grievous Malady, wherewith I am sore vexed.
I have heard moreover that the Jews murmr against thee, and go about to
mischiefthee, I have here a little City and an honest, which will suffice us
both.

Our Saviors Answer to Agbarus.
AGbarus, blessed art thou, because thou have believed in me when thou saw
me not, for it is written of me, that they which see me shall not believe in
me, that they which see me not may believe, and be saved. Concerning that thou
wrotest unto me, that I should come unto thee, I let thee understand, that all
things touching thy message are here to be fulfilled, and after the fulfilling
thereof I am to return again to him that sent me. But after my assumption I
will send one of my Disciples unto thee, which shall cure thy Malady, and
restore life unto thee, and them that be with thee.

These, Epistles Eusebius says, he translated out of the Records of Edessa,
written in the Syrian Tongue, in which Records it afterward followed, that when
Jesus was taken up, Judas (which is also called Thomas) sent unto him Thaddaeus
the Apostle, one of the seventy, who, when he came, remained with one Tobias
the Son of Tobias. When that the same was spread of him, and that he was made
manifest by the Miracles which he wrought, it was signified to Agbarus, and
said, the Apostle of Jesus is come, of whom he wrote unto thee Thaddaeus by
that time began, thorough the power of God, to cure every sore and sickness, so
that all men greatly marvelled. Agbarus hearing of the weighty and wonderful
works which he wrought, that he cured in the name and power of Jesus, forthwith
suspected the same to be he of whom Jesus had written, saying, after my
Ascension I will send one of my Disciples unto thee, which shall cure thy
Malady. And when he had called unto him Tobias, where Thaddaeus hosted, he said
unto him, I hear say, that a certain mighty man come from Jerusalem is lodged
with thee, and cures many in the name of Jesus. Who made answer, and said:
yea, Lord, there came a certain Stranger and hosted at my House, which has
done wonderful things. To whom the King said, Bring him unto me. Tobias
returning unto Thaddaeus, said unto him, Agbarus the Governor sent for me, and
commanded that I should bring thee unto him, that thou may cure his Disease.
Thaddaeus answered, I go, for it is for his sake that I am sent thus mightily
to work. Tobias stirring betimes the next day, took with him Thaddaeus, and
came to Agbarus. As he came, even at his Entrance, there appeared unto Agbarus,
in the presence of his chief men, a great and strange show in the Countenance
of Thaddaeus the Apostle; at which sight Agbarus did reverence unto Thaddaeus,
so that all they which were present marvelled. None of them saw the sight save
Agbarus alone, which questioned with Thaddaeus, and said, Art thou of a truth a
Disciple of Jesus the Son of God, which made me this promise; I will send unto
thee one of my Disciples, which shall cure thy Disease, and show Life unto thee
and all thine? To whom Thaddaeus made Answer, Because thou have greatly
believed in the Lord Jesus that sent me, therefore am I sent unto thee, but in
case that thou believe him as yet, thy hearty Petitions according unto thy
Faith thou shall obtain. To whom Agbarus said, I have continued so believing in
him, that I could have found in my heart mightily to destroy the Jews which
crucified him, were not the Roman Empire a Let unto my purpose. Thaddaeus said
again, our Lord and God Jesus Christ fulfilled the Will of his Father, which
being finished, he is ascended unto him. Agbarus answered, And I have believed
in him and in his Father. To whom Thaddaeus replied; Therefore in the name of
the same Lord Jesus I lay my hand upon thee: which when he had done, he was
forthwith cured of his Malady, and delivered of the pain that pressed him sore.
Agbarus marvelled at this, that even as it was reported to him of Jesus, so in
truth by his Disciple and Apostle Thaddaeus, without Apothecary stuff and
virtue of Herbs, he was cured. And not only he, but also Addus the Son of
Abdus, grieved with the Gout, and falling at the feet of Thaddaeus, recovered
his former Health by the laying on of his Hands. He cured also many other of
his Fellow-Citizens, working mavelous and miraculous things, and preaching
the Word of God. To whom Agbarus said again, Thou Thaddaeus, thorough the Power
of God, do these things, and we have thee in admiration: I pray thee
moreover, that thou expound unto me the coming of Jesus, how he was made Man,
his Might, and by what Power he brought such things as we heard to pass. To
whom Thaddaeus; At this Season (says he) I will be silent, though I am sent to
preach his Word, but to morrow call together to my Sermon all thy People and
Fellow-Citizens, then will I show to them the Word of God, and sow the Word of
Life, and teach the manner of his coming, how he was made Man, of his Meslage,
and to what end he came, being sent from the Father; moreover, of his Miracles
and Mysteries uttered in this World, and Power in bringing things to pass:
besides this, his new preaching, and how bare, slender, and humble he seemed in
outward Appearance; how he humbled himself, and died, and abated his Divinity;
what great things he suffered of the Jews, how he was crucified, and descended
into Hell, and rent that Hedge and mid-wall never severed before, and raised
the dead that of long time had slept; how that he descended alone, but ascended
unto the Father accompanied with many; how that he sits in Glory at the
right hand of God the Father, in Heaven; and last of all, how he shall come
again with Glory and Power to judge both the quick and the dead. When the
Morning was come, Agbarus commanded his Citizens to be gathered together to
hear the Sermon of Thaddaeus; which being ended, he charged, that Gold, coined
and uncoined, should be given him: but he received it not; saying, insomuch
that we have forsaken our own, how can we receive other Men's?

These things (says Eusebius) were done the three and fortieth Year, which
being translated word for word out of the Syrian Tongue, he thought good to
publish.

The Conversion of a Thief by St. John the Apostle, related by Clemens, and
quoted by Eusebius, Lib. 3. chapter 20.
HEAR (says he) a Fable, and yet not a Fable, but a true Report of John the
Apostle, delivered unto us, and committed to memory. After the decease of the
Tyrant, when he had returned to Ephesus, out of the Isle Patmos, being
requested, he went unto the Countries adjoining, partly to consecrate Bishops,
partly to set in order whole Churches, and partly to choose by Lot unto the
Ecclesiastical function, of them whom the holy Ghost had assigned. When he was
come unto a certain City not far distant, (the name whereof diverse do express)
and among other things had recreated the Brethren, beholding a young man of a
goodly body, gracious face, and fervent mind, he turned his face unto him that
was appointed chief over all the Bishops, and said, I commend this young man
unto thy Custody, with an earnest desire, as Christ and the Church bear me
witness. When he had received his charge, and promised diligence therein, he
spoke and protested unto him the second time in words to the like effect.
Afterward he returned to Ephesus. But the Elder taking the young man that was
delivered unto him, brought him up at home, and ceased not, but cherished him
still: and in process of time baptized him. He came at length to be so diligent
and serviceable, that he made him a Phylacterie or Livery Garment, signed with
his master's Arms. But this young man became very dissolute, and perniciously
accompanied himself with them of his own years, idle, dissolute, and acquainted
with ill behavior. First, they bring him to sumptuous Banquets: next they
guide him in the night to steal and to rob: after this, they require that he
consent to the committing of a greater offense. Thus he acquainting himself by
little and little, through the greatness of his capacity, much like a Horse of
a hardened mouth, fierce, strong, and hardy, forsaking the right way, with the
biting of the Bridle, brings himself into a bottomless pit of all misorder
and outrage. At length, despairing of the Salvation that comes of God, being
past all hope of Grace, he practiced no toy nor trifle, but once being over
shoes, he proceeded forward, and took the like lot with the rest of his
Companions; and a rout of Thieves being gathered together, he became a most
violent Captain over them, wholly bent to slaughter, murder, and extreme
cruelty. In the mean while, necessity so constraining, the Bishop sent for
John: He, when he had ended and finished the cause of his coming. Go to (says
he) O Bishop, restore to us thy Charge, which I and Christ have committed unto
thy Custody, the Church, whereof thou art Head, bearing witness. The Bishop at
the first was amazed, supposing some deceit to be wrought touching Money which
he had not received, yet was he not able to answer him, for that he had it not,
neither to mistrust John. But when John had said, I require the young man, and
the Soul of our Brother; then the Elder looking down with a heavy Countenance,
sobbing and sighing, said, He is dead. To whom John said, How? and by what kind
of Death? He answered, He is dead to God, for he is become wicked and
pernicious, and in short, a Thief; for, he keeps this Mountain over against
the Church, together with his Associates. The Apostle then rending his Garment,
and beating his Head with great Sorrow, said, I have left a wise Keeper of our
Brother's Soul; prepare me a Horse, and let me have a Guide. He hastened out of
the Church, and rode in Post; being come to the place appointed, he is
straitway taken of the thievish Watch; he neither flies nor resists, but
exclaimeth: for this purpose came I hither, bring me unto your Captain, who in
the mean space, as he was armed, beheld him coming: But when he saw his Face,
and knew that it was John, he was stricken with Shame, and fled away. The old
man, forgetful of his Years, with Might pursues him flying, and cries, My
Son, why flyest thou from me thy Father, unarmed and old? Tender my Case, O
Son, be not afraid, as yet there remains hope of Salvation; I will undertake
for thee with Christ, I will die for thee if need be, as Christ died for us; I
will hazard my Soul for thine, trust to me, Christ sent me. He hearing this,
first stood still, casting his countenance to the Ground, next shook off his
Armor, trembling for Fear, and wept bitterly. He embraced Saint John, and
coming unto him, answered, as well as he could for weeping, so that again he
seemed to be baptized with Tears, the shaking of the Hand only omitted. The
Apostle, when he had promised and protested to procure for him Pardon of our
Savior, and prayed, and fallen upon his knees, and also kissed his right hand,
now cleansed through repentance, brought him unto the Church again. When that
also he had poured forth oftentimes prayers for him, and strugled with him in
continual fastings, and mollified his Mind with diverse and sundry Sermons, and
confirmed him, departed not before he had fully restored him unto the Church,
and exhibited a great example of true repentance, a great trial of new Birth,
and a singular token of the visible Resurrection.

The Conspiracy of Earl Gowry to have murdered King James in Scotland. Anno
1600.
WIlliam Lord Ruthen, Earl Gowry, was for Rebellion put to death at Sterlin
Anno 1584, yet notwithstanding, his eldest Son John not long after was restored
in blood, and had leave to travel beyond Seas; where he carried a cankred Heart
against the King for his Father's Death, although his Majesty were then but two
years old; for at Padoua, amongst other impressa's in a fencing School, he
caused a hand and Sword, aiming at a Crown for his Device. Returning home, and
too big in his own thoughts to be comprehended with Court observance, he
retired to his Family, accompanied with such of his Creatures that could
descend to observe him, only a Brother of his named Alexander was designed to
play the Courtier to take off the suspicion, being of the King's Bedchamber.
In the mean time the Earl gets what Confederates he could into his conspiracy,
and so the Murder of the King was resolved of on this manner.

The Earl sends his Brother Alexander from Saint Johnstons, his House, to the
King at Faulkland, to entice him thither with as much privacy as could be. And
overnight, the fourth of August 1600. commands one of his servants, Andrew
Henderson, toride with his Brother Alexander, and one Andrew Ruthen, to
Faulkland to the Court the next morning by seven a clock. The King putting his
foot in the stirrup to hunt, Alexander tells him, that he had apprehended one
lately come from beyond Seas, with much Gold coin, and sundry suspicious
Letters to Popish Lords; advising his Majesty to receive the Money and Letters,
and to examine the Person, being in safety with his brother at Saint Johnstons
(but ten miles) and this to be done speedily and privately; which was
concluded on, and to be done at Noon, whilst his Train and Attendants should
be at dinner, Alexander immediately commands Henderson to speed to his Brother,
finding him in his Chamber, where they had communication, that the King would
be there by Noon, and that the business took well with the King, for he clipped
him about the neck. That he was accompanied with a slender Train, the Duke of
Lenox, Sir Thomas Erskin, and about a dozen persons more. Well, says the Earl,
get on your plate sleeves; for I must take an High-land Robber.

The King staying longer in his sport of hunting than was expected, the Earl at
middle of dinner; Andrew Ruthen came in haste, and signified the King to be
near at hand; presently after came Alexander, and William Bloire, and withdrew
themselves to consult, sending Henderson for the Earl's Gauntlet and Steel
Bonnet; at the istant the King comes in, is received by the Earl, and retires
to dinner.

Alexander bids Henderson to fetch the keys of the Chambers from one William
Rynd, and presently after Crauston requires Henderson to come to the Earl, who
commanded him to attend his Brother Alexander, and to do what e're he did bid
him; which was to be locked up within the round Chamber, and to stay in silence
till his return.

Near the end of dinner, the King at his Fruit, and the Lords and Waiters gone
to eat, Alexander begs of his majesty in this opportunity to withdraw, and to
dispatch the business. And up he leads him through four or five rooms, locking
each door behind them, till they came into the round Chamber, where Henderson
stood armed. No sooner entered, but instantly Alexander clapping on his Hat,
pulls out Henderson's Dagger, and holding it to the King's breast, with a stern
countenance faces the King, and says, Now Sir, you must know I had a Father,
whose blood calls for revenge, and you must die, and pointing to the Kings
heart with the dagger, Henderson tript it out of his hand, who afterward
deposed, that he did verily believe if Alexander had retained the Dagger so
long as one might go six steps, he had killed the King therewith; but wanting
the Dagger, the King gave him gentle Language, excusing himself from the Death
of Gowry, by his then infancy; advising him not to lay violent hands on the
sacred Person of his anointed Sovereign, especially in a cause of his
innocence, pleading the Laws of God and man; and his merits, by restoring his
Brother in Blood and Honors; by breeding his Sister the nearest in the Queens
affection, and by his reception of his Bedchamber, withal promising Pardon of
all that is past, which wrought so much upon Alexander for the present, that he
leaves the King in Custody of Henderson until he returns from his Brother,
having taken oath of the King nor to stir nor cry out, and so locks them in.

Alexander gone, Henderson trembles with reverence of his Sovereign, and craves
Pardon; the King works upon his passion, and asks him what he was? who
answered, a servant of the Earls; and will thou kill me? says the King; he
replied with an oath, himself would sooner die.

Presently Alexander enters with a Garter in his hand, and says, Sir, there is
no remedy, by God you must dye, and strives to bind the Kings hands; who said,
Nay, sall you not, Ise die a free man, and struggling together, Alexander got
the Kings head under his arm, and his hand upon his mouth, which the King bit
by the thumb, and dragging him to the window, bade Henderson open it; which
being done, the King cried out into a back Court, where the Duke, the Earl of
Mar, and others were in pursuit of him, who was rumored to be gone out the
back way into the Park.

At this sudden cry of Treason, and known to be the Kings voice, they hastened
to the Chamber where he dined, but no entrance was found. The while John Ramsey
and Sir Thomas Erskin got up by a turn-pike back pair of stairs, directed that
way by a boy of the House, who saw Alexander ascend that way, and forcing one
door finds them panting. Ramsey casts off his Hawk from his Fist, draws out his
Faulchion, and wounds him deadly in the Belly, (being bid to strike low, for
the King found him armed with a Male;) and at that instant comes in Sir Thomas
Erskin, Doctor Herres, and one Wilson, and by them was the Body dispatched,
whilst Henderson slipped away. But soon they suspected, by the noise of unlocking
doors, that Gowry himself was coming to assail them; wherefore they advised the
King to withdraw into the Lobby, and cast the King's Coat upon the dead Body.

The Earl soon entered by his double Keys, with seven Servants, the fore-way,
and his Case of Rapiers, his usual Weapon, ready drawn, to whom Erskin
earnestly said, (to divert him from his purpose) What do you mean my Lord? The
King is killed, and points to his Brothers covered Body, bleeding on the ground.

At the uttering of those Words, Gowry stops, and abating of his Fury, sinks
the points of his Weapons; when suddenly Herres assails him with his rusty
Sword, Ramsey steps in and strikes him to the Heart, yet not so soon but the
Earl thrust him into the Thigh, assisted by Crawston, who hurt Erskin and
Herres in the hand, and they run him through his Body, who lived only long
enough to be hanged and quartered.

Forthwith came up all the Lords, the Court, and Townsmen; where, after thanks
to God for this Mercy, they surveyed Gowry's Body, which did not bleed until a
Parchment was taken out of his Bosom with Characters, and these Letters, which
put together, made TETRAGRAMMATON; having been told, His Blood should not spill
whilst he had that Spell. Being thus deceived by the Devil, he thought he
should not die until he had Power and Rule, which he had of the King, and so
suffered by the Sword.

The Bodies of the two Brothers were sentenced by the Parliament, hanged on a
Gibbet, dismembered, and their Heads set upon the Prison House, and then
ordained the fifth day of August, in all Ages to come, should be solemnly kept
for public Prayers.

Thus this Earl, by his horrid Treason, undid his Family, two of his Brothers,
William and Patrick, flying beyond Sea: there still remained in Scotland a
younger Son, being then a Child, who was from that time imprisoned by Act of
Parliament, and so continued afterward in the Tower of London, until King
James his Death, but by King Charles restored to Liberty, with a small Pension,
which kept him like a Gentleman, until discontinued by the Rump Parliament; by
which means that failing, he walked the Streets poor, only enriched in his
Skill of Chemical Physic, and in other parts of Learning, which he got whilst
he lost his Liberty.

Now remains to tell ye the King's Grace and Preferment unto his Rescuers;
Sir Thomas Erskin was created Earl of Kelly, and by degrees, Knight of the
Garter, Captain of the King's Guard, and Groom of the Stool. Dr. Herres was
well rewarded, but lived not long after. Henderson had a large Pension
confirmed by Act of Parliament, which he lived to enjoy a long time. Ramsey had
the honor of Knighthood, with additional bearing of his Coat of Arms, A Hand
holding forth a Dagger, moumed proper, piercing a bloody Heart, the Point
crowned Imperial, with this Motto;

Haec dextra vindex, Principis and Patriae.
Upon which, one thus versified.
An Arm and Hand (well armed with heavenly might) That gripes a just drawn
Sword thrust through a heart Adorned with a Royal Diadem;

This, and this Motto was his own by Right,
Given by his Sovereign for his just Desert,
And in his Coat of Arms inserted them.
His right hand did revenge, and overcame,
His Prince and Countries Foes, and purchase Fame.
Next he attained to be Lord Viscount Hadington, and Earl of Holderness, living
in great Love and Splendor all the days of King James, whom he quickly after
followed to the Grave, dying on Tuesday the 24th. of January, 1625. and was
buried in the Abbey Church of Westminster, the last of February next following.
Seven notable Observations were remarkable in his Life, happening each of them
upon a Tuesday, which one thus comprehended in a Sonnet.

Upon a Tuesday he his Birth began,
Upon a Tuesday he his Baptism had,
Upon a Tuesday he his Honor wan
Upon the Gowries, (whose Intents were bad)
Upon a Tuesday he at first did wed
The noble Sussex Daughter, who deceast;
Upon a Tuesday then he married
Sir William Cockain's Child, by Heavens behest.
Upon a Tuesday he did taste Death's Cup,
And to his blessed Redeemer gave his Spirit,
Upon a Tuesday he was closed up
Within his Tomb, which does his Corpse inherit.
Thus upon Tuesdays 'twas his Lot to have,
Birth, Baptism, Honor, two Wives, Death, and Grave.
Eight years after this treasonable Attempt of the Gowries, George Sprot, one
of the Earl's Confederates, Notary Public at Aymouth in Scotland, from some
Words of his, sparingly and unawares expressed, and some Papers found in his
House; whereof being examined, with little ado he confessed, and was condemned
and executed at Edinburgh. August 12. 1608.

He died very penitently, and to those Ministers which visited him after his
Condemnation, he confessed his Guilt with great Humiliation. Afterward ganging
up the Ladder, with his Hands loose and untied, he was again put in Mind of his
Confessions; and for the greater assurance thereof, performed an Act
mavelous, promising by God's Assistance to give them an evident Token before
the yielding up of his Spirit, which was, when he had hung a very good while,
he lift up both his hands a good height, and clapped them together three
several times, to the Wonder of thousands of Spectators.

A notable Combat betwixt a Knight and an Esquire in the time of Richard the
Second.
THIS Combat was fought before the King's Palace at Westminster, on the
Pavement there, betwixt one Sir John Annesly Knight, and one Thomas Katrington,
Esquire, the seventh of June, Anno 1380. the occasion thus.

The Knight accused the Esquire of Treason, for that where the Fortress of S.
Savior, within the Isle of Constantine in Normandy, belonging sometime to Sir
John Chandos, had been committed to the said Katrington as Captain thereof, to
keep it against the Enemies; he had for Money sold and delivered it over to the
Frenchmen, whereas he was sufficiently provided of Men, Munition and Victuals,
to have defended it against them. And since the Inheritance of that Fortress
and Lands belonging thereto, had appertained to the said Annesly in right of
his Wife, as nearest Cousin by Affinity to Sir John Chandoz, if by the false
Conveyance of the said Katrington it had not been made away, and alienated into
the Enemies Hands, he offered therefore to try the Quarrel by Combat against
the said Katrington: which being put to the Judgment of ancient Knights, it was
by them delivered, That for such a Foreign Controversy that had risen within
the Limits of the Realm, but touched Possession of things on the further side
the Sea, it was lawful to have it tried by Battle, if the cause were first
notified to the Constable and Marshal of the Realm, and that the Combat was
accepted by the Parties.

Hereupon was the Day and Place appointed, and all things provided ready, with
Lists, railed and made so substantially, as if the same should have endured for
ever. The Concourse of People that came to London to see this tried, was
thought to exceed that of the King's Coronation; so desirous men were to behold
a sight so strange and unaccustomed.

The King, and his Nobles, and all the People, being come together in the
morning of the day appointed, to the place where the Lists were set up, the
Knight being armed, and mounted on a fair Courser, seemly trapped, enters
first as Appellant, staying till his Adversary the Defendant should come. And
shortly after was the Esquire called to defend his Cause, in this form; Thomas
Katrington, Defendant, come and appear, to save the Action for which Sir John
Annesly, Knight and Appellant, has publicly and by Writing appealed thee: He
being thus called thrice by a Herald at Arms, at the third Call he comes,
armed likewise, and riding on a Courser trapped with Traps, embroidered with
his Arms.

At his approaching to the Lists, he alighted from his Horse, lest, according
to the Law of Arms, the Constable should have challenged the Horse if he had
entered within the Lists: but his shifting nothing availed him; for the Horse,
after his Master was alighted, ran up and down by the Rails, thrusting his Head
sometimes over, and sometimes both Head and Breast; so that the Earl of
Buckingham, because he was High Constable of England, claimed the Horse
afterward, swearing that he would have so much of him as had appeared over the
Rails, and so the Horse was adjudged unto him.

But now to the matter of the Combat; (for this Challenge of the Horse was
made after) as soon as the Esquire was come within the Lists, the Indenture was
brought forth by the Marshal and Constable, which had been made and sealed
before them, with consent of both Parties, in which were contained the Articles
exhibited by the Knight against the Esquire, and there the same was read before
all the Assembly. But the Esquire, whose Conscience was thought not to be
clear, but rather guilty, went about to make Exceptions, that his cause by some
means might have seemed the sounder. But the Duke of Lancaster hearing him so
stay at the matter, swear, that except, according to the Conditions of the
Combat and the Law of Arms, he would admit all things in the Indentures
comprised, that were not made without his own Consent, he should, as guilty of
the Treason, forthwith be had to Execution. The Esquire hearing this, said,
that he durst fight with the Knight, not only in those Points, but in any other
matter whatsoever: for, he trusted more to his strength of Body, and favor of
his Friends, than in the cause which he had taken upon him to defend, being a
mighty man of Stature, whereas the Knight among those that were of a mean
Stature, was one of the least.

Before they entered the Battle, they both took an Oath, as well the Knight as
the Esquire, that the Cause in which they were to fight was true, and that they
dealt with no Witchcraft nor Art Magic, whereby they might obtain the Victory
of their Adversary; nor had about them any Herb, or Stone, or other kind of
Experiment which Magicians use to triumph over their Enemies. This Oath
received of either of them, and therewith having made their Prayers devoutly,
they began the Battle, first with Spears, after with Swords, and lastly with
Daggers; fighting so a long time, till at last the Knight had bereft the
Esquire of all his Weapons, manfully overth rowing his Enemy. But as the Knight
would have fallen upon the Esquire, through Sweat that ran down by his Helmet,
his sight was hindered, so that thinking to fall upon the Esquire, he fell down
sideling by him; which being perceived by his Enemy, although he was almost
overcome with long fighting, yet made he to the Knight, and threw himself upon
him, so that many thought the Knight would be overcome, though others doubted
not but that the Knight would recover his Feet again, and get the Victory of
his Adversary.

The King in the mean time caused it to be proclaimed, that they should stay,
and that the Knight should be raised up from the ground, and so meant to take
up the matter betwixt them. But those that were sent for that purpose, the
Knight besought them, that it might please the King to permit them to lie
still, for he thanked God he was well, and doubted not to obtain the Victory,
if the Esquire might be suffered still to lie on him.

But when it would not be so granted, he was contented to be raised up, and was
no sooner set on his feet, but he cheerfully went to the King without any man's
help; whereas the Esquire could neither stand nor go without the help of two
men to hold him up, and therefore was set in his Chair to take his ease, to see
if he might recover his strength.

The Knight at his coming before the King, besought him and his Nobles to grant
him so much, that he might be laid on the ground, as before, and the Esquire to
be laid upon him; for the Knight perceived that his Adversary, through
excessive heat, and the weight of his Armor, did marvellously faint, so as his
Spirits were in a manner taken from him. The King and the Nobles perceiving the
Knight so courageously to demand to try the Battle forth to the uttermost,
offering great Sums of Money that so it might be done, decreed, that they
should be restored again to the same plight in which they lay when they were
raised up. But in the mean time, the Esquire fainting, and falling down in a
swoon, fell out of his Chair, as one that was like to yield up his last Breath
presently among them. Those that stood about him cast Wine and Water upon him,
seeking so to bring him again, but all would not serve, till they had plucked
off his Armor, and his whole Apparel, which thing proved the Knight to be the
Vanquisher, and the Esquire vanquished.

After a little time, the Esquire began to come to himself, and lifting up his
Eyes, began to hold up his head, and to cast a ghastly look on every one about
him; which when it was reported to the Knight, he comes to him armed as he
was, (for he had put off no piece since the beginning of the Fight) and
speaking to him, called him Traitor, and false perjured man, asking of him if
he durst try the Battle with him again: but the Esquire having neither Sense
nor Spirit whereby to make answer; proclamation was made that the Battle was
ended, and every one might return home.

The Esquire, immediately after he was brought to his lodging, and laid in Bed,
grew distracted, and so continning still out of his Wits, about nine of the
Clock the next day he died.

Of such another like Combat fought in France.
THIS Combat was between one Robert le Blanch and Lewis le Force, in a case of
Treason, Blanch the Appealant grapples Le Force, and casts him down, sets his
left foot upon the others stomach, holding up his right hand, with his Sword by
the Hilt, his left hand within a Foot of the point, and therewith presently he
meant to stab him: but to add more strength, his right foot was somewhat raised
from the Ground; when instantly the King cried hold, hold, casting his
Truncheon to part them, whereat Le Force nimbly leapt up without hurt.

The King being willing to preserve Le Force's Life, not with any good
affection (for he supposed him guilty) but for the future examination of
Confederacy; yet he adjudged him vanquished, which the defendant utterly
denied, and craved Judgment of the Constable and Marshal, who had a pretty way
to save the Kings Honor, and yet to do justice, which was, that Le Force
should be prostrate to the fatal stroke as before, and the Appellant with all
his former advantage and form of Postures, and so they did. When Le Force with
nimble strength lifted up Blanch his right foot, which tript him down, skipt up
himself, and stabbed the other to the Heart. And forthwith kneeling to the King,
told him, That besides the Assistance of his Patron Saint, the merit of
Innocence, and the event of this legal Trial, which he in honor would not
refuse; yet for more satisfaction to his Majesty he produced six sufficient
Witnesses, attending in the Field, whom he preserved upon all events, and who
cleared him.

However, the King quarrelled with the Constable and Marshal for declining his
Sentence, being Supreme; which they humbly denied. The King being a Party in
case of Treason, or Felony, cannot be Judge; in Lands and Honor he may. This
distinction in those times of Treason, was taken for Reason.

A remarkable piece of Justice done by the Emperor Rodolphus.
ROdulph the Emperor of Germany being at Norimberg, intent about the affairs
of the Empire; there came a Merchant to him, and complained, that having left a
Bag with two hundred Marks in it, with a Citizen with whom he had lodged, the
man now denied the same; the Emperor asks him for his Proofs: he takes his
Outh of it, but could produce no other Witnesses: The Emperor bids him to stay
in another Room, enquiring of him what manner of Bag it was, wherein the Money
was put. Then purposing to send for the man, it fell out, that he amongst other
Citizens came to salute and welcome the Emporour. The Emperor knowing the man,
said to him: O Sir, methinks you have a very handsome Hat, pray thee give it
me: the Citizen gave it, and took it for an Honor that the Emperor would
accept of it; then did he withdraw himself, and sent a Servant to this Man's
Wife, desiring her from her Husband to send him such a Money-bag (describing of
it) and that (said he) you may know that I come from your Husband, he gave me
his Hat for a Token. The Woman sought out the Bag, and gave it him; the
Emperor shows the Merchant the Bag, who knew it, and rejoiced at the sight of
it. Then the Emperor calling the Citizen, tells him, that this man had
complained to him that he had cozened him of a Sum of Money delivered into his
Custody; the Citizen denies, and swares that none was delivered to him: the
Emperor produces the Bag; the Citizen was confounded, and faulters in his
words; whereupon the Emperor causes him to pay the Merchant to the full, and
sets a good fine upon his head besides, and so the business was ended.

Of the great friendship betwixt Damon and Pithias, two Pythagorean
Philosophers.
THese two Friends were both of them Students of Pythagoras's Learning; it so
happened, that one of them was accused to have conspired against Dionysius King
of Sicilie, for which they were both taken, and brought before the King, who
immediately gave sentence, that he who was accused should be put to death. This
Judgment being passed on him, he desired of the King that 'ere he died, he
might return home to set his household in order, and to distribute his goods;
whereat the King laughing, demanded of him scornfully, what pledge he would
leave him to come again. At which words, his Companion stepped forth, and said,
that he would remain there as a Pledge for his Friend; that in case he came not
again at the day appointed, he willingly would lose his Head. Which Condition
the Tyrant received; and the young man that should have dyed was suffered to
depart home to his House, where he did set all things in order, and disposed
his Goods as he thought meet. The day appointed for his Return being come, and
most part of it past, the King called for him that was Pledge, who came forth
merrily, without any show of Fear, and freely offered to abide the Sentence of
the Tyrant, willing to dye for the saving the Life of his Friend. But as the
Officer of Justice had closed his Eyes with a Kerchief, and had drawn his Sword
to have stricken off his Head, his Fellow came running, and crying, That the
day of his Appointment was not yet fully past; wherefore he desired the
Minister of Justice to loose his Fellow, and to prepare to do Execution on him
that had given the occasion. Whereat the Tyrant being much abashed, commanded
both of them to be brought to his Presence; and when he had enough wondered at
their noble Dispositions, and their Constancy in Friendship, he offering to
them great Rewards, desired them to receive him into their Company: and so
doing them much Honor, did set them at Liberty.

Another of Christian Friendship.
UNDER the seventh Persecution, Theodora, a godly Virgin, for her Religion was
condemned to the Stews, where her Chastity was to be a Prey to all Comers:
which Sentence being executed, many wanton young men were ready to press into
the House. But one of the brethren, called Didymus, putting on a Soldiers
habit, would have the first turn, and so going in, persuaded her to change
Garments with him, and so she in the Soldiers habit escaped: and Didymus being
found a man, was carried before the President, to whom he confessed the whole
matter, and so was condemned. Theodora hearing of it, thinking to excuse him,
came and presented her self as the guilty Party, desiring that she might die,
and the other be excused; but the merciless Judge caused them both to be put to
death.

The admirable love and affection betwixt Titus and Gisippus, two Noble young
men, the one of Rome, the other of Athens.
THere was in the City of Rome, a noble Senator named Fulvius, who sent his Son
called Titus, being a child, to the City of Athens in Greece (the fountain then
of good Letters) there to learn and be instructed, boarding him with a
worshipful man of that City, called Chremes. This Chremes had a Son named
Gisippus, who not only was equal to the said young Titus in years, but also in
stature, proportion of body, favor, countenance and speech; in a word, so
like, that without much difficulty it could not be discerned of their own
Parents which was Titus from Gisippus, or Gisippus from Titus. These two young
Gentlemen, as they seemed to be one in form and personage, so shortly after
acquaintance, the same Nature wrought in their hearts such a mutual affection,
that their wills and appetites daily more and more so confederated themselves,
that it seemed no other when their names were declared, but that they had only
changed their places, issuing (as I might say) out of one body and entering into
the other. They went to their Learning and Study together, as also to their
Meals and Pastimes, delighted both in one doctrine, and profited equally
therein, with such fruitful increase, that in few years scarce any in Athens
were comparable unto them. At last died Chremes, leaving his Son Gisippus a
vast Estate, and being now of ripe years, his friends and kindred were at him
to marry, as also his friend Titus, thereby to propagate his Posterity.

They having found one in all respects answerable unto him, with much
importunity he was contented to go and see her, whom he liked so well, that he
became greatly enamoured of her, taking great delight in the contemplation of
her most excellent beauty, and rare endowments of mind. But no happiness could
betide him without his friend participated with him? therefore on a time he
took Titus along with him to see this Idol of his Soul, who having beheld so
Heavenly a personage, adorned with Beauty inexplicable, such an amiable
countenance, mixed with maidenly shamefacedness, and the rare and sober words,
so well couched, proceeding from her pretty mouth, struck him with so much
admiration, that neither the Study of Philosophy, nor the remembrance of his
dear friend Gisippus, who so much loved and trusted him, could put the
remembrance of her out of his mind; so that withdrawing himself as it were into
his Study, tormented and oppressed with Love, he threw himself on a Bed, and
there ruminating upon what was passed, and thereby his unkindness to his dear
friend Gisippus, he began to curss his fate, and wish he had never come to
Athens; and these thoughts took such a deep impression upon him, that what for
lack of sleep and other perturbations, he was brought into a very languishing
condition. His friend Gisippus perceiving this alteration, and willing to
remedy what was amiss in him, demanded of Titus what was the cause of his
disease, blaming him for unkindness in not revealing it unto him, protesting
there was nothing which lay in his power which he would not undergo to pleasure
his friend; with which words the mortal sighs renewed in Titus, and the salt
tears brake out of his eyes in such abundance as it had been a Land-flood
running down off a Mountain after a storm, so that Titus as it were
constrained, blushing and ashamed, holding-down his head, with much difficulty
returned this answer.

My dear and most loving friend, withdraw your friendly offers, cease your
courtesy, refrain your tears and regrettings, rather take a knife and slay me
here where I lie, or otherwise take vengeance on me, most miserable and false
Traitor unto you, and of all other most worthy to suffer shameful death. For
whereas God of Nature, like as he has given to us similitude in all the parts
of our body, so had he conjoined our wills, studies, and appetites together in
one; so that between men was never like concord and love, as I suppose. And now
notwithstanding, only with the look of a woman, those bonds of love be
dissolved, reason oppressed, friendship excluded; there avails no Wisdom, no
Doctrine, no Fidelity or trust: yea, you your self is the cause of all this.
Alas, Gisippus! what envious Spirit moved you to bring me with you to her whom
ye have chosen to be your Wife, where I received this poison; I say, Gisippus,
where was then your wisdom, that you remembered not the frailty of our common
Nature? what needed you to call me for a witness of your private delights? why
would ye have me see that, which you your self could not behold without
ravishing of mind and carnal appetite? Alas! why forgot ye, that our minds and
appetites were ever one? and that also what you liked, was ever to me in like
degree pleasant? what will ye more? Gisippus, I say, your trust is the cause
that I am intrapped. The rays or beams issuing from the eyes of her whom you
have chosen, with the remembrance of her incomparable virtues, has pierced my
heart in such wise, that I desire nothing more than to be out of this wretched
Life, which is not worthy the company of so noble and loving a Friend as you
be; concluding his Speech with a profound Sigh, and such plenty of Tears, as as
if his whole Body would be dissolved into salt drops.

But Gisippus, nothing dismayed at his words, embracing and kissing him, thus
answered, Why Titus, Is this your only sickness and grief, that ye so
uncourteously have so long concealed, and with much more unkindness kept from
me than ye have conceived it? I acknowledge my folly wherewith ye have rightly
upbraided me, that in showing her to you whom I loved, I remembered not the
estate of our Nature, nor the agreeableness, or (as I may say) the unity of our
two Appetites: surely that default can be by no reason excused; wherefore it is
only I that have offended: I confess to you Titus, I love that Maid as much as
any wise man may possible, and took in her company more delight and pleasure,
than of all the Treasure and Lands that my Father left me, which you know was
very much; howbeit, for the servent love I bear to your Virtues, here I
renounce to you clearly all my title and Interest that I now have, or might
have in that Maiden.

And therefore call to you your former Courage, abandon all the Heaviness, the
day appointed for our Marriage approaches, let us consult how without
difficulty ye may wholly attain your desire. Now you know that we two be so
alike, that being apart, and in like Apparel, few men do know us from each
other, also you know the custom is, that notwithstanding any Ceremony done at
the time of the Spousals, yet the Marriage is not confirmed until at Night,
that the Husband puts a Ring on the Finger of his Wife, and unlooseth her
Girdle. Wherefore I my self will be present with my Friends to perform all the
parts of a Bridegroom, and you shall abide in a secret place where I shall
appoint you, until it be Night, when you shall be conveyed into the Maids
Chamber, and for the likeness of our Personages and of our Apparel, you will
not be known by the Women, which have with us no acquaintance; then get you to
Bed, and put your own Ring upon the Maids Finger, and undo her Girdle of
Virginity, by which the Marriage will be consummated. With these words Titus
began to move as it were out of a Dream, and doubting whether he heard Gisippus
speak, or else saw but a Vision, lay still as a man abashed, but having a
little recovered himself, he thanked Gisippus for his incomparable kindness,
but refused the Benefit that he offered, saying, that it were better a hundred
such unkind wretches as he was should perish, then so noble man as was Gisippus
should suffer any reproach or damage. But Gisippus swear and protested that he
freely resigned the Lady unto him, and therewith embraced and kissed Titus; who
thereupon setting himself up in his Bed, the blood somewhat resorted unto his
visage, and after a little good Meats and Drinks taken, he was in a few days
restored again to his former strength and vigor.

In short, the day of Marriage was come, when Gisippus accompanied with his
Friends, went to the Bride's House, where they were nobly entertained and
feasted, and after the Covenants were read and sealed, the Dowry appointed, and
all other things concluded, the Friends of either part took their leave and
departed; the Bride with a few Women (as was the custom) brought into her
Chamber; then, (as it was before agreed) Titus was conveyed into her Chamber,
and being taken for Gisippus) into her Bed; where he first demanded of her, if
that she loved him, and vouchsafed to take him for her Husband, forsaking all
other, which she with a blushing countenance, half laughing and half mourning,
(as in point to depart from her Maidenhead, but supposing it to be Gisippus
that asked her) affirmed. Then did he ask her, if that she in ratifying that
promise, would receive his Ring? whereto she consenting, put the Ring on her
Finger, and unloosed her Girdle, and so they lovingly sunk down into the Bed
together, where, what they did there, I leave to married men's imagination.

The morrow being come, Gisippus thinking it expedient that the truth should be
discovered, assembled the Nobility of the City to his House, where a full
Assembly being come, Titus made to them this following Oration.

Most noble Athenians, there is at this time showed amongst you an example
almost incredible, of the divine power of honorable Love, and therefore give
due thanks to God, if there remain among you any token of the ancient Wisdom of
your most Noble Progenitors. But I shall not stay you long in my preamble, but
come to the matter. It is not unknown to you all wherefore I came to this City,
and how that happening into the house of Chremes, I found there his Son
Gisippus, of my own age, and in every thing so like each other, that neither
his Father, nor any other man could discern of us the one from the other, but
by our own means or showing, insomuch as there were put about our Necks Laces
of sundry Colors to declare our Personages. What mutual agreement and Love
has been always between us during this eight years that we have been together,
ye all be witnesses, that have been beholders and wonderers at our most sweet
Conversation, and consent of Appetites, wherein was never any discord or
variance. And as for my part, after the Decease of my Father, notwithstanding
that there was descended unto me very large Possessions, fair Houses, with
abundance of Riches: also I being called home by the importunate Letters of my
Allies and Friends, which be of the most noble of all the Senators, offering me
the advancement to the highest dignities in the Publick-Weal; as also the
loving Letters from my tender Mother, wherein she accuses me of unkindness for
my long tarrying, especially now in her most discomfort; Yet could not all this
once remove me from my dear Friend Gisippus, and, but by force, could not I,
nor yet may be drawn from his sweet company, I choosing rather to live with him
as his companion and fellow, yea, as his Servant, rather than to be Consul of
Rome. Yet this my kindness has he well requited, or, (as I may say) redoubled,
delivering me from the death, yea, the most painful death of all other. I
perceive you wonder hereat, noble Athemans, and no marvel; for what Person
should be so hardy to attempt any such thing against me, being a Roman, and of
the Noble blood of the Romans; or who should be thought so Malicious to slay
me, who (as all ye be my judges) never trespassed against any Person within
this City: No, no, my Friends, I do not suspect any of you. I perceive you
desire to know what he was that would presume on such an enterprise? It was
Love, noble Athenians, the same Love, which (as your Poets feign) did wound the
most part of the Gods; who constrained Jupiter to transform himself into a
Swan, a Bull, and diverse other likenesses. The same Love that caused Hercules,
the vanquisher and destroyer of Monsters and Giants, to spin on a Wheel,
sitting amongst Maidens in Women's Apparel. The same Love that caused to
assemble the Princes of Asia and Greece in the Fields of Troy. The same Love (I
say) against whose Assaults may be found no resistance, has suddenly and
unawares stricken me to the heart, and that with such force, that I had
immediately dyed, had not the incomparable Friendship of Gisippus helped me: I
perceive you would fain know who she is that I loved. I will no longer delay
you, noble Athenians, it is Sophronia, the Lady whom Gisippus had chosen for
his Wife, and whom he most entirely loved. But when his most gentle heart
perceived, that my love was in a much higher degree than his toward that Lady,
and that it proceeded neither of wantonness, nor any corrupt desire or
fantasy; but in an instant, by the only look, and that with such fervency, as
made me so captivated in Cupids thrall, that I desired Death rather than life;
he by his wisdom perceived (as I doubt not but that ye now do) that it was the
very provision of God, that she should be my Wife, and not his, whereto he
giving place, and more esteeming true Friendship than the love of a Woman,
whereunto he was induced by his Friends, and not by violence of Cupid,
constrained as I am, has willingly granted to me the interest that he had in
the Lady; and it is I, Titus, that have really wedded her, I have put the Ring
on her Finger, I have undone the Girdle of shamefacedness, what will ye more? I
have lain with her, confirmed the Matrimony, and made her a Wife.

This Oration, instead of applause, was received of the Auditors with a general
murmuring, and disdainful looks on Gisippus; whereupon Titus proceeded thus.

I wonder (noble Athenians) what should make you thus to grudge at Gisippus,
who knew he might find in Greece another Lady, as fair and as rich as this he
had chosen; and one perchance that he might love better. But such a Friend as I
was (having respect to our likeness, the long approved concord, also my Estate
and condition) he was sure to find not one; also the Lady suffers no
disparagement in her blood, nor hindrance in her marriage, but is much rather
advanced (no dispraise to my dear friend Gisippus.) Also consider, noble
Athenians, that I took her not, my Father living, when ye might have suspected,
that as well her Riches as her Beauty should have thereto allured me, but soon
after my Fathers decease, when I far exceeded her in Possessions and Substance,
when the most notable men of Rome and of Italy desired my alliance; ye have
therefore all cause to rejoice and thank Gisippus, and not to be angry, and
also to extol his wonderful kindness toward me, whereby he has won me and
all my blood, such friends to you and your City, that ye may be assured to be
by us defended against all the World: which being considered, Gisippus has
well deserved a Statue of Gold to be set on a Pillar in the midst of your City,
for an honorable Monument in the remembrance of our incomparable Friendship,
and of the good that thereby may come to your City. But if this persuasion
cannot satisfy you, but that ye will imagine any thing to the damage of my
Friend Gisippus after my departure, I vow to God, Creator of all things, that
as soon as I shall have knowledge thereof, I shall forthwith resort hither,
with the invincible Power of the Romans, and revenge him in such wise against
his Enemies, that all Greece shall speak of it to their perpetual dishonor,
shame, and reproach. And therewith Titus and Gisippus arose, the Athenians for
the present dissembling their Malice, for the fear they had of Titus.

Soon after, Titus, being sent for by the Authority of the Senate and People of
Rome, prepared to depart out of Athens, and would fain have had Gisippus to
have gone with him, offering to divide with him all his Substance and Fortune.
But Gisippus, considering how necessary his counsel should be to the City of
Athens, would not depart out of his Country, though he most earnestly desired
the Company of Titus.

Thus Titus with his Lady is departed toward the City of Rome, where, at their
coming, they were, of his Mother, his Kinsmen, and of all the Senate and People
most joyfully received. And there lived Titus with his Lady in Joy
inexplicable, having by her many brave Children, and for his Wisdom and
Learning was so highly esteemed, that there was no Dignity or honorable Office
within the City, that he had not with much favor and praise achieved and
occupied.

But to return to Gisippus, who immediately upon the departure of Titus was so
maligned at, as well by his own Kinsmen, as by the Friends of the Lady, which
he, to their seeming, most shamefully abandoned, leaving her to Titus, that
they spared not daily to vex him with all kinds of reproach that they could
devise or imagine; and first, they excluded him out of their Council, and
prohibited from him all honest Company; but not being therewith satisfied, they
finally adjudged him unworthy to enjoy any Goods or Possessions left him by his
Parents, whom he (as they supposed) by his undiscreet Friendship had so
distained, wherefore they despoiled him of all things, and almost naked
expelled him out of the City. And thus was Gisippus, lately Wealthy, and one of
the most Noble men of Athens, for his kind heart, banished his own Country;
where, as a man dismayed, wandering hither and thither, finding no man that
would succor him; atlast remembering in what pleasure his friend Titus lived
with his Lady, for whom he suffered these damages, concluded to go to Rome, and
declare his misfortune to his friend. In short, with much pain, cold, hunger
and thirst, he came to that City, where, enquiring for the house of Titus, at
the last he came to it: but beholding it so beautiful, large and Princely, he
was ashamed to enter it, being in so simple and mean Array; standing by
therefore, that in case Titus came forth out of his House, he might present
himself to him. He being in this thought, Titus, holding his Lady by the hand,
came forth of his Palace, and taking their Horses to solace themselves, saw
Gisippus, but beholding his simple Apparel, regarded him not, but passed forth
on their way, wherewith Gisippus was so wounded to the heart, thinking Titus
had contemned his fortune, that, oppressed with mortal heaviness, he fell in a
swoon, but being recovered by some that stood by, thinking him to be sick,
forthwith departed, intending not to tarry any longer, but as a wild Beast, to
wander abroad in the World, and so passing forwards, he for weariness was
constrained to enter into an old Barn without the City, where, casting himself
on the bare ground, with weeping and dolorous crying he bewailed his fortune;
but most of all accusing the ingratitude of Titus, for whom he suffered all
that misery, the remembrance whereof was so intolerable, that he determined no
longer to live in that anguish and dolor; and therewith drew his Knife,
purposing to have slain himself: but the wisdom (which he by the study of
Philosophy had attained) withdrew him from that desperate act. And in this
contention between wisdom and will, fatigate with long Journeys and watch, or
as God would have it, he fell into a deep sleep. His Knife (wherewith he would
have slain himself) falling down by him. In the mean time, a bloody Thief which
had robbed and slain a man, was entered into the Barn where Gisippus lay,
intending to lie there all that Night; who seeing Gisippus bedewed with Tears,
and his Visage replenished with Sorrow, also the naked knife by him, judged
that he was a man desperate, and so overwhelmed with grief, that he was weary
of his Life; which the said Ruffian taking for a good occasion to escape, took
the Knife of Gisippus, and putting it in the wound of him that was slain, put
it all bloody in the hand of Gisippus, being fast a sleep, and so departed.
Soon after, the dead man being found, the Officers made diligent search for the
Murderer: at last, entering into the Barn, and finding Gisippus asleep, with
the bloody Knife in his hand, awaked him, laying unto him the death of the man,
and the having of the bloody Knife. Gisippus hereat nothing dismayed, desiring
death more then life, and to die rather by the Laws, then by the violence of
his own hand; wherefore he denied nothing that was laid to his charge, but
desired the Officers to make haste, that he might be shortly out of his life.

Quickly Report hereof came to the Senate, that a man was slain, and that a
Stranger, a Greek born, was found in such form as is above mentioned; wherefore
they forthwith commanded him to be brought into their presence, sitting there
at that time, Titus being then Consul, or in other such like Dignity.

The miserable Gisippus being brought to the Bar with Bills and staves like a
Felon, it was demanded of him, if he slew the man that was found dead? he
nothing denied it, but in most sorrowful manner cursed his fortune, naming
himself of all others most miserable. At last, one demanding of what Country he
was, he confessed to be an Athenian, and therewith cast his sorrowful Eyes upon
Titus with much indignation, breaking forth into fighs and abundance of tears.
Titus now marking him very well, perceived it was his dear friend Gisippus, and
thinking he was brought in despair by this misadventure, he rose out of the
place where he sat, and falling on his knees before the Judges, said, that he
had slain the man, for old malice that he bare to him, and that Gisippus being
a stranger, and all might perceive that he was a desperate Person, who to
abbreviate his sorrows confessed the act whereof he was innocent, to the intent
that he would finish his sorrows with death, wherefore Titus desired the Judges
to give sentence on him according to his merits. But Gisippus perceiving his
friend Titus (contrary to his expectation) to offer himself to death for his
safeguard, more importunately cried out to the Senate to proceed in their
judgment on him, that was indeed the very offender.

Thus they of long time, with abundance of tears, contended which of them
should die for the other, whereat all the Senate and People were wonderfully
abashed, not knowing what it meant. Now it happened, that the Murderer was in
the prease at that time, who perceiving the mavelous contention of these two
Persons, which were both innocent, and that it proceeded of an incomparable
Friendship, was vehemently provoked to discover the truth: wherefore, breaking
through the prease, and coming before the Senate, spoke in this wise;

Noble Senators, I am here come to accuse my self, having lived a lewd Life for
many years: It is not unknown to you that Titus is of noble blood, and one
approved to be always a man of excellent Virtue and Wisdom, and never was
malicious. This other Stranger seems to be a man full of simplicity, and that
more is, desperate, for some evil which has befallen him: I say to you,
Fathers, they both be innocent; I am the Person that slew him who was found
dead by the Barn, and robbed him of his money; and when I found in the Barn this
Stranger lying asleep, having by him a naked knife, I, the better to hide my
offense, did put my knife into the wound of the dead man, and so all bloody
laid it again by this Stranger. This was my mischievious device to escape your
Judgment, whereunto now I remit me wholly, rather than this Noble man Titus, or
this innocent Stranger should unworthily die.

The truth coming thus unexpectedly to light, caused a general acclamation of
the People, and the Friendship betwixt Gisippus and Titus being declared, was
published, extolled, and magnified throughout the whole City. The Senate
consulting of this matter, at the instance of Titus and the People, discharged
the Felon. Titus acknowledged his negligence in forgetting Gisippus, and having
him home to his House, (where he was with incredible joy received of the Lady
whom he should have vvedded) honorably apparelled him, offering him to use all
his Goods and Possessions as his own. But Gisippus desiring to be again at
Athens, Titus, by the consent of the Senate and People, with a great Army
went with him thither, where he had delivered to him all those which were
causers of banishing and despoyling Gisiptus, on whom he did sharp execution,
and restoring to Gisippus his Lands and Substance, established him in perpetual
quietness, and so returned unto Rome.

Of mount Aetna, and of the fiery irruption there in the year 1669.
Aetna, called by Pindarus the Celestial column, is the highest mountain of
Sicilia, for a great space leisurely rising; insomuch as the top is ten miles
distant from the uttermost Basis. It appears toward the East with two
shoulders, having an eminent head in the middle. The lovver parts are
luxuriously fruitful, the middle vvooddy, the upper rocky, steep, and almost
covered with snow, yet smoking in the midst like many conjoyning Chimneys,
and vomiting intermitted flames, though not but by night to be discerned, as if
Heat and Cold had left their contentions, and embraced one another. This
burning Beacon does show her fire by night, and her smoke by day, a wonderful
way off: some adjudging the matter to be diminished by so long an expense,
though our late times can evince the contrary. This is that place which the
Poets did report to be the Shop of Vulcan, where Cyclops framed the
Thunderbolts for Jupiter, whereof Virgil does make his Tract called Aetna.
Under this Hill the Poets feign the Giant Enceladus to be buried, whose hot
breath fireth the Mountain, lying on his face: whereof thus the Poet Virgil.

Enceladus, with lightning struck (fame goes)
This mass o'revvhelmes: who under Aetna laid
Expireth flames by broken vents conveyed,
As often as he turns his weary fides
All Sicil quakes; and Smoke Days beauty hides.
Into this Fiery Furnace it was that the Philosopher Empedocles, affecting
Divine honor, withdrew himself privately from his Companions, and leapt in at
the mouth thereof, but was revealed by his Brazen Shoos which the fire had
thrown up again.

-- Deus immortalis haberi
Dum cupit Empedocles, ardentem fervidus Aetnam
Insiluit --
Empedocles to be a God desires,
And casts himself into the Aetnean Fires.
The extraordinary eruption of this Mountain has been accounted very ominous,
for so it did after the death of Caesar, when not only the Cities thereabout
were damnified thereby, but diverse in Calabria. And in the Year of the World
3982. hard before the Civil Wars of Sicilia, wherein threescore and ten
thousand Slaves were slain by the Praetors, it raged so violently, that Africa
was thereof an astonished witness. In the Year 1614. it ran down like a
combustible Flood, which falling in a bituminous Soil, where Wine and Olives
grew, there seized, spoiling the Lands of two Barons in Rindatza. But the most
prodigious was that Earthquake and Eruption in the Year 1669. which being so
lately, we shall give you a full relation of it, as it was sent to His Majesty
from Naples, by the right Honorable the Earl of Winchelsea, his Majesty's late
Ambassador at Constantinople, who in his return from thence visited Catania,
and was an eyewitness of that dreadful spectacle.

May it please Your Majesty,
IN my Voyage from Malta to this place, wherein I have used all the diligence
the Season has given me leave, I touched at the City of Catania in Sicily, and
was there most kindly invited by the Bishop to lodge in his Palace, which I
accepted, that so I might be the better able to inform your Majesty of that
extraordinary fire which comes from Mount Gibel, 15 miles distant from that
City, which for its horridness in the aspect, for the vast quantity thereof,
(for it is fifteen miles in length, and seven in breadth) for its monstrous
devastation, and quick progress, may be termed an Inundation of Fire, a Flood
of Fire, Cinders and burning Stones; burning with that rage as to advance into
the Sea 600 Yards, and that to a mile in breadth, which I saw; and that which
did augment my admiration was, to see in the Sea this matter like ragged Rocks,
burning in four fathom water, two fathom higher than the Sea it self, some
parts liquid and moving, and throwing off, not without great violence, the
stones about it, which like a crust of a vast bigness, and red hot, fell into
the Sea every moment, in some place or other, causing a great and horrible
noise, smoke and hissing in the Sea; and thus more and more coming after it,
making a firm foundation in the Sea it self. I stayed there from nine a Clock
on Saturday morning, to seven next morning, and this Mountain of fire and
stones, with Cinders, had advanced into the Sea twenty Yards at least, in
several places; in the middle of this fire, which burned in the Sea, it has
formed a passage like to a River, with its Banks on each side very steep and
craggy, and in this Chanel moves the greatest quantity of this fire, which is
the most liquid, with stones of the same composition, and Cinders all red hot,
swimming upon the fire, of a great magnitude. From this River of fire does
proceed under the great mass of the stones, which are generally three fathom
high all over the Country where it burns, and in other places much more; there
are secret Conduits or Rivolets of this liquid matter, which communicates fire
and heat into all parts more or less, and melts the stones and cinders by fits,
in those places where it touches them, over and over again; where it meets
with Rocks or Houses of the same matter (as many are) they melt and go away
with the fire; where they find other compositions they turn them to lime or
ashes (as I am informed.) The composition of this fire, stones and cinders, are
Sulphur, Nitre, Quicksilver, Sal-Armoniac, Lead, Iron, Brass, and all other
Metals. It moves not regularly, nor constantly down-hill; in some places it
has made the Valleys Hills, and the Hills that are not high are now Valleys.
When it was night, I went upon two Towers in diverse places, and could plainly
see at ten Miles distance, as we judged, the fire to begin to run from the
Mountain in a direct line, the flame to ascend as high and as big as one of the
highest and greatest Steeples in your Majesty's Kingdoms, and to throw up great
stones into the Air; I could discern the River of fire to descend the Mountain
of a terrible fiery or red color, and stones of a paler red, to swim thereon,
and to be, some as big as an ordinary Table. We could fee this fire to move in
several other places, and all the Country covered with fire, ascending with
great flames, in many places, smoking like to a violent Furnace of Iron
melted, making a noise with the great pieces that fell, especially those which
fell into the Sea. A Cavalier of Malta, who lives there, and attended me, told
me, that the River was as liquid where it issues out of the Mountain, as water,
and came out like a torrent, with great violence, and is five or six fathom
deep, and as broad, and that no stones do sink therein. I assure your Majesty,
no Pen can express how terrible it is, nor can all the art and industry of the
World quench, or divert that which is burning in the Country. In forty days
time it has destroyed the Habitations of twenty-seven thousand Persons, made
two hills of one, one thousand paces high apiece, and one is four miles in
compass, as your Majesty will see by the draught, that I take the boldness to
send herewith; it was the best I could get, but has nothing of the progress
into the Sea; the confusion was so great in the City, which is almost
surrounded with Mountains of fire, that I could not get any to draw one, but I
have taken care to have one sent after me for your Majesty. Of 20000 persons
which inhabited Catania, 3000 did only remain; all their Goods are carried
away, the Canons of Brass are removed out of the Castle, some great Bells taken
down, the City Gates walled up next the fire, and preparation made all to
abandon the City.

That Night which I lay there, it rained ashes all over the City, and ten miles
at Sea it troubled my Eyes. This fire in its progress met with a Lake of four
miles in compass, and it was not only satisfied to fill it up, though it was
four fathom deep, but has made of it a Mountain.

I send also to your Sacred Majesty, a Relation in Print, which the Bishop gave
me, wherein the beginning is related, and several curious passages. I most
humbly beseech your pardon for the hindering your Majesty so long from your
better employments: and I beseech you, Great Sir, ever to believe I love and
reverence your Person above all expressions, for I am

Your Majesty's most obedient most humble and most faithful Subject and
Servant, WINCHELSEA.
Naples the 27. of April. 7. of May, 1669.

The Relation that was sent Enclosed.
ON Friday the 18th. of March, 1669. the Sun was observed before its setting,
to appear of a pale and dead color, which (being contrary to what it ever
appeared before to us) struck no small terror into the Inhabitants, all objects
appearing also of the same color, with a Paleness received from that of the
Sun. The same Night happened in this City as well as the whole Country
hereabouts, a terrible and unusual Earthquake, whose strange and unequal
motions, joined with horrible roarings from Monte Gibello, exceedingly frighted
the Inhabitants, but was so extraordinarily violent in the Country adjacent,
that the People were forced to abandon their houses, and to fly into the
Fields, to avoid the danger threatened them from the falling of their houses.
The Village of Nicolosi was of all others the most dreadfully handled by this
furious Earthquake, the Houses and other Buildings being shaken all in pieces,
and buried in their own ruins; the poor People (who had preserved their lives
by a timely flight, with such little of their Goods, as their hasty fears would
permit them to carry out with them) continued a Night or two in the Fields,
beholding with grief and astonishment the ruin of their Habitations: but
observing that by these violent concussions, the Earth began to open in several
places, and to threaten them with inevitable ruin, they fled, though with much
trouble and amazement, to this City. These shakings of the Earth being so
frequent and violent, that the People went reeling and staggering, with much
difficulty, supporting one another from falling, insomuch as what with their
want of sleep, the pains they were forced to take in traveling, and the great
terror imprinted on them by what they had seen and suffered, they appeared at
their arrival in this City as so many distracted people, wholly insensible of
what they did.

This dreadful convulsion of the Earth was immediately followed on Monday,
March. 11 about 10 at night by three terrible Eruptions, much about the same
time, and at a little distance one from the other.

These said Eruptions were observed to be on the side of Monte Gibello, about
two miles beyond the Mountain called Mont Pilen, from whence, with a terrible
noise, it threw up its flames with such fury and violence about a hundred yards
in height, its noise not roaring only inwards from the belly of the mountain
as before, but violently cracking like Peals of Ordnance or Thunder from the
side of it, throwing out vast Stones, some of them of 300 pound weight, which
being (as it were) shot thorough the Air, fell several miles distant from the
place, whilst the whole Air was filled with smoke, burning cinders, and ashes
which fell like a fiery rain upon the Country.

In the mean time issued from the side of this prodigious mountain a vast
torrent of melted and burning matter, which like an inundation drowned as in a
flood of fire, the Country on this side of it.

This burning River ran down upon the mountain Monpeleri, which opposing its
diverse course, it divided it self into two streams, which encompassed the said
mountain; one of them taking its way by La Guardia, the Convent of Saint Ann
and Malpasso; the other by the Towns of Onpileri and Falicchi, which in few
hours were wholly destroved and lost, not so much as any sign of them
remaining, with several lesser Villages and Farms, and with them the famous
Image of the blessed Lady of the Annuntiata, which, though highly reverenced
thoroughout the whole Island, esteemed the wonder of Sicily and the whole
world, and to which the People with much devotion resorted in pilgrimage from
the remotest Parts, was also swallowed up and consumed by this dreadful torrent.

This fiery and burning deluge immediately spread it self to about six miles in
breadth, seeming to be somewhat of the color of melted and burning Glass, but
as it cools becomes hard and rocky, and every where in its passage leaves Hills
and Pyramides of that matter behind it.

At the same time Monte Gibello from its top raged with dreadful flames, which
with its noise, and concussions of the earth still continuing, added not a
little to the terror of the People, who ran with cries and lamentations about
the City and Country, expecting nothing but to be swallowed up or consumed by
fire, having no other apprehensions but of death, and a general Conflagration.

The two torrents of fire forward destroying all things in their way, and by
Wednesday, March 13. had on the West side branched it self into several streams
and overran Campo Rotundo, St. Pietro and Mostorbianco, with La Pitielli, and
St. Antonino; and on the East part ruined the lower part of Mascalucia and Le
Placchi, taking its way toward this City.

On Tuesday the 14th. the Wind came Eastward, on which day fell abundance of
Rain, which abated not the progress of the fire; which on the East side had
from Mascalucia made its way to St. Giovanni di Galermo, the lower part whereof
it destroyed; and Passing on, seemed to threaten this City on one side, as did
that on the West side the other.

As the fire approached, the Religious every where appeared with much devotion,
carrying in Procession their Relics, especially those of St Agatha, the
famous Mattyr of Catania, in which they reposed no small confidence, followed
by great multitudes of People, some of them mortifying themselves with Whips,
and other signs of Penance, with great complaints and cries, expressing their
dreadful expectation of the events of those prodigious fiery inundations.

Whilst the People were thus busied in their Devotions, and astonished by their
Fears, news was brought to the Magistrates of the City, that a considerable
number of Thieves and Robbers had taken the opportunity of this general
distraction, to make a prey of the already distressed People, and that they had
murdered several of them for their Goods; and that it was to be feared that
the City of Catania it self might run some danger, from the great numbers of
them which were about the Country, and from thence take their opportunity to
get into the Town. Whereupon, consultation being had for prevention of further
mischief from them, the Commander of the Castle was ordered with a considerable
number of Horse, and a party of Spaniards, to secure the Country and City
against these Robbers: who immediately sent out several parties with his
Provost-Marshal, with order to seize upon all suspected Persons, and such as
were not able to give a good account of themselves; and for such as were taken
in the fact robbing, to execute them by Martial Law, without any further trial:
and accordingly caused three pair of Gallows to be set up for their speedy
Execution; one before the Gate Di Aci, a second in the Marketplace, and a
third before the Gate Della Decima, setting strong Guards upon the Gates of the
City, and causing all suspected houses to be searched, an account to be given
in of all Lodgers, and such Persons to be secured, as could any ways fall under
a suspicion.

The poor People out of the Country being by this prodigious calamity stripped
out of all their Estates, and reduced to great extremity, fled most of them for
refuge to this City, with great lamentations, moving the Charity of the
Magistrates, who were readily inclined to give them the best assistance they
were able; and the Citizens, moved by their complaints and sufferings, freely
opened their doors, filling their Houses with as many of those distressed
People as they could possibly receive; the Bishop and all Persons of Quality
and Estate contributing largely for their support, till better order could be
taken for the disposing of them.

The City of Messina also, and several other Cities (informed of this
extraordinary calamity) sent hither large supplies of Provisions, offering
their best assistance to this place, in case of extremity.

All the Elements seemed at this time to make War upon us, and to conspire
together for the punishment of the Inhabitants: the Air was continually
darkened with Clouds and Smoke, agitated by great and violent Winds, and
oftentimes showred down great Rains, insomuch as the Sun from the beginning of
these Irruptions, very seldom appeared to us, and when it did (with
extraordinary paleness) for a little time only, and (as it were abhorring so
dreadful a spectacle) soon hid its face again under a thick cloud

The Sea ran much higher than it was wont to do, and by his extraordinary
roaring, and in some places overflowing its banks, added not a little to our
consternation; the Land every where infested with Thieves, insomuch, that till
by the extraordinary care taken by the Magistrates and Officers, severe
Execution was done upon such as were apprehended in the fact, no Person was
able to stir abroad without danger of his life; whilst the fire by this
prodigious overflowing of the Mountain, threatened to take possession of all.

On Friday, the fifteenth, the stream of fiery matter which destroyed the lower
part of St. Giovanni di Galermo, divided it self into two parts, one of its
branches taking its way toward Mosterbianco, the other threatening the City of
Catania, but this last was observed to move with the more slowliness than
before, having in twenty four hours time scarcely gained one mile.

On the eighteenth, being Monday, the Torrents being still seen to draw nearer
to this City, the Senate, with Monsegnier Camluchi the Bishop of this place,
followed by all the Clergy, secular and regular, and an infinite number of
People, went in solemn Procession out of this City to Monte de St. Sofia,
carrying out with greatest Devotion their choicest Relics, and upon an Altar
erected in view of the Mountain, exposed them, where they celebrated Mass, and
used the Exorcisms accustomed upon such extraordinary Occasions, all which time
the Mountain ceased not as before with excessive roaring to throw up its Smoke
and Flames with extraordinary violence, and abundance of great stones, which
were carried through the Air, some of them falling within their view, though at
ten miles distance from the Eruption; the ashes which proceeded from thence
were scattered in great abundance, as well on this City as on the Country
adjacent, every where in the Fields, with Cinders, and the heat of the said
ashes, destroying the grass, which obliged the People to drive away their
Cattle to a farther distance, which otherwise would have perished for want of
food.

These streams of ruin daily crept nearer and nearer to this City, but by
uneven and irregular motions, according as it was more or less supplied from
its Fountain; but on Wednesday, the twentieth, we perceived that that Branch of
it which seemed most to threaten this City from St. Giovanni di Galermo, was
wholly extinguished, and the other which bent its course toward Mosterbianco,
ran but slowly, and gave us some hopes that its fury also was near spent; but
the other Torrent which had before overflown Mosterbianco, continued its motion
with as much violence as ever, being in breadth above a Musket shot over, but
in probability, could not easily overflow to the Westwards, which was defended
by its Rocky situation; another Branch which ran by Santo Pietro was observed
to be much larger then the rest, and its stream more quick and active; but
meeting with some opposition in the way, it made some stop, only sending out a
Rivolet toward the East, about three or four yards wide, of its most subtle
and active matter, which directed its course toward a small Village about a
Furlong distance from its main stream, another Branch threatened Campo Rotundo,
but bent its course Westward, toward the Farm of Valcorrente, where its fiery
Body was scattered into several deep and Rocky places, without any considerable
damage.

About this time we had hopes that the violence of this Eruption had been over,
the Mountain not throwing out its flames with that violence as before, and its
noise and roaring in a great measure ceased.

Those who at nearest distance took a view of the Mountain informed, that the
top of it was fallen in, and the Mountain supposed to want near a mile of its
former height; that the largest of the Mouths from whence these fiery streams
were vented, was about half a mile in compass, but the view of this dreadful
inundation carried such terror in it, as they were not able to express; from
all these Mouths were vomited Rivers of a thick and fiery substance of Stone
and Metals melted, whose depth was various, according to the several places it
filled in its passage, in some places four, in others eight, twelve or fifteen
yards and upwards; its breadth in some places six miles, in others much more;
its flame like that of Brimstone, and its motion like that of Quicksilver,
advancing ordinarily very slowly, unless where it was provoked by the addition
of another Torrent, or some considerable descent. Wheresoever it passed, it
left large heaps of its congealed matter, with which it covered and burnt the
Earth, melting the Walls of Castles and Houses, throwing down and consuming all
before it, nothing being found able to resist its force, nor any thing able to
quench its burning, Water being observed rather to add to its fury; wheresoever
it has passed, it has lest its dreadful marks behind it, levelling some Hills
and raising others, so much changing the situation, that not the least trace
of any Place or Town remains, nothing being to be seen but confused heaps of
ragged stone, which yielding a noisome fume, strikes terror and astonishment to
all that behold it

On Friday the 22th, the Mountain again roared with much loudness, and threw up
from its Mouth a vast quantity of matter, which formed two large Hills higher
and larger than that of Monpolori, with a large Bank of the same matter to the
East, sending down a violent stream of its liquid matter toward Malpasso, much
enlarging the former Current, and passing thence to Campo Rotundo and Santo
Pietro, completed the Ruins of those Towns, driving furiously toward Moster
Bianco, which it wholly ruined, from thence passing on to Albanelli, in four
days space destroyed all the Gardens and Vineyards, with 63000 Vines.

From this time till the twenty fifth the Mountain continued silent, but then
it burst out again with more force than ever before, its noise much louder,
like Peales of Ordnance, and so forcible and lasting, as for twenty four hours
it caused a shaking and trembling in our buildings, the Air so filled with
Smoke and Ashes, as darkened the face of the Sky.

The Birds and Fowls about this time, either thorough want of Food, or the
illness of the Air, which was corrupted with the noisome smells arising from
these burnings, were observed to lie dead in all places.

On the twenty eighth, the grand Current was advanced near the City as far as
the old Capucius, which struck so great a terror into the People, that most of
them left the City, only some Officers remaining with such Persons as were
under their command, who secured and sent away the Magazine and all the
Artillery from the Castle.

On Wednesday April the sixteenth, with an impetuous fiery Torrent it came
toward Sardanello, where all the remainder of the Inhabitants of this City
were Spectators of it, which resembled a River of melted and burning Brass,
about ten Else wide, running with swiftness to the Arch of Marcus Marcellus, a
famous piece of Antiquity, and passing under it, ruined about six Else of it,
which was the breadth of the Current in that place: from thence it ran to
Madonno di Monserratto, which it wholly destroyed: then falling down to Madonna
delle Gratie, it entered in at one Gate, and passed thorough another, without
any considerable hurt, and running through the Gate Della Decima, filled all
the Plain Di Schiard Vina, where it was above six Else deep. Then taking its
way toward the Bulwark on the Sea side, under the Castle of this City, it ran
by two Else deep into the Sea; in which it has made its progress a mile in
length, and as much in breadth, and is drawing toward the Gate of the Channel,
which gives us great apprehensions lest it may that way invade the City it
self: nor is there less danger on the side Del Tindaro, where there runs a
great Torrent of the same active matter, which draws near, and seems to
threaten the Walls, and is in that place about a mile in breadth, having
overflowed and destroyed all the Gardens from the Gate Della Decima, as far as
Madonna delli Amellati.

In this fiery Inundation eleven Towns were wholly overflowed, consumed, and
lost, with all the Lands belonging to them, no footsteps of them remaining,
many Towns ruined in part, besides several Castles, Farms, Gardens, Vineyards,
and other places; the Town Nicolozi wholly ruined by the Earthquake, and other
Towns ruined in part.

The reason of these fires is the abundance of Sulphur and Brimstone contained
in the bosom of this Hill, which is blown by the Wind, driving in at the Chops
of the Earth as by a pair of Bellows, thorough which Chinks also there is
continually more Fuel added to the Fire, the very Water administering an
operative Virtue to the combustible matter; as we see that Water cast on Coals
in the Smiths Forge, does make them burn more violently; thus described by
Lucretius, translated by Mr. Sandys,

Hollow the Mountain is throughout, alone
Supported well nigh with huge Caves of Stone.
No Cave but is with Wind and Air repleet;
For agitated Air does Wind beget,
Which heats the imprisoning Rocks when hot it grows,
The Earth chaft by his Fury; and from those
Strikes forth Fire and swift Flame, it self on high
It mounts, and out at upright Jaws does fly:
And Fire sheds afar off, far off dead Coals
Transports, and Fumes in mystery Darkness roles;
Ejecting Stones withal of wondrous size,
All which from strength of struggling Winds arise.
Besides, against the Mountains roots the Main,
Breaks her swollen Waves, and swallows them again;
From whence unto the summit of the Ascent
The undermining Caves have their Extent;
Through which the Billows breathe, and Flames out thrust,
With forced Stones, and darkening Showers of Dust.
To which we may add that of the Poet Ovid,

Ista bituminaea rapiunt incendia mires,
Luteaque exiguis, etc.
A rozen Mould these fiery Flames begin,
And clayie Brimstone aids the Fire within:
Yet when the slimy Soil consumed, shall
Yield no more Food to feed the Fire withal,
And Nature shall restrain her Nourishment,
The Flames shall cease, hating all Famishment.
West of this Aetna lies the Aeolian Islands, one of which, called Strombolo,
burns almost continually at the top like a Beacon, and exceeding clearly, so
that by Night it is to be discerned a wonderful way. These places (and such
like) are commonly affirmed by the Roman Catholics to be the Jaws of Hell, and
that within, the damned Souls are tormented. Mr. Sandys in his Itinenary
relates, That it was told him at Naples, by a Countryman of ours, and an old
Pentioner of the Pope's, who was a Youth in the days of King Henry, that it was
then generally bruited throughout England, that Master Gresham, a Merchant,
setting Sail from Palermo, (where then dwelt one Antonio, called the Rich, who
at one time had two Kingdoms mortgaged unto him by the King of Spain) being
crossed by contrary Winds, was constrained to anchor under the Lee of this
Island. Now about midday, when for certain hours it accustomably forbeareth to
flame, he ascended the Mountain with eight of the Sailers; and approaching as
near the Vent as they durst, amongst other Noises they heard a Voice cry aloud,
Dispatch, Dispatch, the rich Antonio is a coming. Terrified herewith, they
descended, and anon the Mountain again evaporated Fire. But from so dismal a
place they made all the haste that they could, when the Winds still thwarting
their Course, and desiting much to know more of this matter, they returned to
Palermo. And forthwith enquiring of Antonio, it was told them, that he was
dead; and computing the time, did find it to agree with the very Instant that
the Voice was heard by them. Gresham reported this at his Return to the King.
In Gresham himself, as this Gentleman said, it wrought so deep an Impression,
that he gave over all Traffic, distributing his Goods, a part to his Kinsfolk,
and the rest to good Uses, retaining only a Competency for himself; and so
spent the rest of his Life in a solitary Devotion.

FINIS.

