EYPKA, EYPKA. THE Virtuous Woman found Her LOSS BEWAILED, AND CHARACTER
EXEMPLIFIED IN A SERMON Preached at Felsted in Essex, April, 30, 1678.

At the Funeral of that most Excellent Lady the Right Honorable, and Eminently
Religions and Charitable Mary, Countess Dowager of Warwick, the most
Illustrious Pattern of Sincere Piety, and Solid Goodness this Age has
produced. With so Large Additions as may be styled

THE LIFE OF THAT NOBLE LADY. To which are Annexed some of her Ladyships Pious
and Useful Meditations.

By Anthony Walker, D. D. and Rector of Fyfield (...) the same Country.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

TO THE Right Honorable KATHARINE, VICOUNTESS RANALAUGH. AND THE HONORABLE
ROBERT BOIL, Esquire Executors of the Last Will of the Right Honorable Mary,
Countess Dowager of Warwick.
Right Honorable Madam, and Truly Honorable Sir.
MY Obedience to the repeated Commands I have received, (for so I shall always
esteem your Requests) from both your Honors to publish the Sermon, I was by
the same Authority engaged to Preach at the Funeral of that excellent Lady, the
Genuine Sister of your virtue, as well as the Germane Sister of your blood; had
not been guilty of these few weeks delays, had not the indisposition which
began to seize me at so near and perplexing a stroke, and under which I
labored all the time of my preparations, and in the hour of its delivery,
continued upon me many days: After an effect so natural to so pressing a cause,
that I know not whether the health of my body could have consisted with the
soundness of my mind, under such an inexpressible loss to the Church of God,
and my poor self in particular.

But what I was constrained to defer a while, Ut bonum quo diu fruiti sumus,
etiam caeteris noscendum, imitandumque before describerem. S. Hier. Ep. 10
Epitaphium mercellae viduae.
I now multo cum faenore present to you both, with all humble observance: and
under your favorable protection to the eye of the world. The Sermon is such,
almost verbatim, as my hasty and sickly preparations would then allow: Her
Ladyships Character I confess is much enlarged, that I might somewhat more
fully, than those streights of time would suffer me, propound to the knowledge
and imitation of others; Grandes materiasingenia parva non sustinent. Et in
ips^ conatu ultra vires ausa succumbunt. quantoque magis fuerit quod dicendum,
est tanto magis obruitur qui magnitudinem rerum verbis non potest explicare.
that good we had the happiness to enjoy so long, and yet too short a time.

I am conscious to my self of the great disproportion betwixt my performance
and her merit, for which my Apology is that of St. Jerome, weak parts cannot
sustain great matters, etc. Yea this is a Fate must have inevitably attended
whoever had been her Orator in some degree. When I may say as truly of her as
Greg. Naz. of his Gorgonia, her Prudence and Piety no man living was able to
set forth, with proportionable language. And again, It is exceeding difficult
to reach the excellencies of her Virtues either by deed or word, by imitation
or encomium. And though very many might have praised her more floridly, none
could have represented her more truly, no man living having known her so long
and so intimately as my self.

And my weakness and plainness may attain this double advantage.

First, Render the Narration more credible, Quaedam abstraxero ne incredibilia
videantur, etc. Hier. ad Demet.
which if it had been dressed up with all the ornaments of which 'twas capable,
would have looked in this Age, more like a Romance than an History.

Secondly, It will better suit with the Original it copies, for as is said of
Suetonius, he wrote the lives of the Roman Caesar's, with the same liberty they
led them. So I have writ this excellent Ladies life, with the Age ad ipsius
lauds accedamus neglecta sermonis elegantia et concinnitatate; nam ne haec
quidem quam laudandam suscepimus lascivo unquam ornatu delectata est. Naz.
same undisguised simplicity with which she lived it. And though never any man
had a more concescending, constant, sincere Friend, than she vouchsafed to be
to me, yet is not the testimony less true, because of a Friend; but the more
scrupulously exact for fear of desecrating so sacred a name, and offending the
Genius of her, who above all things hated falsehood.

I am not the first, nor shall be the last, whom those (whose charity and good
opinion is not only so wise as to begin at home; but also so kind as to dwell
and end there too) will despise or pity, and bless themselves in the conceit,
of what mighty matters they could have done; if this Province had fallen to
their share. It may be little thinking, how such sorrows as mine justly are,
would have blunted the edge of their keener Eloquence; and how unmeet a Theme
so calamitous a loss is, on which to show our wit. Non oportet ex calamitate
ipsa ostendendi ingenii ansam arripere.


But let such, for me, enjoy their humors, I Will say no more lest I awake them,
and so deprive them of their pleasant dream.

For my self, I have endeavored to approve my Conscience to God: Hic murus
aheneus esto. And I hope I may appeal to your Honorable Attestation, (whose
Testimony will be without and beyond exception) in most things I have written
of Your, My, Marcellant tuam into meam, et ut verius loquar, nostram. S. Hier.
ep. 16.
Our incomparable Friend.

And I doubt not but all who knew her Ladyship thoroughly, will be able to say as
the poor people are reported to have said after the Funeral Sermon of another
The Lady Veer.
eminent Ornament of this Country.

They could have said a great deal more of Her, than the Minister did: At the
hearing of which our good Lady was much pleased, and said; She should value
such a Testimony above all others. The Poor, like the Widows, which stood about
the dead body of Dorcas; showing the Coats and Garments she made for them,
Acts. 9.39.
whilst she was with them, being the most unexceptionable witnesses.

I confess it seems both decent and necessary to suggest some Arguments of
Comfort to them whom I know to be oppressed with so bitter and distressing a
loss. And the undertaking would not (in one respect at least) be altogether
unsuitable to my self. Because, Great is that Cordial which is administered by
those who are partakers of the same sorrows. Magnum Pharmacum illud est, quod
abillis qui eodem dolor affecti sunt porrigitur et qui in eadem calamitate
versantur eorum in consolandis calamitosis major est Authoritas.
And their Authority is greatest in comforting the calamitous, who bear a deep
share in the same calamity, as one of the Ancients has well said.

Give me leave therefore, much honored Madam, Sir, besides what you will meet
with in the following discourse, to remind you of that great Panpharmacon. It
is the Lord who has done it, that Wisdom and Goodness which commits no errors,
but does all things well and wisely. And our daily prayers for the fulfilling
of whose Will, obliges, at least, to a submiss acquiescence when it is done.

And as to her, She has finished her course triumphantly, and she has
obtained the Crown: She rests from her labors, and her works do follow her.
She is landed in safe harbor, got off the rough Seas of sins and sorrows. She
is taken from the evil to come, and shall neither feel nor see what our sins
may justly make us fear. Non moeremus quod talem amisimus sed gratias agimus
quod talem habaimus imohabemus: Deo enim vivunt omnia et quicquid revertitur ad
Dominum, in familiae numero computatur. Epita. Paul.
She would not be again with us as well as she loved us, let us long and hasten
to be with Her: We have used to account her happiness our own, therefore her
blessedness cannot make us miserable.

She is not lost, but gone before; and She could not be where She is, nor enjoy
what She does; without being parted from us, till we can overtake Her.

Be pleased also to remember that of St. Jerome, We mourn not because we have
lost such an one, but give thanks that we had such an one, yea have such an
one: for all such live to God, and whatever returns to the Lord, is to be
accounted in the number of the Family.

But I must repress my self, reflecting how needless it is to cast in my Mite
into such full Treasuries.

I am conscious to my self but of one offense, which may make me apprehend your
Frown: Which is, my adventuring to insert, without your leave or knowledge some
short touches of that Noble Stock of which her Ladyship was so conspicuous and
eminent a branch.

But as I have the Example of many Ancients, Praecepta sunt Rhetorum ut majores
ejus, qui laudandus est, et eorum gesta altius repetantur: si^que ad ipsum per
gradus sermo perveniat: qno viz. avitis paternisque virtutibus illustrior fiat,
et non degenerasse a bonis ipse videatur. Hier. de Nepotia.
and almost all Moderns, who write on such occasions; so would it have been a
great Hiatus and indecent deficiency to her Story, to have been wholly silent
in it. And I have been so concise and cautious, not to offend the humble
modesty of those who yet survive.

That when the laws of Order and Method have obtained the allowance Justice may
demand; your Honors kindness will I hope, (at least for her sake) supply what
shall be farther needful of Forgiveness.

Those few of her Ladyships pious and excellent Papers, which are inserted in
the discourse, or subjoyned to it; (as they justly may, so I hope they) will
give Ornament and Luster to it, in the Judgment of all serious Christians: As
richer Trimmings of Gold and Silk use to do to Garments made of courser
Materials.

I shall not enlarge your trouble by being importune in begging your Patronage:
It Is Natural to all to defend their own; and surely besides the many Titles you
had to me before.

Now by your Executorship, you have an Indefeasable Right to me: For nothing to
which her Ladyships Will entitles you, was more entirely Hers, and consequently
your Honors, than

Much and Truly Honored Madam, Sir, Your Honors Most Humbly Devoted and
Faithful Obedient Servant Anthony Walker.
May 27. 1678.
PROVE. 31.29, 30, 31. Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest
them all.

Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman that fears the Lord,
she shall be praised.

Give her of the fruit of her own hands, let her own works praise her in the
gates.


THat hard question which Solomon propounds in the tenth Verse of this Chapter,
Who can find a virtuous woman? I could have answered with an (...), more
rapturous and quick, and brisk, than that of Archimed^^ ^^en he had solved the
posing Problem; had not her sudden loss surprised and overballanced the joy of
finding her, and sunk it into a gulf of inexpressible grief, which might justly
strike me dumb with astonishing amazement, into the deepest silence, Prooem. in
Eccl.
as S. Jerome tells his Paula and Eustochium, it happened to himself, upon the
unexpected death of the holy Blaesilla.

And this might excuse our measuring, and wearing out, this solemn saddest
hour, not by sliding Sands, but as they used of old, by distilling drops of
Water, (...).
our bitterest and saltest Tears, or rather, if our Blood can circulate and
flow in such a consternation, and be not chilled and stagnant, with Streams of
that, both from our Veins and Hearts. But though the Laws of Nature might
indulge such gratifying of our passions, Lev. 10.3. Aaron held his peace.
as we are Men, the Law of Grace will not allow it, as we are Christians: to
whom a sullen silence is as much forbidden as a submissive holding of our peace
is changed on us.

For we must not sorrow, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
as Men without hope, for them who leep in Jesus, as without any hesitance, we
may conclude she does, who lived so entirely to him; and it would be too rank a
selfishness, and unkind a Sacrilege, to rob her, but in our wishes, of the
enjoyment of God, and the inheritance of Saints in Light, that we might again
enjoy her kind, obliging, Col. 1.12
holy conversation, in this vale of Banishment and Darkness.

If therefore, she being dead, yet speaks, as doubtless she does, Heb. 13.4.
and will do to all that had the honor and happiness to know her, either to
our comfort or conviction; let me force a passage through my obstinate and
stupifying sorrows, and partly be her Echo, partly represent her in effigy,
that by this innocent and useful way, she who is gone to live with God in
Heaven, may still live with us on Earth, in our grateful remembrance of her
virtuous perfections, in our serious practice of her wise and holy counsels,
and in a ready imitation of her exemplary Piety.

But because the most usual and useful method of instructing, is, by giving
rules first, and then illustrating those rules with apposite and fit examples,
which prove them practicable, and possible at least, if not easy also, to be
observed, I shall pursue that order, and give you the rule and measure, from
the wisest of Men in his Generation, and the example from the best of Women in
her own; the first from the Pen of the Royal Preacher, the second from the
Hearse of a noble Lady, both Epithetes which carry grandeur in their sound, and
may awaken, yea, command attention.

The whole Chapter contains a Dialogue betwixt Bathsheba and her Son Solomon,
under the well disguised name of Lemuel, wherein she, after her scandalous fall
(to show the mighty power of Divine Grace and sincere Repentance) now
consecrated to be a Prophetess, The Prophecy which his Mother taught him.
by a divine afflatus, instructs and catechises him in things of greatest
importance, and nearest concernment, which she performs with a strong Pathos,
and most winning insinuation, and has the honor to have her prudent, holy
counsels recorded in the Sacred Canon. And this fills up the nine first Verses,
and from thence he reciprocates, and in a lofty strain approves and applauds
his Mother.

This latter part presents us with the Icon and Character of an excellent and
Heroic Woman, which is laid down in two and twenty Verses, according to the
number, and in the order of the Letters of the Hebrew Alphabet; every Letter in
due sequence, beginning a several Verse, Psalm 25.34.111.119. Lament. and
diverse other.
to intimate there is somewhat signal in it, which is composed with so much art,
as we find many other eminent portions of the Holy Scriptures are.

Some Interpreters allegorize these words, and make the Virtuous Woman the
Figure of the true Church. Others refer them to the Holy and ever Blessed
Virgin Mother. Others suppose them to describe an holy and devout Soul, that
consecrates it self entirely to God in the practice of all divine and truly
ennobling Virtues. Others will have them to be, by a Prosopopoeia, the Idea of
Spiritual Wisdom, and Heroical Virtue in the Abstract. But the most, and I
think the best Expositors, esteem them the Icon, Idea, Character and Picture of
a truly Wise, Religious, Godly, Gracious Woman, drawn by the Holy Ghosts own
Pencil, in the hand of the most exquisite Master and Artist, Solomon.

He begins with an inquest after her, Who can find a virtuous Woman? implying,
she is a rare creature, and hardly found, but to encourage your search, he
assures you, she is worth looking for, her value being inestimable, for her
price is far above Pearls and Rubies, and all Precious Stones. And then
descends to draw her Pourtraicture and Beauty, with comely and due proportions,
with bright and orient colors, and sets her in the most advantageous Light, in
eighteen Verses. And finally crowns her with this Wreath of Laurels, with this
golden Coronet, with this Diadem of costly Jewels, which make my present Text.

Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou excellest them all.

Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but the woman which fears the Lord,
she shall be praised.

Give her of the fruit of her hands: let her own works praise her in the gates.

The words are a Royal Garland, set on the Temples of the Virtuous Woman, by
the hands of Solomon and God. I may not give the scent of every single Flower,
the sense of every severa word. Such solemn trifling would look like fulsome
Pedantry, and ill become the mournful gravity of this occasion.

The mixed and compound fragrancy resulting from the whole, wreathed and bound
up together, is this; That solid and true praise is only and superlatively due
to the sincerely, godly, and gracious woman, who may claim it by the fruits her
virtue has been pregnant with: or Goodness in good earnest, substantial
Religion which has fruitful hands, deserves, and shall obtain, an honorable
testimony both of God and Men.

But as too minute a niceness is unmanly, and obraids the Auditory, so too
general a procedure is confused and cloudy, acts the Dictator, and arbitrarily
imposes both on Text and Hearers, rather than deduceth fairly, and convinces
clearly: I shall therefore use that method which is free from both extremes,
taking for granted what is obvious, and rendering so, by additional Light, the
rest which needs it.

I may call this Text the Porch to the Temple of Honor, and it has two Doors,
one to shut out the bold Intruders, and false Pretenders: the other to admit
the true and rightful claimers. Plainly it shows;

1. Negatively, who does not deserve.

2. Positively, who does deserve true praise.

1. Negatively, no Woman deserves true praise.

1. For Favor.

2. For Beauty.

2. Positively, every Woman deserves true praise.

1. Who fears the Lord.

2. Who is fruitful in good works.

First, per remotionem, negatively, because the Gates of this Temple are
thronged with Worshippers, and Praise has many Candidates and Votaries, and
many run for this prize, but only one obtains it. I shall briefly show how
Solomon thrusts back, and shuts the Door against, nonsuits the Plea of most
Pretenders, under two instances, of Favor and Beauty, and by parity of reason
shocks the bold confidence of all others, who can show no better Charter for
their claim: as if he had said, whatsoever is false and vain can produce
nothing that is true and lasting: but Favor is false, deceitful, a lie. And
Beauty is a vanishing, a fading, fleeting thing; therefore all the praise you
affect, or can obtain by these, is like the Seed from whence it springs: false
and deceiving, perishing and vain, and she who sows such wind, may expect
nothing but a crop of Whirlwind, Hos. 8.7. Vide Cora. a Lapide in locum.
a blasting and a cold return.

By Favor is meant a comely presence, a graceful deportment, a winning
carriage, decent gesture, handsome motions, a ready wit, and good expression,
and a decorous conversation, made up of all these and such like Ingredients,
which is most taking, and renders Women desirable and acceptable, and procures
Favor in the Eyes and Hearts of Men.

By Beauty he understands a goodly proportion of members, a just Symmetry, and
due situation of parts with the fit mixture of the Rose and Lilly, Pulchritudo
est Gypsum sepulchro inductum, i. phlegma sanguine commi^tum pulcbre per pellem
pellucens. S. Chrysostom.
the best Varnish of a clear well colored skin, and whatever else composes an
harmonious Air. Or, if you please, Beauty, whether natural or artificial,
whether the mixture of Blood and Phlegm shining through a good skin, as S.
Chrysostom defines it, or Ceruss and Vermilion daubed on, to hide a bad one:
whether a Gift wherewith God has blessed them, or a Theft for which God will
blast them; whether the Benefit of the Author of Nature, or the Artifice of him
who delights to disguise and destroy his Workmanship.

Both these are vain and inconstant, false and deceitful, adventitious, or
external, the best no effect of our choice, as every thing must be which is
praiseworthy.

The worst proceeding from a corrupt and sinful will, therefore blameworthy,
and reproachable, not excusable, Temporis and morbi ludibrium. G. Naz. Can. 1.6.
much less commendable. Not Ague-proof, nor tenable against the first assaults
of age or sickness, nor dare be looked upon by Wind or Sun.

And not only empty, vain, and destitute of good; but fallacious and deceiving,
and full of evils, snares and bands, and nets, and great temptations. Fastus
inest pulchris, siquiturque superbia formam.
First, to the Women themselves, who have them, or who make them; too often
rendering them proud, disdainful, wanton, lascivious, despisers of others,
wasters of their time, Idolizers of their own reflections in a Glass, and
careless, or afraid to behold the image of their impurer Souls in the Crystal
of God's Law, and more afraid of being sick, or dying, than of a thousand Sins
or Hells.

Secondly, deceiving and destroying silly Men, through whose Livers, Prove. 7.23.
the seats of Lust, those mortal Darts do strike, which an invisible Bow shoots
from their wanton Glances, and bewitching Smiles and Arts.

And by parity of reason, the like may be said of all the other perishing,
empty, lying vanities: honors, riches, strength, the wisdom of the flesh, and
learning merely humane, which are but adventitious Goods at best, and seldom
make Men better, often worse. What shall I say, shall I praise you for these? I
praise you not: nor will God ever praise you, or reward you for them.

Nay, I must rather drive such false Hucsters for true praise, out of the
Temple of lasting Honor, with such a Scourge as the Prophet Jeremiah long
since prepared for that purpose; Let not the wise man glory in wisdom: Jer.
9.23.
nor the witty woman in her wit. Let not the strong man glory in his strength:
nor the fair woman glory in her Beauty. Let not the rich man glory in his
riches: nor the fine woman glory in her dress. Let not the honorable Man glory
in his Honor, nor the courted Mistress glory in her Favor. Let not the
learned Man glory in his being Natures Secretary; nor the wanton woman in being
skilled in the depths of Satan. But let him and her that would glory, and not
be ashamed, or glory in their shame, glory in this that they know the Lord, and
love and fear him in sincerity and truth. Which brings me to the positive part,
and is the foundation which Solomon lays, whereon to build a Pyramid of lasting
Fame.

Not the graceful, Pulchritudinem existima animi ornatum non in corporis forma,
sed in moribus pulchritudo sita est. Corn. a Lapide ex Chrysostom.
but the gracious woman, not she who glories in her face, but she who like the
King's Daughter is all glorious within, even the woman that fears the Lord
she shall be praised.

In which positive part we have the good Woman's Character, and Crown.

1. Her Character, which has two parts, for the new creature also consists of
Soul and Body, an inside, and an outside.

1. She fears the Lord, there is the Soul of her Virtue, the root of the matter
within ground, Grace in the Heart.

2. She has fruitful hands, there is the Body of her Virtue, the good Tree
above ground, works in her life.

2. Her Crown, Praise and Renown. Which is,

1. Promised to her: She shall be praised.

2. Commanded for her: Give her of the fruit of her hands, let her own works
praise her in the gates.

3. Performed concerning her: Thou excellest them all.

As briefly as may be concerning these Particulars: and first let us view both
Pages on which her Character is written.

1. A woman that fears the Lord, that is, who is sincerely religious, good in
good earnest. Nothing is more frequent or obvious in Scripture than such
Synechdoches, as put one eminent Grace for all the Chain of Graces. So
sometimes the Love of God, sometimes Trust in God, and most commonly the Fear
of God is put for being truly religious, or is made the Periphrasis of a godly
Man. As in that signal promise of the New Covenant, Jer. 32.38, 39, 40. They
shall be my people, and I will be their God, and I will give them one heart,
and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and their
Children after them. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them to do them good, and I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Job 1.1. There was a man in the
land of Uz, whose name was Job, and that man was perfect and upright, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil: so verse. 8. Have thou considered my servant Job,
that there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one
that fears God, and escheweth evil. verse. 9. Does Job fear God for naught?
Eccl. 12.13. Fear. God, and keep his Commandments, that is the whole of Man:
Psalm. 15.4. He honors them that fear the Lord; where the godly Man is under
this Denomination of one that fears the Lord, opposed to the wicked, called
there a vile person. It Is also an infallible sign of the presence of all other
Graces, in the exercise of which true Godliness consists; for as the Law is
copulative, so are the Graces by which we obey it, and as where the Soul is
discovering it self by one vital act, all its faculties and powers are; so
where the Spirit of God is working one Grace in truth, the Spirit of all Grace
is, for the Spirit can no more be without its Graces, than the Soul without its
Faculties: yea, the fear of God contains all Graces in it, therefore when
Abraham offered up his Son Isaac, which was a mighty act of Faith and Love: God
says, Now I know thou fear me, Genesis 22.12. And as it is so frequent, it
would be endless to cite all, so it is so obvious, it is needless to cite more.

2. The other Page has this Inscription, Fruitful hands: the good Woman is
like Dorcas full of good works.

1. Hands, two Hands to hold the two Tables of the Law, Deuteronomy. 9.15.
as Moses came down from the Mount with the two Tables in his two hands, in
each hand one, neither empty nor idle.

The first in the Right Hand, there is Religion toward God. The second Table in
the Left Hand, there is Righteousness and Charity toward Men.

2. These Hands bear Fruit, good works spring, and grow naturally, freely,
seasonably, easily, maturely as fruits from a prolifique Tree, planted in a
good soil, and by the Waters side, as the godly Man is described in the first
Psalm: called Fruits of Righteousness, Fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. where S.
Paul has a signal Antithesis betwixt Graces and Vices, calling the first
Fruits, the other Works; the Works of the Flesh: verse. 19. There Is servile
drudgery in them: Fruits of the Spirit: verse. 22. There Is a spiritual easiness
in the production of them by the new Nature.

3. They are Fruits, in the plural, for variety of kinds, for number in every
kind. First, various acts of Devotion, Prayers, Praises, Reading, Hearing,
Meditation, Conference, Preparing, Communicating, and all these reiterated, the
Morning and the Evening Sacrifice, the weekly Sabbaths, solemn Fasts and
Festivals, secret, private, public Devotions, Morning, Evening, and at Noon
day: Psalm. 119.
yea, at Midnight, seven times a day: yea, in a sober sense, all the day long,
nay, all day, and all night too, as it is testified of Anna, Luke 2.37. That
she departed not from the Temple, but served God with fasting and prayers night
and day. 1 These 5. Romans 12.12.
Pray without ceasing, continuing instant in prayer, giving thanks continually,
and in all things.

And the Left Hand, though it grow on another Arm, draws Sap and Virtue from
the same Tree and Root, to make it fruitful in variety and multitude of Acts of
Justice and Charity.

1. Of Justice, thinking, speaking no evil of any Man, but dealing honestly
with all Men, Superiors, Equals, Inferiors, in all natural, moral, civil
Actions, in all concernments of Body, Goods and Name, wronging no Man,
defrauding no Man, but doing to others as they would others should do to them;
and observing this rule constantly, and in all occasions and occurrences, and
so doing righteousness at all times.

2. In Charity, Matthew. 25.
relieving the distressed, feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting
the afflicted by sickness, prison, or any other pressures, instructing the
ignorant, comforting the feeble-minded, and supporting them who are cast down
under any temptation, Eccl. 12.6.^.
and this not once or twice, or to one or two, but sowing this seed in the
Morning, and not withholding in the Evening, giving this portion to seven, and
also to eight, casting Bread upon the waters, yea, scattering by all waters.
This briefly of the good Woman's character.

2. Her Crown, Praise: Praise is the shadow which attends the Body of Virtue.
The Echo which sounds an honorary Testimony.

1. From the Consciences of all Men, even those who will not practice it
themselves, cannot but approve it and applaud it in them that do; if there be
any virtue, if there be any praise, the Apostle of the Gentiles, nay, the
Consciences of the very Gentiles has annexed them so close together, Se Judice
nemo nocens absolvitur.
they cannot be parted: for as no vicious and guilty person can be absolved,
though he were to be his own Judge: so no virtuous person can be condemned,
Romans 2.
though to be judged by his Enemies. That law written in the heart cannot but
approve the Transcript, and Counter-part, and Copy of it self where ere it
meets it.

2. From the Mouths of all good Men, and those especially who have found and
felt its beneficial influence.

Beloved, thou do faithfully whatever thou do to the Brethren, 3 John 5.6.
and to Strangers, which have born witness of thy Charity before the Church: S.
Paul even boasted of the forward zeal of them of Achaia, 2 Cor. 9.12, 13. 2
Cor. 8.3
and God was glorified for their liberal distribution to all Men. And of the
Churches of Macedonia he bears record, That to their power, yea, and beyond
their power they were willing of themselves. Job 31.20.
The Loins of the poor blessed Job who were warmed by the sleece of his Sheep:
Her children rise up and call her blessed, for the care of their tender and
pious education, and her husband for her chaste conversation and faithful
industry, of which he is not only a witness, but reaps the benefit of it, and
for those he praises her.

3. From the whole Chorus of the Heavenly Hierarchy, the Angels Joy in Heaven,
is the most landative acclamation to her Virtues.

4. From God and Christ, whose Euge, Well done, good and faithful servants,
whose, Come ye blessed of my Father, whose testimony, I was hungry, Matthew. 25.
and ye fed me; naked, and ye clothed me; is the highest praise imaginable, or
possible.

Now this praise is first promised, She shall be praised: God leaves us not
without encouragements to make us good. Promises and Threats, Rewards and
Punishments, are the great instruments of Government, both with God and Men;
and all Rewards include Praise, and are the silent, yet the loudest
commendations.

A Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.
and Life, is provided, and fore-promised, to them that fight the good Fight,
that keep the Faith, that are faithful unto death. Great and precious promises,
2 Cor. 6.7.
that God will receive us, be our Father and our God, to provoke us to cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness in the
fear of God. 1 Pet.
An Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven: Rivers of pleasure, fullness of joy, an eternal Kingdom, and everlasting
life. And in the Letter, the highest praise, Romans 2.28.
for he that is circumcised in heart and spirit, that is a Christian within,
his praise shall be of God, and he is approved indeed whom God commends; Ps.
11.26.
and we have God's word for it, that the righteous shall be in everlasting
remembrance.

2. It Is commanded and given in charge concerning her to others. Give her of
the fruit of her hands; let her works praise her in the Gates. Let them be
spoken of and mentioned to her honor in the Assemblies of the great Men, and
in the concourse of the people, which use to be most frequent in the Gates; God
gives not only leave, but charge; and it is not only an allowable courtesy, but
a just debt and tribute due to virtuous persons, to declare and celebrate their
famous Acts. It Is an Apostolical precept to the Philippians concerning
Epaphroditus, who for the work of Christ was near unto death; hold him, and not
him only, but such as he, in reputation. Phil. 2.29.
Yea, our Lord himself concerning Mary, who anointed him, and wrought a good
work upon him: Mat. 26.13.
Praedicendo praecepit, Verily, I say unto you, wheresoever this Gospel shall
be preached in the whole world, there shall also this that this woman has done
be told, for a memorial of her. And God will have the Virtues and the Victories
of his Saints recorded, to provoke our imitation of them, and encourage our
weakness to war against vice, says S. Gregory.

3. It Is performed concerning her, thou excellest them all; 1 Cor. 14.12.
we should labor to excel in Duty. Seek that you may excel. What do you more
than others? See that ye abound more and more, so run, outrun others, that ye
may obtain; and praise shall be proportionable: Thou excellest them all. We
find such Encomiums frequent in Scripture. Thus of Hezekiah, 2 King. 18.5. He
trusted in the Lord God of Israel, so that after him was none like him of all
the kings of Israel, nor any that was before him, that is, for strength of
Faith. So of Josiah, 2 King. 23.25. And like unto him there was no king before
him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his soul, and
with all his might, according to the Law of Moses, neither after him arose any
like him. So God's testimony of Job, Job 1.8. is, That there was not a Man like
him in all the earth. So S. Paul testifies of Timothy, Phil. 2.20. I have no
man like minded, who will naturally care for your estate.

Thus have I lightly shaken the principal Branches of this goodly Tree: and the
ripe and pleasant Fruit which is fallen from them all, I shall pick up and
serve in one Dish. To be sincerely religious, to be a virtuous, gracious, godly
woman is the highest accomplishment, and deserves the greatest praise: nay,
it is the most honorable testimony can be given to any, to say of her in truth,
she was godly, and feared the Lord.

There seems to be a great agreement and likeness betwixt the hundred and forty
fourth Psalm, in point of happiness, and this Chapter in matter of Duty; and
Praise resulting from it. And therefore the transcribing those words, may give
much light and illustration to what lies before us. David therefore to show,
populum quae faciunt beatiorem, What will make a people happy, proceeds thus,
v. 12. That our sons may be as plants grown up in their youth, that our
daughters may be as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace.
Verse. 13. That our garners may be full, affording all manner of store, that our
Sheep may bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our Streets. Verse. 14.
That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no breaking in, nor going
out, that there be no complaining in our Streets. Verse. 15. Happy is that
people that is in such a case. Every one will be ready to acknowledge and
admire the happiness of such a People. But says David, I Will tell you who are
infinitely and more truly happy, yea, who are only so indeed; yea, happy is
that people whose God is the Lord. So Solomon in this Chapter, to describe the
Woman who deserves praise, she that is so good a wife, that the heart of her
Husband does safely trust in her, that will do him good, and not evil all the
days of his life, that is a Crown to him, and renders him honorable in the
gates. She that is so good an Houswife, that she works willingly with her
hands, stays at home, rises early, is industrious, planteth, purchases,
increases her estate, she that is so good a Mother, as to educate her children
well, and so good a Mistress as to provide most carefully for all her servants,
that they are so far from wanting clothes, that their Liveries are Scarlet. She
that is so good a Neighbor that she treats the rich, and relieves the poor and
needy, Super omni^ a vultus accessere boni.
and obliges all by the law of kindness in her tongue, sweetning all by kindest
words, and kinder looks. This Woman certainly deserves to be admired; yea, is
almost adored as a terrestrial Goddess. But after all this, says Solomon, yet
show I you a more excellent way to obtain true and lasting praise; the godly
Woman, the Woman that fears the Lord, she, she deserves to be praised above
all others.

Most Men and Women affect to be praised, but it is for the most part for vain
and deceitful things, which deserve no praise at all; and if they attain any,
it is a poor and empty praise which may sound and make a noise in the world,
amongst the foolish heard, but signifies little with wise Men, and nothing at
all with God, who designs Glory and Honor for none but those who seek it by
patient continuance in well doing, and working good, Romans 2.7, 10. But to fear
the Lord, that is, to be godly, this deserves praise indeed. A truth so
evident, and clear by its own light, it is hard to add any thing to it for proof
or illustration, to make it clearer, nature has printed it in our hearts, and
the new nature in a second and fairer edition, as a common principle. And first
notions are indemonstrable.

To praise is to bear witness, or give an honorable testimony, of a Man or
Woman's having such a Virtue, Grace, Perfection, Excellency in them, and the
very acknowledging and testifying that they have them, is a praising of them
highly: as Acts 11.24. Barnabas is abundantly praised, in that testimony that
he was a good man, full of the Holy Ghost, and of faith, without adding other
encomiastick Words. So when God himself vouchsafes to write Job's Panegyric,
Job 1.1. he calls him his servant, a perfect and an upright man, one that
fears God, and escheweth evil. Acts 13.22.
And S. Paul expressly says, that God gave testimony to David, when he said of
him, I have found David a man after mine own heart, who shall fulfill my will.
For as we say for reproach, call a man ungrateful, and you can say no worse,
you have stigmatized him with the foulest brand. So for Praise, call a Woman
Godly, you need say no more, there is praise enough in that. So that if you
confine me strictly, I must stick in the Center, and draw no lines from it, but
all will return upon it self, and be the Epha never so full, it will settle
upon its own Base: I may say aliud, but not amplius, none can be commended
highlyer, than to have this Character impressed, they fear the Lord.

Again if I should compare the fear of the Lord with other things to give it
its due preference, or let my self loose into an enumeration of its causes,
properties, effects, signs, consequents, advantages, and unseasonably
commonplace upon it, I should lanch into an Ocean, in which I should lose my
self and your patience, and despair to kenn a shore in more than an hours
sailing: I shall therefore confine my self, or rather willingly submit to be
confined by the straits of time, to very narrow measures, which shall be these
two:

1. To point in general at the objects of Praise, and show what interest
Religion or the Fear of God has in them.

2. To show what usually acquires praise to men, in reference to God, their
Neighbors and themselves, and declare how being sincerely religious, will
entitle us to it on those Accounts.

1. As to the Objects of true Praise. 'The first and grand object of Praise is
God, and the divine perfections, which is so evident through all the
Scriptures, and to the light of Reason, that I Will not waste time to prove it;
and consequently, what is next to them, and likest to them, is the next, and
first in the order of the secondary objects of Praise. Now that is the Image of
God reflected and imprinted on the Soul of Man; and this, Religion and the Fear
of God produces: Ephesians. 4.24. The new man is created after God's image in
righteousness and true holiness: And Coloss. 3.10. The new man is renewed in
knowledge after the image of him that created him.

And they that sincerely embrace the great and precious promises of the Gospel,
are thereby made partakers of the divine nature: A God-like temper and
disposition. For Godliness is Godlikeness. Therefore it is enjoined in such
language, Be ye holy, for I am holy: or, as I am holy, says the Lord. 1 Pet.
1.16. and Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful as your Father is merciful; and be ye
perfect as your heavenly father is perfect, Matthew. 5.48. They therefore that
approach so near the most praiseworthy object, deserve great praise.

2. The object of Praise is some excellent good, it must be good, or it
deserves reproach; but it must be also excellent, or no notice is taken of it.
Now the fear of God is excellent, Psalm. 19. The Saints are the excellent of the
earth; Psalm. 16.3. The righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor, Prove.
12.26. Wisdom excels folly, as light excels darkness, Eccles. 2.13. And
the things of God's law, wherein good men exercise themselves, are said to be
more excellent, Romans 2.18. The godly therefore are to be praised, for they are
excellent.

3. It must be a chosen good, for it would be no praise for any Man (if that
were possible) to be good without, or against his will. If I do this thing
willingly I have a reward: 1 Cor. 9.17. Now this good woman chooses. Mary has
chosen the good part: Luke 10.42. (And so did our honorable Mary, if ever any)
and it is employed in the reproach cast upon Sinners: Prove. 1.29. That they did
not choose the fear of the Lord: that the Saints do choose it: Psalm. 119.30. I
have chosen the way of truth, thy judgments have I laid before me: and verse.
137. I have chosen thy precepts. Isa. 56.4. The eunuchs which choose the things
which please me. And it is the high commendation of Moses, Heb. 11.25, 26. That
he chose to suffer affliction with the people of God, rather than to enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season, and esteemed the reproach of Christ, greater
riches than the treasures of Egypt.

4. It must be some permanent and abiding good, not fading, not like the
morning cloud and early dew: now the fear of the Lord endures for ever: Psalm.
19.9.
and where it is in truth it will both continue and grow. The righteous is an
everlasting foundation: Prove. 10.25. The good part they choose shall not be
taken away.

They repent not of their repentance, and Christ has prayed that their faith
fail not.

They go from strength to strength till they appear before God perfect in Zion,
and bring forth more fruit in their age.

The path way of the just is as the shining light: Pov. 4.18.
which shines more unto the perfect day.

2. I shall consider the object of Praise more specially, and what men are
esteemed to merit praise for, with respect to God, their Neighbors and
themselves.

1. Men are praised for their well performing of their duty to God, as good
servants.

2. For their Beneficence to men in all relations, as useful, just, kind,
charitable amongst and toward all men.

3. For their wisdom to themselves, as being prudent, discreet, and wise in
their own concerns.

Now Religion, the Fear of the Lord, is productive of all these in an eminent
degree; and therefore are they greatly to be praised in whom it is.

1. This fear will make good servants to God. This is a principal part of a
servants duty. Mal. 1.6. If I be a Master where is my fear? Now this fear is
the root of universal obedience: he that fears God will not, dare not offend
him: Fear God and keep his Commandments, this is the whole duty of man: Eccles.
12.13. Only fear the Lord, and serve him; if you fear him, you will not fail to
serve him. What does the Lord require of thee, Deuteronomy. 10.12.
but to fear him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and soul:
serve the Lord with fear, Psalm. 2. Let us have grace whereby we may serve God
acceptably with reverence and godly fear: Heb. 12.28. Yea, the fear of God will
help to clean from all filthiness both of flesh and spirit, and to perfect
holiness: 2 Cor. 7.1. So that if it be praiseworthy to be a dutiful child and
obedient servant to God, as certainly nothing deserves it better; the woman
that fears the Lord has a just claim to Praise.

2. The fear of the Lord will make fruitful in all good offices to our
Neighbor, humble and obedient to Superiors, careful of, and tender to
Inferiors, just and kind to all, and munificent and liberal to those that are
in want. This good woman in the Text, who fears the Lord in her heart, had
fruitful hands, and works of her own to praise her in the gates.

It Is the excellency of Religion to make good in all relations. Good
Magistrates, it is the first qualification of Jethro's Justice: Able men that
fear God: Exodus 18.21.

So Nehemiah of himself, Neh. 5.15. The former Governors which were before me,
had been chargeable to the people, and had taken of them bread, and wine, and
forty shekels of silver, yea, even their servants had rule over the people, but
so did not I because of the fear of God, and good Subjects: Fear thou the Lord,
and the King; Prove. 24.21. Fear God, and honor the King: 1 Pet. 2.17. One will
enforce the other, and will make subject for conscience sake: Romans 13.5.

It will make loving and good Husbands, and it will make good and obedient
Wives, like Sarah; for holy women who trust in God are in subjection to their
own husbands: 1 Pet. 3. And this made this Virtuous Woman so excellent a Wife.
It will make good Family-Governours, who will walk in their house with a
perfect heart, and will neither provoke their Children, nor deny what is equal
to their servants, whilst they remember themselves have a Father, and a Master
in heaven; Col. 4.1. It will make dutiful children, and faithful servants.
Servants obey in all things your Masters according to the flesh, not with
eye-service, as men pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing God: Col.
3.22. In a word, it will make honest and righteous in our whole conversation:
S. Peter puts together Acts 10.35. Fearing God and working righteousness.

It renders also charitable and bountiful to them in need; this good Woman,
verse. 20. Stretches out her hands to the poor; yea, she reaches out her hands
to the needy. The good man is ever merciful, and lends; yea, liberal, and
gives.

Cornelius is described, Acts 10.1. A devout man that feared God, and gave much
alms to the people; and S. James tells us, that true Religion and undefiled is
to visit the fatherless, and widows in their affliction, that is to relieve
them.

So that if to be good in all relations, and to be a Benefactor and common good
to mankind, deserves praise, the fear of God deserves it, which makes men such.

Thirdly and lastly, the fear of the Lord will make a man wise for himself, to
do himself good: And men will praise thee when thou do well to thy self;
Psalm. 49.18. And nothing is more praiseworthy in man's account, than to be
wise, nor in the account of God, than to be wise to salvation. Now the fear of
the Lord not only makes wise, but is wisdom it self.

The fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is
understanding: Job 28.28.

Wisdom and Godliness are synonymous words in the Holy Ghost's Language, the
wise man is the good man, ( wise virgins, Matthew. 25.) and the wicked man the
fool. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; the head, the chief of
wisdom; a good understanding have all they that keep his commandments. The
praise of every one of them who do so endures for ever: Psalm. 111, ult.

I am loath, notwithstanding the straits of time, to dismiss this great truth
without some short improvement, let me therefore take advantage from the desire
of fame and praise, which nature has planted in us all.

1. To reprove the blindness and folly of Men who will not see, or seeing, not
pursue the only true and safe, and sure method of attaining it, by laboring to
be soundly and sincerely godly, but build upon the sand, that hollow, sinking
ground, which will not bear this triumphal Arch, this Royal Pillar; their
natural, fortuitous, acquired accomplishments, their strength, beauty, riches,
honor, fleshly wisdom, all which are perishing and vain, false and deceiving,
and will crown them at last but with fading flowers, and withering garlands,
with the praise of foolish men, like themselves; never with that praise which
comes from God: for the Lord takes no pleasure in the legs of a man, Psalm.
147.10.
nor in the face of a woman: in the strength of the one, nor in the beauty of
the other; but the Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him, and hope in his
mercy. I beseech you therefore, and adjure you by all the obligations of duty
to God, and wisdom for your selves, devote your selves to the fear of God
entirely. Resolve to be good in very good earnest; to be Christians indeed, and
Christians within, circumcised in heart and spirit, Romans 2.28.
that your praise may be of God, 1 Pet. 1.7.
and not of men: and found in the faith, that it may be found to praise, and
honor, and glory, at the appearance of Jesus Christ.

And to encourage you, lift up your eyes, bestow one steady, wishful glance
upon the goodly fruit, with which this tree of life is laden, of which,
whoever eats shall never die, but live for ever.

1. All your sins shall be pardoned, you shall have peace with God, with
conscience, and with all the creatures; acceptance of your persons, and of all
your services.

2. You shall be freed from the power, the filth, and the deceitfulness of sin,
the vassalage of Satan, the sting of death, and from the pit, and fear of Hell.

3. Your Souls shall be repaired to their original perfections and excellencies
in the Image of God, and participation of the Divine Life.

4. You shall be ingrafted into Christ, adopted into the Family of God, made
temples of the Holy Ghost, with all the Blessings which are consequent on these.

5. You shall be heirs of all the promises; yea, inherit all things: have all
your wants supplied, all just desires satisfied, all conditions sanctified, all
providence blessed, to promote your everlasting good.

Lastly, you shall be crowned with the unwithering Laurels of true, and of
eternal praises, by Men, by Angels, and by Christ, and God; and when you die in
nature, begin to live in glory; go to God and see his face, and be for ever
with him, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are
pleasures for ever more.

And for further quickening and strengthening you against the difficulties which
may seem to meet you, and to obstruct you in this excellent way. Let me set
before you the examples of the Saints of God, who, though men of like passions
with your selves, inwardly clogged with the same corrupt and sinful nature,
outwardly beset with the like or same temptations, cast off the weight which
hung upon them, broke through the difficulties which did encompass them, and
ran the race which was set before them, and through faith and patience
obtained, and now inherit the promises, and that sure reward, that Diadem of
Joy, and Praise, which God has provided, and Christ has purchased for, and
promised to them that love and fear him, and wait for his appearance. Reflect
on all the Worthies of the Old Testament, and New, the holy Patriarchs,
Prophets and Apostles, the noble Army of Martyrs, all the primitive Christians,
whose names are recorded in the Church's Story, all the devout men and women of
succeeding ages; and follow that Cloud of Witnesses, as Israel followed that
Pillar of Cloud and Fire, through the wilderness till they arrived at Canaan.

And that you may not doubt, or fear that God's Arm is shortened, or his hand
grown weak, his Bowels straightened, or the aids of his Grace less powerful,
sufficient, yea, exuberant than they were of old.

Let me set before you an illustrious, an Heroic, a recent instance, fresh in
your memories, known to you all, a President, as much beyond exception, as
example, which may silence all your cavils of difficulty, and much more of
impossibility.

I mean the thrice honorable, and truly noble, the most excellent and
incomparable Lady, the sacred Shrine of whose venerable Hearse we are now
drenching with the just tribute of our floods of tears, and strewing with the
sweetest Flowers of Applause and Admiration, though they as much too few, as
these too pale and faint for such an offering.

She was a Woman, of the feebler Sex, a sinful daughter of first sinning Eve, a
rich woman, and how hardly can such be saved? That had as much business to
divert her, and as much plenty to entertain her, as much beauty to tempt her,
and as much favor to entangle her, as any of you, and lived in the same
atheistical, degenerate age with your selves, wherein sincere and serious
Religion is made the greatest Ridicule, esteemed the most unmodish and
unfashionable thing.

And yet in the midst of all these disadvantages, I may without Hyperbole
invite you, as the Crier used to call Spectators to the secular Plays: Come see
those Shows, Quos nemo mortalium vidit, vel visurus est, Come see, come hear
such an example of Heroic Virtue, of Generous Piety, of sincere, humble,
unaffected, serious, fruitful Religion, as in all respects this age has not
produced, as has had rare, if any Presidents to follow, and will I fear be
followed by few, or none, but with long distant intervals.

An hundred Mouths and a thousand Tongues, Si mihi sin^ centum linguae, sint
oraque centum.
though they all flowed with Nectar, would be too few to praise her. O for a
Chrysostom's Mouth, for an Angel's Tongue to describe this terrestrial
Seraphim; or a ray of light condensed into a pencil, and made tactile to give
you this glorious child of light in vive Effigy.

But what great Masters can present in minature? what skillful hand epitomize
so great a soul, and draw her in little (on so few remaining Sands) who had
nothing little, nothing mean, but a little esteem of her own perfections, and
being mean in her own eyes.

For she was truly excellent, and great in all respects: great in the honor of
her Birth, being born a Lady, and a Virtuosa both, Seventh Daughter of that
eminently Honorable Richard, the First Earl of Cork, who being born a private
Gentleman, and younger Brother of a younger Brother, to no other Heritage than
is expressed in the Device and Motto, which his humble Gratitude inscribed on
all the Palaces he built, God's Providence, mine Inheritance. By that
Providence, and his diligent and wise Industry, raised such an Honor and
Estate, and left such a Family as never any Subject of these three Kingdoms
did, and that with so unspotted a reputation of integrity, that the most
invidious scrutiny could find no blot, though it winnowed all the methods of
his Rising most severely, which our good Lady has often told me with great
content and satisfaction.

This Noble Lord by his prudent and pious Consort, no less an Ornament and
Honor to their Descendants than himself, was blessed with five Sons, of which
he lived to see four Lords, and Peers of the Kingdom of Ireland.

And a Fifth, more than these Titles speak, a Sovereign and Peerless, in a
larger Province, that of universal nature, subdued, and made obsequious to his
inquisitive mind.

And eight Daughters.

And that you may remark how all things were extraordinary in this great
Personage: it will, I hope, be neither unpleasant, nor impertinent, to add a
short Story, I had from our Lady's own mouth.

Master Boil (who was then a Widdower) came one Morning to wait upon Sir
Jeoffry Fenton, at that time a great Officer of State in the Kingdom of
Ireland; who being engaged in business, and not knowing who it was who desired
to speak with him, a while delayed him access, which time he spent pleasantly
with his young Daughter in her Nurses Arms. But when Sir Jeoffrey came, and saw
whom he had made attend somewhat long, he civilly excused it. But Master Boil
replied, he had been very well entertained, and spent his time much to his
satisfactiou, in courting his Daughter, if he might obtain the Honor to be
accepted for his Son-in-law. At which Sir Jeoffrey smiling, (to hear one who
had been formerly married, move for a Wife carried in Arms, and under two years
old) asked him, if he would stay for her: to which he frankly answered him he
would, and Sir Jeoffrey as generously promised him, he should then have his
full consent. And they both kept their words honorably. And by this virtuous
Lady he had thirteen Children, ten of which he lived to see honorably married,
and died a Grandfather by the youngest of them.

Nor did she derive less honor from the collateral, than the descending Line,
being Sister by Soul and Genius, as well as Blood to these great Personages,
whose illustrious, unspotted, and resplendent Honor, and Virtue, and whose
useful Learning, and accurate Pens may atone and expiate, as well as shame,
the scandalous Blemishes of a debauched, and the many impertinencies of a
scribbling Age.

1. Richard the truly Right Honorable, Loyal, Wise, and Virtuous Earl of
Burlington and Cork, whose life is his fairest, and most laudable Character.

2. The Right Honorable Roger, Earl of Orery, that great Poet, great
Statesman, great Soldier, and great Everything which merits the name of Great
or Good.

3. Francis, Lord Shannon: whose Pocket-Pistol, as he styles his Book, may make
as wide Breaches in the Walls of the Capital, as many Canons.

4. And that Honorable, and well known name R. Boil, Esquire, that profound
Philosopher, accomplished Humanist, and excellent Divine, I had almost said
Lay-Bishop. as one has styled Sir H. Savil, whose Works alone may make a
Library.

The Female Branches also (if it be lawful so to call them. whose Virtues were
so masculine, Souls knowing no difference of Sex) by their Honors and Graces
(by mutual reflections) gave, and received luster, to, and from her.

The Eldest of which, the Lady Alice, was married to the Lord Baramore.

The Second, the Lady Sarah, to the Lord Digby of Ireland.

The Third, the Lady Laetitia, to the eldest Son of the Lord Goring, who died
Earl of Norwich.

The Fourth, the Lady Joan, to the Earl of Kildare, not only Primier Earl of
Ireland, but the ancientest House in Christendom of that degree, the present
Earl being the six and twentieth, or seven and twentieth of Lineal Descent.
And, as I have heard, it was that great Antiquary, King Charles the First his
observation, that the three anientest Families in Europe for Nobility, were the
Veres in England, Earls of Oxford, and the Fitz-Geralds in Ireland, Earls of
Kildare: and Momorancy in France. It Is observable, that the present young Earl
of Kildare is a mixture of the Blood of Fitz-Geralds and Veres.

The Fifth, the Lady Katharine, who was married to the Lord Vicount Ranelaugh,
and Mother to the present generous Earl of Ranelaugh, of which Family I could
have added an eminent Remark, I meet with in Fuller's Worthies.

This Lady's Character is so signalized by her known Merit, among all Persons
of Honor; that as I need not, so I dare not attempt beyond this one word, She
was our Lady's Friend-Sister.

The Sixth, the Lady Dorothy Loftus.

The Seventh (the number of Perfection) which shut up and crowned this noble
Train, (for the Eighth, the Lady Margaret died unmarried) was our excellent
Lady Mary, married to Charles Earl of Warwick: of whom, if I should use the
Language of my Text, I should neither despair their pardon, nor fear the
reproach of rudeness: Many Daughters, all his Daughters did virtuously; but
thou --

She was Great by her Marriage into the Noble Neighboring Family, which yet
received accession to its Grandeur, by the luster of her Name and Virtues. But
she needed neither borrowed Shades, nor reflexive Lights, to set her off, being
personally great in all natural Endowments and Accomplishments of Soul, and
Body, Wisdom, Beauty, Favor, Virtue.

Great by her Tongue; for never Woman used one better, speaking so gracefully,
promptly, discreetly, pertinently, holily, that I have often admired the edifying
words that proceeded from her Mouth.

Great by her Pen, as you may (Ex pede Herculem) discover by that little taste
of it, the world has been happy in the hasty fruit of one or two interrupted
hours after Supper, which she professed to me with a little regret, when she
was surprised with it is sliding into the world, without her knowledge, or
allowance, and wholly beside her expectation.

Great by being the greatest Mistress, and Promotress, not to say the
Foundress, and Inventress of a new Science -- The Art of obliging; in which she
attained that Sovereign Perfection, that she reigned over all their hearts with
whom she did converse.

Great in her nobleness of Living, and in her free and splendid Hospitality.

Great in the unparalled sincerity of constant, faithful, condescending
Friendship; and for that law of kindness which dwelt in her Lips and Heart.

Great in her dexterity of Management.

Great in her quickness to apprehend the difficulties of her Affairs, and where
the stress and pinch lay, to untie the Knot, and loose and ease them.

Great in the conquest of her self, and mastery of her passions, as I could
give several pregnant instances, but epecially in that of the death of her dear
and only Son; wherein her behavior was so submiss, serene, and calm, I confess
I cannot but judge it scarce imitable, or attainable by any other.

Great in a thousand things besides, which the world admires as such; but I can
be, and here profess my self her faithful witness, she despised them all, and
counted them but loss and dung in comparison of the fear of God, and the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord.

The Substance of great Volumes uses to be summarily contracted into Contents
and Titles. All I have said is but an imperfect Index, to this great Folio of
Voluminous Virtue. You that knew her must have the Book before you, turn over
the leaves of your own memories, and read with pleasure what those hints refer
you to.

But I promised you to present her, as an example of Solomon's Rule, let us
therefore bring her, and the Text together, and never two were better met. If
ever this Scripture were fulfilled, it is this day fulfilled in your ears.

O thou Great, Heroic, Noble, Blessed Soul, (and blessed be that God, and
Grace that made thee such) Many daughters have done virtuously, but thou
excellest them all. Though thou wantedst not Beauty, and did exceed in
Favor; thou did neither prize them, nor catch at praises by them, but did
fear the Lord with all thy heart, and esteemedst that thy only praise and
honor. Thy hands were fruitful, and thy lips too, and thy Fruits were many,
pleasant, useful, seasonable, ripe, sweet, and fragrant: both to God and Man.

Thou art now praising God, and we are praising thee: with the Sprigs of those
Laurels will we crown thee which thy own hands did plant, and eyes did water;
that God may be praised in thee, and for thee, and others drawn by holy
emulation to transcribe thy Copy. I shall begin with that which always had the
first place in her care, and heart, her Religion, and Piety, which in the
language of my Text, is the fear of the Lord. And I may, as is said of
Hannaniah, Neh. 7.2. truly attest, that she feared the Lord above many; above
most, not to say above all: that she feared the Lord greatly, as is testified
of Obadiah, 1 King. 18.3. Or as David calls himself Gods servant devoted to his
fear: Psalm. 119.38. So might she most truly.

I shall give you an account of,

1. Her Entrance, or Beginning.

2. Progress, or Growth.

1. Practice, and Exercise of Religion as to her self.

2. Of her Zeal, and holy Industry to promote it, and encourage it in others.

First, as to her beginning to be seriously Religious, and to make it her
business in good earnest, though she had good education, and had been
principled in the Grounds of Catechism in her youth: yet she would confess she
understood nothing of the life and power of Religion upon her heart, had no
spiritual sense of it, till some years after she was married. She has told me
also with what prejudice and strange apprehensions, as to matters of Religion,
she came into the Family in which she lived and died with so much Honor, for
she was almost frighted with the disadvantageous account was given of it: but
when she came to see the regular performance of divine Worship, and hear the
useful, edifying, preaching of the most necessary, practical, and substantial
truths, and observe the order and good Government, and received encouragement
from her Right Honorable Father-in-law, who had always an extraordinary value
for her, and affection to her: her prejudice wore off, and approbation
followed. Which minds me of a comparison, used by the Learned P. Martyr, which
occasioned the Conversion of the Pious Galeacius Caracciolus.

If a Man standing at a great distance see a Company dancing, he wonders at
their antic Gestures, and seemingly ridiculous motions, and thinks them a
company of mad men: but if he approaches nearer, and comes within the hearing
of the sweet and harmonious Music, which guides and measures out those
motions, and observes how regularly one answers to the other, he then admires
them, approves their decency and order, and desires to dance with them. So if a
man take up the reports the world gives of serious Christians, or sees them at
a distance busily attending all the duties of their holy Calling and
Profession, he thinks of them as Festus did of Paul: that they are beside
themselves, or mad: but if he acquaint himself more thoroughly with them, and
hears and understands the Word of God, which is as it were the Music to which
they dance, and takes notice how they measure all their motions by its melody,
he sees such an agreeing and beautiful conformity betwixt them; he cannot but
approve it, and join with them.

God made use of two more remote means of her Conversion, Afflictions, and
Retirement, the kind of the first, and the occasion of the second need not here
be named. Only the divine Wisdom and Grace is very adorable, for adapting
suitable means to bring his purposes to pass: as these were in her
circumstances, for she would since acknowledge that her great difficulty and
remora, was her love of the pleasures and vanities of the world, which she
neither knew how to reconcile with the strictness of Religion, nor yet could be
content to part with for that, whose sweets and better pleasures, she was not
then acquainted with: God therefore gradually weaned her, by rendering more
insipid what had too much pleased her, and by giving her vacancy and freedom
from distraction, to acquaint her self more thoroughly with the things of God.
By which she was enabled to set to her seal to that testimony which God gives
to spiritual Wisdom, That all her ways are pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace: and to her Friends would frequently and freely do it, assuring them That
she had no cause to repent the change she found, of the solid and satisfying
pleasures she obtained in Religion, for those unquiet, empty ones, she left in
ways of vanity: thereby encouraging them to try, not doubting, but upon
experience they would become of the same mind.

Two more immediate helps which God blessed to her, were the preaching of the
Word (which God has ordained for the salvation of them that believe: 1 Cor.
1.21.) and Christian Conference, and (because such an hint may do others good)
the pressing the necessity of speedy and true repentance, and showing the
danger of procrastination, and puttings off, and stifling present convictions
by delay: This seemed to turn the wavering, trembling balance, and to fix the
scale of her resolution.

This is about nine and twenty years since, from which time (though before her
conversation was viceless, sweet, and inoffensive, yet she would confess her
mind was vain) she walked with God most closely, circumspectly, accurately. And
I verily believe few (if any) ever chose the better part, more resolutely than
this our noble Mary, or devoted themselves more unreservedly to God's love, and
fear, and service, learning to be good in very good earnest, and to increase,
and grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

2. To promote this, like the wise man in the Gospel, Mat. 7.24. She dug deep
to lay her foundations on a rock. She made a strict scrutiny into the state of
her Soul, and weighed the reasons of her choice, in the balance of the
Sanctuary. And with the other Builder in the Gospel, sat down and considered
with her self what it might cost to finish her spiritual edifice, and whether
she were furnished to defray that charge. And also whether the grounds of her
hope were firm, and such as would not abuse, and shame her, and her evidences
for Heaven, such as would bear the Test, and Scripture would approve.

And this she drew up at large, with her own hand judiciously, soberly,
modestly, humbly, and about twenty years since did me the honor with greatest
secrecy to read it to me, and obliged me with all freedom and faithfulness to
give her my judgment of it; which I could not but do with much approbation. And
this, I doubt not, remains amongst her many excellent Papers.

Having thus put her hand to the plough, she looked not back, but minded
Religion as her business indeed; and never gave suspicion of trifling in so
serious a work.

3. Therefore for her practice of it, it was her great design to walk worthy of
God in all well-pleasing, to adorn her professed subjection to the Gospel, by a
conversation becoming it, and to show forth his virtues and praises, who had
called her to his mavelous Light.

First then she was circumspectly careful to abstain from all appearance of
evil; and in all doubtful cases 'twas her rule to take the furest side; for she
would say, I am sure, 'twill do me no hurt, to let them alone. Though therefore
none were further from censuring others, or usurping judgment over their
liberties; yet for her self she would never allow her self the addition of
artificial handsomness, (used neither paint nor patch) and was pleased with a
saying of one of her spiritual Friends, upon the reading the Book which
apologizes for it: O Lord, I thank thee, that thou gave me not wit enough to
write such a Book, unless withal thou had given me Grace enough not to write
it. Neither would she play at any Games, because beside many other
inconveniences, she judged them great wasters of precious time: of which she
was always very thrifty. And though she was known to be a woman of good
understanding, yet were there three things which were too hard for her, and she
would confess she could not comprehend them.

First, How those who professed to believe an Eternal Estate, and it is
dependence upon the short inch of time, could complain of times lying as a dead
commodity on their hands, which they were troubled how to drive away.

Secondly, how Christians, who would seem devout at Church, could laugh at
others for being serious out on it, and burlesque the very Bible, and turn
Religion into Ridicule.

Thirdly, How knowing men could take care of souls, and seldom come amongst
them, never look after them.

And though in the forenamed particulars, she was content only to give example
of forbearance: yet from the Playhouse, since the Stage has taken so great
liberty, she would openly dehort her Friends with greatest earnestness.

She, very many years since, began to keep a Diary; and consulted two, whom she
used to call her Soul-Friends, and ever esteemed such her best Friends,
concerning the best manner of performing it. This, at first, she used to
perform every Evening; but finding that inconvenient, by reason of her Lords
long illness, which gave her many inevitable diversions and interruptions at
that season, she changed it into the quiet, silent morning, always rising
early. And therein amongst other things recorded the daily frame of her own
heart toward God, his signal providence to her self, and sometimes toward
others, his gracious manifestations to her Soul, returns of prayer, temptations
resisted, or prevailing, or whatever might be useful for caution or
encouragement, afford her matter of thankfulness or humiliation. And by this
means she had arrived at such experience, that she could conclude, at least
make strong conjectures of the events of things she spread before the Lord in
prayer, by the frame of her own heart, in the performance of it, as I could
instance in particulars, if it were convenient.

She used to call Prayer Hearts-ease, as she often found it; and though her
modesty was such, and she was so far from a vain, affected ostentation of her
gifts, I cannot name one person with whom she prayed, yet can I say she was as
well mighty, and fervent in prayer, as constant and abundant in it; for she
sometimes using her voice, has been overheard, and her own Lord (knowing her
hours of prayer) once conveyed a grave Minister into a secret place, within
hearing, whom, if I should name, I suppose would not be denied to be a
competent Judge, who much admired her humble fervency; for she praying prayed,
and when she used not an audible voice, her sighs and groans would echo from
her Closet at good distance. And the very day before she died, she was shut up
above an hour, which she spent in fervent, private prayer, notwithstanding her
indisposition; and indeed prayer was her very element, in which she lived, and
actually died; and 'twas as the vital breath of her Soul, and the wing that
wafted it immediately to Heaven.

But if she exceeded her self in any thing; as much as she excelled others in
most things, 'twas in meditation: this was her Masterpiece; for she usually
walked two hours daily in the morning, to meditate alone, in which divine art
she was an accomplished Mistress, both in set and occasional, in the first
choosing some select subject, which she would press upon her heart, with
intensest thoughts, till she had drawn out all its juice and nourishment: and
for the second, like a spiritual Be, she would suck Honey from all
occurrences, whole Volumes of which she has left behind her.

After this consecrating of the day with reading Scriptures, Lectione assidua
and meditatione diuturna pectus suum Bibliothecam secerat Christi; unde hic
fervor, aisi ex amere Dei? unde legis Christi indefessa meditatio nisi ex
defiderio ejus qui legem dedit?
prayer, and meditation: a short dressing time, and ordering her domestic
Affairs, or reading some good Book, spent the remainder of the morning till
Chappel-prayers, from which she was never absent, and at which she was ever
reverend, and a devout example to her whole Family.

She was a strict observer of the Lordsday, which is truly called the Hedge and
Fence of Religion, and though some please themselves to call this Judaizing, to
excuse the liberties they indulge themselves: I am sure our Church has
enjoined us all to cry to God for mercy, for the breach of, and for grace to
incline our hearts to keep, the fourth Commandment, as well as any of the other
nine: and it is not hard to observe that the streams of Religion are deep, or
shallow, according as these Banks are kept up, or neglected.

She was a very devout Communicant; seldom omitting to prepare her Soul with
solemn fasting, to renew her covenant with God.

And in the act of receiving, I cannot think of her without reflecting on S.
Stephen, when he saw the Heavens opened, and Jesus standing at God's right
hand, and his face was as the face of an Angel.

And to encourage others to such serious preparation to that Sacred Ordinance,
as she used before it: I shall show what sweet advantages she reaped in it, and
by it. And this I shall do by transcribing word for word out of her Diary, what
I find written with her own hand, concerning one of the last Sacrament Days,
she ever enjoyed. For the Sacrament which was appointed to have been
administered in her Ladyships Chapel upon Easter Day, was put off by reason of
her falling ill in Passion week.

November, 25. Sacrament Day.

AS soon as I awaked, I blessed God. When I had read in the Word, the Chapters
of the Sufferings of my Blessed Savior, I spent much time in meditating of his
dying love. By which thoughts I found my heart much drawn out to love him, and
melted by his love: then with great and awful apprehensions of God upon my
heart, I went to pray. In which duty my heart was lifted up in the high praises
of God, for both spiritual and temporal mercies: and my affections were much
drawn out in the duty, in which my heart did follow exceeding hard after God
for a nearer communion with him in the Sacrament than ever yet I had. I then
renewed my covenant with God: and made promises, that by his Grace enabling me,
I would walk more closely with him, for the time to come. That which in
especial manner I begged of God at this Sacrament was more love to him, more
holiness, more contempt of the world, and the Glories of it, that I might be
more useful to the Souls and Bodies of my Fellow Christians than formerly I had
been.

Those mercies, which in especial manner, I was grateful for, were, the
Creation and Redemption of the World, and for the Gospel, and the Covenant of
Grace, and for converting Grace, and for Justification, and for some measure of
Sanctification: and for so much Patience exercised toward me, before my
conversion: and in order to it, imbittering Creature Comforts, that I might
seek for comforts above: and for a sanctified affliction, and for some degree
of patience to bear it, and for supports under it by the warm and lively
comforts of the Holy Ghost: and for returns of prayer: and for so many
opportunities to seek unto God: and for the sweet reviving hours I had enjoyed
with God in solitude by Heavenly Meditations: and for the Word and Sacraments,
and the sanctifying motions of Gods Spirit. I was in a more than usual manner
melted in the duty, and shed a very great plenty of tears in it: which when I
came from, I found a longing desire to partake of the Lord's Supper, and a
great joy that I was going to partake of it. Then I went to hear -- the Text
was, I am the way, the truth and the life, no man comes to the Father, but by
me.

I was attentive at that good Sermon. And by what I heard of the excellency of
Christ, had my heart much warmed with love to him.

Afterward, at the confession before the Sacrament, I found my heart in a more
than usual manner broken for my sins, which I bewailed with great plenty of
tears, and from my heart judged, and loathed my self for them. After I had
received, I found my heart in an extraordinary manner warmed with love to God.
And my Soul did follow very hard after him, to be made more holy, and for Grace
to serve him better than ever yet I had done. I had very lively affections in
the duty; in which I received much joy, and had sweet communion with God in it.

After I had at the Table of the Lord given to the Poor, I came from the
Sacrament with my heart in a sweet, grateful, and Heavenly Frame, and then in
private blessed God, for that blessed Feast, and begged strength to keep my
promises I had made to God, of new obedience.

In the Afternoon I heard again the same person, upon the same Text, I was in
an attentive, serious, frame at that good Sermon. The Subject of which was to
show, that Christ was the only way for poor penitent sinners to come unto the
Father.

I meditated upon the Sermons, and prayed them over. And had also meditations
of the Joys of Heaven, with the thoughts of being for ever freed from sin, and
of being ever with the Lord, where I should enjoy him in his fullest love.

I found my heart much revived, and my Soul did then make strong Sallies and
Egresses after that blessed Rest.

After Family Duties were over, at which I prayed with fervency, I did before
going to Bed commit my self to God.

O Lord, I do from my Soul bless thee for this sweet day, in which thou were
pleased to vouchsafe unto me, thy most unworthy Servant, more Soul-joy, than
thou did give me for a long time before.

She was a very ferious and artentive hearer of the Word, and constantly after
Sermon recollected what she heard, sometimes by writing, always by thinking and
calling it to mind, that she might make it her own, and turn it into practice,
not content to be a forgetful, fruitless hearer only, but a doer, that she
might be blessed in her deed.

And such she was for the external performances of Religion.

And though this was beautiful and lovely, yet her chief glory was within, in
the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, in that dress of
Graces which adorned her Soul, this string was all of Orient Pearls, and evenly
matched, not one ill watered, or of unequal size. There was not one dried or
withered Limb, one member wanting or defective in the new creature, she was
complete in Christ, all of a piece.

The Head of her Knowledge was comprehensive and clear. The Eye of her Faith
was piercing and steady. The Ear of her obedience was open and light of
hearing, and boared at the door posts of wisdoms house. Her Palate was savory,
and relishing, to which God's Law was sweeter than the honey, and the
honeycomb, and more esteemed than her necessary food. The Cheeks of her Modesty
were fair and ruddy. The Arms of her desires were stretched out after God, and
flexible, to embrace him. The Hands of her Justice and Charity were strong and
open. The Breasts of her Bounty were well-fashioned, and full of milk, and the
Bowels of her compassion were tender and fruitful. Her hunger and thirst after
righteousness was even greedy and insatiable. The heart of her sincerity was
sound and lively, and the pulse of her conscience smooth and equal. The feet of
her affections were swifter than the Roes on the mountains of Bether, more
truly winged than the Poets feign their Mercuries. The natural heat of her Zeal
more fervent than the coals of Juniper, and the radical moisture of her
repentance more fluid than the springs of Pisgah. Being seen with dry eyes,
under tear-moving circumstances, which very nearly concerned her self, and
being asked, how she could refrain? She replied, I desire to weep for nothing
but my sins. Her name was as ointment poured forth, which made her the delight
and admiration of all good men and women; yea, you may call her a She Jedidiah,
a Female Lemuel, the Lord's delights, she with whom God was.

Now the Soul of this excellent Body, which animated all its goodly parts
within, was the love of God, and the gorgeous Robe which clothed it without,
was her deep humility. These were the Sun and Moon in this great Firmament, all
whose Stars were of the first magnitude, and the least of which would have made
the great Luminary in another Orb. Such was this beauteous Spouse of Christ, so
like her Heavenly Bridegroom, that for that resemblance sake, we may say of her
she was exceeding lovely.

Nor was she less solicitous to make others good, than to be so her self. She
well remembered our Savious charge to S. Peter, When thou art converted,
strengthen thy Brethren: She set her heart to build God's spiritual Temple, and
therefore she applied her self to it with all her might. She had holy
Transports for the Glory of God, and she was a great Lover of Souls, and those
two engaged her to promote Religion with utmost industry and zeal, which that
she might accomplish more advantageously,

1. She avowedly designed to represent Religion as amiable, and taking, and
free from vulgar prejudice, as possibly she might; not so as might affright and
scare men from it: but that it might allure them, and insinuate it is self into
their love and liking: to this end she was affable, familiar, pleasant, of a
free, and agreeable conversation, unaffected, not sour, reserved, morose, sad,
dejected, melancholy, which presents Religion most disadvantageously. She was
naturally of the sweetest temper in the world: and Grace inoculated into such a
stock, thrives even luxuriantly. Whereas some crabbed, peevish, sullen natures
starve the best Cien they are grafted with. As I remember one, of whom 'twas
usually said, he had Grace enough for seven other men, yet scarce enough for
himself. And she made grace and nature both subservient to the good of others.

As we say of some neat, well fashioned persons, what ere they wear becomes
them, and sits well: I must do her this right, to testify, I never saw
Religion become any person better. And 'twas hard not to approve and love a
dress so decent and adorning.

2. She kept her self free and disinteressed from all Parties and Factions,
that none might suspect a design of making Proselytes to any, but to God.

She was neither of Paul, nor Apollos, nor Cephas, but only Christ. Her name
was Christian, and her Surname Catholic, she had a large and unconfined Soul,
not hemmed in, or pounded up within the Circle of any man's name, or drawing a
Latitudinarian in the true commendable sense: and whoever feared God, and
wrought righteousness was accepted of her.

She very inoffensively, regularly, devoutly, observed all the orders of the
Church of England, in its Liturgy and public Service, which she failed not to
attend twice a day with exemplary Reverence, yet was she very far from placing
Religion in Ritual Observances. And I may not deny, that she would sometimes
warm her heart (though never with strange fire) at private Altars, in her own
Chamber or Closet.

3. She would perfume the company with good discourse, to prevent idle, or
worse communication, not abruptly, obraidingly, or importunely, which is very
nauseous and fulsome, and spoils a good game by bad playing. But she was like a
spiritual Stove, you should feel the heat, and not see the fire, and find your
self in other company amongst the same persons, and rather wonder than perceive
how you came there; for she would drop a wise sentence, or moral holy Apothegm
(with which she was admirably furnished, of her own making or collection) that
suited with, at least not far remote from what was talked of, and commending,
or improving that, she would wind about the whole discourse without offense, yea,
with much pleasure.

She kept a Book of such wise, pithy Sayings, much valuing words, which
contained great use and worth in little compass.

I shall transcribe a few of many.

THe almost Christian is the unhappiest Man, having Religion enough to make the
world hate him; and not enough to make God love him.

God's Servants should be as bold for him as the Devils are for him.

What will make thee happy at any time, may make thee happy at all times.

O Lord, what I give thee, does not please thee, unless I give thee my self. So
what thou give me shall not satisfy me, unless thou give me thy self.

O Lord, who give Grace to the humble, give me Grace to be humble.

He loves God too little, who loves any thing with him, which he loves not for
him.

The true measure of loving God, is to love him without measure.

So speak to God, as though men heard thee, so speak to men, as knowing God
hears thee.

Seneca said, he was better born, than to be a slave to his Body.

Luther said, Christ's Cross is no Letter, yet it taught him more than all the
Alphabet.

We should meditate of Christ's Cross, till we be fastened as close to him, as
he was to his Cross.

By how much the more Christ made himself vile for us: by so much the more
precious he should be to us.

We need every day blood for our hearts, as water for our hands.

Through Christ's wounds we may see his Bowels.

He only can satisfy us, who satisfied for us.

He that takes up Christ's Cross handsomely, shall find it such a burden as
Wings to a Bird, or Sails to a Ship.

It Is a great honor to be Almoner to the King of Heaven.

The Bowels of the poor are the best soil, which brings forth an hundred fold.

Who would not starve a Lust to feed a Saint.

To give is the greatest sensuality: How indulgent then is God to annex future
rewards, to what is so much its own recompense.

To be libelled for Christ is the best Panegyric.

Where affliction is heavy, sin is light.

God chastises whom he loves, but he loves not to chastise.

Sin brought death into the world, and nothing but death will carry sin out of
the world.

If all men's troubles were brought into a common store, every one would carry
back what he brought, rather than stand to a share of an equal division.

Though time be not lasting, what depend on it, is everlasting.

The best Shield against Slanderers, is to live so, that none may believe them.

He that revenges an injury, acts the part of an Executioner. He that pardons
it, acts the part of a Prince.

Sanctified afflictions are spiritual promotions.

Man is a pile of Dust, and puff of Wind.

Why are we so fond of that life which begins with a Cry, and ends with a Groan!

But I will not cloy you, knowing it is safest to rise with an appetite; even
when we are entertained at a Banquet.

4. Where she had particular kindness, or personal interest, she would improve
the authority of her friendship to gentle, but free correption, and argue, and
persuade so strenuously, that her Bow, like Jonathan's, seldom returned empty;
and plead the cause of God, and their own souls, to whom she spoke with so
winning and insinuating sweetness, that 'twas hard to resist the Suada, shall I
say, or rather the spirit, by which she spoke. Let me refound and echo from
her lips (though alas too faintly) how she would with melting charms, and
powerful strains, attempt upon the Friends, for whom she had a kindness, and
whom she longed to rescue.

COme, come, my Friend, you must be good, you shall be good; I cannot be so
unkind, nay, so unfaithful to the laws of Friendship, as to let you perish, and
perish in a way, you know as well as I, leads down to Hell. It grieves my very
soul to see so good a nature ensnared against the dictates of its own light, by
bad example, custom, or somewhat else -- And if they replied with excuses, she
would stop them thus: I pray, my Friend, have patience, hear me out, I know, or
guess at least, what you would say, and I would not have you say it. It Is bad
to commit sin, but it is worse to plead for it, and defend it. None sin so
dangerously as those who sin with excuses. The Devil then ties a new snare,
when he gets into our tongues to fasten us to our failings, and raises an
out-work in our own mouths, to secure the Fort he possesses in our hearts: I
take it for granted, all other Holds were slighted easily, could you conquer
such or such a vice, too much by custom prevailing with you. Unhappy custom
that dares prescribe against God's Law -- But, Friend, use no arguments that
will not hold water at the day of judgment: though hand join in hand, you know
what follows. And no example, custom, number should allure us, which cannot
excuse us, and secure us. But this is the mischief of sin lived in, it
bewitches the heart to love it, that it cannot leave it. Cannot, so men love to
speak; but it is because they will not, that is, will use no endeavors to be
rid on it. But you must leave it, there is no remedy though it cost you trouble,
smart, and self-denial. There Is as much as all this comes to, in cutting off a
right hand, and digging out a right eye. I speak to you, as to one in whom I
have a party to help me plead. I mean your conscience, and the belief of the
Scriptures; for if you were one of those on whom you know I use to set my mark,
I should not give you this trouble, nor esteem my self under more than the Laws
of general charity to wish you better, should hardly venture my little skill to
make you so.

But as for you, who still own God's authority, and believe his Word, and
attend his Worship. Why should I despair of making one piece of your self,
agree with the other, your practice with your convictions, your conversation
with your conscience.

And not to fright you with the Thunderclaps of wrath and vengeance, and God's
judging you know who -- listen still to the voice, it is your peculiar eminency
to be kind and grateful (and because there is a kind of magnetic virtue in
those arguments which touch our temper, and a string will move it self when
another instrument is touched that is set to the same Key, and pitch) I shall
attack you on that side, hoping the strongest excellency of your nature, will
prove the weakest defensasative for sin, and to keep out God.

You therefore who are so good natured, so kind, so grateful that you never
think you have acquit your self sufficiently to those who have been civil, or
as you please to called obliging. Oh how can -- be so unkind, and so ungrateful
unto God Almighty, the kindest Fiend, who is so much before hand with you, who
has given you so much, and is so ready to forgive you all. Oh, that you, who I
dare say would take my word for any thing else, would do me the honor to take
my word for him, who I assure you upon your sincere repentance will be fully
reconciled to you in Christ, and never so much as obraid your past neglects,
but heal your backslidings, and love you freely. And do not fear that you
shall have cause to repent of your repentance. No man ever yet was a loser by
God; and you shall not be the first: you shall not lose your pleasures, but
exchange them, defiling ones for pure and clean, and ravishing. And let it not
seem strange, or incredible to you, that there should be such things, because
perhaps you never felt them. Alas, you have deprived your self unhappily, by
being incapable of them. New wine must be put into new bottles.

To say nothing of what the Scriptures speak of a day being in God's courts
being better than a thousand, and of joys; and unspeakable, and full of glory,
of the great peace they have who keep God's law, and that nothing shall offend
them, that wisdoms ways are pleasantness. Let my weakness reason out the case
with you. Do you think that God's Angels which excel in all perfections, have
no delights, because they have no flesh, no sense, no bodies, as men and
beasts: or have our Souls (the Angels in these houses of clay) which are God's
Images, and the price of his Blood no objects, no employments which may yield
them delight and satisfaction.

Think not so unworthily of God, or meanly of your self; have not the strokes
of your own fancy, or the intellectual pleasures of your mind, sometimes
transported you beyond all the charms of your senses, when they have chimed all
in tune together.

And cannot God, think you, who is a spirit, and so fit an object for our
souls, give them as great pleasures, as any object of our taste and sight.

Come, come, my Friend, take my word for it, there is more pleasure in the peace
of a good conscience, and in well grounded hopes our sins are pardoned, and in
serving God, and expectation of eternal life, than in all the pleasures in the
world. Alas, I was once of your mind, but I assure you upon my word, I have
really found more satisfaction in serving God, than ever I found in all the
good things of the world, of which you know I have had my share.

Try therefore, dare to be good, resolve to be so thoroughly; and if you do not
find it much better than I have told you, never take my word, or trust me more.

Thus and much more powerfully would her zeal for their good cause her to argue
with her Friends, that she might by holy violence attract them, and allure them
to be good, and happy.

5. She was of an extensive charity, and would make people good by believing
them to be so, and by this engagement make them ashamed to deceive her hopes,
and disappoint her expectation.

6. She had a tender, conscientious care to provide good Ministers, and to
encourage them, would augment their maintenance where 'twas small; Leez,
Braintree, and Foulness, etc. may be her witnesses in this, and indeed she was
the heartiest and truest Friend I ever knew to such, and do despair ever to
know her like, in this respect.

7. She had a great care of the Souls of her Servants, and if she had any
ambition in her, 'twas in this, to be the Mistress of a religious Family. This
appeared amongst others, in these particulars.

1. In exacting their attendance on God's public Worship, and reverent
behavior there.

Her Eye surveyed her Chapel, and none could be absent, but she would miss
them.

2. In personal instruction, and familiar persuading of them, I appeal to the
consciences of all that served her, what one of them has she not, on some
occasion, dealt with to do them good.

3. In preparing them for, and persuading them to the frequent partieipation of
the Lord's most holy Supper.

4. In scattering good Books in all the common Rooms and places of attendance,
that those that waited might not lose their time, but well employ it, and have
a bait laid of some practical, useful Book, and fitted to their capacity, which
might catch and take them.

5. In making it the Foot-step to preferment, for she used to make the
hundredth and first Psalm the Rule of her Oeconomicks; and though she treated
all her servants as Friends, yet they were her Favorites, which most signally
feared God.

And she was not a first Table Christian only, we need not draw her Picture
with a side-face, to hide the disfigurement of either side, both her hands
wrought in the work of God: she did not claudicare, but walked in his ways with
both her Feet. She had learned S. John's Lesson: That he who loves God, must
love his Brother also.

1. She was exactly righteous.

2. She was prodigiously charitable.

1. She was exactly just in word and deed. She never forfeited her Title, to
the privilege of Peerage, to be believed upon the honor of her word; which
was, as sacred as any oath, and as good security as many bonds. No
inconvenience to her self would make her recoil, or flinch from the obligations
she had brought her self under, by her own mouth: yea, she had such an
abhorrence of a dishonorable recess, from express, or but intimated promises,
that it would render her esteem of such persons exceeding cheap and mean, who
by little arts and shifts would loose and free themselves from their
engagements, and disappoint the expectations they had raised in others, to save
their charges, accounting their money spared, a very poor and base redemption
of their reputation.

She abhorred a lie; and used modestly to give this testimony of her self, You
know I dare not, I will not lie. And her Lord knew this so well, that though he
were positive enough, yet would never persist, if there happened any contest,
against whatever she affirmed peremptorily.

And a lie was the foulest blemish any could stain themselves with, in
conversing with her, and the most unpardonable fault, a servant could contract,
to whom she used to say, Tell me the truth, and I can forgive you any thing.

I shall take liberty on this occasion to add a passage, which may be useful on
a double account:

1. To let her Honorable Friends know she forgot them not, though her purposes
were prevented.

2. How she feared the shadow of a lie.

About a Month before she died, she was, (though then in as perfect health, as
I have known her) determined to alter her will. And whereas she had before
given many honorable Legacies in money to persons of great Quality: she said,
she would alter them all, for this reason, because they were rich, and money
they needed not: but she would give it in something they might keep, as kind
memorials of her: and when she had set down all their names in a Paper, she
also bethought her self what would be most acceptable to every of them: For,
said she, that renders a gift most agreeable, when it suits the fancy of the
party to whom it is designed. And then surveying her own store, she fixed on
what to give to most of them, but not finding her self actually provided, of
what she might bequeath to all, she resolved to leave all to a Codicil, to be
annexed to her Will, and expressly said, I am now, God willing, going to London,
when I have finished my Will, and then I will by discourse find out,
undiscerned, what will be most pleasing to every one of them, and will provide
accordingly. Yet when the draught of her Will was made, she would put into the
Will its self for the Right Honorable the Countess of Scarsdale her beloved
Sister-in-law, (who was one of that number to which in her former Will she had
given a Legacy in money) a set of silver Sconces, which adorned her own
Chamber. And when I asked her Ladyship why she would not leave her to the
Codicil among the rest, she was pleased to give this reason: Because, said she,
she is the only person living to whom I ever intimated being in my will, and I
would not die, and have it found otherwise, and so be under the suspicion of
having told a lie, or dying with a lie in my mouth.

She had learned S. Paul's Lesson to perfection, To speak evil of no man: and
where she could not speak well, the worst injury she would do was to be silent,
and say nothing, unless it were to some single Friend, of whose Taciturnity she
was secure by experience.

Nor would she invidiously diminish the just praises of any who deserved them.
Nay, would rather study to extenuate their other failings, by presenting the
light side to hide the dark one. And would commend them for one good quality or
action, to cover many bad ones: and would say, yet I must do them this right,
they are so, or so -- for all this.

And she was no less accurately just in deed than word: she had learned to do,
as well as to say: she not only gave goodly words, but good performances.

And because the due discharge of the duties of our Relations is one of the
most signal evidences of Righteousness, and the greatest ornament of our
Profession of Religion. I shall touch briefly how she used to acquit her self
in that respect: as a Wife to her Husband living, as an Executrix to his Will,
and a Trustee to the Estate, as a Mother, as a Daughter, as a Sister, as a
Friend, as a Mistress, as a Landlady, as a Neighbor. In all which she was as a
singular Blessing to her Relatives, so an eminent example to others.

First, as a Wife. The heart of her Husband did safely trust in her, and she
did him good, and not evil all the days of his life. Never was woman more truly
a crown or ornament to man. She always lived with a sense of the covenant of
God, which was betwixt them upon her heart. She was an equal mixture of
affectionate obedience, and obediential affection.

She would conceal and hide his infirmities, deeply sympathised in his long
indispositions, attended, and relieved him under them with the greatest
tenderness, loved his Soul, and would both counsel him with prudent zeal, and
pray for him with greatest ardours, and fervency. And he was not wanting in
praising her. He has with vehement protestations said to me: He had rather
have her with five thousand pounds (though she brought him much more) than any
woman living with twenty. Yea, when the very Torrents of his Sorrow were
highest for the death of his only Son (and Family) he made that the
circumflexing Accent of his grief: 'twould kill his Wife, which was he said
more to him than an hundred Sons: Sed quid verba audiam, cum facta videam: He
gave her his whole estate, as an honorary testimony of his graceful esteem of
her merits toward him, and left her sole Executrix, a high testimony of his
confidence in her integrity. Which trust, though it cost her almost unspeakable
labor and difficulties, she discharged with such indefatigable pains, such
scrupulous exactness, and admirable prudence, that as she failed not of one
Title of the Will, till all was fulfilled; so she never gave, or left occasion
of the least noise of any complaining, of any interested person, but rendered
all more than silent, satisfied, more than satisfied, applauding, and admiring
her prudent, and honorable conduct of that great Affair. Which she owned to
God with much thankfulness, as no small Mercy and Blessing to her. And for that
Noble Estate which was to descend to others after her, she would not have
wronged it in the least, to have gained the disposal of the whole; and
therefore was at vast expenses in repairs, both on the Mansion, and Farms,
though her self but a Termer. Yea, though none were more ready to recede from
their own right, which determinated in her own personal interests; yet would
she be stiff, and tenacious, in what may concern her Successors: Usually
saying, whatever she lost her self, she would never give occasion to them that
came after her, to say, she had damnified the Estate, or wronged her trust, or
them. I must add one particular, because I believe she was the first, and will
be the last instance of it.

Her noble, splendid way of living (which in most is sacrificing to their
vanity and ostentation) for she lived very great, as you all are witnesses) was
not an act of pride or ambition, but purely, at least principally, of
conscience; she would not contract, or abate, because she would not deceive her
Lord's trust, who gave her the Estate to keep up the honor of his Name and
Family in a place where it had flourished, and in that kind been famous so many
years.

She was a most incomparable Mother, which appeared in the education of one Son
of her Body, and three Daughters of her Soul; for so I may truly speak. She
never bare more than two Children; one Daughter, who died young, and a Son, the
gallant, hopeful, young Lord Rich, of whom the world has had an account, by
the same hand which has had the unhappy honor to be employed the third time
in this mournful Service: Planctus unigeniti at the Lord Rich's Funeral: Leez
lachrymans at the Earl of Warwick's: and this.

The pious methods of whose education might be suggested with advantage, but I
should never have done, should I allow my self liberty to enlarge on all was
commendable, or exemplary; yet one thing I will not conceal; those three
excellent Ladies to whom she was an own Mother, though but an Aunt-in-law, and
who are by their Cousins death become so vast fortunes to their Husbands, being
left with less plentiful portions, she would even during her Son's life, never
leave pressing her Lord to make noble provisions for, and settle their portions
suitable to their Birth and Qualities, which as they well knew, so I doubt not
but they will most readily attest with becoming acknowledgments, as also all
the other never to be forgotten obligations, which she so nobly ceased not, to
please her kind humor, in conferring on them.

I never personally saw her Right Honorable Father, nor could remember her
dutiful observances of him; but this I know, that engagements o^ her own
affections would not supersede her respects to him in her marriage, till his
full consent and approbation was obtained.

And no Child could make more honorable mention of Parents than I have heard
her do of hers, and for the transmitting it to posterity, I cannot say she had
resolved to write and publish her Father's Life; but I can, and do affirm, she
had it in deliberation, and had considerable materials, and Collections, many
of which she has discoursed, and read to me, or given me the favor to read my
self.

She was so endearing a Sister, no language can express it; and therefore it
would be inexcusable boldness for me to attempt it.

A Friend so faithful, so kind, so constant, so condescending, so open, so
free, unreserved, unsuspicious, as I believe is not to be found on earth. I
could give instance of a Friendship, which as she vouchsafed to contract with
much condescension on her part, continued thirty years, not only without
interruption, or Eclipse, but without the least cloud or shadow of
misunderstanding on either side for that long space.

The best Mistress in the world, to almost a Proverb, in a double care, both of
the spiritual and bodily welfare of her servants, whom she as much loved to
please, as other persons servants can do to please their Masters, it being her
peculiar delight to render the lives of all easy and pleasant, and free from
discontent, that they might serve God with cheerfulness. And when she was to
leave them, she left not off her kindness to them, or care for them, but
provided to the uttermost of her power, for their comfortable subsistence,
according to their degree and time of service, giving Legacies liberal and
noble, four hundred pounds, three hundred pounds, two hundred pounds a piece,
to some, one hundred pound a piece to many, to others eighty, to many seventy,
to buy them Annuities or their lives; to others fifty, forty, twenty, and a
full years wages to every one not specified by name, and three Months
Entertainment, with Lodging, Diet, and all accommodations, as in her life; that
they might have time to seek out, and provide places for themselves, and not be
exposed to inconveniences, by a sudden remove.

She was a most noble, I may say, indulgent Lanlady, and would usually say of
her Tenants, Alas, poor creatures, they take a great deal of pains, and I love
to see them thrive, and live comfortably, and I cannot endure to see them
brought into straits, and therefore would without grudging or difficulty have
all things made convenient for them, and if they had sustained any considerable
losses, effectually consider it. And for her Copyhold Tenants, would urge with
warmth the timely finishing the Rolls of her Courts, and delivery of their
Copies, professing she could not in conscience suffer it to be neglected,
because it was all they had to show for their Estates, a piece of eminent
justice, not more honorable than necessary in Lords of Manors.

And lastly, as a Neighbor, she was so kind and courteous, it advanced the
Rent of adjacent Houses to be so near situated to her, not only her House, and
Table, but her Countenance and very heart were open to all persons of Quality
in a considerable circuit, and for the inferior sort, if they were sick, or
tempted, or in any distress of Body or Mind, whither should they go but to the
good Countess whose Closet and Still-house was their Shop for Surgery, and
Physic, and her self, (for she would visit the meanest of them personally) and
Ministers whom she would send to them, their spiritual Physicians. But as her
love to God was the soul of her Religion, so the exuberancy of her charity
toward those who needed her abundant liberality, was the conspicuous Crown
which beautified all her sweetness, and goodness toward Men: for in this she
was forward, I bear her record, to her power, yea, and beyond her power; for
she would even anticipate her Revenue and Incomes, rather than want wherewith
to be liberal. S. Jerome placed in the highest rank of the praises of his
admired Paula, that she not only made her self poor to relieve, but died in
magno Aere alieno: S. Hier. Epitaphium Paulae.
And I am sure it used to be said of our excellent: Lady, That was the Lady
that would borrow money to give away: She would not live poor (in good works)
to dye rich, yea, though she had chosen Executors, in whom her heart could
trust as safely as ever her Husbands did in her, yet she would make her own
hands her Executors, and they were very faithful, to her enlarged heart.

But to be more particular; when she had in her Lord and Husbands life time, a
separate maintenance or allowance, settled by Marriage Articles, she was
pleased to ask me my opinion concerning the quota pars: What proportion one is
obliged to consecrate to God of our Estates, and when I told her it was hard,
if not impossible, to fix a Rule which might hold universally; but the
circumstances must be considered in which persons stood, their Qualities, their
Incomes, their Depenpendances, necessary and emergent Occasions, inevitably
occurring -- But she persisting to urge a more particular answer as to her
self, what would be fit and becoming her to do, I not being ignorant of her
circumstances, (I must bear my own shame in acknowledging the straitness of my
own heart, told her) I supposed a seventh part: But before I could suggest the
reasons, she preventingly replied, she would never give less than the third
part, and she kept her resolution to the full and with advantage; laying aside
constantly the third part for charitable uses, and would sometimes borrow of
that which remained to add to it, but never defaulk from that to serve her own
occasions, though sometimes pressing enough.

When she came to the possession of so large an Estate as her Lord bequeathed
her for her life, she in good measure made it true, what a great Person was
reported to say; that the Earl of Warwick had gave all his Estate to pious
uses: Meaning thereby, that he had given it to this Noble Lady, who would so
convert it.

And it is a great truth, which I have had from her own mouth, that all the
satisfaction she took in it, was the opportunity it afforded her of doing good.
And I have heard her earnestly averr, that she would not accept of, or be
encumbered with the greatest Estate in England, if it should be offered her,
clogged with this condition, not to do good to others with it.

But some may say, were her Eyes as open as her Hands, did she not scatter it
as carelessly as profusely? Nothing less, her liberal Soul devised liberal
things: I will point at some few of many.

1. There are some Objects of real Charity, which are not so to vulgar Eyes or
Purses; on whom she would confer, and whom she would surprise, with noble and
suitable assistances, this struck deep, drew an whole bag at once, but made no
noise.

Some scarcely known to any but my self, and it may be had not been to me, but
to ask my judgment, whether it might be reduced to the account of charity, to
give to such and such, being in such circumstances: For she was never less
tender of their modesty than compassionate of their necessity, and was more
sollicitous for their pardon, than their thanks, for helping them.

2. Foreiners who fled either to preserve their Religion, or to embrace what
they were convinced of to be the truth.

3. A great many young Scholars of hopeful promising Parts, whom she wholly or
in good measure educated at the University, allowing some thirty, some twenty,
some ten, some eight, many five Pounds per Annum, and some others who had more
assistance, less.

4. Abundance of young Children which she put to School in the neighboring
Towns, I cannot say how many, but rather sans number, all that were poor and
willing to learn: Nay; that could be persuaded to it, whose Schooling she did
not only pay for, but gave them both Books and often Clothing; and not only
near home but as far as Wales, contributing nobly to that pious design, of that
good old man and indefatigable promoter of it Mr. Gouge, so amply attested by a
Cloud of Witnesses, beyond exception, to rescue Wales from its remaining
ignorance and demi-Barbarism.

5. Many Ministers of both denominations, as well Conformists whose livings
were so small as not to yield them a subsistence, as those who had none at all.

6. Many occasional Objects of Charity, which you may surely conclude, failed
not to ply at those Stairs where 'twas seldom low water: And though she was
sometimes imposed upon, and deceived by those that neither needed nor deserved
what she gave, yet this did not discourage her from giving again: For she said,
she had rather relieve ten that only appeared meet objects and were not, than
let one go unrelieved who was so indeed: For though they deceived her in her
giving, God would not deceive her in accepting, what was sincerely done for his
Name sake.

7. Lastly, the Poor which she fed in great number, not only with fragments and
broken meat, but with liberal provision purposely made for them. She was a
great pitier, yea a great lover of the poor, and she built a convenient house
on purpose for them at her London-Seat, (as they had one at Leez) to shelter
them from rain and heat while they received their dole, and when she was at
London with her Family, had in her absence, whilst no house was kept at Leez, a
kind of house kept for their sakes alone: That is, twice a week, good Beef and
Bread provided for the poor of four adjacent Parishes, and has taken order in
her Will to have the same continued three months after her decease, and by the
same Will has given an hundred pounds to be distributed to the Poor of
Braintree, Felsted, Little-Leez, and Much-Waltham, at or shortly after her
Funeral.

And though it cannot reasonably be expected from one who had no Lands of
Inheritance, to leave charitable foundations. Yet I may, without Hyperbole,
say, that every year she lived, after she came to be Mistress of the Estate,
she gave as much in charity as would have purchased Lands sufficient to have
endowed an Almshouse or Free School. And that pious and liberal foundation of
Rochford Almshouse, which though founded legally by a Patent granted under the
Broad Seal for its confirmation, by the Ancestors of that Family, of which she
bore the Title; was by the death of the Founder, not endowed, yet as all her
predecessors had done.

She always paid the Alms-people their full designed Allowance, and ordered by
her last Will it should be so done for a year after her decease. And I must
here take leave to add, to their great honor, and the satisfaction of all that
relate to that Family, that those Right Honorable and worthy persons, to whom
the estate descends, have agreed to continue the same plentiful allowance: And
if I were worthy to advise them, I would earnestly persuade them to make Legal
Settlement, and endow it with Lands to the value of what they resolve to allow,
before they make the division of the Estate.

But methinks I hear it asked, what! had she no Spots, no Scars, no real nor
imputed Blemishes? how could she live in such an Age and not be corrupted or at
least traduced? neither scorched by the fire of infection, nor blackned by the
smoke of revengeful detraction, for obraiding the guilty by her innocence? This
overdoing is undoing, if you would make us believe she had no faults, we shall
sooner believe you have no truth: And that all you have said has more of
Romance, and what you fancy, than Narrative of what she was or did. I confess
it is next to a miracle to consider, both how divine Grace enlarged her heart,
and established her goings, and restrained the tongues of others from
reproaching, or showing dislike of that in her, for which they deride and hate,
not to say persecute others.

But I must implore that candor while I embalm her memory, with the sweet
Ointment of her own good name, you granted to her virtues, which acquired it,
and made it so fragrant.

I therefore solemnly protest, I have spoke the truth (though the truth in
love, as I am allowed and required Ephesians. 4.15.) and have not knowingly disguised
or falsified, nor dipped my pen in flattering colors.

But since you are so inquisitive, and seem to deny me the just and civil
freedom, to draw a veil of silence over her imperfections, and your curiosity
will be peeping under that sacred Pall, which should secure and shroud the
worst of men from being pryed into; and the Vault, and Grave, that place of
darkness and forgetfulness, which should bury all defects and render them
invisible, must be ransacked: Draw back the Curtains, let in the light, survey
its secretest recesses; nor She, nor I in her behalf, fear the most piercing
Eagle-eye or Scent: Nor that I deny her to have been a Sinner, while I adore
that Grace that made her a Saint, or that she was a Woman, while I proclaim her
a Terrestrial Angel.

But these three things I say, and will adhere to.

First, That she was not notoriously defective in any Grace or Virtue, but as
eminent in all as most have been for any single one: She was not only aliquid
in omnibus, but omnis in singulis, she did abound in every grace. Which St.
Gregory Naz. admires in Gorgonia, and St. Jerome in Nepotian: Ita in singulis
virtutibus eminebat, quasi caeteras non haberet.

Secondly, She was never stained with any scandalous deformity, another rare
mercy: For though she did humanum pati, slip now and then, or stumble if you
will; she fell not, much less lay or wallowed to defile her Garments, which I
testify not only from my own observation, but her own Pen.

After God had thus savingly (I hope) wrought upon me, I went on constantly,
comfortably in my Christian course, though I had many doubts and fears to
contend with: And did truly obey that Precept of working out my Salvation with
fear and trembling, yet God was pleased to carry me still onward: And though I
too often broke my good resolutions, I never renounced them, and though I too
often tript in my Journey to Heaven, yet I never forsook my purpose of going
thither.

Thirdly, Her very defects and failings were such as others might be proud of,
her Weeds would have been Flowers, and her Thistles appeared Roses in another
Garden.

For I never heard her blamed for more than two faults, by the most curious
observers and inspectors of her disposition or behavior.

1. Excess of Charity.

2. Defect of Anger, or what was reduceable to those two, two goodly faults:
But even these admit Apology more easily than they need it.

1. What was reputed the culpable excess of her Charity, was her credulous
easiness, to believe most people good, or at least better than they were. I
confess she did bend a little to this right hand error, but if it were a bad
effect, it proceeded from a good cause. For as it is observed, that as they who
are conscious to themselves of some great evils, scarce can esteem any less
nocent than themselves; so they that have clear and innocent hearts, are ready
to judge the like of others. Charity thinks no evil, and she used this good
opinion of others, as an instrument to make them what she was so willing to
signify she thought them: And though she would never despair of any man, while
she found them under the Awe of Gods Authority and Word, for even those may
receive some nourishment, who eat against Stomach, and the Seive under the Pump
may be cleansed though it hold no water; yet if she observed a person to scorn
or deride the Scriptures, despise Gods Ordinances, and turn all that was sacred
into ridicule -- She used, as her Phrase was, to set her mark upon that man:
And I must further add, She was neither so often nor so much mistaken in her
judgment of persons, as some supposed she was; they more mis-interpreting her
civility, than she did the others sanctity.

2. For her Defect of Anger, which implies, if it be faulty, want of zeal
against sin, and sinners, and so it is an unjust charge; for though I confess
she could not rage and storm, and discover her anger, as some persons do, who
verify the saying, Ira furor brevis, Anger is a kind of madness; for her
sedate, composed, serene mind, and sweet, and amicable disposition was scarce
forcible to what was so contrary to her nature; yet would she make deeper
impressions of her displeasure for great faults, than those who appeared most
furious, like a still soaking shower, which will wet more than a driving storm.
And therefore 'twas observed, that if any servant had been faulty, they had
rather have passed the Gantlet thrice of their Lord's most furious expressions,
than have once been sent for to their Lady's Closet, whose treatment was soft
words, but hard arguments against their faults, and like that silent lightning,
which without the noise of Thunder melts the Blade, and sindgeth not the
Scabbard; neither the frightful hissing, nor the venomed sting, but the
penetrating oil of Scorpions.

This little is enough to extenuate her, almost commendable faults; and it is a
great evidence of her goodness, that these things were imputed as Blemishes,
for they who would not spare her in these little errors, showed plainly that
she was not chargeable with more or greater.

I am now arrived at the last Stage of this Mournful Journey, to give an
account of her surprising, and never enough lamented death.

What presages she might have of its near approach she never discovered, but
her preparations for it had been long habitual, it was one of the most constant
subjects of her thinking, and she used to call her walking to meditate of it,
her going to take a turn with death, and it could never surprise, or take her
unprepared, who was always preparing for it.

Yet there are some passages, worthy of our remarks of the watchful kindness of
Divine Providence over his own, allarming them to trim their Lamps (as the wise
Virgins did) against the coming of the Bridegroom, and allowing them fit
opportunities to do it, as he signally did to her.

I shall on this consideration very seasonably add another Transcript out of
her Ladyships Diary, which contains an account of the last Sunday of her
health, being written but the very day before she was taken ill, and in which
God did, it seems, in a most remarkable manner, impress the thoughts of her
approaching dissolution on her Soul, though there were no visible symptoms of
it then upon her Body.

March 24. Sunday.

AS soon as I awaked, I blessed God; then I meditated and endeavored by
thinking of some of the great mercies of my life, to stir up my heart to return
Glory to God. And those thoughts had this effect upon me, to melt my heart much
by God's love, and to warm it with love to him.

Then I prayed, and I was enabled in that duty to pour out my Soul to God, and
my heart was in it, carried out to praise God, and I was large in recounting of
many of God's special mercies to me. And whilst I was doing so, I found God
mighty upon my spirit and my heart, in a much more than ordinary manner,
carried out to admire God for his goodness, and to love him. And I found his
love make great impressions in my Breast. And melting me into an unusual plenty
of tears.

Those mercies which in an especial manner I was grateful for, were the
Creation and Redemption of the World, and for the Gospel and the Sacraments,
and for free Grace, and the Covenant of Grace, and for the excellent means of
it I had enjoyed: and for the great patience God has exercised toward me
before and since my Conversion. And for checks of Conscience when I had sinned,
and for repentance when I had done so. And for a sanctified affliction, and
supports under it. And for so large a portion of worldly Blessings.

After I had begged a Blessing upon the public Ordinances, I went to hear Mr.
Woodroof: his Text was, Pass the time of your sojourning here in fear -- Then
after a summary account of the Sermon, follows: In the Afternoon I heard again
the same Person upon the same Text. And then follows a concise and methodical
recapitulation of that Sermon also. "And after that -- I was in a serious and
affected frame at both the Sermons, and was by them convinced of the excellency
of fearing God, and of spending of the remainder of the term of my life in his
service. And did resolve to endeavor to spend the remaining part of my time
better.

At both his Prayers I prayed with fervency: afterward I retired, and
meditated upon the Sermons, and prayed them over.

And I had also this Evening large Meditations of Death, and of Eternity; which
thoughts had this effect upon me, to make me in an extraordinary awakened
frame, in which the things of another life were much realized to me, and did
make very deep impressions upon me. And my Soul did follow hard after God, for
Grace to serve him better than ever yet I had done.

O Lord be pleased to hear my Prayers, which did not come out of fained Lips:
and to hear the voice of my weeping, for more holiness, and for being more
weaned from the world, and all things in it.

After Supper, I committed my self to God.

This was written the very last day of her health, Monday Morning: in which we
see how God realized to her, and gave her extraordinary impressions of Death,
Eternity, and the Life to come, when he was about to bring her to it; for the
very next day she began to be ill of that Sickness of which she died.

Our excellent Lady was far from their humor whose Consciences are so bad and
unquiet company, that they hate solitude, and dare not be alone: For she loved,
and even hugged her retirements as her greatest satisfactions. And though, when
she was called to it, she would deny her self and particular inclination (as in
the Universe Individuals do, to obey the laws of universal Nature) to comply
with a duty of a larger spread; as is related of the devout Marquess of Renti
in the two years time he spent in repairing the seat of his Ancestors, which
diversion he cheerfully suffered as a willing mortification, being a duty he
owed to the Station in which God had placed him.

So she cheerfully sustained the hurry of business which was inevitable to the
acquitting her self of the trust reposed in her, by her Lords last Will.

But never did Bird take Wing, when dis-intangled from a Net, with greater
cheerfulness, nor chirp out the pleasures of its unconfined freedom, more
merrily than she did solace her self, when she had escaped the noise and crowd
of affairs, which ruffled and turmoyled her quiet, and suspended the enjoyment
of her self. And when her dearest Sister was in the beginning of the last
winter, about to leave her; her last farewell she took was in these words: Now I
have done my drudgery (meaning her business) I will set to the renewing of my
preparations for Eternity, and she made it the repeated business of the last
winter.

In the beginning of the last March, she set to the making of her Will anew,
and signed and sealed it on the twelfth day of the same Month, and on the
Tuesday in Passion Week, March 26. was taken with some indisposition, loss of
Appetite, and aguish distemper, and had four or five Fits, which yet in that
season were judged both by Physicians and her Friends, more advantageous to her
health than dangerous to her life. And in this state she continued freed from
her fits in her own apprehension, and in our hopes, till Friday the twelfth of
April, on which day she rose with good strength, and after sitting up some
time, being laid upon her Bed, discoursing cheerfully, and piously, one of the
last sentences she spoke was this, turning back the Curtain with her hand,

Well, Ladies, if I were one hour in Heaven, I would not be again with you, as
well as I love you.

Having then received a kind visit from a Neighboring Lady, at her departure
she rose from her Bed to her Chair, in which being set, she said she would go
into her Bed, but first would desire one of the Ministers then in the house to
go to prayer with her, and asking the company which they would have, presently
resolved her self to have him who was going away, because the other would stay
and pray with her daily; and immediately he being called, and come, her
Ladyship sitting in her Chair, by reason of her weakness, for otherwise she
always kneeled, holding an Orange in her hand, to which she smelt, almost in
the beginning of the Prayer she was heard to fetch a sigh, or groan, which was
esteemed devotional, as she used to do at other times. But a Lady looking up,
who kneeled by her, saw her look pale, and her hand hang down, at which she
started up, affrighted, and all applied themselves to help, and the most
afflictively distressed of them all, if I may so speak, when all our sorrows
were superlative, caught her right hand, which then had lost it is pulse, and
never recovered it again.

Thus lived, thus died this Right Honorable Lady, this Heroic Woman, this
Blessed Saint, this incomparable pattern of flaming zeal for the glory of God,
and burning charity for the good of men; in the actual exercise of prayer, by
which she so often anticipated Heaven by pregustation, and which now wafted her
longing soul into the Holy of Holies, within the vail: at the kiss of God's
mouth, as Moses did, though not full of years, yet full of mature fruits, and
Graces, when all men judged her worthy of a longer, but God, the only unerring
Judge, found her full ripened for a better life. And in a sweeter Euthanasia
than Augustus could wish himself, might claim a more triumphant Plaudite than
he. Yea, might have sung her Nunc demittis with good old Simeon, nay, with the
holy Apostle, that joyful Epinichion, I have fought a good Fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith, henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at
that day, and not to me only, but unto them also that love his appearing.

You have heard, though too too dryly, how she served and honored God, I
should now show to encourage you to do the like, how he honored her, according
to his word by Samuel: Him that honors me, I will honor. And that of our
Savior, He that serves me, him will my Father honor.

But I have much prevented my self by what is interwoven through all the
preceding discourse: The greatest honor God can put upon his creatures, is to
vouchsafe to use them, and to make them Vessels of Honor, fitted for their
Master's service. And this he conferred upon her in eminent and redoubled
measures. He imprinted on her the fairest impress of his most amiable Image,
and rendered her habile, and ready to every good word and work.

He gave her riches, and honor in abundance, as is said of Jehosophat, 2 Chronicles. 17.5, 6.
and yet her heart was not puffed up by them, but lifted up under them in the
ways of the Lord, as it there follows.

He gave her the Heaven upon earth, (after some shivering scruples, and
trembling fears) the blessed calm of a purified, pacified, serene, and
well-assured conscience.

He gave her the fragrant perfume of an odoriferous name, and more than
unspotted, a bright, and resplendent reputation.

He gave her many endeared Cordial Friends, faithful to her as her own Soul, to
assist, counsel, comfort, help her, and carry her through her greatest
difficulties, and entangling affairs, concerning one of whom she used often
with much thankfulness to say, He was a Friend of God Almighty's giving; even
beyond her own expectation.

He gave her many merciful deliverances, one very like to that Gregory
Nazianzen insists so largely on in his Funeral Oration for his Sister Gorgonia,
the Mules in whose Chariot running away, not only bruised, but brake her Bones,
and yet God miraculously restored her. So when the Horses in our Lady's Coach
excussed the Coachman, ran furiously away, God almost miraculously hung the
Coach against a Post in the way, stopped their fury, rescued her life from most
eminent hazard, and healed the bruises she received with safety. This happened
July, 23. 1661.

He gave her the affectionate esteem of all her Neighbors, to such a degree,
that she was like Titus, Deliciae humani generis, the delight and darling of
her Country, and with so loving a willingness did they delight to serve her,
that you might see fifty fresh, brave and gallant Teams, day after day bringing
in her provisions, without other invitation than the bare knowledge of the
time, which themselves would enquire out; and nothing would grieve them more,
than to be prevented in paying this Tribute of Honorary Respect.

He gave her such an esteem for her prudent integrity, and discreet, and
impartial Righteousness, that she began to be (an employ and honor not usual
to her Sex) the Arbitress and Umpress of all the controversies amongst adjacent
Neighbors, many of which she reconciled happily, and all which she decided
wisely and justly.

He gave her the universal approbation, love, admiration of all that knew her,
that the Proverb was confuted, which says, Who has no Enemies, has no
Friends. For either she had none, or her ways so pleased the Lord, he made her
Enemies to be at peace with her. For honorable, and mean, rich, and poor, of
all degrees, and which is more, of all persuasions, paid her most kind respect,
honored, and loved her.

Finally, he prevented her with the blessing of goodness, and crowned her with
loving kindness, and tender mercy. He made her glad with the light of his
countenance, and satisfied her as with marrow and fatness; he granted the
requests of her lips, and shut not out her prayer: He gave her ability, and
time to discharge her trust, and settle her worldly affairs with honor and
satisfaction, and he gave her opportunity, space, and an heart to recollect her
self, and redeem what a hurry of business had deprived her of, and renew her
evidences for Heaven.

He took out the sting of death before she died, Intelligeres illam non emori,
sed emigrare, and mutare amicos non relinquene. Hierom.
and the pains of death when she died, and with a kiss of his mouth sucked up
her Soul to Heaven, to be immersed in that fullness of joy, and bathed in those
rivers of pleasure, which are at his right hand for evermore.

May we live like her, may we die like her, that we may live with her, and with
our common Lord, for ever.

And for your noble Lordship, who are now investing your self with her large
and noble Mantle -- May Elijah's spirit rest upon you, as well as his Mantle:
that you may rise up an Elisha in her place and stead.

That Leez may be Leez still: the seat of Nobleness, and Honor, the Hospital
of Bounty, and Charity, the Sanctuary of Religion, and the fear of God.

That so you may live, and may live longer, and as much desired, and when you
die (as die you must, for Leez, though a Paradise, has no Tree of Life) you
may die later, and as much lamented as your Noble Predecessors.

A Copy of that Excellent and Pious Letter, written to the Right Honorable
George Lord Berkeley; by the Right Honorable Mary, late Countess Dowager of
Warwick, of which Intimation is given in the 48 page of the foregoing Discourse.
My Lord,
IN obedience to your Commands I have undertaken that which I know I am very
unfit to perform; which is, to give your Lordship Rules for holy living. Yet
because your Lordships Friendship makes you so kind, as to believe what is said
by me, will make a deeper impression than by others who have not so great a
share in your Lordships esteem; I have ventured upon it, not to inform you, as
one I believe ignorant, (for I know your Lordship to be very much better able
to instruct me) but to put your Lordship in mind, That not the knower of the
Law, but the doer of it shall be justified; and that, If you know these things,
happy are you if you do them. For he that knows his masters will, and does it
not, shall be beaten with many stripes. I will begin my first Rule of Advice to
your Lordship, with desiring you not to turn the day into night, and by
sleeping so long in the morning, give your self only time in haste to put on
your clothes, and it may be sometimes with more haste say a short formal prayer
to stop the mouth of a natural Conscience, which for haste you hardly mind your
self, and therefore have little reason to expect God should. Therefore I shall
advise your Lordship to go to bed in so good an hour at night, as that you may
wake in so good time, as you may not lose the morning, which certainly is the
best time for the Service of God. And I would have you as soon as you wake, fix
your thoughts upon that God that gives you time to think, and do as Holy David
did, who said, As soon as I awake, I am with thee. Consider how your Bed might
have been your Grave, for many every night go down into the place of silence,
and there take their long and last sleep. Consider also what a mercy sleep is,
and if we miss but a nights rest, how burdensome and uneasy a man would be to
himself; therefore begin the morning with blessing God for it, and then commune
with your heart upon your bed, and be still; and consider what a mercy it is to
have another day added to your life, that you may make your peace with God,
before you go hence, and be no more seen. Think what many a poor dying Creature
would give for a day to repent in, and at what a high rate (if it were to be
purchased) the damned Spirits would purchase a day to repent in. Consider, a
day is a precious thing, when Titus a Heathen could say (when he had spent a
day without doing good) to his friends with great regret, O my friends, I have
lost a day! And another could say, He was not worthy the name of a man, who
spent a whole day in worldly pleasures. Remember, this little moment of time is
all we have given us to provide for Eternity in; and therefore not to be spent
and thrown away carelessly, as if we had no God to serve, nor no Soul to save.
Therefore have a care, lest it be said of you, as it was of Jesabel, I gave her
space to repent, but she repented not. When your Lordship has thus in the
morning brought your heart into a serious frame, then my second Advice is, to
leave your Bed, and as soon as you are ready, retire to your Closet, and let
none of the business of the World be first dispatched, (though the Devil be
never so busy to persuade you to it) but say to all your worldly employments,
Stay here, while I go yonder and worship, and I will come to you again. When
you have shut your door, and have shut out outward Company, then have a care to
shut out inward, vain and distracting thoughts, which will be very busy to
steal away your heart. Then I would advise you to begin your private devotions
with reading the Word of God, the Holy Scriptures; for David says, Wherewithal
shall a young man cleanse his ways? even by taking heed thereunto according to
thy Word. And certainly these Divine Oracles of God, are a most excellent means
toward the mending of our lives. Therefore I would have you begin every
morning with reading some portion of it, remembering it is that Word by which we
must one day he judged. When you have done this, I would not advise you
presently to clap down upon your knees, but first to consider seriously what
you are going about, viz. That you are going about to speak to that God, before
whom the Angels and the Cherubins do cover their faces in token of reverence,
as not being able, or worthy to behold so much glory; and that Abraham (the
Father of the Faithful) presented himself before him with so much humility, as
that he called himself dust and ashes. Therefore do you prostrate your self
before him with humility, remembering that he has said, that he will have
respect unto the lowly; And yet come with confidence as to a gracious Father,
who has promised, That whosoever comes unto him, he will in no wise cast out;
and that before we call, he will answer, and whilst we are yet speaking, he
will hear. Remember that Prayer is the key of Heaven; it is that by which you
can pour out all your wants to God, as to a most loving Father, with a
confidence that he will supply them. The Scripture tells you, That the
effectual fervent prayer of a righteour man avails much; and it tells you,
that though Elias was a man subject to like passions with us, yet God heard
him, and granted his requests, to encourage us to come with boldness to the
Throne of Grace. Therefore do not only make conscience to pray, but make
conscience also how to pray. Pray with zeal and fervency, do not satisfy your
self with the body of the duty without the Soul; but as pious Hanna did, pour
out your spirit before the Lord in the name of Christ, for things what you
stand in need of. And remember that David said, that the Lord had heard the
voice of his weeping. And therefore if you can, weep for your sins, at least
mourn, that you cannot mourn for sinning against so gracious a Father, that so
the mercies of God may melt into an ingenuous sorrow: And do not leave your
prayers till you have enjoyed some Communion with God in them, and then you
will be fit to go cheerfully about your worldly employments. Forget not, God
has entrusted you with Children, and therefore remember to take care they be
bred up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; and to season them in their
young and tender years with Principles of Piety and Honor, that so setting
them forth in the way wherein they should go, when they are old, they may not
depart from it. Remember also you have a Family to govern, and take up good
Josuah's resolution, that you and your house will serve the Lord; and David's,
who said, that his eyes should be on the Faithful in the Land, that they might
serve him, and he that tells lies, should not tarry in his sight. Therefore
have a care not to keep any that is openly profane and scandalous, but at least
let them be morally civil; and let God be solemnly twice a day publicly
worshipped by your self and Family, and set them good Examples, and say unto
them as Gideon did to his men in another case, Look on me, and do likewise.
When you have thus spent your morning, then I am not so rigid as to forbid you
all Recreations; no, I think them very necessary for Diversion; but I must be
so severe as to forbid you such as may put you into any passion or disorder,
which may be hurtful both to Soul and Body. Therefore I would absolutely forbid
you Dice and Cards too, unless it be sometimes, when you must keep these
limitations. First, not to play all day long, as if you were made only to eat
and drink, and rise up to play. For certainly, God did not give us time, as we
give Children Rattles, only to play withal. Remember what your good Friend Dr.
Tailor says, That he that spends his time in sports, and calls it Recreation,
is as he whose garment is nothing but fringes, and and his meat nothing but
sauce. Therefore I shall advise you, that your Recreations may be as your
sauce, not as your full meat. The second limitation I would advise, is, not to
play for more than you care whether you win or lose; Remember that Mr. Herbert
in his excellent Poems says, Game is a Civil Gunpowder in Peace,
Blowing up houses with their whole increase.
My next Advice to you, is to make a good choice of your friends, and to keep
company most with those of them, that are civil and religious, and ingenious;
for such company will be both pleasant and advantageous to you; but the ranting
Gamesters company ought to be displeasing to you, for I am sure you may get a
great deal of ill by them, but no good; therefore let such Company be rather a
punishment than a choice. Next I would desire you to be as cheerful as you can,
and to that purpose I would recommend to you that gaity of goodness, that will
make you most pleasing to your self and others. And now (my Lord) as your
Friend, you must give me leave to give you not only good counsel, but my own
experiences too (like Nurses who feed their Children with nothing but what they
have first themselves digested into milk) and to assure you, that however the
Devil and wicked men may persuade you, That Religion will make you melancholy;
yet I can assert from my own experience, that nothing can give you that
comfort, serenity and composedness of mind, as a well and orderly led life;
This will free you from all those sad disquieting remorses and checks of
conscience which follow an ill action, and give you that peace of God that
passes all understanding, and that continual feast of a good conscience. This
will make you rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: This will calm
your desires, and quiet your wishes, so as you shall find the consolations of
God are not small. You will find you have made a happy exchange, having Gold
for Brass, and Pearls for Pebles. For truly (my Lord) I am upon trial
convinced, that all the pleasures of this world are not satisfactory. We expect
a great deal more from them than we find. For pleasures die in their Birth, and
therefore, as Bishop Hall says, are not worthy to come into the Bills of
Mortality. I must confess for my own part, though I had as much as most people
in this Kingdom to please me, and saw it in all the Glories of the Court, and
was both young and vain enough to endeavor, having my share in all the
Vanities thereof; yet I never found they satisfied me, God having give me a
Nature incapable of satisfaction in any thing below the highest Excellency. I
never in all my life found real and satisfying Comforts but in the ways of God,
and I am very confident your Lordship never will neither. Therefore I beseech
you try this, and then I verily believe you will be of my opinion, That all her
ways are pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. When you have spent what
time you think fit in your Recreations, or visiting Friends, or receiving
Visits from them, then I would have you every day set some time apart for
reading good Books and Meditation; do not fear that a little time alone should
make you melancholy, for the way not to be alone, is to be alone, and you will
find your self never less alone, than when you are so. For certainly that God
that makes all others good company, must needs be best himself. Be often in the
profitable work of self-examination, be not a stranger at home; but pray S.
Austins Prayer, Lord, make me know thee and my self. You will find the practice
of this Rule conduce much to the good of your Soul. This will make you see what
sin is most predominant, and what grace is most weak, and therefore had need be
strengthened. It will keep sin from growing undiscerned by you. Remember (my
Lord) the best Gardens had need often to be weeded, or else they will soon be
overrun: and the most delicate neat House must be often swept, or else there
will be much dirt and dust in it. Meditation is a most profitable Duty. I would
therefore have you meditate sometimes on the transitoriness and
dissatisfyingness of all this Worlds glories. Your Lordship, your self, has, as
young as you are, seen such strange Revolutions as are sufficient to convince
you, that there is nothing certain in this life, but that there is nothing so;
and that all is vanity and vexation of spirit. God has in our Age cast contempt
upon Princes, and stained all the glory of humane Excellencies, to make us
cease to put confidence in man, whose breath is in his nostrils; for wherein is
he to be accounted of? God has famished all the gods of the Earth, that he
might be God alone, and has imbittered the Stream, that we might come to the
Fountain. Therefore often meditate on this, and it will keep you from
over-loving any sublunary thing. Next I would have you meditate sometimes upon
the shortness of your life, and the uncertainty of the time of your death; On
the black Abyssus of Eternity, and on the great account you must give of all
you have done in the flesh, whether it be good or evil. For we must all appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, to receive according to what we have dove
in the flesh, whether good or evil. I would not keep you upon such melancholy
thoughts as these too long, and therefore I would have you think of the Joys of
Heaven, of that Rest that remains for the People of God, of that better Country
that is a heavenly one, of that City that has a foundation, whose Maker and
Builder is God, and of those Joys which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor
has it ever entered into the heart of man to conceive what God has laid up for
them that love him. For Heaven will make us happy, not as Philosophy pretends
to do, by the confining, but by the fruition of our desires. There we shall be
past doing, as well as past suffering ill. There all tears shall be wiped from
our eyes, and we shall obtain joy and gladness; and sorrow and sighing shall
fly away. Those are unmixt blessings which are reserved for the other life. We
shall then enjoy health without sickness, joy without sorrow, and happiness to
Eternity; but that which is above all; we shall be ever with the Lord, and see
him who shall be all in all to us, yea we shall follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes. Such Meditations as these I would have you frequent in, that whilst
you are musing, the fire of Heavenly Devotion may burn and inflame your heart
with love to God, that so your Meditation of him may he sweet. I would also
recommend to you the frequenting of the public Ordinances, which are excellent
helps to Devotion; for Faith comes by hearing, and God has promised that those
who wait upon him shall renew their strength, and that he will make them joyful
in his House of Prayer. I know your Lordship too well, to say much to persuade
you to works of Charity, for I am not ignorant that your Lordship abounds in
good Works; only to encourage you to continue in the exercise thereof, I would
put you mind of some promises, how that God has said, He that gives to the
poor, lends unto the Lord, and that whosoever gives unto a Disciple, in the
name of a Disciple, though but a cup of cold water, shall in no wise lose his
reward.

And now (my Lord) I fear I have tired you with my too tedious Rules, and
therefore I shall put an end to them, when I have given you this one, which is
to conclude the day always with Prayer, and not to give sleep to your eyes, nor
slumber to your eyelids, till you have called your self to an account what
mercies you have received that day, that you may praise God for them; and what
sins you have committed that day, that you may be humbled for them. Remembering
what the good Primate of Armagh said, That the best man living did enough in
the day, to bring him upon his knees at night. Therefore every night make your
peace with God, remembering that many have shut their eyes in a healthful sleep,
and yet waked in another World. My Lord, I have now done with my Rules, which I
should never have ventured upon, had you not assured me, that you are confident
they would by Gods blessing do you good, and also faithfully promised me, that
you would practice them. Which promise I must beg your Lordship to perform, and
then I shall be much satisfied; for I assure your Lordship, I am so much your
Friend, as I cannot but with great earnstness desire the Salvation of your
Soul; and indeed, all professions of friendship that are made, are but empty
professions, if they do not aim and design all they can to make their Friends
eternally happy; which I beseech your Lordship to believe, is the earnest
desire of,

My Lord, Your affectionate Friend and most humble Servant.

Occasional Meditations UPON SUNDRY SUBJECTS: WITH Pious Reflections UPON
SEVERAL SCRIPTURES.
By the Right Honorable Mary, late Countess Dowager of Warwick.

LONDON, Printed for Nathanael Ranew, at the King's Arms in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1678.

OCCASIONAL MEDITATIONS.
MEDITATION I. Upon a Damm made to stop the Water.
THis Damm that is put up purposely by this person to keep to himself the
water, declares him to be no good natured man. Because, though he is supplied
by Neighboring Springs with more water than he needs for his necessary uses;
yet stops the Current of it from his Neighbors, who want it, desiring to keep
all for himself.

Turn this, O my Soul, into an Occasional Meditation, which may be useful to
thee. By considering that this may not very improperly be compared to rich
persons, to whom God has given with a liberal hand great plenty of this worlds
wealth, by which he designs that they should not only be watered themselves,
but water others also. But they instead of distributing to the necessitous
poor, enclose to themselves all that God has bestowed upon them, to bestow it
upon their excesses in rich Clothes and Furniture, with which they adorn their
persons and walls, which expenses are the Damm which stops the current of their
charity, and keeps it back from the poor and indigent, whose wants would be
comfortably supplied by their superfluities.

O Lord, I beseech thee to humble me exceedingly under the remembrance of my
former guiltiness in this kind: and make me for the future, when thou art
pleased to pour thy benefits upon me, to consider thou designest I should be
thy Almoner to conveigh, as through a Conduit-Pipe, thy Alms to thy necessitous
poor, and let me never more dare to stop and damm up what I ought with a
liberal hand to sow for the refreshing of others. O let me willingly starve a
lust to feed a Saint. And let me remember that he that sows sparingly, shall
reap sparingly. And let me not only now and then drop a little for charity; but
make me one of those persons mentioned in thy word, who being liberal, devise
liberal things, and by so doing be established.

Oh, make me, as it were, an open Flood-gate to water my Neighbors
Necessities, that so I may, as much as in me lies, be an Imitater of thy Divine
Bounty, who do good to all. Oh make me to do so as far as I am able, but
especially make me remember the hooshold of faith; that so I may show my love
to him that begets by loving him that is begotten. And seeing my goodness
extends not to thee; let it do so to thine. Make me to feed hungry mouths,
and cloth naked Backs, that at the last day I may be amongst those to whom
thou will say, Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world. For I was hungry, etc.

MEDITAT. II. Upon the Consideration of the different manner of the working of
a Be and a Spider.
WHile I am minding this despicable Spider, which for all its being so, has
some of its kind that have the honor to inhabit the Courts of the most
glorious Potentates, (for the inspired Volumes tell us, they are in Kings
Palaces) It makes me consider, that the work they are so busily employed in,
while they spin their Webs, (which is all spun out of their own Bowels, without
having any help from any thing without them) is when it is finished good for
nothing; but is soon brushed down and flung away: Whilst the industrious Bees,
that are busily employed in making of their useful Combs, do daily fly abroad
to enable themselves to do so: And flying from one Flower to another, gather
from every of them, that which both renews their own strength, and yields
others sweetness.

By the Spiders work I am minded of a Formalist or proud Professor, who works
all from himself and his own strength, and never goes out of himself to a
Promise to get strength for his performances, or to work by: And therefore his
thin-spun Righteousness is good for nothing, and will be flung away.

The Bees going out, minds me of the Real Christian, who is renewed in the
Spirit of his mind, and that he may be enabled to work the great work, he he
came into the World for, he goes out to an Ordinance, and to Christ in a
promise for strength to work by, and by them obtains it, and this makes his
work give honey, and become good for something.

O Lord, I do most humbly beseech thee, let me not dare to work from my self,
but to go out daily to thee, for ability to work my great and indispensable
work with: That I may deny my own Righteousness, and make mention of thine
only. And may thereby find such sweetness from every Ordinance and Promise,
that my Soul may be like a Garden which the Lord has blessed; and may prosper
and thrive exceedingly.

MEDITAT. III. Upon feeding the Poor at the Gate with some broken meat left at
a Feast.
HOw thankful are these poor necessitous persons, for the fragments of that
Feast, which was so plentiful to those who sat within at the Table. Improve
this, O my Soul, by considering the different Estate of the Church Triumphant,
and that which is yet Militant.

That is in possession of eternal bliss, happy in the fruition of God, and
enjoys him in his fullest love, and is every day feasted with the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb; when This being present in the body and absent from the
Lord, as yet without the door of Heaven, is glad of some tastes of those Elixirs
of pleasures, which are earnests of the purchased possession and previous gusts
of it, and as it were some crumbs and parings of Glory; some of the broken meat
of those blessed Inhabitants of the new Jerusalem's full and delicious every
days feasts.

O Lord, I most humbly beseech thee; entertain me sometimes with some tastes of
those joys, which those partake of who are present with thy self. Let me see
thee through the Lattice, till I can see thee as the pure in heart shall see
thee in another world: That so I may long to be dissolved and to be with
Christ, and believing in thee let me even here rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of glory.

Which may make me thankful to thee for what I here enjoy of thee: Knowing that
Christ possessed by Faith is young Heaven, Glory in the bud; and thereby do
thou raise my desires to go to those celestial mansions where Glory is full
blown, and where I shall be entertained with Rivers of pleasures at thy Right
Hand for evermore.

MEDITAT. II. Of my Gardeners choosing fine young thriving Stocks to graft on,
and rejecting old and withered ones.
MY Gardiners care now he is grafting, in choosing young and flourishing Stocks,
and passing by those which are old or withered; minds me of Gods dealings with
his Creatures in grafting his Grace upon their hearts. He seldom doing it upon
old decrepid withered sinners, those old Stocks being often neglected by him,
because they willingly forgot their Creator in the days of their youth, (when
they had an inspired Precept to remember him) and would go on in ways of sin,
and live so wholly without God in the world, that he was but seldom in their
thoughts, they resolving to indulge themselves in all forbidden pleasures,
thinking that at last a death bed Repentance and crying of God mercy, and
saying Lord, Lord, would be enough to fit them for those eternal mansions
whereinto no unholy thing shall enter: And so boldly go on to add sin to sin,
(upon presumption of mercy) while death is ready to close their eyes, not
considering that there is not in the God-breathed Oracles, one example (that I
remember) of sickbed saving Repentance. And though there is one of the Thief
upon the Cross kept upon record, to keep real penitents from despairing of
mercy at the close of their days; yet there is but one to prevent bold
impenitent sinners from presuming of mercy.

And though the mercy of God ought not to be confined to any Age, yet we may
observe he does not frequently work saving Grace in old and withering
Creatures, but chooses young Disciples, and loves and delights to graft his
Grace on such, that they may go on to bring forth more fruit in their Age,
having given God the Spring and May of their lives, by a solemn Act of an early
selfdedication to him, and choosing to walk in all his ways. And who by setting
forth betimes in their journey to Heaven, have a long time to glorify God in:
and to be examples and encouragers to others to come in, to serve God, by
assuring them that all his ways are pleasantness, and his paths peace. And that
his yoke is easy, to those who take it on them, though it may gall their Necks
that struggle at it, and are unwilling to bear it.

O Lord, I do most humbly beseech thee by this occasional Meditation, let my
heart be lifted up in the high praises of thee my great and good God, for not
suffering me to continue so long under the reigning power of sin, as to be cast
off as an old and too withered a stock to graft Grace upon, but that thou were
pleased to show me the Beauties of Holiness betimes, before the Autumn of my
age. Though, Lord, I do confess, with S. Augustine, that too late, Lord, too
late I knew and loved thee, and do heartily grieve that I did not, as I should,
devote all the spring of my years to thee, but did give some of my green time
to vanity and folly, being then too conformable to the wicked world, and too
little conformable to thy blessed Will.

But oh for ever admired be thy mercy that did pluck me as a Firebrand out of
the Fire, and left me not to be fuel for everlasting Burnings. Thou might
then Lord, justly have said to me; Thou that art filthy, be filthy still: and
might have punished my former sins with leaving me to die in my sins. But
blessed be thy name, that thou did implant in me some of the Graces of thy
sweet and holy Spirit, before my old age, by which thou have been pleased to
give me more time to serve thee, and taste the pleasures which are to be found
in doing so. And have thereby enabled me to declare to others what I have my
self long experimented, that thou art good to the Soul that seeks thee: and the
purest, most satisfying and lasting pleasures are to be found in an holy and
strict walking with thee, and that, in keeping thy Commandments there is great
reward. And that religious persons have their joys, though the blind Sodomites
of the world want eyes to see them. O Lord, make me now in my old age bring
forth more fruit, that so thou may not say of me, as as justly thou did of
the fruitless Figtree, Cut it down, why cumberest thou the ground.

MEDITAT. V. Upon looking out of my Window at Chelsey upon the Thames.
THis sweet River which I looked upon with so much pleasure and delight, while
it was smooth, serene and calm, when a sudden Tempest rose unexpectedly, and
made it rough and troubled, proved rather frightful, than delightful to me, and
made me shut my Window, and cease looking on it.

This minds me what an alluring attractiveness there is in persons calm and
patient, free from the boisterous disorders of turbulent passions, who
entertain the eyes of all Beholders delightfully, while they continue so. But
if that admired Gentleness be by a sudden eruption of their passions turned
into fury, the very form of their visage seems to be changed, and looks
frightful to all Beholders, and very unalluring.

O Lord, I beseech thee make me more than ever to study and practice those
Christian adorning Graces of Meekness and Patience, that thereby I may evince
to others how great Beauty there is in being calm and free from unbeseeming and
violent passions, and that I may by Sweetness and Gentleness adorn my holy
Profession, and excite others to be imitaters of those Graces.

MEDITAT. VI. Upon seeing a fine Carpet taken off a dusty Table.
WHilst this fine Carpet was upon the Table it appeared very fine and clean;
but when that adorning Cover was removed, how foul and dusty was it found to be.

This minds me of a formal Professor, which puts all his Religion in formality
of outward Duties, and Gestures, which to Beholders make him appear decently.
But all this while under that outside appearance of Devotion his heart is nasty
and dusty, his care being only (like a painted Sepulcher) to appear beautiful
without, whilst within there is all uncleanness, and so thinks by putting on an
hypocritical outside to hide all his faults, and serve the Devil securely in
Christ's Livery.

O Lord, I humbly beseech thee suffer me not to satisfy my self with the
outward formality of Duties, which may seem well to my lookers on. But make me
mind the inward and spiritual performance, and how my heart is affected in
them. And let me look to heart cleansing, knowing, that thou my great God
look to the heart. And that though I may by covering over a dusty heart with
a fine outward formality, deceive men, I cannot deceive thee the great
heart-searcher, before whom all things are naked and open.

MEDITAT. VII. Upon childrens playing in the streets, and falling to fight, etc.
THese Children by the delight they take in their play not only forget the time
allotted for their recreation, and slip the hour prescribed for their return,
to learn their Lessons in, and have not only thereby ventured a whipping, but
have fallen out amongst themselves, tearing one another faces: which one of
their offended Fathers seeing, snatched up his Son, and severely corrected him,
which other persons in the street beholding, though they knew neither the
Child, nor the person that ended the Fray, by taking away the Fighter,
concluded by the correction that he gave, that he was the careful Father of the
Child, who had used his Rod to prevent, perhaps, the loss of an eye

This may be useful to mind me of the great Father of all the Families of the
Earth's wise proceeding with his Children, when he sees them wasting of their
time about things of no concernment, which ought to be employed in learning
what is of everlasting concernment, and are quarrelling and fighting not
against their lusts, but one against another. He does, to prevent the mischief
they might do each other, correct them seasonably, by which he shows his
fatherly care of them.

O Lord, I do most humbly beseech thee, sanctify this Meditation to me, that I
may remember, that though there is no knowledge either of love or hatred by all
that is before us; and that though thy out ward dispensations are often in the
dark to us; yet it is a sign of Sonship that thou corrects a disobedient
careless Child.

And therefore let me not in an afflicted condition (if thou by thy providence
shall again bring me into it) think that thou hate me, but that thou art a
most Gracious Father, who correctest me in faithfulness to prevent what thou
foreseest, and I did not, would mischief me.

MEDITAT. VIII. Upon the lighting many Candles at one.
THis Candle that has lighted so many, still gives as much light as it did
before, and has lost nothing by what it has imparted unto them.

Improve this, oh my Soul, by considering, that some excellent Christians (who
as the inspired Volumes tell us of that admirable person S. John Baptist, who
was a burning and a shining Light) are so conspicuous, that all Beholders take
notice of their well ordered conversation, their Light so shining before men,
that others seeing their good works are thereby excited to glorify God, and
are also so communicative of that light wherewith God has vouchsafed to
enlighten their understandings, that they are in a spiritual sense, what Job
said he was in another, eyes to the blind: and are still teaching young
Disciples what they who are old have been taught of God; and so train them up
in the School of Christianity. And yet by imparting their knowledge of God,
know him not the less themselves, but many times the more, and by informing
them of the pleasures of Religion, bring them into the holy path which leads to
eternal life, yet hinder not their own progress toward Heaven.

O Lord, I most humbly beseech thee, let this Meditation provoke me, more than
ever yet I have done, to impart to my Fellow Christians, (especially my Family,
under my authority) what I know of thee, that by my declaring how good a God
thou art, I may bring many others to know thee, not only with a general, but an
experimental knowledge; which will make them say as I do, That thou art good,
and do good. O let me by declaring what thou have done for my Soul, cause
others to join with me in adoring thee for thy greatness, and loving thee for
thy goodness; that so we may magnify thy name together. And I may be
instrumental to impart light to others, and be made a burning and a shining
Light my self.

MEDITAT. IX. Upon the drawing of the Window-curtains to prevent the Suns
putting out the Fire.
AS soon as I perceived that the shining of the Sun into the Room, would put
out the Fire, I instantly drew the Window-curtains to prevent it.

Which minds me of the necessity there is, that God should sometimes, (when he
sees the Fire of Celestial Love, in the hearts of his People, in danger of
being put out by other flames) take that away from us which would take us away
from him. And if he does it not by death, yet to prevent our cooling in our
affections, does, as it were, by some dark providence, draw a Curtain between
us and what we dote upon.

O Lord, I beseech thee: when thou see the Fire of thy Love in my heart,
ready to be put out by any thing, be so merciful as to draw what obscuring
Curtain thou please, to hinder it, that my love to thy Divine Majesty, may be
like the Fire upon the Altar that never went out. O let it never be
extinguished by any earthly object. But let my love to thee drown and swallow
up all creature-loves. O blot our every name from my corrupted heart, that
hinders the deeper engraving of thy name there; and remove me from what, and
whom thou will; so thou will thereby bring me nearer to thy self. Oh, though I
have sparks for Creatures, yet let my greatest blaze, blaze toward Heaven.
Amen.

MEDITAT. X. Upon a person who had great knowledge, and very quick, but
unsanctified parts.
THis person, who is in this very profane Age celebrated for a great Wit, and
is very acceptable to all his companions upon that account, does yet make so
very ill use of those acute parts God has been pleased to bestow upon him,
that he improves them only to make jests, and to laugh at all that is either
serious or sacred, endeavoring as much as in him lies, to make all Devotion be
turned into Ridicule: and so abuses all the knowledge that God has bestowed
upon him, so contrary to the design for which 'twas given him, of glorifying
his great Creator; that he only turns it against him, to his own final
destruction without repentance, using it as a Torch to light himself to Hell
thereby.

O Lord, I most humbly beseech thee let this Meditation make me choose to have a
little sanctified knowledge, rather than the most raised and quick parts
unsanctified, and help me to improve those parts thou have bestowed upon me, to
thy Honor, that I may never fight against thee with thy own weapons, but may
bring some Glory to thee by them. O be pleased to give me Light in my Head, and
Fire in my Heart, even that Fire from Heaven, by which I may inflame others
with true zeal for thy Glory, that using those weak parts for thee thou have
vouchsafed to me, I may by the little knowledge I have be lighted to the
Regions of Bliss, whilst otheres with their greater knowledge, devoid of Grace,
go down to utter darkness.

MEDITAT XI. Upon seeing a Silkworm spin.
THis Silkworm has for a long time entertained my Eyes with observing how
busily it was employed in spinning its curious Threads of Silk: and that when
it had made it is purse of Silk, into which it has confined it self, if the
Looker to it does not wind off what it has spun, rather than it will keep that
weight of Silk upon its Back, it will make a way to get from under it by eating
a hole at the top of it, and so flings it off.

Which minds me of those very vain persons that are puffed up with their being
adorned with fine Clothes, which is being proud of putting on of that which the
Silkworm puts off.

This may be useful to caution me against loving and delighting in fine Silks.
When I do consider that all the finest and best mingled ones that can be put on
to adorn me with, are all spun by a poor Worm: and that to be proud of Fine
Clothes, is to be so of that, which is the monument of our Sin: for if Adam had
not sinned, we should have had no need of clothing to have hid our shame. And
that even Pearls which are by many purchased at so dear a rate, that they may
adorn themselves with them, are but the sickness of the Fish; and that Crimson,
with which crowned Heads are often clothed, is dyed with the blood of a Fish:
and that even Gold and Silver for which many persons venture their immortal
part, is dug out of the entrails of the earth. And it is in the inspired
Volume told us, that He that loves Silver shall not be satisfied with Silver:
Nor is all the Gold that is in all the Mines in the whole world worth one
immortal Soul.

O Lord, I do most humbly implore, that thou would by these considerations of
the inconsiderableness that is in all these glittering adornments, which poor,
deluded, proud persons look on with eyes of admiration. Humble me exceedingly
for having in my youth been too guilty of this sin of too much loving, and
delighting in fine Clothes, being then too much taken up with the adorning of
my vile body, and too little so, with adorning of my better part.

O Lord, make me for the time to come to watch against this sin, which did so
easily beset me, and let me never more lift up my Soul to this tinsel and
pagentery vanity: but make me study to be like the King's Daughter, all
glorious within. And though thou my God has told us, that those that wear gay
Apparel are in King's Houses, and that in thy inspired Volume the Virtuous
Woman is said to have all her Household clothed with scarlet, and that her own
clothing is Silk and Purple, which seems to intimate that it is not unlawful
to wear Silk, Scarlet, and Purple, and that the Silkworm was not made only to
spin for the proud. Yet, O Lord, I do beseech thee, let me never more yield to
that pityful temptation of being drawn to esteem either others, or my self upon
the account of being set out with much bravery: but let me value more, others
my Fellow Christians, and prize more in my self, the adorning of a sweet, meek,
quiet, contented spirit, which is in thy sight of great value. And if I be
adorned with the Graces of thy Holy Spirit, help me to consider they will make
me beautiful to all eternity, where as all my bodily adornments are pulled of
at night when I go to rest, and must be all for ever parted with at the night
of death by me.

O Lord, therefore be pleased to make me often call to my remembrance the very
great and sensible pleasure, I have often experienced in clothing naked Backs,
when thou have let me have the honor of being thy Almoner, and dispensedst thy
charity through my hands to thy necessitous poor; and let that make me rather
to choose to cloth naked Backs, than to please idle eyes, and rather to choose
to see many of my Fellow Creatures kept warm, being covered with my Charity, in
plain, but warm Apparel, than to starve my Charity, by putting upon my self one
rich laced Gown, which would, if sold, and distributed unto the Poor, make many
decent, and convenient Gowns for several indigent persons.

MEDITAT. XII. Upon desiring a friend to preserve safe for me some precious
things, which were kept for me, till I needed them, and then seasonably
produced to help me.
HOw earnestly did I desire my Friend to lay up safe for me these things, and
how faithfully has he preserved them, and how seasonably has he produced them
for me at my need?

This may be useful to excite me, to practice gratitude, to my best and highest
Friend, to whom I have often sent up the respirations of Soul, that he would keep
for me both those Truths I have learnt out of his Sacred Word, and those
experiences I have had of his Goodness, and supports vouchfafed me under
afflicting providence, not daring to trust to my memory only, these engaging
mercies I have received, lest his Word and benefits should slip out of my mind;
and I have petitioned him also, that he would bring afresh into my mind those
Truths, when I most needed them.

O Lord, I adore thee for bringing again afresh to my Memory, those supporting
promises, to strengthen my weak Faith, when I most needed them, which thou did
preserve for me, till the times of my greatest exigencies, and did then
comfort me by them.

And, O Lord, I do also thankfully acknowledge, that when thou did as a
gracious Father, chastise me by afflictions for my enormities, and I was even
ready to faint in taking that wholesome Soul Physic, of thy prescribing, that
thou were then pleased, by my considering the benefits which had formerly
accrued to my better part, by sanctified afflictions, to make me not only in
some good measure patient under them; but did also make me to believe, they
would be for my spiritual good. And thus thou made my Memory a Cabinet, to
preserve my own experiences, that they might be seasonably produced to keep me
from doing as Issachar did, crouch down under my burdens.

MEDITAT. XIII. Upon my often waking in the night, and presently falling asleep
again.
HOw often have I awaked this Night, and instantly fallen asleep again? being
so drowsy, that I could not long keep my self from slumbring.

This may be useful to mind me of my Spiritual Condition, having often been in an
awakened frame, in which I have been put upon seeking after the great things of
Eternal Concernment, which have then been so realised unto me, as to take deep
impressions upon my heart, and has made my Soul to follow hard after God for
Mercy, and for power to serve him better; but alas! how soon have I by carnal
security been drowsy and fallen asleep again; and though in the Divine Records
of Gods revealed Will unto us: he has bid us, that we should not sleep as do
others, but that we should be watchful; yet I have been apt to forget that
Precept; and to say to my self, in a spiritual sense, what was said of natural
rest (which is a shutting up of the Senses) concerning Lazarus; that if he
slept he should do well, (though I slept, it should be well with me.)

But, O Lord, I do most humbly beseech thee, do unto me, as thou said thou
would do unto him, come and awaken me out of my sleep.

O let me no longer be so unequal in my Devotions, as to have my Goodness like
a Morning Dew, which soon passes away; and so be sometimes awake, and sometimes
asleep. But let me be kept watchful, by the serious sense of, my mortality; and
of the strict account I must give to thee, of all that I have done in the
flesh, whether it be good or evil: And when thou see me falling again into my
Spiritual Lethargy, do thou say unto me, as the Mariners in the storm did unto
Jonah; Arise thou sluggard and call upon thy God.

PIOUS REFLECTIONS UPON SEVERAL SCRIPTURES.

Pious Reflections On Several SCRIPTURES.
REFLECTION 1.
LOrd when I read in thy Word, of the man after thine own heart, saying, Rivers
of waters run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy commandments; and yet
consider that I am so far from imitating him, that I can many times suffer sin
to be upon my brother, without so much as giving him reproof for it, or
advising him, so much as to consider whom he offends by it: Nay, sometimes I am
ready to make a mock of sin, and to laugh at that which is a grief to thy Holy
Spirit. O Lord, I beseech thee humble me under this consideration, and make me
for the time to come to imitate holy David, in my charity toward my offending
Brother. And with thy servant Lot to have my soul vexed in hearing and seeing
the filthy communication of the wicked. O let me be so charitable as to weep
over the Soul of my offending Brother, and let me, as much as in me lies, help
him out of the snare of sin, and by my Prayers, and holy Example, help him
toward Heaven.

REFLECT. II. Jonah 4.9. Then said the Lord, do thou well to be angry for the
gourd? and he said, I do well to be angry even unto death.
LOrd, when I read of this peevish Prophet Jonah, who because thou wast
merciful unto the repenting Ninevites, and did not destroy them in forty
days, according to what he had proclaimed, was so discontented, that when thou
expostulatedst with him, and askedst him, whether he did well to be angry; he
was so far from confessing his fault, as that he seemed to dare to approve it
even to thy very face, by these words, I do well to be angry even unto death. O
Lord, how does this show me the madness of this passion of anger, and
discontent, which does for the present so far distract us, that we are ready to
justify a fault in stead of begging pardon for it? O Lord, I do therefore most
humbly beseech thee, to enable me, to be slow to anger, remembering that thou
have told me; that he that is slow to anger, is better than the mighty; and he
that governs his Sipirit, than he that takes a City; and he that has no rule
over his spirit, is as a City that has no wall. O bring all my passions into
subjection to my reason, and my reason to my Religion. Let me not fret my self
in any wise to do evil, nor to be angry, and sin in my Anger, but give me a
meek, quiet, contented spirit, which is in thy sight of great value. Let me
learn of thee to be meek and lowly, that I may find rest unto my soul.

REFLECT. III. Mark 9.5. And Peter answered and said to Jesus, master it is
good for us to be here.
LOrd, when I peruse these words of Peter's, that it is good to be here: this
makes me reflect upon my self, in relation to this present World; who, am often
times, when I am delighted with any thing here below, which does please my
sensual appetite, ready to say it is good to be here. But, O Lord, I beseech
thee do thou then say to me, up and be going, for here is not your rest. Look
beyond things temporal to those which are eternal: these worldly pleasures dye
in the birth, and therefore are not worthy to come into the Bill of Mortality:
make me to consider these things cannot satisfy me for a moment, much less for
eternity; and that though the world seems to kiss me, it is but to stab me,
though it makes me sport, it is but to put out my eyes; it promises much, but
performs nothing; and therefore let me not say, it is good to be here; but let
me seek after that city that has foundations, whose maker and builder is God,
after that better country, that is an heavenly.

REFLECT. IV. John 4.28. The woman left her waterpot.
LOrd! when I read that after thou were pleased to instruct the Samaritan
woman, that thou were the Christ, the Savior of the world; she presently left
her water-pot, and went into the City to inform others, that they also might
come and be blessed with a sight of him, who is the desire of all Nations. O
Lord, this does indeed convince me, that the Soul that once finds thee, is
presently content to part with all: For this woman, before thy revealing thy
self to her, was busied about her water-pot, and her worldly employments: but
after she had found the Messiah, she could (as it were for joy) forget her
water-pot, and willingly part with it, to inform her Neighbors what she had
found, that they also might have a part with her. O Lord, that thou would
enable me also, to leave all to follow thee; and that I may like Simon Peter,
who when thou calledst him from his fishing, left his nets straightway, and
followed thee; leave all my worldly wealth and follow thee, and count all
things dung and dross to gain thee, and with the man spoken of in the Gospel,
sell all to obtain the pearl of greatest price, that having found Jesus, I may
willingly part with all for thee; and having thee, may say I have enough. Lord
I am willing, if thou call'st me to it, to leave my water-pot, and my nets, and
all for thee.

REFLECT. V. Acts 24.25. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance and
judgment to come, Felix trembled, and answered, Go thy way for this time, when
I have a convenient season I will hear thee.
LOrd, when I peruse this Verse, and see that thy chosen Vessel, though a
Prisoner, as he reasoned of Righteousness, Temperance and Judgment to come,
could make Felix tremble; and yet he could put him off to another season. This
makes me to reflect upon my self, in regard of the good motions, that the holy
Spirit many times comes to me with, as it were, in the cool of the day, when
the heat of temptation is over, saying, Do thou well to be angry? do thou
well to love this world? Do thou not remember God has bid the not to love
this world, nor to consume thy days in vanity, nor to be vain in thy
imaginations? But God has bid thee work out thy salvation with fear and
trembling, and give all diligence to make thy calling and election sure.
Remember thou have a great work to do, and thou have but a little moment to do
it in; thy body is but dust, and must soon return to dust; but thy soul is made
for eternity; it must last for ever, its more worth than an whole world,
therefore seek rest for that, therefore look beyond things temporal to those
that are eternal. Lay up for thy self treasure in heaven, and let thy heart be
there also.

O Lord, how often has thy blessed Spirit thus, as it were, whispered into my
Soul; and though upon such serious considerations, I have with Felix trembled,
for the present; yet I have with him also said, Go thy way for this time, when
I have a convenient season I will hear thee. But, O Lord, I beseech thee pardon
this procrastination, and putting off good resolutions for the time past, and
now enable me to make haste, and not delay to keep thy commandments, and to
follow the example of the Prodigal, who said, he would arise and go to his
Father, and he straightway arose and went, according to his resolution and
promise. Make me, Lord, to remember that it is to day, if I will hear thy
voice, that I must not harden my heart, and that now is the accepted time; now
is the day of salvation. Let me therefore now work the work of God whilst it is
day, for the night comes wherein no man can work. Lord, make me to consider,
that if it be hard to repent to day, it will be much harder to morrow; and that
I have no assurance that I shall live till to morrow. Make me therefore to
remember thee my Creator in the days of my youth, before the evil days come,
wherein I shall say, I have no pleasure in them; and with the wise Virgins to
prepare to meet the Bridegroom of my soul, with my lamp ready and well
furnished with oil, that when thy blessed Spirit, next knocks at the door of my
heart, by any good motion, I may presently entertain it with caresses and
satisfaction, and not say with Felix, Go thy way for this time, when I have a
more convenient season I will hear thee.

REFLFCT. VI. 2 Samuel 12.5. And David's anger was greatly kindled against the
man, and he said to Nathan, As the Lord lives, the man that has done this
thing shall surely dye.
LOrd, when I read of Nathans coming to David, and by a parable showing him his
own fault, and hear him presently say, As the Lord lives, the man that has
done this thing shall surely dye. This discovers to me my own iniquity, who am
many times ready with David to condemn my own actions in an other person, and
to be a severe censurer of the faults of others, but to pass a very slight one
upon my own, and can easily discern the mote in my brothers eye, but cannot
perceive the beam that is in my own eye. O Lord, I beseech thee, when I would
censure, make me to begin at home, and to judge my self; remembering that I have
most reason to do so; for I can see in my brother but a a life full of sin, but
I can see in my self an heart full of sin; let me therefore in lowliness of
mind esteem others better than my self, and not judge another but judge my
self, that I may not be judged of the Lord.

REFLECT. VII. Jos. 23.15. But as for me and my house, we will serve the Lord.
LOrd, when I read of thy servant Joshuah before his death, reckoning up all
the great engagements that the Children of Israel had to serve thee, to provoke
them to renew their Covenant with thee, and to keep close to thy service; and
hear him taking his most happy resolution, that whatever they did, He and his
house would serve the Lord.

How desirous, O Lord, am I to follow this holy man's Example, and to resolve
that whatever the rest of the World does, I and my Family will serve the Lord;
let me not think it enough to serve thee my own self; but make me to do, as
thou said thou knewst thy servant Abraham would, to command my Children, and
my Household after me, that they may keep thy Commandments, to do Judgment and
Justice. And as holy David did, let me say, He that walks uprightly, he shall
serve me, mine eye shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with me: He that tells lies shall not tarry in my sight, that it may be said
of me, as it was of Cornelius, That I fear God and all my house.

REFLECT. VIII. Luke 16.25. And Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy
life time receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now
he is comforted, and thou art tormented.
LOrd, when I read this sad answer of Abraham, to the Rich-mans request: Son,
remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things: How sad a
remembrance do I believe this must needs be to him, to consider his former
prosperity; and to think that he was cleathed in Purple and sine Linen, and
sared sumptuously every day; and now wanted a drop of water to cool his tongue.
The remembrance of his former prosperity, was now but an aggravation of his
misery.

For what good did it do him to consider that in his life time, he had it may
be a great Retinue, and many to wait upon him: when in Hell his Attendance were
only Devils and damned Spirits.

O Lord, I beseech thee therefore, let it never be said to me, as it was to
this miserable great one; thou have in thy life time had thy good things; thou
have had thy consolation.

O Lord, I beseech thee, give me not my Portion in this Life, nor let me have a
short Heaven here upon Earth, and an eternal Hell hereafter.

Let me not be satisfied with the blessings of thy Footstool, without those of
thy Throne; nor with the fatness of the Earth, without the dew of Heaven.

Let me not say to gold thou art my hope, or to the fine gold thou art my
confidence.

Let me not count these lower things my good things, because these may stand
with Reprobation, and a Dives may have them, and go to Hell. But let me account
those things my good things, which cannot stand with Reprobation.

O visit me with the favor of thy chosen: O let me not so much covet to be
clothed with purple, and fine linen, as to be like the kings daughter all
glorious within; and be clothed with the Righteousness of Christ, and help me
to put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and to make no provision for the flesh, to
fulfill the lusts thereof.

REFLECT IX. Mark 8.36. What shall it profit a man to gain the whole world,
and lose his own soul?
LOrd, when I read these words, and see, as it were, my blessed Savior,
putting the whole world into one Scale of a Balance, and the Soul of a poor
Creature into the other, and the Soul out-weighing all the World: How really
does this convince me, that whosoever shall exchange his immortal Soul to gain
the whole World, would make a sad bargain.

O Lord, I beseech thee therefore, let me not sell the Devil mine, for a little
scrap of it; but remembering the preciousness of it, by the price it cost; For
we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as silver or gold, but with the
precious blood of Christ. Therefore if the Devil should come to me, as he did
once to my Savior, and show me all the Kingdoms of the World, and all the
glories of them, and say, all these will I give thee for thy soul. I may say to
him, Get thee behind me Satan: I Will never make such a fools bargain.

REFLECT. X. 1 Samuel 30.6. And David encouraged himself in the Lord his God.
LOrd, when I read this Chapter, and consider the sad condition of David who,
when he returned, found Ziglag burnt, and his two Wives carried Captives by the
Amalekites; and the people that were with him talking of stoning him, that he
was in so sad an outside condition, that he was sorely distressed, yet the
Text says that David, (even then) encouraged himself in the Lord his God.

O Lord, how does this make me cry out and say, blessed are the people which
are in such a case, yea blessed are the people, whose God is the Lord; yea
blessed are they, who in their greatest trials and distresses can encourage
themselves in God, that can trust in God at all times. Lord, those that know
thy name will put their trust in thee, and thou will keep them in perfect
peace, whose mind is staid on thee, because they trust in thee.

O Lord, I beseech thee, let this make me follow holy David's Example, in all
my distresses to encourage my self in thee, knowing it is better to put
confidence in God, than to put confidence in Princes.

REFLECT. XI.
Genesis 22.9. Abraham bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar, on the
wood. V. 12. Lay not thy hand upon the lad, neither do thou any thing unto him.
LOrd, when I read with what ready obedience faithful Abraham complied with that
command, which not only ran cross to his natural affection, but eemingly would
disappoint the Promise he so long waited for, and at length received, with so
much joy and satisfaction, that he named his Son, Isaac (Laughter) as a Witness
and Memorial of it. And also, how when he had stretched out his hand, and took
the Knife to slay his Son, thou calledst from Heaven to him, Lay not thy hand
upon the lad.

This greatly shames me to think how slow and backward I was to yield to thy
gracious commands and calls, to devote my self entirely to thee, in a course of
strict Religion, and to present my Body as a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable
to thee, for fear of slaying my Isaac, loosing all my joy and delight, as if I
might never have been merry after my so doing.

But, O Lord, I must acknowledge I was afraid where no fear was: For I find by
blessed experience, Religion (the being laid on thine Altar) neither kills, nor
burns up our delights, only confines and tames them: For as I read in the
Parable of the prodigal, though he had had much mad jollity before, he never
knew what true joy was till he came to himself, and returned to his Father, for
'twas then, and not till then, that he and his began to be (truly) merry,

REFLECT. XII.
Mart. 7.21. Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in heaven. O
Lord, when I read that it is not calling upon thee, Lord, Lord, but the obeying
thee as such by doing of thy Will, that will give entrance into thy Kingdom. O
Lord, how desirous am I, to live my Prayers. And as I every day pray as thou
have taught me, that thy Will may be done: So Lord enable me to do thy Will,
even when it is most cross to my own.

Let thy Will commanding be my will obeying. O help me to resign my will wholly
to thine, make me cheerfully to do, and patiently to suffer thy Will.

Lord, let they holy Will be done by me, and upon me.

FINIS.
Imprimatur,

Geo. Thorp, Rmo. in Christo P. and D. Domino Gulielmo Archiep. Cant. A Sacris
Domesticis.
May 31. 1678.
A CATALOGUE OF Some Books Printed for, and Sold by Nathanael Ranew, at the
Kings Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.
Folio's.
THe Works of Josephus, with great diligence Revised and Amended, according to
the excellent French Translation of Monsieur Arnauld d' Andilly. Also the
Embassy of Philo Judeus to the Emperor Caius Caligula, never translated before;
with the References of the Scripture. A new Map of the Holy Land, and diverse
Copper Plates serving to illustrate the History.

The Principles of Christian Religion; with a large Body of Divinity,
methodically and familiarly handled, by way of Question and Answer, for the use
of Families. Together with Immanuel, or the Mystery of the Incarnation of the
Son of God: by the most Reverend James Usher, late Archbishop of Armagh: To
which is added in this seventh Edition, twenty Sermons preached at Oxford
before his Majesty, and elsewhere: Perused and published by his Lordships
Chaplains; with the Life of the Author, containing many remarkable Passages,
and an Alphabetical Table never before extent.

Quarto's.
The Harmony of the Divine Attributes, in the Contrivance and Accomplishment of
Man's Redemption by the Lord Jesus Christ: or Discourses wherein is showed, how
the Wisdom, Mercy, Justice, Holiness, Power, and Truth of God, are Glorified in
that great and blessed Work: by William Bates D. D. in quarto.

Of Wisdom, three Books written in French, by Peter Charron, Doctor of Law in
Paris: Tranflated by Sampson Lennard in quarto.

A Sermon preached at High-Wickham, in the County of Bucks, wherein the
Ministers Duty is remembered, their Dignity asserted, Man's Reconciliation with
God urged; by Samuel Gardner, Chaplain to his Majesty, in quarto.

The Norfolk Feast, A Sermon preached at St. Dunstans, being the day of the
Anniversary Feast for that County; by William Smythes Minister in that County,
in quarto.

The Speech of Sr. Audley Mervyn Knight, His Majesty's prime Sergeant of Law,
and Speaker of the House of Commons in Ireland; delivered to his Grace Duke of
Ormond, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the 13th. Febr. 1662. in the Presence
Chamber in the Castle in Dublin.

Octavo's.
"EYPHKA, "EYPHKA. The Virtuous Woman found. Her Loss Bewailed, and Character
Exemplified in a Sermon preached at Felsted in Essex, April 30. 1678. At the
Funeral of that most Excellent Lady, the Right Honorable, and Eminently
Religious and Charitable Mary, Countess Dowager of Warwick, the most
Illustrious Pattern of Sincere Piety, and solid Goodness this Age has
produced. With so large Additions as may be styled The Life of that Noble Lady:
By Anthony Walker, D. D. and Rector of Fyfield in the same County. To which
are Annexed some of her Ladyships Pious and Useful Meditations.

A worthy Communicant; or a Treatise showing the due order of Receiving the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: By Jeremiah Dyke, in Octavo.

The Way to Salvation, or the Doctrine of Life Eternal; laid down from several
Texts of Scripture, opened and applied; fitted to the capacity of the meanest
Chirstian, and useful for all Families, by John Hieron, in Octavo.

Solitude improved by Divine Meditation, or a Treatise proving the Duty,
Demonstrating the Necessity, Excellency, Usefulness, Nature, Kinds, and
Requisites of Divine Meditation: First, intended for a Person of Honor, and
now Published for general use, by Nathanael Ranew sometime Minister of Felsted
in Essex, in octavo.

Moral Virtues Baptized Christian, or the Necessity of Morality among
Christians, by William Shelton of Bursted Magna in Essex, in Octavo.

The Burning of London in the Year 1666. Commemorated and Improved in a hundred
and ten Meditations and Contemplations, by Samuel Roll Minister of the Gospel,
and sometime Fellow of Trinity College in Cambridge: in octavo.

Natural Theology, or the Knowledge of God from the Works of Creation;
Accommodated and Improved to the Service of Christianity, by Matthew Barker: in
octavo.

Christ and the Covenant, the Work and way of Meditation; God's Return to the
Soul or Nation, together with his preventing Mercy; Delivered in Ten Sermons by
William Bridge, sometime Minister of Yarmouth.

The Sinfulness of Sin, and the Fullness of Christ; delivered in two Sermons by
the same Author.

The Vanity of the World by Ezekiel Hopkins: in octavo.

The Souls Ascension in the state of Separation, by Isaac Loeffs: in octavo.

An Explication of the Assemblies lesser Catechism, by Samuel VVinney: in
octavo.

Iter Boreale, with other select Poems; being an exact Collection of all
hitherto extant, and some added, never before Printed, by Robert VVild D. D. in
octavo.

A Synopsis of Quakerism, or a Collection of the Fundamental Errors of the
Quakers, by Thomas Danson: in octavo.

A Poetical Meditation, wherein the Usefulness, Excellency, and several
perfections of Holy Scriptures are briefly hinted, by John Clark: in octavo.

Twelves.
Correction, Instruction, or a Treatise of Affliction, first conceived by way
of private Meditation, afterward digested into certain Sermons, and now
published for the help and comfort of humble suffering Christians: by Tho:
Case, in Twelves.

The Poor doubting Christian, drawn to Christ, by Thomas Hooker of New England,
in Twelves.

Ovids Metamorphosis in English verse, by George Sandy's in Twelves.

Aesop's Fables, in Prose with Cuts, in Twelves.

The Principles of Christian Religion, with a brief Method of the Doctrine
thereof, Corrected and Enlarged by the Reverend James Usher Archbishop of
Armagh, in Twelves.

A plain Discourse of the Mercy of having Godly Parents, with the Duties of
ildren that have such Parents, by M. Goddard, in Twelves.

(...), Novum Testamentum; huic editioni omnia Difficiliorum vocabulorum
Themata, quae in Georgii Passoris Lexico Grammatice resolvuntur in Margin
apposuit Carolus Hoole; in eorum scilicet gratiam qui primi Graecae Linguae
Tyrocinia faciunt: in Twelves.


