REPORTS OF THAT REVEREND AND LEARNED JUDGE, SIR HUMPHRY WINCH KNIGHT;
Sometimes one of the JUDGES of the COURT OF COMMON PLEAS.

Containing many Choice Cases, and excellent matters touching Declarations,
Pleadings, Demurrers, Judgments, and Resolutions in points of LAW,

In the four last years of the Reign of King JAMES, faithfully Translated out
of an exact french Copy, with two Alphabetical, and necessary Tables, the one
of the names of the Cases, the other of the principal matters contained in this
Book.

LONDON Printed for W. Lee, D. Pakeman, and G. Bedell, and are to be sold at
their Shops in Fleetstreet, 1657.

COURTEOUS READER,
THe principal end in publishing Books is the profit which redoundeth to
others, and what improvement can there be either more noble in it self, or of
greater advantage to the receiver then that of knowledge, and especially of the
Laws of this Nation in which you live, and by which your actions ought to be
regulated: the study of other learning being private, fitter for Universities,
then Common wealths, fuller of contemplation, then experience, and more
laudable in Scholars themselves, then beneficial unto others; if therefore
either benefit will prevail with you, or delight persuade you, then (I beg
favor to speak with some confidence) you will find both those desired motives
in this solid Book to Court you: the Author of the greatest part of them was
for many years a grave Judge of the Court of Common Pleas, reverend for his
learning and integrity, and honorable for his employment, of whose death, The
death of Justice Winch 4. Febr. vide fol. 125.
and great worth you will find a deserved testimony near the end of these
Collections; some eminent and judicious Pen (unhappily by time buried in
oblivion) has made some addition of Cases to our great Author no less quaint,
then useful, which being found in one entire exact french copy; you have here
with all deligence faithfully rendered in English for public use: touching the
errors which may occur in this Tract, be pleased to distinguish, some being of
more consequence then others: the first you will find particularly corrected
in the usual place after the end of this Book, and the rest an easy judgment
may in Transitu rectify which is hoped are not many: this copy coming to
some ingenuous hands, it was thought fit to expedit the printing thereof to
prevent other spurious Copies in prejudice of the public, especially at this
time wherein the press is prostituted to so much ignorance, and lawless
liberty: and now to speak a modest word of the merit of this work, not only as
an invitation to the buyer, and for his benefit, but rather with due respect to
the memory of our Author, who (is hoped) will live in this posthumous issue,
and surely it is no small prejudice to the professors of Law that the rest of
his labors are abortively smoothered. The Cases herein you will find well
polished in the stating, and solidly canvased in the debating; both the Bench,
and Bar of that Court (with leave be it spoken) being then as well supplied
with deep Sages of the Law, as in diverse years either before, or since: expect
matter here, not eloquence, and the grateful nutriment of the understanding,
rather then the pleasing condiments of Rethorick to tickle the Fantasy.
Farewell.

A Table of the several names of the cases contained in this Book.
A
AYlesworth against Harrison 19 Widow Archers case 20 Allen against Brach 27
Avis against Genney 65 Adams against Ward 90 Austin against Beadle 113 Ashley
against Collins 114
B
BArtlet against Bartlet 2 Bull against Fankester 19 Buckley against Simonds 35
Bishop of Gloucester against Wood 46 57 Batterseys case 48 Bulloign against
Gervase 58 Buckley against Simonds 59 Brigs case 65 Bret and Ward 70 Bacon
against Weston 70 Barley against Foster 71 Boon and the Bishop of Norwich 72
Blunt and his wife against Hutchinson 73 Bray against Sir Paul Tracie 79 Baker
against Baker 100 Brown and Ware against Barker 102 Bubles case 103
C
AUditor Curle for words 33 39 Clotworthy against Mitchel 49 Countess of Berk.
against Sir Peter Vanlore 77 Cook against Cook 90 Crompton against Philpot 102
Cooper against Edgar 103 104 etc. 115 116
D
DUncombe against the Bishop of Winton 7 Duncombe against the Universitie of
Oxford 11 Davies against Turner 18 Dodderidge against Anthony 52 Davies Eliz.
against Hawkins 125
E
EArl of Northumberland and Earl of Devon. 6 Ewer and Vaughan 8 Empson against
Bathurst 20 50
F
FLemming against Pitman 63 Fosters case 72 Ferrers against English 73
G
Goddard against Gilbert 10 Grice against Lee 16 Sir Edward Grubham against Sir
Edward Cook 20 23 Gratwick against Gratwick 23 Good against Bawtrie 34 Gell
against white 35 Gage against Johnson 53 Grasier against wheeler 76 Good
against Good 78 Goldingham against Sir John Sands 81 88 Godsals case 90 Gibson
against Ferrers 114 120
H
HArrington against Harrington 9 Harris against wiseman 19 Doctor Hunt against
Allen 25 Hill against Waldron 29 Hoels case 30 54 Harvey against the hundred of
Chelsam 66 Hasset against Hanson 66 Heath against Trist and Cawtrel 73 Holman
against Tuke 80 Hickford against Machin 82 83 etc. Hickman against Sir William
Fish 100 Holman against Sir Thomas Pope and his wife 102 Holbeach Sir Thomas
against Sambeach 102 Hilliard and Sanders 109 110 111 121 122 Holt and Rand
against Holt 112 Hitcham Sir Robert against Brooks 123 124
I
Johnson against Norway 37
K
KIng against Bowen 2
L
LEwings against March 4 LLewellings case 11 Sir Henry Lelloe warden of the
Fleet 35
M
Mayor against two Bailiffs 16 Maps against Sir Edward Sidley 22 Mabies case 23
Mackwilliams case 41 Mankleton and Allen 73 Marriots case 78 Methol against
Peck 112
N
NOrton against Lakins 1 Napper Sir Robert 74 87
O
OXford and his wife against Goldington 64 Over and her husband against Tucker
82
P
POtter against Turner 7 Parson and Morlee 19 Pleadal against Gosmore 67 124
125 Potter against Brown 70 89 Priest and King 77 Portington and Beamond 79
R
REignolds against Pool 1, 44 Rives case 48
S
SAckvil against Earnsby 4 Sir George Spark 6 Savil against Thornton 13 Sir
George Stripping in waste 15 Spencers case 57 Sparrow against Sowgate 61
Sheldon against Bret 63 Summers case 66 Stephens and Randal 77 Summers against
Dugs 80 Sheis against Sir Francis Glover 100
T
TOpping against King 5 Tutter against Friar 7 Trehern against Claybrook 26 69
Thorntons case 63 Theakers case 71 Thorns case 76 Trenchard Sir George against
Hoskins 91 92 93
V
VAnheath against Turner 24
W
WAste against Pretty 3 White against Williams 5 Wetherly against Wells 6
Wright against Black 28 54 Whitgift against Sir Francis Barrington 31 Webs
against Barlow 62 Sir Michael Wharton and Sir Edward Hide 72 Westley against
King 75 Weaver against Best 75 Woodley against the Bishop of Exeter and
Manwaring 94 95 96 etc. Wen against Moore 101
EASTER TERM, In the 19. of KING JAMES in COMMON BENCH.
Easter Term. 19. Jac.
IT was said by Warberton Justice, that in the time when Anderson was chief
Justice of this Court, that it was adjudged, that where a Coppiholder alleged
a custom within a Manor to be, that every Coppiholder may cut trees at his
pleasure, that this custom is against common Law, and also his opinion was,
that where a custom was alleged to be, that if a Tenant in ancient Demesne
devise his land to another without other words expressing his intent, that the
devisee shall have the fee simple: and Hobert inclined to this opinion, and by
Hutton and Winch he shall have fee by the custom, and accordingly it was
adjudged.

Norton against Lakins Ent. Hill. Jac.
NOrton against Lakins Ent. Hill. 18. Jac. in debt upon an obligation, the
condition was to stand to the arbitrament of J. S. and the Defendant pleaded
that he made no arbitrament, the Plantiff showed the award and the breach. And
the case in effect was, that the Plantiff and the Defendant put themselves upon
the arbitrament of J. S. of all matters between them till the first of March
18. Iac. and he made an award that each shall release to the other matters and
differences between them till the ninth day of March 18. Jac. and it was argued
by Sergeant Henden that the award is void, for by their release the obligation
upon which this action is brought is discharged: but it was ruled to be a good
award, for though it shall be void for that part of the award, yet it shall be
good for the rest; but Winch doubted of the case.

Reynolds against Poole; Ent. Hill. 18. Jac. Rot. 641.
REynolds against Pool Ent. Hill. 18. Iac. Rot. 641. Reynolds libelled in the
spiritual Court against Pool, for the Tithes of a Park, and Pool prayed to have
a prohibition, and he showed that he, and all those whose estate he had in the
Park, had held this as a Park till the 11. of Eliz. at which time it was
disparked, and that time beyond memory etc. the occupiers had used to pay to
the vicar of the parish a Buck in Summer, and a do in winter in lieu and
satisfaction of all Tithes due to the Vicar. And it was argued by Sergeant
Henden, that this is not a sufficient cause to grant a prohibition, because
that now the Park is destroyed and sowed, and so the prescription fails, for it
was annexed to the Park: secondly the question is for the Tithes of corn and
those do appertain to the Parson and not to the Vicar, and he cited a case
between Hawk and Collins in this Court; there the prescription was, that he and
all those, whose estate he had, had used to pay to the Vicar a certain thing in
le^u and satisfaction of all Tithes due to the Parson, and for this a
prohibition was denied.

Sherley: he had preserved that he had used to pay this to the Vicar, and this
shall be intended for Tithes due to the Vicar, and not to the Parson: Sergeant
Ashley to the contrary, and that the prescription is good for this extends to
the soil and not to the Park; Hobert said, that Tithes of corn are sometime
payable to the Vicar, and not always to the Parson; for put the case that at
the time of the derivation of the Vicarage out of the Parsonage the composition
was that the Vicar shall have the Tithes of that Park, in th^s case by reason
of such general terms, he shall have the Tithe of hay, corn, deer, or any other
thing which grows in that. And the composition being made before time of
memory, no man can say but that it was made in such manner, and the case of
Okenden Cowper in this Court, in which the Court was divided, differed from
this case, for there the prescription was to pay a Buck arising and coming out
of the Park, and there was no deer left in the Park: and Hutton agreed, for
there he destroyed his own prescription, and he agreed with Bracies case put
after, for there was a contrariety in the prescription. Warberton; the case of
Bracie in this Court was, that the Parson libelled against him for the Tithe of
corn, where this was due to the Vicar and not to the Parson and denied him for
that reason, for he may not plead the title of another man; and the Parson and
the Vicar ought to agree among themselves; but in our case no Tithes are to be
set out, and for that reason he may plead this, but it seems to me that the
prescription shall go to the soil, and not to the Park and when it is
destroyed, he shall pay Tithes in kind as a garden or an orchard, so long as it
is used as a garden or an orchard, that the occupier of that shall pay a penny:
now if this be ploughed and converted to other use, he shall pay Tithes in
kind: and Hobert agreed to the case of the garden or orchard, for the penny is
paid for the herbs or fruit. Winch was absent: and Hutton said, that the
prescription shall go to the soil, and the Vicar by prescription may have the
herbs of the glbe of the Parson: Hobert, the Park is only an appellation or
name of land, and this name or appellation may not pay Tithes, but the land it
self: and put the case that a man had al-wayes paid 10. s. for the Tithes of a
meadow, and after he sowed that with corn, here for the payment of this 10. s.
he is discharged: Warberton, I deny the case of the meadow; and so it was
adjorned.

Bartlet against Bartlet, Trin Jac. Rot. 1784.
TR. 18. Iac. Rot. 1784. Richard Bartlet brought an action upon the case
against Thomas Bartlet, and he declared upon an account, and showed that the
Defendant was found in arrerages in 20. l. which he promised to pay when he
should be requested, and now the Plantiff had not laid any day or place of
request in his declaration, and Ashley moved in arrest of Judgment, that the
declaration is not good, for the request is also parcel of the promise: but
Hobbert chief Justice said, that when a man brings an action upon the case for
a thing which was originally a debt, the Plantiff need not lay any time or
place of the request, but when the action is brought for a Collateral thing,
there he ought to lay a day and place of the request, and so it was adjudged
according in the same case.

King against Bowen, Ent. Trin. Jac. Rot. 1755.
KIng againk Bowen entered Tr. 18. Iac. Rot. 1755. William King brought an
action upon the case against John Bowen for these slanderous words spoken of
him, King is a false foresworn knave and took a false oath against me at a
commission at Witham, and the Defendant Justified the words, and it was found
for the Plantiff, and Henden said, that it had been alleged in arrest of
Judgment that the words are not actionable, and he said that he agreed if one
say of another that he was foresworn in a Court which is not a Court of record,
that none action will lie, because the party is not punishable for that in
perjury, but in our case the commission issued out of the high Commission
Court, which Court to the examination of witnesses is in nature of a temporal
Court, and had been confirmed by act of Parliment: and Sergeant Harvey argued
to the contrary, that the first words are not actionable, and then the
subsequent words are uncertain, and yet if one say of another, that he was
foresworn at the Common Pleas bar, the words are actionable, for it shall be
intended that this was upon examination in the execution of Justice: Hobert, if
a man is foresworn in a Court Baron before the Steward, this is perjury, but in
our case the words are altogether uncertain, for it does not appear what
authority the Commissioners had, nor yet in what manner he was forsworn; and
Justice Hutton said, if one man say of another he was foresworn before the
Bishope of S. this is not actionable, but if one say of another, that he was
forsworn before the Bishop of S. upon examination by him by virtue of a
Commission issuing out of the Chancery, this is actionable, and Hutton agreed
to the case of the Court Baron, and the same Law by him if that be in a Court
Leete, but in the principal case Judgment was arrested.

Wase against Pretty Ent. Hill. 16. Jac. Rot. 1716.
WAse against Pretty Ent. Hill. 16. Iac. Rot. 1716. in an ejectione firm, the
case was, that one joint Coppiholder did release to his companion, and the
question was, whether this is good without surrender and admittance, for it was
objected, if this shall be good, then a Coppihold shall pass without the assent
of the Lord, but it was resolved by Hobert, Warberton and Winch (Hutton being
absent) that the release is good, and Warberton said, that by Littleton, if 3.
Ioyntenants are, and one of them release to another, he to whom the release is
made is in by the releasor, but if there are but two, then he is in by the Lord
or from the first conveyance; Winch, if two Ioyntenants are in capite, and one
release, to the other, the King shall not have a fine for this Alienation; but
Hobert said, that the practice is otherwise at this day, but he said, that when
one joint Tenant releases to another, he is in by the first conveyance, and in
the case in question the release shall be good without surrender and
admittance, for the first admittance is of them and of every of them, and the
ability to release was from the first conveyance and admittance; it seems if a
Tenant in Capite alien upon condition, and afterward he enters for the
condition broken, he shall not pay a fine for such an alienation: Hitcham
Sergeant said, that if land be given to two upon condition that they shall not
alien, and one releaseth to the other, this is no breach of the condition;
Hobert, if the King grant you his demeasnes, you shall not have his Copihold.

Winch said, that it was adjudged in this Court, that where one erected a house
so high in Finsbury fields by the wind mills that the wind was stopped from
them, that it was adjudged in this case that the house shall be broken down.

Goddard against Gilbert.
GOddard brought an action upon the case against Gilbert for these words, thou
art a thief, and have stolen 20 loads of my furzes, and upon not guilty
pleaded it was found for the Plantiff, and it was moved in arrest of judgment
by Hitcham, that these words are not actionable, for though the first words of
themselves had been actionable, yet when those words are coupled with other
words which do extenuate them, it is then otherwise, for if a man say thou art
a thief and have stolen my apples or my wood, it shall be intended that the
apples and the wood were growing, and he said there is no difference to say in
this case you are a thief and have stolen 20 loads of my furzes, but it was
said by Justice Warberton, that the furzes shall be intended to be cut, for
that is the most natural and proper signification of the words; and Hobert
chief Justice said, that it is true that it is the most proper signification
of the words, but yet they are furzes when they are growing as well as when
they are cut down; and Hobert chief Justice said, if a man say of another, thou
art a thief, and have stolen my corn; in this case the words shall be taken in
the better sense, and judgment in the principal case ought to be arrested, and
it was the opinion of him and of Winch, that there is no difference where a man
said thou art a thief and have etc. and thou art a thief, for etc. ut supra;
but it was adjourned.

Winch Justice said, I was of counsel in the Kings Bench in a case where a man
had a window in the backside of his house, and another man erected a wall
within a yard and half of that in his own ground, and adjudged in an action
upon the case that the wall shall be broken down; Warberton, certainly this was
an ancient house, but Winch said that made no difference.

It was ruled, that after imparlance in debt, upon an obligation the Defendant
shall be received to plead that he was always ready to pay, notwithstanding it
was strongly urged 13. Eliz. Dyer 306. is to the contrary.

Gilbert Lewings against Nicholas March.
GIlbert Lewings brought an action of covenant against Nicholas March, and
de^lared, that Charles Cornwallis had granted the next avoydance to the Church
of D. to Thomas March, and that Nicholas March was his Executor, and that
Nicholas March assigned this to Gilbert Lewings his executors and assigns, to
present to the same Church when that shall become void, and covenanted that the
same person, who shall be so presented by him, shall have and enjoy that
without the let or disturbance of the said Charles Cornwallis or Nicholas
March, or any of them, or any by their procurement; and after Gilbert Lewings
presents I. S. and after I. W. presented an other claiming the first and next
avoydance, by the procurement of Charles Cornwallis, and ruled that the
declaration was not good, for it ought to say that Charles Cornwallis granted
to I. w. the next avoydance and procured him to disturb, and that by his
procurement he was disturbed; Athow, It seems to me to be but little difference
to say, he disseised me by the procurement of I. S. and he commanded I. S. to
disseise me, and he did that accordingly at his command.

Sir Edward Sackvil against Earnsby.
Upon a motion made by Sir Randal Crew in the behalf of Sir Edward Sackvil
against Earnsby, the case was, that two brothers were seized of land, to the
eldest for life, the remainder to the youngest in tail, and they covenanted
with Sir Edward Sackvil to levy a fine to him of that land, and before the fine
acknowledged the eldest brother dyed, and the question was whether the youngest
shall be compelled to levy the fine, and presidents were commanded to be
searched concerning that matter.

Note, that it was said, that where a commission issued out of the Court of
wards to 4 persons or to any 2 of them, and one of them refuse to be a
Commissioner, and the other 3 sit as Commissioners, and he who refused was
sworn and examined by them as a witness, and ruled that this is good, for
though he refused to be a Commissioner, yet he is not excluded to be sworn as a
witness.

In evidence to the Jury the case was, that Tenant in tail bargained and sold
his land to I. S. and his heirs, and I. S. sold to the heir of the Tenant in
tail being of full age, and Tenant in tail died, and the heir in tail
claimed to hold his estate, and the doubt was, whether he was remitted or no?
Hobert was of opinion, that after the death of the Tenant in tail that the
heir is remitted, for if Tenant in tail bargain and sell his land, the issue
in tail may enter, and where his entry is lawful, there if he happ^ the
possession, he shall be remitted; Hutton and Warberton Justices contrary. For
at the first by the bargain and sale the son had fee, and then the estate of
the son may not be changed by the death of the father, he being of full age
when he took this estate, and this was in an Ejectione firm of land which
concerns Sir Henry Compton and the Lord Morley and Mounteagle.

White against Williams.
White brought an action of account against Williams as his Bailiff to his
damages 100. l. the Defendant pleaded he never was his Bailiff, and it was
found against him, and the Judgment was given that he should render an
account, and at the day the Defendant made default; Ideo consideratum est per
Curiam quod Querens recuperet versus predict. Defendent. 42. l. 10. s. and upon
that the Defendant brought a writ of error, and assigned for error, that the
Court gave Judgment of the value without inquiring of the value, and it was
holden by Gaudy and Fenner only present, that the Judgment ought to be given
which the Plantiff had counted of. Baron Altham contrary, for the Court may in
discretion give a lesser sum Hill. 43. Eliz. B. R. vide 14. E 3. Account 109.
20. E. 3. 17.

Sir George Topping against King.
VVAst was assigned in the cutting of Elmes and other Trees to such a price,
and Judgment was given for the Plantiff by nihil dicit, and a writ of inquiry
of damages issued upon that, and the Jury found to the damages of 8. s. and
upon this Davies the Kings Sergeant moved to have a new writ of inquiry, and
that the old writ shall not be returned, for the damages are too little; Winch
said, all is confessed by the nihil dicit. Hobert, The Jury here have found the
value, and presidents were commanded to be searched, and Hobert said, that if
an information is for engrossing of 1000 quarters of corn, and Judgment is
given by nihil dicit, and a writ of enquiry issues which finds him guilty of
100. yet this is good. And not, that at another day the case was moved again,
and it was between Sir George Topping and King, and it was said, if a man
recover in waste by nihil dicit, and a writ of inquiry issues, the Jury in this
case may inquire of the damages but not of the place wasted, for this is
confessed and so are the presidents according; and Hobert said, if the
Defendant is bound by the nihil dicit as to the place wasted, for what cause
shall not he be bound as to the damages, and by all the Court if the jury
find damages only to 8. s. the Plantiff shall not have Judgment, for it
ought to be above 40. s. Hob. this is in the discretion of the Court in this
case, and it was also said in this case, that upon the grant of all the trees,
and after the grantee cut them, and new ones grow upon the slumps which in time
will be trees, that in this case the grantee shall have them also by Hobert.

Wetherly against Wells in an action for words.
VVEtherly against Wells in an action upon the case for these words, thou have
stolen hay from Mr. Bells racks, and upon not guilty pleaded it was found for
the Plantiff, and now it was moved in arrest of Judgment, because he had not
showed what quantity was of that, and perchance it may be of so little a value
that it is not felony, and the rather because it is hay from the Racks; but
Hobert contrary, that Judgment shall be given against the Defendant for the
Plantiff, for it has been adjudged lately in this Court, that where a man was
charged with petty Larceny to steal under the value of 12. d. that an action of
the case will lie, for the discredit is not in the value, but the taking of
that with a fellonious intent, and yet it had been adjudged in this Court, that
where one said of another, thou art a thief, and have stolen my trees, that in
this case an action will not lie, but this is by reason of the subsequent words
trees, for it is said Arbor dum crescit, lignum dum crescere nescit. And Winch
said, that it had been adjudged actionable to say, thou art a thief and have
stolen my corn, and yet perchance not exceed 2. or 3. grains, and Warberton
said, that it had been adjudged in the Kings Bench, that where one said thou
art a thief and stollest the corn out of my field, that no action will lie.

The Earl of Northumberland and the Earl of Devon.
NOte, that in the case of the Earl of Northumberland and the Earl of Devon.
execution issued out for damages recovered, against the Bailiff of the Earl
of Northumberland by the name of I. S. of D. and there was I. S. the father and
I. S. the son, and the father being dead the son issued his writ of Idemptitate
nominis, and he prayed to have a supersedeas; and Warberton demanded of
Brownlow if he had any such president to award a supersedeas in such case, who
answered, no, and Warberton and Hutton being only present said, that they will
advise of that.

Sir George Spark Prescription.
IN a Replevin for the taking of a horse in 5. acres of land in such a place,
and the Defendant avowed as Bailiff to Sir George Spark, and showed that Sir
George Spark, and all those whose estate he had in the land, had used time
beyond the memory of man to have herbage and pasturage in all the 5. acres when
that was not sown, and upon this plea the Plantiff demurred; Ashley argued for
the Plantiff, that the prescription is void, and this is not like to the case
of a common, for a man may prescribe to have common in another man's land, for
this is but a reception of the profits with the mouths of his cattle, but in
our case it is all one as to prescribe to have the land it self, and I may not
prescribe to have land it self, for I may not say that I and my ancestors had
used to have such land, for such a prescription is void: to which Hobert chief
Justice and all the Court agreed as to that point, and then to prove that this
is all one as to prescribe to have the land it self, he said that if a man lets
the profits, and the herbage of land for years, this is a lease of the land it
self, as was lately adjudged in this Court; which was also granted by the
Court, also he said that this appears by the 27. of H. 8. 12. that a man shall
have a praecipe quod reddat of pasturage or herbage, but not of common, and a
formedon lies of pasturage 4. E. 4. 2. and the Regist. fo. 177. Ejectione firm
lies of pasturage; and so he concluded that upon the matter he prescribed to
have the land it self; but Hobert chief Justice and all the Court to the
contrary, that the prescription is good, for that may have a good beginning by
grant, for a man may lawfully grant the pasturage and the feeding of his land
when that is not sowed, and by consequence, if that may be good by grant, it
may be good by prescription; and judgment was commanded to be entered for the
Defendant. See prescription 51. and 52.

In trespass the Defendant pleaded in bar, that such a one was seized of land
in the right of his wife, and that his wife died seized, and that he was heir
to her, entered and gave Color to the Plantiff, the Plantiff replied that the
husband and wife were jointly seized, and that the wife died, after whose death
the husband was seized by Survivor-shipp, absque hoc that the wife died seized;
and Warberton and Hutton being only present, the traverse is not good, that the
wife did not die seized, but it ought to be that she did not die sole seized.

In trespass for the taking of goods in a place in yorkshire, and the Defendant
justified as servant to the Bishop of Durham, and he showed that the Bishop of
Durham had a Fair, and that time beyond memory he and his predecessors had
used to seize the cattle that were sold, if he who bought them refused to pay
toll, and if the thing taken was not redeemed within such a time, he might sell
the same. And he justified in a place in Durham, absque hoc that he was guilty
in Yorkshire; and by Warberton and Hutton this is a good traverse, to the
place, for it is local.

If a Capias issued, here to have the body of such a one at Westminster such a
day, and the Sheriff bring the body, or return the writ before the day, this is
good by Justice Warberton.

Tutter against Friar.
TUtter against Friar; a rent charge was granted for years with a nomine
poenae, and a clause of distress if that was not paid at the day, and the rent
was behind, and the years incurred, and it was moved by Athowe, that though
the years are incurred, that he may distrain for the nomine poenae, but the
Court was of a contrary opinion, for that depends upon the rent, and the
distress is gone as to both of them.

Duncombe etc. against the Bishop of Winchester, etc.
DUncombe and others against the Bishop of Winchester, and others Defendants,
in a Qu Imp. and the case was, that Sir Richard Weston was seized of the said
Church in fee, in gross, and was convicted of recusancy, and a Commission
issued to certain Commissioners, to seize two parts of his lands and goods, and
they seized this advowson inter alia, into the hands of the King, and the King
granted the advowson to the Plantiff, and the Church became void, and whether
the King, or the university of Oxford shall have that, was now the question,
and it was appointed to be argued the next Term.

Potter against Turner.
IN the Kings Bench, Pasch. 19 Iac. the case between Potter and Turner, was as
I conceived to this effect; A. was indebted to B. in 20. l. and C. was indebted
to A. in 30. l. and A. in satisfaction of the debt, which he owed to B.
assigned the debt of 30. l. which C. owed to him, and made a letter of attorney
to sue in his name; A. and B. acquainted C. with this agreement, and C.
promised to B. in consideration that he will forbear till such a day that he
will pay him the money; and upon this promise he brought the action against C.
and he pleadded non assumpsit, and it was found for the Plantiff. And it moved
in arrest of Judgment, that the consideration was not sufficient, according to
Banes case Coke. 9. If executors who had not assets promise to pay a debt of
the Testator, this shall not bind them, because they who made the promise were
not chargeable, but on the other side, it was said by Whitwick of our house,
that this was a good consideration, for the assignement of that debt was
lawful, and no maintenance at all, as appears by 15. H. 7. 6. and a recovery by
B. against C. is a good plea in bar, in an action brought by A. against C.
but Dodderidge Houghton and Chamberlin only present to the contrary, for B.
here had only an authority to sue, and this is at all times Countermandable by
A. As if I deliver goods to my servant to deliver over to I. S. and I. S.
promise my servant that in consideration that he will deliver them to him, he
will give him so much money, this is no consideration, except that they are
delivered accordingly, for this is only an authority to deliver goods which is
always countermandable by me. And Judgment was entered for the Defendant.
vide 4. E. 4. 14.

Ewer and Vaughan.
IT was said by Dodderidge and A. in the argument of the case, between Ewer and
Vaughan, that it had been adjudged by all the Justices, in one Trewmans case,
that no writ of error lies of a judgment, given in the Stanneryes in Cornwall.

A Prohibition to the Admiralty.
MAny poor Mariners sued one Jones the Master of a ship, for wages in the
Admiral Court, and judgment was given against Jones, and now he prayed to have
a prohibition, and he suggested that the contract was made, at London in
England, and so the suit was not maintainable, in the Admiral Court, but the
prohibition was denied, because he had not sued his prohibition, in due time,
viz. before a judgment given in the Admiral Court, which in point of
discretion they disallowed; and also these are poor Mariners, and may not be
delayed of their wages so long, and besides they may all join, in a Libel in
the Admiral Court, but if they sue here, they must bring their actions several,
for they may not join here in an action, and therefore it is good discretion in
the Court, to deny the prohibition.

Pastons case, it was said by Hobert, that a Coppiholder may hedge, and
enclose, but not where it was never enclosed before, and agreed by him, and
Warberton, that a Coppiholder may dig, for Marle without any danger of
forfeiture, but he ought to lay the said Marle upon the same Coppihold land,
and not upon other land, and this was upon the motion of Hendon Sergeant.

In a case which concerned, the Lady Mollineux and Fulgam, the case was in an
Ejectione firm, that the Jury found the defendant guilty, of 10. acres, and
the judgment was entered of 20. acres, and upon that the defendant brought a
writ of error, in B. R. and now the Plantiff prayed that this might be amended:
and Finch argued, that this ought to be amended, and he cited a case. Pasch. 8.
Iac. Rot. 525. John Chilley was Plantiff in debt, and recovered, and the
judgment was, that the aforesaid, Henry Chilley should recover etc. and upon
that error, was brought in the exchequer chamber, and that was assigned for
error, and yet after Pasch. the 9th. Iac. this judgment was amended in the
Kings Bench, and John inserted for Henry, and diminution was alleged, and the
first judgment was affirmed in the exchequer chamber, and he cited a case, M.
8. Iac. Rot. 1823. in C. B. dower, was brought of 4. Gardens, and judgment was
given, to recover in 3. and upon this error was brought, and yet this judgment
was afterward amended, and he cited a case, Pasch. 17. Iac. between Sherley
and Underhil in a Qu. Impedit, where it was amended after error brought, and he
vouched one Masons case 12. Iac. in an action upon the case, against the
husband, and the wife, for words which were spoke by the wife, and judgment
was given against them, and that the wife capiatur, where it should be husband
and wife Capiantur, and yet this was afterward amended: Hendon contrary, after
error is assigned, it may not be amended, in point of substance, and the case
of Chilley may be good Law, for the misnaming only et praedictus Henricus,
where was no Henricus before, could not have other signification, or intendment
then John who was named before in the record; Warberton and Hutton, the
misnameing Henry for John, is matter of substance clearly, and then Hendon
said, that now the judgment shall not be amended, because the prayer of the
Plantiff, to have that amended came too late, because it is after error
brought, and diminution alleged; and the record certified, and then both the
parties are concluded, but if only, a writ of error was brought, and no
diminution was alleged, that then the judgment may be amended, and he said,
that he had not found in any book, where any amendment was after diminution
alleged, as here, and he cited 22. E. 3. 46. in dower, it was assigned for
error, that no warrant of Attorney was entered for the Defendant, and ruled
that this may not be assigned for error, after a scire facias sued; see 4. E.
4. 32. but Hobert chief Justice said, that it shall be a brave case, that our
judgments shall be made good, or bad, at the pleasure of Clarks, and we shall
not be able to amend them, to which Warberton also agreed. And day was given
over to speak to that again, and after, in the same Term this judgment was
amended, per Curiam.

Action of debt upon a bond, and the Condition was to save the obligee
harmless, of a nomine poenae, against Mary Moore, and he pleaded that he had
saved him harmless, and per Curiam this is not good, for if he will plead in
the affirmative as here, he ought to show how he had saved harmeless, but if he
had pleaded in the Negative, as he might well, then non damnificatus is a good
plea generally.

Harrington against Harrington in account.
HArrington brought an action of account against Harrington, and declared of
the receipt of moneys, by the hands of a stranger, and the Defendant pleaded in
bar a gift of the same money, afterward by the Plantiff to him; and it was
argued by Towse, that this was no plea in bar of an account, but it is a good
discharge before Audito^s, and he cited 28. H. 6. 7. Hendon to the contrary,
and said the opinion of Brian chief Justice 21. E. 4. is that he may plead that
in bar of account; and Warberton Justice being only present agreed, for by
the gift it is his own moneys, and herefore he may plead that in bar.

It was said by Warberton, that if an Advowson is holden of the King, and the
Tenant alien without license, that the King may not seize that without office,
which was granted by Hobert, and by Winch only present, and in the same case by
Warberton, that a scire facias, issuing against the Alienee will not entitle
the King, but ought to be an office found, and it was also said in the same
case, by Sergeant Jones, that the ordinary shall have 28. days to examine the
ability of one who is presented by the canon Law; and the same Canon Law is,
that the Patron shall not present another during the 28. days.

Goddard against Gilbert.
GOddard brought an action upon the case, against Gilbert thou art a thief, and
have stolen 20. load of my furzes, and upon non culpabilis pleaded, it was
found for the Plantiff; and now it was moved in arrest of judgment, by
Hitcham, for where words may be taken in a double sense, one actionable, and
another not actionable, they shall all times be taken in the better sense, and
in our case, to take furzes may be felony, and it may be not felony, for if
they are growing they are not felony, and it shall be intended that they were
growing, rather then cut down, and no man will presume, that any will take 20.
loads of furzes, with a fellonius intent, because the carriadge of them is
visible to all the world, for it shall not be intended, that he carried those
in the night, and so he prayed that the Plantiff may be barred.

Attoe Sergeant contrary; words which implies a double signification, shall be
taken in the worser sense, which tends most to the disgrace of the party, for
they shall be supposed, to be spoken in malice, and so with a purpose to defame
the party, and he cited a case, Trin. 2. Iac. B. R. Rot. 663. Kellam against
Monest, thou art a thief and have stolen my corn, and adjudge to be actionable.
Hobert, Warberton, and Winch contrary, for words shall be taken in the better
sense, and not in a strained sense to punish the party which spoke them, as if
one say to another, I wonder you will eat, or drink with him, for he has the
pox, now every one that hears, that will suppose, that he means the french
pox, and yet in a legal signification it shall not be taken, but in the better
sense, for the small pox: but Warberton said, that if one say of another, that
he is laid of the pox, an action lies, for it is intended the french pox; and
Winch said, that those actions of slander, were known to law but of late times,
and for that 26. H. 8. it was thought that an action would not lie, for calling
another thief, and in the principal case, judgment was commanded to be
entered, quod Querens capiat nihil per brevem suum, and note, that I saw Hobert
show presidents to Winch, in a paper which were delivered to him by the
Plantiff, and drawn by his Council, and he said to Winch, that by those it
seemed, that in the Kings Bench they made a difference between, (for) and (and)
as had been said before; and he marvailed much at that.

In a Capias Ulagatum before judgment, the Sherif returned that I. S. and I.
N. rescoused the party etc. and Attoe moved, that the retorn was not good, for
there ought to be additions, by which they may be sued to the outlawry, but
Hobert and the Court hold this to be good without addition, for no statute, nor
book will compel the Sheriff to give additions in this case. And it was said,
that if the Sheriff in this case, retorn that the party himself, simul cum I.
S. and I. N. made the rescouse, that this is not good, but in the principal
case, it was ruled that the return was good, and the rescousers which were
present, were committed to the fleet, Homan and Hull were rescousers.

Upon the reading of the record the case was, that an executor brought an
action against one upon a promise made to the Testator: in which the executor
was nonsuite; and 3. l. costs given against him: and the Defendant bruught an
action of debt upon that recovery, against the executors: and upon this it was
demurred in law, and Sergeant Towse said, that there are two causes of the
demurrer, first, whether the Defendant shall be charged as executor, and is not
named executor, and secondly, whether upon the nonsuite of an executor, the
Defendant shall have costs by the statute, of the 23. H. 8. Hobert chief
Justice, said to him you say well.

Note that it was said, by Hobert chief Justice, that if a man dies intestate,
and he to whom the Administration appertains, is sued by others which pretend
to be Administrators, and sentence is given against the right Administrator,
and costs given against him, the costs shall not be of the proper goods of the
Administrator, but of the goods of the intestate; as the costs which are spent
in the spiritual Court, for the provate of a Testament, shall be only of the
goods of the Testator; Hutton if the Legatee sue in the spiritual Court, for a
Legacy, and recovers the costs, which he shall recover, shall not be of his own
goods, but of the goods of the Testator, and no prohibition shall be granted,
for any such sentence given in the spiritual Court: Hobert to the contrary; for
if by such means the goods of the Testator are so wasted, that the debts, and
legacies of the Testator, may not be discharged, a prohibition shall be
granted, and in every case, where the sentence in the spiritual Court, crosses
the common law, a prohibition lies, and he said that in the case of one Barrow
in this Court, it was his opinion, and the opinion of the rest of the judges,
that if Administration be committed by force of 21. H. 8. and the Administrator
pay all the debts and Legacies, that in this case, the ordinary had not power
to dispose of the rest of the goods, to the children of the intestate, but they
shall remain to the Administrator, and that by the very intention of the
Statute of 21. H. 8. but Hendon said, that he could show a president of that,
and the Court desired that they might see, that if any such president were.

LLewellings case.
Upon the reading of a Record, in the case of LLewelling, the condition of the
obligation was, that the obligor should surrender his Copihold land, to the use
of the obligee, and he pleaded that he had surrendered that, and upon that
plea, the Plantiff demurred, and it was adjudged upon the opening of the case,
by Warberton and Hutton, being only present in the Court, that judgment shall
be given for the Plantiff, for the plea in bar is not good, because the
Defendant had not showed when the Court of the Lord was holden.

Duncombe against the University of Oxford.
In a Qu. Impedit, in which Duncombe and others were Plantiffs, who were
grantees of the King, against the University of Oxford: and the case was, Hill.
18. Jac.
that Sir Richard weston was seized of an advowson in gross, inter alia and
was convict of recusancy, and a Commission issued, to seize two parts of his
land, and goods, and they seized this advowson, inter alia, and the King
granted the advowson to the Plantiffs, and the Church became void, and they
presented, and were disturbed by the University of Oxford, and their Clark,
upon which they brought a Qu. Impedit, upon which a demurrer was joined: and
Sergeant Jones argued for the Plantiff, and there was two points in the case,
first, whether an advowson in gross, is given to the King by the Statute of
the 28. of Eliz. and the Statute is, that the King shall seize the lands,
tenements, and hereditaments, of such a recusant convict, and whether by the
same statute an advowson in gross, shall be seized, and he held that it shall,
for though perchance the word lands, and Tenements, will not carry that, being
an advowson in gross, yet this word hereditament, will carry it to the King by
force of the Satute, for it appears by dyer 350. that if the King grant an
advowson, by the name of an hereditament, that in this case this will pass the
advowson, and for that Coke 10. Whistlers case, the King by the grant an of
hereditament, grants an advowson, by such words to a common person then by the
same reason a common person may grant, that to the King by the same words: but
it may be objected, that because an advowson in gross; is not valuable,
therefore it is not given to the King; and upon this doubt upon the Statute of
Wills, ^. H. 8. the question was, whether an advowson was devisable; by the
name de bonis et Cattallis fellon. Butler, and Bakers case, that they are not
devisable, for it is not valuable, but the 4th Iac. between Taverner and Gooch,
which case may be seen in the new book of entries, that an advowson was
devisable: before the Statute 5. H. 7. 37. it shall be assets, 9. H. 6. 55.
recovery in value lies of that; but admit that this is only a thing of
pleasure, for the advancement of a friend, yet that shall be given by the
Statute to the King.

But the second objection is, that though it is given to the King, yet it is
not extendable upon the Statute by the Commissioners, for answer to that, see
Sir Christopher Hattons case, 13. Eliz. cap. 4.
upon the Statute of H. 8. which says, if a man be indebted to the King, all
his lands, and Tenements, shall be extended for this, and it was ruled, that an
advowson was extendible for the debts of the King, and more is given to the
King by the Statute, of the third of Iaco. then was by the 28. Eliz. for by the
28. of Eliz. the King may not seize the land, but upon default of payment, of
20. l. by the month, but by the Statute of the third Iaco. he may seize
presently, and no election is given to the party: secondly, by the Statute 28.
Eliz. the seizure of the King, was only in the nature of distress, for the
payment of money, but by the Statute of 3. Iac. the King had election to seize;
to satisfy himself, and he may refuse to be satisfied at his pleasure, and so
the Statute which gives this to the University, does not take away the title of
the King, and upon that he concluded, and prayed judgment for the Plantiffs:
Harris Sergeant to the contrary; the Statute of 3. Iaco. is the only subject of
the doubt, and the first branch disables the recusant to present, secondly, it
makes the present action void, thirdly, after conviction the University shall
present, and this in verity, is that upon which the doubt is founded, and upon
that branch he conceived that the King had concluded himself, to present to the
church of the recusant, for he being party himself to that act of Parliament,
he had dismissed himself of all right, and Fortescue in laudibus legum Angliae
non sunt ad voluntatem principis, sed ad voluntatem totius Regni, id est, the
Statutes of England, are not at the will and pleasure of the King, but at the
will of the whole Kingdom, Doctor and Stud. agreed, and 14. H. 8. Fo. 7. E. 6.
Mounson; and the case of Alton woods, if the saving of an act of Parliament be
repugnant, it is void, and so upon those cases, he inferred that the King being
party to every act of Parliament, he is bound by that, and had dispossessed
himself of the advowson, by the Statute of the 3. of Iaco. which had given that
to the University, and had abrogated the power of the King, to seize the
advowson, by virtue of the act of 28. of Eliz. for otherwise, this Statute
which gives that to the University, shall be merely void, and Statutes which
are repugnant to former laws take them away, and do not confirm them, and
though the Statute of the 3. of Iaco. is in the affirmative, yet that has
taken away the force of the Statute, of the 28. Eliz. but it may be objected,
that before the recusant is convict, the King had but a possibility, and then
by the Statute of the 3. Iac. the King had not dismissed himself, of that which
in judgment of the law is but a mere possibility, and by consequence, because
he had nothing at the time of the making of the Statute, but a possibility, he
had not given that over, by the same Statute to the University; to this he
answered, that the King may well give a possibility, and a future thing, as 9.
H. 6. 62. 24. E. 3. 24. 30. E. Eliz. Treshams case, and so he concluded,
because that this is given to the University by act of Parliament, the King
being party, he had dismissed himself; and the 3. Iaco. -- repeals 28. Eliz. as
to that purpose, and so he prayed judgment upon the whole matter for the
Defendants.

And it was said by Hobert chief Justice that this is indeed a case, of great
weight and importance, and the Court agreed that the Statute, of the 3. Iacobi
gave only a power to the University of Oxford, and not an interest, but day was
given over to argue this again the next Term.

Sir George Savil against Thornton.
SIr George Savil declared, that he was seized in fee, and in gross, of such a
Church, and that he presented I. S. his Clark who died, and that he presented
another, and was disturbed by Thornton the incumbent* the Defendant pleaded,
that a long time before the Plantiff had any thing in that, the Pryor of D. was
seized of the advowson, and he being seized such a day granted the next
avoydance, to one Golding, and that the advowson and the Priory, came to the
hands of H. 8. by the Statute of 31. H. 8. by force of which H. 8. was seized,
and afterward the church became void, and the executor of Golding who was
grantee of the next avoidance, presented his Clark who was admitted
accordingly; and afterward he died, that H. 8. died seized of the advowson,
which descended to E. 6. and so to Queen Mary, and from her to Queen Eliz. who
was seized in the right of the Crown, and she being so seized granted the next
avoidance, to one Buckley her Clark, who was admitted, instituted, and
inducted; after which Queen Eliz. died, and the advowson descended to King
James; and in the 7th. year of his reign the Church became void, and he
presented the Defendant, the Plantiff by way of protestation, said that Queen
Mary was never seized, nor died seized, and by protestation that Queen Eliz.
was never seized, so that this might descend to King James, and for plea said
that well and true it is, that H. 8. was seized, and died seized, so that this
descended to E. 6. and that E. 6. such a year of his reign, granted that to
Wyat and his wife in fee, who granted that to the Plantiff, and that Queen
Eliz. presented L. only, absque hoc that E. 6. died seized, upon that it was
demurred in law; and he showed the cause of his demurrer, first because the
protestations which he had taken in his replication are not good, secondly the
traverse is not good.

And it was argued for the Defendant, by Bawtry Sergeant that the replication
is not good, because he had taken that by protestation which is traversable,
see the principal case of Gresbrook and Fox, and see the 22. H. 6. and then for
the traverse he held that to be naught; First because he had traversed that
which was but a mean conveyance. Secondly he had traversed that which he had
confessed, and avoided; and thirdly he had not traversed that which he ought
not to have traversed, and for the first it is put regularly in our books that
a mean conveyance shall not be traversed, and the descent here from E. 6. is
but a mean conveyance, and the substance is the presentation of Queen Eliz. and
that ought to be traversed, 17. H. 7. 2. the Prior of Tower Hills case, there
it said, if in Assise the Tenant plead, that the Plantiff was seized, who
infeoffed one B. who infeoffed C. who enfeoffed the Tenant, that it is no plea
for the Plantiff to say, that he was seized till the Defendant disseised him,
absque hoc that C. enfeoffed him, and for that reason, he ought to traverse the
feofment, made by B. for the other was but a mean conveyance: see Dyer 107. in
Trespass the Defendant conveyed to the donee, by 5. or 6. discents by dying
seized, of the estate tail in every of them, the Plantiff confessed the
intaile, and conveyed to him by feofment made by the heir of the donee which
was a discontinuance, and took traverse to the dying seized of the same
feoffor, and ruled to be evil, for he ought to traverse the most ancient
descent: 43. H. 3. 7. Secondly it is evil, because he had confessed the seisin
of E. 6. and the grant by the same King to Wyat, and so had confessed and
avoided the seisin of the same King, and then the Law will not suppose that E.
6. purchased that again, and for that the traverse of his dying seized is evil,
when he had sufficiently confessed and avoided that before, as Dyer 336. in
Vernons case, a descent was pleaded to the heir from his ancestor, the other
party said, that the ancestor devised that to him, absque hoc that this
descended to him as son and heir, and ruled to be evil, for a traverse needs
not when he had confessed, and avoided that before: Vide 14. H. 8. Sir William
Meerings case, 26. H. 8. 4. by Fithzherbert, but Brook in the abridgement of
the same case, said that if the traverse is evil then he had waved the plea
before, and all was evil: 7. E. 4. by Littleton, for hereby the representation
of Queen Eliz. she had gained the inheritance to the Crown, and then the
traverse being evil, he had waved the former plea which was good without
traverse, and this seisin in the Crown is not answered, but by way of argument
as here 14. H 6. 17. he ought to traverse absque hoc that he died in his
homage. 20. E. 4. 5. 35. H. 6. 32.

Sergeant Jones to the contrary, and as to that which has been said, that the
presentment is alleged to be in jure coronae, and the confessing the
presentment is a plea by way of argument, to which he answered that the record
is not so, but the seisin of the advowson is alleged by descent, to Elizabeth
Queen, by force of which she was seized in jure coronae, and Jones argued that
the traverse is good, for every plea in bar ought either to be traversed, and
denied, or confessed and avoided, and here that ought to be traversed Dyer 208.
312. in avowry for a rent charge, and seisin was alleged in the grantor, of
the land in fee, and the Plantiff said he was seized in tail, he ought to
traverse that he was seized in fee, and a good traverse Hill. 2. Iac. in C. B.
Rot. 1921. Edwards against D. it was pleaded that such a man was seized in fee
of a rent charge, and the other confessed that he was seized in fee, and that a
long time before he enfeoffed one I. S. there he ought to traverse, that he was
seized at the time of the grant: see the new book of Entryes Tavener and
Gooches case, in a Qu. Impedit. And a note by the Lord Cook: also he said,
that after the grant there may be an usurpation, and so the dying seized in the
case of an advowson in gross ought to be traversed, ^e 21. E. 4. 1. 20. E. 4.
14. and as to that which has been said, against the protestations; he answered
it ought to be traversed, and for that the rest ought to be taken by
protestation: and in some cases the conveyance is traversable; see Cromwels and
Andrews case. And so he concluded and prayed judgment for the Plantiff

Note that he said, that it was adjudged in that Court 2. Iac. in the case of
the Bishop of Winchester, that two usurpations gain the advowson from the
King. And the reason was, because the King by an usurpation may gain an
advowson, in him out of a Common person, and if the King Usurp, and the right
patron present, he is remitted: Hobert by such usurpation, the possession is
gained from the King, but not the right, and note that upon the argument in the
principal case, by Bawtry and Jones, it was ruled by Hobert, Warberton, and
Hutton, that if the Defendant do not show better cause by such a day, judgment
shall be given against him; and Hutton said, that he had studied the case, and
found no doubt but that the traverse is good, Winch was absent in the Chancery.

M. 19. Iac. C. P.
IT was moved for a prohibition by Harris Sergeant, to the Court of Audience,
because that the Plantiff was sued there for saying to one thou art a Common
Queen, and a base Queen, and Harris said, that a prohibition had been granted
in this Court, for saying to one that she was a piperly Queen, and it was the
case of Man against Hucksler; and Finch said, though the words are not
actionable in our Law, they are punishable in the spiritual Court, for the word
Queen in their Law, implies as much as whore, but Hobert said, that this word
Queen is not a word of any certain sense, and is to all intents, and purposes,
and individuum Vagum, and so in certain; see more after.

Note that it was said by Justice Warberton, that it was adjudged in the case
of one Ablaine of Lincolns Inn, that if a man made a lease for years rendering
rent, and the lessee or a stranger promise upon good consideration to pay the
rent; that in this case no action upon the case will lie, for it is a rent, and
is a real thing; and Hutton Justice being only present agreed, this was upon
the motion of Finch Sergeant, and Mic. 43. Eliz. in the Kings Bench in an
action upon the case, and he declared how he let certain land to the Defendant
for years, in consideration of which the Defendant promised to pay him for the
farm aforesaid, 20. l. and Hitcham moved that the action will not lie, because
it appears to be for a rent, for which an action of debt lies, but by Gaudy,
Fenner and Clench it is not a rent, but a sum in gross, and for that reason,
because he promised to pay that in the consideration of a lease, clearly an
action upon the case lies, but Sir John Walter replied, that a writ of error
was brought of this case of Simcocks in the exchequer chamber, and the matter
in law was assigned for error, and it was ruled that no action upon the case
will lie, for Walmsley said this was a rent, for of necessity there ought to be
supposed a commutation between the lessor and lessee, and that the lessor
demanded of the lessee, how much he would give for that, and then he answered
20. l. this made an entire contract, and for that reason an action of debt
lies, and not an action upon the case, and Savil and Kingsmil agreed to this.

In evidence to the Jury, in a replevin brought by I. S. against one Bennet,
for the taking of beasts, and the Defendant made Conusance, and he said that
Mr. Potts was seized of 6. acres of land, and granted a rent charge out of that
to one William Pots his son in tail, and for rent behind he avowed, and the
issue was, that the rent did not pass by the grant; and Hobert said, that in
this case the avowant ought to prove that the grantor was seized of 6. acres,
or more, and not of 4. or 5. acres, if he will maintain his issue in this case.

Action upon the case for words he innuendo the Plantiff stole the Tobacco out
of his Mrs. shop. Finch moved the declaration was not good, because he had not
averred that there was a communication concerning him before, and where the
person is incertaine there the innuendo is void, Hobert and Winch held that to
be good, but then Hobert moved that the declaration was not good, because he
said the Tobacco in his Mrs. shop, and had not averred that there was Tobacco
there, to which also Winch agreed, but if he had said that he had stolen
Tobacco out of his Mrs. shop; such declaration without any averment is good;
but here the words (the) had altered the sense, and so there ought to be an
averment; and Winch said, that if he had said, that he had stole 2 or 3 pound
of Tobacco out of his Mrs. house, this had been good without any averment, for
the certainty appears; and it was adjourned.

Trin. 19. Jac.
Sir George Stripping in Wast.
SIir George Stripping brought an action of waste, and an estrepment was
awarded to the Sheriff of Kent, to prohibit him to make waste, and the Sheriff
returned the writ executed accordingly: and now there was an affidavit made to
the Court, that since the estrepment he had cut down certain Willowes, which
grew upon the bank of the River, by which a bank fell down, and a meadow
adjoining was overflowed, and upon this affidavit Davies moved for an
attachment against the Defendant, for it appears by this affidavit that waste
is committed, for the cutting of willowes in this case is waste, because that
they support the bank, as if they grew near a house: Hobert and Winch being
only present, that this is a waste in law, but yet no attachment shall be
awarded, because that this appears only by affidavit, and is only the
collection of the party, and this does not appear by pleading, or by the recor^
of the Sheriff; and Brownlow said, that in this case he ought to have a Pond,
which was granted.

Mayor against two Bailiffs.
ACtion of false imprisonment was brought by Major, against 2 Bailiffs of a
corporation, who pleaded not guilty, and at the nisi prius the Plantiffe was
nonsuite; and now Sergeant Richardson moved upon the Statute of cap. 5. 7. Iac.
for double costs, and that upon the very words of the Statute, and the question
was whether the costs ought to be taxed by this Court, or by the Justices of
Assize: Hobert said, that upon the nonsuite the Justices of Assize might have
commanded the Jury to have taxed the single costs, and then the same judge
might have doubled them, and that within the words of the Stat. but if the
judge grants this, then upon his certificate the double costs shall be
assessed, for otherwise the party shall be without any remedy, and Brownlow chapter
Prothonotary agreed with that as to the certificate, that this Court shall
assesse the Costs, and Brownlow had a president according.

Mich. 19. Jac.
Grice against Lee.
GRice against Lee in an action upon the case, and the Plantiff declared that
he being long time before, and still is seized in f^e of certain messages, and
lands in Layton Buzard in the County of Bedford, and that to these messuages he
had a common appendant time beyond memory etc. in 600 acres of waste called
Layton Heath, and had common in 600 acres of wood in Layton aforesaid, and that
the Defendant had made certain conney borroughs, and which the aforesaid
couneys (where he had not made any mention of any conneys before) eat up the
grass, and that the Defendant had enclosed the said wood, by which the Plantiff
had lost the profits, and the Defendant as to the digging of the heath for
coneys, said, that E. 3. granted to the Dean and Cannons of Windsor, that they
and their successors haberent in omnibus terris dominicalibus liberam Warrennam
sibi tunc et successor. et in posterum conferendam. And that the 20. E. 4. the
Duke of Suffolk and his wife granted to them the said Manor of Layton; whereof
the said Heath is parcel, and said that 22. E. 4. it was enacted by Parliament,
that all charters made by King E. 3. to the Deane and Canons of Windsor shall
be good, and that the said Deane and Cannons of Windsor being so seized of the
Manor of Layton, and of the Heath in the 3. H. 7. erected a free warren, and
that by mean conveyance the said D. and C. conveyed that to the Defendant, and
so justified the making of the said coney borroughs, by virtue of the charter
of E. 3. and as to the 600. acres of wood he justified by the license of the
father of the Plantiff, who then was seized of the common, and upon these pleas
in bar the Plantiff demurred; and Sergeant Richardson took exception; because
that it is not expressy alleged that he was seized of the house and land, to
which the common is appendant at the time of the making of the conney
borroughs, for he only said that a long time before the erection of the conney
borroughs, and yet he is seized, which immplies that he was seized, before and
after, but not at the time of the warren made, and for this he cited the Book
of entries where waste was brought, and he counted of a lease for life to the
Defendant and a grant of the revertion, and an attornment of the Tenant, and
that the Defendant had made waste, and ruled to be evil, because he had not
alleged that this was after the attornement, and so in Stradlings and Morgans
case; and he cited a judgment, 5. Iac in C. B. Adkinson brought an action of
trespass against I. S. and declared quod per multos Annos jam preteritos he had
exercised merchandise, and that the Defendant such a day said of him that he
was a Bankrupt; and it was adjudged that the declaration was evil, because he
had not alleged that he exercised merchandise, at the time of the speaking of
the words, and he said that the cause of the judgment was entered upon the
roll, and the same case he could show to the Court: and Hobert desired to s^e
that, for he doubted much of the law of the same case, to which Winch and
Hutton agreed, and Richardson said, that as to that which may be said, that a
fee simple shall always be supposed to have continuance if the contrary is not
showed; to that he answered that is not so, for the book of the 7. H. 7. 8. if
in bar of assise, the Tenant said that I. S. was seized and gave, this is not
good because he had not showed quod fit seisitus existens dedit etc. which
being in a plea in bar, is more strong then in a declaration, to prove that a
fee shall not be intended to have continuance without an express allegation:
and so he concluded that the declaration is naught: but by Hobert, Winch, and
Hutton, it is very good notwithstanding this objection, and Winch cited the 13.
Eliz. in Ejectione firm, where the life of the person was not clearly
alleged, but the declaration only was that the lessor was, and yet is seized,
which was a sufficient averment of the life of the person, and so the
declaration is good, and another exception was taken to the declaration by
Hitcham Sergeant, because that the Plantiff had declared that the Defendant had
made conney borroughs, and with the aforesaid conneys had eat up the grass,
where he had not alleged any storeing of the coney borroughs before with
coneys, and then it is impossible they should eat up the grass to the prejudice
of the Plantiff, but to this it was answered by Sergeant Attoe, that though the
declaration as to that is naught, yet the diging of the coney borroughs is to
his prejudice, and sufficient to maintain the action, which the Court granted:
and as to the matter in law Attoe argued for the Plantiff, and recited the case
to be that, E. 3. granted to the Deane and Chapter of Windsor, that they shall
have free warren in the lands which yet they had not purchased, and of which
they were not seized at the time, whether this is a good grant, and shall
extend to take effect after the purchase; see Buckleys case: and be argued that
it is not a good grant, and he put a difference between a warren, and other
privileges which are flowers of the Crown, which may be granted infuturo: but
a warren never was a flower of the Crown, and for that reason a grant de bonis
et cattallis fellon. et fugitivorum may be granted, and yet not be in esse at
the time of the grant, for it is a flower of the Crown, and it is said 44. E.
3. 12. that the King may not grant a warren in other men's lands, but only in
the land of the grantee, and upon this he concluded that this grant shall not
extend to land after purchased, and the rather because it is in the nature of a
license which shall be taken strictly, see 21. H. 7. 1. 6. -- And Hobert chief
Justice said, that this word demeans is derived of the French words en son
manies, and though the Lord of the manor had the waste in his hands; yet he
had not the common: and as to the confirmation by Ed. 4. they all agreed that
this will confirm nothing to him but what was granted by E. 3. himself; and
then as to the license pleaded that is of no effect, for first the license is
pleaded to be made to one Sir Cha. Haydon, and the Defendant did claim under
him, and this license was made by the father which will not bind the son who
had the land, to which the common is appendant after the death of his father,
for a common may not be extinguished without deed; and Hobert and all the Court
agreed, that the license of the father will not bind the son; and by the Court
if nothing is showed to the contrary within a week, judgment shall be given
for the Plantiff.

Davies against Turner.
DAvies brought a replevin against Turner, and he declared of the taking in a
place called the Holmes, and the Defendant made conusance as bailiff to Sir
George Bing, for that one Clap held certain land of him by 20. s. rent and
suite of Court, and for the rent he avowed, and alleged seisin by the hands
of Clap, the Plantiff said, that Chap held 40. acres of land by 9. s. rent,
fealty, and suite of Court, absque hoc that he held modo et forma, and upon
this it was demurred; and the single point was this, in auowry the Tenant
alleged etc. and the question is whether he ought to traverse the tenure, or
the seisin, and it was argued by Henden Sergeant, that he ought to traverse the
seisin, and that the traverse of the tenure is not good, and besides here is
double matter, for the conclusion sounds in bar of the avowry, and in
abatement of the avowry: see a good case 18. H. 6. 6. for the falsness of the
quantity of the land, and the falsness of the quantity of rent, the on goes in
bar, the other in abatement of the avowry, 47. E. 3. 79. 5. H. 6. 4. and
affirmed for good law.

And as to the second point he held the seisin to be traversable, and not the
tenure, and first he said there was a difference between pleading in bar of
avowry, and in the abatement of the avowry, for in bar of the avowry there
the seisin is is not traversable by Frowick 21. H. 7. 73. which opinion he held
for good law: for it is agreed in Bucknels case, Co. 9. he may not say that he
held of a stranger, absque hoc that the avowant was seized, but otherwise it is
when that goes in abatement of the avowry.

Secondly he said that the seisin is the principal thing, and the principal
thing ought to be traversed, for if a man had seisin of many services, seisin
shall never be aided till the Stat. of magna charta: see Bucknels case Cook 9.
and here the seisin is the most meterial thing, and the most proper; see 37. H.
6. Bro. -- Avowry 76. ne tiendra is no plea for a stranger to the avowry, but
he ought to answer to the seisin.

Thirdly the cause for which the seisin is traversable, see a notable case per
Danby 7. E. 4. 29. for the beginning of the services may be time beyond memory
etc. and for that reason may not be tried: see 20. E. 4. 17. 22. H. 6. 3. 26.
H. 6. 25. by Newton he may traverse the tenure: Attoe contrary 13. H. 7. 25. to
this it was answered, that the number Roll may not be found: 5. H. 7. 4. 13.
H. 6. 21. 21. H. 7. 22. by Frowick; and Kingsmil: Harvey to the contrary, the
case was that the Defendant made conusance as Bailiff to Sir George Bing for
this, that Chap held a message etc. by certain rent, and by suite of Court;
and the other said, that he held 40. acres by 9. s. and suite of Court, absque
hoc that he held the message, and the land modo et forma, and he argued that
it was a good traverse of the tenure, and not double, which was granted by
Hobert and by Winch being only present, and Hobert said, true it is that if the
Lord had seisin of more then the very services, in this case it may not be
avoided in avowry, and no fall tenure shall be avoided etc. but when he joins
another falsity, and that is in the quantity of land, now the false quantity of
the rent had made the tenure traversable, and the judgment was commanded to be
entered accordingly.

Trin. 19. Jac.
Thomas Bull Executor etc. against Fankester.
THomas Bull Executor of William Bull brought an action against Fankester; and
declared that the Defendant enfeoffed his Testator in certain land, and that
he covenanted for him and his heirs, that he was seized of a good estate in
fee, and he alleged the breach, upon which they were at issue, and now Attoe
moved in arrest of judgment, first because the Plantiff sueing as Executor had
not showed the Will, for it has been adjudged here, that if a man bring an
action as executor, and do not show the Will, that the Defendant may demurre
upon that, because it is matter of substance: but Hobert said it is very good;
because the Defendant had admitted him to be responsible, but it is true he
might have demurred upon the declaration, as we often times adjudged here;
secondly Attoe said, that the covenant being made with the heir, the executor
shall not have an action of covenant, for it is annexed to the land, which was
granted by Hobert and Winch being only present in the Court.

Note that it was said at the bar and agreed, by Hobert, that if the debtor
make the dettee his executor, he may now retain in debt against him, and safely
plead plene administravit, if he had no other goods, and shall not be driven to
his special plea, and so it had been agreed often times in this Court.

Parson, and Morlees case.
PArson and Morlees case, it was said that the Lord Chancellor presented to a
venefice, which belonged to the King, which was above the yearly value of 20.
l. per annum, and this was referred to Hobert chief Justice, and to Tanfield
chief Barron, to certify whether this was merely void; it remained good till
it was avoided.

Harris against Wiseman.
HArris had procured a prohibition against Wiseman, who had libelled in the
spiritual Court against the Plantiff for a frat in the Church, which did belong
to his house, and it was said by Hobert and Winch only present, that a man, or
a Lord of a manor, who had any Isle or a seat in the Church etc. and he is
sued for that in the spiritual Court, he shall have a prohibition, but not
every common parishioner for every common seat, and upon the first motion at
the bar in this case, day was given over to the Defendant, to show cause
wherefore that a prohibition shall not be granted: and the Defendant not having
notice of that, after the day the Plantiff had a prohibition, and now after the
day he showed a good cause, and upon that a supersedeas was granted to stay the
prohibition in that case.

Aylesworth against Harrison.
AYlesworth against Harrison in debt against an executor, the question was
whether he may plead plene Administravit, and give in evidence a debt, in which
the Testator was indebted to him, or whether he may plead the special matter,
that plea amounting but to the general issue; and it was argued by Harris
Sergeant, the Defendant may plead the special matter, and shall not be bound to
the general issue, to leave that to the lay people who may suppose such a
retainer to be an administration: and he vouched the 15. E. 4. 18. if a man
illiterate seal a deed which is read to him in another manner, etc. and he
delivers that as an escrow to be delivered over as his deed upon conditions
performed: and this is delivered over before the conditions performed, he may
in this case plead the special matter, and conclude so not his deed, or if he
will he may plead the general issue, of non est factum: and so is 39. H. 6. in
dower, the Tenant said that before marriage the husband infeoffed him, and that
after the Tenant let to him at Will, and that the husband continued possession
during his life, absque hoc that he was seized of such an estate of which she
might have dower: and exception was taken there, because that this only amounts
to the general issue, and yet ruled to be good for the lay people may conceive
such a continuance of possession during the life of the lessee, to be such an
estate of which the wife may have dower if this were put upon the general
issue; and in our case, because he had liberty to plead specially, or
generally, he prayed that the Defendant may be admitted to plead specially, and
that he may not be bound to the general issue: Sergeant Hendon to the contrary,
if one plead a plea which amounts to the general issue, see Layfields case,
Coo. 10. and though in Woodwards case commentaries; there was such a plea
pleaded, yet this does not prove the contrary, for in the same case no
exception was taken by the Plantiff: and presidents do prove that the
Defendants in this kind have been compelled to plead the general issue; Hobert,
if no special matter may be alleged to the contrary, the Defendant shall be
compelled to plead the general issue, and this is good discretion in the Court,
to take away the perplexity of pleading, because one plea is as good as the
other: to which Winch being only present agreed, and it was ordered that the
Defendant here plead accordingly.

In debt against the heir upon the obligation of his father, and in the
declaration the Plantiff omitted these words, obligo me et hered es meos etc.
and after error brought, the Plantiff prayed that this might be amended,
because it was the misprision of the Clark only: Hobert and Winch said, that
this shall not be amended, for it is a matter of substance, but because the
clark who made this misprision was a good clark, day was given over etc.

Widow Archers case.
IN debt against the Widow of Archer being executrix of her husband, and the
Plantiff declared that neither the Testator in his life, nor the executrix
after his death had paid that, omitting those words licet saepius requisitus:
etc. and evil, but this omission was amended.

Sir Edward Grubham against Sir Edward Cook.
SIr Edward Grubham brought an audita querela against Sir Edward Cook upon a
recognizance of 4000. l. and this was acknowledged to the use of his Mother,
and showed that the conusor had infeoffed him, and another in the land, and
that the conusee had sued execution only against him; and it was found for the
Plantiff, and it was so moved in arrest of judgment by Ashley Sergeant, first
because he had not showed in this audita querela when the Statute was
certified, nor yet the Test, nor yet the return of the writ of extent:
secondly the Plantiff had not showed himself the party agrieved, because he had
not showed an ouster, and before an ouster no audita querela lies for the
purchasor, but otherwise for the heir; as 17. assise 24. Hobert and Winch only
present, the liberate is an ouster of it self.

Empson against Bathrust.
EMpson against Bathrust in an action of debt upon an obligation of 23. l. the
condition was to pay 20. l. and the Defendant pleaded the Statute of the 23. of
H. 6. cap. 10. that no Sheriff may take an obligation by color of his office
in other manner or form then is there prescribed by the Statute, and he showed
that a Statute of 200. l. was acknowledged to him, the Defendant by I. S. and
that this was extended by the Plantiff being sheriff; and that it was agreed
between one Charles Empson brother to the Plantiff, and the undersheriff
before the liberate executed, that the Defendant should enter into the said
bond to the use of the Plantiff, the Plantiff confessed this, and pleaded the
Statute verbatim; where upon the Defendan demurred, and Hendon argued for the
Defendant, and said there is 3 points in the case: first when the sheriff does
take an obligation with penalty for money which is given to him for his fees
which are due by the Statute of the 29. of Eliz. whether this be good within
the Statute: the second point is, when the Sheriff extends the Statute, and the
conusee enters into bond for the payment of his fees after the extent, and
before the liberate returned, whether this is good: and thirdly where the
Satute gives 12. d. in the pound for the first 100. l. and if that exceed, then
but 6. d. whether this shall be taken but only 6. d. in the pound for all, that
exceeds a hundred pound, or whether he shall have 12. d. for the first 100. l.
and 6. d. for the rest: and if any of these 3. points be against the Plantiff,
he shall not have judgment. And first Hendon argued that this bond with
penalty is out of the Statute, of the 29. Eliz. for first in our case the bond
is void, by the 23. H. 6. for it is taken to another, and not to the Sheriff,
and besides the same Statute does not extend to any obligation with penalty,
and then it never was the intent of the 29. of Eliz. that any other should be
taken, or after another manner, and the Statute of the 23. H. 6. was made only
to prevent the extortion of the Sheriffs, and of their officers, as may appear
by a particular recital of the Statute: and yet he agreed that by the equity of
the same Statute, he shall have 4. d. for every warrant as appears by the new
book of entries: and then he said, if the Sheriff take other fees, or in other
manner it is extortion: and for that by 21. H. 7. if he takes an obligation, or
covenant which tends to extortion, the law will meet with that, and he relied
much upon Manninghams case Com. 65. where it is said, the Sheriff may take a
bond, with a great penalty for the appearance of the party, but not for his
fees by the Stat. of 23. H. 6. for that Stat. as to fees is not repealed by the
29. Eliz. and so he concluded this bond with penalty for his fees was
extortion, and void by 23. H. 6. which is not repealed by the 29. Eliz. and by
consequence void, for that Statute was not made to punish them, but to prevent
all extortion in them; and this Statute is penued strictly to prevent any thing
which had but any color of extortion, like to the Statute of the 13. of Eliz.
cap. 8. against usury, if any evasion be made by any indirect dealing to avoid
this, yet the Statute will meet with that, as appears in Claytons case: and
for that reason he concluded this bond with a penalty to be void.

But admitting the bond to be good, the Sheriff had not taken that in due time,
for before the liberate there is no complete execution, but otherwise in the
case of a Statute Merchant, for there needs no liberate of it self: see the
books of entries 59. the difference agreed, by which it is apparent that before
the liberate there is no complete execution, and the words of the 29 of Eliz.
are for the serving and the executing etc. so that before execution the Sheriff
shall have nothing, for this word (for) implies a condition precedent, as an
annuity pro consilio impenso; he ought to show that he had given counsel; and
yet it is true that this Statute of the 29. Eliz. has made a contract between
the Sheriff, and the party that has execution, and he may have his contract,
for it is a contract in law, and so it was resolved, but he shall not have that
before execution, as was holden, Pasch. 14. Iac. Rot. 5. 39. B. R. Pierpoint
against Bowley, that the Sheriff shall be bound to redeliver the fees to the
party, if it be not fully executed, by which it is apparent, that before
execution no fees are due to the Sheriff; and as to the third, he argued that
the Sheriff shall have only 6. d. in the pound when that exceeds a hundred
pound, for the intent of the Statute is to put that incertainty, and not to
make fractions; but it will be objected the inconvenience that will ensue upon
this construction, for then the Sheriff shall have as much for the executing of
100. l. as for 200. l. to this he answered that this may well be, for it is the
words of the Statute: and for authority in that point he cited the case of
Fosset and the Sheriff of Nottingham Pasch. 36. Eliz. Rot. 1301. where this
very point came in question, indeed no judgment was given in the case, but the
opinion of the Court was as he had argued: and so he prayed judgment for the
Defendant; Bawtry Sergeant to the contrary, and he argued briefly as to the
first point, that the obligation with penalty was taken for due fees, for it is
a due debt, and then what reason is there that he shall not take an obligation
for a due debt: and as to the second point he argued that the bond was well
taken before execution, for the words of the Statute are that the Sheriff shall
not take of any, either directly or indirectly, for that which he shall leavy
or extend in execution etc. and this word (for) implies a taking before or
after 21. H. 7. says that the prisoner shall be discharged paying his fees,
and this payment ought to be before discharge, and the common law said that an
hostler may retain a horse for his meat, in this case payment ought to be for
his meat before the delivery of his horse: and Coo. 5. Graies case, there
Popham said if a man had pot water by prescription paying 6. d. in this case he
ought to pay before he has the water, for otherwise the owner had not any
remedy, and so here he doubted that when the Sheriff made execution whether he
shall have any remedy or no: and therefore it is good conscience to allow him
to take a bond for that before he make execution, for otherwise a great
inconvenience may ensue, for perchance after the extent, and before the
liberate, the parties may agree, and then the Sheriff shall not have any thing
for all his pains which he had taken in the extent, which never was the intent
of the Statute, but it may be objected that in this case the Sheriff may have
an action upon the case against the debtee, or the conusee if he make such
composition, I answer, yet this is a great hinderance, and trouble to the
Sheriff to prosecute the suite, and it shall be very inconvenient to allow that
the Sheriff shall be allowed no other remedy: and then for the third point he
argued that the Sheriff shall have 12. d. in the pound for the first 100. l.
where the bond exceed 100. l. and 6. d. for that which exceeds, for otherwise
as the case is he shall have nothing at all for the first hundred pounds, for
the words of the Statute are, if the same be above 100. l. then he shall have
6. d. so that 6. d. only shall be taken for that which is above 100. l. and
nothing for the first hundred if this construction shall be made: and he also
remembered the objection made by Hendon, and so concluded that judgment ought
to be given for the Plantiff: Hobert said clearly, the Sheriff may take a
single bill for his fees, and that is the ordinary course, also he read the
Statute of the 29. Eliz. that it shall be lawful to the Sheriff etc. and said
the words of the Statute made a contract in law, for which an action of debt
lies for the Sheriff, and he ^^id to Sergeant Bawtry that the second point will
be found to be against him, and for the third point that the Sheriff shall have
but 6. d. for all in the case the sum exceed 100. l. and so they thought
judgment ought to be given for the Defendant; and Justice Winch said that the
reason wherefore the sum of 12. d. in the pound is given if that not exceed
100. l. is, because that it is as much labor to the Sheriff, to execute 100.
l. as it is for 500. l.

Maps and Maps against Sir Isaac Sidley.
MApps and Mapps brought an action upon the case against Sir Isaac Sidley upon
a promise; and showed that one named Holdish was indebted to the Testator of
the Plantiffs in 12. d. upon a bond which became due, and that the Defendant in
consideration that the Plantiffs will forbear to prosecute a suit upon the same
obligation, he promised to pay that; and the Plantiffs showed that they had
forborne him till such a day etc. and upon non assumpsit pleaded it was found
for the Plantiff, and now it was moved in arrest of judgment by Hitcham
Sergeant of the King, that this declaration is not good, for this forbearance
ought to be for ever, and not a temporary forbearance only, for the Defendant
by his promise had made the debt his own, as if the assumpsit and promise had
been to forbear to come to my house, this ought to be a perpetual forbearance;
and here the assumpsion of the Defendant amounts to a release in law to the
principal, and yet he agreed if this had been generally that he had forborne,
and had not showed he had forborne ill such a day, the declaration had been
good: Hobert, if the promise had been to forbear till such a day, there he may
sue the dettee if he do not pay it the day, and it was adjourned.

Mich. 19. Jac.
Mabies case.
MAbies case, Hobert in Parson Mabies case if I let my rectory excepting my
glebe, the exception is void, for no rectory may be without glebe: and the same
law of a manor excepting the demeasnes, but he may except parcel of the glebe,
and good, but in pleading the lease of a rectory this shall be taken for the
whole rectory, and not for parcel.

Gratwick against Gratwick.
GRatwick brought a formedon in remainder against Gratwick, and the Tenant
pleaded that the day of the purchase of the writ, and yet he the Plantiff is
seized of the moity of the land in demand; and it was argued by Sergeant Harvey
that this is no good plea, for he ought to show of what estate he was seized,
and he may be seized by virtue of a Statute, and he vouched the 39. E. 3. 7.
Hobert, if he had said that he was seized in his demeasne as of fee, or as of
freehold, this had been good, and a seisin by force of a Statute is no seisin
at all: and Hutton said, if Tenant plead entry in part pending the wri^, he
ought to say that he entered, and expulsed the other, for otherwise it is not
good: and I conceive that the Court inclined that in the principal case, that
the plea for the cause aforesaid, being of a general seisin was not a good plea.

Sir Edward Grubham against Sir Edward Cook.
AT another day the case of Sir Edward Grubham and of Sir Edward Cook was
moved again, and it was objected by Ashley, that the declaration in the audita
querela is not good, because he had not showed the day of the Testee, and of
the return of the writ, and execution in certainty, but only by process such a
day out of the Chancery, which is not good, but he ought to plead all the
record of the extent in special; and he offered to show a president of that:
and secondly he had not showed the execution of the liberate by which the land
was delivered, and so there is no express allegation of a grievance: Richardson
the presidents in the old book of entries are according to our declaration: and
Hutton vouched the 9. H. 6. and 39. H. 6 and in an action of debt upon a
judgment, he needs not recite all the record, but he may begin at the
judgment: and as to the second point they all agreed, that the party may have
an audita querela before an ouster; and yet here the showing that it was
delivered to the conuser by the liberate is a sufficient averment of the
ouster, for it may not be delivered without an ouster; and ruled that the
Plantiff shall have judgment if the Defendant do not show other cause by such
a day.

Upon a Capias Vtlagatum the sheriff returned that the party which was
arrested, had a protection from Lord Stafford, who was a Lord of the Parliamen:
and it was moved by Sergeant Hitcham that the return was not good, for the
protection of a Lord of the Parliament is not good in a Capias Utlagatum, which
concerned the King; and by Winch Justice only present in Court, the return is
clearly naught: and day was given over to the Sheriff to amend his return: and
this was granted by Hobert chief Justice, at another day this Term,

Peter Vanheath against Turner.
PEter Vanheath brought an action against Turner, and declared upon the custom
of Merchants, that if any Merchant over the sea deliver money to a factor, and
make a bill of exchange under his seal, and this is subcribed by the Mr. or by
any of the company of such Merchants, that the Merchant himself, or all the
company, or any one in particular may be charged to pay that; and he showed
that one Morgan was factor of the company of which the Defendant was one; and
that the said Morgan did substitute one Greenway, to whom the Plantiff
delivered 100. l. upon a bill of exchange, to which bill one Bounder being one
of the company set to his hand in England; and so the action accrewed to the
Plantiff.

The Defendant pleaded nihil debet per legem, and upon that the Plantiff
demurred in law; and the question was whether the Defendant may wage his law,
and it was argued by Sergeant Harvey that he shall not wage his law, for this
is only an action upon the case, and sounds only in nonfesance, and here is no
privity between the Plantiff and Defendant; for the bill was made over the sea,
and subcribed here in England, and he shall not charge the Defendant without a
special custom, so that it is plain that it is custom which made the
Defendant liable, and if the Defendant do not pay for this no action of debt
lies, but only an action upon the case: and every plea ought to conclude to the
point in action: and for that in trover and conversion non culp. is a good
plea: and yet he may traverse the finding, for this tends to the issue, and is
good; and so in debt upon a lease for years, nihil debet is a good plea, or non
dimisit, for the cause aforesaid, but when the plea does not tend to the point
in issue, it is otherwise, for he ought to traverse that which tends to the
point in issue, and in our case the Defendant may traverse the custom, or give
answer to the nonfesance, but he shall not wage his law; and an action lies
upon this contract against the Mr. for this, and so he concluded that judgment
ought to be given for the Plantiff.

Harris Sergeant contrary; this non payment is not a non fesance in the
Defendant; and here the Defendant may not plead not guilty, or non assumpsit,
for no promise was made, and it is a general rule in law, that where a man may
traverse the conveyance, there he shall not wage his law: see 5. H. 7. but here
the Defendant may not traverse the conveyance, Ergo he may wage his law, and 5.
H. 7. the successor of an Abbot shall have his law of a contract made with his
predecessor, and he said that the book of the 23. E. 3. is not law. Hobert
chief Justice if the Bailiff at the common law make a substitute, the
substitute is not chargeable, but here the custom will bind the law. Secondly
he laid 2. or 3. Merchants trade over the sea who made a factor there, who
takes money there, and gives a bill, and this is subscribed by one of the
company, that this should bind all or any of the company is not a good custom,
and the custom of Merchants is part of the common law of this Kingdom, of
which the judges ought to take notice: and if any doubt arise to them about
there custom, they may send for the Merchants to know there custom, as they
may send for the Civillians to know there law, and he thought that the
Defendant ought to be admitted to wage his law, for the delivery of the money
made a contract in law, and as he may have an action of debt, so without
question he may have an action upon the case, and so count upon a promise, and
then the Defendant may not wage his law.

Mich. 19. Jac. C. P.
Doctor Hunt against Allen.
DOctor Hunt brought an action of debt upon an obligation of 100. l. against
the heir of Edmond Allen, and the condition of the obligation was, that
whereas the testator Edmond Allen, in the first year of the reign of the King,
has given and granted to the Plantiff the presentation to the Church of D. if
therefore the said Edmond Alllen, from time to time shall make good the said
grant from all incumberances made, or to be made by him, and his heirs, that
then etc. and the grantor dyed, and the Church became void: and the heir of
the grantor presented, and whether this was a breach of the Condition, was the
question; and Hobert chief Justice and Winch being only present, thought this
tortious presentation to be no breach of the condition, but this extends only
to lawful disturbance by the heir, and by the pleading here it appears, that
though the heir presented, yet he had no right to present, because that his
father had granted that before: and then the presentation of the heir is as a
mere stranger. And those general words will not extend to a tortious
disturbance by the heir: but Hobert said, that the words shall have such a
construction as if it had been said, that he shall enjoy the same, from any act
or acts made by him, or his heirs: and in this case there ought to be a lawful
eviction to make a breach of the condition: but otherwise if the condition had
been that he shall peaceably enjoy from any act or acts made by him, or his
heirs, in that case a tortious disturbance would have been a breach of the
condition, but it was adjorned till another time.

Information was for that one such, his apprentice, departed out of his
service, and the Defendant received and retained him without a testimonial from
the Mr. contra formam Statuti. And so he demanded 5. l. the Defendant pleaded
nihil debet per patriam, and it was found against him: and now Hendon Sergeant
moved in arrest of judgment, that an apprentice is out of the clause of the
Statute of the 5th. of Elizabeth; and that the same Statute extends only to
servants, and to laborers retained within that Statute, for the statute says,
be it enacted that no person or persons that depart out of service without
showing of a testimonial, as is above remembered, and this branch as is above
remembered, had only reference to the next clause before, and the same branch
before makes only mention of certain trades, in which an apprentice as in our
case is not included: and the certificate set down within the Statute, proves
that an apprentice is not within the Statute, for the words are I. W. servant
to such a one etc. and so it extends to servants, and not to apprentices; and
secondly, he said the information is not good, because he had not showed in
what trade this apprentice served: and perchance he was retained in such a
trade as is not within the Statute: and ^hirdly, he had not showed what time he
was received, that so it might appear that he was an apprentice but for half a
year: and such a retainer is not within the Statute, fourthly, the conclusion
of the information is contrary to the form of the Statute; yet this does not
aid the imperfection of the information, for such information only extends to
matter of circumstance, and not to matter of substance. Finch Sergeant
contrary, that the retainer of an apprentice who departs out of the service of
his Mr. without a testimonial, is within the Statute of the 5th. of Eliz. for
the same branch is general, there being no person who departs etc. and an
apprentice is a person which departs; secondly, the clause of the Statute is,
be it enacted that none of the forementioned retained persons etc. and an
apprentice is a person which is in a special manner named before, Mich. 19. Jac.
and therefore he is within the express words of the same branch. Thirdly, the
form of the testimonial proves that, for it is I. W. servant to such etc. and
an apprentice is such a servant. Hobert chief Justice said, that it was never
the intent of the Statute, to make an infant who is an apprentice, to be within
the danger of the same Statute, for an infant at the age of 14. years may be
bound to be an apprentice: and the punishment which is given by the same
Statute is, that such person shall be whipped as a Rogue, which plainly proves
the Statute, intends only those who are of full age: and if other construction
shall be made, perchance that the son of a gentleman may be punished as a
Rogue by such departure: and he held that if an apprentice depart with his Mrs.
goods delivered to him, that in this case he is not within the Statute of the
21. H 8. as another servant is; and Sergeant Finch said, that there is an
express exception, and if that had not been, that an apprentice had been within
the danger of the law; but Hobert said, that he doubted much whether an
apprentice had been within that Statute, though the Proviso had not been made,
but this proves that the makers of the Statute, thought this to be a hard
matter to make an infant who is apprentice to be within the danger of the same
law: and for that reason the proviso of the Statute was made. Winch said to
which Hutton agreed, that when the Defendant had pleaded nihil debet, and this
was found for the Plant^ff; yet he may move in arrest of judgment, if the
matter be not within the Statute adjurned.

In a replevin the Defendant said, that he h^d property in the beasts absque
hoc that the property was to the Plantiff, and so prayed judgment of the writ:
and it was found for the Plantiff: and now Harvey Sergeant moved in arrest of
judgment, for in no book is found such a traverse as this, that the Plantiff
had not property, but only that the property was to the Defendant: and secondly
the conclusion of the plea is not good, for he ought to conclude to the writ
and not to the action. Hobert 6. H. 7. is, that an action of detinue affirms
the property at the time of the action, but a repleviant the time of the
taking: and two men may have such property in the same thing, that every of
them may have a replevin; and Hutton said that when the Defendant in the
replevin claimed property, he ought to conclude to the action: and Hendon
Sergeant being only at the bar, and not of council in the case said, that
the book of entries is, that he shall traverse the property of the Plantiff, as
in the principal case. Hutton Justice said, that this was never seen by him:
but they all agreed that this being after verdict, judgment shall be given for
the Plantiff.

Trehern against Claybrook Ent. Tr. 18. Jac. Rot. 650.
TRehern against Claybrook in a debt upon a lease for years, the jury gave a
special verdict to this effect, that John Trehern Grandfather of the Plantiff
was seized of land in fee, and let this for forty years rendering rent, for
which the action is brought, and that he devised the reversion to the Plantiff
in catle, the remainder to Leonard Trehern in tail with diverse remainders
over, and with provises in the same will, that for the raising of a stock for
the Plantiff, and for him in remainder, his will was that one Griffith, and
Anne his wife, being daughter of the devisor should have the profits, and rent
of the said land to their own use, until the time that the Plantiff and the
said Leonard Trehern accomplish the age of 21. years, provided always, and
upon this condition, that the said Griffith and his wife within 3 months of
his decease, enter into bond to the overseers of his will in such a sum, and
in such a penalty as shall be thought fit by the said overseers: and this bond
to be made by their advice; and if the said Griffith and Anne his wife do
refuse to be bound as is aforesaid, then the overseers shall have the rents,
and the profits etc. and the jury found over that he made two executors and 3.
who were overseers, and that the 3. October 16. Iac. died, and that within 3.
weeks after the death of the devisor, the executor read the will to the
overseers, but they found that the overseers did not remember that; and if upon
all the matter Griffith and Anne his wife had not performed the condition was
the question: and that if not, the reversion was in the Plantiff. And the point
in law upon the verdict was whether Griffith and Anne his wife, ought of their
perils to tender the bond within 3. months, or whether the overseers ought to
make the first act, and to tender the bond and the penalty for them to seal;
and Towse Sergeant argued that Anne and Griffith her husband ought to tender
the bond at their peril, for he said, that the condition did precede the
estate, and therefore if they will have the benefit of the devise, then he
ought to tender the obligation; and vouched Corbets case, and 18. Eliz. the
devise of land upon condition to pay money, he ought to pay that at his peril:
Attoe Sergeant contrary, and yet he agreed, that if the condition was to
precede the estate, then the law was as Towse had said, but here he said the
estate precedes the condition, for all the profits are devised to Griffith and
to Anne his wife during the minority of the Plantiff, by which it is apparent
the estate is presently in the devisees; and by consequence the estate precedes
the condition; and then the sole doubt will be whether Griffith and Anne his
wife ought to procure the overseers to make the obligation, and to limit the
condition, or whether the overseers ought to make this first, they being the
parties instrusted by the Will: see more after.

Upon an elegit the Sheriff returned that to be executed, and the extent of the
Church of St. Andrews Als. St. Edes, and Attoe prayed the Sheriff may amend
this, and make that Andrews only, for that is the true name, Hobert and the
Court, if this be the true name the alias dictus is surplusage, and will not
hurt the return of the writ.

Hill. 19. Jac. C. P.
Allen against Brach Ent. Hill. 19. Jac.
ALlen against Brach upon the reading of a record in a replevin, the case was,
Tennat of a Coppihold for life, in which the custom was, that the wife shall
have her widows estate, and the husband was attaint of felony, and executed,
and whether the wife in this case shall have the widows estate, was the
question upon the demurrer; Winch being only present seemed that not without a
special custom.

In an action upon the case, the Plantiff showed that he was possessed of a
Wind mill sufficiently repaired, and that he at the instance and request of the
Defendant let that to I. S. and in consideration thereof, the Defendant
promised to pay the rent, and that the Mill should be left in sufficient repair
(except the Sails,) and he averred that he had let that to I. S. accordingly,
and that he had not paid the rent, nor left that sufficiently repaired: and
Sergeant Hendon said, that the declaration is not good, first, because that the
Plantiff had showed that he was possessed of a Wind Mill; and had not showed
of what estate; and it may be this was only at will, and then the lease is
void: Hutton Justice, it is good, notwithstanding this exception, for the
showing that he was possessed was surplusage, and if he had showed that he let
for years, and never showed that he was possessed, yet this is good: and if the
lessee never enter, yet the assumpsit ly^^; secondly Hendon moved that the
promise was to pay the rent, and to leave the Mill sufficienty repaired except
the sails, and the Plantiff averred that he had not repaired, and never made
mention of excepting the Sails; and here the jury found the Defendant guilty
of all, and had given entire damages, and it appears by the Plantiffs own
showing that he shall no have any action at all for the sails, for they are
excepted, and therefore though the promise is good for the rent, yet it is not
for the not reparation, and the damages are entire; Winch and Hutton Justices
only present held this good after verdict; and judgment was given according.

Wright against Black and Black.
Wright against Black and Black in an action upon the case, and the Plantiff
declared that he was of good fame, and that the Defendants such a day and year
at the Sessions of Norwich, preferred a Bill of indictment, containing that the
Plantiff felloniously stole two bundles of vetches, and also they maliciously
incited one I. S. to give in evidence to the grand Jury, that this was Billa
vera: and upon not guilty pleaded it was found for the Plantiff, and now it was
moved in arrest of judgment by Sergeant Richardson, first because the Plantiff
had not averred in his declaration that the Bill was found, but only that he
preferred a Bill of indictment against him containing such a thing; and this is
not good, as 21. E. 4. 41. one pleaded a pattent of exemption, and this was
pleaded quod inter alia continetur, and ruled no express grant was pleaded,
and so evil: and so Browning and Beestons case, Com. 173. there a condition was
pleaded, that in such an indenture it was contained, that if such a thing was
not made, then the lease shall be void; and evil, because he had not expressly
averred what the condition was: and so in our case, to say the Defendants
preferred a Bill of indictment containing that the Plantiff stole 2. bundles of
Vetches, this is only in nature of a recital, and no direct affirmation that
there was such an indictment; and this declaration does not agree with the
precedents, and therefore it is evil: secondly, admit this to be good, yet as
this case is, the Plantiff may not have an action upon the case, but an action
of conspiracy against both. Thirdly, the declaration is not good, because it
sets forth that the Defendants incited I. S. to give in evidence to the grand
jury that this was Billa vera: and had not averred that he was sworn, and then
though an action may lie for the other, yet because the action is brought for
all; and damages are entire, all shall be void, and the Plantiff shall not have
judgment for any: and lastly he said the action it self in this case will not
lie, because the indictment was not found, but only an evidence, and an
acquital before the grand jury; and this is lawful being in an ordinary course
of justice; and prayed that the Plantiff may have judgment in the case.

Attoe contrary. First the Plantiff here may not have a writ of conspiracy, for
the indictment was not found, but yet if we should admit that he may have a
writ of conspiracy, yet he may as this case is have an action upon the case at
his election, which was granted by Justice Winch as to this point: and yet he
said that this action upon the case, is in the nature of a writ of conspiracy,
and for that reason there ought to be some act made, or else an action of
conspiracy will not lie upon a bare attempt; Attoe an action upon the case will
lie upon this attempt, for by this the Plantiff is defamed as much as if the
Defendants had said, that he had stole 2. bundles of Vetches, and this is more
then a defamation by word, and though the indictment was not found, yet an
action upon the case lies, as 10. Jaco. B. R. Whorwoods case, against S. and R.
declared that the Defendant preferred a Bill of indictment, containing such a
thing without any eo quod etc. and the Bill not found, and yet an action upon
the case lies very well: upon this attempt without an express averment of an eo
quod, because that the indictment was not found, but otherwise it is where the
indictment is found, there it is not good containing such a thing as my brother
Richardson had said, without an eo quod, and the same case of Whorwood was
adjudged accordingly; and it was also affirmed in the exchequer chamber upon a
writ of error brought there; and he also cited a case 14. Iac. in B. R. Rot.
236. Demey against Ridg, where was a Bill of indictment for the stealing of a
horse, and the Bill was not found, and yet adjudged that an action upon the
case will lie for that: Richardson said, that the indictment is not found here,
and therefore it was no slander, and so was adjudged in a case in the 44. of
Eliz. in the Kings Bench which was one Jeroms case, Justice Hutton said that it
seemed to him that the action does not lie, for for it is not averred that
there was any felony committed, also Justice Hutton held that in this case the
declaration is not good, because it is not expressly alleged with an eo quod,
that the Plantiff stole the Vetches; but only an indictment preferred
containing such a matter, and Justice Winch said, that the framing of an
indictment in a Court of record, is not any cause of an action, for it is a
proceeding in an ordinary Course of justice; and for that reason ought not to
be punished by an action upon the case, for that will deter and scare men
from the just prosecutions in the ordinary way of justice: Hobert chief Justice
was of a contrary opinion: and yet he said that it is true that the ordinary
Course of justice, ought not by any means to be hopped or hindered, and as that
may not be obstructed, so neither may the good name of a man in any thing which
concerns his life be taken away, and impeached without good cause, for Courts
of justice were not erected to be stages, to take away the good name or fame of
any man: and therefore by the common law, if two do maliciously conspire to
judict a man without cause, though the indictment it self be good, and legally
drawn, yet a writ of conspiracy lies against those which caused this indictment
to be preferred; and it is as great a slander to prefer a Bill of indictment
to the grand jury, and to give this in evidence to them, as it is to declare
that in an ale house; and as to the declaration he held that to be good without
any averment of an indictment indeed; and the indictment in writing, and the
preferring that to the grand jury contains the scandal: and I am of opinion
that an action upon the case lies well: see more after.

Easter 20. Jac. C. P.
Hill against Waldron. Easter 20. Jac. C. P.
HIll against Waldron in an action of debt upon an obligation, the condition
was that I. S. shall levy a fine to the obligee before such a day of such land,
the Defendant pleaded that the obligee had not sued forth any writ of covenant,
the replication was that before the obligation made I. S. had made of feofment
in fee of the same land to I. S. and that the feoffee continued in possession
at the time of the making of the obligation: and upon this the Defendant
demurred: and in this case two points were moved; first, when I am obliged that
I. S. who is a stranger, shall levy a fine to the obligee, whether in this case
the obligee is bound to sue a writ of covenant, and it was argued by Sergeant
Harvy that not, yet he agreed that if the condition was, that the obligor shall
levy a fine to the obligee, in this case the obligee ought to do the first act,
viz. to sue a writ of covenant, as Palmers case Cook 5. but otherwise when the
fine is levied by a third person, for there the obligor had took all upon him
4. H. 7. 15. E. 4. if I am bound to marry the daughter of I. S. and she will
not marry me, yet I have forfited my obligation, and so here he ought to leavy
a fine at his peril, and at his own costs, or at the costs of the obligor. But
admitting that the obligee ought to sue a writ of covenant, because it appears
by the replication that before the obligation made, I. S. had made a feofment
over, and that the feoffee did continue possession at the time when the fine
was to be leavied; and therefore the obligee needs not to sue forth any writ of
covenant, because he who is to leavy the fine had disabled himself to perform
that; and he urged Sir Anthony Maines case where Cook 5. the party needs not
to tender a Surrender because that he who had the reversion had granted that
over before the Surrender was to be made.

Sergeant Hendon to the contrary, for he argued that the obligation is not
forfeit, except the obligee sue a writ of covenant, and there is no difference
between this case, and when the obligor himself was to leavy a fine, for the
obligor had not undertaken for the whole fine, but only that I. S. shall
acknowledge a fine, and if the obligor shall be compelled at his peril to sue
a writ of covenant, then you will construe the condition to extend to an
unlawful act, for it shall be maintenance in him to sue forth a writ of
covenant, and he vouched a case P. 4 Iac. Rot. 1548. Burnell against Bowl: the
condition of the obligation was, that I. S. shall acknowledge a judgment in
this Court to I. D. and in debt upon this obligation the Defendant pleaded that
the Plantiff had not sued forth any orginall writ, and it was holden a good
plea: and for the second point he held that the obligee ought to sue this writ
of Covenant, though that I. S. had dismissed himself of the land, for the words
are general that I. S. shall leavy a fine, and this he ought to do, though no
estate pass by the fine, for a fine upon release shall be a good performance of
the Condition, but otherwise if it had been to make a feofment in fee, for a
man cannot make a feofment except he be seized of the land at the time, as 31.
E. 3. debt. 164. a man was obliged to present the obligee to such a Church, and
the obligee took a wife by which he had disabled himself to be a person, yet
the obligor ought to present him, for otherwise he shall forfeit his
obligation, and so in this case Hobert and Hutton as to the first point held
the bar to be good, and that the obligee ought to sue forth the writ of
Covenant, for Hobert said he ought to do that, for it is no reason to compel
the obligor who is a stranger to the estate which passes by the fine to sue a
writ of Covenant, and for that reason, if I am bound to compel you to come upon
such land to take a feofment, I am not bound that the other make a livery of
seisin, but if the case was that I was obliged to you, that I. S. shall leavy a
fine to I. N. in such case the fine ought to be leavied at my peril, though
that I. N. will not sue a writ of Covenant; Hutton according, but Winch doubted
of the case, and as to the second point Hutton and Hobert agreed that the
obligee as this case is needs not to sue a writ of Covenant, because that I. S.
had made a feofment of the land before, and so had disabled himself at the time
of the obligation, for now it is impossible to leavy a good fine, for if he
should enter into the land and put out the feoffee, this were not good within
the condition; and Hutton said, it ought to be agreed that if I. S. had made a
feofment after the time of the making of the obligation, and so had disabled
himself afterward, and the obligor is bound that a fine shall be leavied, this
is to be understood of a good and a lawful fine, and not a fine in name only;
and he put the case; that I let for years, and after Covenant to make a
feofment to I. S. this lease for years is a breach of the Condition, though at
the time of the Covenant made the lease for years was made. Justice Winch
thought the contrary, for this disability is by the act of a stranger, and for
that the obligor may not take any certain notice of that, and therefore if I am
obliged to you, that I. S. shall enfeoffe you of his Manor, and at the time I.
S. had made a feoffement of two or three acres of the same Manor, yet if he
enfeoffe you of that which he was seized at the time of the obligation, this is
a good performance of the Condition, though that 2. or 3. acres were disjoined
from that before, and so in this case the obligor being a stranger to the
estate of I. S. if I. S. make such an estate as he had at the time of the
obligation made, this is sufficient, upon which he concluded, that the Plantiff
shall not have judgment, but afterward judgment was commanded to be entered
for the Plantiff according to the opinion of Hobert and Hutton.

Hoels case.
HOels case upon a special verdict, was to this effect, a man was seized of 2.
acres of land in fee, and had 2. sons, and he devised both the acres to his
wife for life, the remainder of one acre to his eldest son in fee, the
remainder of the other acre to his youngest son in fee, upon this condition in
manner and form following, if either of my sons die before my depts and
legacies are paid, or before either of my sons enter into their part, that
then the longest liver shall have both parts to him and to his heirs in fee,
and the devisor died, and Hoel the Plantiff being the eldest son in the life
of his mother released all his interest and his demand in this to his younger
brother, and the doubt was, whether this condition was gone by this release,
and Attoe argued that it was gone, for Littleton says, that every land may be
charged one way, or other: see Anne Mayowes case, Release, Coo. 1. Albaines
case, power of revocation released: see more of this afterward.

Trin. 20. Jac. C. P.
Whitgift aganist Sir Francis Barrington.
IN Replevin the Defendant avowed as Baliff to Sir Francis Barrington, and that
Whitgift the Plantiff held certain land of Sir Francis Barrington, by escuage
et quendam reditum, and that the said Sir Francis was seized by the hands of
Whitgift his very Tenant, and for homage he avowed; and upon this the Plaintiff
demurred; first, because he had avowed for homage, and had not showed how nor
in what manner the homage is due, whether in respect that the tenancy come to
him by descent, or by purchase, and for that this general allegation is naught,
for by Hendon Sergeant all the presidents in such avowryes made mention of the
title to the homage, as 4. E. 4. in avowry for homage, the tenure is showed,
and a descent alleged, or a purchase of the land, and in no book or in any
president that he ever yet saw, did he see such a general allegation in avowry
for homage, but he agrees the book of the 44. E. 3. 42. if the avowry is upon
tenant by the courtesy, this general allegation is good, but otherwise of a
tenant in fee simple; and for that he alleged the second E. 3. avowry in a
replevin, the Bishop avowed for homage due by the Plantiff, and exception was
taken, because it was not showed in whose time the death of the ancestor was,
whether in his own time, or the time of his predecessor, and ruled to be evil,
for his avowry being his title he ought to show that in certain, and so in our
case. Hobert this case does not prove our case, for in our case prima facie it
is certain to all intents and purposes, and I cannot see how an avowry may be
better made; and Finch at the bar vouched a president in the book of entries
title horse de son fee: secondly, where such a avowry as in our case is made,
and then Hendon moved that the avowrie is not good, for he had showed the
tenure by homage, and by escuage, and rent de quo quidem redditu, he was seized
etc. and this is also repugnant; for when he said that he was seized of the
rent by the hands of the Plaintiff, this is a seisin of the homage as Bevils
case is, and then by his own showing, because the seisin of the rent is a
seisin of the homage, he shall not have the homage of the Plantiff.

Thirdly, admitting this point against him, and that the seisin of the rent is
not seisin of the homage, yet the pleading is not good, for when he expressly
alleged seisin of the rent in this manner de quo quidem redditu he was
seized, this excluded the seisin of any other services, but only of the rent
which is expressly alleged: and therefore in our case he ought to have
alleged generally de quibus serviciis he was seized, and to leave this to the
construction of the Law; and he vouched 13. H. 7. 31. Sergeant Harvy to the
same intent, for though perchance no good reason may be given wherefore the
pleading shall be such, and that the seisin of the homage ought to be
expressed, yet because all the presidents are so, the course of pleading shall
not be altered: and all the presidents show a seisin of the homage; see the
book of entries 597. and 598.

Sergeant ^owse to the contrary, the book of the 19. E. 2. Recovery 224. is,
that the alleging of the seisin or escuage, as in our case of tent, is a
sufficient avowry for homage; and 29. H. 3. such an allegation of the seisin of
rent was made in avowry for fealty, and good. Hutton, if the book of the 19. E.
12. be as Towse had alleged, it is all one with our case, Hobert seems the
avoury is good, notwithstanding this last exception, for perchance he was not
actually seized of the homage by the hands of the Tenant himself, and then by
his own, showing his avowry shall abate, and he demanded of Brownlow, if there
were any such president of an avowry, who answered no. Hobert, if the continual
pleading be as my brother Harvy had alleged, we will not alter the course of
pleading, but in my opinion, in reason none may plead in better manner or form,
and Hutton being only present agreed, and then Hobert commanded the presidents
to be searched concerning that matter, and Finch at the bar being of Council
with the avowant said, that till the resolution in Bevils case, it was a great
question whether the seisin of the rent was the seisin of the homage, and
therefore perchance it will be hard to find my ancient president: they
adjourned, and at another day Hutton and Winch being only present, judgment
was given for the avowant against Whitgift, and Hutton said, that he had spoke
with the other Justices, and they agreed.

Upon a motion made by Towse, the case was this, a man made a lease for one
year, and so from year to year during the Will of the lessor, and lessee,
rendering rent, and the lessee died, and the rent was behind, and by Winch
being only present, if the rent is behind in the time of the lessee and he
dies, an action of debt is maintainable against his Executor in the detin^t
only; and so I conceive, if that was behind after his death, he may have an
action in the debt and the detinet, or in the detinet only; to which Brownlow
agreed; Secondly Winch said, that when a man made a lease for a year, and so
from year to year at the pleasure of the parties, that this is a lease for 3.
years, and not for two. Thirdly, he doubted if the lessee hold over his term so
that he is tenant at sufferance, what remedy the lessor had for his rent.

Upon the reading of a record the case was, that a Scire facias issued against
the land, Tenant to have execution of a judgment given against Ferdinando Earl
of Darby in the 15. Eliz. and the Defendant pleaded, that a long time before
the said Ferdinando any thing had in the land, one Edward Earl of Darby was
seized of the land, and being so seized 3. Mar. infeoffed I. S. to the use of
the Lord Strange and his wife in tail, the remainder over to the said
Ferdinando, and made the said Ferdinando heir to the estate ta^le, and
pretended that by this means the land should not be liable to this judgment,
because it was intailed to Ferdinando; and of such estate he died seized; the
Plantiff traversed the feofment made by Edw. Earl of Darby, and the jury found
that the feofment was made by Edward Earl of Darby to the same persons as the
Defendant had pleaded, but this was to the use of the feoffor for life, the
remainder over to the Lord Strange and his wife, the remainder as before; and
whether this shall be intended the same Feofment which the Defendant had
pleaded was the question, because the estate for life was omitted; and upon the
special verdict that was the question, and Attoe said, that if the jury had
found this feofment made to other feoffees, though the estate had agreed this
should be found against the Defendant; and Winch Justice said, that there was
such estate found as had taken away the execution or extent, and the estate for
life is not material; but it was adjourned till another day.

A man Covenanted to make such assurance as shall be devised by the counsel of
the Plantiff, so the same assurance be made within the county of Norff. or the
City of Norwich, and the Plantiff assigned the breach, and showed that in this
case his Council devised, that a fine should be leavied of the same land which
was not done; and it was moved by Sergeant Attoe, that in this case the breach
was not well laid, because he had not showed where his council devised that the
fine should be leavied.

In the case of a prohibition, in case of a libel in the Ecclesiastical Court
for the tithes of Cattles, the Plantiff alleged that those Cattle, of which
Tithes were demanded, are for his Dairy, and for the plough; and Winch being
only present said, that the parson shall not have Tithes of such Cattle, but if
he bred up Cattle to sell, it is otherwise; secondly, the Plantiff in the
prohibition alleged that time beyond memory the parishoners had paid a half
penny for the Tithe of a Calf, and a penny for a Cow; and that upon a day
limited they use to bring this to the Church, and to pay this to the Vicar,
and now the Vicar had libelled in the spiritual Court, against them to compel
them to bring it home to his house; and Winch said that this is no occasion of
a prohibition, for they agree in the modus, but vary in the place of payment,
and this is not matter of substance, and for that reason no prohibition will
lie.

Upon the reading of a record the case was, that the father made a feofment to
the use of himself for life, the remainder to his son and his wife, and to the
heirs of the body of the son, and this was for a jointure for his wife, and
the father died, and the son also died, and whether this was a good jointure
was the question, for all this matter was pleaded in bar of dower brought by
the wife, and it was ruled to be no good jointure for the feme, notwithstanding
that the father died in the life of his son, and Hutton said, if a man made a
feofment to the use of himself for life, the remainder to his Executors for
years, the remainder to his wife for a jointure, this will be no good jointure
within the Statute of joyntures, though the feme here had the immediate
franktenement.

In an action of debt, against an Administrator who pleads outlawry in the
Testator; and it was moved that this was no plea, for he had taken the
Administration upon him. Winch, a man who is outlawed may not make an executor,
for if he meet with his goods, he shall answer for them to the King; and for
that reason it seems to be a good plea, 3. H. 6. 32. and Brownlow chief
Prothonotary, said that he could show a president 27. Eliz. where this is
adjudged to be no plea, and Justice Winch said to him, show that president if
any such be; and upon Tuesday after he showed that, and then Winch agreed.

Auditor Curle for words.
AUditor Curle brought an action upon the case, and in his declaration he set
forth the Statute of 32. H. 8. for the erection of the Court of Wards, and that
the same Statute appointed the Auditor of the same Court, and showed that the
Plantiff was an Auditor of the same Court: and that the Defendant such a day,
and at such a place, said of him you have taken money for engrossing of
feodaries innuendo accounts, and tunc et ibidem you are a Cozner and live by
Cozning, and I will prove that to be Coznage; and upon not guilty pleaded, it
was found for the Plantiff, and now it was moved in arrest of judgment by
Finch Sergeant of the King, that the Plantiff shall not have judgment upon
this verdict, for the first words are not actionable, for the taking of money
for the engrossing of feodaries are insensible, and then the inuendo will not
help nor aid that, also the words in the second place are not actionable,
because he had not said that he was a Cozning officer, and so he had not
expressly applied that to his office, and the words are found generally, but yet
admitting that the last words are actionable, yet the Plantiff shall not have
judgment, for the damages are entirely given, and for that reason void; see
more and Bedles case cited in Osborns case, Cook 10.

Harris Sergeant to the contrary, for an Auditor is an officer of trust, and he
took an oath when he entered into his office, and his receiving fees which are
not due, are also extortion; and the words of Cous^^age shall have also
relation to the office, as in Barkleys case, you are a corrupt man, an action
lies, and Haywel and Stakleys case, of a Justice of the peace, and Sir Miles
Fleetwoods case, he being receiver of the Court of wards, one called him Mr.
deceiver and ruled, action lies, and tunc et ibidem shall have relation to the
same time, in which the said words were spoken; and so he prayed judgment for
the Plantiff: and it was adjourned till another time. See after.

Good against Bawtry.
GOod brought an Ejectione firm against Bawtry, for ejecting him of certain
lands in Creeting St. Mary's, in Creeting St. Olaves, and in Creeting omnium
sanctorum, and a Venire facias issued, to try the issue, to Summon 12. men de
vicineto de Creeting St. Mary, Creeting St. Olaves, and Creeting omnium
omitting Sanctorum; and it was now moved in arrest of judgment, by Attoe
Sergeant, that the Venire facias was not good, for it ought to be of all the
Creetings, and the Court blamed the Clark very much for his negligence, but it
was adjourned till another time.

A man let an advowson for 40. years, and the lessee covenanted that he would
not alien without the assent of the lessor, and he showed all the matter,
because he had aliened to I. S. without his assent, and the Defendant pleaded,
that he had not aliened without his assent, and upon that they were at issue,
and it was found for the Plantiff, and now it was moved in arrest of judgment,
because he had not laid, that the alienation was by deed, for an advowson may
not pass without deed, and Hobert said, if a man will declare in an ejectione
firm of a lease made by the husband and the wife without deed, this is not the
lease of the wife without deed, or yet if the Defendant will plead, not guilty,
or non dimisit, and this is found for the Plantiff, the Plantiff shall have
judgment, for this shall be intended to be by deed, which was granted by Winch
Justice being only present, that the breach was well laid, and he alleged a
president 43. Eliz. a man avowed, and had not showed that this was by deed; and
the Defendant pleaded non concessit, and found for the avowant, and he had
judgment, but Hobert denied this case, but afterward in the principal case,
it was adjudged that the breach was well laid, and the Plantiff had judgment.

In a formedon in reverter the Tenant was essoyned, and the vouchee also
appeared, the case was essoyned, and he had day over till octabis Michaelis.
And then the Attorney of the Defendant would have been essoyned, and it was
argued by Hendon Sergeant, that he shall not be essoyned, and yet he agreed if
the vouchee had not appeared, the Tenant might have been essoyned again, 13.
E. 3 essoyne the 8. and the same Law of the vouchee be returned tarde, but if
the vouchee appear, and is essoyned, there the Tenant shall not be essoyned
again, and so is the express ^ook of the 3. H. 7. 17. 9. E. 3. 39. and the
reason is, because by the appearance of the vouchee the Tenant is out of the
Court etc. and it was adjourned till another day: and at that day it was
resolved by the Court, that the Attorney shall be esso^ned, and this was upon
the view of a like judgment, in the case of the Earl of Clanrickard; and
Hobert said, that in that case the Roll of the 3. H. 7. was searched for, and
could not be found; and Towse urged 22. H. 6. and 13. E. 3. essoyne 8.

Sir Henry L. Warden of the Fleet.
RIchardson Sergeant moved for the warden of the Fleet Sir Henry L. and his
motion was that whereas one I. S. was in execution, in the Custody of the
Warden of the Fleet, for 300. l. and he made an escape, and he at whose suite
he was in execution, brought an action upon this escape against the Warden of
the Fleet, and he showed that the Warden upon fresh suit had taken him again,
and he prayed that the Plantiff may not proceed in his action, for though the
Warden of the Fleet may plead this, though the action was brought before the
retaking of the party, yet he prayed for the saving of charges, that the action
may be stayed, and he said, that there was such a case in this Court, against
Harris deputy Warden to Sir Henry. L. upon such an escape, and he pleaded to
the issue; and after he retook the prisoner: and in this case the Court had
also relieved Harris if the issue had not been joined, but Hobert, let the
Plantiff be brought here present in Court, and then we will speak to that point.

Gell against White.
Gell against White and others, and he declared in action of Trespass, but the
writ was general, but the declaration was quare vi et armis bona et catalla sua
ceperunt, et asportaverunt viz. tertiam partem unius dishei plumbei, Anglice,
the third part of a dish of lead Ore: and it was moved that the Plantiff shall
not have judgment for the variance between the writ, and the declaration; and
though it is objected, that here is nor any original writ at all, for in verity
there was not any, yet the declaration is contrary to it self; for if in a
replevin the Plantiffs writ is, de bonis et Catallis; and his declaration is of
a taking of a horse, this is not good, and so here bona viz. tertiam partem
etc. for this particular thing may not be said to be goods and Chattels: and
Harris Sergeant moved, that the Attorney might be banished the Court, for
declaring without a writ according to the express book, 20. H. 6. Hobert, good
reason; adjourned till another time.

Anne Buckley against Simonds Mich. 18. Jac. Rot. 2120.
ENtered Mich. 18. Jac. Rot. 2120. Anne Buckley was Plantiff in a Quare Imp.
against Simonds, and the case in effect was, that Andrew Buckley, Grandfather
of the husband of the Plantiff, did Covenant by indenture with Preston, that
before such a day his Son should marry the daughter of Preston. And Covenanted
to convey 6. l. 13. s. per Annum of rent issuing out of land, to hold to them
during the life of the Covenanted and his wife, and after this he Covenanted
for him, his hetres, and assigns, that after the death of the Covenantor, and
his wife the land to which the advowson in question is appendant shall remain,
come, and be unto the said son and his wife, and upon a demurrer the question
was, whether this Covenant did raise a present use to the Son, and to his wife,
or whether this only rests in Covenant, and Harris Sergeant argued, that no
present use will arise by this Covenant, for first, all other Covenants in the
indenture are in the future, for the words are, that the lands shall remain and
come etc. and therefore till the death of the Covenantor the fee simple is in
him, and no use will arise, for it shall be in the election of the Covenantor,
what estate he will make to his Son, for he himself shall interpret his intent,
and the difference in our books is, when the words are in the present tense,
and when in the future, and for this he cited 22. H. 7. by Justice Read, if a
man Covenant that land shall descend, remain, or revert, he said this did not
give any present interest, because the wors are in the future, and it is in the
election of the Covenantor, how, and in what manner the land shall pass; and
there he put the case, that if I give my horse, or my Cow to I. S. there the
Donee had election to take at his pleasure the one or the other, because the
words are in the present tense, but if the words are, that I will give a horse,
or a Cow, there the Donor had election which he shall have, because the words
are in the future: the Lord Borroughs Covenanted 34. H. 8. Dyer 55. with
another in frank marriage with his son, that immediately after his death, his
son shall enjoy the use of his land of inheritance, according to the course as
then they stood; and the question was, whether the sea simple was presently out
of the Covenantor; and the opinion was that it was not, because it was but a
Covenant, and did not change the fee simple, and so is Dyer 96. Sir Thomas
Seymor promised, and Covenanted by indenture in consideration, that the
Covenantee had granted land to him, that he would leavy a fine to Wimbish and
Pennoy of other lands, which fine should be to Sir Thomas Seymor for life, the
remainder to the Covenantee in tail, and no fine was levied, and the question
was, whether any use was raised by this Covenant to the Covenantee, and the
opinion of the book is, that not, because it is in the future, and he cited the
20. H. 7. 10. the Duke of Buckingham in consideration, that the Lord Henry his
brother was to marry the Lady Wiltshire, he Covenanted with Bray, and with
others, that the Manors of D. and of S. shall be to the Lady and to her heirs
of her body begotten by the said Lord, and after the Duke granted to the Lord
Henry and his wife for their lives: and it was argued whether this second grant
is good or no, for if it is, then the first Covenant will not work to raise an
use to the feme, and the book left that as a quere; and if it be, then he
argued that in the principal case no present use is raised, but that this rests
merely in Covenant, and so he prayed judgment for the Plantiff.

Sergeant Hendon to the contrary, for he thought this will raise a present use,
and that this was the intent of the parties, that this should raise a present
use, for the intent was to advance them first, during their lives with the
rent, and after the death of the Covenantor and his wife with the land it self,
and therefore of necessity this will raise a present use, for a bare action of
Covenant may not be any advancement at all; and the rather here, because they
who take benefit of this are strangers to the Covenant, and not Preston
himself, for as it appears by 3. H. 7. a stranger shall not take benefit by a
Covenant; and therefore he said the intentions of the parties was to raise an
use, for otherwise there shall be no advancement at all.

And further the words in the indenture are Covenant and grant, and if no use
is raised, then this word grant is idle, and every word shall be so expounded
that they may take effect, and the word Covenant is insufficient of it self to
pass an estate in land, or to have any estate in signification other then to a
mere Covenant, and to be obligatory: as is put Co. 2. Cromwels case, Tirrels
case, there vouched, a lease for years provided, and it is Covenan^ed, and
agreed, there the Covenant is a condition, and also a Covenant, and 8. Ass. 1.
12. it is agreed, that if I Covenant that an other shall have my land for 7.
years, this a good lease of the land it self, and it was adjudged here Tr. 2.
Jac. Rot. 1696. accordingly; and in our case this word Covenant and grant, is
also sufficient to raise an use, and to give an interest in the land it self:
and yet he agreed that if there was an other act to be made by the Covenantor
or the Covenantee, that then no use will arise, but it shall rest only in
Covenant, Dyer 162. there are Covenants between the Lady Vere and Sir Anthony
Wingfield her son, that the said Lady would convey to her son by a recovery;
and that after 6. months the said Sir Anthony shall make an estate to his
Mother for life, and there it is doubted whether the use is changed within the
6. months, and it was holden that it was not, Mich. 20. Jac. C.P.
for then it is impossible that the Covenants should be performed, and in that
case it is in the power of the Covenantor, to make an act that the Covenants
shall not be performed, and therefore Covenants will not raise an use; but in
our case no act of the Covenantor may hinder that this use shall arise, and
therefore good, and for that the difference is, Dyer 296. which is entered 11.
Eliz. the Roll of which I have seen, the father upon the marriage of his son,
promised to the friends of his wife, that after his death his son shall have
his land, to him and his heirs, and the book is ruled that this did not change
the use, and the reason was, this Covenant was by words, and not in writing,
but it was not doubted, if this Covenant had been by writing, but that the
Covenant will raise an use, which is all one with our case, and so was Callard
and Callards case 37. Eliz. stand forth Eustace, reserving to my wife and my
self, I give to thee and thy heirs, and there it was doubted, whether any use
will arise to the son, and ruled that not, because this was by words only, but
it was also agreed, that if these words had been by writing, they had been
sufficient to raise an use to the son, and he cited Dyer 232. before the
Statute of the 27. H. 8. A Covenanted and agreed with B. that upon the marriage
of his son, with the daughter of the other, that he would retain his land for
life, and that after his death it shall remain to his son and his wife in fee,
and the book is that this Covenant will raise an use, also if this Covenant and
agreement will not amount to raise an use, then it is not to any use or purpose
at all, and by consequence the consideration of the marriage is void also, and
an action of Covenant will very well lie, without any such consideration of
marriage; and so he concluded, and prayed judgment for the Defendant,
adjourned.

Mich. 20. Jac. C. P.
Johnson against Norway.
Johnson brought an action of Trespass against Norway of Trespass made in a
piece of ground, and the Defendant pleaded, that 14. H. 7. Roger Le Strange and
Anne his wife, were seized of the Manor of D. and one Giles Sherington Abbot
of C. was seized of an acre of land in fee, and held this of the said Roger
Le-Strange as of the Manor of D. aforesaid, and that the 22. H. 7. the Abbot,
and all the Monks died, by which the said land escheated to Roger etc. and the
Manor descended to his son and heir after his death; who conveyed the Manor
of which the acre is parcel after the escheat by mean conveyance to Hobert in
fee, and that Hobert 12. Eliz. infeoffed one Wright of the Manor, of which the
said acre is parcel, and so justified by a conveyance from Wright to the
Defendant: the Plantiff replied by protestation that the Abbot was not
eligible, and for plea he said, that the aforesaid Hobert 10. Eliz. infeoffed
I. S. of the said acre of land absque hoc that he infeoffed Wright of the sad
Manor of which the said acre is parcel; and upon this the Defendant demurred
generally. And Sergeant Attoe argued for the Plantiff, that the Plea of the
Defendant is evil, and then though the replication of the Plantiff is not good,
yet the Plantiff shall have judgment, and he cited Turners case; Hobert it is
true, Cook 8.
if the replication be merely void, then it is as you had said, but if the
replication be the title of the Plantiff, and that be insufficient, there the
Plantiff shall not have judgment, though the plea in bar was evil. Attoe
agreed, that if it appear by the Plantiffs own showing, that he had no cause of
action, and that he had no title, he shall not have judgment, but here he had
made a good title by the lease of the said acre of land, and though our
traverse is evil, and sounds in doubleness, yet the Defendant had demurred
generally, and so he had lost the advantage of the doubleness, or of the
negative pregnant, for if a man plead double matter, this is only matter of
form, and not of substance, and therefore after verdict it is good as has been
adjudged: but he proceeded in his argument, and he said that the bar of the
Defendant is not good, for by his own showing this acre of land is not parcel
of the Manor, for by the dissolution of the Monastery by the death of all the
Monks, the land shall go to the founders and donors, and not to escheat to the
Lord of which that is holden, as appears 2. H. 6. 7. and 5. H. 7. if an annuity
or rent be granted to an Abbot in fee, and the Abbot and all his Monks do die,
the annuity or the rent is extinct, and shall not escheat: see the Deane of
Norwiches case Coo. 3. agreed, that by the death of the Abbot and his Covent
the corporation is dissolved, and then the possession shall go to the founders,
and shall not escheat to the Lord of the Manor of which the Land was holden,
and he said that this point is proved clearly by the Statute, of the 27. H. 8.
and 31. H. 8. of Monasteries, in which Statutes there is an express saving to
all persons, except to the donors and to their heirs; and no mention is made
of the saving of the right of those of whom the land was holden; and that
proves clearly, that if the makers of the Statute had thought that the land had
escheated to the Lords, they would have excepted them in the saving of the act,
as they had excepted the Donors and Founders, for if otherwise the lands, and
possessions shall escheat to the Lords of which the land was holden, they are
within the saving of the Statute: and then it will follow that after the death
of all the Monks, as at this day, that the Lords shall have the land by
escheat, which the Sages of the Law never dreamt of who made that Statute, that
any thing may accrue to the Lord, and therefore they provided only for the
title of the Donors and Founders, which is an argument that they thought, that
upon the dissolution of the Monesteries, that the lands shall go to the
Founders, and the same he thought concerning a corporation at this day, as of
Suttons Hospital etc. and so he concluded that, because in the bar of the
Defendant he claimed to hold from the Lord, to whom he supposed the land to
escheat, and did not claim etc. by his own showing the bar is not good: and
though our replication, and traverse is not good, yet the Plantiff shall have
judgment.

But admitting that the bar is good, yet the replication and traverse is
good, and then judgment shall be given for the Plantiff: and the case is, the
Defendant pleaded a feofment of the Man. 12. Eliz. to Wright after that he had
showed the escheat of an acre, the Plantiff replied that the 10th. Eliz. the
Feofor infeoffed C. of the acre of land, absque hoc that he was infeoffed of
the Manor of which the acre is parcel, and Attoe argued, that the traverse is
good, and he alleged 38. H. 6. 49. the same traverse, and here when the
Defendant had pleaded that the acre escheated, and had alleged a Feofment of
the Manor, and had not expressly alleged a Feofment of the acre, the Plantiff
may traverse that which is not expressly alleged, because this destroys the
very title of the Defendant; and he cited for that 34. H. 6. 15. a writ of
privilege in trespass, as a Servant to an auditor of the exchequer, the
Plantiff replied that he was servant to him in husbandry, absque hoc that he
was his servant to wait and attend upon him in his office, and it was holden a
good traverse, and yet that was not expressly alleged by the Defendant.

Hobert chief Justice said, that the traverse is not good, for by the Feofment
which was made the 12th. Eliz. he had confessed and avoided the Feofment which
was made 10th. Eliz. and so there needed no traverse, and therefore he said,
the great doubt of the case will be upon the bar of the Defendant, whether by
the death of the Abbot and the Monks, the land escheat to the Lords of whom
that was holden, or whether that shall go to the Donors, and to the Founders,
and he thought that the land shall escheat, to which Winch seemed to agree; and
Hobert said, that the writ of contra formam donationis was given to the Founder
or Donor by the Statute, and not by the Common Law; but in the principal case,
the judges said they would advise of that, and gave day over to argue that
again.

Auditor Curles case before.
ANd now at this day the case of Auditor Curle was moved again in arrest of
judgment, by Hendon, and he said Auditor Curle brought an action upon the case
against Tuck, and he showed in his declaration the erection of the Court of
Wards, by the Statute of 32. H. 8. and that it was ordained by the same
Statute, that those persons which shall be ordained Auditors of the same Court,
shall be sworn and take an oath, and that such a time the Plantiff was sworn an
Auditor, and that to the office was 2. s. due to be paid for the engrossing of
Feodaries, and that the said Plantiff exercised the said office honestly, and
justly, and with the fees and the profits of the same he maintained his family,
and that the Defendant such a day, and at such a place having Communication
with the Plantiff concerning his behavior in his office, said to him, you have
received money for the engrossing of Feodaries, and I will prove that to be
Cousenage, and tunc et ibidem said you are a Couzner, and live by Couzning; and
Hendon after verdict, for the Plantiff moved in arrest of judgment, first, he
said the office appertains to 2. Auditors, as appears by the Statute of 32. H.
8. and by Auditor Curles case, and if that appertain to 2. then this does not
appertain to the Plantiff alone, and secondly, the Plantiff had expressly laid
in his declaration what fees are due to the office for the engrossing of
Feodaries, and then when it appears by his own showing that the fees were due,
and that the Defendant said of him, that he took money for the engrossing of
Feodaries, this may not be any scandal to him, and he cited Suaggs case, Coo.
4. where the Plantiff showed that his wife was living, and that the Defendant
said of him, that he had killed his wife, here in this wise no action lies, for
it appears by his own showing, that the wife was alive, and so no scandal, and
so in our case, when he had showed that such fees were due for the engrossing
of Feodaries, it was no scandal to him, for the Defendant to say, that he took
money for the engrossing of them, and thereby the words are general of
Couznage, and they may have other interpretation as the Couzning at the Cock
pits, or the like, and then those general words shall not be applied to his
office, and not left to such an exposition as is equivocal, and he vouched
Sergeant Heales case, Mr. Heales Warrants have undone many a man, and adjudged
that an actition lies, because it had relation to his profession, but he said
that this was afterward reversed in the Exchequer chamber, because the word
Warrants is general, and may be applied to other things: but Winch interrupted
him, and said that it was not reversed for error, and then Hendon alleged
Yardleyes case 11. Jac. in C. B. where one said to another, is Yardly your
Atto^ney, your Attorney is a briving knave, and took 20. l. of you to Cozen me,
and the opinion was, that an action will not lie, and Winch interrupted him
again, and said it was adjudged the contrary, and after Hendon alleged Eliots
case against Brown Hill. 17. Jac. B. R. thou have made false writings between
I. S. and his brother, and adjudged that an action lies, and he cited Mallard
against Wise for these words, 10. Jac. Mallard is a knave, and forged my
husbands Will against his mind, and ruled that no action lies, and so 13. Jac.
Harvey against Boking, and he applied all those cases, that the words ought to
scandalize him in his office and profession, for if words by any intendment may
have relation to any thing else, they shall not be interpreted to have relation
to his office, and therefore here the words are too general, also he showed
that when the Plantiff had said, that the Defendant such a day having
communication concerning him in his office, said you have received money for
the engrossing of Feodaries which is Coznage, and tunc et ibidem said you are a
Cozner, and live by Cozning, these words tunc et ibidem shall not have relation
to all: but only to the last words, and cited 5. H. 7. 8. to that purpose: and
so he concluded against the Plantiff.

Attoe Sergeant to the same purpose, but his only argument was, because the
Plantiff had alleged that the fees were due to him, and so no scandal
according to Snags case.

But it was resolved by Hobert and Winch being only present, for Hutton was in
the Chancery, and Jones was not yet returned from Ireland; that the Plantiff
shall have judgment, and first it was agreed by them and by Hutton the day
before, that tunc et ibidem shall have relation to the same time that the first
words were spoken, and secondly, by Hobert and Winch though the office
appertains to 2. yet this is a scandal to him, for the scandal is to the
person, and not to the office, and the persons are distinct and several, though
the office is joint, and they may not join in an action, for of the other no
words are spoken, and so they agreed that this objection is of no force, and as
to the other objection which was made by Hendon, and by Attoe, Hobert said that
true it is as had been cited, but he said for his part he never was, nor yet is
satisfied in the Law of that case, for be she in life or not, yet the scandal
is the same to the standers by, who perchance did not know that she was living,
and so the scandal never the less: but admitting the case to be good Law, yet
our case differs from the reason of that, for in our case he had showed that 2.
s. fees were due to him for the engrossing of Feodaries, and the Defendant
said, that he took money for the engrossing of Feodaries which is Couzning, and
so shall be intended that he took more then was due, and this is extortion; and
as to Eliots and Browns case he agreed, that to say he had made false writings
no action will lie, for it is no scandal to him in his profession, for it does
not appertain to an Attorney, to make writings, no more then it appertains to
an Appothecary to give Physic, and so it is no scandal to him in his
profession: and he agreed the case of Mallard against Wise, he forged my
husbands Will, no action will lie, for the words are repugnant and contrary,
for if it be forged, it is not the Will of her husband, but in our case the
words had a plain sense to common understanding, and shall be intended to
refer to his office, for if he had said that he took money for engrossing of
Feodaries, which is desceit without question, that had been actionable, but
there may not be Couzning without desceit.

And he cited Boxes case, where one said of an Attorney, that he was a
maintainer of suits, and a Champerter, action lies, for it shall be taken to be
a scandal to him in his profession, for though an Attorney may maintain suites,
yet he ought not to be a Champerter, and he further said, that he who will
maintain an action for words ought to be scandalized in his public profession,
and he cited a case which was in the Kings Bench, Brad against Hay, and the
Plantiff declared, that he was Bailiff to such a one, and that he had the
buying and the selling of his Corn, and that the Defendant said of him, that he
sold by false measures, and adjudged that no action lies, for it is not a
scandal to him in his public profession, and so 36. Eliz. one said of a
Merchant that he kept a false debt book, and because he may be a Merchant
without a debt book, it was ruled that an action does not lie, but if he had
said of him that he deceived men by buying and selling, these words had been
actionable, and he said that two things are required to every public
profession, science, and fidelity, and when a man who has a public profession
is scandalized, in either of those an action of the case lies, and cited
Palmers case of Lincolns Inn, he being a Lawyer 'twas said to him by one, that
he had as much Law as a Iackan-apes, and adjudged to be actionable, for it is a
scandal to him in his profession, and so Sir Miles Fleetwoods case, where he
who is Plantiff in this action was Defendant in that, he being receiver of the
Court of Wards, one said to him, Mr. deceiver has Couzned the King, and has
dealt falsely with him, and adjudged that an action upon the case lies, and yet
he did not show, wherein he had Couzned him or dealt deceitfully with him, but
yet because it appears to the Court that he might deal deceitfully, and Cousen
the King, therefore actionable, and he cited Birchleys case, you have dealt
corruptly, an action lies, and yet he did not show wherein he had dealt
corruptly, and here he had said he was a Couzner by the receipt of money, which
is an express scandal to him in his office. Winch accordingly to every office
of trust is a condition in Law annexed, that he deal honestly and justly, and
he cited Wingates case in the Kings Bench, one said to another, is Wingate your
Attorney, and the other said that he was, and the other replied, take heed and
follow him well, for else he will make you throw your purse over your bosom;
and it was adjudged that an action lies, for it is a scandal to him in his
profession, and it shall be taken as much as if he had said, he will make you
spend all the money in your purse, if you look not the better to him, and so
applied this to the principal case: and in this case judgment was commanded to
be entered for the Plantiff in the action, if no other cause be showed before
such a day.

An action upon the case was brought for these words, the Plantiff did load a
ship of my Fathers with Barley, and did steal, and Couzned 7. quarters thereof
in measure, and upon not guilty pleaded it was found for the Plantiff, and now
it was moved in arrest of judgment, that the word Cozned being joined with the
word stole, had taken away the force of that, and made it but Cozning, but
Hutton contrary, and that it shall be understood, that he stole 7. quarters in
measure, and quantity, and Winch seemed to agree, and it was adjourned: and an
other day awarded that an action lies.

Godfrey Wade Alias Mack-Williams case.
GOdfrey Wade and others in an ejectione firm, and the case upon a special
verdict was to this effect, Henry Mack-Williams the father was seized of land,
and being so seized he conveyed that to the use of himself for life, the
remainder to his wife for life, the remainder to the heirs of their two bodies
engendered, the remainder to the heirs of the body of Mack-Williams the
Feoffor, and the remainder to his right heirs in fee, and he had a son by his
wife named Henry, and 5. daughters, and he died, and afterward the son in the
life of his Mother by deed indented, leased to White-Head for 31. years
rendering rent, and afterward he leavies a fine to the use of himself, and his
heirs in fee, and died, and after whose death the Mother suffered a recovery
within six months, in which 4. of their husbands were vouched, and the
recovery was to the use of the feme for life, the remainder to every one of the
daughters in fee, and the sole doubt was, whether the lease made by Henry the
son is defeated by this recovery, and it was argued by Harvey Sergeant, that
the lease shall stand good, notwithstanding this recovery suffered by the
Mother, for he said, that Henry Mark-Williams being issue in tail, and also
being heir to the remainder in fee, who made this lease by indenture, in this
case this lease issues as well out of the estate tail, as out of the reversion
in fee, and the fine leavied in the life of his Mother, binds and bars the
estate tail at the time of the fine, and then the lease being drawn out of the
reversion in fee, which descended to the daughters after the death of their
brother, this reversion shall be charged with the lease, and the recovery had
not destroyed that: and this case will differ from Capels case, for it is
agreed, if tenant in tail be, the remainder in fee, and he in remainder in fee
granted a rent charge, and after Tenant in tail suffer a recovery, by this the
rent is destroyed, for there he who suffered the recovery was Tenant in tail in
possession, but in our case when the son had leavied a fine in the life of his
Mother, by this fine the tail is destroyed, and the Mother is become Tenant in
tail after possibility of issue extinct, which is only an estate for life in
quantity, and then though she suffers a recovery, yet this does not destroy the
lease made by Tenant in tail, when there was also a fine leavied to confirm
that. Secondly, he argued, that when the issue in tail in the life of his
Mother made a lease for years by indenture, and then leavied a fine, and died,
and then the Mother being Tenant in tail, and joyntress within the Statute of
11. H. 7. as in our case she is, and she suffers a recovery, and vouches the
daughters in reversion, and lessee for years enters after the death of the
feme, by force of 11. H. 7. for lessee for years is a person who may enter
within the express words of that Statute, which gives entry to any person who
has an interest, and see for that Coo. 3. Lincoln College case, and Dyer 148.
Thirdly, he held that though it should be so, that lessee for years may not
enter by force of the Statute, of the 11. H. 7. yet he may falsify a recovery
by the Statute, of the 21. H. 8. which enables lessee for years to falsify as
well as lessee for life, and it appears by the verdict, that the sole intent of
this recovery, was to defeat the lease for years, for this was suffered within
6. months after the death of Henry Mark-Williams the son, and also the
recovery was to the very same uses which they were before, and therefore the
lessee may falsify the recovery, it is true in Capels case, the lessee of him
in remainder may not falsify a recovery suffered by Tenant in tail, though it
was suffered of purpose to defeat the lease for years, but in our case the
lease for years does not enure by virtue of the estate tail, for that is bound
by the fine, but this issues out of the reversion in fee, and for that reason
the lessee shall falsify this recovery, in an ejectione firm, or in an
avowry, and he cited Kings case, Hill 37. Eliz. B. R. Rot. 293. Tenant in tail
infeoffed his son, and after he disse^sed him, and afterward leavied a fine of
that with Proclamations, the son entered upon the Conusee, and made a feofment,
and the Proclamations passed, and the feoffee of the son let for years, and
then the father and the son died, and the issue in tail brought a formedon, and
recovered, and it was agreed, that lessee for years may falsify this recovery,
and he said that he had seen a Note in Justice Manwoods Study, that it was
agreed in his Circuit, that lessee for years to begin at a day to come may
falsify a recovery, and so be concluded his argument.

Hendon Sergeant to the contrary, and he divided the case in three points.
First, when Tenant in tail had issue a son, and a daughter or two sons, and the
eldest son in the life of his father, who is Tenant in tail levies a fine, and
dies without issue, whether this shall bind the youngest son, and he thought
that it should not, and yet he agreed, that an estate tail may be barred by a
fine, though he who leauied the fine was not seized at the time of the estate
tail, and this by the very words of the Statute, of the 32. H. 8. see the case
of fines Coo. 3, and Grants case vouched, Lampets case, and so is the case of
Hunt and King 37. Eliz. cited by my brother Harvey, and so he agreed clearly,
if the son who leavies the fine, survives the father who was Tenant in tail,
that then in this case this binds the estate tail for ever: and the reason is
upon the very words of the Statute, of 32. H. 8. or any was intailed to the
Ancestor of the issue in tail, and in this case, when the issue does survive
the Ancestor, and dies, this shall bind the issue, because it was intailed to
him who leavied the fine who was his Ancestor, for he may not make any
Conveyance to the estate tail, except he make mention of him, who leavied the
fine, because that he survived the father who was Tenant in tail, but when he
who leavies the fine dies in the life of his father, viz. the eldest son, then
the youngest son may convey an estate tail to him without making mention of
his eldest brother: and this appears by the 46. E. 3. 9. 4. H. 6. 10. 11. H. 7.
6. see the case of Buckner Coo. 8. from which cases he inferred, that if the
youngest brother may have an action at the Common Law, without making mention
of his eldest brother, then such a construction shall be made of this word
Ancestor, in the Statute of 32. H. 8. that it shall be taken for such an
Ancestor, by whom the issue in tail claims, and for no other Ancestor, and for
this he put the case, if land be given to a man and to his heirs, females
begotten of his body, and he had issue a son, and a daughter, and the son
leavied a fine, and died, this shall bar the estate tail for the cause
aforesaid, and for authorities in this kind he cited the reports of Dallison
of -- Eliz. printed at the end of Ashles Tables in Stamfords case in the end of
the same case, where the very difference is agreed, Mich. 29. Jac. C. P.
where the eldest son dies in the life of the father, and where not: and Hobert
demanded of him by what warrant those reports of Dallison came in print.

And then Hendon cited the opinion of some of the judges, in the case of Zouch
and Banfield: and see Coo. 3. the case of fines according to this difference:
and he said, that Sir George Browns case will warrant that in the very letter
of it, for there it is said, that no issue inheritable by force of the tail may
enter after the fine, by which he inferred, that if he is such an issue that is
not inheritable, he is out of the Statute, and so he concluded the first point,
that the fine being leavied by the eldest son, in the life of his Mother, that
shall not bar the estate tail. Secondly, he argued that as this case is, the
feme is not within the Statute, of the 11 H. 7. because that at the time when
she suffered a recovery, she was seized of an estate, in general tail by force
of the remainder which was limited to her and her husband, and to the heirs of
their two bodies engendered, which took effect in the feme, at the time of the
death of the husband; and this being an estate in tail of the purchase of the
huband which took effect in remainder, this may not be a jointure within the
Statute of of the 27. H. 8. and then if she be not a joynteress within that
Statute though this estate was of the purchase, and of the acquisition of her
husband, yet this is out of the danger of the Statute, of the 11. H. 7. for the
words are, any woman who had any estate in dower, or in tail joint with her
husband of the purchase, and of the acquisition of the husband: which words of
the purchase of the husband had relation to Tenant in dower, or to a woman who
was a joyntress, and was not the intent of the Statute, to make such a
remainder to be within the danger of the Statute, when the husband himself in
his life may dock this by a recovery, and therefore it is not within the
Statute.

And as to the Third point he argued, that admitting that she was a joyntress,
within the Statute of the 27. H. 8. yet when the feme suffers a recovery with
the assent of him in remainder in fee, this recovery is out of the body of the
Statute, of 11. H. 7. any which shall discontinue, or release with warranty,
and that all such recoveryes shall be void, and shall be taken for fained
recoveries, and this may not be imagined a fained recovery, where he in
remainder in tail is vouched by him who is Tenant for life, Jennings case Coo.
10. and such recovery, as is there resolved, is out of the Statute of the 14.
Eliz. and is good by the Common Law, and so in our case, but admitting this to
be within the Statute of the 11. of H. 7. yet the proviso of the same Statute
had made that good, for there is an express proviso, that a recovery with the
assent of the heir inheritable, if this appear upon Record this shall not be
within the Statute, and in our case, this is with the assent of the heir
inheritable, and also this appears to be of record, and so the recovery is out
of the danger of the Statute, of the 11. H. 7. See Doctor and Student, a book
which was written but a little time after the making of this Statute, and Dyer
89. Vernons case, and he said that the intent of the same Statute, and of the
proviso of the same Statute was to have issues and heirs, and not termors, who
had only a future interest to falsify recoveries, and so he concluded that the
recovery is out of the same Statute, and that the proviso of the same Statute
had made that good, by the assent of the heir, but admitting, this should be
against him, that this recovery shall be within the Statute, yet the lessee in
our case shall not falsify, nor take advantage of the forfeiture by force of
the same Statute, but it has been objected by Harvy, that the wife in this
case had only an estate for life, or Tenant in tail after possibility of issue
extinct, and he answered that the resolution in Beamounts case Coo. 119. is
contrary, for it is there expressly agreed, that she was Tenant in tail after
the fine leavied by the issue, and so was it also resolved in Pophams case 9.
Eliz. but there it was doubted whether she was Tenant in tail, within the 32.
H. 8. who might make a lease, but all agreed that she was Tenant in tail, who
may suffer a recovery, and bind the remainder: and then when the feme suffers
such a recovery as in our case, that recovery shall take away a term for years
which was made by the issue in tail, Mich. 20. Jac. C. P.
in the life of his mother, notwithstanding she was a joynteress within the 11.
H. 7. also he said, that this lease for years being made by Henry
Mark-Williams, the son who was heir to the estate in tail, and also to the
reversion in fee, being made by deed indented rendering rent, this shall be a
lease which issued out of the estate in fee simple, and not out of the estate
tail, and this shall be out of the estate tail by estoppel, being by deed
indented, for an estate shall not enure partly by way of interest, and this
lease to begin after the death of the feme, he may not take advantage of the
forfeiture, for though the words of the Statute are, that all such recoveries
shall be void, yet this shall not be void without entry, and he who will have
benefit, by this ought to be mabled to enter presently, so soon as the recovery
is suffered, for as there ought to be a person, in esse, who shall take benefit
of the same Statute, as appears by Coo. 3. Lincoln College case, so there
ought to be a present estate in esse at the time of the recovery, for the words
of the Statute are to whom the interest shall appertain, but in our case the
interest does not appertain to the lessee, who had only a future term, and
therefore he shall not take the benefit by any forfeiture, within the Statute
of 11. H. 7. and the rather in our case, because there is a rent reserved; also
all this matter is found by special verdict what estate the son ha^ and when he
made the lease by indenture, Dyer 244. Coo. 155. and Bredons case, in Treports
case lessee for life, and he in reversion by indenture let for years, this is
no estoppel, and it shall be said to be the lease of one, and the confirmation
of the other: and here the lease shall be said to issue out of the reversion in
fee, and not out of the estate tail, and he vouched a case adjudged 10. Jac.
when Flemming was chief Justice of the Kings Bench between Errington and
Errington, and the case was, that a man conveyed land to the use of himself,
and his wife in tail, the remainder to his right heirs, and had issue a son and
a daughter, and he died, and the son let for years to begin after the death of
his Mother, and he died without issue, and the daughter leavied a fine, and the
wife who was Tenant in tail died, and the question was, whether this lease for
years issued out of the estate tail by way of estoppel, for then the Conusee
shall not avoid this, but it was adjudged this lease was drawn out of the
reversion in fee, and the Conusee of the daughter shall avoid that, which is
all one with our case; but admit that this lease is good by estoppel out of the
estate tail, yet he shall not take benefit of the forfeiture, within 11. H. 7.
and this differs from Sir George Browns case, for there the Conuser entered by
virtue of a remainder, and not by the estate tail which passed to him by
estoppel: and upon that he concluded, that if this is an estate merely by
estoppel, he shall not have benefit by that.

Pope and Reynolds before.
NOw the case between Pope and Reynolds (which see before) was moved again by
Ashley for the Plantiff in the prohibition, and the case was, that he was owner
of a Park, and the Park had been time beyond memory, replenished with deer till
the 10th. of Eliz. at which time that was disparked, and that the owners had
used before the disparking to pay a Buck in Summer, and a Do in winter, in
full satisfaction of all Tithes due to the Vicar; and the Parson had libelled
in the Ecclesiastical Court for Tithes in kind, and also traversed the
prescription, and it was found for the Plantiff in the prohibition, and it had
been moved in arrest of judgment, that notwithstanding this prescription is
found for the Plantiff, yet he shall not have judgment for two causes. First,
because gross Tithes belong to the Parson; and not to the Vicar, for the
Vicaridge is derived out of the Parsonage; to this he answered, that for the
most part every Vicaridge is derived out of the Parsonage, but it is a mere non
sequitur that this does, for the Vicarage, and the Parsonage may have several
patrons, Fitzh 45. also a Vicarage may be time beyond memory, as in our case
40. E. 3. 2. 7. and Fitz. juris utrum. a Vicar may have a juris utrum. and also
he said, that in some parts the Vicar shall have Tithe Corn, and hay, and not
the Parson, and so he concluded this to be a good prescription by the Common
Law; and then for the second point, he argued that though the Park is
disparked, yet the modus decimandi continued, and he vouched Beddingfields, and
Fields case P. 38. Eliz. B. R. prescribed to pay 10. s. for a Park, this modus
had a continuance notwithstanding the disparking: and 18. Iac. upon a motion a
prohibition was granted in such a case.

Hendon to the contrary; and yet for the first point he agreed, that a
prescription to pay Tithes to the Vicar was good, for here it appears, that
the Vicarage is as ancient as the Parsonage, both being time beyond memory; and
it was the opinion of all this Court when the case was first opened, and so he
said, he would not insist upon that, but agree the Law to be against him, but
then for the second point, he held the modus to be gone by the disparking, for
the prescription is annexed to the Park, and not to the land, for the
prescription is to pay a Buck and a Do for all manner of Tiths of that Park,
and then the prescription is in some sort annexed to that merely as land, but
quatenus a Park, and for this he held, if a man will prescribe to pay 10. s.
for the Tithes of such land, and it is given in evidence to be a Park, this
will not maintain the issue, for a Park is deceivable one way or other, and so
are of several natures, and so Coo. 4. Lutterels case, a tenure to cover the
hall of the Lord, if the hall is thrown down the tenure is gone, and here when
the Park is destroyed, the modus is also destroyed, but it has been objected
here, that the prescription is general, and therefore though the Park was
disparked, yet the modus had continued, to this he answered, that this
prescription shall have such construction as a grant shall have, and though it
is general, yet it is sub modo subject to this limitation, that this always
continue and remain a Park, and it was resolved 43. Eliz. that the Commoner may
not grant over his Common, except he grant over his Tenement, for they may not
be severed, and so indeed is Nevils case in the Commentaries: a man prescribed
to have estovers to burn in his house, if the owner destroy the house the
estovers are gone, for the prescription is annexed to the house, and so in our
case the prescription is annexed to the Park, and not to the land, for 18. H.
6. 21. a Park may not be without the grant of the King, and the Common Law
says, if a man prescribe to have Tithes in a Vineyard, if the Vineyard be
converted to another use, the Tithes are gone, for it is said tantum est
prescriptio, quantum est possessio, and vouched Coneys case, 14. Caro. who
prescribed to be discharged of paying Tithes for a meadow, and afterward this
was converted to arrable, and the opinion of the Court was, that the
prescription is gone, and the rather in our case, because it is by the act of
the party himself that the Park is destroyed, and yet he agreed the principal
case in Lutterels case, Coo. 4. for there a new will is only a translation of
the old, and no destruction of the thing which was before: but in our case the
Park it self is destroyed by the act of the party himself, and therefore the
prescription which was annexed to this is gone forever.

Also this prescription is against Common right, and therefore shall be taken
strictly, as Teringhams case Coo. 4. a man had Common appurtenant in another
man's land; and he purchased parcel of the same land, the Common is gone,
because this Common is against Common right, but otherwise of a Common
appendant, and he cited Wilds case Coo. 8. according to our case, that a
prescription to pay a Buck, and a Do for the Tithes of a Park is against
Common right, for though Tithes are not due Iure divino; yet they are due jure
humano and Communi; and therefore the prescription is not founded in Law, and
it shall not be intended to the Park, when that is destroyed and converted to
arrable, as if a man made a feofment of land with warranty, and afterward the
land is improved and made of greater value, then that was at the time of the
feofment; if in this case the feoffee is evicted and lease that, and recovery
in value upon the warranty, he shall recover in this case, only the value that
this was at the time of the feofment made, and not according to the value, that
the land is of at this day by the improvement, 32. E. 3. Entry 81. and in our
case it shall be intended, that by composition at the first this prescription
had beginning, and the composition only extended to the Park, and not to a new
thing, and for that reason the prescription is gone in this case, and he cited
a case in this Court, M. 10. Iac. Rot. 1223. in a prohibition between Roux C.
D. the Plantiff suggested, that such land was parcel of a Park as in our case,
and that the owner had used to pay the shoulder of every Do which was killed,
and 2. s. annually for all Tithes, the Defendant pleaded that this was
disparked, and the first opinion of the Court was, that the Defendant ought to
plead in certain how that was disparked, secondly, this was doubted whether the
modus as to the 2. s. was gone in regard, that the shoulder of the Do is gone
by the disparking, out of which he collected that the modus is annexed to the
Park, and not to the land, and so he concluded, and prayed a consultation.

Winch said to him the prescription is found against you, and therefore you
ought to have demurred; Hendon, if the prescription is gone, the Plantiff shall
not have a prohibition; and at another day judgment was commanded to be
entered for the Plantiff, judgment.
if no other matter is showed by such a day, Hobert and Winch being only
present.

The Bishop of Gloucester against Wood.
IN a Trover and conversion brought by the Bishop of Gloucester against Wood,
upon a special verdict, the case in effect was, that the predecessor of the now
Bishop was seized of the Manor, of D. and he let 20. acres of that to A. and
B. during the lives of 3. of their Children rendering 27. s. ren^ per annum, and
also paying and delivering to the Bishop and to his successors, two of the best
beasts upon the death of every one of the Cestuy que vies, and over the jury
found, that after the lease of the 20. acres, the same predecessor let all the
Manor, rendering the ancient rent to Wood the Defendant, and after one of the
Cestui que vies died, and he seized two of the Cattle for a herriot, and
whether this appertained to Wood the lessee of the Manor, or to the Bishop was
the question, and it was argued by Sergeant Hendon, that this appertains to
the Plantiff, and not to Wood: and as to that the single point, is a Bishop: is
seized of a Manor in the right of his Bishopric, and lets parcel of that for
life, whether the reversion of this parcel be always parcel of the Manor
notwithstanding this lease, and he argued that it was not, and yet he agreed,
that if another let, as aforesaid, the reversion continues always parcel of a
thing in possession, and that in the case of the King himself, as appears by
Dyer 230. if the King lets parcel of a Manor for life, the reversion of this
parcel passes to the King, for the reversion had all times continuance in the
same capacity, and no alteration is made of this by force of the lease, but
where the lease for life is a discontinuance, there he gains a new reversion,
and this shall not be parcel of the Manor, and for that if a man is seized of
a Manor in the right of his wife, and he lets parcel for life, this is a
discontinuance, and he had gained the reversion in his own right, and for that
reason the reversion may not be parcel of the Manor, as appears by 18.
Assizes: and also he held if Tenant in tail lets parcel of a Manor for life,
that were the reversion of this parcel, is not parcel of the Manor for the
cause aforesaid; and so in our case, when the Bishop granted parcel which is
not grantable by the Statute, now he had discontinued the reversion, and had
gained a new fee simple which may not be parcel of the Manor, so long as this
new fee simple had a continuance, and this was his first reason.

And secondly, he argued from the intent of the parties, because the intent
was, that the lease to Wood shall be good, and if the reversion of the 20.
acres pass to Wood, this will make all the lease void, for no rent may be
reserved out of the reversion, but out of the land it self, 3. Assise Placito
ultimo, a Bishop let land, and a hundred, rendering rent, the rent issues out of
the land, and not out of the hundred, and so here it issues out of the land,
and not out of the reversion, which made the lease all void; and so he
concluded the first point, that the reversion of the 20. acres did not pass to
Wood the lessee of the Manors.

Secondly, when the Bishop lets 20. acres of ground rendering rent, and this is
not confirmed by the Dean and Chapter as it ought, and after he lets the
Manor, and the successor accepts the rent of the Manor, this acceptance shall
not make the lease of the 20. acres to be good, admitting that the reversion do
pass; and when the Bishop had made a lease for 3. lives he may not contract for
the reversion, and when a lease is merely void in the creation, there no
acceptance afterward may make that good; but admitting this to be against him,
yet the lessee shall not have the Herriot, for they are not appendant to the
reversion, but due only by way of Covenant; and the words are yielding etc. and
this being a Collateral thing, it shall not go with the reversion; and the
Herriot here may not be had without it be delivered by the lessee for life.
Secondly, it is paid only in the name of a Herriot, and this is not Herriot
service. Thirdly, it is to be paid upon the death of a stranger, and not upon
the death of the lessee, and all this proves this Herriot to be collateral; and
he cited Rawlins case, a lease for years paying for a fine 20. l. this is a
sum in gross, and shall not pass with the reversion; and so he prayed
judgment for the Plantiff.

Attoe contrary; and yet he agreed the case of the husband and wife, and of the
Tenant in tail, for here the lessor gains a new fee simple, but in our case,
when the Bishop lets for life, this is not any wrong, for the successor may
enter, and he shall have this lease not in his natural capacity, but always in
his politic capacity, and for that there is an apparent difference between
the cases; and for that reason, he held that the reversion was parcel of the
Manor, and so passed to the lessee, and as to that which had been said, that
the intent of the parties was only, that the Manor in possession, and not the
parcel in reversion should pass to the lessee, for that is most beneficial to
the lessor, to this he answered that by express words this is granted, and no
construction shall be made contrary to the very express words of the grant, and
here though the Defendant had not any title at all to the Herriot, yet the
Plantiff shall not have a trover and conversion for this, because that he
himself had not right to this, and for that reason judgment shall be given for
the Defendant; and he also argued, that the lease of the reversion is not
merely void, but voidable, and then the acceptance extends to this: see 37. H.
6. the lease of a Pri^r 2. E. 6. B^. Abbots case. Upon which authorities, he
said clearly by the Common Law this lease of the reversion is not merely void
but voidable, and for that the confirmation of the Dean and Chapter, after the
Statute of the first of Eliz. had not altered that; and for that a lease after
the Statute shall not be merely void, and see Lincolns College case, Coo. 3.
and in our case there is a possibility, that the lessee of the Manor may
survive the cestui que vies of the 20. acres, and that possibility is
sufficient to make this good out of the reversion, for then the lessor may
distrain for his rent, but where no possibility of a distress is, there no rent
may be reserved; as in Jewels case, the lease was void, for there was no
possibility that the lessor shall ever distrain, but in our case the lease for
years is good, for the lessor is not without his remedy, for he may have an
action of debt upon this reservation; 1. H. 4. 2. there a measnalty in gross
was let rendering rent, and good, for by possibility the Tenant may die without
heirs, and yet this is a remote possibility; 12. E. 3. execution 112. a
reversion granted by fine in tail rendering rent, is good; and Coo. 5. Elmers
case, that a reversion being let for life rendering rent, is a good reservation
at the Common Law; and he held without question, that where a Bishop is seized
of a Manor which consists part of freeholders, and part of Copiholders, that a
lease of the Manor rendering rent is good; and in our case the reservation of
the rent is entire, and shall bind the successor: and as to that which had been
said, that the Herriot is Collateral, and shall not go with the reversion, to
this he answered, that if it is merely Collateral, then it shall not go to the
successor of the Bishop but to his executors, as if the lessee had covenanted
or obliged himself to pay this Herriot to the successor, he may not have
benefit of this obligation, but the executor of the Bishop who was lessor shall
have that, and so he said, that the argument made by Hendon is against him, for
if it be merely Collateral, then this shall not go to the successor, and though
the lessee of the Manor may not have it, the Plantiff shall not have a Trover
and Conversion as he said before: but he held this good by way of reservation,
for modus and conventio vincunt legem, and as to that which has been said,
that the Herriot is to be paid upon the death of a stranger, and not upon the
death of the lessee himself, to this he answered, that this is nothing, for the
payment shall be out of the beasts of the lessee, and not out of the beasts of
a stranger, and so he concluded and prayed judgment for the Defendant.

Rives case.
SAlmon avowed for a rent charge, and he showed that Sir Robert Rives had a
rent charge granted to him, and he further showed a descent of that to the son
and heir of Sir Robert; and showed that the rent was behind unpaid to him viz.
to his son and heir, and he avowed as Bailiff to the son, and exception was
taken to the avowry, because it is not expressly alleged in whose time the
rent was due, whether in the time of the father, or in the time of the son, for
if it is behind in the time of the father, the son may not distrain for that:
but it was resolved that the avowry was very good, for in as much that he had
showed, that the rent was not paid to the son, this implied the rent was due to
the son, and not to the father.

An Executor brought a Scire Facias upon a judgment given for the Testator in
debt by him, and the Defendant would have pleaded the death of the Testator
between the verdict and the judgment, and per Curiam he was not suffered, for
he may not plead this in a Scire Facias, but the Defendant is put to his writ
of error.

In Trespass for beasts taken in London, and the Defendant justified to taking
as a distress upon a lease of land in Kent, and the Plantiff replied that the
Defendant sold the beasts in London, and so not a good plea to bring the Trial
out of Kent, and to have that tried in London, which note.

Batterseys case.
AN action upon the case was brought against one Hordecre upon an assumpsit,
and he declared that the Defendant had arrested one Battersey, by virtue of a
Commission of Rebellion out of the Cinque ports, and that the Plantiff keeping
a Common Inn, the Defendant brought the said Battersey to his Inn, and
requested the Plantiff to keep him a day and a night, and promised in
consideration there upon that he would save him harmless; and he showed that he
kept the prisoner accordingly; and that the said Battersey brought an action of
false imprisonment against him, and recovered against him, upon which the
action accrewed: and upon non assumpsit pleaded, it was found for the Plantiff,
and now it was moved in arrest of judgment, because he had not showed that the
said Battersey was lawfully arrested and imprisoned, and then if a man will
without cause arrest a man, and promise in this case, no action will lie, for
it is no consideration because that the imprisonment is unlawful, but Hobert
chief Justice, Hutton and Winch contrary: for be the imprisonment lawful, or
not lawful, he might not take notice of that: as if I request another man to
enter into another man's ground, and in my name to drive out the beasts, and
impound them, and promise to save him harmless, this is a good assumpsit, and
yet the act is Tortious, but by Hutton, where the act appears in it self to be
unlawful, there it is otherwise, as if I request you to beat another, and
promise to save you harmless, this assumpsit is not good, for the act appears
in it self to be unlawful, but otherwise it is as in our case, when the act
stands indifferent, but Hobert said, it may be there is a difference between a
public officer, and a private man, for if the Sheriff arrest a man unlawfully,
and promise as before, this is a good assumpsit, but perchance otherwise of a
private man as here, but in the principal case, the Defendant had pleaded non
assumpsit, and this implies a Lawful imprisonment, for otherwise the Defendant
might have given the unlawful imprisonment in evidence, and judgment was
commanded to be entered for the Plantiff.

Claworthy against Mitchel.
CLaworthy against Mitchel in a replevin, the Defendant avowed for a rent, and
showed that his father was seized, and let for years rendering rent, and he
died, and that the reversion descended to him, and for rent behind he avowed;
in bar of which avowry the Plantiff said, that the father devised the
reversion to another, and the other maintained his avowry, and traversed the
devise; and it was found that the devise was only of two parties, and not of
the third part, for in very truth, the land was holden by Knights service, and
all this was found by special verdict, and for whom the jury had found was the
question; and it was argued by Hendon, that this verdict is found for the
avowant, and he vouched 32. H. 8. Brook issue 8. in a precipe quod reddat, if
the issue be whether A. and B. infeoffed the Tenant, and it is found that A.
infeoffed him, but not that A. and B. infeoffed him, the issue is found against
the Tenant, see 14. E. 4. and Dyer 260. in debt upon a lease for years of
diverse parcels of land, and upon non demisit pleaded, it is found quod demisit
all except one parcel, this is found for the Plantiff, and ^rin. 15. Iac. Rot.
2022. Allen against Soper in a replevin for a horse, and avowed for damage
fesant, and the Defendant claimed Common for his beasts Levant and Couchant
upon his land, and some in this case were found Levant and Couchant, and others
not, and it was found against the Plantiff, and he said in this case, when the
Defendant had alleged a devise of all the land, and upon this issue is
joined, and it is found that part is devised and not all, this is found against
the Plantiff, because the issue is joined upon a particular and a special
point, whether all was devised or no, and yet he agreed that upon a general
issue as in trespass in 20. acres of land, and the Defendant is found guilty
but only in one, yet the Plantiff shall have judgment, but not where the issue
is joined upon a particular point as here, but admitting that the Plantiff
shall have judgment, yet the avowant shall have return for the third part; as
in debt upon a lease for years, and it is found that he had not cause to demand
all the rent, but that t^is ought to be apportioned, yet he shall have
judgment for the residue, and so here: Ashley Sergeant to the contrary; the
jury have found for the Plantiff, for the avowant had avowed for all, and he
alleged 26. Assise, where in an assise the seisin and the diseisin was found,
and yet because there was no Tenant found of the Frank-tenement, the Plantiff
shall have judgment, and as to that that had been said, that the avowant shall
have retorn for part, he denied that, for now it appeared by the special
verdict, that the avowant and the devisee are Tenants in Common, and Tenants in
Common ought to join in avowry: and for that reason the avowant shall not have
return for any part, but he ought to replead, Dyer 177. see the book; Hobert
said, that without question in this case, if the jury had given a general
verdict, this had been against the Plantiff, for it was not devised, if all was
not devised according to the issue: and then if it would have been against the
Plantiff in this case of a general verdict, the special verdict shall be
construed to be of the same nature in law, and it shall be adjudged by us
against the Plantiff, for generally where the general issue shall be against
any of the parties, there the special verdict shall be of the same degree, and
Winch and Hutton agreed, and by Winch who pleads in the affirmative, ought to
prove all to be true, as in the case of Soper, which had been remembered by my
brother Hendon, and by Hutton, every issue which is taken upon absque hoc ought
to be precisely found; and as to the second point, he held that the avowant
shall have return for part, for here the jury have found the third part of the
reversion in him, and by that there appears a sufficient certainty to the Court
to make an apportionment, and then if the Court may make an apportionment, the
avowant shall have return for so much as is due to him, but if the
apportionment is to be made by the jury, and not by the Court, there the
avowant shall not have return for the third part, but if it was in debt for 40.
l. and the jury find 20. l. the Plantiff shall have judgment of that part to
be apportioned by the jury: and so in Trespass, if part be found for the
Plantiff, he shall have judgment, for the demand is by writ, but in our case
it is an avowry, and it is a certain issue, and for that reason the avowant
shall not have return for the third part, adjourned; Hutton alleged 28. H. 8.
32. and at another day judgment was commanded to be entered for the avow ant,
Hobert, and Winch being only present.

Note, that if a man make a lease of several parcels of land in a Town, and
this is for the trial of a title in an ejectione firm, he ought to enter into
every part of those several, and to leave a servant, or other to keep the
possession till he had entered into every parcel: and then to deliver the lease
of all, and this is good.

Empson and Bathrust before.
THe case of Empson against Bathrust was moved again by Harris, and he prayed
judgment for the Plantiff, and it had been said, that this obligation is void
by the Statute of the 23 H. 6. but he held that this Statute did not extend to
this obligation, for it is only where a sheriff takes a bond of any person
which is in his ward, and yet he said, he never found in any book the Sheriff
might exact any fee of any person, for he is an officer of the King, but 21. H.
7. he may prescribe to have a bare fee, but the Statute of 23. H. 6. appoints
little fees in some cases. Secondly, he argued in this case, that the Sheriff
may take a bond for by 29. of Eliz. this is a due debt to the Sheriff; and then
if the Sheriff give the party day till another day, it is good reason he shall
have a bond for that for his security. Thirdly, he held that the Sheriff may
take this bond of the party after the extent, and before the liberate by the
Statute of the 29. Eliz. for otherwise perchance when the Sheriff had made the
extent, perchance the Conusee will not sue out the liberate, and so the Sheriff
shall be defeated of all his labor and travel taken in the extent: and in the
last place he said, that in case the sum exceeded a 100. l. the Sheriff shall
have 6. d. in the pound for that which exceeds, and 12. d. for the first
hundred pound: but it was resolved by Hobert, Winch, and Hutton, that judgment
shall be given against the Plantiff, and first they agreed this obligation not
to be within 23. H. 6. for the party was not in the ward of the Sheriff, and
so was resolved in Bewfages case. Secondly, it was agreed by the said 3.
Justices, that the Sheriff may not take his salary appointed by the Statute,
till a complete execution, viz. till the liberate, for the words of the Statute
are in the negative, and does not establish the fees, but only tolerates them,
and Hobert said, if the Sheriff made an extent, and before the liberate a new
Sheriff is chosen, then in this case the new Sheriff shall have the fees
appointed by the Statute, and not the ancient Sheriff: and by Hobert, if the
Conusee sue an extent, and then refuse to sue the liberate to the intent to
defraud the Sheriff of his fees, the Sheriff shall have his remedy by his
action upon the case; and by Hutton, if the Sheriff return upon the extent,
that he is ready to deliver that to the Conusee, this is sufficient to entitle
him to his action upon the case, and thirdly, it was holden by Hobert, and by
Winch, that the Sheriff shall have but 6. d. in the pound for all, if it exceed
100. l. for so was the intent of the Statute, but Hutton said, that the Common
practice is otherwise, and Hobert said, that he did not value that, for he knew
well enough that the Sheriff will rather take more then less then their fees,
and though it had been said, that if such a Construction shall be made, then
the Sheriff shall have as much for executing 100. l. as 200. l. to this he
said, the Sheriff ought to take this subject to this casually, for it is the
very words of the Statute: and lastly, it was resolved by Hobert and Winch,
that the obligation was void by the Common law, and extortion, and a taking by
the Color of his office, see Dive and Manninghams case, and Hobert said, that
every bond that is taken for any thing which is malum in se is void by the
Common law, and this extortion is malum in se; and so void by the very Common
Law, see Ouleys case 19. Eliz. in Dyer; but Hutton doubted whether this bond is
void by the Common Law, because the Statute of the 23. H. 6. inflicts so great
specialty upon the Sheriffs for extortion: and after judgment was Commanded to
be entered for the Defendant in the action, if no other matter be showed to the
contrary before such a day.

In trespass quare vi et armis one such being his servant cepit et adduxit at D.
in Essex, the Defendant pleaded that he was a vagrant in the same County, and
he not having notice that he was servant to another, he retained him; and it
was moved by Finch, if I retain the servant of another man in the same County
where I and his Mr. inhabit, this is not justifiable, though in verity I had
not notice of that, and this according to the express book of the 19. Ed. 3.
47. Hobert, the book may not be law, for it is a hard matter to make me take
notice of every servant, which is retained in the same County, and yet
perchance if this retainer be upon the Statute of laborers, at the Sessions
this is notorious, and I ought to take notice of that at my peril, but it is
otherwise of a private retainer; for though it is within the same County, yet
being a private matter in fact, the Law will not compel me to take notice of
that at my peril, otherwise if this be matter of record, 2. H. 4. 64. and
Hobert and Winch seemed to agree, and then Finch moved that the Plantiff had
charged the Defendant with his servant by cepit et adduxit, and the Defendant
excused himself, and never traversed cepit et adduxit, see 11. H. 4. Hutton and
Hobert, the receiving and the entertaining of a servant may not be said to be
vi et armis.

Mr. Spencers case.
HArvy Sergeant came to the bar, and demanded this question of the Court, in
the behalf of Mr. Spencer, a man was seized of land in fee; and sowed the land,
and devised that to I. S. and before severance he died, and whether the devisee
shall have the Corn, or the executor of the devisor was the question: and by
Hobert, Winch, and Hutton, the devisee shall have that, and not the executor of
the devisor: and Harris said 18. Elizabeth Allens case, that it was adjudged,
that where a man devised land which was sowed for life, the remainder in fee,
and the devisor died, and the devisee for life also died before the severance,
and it was adjudged that the executor of the Tenant for life shall not have
that, but he in remainder: and Winch Justice said that it had been adjudged,
that if a man devise land, and after sow that, and after he dies, that in this
case the devisee shall have the Corn, and not the executor of the devisor, nota
been.

Dodderidge against Anthony, Entered Mich. 19. Jac. Rot. 1791.
ENt. Mich. 19. Jac. Rot. 1791. Peter Dodderidge brought an action of account
against one Anthony, and he declared that he de^ivered to the Defendant so many
pieces of cloth, called Bridge-water red to be sold at Bilbo in Spain, and the
Defendant said, that he sold the same cloth at Bilbo in Spain for 40. l. 18.
s. English, to be paid in May next ensuing, the sale which was in November
before, and over he alleged the Custom of Merchants to be, that if any
Merchant had goods in the same Kingdom to be sold to another Merchant, and he
sell the goods to be paid at a day to come, and this is done before a public
Notary, and thereby a Bill signed and acknowledged to him and in his name who
sold the goods, and that if the Merchant who so sold the goods, delivered the
Merchant who was owner of the goods, this Bill so taken in his name, this shall
be a discharge to him of the goods: and he averred that he sold them to a
Spanish Merchant, and that he took a Bill accordingly, and at London offered
that Bill to the Plantiff, who refused that, and upon this plea the Plantiff
demurred. Attoe argued that the plea is not good, because he had not alleged
that the party who takes such a Bill may plead that, and the Custom is also
alleged with an (if) if the party sell, and if he take the Bill, and not with
positive averment, that he may so sell and may so take the Bill, which being
delivered to the owner of the goods, shall be a discharge to the factor who
sold the goods: and here this custom is not good by the Common Law, for if I
deliver goods to another to sell, and he sell them to be paid the money at a
day to come, this is not good, for he ought by his sale to make a complete
contract: and if I sell my horse for 10. l. I may retain the horse till the
money is paid, for till then the contract is not complete; and so in this case,
and here the Plantiff shall have an action of account upon this delivery, and
if he sell them otherwise, or do not sell them for ready money, he had gone
beyond his Commission, and this Custom is unreasonable, that the Bill shall be
taken in his name who sold the goods, but perchance if the custom had been
alleged, to take the Bill in the name of the owner of the goods, this had
been good; but in our case the owner of the goods may not sue, nor have any
remedy for his goods, except the factor will go into Spain and sue the said
Bill, and it is unreasonable to leave this to the pleasure of my factor,
whether I shall have any remedy for my goods sold, and it is very unreasonable
that I shall be paid with a Bill which may not be sued, and here the Plantiff
is a stranger to the Custom of Spain, and shall not be bound by that.

Sergeant Harris to the contrary: the Custom which is alleged is good among
Merchants, though it is not good according to our Common Law, and so if two
Merchants trade jointly, and one of them dies before severance of the goods,
yet his executor shall have his part, and not the Survivor, and so by the law
of Merchants a man cannot wage his law in debt upon a simple contract; by which
it is apparent that the laws of Merchants differ from our laws, and indeed the
laws of Merchants are National laws: and that this is the Custom in Spain is
confessed by the demurrer, and then we may not examine that by the reason of
our laws, and the laws of Merchants ought to be favored for trading sake,
which is the life of every Kingdom; and by the law of Merchants a Bill without
seal is good, and yet by our law it is but an escrowl: and so I pray judgment
for the Defendant. Hobert chief Justice, when the Merchant had delivered goods
to the factor to sell, he had made the factor negotiator gestorum: and for that
reason the factor may sell the goods without ready money, and this is good
reason, for perchance the goods are of that nature that they will not keep
without perishing, by which clearly it appears, that if I deliver goods to
another to Merchandise, and to sell, he may sell them without ready money, but
if my factor or Bailiff will sell them to one which he knows w^ll prove a
Bankrupt without ready money, this is not good: but secondly, he held the
custom, as it is here alleged, not to be good, for then the party shall have
no remedy for his money, except the factor will go into Spain and sue the Bill,
and the laws of Merchants are special laws for their benefit, and not for their
prejudice: and this custom as it is alleged is too large: but if he had
alleged that such Bill taken by the factor shall be as good and effectual to
the Mr. as if it had been taken in his own name, this had been good, besides
the custom is not good, for it is alleged to be that when the factor had
delivered the Bill to the owner of the goods, this shall be a discharge to him
who was the factor, and here is no time set within which this may be delivered,
and so for ought is showed it may be delivered 10. years after, which may be
good; and to that which had been said, that the laws of Merchants are national
laws, he denied that, for every Kingdom had its proper and peculiar laws, and
though this is the law of Spain, and national to them, yet this ought to be
reasonable, or else it shall not bind: and judgment was commanded to be
entered for the Plantiff, Hobert and Winch being only present.

It was ruled that he who had land in a parish who did not inhabit there, shall
be chargable to the reparation of the Church, but not to the buying of
ornaments of the Church, for that shall be levied of the goods of the
parishioners, and not of their lands, by Sir Henry Yelverton, and said to be so
formerly adjudged.

In trespass the Defendant pleads, that one such was possessed of a term for
years, and bring so possessed by his last will and Testament devised that to
the Defendant, and died, after whose death the Defendant entered, and was
possessed by virtue of the devisee, upon which plea the Plantiff demurred
generally: and Hutton thought this plea prima facie to be good, though the
Defendant had not expressly alleged that the devisee died possessed, but his
plea implies that, for he had said, that he entered by virtue of the devisee
and was possessed, and this only matter of form, and not matter of substance,
and no cause of general demurrer, which Winch also granted that this was also
matter of form, and not matter of substance.

Gage against Johnson for his fees.
GAge brought an action against Johnson as his servant and Solicitor to the
Defendant in a suit in the Kings Bench taking for every Term 3. s. 4 d. for his
fees, and for this he brought his action of debt: and Sergeant Hitcham moved in
arrest of judgment, and he urged the case of Samuel Leech, an Attorney of
this Court, in an action upon the case brought by him, upon a promise to pay so
much for the soliciting of a cause of the Defendant, and the opinion was, that
the action will not lie, for it is in nature of maintenance, for a Solicitor
may not lay out money for his Clyent: and if an action upon the case will not
lie, then much less an action of debt: and Hobert said, that a Councellor may
take fees of his Clyent, but he may not lay out or expend money for him, and
the same law of an Attorney, for if he did disburse money for him, he doubted
much what remedy he should have: and he further said, a servant may follow
business for his Mr. and may take money for his labor, for if I retain my
servant generally, he is not bound to follow my suits at law, except at his
pleasure, for that is an extraordinary service: and for that if I will say to
my servant, that if he will follow my business at Westminster, I will give him
so much for his pains, my servant in this case is not without his remedy: but
if his service is coupled with Soliciting to take money for his pains, his
opinion was that no action will lie, to which the other justices also agreed,
and they arose.

Wright against Black before.
NOw the case of Wright and of Black was moved again, and the case was, that
Wright had brought an action upon the case against Black and Black, for that
the Defendants intending to make away his good name, and to cause him to lose
his goods, did maliciously and without cause at Norwich in the County of
Norfolk, prefer a Bill of indictment at the Sessions of peace, containing that
the Plantiff stole two bundles of fetches, and also did cause and entice one I.
S. to give in evidence that the indictment was good and true, by reason of
which he was bound to Answer that at the next Assiles, and there he was
accquitted: and whether the action was maintainable was the question, and Attoe
argued that the action is maintainable, though it is not showed that the Bill
of indictment was found: and he vouched a case, which was Hill. 10. Iac. B. R.
Rot. 921. between Whorewood and Cordery and his wife Defendants, which case and
judgment was after affirmed in the Exchequer Chamber upon a writ of error, and
the case was, that the Plantiff declared that the Defendants intending to take
away his good name, did charge him to have ravished Dorothie Coxe, and
maliciously exhibited a Bill of indictment, containing that the Plantiff did
felloniously ravish the said Dorothie their daughter, and did give this in
evidence to the Grand jury who found Ignoramus: and yet it was adjudged that an
action lies, and he cited a case the 19. Iac. in B. R. Deney against Ridgy,
where was -- only an indictment preferred concerning the stealing of a horse,
and no more, and yet an action lies. Hobert chief Justice said, that if seemed
to him that it is actionable, for this is as great a scandal to give this in
evidence to the Grand jury, as to publish this upon an Alebench: and as the
course of Justice ought not to be stopped, so neither ought the good, name of
man in things which concern his life be taken away without good cause, and I
have heard that judgment was given another Term for the Plantiff, but quere
better of that.

Hoes case.
HOes seized of land in fee, he devised that to his wife for life, the
remainder of one parcel of that to Thomas his eldest son, the remainder of the
other parcel to his youngest son in fee, and this devised was with proviso that
the feme shall pay his legacies, and also his will was, that in case his wife
died before the payment of his debts and legacies, that then his two sons shall
pay them, and if it happen that either of them die before his debts and
legacies paid, or before either of them do enter into his part, that thou the
other shall have all the land in fee, and after the devisor died, and in the
life of the mother the eldest son released to the youngest all his right,
title, Claim, and demand to the land which was devised to him by his father,
and after the wife died, and two points came in question in this case. First,
whether this limitation is good. Secondly, whether the release is good, and it
was argued by Richardson Sergeant, that this limitation of the Statute by way
of devisee is good, and he vouched Dyer 330. Clarks case, and 4. Eliz. Goldley
and Buckleys case, a man devised to his son and his heirs, provided that if his
personal estate did not suffice to pay his debts and legacies, that then his
lands shall be to another, and he vouched Brown and Pells case, which was
adjudged in Banco Regis, the case was, that a man had two sons, William the
eldest, and Thomas the youngest, and he devised his lands to Thomas his son and
his heirs, provided that if Thomas died without issue living, that then William
shall have the land, and it was resolved that this was good to William by way
of executory devise, and in that case doubt was moved whether if Thomas suffer
a recovery, whether this shall take away the estate of William; and it was
holden by all the Court, except Doderidg, that it shall not, but all agreed
that this devise upon the future contingency is good, and so he concluded, that
if the youngest son die in the life of the Mother, and before the legacies are
paid, the land shall remain to the Plantiff, according to the intent of the
devisor: but the other doubt is, when the Plantiff did release all his right,
and claim to the other, whether this release will extinguish this future
possibility; and he held that it will not: and he said that he had seen the
case of Lampet Coo. 10. and there the release of a possibility is penned as in
our case, and if any word discharge this possibility, it is this word right,
but if the resolution of that book had not been against him, he would have
argued that this right was not sufficient to extinguish this future
possibility, but that there ought to be a more apt and proper word, but he said
he would not argue against books: but he said that which he would insist upon
was the distinguishing of possibilities, for there are two manner of
possibilities, the one is Common and ordinary, the other is more remote and
foreign. And first, there is a possibility which is Common and necessary, and
this depends upon an ordinary casualty, as a lease for life, the remainder to
the right heirs of I. S. for it is apparent that the right heirs of I. S. may
take by this, and such a possibility may be released: and a possibility which
is remote and foreign is, as if a lease be made for life, the remainder to
another during the life of the lessee for life, or a lease for life, the
remainder to the Corporation of B. those remainders are void: but yet by
possibility they may be good, for in the first case the Tenant for life may
enter into religion: and in the latter case the King may make Corporations, and
yet because such possibilities are not usual, the remainders are void: see Coo.
2. Chamleys case, where such a remote possibility may not be released, if a man
give land to one which is married, and to another woman which is married, and
to the heirs of their two bodies engendered, this is a good estate tail, for
there is a common possibility that they may intermarry, but if the gift be to a
man and to two women who are married, and to the heirs of their bodies
engendered, they shall not have an estate tail executed, for it is a remote and
foreign possibility, and an imbrodery of estates which the law will not
allow, nor respect: see the Rector of Chedingtons case, that such a possibility
as in our case may not be released, for first here the mother ought to be dead
before the Plantiff shall have land. Secondly, legacies ought to be paid.
Thirdly, Thomas ought to be dead, and till all these possibilities hap, the
Plantiff shall have nothing in the land, and for that it is a remote
possibility which is not gone by the release, for as it is said, when a
possibility shall be gone by a release, there ought to be a good foundation
upon which the release may operate: secondly, the possibility which is released
ought to be necessary and Common, but in our case it is not necessary that the
son shall enjoy it in the life of his mother: and also the mother may in a
short time pay the legacies, and then neither of the sons shall have the land:
by which circumstances it is apparent, that this is not a Common or an ordinary
possibility, but is a remote and foreign expectancy, which shall not be gone
by this release, and this differs from Lampets case, for there was a
possibility of a Chattel, which as it may easily be created, so it may easily
be destroyed, but in our case it is a franktenement, which as that requires a
greater ceremony in the creation, and for that it will require a greater matter
to destroy, and to extinguish that; and it is said in Woods case cited in
Shelleys case Coo. 1. that if a man covenant with A. that if I. S. infeoffed
him of the Manor of D. that then he will stand seized to the use of him and
his heirs of the Manor of B. and the Covenantee died, and the said I. S.
infeoffed the Covenantor, in such case the heir shall be inward, and yet it is
only a possibility which descends, which possibility of an use may not be
discharged, or released, and yet in that case there was a possibility which is
more Common, and ordinary then in our case; for there was a possibility that I.
S. should make the feofment, and so say a good foundation upon which the
release may operate: and he put the case that I. shall let for so many years as
I. S. shall name, if I. S. name it is good, and yet he held if I. S. release
before the nomination that this release is merely void, because he had only a
possibility: and as to Digs case Coo. 1. there a power of Revocation may be
released, and good reason, for the Covenantor who released had the bird in his
own hand, and for that it was no remote possibility: but there it is said, that
if the power be limited to an estranger, there the stranger may not release:
and he also agreed Albanies case, for there the power to release was upon the
death of a man only, but in our case it is upon death, and other contingencies
by which these remote possibilities shall not be released. Hoes case Coo. 5.
there a release of all actions, and demands to the Bailee made this void; and
in the case of Brown and Pell which was remembered before, it was the opinion of
all the Court against Judge Doderidge, that where the devise was to the son in
fee, and if he died without issue living, that then his eldest brother shall
have that, if in this case the second son suffer a recovery, yet this had not
destroyed the possibility which the eldest brother had to have the land, and if
a common recovery which is matter of record, and the common assurance of the
realm will not take away this possibility, a fortiori a release which is but
matter of fact, and so he concluded and prayed judgment for the Plantiff.

Bawtry to the contrary, and he said, that if this remainder shall be good,
then the inconvenience which the judges had always endeavored to take way
shall be on foot again, as in the case of Chamley, and Corbets of springing
uses, for if it shall be lawful for a man to limit a fee upon a Collateral
condition or limitation, then there shall be a perpetuity, and for this if any
litteral construction shall be made upon such conveyances, this will introduce
dangerous events to inheritances, and for that he held that limitation to the
Plantiff to be merely void, for when the land is devised in fee, this devisee
by this had an absolute estate in fee, and it shall be strange to give this to
another though this be by way of devise, for though the will of every man shall
be supplied by the intent of the devisor, yet his intent ought to stand with
the rules of the law, and otherwise his intent shall revert, and for that he
cited 29. H. 8. a man made two executors, provided that one of them shall not
administer, here the intent did plainly appear, and yet because the intent is
contrary to the power which the law gives to every executor, therefore it is
void: and it is put for a bare rule in Corbets case, that such a conveyance
which a man may not make in his life time, by act executed, he may not make by
his Will, but a man may not make such a conveyance by act executed in his life
time, for as it is said in Colthirsts case, if a man let for life, the
remainder for life, upon condition that if the first lessee do such a thing,
that then the land shall remain over to a stranger, this remainder is void: for
when the land is given before, this second limitation is merely void: and also
the case is put, that if a man give lands in fee upon condition, the remainder
over this remainder is void; for the other had an estate in fee before, by
which it is apparent, that when an estate is one time lawfully vested in any
certain person, there no limitation may give that to a stranger, by any act
executed in his life at the common law, and then it shall not be good by way of
devise 28. H. 8. Dyer, a term was devised for years, the remainder over: and it
was adjudged by Baldwin, and by Shelley, that the remainder in that case is
void, for when the devisor had given his term, he may not limit this remainder
over, though this be by way of devise: and this may be good law notwithstanding
Lampets case, for there the lease was devised and not the land, and for that
reason may be a difference: and he vouched the case which was remembered by
Richardson 29. H. 8. 33. and then as to the second point, he held that the
release was good, admitting the first point to be against him, for if the
eldest son had any right by this release, then this word right in the release
will destroy and extinguish that, and this possibility is not remote and
foreign, for the condition or limitation is annexed to the estate, and is not
a subsequent condition which creates an estate, and this depends upon an
ordinary casualty which is common to all men, and the payment of debts and of
legacies, is incident and common to every executor; and as for Albanies case
Coo. 1. the case was, that a man had a power to revoke uses upon the death of a
stranger without issue, and resolved that this power may be released, and yet
his power depended upon two contingencies, death, and death without issue, and
the case is also there put, if A. infeoffe B. upon condition, that if B.
Survive C. and then if A. and his heirs pay to B. 10. l. that then he shall
enter, in this case there are many contingencies involved in one conveyance,
and yet it is there said, that these contingencies may be released; and in
Lampets case Coo. 10. there are six reasons, wherefore such a contingencie may
be released, and our case is within all the reasons which are there mentioned,
for the words in the release as have been remembered by my brother Richardson,
are all one with our case, and the first reason is, because this is a Chattel,
which as it may be easily created, so it may be easily destroyed, to this he
gave answer, that this remainder of a Term was an interest to him who released:
and so in our it is an interest of a remainder to the Plantiff, and for that
the release is good. Secondly, it is a maxim in Law, that every land may be
charged one ways or another, and we are within this reason also, for if this
estate be in the Plantiff, then this may be released.

Thirdly, the foundation of every act ought to be regarded, for Grants case
there vouched destroys the possibility with a fine by reason of the original
act, the fourth reason there remembered is, because that if the devisee had been
dead, his Executor shall have the interest, the same reason in our case, if the
Plantiff had been dead before the remainder or the contingencie hap, yet his
heir shall have that. See Shelleys case; the fifth reason is, the legacy was
in present, though this was to take effect in futuro, and so in our case the
Will is in present, though the state is to take effect in futuro, and sixthly,
it shall be against reason to establish such a perpetuity of a Chattel, and so
in our case it shall be against reason to establish a perpetuity of a
franktenement: and the release is very well penued, for it is of all his title,
right and claim to the reversion, and remainder which the father devised to the
Plantiff, and so the release is not general, but this is a particular, and
special release of that which was devised to him by his father, and Hoes case
Coo. 5. is not like to our case, for first there the duty was altogether
uncertain, and secondly, the condition there did precede the duty: but in our
case the condition is annexed to the estate, and so he concluded and prayed
judgment in the case for the Defendant.

Finis M. 20. Jac. The Bishop of Gloucester against Wood before.
NOw the case between the Bishop of Gloucester and Wood was adjudged, Hobert and
Winch being only present: and first it was resolved by them, that when the
Bishop let parcel, as 20. acres for life, and after he lets the Manor it self
to another rendering rent, in this case the rent issues out of the entire
Manor, for if in debt for the rent, the lessor do declare upon a demise of the
Manor omitting the reversion of this parcel, the declaration is evil: and
upon non dimisit pleaded it shall be found against him. Secondly, this they
held, that the Herriot reserved shall go with the reversion: and if this do not
go with the reversion to the lessee of the Manor, yet the Plantiff shall not
have the Herriot, and then though the Defendant had not good title to the
Herriot, yet if the property of the Herriot do not appertain to the Plantiff,
he shall not have a trover and conversion, for the Defendant had the first
possession: and judgment was commanded to be entered for the Defendant, if no
other cause was showed before next thursday.

Hill. 20. Jac. C. P.
Bulloigne against William Gervase Administrator.
BUlloigne brought an action of debt upon an obligation of 12. l. against
William Gervase Administrator to I. S. and the Defendant pleaded, that the
intestate died outlawed, and that the outlawrie always continued in force, and
upon this the Plantiff did demur generally, and it was argued by Attoe for the
Plantiff, for the plea is not good, for this is a plea only by way of argument,
that he shall not be charged for this debt, because he had not assets: and in
this case, this outlawrie ought to be given in evidence, upon nothing in his
hands being pleaded; and it ought not to be pleaded in bar, for by
possibility the outlawrie may be reversed, and then the Administrator shall be
charged if he had any goods, and he vouched a case in this Court, Trin. 27.
Eliz. Rot. 2954. Worley against Bradwel and Dame Manners his wife,
Administratrix to Sir Thomas Manners, and the feme pleaded outlawrie in the
intestate, and the Plantiff demurred generally, and it was adjudged to be no
plea; and note, that the record was brought into the Court, and read
accordingly. Hitcham Sergeant to the contrary, the record in Manners case was
not well pleaded, for the Defendant only showed, that a Capias ad
satisfaciendum issued against the Testator, and did not show any recovery, or
judgment against him, and that was the reason of the judgment in that case,
and the Plantiff here ought to have demurred specially, as the case of 27. of
Eliz. for otherwise he shall not have advantage of this plea: and the plea is
only evil for the manner, for it is apparent that by the outlawrie of the
Testator all his goods are forfeit, and this is the reason of the book of 16.
E. 4. 4. it is a good plea in an action of debt to plead an outlawrie in the
Plantiff, and to demand judgment of the action, and not judgment of the writ,
for the debt is forfeit to the King by the outlawrie; Hobert, Hutton, and
Winch, the president showed by Attoe is not answered, for though the pleading
of the outlawrie is without showing of a recovery, and judgment, yet the
outlawrie is good till it is reversed; and Hutton said, that in some cases an
Executor or Administrator had goods, though the Testator died outlawed, as if
the Testator let for life rendering rent, and the rent is behind, and after the
Testator is outlawed, and dies, this shall not be forfeit, but his Executors
shall have the rent, and if a man make a feofment upon condition, that the
feoffor pay 100. l. to the feoffee, and his heirs, or Executors, and the
feoffee is outlawed, and the feoffor pay the money to his Executors as he may
well, the Executors, and not the King shall have that, also if the Testator is
outlawed, and he devise his land to his Executors to be sold, these moneys
shall not be forfeit, and they shall agree that the plea was not good
notwithstanding the general demurrer, for he who will bar another by an
argumentative plea, his plea ought to be infallible to all intents and
purposes, and so it is not here, for the Executors and the Administrators may
be charged by the having of goods, though the Testator was outlawed, and for
that the plea of the Defendant is not good in substance; and the general
demurrer is good, by Hobert, and by him if we suffer this plea, then the
Defendant will keep the goods, and not reverse the outlawrie, nor yet satisfy
the King; also if he had not goods, the Defendant may plead plene
Administravit, or nothing in his hands, and give this outlawrie in evidence.
See 8. E. 4. 6. 3. H. 6. 32. 39. H. 6. 37. by the opinion of Prisot, and also
see the case in E. 4. 5. a case to this purpose; and also note well that it was
said concerning the case of Manners, that a writ of error was brought of that
afterward; and that the case remains till this day undetermined.

Buckley against Simonds Ent. 18. Jac. Rot. 2120.
NOw at this day the case of Buckley and Simonds was argued by Justice Hutton,
and by Winch; and the case was briefly this, Anne Buckley Administrator to
Andrew Buckley her Husband was Plantiff in a quare Imp. against John Simonds,
John Prior, and Robert Pierce, Alias Price for disturbing her to present to the
Church of D. and showed that Andrew Buckley Grandfather of the Husband of the
Plantiff, was seized of the said advowson in gross, and presented one I. S. and
he died, after whose death the advowson descended to Richard Buckley, and that
the Church became void, and that one Richard Williams usurped upon the said
Richard Buckley then being within age, and that Richard Buckley also died, and
by his death the said advowson descended to Andrew Buckley as brother and as
heir to Richard, and that the Church became void, and before the presentment by
Andrew, and within 6. months Andrew died, and that the Administration of the
goods of Andrew were committed to the Plantiff, and that she presented within
6. months, and the Defendants disturbed her, and the Defendants pleaded in
bar, and confessed the seisin of the Grandfather as is alleged in the
declaration, and they said, that the said Andrew Buckley 14. Eliz. by his
Indenture made between the said Andrew Buckley on the one part, and John
Preston of the other part, by which the said Andrew Buckley by the same
Indenture covenanted with Preston in consideration of a marriage to be had
between John Buckley and Elizabeth Preston, daughter of John Preston, he
covenanted with him and his heirs, that immediately after he death of him and
of his wife, the said advowson (inter alia) shall be to the said John Buckley
his son, and to Elizabeth Preston, and to the heirs of John, and so the
Defendant claimed by virtue of a lease for 1000. years made by John Buckley,
and the Plantiff demanded Dyer of the Indenture which was read to this effect,
that Andrew Buckley by the said Indenture covenanted with Preston, that in
consideration of a marriage between his son and the daughter of Preston, that
he will grant a rent charge of 6. l. 13. s. out of his land at Weymouth, and at
Melcombe Regis payable at 4. usual feasts; and he Covenanted for him and his
heirs, that he would convey the land in Melcombe Regis and Wike Regis to such
persons as Preston should appoint, provided that the said Andrew Buckley and
his wife may enjoy that during their lives without impeachment of waste, and
covenanted that immediately after their deaths, the lands shall immediately
remain, come, and be to the said John Buckley, and Elizabeth his wife: and that
the advowson of Bradway shall remain, come, and be to the said John Buckley and
Elizabeth his wife, and upon all the matter the question was, whether by this
last covenant, an use will arise of the advowson in Bradway to John Buckley,
for if an use is raised to him, then this lease made by him is good, and by
consequence the title of the Defendants is good to present to this advowson,
and if not, then the fee always remained in Andrew Buckley, the Grandfather,
and by devise discends did come to Andrew Buckley the Husband of the Plantiff,
and th^n the quare Impedit is maintainable.

And Hutton began his argument, he argued that no use will arise to John
Buckley by this Indenture, for when a man will raise an use by way of covenant,
there are 4. necessary things which ought to concur. First is a sufficient
consideration as of blood, or marriage, or other Collateral considerations, as
if I covenant with you, that when you infeoffe me of certain land, I will stand
seized to the use of you and your heirs, this is good, but if the consideration
be for money, then this ought to be enrolled, or otherwise no use will arise,
the second point is, there ought to be a deed to testify this agreement, for
otherwise no use will arise, as was resolved 38. Eliz. in Collard and Collards
case. Thirdly, he who covenants ought to be seized of the la^d at the time of
the covenant, as was resolved 37. Eliz. in Yelvertons case; a man covenanted to
stand seized to the use of his son of such lands as he should afterward
purchase, and it was holden void, because he was not seized at the time of the
covenant: and lastly, the uses must agree with the rules of the Common law,
Cook 1.
and he cited Chudleys case, a man covenanted to stand seized to the use of one
for years, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. this remainder is void,
though this is by way of covenant, and use, for the freehold may not be in
abeyance: and so if I will at this day bargain and sell my lands in fee, they
shall not pass without the word heirs, for it was not the intention of the said
Statute, to raise uses in such manor contrary to the rules of the Common law
or uses which are uncertain, and in our case the intent was, that no present
use shall arise, for out of the same land is granted a rent charge to John
Buckley and Eliz. his wife, by which it appears plainly, that it was not their
intent that any present use should arise by the delivery of the indenture: and
if the use do not arise presently upon the delivery of the Indenture, it shall
never arise at all; also the intent appears, for it is, that the land shall
remain free from incumberances, and this sounds only in covenant, and for this
reason the covenants shall be of the same nature, and lastly the covenant is,
that the land shall remain and be, and this is altogether incertaine, and for
this no use will arise, because this fails of words, as if I covenant to leave
my lan^ to my son after my death, this will not raise an use to my son, no more
then if I covenant with the friends of my wife, that after my death she shall
have my goods, this will not make my wife to be Executor: and he vouched 21 H.
7. 17. 34. H. 8. 59. the Lord Borroughs case Dyer 355. 166. 324. and so be
concluded, that judgment ought to be given for the Plantiff.

Justice Winch argued to the same purpose, and he said the first part of the
covenant contains, that there shall be a marriage before such a day if the
parties shall agree, and the second part is a covenant, that the feme shall
have 6. l. 13. s. for her jointure, and if this covenant executed an use of the
land presently, then this destroys the jointure, which was not the intention
of the parties. Thirdly, there is another covenant to convey Coppihold land,
and if this covenant do raise an use, then it will follow that John Buckley
shall have the land, though the marriage do take effect, and besides the
covenant does create an use presently, or not at all, and then when this use is
to be raised by this covenant which contains in that nothing but future and
Executory matter, this will not create a present use: and he cited the books
which were vouched at the bar, and by Hutton, and so he concluded, that this
covenant will not raise an use presently to John Buckley, and that judgment
ought to be given for the Plantiff.

And at another day the case was argued by Hobert chief Justice for the
Plantiff, and that no use will arise by this covenant, and he said, if I will
covenant to make assurance of my land to my son, or to a stranger, this
covenant is merely nugatorie, and will not raise an use, but on the contrary,
if I will covenant to stand seized to the use of my son, though there is also a
covenant to make further assurance, yet this will raise a present use, for the
covenant is declaratory, and not obligatory, and so is Dyer 235. and there was
no word to assure the land, or to stand seized to uses, but only that the land
shall come, remain, and be in tail, or in fee, and there was no word to assure
the land: and this case is agreeable to the case of 21. H. 7. 18. by Read, that
no use will arise; and the reason is plain, because the covenantor had
election, in which manner he shall have that, whether by descent, or in any
other manner, for if I covenant that my land shall descend to my son after my
death, no use will arise by this covenant, and he put the case in Chudleys
case, that if a man covenant that after his death his son shall have his land
in tall, it is said that the son shall have an estate executed by the Statute
of 27. H. 8. and the covenantor shall have an estate for life, and so the law
makes in that case fractions of estates, as the case of the Lord Seymor Dyer
96. seems to accord with this, and besides those two books he said he could not
find any book which will warrant that, and for that reason he held those two
books to be no law, for if I Covenant, that my son shall have my land after my
death, this will not raise an estate to me by implication for life, and an
estate to my son, and so by such means to change my estate in fee, for an
estate for life without more words, for the word covenant in his proper and
native signification is only obligatorie, and yet it had been always conceived
sufficient to raise an use to him who is not party to that, as if I covenant
with a stranger, that I will stand seized of my land to the use of my son, this
will raise an use to my son, and yet neither my son, nor the covenantee may
have an action of covenant, but an use will very well arise to my son, as if a
man bargain, and sell his land in consideration of 100. l. paid by I. S. though
in this case the consideration arises from a stronger; yet that will pass the
use to the bargainee: and in case of covenant, it is not this word covenant
only which creats the use, but it is rather the agreement of the parties which
is testified by the covenant, for if sufficient agreement appears, there will
not need this word covenant, as if I will agree and declare to stand seized to
the use of my son, by which it appears that the word covenant is only
declarative of the intentions of the parties; and then in the principal case
the covenant is, not that the son shall have the land, but that the land shall
come, remain, and be to him: and those words are uncertain as 21. H. 7. redert,
come, or descent: and for that reason it is all one with the law of the same
case, and then void to raise any use for the incertainly: and then when Andrew
Buckley covenants, that his son shall have his lands and no words to enforce
his intention: and for that reason the intention shall be liable to an action
of covenant, and not to change his estate which he had in fee, for an estate
for life by this covenant, but if he had expressly covenanted that in
consideration of marriage of his son, that he would hold his land for life, and
after this should be to his son, this will change the estate which was in fee,
for an estate for life, but in our case the covenant being general and left to
the indifferent construction of the law, the word covenant shall be taken in
his proper and native signification, and this is obligatorie: and so he
concluded, that this covenant being at the first to grant a rent, and was
executory, and the last part of that is executory for assurance: and the
limitation of the estate to the son being entangled between these two
Covenants, this shall be of the same nature; and by consequence the covenant is
obligatorie only, and will raise no use to the son: and so he concluded, that
judgment shall be given for the Plantiff, and it was commanded to be entered
accordingly.

Sparrow against Sowgate.
IN debt by Sparrow against Sowgate, who declared that the Defendant became
Bail for one Richard Sowgate in Banco Regis, against whom the Plantiff had
brought a Bill of debt of 77. l. and now the Defendant bound himself in a
Recognizance of 77. l. upon which the action is now brought, that in case
judgment should be given against the said Richard Sowgate, that he shall
satisfy the said judgment, or render his body to prison, for in this case no
part was impossible, for after the judgment the principal may render himself,
in B. R. to the Marshal for the redemption of his surety, and that is the
Common course there as he said, but he agreed the case to be otherwise, if a
scire facias issue out of the Kings Bench against the Bail, for there the death
of the principal is a good plea: for a scire facias does not lie there till
default is assigned in the principal, in his not coming upon the capias ad
satisfaciendum, which may not be when he is dead. Note that, but yet before any
capias, it is clear he may have an action of debt.

Sir Robert Hitcham Sergeant of the King to the contrary, and he alleged this
to be the constant course in the Kings Bench, that the Bail is never chargable
till there is default assigned in the principal upon the recorn of the Capias
ad satisfaciendum, which may not be here, for the principal is dead; and he
agreed the case of the other side, that when a man is to do two things though
the one is become impossible, yet he ought to perform the other: but when it is
in the election of one to make either the one or the other, then it is
otherwise; see Dyer 262. and so he concluded for the Defendant. Hobert chief
Justice said, that it is inconvenient that the Plantiff shall be forced to sue
his Capias ad satisfaciendum against the party, before he have execution
against the Bail, for perchance he will sue a fieri facias or an elegit against
him, and that the Corpse of the party will not satisfy him: and Browlow
Prothonotary said, that it had been adjudged in this Court, that such plea is
not good: Winch, the course of the Kings Bench is, that default shall be
assigned upon the retorn of the principal before the Bail shall be charged: and
though the Plantiff refuse to take his body after he had made his election to
take his fieri facias or elegit, he shall never more resort to the Bail, which
was granted by Hobert and Hutton, as to that last point: and it was holden by
all the Court, that if the principal render his body, though the Plantiff
refuse to take that, yet that is a discharge of the Bail, and also it was
agreed by Hutton, Hobert, and by Winch; that if the course of the Kings Bench
be such, that the Bail shall not be forfeit till there is a default assigned in
the principal, the same course also shall be followed here: and per Curiam if
the course of the Kings Bench be such, that such Capias is necessary to be
awarded, that then a convenient time shall be allowed for the principal to
render his body gratis, and if the principal do die before such time the Bail
is discharged; but it was said by Winch, if he die before convenient time, and
the Capias is awarded, that such death shall not discharge the Bail, note that
Jones Justice said, that he thought in this case, that it is necessary that the
principal render himself gratis, for when he is let to Bail, the law supposes
him to be always in custody, and to be forth coming: and for that reason he
ought to appear within a convenient time when the Plantiff demands him, which
Hobert also granted, but he said that there needs not any demand, if the course
of the Kings Bench is contrary: and Jones Justice said, that he had a judgment
given in the Kings Bench, that the bail is forfeit after default is assigned in
the principal, and Winch said, that the course of the Kings Bench is, that
default ought to be assigned in the principal, upon the return of the Capias
before the Bail shall be charged: and it was agreed, if that course be there,
it shall be observed here also; but it was said by Hutton, that there ought to
be a scire facias awarded, and returned against the Bail, before the Bail is
forfeit; and it was adjourned until another time that they might see presidents.

Cyprian Web against Barlow.
CYprian Web brought a replevin against Barlow, and the Defendant avowed as
lessee for life of the Manor of Froston, to which the Plantiff is a Copiholder
of a Copihold of the same Manor; and that 15. Iaco. in mense May he girdled
and cut a tree in the middle upon his Copihold, and that the steward Anno
Supradicto charged the homage to find this, by which he had forfeit his
Copihold, and the Defendant being Lord of the Manor distrained his beasts
damage feasant, and the Plantiff said, that the custom of the Manor is, that
every Copiholder may lap and girdle absque hoc that he cut the tree, and upon
that the Defendant demurred, and Attoe argued for the Plantiff in the replevin,
that this is no cause to forfeit the Coppihold, for though the steward did
charge the homage to find that, yet it does not appear, that he gave any proof
of that. And secondly, the forfeiture is alleged to be in May; and the Court
was holden in April before, which was impossible, which the Court granted as to
that last point, and for that the Plantiff had judgment.

East. 21. Jac. C. P.
Thorntons case in a Prohibition.
THornton prayed a prohibition to the Arches, and the case was such, one had a
recovery in a quare Impedit, and he had a writ to the Bishop against Thornton,
upon which A. his Clark was admitted etc. and after the recoverer died, and
Thornton supposing his heir to be in the ward of the King, and that the said A
took another benefice without sufficient qualification, by which the Church was
void by Cession, and he attained a presentation of the King, and he was
admitted etc. by the Lord keeper being within the Diocese of Lincoln; and A.
sued him in the spiritual Court, and Thornton prayed a Prohibition, and it was
granted per Totam Curiam, for without question there ought nothing to be
questioned in the spiritual Court, after the induction of the party, and
whether it is a Cession or no, does properly belong to the Common Law: and
Jones cited a judgment in Williams case according, note that by the
constitution of Otho and Othobon; that institution and induction is voidable in
the spiritual Court, if no Prohibition be prayed.

Sheldon against Bret.
IN a quare Impedit, between one Sheldon and Bret, Hutton said, that we in
Chancery have adjudged, that the grant of the next avoydance for money when the
Parson was sick in his bed ready to die is Simony, for the Statute is, if the
contract be made directly, or indirectly by any way or means.

Fleming against Pitman.
FLeming brought an action of Covenant against Pitman, and he declared upon an
indenture, and that the Defendant Covenanted to serve him honestly and
faithfully, as an apprentice in the mystery of Drapery for seven years, and
that he had defrauded him of his goods etc. the Defendant pleaded the Statute
of the 5. of Eliz. that none shall be an apprentice to any of the most worthy
trades, (among which Drapery is one,) except his father have freehold, to the
value of 40. s. per annum to be certified to the place in which he is to be
apprentice, by three of the Justices of the peace of the same County, and this
certificate to be enrolled in the Town book; and he pleaded that no such
certificate was made, and he pleaded the branch of the Statute of the 5. of
Eliz. which made every retainer contrary to the form of this Statute to be
void; and the Plantiff replied that he had 40. s. per annum; and the Defendant
rejoyned, that he had not 40. s. per annum; upon that the Plantiff demurred,
because the Defendant said in his rejoinder, that he had not 40. s. per annum,
and in his plea he pleaded no such certificate; and the Justices etc. Hutton,
Hobert, and Jones said, that the retainer is good, though there is not any such
certificate, or inrolment, if re vera the father had 40. s. per annum, for the
intent of the Statute is, that sufficient men's sons should be apprentises,
which is observed if the father had 40. s. per annum, and Winch cites
Englefields case upon the Statut 28. Eliz. cap. 3. that every one which claims
by a conveyance from a Traitor, shall bring in his conveyance to the Chequ^e to
be enrolled; and yet if it be brought in, though it be not enrolled, the
intention of the Statute is fulfilled, and Jones cited a case in Banco Regis
18. Eliz. Robins case, upon the Statute of 21. H. 8. of Pluralities, where it
was adjudged, that a dispensation is good, though it is not enrolled; and yet
there are as strong words of inrolment as may be.

And after in Trinity term 21. Iac. the same case was argued again by Attoe for
the Plantiff, and by Hitcham for the Defendant, and per totam Curiam at that
time it was agreed clearly, that this is a departure; but for the second point,
whether the pleading of the certificate were good or no, that was the doubt;
and Justice Hutton thought there ought to be a certificate precede the
indenture, or otherwise that shall be void; but Hobert, as to that would not
give his opinion, but he seemed as Hutton, and Hobert chief Justice took
exception to the laying of the action, for he thought the Statute of the 5. of
Eliz. shall not be intended so strong against infants, as to make Collateral
covenants to be good: but Attoe moved that this covenant is incident to the
retainer to serve truly and faithfully, and yet if it were a Collateral
covenant, yet he had lost the advantage of that by his pleading, as in debt
upon an obligation against an infant, if he plead non est factum, he shall not
have advantage of his Infancy, to which Hobert also agreed; but he said, this
is not like to our case, for here it appears by the Count of the Plantiff, that
the Infant was but of the age of 15. years at the time of the retainer, of
which the Court ought to take notice: and here the Infant was not bound by this
Covenant at the Common Law, and no Collateral covenant shall be maintainable
upon the Statute, for this being against an Infant, it shall be taken strictly,
as a custom that one shall infeoffe, yet that custom will not warrant him to
lease and release: and as to that which had been said, that it is incident to
every retainer to serve truly and faithfully, that is very true, and an action
upon the case lies upon a covenant in law, but not upon the covenant in fact,
he ought to have Collateral security, which was also confessed by Hutton, and
he said moreover, that the retainer is for the benefit of the Infant, that he
learn his Trade, but the covenant here is for his disadvantage, and for the
advantage of his Mr. and for that reason it is void, as if an Infant had
covenanted to pay 10. l. for the learning of his Trade when his time was up.
Winch Justice contrary to that last point, for he thought the covenant to be
incident to the retainer, and good though he is an Infant, as an Infant who
levyes a fine, is also enabled to make an indenture to lead the uses; and note
that Hutton, and Hobert said also, that the bar of the Defendant is good,
viz. the pleading of the want of the certificate, and for that reason the
replication of the Plantiff, that he had 40. s. per annum is evil, and though
the rejoinder of the Defendant is evil, and a departure; yet it appears that
the Plantiff had not any cause of action: and for the covenant they said, that
they two are strong in their opinions; and upon that Winch agreed also, that
judgment shall be given against the Plantiff: and Attoe moved the Court, what
remedy the Plantiff may have, for the loss is 500. l. and per totam ^uriam he
shall not have an action of account, for that lies not against an Infant being
an apprentice, Coo. 11. 89. and the Court said, that as to the retainer, and
the damage, it is no more then if an Infant had been retained by word, and
there is not any remedy, but an action upon the case, and Attoe said, that they
had thought to have brought an action of Trover and conversion, and he doubted
whether that will lie, and after the Court said to him, you had best to bring
an action upon your case, and it was afterward ordered by Arbitrament.

Oxford and his wife against Goldington.
IN a Prohibition for Oxford and his wife against Goldington to the Court of
Audience, for they are sued there for a legacy devised to the Plantiff, by one
George Cotton, and this is as they are Administrators to one William Cotton,
who was executor of the said George: for that he libelled against the Plantiffs
in the Prohibition in the Court of Audience, and had showed that they had goods
of the first Testator, and a Prohibition was awarded; and Finch moved for a
consultation, and he said, if by the spiritual Law an Executor wastes the goods
of the Testator, and after dies intestate, that in this case his Administrator
shall answer, that viz. the debts and the legacies of the first Testator: and
Doctor Pope who was present in the Court said, that the Law was so, and so he
said the Common Law was, that is the Statute of 31. E. 3. which gives the same
remedy against an Administrator as against an Executor, if the Executor die
intestate, for it is the interest of the first Testator, upon which the
Administrator shall be committed to the next of the Kin: and if none will take
that upon them, then the Administration of the Executor ought: and ought to
take several letters of Administration for that: and if no letters of
administration is taken, and yet he meet with the goods, he shall be charged as
an Executor of his own wrong, and if no goods be of the first Testators, then
it is no reason that he should be charged: and the Statute of 31. E. 3. gives
no remedy, (per Curiam) but against the immediate Administrator; and if the
case be as you have alleged, then the Legatee or the debtee is at no damage,
or mischief, for he may sue the Administrator of the first Testator if he had
goods, or any other who had goods as Executor of his own wrong, and if none
will take letters, nor yet meddle with the goods, then the debtee or the
Legatee may take letters of Administration himself, and so no consultation was
awarded, but the Prohibition stood.

Avis against Gennie and others.
ONe Avis brought an action of Trespass, of his close broken against Gennie and
two others: and the writ was general, but in the the declaration he affirmed
that to be in Ayring half a Rood, and in digging another half Rood, and after
in his new assignement showed that to be a Sellion containing by estimation and
acre, and it was found for the Plantiff, and damages assessed to 20. s. and now
it was moved in arrest of judgment by Attoe, because the new assignement is
more large then the declaration, and the opinion of the Court was, that because
this was but an action of Trespass where damages only is to be recovered, that
this is very good, but otherwise it is, perthance if that had been in an
ejectione firm.

Brigs case.
BRigs brought a Prohibition against another, and alleged that the Dean and
Chapter of D. was seized of the Manor, and the Defendant being Vicar, sued to
have Tithe in Court Christian, and showed that time beyond memory etc. they had
held that discharged of Tithes for them and their Tenants, and that they let
that to the Plantiff, and it was moved by Hendon Sergeant, that the Dean and
the Chapter are a body Politic, and temporal, which are not capable of this
prescription, in non decimando Coo. 2. the Bishop of Winchesters case, Hobert
said, that the Dean and Chapter are a body spiritual, and are annexed to the
Bishop throughout all England, and if the Bishop is capable of that as it is
plain he is, then the Dean and Chapter is also capable of that, which was
granted by Hutton: but Winch doubted, for Winch said he may be a lay man, and
for that the Plantiff ought to aver that he is a spiritual person; Hutton
confessed that the Dean may be a lay man, as was the Dean of Durham by special
license, and dispensation of a King; but that is rare, and a special case, and
is not common, and general, and therefore not to be brought as an example,
which was also granted by Hobert chief Justice, and upon that, day was given
over to the Defendant to show cause wherefore the Prohibition shall not be
granted.

Anne Summers case in Dower.
A Writ of Dower was brought by Anne Summers against the Tenant of the land,
and he pleaded a fine with proclamations levied by her husband, 14. Iac. in
which year the husband died, and the wife had not claimed within the Statute of
the 4. H. 7. cap. 24. the demandant replied, that 15. Iac. she brought a writ
of Dower against the now Tenants, and against two others, and that the writ
abated by the death of the two others, and that she brought a writ by Iourneys
accounts, the Tenant replied, that the others were not Tenants, but one Sir
John Web, and it was moved that this rejoinder was evil, for they confessed
that they themselves are Tenants, by which the writ is good against them at the
least; Hobert, if she brought a writ of Dower against one who is not Tenant,
that is not any claim within the Statute; but if she brought a Dower against 4.
who are Tenants, and two die; and she bring a writ against the others by
Iourneys accounts, this is a good claim within the Statute, though the second
writ was after the time limited, but quere here if the two who died, were not
Tenants.

Trin. 21. Iac. C. P.
Harvey against the Hundred of Chelsam.
HArvey brought an action upon the Statute of Winchester; of Hue and cry
against the Hundred of Chelsam; and it is found for the Plantiff, and a writ of
error was brought, and all the record was certified; and now the Plantiff
prayed two things may be amended, the first is the title of the action, for
upon the roll it is an action upon the case, it should be an action upon the
Statute, but it was said by Hobert, that it shall not be amended, for the
Statue of the 18th. of Eliz. did not give amendments upon indictments, or upon
popular actions, or actions upon penal Statutes; and cited a judgment in
Doctor Husses case Coo. 9. 71. which was reversed in Banco Regis, upon default
in pleading being upon a penal Statute, and so in Mich. Term last Judictari for
Indictari, and adjudged that it shall not be amended: and the second point was,
upon the venire facias where was one Gregory returned, as appears by the names
of the Jury; but the Clark of the Assise returned one George, and it was
entered upon the roll and certified in the record to the Kings Bench; and per
totam Curiam there needs no amendment, for that name of George where it should
be Gregory, being in the tales de circumstantibus, and not in the principal
panel, and it was also by consent of the parties; and as to the first point,
all the Court agreed with Hobert; and for the second point Hobert said, that if
that variance had been material, it should not be amended, for we will not make
a new certificate, for the Court of the Kings Bench may choose to credit the
first or the second certificate, and so we submit our judgments to the censure
and pleasure of another Court, which we will not do: and in the great case of
Fulger 18. Iac. where we made such a new certificate, though it was adjudged
according to our opinion; yet they would not credit our last certificate; and
therefore we will not make a certificate again; which note well.

Hasset against Hanson.
HAsset brought an ejectione firm against Hanson, and upon a general issue,
and a special verdict the case was this, that one Woodhouse was lessee for
years of the King of a Manor, and I. S. was a Copiholder of a Tenement of
inheritance, and the Coppiholder bargained, and sold his Coppihold land in such
a Town to the lessee of the Manor, and this was by indenture, and the
indenture was to this effect, that he bargained and sold all his lands and
Tenements, as well Coppiholds, as other land bought of John Culpepper in such a
Town: and it was found that the lessee of the Manor entered in the Coppihold,
and occupied, and after that the said I. S. died, after whose death W. S. his
heir was admitted as heir of I. S. upon the presentment of the homage, that I.
S. died seized, and that the said W. is his heir; and that at the same Court W.
S. Surrendered to the use of the Plantiff, and he was admitted, and it was
argued by Richardson for the Plantiff, and by Attoe for the Defendant.

And these ensuing points were agreed by the Justices, (S.) by Hobert, Winch,
Hutton, and Jones; and first it was said by Hobert, that though a Coppiholder
may not convey his Coppihold to a stranger without Surrender and admittance;
yet he may grant his estate to the Lord of the Manor out of the Court by
bargain and sale, for the custom is not between the Lord and his Tenants, but
between themselves only. Secondly, Winch said, that the admittance of the Lord,
viz. the lessee of the Manor amounts to a grant to him, who had a title, but
it is otherwise, if it is to him who was in by wrong, as by disseissin Coo 4.
22.. which was granted by all the Court. Thirdly, Jones Justice said, that the
bargain is void, for it is of all lands, and Tenements bought of John
Culpepper, and it was not found by verdict, nor yet averred by the party, that
the land was bought of Culpepper, which Hobert and Hutton granted: and Hutton
cited 2. E. 4. 29. but Winch to the contrary, as to that point, but they all
agreed that the Plantiff shall have judgment, and accordingly so it was done.

Mich. 21. Jac. C. P.
M. 21. Iac. in C. P. Pleadal against Gosmore.
PLeadal, an Attorney of the Common pleas, brought an action of trespass against
Gosmore, and he declared of the taking of a Mare Colt in May, and of the
retainer till the first of July, and that the Defendant held him in Compedibus,
Anglice in fetters, diversis vicibus and temporibus, by which she Colt was much
the worse: and the Defendant pleaded, that the Countess of Hartford was Tenant
for life, of the Manor of Sherstone, within which the taking of the Colt is
supposed to be, and that the Lords of the Manor time before memory etc. had
used to have estrayes, and used to seize them by their Bailiffs, and to
proclaim them according to the Law of the land; and that the said Mare Colt
came within the Manor such a day, and the Defendant as Bailiff to the said
Countess seized that as an astray, and made proclamation according to the Law:
and when the Mare Colt was so fierce and wild, that he could not came that, nor
keep that out of the lands of his neighbors, he Fettered her, as to him been
licuit, and he detained her till the first of July, at which day the Plantiff
came to him and told him, that this was his Mare Colt, upon which the Defendant
delivered her, which is the same Trespass etc. and upon that the Plantiff
demurred: and Attoe argued, that the plea was not good for matter of Law, for a
man may not Fetter an estray Colt, as appears in the like case 27. Assizes: and
the reason is, because satisfaction shall be given for his damages which he
made to the Defendant: and he cited a case, adjudged in that point 8. Iac.
Trin. between Harvey and Blacklock in this Court, where the Defendant pleaded
such plea in all points, as here as to the Fettering, for the Defendant
fettered the horse of the Plantiff; because he was so fierce and so wild to one
of his own horses, and so continued till he delivered him to the Plantiff: and
because the horse died within the year the Plantiff brought his action, and
upon this plea pleaded by the Defendant, it was demurred in law; and judgment
was given for him, for Cook who was then chief Justice said, that a horse may
be of 40. or 100. l. price, and it shall be intolerable to allow such Nuisance;
and secondly, he had not made proclamation, and so trespass lies against, and
so in our case. Harris Sergeant to the contrary; for when the Lord of a Manor
takes an estate, he had some kind of property before the year is expired: and
for that reason he may detain the estray against the owner, till amends is made
to him 44. E. 3. 14. 29. E. 3. 6. by Knevet 20. H. 7. by Vavasor, and Frewick:
and if he had property against the owner himself, he may use that with
moderation to make some benefit of that; especially in case of necessity, as
22. Assise 5. 6. a man may justify the beating another if he be in a rage, and
6. E. 4. 8. one may justify the felling of a tree in the ground of another in
case of necessity; and here is no other way to restrain this Savage Colt, and
so the justification is good, but in this case it was resolved by Hobert, Winch
and Hutton, Jones being in the Chancery. First, when a beast comes within the
Manor of another Lord, this is a trespass, but after the seizure for an estray,
it is a possession of the estray in the Lord, and the beginning of property; as
Hutton used the term, so that he may have an action of trespass against any
stranger, which takes that out of his possession: and if he estray into the
land of another, he may him retake.

Secondly, it was resolved, that if the Lord make not proclamation in
convenient time, that this possession became tortious, for the law necessarily
imposes it, upon the Lord of the Manor, that he make Proclamation, because
that otherwise the owner may not come to the knowledge of him. Thirdly, that
the estray within the year is, as a pledge in the Custody of the law, till
amends be made to the Lord: and for that reason the Lord may not work him no
more, then he can work a distress. Fourthly, it was resolved that if the estray
go into the Manor of another Lord, and the last Lord claims that as an
estray, the first Lord had lost that, but not before claim. Fifthly, Hutton and
Winch agree, that he might Fetter the Colt being so fierce, and wild, for he is
answerable for the trespass and wrong which he makes in the land of his
neighbors; and also to the owner if he lose him, and therefore it is
unreasonable, that he may not keep him safe for his indemnity: and that is not
like to the case 27. Assise, which was urged of the other side, also they said,
fettering is the usual way in the Country to restrain wild horses: and
therefore if it be in an ordinary manner, as he Fetters his own, there is not
any remedy against the Defendant. Hobert chief Justice, was against that last
point, for the Lord may not hold him in arcta custodia as a prisoner; because
he had rather the keeping of an estray, the the property, and for that if the
estray go into the land of another Lord, the first may not take him again, if
the other claims him as an estray, for the possession was, rather in regard of
his Manor, then in regard of himself, and therefore he shall not answer for
the wrong, which he does in the lands of others, for the possession is in
regard of his Manor: and his Fettering is an abuse, and he may not neither use
nor abuse an estray, and he said over, that the Defendant had not well pleaded
for another reason, because he had not showed, that he proclaimed him in the
next market Town within convenient time, which convenient time ought to be
adjudged by the Court: and he said, the Lord may not keep him else where within
the year then within the Manor: Winch Justice said, the Defendant ought to
proclaim an estray, ut supra, if the year be past, for by that he gains an
absolute property; but here where no property is divested, he needs not to
proclaim him within the year: and Hobert commanded this case to be moved again:
see the last case but one in the book.

Ruled that after imparlance in debt upon an obligation, the Defendant shall be
admitted to plead always ready, though the 13. Eliz. in Dyer was urged to the
contrary.

Hill. 21. Jac. C. P.
Hillary Term in 21 year Iac. C. P. Trehern against Claybrook.
TRehern brought an action of debt against Claybrook upon a lease for years,
and upon nihil debet pleaded, and a special verdict, the case was to this
effect; the Grandfather of the Plantiff was seized of lands in Southwark, and
he made a lease for years of that to the Defendant at London rendering 45. l.
rent, and after he devised the reversion to the Plantiff in fee, and in his
will he set forth that his intent was, that his Executors shall have the
reversion during the Term, upon condition that they enter into bond to pay 34.
l. per annum at 4. usual Feasts during the Term; and he further devised, that
this bond shall be made by the advice of his overseers, and he limited all
this to be done within 6. months after his decease, and if his Executors
refuse, his will was, that his overseers shall take the profits upon the same
condition; and appointed that both obligations be made to the Plantiff, and the
devisor died, and the Executors within 3. months showed the will to the
overseers, but no obligation was offered to be made within the 6. months, and
the Plantiff required the Executors to enter into the obligation, and to pay
the rent, which was not done, and he claimed the reversion, and brought his
action afterward in London where the lease was made, and not in Southwark
where the land did lie, and this case was twice argued by Council at the bar;
and now it was argued by the 3. Justices. Hobert being absent.

And Jones Justice moved a point, which was not moved at the bar viz. that
the Plantiff is devisee of the reversion, and so is privy in estate only, and
for that reason the action ought to be brought in Southwark where the land
lies: and not in London where the contract was made; but the lessor himself had
liberty to bring the action where he pleased, in regard of the privitie of
estate and contract: and so was it adjudged in the Kings Bench, between Glover
and Humble: and here though this be after verdict, and no exception taken by
the Defendant; yet we as Judges of the case may take notice of that ex officio,
and give judgment against the Plantiff: and the 3. Justices agreed, that here
is a condition, by which the reversion is vested in them, but it is in the
Plantiff till performance of that, which not being performed by them within the
time limited, the Plantiff ought to have the rent: and though the Will is,
that it shall be with the advice of the overseers, and no advise is found; yet
that is at the peril of the Executors, who ought to give notice of that to the
overseers, being to their advantage: and for that see 21. H. 6. 67. 46. E. 3.
5. 18. E. 3. 27. 11. H. 4. 13. which cases were cited by Sergeant Harris at the
bar; and they agreed, that the overseers shall not have the reversion, for
though it was devised to them; yet that was upon the refusal of the Executors,
and no refusal is found, but only a non performance of the condition: and also
the devise is tied to them upon condition, to do that within 6. months, which
ought to be performed in convenient time at the least, though it be in case of
a Will: and so they concluded, that the Plantiff had right as to the matter in
Law; but that judgment shall be given against him upon the matter supra; and
it was resolved, that this was not aided by any Statute of Ieofailes, for this
is a mistrial: but another point was moved, whether the Plantiff shall pay
costs, within the Statute of the 23. H. 8 or 4. Iac. the words of the Statute
are, if the Plantiff be nonsuite, or verdict given against him upon a lawful
trial; but here it was resolved, that he should not pay costs, for no verdict
is found against the Plantiff; but rather for him: and judgment is given
against him, because he mistook his action, and in Bishops case Coo. 5.
judgment was given against the Plantiff, upon a material variance in the
verdict, and no costs was given: and it is not only out of the letter of the
Statute, but also out of the intent, for it may not be imagined, that the
Plantiff had stirrd an unlawful suite, when the matter which he declares is
found for him: and that Statute is not taken by equity, as Hutton said, for it
has been agreed here, that if Executors are nonsuite, or judgment given
against them upon a verdict, they shall not pay costs, within the Statute of
the 23. H. 8. or 4. Iac. and so is the constant practice, for the Statute
speaks of any contract or specialty made with the Plantiff, or between the
Plantiff and Defendant: and the Executor brings an action upon the contract of
another: and in the principal case, judgment was entered, that the Defendant
should go without day: and that he shall not have costs against the Plantiff.

Bret and Ward.
NOte upon evidence to a Jury, between Bret and ward upon the dissolution of a
Vicarage, in the County of Warwick, which was part of the Priory of Dantry,
where the Pope by his Bull gave to the Vicar minutas decimas et alteragum: and
it was certified by the Doctors, that alteragum will pass to the Vicar Tithe
wool etc. and the usage was showed in evidence, and the Copy of the Popes
Bull; and the Court would not credit, that without seeing the Bull it self, and
so the Plantiff was nonsuite, and the Jury was discharged.

Bacon against Weston.
BAcon brought an action of debt upon an obligation against Weston, as an
Administrator to one Oaks: and he pleaded, that the said Oaks such a day and
year in his life time, acknowledged a judgment to him in the Kings Bench, upon
an indebitatus est of 1500. l. and died, and that he retained so much of the
goods to satisfy himself, and that over that 1500. l. he had put 40. s. and it
was moved that he ought to plead the general issue, and give this matter in
evidence as he may well: but it is a mischief to the Plantiff, to take issue
upon that, for then he ought to say, that he had assets. Hobert, true he may
give this in evidence, or he may plead, that the judgment was not satisfied,
or defezanced: but we may not compel him to change his plea, except he will
assent.

Potter against Brown.
POtter brought an action upon the case against Brown for these words, he (
innuendo the Plantiff) as is arrant a thief as any is in England, for he did
break open the Trunck of the Plumbers, standing in my Lord of Suffolks Hall
with another man's tools, and took out 20. l. and upon a general issue, it was
found for the Plantiff, and damages given to twenty pound: and Hendon Sergeant
moved in arrest of judgment. First, because for want of an averment, that
there are Thiefs in England; and it had been adjudged, that if A. say of B. he
is as arrant a Thief as any is in Warwick Goal; yet B. ought to aver, that
there are Thieves in Warwick Goal: but it was holden by the Court viz. by
Hutton, Winch, and Jones, that there needs not any such averment: and the
difference is, when the words do relate to a particular place, and when to an
entire realm, and the same law when it is tied to one kind of felony, for it
is very well known, that there are Thieves in England, and any in other realm;
and Hendon moved, that the last words extenuate the former, for the latter
show, that he took that as a trespass, for he did not say that he stole 20. l.
out, but took it out, and so it shall be intended, that he took it as a
trespasser: as to say B. is a Thief, for he took money out of my Pocket,
implies a trespass: and he is a thief, for he took my horse; this shall be
supposed that he took him as a trespasser, and Hutton said, that till the time
of Hen. 8. there was not any actions brought for words, and to the end to
settle peace, he thought words not to be taken so largely, and favorably in
giving way to unruly tongues, and to the unbridled humors of men, but rather
strictly to curb them for their evil language: see after.

East. 22. Jac. C. P.
Easter Term in the 22. year of King James in the Common Pleas.
Upon Wednesday being the 25th. day of April, and the first day of this Easter
Term, which was the first day which I came to Report; and it was agreed by the
Court the same day: that if one come to the Bar to make his law in debt,
brought against him upon a simple contract, that the Plantiff shall be
demanded, and if he will be nonsuit he may, and then the Defendant shall not
recover costs against him; but as I have heard that this was to have been
intended where the Plantiff was an executor, or Administrator, and not of any
other.

Leonard Barley against Foster.
BEtween Leonard Barley Plantiff, and Foster Defendant, it was agreed without
scruple by Winch and Hutton Justices only present in the Court, that if a man
infeoff another to the use of A. for life, and after his death to the use of
his daughter, till B. pay her a 100. l. and then to other uses etc. to the use
of B. I. in this case the daughter had not any remedy for the 100. l. if B.
will not pay that, except he make a new promise, and then upon that she shall
have an action upon the case, upon which if she recover, and have
satisfaction, the use will arise to B. but otherwise not, though she have
judgment to recover that, and whether this same is discharged, is triable by
the record of the recovery.

John Theaker's case.
NOte that one John Theaker was seized of certain lands, and died in January
last, and his wife was married to one Duncombe within a week after, and one
Alphonsus Theaker entered into the land, as Cozen and heir to John Theaker
deceased, and the wife of John Theaker who was dead gave out words, that she
was with child, by her first husband, and upon that Alphonsus Theaker had a
writ de ventre inspiciendo, directed to the Sheriff of London, to inquire by
21. Knights and 12 women in the presence of the Knights, whether she was with
child or no, and the Sheriff executed that, and returned that they thought that
she should be brought to bed within 20. weeks, and upon that it was prayed,
that the Court would award according to Bracton, that she may be taken into
custody, and that she may have diverse women of fashion which may attend her
daily, till she is delivered, that no deceit may be contrived against Alphonsus
to deceive him, but the Court would not agree to that, though there was a
president urged, Hill. 39. Eliz. Rot. 1200. Sir Percival Willoughby and the
Lady Willoughby his brothers wife in this Court: but the Court awarded, that
she should not be taken and detained from her husband, but that a writ should
issue to the Sheriff of Surrey, whither the woman was now removed to return
diverse sufficient women which may resort to her daily, till she is delivered,
which was done accordingly.

Fosters case.
FOster brought an action of debt of 300. l. against C. upon 2. obligations,
dated 20. December to pay him 150. l. etc. and averred he had not paid that,
and did not say, nor any part of that: and Bing took exception to that in
arrest of judgment, because he had not averred, that he had not paid any part
of that, and perchance he had paid part, but not all; but Hutton said, that it
is very good, though this be upon several bonds, and it any be paid, it ought
to come of the other part to show that. Woolsey was outlawed at the suit of
Jones, in an action of debt upon an obligation, and the Capias ut legatum was
taken out of the Court of the common pleas, where he was outlawed in Trinity
Term 21. Iac. and in December following, Woolsey was warned to be at the Town
of Shrewsbury to choose Burgesses: and before the day a binding process, did
issue out of the Marshes of Wales against Woolsey, after Jones had delivered
the Capias ut lagatum to the Sheriff to take Woolsey, and the same morning that
the election was, Woolsey was taken upon the Capias ut lagatum, but he was
suffered to go and to give his voice in the election, and then the Baileys of
the Marches of Wales arrested him upon the process; and because the Bailiffs of
the Sheriff, would not suffer the Bailiffs of the Marches to take him away from
them, there was gathered a great riotous company on both sides, but the
Bailiffs of the Sheriff took him away, and they and all them, who took their
parts were sued in the Marches, for the withstanding their Bailiffs, and upon
this Harris moved for a Prohibition, and the Court etc. Winch and Jones said,
that if he is outlawed bona fide it shall be granted, for the Bailiffs of the
Sheriff had lawfully arrested him, and it is lawful for them to keep him, and
for others to assist them; and Winch said, that if the persons which stood by,
had refused to help them, this had been also sinable, and it was said, that the
suffering him to go to the election, was not any sign of a fraudulent arrest;
nay, if the party himself, had consented to a fraudulent arrest upon a Capias
ut lagatum, this had not been punishable, though they had known that there had
been binding Process out against him, because the arrest and the detainer was
lawful, and agreed in the principal case, that a Prohibition shall be granted;
and it was said, that the other side are punishable, because they did not aid
the Sheriff, for the officers of the other side were the cause of the Riot.

Sir Michael Wharton, and Sir Edward Hide.
IT was agreed without scruple, between Sir Michael Wharton and Sir Edward
Hide, that if a man in an avoury convey a good estate for years to two, and one
release to another, that is not good, without the showing of a deed in that
case.

Michael Bone, and the Bishop of Norwich.
IT was agreed between Michael Bone, and the Bishop of Norwich in trespass, that
by the lease of a Grange, and all houses and buildings thereupon, and belonging
or let heretofore to one Edward Garrard; that in this case, if it may not be
proved, that the Tithes were not let to Garrard, then they will not pass by
this lease, for it is not possible that Tithes shall pass as appurtenances to a
grange, because that they are of several natures: except as Winch said, that
the Grange is the Gleab; for if it is, then the Rectory may pass by this name.

William Trist, and Cawtrel, at the suit of Heath.
WIlliam Trist and Cawtrel, were bound in an obligation of 40. l. to one Heath,
who brought an action of debt upon that, and recovered at the assizes, and now
it was moved in arrest of judgment, that this was a mistrial, for the venire
facias was between Heath and John Trist, and the Sheriff returned, that to be
between Heath and William Trist; and for this variance he shall not have
judgment in the Case.

Hutton said, in the case between Mankleton and Allen.
MAnkleton and Allen, that is a man had goods taken from him, which taking he
supposes to be felony, but it is not, and he complains to a Justice of peace
of that, who commits the offender, and binds the other to prosecute: and he
accordingly preferred a Bill at the Sessions, and the other is acquitted; and
the opinion of Hutton in this case was, that this is not punishable, by an
action upon the case in the prosecuter, for that shall never be maintained
without apparent malice in the prosecutor.

Blunt and his wife against Hutchinson.
BLunt and his wife brought a quare Impedit against Hutchinson, and made title
to present to the Church in the right of his wife, and after the issue joined,
and before the venire facias the wife died, and the Plantiff showed, that
himself had took out a venire facias in his own name, and upon that Harris
demurred in law, because he supposed that the writ was abated; but Winch was of
opinion, that the writ was not abated, because this was a Chattel vested in the
husband during the life of the wife.

Ferrers against English.
IN an action upon the case, upon a promise between Ferrers and English, and
upon non assumpsit it was found for the Plantiff, and now it was moved in
arrest of judgment, that the venire facias was not well awarded, for it was
proecipimus quod tibi venire facias Duodecim. liberos et Legales homines Coram
Henrico Hobert apud Westmonasterium, where that ought to be Coram Iusticiariis
nostris, and therefore the writ being insufficient it is not amendable, and for
that he cited the case where the venire facias was awarded to th Coroner, and
that ought to be awarded to the Sheriff, and this adjudged to be erroneous,
this case was answered, that this was the custom, and there was a case
alleged to be adjudged 30. Eliz. between Cesor and Story, where a Capias did
issue out of this Court, in this form, Ita quod habeas Corpus ejus Coram
Iusticiariis omitting apud Westmonasterium; and this was reversed for error;
but this was answered to be in an original, which ought to be precise, in every
point; but Sergeant Crook said, that because this was but judicial process, and
the trial is taken upon the habeas corpus that it is amendable, for in all
cases where the roll is right, though there be an error in the venire facias;
yet this is amendable.

Sir Robert Nappers case.
A Rent was granted to Sir Robert Napper, and if it happen that this annual
rent to be behind, that then the land shall at all times be open, and subject
to distress of the Grantee, according to the true form and effect of the said
indenture; and upon all the pleading a demurrer was joined, and the sole doubt
was, whether the last words were a distinct covenant by themselves, for if they
are, then the obligation is forfeit, for the lands are not open to distress,
because that the mother of Sir Robert held that till the age of 24. years, or
whether they are part of the former covenant, and then the former word will
qualify that, because there was not any act made by him to the contrary, and
it was argued by Bawtrie, that they are all one covenant, for they charge the
land with the Annuitie, and he covenants that this shall be open to distress,
and it is all one matter and thing, and is therefore a covenant; and where one
covenant does depend upon another, there one expounds the other, so Dyer in
Throgmortons case 151. and he urged many cases which are cited there, and he
cited the Lord Cromwels case, where words of proviso are placed between words
of covenants, yet they will work according to the intent of the persons, and
there it is said, that ex antecedentibus et consequentibus fiat relatio: and so
it appears to him, that this referred to the estate which Sir Thomas had from
his father, and that he made nothing to impeach or to alter that and he cited
the case of Sir Moile Finch, though by the fine the Manor of Beamstone was
destroyed; yet in the said indenture, free egress and regress was reserved to
the Courts for the Lady Finch: and afterward an other fine was levied of all
the lands and Tenements, except the Manor of Beamstone, where in verity that
was destroyed before, and yet the judges did construe this to be a good
exception, because this was in verity the intent of the parties, and there they
made a construction upon the covenants, which did lead the fine, and upon the
latter indenture which did direct the others, and so the principal case, in
Althams case the judges did not only adjudge upon the first words of the lease,
but upon altogether, and he cited the case of Hickmote where the exception
extends to all the parties of the precedent deed: and Hendon argued to the
contrary, that they were several covenants, and yet he granted, all the cases
cited by Bawtrie, but said, they all stood upon this difference, where it is a
joint thing, and where it is a several thing as here, and for that reason, that
ought not to be applies to that, for they are distinct sentences, and not
joint, as is expressed in Sir Henry Finches case, Coo. 6. and they ought to be
construed as distinct covenants, for otherwise they shall not take effect at
all, for then he had not any remedy, for the rent which is expressly against the
intentions of the parties, and Crawley Sergeant said, that if the two first
covenants were according to the title, and the last was only conditional, if
the rent was behind, that then it should be open to distress, and the Court
seemed that they were several covenants, but judgment was respited for that
time; and the same Term, the case was moved again by Hendon, that they were
distinct covenants, and that this was the scope of the indenture, and the
intention of the parties, that this should begin presently, and secondly, the
two covenants are of several natures, and if the third covenant be not several,
then it is idle, for all is implied in the first, and day was further given to
advise of that, but the opinion of the Court seemed to be for the Plantiff. See
after Trin. 22. Iac.

Westlie against King.
VVEstly against King in debt the bond did bear date the 11th. of February 18.
Iac. and this was to perform an award, Ita quod the ward be made before Easter,
of all controversies depending between them in the Star chamber, and the
Defendant pleaded, that there was no award made in the mean time, and the other
showed the award, and assigned the breach, and the Defendant replied, that
before the award was made etc. upon the 16th. of March; they discharged the
Arbitrators, and so concluded as at the first they made no award; and now
Sergeant Davenport moved, that he had not maintained his bar, quod non fecerit
tale arbitrium, and have given the discharge in evidence, for now it appears,
that the bond is forfeit; but Hutton said, that the Plantiff ought to have
showed this discharge, and so he had showed the forfeiture, and he said
further, that the rejoinder is an affirmation of the bar, if they were
discharged then they made no award, and this notwithstanding showed a
forfeiture of the bond, but not upon the point which the Plantiff had alleged:
and Winch said, though this is is so; yet it appears, that the Plantiff had
cause of action by all the record before, and day was given over in the case;
and at that day the Court was of opinion, that judgment shall be given for the
Plantiff, for by the rejoinder the Defendant had showed, that he had forfeited
the bond, though that be another matter then is in the replication: and so he
shall have judgment, super totam materiam according to the judgment in
Francis Case Coo. 8. for their the declaration stood good, though the Plantiff
had not cause of action in the same manner, yet because it appeared, he had
cause of action he shall have judgment.

Weaver against Best.
Weaver against Best, in debt for 48. s. in the debet and detinet, and for 2.
shirts in the detinet only, and he declared, that the Defendant such a year
retained the Plantiff to be his servant in husbandry, giving him 48. s. and a
shirt by the year, and he showed that he retained him for the next year, and he
averred that he served him, and they were at issue upon nihil debet, and the
Plantiff had a verdict for him, and it was now moved in arrest of judgment by
Sergeant Brigman, because he had not showed that his retainer was according to
the Statute of the 5th. of Eliz. which Statute limitteth the form of there
retainer, and their wages, and other things, and he had not showed the place
where service was, and also he had joined two debts in one action, one in the
debet, and detinet, the other in the detinet only; and Winch Justice said, that
the Statute of the 5. Eliz. extends to such as are retained in husbandry, and
therefore other retainers are left as they were before the Statute at the
Common law, and this shall be intended to be a retainer according to the
Statute, if the contrary be not showed by the other party, for his retainer
was for a year, and therefore it shall be intended, that the wages was
appointed by the Justices, and it was also said by the Court, that if the
justices of the peace in this kind, do neglect to set down the wages, yet a
servant may bring an Action upon his own contract; also it was said, that he
needs not to show the place where he served, for if he did no service; yet if
he did not depart it is very good; and for the other matter it was clear, that
he may bring his Action, so by several precipes in one writ.

Thorns case.
IT was agreed clearly between Thorn and C. that where an obligation is made,
and the obligor, and the obligee, conferred about it, and the obligor said to
the obligee, that he had forged this, this is actionable, for here it refers to
a certainty, but if he had said to the other thus, he was a forger, and had
forged fals^ writings no action will lie, for the words are to general in that
case, also it was agreed clearly by the Court, the Sheriff may not arrest a man
upon a Capias after the time of the return of the writ.

Grasier against Wheeler.
Grasier as Executor brought an action of Covenant against Wheeler, upon a
lease made by the Testator rendering rent, and this was made by I. S. and the
Defendant covenanted, that the lessee should pay the rent, and the Plantiff
assigned the breach in non-payment of 30. l. to the Testator such a day when it
was due, and for 10. l. due in his own time, and the attorney of the Defendants
as to the 10. l. pleaded non sum informatus, and as to the other he pleaded,
that the Defendant paid to the Testator 7. l. in money, and a horse in full
satisfaction of all the said 30. l, and that the Testator accepted that in full
satisfaction, and the Plantiff said, that this was paid to the Testator for
another debt absque hoc, that he received that in satisfaction of the 30. l.
and now Devenport argued, that the issue was misjoyned, for the issue ought to
have been taken upon the payment, and not upon the acceptance; and he cited
Pinnels case Coo. 5. where the payment in full satisfaction ought to be pleaded
precisely; and he said, that he agreed to the case of Nichols Coo. 5. where the
issue was joined upon payment upon a single Bill, and found that this was not
paid, and the Plantiff had judgment; but if the issue had been found for the
Defendant, that had not been aided by the Statute, for though it had been paid;
yet that was no bar. Bridgman contrary: and he said the difference is, where
the issue is joined upon a matter alleged by the adverse party, and they are
at issue upon a point which is not material, that is aided by the Statute of
the 18. Eliz. and where no issue at all is joined there is not any help. Winch
Justice said, that this is an issue which will make an end of the matter,

And at another day this Term, Sergeant Harvey moved the case again in arrest
of judgment, because the issue is joined upon the acceptance, which is not
material; and he cited Fowkes case depending in this Court, debt upon an
obligation, and the Defendant pleaded the acceptance of another obligation in
satisfaction which in verity is no bar, and issue was taken upon that, and it
was doubted whether this being insufficient, be aided by the Statute or not.
Bridgman Sergeant said to the contrary, and he said as before, that because the
issue is taken upon the allegation of the Defendant if it is not good; yet it
is aided by the Statute of 32. H. 8. and Hutton said this is a full issue, and
as to the traverse said, it is a material issue, for he pleaded, that he
accepted them for another thing absque hoc; that he accepted them in
satisfaction of the 30. l. which is the most proper issue, for he said it is
clear, that he may say that he accepted them for part etc. and good, and so
here.

The Countess of Barkshire, and Sir Peter Vanlore in Dower.
IT was agreed clearly in Dower, between the Countess of Barkshire and Sir
Peter Vanlore, that if the Tenant plead never seized to have Dower, and in
verity the husband of the demandant had an estate, but that was by disseisin,
which is avouched by the entry of the deseissee, who had a title paramont this
is no title, by which she may have Dower, though they are at issue upon this
plea, and also it was agreed, that if a man had a good estate by bargain and
sale from him who had right to alien that, and yet after he accepts a fine upon
conusance of right as that etc. from the other party, though in this case this
be a conclusion to the parties between whom the fine was, to deny that the
land was of the gift of the Conusor, and so that he was seized; yet it is not
any conclusion to the jurors to find the verity of the matter in fact, and
that he had nothing of the gift of the Conusor; also it was agreed in that
case, if a man held lands in capite, and others in Soccage, and he made a
devise of all his fee simple lands, and left only his lands in tail to descend
to the heir which does not amount to a full third part, this is a good devise
of all the fee simple lands: and this case was also admitted, that where the
Lord Norrice gave land to Sir Edward Norrice his youngest son, and to the heirs
of the body of the father, and then the Lord Norrice died, and after Sir
Edward died without issue, that the son of the eldest Brother who was then
dead, shall take that as heir in tail, and that he in this case had that by a
descent from Sir Edward Norrice his Uncle, which also does clearly prove, that
in this Sir Edward Norrice son of the Lord Norrice was in this case Tenant in
tail.

The residue of Easter Term in the two and twenty year of King James. Stephens
and Randal.
IN replevin between Stephens and Randal, who made Conusance as Bailiff to the
Earl of Bath, and he showed that such land was parcel of such a Chantrey, which
came to King Edward 6. by the Statute of 1. Edward 6. and also he pleaded the
saving of the said Statute, by which the right of others was saved, and pleaded
all uncertain, and showed that so much rent was behind, upon which he made
Conusance as etc. to which the Plantiff replied, that the land is out of the
fee and signiorie of the Earl of Bath etc. and this was ruled to be no plea,
for he confessed so much in his avoury, and this avoury is not for rent
service, for the signiorie is extinct by act of Parliament; but this is for
rent reserved by the saving of the act of Parliament, and this is a rent seek,
and yet is destrainable for the privilege which was before, but he may
traverse the tenure, that at the time of the making of the Statute, nor never
after this was holden of the said Earl of Bath.

Priest and King.
Priest and King in an action of -- which was entered between them Trin. 21
Iac. Rot. 3595. and this was debated between the Judges and the Prothonotaries,
and the case was, that two were bound for the appearance of an other, and
judgment was given against the debtor, now if upon the capias he come and
offer his body, and the Plantiff refuse that, yet that discharges the
sureties; but the Prothonotaries said, that notwithstanding this refusal he may
take a Capias against him within the year, because that at the first he might
have had a fiery facias, or an elegit quere of that; but Winch thought that in
this case, he ought to have a fiery facias, but if he had come upon the
Capias, and had no suer^tes and he refuse to take him, and this is so entered
now quere, if he had not discharged him.

Hendon moved the Court for a prohibition to the spiritual Court, and suggested
that one had libeld in the spiritual Court for a legacy, and the Executor
showed that he had not assets to discharge the debts of the Testator, and that
Court would not allow this allegation, and upon this he prayed to have a
prohibition: and it was the opinion of the Court, that no prohibition shall be
granted, for the legacy is a thing merely which is determinable in the
spiritual Court, and no other Court may have Conusance of that, and this is
also a thing which does consist merely in the discretion of the Court; and
resolved that in a thing which merely does rest in discretion of the Court, in
this case no prohibition shall be granted.

Henry Good against Thomas Good.
IT was agreed in the case by the Court, between Henry Good and Thomas Good,
that if the devisee of 500. l. sue in the Marches of Wales for this legacy,
that a prohibition is grantable, for though the Court of the Common pleas had
no power to hold plea of that, yet because that the thing is only triable in
the Ecclesiastical Court, a prohibition may be granted to reduce that to its
proper Court: and though the instruction of the Court of the Marches be to hold
plea of all such things, wheresoever there is no remedy at the Common Law, yet
this is to be understood of matters of equity, and not to take the
jurisdiction from the spiritual Court, for in verity the King may not do that
by his Letters pattents; but yet the Court agreed, that if the Executor do
suffer a decree against him in the Court of the Marches, and not come to them
at the first to be releived, it is now merely in the descretion of the Court
whether they will grant that or no, for that is a means to lengthen suits, and
to make the more delay, before he do recover his legacy.

If a Capias ut legatum issues to the Sheriff to take the party, and to
enquire what lands and Tenements he had, and the Sheriff finds by inquisition
that he is seized of many lands, and continues possession in them, and the
Sheriff do out me, I shall have an action of trespass.

John Marriots case.
Sergeant Crawley moved this case in arrest of judgment in the case of John
Marriot, and he declared upon a contract, to table with the Plantiff at Ashton
in Northamptonshire, and ad tunc and ibidem superse assumpsit to pay 4. s. by
the week for his diet; and Crawley moved, that this ought to have bin tried in
Northamptonshire, for these words ad tunc et ibident refer to Northamptonshire
which was next before, and not to London: Hutton said, that it ought to refer
to London, otherwise it was idle, and it is to be intended of the time and the
place where the promise was made, but it was said if the issue had been,
whether he was tabled or no this shall be tried there.

Giles Bray against Sir Paul Tracie.
GIles Bray brought an action of waste against Sir Paul Tracie, and in his
declaration he conveyed a good term to the Defendant, and a reversion to
himself; and upon a general issue a special verdict was found to this effect:
that Sir Edmund Bray was seized of this land in his demeasne as of fee, and he
being so seized 16. Eliz. made this lease for diverse years to I. S. and he
being so seized of the reversion conveyed that to the use of himself for life
without impeachment of waste, and then to the use of Edward Bray his eldest
son, and to Dorothie his wife, and to the heirs males of the said Edward, upon
the said Dorothie to be engendered, and then Edward died having issue in tail
the Plantiff, and then this lease was assigned to Tracie, and then Dorothie
died, and then the waste was committed, and then Edmund the Grandfather died,
and the question was, whether in this case an action of waste will lie or no.

The argument of Sergeant Harris.
HArris argued, that the waste does lie, for the privilege or despensation,
which was annexed to the reversion, for life of the Grandfather is no
dispensation to the estate of the lessee, for though the action was suspended
during his life; yet now it is on foot again, and in many cases an estate may
be dispunishable of waste, and yet by matter ex post facto this shall be
punishable, viz. where the first privitie of the estate was determined, as in
case a lease for years be without impeachment of waste, and then the lessor
releases to the lessee etc. the first privity is gone, and he is now punishable
in an action of waste, and here in our case there was no absolute dispensation,
but only for the time, and yet perchance though the estate is subject to waste
in the creation, yet if the lessor will afterward, by his deed grant that this
shall be dispunishable, this may privilege him, but here is no such matter in
the case at the bar, and of this opinion was the Court, and Winch said, that
there was no difference where the Frank tenement is intercedent; for if this
be not punishable, yet the particular estate shall not participate of that
privilege of him in the remainder: and Jones Justice said, if the particular
estate had been extracted, and drawn out of that estate for life, in that case
that had been dispunishable; but it was agreed by Hendon Sergeant, that the
Plantiff in his declaration had declared of a waste after the estate for life
was determined, and they found that this was made in the time of him in
reversion for life, and so differed, but the Court was of opinion, that this
was nothing to the purpose, for it is only a variance from the time, and not
from the matter, for it is not material whether this was before his death or
after his death, because in both cases this is punishable, but day was given
over to show other causes.

Portington and Beamount.
IT was argued clearly in the case, between Portington and Beamount, that if
the Court of the Council of York, which is a Court of equity, do decree
against a maxim in law, as against a joint Tenant who had that by
Survivorship, that the heir of his companion shall have the Moietie, that in
this case a prohibition shall be granted, except that during the lives of the
parties, it was agreed that there shall not be any Survivorship, and then they
hold plea upon that equity, and then good.

In Dower it was agreed clearly, that if the Tenant show, that before the
husband any thing had in the land, A. was seized of the same land in fee, and
le^ that for years rendering rent, and granted the reversion to the husband of
the Plantiff, who died seized of the said reversion, and so demanded judgment,
if the demandant shall have Dower etc. this is no plea in bar of Dower, but
proves she had title of Dower, but this saves the lease for years, and she
shall have judgment only of the reversion, and of the rent: and also she does
save to the Tenant damages, and the demandant shall be endowed of the reversion.

Summers against Dugs.
SUmmers brought an action upon the case upon a promise against Dugs, and he
showed in his declaration, that the Defendant was rector of the Rectorie of D.
and that he and all his predecessors had used to have all manner of Tithes, and
said that he the Plantiff occupied 100. acres of land in the same parish, and
showed that the Defendant promised to the Plantiff, that in consideration that
he would plant his lands with Hops, and so make the Tithes to be the better,
the Defendant promised to the Plantiff to allow him toward every acre, which
he shall so plant 40. s. toward the charge in planting them: and he showed
that he planted an acre at the request of the Defendant, and so upon the
promise brought the action, and now it was moved whether this was a good
consideration to ground an action, because the Tithes are not bettered by the
planting of that with Hops, but by the growing of them, and the increase of
them; and he had not averred, that the Tithes were of better value then they
were before: and it was also moved, that he may not have an action for the Rood
etc. but this afterward was referred to Arbitrament; but the Court said, if
the Plantiff had showed in his declaration, that he might have made more
benefit of that by other means, then that by the planting of it with Hops, the
Tithes also being bettered, then it had been more clear.

Philip Holman against Tuke.
PHillip Holman was executor of George Holman, and he brought an action of debt
against George Tuke, and declared upon a lease made by himself by the name of
Philip Holman executor of the Testament of George Holman deceased of such land,
and the said land was delivered to him in execution of a Statute by extent,
which Statute was made to this Testator, and this lease was for years, if the
Plantiff should so long continue seized by force of the Statute, and it was
rendering 100. l. per annum and for 3. years rent behind, he brought his action
in the debet and in the detinet, and also in the declaration he averred, that
he did continue seized so long by virtue of the extent, and Sergeant Bing
demurred in law, because he said the action ought to be brought in the detinet
only; because he had brought the action as executor; but Hendon and the Court
etc. Jones and Hutton to the contrary, because the lease was made by himself,
and Hutton said in the case there is difference between a personal contract,
and real, and it was said, that an executor shall never be forced to bring his
action in the detinet only, where he need not name himself to be an executor:
which note well.

It was agreed in a case by Hobert, that where a man brought an action de parco
facto and declared upon the breach of a pound, and also of the taking out of
beasts; and the Defendant as to the taking out of the beasts, pleaded not
guilty, and as to the breaking of the pound, he said that he was Lord of the
Soil, upon which the pound stood, and tha^ he brake of the Lock, and put a lock
of his own; and Hobert said in this case, that he ought to plead the general
issue, for in verity this is not any broach of the pound, except the beast come
out of it: and Jones Justice was of an opinion, that if he put out the beasts
he may not have this action, because the freehold was in him, but he ought to
have a special action upon the case.

Entered in Easter Term in the 19th. year of King James Rot. 1672. Ellen
Goldingham against Sir John Saunds.
ELlen Goldingham brought an action of Dower against Sir John Saunds, to be
endowed of the third part of the Manor of Goldingham, and he vouched the son
to warranty, as son and heir to Christopher Goldingham, husband of the
demandant, who appeared, and entered into warranty freely, and he pleaded that
he had nothing by descent from Christopher Goldingham his father, upon which
plea the Tenant and the vouchee were at issue, and the demandant had judgment
against the Tenant to recover, but cesset executio until the voucher is
determined: and after that, and before the day of the nisi prius Edward
Goldingham died, and then at the day the Tenant lost by default, so is the
Record, and now upon the prayer of the demandant to have a writ of seisin,
these cases were moved.

First, by Sergeant Hendon, that the writ of seisin may be stayed, because as
he said, the Tenant may revouch the heir of the heir, for it is not possible,
that the vouchee should lose by default, because that he was dead, and
therefore you may see, that he conceived, that where it is said in the Record
viz. on the back of the postea, that the Tenant lost by default, he conceived
that to be meant of the vouchee, and not of the Tenant in the writ of Dower:
but Hutton was of opinion, that admitting that it should be so intended, yet he
may revouch, for there was a judgment given against him with a cesset executio
till the voucher is determined; and that is now determined by his death, and
when judgment is once given he had not day in Court; but if the vouchee had
died after the warranty, then he may revouch, but here the Court rather
intended, that the record shall be meant that the Tenant in the writ of Dower
made default, and then it is not possible, that ever he shall revouch, but they
said, it had been more question if the Tenant had appeared at the day of the
nisi prius, and had pleaded the death of the vouchee after the last
continuance, and had prayed the advantage of his warranty: and at another day
Hendon moved, that the judgment given against the Tenant was not good, for it
was absolute with a cesset executio, where that ought to be a conditional
judgment etc. against the Tenant if the vouchee had not assets, and if he had,
then judgment against him according to the Lord Dyer 202. Mich. 3. Ma. Rot.
508. for otherwise the Tenant shall lose the benefit of his warrantie against
the voucher, and so if the heir do confess the assets, yet the judgment shall
be conditional, for otherwise if he had not assets according to his confession,
the demandant shall have a new judgment against the Tenant, and of this
opinion was Jones Justice.

But Hutton said, that this was very well, and that the judgment may be either
ways conditional, or absolute, and he said, that this is no prejudice to the
warranty, for the Tenant may have a scire facias against the vouchee; but in
this case day was given over till the next Term; and the Prothonotaries were
commanded to search the presidents concerning that. See more after.

Mary Over and her second husband against Tucker.
MAry Over and her second husband brought an action of Dower against one
Tucker, and demanded Dower of the indowment, of one Paul her first husband, and
it was agreed, that this trial ought to be by witnesses according to Dyer 155.
and it was awarded by the Court, that the the Council of either side should
draw up Interrogatories, and put their neams to them, and then they should be
delivered to Master Waller the Prothonotary, in whose office the cause is
entered, and he shall have the examination of the witnesses of both sides, and
then seal up the Interrogatories again, and so remain till they were delivered
over to the Court, and then qui melius probat melius habet.

The residue of Easter Term in the two and twentieth year of King James in C. P.
AN action of debt was was brought against an Executor, who pleaded plene
Administravit, and the other replied and showed that before this action
brought, he brought another action against the Defendant in which he was
outlawed, and that after the reversal of the outlawrie he took out this writ
etc. and that he had assets at the first bringing of the first writ, and issue
was taken upon that, and it was found for the Plantiff, and it was resolved
that the Plantiff shall have judgment, for this is in nature of Journeys
accounts according as it was in Aldridges case upon the same matter, which was
long debated by the Court, and it was also affirmed to be good law, in a writ
of error brought of that in the Kings Bench, for otherwise if it should not be
so, the Defendant himself should take an advantage of his own evil plea, which
the law will not allow by any means to be suffered, but then it was said by the
Court, that in this case, the Plantiff in the action ought to bring his second
writ immediately after the reversal of the first judgment in the outlawry, if
he will take any advantage of that.

Trin. 22. Jac. C. P.
Trinity Term in the two and twentieth year of King James in the Common Pleas.
HIckford brought an audita querela against Machin, and the case in effect was
this, Richard Davis 43. Eliz. acknowledged a Statute Merchant of 500. l. before
the Mayor and Clark of Gloucester to Machin, and all the circumstances of the
Statute de mercatoribus were well observed, saving only that no day of payment
was mentioned, and after the said Machin took a lease for years of part of the
land, of which the Conusor was seized, and after the Conusor died intestate,
and Hickford took out letters of Administration, and Machin sued execution
against the said Hickford who brought an audita querela: and the single point
was, whether this Statute be good, in regard that no day of payment is
appointed, and after diverse arguments by the Sergeants in other Terms, this
Term it was argued by all the Court, and the effect of their several arguments
were in this manner.

Jones Justice began and said, it seems to me that the Statute is good, and
that no audita querela will lie, and he said here had been 3. objections made
against this Statute; first, that every Act of Parliament which gives
directions for the doing of a thing, ought to be precisely pursued, and shall
not have an explanation upon an explanation, and he said, that notwithstanding
this objection, he thought the Statute to be good, for in every Act of
Parliament there is substance, and there is form, and if the substance be
observed, though not every circumstance, yet that is very good, and so is the
case concerning conditions, which are as strictly to be observed as any thing,
yet if the substance be observed, though not the very letter, yet this is very
good; as the case of Scroop, Cook. 10.
one Covenanted to stand seized, to devise uses with a provisee, that if he
shall be disposed to alter, disanul, or change the uses etc. that then it shall
be lawful, at all times at his pleasure to do this by his writtag indented,
under his hand subscribed in the presence of 3. witnesses to disanul them, and
also by the same writing to determine and set down other uses; now if by
indenture in the presence of three witnesses, he do covenant with another to
stand seized to other uses etc. here though there is no express determination
of the former uses according to the words; yet the limitation of the new uses
do implie a determination of the former uses, and so the substance of the words
observed, though not the very litteral expression: and so was it lately
resolved in this Court between Kenet and Lee, that where such covenants were
with power of revocation in his life time sealed and delivered, now if in this
case this be done by Will sealed, this is a sufficient revocation, for the
intent was satisfied, and if in this case, then by the same reason in our case;
but now let us come to this Statute, and in this Statute there are matters of
substance, and matters of circumstance; and the Statute of Acton Burnel says,
that the debtor shall come before the Mayor to acknowledge that, now this is
but a circumstance of the Statute, for if the Mayor come before him, this is
very good, for the substance is, that the Statute must be acknowledged before
the Mayor in proper person, and not by Attorney, and also the Statute says,
that the recognizance be entered into the Roll with the hand of the Clark, here
the inrolment is the substance, and not the writing, and so the Statute de
mercatoribus is, that he ought to come before the chief Officer of the City
etc. and yet it has been ruled here, that if the City be governed by 2. chief
officers, he ought to come before them both, for to this purpose they are but
one: nay, the Statute is, that he shall be a Merchant who shall acknowledge
that, and yet if he be not a Merchant, he is within the compass of the Statute
to be a Conusor; but now to the point, whether this is substance or
circumstance, and I am of opinion, that though the day of payment is not
expressed, yet it is very well, for a day may be in that, and yet not be good,
as if it be at Michaelmas after I. S. shall come to Paul's, now in this case,
because it may not appear to the Mayor Iudicially when to award execution,
therefore it is not good; but if this be to pay the first return of Michaelmas
Term, this is very good, for there he may know immediately when to award
execution, and the same law if it be to pay before Michaelmas next, or to pay
presently, as an obligation, and so the Mayor is bound to take notice, that
this is to be paid presently.

Another objection that it shall be frivolous, that his body shall be taken so
soon as it is acknowledged, but I answer, that this may be very well, for this
is for the security of the Merchant who is the Conusee, and Merchants shall
not be supposed to know when tendering may be, in regard, that they are supposed
to be men of foreign imploment, and so upon the Statute of Bankrupts, for the
words of the Statute are, to every creditor a portion is allotted to him; by
your construction the sale shall be void, because it is not according to the
words of the Statute, but you see that this is ruled to be against you.

The third objection is explanatorie to the Statute of Acton Burnel; and for
that it ought to be precisely perused and not to vary from that, but I answer
to that, that the Statute de mercatoribus it self had not been observed in
every point and circumstance, for the words of the Statute are, that if the
debtor do not pay at the day, that then the debtee may come before the Mayor
and sue executtor, and yet it was resolved Coo. 2. 48. that the executors of
the Merchant may come; and besides the words of the Statute are, that the
extent shall be of all his lands, which were in the hands of the debtor at the
time of the Statute acknowledged, and yet if he who is the Conusor purchase
lands afterward; yet they shall be liable to be extended by force of the same
Statute, though not made mention of, and so it is out of the words of the same
Statute; and so I am of opinion, that the Statute is good, and that in this
case no audita querela lies.

The argument of Justice Hutton
HUtton contrary, I am of opinion, that this Statute is void, and that the
audita querela well lies in this case, and all my argument shall be upon the
Statute Acton, Burnel, for this is the fundamental Statute, and I conceive that
the intent of the law is, to contain a certainty when the money shall be paid;
and the conclusion of the Statute de mercatoribus goes over, and further then
the Statute of Acton Burnel, for this does extend to all the subjects of the
Kings, (Jews only excepted) and there is a reservation, that this shall not
destroy the action of debt, and also there is a reservation to the Judges, that
they may take a recognizance as before, and this Statute of Acton Burnel was
made the 11th. Edw. 1. and there are in that Statute several essential points,
Acton Burnel explained.
which of necessity ought to be observed, and first that this ought to be
taken before an officer, and yet two officers which are the chief officers may
well do this, for to this intent they are but one. Secondly, there ought to be
a seal of they p^rtie. Thirdly, a day of the payment ought to be also
expressed, because the security is taken before an ignorant man. Fourthly, the
seal of the King ought to be to that: and fifthly, this ought to be enrolled:
and it has been also agreed to my hand, that a conjectural day of payment is
not good, as at Mich. after the return of such a one from Rome, or after the
accomplishment of the age of 27. years, for those shall never be days to give
jurisdiction, though they are good by way of contract: and such a recognizance
is good, for any thing for which an action of debt will lie, but if no action
of debt will lie in this case, then it is not good; and so is also the Statute
of 23. H. 8. cap. 6. for it does not extend to such things; but where an action
of debt lies.

And the first part of the Statute is, that the debt and the day of payment be
entered in the roll, that so it may appear whether the day be past nor no, and
that may not appear by the judgment of the law, but upon the face of the
Statute, and there is also one clause in the Statute, that if the debtor will
say, that his goods were delivered, or sold for less then they were worth the
party had no remedy, for when the Sheriff had sold them, the debtor may
account it his folly, that he sold them not before the day of the suit; but if
in our case, the money is payable presently, he had then no time to sell them,
for certainly the meaning of the Statute was, in this to give time to the
Conusor to allien, and to sell his goods; and so of a recognisance taken before
the chief Justice, upon the Statute of the 23. H. 8. without question a day
ought to be limited when that shall be paid, and there ought to be the seal of
the party, and the seal of the King, and the day of the payment specified, and
my first reason wherefore this Statute is void, is because when an act of
Parliament limits jurisdiction or power to any inferior man, he ought to pusue
his limited jurisdiction precisely in all the substantial points: as the
Statute of Magna Charta limits, that he shall hold his turn viz. the Sheriff
within one month after Michaelmas or Easter, now if he hold that but 2. days
after it is void.

And the reason is, he ought to pusue this limited jurisdiction, and then what
difference is between those several jurisdictions, and I cannot compare that to
a better case, Cook 10.
then to Neufages case upon the Statute of the 23. H. 6. if the Sheriff do take
an obligation for an appearance, if it do not appear in the condition, when the
day of appearance is, then this obligation is void, for the day of appearance
ought to appear expressly; and not to leave this to the construction of the law,
and then what difference is there between our case: indeed contracts may be
many times made good by reference, but so may not a Recognizance; and yet 17.
Edw. 4. a man made a contract to give so much for Corn when he saw that, and
the contract by the Justices was awarded void, because that no day was set when
that should be paid, and see the book which is, I conceive that if the contract
had been to pay, when he took the Corn it had been good, and so here if a man
had such a jurisdiction, he ought to pursue that precisely; and for that the
day in all those cases ought to be observed, and a fortiori in our case: and an
other reason is out of the presidents in all times, and though there may be
some few which does pass, sub silentio yet I do not value them according to
Slades case: Cook 4.
and 5. Edw. 4. and all the subsequent Statutes since the Statute of Acton
Burnel, are but declarations, and additions to this Statute, and as Grants case
upon the Statute of 32. H. 8. nay that is not only a Statute of explanation,
but is also an original Statute, but the Statute of 34. H. 8. of Wills is
merely a Statute of explanation, and for that reason in Buckler and Bakers case
is, Cook 3.
that Act to be construed precisely according to the word, and no new
interpretation may be made of that; and for an answer to that which my brother
Jones said, that here is a day equevolent to an express day, for it is implied
in law to be paid presently, according to the case of an obligation; but I say,
that in this case there is a diversity in our books, in the case of an
obligation, 14. Edw. 4. 14. H. 8. 29. and other books, whether this is payable
presently or upon request, and therefore in a case so dubious it is not fit to
make an ignorant Mayor to judge another case, by the rule of this case being so
dubious, and so doubtful, for if in this case it be not payable without a
request, then this is matter of fact, and not triable before him, nay the
Statute of mercatoribus it self appoints that the day be mentioned, and so both
the Statutes do mention, that there ought to be a day of payment appointed and
fixed in the Statute, and then wherefore shall we make construction, that an
employed day will so serve the turn; and in the Statute de mercatoribus the form
of the writ is set down, which does expressly mention a day, and so I think
there is not any doubt, but that if it were a Recognisance upon the Statute of
of 23. H. 8. for default of day it shall be void: and so in our case, and so he
said the audita querela lies well.

The argument of Justice Winch.
VVInch to the contrary, and because the effect of his argument was to the same
purpose, with that of justice Jones, and of the Lord Hobert, I will report that
but briefly: and he said, that he held this to be within the Majors
jurisdiction, for the purpose and the intent of this Statute is, to give
security to the Merchant creditor, and for that reason the day is not
material; but I will insist upon two things veritatem facti, and
considerationem legis, here is a good contract, and for that it ought to be
paid presently, and if there had been no other matter but this, that it had
been payable at a day past this had been good, for the mistake of the Clark
must not make any Statute to be void: but yet I grant, if this were part of the
jurisdiction, this ought to be pursued precisely as the law does prescribe, but
a petty addition or omission, so that be not in point of substance will not
hurt that: and this is not part of the jurisdiction, but it is to the Statute
according to the intentions of the parties, and the day is only part of their
agreement; but it has been said, that this had been idle, for the Statute
shall not be taken so to pay presently, but I say the contrary, for though he
had not his money in his hand, yet he will not trust him but will have his
security, and yet I agree to the difference before, that there ought to be a
time certain, and not to be proved after by averment; and here when no time is
fixed, this is payable presently; but there shall need to be a request, then I
hold it is out of the Statute, and when Satutes are obscure, they ought to be
interpreted according to the rules of the common Law, and as to the case of an
obligation, it is payable presently, and we ought to intend that the Mayor
takes notice, that this ought to be paid presently, for ignorance of the law is
not supposed of any; besides, if this Statute be absolutely void, then the
party is without remedy, and in such a case we ought to b^ favorable in our
expression: and so I conclude against the audita querela.

The argument of the Lord chief Justice Hobert.
HObert chief Justice to the same intent: I hold that the Statute is good, and
we ought to beware how we destroy assurances, except it be upon good and sure
grounds: and it is a perilous case, to make an ignorant man to lose his right
by a slip, and we ought to be the more wary, because this is for Merchants,
and the Statute was made for their security, and by intendment they are men of
foreign employment, and so have the less occasion to know the Law, and these
Statutes of traffic are to be cherished and not be pared to the very quick,
and we all agree that every substantial matter ought to be pursued, but not
circumstances, and then the question is, whether this be substance or
circumstance, and we also agreed that there ought to be a time certain when the
money shall be paid, and that is either an actual time or a legal time, and for
the material points, that ought to be acknowledged before an officer, and in
the Statute of Acton Burnel this word Mayor is in that, and no other principal
officer, and yet there is no doubt but that this may be taken before another,
who is a principal officer of a corporation, though he be not a Mayor.
Secondly, this ought to be also before the Clark. Thirdly, it ought to contain
words obligatorie. Fourthly, there ought to be a person bound. Fifthly, this
ought to contain a sum, but it may be a doubt if an action of debt will lie
for that. Sixthly, it ought to be under the seal of the party. Seventhly, it
ought to be under the seal of the King. Eighthly, the inrolments is also
necessary, and this Statute is such a remedy as the Common Law never gave to
the King himself, so all assurances in this kind are to be made to the
Merchants, and certainly in our case the day is not so material; but the time
which the law will take notice of, for the ignorance of the Mayor must not make
any Statute void, and I do not grant the case, that if this was to pay 10. l.
after the death of S. P. this will not make that void, but if the Statute be to
pay at several days, then then it is a quere in law, whether it be payable
till all the days of payment be past as of a bond; and for the writ, it is but
to proportion our actions according, and to do after this way, or manner; and
so upon the whole matter I conclude that the Statute is good, and that the
audita querela does not lie; and judgment per Curiam was commanded to be
entered against the Plantiff.

The case of Giles Bray was moved again in arrest of judgment, and Hendon
said, that the Plantiff had declared of a waste made after the death of the
said Edmund Bray the Grandfather, which was to his disinheritance etc. and the
Jury did find the original lease and assignment, and they found that the waste
was made before such a day, which was before the death of the Grandfather, and
now he said, that because it is found generally, that before the death of the
Grandfather the waste was made, and this was found precisely, and it is not
found precisely, that at the time of the waste made he was termor in
possession, and that is not good, for it may be that he made that before the
assignment, and then it is not punishable of waste, and if the waste was made
in the life of the Grandfather, he ought so to have declared, for otherwise it
was not immediately to his disinheritance; nay, the Grandfather might have
during his life released or confirmed to the Tenant, and so have determined the
waste, and then he in reversion shall not recover: like to the case where an
Abbot declares of the waste against the lessee of his predecessor, and declares
of waste generally, this is not good, for if this was made in the time of his
predecessor, then he may not punish that, and so in our case, perchance the
Grandfather had released, and then he in reversion may not recover, but as to
the first exception the Court seemed, that because the Plantiff showed expressly
that he was possessed by virtue of the lease, and he being so possessed made
waste, the finding of the jury shall be agreeable to that: and so this
exception was over ruled, and for the other, the rule of the Court was, that
whether this waste was committed in the time of the Grandfather, or after his
death, this waste was to his disinheritance, and the Grandfather by his release
might not by any means discharge that waste, for he may not transfer that
privilege, and so the judgment was given for the Plantiff.

The residue of Trinity Term 22. Jac. C. P.
NOw the case of Sir Robert Napper and Sir Thomas Earsefield, was moved again
in which the Plantiff assigned the breach, because that after Sir Thomas and
his wife did live asunder, the land was not open nor subject to distress of Sir
Robert Napper, and upon the opening of this to the Court, the Court conceived
that this rent was granted to be paid immediately, and to distrain for that,
but afterward there is a clause, that it shall not begin in point of payment,
till Sir Thomas and his wife did live asunder, and then it shall be paid the
first day which was limited after: and Crawley Sergeant said, that the intent
was, that it should begin presently, and that it should be subject to distress,
and therefore to make that an entire covenant, is against the very intentions
of the parties, for covenants in nature are several, also if they shall be
construed, otherwise the party shall be without the remedy which was intended
(S.) a distress, but the Lord Hobert and Winch were of opinion, that if Sir
Thomas Earsefield had received his estate truly, that he had but a reversion
expectant upon a term for years, and then had made such a grant and such
covenants, then in this case the covenant had not been broken, and then the
meaning would be, that he should not have any rent till he had one to grant,
but it does not appear here, and therefore is a difference, and the covenant is
broken, and Winch said, that the intent was, that the wife shall have that, for
her maintenance when they did live asunder, so that then it shall be paid to
the use of his wife, for this was in trust for her, and for that reason they
ought to be several covenants of necessity, for the state of the Mother of Sir
Thomas Earsfield did not appear in those indentures, and then he ought to take
that as it is at this time, and the appearing of that now is not material: and
if any other construction shall be made, then the parties to the indentures
shall be deframed: Hutton of the same opinion, that they are several covenants
in the intent and meaning of the parties, and they are of several natures, for
the first covenant is in the affirmative, the second is in the Negative, and
the third is in the affirmative, and it is all one, as if the word covenant had
been to every clause in express words, for he did not say, that this should be
always open, and liable to distress according to this estate, for then it had
been but one covenant, and it had been otherwise, for if no estate had
appeared, he shall not be chargable in law, nor perchance he would not deal
with him, and we ought not to take notice of any thing, but that which is upon
record; nay, his own plea proves that they are several covenants, for to the
negative covenant he pleads negatively, and to the other he pleads in the
affirmative, and so the very intent proves them to be several covenants, and
Hobert of the same opinion, that it shall be taken as a present grant to charge
the present possession, and so judgment was commanded to be entered for the
Plan.

Entered Easter Term 18. Jac. C. P.
THe case of Goldingham and of Saunds, was new moved again by Sergeant Winch,
and he prayed a writ of seisin against Saunds, and the doubt was, whether the
first judgment being absolute with a cestat executio was good, or whether this
ought to be conditional; and I conceive that in our books there are those
differences in this point, if the Tenant do vouch in a foreign County, then
without any more the demandant shall have judgment against the Tenant
presently: 17. Ed. 3. 50. 13. H. 4. judgment 224. because the demandant shall
not recover, Cook. 9.
but only in the same County, and the reason is clear in Anne Beddingfields
case, because the original may not extend to another County; but if the
voucher be in the same County, then in some cases it shall be against the
vouchee, and in some cases it shall be against the Tenant, and if the vouchee
will come and render Dower, then the judgment shall be conditional against him
etc. if he had in value, and if he had not, then against the Tenant, and the
other against the vouchee, and so is Dyer fo. 202. and Grayes case was a
conditional judgment against the vouchee, and so is the case 18. Ed. 3. fo.
56. out of which books I note that in some cases, the vouchee shall have
judgment against him, and the judgment in that case shall be conditional, and
so if the vouchee make default, then the judgment shall be conditional against
him 4. Ed. 3. 35. the old print: 2. H. 4. 7. but if the case be, that the
demandant is delayed in his execution by the vouchee, then he shall recover
against the Tenant, as if vouchee be in the ward of the King Dyer 326. and so
in the case of a Common person, as is 17. Ed. 3. by the Reporter, who also
cites a judgment given in the time of the same King, though the opinion of the
book is against that; but then it has been said, that this is mischievous, for
then the Tenant shall loose his warranty: I answer no more then when he is
vouched in the ward of a Common person, and over this the Law does provide a
remedy for him, See 27. H. 8. cap. 10. and 32. H. 8. cap. 5.
as the Act of H. 8. if the feme be evict of the Dower by a title which is
paramount, then she may have a scire facias against the Tenant, and if the
vouchee had not assets in this case, then the Tenant shall have execution
against them as they hap, and so is the judgment in Dyer 202. and there was a
judgment in this Court 38. Eliz. Marie Ashburnham brought a writ of Dower
against Skinner, who vouched the heir of the husband, as in this case, and they
were at issue upon assets in the same County, and the same judgment as here,
and it was found by verdict for the vouchee, and after the judgment and before
the voucher was determined, a writ of error was brought, and affirmed, and our
case here is as strong as this, and so I pray a writ of seisin for the
demandant. Sergeant Hendon to the contrary, the question is, whether this ought
to be a conditional judgment, or whether this may be absolute with a cesset
executio as the case was here, and I shall lay this foundation, that it is in
the election of the feme when the heir is vouched in the same County, whether
she will have the same against the Tenant, or vouchee; but for the case of 17.
Ed. 3. that is but a quere of the Reporter which I do not value, for the book
it self was otherwise, that it ought to be conditional, because it is in the
election of the feme to have that against either: and for Dyer 202. there the
question is, whether the judgment shall be presently or stay and expect till
the issue is tried between the vouchee and the Tenant, but no question whether
this shall be conditional or no: and the reason is, when he is vouched in the
same County if he had assets, then she had not election, for there it shall be
only against the vouchee, if that be found by verdict, or confessal, and this
is for the benefit of the purchasor, and also for the benefit of the demandant:
in Dower for the warranty in the ancient time was the Common assurance of the
realm; and for that reason, if the judgment may be against the heir, it shall
never be against the Purchasor, and also it is for the benefit of the feme, who
is demandant in Dower, for if she be endowed against the Tenant, and afterward
she be evicted she shall not have a scire facias, but if it was against the
heir, then she shall have a scire facias to have in recompense: and so is 16.
Ed. 3. Judgment 3. that if in Dower the heir is vouched and made default the
judgment shall be against him; out of which I do conclude, that the judgment
ought of necessity to be conditional, for by this the State of the feme, and
of the Tenant is preserved, for if the feme shall have that against the heir,
then she saves her warranty in Law, and therefore if the judgment at the first
may be absolute, then you take away all advantages from the feme and the
purchaser, if it hap that it shall be against vouchee, and for that reason it
is not good, for it is unalterable, and it is a principle in out Law, that the
feme shall recover against the heir, if he be vouched in the same County if he
had assets, and not against the Tenant 6. H. 3. Dower 16. the demandant shall
recover immediately against the vouchee, when he was vouched as heir, and so is
18. Ed. 3. recovery in value 16. et 31. Ed. 3. vouch. 30. there the judgment
was against the vouchee, though he had nothing by descent at the day of the
writ purchased; and there is a writ in the register, which recites such a
recovery voucher and judgment conditional, and so is the 34. H. 6. expressly:
and for that to say, that the judgment may be absolute, is to make all those
books erroneous, and the case of Dower differs from all other cases of
vouchers; for if land descend in tail, it is sufficient assets for the feme to
have Dower, because the feme is dowable of them, for this suffices to say,
that he had assets generally 7. Ed. 2. Dower 184. out of which I conclude, that
this voucher is not like to other vouchers, but this is only to secure the
estate of the Purchasers; and then as to the president, I answer first, it was
found there, that the vouchee had nothing: and also it was never debated, for a
writ of error was brought of that and nothing done, for this was referred to
Arbitrament, and so I pray that no writ of seisin may be awarded: and the Court
seemed to be of opinion, that the judgment may be conditional, chiefly Hobert
and Jones vehemently, but now they said because that judgment is once given,
they are not to reverse their own judgments, and to give another judgment,
and now it is as if he had no assets, but yet that does not aid an erroneous
judgment given before, and therefore if the Tenant will be relieved, he ought
to bring his writ of error, but it was said, that if this judgment was to be
given again, this was as it should be, because that is all one now as if he had
not assets, and the judgment stood as it was.

Potter against Brown.
NOw the case of Potter and Brown was moved again, and Hendon took two
exceptions as before, first for default of averment; and secondly, the words
are not actionable, for it was adjudged in Lanes case, if one say of another
that he is as arrant a Thief ^s any is in the Goal of Warwick, this is not good
without averment, that there are Thieves in Warwick Goal, and here it shall be
so, for the law does not suppose, that there are Thieves in England, and
besides here in this case the subsequent words do qualify the other, for the
words under the (for) ought to be of such a thing as is Theft, and that is not
so in our case: Sergeant Richardson to the contrary: the last words do not
qualify but rather aggravate them, for he gives a reason of his speech, and
this taking is to be understood with a fellonious intent, for the first words
do charge him to be a Thief, and therefore the last words shall be intended,
that he took them with a fellonious intent, for he did not only charge him in
the general but in particular; but the Court etc. Hobert, Hutton, and Winch
said, that the Plantiff shall not have judgment; because he fails of
averment, for he did not say expressly, that he is a Thief, but as arrant a
Thief as any is in England, and we are not to enquire after words, except they
are plain, for if one say he was in Warwick Goal for stealing of a Horse
adjudged not to be actionable, and we may not presume, that there are Thiefes
in England, and so judgment was arrested.

Adams against Ward.
INtra. Trin. 21. Iac. Rot. 1845. note that it was said, in an action upon the
case between one Adams, and Ward an Attorney, that whereas one Hennings sued
Adams in an action of debt, and Adams retained Ward to be his Attorney, and
gave him warrant to plead the general issue, and Ward suffered the judgment by
nihil dicit, that this was not any cause of an action, except it was by Covin,
and for that if Adams had not laid in his declaration, that this was by Covin,
he should not have recovered, and at another day it was agreed, that the Covin
was not traversable by Plea, but only in evidence at the Bar.

Cook against Cook in Dower.
IN a writ of Dower between Cook and Cook they were at issue, and at the day of
nisi prius the Defendant pleaded, that the demandant had entered, and was
seized, and yet is seized since the last contrivance etc. Octabis Sancti
Hillarii ultimo quo die continetur usque ad hunc diem etc. vicesimum diem
Februari^ which in verity was the day of the nisi prius, and it was demurred
upon this Plea for two causes: the first was, because he had not showed that
the Tenant was disseised, for otherwise it shall not abate the action, and to
say that the demandant was seized was not sufficient, for though this implies
so much that the other was disseised, yet here it ought to be expressly
alleged, but the Court spoke nothing to this; but Winch thought this to be
very good according to Dyer 76. there the entry is pleaded only, and yet good:
but they resolved that the pleading of the continuance is not good, for it is
from one Term to another nisi prius justiciarii Venerint, etc. and he ought to
have precisely showed that: but the question now was, whether the demandant
shall have judgment to have seisin, or have apetite Cape only: and Justice
Hutton said, that it was adjudged in Sir Henry Browns case, that if a man
pleaded an insufficient Plea after the last continuance, there the Plantiff
shall have judgment, as if the first issue had been tried for him: and for
this he cited the new book of entries fo 57^, and this may not be a judgment
by default, for they both appeared, and therefore he shall have the same
judgment, as if the first issue had been tried for him; and it was said in
this case, though the Defendant did demur generally, yet this is very good.

The residue of Trinity Term in the 22. year of King James.
GOdsel an Attorney, brought an action upon the case for words, and he laid in
his declaration, that the Defendant spoke those words among other. Master
Godsel is a knave, for he forged false deeds for which he was imprisoned at
York, and should have lost his ears, and the jury found only these words,
Godsel is a forger of writings, and deserves to lose his ears, and Hendon moved
in arrest of judgment, that the words which are found are not the words in the
declaration, for the words were there that he forged deeds, and it is only
found to be writings, and it was adjudged in this Court, between Brown and
Ellis, that for saying an Attorney had forged writings, no Action will lie, for
they are too general, and besides it does not at all appertain to him to make
writings, and so for Nowels Case, he is Cooped up for forging of writings, and
it was adjudged not to be actionable, and so to say he is a forger of writings,
by which he had cozned fatherless Children, the words are not actionable,
because he did not say Deeds, and upon this motion and reason the judgment in
this case was arrested.

This case is Entered Hillarie the 21. Jac. Roll. 550. Sir George Trenchard
against Peter Hoskins
TRenchard brought an Action of Covenant against Peter Hoskins, and declared
upon an indenture bearing date the 19th. of September 44. of Eliz. made between
John Hoskins father of the Defendant, and the Defendant on the one part, and
the Plantiff on the other part, by which they bargained and sold certain lands
to the Plantiff in Hammond which indenture rehearses, that King Henry the
eight was seized of this land in his demeasne, as of fee in the right of his
Crown, and from him conveyed that to Ed. 6. who in the 7. year of his Reign by
his letters patents bearing date at Westminster, he granted that to one Fitz
Williams, and to Hilton in fee, as by his letters patents may appear, and they
being so seized by indenture which bore date etc bargained and sold that to
Henry Hoskins and to Proud, and also recited that Proud releaseth to the said
Hoskins all his right, as by the said release may appear: and conveyed that to
John by descent: and so the said John being seized he and his son Peter made
this conveyance to the Plantiff upon a good consideration, in which they did
covenant with the Plantiff in this manner, and the said John and Peter for them
and there heirs do Covenant and grant to, and with the Plantiff etc. that they
the said Peter and John Hoskins according to the true mean^^ing of the said
indenture, were seized of a good estate in fee simple, and that the said John
and Peter or one of them, have good Authority to sell that according to the
intent of the said indenture, and that there was no reversion, or remainder in
the King by any Act or Acts thing or things, done by him or them: and the
Plantiff laid the breach that neither John nor Peter had a lawful power to
^^ll, the Defendant pleaded that John had a good power to sell that, according
to the intent of the said indenture, notwithstanding any Act or Acts made by
him or his father, or by any claiming under them, and upon that the Plantiff
demurred; and the case was now argued by the Court, and Jones Justice began,
and said that his opinion was, that the Plantiff shall be barred, the case
being upon construction of covenants: and the sole question is, whether they
are several covenants, or only one covenant, and I held that they are all one
covenant, and those words for any Act or Acts do relate to the two other
precedent sentences, and so it is all but one covenant, though this stand upon
several parts, for if these words were placed in the forefront there had been
no question, but that this had been but one covenant, and this made no
difference when it is set before, and when it is set after, and the repeating
of that had been toutalogie, for if I covenant I will build a house at Dale,
Sale, and a vale of Brick, here Brick shall refer to them all, because it is
tied in one entire sentence and covenant; and so if I covenant with you, that I
will go with you to Canterbury, to Salisbury, and Coventrie here the word goes
relates to all 3. as in the case of Sir Henry Finch, the rent was granted out
of the Manor of Eastwel, and not of the Message lands, and Tenements lying
and being in the Parish of Eastwel, or else where in the same County belonging
thereto, and resolved that land which is not parcel of the Manor is not
charged with the rent, because it is all but one sentence and one grant; and
cited the case of Althams case, and Hickmots case, where special words will
qualify general words, where they are all in one sentence, and so I conceive
they are but one covenant, Cook 8. and 9.
especially in the intents of the parties, and upon the intents of all the
parties of the deed, for when a deed is doubtful in construction, the meaning
must be gathered from all the parties of that; but yet that is tied with two
cautions, that it be not against any thing expressed by the said indenture; but
only in case where it is doubtful, Cook 2. and 5.
so Cheineys case and Baldewins case, a habendum will destroy an implied
premises, Cook 4.
but not an expressed, and so in Nokes case, an express particular covenant
qualifies the generalty of the employed covenant: like to the case which was 32.
Eliz. in the Court of Wards, between Carter and Ringstead, Cook 8.
where Carter was seized of lands in Odiham, and of the Manor of Stoy, and
there covenanted, that he would Levy a fine to his son of all his lands in
Odiham in tail, and for the Manor of Stoyes, that should be to the use of his
wife, now these subsequent words drew that out of the tail, according to the
intent of the parties, and so in our case; and I also take an exception to the
form of the declartion, for he conveyes that to Fitz Williams, and to Proud,
and Hoskins by the name of all his lands and Tenements which were in the tenure
of Anne Parker, and did not aver that these lands for which the Covenant was
made, were in her hands; and for that it is not good, and for these reasons I
conceive the Plantiff shall be barred.

The argument of Hutton Justice.
HUtton to the contrary, I hold that they are 3. several Covenants; and yet I
agree the cases before cited, and the reason is, they are all included in one
sentence, for it is the care of the Purchasor, that he had an owner of the land
before he purchase, for that which is the ground of assurances, that he is
seized in fee, and hereafter that the Covents that this is free from
incumberances made by him, and that he had good title to alien which strikes at
the very root of assurances, and my first reason is, because here are several
parties, and they covenant that one of them is seized of a good estate, and
that they or one of them had power to alien that, for it may not stand with the
intents of the indentures, to buy of him who had no title, and might not sell,
and also the last Covenant is merely in the negative, that they have made no
Act or Acts by which the reversion shall be in the King; and that is all one,
as if the word Covenant had been added in every clause of the sentence, and
Covenants in law may be qualified by express Covenants, but if a man made a
lease for years upon condition to pay 20. l. in this case an entry by the law
is employed for default of payment; but yet if it added that, if it be behind
he may enter and retain till he is satisfied of the 20. l. now in this case
this had taken away the employed Covenant and condition, but every express
Covenant must be taken most beneficially for the Covenantee, and in Nokes case
it is said, that an express Covenant controuls an implied one, but he may use
either of them at his pleasure and election: and I grant Henry Finches case to
be good law, for there is not any clause or sentence till after the Alibie; but
yet in Dyer 207. they are distinct sentences, and shall receive several
constructions, and so here the matter being several they shall receive diverse
constructions, and he Covenanted that he was seized in fee, and that he had
power to alien that, and this was to encourage the Purchasers: and for the form
he needs not aver, that this was in the hands of Anne Parker, for he had
confessed that in the bar, that he came lawfully to that, and besides the
Covenant is broken, though he never was seized, and so I conceive that the
Plantiff shall have judgment.

Winch to the same intent, it is true if it had been all but one Covenant, then
if it had been no question this had not been broken; but I think they are
several Covenants, like to the case of Sir Robert Napper lately adjudged; also
the first two Covenants are in the affirmative, and the other in the Negative,
and for that they ought to be answered with several pleas, and these kind of
assurances are the Common assurances, and therefore they ought to be
interpreted favorably for the Purchasers, and John was not deceived in these
Covenants, for they brought down upon the deed an estate in fee, and it is also
agreed if the word Covenant and grant had been diverse times added to the
several clauses, then they had been several Covenants, and now it is all one
word, and made those to be several Covenants; and words of relation never will
control that which is certainly put down before; and so he concluded in this
case the Plantiff shall have judgment to recover.

Hobert chief Justice to the contrary, every deed ought to be construed
according to the intention of the parties, and the intents ought to be adjudged
of the several parts of the deed, as a general issue out of the evidence, and
intent ought to be picked out of every part, and not out of one Word only: and
here Peter joined with his father to strengthen the assurance, and John had not
only his own estate, but the estate of Proud; and it is plain he never meant to
entangle himself with other Conveyances, then those which he and Proud had
made, and I hold this to be no independent Covenant, and it is all bound with
one clause (S.) for any Act or Acts made by them etc. and it is confessed if
these words had been placed in the forefront, that then they should relate to
all, and it is as clear as if they were: and the first reason is, that the
intent appears only to undertake for himself, because he should but have part
of the land, and for that he was to warrant his evidence, and to that end he
was to deliver to him his title at large in the said indenture: and here he had
made the Plantiff privy to every several conveyance of that to inform the
Purchaser of it: and will you also entangle him with a covenant, you might have
taken notice of his title; and it appears to be the very intents of the
parties, that you should take notice of the title, and inform your selves
concerning the same. Secondly, this is a sentence which may be taken both
ways: and I say it is agreed that if it had begun with these words
notwithstanding any Act or Acts etc. that then it shall be all construed by
this, and I never saw any difference: I grant they are several Covenants in
point of fact, but not in point of obligation, for there are not several words
of binding; nay I say if he had released this last he had released all, but it
has been said, that one is in the negative, and the other is in the
affirmative: but I do not value that; and it has been said, that this is the
Common assurance of the Realm, and if other construction shall be made, then no
man shall be sure of his own, we had given him leave to say that no reversion
nor remainder is in the King by any Act by him made, and the King may not have
any reversion, and he seized in fee, also this clause standing indifferent,
whether this shall be referred to all or not, and then the question is, how the
Court will adjudge of that, for my part I take it that this may stand with the
intent of all the parties of the deed; but take that as you take it, that this
destroys all, for if he is absolutely seized in fee, what matter is where the
reversion is, and yet if the reversion was in the Crown, and not by his Act you
confess that may not charge him, which is expressly against the first Covenant,
if this be distinct by it self, but take that indifferently, and all the
parties will stand together: Nappers case has no affinity with this, for
questionless there were several Covenants, for in that indenture it did not
appear what estate Sir Thomas Eearsfield had, and for that reason nothing might
be collected out of that, but he had a present estate; but in our case all is
contained in the body of the indenture, and Nokes case is a strong case, and
stronger then the case at the bar is, for thereupon construction of all the
parties of the deeds, the special warrantie controuls the general warranty: and
the reason is no man will take an express special warranty when the intent is,
that he shall have a general warranty: and there was a case lately ajudged
between the Earl of Clanrickard and his wife against the Countess of Leicester,
where the Lady pleaded that she was Tenant in Dower, where in verity she had
the revesion in fee expectant upon a Term for life, and they conveyed all the
estate the Lady had in Dower; and then they covenanted, that they would convey
all their estate to the Lord of Leicester and his heirs, during the life of his
wife, and then Covenanted that they would convey all their estate to the Earl
of Leicester and his heirs for ever in the aforesaid land: and it was resolved,
that though such Covenant will raise an use to the party who ought to have
that, and so the reversion will pass if there had been no more words: now it
was but during the life of the Lady for that third part, for the Covenant was
but to strengthen an estate, and not to convey it, and so he concluded that the
Plantiff should be hard, and after it was said by the Court, that this case was
not of weight to be brought into the Exchequer Chamber, and therefore the Court
advised that the parties would agree; quere, for the residue in the Exchequer
Chamber concerning that.

Entered Hill. 18. Jac the case of Comendams. Richard Woodley against the Bishop
of Exeter, and Mannering.
RIchard Woodley brought a quare Impedit against the Bishop of Exeter, and
Mannering who was Parson of the said Church, and he declared that Arthur Basset
was seized of an acre of land, to which the said Advowson was appendant in his
demeasne as of fee, and that he the 13. Octobris 13. Eliz. granted the next
advowson to one William Manwood, who was then incumbent in the said Church, who
by his will 20. November made one Harcourt his executor and died, by whose
death the Church became void, the which was the first and the next avoydance
after the grant, and Harcourt presented Cardon, and that the said Arthur Basset
so being seized in fee 18. Octobris 17. Eliz. by his will in writing devised to
John Basset his son the first and next avoydance of the Church aforesaid, which
first and next avoydance happened after the death of the said Arthur Basset, and
that the said John Basset was possessed of the said next avoydance, and the
said Chardon being incumbent 29. of September 37. Eliz. he was elected Bishop
of Down in Ireland, and he being so Elect, the Queen by her letters 37. of her
Reign considering the smalness of the said Bishopric; that it was not able to
maintain him in his episcopal dignity, ex gratia sua speciali concessit
Lycensavit et potestatem dedit to the said Chardon Bishop elect, that he with
the said Bishopric the rectory of Tedbome in comendum ad huc recepire et
fructus de etc. in usus suos convertere disponere et applicare valeat et
possit, habendum that in Comendam for 6. years, and within the 6. years he was
consecrated, and after the Term of the 6. years the Church became void, per
legis Anglie, and that the Queen by her prerogative presented one Be who was
admitted, instituted and inducted, and the Plantiff conveyed from John Basset
his title by his grant of the next avoydance, and showed that the said Church
became void by the death of Gee, and that the vacation by the death of Gee is
the next avoydance after the death of Arthur Basset, by reason whereof the
Plantiff presented, and was disturbed, and upon his decla, ration Edwards the
patron demurred, and the Bishop claimed nothing but as ordinary, and Manering
pleaded and confessed the seisin of Arthur Basset, and the grant to Manwood,
and the presentation by Harcourt of Chardon, and the devise to John Basset, but
he showed that after the death of Arthur Basset the Acre to which the advowson
is appendant, descended to Thomas Basset as etc. and he being so seized the
Church became void by the death of Chardon, who had the next avoydance after
the death of Arthur Basset, and that this remained void, by 2. years after his
death, by which the Queen presented by Lapse the said Gee, who was admitted
etc. and Thomas Basset conveyed that to Edwards, and that became void by the
death of Gee, and that he presented the said Mannering etc. absque hoc quod
praedicta vacatio Ecclesiae praedictae post Mortem de Gee was the first and
next avoydance after the death of Arthur Basset, as the Plantiff had alleged,
and upon this bar the Plantiff demurred: and it was argued by the Council of
both sides on several days, and in Michaelmas Term ensuing, it was argued by
the Court, but because that Harvey was newly made Justice he did not argue the
case; but Justice Hutton began.

The argument of Justice Hutton.
ANd Justice Hutton after a recital of the case said, that his opinion was,
that the Plantiff should be barred, and in the first place it is to be
considered whether the King had any title at all to present by the Creation of
Chardon to be Bishop. Secondly, admit that he had title whether he had
dispensed with that, and by his dispensation he had satisfied his prerogative.
Thirdly, admit that the King had title, and that this was not satisfied with
the Commendam, whether the grantee had lost his turn; and as to the first point
it ought to be agreed, that when a parson is made a Bishop, that he is
discharged of the Church by the Common Law, and so is the 45. Edw. 3. 5. and
Dyer 159. petit. Broo. 116. and this is an avoydance by Cession, and for any
thing that I see in our books the King had not any title to present, except
that he himself was pat^on, but because that did not happen fully in question
here: I will not deliver any opinion: but I will say what our ancient books do
lay 41. Edw. 35. adjudged that the King shall not present to a prebendary where
the prebend was made Bishop, and the tithe which the King had to present, was
by reason that the temporalities of the Bishopric, of which he was prebend was
in his hands, and see the 7. H. 4. 25. a good case 11. H. 4. 37. Dyer 228. and
for Brooks presentation 61. that is but the report of the Chancellor, who had
that in presentation; but our Common Law does not warrant any such thing, and
then for the second point, whether the King had dispensed with his prerogative;
and in the first place we are to know that these Commendams were at the first,
but to see the cure served, and by the opinion of Pollard, the ordinary is to
see the cure served, though that be charged with such rents, that none would
have it, and for that Commendams were at the first good, but now if the King
had title, then that began per the consecration, otherwise he shall never have
it: and so is 41. Edw. 3. 5. if consecration does not give that he shall never
have it: and hereby his grant to hold that in Commendam he had dispensed with
this prerogative, and if this had been granted to him for his life none will
deny, but that he had dispensed with his prerogative, and shall never take
advantage of that again afterward, and no more in this case, for he is
incumbent to all intents and purposes, for Fitz N B. 36. he may have a
Spoliation, and yet in this case he is parson and Bishop, and now that the King
may dispense with that it is not to be doubted; and I will compare that with
the like cases A. 6. Eliz. Dyer 252. where the King granted the Custody of the
land, and heir of his Tenant if he died his heir being within age, and this
grant was to Cantrel, and it was agreed to be good, and Wardship is as Royal an
ancient perrogative as any appertains to the Crown: and 3. H. 6. title grant
61. the King may grant the temporalities of the Bishopric before it is void,
which in my opinion is Cosen German to our case: out of which book I conclude
the King may dispense, and by the dispensation he is full parson, and this is
for his life, for the King may not make him incumbent, except it be for life,
like to the case of Dyer fo. 52. where the patron and the ordinary made a
confirmation of a lease for part of the time which was made by the parson, and
agreed that this shall stretch to the whole time, and no better case may be put
then the case of Packhurst, in Dyer 22. 8. where Packhurst was incumbent of the
Church of Cleave and was made Bishop of Norwich, but before he was created
Bishop, he had a dispensation from the Archbishop to retain that in Commendam
for 3. years, notwithstanding his advancement; and he resigned during the 3.
years and issue there taken upon the resignation; and this case proves all the
parts of our case, first that the King may dispense, and that by his
dispensation he is complete person to resign: and if he do resign during the
years, the King shall not have the prerogative to present again, for that was
satisfied with the dispensation: and also when the King came to his prerogative
by subjects means, he ought to take that as it falls, for otherwise he loses
that quite, vide Bastervils case Coo. 7. and another reason is, if it be not
satisfied, then the King shall have another which is mischievous, and this
being a new case such president is not to have more favor then the necessity
of the Law will require: and so my opinion is, that it is all one as if it had
for life: and there is a good case 9. Ed. 3. 20. where the King had 2.
presentiments, vide the case; but it was upon another reason, but the case of
21. H. 7. 8. Frowike: where the grantee of the next avoydance had judgment to
recover, and the incumbent resigned, so that it is the second presentment, yet
the Plantiff shall have the effect of his judgment, and he had a writ to the
Bishop; quere the application, for I did not well hear that, but in our case,
if the prerogative of the King was not satisfied; yet it ought to appear that
when he presented Gee. he had no title, but that was an usurpation: and if the
King was not satisfied, then the Plantiff shall not have judgment, for then
Gee was an usurper: and upon that declaration the Plantiff shall be barred; but
now for the last point, admit that the King was satisfied of his prerogative by
his presentation of Gee, whether the Plantiff had lost his course, and I think
he had, and in the first place the words of the devise are the first, and the
next avoydance which shall hap after the death of Athur Basset, now it has
been objected, that the King had the first by his prerogative, and therefore he
shall have the second, and I think in this case Brook presentation 52. is a
strong case, where a presentation was granted to one, and after to another,
when the first is void, and ruled that the second grantee shall not have the
second, and so Dyer 35. it ought to be taken according to the words, for
otherwise he shall not have any, for modus et Conventio uniunt Legem, and the
case of quare Impedit 152. proves something to this purpose, for a man had 4.
advowsons, and granted the next which should hap of them to I. S. and he died,
and the heir assigned the wife for her Dower one Manor to which the advowson
was appendant, which first became void, and ruled that the Grantee shall not
have that against the feme, and then it was moved by Thorpe, that he shall have
the second, but Shard said certainly never, which proves that, if the turn of
the Grantee was taken from him by the indowment of the feme he had lost that
for ever: the like case is the 15. H. 7. 7. 14. H. 7. 22. moved by Mordant,
that the Grantee of the third shall have the fourth, when the wife is endowed
of the third, which case is brought to prove a case, which without question is
not law, and that is that the King being Guardian of the Grantee of the next
avoydance, and he grant that, in this case the heir shall have that at his full
age, which without question is now law, for by the same reason his course may
be the 20. but there are two rules from this, which seem to cross this opinion:
one rule is that the words of the grantor shall be taken most strong against
himself, and the other that the Grantor shall not be received to avoid his own
grant, as it is said in Davenports case Coo. 8. but yet these rules are to be
intended where the words are complete, for as the case is the 13. Ed. 3. Grant
65. that where the husband and his wife are joint Tenants for life, and he in
reversion grant the lands only which the husband held, in this case nothing
passes, for the reversion was expectant upon a lease which the husband and
wife held: nay, I will cite one case, where a man by his own Act shall avoid
his own grant: in a quare Impedit Elmes against Tailor, where a man was seized
of the Manor, to which the advowson was appendant, and he granted the third
next avoydance, and after against his own grant he usurped, and it was
adjudged, that by this usurpation he had gained the advowson, to be appendant
to his Manor again, and that the Grantee had lost his course, and so the case
in Dyer 283. where the Church was void, and the patron granted the next
avoidance tunc vacant. to another, and this pro hac unica vice tantum: and
there resolved, that the grant was not good, and that it should not extend to
another: and so in our case it shall not extend to a second: another reason is,
if the King had a prerogative he is bound, and every derivative estate under
him, for he shall not be in better case, then the grantee, for he was bound by
the law of the land: and for that it is equity, and it is Justice that the
estate of the grantee should be bound, and so in this case, like to the case in
Plowden 207. and Dyer 231. where by Act of Parliament the possessions of an
Abbot were bound, now if afterward the Abbot made a lease for years, or
granted the next avoydance, and then after they came to the King, he shall
avoid the grant, for the interest of the Grantor was bound by Act of
Parliament, and see the case of the universitie of Oxford Coo. 10. where a man
before he was a recusant convict, he granted the next avoydance, and after he
became a recusant convict, and then the Church became void, now the grantee
shall not present, for his interest was bound by Act of Parliament, and so he
must take it, and here it behooves him to take that, as it is bound with the
prerogative of the King: and so upon all the matter he has lost his title, and
he concluded that the Plantiff shall be barred.

The argument of Justice Winch.
WInch Justice of the same opinion, but because his argument was much to the
purpose of that with Hutton, and the Lord Hobert; therefore I will not Report
that verbatim; and Winch said, I will speak to the last point which was moved
by my brother Hutton, and I hold that where he had the first granted to him,
now he shall have none at all, for it is punctually expressed that he shall
have the first, and that shall not extend to the next which may be granted: but
I grant if two coparceners had an advowson, and the eldest presented, and then
she granted the next avoydance, that in this case the grantee shall have the
next which may be granted, and the reason is, because she may not dispose of
the estate of another; but if in this case the course be evict, by title
Paramount of the King, then the grantee had lost that, and he cited the case of
Brook presentation 52. and Gilbie and Iuxtons case, which was directly adjudged
with the case of Brook, in which he was in council as he said: and he said that
the book of 15. H. 7. is not to be relied upon for Law: and he cited, quare
Impedit 154. and said, that the King in this case shall not have the
presentation against the devisee, for he had a title settled before the title of
the King, for though the prerogative of the King is more ancient, yet his title
is subsequent, and he cited diverse cases, where the title of the subject was
before the title of the King, and so the case of the 15. H. 7. was adjudged,
that he may not out the grantee of the next avoydance, and I think there is
much difference between a patron of inheritance, and he who had only a turn to
present, for there if the prerogative shall hold place, he had lost all the
fruit of his title, and he said our ancient books are, that the King shall not
have any prerogative, except he himself be patron, but admit he had, then he
had dispensed with that, for the Commendam may not be for years; and the
Commendam did not make any alteration; but only a dispensation, and the case in
Dyer shows that he remained parson to resign, and shows plainly that the King
had lost it: true it is there are some few precedents of these Commendams: but
there are none in our books, and for the assumption of the Bishopric, it is
all one with England, for the 17. Ed. the third, the Bishoprics are donatives,
and Fitz N. B. 169. 14. Ed. 3. 26. Plowden 44. and the books are the Common Law
that we have, and he showed some precedents of these Commendams to the Court,
and showed the case of the Earl of Kildare, where the incumbent had a Church
with cure in England, and an other in Ireland, and void for the Plurality; and
16. Eliz. Thorn-Borrow Parsonage was void, when the incumbent was made Bishop
of Ireland, and Bancrofts case who was Deau in Ireland, and then was made
Bishop of London, and it wa^ holden, his Deanery was void, and 4. Iac. Dod was
made Bishop of N. and the Chancellor here in the right of the King presented to
the living: and if a beneficed man do take a Bishopric, by the very taking of
that his benefice is void, by the consecration clearly by the Laws of the
land, for they are two incompatible benefices, and may not by any means stand
together, and so upon the whole matter, in regard that by the assumption of the
Bishopric, the benefice was void by the very consecration, and if the King had
any title, this was satisfied by his License, and dispensation to hold that in
Commendam, and so he held the Plantiff shall be barred.

The argument of the Lord chief Justice Hobert.
HObert chief Justice of the same opinion, and after a Brief Recital of the
case, said that his opinion was, that the Plantiff shall be barred, upon the
most of his case (S.) admitting that Clardon did live above the 6. years, so
that the King did present Gee in point of prerogative, yet the Plantiff had not
title upon the most of his matter, much less upon the viciousness of his
pleading, and first we are to deal, with the avoidance of benefices, with their
compatibles, and then with the Commendams of the King: and first I hold if a
beneficed man take a Bishopric he has clearly lost his benefice by his
consecration, by the laws of the Land, for they are two incompatible
benefices, and they may not stand together, but in this we must distinguish, in
this manner, first a benefice may be void by subordination, as where one is
made Bishop of the same Diocese in which his Parsonage is, and this is the very
reason of Dyer 158. and 8. Ed. 3. 9. where a Prebend of the same Church is made
a Dean, but otherwise if he be made Dean of another Church, and so my opinion
is, if a Bishop be made an Archbishop of the same province, where his
Bishopric is; nay, if there is Parson and Vicar of the same Parish with cure,
and the Vicar accept the Parsonage, the Vicaridge is void, for the Vicaridge
was derived out of the Parsonage, and our books say, it was a long time before
they would give the Vicar any estate, and the reason was, because here was a
Corporation erected without Lawful Authority, chiefly by the ordinary with the
consent of the Patron: and this case has not his fellow in the Law, and it is
de novo that it is made, for ab nitio non suit sic: and that also had enabled
him to bring an action against the Parson; and also it gave to him a freehold,
but the chief reason was he eased the Parson in his duty, and therefore good
reason he should have part in the profit, but in our case the reason of the
subordination does fail, for he is Bishop of another Diocese (S.) in Ireland,
and therefore we ought to search for another reason, and without doubt the Law
is all one in that also, and this is ratione eminentiae by reason of the
dignity of a Bishop, and so is Packhursts case in Dyer ruled without any
exception; and the case of the 44. Ed. 3. where one who had been prebend in
England was made Bishop in Ireland, and ruled the prebendary to be void, and
because the office of a Bishop and a Parson, do differ in the eminency,
therefore a Bishop may not be a Parson, and now for the other point, whether
the King had a prerogative or no, I spare to speak, because there is no
necessity to draw that into question, for the Plantiff had admitted that, and
the Defendant had not denied it: but for the Commendam I do not make question
but the King may make one, and so may the Arch Bishop, but the power of the
Archbishop is potestas limitata, but the King had a double power, one by
antitient title before any claim made by the Pope, and the other by the
Statute; but now for the other point, I think it is a Commendam for years, and
first I hold if the case had been that he should hold that in Commendam with
his Bishopric in pristino Statu, that had taken away the power of the King to
present afterward, and the reason is plain, for the prerogative is to present
to that which is void by the assumption of the Bishopric, which does never
hap, for by the Commendam he had that still as before, but here the Commendam
is for years, and if he do also resign during the years, then this is void by
resignation, and so is the case of Packhurst, that when he resignes during the
years of the Commendam, the Patron shall have that, and not the King: and so
also my opinion is clear, that if he had died within the 6. years limited by
the Commendam, that the King shall not have that, for then it is void by death,
and not by the assumption of the Bishopric, which book proves directly, that a
Commendam may be as well for years, as for life; but yet I do not hold that upon
those temporary Commendams, if the Bishop continued Parson during the years,
and made no Act to impeach, that then is a void cause (S.) the assumption of
the Bishopric, and then when that is determined the supension is determined,
and it is void by the original cause (S.) by the assumption of the Bishopric:
and this Commendam does not turn the second or first Patron to any prejudice,
for the incumbent is still in by the presentation of the Patron, and the
determination of the Commendam is not any cause of the avoidance of the
benefice; but this is quasi non causa, which is causa stolida, as the Logicians
do term it: but in this case the assumption is the cause of the Cession, and it
is like to the case of 25. Ed. 3. 47. where the King brought a quare Impedit
against the Archbishop of York for a Prebendary; vide the case: and ruled in
that case, that the confirmation of the King had not taken away his title to
present, and the reason was, because the confirmation had not filled the
Church, but continued that full which was full before, and here this temporary
Commendam may not restrain the King to present afterward, for this is not a
presentation, and therefore may not take away the title of the King: and here
the Plantiff has not well expressed it, for he has not showed in this Court,
that the presentation of the King was lawful, neither that Chardon held that by
virtue of the Commendam for all the 6. years, but only that the Church became
void, by the Laws of England, and that is not sufficient: and then if all
before were for the Plantiff, yet the question is, whether he has lost his
turn: and I think that he has, omnis argumentatio est a notoribus, and the
first is better known, then the second, and the second may not be the first,
and there when the devise gave him the first, it is idle to say, that he shall
have the second, for that departs from the meaning of the words, and in every
grant the law implies quantum in se est, and no man may say, that the devisor
did intend to warrant that from ancient Titles; and so the Lord Hobert
concluded his argument, and said his opinion was, that the Plantiff shall be
barred, and judgment was commanded to be entered accordingly.

Mich. 22. Jac. C.P.
Michaelmas Term in the two and twentieth year of King James in the Common
Pleas.
DAvenport moved for the amendment of a Record, where a recovery was suffered
of lands, in Sutton in the County of York, and the indenture of bargain and
sale was by the right name, and the indenture of uses by the right name, but
the writ of entry was of the Manor of Sulton, and upon the examination of the
parties to be recovery, that the recovery, was to no other uses then is
expressed, and mentioned in the said indenture, this was to be amended.

Sheis against Sir Francis Glover.
SHeis brought an action upon the case against Sir Francis Glover, and showed
for the ground of his action, that where one Harcourt was bound to the
Plantiff, in a Recognizance etc. upon which the Plantiff took forth an elegit,
and the Defendant being the Sheriff of the County, took an inquisition upon
that upon which it was extended; but he refused to deliver this to the
Plantiff, but yet he returned, that he had delivered that, and upon that he
brought his Action, and upon not guilty pleaded, it was found for the
Plantiff, and now it was moved in arrest of judgment by Sergeant Hendon, and
the reason he showed was, because he laid his action in an improper County,
for though the return was in Middlesex where the Action was brought; yet
because the land lies in Oxfordshire, where the seisin ought to be delivered
the place is Local, and for that the Action ought to be brought there, and now
Sergeant Breamston argued that the Action was well brought in Middlesex, for
this being but a personal thing, he may bring that in either of the Counties,
as 14. Ed. 4. 13. Ed. 4. 19. expressly in the point, and to the second objection
that had been made, that an Averment may not be against the return of the
Sheriff, to that Breamston answered, that in an other Action an Averment may be
against the return of the Sheriff, though not in the same Action, as 5. Ed. 4.
but it was agreed to have a new trial by the preservation of the Justices, for
otherwise it seemed the opinion of the Court was, that the Plantiff shall have
judgment upon the reasons urged by Sergeant Breamston.

Mary Baker against Robert Baker an Infant in Dower.
MAry Baker brought a writ of Dower against Robert Baker an Infant, who did
appear by his Guardian, and he pleaded that his father who was husband of the
demandant, was seized of a Message and of land in Socage, and devised that to
the demandant for her jointure in full satisfaction of all Dower, and he showed
that after the death of his father, the demandant did enter into the said
Message, and land, and was seized of that by virtue of the devise, and to that
the demandant did reply by protestation, that he did not devise, and for plea
confessed the seisin of the husband and her own entry, but she further showed
that the Infant, who was then Tenant, was but of the age of 14. years, and that
she entered as Guardian in Socage to the Infant, and disagreed to accept of that
by virtue of the devise, and traversed the entire, and the agreement: and it
was said by the Court, that his bar is good, though it had been more pregnant
to have alleged, that she entered virtute legationis praedictae, and so was
seized, and after it was said, that the Replication was very good without the
traverse, for this was not expressly set down, but that was but merely the
consequence of the plea, which in verity was not traversable.

Hickman against Sir William Fish.
HIckman had judgment for 600. l. and 10. l. damages against Sir William Fish,
and he acknowledged satisfaction for 410. l. of the said debt, and damages; and
after there was an agreement between them, that if Sir William did not pay the
residue by such a day, that then it should be lawful for Hickman to take out
execution against the said Fish, without suing of any scire facias, though it
was after the year; and afterward the money not being paid, Hickman sued forth
a Capias ad satisfaciendum against Sir William Fish, directed to the Sheriff of
Bedfordshire for 210. l. and now upon a habeas Corpus, Sir William Fish was
brought to the bar, and Sergeant Crawley moved for a supersedeas for him,
because the writ emanavit improvide etc. and by the Court it is a cause to
discharge him of the execution, for the Capias ought to have issued for 200. l.
only, and he ought to have sued a scire facias, though this was after the year,
because the Process was not continued, but they said withal, it was in their
discretion, whether they will grant a supersedeas, for they may put the
Defendant to his writ of error.

It was ruled, that if an action of debt was brought, and the venire facias to
try the issue is in placito debiti, and so is the habeas Corpus, and the
Panel; but in the Jury Roll of the nisi prius, at the latter end of the jurata
there it is placito transgressionis; and agreed in this case this is amendable,
or in this case it is good without amendment.

Wen against Moore.
THomas Crew Sergeant did move in arrest of judgment, where one Wen brought an
Action upon the case against Moore, and upon non assumpsit, it was found for
the Plantiff, and he said that the Colloquium was laid to be at Bourn in the
County of Lincoln, and the venire facias was de Vicineto de Born, without the
letter (u.) and for that reason, that they are several Towns, therefore error,
for if the entire Town is omitted: the trial is insufficient; but the Court
held this to be very good without amendment, and shall be intended to be the
same Town.

It was moved in arrest of judgment by Sergeant Finch, that where one had
brought an Action upon the case against one, and showed that the Defendant in
consideration of 12. d. given to him by the Plantiff, he assumed and promised,
that if the Plantiff may prove that he cut quandam arborem, upon the land of
Sir Francis Vain tunc crescent, that he would give to him 10. l. and this being
proved by the Plantiff, it was now moved in arrest of judgment, that quandam
arborem is an individual tree, and it ought to be aliquam arborem, and another
cause was alleged, because it was not showed, that this was upon the land of
Sir Francis Vain, then growing, but only he had said growing, and that may be,
for perchance he purchased the land afterward, and before the Action brought,
and so it might be growing, though not tunc crescent. at the time of the
promise, but the Court etc. Winch, Hutton, and Harvey, seemed that the
declaration was good, for they said there is no question if quandam had been
out, this had been good, for it is the singular number, and he that certain, or
be that uncertain, yet by the verdict it is made certain, that this is a tree,
and also those words tunc crescent. do refer to the time when the tree was
feld, and not to the promise.

Holman against Sir Thomas Pope and Elizabeth his wife.
Sergeant Hendon moved in a case, where an Action was brought by one Holman
against Sir Thomas Pope and Elizabeth his wife as daughter and heir to Sir
Thomas Watson, and pending the writ, Pope died, and he moved that the writ
ought not to abate, because it is brought against her as daughter and heir,
where the land is assets, in which the husband had nothing: like to the case of
an Executrix, who brings her action in her own name, and the name of her
husband, and pending the writ, the husband dies, the writ shall not abate, but
Justice Harvey said, this case of Executors was adjudged against him, and
Hobert chief Justice was of opinion, that the writ shall not abate, but day was
given over in that case.

Sir Thomas Holbeach, against Sambeach.
IN the case between Sir Thomas Holbeach, and Sambeach in a replevin where a
demurrer was joined, the case was this, one being Tenant for life, and he in
remainder in tail, joined in a grant of a rent in fee out of that, and then
they joined in the levying of a fine to a stranger and his heirs, and in this
case it was said, that the estate of the grantee of the rent which before was
determinable, is now made absolute, and a judgment was also cited to be in
that case lately adjudged: to which the Court seemed to agree, and they said,
if this be the point, they will give judgment presently.

Crompton against Philpot.
HEndon Sergeant moved in arrest of judgment, in a case for Philpot a crier of
this Court, where one Crompton had recovered 40. l. damages against him, in an
action upon the case, for words spoken against Crompton, etc. he innuendo the
Plantiff stole a ring, and had been hanged for that but for me, and it was said
in the first place, that it does not expressly appear, that the words were
spoken of the Plantiff himself, neither is this introduced by any precedent
Colloquium as it ought, for otherwise the innuendo will not aid it: but in
verity the declaration was, that the words were spoken de eodem Richardo
innuendo etc. and also he said, that the words are not actionable, because that
no value is expressed, but it was ruled, if that were but petie Larcenie, the
action lies, but the Court gave no absolute opinion in the case, for they were
willing to compound for the poor man.

The residue of Michaelmas Term in the two and twentieth year of King James.
Brown and Ware against Barker.
BRown and Ware brought an action against Barker, and they declared, that
whereas there was a suit depending between the Plantiffs and other
Coppiholders, of such a manor in the Chancery against Brook their Lord, and
that one Woolsey was there Clark, and that he for his fees, and for the
procuring of a decree had disbursed 14. l. and that there being a Communication
between the Plantiff, and the Defendant concerning the same, he being a
Coppiholder of the same Manor, that in consideration, that they would pay to
Woolsey 14. l. he would pay to the Plantiffs 40. s. upon request, and the
Plantiff showed, that they had paid the 14. l. and that the Defendant had not
paid the 40. s. Licet postea saepius requisitus fuisset, and upon non assumpsit
pleaded, it was found for the Plantiffs, and now it was moved in arrest of
judgment, by Crook Sergeant. First because he is a stranger to the suit, for
he had not alleged, that the Defendant was a party, and then it is no
consideration, but this was overruled, because they paid the 14. l. upon his
request; the second exception was, that this postea saepius requisitus, was not
sufficient in this case, because that he ought to express the certainty when,
and the place where the request was made after the promise, and the 14. l.
paid, and he said, there is a difference where a thing is a present duty, and
where it is a duty upon request, or upon any Collateral Act, there the request
is traversable, otherwise when it is a duty upon a contract, or upon an
obligation, there Licet saepius etc. is sufficient, and according to this it
was adjudged Hill 18. Iac. Rot. 1894. debt upon an arbitrament between one
Prideaux, and Walcot for the payment of 340. l. upon request, and it was
alleged there, that he had not paid that Licet saepius requisitus, and it was
adjudged, that in this case it was not sufficient, because it was not a duty
presently, but upon the request, and the place where the request was made,
ought to be put in certain, and he cited another case H. 16. Iac. between Hill
and Moor, adjudged in this point of assumpsit, as in our case, for where it
becomes to be a debt payable upon request, there ought to be alleged a time
and place of the request: and so H. 30. Eliz. one Welborns case, where a man
promised to pay so much money for costs of a suit, when he should be requested
to pay that, and there after verdict, judgment was arrested: and Hobert said,
that the request is part of the cause of the Action, and for that it ought to
be set down precisely, and there ought to be a promise broken, and such a
promise upon which an issue may be taken.

Bubles case.
IT was argued in the case of Buble, who was Administrator during the minority
of an Infant, that the Court of the Marches of Wales have no Authority to
force such an Administrator to account before them, but only the Ecclesiastical
Court: and if they intermeddle in any such thing, this Court may grant a
Prohibition.

The great case of Cooper, and of Edgar in Ejectione firm.
I In Ejectione firm between Cooper and Edgar for diverse lands in Norfolk,
upon a lease made by Downey and his wife for 5. years, and upon the general
issue the jury gave a special verdict to this effect; that one Henry Foyne was
seized ofland in his demeasne as of fee, and 9. April 34. Eliz. infeoffed
Justice Windham and others, to the use of Anne his wife for life, the remainder
to him and his right heirs in fee, and then Henry died, and that the reversion
descended to Robert Foyne as son and heir to Henry, and he being so seized of
the reversion 11. Iun. 10. Iac. by indenture made between Robert and Anne his
Mother, who was Tenant for life, it was agreed that Robert should levy a fine
of that in Trinity Term, and this fine was to be to the use of Anne and her
heirs for ever, if Robert did not pay or cause to be paid to Anne 10. l. upon
the first of September next, and if he pay then it shall be to other uses (S.)
to the use of the same Anne for life, of that part of which she was seized, and
of the residue to the use of Robert and his heirs; and they found over that the
fine was levied to the same uses the same term; and they found over, that
Robert died at the age of 20. years, and a 11. months, and this was before the
first of September, and it was found, that one Anne, and Elizabeth under whom
the Plantiff did claim were sisters and heirs to Robert: and that they had not
any notice of the use, nor of the indenture, and that they did not pay the
money upon the first of September, but that afterward they entered, and made
the lease etc. and the Defendant claimed under Anne, who is now the Lady Caesar,
and now if upon all the matter the Defendant be guilty was the question.

And Crawley Sergeant argued for the Plantiff, and the substance of his
argument was in this manor, and first he said, that he conceived the points to
be upon the special verdict, either to concern the ancient estate, or the new
estate of the Lady Caesar, and here we are also to consider, whether the uses
are well created and stand good, by the indenture, and by the fine without the
help of the special verdict, and first I will not dispute, when an Infant
levies a fine, and dies before the reversal of that, whether his heir may avoid
that, and this is ruled in Cooks Reports 10. H. 7. 16. that this may not be,
because that this trial ought to be by inspection, which now may not be, when
he is deed, but that which I will insist upon in the first place is this, when
an infant made an indenture to declare the uses of a subseqent fine, and he
does after that at another time levy a fine generally without expressing of
any use in the fine, whether he may any wise enter, and avoid the uses of the
same fine, or whether the law of necessity does adjudge the fine to be to the
same uses, without the help of any Averment, and I hold that he may avoid those
uses, which do stand upon this difference, that it is incongruous to reason,
that if the law admits a man to be of ability to levy a fine, then at the
same instant, or after he may declare the uses, because it it is intended, that
he is of full age, and if this had been a fine with grant, and render in which
there is always an use expressed, as 26. H. 8. 2, that the grant of an Infant
is absolutely void: but I do agree the case in Beckwiths case of a feme Covert.
Cook 2.
or of a man of nonsane memory, that their declaration of that subsequent use
is good, because that the fine which is levied by them, is a perpetual Bar and
conclusion, and by such means there disposal does conclude them for ever: but
it is otherwise of an infant, for he may avoid the fine by error during the
minority, and the opinion of the book of 46. Ed. 3. 34. is, that if an infant
do alien a rent, he may bring a dum fuit infra aetatem, which seems to infer,
that the grant of an infant is not absoluely void; I answer that is but the
admission of the Court, and 15. 7. 4. if an infant made a deed, and at full age
he enrolled that, this is a conclusion for him to deny that, for this
inrolment is an affirmance of that, and the reason of that is, because this is
an affirmance of the same thing: but here the fine and the uses are distinct,
and for that they are voidable, and for the other point the derdict had found,
that the fine was levied to the uses aforesaid, whether that had established
the uses, and made them unavoidable so long as the fine is in force, and I hold
that it had not, for it is no more then ad usus supra dictos, and it had not
bettered the uses, for they had no reference to aid the uses: like to the case
of the Earl of Leicester in Plowdon, and the 5. Ed. 4. 41. and yet I grant that
an Act of Parliament may make a thing void which was good, but so may not a
fine, and so held the verdict had not aided that.

The residue of Michaelmas Term in the two and twentieth year of King James.
ANd now he argued to the third point, which is the great point, whether those
words if Robert do not pay, make a subsequent or a precedent condition; and I
hold that it is a precedent condition, and this interpretation stands best with
the intentions of the parties, for before Ann had an estate for life, and
Robert in fee, and if a present use will arise, then Ann shall have all
presently, and leave nothing to Robert, but if the uses do forbear settling till
the first of September, and arise according to payment, and all the doubt
stands upon this word (if) which is some time taken as a limitation, as if a
man gives land to another, and to the heirs of his body, and if he die without
issue, then to another there (if) is a limitation, as it is in Bestons case:
but here this refers to a contingencie: and therefore it is a condition, and
saving the opinion of Hide and of Mountague in Colthursts case: I hold that
(if) there was a condition, and regularly (if) is a note of a precedent
condition: and I will first prove, that by Logic, for the word are an entire
Hypothetical proposition, (S.) the use shall be to An if etc. and in this is a
Histeron proteron invertio ordinis partium, that the consequent should be
before the Antecedent: in this manner if Robert do not pay 10. l. to Anne the
first of September, then it shall be to the use of Anne, and so quelibet pars
in Loco proprio redigenda est, and then if it is so, it is no doubt but this is
a precedent condition, and he cited Wheelers case 14. H. 8. a man granted his
Term, if he could procure the good will of his Lessor. and this was adjudged to
be a precedent condition, and so is Bracton Lib. 2. cap. 6. if the condition is
in futuris, then it is always precedent as to do talem rem si dederis mihi 10.
s. there it is said, valet donatio sed suspenditur tanquam etc. and if we
observe quite thorough Wheelers case this is always a note of a precedent
condition, and yet I grant that in some case it may be a note of a subsequent
condition, but that is quando impediatur etc. as in the principal case in
Colthirst si vellet inhabitare there of necessity this ought to be a
subsequent condition.

Now the next point is, whether the condition is discharged by the the death of
Robert before the first of September; and I hold that it is, for If
distinguishes as if the word had been, that if Robert do not pay; yet if he
die before the day, he is discharged of the payment, for there was not any
default in him, for all Humane contracts must give way to this Statute of
mortality, Statutum est omnibus mori, and there was not any default in the
heir of Robert, for he was not bound to pay, and therefore he needs not to do
that being to his prejudice, but my chief reason is upon the general rule of
all conveyances, for our law in its institution was a Law of mercy, and will
endeavor to justify Acts made in obedience to that, and to excuse defaults of
disobedience: and this is the reason of Master Littletons case, if a feofment
is made upon condition, that if the feoffor pay 10. l. such a day etc. now that
being to reduce an estate is not taken literally, but if the heir or executor
pay that, this is sufficient to reduce the estate, and so it may be paid at
other places, and to other Parsons, and so if the condition is to be performed
of the part of the feoffee, there his feoffee may pay that.

The next point is, whether any notice is requisite, and he held that there
ought to be notice, because the heirs are ignorant of that; and in some case
where a man is bound to take notice of that; yet by the Act of Law, that shall
be discharged, as in Sir Andrew Corbets case: but now for that last point, Cook
4.
whether the ancient estate for life is gone, and it is clear, it was gone by
the Common Law, but the question is, whether it is within the saving of the
Statute, of the 27. H. 8. and I hold it is not, for this is repugnant to the
estates conveyed, and to the uses limited: true if this had been a lease for
years, then it had been saved, as is resolved in Lillingstons case, Cook 7.
and Dyer 344. but this being a freehold confounds the nature of the fine if it
shall be saved, for the nature of such a fine is to carry a Franktenement, and
this is repugnant to the uses limited, for it is presently in Anne and her
heirs, if Robert do not pay, and for that if the Franktenement is saved, there
is no uses limited of that, which is contrary to the intent of the parties, and
also here the Conusee took an interest by the fine, and for this it is out of
the saving of the Act of Parliament, and so I pray judgment for the Plantiff.

The argument of Sergeant Finch Recorder of London.
LEinuage Finch Sergeant, and Recorder of London contrary: and after a Recital
of the case said, that I think judgment ought to be given for the Defendant,
it is usually said, finis finem imponet Litibus, but here our fine had not that
sense, for that had been questioned in all the Courts of Westminster, and now
it is come to this Court, where we ought to have begun, for this is the proper
Court to determine the right of inheritances, ergo spero sumus in Loco proprio;
and therefore shall be at rest: and the case upon this special verdict stands
upon two points. First, whether by the indenture and fine, the Lady Caesar had
gained the inheritance. Secondly, if she had not gained the inheritance,
whether she had kept her first estate, and for the first there are three
pertinent points moved by my brother Crawley, to which I will add a fourth.
First, whether the words make a precedent or subsequent condition. Secondly,
whether the death of Robert had discharged that, and that is become impossible.
Thirdly, admit that this is become impossible, whether the use will arise to
the Lady Caesar, and I hold that it will arise to the Lady Caesar. Fourthly,
whether any notice is requisite: and here first by the way, whether an infant
may limit the uses of a fine, I will not argue that, for so it is resolved in
Beckwiths case; and so is it cited in Mary Portingtons case to be adjudged, and
there was one Jews case 26. Eliz. before Wray and Anderson, and the reason is
apparent, that when the law had adjudged by inspection, him to be at full age
when he levies a fine, he shall never come after the fine is levied, and said
that he was within age at the time of the limitation of the uses; nay, I will
cite one case to show how cautelous and wary the law is in adjudging by
inspection: Points case, where an infant brought a writ of error to reverse a
fine, and day was given till Octabis Mich. to be adjudged by inspection, and
before the day the Term was adjourned till Mense Michael. but between Octabis
Mich. and Mense Mich. he came of full age, and yet upon Octabis Mich. upon the
Essoyne day Justice Crook took his inspection de been esse, and it was ruled,
that now he may not avoid the fine, but he was forced to compound for the Land,
and so the 6. Iac. was one Randals case, who reversed a Statute by reason of
his minority by audita querela, and the last judgment, for some error in that
was reversed, and then he brought a new audita querela, when he was of full
age, and he cited all the proceedings upon the first, and adjudged that the
audita querela does lie, and so here, when the law inables him to levy a fine,
the same inables him to declare the uses; and now for the first point, whether
this be a precedent or a subsequent condition, for that is the fair Helena for
which we fight, and yet I agree with my Brother Crawley, that in some Cases
there shall be a transposition of Terms, and the parts in the proposition, in
some cases (if) is a note of a subsequent condition, and for this the judgment
of the case in Colthirsts case, where a remainder was limited si ipse
inhabitare vellet, and to be a subsequent condition: and so I will not deny,
but that if a man make a feofment in fee, upon condition that if the feoffee
pay 20. s. then he shall hold to him and his heirs, it is no question but the
fee simple passes; and it is a subsequent condition to reduce that; but
secondly, this does better agree with the intents of the parties, and for the
first, the fine is levied to the use of the Conusee, and the Conusee is now in
by the Common Law; but defeasable upon condition afterward. Secondly, the
intents of the parties plainly do appear, that he shall have the land to the
use of her and her heirs, if Robert do not pay 10. l. and if he does, then to
other uses, now if no former use had been expressed by which this will result,
those last words will, and I say no mean use will result; but it shall be to
the use of the Conusee, and those words for ever, though they add nothing to
the estate of Anne, yet they serve to show the intentions of the parties, that
if he do not pay, then it shall be to the use of Anne and her heirs, and if he
paid, then that she should have that for life; but it is absolutely against the
intents of the parties, that she shall have neither, and for that of necessity
to supply the intents of the parties, this shall be a subsequent condition;
like to the case where a man levies a fine to the intent, that the Conusee
suffer a recovery against him, now of necessity to have the intents of the
parties fulfilled, the fine shall be to the use of the Conusee for this time,
though none is expressed, for otherwise it would result, and so in this case,
that the intentions of the parties may be performed, this shall be a subsequent
condition.

The residue of the argument of Sergeant Finch.
NOw for the second point admit, that this is a precedent condition, whether by
the death of Robert before the first of September, the condition is become
impossible to be performed, because that the letter of the condition is, that
if Robert Foyn pay to the said Anne etc. and I hold others are enabled in Law
to perform that, and that Robert his heirs or Executors may pay that: and a
thing which is implied or supplied by the Law is as well, as if it had been
expressed, as between Corbet and Cottow 39. Eliz. a bond to appear such a
return of the Term at Westminster, and the Term is adjourned before the day to
Hartford, and ruled that he ought to appear where the Term is, and so in many
cases where the words are short and curtailed, the law will supply that: 41.
Ed. 3. 17. a feofment to two to infeof another, if one die, the survivor may
make that, and yet it was not said that the Survivor may, and so is Brook
joyntenants 62. and conditions 290. words in the Copulative may be taken in the
disjunctive, and there cannot be a more apt case, then Littleton fo. 76. where
though there are the words of the feoffor, and the feoffee only; yet the heirs
of the feoffor, or the feoffee of the feofee, may perform that, for the words
being so, the Law supplies them; and if there is any difference between our
case and Littletons, then our case is the strongest, for Littletons case are to
defeat an estate which shall be taken strictly, and if his case be taken so
favorably, then much more in our case: and we see the words taken strictly,
when they are to defeat an estate, as that 3. of Eliz. a lease was made for
years upon condition, that if lessee do not pay, then that the lessor or his
Assigns may enter, and afterward the lessor granted the Reversion, and now
adjudged that the grantee may not enter, because it fails of the word heirs in
the reservation of the condition, and for that reason the lessor had but an
estate for life in the condition, which he may not transfer to another, because
he had not fee in the condition; and there was a case adjudged Pasch. 41. Eliz.
where a man was bound to infeof the obligee and his heirs, and in this case the
obligee died, and the Executors sued the obligation, and adjudged that they
shall be barred, because he made an estate to the heirs of the obligee, and so
is the principal case of the 10. H. 7. and Dyer 14. where a man covenanted,
that he will build a house, his Executors may make that, and so here it may be
performed by his heirs, and therefore it is not discharged: and now for the
third point, admit, that it is become impossible whether the use will arise:
and I hold that it will arise, and in that I take this difference between a
fine or feofment, and an obligation upon condition to make such Acts, for the
condition of the obligation is taken only for the benefit of the obligors, and
therefore if that do become impossible by the Act of the law the obligation is
saved, but here the limitation of the uses, are the words of the Conusor, and
therefore shall be taken more strongly against him; in which I put this case,
if a man had two sons, and he do Covenant in consideration of natural
affection, that if the eldest return from Rome by such a day, that then he will
stand seized to his use, and if he do not return, then he will stand seized to
the use of the youngest son; now if in this case the eldest die before the day,
so that it is become impossible that he should return, yet that will not hinder
the raising of the use to the youngest son; and so in Dyer 331. the limitter
may not have any estate against his own limitation of his uses, for this is his
own fact, and so in our case it is his own default to make such a limitation:
and now for the fourth point, whether any notice is requisite to the heirs, and
first I agree that in many cases, a man shall not lose a thing except he had
notice; but there are two exceptions from this rule, upon which I will put some
cases, and then I will apply them, and first the ordinary may present by laps,
and he needs not to give notice, for its supposed in law, that the ordinary
will in 6. months see whether the cure is served or no; nay, if the patron was
a Purchasor, and a stranger present, he had lost his inheritance, and yet no
notice ought to be given: and the 12. H. 7. if the Tenant of the Lord do die
without heir, and a stranger do enter, and Abates and dies seized, now the Lord
had lost the benefit of the escheat, and yet perchance he had no notice of
that, and so was the opinion of Dyer and Welsh 4. Eliz. that if two Copartners
make partition, in this case, the Lord ought to take notice at his peril; and
secondly, when one is bound to take notice at his peril as in Westby's case;
Cook 3.
the new Sheriff ought to take notice of the Execution upon the prisoners when
he takes them, and so is the first of H. 7. 4. a man being bound to perform an
arbitrament, he ought to take notice of that at his peril; but in our case here
is a presumption in law, that he had notice, for he had the land from his
ancestor, and in the same degree, and so the law does intend, that he had
notice of the conditions, and if he had not, it is the default of his Ancestor,
that he had not left his deeds with him. Secondly, the heir is privy to the
condition, this does descend to him, and therefore he ought to take notice of
that: and put the case, that an Action of debt is brought against the heir,
upon the obligation of his father, and he pleads he had nothing by descent, and
it is found that he had a reversion expectant upon a Term for life, of which he
had not notice of, yet that will not excuse, for the law intends that he had
notice, and that he shall be charged as if it were his own debt, and also the
deed after the death of his Ancestor does appertain to him, and if the deeds
are kept from him, he may have an action for them, and besides, here no man is
bound to give him notice, for if it should be given, it ought to be given to
the heir, or to the Executors, for they may both save the land by the
performance of the condition; nay, if there be 20. Coheirs, there ought to be
notice given to them all, because they are to lose their inheritance by that,
and it is not like to the case which was adjudged, where there are two obligors
to make such an assurance as the obligee shall devise, there a devise to one is
sufficient, because this concerns a personal thing, but otherwise when this
does concern an inheritance as here: but I rely upon the reason of the first
forming of the deed, if I am not bound to give notice at the time of the making
of the deed, I shall not be bound to give notice by any matter ex post facto:
and yet I do agree that in many cases where a thing is certain at the first,
and does refer to some future agreement, that in such cases, there ought to be
notice given to the party, as Hill. 12. Iac. in this Court Rot. 109. where a
promise was made upon a consideration, Trin. 22. Jac. C. P.
that the other will with draw his suit which he had in the Exchequer; that
then he will give to him so much when he came into Somersetshire, and adjudged
that the party ought to give notice when he came in to Somersetshire; but in
our case every thing is certain at the time of the making of the deed 38.
Assizes 7. if a feofment is made upon condition to regrant to the feoffor and
his heirs, if in this case the feoffor do die, he is not bound to regrant to
his heirs without a request; another reason is, who shall give notice to the
Lady that Foyn is dead, she is bound to take notice of that at her peril, and
also if the Lady had died, who shall give notice to the Executors, that they
may attend to receive the money, for if they do not attend, this is a
peremptory refusal; and for that reason it is equity, that if no notice is to
be given of one side, then there shall be none given of the other side; and so
I conceive, that there does not need any notice; and now for the last point
etc. of the estate for life, whether if no fee do arise, whether she had lost
her estate for life, and first this is no Forfeiture, for here he in reversion
is party; but it is said, that this is extinct, but let us examine, if this
had been before the Statute of uses, no more use will result then was before,
and for the estate for life that is saved, and it was resolved Trin. 5. Iac.
that if Tenant for life grant his estate by fine to another, and yet he does
express no use, that it shall be to the use of the party, because that the Law
intends that by this it is disburthened of the danger of waste: but in our
case, the estate of the Conusee is saved by the Statute of the 27. H. 8. for
this saves all rights, titles, possessions etc. of those who shall be seized to
any use, and so was it adjudged in Cheny and Oxenbridge his case, that the Term
for years was saved, but the doubt in that case, was not whether a Term was
saved which he had to his own use, but that which he had to the use of his
wife, and adjudged that this was saved; and 32. Eliz. it was ruled in the
Chancery, between Tates and Willers, that if he in reversion do infeof lessee
for years and two others, there it was ruled that the Term was saved, and so it
was adjudged Trin. 17. Iac. Rot. 246. Francis Priors case, that where the
lessee for years is, and he in reversion levies a fine to the lessee, to the
intent that he suffer a recovery, here the Term is saved, and yet for the time
the lessee was seized to his own use: but because that the fine was Preparatory
to enable him to suffer the recovery; now in this case after the recovery
suffered, that will look back to the first agreement of the parties, and so the
Statute has saved the Term: and for that reason, if the Statute do save a Term
which is of small account, much more a freehold, and so he prayed judgment for
the defendant, see more after.

The case of Hilliard and of Sanders entered Mich. 20. Jac. Rot. 1791.
HIlliard brought a replevin against Michael Sanders for the taking of Beasts
in a place called Kingsbury, and the Defendant avowed, and showed, that Sir
Ambrose Cave was seized in his demeasne as of fee of Kingsbury, where the place
in which etc. is parcel: and 14. Feb. 16. Eliz. granted a rent charge of 42. l.
8. s. 4. d. to one Thomas Bracebridg, and to the heirs of Thomas upon Alice to
be engendered, the remainder to the right heirs of Thomas, and Thomas had issue
John, and Thomas died, and then John his son died, having issue, Anne the wife
of the Avowant, in whose right he avowed for the rent of half a year etc. 21.
l. 4. s. 2. d. due at W. in Bar of which avowrie the Plantiff pleaded that true
it is, that Sir Ambrose Cave was seized of the Manor etc. and he made the
grant according, and that Sir Ambrose Cave died seized, and that the said
Manor descended to Mary his daughter, as daughter and heir to him, who was
married to one Mr. Henry Knowles, and showed that he was seized, and then
showed that the 12. Iac. it was agreed between the said Sir Thomas Bracebridg
and Alice his wife, Mich. 22. Jac. C. P.
and the said Henry Knowles and mary his wife, that for the extinguishment and
final determination of the said rent, that Thomas and Alice should levy a fine
to Henry and Mary of the said lands and Tenements aforesaid, by the name of the
Maniior of Kingsbury, 300. Acres of land, and of diverse other things, but no
mention was made of the rent, and this fine was upon Conusance of right, as
that which they had etc. and also they released all the right which they had in
the land to Henry and to Mary, and then showed that after the death of Mary,
this land descended to two daughters, one being now married to the Lord
Willoughby, the other to the Lord Paget, under whom the Plantiff claimed, to
which the avowant said by protestation, that there was no such agreement, and
for plea that the rent was not comprised, and upon that it was demurred in Law:
and now Sergeant Attoe this Term argued for the Plantiff, and the substance of
his argument was in this manner: Attoe said the case was, Tenant in tail of a
rent charge, agreed with the Tenant of the land to extinguish that, and that he
would levy a fine of the land to the land Tenant, which is upon Conusance of
right, and upon release, which fine is levied accordingly: whether this cuts
off the tail of the rent, and I hold that it will; and I do not find any
opinion in all the Law against this, but only the opinion of Thornton in Smith,
and in Stapletons case in Plowden: which I do not esteem to be a binding
authority: and the case is, Tenant in tail of a rent disseised the land
Tenant, and levied a fine with proclamation of the same fine to a stranger, now
said Thornton, this shall not bar the issue in tail of the rent, because the
fine was only levied of the land, and he cited this to prove another case,
which is Tenant in tail of land accepted a fine of a stranger, as that which he
had etc. and he rendered to him a rent, and he said that his issue may avoid
that rent, and this case I grant, because the rent was not intailed, but for
the other case I openly deny that, and there is much difference between those
two cases, for a fine levied of the land may include the rent as well as the
land, but it is impossible that a fine of rent should include the land, and our
case here is pleaded to be of the land, and of the rent, and a fine of the land
may carry the rent inclusively, because it is a fine of a thing intailed; yea,
it is not a new thing, that rent should be carried inclusively, by way of
extinguishment in the case of a feofment, and then a fortiori in a fine which
is a feofment upon Record, and especially when it is levied on purpose to
extinguish the rent, and the Statute of fines is more strong, for that is of
any lands, Tenements, and hereditaments any ways intailed to any person etc.
but this rent is an hereditament intailed to the person who levied the fine,
and this which is carried inclusively is within the Statute; nay, if a man had
nothing in the land, yet if it was intailed to him who levied the fine, this
shall bar the estate tail for ever, as if Tenant in tail made a feofment to G.
S. and after that he did levy a fine to a stranger of the same land, that in
this case the issue shall never avoid this, and yet neither the Conusor, nor
the Conusee had any thing in the land, and see for Archers case, Cook 3.
where the issue in tail levied a fine in the life of his ancestor, and a good
bar, and yet there he had but a possibility, and so was the case of
Mark-williams, Mich. 19. Jac. Rot. 763. C. B.
where all the distinctions were made, for Henry Mark-williams was heir
apparent to his Mother who was Tenant in tail, and he levied a fine in the life
of his Mother, and died without issue, and then his Mother died, and it was
ruled, that this did not bar the sister heirs, because she may have that, and
never make mention of her brother, but in our case, if the rent had been
granted in fee, it had been no question, but that a mere release will
extinguish that, and I think a fine with proclamation is as forcible to
extinguish a rent which is intailed as a release is, for a rent in fee: another
reason is this, is a fine directly of the rent, though this is by the name of
land, and also this is upon Conusance of right etc. and also in that he
released, and remised to the Conusees all his right in the said land, but a
case out of Bendloes Reports may be objected, Tenant in tail accepted a fine of
the land, and rendered that for life, ruled the issue is not barred: but first I
do not allow this case to be good law, but if it be good law, the reason is,
because he accepted only a fine of the land, and for that it only extends to
that and not to the rent, as if a man is seized of 3. acres, and he accepts a
rent of two of them, which render of them all, this is void for one acre; and
lastly, by a feofment of land by warranty a rent is discharged, 21. H. 7. and
here I conceive, that the replication to the bar of the avowrie is not good,
for his plea is, that the rent in this case is not comprised, and that is a
point in law, whether it is comprised or no; for if we do take issue upon that,
we shall draw the trial here from the Court to the jury in the County, which
is not good, and so upon all the matter I pray judgment for the Plantiff in
the replication.

The argument of Davenport Sergeant.
DAvenport Sergeant to the contrary, and he said, the case is as has been
recited, and the question is, whether the rent so granted in tail is by this
agreement of the parties, and by the fine of the land, whether it has
extinguished the rent: and I hold this conveyance which only passes the rent
by implication, is no bar to the issue in tail within the Statute of fines, for
where it is said, that a fine was levied of the rent by the name of the land,
and made no mention of the rent, this will not carry the rent, and yet I agree
this fine to be a feofment upon record, and to be a bar against the parties who
levied that, but not against the issue; if this had been before the Statute of
fines, it is no question, this had been no bar against the issue, for it is the
express book 13. Ed. 3. avowrie 12. and 26. H. 7. 4. Tenant in tail of a rent
made a feofment in fee of the rent with warrantie, and there it is said, that
the warrantie did not extend to issue quoad the rent, but now our case is upon
the Statute of 32. H. 8. which says that a fine shall be a bar of my lands,
Tenements, and hereditaments any way intailed, but yet I conceive that this
requires that the fine be levied expressly of that, and not by way of
conveyance, and so the case of Smith and Stapleton by Thornton, who said that
this was granted to him to be law, which must needs be meant it was granted by
the Court, or by the Council of the other side, and the reason of that is,
because it ought to be levied of that expressly, and there it is said, if Tenant
intail of an advowson, do levy a fine of the nomination, that shall not bar
the issue, and yet in effect that is the advowson, and because it is not levied
of that expressly, it is not good, and then for the precedent agreement that is
indeed, that the fine shall be for the extinguishment of the rent, and what
then will that prove, that the fine was levied of the rent, and here the writ
of Covenant was not brought of the rent, and yet I agree that agreements which
do lead uses of fines, will qualify them against the very nature of the fine,
as the case of the Lord Cromwell and Puttenham in Dyer: but I do not hold the
agreement will extend over the nature of the fine, and therefore this being a
rent in gross, it may pass by the name of land, and the averment here is
contrary to that which does appear upon the Record, and then not comprised is a
good plea; but this shall not be tried by the Country, but by the Record; as
12. H. 7. 16. for it is only to inform the Court, that the party had mistaken
the Law, and shall be tried by the Court, and not by a jury in the Country, as
Attoe said, and so upon the whole matter of the case I conclude my argument,
and pray judgment for the Avowant: see after Hill. 22. Iac.

The residue of Michaelmas Term in the two and twentieth year of King James.
Ralph Holt and Rand against Robert Holt.
RAlph Holt and Rand were jointly, and severally bound in an Obligation to
Robert Holt, and he took out Process against them by several Praecipes, and he
had two several judgments, and took out two several Executions against them of
one Test, (S.) a fieri facias against Rand, and a Capias ad satisfaciendum
against Holt, and the question was, whether the writs were well awarded, and
whether when one is Executed the other is discharged, and Sergeant Crew urged
15. H. 7. 15. if after a Capias executed, Sir Gilbert Dabenhams case.
he may not have a scire facias against the same party, and he cited a case to
be adjudged in the 13. year of King James, between Crawley and one Lidcat,
where two joint obligors, and the obligee did sue them, and had two several
judgments against them, and he took an elegit against one, and a Capias
against the other, and he who was taken upon the Capias brought his audita
querela by which he was discharged of the execution, for in so much that he had
taken an elegit against one, he is concluded to take any Process against the
other as well as against him, who had the elegit sued against him, and so is
Cook 1. 31. and yet some books are, if the fieri facias is served for part, he
may have a Capias for the residue, and so is the 18. Ed. 4. and ^0 Ed 4. 3. but
here the fieri facias was executed for all, and for that no Capias ad
satisfaciendum shall issue in this case: but Waller one of the Prothonotaries
c^^ed a case in this manner, that if a noble man and another be bound in an
obligation as before, and the obligee had such a judgment, as here in this
case, he may have an elegit against the noble man, because that the first
Process against him is by summons and distress, and he may have a Capias
against the other, or a fieri facias; but Hutton denied this case, and said,
that he shall have the same execution against both; for as this ought to be one
satisfaction quo ad ec. sati factionem, so this ought to be one for the manner
also, and though in this case, that the Capias was not well awarded; and Harvey
Justice agreed to that.

Methol against Peck.
MEthol brought an action upon the case against Peck upon an assumption, and he
declared that in considerat^on, that the Plantiff would pay unto one Plaford
52. l. to the use of Peck such a day etc. Peck promised to redeliver his bond
in which he was bound in the said sum, when he should be requ^sted to that;
and he said that he paid the 52. l. to the use of Peck, and that the said
Defendant had not delivered the said obligation licet saepius postea requisitus
(fuisset,) and upon the issue of non assumpsit, it was found for the Plantiff,
and now it was moved in arrest of judgment, because he had not showed the day,
and the place of the request, but the Court etc. Hobert, Hutton, and Harvey
were of opinion, that judgment shall be given for the Plantiff; and yet they
agreed he might have demurred upon the declaration, and that was good, and also
they held, if that had been generally saepius requisitus etc. it had not been
good; because the request is parcel of the promise, and therefore ought to be
precisely set down to be after the promise, and the payment of the 52. l. but
here they said, for the time it is very well expressed by this word postea, and
there is not any defect but only in the place, for postea implies, that this
was after the promise, and payment of the money; and Hobert said, that all the
points of the declaration quoad the substance are good, only it fails in the
place where the request was made, and this varied by the issue, and all the
rest is sufficiently alleged to ascertain the Court, that the promise is
broken; and Hutton said, that in his opinion such a request ought to be given
in evidence; but Harvey said, that though the request is parcel of the promise,
and that ought to be sufficiently alleged, and so it was here, so that the
Court may give judgment of that, and he said, that postea requisitus had
relation to the time of the promise, and the payment of the money: and
judgment was given accordingly for the Plantiff, in the said case.

Sir John Davis privilege denied.
NOte that this day being the 26. of November, Davis who was the Kings first
and chief Sergeant came to the Bar, and he offered to move the Court, and they
refused to hear him, because his course was gone in his absence, and he
claimed his privilege, that the Kings Sergeant might move at any time: but
Justice Hutton answered that 20. years ago, when he was made Sergeant, there
was no such custom, or privilege, except they moved for the King; and so said
Justice Winch also, and he said, that though of late time such favor had been
given to them; yet that was ex gratia Curiae, and this was an evil custom,
especially now when the King had five Sergeants, and he used to have but two,
and so they told him they would not allow of any such privilege, or
prerogative, neither would they hear him upon any such account, and they said
perchance of favor they might hear him.

Austin against Beadle.
AUstin brought an ejectione firm of lands against Beadle, and declared of a
lease made at Haylesham, and the Defendant pleaded, that Haylesham praedict.
ubi tenementa jacent, is within the five Ports, where the writ of the King rans
not, and so he pleaded to the jurisdiction of the Court, and the other replied,
that the Town of Haylesham was within the County of Sussex absque hoc, that it
was within the five Ports, and upon that the Defendant demurred, and it was
argued by Finch, that the traverse was not good; and he said, that he ought to
have traversed, absque hoc quod villa de Haylesham ubi tenementa jacent is
within the five Ports, for the verity was that it was part in the five Ports,
and part in the County of Suffex, and the land lies in that part which is in
the five Ports; and for that he may not take issue upon that traverse, for then
it will be found against him, and so he said it was held 50. Ed. 3. 5. that the
Plantiff in trespass there in his declaration and replication he distinguished
the part, and so the Plantiff ought here, but it was answered by the Council of
the other side, and resolved also by the Court, that the traverse is good, and
that the Bar is naught, and if the Plantiff may not traverse in other manner,
and that the Defendant in his Bar, he ought to have made his distinction, and
every plea which goes to the jurisdiction of the Court, shall be taken most
strong against him who pleads that, and the traverse here ought to be to the
Town, and not to ubi which was idle, for the law said as much, and we do not
imagine any fractions of Towns, and so I conclude the Plantiff ought to have
judgment.

Ashley against Collins.
IN a case between Ashley and Collins, it was agreed clearly by the Court, that
if an infant made an obligation, and after he being sued upon that, an Attorney
without warrant suffers a judgment by non sum informatus, that this was no
cause to grant an audita querela, and upon the opinion of the Court, the audita
querela was quasht, for it was said, he shall have a writ of error if he were
within age, and if he was not then he shall have his writ of disceit against
the Attorney.

Anthony Gibson against Edward Ferrers.
ANthony Gibson brought an Action of debt of 1000. l. upon an obligation made
the 11th. of December 21. Iac. and the Defendant came and demanded Oyer of the
condition, and the condition recited that, whereas there were differences
between the said parties, concerning some accounts, now they had for the final
determination, of them they had put themselves upon the award, and arbitrament
of Gerrard de Malines to be made before the last day of December next, if
therefore the said Edward Ferrers his Executors etc. shall and do for his and
their parts perform, stand to and keep the said Arbitrament of the said Gerrard
de malines, that then etc. quibus lectis et auditis idem Edwardus dicit quod
praedictus Antonius Actionem suam versus cum habere non debet; because he said,
that the said Gerrard de malines did not make any Arbitrament: and the other
replied and showed an Arbitrament, which he did award to Gibson interested to
be paid for money among diverse other things, and upon that the Defendant did
demur in law, and it was argued by Bridgman Sergeant for the Defendant; that
Arbitrament is void, for it is for the payment of interest; and I hold that
Arbitrators who are judges indifferently chosen, may not award interest to be
paid, for that is an unlawful thing, for all the Statutes which have been made
concerning usury, have branded that to be unlawful, and those differences which
are submitted, ought to be intended to be lawful differences, and he cited a
case in the Kings Bench, where an action upon the case was brought, upon a
promise made upon consideration, that if the Defendant will forbear the
principal together with the interest, that he will pay that at a certain day;
and it was adjudged, that the action lies, because there was no certain
interest set down; for he said, if the certainty of the interest had been set
down the consideration had not been good; and then if this thing be so unlawful
that a man may not bind himself by his promise, then a fortiori Arbitrators
may not award that; and for another reason it is void, because that interest is
awarded, for the time after the submission was made, and so I pray that the
Plantiff may be barred.

Hendon contrary, I hold the award to be good; for though that shall be void
for the interest, yet it shall be good for the residue, and then the non
payment is a breach of the condition, for where an award is made for a thing
against the law, and for another which does stand with the law, this is good
for one, and void for the others, so here. Secondly, this award is not for
interest, but rather for the damage for the forbearance of the money; but admit
that this were for direct usury, yet that is not void; my brother Bridgman had
cited a case where an assumpsit for usury was void, I know well what the
judgment was; for I was of Council in the case, and much was said in that
against usury, and Glanvil was cited Lib. 9. cap. 14. which said, that an
usurer did forfeit his goods; but that is to be intended of such, who live by
the common oppression of the people; and there was not any precedent found
where a contract for usury was void: Noy, the 26. Ed. 3. 24. debt is brought
for money given for usury, and admitted, and the Statute of the 13. Eliz. and
37. H. 8. which were made against usury, shall be frivolous, if such contract
shall be merely void; for they made only such contracts to be void, as were
made for above 10. in the 100. and so I pray judgment for the Plantiff.

An action upon the case was brought for calling one thief, and the other did
justify the words, and said that he was possessed of a Heifer which was
privately taken from him; and that upon search he found that in the possession
of the Plantiff with his ears cut off, and marked with the Mark of the
Plantiff, and it was ruled, that this was not a good justification, for the
matter is not sufficient; but he ought to have expressly averred that the Heifer
was stole from him, and accordingly it was adjudged.

Hill. 22. Jac. C. P.
Hillary Term in the two and twentieth year of King James in the Common Pleas.
THe residue of the case between Cooper and Edgar, and now this Term Sergeant
Crook argued the case for the Plantiff, and after a recital of the case, he
said that the general question is, whether the Lady Caesar had any estate by
this fine, or whether the old estate for life remains; for if she had the one
or the other, then it shall be against the Plantiff, and he said the points
which I will insist upon are four. First, whether these words do make a
precedent, or a subsequent condition; for if the uses do not arise till there
be a failing of the payment, then it is on my side, but if the uses do arise
before, then indeed it is against me, and I hold that no use will arise till
there is a default in payment; in which I will observe, that the words are all
in one period, and one sentence, and till the first of September the use will
remain in Robert Foyne; for here the same is voluntary, and it is without any
consideration, and then what does the Law say till the condition was performed,
the use was in him and his heirs; the grand doubt is, whether (si) here made a
precedent or a subsequent condition, and I hold that (si) is always a note of
a precedent condition, if it may stand with the law, and with the intentions of
the parties, but if it does cross either of those, then that is a subsequent
condition, and yet I agree if (si) is annexed to an estate which passes by
liverie, then this is a subsequent condition, and the same if it be annexed to
a grant which is executed, but if it is annexed to a grant which is executory,
then that is a note of a precedent condition, and so is Bracton lib. 2. fol.
190. where there is an example, and the placing that first or last is not
material; and in the case of an use which is executory as this is, there till
the (if) is performed nothing will pass; Plowden 172. nay, the case of 14. H.
8. by Brooks and by Brundwel, if I covenant that another shall have my land
when he marries my daughter, no use will arise till he marry her, and the case
of Colthirst proves my difference both the ways, for the lease was made to
Henry and his wife for life, the remainder to William si ipse inhabitaret etc.
and if he die in the life of Henry or his wife, that then it shall remain to
Peter, there the first (si) is a precedent condition, for if he do not die in
the life of them, then Peter shall take nothing by that, and to this purpose
there is a notable case 13. H. 6. 7. where a man made two his executors, and if
they did refuse to administer, then he made two others within 3. months after
his death, and ruled that in the mean time they are not executors; and yet (si)
was placed in the subsequent place there, and there was a case H. 33. Eliz.
between Iennings and Cawman, where a man made his will, and devised his lands
to his son for 3. years; and afterward appointed, that if his wife whom he
made Executrix did not suffer him to enjoy that for 3. years, that the son
shall be executor, and the question was, whether the feme was executor in the
mean time, and there Anderson said, that this was a precedent condition; but
the other Justices were against him, because it was a thing of continuance, and
there they agreed the case of Colthirst, that the word si ipse inhabitaret are
a subsequent condition, because it is a thing of continuance which may be
infringed and broken every year; and there was a case in this Court 29. Eliz.
Rot. 854. between Johnson and Castle, where a man devised his term to his
youngest son, if he lived to the age of 25. years, and did pay to his eldest
brother so much money, and agreed no estate passes till the age of 25. years,
and payment of the money, and the reason was, that a devise executory may
depend upon a precedent condition, and so here the use is executory, and
nothing passes till there is a failing of the payment: like to the case of the
15. H. 7. where a grant is made upon condition, that if the Grantee perform
such a thing he shall have such an Annuitie, there nothing does pass presently,
and so 21. Ed. 3. 29. where a man was bound in an obligation, not to infeoff
when he came to the house of Ancestor etc. vide the case, and here in our case,
because the condition is, that if he do not pay that, then she shall have it to
her and her heirs; therefore it is a precedent condition, and if the use had
been limited to him if he marry his daughter such a day, in the mean time no
use will arise, because the limitation is to him upon a thing not executed, and
this being all in one sentence, no use will arise in the mean time; the second
point is, whether the heir of Robert Foyne may pay that, or is bound to
perform, that then the law dispenceth with that; for it is limited if Robert do
not pay, and so it is personal to him, like to the case in Plowden, when a
thing is reserved to be made by the person of a man, no other man may perform
that, neither the heir nor yet the Executor: as in Dyer 66. 8. H. 4. 19. 21.
Ed. 3. 29. where the heir is not named, he is not charged, and 10. Ed. 4 12.
11. Ed. 3. 16. and so in this case, because it is personally limited to Robert
Foyn: and ergo if he do die, there the law will not compel the heir, and that
is the reason of Littletons case, fol. 76. for there though the father
Morgaged, and the son is not named in the condition; yet because he had an
interest in the condition, he may perform that, and so the case fol. 77. the
feoffee of the feoffee may perform that, though it is annexed to the first
feoffee only, and this is for the salvation and safety of his estate, and in
the first case being in A. Morgage the law said, that the heir shall not be
prejudiced: but when it is a voluntary Act, and in point of discretion to the
father, there the son may not perform that, and here the law had prevented the
father in the point of election, ergo it is discharged, and it is like to the
case of the Countess of Arundel, where a thing is annexed to the person of a
man, no other may perform it, and so here the heir may not perform that, for it
is discharged by the death of Robert. Thirdly, admit that he may perform that,
then the question is, whether default of notice may not excuse, and here the
Lady was a party to this condition in the indenture, and here the ignorance of
the fact may excuse, and when the law does put a man upon a necessity, there
it will excuse him as 44. Ed. 3. 61. and 50. Ed. 3. 39. and so the Law will not
impose a necessity of notice upon him.

The residue of the case of Cooper and Edgar by Sergeant Crook.
But Crook said, that he being heir is bound to take notice; but for answer to
that I will cite you one express case, Francis case Cook 8. for there the heir
was not bound to take notice of the proviso in the feofment without notice
given to him of it: Winch, that case directly complies with our case, and so
Farmers case Cook 3. lessee for years in possession levies a fine, that does
not bar the reversioner, because he continued in possession at the same time,
and he had not notice of that, and here if the Ancestor had not died seized,
there had been some color that he might have had notice; and this differs from
Littletons case, where the heir may pay the Morgage, that in that case he ought
to take notice at his peril, because he did not die seized: Corbets case.
and see 4. Coo. 8. where land is given to executors to take the profits, there
resolved that default of notice does not hurt them, but they shall hold against
the heir: now for that last point, whether the estate for life is saved by the
Statute of the 27. H. 8. or whether it is gone by the acceptance of the fine,
and I think it is gone, and yet I agree, if it had been lessee for years, it
had been within the saving of the Statute, because he is but a conduit pipe to
convey that; but in our case when it is by limitation of the use, then it will
not be saved, because that it is by her own provision that the use is so
limited to her, and so the law will not aid that; and by the common Law it is
an express determination of the estate: 1. H. 7. also the cases of Tenant for
years, being within the saving of the Statute does in no sort help this case,
for it may well stand with the estate; but out of the freehold the uses do
arise, and besides the law will not provide for him, who had not provided for
himself: as 5. H. 7. 7. if a man made a gift intaile rendering rent, the Law
will not raise any other tenure, and it is a rule in law, that a man shall not
take an estate by implication, where he had expressly limited an estate to
himself, and to that purpose there was a good case Hill. 13. Eliz. between
Richmond and Bowcher, where a lease was made rendering rent to the lessor his
executors and his assigns, and there the lessor died, and it was ruled in that
case, that the Executors nor the assigns shall not have that, nor the heir,
for it was not reserved to him, and in 16. Iac. one Farmers case, where such a
lessee for years took a feofment with an intent to suffer a recovery; but he
continued in possession two terms after, before he suffered the recovery; and
yet it was adjudged the Term for years was saved: but here he being Tenant of
the freehold, this may not stand with the limitation of the uses: and so I pray
judgment for the Plantiff.

The argument of Davenport Sergeant.
DAvenport to the contrary, after a Recital of the case said, that he thought
this to be a subsequent condition, for here are two uses limited, and so there
is two conditions for the first (if) if he do not pay this is subsequent, and
the estate does proceed; but the other is precedent, and the estate is
subsequent, and the sole difference when (if) makes a precedent, and when a
subsequent condition is upon the words, for in this case words make the case,
and if the estate is limited first, and then the condition seems annexed in
words to determine that, in that case it is a subsequent; but if the Act is
first appointed to be made, and then the estate is limited by express words,
there the estate will not begin till the tunc is performed; and so is the very
difference 14. H. 8. 22. and there the principal case is adjudged to be
subsequent, and upon that difference is 15. H. 7. and Coo. 7. where the estate
is first limited, and then the condition is after that, and the meaning of the
parties was, that the Lady shall have the fee if the other will not redeem
that; and I desired to be tried by no other cases, then those which my brother
Crook had cited; Mary Portingtons case (si) is a proper word to determine an
estate, and then the estate ought to be before; and for the difference between
things executed, and things Executory under favor that is no difference, but
that is as the words are placed; and I deny the case of Executors put by my
brother Crook, and so I say it is a present estate, but it is defeasable after
by payment: but now for the second point, whether it was discharged by the
death of Robert, or whether the heir may pay that, and I think that its
impossible to avoid; Mr. Littleton and my brothers difference of Morgage is no
difference; and Littleton says, that the heir may perform that, because he
has an interest in the condition; and the reason is not, because he is
charged, and so the case of the feoffee may perform that, and yet in both cases
it is annexed as personally as it may be; and Sect. 337. no mention is made of
the Morgage; but its in this case, if the condition had been that a stranger
should pay that, then this is merely personal: and so is Hill. 28. Eliz.
between Waltham and Ashworth, if an heir is bound to perform a condition, then
a stranger may not perform that, but any who had an interest as Guardian in
Soccage, or Chivalry; and here by reason of the interest of the heir, by the
non-payment he had broken the condition, for this is an hereditarie condition
or limitation, by which the heir had an interest: now for the third point,
whether he is bound not having notice; and I do conceive that, because the
notice is ancestrel, and he was party to that, and so there was an original
notice upon the agreement which is also hereditarie, and discends to the heir;
and that shall force him to take notice of that at his peril; but if it had
been collateral to the father, there I grant that will not bind the son
without express notice, as in Francis case: for there was not any Act by which
the father was bound to take notice, and I desire no better case, then Sir
Andrew Corbets case. Fourthly, the estate for life is not drowned by the common
law, neither by the Statute, for it is grounded upon the Condition, and so
there is not any Surrender in the case, and when an agreement is, that such a
fine shall be levied, now that shall be understood to be meant only of the
reversion, and he cited Sharingtons case, where Tenant for life levied a fine
upon conusance of right, to him in reversion to the use of others, there
because it might not appear to be otherwise, the estate of the Conusee was
saved: and Farmers case where a lease was made to Farmer for years rendering
rent, and after he bargained and sold the reversion for 41. years, and then
made an indenture between the lessor, and the lessee, and one of the
bargainees, that the recovery shall be suffered to the use of them and their
heirs, and adjudged the reversion for years was saved: and so I pray judgment
for the Defendant.

The argument of Sergeant Finch Pasch. 1. Carol.
ANd the following Term the case was argued by Henage Finch Sergeant of the
King for the Plantiff, and he said, the first point is, whether this made a
precedent or a subsequent condition, in which there had been much Logic used,
and it had been said, that it is a rule in law, that when a state is first
limited, and there are words of condition to divest, that in that case there is
a subsequent condition which ground I will not deny; but I deny that here the
estate is first limited, for though that seems to be in words, yet it is not in
the intents of the parties, but here first I will note an ordinary difference
in our books, that proviso and sub condition are notes of a subsequent
condition, (si) of a precedent condition, as appears by Mr. Littleton; and the
reason of this difference is, because proviso and sub condition make a full
proposition, and so does not the word (si;) and I compare that with Henry
Finches case, where aut and alibi never begin a sentence, and so (si) never
made an entire proposition: but the proposition is, that the fine shall be to
the use of the Lady, if Robert do not pay, which is an Hypothetical proposition
knit with a copulative conjunction, and then the antecedent ought to be (si,)
for all does depend upon that, but it has been objected, that this is not an
antecedent, for it is put in the last place, but I say put that where you will
(si) will rule the sentence, and will have a construction in the first place;
(S.) if Foyn do not pay 10. s. the first of September, then that shall be to
the use of the Lady, and her heirs, and there are many cases, where (si) being
so transposed will make a precedent condition 1. H. 4. 4. where the Judges will
receive the Attorney of the vouchee if his Master will consent, there he is no
Attorney till he do assent 3. H. 6. 71. per Martin a man made another his
Executor, if he will be bound to I. S. in that case before he is bound to I. S.
he may not maintain an action as an Executor; and so by those authorities 7.
Ed. 3. 41. 14. H. 8. Whistlers case, and Dyer 159. now for the second point,
whether by the death of Foyn the condition is discharged; and I hold that it
has discharged that, and I hold Littletons case, where a day is limited, and
where not will aid me: and I conceive that in many cases, where Acts are not
judicially annexed to the person of a man, yet they may be discharged by the
death of the parties, if they are Colateral Acts; and put the case, that the
use had been so limited, that if I. S. do not pay so much money before etc. now
if I. S. do die before the day, it is no question but that the condition is
discharged; and also if it had been limited in this manner if Foyn do not pay
this to a stranger, there by death also it is discharged, and the difference I
conceive is, when the money is to be paid as a duty, and where as a penalty,
and this difference I learn of Mr. Plowden in the argument of Sir Thomas
Treshams case reported by the Lord Cook, and also by the Lord Dyer, and by Dyer
it is said, that such a sum of money to be paid to the feoffes is not my
duty, and therefore I say this Colateral Act is merely discharged by the death
of Foyn: and Littleton seems to implie so much, for in all the cases of
Morgages, he says, that the Executor or heir may pay that, but when he comes
to such a feofment made to the feoffee to pay money on his part, he said, that
if he alien the land the party himself or the vendee may pay that, but not the
heirs, nor Executors of the feoffees; and there was a case 18th. Eliz. in this
Court, A. levied a fine to B. and his heirs upon condition, that if he pay so
much to the son of A. when he comes to the age of 18. years, then to the use of
B. and if not, to A. and his heirs, and the son died before the day, and the
opinion was, that B. shall have that: now for the last point, whether the
estate for life is gone, and I hold that it is, and here he agreement of the
parties hinders the operation of the law, and that law will not provide for
him, that provides not for himself, and the Lady her self was party to the
limiting of the uses, and she covenanted that she will be seized by virtue of
the fine, and under the condition in the indenture, and so it is a plain
Surrender of her former estate, and so I pray judgment for the Plantiff.

The argument of Sergeant Hendon to the contrary.
HEndon contrary, there are 3. points. First whether this be a precedent or a
subsequent condition, and I conceive it is subsequent, and here the indentures
being but to declare the uses of the fine, and not to create any use, ergo it
shall be guided by the intents of the parties appearing in them, and so is the
Earl of Rutlands case Cook 5. and Dyer 357. and Shelleys case, and the meaning
of the parties was not to raise any use to Robert, but only a possibility to
reduce that by the performance of the condition, and first it is here said,
that the Conusee shall be seized to the uses hereafter expressed, and under the
conditions, and then the use ought to preceed the condition, for no man may
stand seized under the condition, except the condition is subsequent to the use
to arise. Secondly, when is the use to arise to Robert, surely when he pays
10. s. and then in the mean time the use is to the Lady and her heirs, for tunc
had here relation to, when as it is said in Boles case Cook 3. and in Grants
case cited in Loves case Cook 10. and 17. Ed. 3. 1. all which cases prove that
t^en had relation to when, and before this when he had nothing, and this does
appear to be the agreement of the parties; and now for the words themselves, I
take it that they make a subsequent condition, and so it is here limited in
intention, and for that in matter also; and it is said in Colthirsts case in
Plowden, that if the estate does first pass reducible upon condition, then it
is subsequent, and here it is limited to the Conusee and his heirs, if the
Conusor do not pay: but here it has been said is inversio verborum, and the
consequent is placed before the Antecedent, and this has been proved by
Logic: I never knew cases in law to be expounded by Logical and Grammatical
learning, but by the intentions of the parties, and here I conceive that the
estate is v^sted in the Conusee by the fine, and so the condition is
subsequent: but admit it is Executory, and I say concerning that there are
these differences; that if the state of the thing granted is executory, and
that the condition of the thing granted is Executory, and the condition is to
remain with the estate, so long as the estate does remain, the condition is
precedent: 28. E. 3. 2 4. 3. 1. H. 6. 32. but if the condition be but one time
to be executed, and that not contained with the estate, then it is subsequent
10. Eliz. Dyer Calthorps case: but here our estate is executed, for it is
expressly limited to the Lady Caesar and her heirs, which takes away all implied
uses, so that no implied use shall result in the mean time, and so 75. Assizes
land given to a man and to his heirs, if he have heirs of his body, now this
(if) is subsequent, and so I conceive that it is not a condition simply, but a
conditional limitation, for it appears by Mr. Littleton, because it is no
otherwise expressed, and another reason is, because the condition is annexed to
the future time, ergo that is subsequent, and yet I grant there is a difference
betwixt such an estate conditional annexed to an interest, and where it is is
annexed to an authority, it may be precedent, but for an interest it is
subsequent, as is the case of Bracton lib. 2. fo. 3. and now for the second
point, whether the heir may and ought to perform that, and I do conceive that
he is, and it is not annexed to the person, because it is real, and does arise
with the land. Secondly, yet the law does expect who ought to have performed
that, but it is the performance it self which the law does respect: 4. E. 3. 2.
such condition real which does arise with the land, and in such a case no
notice is in that case requisite: and the last point is, whether the estate for
life is gone, and I hold that it is saved by the common law of England, for the
fine only is as the grant of the reversion by the explanation of the indenture,
and then there is no surrender in the case; but when the condition is
performed, the estate for life does remain, and so was it resolved in Mr.
Mansors case; and yet I agree that a little matter will make a surrender; and
Mr. Ruds case where lessee for years of an advowson, was presented by the
Patron, that was a surrender: but the Statute of the 27th. of H. the Eighth at
the end saved that, though it is to her own use, for the words of the saving
are to every person, and their heirs which hereafter shall be seized to any use
all such former rights, etc. possession etc. as they might have had to their
own use, in any lands whereof they be seized to any other use whatsoever: and
so upon the whole matter I do conceive, that judgment ought to be given for
the Defendant.

The residue of the case of Gibson and Ferrers.
NOw the case of Gibson and Ferrers, which see before, was argued again by
Sergeant Bridgman; and he said, as before, the award is not good for the
interest, and yet he now agreed that covenants, bonds, and contracts for usury,
are good in law, but yet it may not be awarded 17. Ed. 4. 5. if a man do submit
to Arbitrators, they may not award that he and his wife shall levy a fine, but
if the party himself do promise that, this is good, and shall bind the wife
to perform that; and besides he said, that here is an award made only of one
side, and nothing is allowed to Ferrers, and so not good: 9. Ed. 4. 29. 29. H.
6. 22. and I pray that the Plantiff may be barred: Hendon to the contrary: and
he argued, if an award be good in any part, though it be not in that which is
assigned for breach, yet it is good upon such plea of nullum fecerit arbitrium;
and the other shows an award, and assigns the breach, in this case the breach
is not traversable, for it is of the form, and not of the substance of the
action: but to that the Court did presently answer, that the cause of the
action is the breach of the award, and this he ought to make apparent to the
Court, for otherwise he shall not have any action, and though the breach is not
traversable, yet it is of the substance of the action, for upon such plea
pleaded, he not only ought to maintain the award, but to show the breach, for
it shall be otherwise if it be found against him; and then Hendon answered to
the other exception, that this is not for direct usury, but is rather for the
damage, which he sustained by the forbearance of the money, and yet if it were
for interest it is good, and then as to that which now had been agreed by my
brother Bridgman, that contracts and obligations for usury are good: I say then
by the same reason an award for that is good, for whatsoever a man may contract
for, the same thing may be awarded; if the contract will bear that, and usury
is not malum in se, but only malum prohibitum, and is good by our law, and here
in this case, though the Arbitrator was deceived in the sum, yet after the
award made it is altogether certain, and an implied recompense is sufficient in
this case: but the Court said, that the casting up of the accounts did not make
an award, for it is not a good Calculation, but the ending of the controversies
that does make the award, but yet the opinion of the Court in this case was,
that the award was good, for an Arbitrament shall not be taken absolutely upon
the bare words, and the Court did command the parties to come before them upon
the morrow in the Treasury, and as it seems this was for mediation to make an
agreement, for the opinion seemed to be for the Plantiff.

The case of Hilliard and Sanders argued by the Court.
Justice Harvey this Term did argue the case of Hilliard and Sanders, which see
before; and after a brief recital of the case, he said that his opinion was,
that the avowant shall not have return, because that by the fine of the lands
the rent is extract, and I am induced to be of this opinion by two things, the
first is the agreement, and the other is the favorable exposition of the
Statute of fines, to settle repose and quiet, and I will first show the
efficacy of fines at the common law; 21. Ed. 4. the Pryor of Binghams case, it
is laid for a ground and rule in law, if a thing be contained in a fine either
expressly, or implicitly, this is very good: and so is 44. Ed. 3. 22. 37. H. 6.
5. for a fine is no more then an agreement, and therefore it is called in latin
Concordia, and then see if by any words you may pass this rent by the fine, and
though the word rent is not there, yet if it be so infolded in the lands, that
is good with that, it is very good, and for that 3. H. 7. 16. 17. 21. H. 7.
proves that by a feofment of the land the rent does pass, and wherefore not by
fine then, and this shall be within the Statute of 4. H. 7. and 32. H. 8. and a
case may be out of the Statute of 32. H. 8. and yet be within the Statute of
the 4. H. 7. as the 2. Ed. 3. in Dyer though the feme after the death of the
husband she may enter upon the discontinues of the husband, yet if she do not
within 5 years she shall be barred, and now you see that the construction of
these Statutes was always to settle repose and quietness, for if such a
construction should be made according to the opinion of Chornton in Smith and
Stapletons case, then it will be mischievous, and for his opinion it was only
in the way of arguing, and yet I conceive he had the good opinion of the
Reporter, and without all question it is a case of as hard a construction as
that is of Archers case, where the heir who nothing had in the land in the life
of his father, did levy a fine, this is a bar for ever, and the reason is,
because it is of a thing which is intailed, and he cited a case in Bendloes
Reports, where a discontinuee was disseised by Tenant in tail who levied a
fine, and the discontinuee entered, and then proclamations passed, that in this
case the issue was barred; truly I do agree the case of 36. H. 8. that that a
fine levied of land did not bar him who had title of Common, or a way, the
reason is, because there is no privitie, but in our case there is a privitie,
and by Margaret Podgers case a Coppiholder is within this Statute, and in our
case the rent passes especially in regard of the agreement, as in the Lord
Cromwels case, and he cited a case primo Jacobi, between Gage and Selby in an
ejectione firm, where Gage was Tenant in tail, and he levied a fine to I. S.
in fee, and after he levied another fine to the use of himself for life, the
remainder over, and his brother brought a writ of error to reverse the first
fine, and ruled that he may not, for the second fine had barred him of any writ
of error, and so I conclude the fine had extinguished the rent.

The argument of Justice Hutton to the contrary.
HUtton contrary, the fine had not barred the rent, in which I will consider
the nature of fines at the Common Law, and they were of mighty and great
esteem, and force, as appears by the great solemnity which is used in them, as
is prescribed in the Statute of fines 18. Ed. 1. de modo Levandi fines, and he
agreed that such a fine by Tenant in fee simple will pass that inclusively, for
by the release of all his right in the land a Signiorie is gone. I agree also
that a fine is but an agreement; but yet it must work according to the nature
of the thing, as upon a writ of Measne, or of right of advowson, a fine may be
levied, and yet it is not levied of the lands, but of the advowson, or
Signiorie, and so if the writ of covenant be one thing, and the agreement of
another thing, then it is not good, and first I will prove, that at the Common
law fines have been rejected when the writ of covenant did not contain the
thing of which the fine is to be be levied, and if at the Common law a fine was
levied of rent, there ought to be a writ of covenant of that 18. Ed. 2. fines
123. and there the rule is given, that it is against reason to hold covenant of
that which never was, and the rent there never was before, but ought to begin
then, and yet it is clear a man may create a rent by fine; but he shall not
have a writ of covenant of that when it was not in esse before, and because the
concord may not vary from that, therefore it was not received 38. Ed. 3. 17.
Knevet put the rule, that a fine may not be of more then is in the writ of
covenant, and when a fine is properly levied of that, it is by way of release:
Fitz. fine 100. and so I conceive here the rent does not pass. Secondly, here
no man may plead that any fine is levied of this rent, for this is forced in by
the name of land, which is absurd, and contrary: and here is not any fine
levied directly of the rent, nor any Silver of the King paid for that, but only
by the judgment of consequence: and now for the Statutes of fines, whether it
is a fine within these Statutes, and I hold that it is not: and I am of opinion
that if the rent had been behind before all the days of proclamation pass,
and the issue had accepted, that he is remitted: and the same law is, if Tenant
in tail of such a rent, and he acknowledge such a fine with proclamations, and
the proclamations pass, now if his issue had accepted the rent before the
proclamations passed, he is remitted: and now for the Statute of 32. H. 8. that
is not taken by equity, because it is a Statute of explanation, which
regularly may not be enlarged: and so appears in Butler and Bakers case; and
now for the agreement it self that is not any thing, for this is by a contrary
name which may not be good: like to the case of the Lord Cromwell, for there was
an agreement to raise a rent by fine, but here is an agreement to pass a rent
by another name, and will any man say that if a man agree to levy a fine of
rent by the name of an advowson, that this will pass the rent; and I think that
the case of Thornton is good law, and so is also the case which is put after
that of the advowson: and yet I agree if Tenant in tail do accept a fine with
render to another for years, that shall bar him, because that does not work a
discontinuance, but otherwise where it is for life, and so in my opinion the
rent remains, and the avowant shall have judgment.

The argument of the Lord chief Justice Hobert.
HObert to the contrary, the short question is, whether the rent is extinct by
the fine of the land, and I hold that it is, and it is agreed it is a bar
against the parties themselves, though not against the issue, and that being
granted I see no second reason wherefore the issue shall not be barred, and
first I am of opinion, that this plea of not comprised, it is not good; because
this fine does work by way of release, but it was said at the bar, that things
ought to pass literally in a fine, which I deny, and also every informalitie
of a fine which is cause to reject that, is not a cause to frustrate that when
that is levied, and the words of the Statute are of any lands, Tenements, or
hereditaments any wise intailed, and if there be any word in the conveyance
which will carry that, it is sufficient, and it shall be put upon the
construction of the law, and as to that, that the fine shall be according to
the writ of covenant; but I say if there be no writ of covenant, then there is
no departure: but it was said, that the Silver of the King was not paid, which
I also deny, for it was paid inclusively, and the words of the Statute are of
any thing any wise intailed, and Tenant in tail had as great power to pass
that by fine, as Tenant in fee simple: and for the case of Thornton, I know he
was a learned man, but let it suffice that he was so esteemed; but for his
opinion I do utterly deny that, and I do deny the case put by my brother
Hutton of the Piscary, for I hold if a man had a Piscary in another man's land,
and levies a fine of that by the name of land, this will pass the Piscary
clearly, and so the same if a man have an office appertaining to land intailed,
and a fine is levied of that by the name of the land, this shall bar the issue;
and I deny that Statutes of explanation shall always be taken literally, for
it is impossible that an Act of Parl^ament should provide for every
inconvenience which happens, and so the case of Godfrey and Wade adjudged, that
the fine of the youngest son may not bar the eldest, and yet within the words
the eldest was heir to him, but this word heir shall be expounded as his heir,
and so we use to expound the Statute of 4. H. 7. which is an original Statute,
and binds parties, and privies, and here the eldest brother is not privy, for
he claims before him: and so I conclude that the rent is gone: and judgment
was given accordingly.

Sir Robert Hitcham against Brooks.
SIr Robert Hitcham Sergeant of the King, brought an action upon the case
against Brooks, and set forth in his declaration, that he was one of his
Majesty's Sergeants at law, and that the Defendant spoke these words of him, I
doubt not but to prove, he, innuendo Sir Robert Hitcham, has spoken treason,
and upon not guilty pleaded, it was found for the Plantiff, and now it was
moved in arrest of judgment by Hendon; first, because it is not a direct
affirmation, that he spoke treason but he doubts not but to prove that, like to
Penticosts case which was adjudged here, where one Baker said of him, I will
prove that Penticost was perjured, and no action will lie, because he did not
directly affirm that he was perjured. Secondly, because he had not showed when
he spoke those words, and perchance it was in his infancy, or lunacie, or
before the general pardons. Thirdly, here is not any allegation of any
conference had of the King before, and the speech of Treason is not Treason,
but when there is an intent to commit that, and words shall be taken in the
best sense, as the case of Stanhop Cook 4. and so in the case between the Earl
of Shrewsbury, and Sir Thomas Stanhop, one laid to Sir Thomas Stanhop, that the
Earl is a subject; nay, said Sir Thomas that is his grief, and adjudged those
words are not actionable, and yet the words might be taken as if he had repined
to have a Sovereign, but the words were taken in the best sense: Finch to the
contrary; this is more then a bare affirmation, for he said he doubted not but
to prove that, as much as if he had said, I am sure of that, and Mich. 16. Iac.
Sidnams case, where one said, I think in my conscience that if Sir John Sidnam
might have his will he would kill the King, and all his good subjects, and
adjudged upon a writ of error brought of that, the words are actionable: and so
in Whorewoods case, so sure as you believe that God rules the world, and that
the King rules the Kingdom, so sure did Whoorwood steal such goods, and
adjudged to be actionable; and yet perchance the party to whom he spoke, did
not believe either of them, and so Woods case 18. Iac. I will call him in
question for killing of a man, I will pawn my shirt but I will hang him, and so
here, and prayed judgment for the Plantiff.

Ashley Sergeant contray; words which may be taken in a double sense shall be
taken in the best sense, and it shall be intended he spoke Treason in putting
of a case, or in speaking that after another, and yet he offended not; and so
if he had said, that he had written, or printed Treason, for so do the printers
of the King, and the Clark of the Crown; and so I conceive that the Plantiff
shall not have judgment.

Easter 1. Carol.
ANd Sergeant Bawtrey, the Term following argued for Sergeant Hitcham, that it
was plain, that the Defendant spoke the words with a full intent to take away
his life, and to speak Treason is to speak ex cord suo, and not that which
another spoke, and now in Easter Term 1. Carol. judgment was given for the
Plantiff by Hobert, Hutton, Harvey, and Crook with one accord: and they said
the limitation of the time is not material, for if it was spoke in his infancy
etc. Brook ought to have showed that: and Crook cited Walgraves case 32. Eliz.
in B. R. one said of him that he was not a good subject, and adjudged, because
he spoke them maliciously, and he being one of the privy chamber, that the
action will lie, and so 5. Iac. Blanchflower and Alwood thou haste spoke
Treason, and shall be hanged for that, adjudged to be actionable, and the 7.
Iac. Barford against Prowse, thou haste spoken Treason, and I will prove that,
adjudged to be actionable; and judgment was given for the Plantiff according.

Pleadal against Gosmore.
PLeadal brought an action against Gosmore for the taking of his Colt, and
fettering him by which the Colt was much the worse, and the Defendant
justified, and showed that the Colt was taken within such a Manor which was
the Counteses of Hartfords, and that she had estrayes within the same Manor,
and he justified the taking as Bailiff to her; and showed that he fettered him
to the end to keep him from doing harm, because he was wild: and Sergeant Attoe
demurred in law, and he said that a man may not fetter an estray, because he
shall be paid for his keeping, and for the hurt that he did; and he cited a
judgment 8. Iac. in this Court Rot. 1749 between Harvey and Blacklock, for the
taking of his horse, and the fettering him by reason of which he fell into a
ditch and was drowned, and the other justified the taking as an estray, and he
fetred him to one of his own horses, because he was wild, and they both fell
into a ditch, and were drowned etc. and adjudged to be no Plea, and the reason
which the Lord Cook gave was, because he shall be paid for the keeping of him,
and for his damage, and of this opinion was Hobert in the case at the bar: but
Winch, Hutton, and Harvey contrary: that he may fetter him as he may his own
horse, and for the case which was alleged, they said that there was no
proclamation pleaded, and so the justification was not good, and judgment was
entered for the Defendant: and this was the last case that ever Justice Winch
spoke to in the Court; for he being a man not more admired for his profound
learning, then he was reverenced for his piety and integrity died upon Friday
following, being the fourth day of February in the morning as he was making
ready to go the Hall.

Elizabeth Davis against Hawkins.
THere was a case between Elizabeth Davis and Hawkins in the spiritual Court
for defamatorie words, and sentence was given against the Plantiff who appealed
to the Arches, and judgment was given for the Plantiff, and 12. d. costs, and
then came the general pardon, and the Defendant did appeal to the deligates,
and there the second sentence was affirmed, and greater costs given, and the
Defendant did plead the general pardon, and they would not allow of that; and
now it was moved for a prohibition, and these points were debated by the
Council, and agreed by the Court etc. by Hobert, and by Harvey; that though
this suit and sentence is only for to make the party to deny the words, and
confess his fault in some public place, yet it is in effect, as if it were
merely at the suit of the King for reformation, and this is a new invention
which they had found out, to take away the benefit of the pardon of the King,
and now to the new costs which were taxed by the deligates, they were not taken
away by the pardon, for though the first offense was, yet because this new suit
was not only to quash the sentence for the offense, but also for the costs,
ergo these new costs were assigned for the unjust vexation, for he was the
cause of the removing of that; and so they may do for the unjust vexation; but
not for the first offense.

The End.
A perfect Table of the Principal matters contained in this Book.
A
Account against a Bailiff, to the damage of 100. l. and judgment to account,
he makes default, what judgment shall be given: 5. Account what is a good Plea
in bar therein, 9 An action upon the case where a request, and the time and
place thereof necessary, and where not, 2 Action for saying the Plantiff is a
false for-sworn knave, and took a false oath at a Commission, 2 and 3 Action
for saying, thou art a Thief, and have stolen 20. load of my furzes, lies not,
3 and 10 Action for etc. thou have stolen Hay from Mr. Bells Racks, and
judgment for the Plantiff, 6 Action upon the case upon a promise, what is a
good consideration, a quaint difference taken, 7 8 Amendment of a judgment,
where, and within what time: good matter 89 Award where good in part, and void
for the rest, 1 Action for words, that the Plantiff stole Tobacco out of his
Mrs. shop not good, without averring that there was Tobacco there, 15
Attachment denied upon an affidavit, 15 16 Audita Querela where it lies
against one Feoffee, and where before an Ouster, 20 23 Action upon a promise
what consideration is good therein to forbear, 22 23 Action upon the case for
procuring the Plant, to be indicted for stealing Vetches, where it lies, and
if it ought to be a writ of conspiracy, 28 54 An action by an Auditor for
saying, you are a Cozner, and live by Coznage, 33 39 40 41 An action for saying
the Plantiff loaded a ship with Barley, and stole 7. quarters of it by measure,
it lies, 41 Avowrie for rent granted to the father, and that it was arrear to
his son, good without saying in whose time it was arrear, 48 Action upon the
case to save the Plantiff harmless for keeping a prisoner, good, without saying
he was lawfully arrested, 48 49 In avowrie for rent upon a lease by the father,
the son claims by descent, the Plantiff says the father devised the
reversion to another, the jury found a devise only of two parts, judgment
given for the Avowant, 49 50 Amendments not allowed upon indictments, actions
popular, or penal Statuts, and if one be named in the venire facias, Gregory is
returned George, there needs not amendment if it be in a Tales, otherwise in a
principal panel, 66 Action for words, he is as arrant a Thief as any is in
England, the Plantiff needs not aver, that there are Thieves in England, for
the difference is when the words relate to a particular place, and when to an
entire Realm, and so when it is tied to one kind of fellonie, 70 89 Action
upon the case where it lies for a malicious prosecution at the Sessions, 73 An
action by the Obligee for the Obligor saying he had forged the bond, but if he
had said to another, that he was a forger and had forged false writings, no
action lies, 76 Action upon the case, upon a contract in London, to Table with
the Plantiff at A. in N. and he then and there assumed to pay 4. s. by the
week, where the action must be brought, 78 An action upon a promise against a
Parson, in consideration that the Plantiff would better his Tithes by Planting
hops, that he would allow him 40. s. an acre for his charge, if that be a good
consideration, 80 Action upon the case where it lies against an Attorney for
convinous pleading, 90 Action by an Attorney, for saying, he had forged
writings, and deserved to lose his ears, lies not: 90 91 An action against a
Sheriff, wheth^r it lies in the County where the return of the extent was
made, or where the land lies, 100 Averment against the Sheriffs return, where
good and where not: 100 Amendment where the venire facias, habeas Corpus, and
the panel agree, but the Jury Rol^ differs: 101 Action of the case upon a
promise: 101 Action for saying the Plantiff stole a ring, and had been hanged
but for me, lies: 102 Action upon a promise where the time and place of the
request ought to be expressed: 102 103 112 113 A^bitrators (amongst other
things) award interest money, whether good for all or part: 114 120 Action by
Sergeant Hitcham for saying, I doubt not but to prove Sir Robert Hitcham has
spoken Treason: 123 124
B
A Bail where he is not liable to the judgment until default be in the
principal, or if the principal die: 61 62
C
A Commission to 4. or 2. of them, and one refuses, the other sit, the 4th.
may be a witness: 45 Condition to save harmless, he plead in the affirmative,
he must show how: 9 A Coppiholder releaseth to his Companion, it is good
without admittance: 3 A Coppiholder where he may enclose, or dig for Marle, and
where not: 8 A Covenant to enjoy without the let of the Grantors etc. or by
their procurement: 4 A Custom for a Coppiholder to cut trees at his pleasure
is void: 1 If Tenant in ancient Demesne devise his lands, the Devisee shall
have fee: 1 Covenant. See fine: Costs where they shall be given against an
Administrator: 11 A Condition to surrender coppihold, he pleads he did it, not
good because he showed not when the Court was holden: 11 A Commission to seize
for recusancie, they seize an advowson, the King grants to I. S. who presents
and is disturbed by the Universitie of Oxford, to whom the presentation
belongs: 11 12 13 Costs upon a Nonsuit at a nisi prius, whether assessible by
the Court, or by the Judge of Assize: 16 Common claimed to 600 acres and
certain Messuages and lands, and that he was disturbed by digging common
Borrowes, and does not say he was seized at the tim^, much good matter: 16 17
Custom of Merchants in Bills of Exchange, variety of good matter: 24
Condition to free the n^xt avoidance from encumbrance, the Grantors heir
presents, if that be a breach: 25 Custom to have a widows estate, and the
husband is attainted, if it holds: 27 Condition that I. S. shall levy a fine
to the Obligee who sued not a writ of Covenant, the Plantiff replies that
before etc. I. S. had made a feofment of etc. whether the Obligee must sue a
writ of Covenant. 29 30 A Condition contingent where extract by release: 30 31
54 55 56 Covenant to make assurance by advice, so that it be within Norfolk or
City of N. a fine is advised, not good, because not showed where it should be
levied: 32 33 Covenant not to alien an advowson without assent, the Plantiff
says he had aliened etc. good, although he had not said by deed: 34 Covenant
where it raises a present use, and where not: 35 36 37 59 60 Custom touching
Merchants and national laws: 52 Church shall be repaired by him who has land
there though he be no inhabitant. but not liable for the ornaments thereof: 53
Coppiholder what act by him will make forfeiture: 62 Covenant by a draper
against his apprentice for defrauding him, the Defendant pleads the Statute 5.
Eliz. and that thereby there ought to be a certificate that his father had 40
s. per annum freehold which was not done here: 63 64 If a Coppiholder sels his
land to a Lessee of the Manor it is good: 67 Condition in a Will where nothing
vesteth till it be performed: 69 Costs not to be paid where the Plantiff
mistakes his action: 69 Covenant brought by an Executor, the Defendant pleads
giving of an horse in full satisfaction which the Testator accepted: 76 A Court
of equity if it does decree against a maxim in law, as benefit of
Survivorship, a prohibition lies: 79 Covenant that he was seized of a good
estate in fee and had good authority to sell, and that no reversion was in the
King etc. 91 92 93 Condition, where it shall be precedent, and where
subsequent: 105 106 107 108 etc. 115 116 etc, Costs not discharged, although
the offense be pardoned: 125 Commendam. See King:
D
IN dept, after imparlance, always ready is a good Plea: 4 Distress gone as to
the nomine Paenae if the rent be expired: 7 A Declaration where it shall be
mended in matter of substance: 20 Damages where good in part especially after
verdict: 27 28 Debt against an Administrator who pleads outlawrie in the
intestate, no good Plea: 33 58 A man sows land, and devises to I. S and dies
before severance, whether the devisee, or Executor shall have the Corn: 51 A
Devise for years, if an entry by him must be pleaded: 53 Declaration see new
assignment. Dower a Tenant pleads a fine levied by her husband and that the
wife had not claimed within the Statute 4. H. 7. she replied she brought a writ
which abated, and this writ now brought was by Journeys accounts: 66 Debt for
rent must be brought by a privy in estate only where the land lies, otherwise
of a Privy in estate and contract: 69 Debt upon a bond the Plantiff says he
had not paid the money and did not say, nor any part thereof, good, for that
must come of the other part to show: 72 Debt upon a bond to perform an award,
the Defendant pleads no award, the Plantiff maintains the award and the
breach, the Defendant rejoyned that before the time of the award they
discharged the Arbitrators: 75 Debt by a servant for wages in the debet and
detinet, and for 2 shirts in the detinet only, good without showing that it was
according to the Statue, and by several precipes in one writ: 75 In Dower the
Tenant pleads never seized to have Dower the husband having an estate but by
disseizing which was avoided by entry: no Dower: 77 In Debt two were bound for
the appearance of annother, and judgment against the debtor, who upon the
capias offers his body, the Plantiff refuses, the suerties are discharged, but
the Plantiff may take a Capias within the year, but if he had come on the
capias and had not Suerties, and he refused him, Quer. if he be not discharged:
77 78 Dower of a reversion after a lease for years, she shall have the rent,
and the Defendant pay no damages: 80 Dower, what judgment shall be given,
where the vouchee dies, whether absolute or conditional: 81 88 Dower, where
the trial ought to be by witnesses, and in what manner: 82 Dower, the Tenant
pleads, that the demandant had entered, and disseized since the last
continuance: 90 Where the Demandant shall have judgment, and where only a
petit Cape: 90 Dower, against an Infant who pleads a devise to the demandant in
satisfaction of Dower and entry: 100
E
ERror lies not for a judgment given in the Stanneries in Cornwall 8 If an
Executor be nonsuit he shall pay no costs 10 Executor where he brings an
action he ought to show the Will, otherwise if the issue be joined 19 If the
Debtor makes the Debtee Executor, he may retain, and plead fully administered 19
Execution, what fees are due to the Sheriff where the debt exceeds 100. l. 21
22 Essoign, in a Formedon after the Vouchee appeared 34 Escape against the
Warden of the Fleet, retaking upon fresh suit good after an action, but not
after issue joined 35 Escheat where lands are given to a Monastery, and all
the Monks die, who shall have it, the founders, or the Lord of whom it is
holden 38 Executor where he or a devisee shall have the Corn 51 If an Executor
waste the goods of a Testator and dies intestate, his Administrator shall be
liable, and by the Court 31 Ed. 3. Coo. 11. gives no remedy but against an
immediate administrator 65 Estray whether the party may fetter him or no 67 68
124 An Executor where compellable to plead a general issue, and give the
special matter in evidence 70 Executor may bring an action in the debet and
detinet upon his own contract 80 Executor, an action brought against him by
Journeys accounts, where good 82 Execution, where the party shall be
discharged by supersedeas at the Courts discretion 100 101 Execution see
purchase 112
F
TEnant for life, and he in remainder in tail Covenant to levy a fine, Tenant
for life dies, if he in the remainder, ought to do it 4 In a Formedon the
Tenant pleads, that at the day of the writ the Plantiff was seized of the
moitie thereof, not good 23 Fees where an action of the case lies for them by
a Solicitor 53 54
G
GEneral issue where it ought to be pleaded, and where not 70
H
HErriot whether it be due to the Lessee of part of the Manor, or to the
lessee of the whole Manor 46 47 57
I
INformation for engrossing a 100. Quarters of Corn, and upon inquiry he is
found guilty of a 100. it is good for so much 5 In an idempnitate nominis the
Plantiff prayed a superdeas to stay Execution, Curia Advisari vult 6
Information, for entertaining his apprentice without a Testimonial contrary to
5 Eliz. 25 Jointure the father makes a feofment to the use of himself for life,
the reversion to his son and his wife intail, this is no Jointure, though the
father die in the life of the son, so if it had been for years 33 Infant and
Apprentice unto what Covenants liable 63 64 Issue, in a quare impedit is
joined, the wife one of the Plantiffs dies, before the venire facias, the writ
does not abate, because it was a Chattle vested in her husband 73 Infant, where
he may declare uses upon a fine, and what acts are by him void, or voidable 104
Infant, in a judgment against him, where he shall be relieved by audita
querela, or error, and whether against the Attorney who suffered it 114
K
Where the King may seize without office and where not 9 Where an usurpation
gains an advowson from the King 14 King, where he has title to present, the
incumbent being created a Bishop in Ireland, and what act is a dispensation
thereof, and where a Commendam is well granted and the several kinds thereof
94 95 96 97 98
L
A Lease of a rectorie excepting the Gleab, void otherwise if parcel of the
Gleab 23 A Lease for a year, and so from year to year, this is a Lease for 3.
years, and if the Lessee hold over, Quer. what remedy for the rent 32 A Lease
for years by him in remainder in tail, if destroyed by a recoverie 41 42 43 In
a lease to try a title of several parcels he ought to enter into them all
severally 50
M
A Miss-trial is not aided by any Statute of Jeoffales 69
N
Nuisance by stopping the wind, abated 3 Nuisance for stopping a light, abated 4
Notice to give bond where necessary and where not 26 27 New Assignment if it
be more large then the declaration, it is good in Trespass, but otherwise in an
ejectione firm 65 Notice, where ought to be taken and by whom 108 120
O
ORdinary, what power he has to dispose after debts and legacies paid 11 An
Obligation where good upon the Statute 23. H. 6. 20 21 50 51
P
A Prescription to pay the Vicar a Buck in Summer, and a Doa in Winter for a
Park which becomes Disparked 144 Prescription to have land it self, void 6
Prescription, See Replevin. A Prohibition to the Admiraltie lies not after
judgment given there 8 Protestation where good and where not 13 14 Prohibition
where it lies to the Court of Audience for saying, thou art a common and base
Queen 14 15 Promise by a Lessee or a stranger to pay rent, if an action he
thereupon 15 A Presentation by the Lord Chancellor, where it belongs to the
King is only voidable 19 Prohibition where it lies for a seat in the Church, a
difference between the Lord of the Manor and another Person 19 A Protection
from a Peer not good in a Capias utlagatum 24 A Prohibition where the parties
agree in the modus, but vary in the place of payment lies not 33 A
Prohibition awarded against one who sued in the Court of Audience
Administrators for a Legacy as Executors 64 65 In a prohibition the Tenants of
a Dean and Chapter allege prescription for non-payment of Tithes, and good,
because they are a spiritual body 65 In a Prohibition upon a suit for a
Legacy, the Executor showed he had not assets to pay the debts, and the
spiritual Court would not allow that allegation, yet no Prohibition 78
Prohibition to the Marches of wales, because a Legatee sued there for 500. l.
good before a decree, but not after 78 Prohibition, see Court of equity etc.
79 Prohibition to the Marches of Wales for requiring an account of an
Administrator 103 Process against two Obligors by several precipes and thereupon
several Executions, whether the writs are well awarded 112 A parco fracto where
it lies against the Lord of the Soil, and where not, except the Cattle come out
80 81 Prohibition to the delegates, a pardon not allowed of there 125
Q
IN a Quare impedit adjudged that nothing ought to be questioned after
induction, the spiritual Court there 63
R
TEnant in tail sells to I. S. in fee, who sells to the heir of Tenant in tail
being of full age, the father dies, if the son be demitted 5 A replevin etc.
the Defendant says that all those etc. had used to have pasturage in etc. when
it was not sowed, the Prescription is good 7 In a return of Rescous there
needs no addition 10 Replevin for rent issuing out of six acres, the avowant
must prove that the grantor was seized of 6. acres or more 15 Replevin in the
Plantiff claims property without that the property was in the Defendant,
the Traverse not good, yet judgment for the Plantiff because after verdict 26
In Return of an extent by the Sheriff, surplusage hurts not 27 Replevin the
Defendant avowed for homage, and showed not how it was due, if good 31
Replication although evil, where the Plantiff shall have judgment if the
Defendants plea be vicious 37 A Riotous quarrel about an arrest between the
Sheriffs Bailiffs, and the Bailiffs of the Marches of Wales 72 Release an
avowrie not good without pleading it by deed 72 A Rentcharge granted and a
Covenant if it happen to be behind, then the land to be always open to
distress, whether this be a distinct covenant or not 74 87 Replevin for rent,
the Defendants say, that the land was parcel of a Chaunterie which came to the
King by the Statute, wherein the right of others was saved, the Plantiff
replies that the land is out of the fee of the Defendant, no good plea, but he
might have Traversed the Tenure, that at the making of the Statute the land was
not holden of him 77 A Record amended, where the bargain and sale and deed of
uses, were by the right name, but the writ of entry was of another name 99 100
Rent granted in fee, by Tenant for life, and him in remainder in tail, levied a
fine a good grant 102 Rentcharge whether it be extinct by a fine of the land
to the Ter-tenant, and a release unto him 109 110 111 121 122
S
SCire facias, the Defendant pleads a feofment, the Plantiff traverses and the
jury found a feofment to other uses, whether this shall be intended the same
feofment which was pleaded 32 Scire facias by an Executor upon a judgment for
the Testator, the Defendant cannot plead the Testators death between the
verdict and judgment, but he must bring a writ of error 48 Simonie, a grant of
a next avoidance for money, the Parson being ready to die, is Simonie 63 A
Sheriff by force of a Capias utlagatum, to inquire what lands etc. cannot put
the party out of possession 78 Statute-Merchant, if good in regard no day of
payment is limited, largely and learnedly argued by the Court 82 83 etc.
Servant taken away. See Trespass.
T
TIthes. See Prescription. Trespass, the Defendant says, that I. S. was seized
in right of his wife, and that she died seized, and that he as heir etc. the
Plantiff replied that she died not seized, he ought to have said that she died
not sole seized 7 Trespass in Yorkshire, Justification in Durham without that
that guilty in Yorkshire, good, because it is local 7 A Traverse to a
presentation where good and where not 13 14 Tenure where it is Traversable and
where the seisin 18 Tithes not due of Cattle for the diarie 33. Trespass for
Beasts taken in London Justification upon a lease of land in Kent. Replied that
the Defendant sold them in London, no good plea to bring the trial out of Kent
48 Trespass for taking ones servant, lies not upon a private retainer,
otherwise if it were at the Sessions 51 Tithe given by the Pope to the Vicar,
and the Copy of the Bull only was showed in evidence not good 70 Tithes cannot
be appurtenant to a Grange, except the Grange be the Gleab 72 73 Traverse where
good, and where not 113
U
VEnire facias omitting part of the venue if good 34 Variance between the writ
and Declaration where good 35 A feofment to the use of A. for life, and after
to the use of his daughter till B. pay her 100. l. here the daughter has no
remedy for this 100. l. without a promise 71 A Ventre inspiciendo awarded and
returned, but the Court would not agree, that she should be detained from her
second husband, but attended by diverse women till her deliverie 71 Variance
between the venire facias, and the Sheriffs return, no judgment in that case
73
W
IN Waste judgment by nihil dicit, and upon an inquiry, the jury found 8. s.
damages, what judgment shall be given 5 Wager of Law upon a Bill of Exchange
24 Writs, a difference wherein there is an error in the original, and where in
the judicial writ, that is amendable 73 Waste although for a time it is
punishable, yet after the action may revive 79 86 Writ, against husband and
wife as an Inheritrix, the husband dies, if the writ abate 102
Errata.
PAge 1. line 2. 27. for do read Doa p. 2. l. 4. r. lieu p. 4. l. 2. 22. r.
300. pa. 8. l. 36. r. Hendon and so throughout p. 12. in the Title r. Duncombe
against the University of Oxford p. 12. l. 14. r. 38. H. 8. cap. 39. p. 14. in
the Title r. Sir George Savile against Thornton p. 15. l. 21. r. communication
p. 16. l. 12. r. 7. Jac. cap. 5. p. 17. l. 47. r. Maines, and l. 17. r. sic.
and also p. 17. and 18. in the Margent r. Trin. p. 21 l. 51. r. 39. Eliz. p.
23. l. 9. r. till p. 26 l. 28 for writ r. Action, and for Action r. writ p. 27.
l. 12. for he r. they p. 28. l. 34. r. may not p. 29. in the Margent r. Easter
p. 29. l. 33. for S. r. N. p. 33. l. ultim. r. Moore p. 36. l. 43. r. Titterels
p. 45. l. 20. r. demandable p. 50. l. 35. r. Bar p. 51. l. 22. r. a penalty p.
53. l. 16. r. may not p. 54. l. 44. r. Estate p. 57. l. 19. r. in our case p.
58. l 50 r. 16. E. 4. p. 68. l. 5. r. estray p. 71. l. 26. r. 12. Note in p.
72. l. 7. Wolseys case ought to have been printed by it self p. 77. l. 4. r.
avoided p. 88. l. 4. r. Finch p. 90. l. 15. r. continuance p. 100. l. 21. for
preservation r. persuasion and l. 34. for entire r. entry p. 109. in the
Margent for Trin. r. Mich. p. 112. l. 25. r. thought p. 114. l. 18. for
interested r. interest.


