

London Printed for Samuel Manship at the Black Bull in Cornhill near the
Royal Exchange.

THE LIVES Of the most Famous English Poets, OR THE Honor of PARNASSVS;

In a Brief ESSAY OF THE WORKS and WRITINGS of above Two Hundred of them, from
the Time of K. WILLIAM the Conqueror, To the Reign of His Present Majesty King
JAMES II.

Marmora Maeonij vincunt Monumenta Libelli; Vivitur ingenio, caetera Mortis
erunt.

Written by WILLIAM WINSTANLEY, Author of the English Worthies.

Licensed, June 16, 1686. Rob. Midgley.

LONDON, Printed by H. Clark, for Samuel Manship at the Sign of the Black Bull
in Cornhil, 1687.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL Francis Bradbury, Esquire
THE Judicious Philosopher Philo-Judaeus, in his Book De Plantatione Noe,
says, That when God had made the whole World's Mass, he created Poets to
celebrate and set out the Creator himself, and all his Creatures: such a high
Estimate had he of those Genius of brave Verse. Another says, that Poets were
the first Politicians, the first Philosophers, and the first Historiographers.
And although Learning and Poetic Skill were but very rude in this our Island,
when it flourished to the height in Greece and Rome, yet since has it made
such improvement, that we come not behind any Nation in the World, both in
Grandity and Gravity, in Smoothness and Propriety., in Quickness and Briefness;
so that for Skill, Variety, Efficacy and Sweetness, the four material points
required in a Poet, our English Sons of Apollo, and Darlings of the Delian
Deity, may compare, if not exceed them.

-- Whose victorious Rhyme, Revenge their Masters Death, and conquer Time.

And indeed what is it that so masters Oblivion, and causes the Names of the
dead to live, as the divine Strains of sacred Poesy? How are the Names
forgotten of those mighty Monarchs, the Founders of the Egyptian Pyramids, when
that Ballad-Poet, Thomas Elderton, who did arm himself with Ale (as old Father
Ennius did with Wine) is remembered in Mr. Cambden's Remains? having this made
to his Memory, Hic situs est sitiens atque ebr ius Eldertonus,
Quid dico, hic situs est; hic potius sitis est.


Now, Sir, all my Ambition, that I address these Lines unto you, is, that you
will pardon the Defects I have committed herein, as having done my good will no
so short an Epitome to lay a Groundwork, on which may be built a sumptuous
Structure; a Work well worthy the Pen of a second Plutarch; since Poetical
Devices have been well esteemed. even amongst them who have been ignorant of
what they are; as the judicious Mr. Cambden reports of Sieur Gauland, who, when
he heard a Gentleman express that he was at a Supper, where they had not only
good Company and good Cheer, but also savoury Epigrams, and fine Anagrams; he
returning home, rated and belowted his Cook, as an ignorant Scullion, that
never dressed or served up to him either Epigrams or Anagrams.

But, Sir, I entrench upon your Patience, and shall no further; only
subscribing my self,

Your Worship's ever to be Commanded, William Winstanley.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
AS we account those Books best written which mix Profit with Delight, so, in
my opinion, none more profitable nor delightful than those of Lives, especially
them of Poets, who have laid out themselves for the public Good; and under the
Notion of Fables, delivered unto us the highest Mysteries of Learning. These
are the Men who in their Heroic Poems have made men's Fames live to eternity;
therefore it were pity (says Plutarch) that those who write to Eternity,
should not live so too. Now above all Remembrances by which men have
endeavored even in despite of Death, to give unto their Fames eternity, for
Worthiness and Continuance, Books, and Writings, have ever had the
Pre-eminence; which made Ovid to give an endless Date to himself, and to his
Metamorphosis, in these Words; Jamque Opus exegi, etc.

Thus Englished by the incomparable Mr. Sandys.

And now the Work is ended, which Jove's Rage,
Nor Fire, nor Sword, shall raze, nor eating Age,
Come when it will, my Death's uncertain hour,
Which only of my Body has a power:
Yet shall my better Part transcend the Sky,
And my immortal Name shall never die:
For wheresoever the Roman Eagles spread
Their conquering Wings, I shall of all be read.
And if we Prophets truly can divine,
I in my living Fame shall ever shine.
With the same Confidence of Immortality, the Renowned Poet Horace thus
concludes the Third Book of his Lyrick Poesy.

Exegi Monumentum are perennius.
Regalique situ, etc.
A Monument than Brass more lasting, I,
Than Princely Pyramids in site more high
Have finished, which neither fretting Showrs,
Nor blustering Winds, nor flight of Years, and Hours,
Though numberless, can raze; I shall not die
Wholly; nor shall my best part buried lie
Within my Grave.
And Martial, Lib. 10. Ep. 2. thus speaks of his Writings; -- My Books are read
in every place,
And when Licinius, and Messala's high
Rich Marble Towers in ruined Dust shall lie,
I shall be read, and Strangers every where,
Shall to their farthest Homes my Verses bear.


Also Lucan, Lib. 9. of his own Verse, and Caesar's Victory at Pharsalia,
writes thus;

O great and sacred Work of Poesy!
Thou freest from Fate, and giv'st Eternity
To mortal Wights; but Caesar envy not
Their living Names; if Roman Muses ought
May promise thee, whilst Homer's honored,
By future Times shall Thou and I be read;
No Age shall us with dark Oblivion stain,
But our Pharsalia ever shall remain.
But this Ambition, or (give it a more moderate Title, Desire of Fame, is
naturally addicted to most men; The Triumph of Miltiades would not let
Themistocles sleep; For what was it that Alexander made such a Bustle in the
world, but only to purchase an immortal Fame? To what purpose were erected
those stupendous Structures, entitled The Wonders of the World, viz. The
walls of Babylon, the Rhodian Colossus, the Pyramids of Egypt, the Tomb of
Mausolus, Diana's Temple at Ephesus, the Pharoes Watchtower, and the Statue of
Jupiter in Achaya, were they not all to purchase an immortal Fame thereby? Nay,
how soon was this Ambition bred in the heart of man? for we read in Genesis the
11th. how that presently after the Flood, the People journeying from the East,
they said among themselves, Go to, let us build us a City, and a Tower, whose
Top may reach unto Heaven; and let us make us a Name. Here you see the intent
of their Building was to make them a Name, though God made it a Confusion; as
all such other lofty Buildings built in Blood and Tyranny, of which nothing now
remains but the Name; which is excellently expressed by Ovid in the Fifteenth
Book of his Metamorphosis.

Troy rich and powerful, which so proudly stood,
That could for ten years spend such streams of Blood,
For Buildings, only her old Ruins shows,
For Riches; Tombs, which slaughtered Sires enclose,
Sparta, Mycenae, were of Greece the Flowers;
So Cecrops City, and Amphion's Towers:
Now glorious Sparta lies upon the ground,
Lofty Mycenae hardly to be found.
Of Oedipus his Thebes what now remains?
Or of Pandion's Athens, but their Names?
So also Sylvester in his Du Bartus.
Thebes, Babel, Rome, those proud Heaven-daring Wonders,
Lo under ground in Dust and Ashes lie,
For earthly Kingdoms even as men do die.
By this you may see that frail Paper is more durable than Brass or Marble; and
the Works of the Brain more lasting than that of the Hand; so true is that old
Verse, Marmora Maeonij vincunt Monumenta Libelli: Vivitur ingenio, caetera
mortis erunt.

The Muses Works Stone-Monuments out-last.
It Is Wit keeps Life, all else Death will down cast.
Now though it is the desire of all Writers to purchase to themselves immortal
Fame, yet is their Fate far different; some deserve Fame, and have it; others
neither have it, nor deserve it; some have it not deserving, and others, though
deserving, yet totally miss it, or have it not equal to their Deserts: Thus
have I known a well writ Poem, after a double expense of Brain to bring it
forth, and of Purse to publish it to the World, condemned to the Drudgery of
the Chandler or Oyl-man, or, which is worse, to light Tobacco. I have read in
Dr. Fuller's Englands Worthies, that Mr. Nathanael Carpenter, that great
Scholar for Logic, the Mathematics, Geography, and Divinity, setting forth a
Book of Optics, he found, to his great grief, the Preface thereof in his
Printers House, Casing Christmas-Pies, and could never after from his scattered
Notes recover an Original thereof; thus (says he) Pearls are no Pearls, when
Cocks or Coxcombs find them.

There are two things which very much discourage Wit; ignorant Readers, and
want of Mecaenasses to encourage their Endeavors. For the first, I have read
of an eminent Poet, who pass by a company of Bricklayers at work, who were
repeating some of his Verses, but in such a manner as quite marred the Sense
and Meaning of them; he snatching up a Hammer, fell to breaking their Bricks;
and being demanded the reason thereof, he told them, that they spoiled his
Work, and he spoiled theirs. And for the second; what greater encouragement to
Ingenuity than Liberality? Hear what the Poet Martial says, Lib. 10. Epig. 11.

What deathless numbers from my Pen would flow,
What Wars would my Pierian Trumpet blow,
If, as Augustus now again did live,
So Rome to me would a Mecaenas give.
The ingenious Mr. Oldham, the glory of our late Age, in one of his Satyrs,
makes the renowned Spenser's Ghost thus speak to him, dissuading him from the
Study of Poetry.

Choose some old English Hero for thy Theme,
Bold Arthur, or great Edward's greater Son,
Or our fifth Henry, matchless to renown;
Make Agin-Court, and Crescy-fields outvie
The famed Laucinan-shores, and walls of Troy;
What Scipio, what Maecenas would thou find;
What Sidney now to thy great project kind?
Bless me! how great a Genius! how each Line
Is big with Sense! how glorious a design
Does through the whole, and each proportion shine!
How lofty all his Thoughts, and how inspired!
Pity, such wondrous Parts are not preferred:
Cry a gay wealthy Sot, who would not bail,
For bare Five Pounds the Author out of Jail,
Should he starve there and rot; who, if a Brief
Came out the needy Poets to relieve,
To the whole Tribe would scarce a Tester give.
But some will say, it is not so much the Patrons as the Poets fault, whose
wide Mouths speak nothing but Bladders and Bumbast, treating only of trifles,
the Muses Haberdashers of small wares.

Whose Wit is but a Tavern-Tympany,
The Shavings and the Chips of Poetry.
Indeed such Pedlars to the Muses, whose Verse runs like the Tap, and whose
invention ebbs and flows as the Barrel, deserve not the name of Poets, and are
justly rejected as the common Scriblers of the times: but for such who filled
with Phebean-fire, deserve to be crowned with a wreath of Stars; for such brave
Souls, the darlings of the Delian Deity, for these to be scorned, contemned,
and disregarded, must needs be the fault of the times; I shall only give you
one instance of a renowned Poet, out of the same Author.

On Butler, who can think without just rage,
The glory and the scandal of the age;
Fair stood his hopes, when first he came to Town,
Met every where with welcoms of renown,
Courted, and loved by all, with wonder read,
And promises of Princely favor fed:
But what reward for all had he at last,
After a life in dull expectance passed?
The wretch at summing up his misspent days,
Found nothing left, but poverty, and praise:
Of all his gains by Verse he could not save
Enough to purchase Flannel, and a grave:
Reduced to want, he in due time fell sick,
Was fain to die, and be interred on Tick:
And well might bless the Fever that was sent,
To rid him hence, and his worse fate prevent.
Thus you see though we have had some comparable to Homer for Heroic Poesy,
and to Euripides for Tragedy, yet have they died disregarded, and nothing left
of them, but that only once there were such Men and Writings in being.

I shall, in the next place, speak something of my Undertakings, in writing the
Lives of these Renowned Poets. Two things, I suppose, may be laid to my charge;
the one is the omission of some that ought with good reason to have been
mentioned; and the other, the mentioning of those which without any injury
might have been omitted. For the first, as I have begged pardon at the latter
end of my Book for their omission, so have I promised, (if God spare me life so
long) upon the first opportunity, or second Edition of this Book, to do them
right. In the mean time I should think my self much beholding to those persons
who would give me any intelligence herein, it being beyond the reading and
acquaintance of any one single person to do it of himself.

And yet, let me tell ye, that by the Name of Poet, many more of former times
might have been brought in than what I have named, as well as those which I
have omitted that are now living, namely, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Mr. John Weever,
Dr. Heylin, Dr. Fuller, etc. but the Volume growing as big as the Bookseller at
present was willing to have it, we shall reserve them to another time, they
having already eternized their Names by the never dying Histories which they
have wrote.

Then for the second thing which may be objected against me, That I have
incerted some of the meanest rank; I answer, That comparatively, it is a less
fault to incert two, than to omit one, most of which in their times were of
good esteem, though now grown out of date, even as some learned Works have been
at first not at all respected, which afterward have been had in high
estimation; as it is reported of Sir Walter Rawleigh, who being Prisoner in the
Tower, expecting every hour to be sacrificed to the Spanish cruelty, some few
days before he suffered, he sent for Mr. Walter Burre, who had formerly printed
his first Volume of of the History of the World, whom, taking by the hand,
after some other discourse, he asked him, How that Work of his had sold? Mr.
Burre returned this answer, That it sold so slowly, that it had undone him. At
which words of his, Sir Walter Rawleigh stepping to his Desk, reaches the other
part of his History, to Mr. Burre, which he had brought down to the times he
lived in; clapping his hand on his breast, he took the other unprinted part of
his Works into his hand with a sigh, saying, Ah my Friend, has the first Part
undone thee? The second Volume shall undo no more; this ungrateful World is
unworthy of it; When immediately going to the fireside he threw it in, and set
his foot on it till it was consumed. As great a Loss to Learning as Christendom
could have, or owned; for his first Volume after his death sold Thousands.

It may likewise be objected, That some of these Poets here mentioned, have
been more famous in other kind of Studies than in Poetry, and therefore do not
shine here as in their proper sphere of fame; but what then, shall their
general knowledge debar them from a particular notice of their Abilities in
this most excellent Art? Nor have we scarce any Poet excellent in all its
Species thereof; some addicting themselves most to the Epick, some to the
Dramatick, some to the Lyrick, other to the Elegiack, the Epaenitick, the
Bucolick, or the Epigram; under one of which all the whole circuit of Poetic
Design is one way or other included.

Besides, should we have mentioned none but those who upon a strict scrutiny
the Name of Poet does belong unto, I fear me our number would fall much short
of those which we have written; for as one writes, There are many that have a
Fame deservedly for what they have writ, even in Poetry itself, who, if they
come to the test, I question how well they would endure to open their
Eagle-eyes against the Sun. But I shall wade no further in this Discourse,
desiring you to accept of what is here written.

I remain Yours, William Winstanley,

The Names of the Poets Mentioned in this Book.
Page. Robert of Gloucester 1 Richard the Hermit 3 Joseph of Exeter 5 Michael
Blaunpayn 6 Matthew Paris 8 William Ramsey 10 Alexander Nequam 11 Alexander
Essebie 14 Robert Baston 15 Henry Bradshaw 16 Havillan 17 Sir John Gower 18
Geoffrey Chaucer 23 John Lydgate 33 John Harding 37 Robert Fabian 40 John
Skeleton 42 William Lilly 44 Sir Thomas More 46 Henry Howard, Earl of Surry 49
Sir Themas Wiat 56 Dr. Christopher Tie 58 John Leland 60 Thomas Churchyard 61
John Higgins 63 Abraham France 65 William Warner 67 Thomas Tusser 69 Thomas
Stow 72 Dr. Lodge ib. Robert Green 74 Thomas Nash 77 Sir Philip Sidney 79 Sir
Fulk Grevil 85 Mr. Edmund Spenser 88 Sir John Harrington 93 John Heywood 95
Thomas Heywood 96 George Peel 97 John Lilly ib. William Wager 98 Nicholas
Berton 99 Tho.Kid, Tho. Watson, etc. 100 Sir Thomas Overbury 101 Mr. Michael
Drayton 105 Joshua Sylvester 108 Mr. Samuel Daniel 109 George Chapman 112
Robert Baron 113 Lodowic Carlisle 114 John Ford ib. Anthony Brewer ib. Henry
Glapthorn 115 John Dvis of Hereford 116 Dr. John Done 117 Dr. Richard Corbet
121 Mr. Benjamin Johnson 123 Fr. Beanmot and Jo. Fletcher 128 William
Shakespeare 130 Christopher Marlow 134 Barton Holyday ib. Cyril Turney 135
Thomas Middleton ibid. William Rowley 136 Thomas Dackar 137 John Marston ibid.
Dr. Jasper Main 138 James Shirley ibid. Philip Massinger 139 John Webster 140
William Brown ib. Thomas Randolph 142 Sir John Beaumont 145 Dr. Philemon
Holland 146 Thomas Goffe 148 Thomas Nabbes ib. Richard Broom 149 Robert
Chamberlain 151 William Sampson ib. George Sandys, Esquire 152 Sir John Suckling
154* Mr. William Habington 155 Mr. Francis Quarles ib. Mr. Phineas Fletcher 159
Mr. George Herbert 160 Mr. Richard Crashaw 161 Mr. William Cartwright 162 Sir
Aston Cockain 163 Sir John Davis ib. Thomas May 164 Charles Aleyn 165 George
Withers ib. Robert Horric 166 John Tailor, Water-Poet 167 Thomas Rawlins 169
Mr. Thomas Carew ib. Col. Richard Lovelace 170 Alexander Broom 171 Mr. John
Cleaveland 172 Sir John Birkenhead 180 Dr. Robert Wild 181 Mr. Abraham Cowley
182 Mr. Edmond Waller 183 Sir John Denam 185 Sir William Davenant ib. Sir
George Wharton 187 Sir Robert Howard 188 W Cavendish, D. of Newcastle ib. Sir
William Killegrew 189 John Studley ib. John Tatham 190 Thomas Jordan 191 Hugh
Crompton ibid. Edmond Prestwich 192 Pagan Fisher ib. Edward Shirburn, Esquire 193
John Quarles 194 John Milton 195 John Ogilby ib. Sir Richard Fanshaw 196 Earl
of Orrery 197 Tomas Hobbs ib. Earls of Rochester 198 Mr. Thomas Flarman 200
Martin Luellin 201 Edmond Fairfax ib. Henry King, Bishop of Chichester 202
Thomas Manley 204 Mr. Lewis Griffin ib. John Dauncey 206 Richard Head 207 John
Philips 210 Mr. John Oldham 212 Mr. John Driden 214 Mr. Elkanah Settle 215 Sir
George Etheridge ib. Mr. John Wilson ib. Mr. Thomas Shadwell 216 Thomas
Stanley, Esquire ib. Edward Philips 217 Mr. Thomas Sprat ib. William Smith 218 Mr.
John Lacey ib. Mr. William Whicherly ib. Sir Roger L' Estrange 219
THE LIVES Of the most Famous English Poets, FROM WILLIAM the Conqueror, to
these Present Times.
The Life of ROBERT of Gloucester.
WE will begin first with Robert of Gloucester, so called, because a Monk of
that City, who flourisht about the Reign of King Henry the Second; much
esteemed by Mr. Cambden, who quotes diverse of his old English Rhythms in praise
of his Native Country, England. Some (who consider not the Learning of those
times) term him a Rhymer, whilst other more courteously call him a Poet: Indeed
his Language is such, that he is dumb in effect, to the Readers of our Age,
without an Interpreter; which that ye may the better perceive, hear these his
Verses of Mulmutius Lunwallo, in the very same Language he wrote them.

A King there was in Brutayne Donwallo was his Nam,
Staleworth and hardy, a man of great Fam:
He ordained furst yat thieves yat to Temple flowen were,
No men were so harby to do hem despit there;
That has he much such yhold, as hit begone tho,
Hely Church it holds yut, and wole ever mo.
Antiquaries (amongst whom Mr. Seldom) more value him for his History than
Poetry, his Lines being neither strong nor smooth, yet much informing in those
things wherein he wrote; whereof to give you a take of the first planting
Religion in this Land by King Lucius, Lucie Cocles Son after him King was,
To fore him in Engelonde Chrestendom non was,
For he hurde often miracles at Rome,
And in meny another stead, yat through Christene men come,
He wildnede anon in his heart to fonge Chrystendom.
Therefore Messagers with good Letters he nom,
That to the Pape Eleutherie hastelyche wend;
And yat he to him and his men expondem send,
And yat he might seruy God wilned much thereto,
And said he wald noght be glader hit were ydo.


This English Rhymer or Poet, which you will have it to be, is said to have
lived whilst he was a very old man, and to have died about the beginning of the
Reign of King John.

RICHARD the Hermit.
COntemporary with Robert of Gloucester, was one Richard, a Religious Hermit,
whose Manuscripts were a while ago (and for ought I know, are still) kept in
Exeter-Library, although Exeter-House in the Strand, is converted now into an
Exchange: This Religious Hermit studied much in converting the Church Service
into English Verse; of which we shall give you an Essay in part of the Te Deum,
and part of the Magnificat,

Te Deum.
We heryen ye God, we knowlethen ye Lord:
All ye erye worships ye everlasting fader:
All Angels in heuens, and all ye pours in yis world,
Cherubin and Seraphin cryen by voice to ye unstyntyng.
Magnificat. My Soul worschips the Louerd, and my Ghost joyed in God my hele
For he lokyd ye mekenes of his hondemayden:
So for iken of yat blissefulle schall sey me all generacjouns;
For he had don to me great yingis yat mercy is, and his nam hely.
He likewise translated all the Psalms of David, as also the Collects, Epistles
and Gospels for the whole year, together with the Pater Noster and Creed;
though there was then another Pater Noster and Creed used in the Church, sent
into England by Adrian the Fourth, Pope of Rome, an Englishman,, the Son of
Robert Breakspeare of Abbots Langley in Hertfordshire, unto King Henry the
Second; which (for variety sake) we shall give you as follows:

Pater Noster.
URe fader in hevene rithe,
Thy nom be haliid everliche,
Thou bring us to thy michilblisce,
Thy will to wirche thu us wisse,
Als hit is in hevene ido
Ever in earth ben hit also,
That heli bred yat lastyth ay,
Thou send hious yis like day,
Forgio ous al yat we hauith don,
Als we forgiu och oder mon,
He ler ous fall in no founding,
Ak scilde ous fro ye foul thing. Amen.
The Creed.
I Believe in God fader almighty, shipper of heaven and earth,
And in Ihesus Crist his onle thy son ure Louerd,
That is iuange thurch the hooli Ghost, hoar of Mary Maiden,
Tholede pine undyr Pounce Pilate, pitched on rode tree, dead and yburiid.
Litcht into hell, the thridde day fro death arose,
Steich into hevene, sit on his fader richt hand God Almichty,
Then is cominde to deem the quikke and the deed,
I beleve in ye hooli Ghost,
All hooli Church,
Moan of all hallouen forgivenis of sine,
Fleiss uprising,
Lif withuten end. Amen.
When this Richard the Hermit died, we cannot find, but conjecture it to be
about the middle of the Reign of King John, about the year 1208.

JOSEPH of Exeter.
JOseph of Exeter was born at the City of Exeter in Devonshire, he was also
surnamed Iscanus, from the River Isk, now called Esk, which running by that
City, gave it formerly the denomination of Isca. This Joseph (says my Author)
was a Golden Poet in a Leaden Age, so terse and elegant were his Conceits and
Expressions. In his younger years he accompanied King Richard the First, in his
Expedition into the Holy Land, by which means he had the better advantage to
celebrate, as he did, the Arts of that warlike Prince, in a Poem, entitled
Antiochea. He also wrote six Books De Bello Trojano, in Heroic Verse, which,
as the learned Cambden well observes, was no other then that Version of Dares
Phyrgius into Latin Verse. Yet so well was it excepted, that the Dutchmen not
long since Printed it under the name of Cornelius Nepos, an Author who lived in
the time of Tully, and wrote many excellent pieces in Poetry, but upon a strict
view of all his Works, not any such does appear amongst them; they therefore do
this Joseph great wrong in depriving him the honor of his own Works. He was
afterward, for his deserts, preferred to be Archbishop of Bordeaux, in the
time of King John, about the year 1210.

MICHAEL BLAVNPAYN.
THis Michael Blaunpayn, otherwise surnamed the Cornish Poet, or the Rymer, was
born in Cornwall, and bred in Oxford and Paris, where he attained to good
proficiency in Learning, being of great fame and ostentation in his time, out
of whose Rymes for marry England;; as Cambden calls them, he quotes several
passages in that most excellent Book of his Remains. It happened one Henry of
Normandy, chief Poet to our Henry the Third, had traduced Cornwall, as an
inconsiderable Country, cast out by Nature in contempt into a corner of the
land. Our Michael could not endure this Affront, but, full of Poetical fury,
falls upon the Libeller; take a taste (little thereof will go far) of his
strains.

Non opus est ut opus numere quibus est opulenta,
Et per quas inopes sustent at non open lenta,
Piscibus and stanno nusquam tam fertilis ora.
We need not number up her wealthy store,
Wherewith this helpful Lands relieves her poor,
No Sea so full of Fish, Tin, no shore.
Then, in a triumphant manner, he concludes all with this Exhortation to his
Countrymen: Quid nos deterret? si firmiter in pede stemus,
Fraus ni nos superat, nihil est quod non superemus.
What should us fright, if firmly we do stand?
Bar fraud, and then no force can us command.


Yet his Pen was not so lushious in praising, but, when he listed, it was as
bitter in railing, witness this his Satirical Character of his aforesaid
Antagonist.

Est tibi gamba Capri, crus passeris, and latus Apri,
Os leporis, catuli nasus, dens and gena Muli,
Frons vetulae, tauri caput, and color undique Mauri,
His argumentis quibus est argutia Mentis,
Quod non a Monstro differs, satis hic tibi monstro.
Gamb'd like a Goat, Sparrow-thigh'd, sides as a Boar,
Hare-mouth'd, Dog-nos'd, like Mule thy teeth and chin,
Brow'd as old wife, Bull headed, black as a More,
If such without, then what are you within?
By these my signs the wise will easily conster,
How little thou does differ from a Monster.
This Michael flourished in the time of King John, and Henry the Third.

MATTHEW PARIS.
MAtthew Paris is acknowledged by all to be an Englishman, saving only one or
two wrangling Writers, who deserve to be arraigned of Felony for robbing our
Country of its due; and no doubt Cambridge -shire was the County made happy by
his birth, where the Name and Family of Paris is right ancient, even long
before they were settled therein at Hildersham, wherein they still flourish,
though much impaired for their Loyalty in the late times of Rebellion.

He was bred a Monk of St. Albans, living in that loose Age a very strict and
severe life, never less idle than when he was alone; spending those hours,
reserved from Devotion, in the sweet delights of Poetry, and laborious study of
History, in both which he excelled all his Contemporaries: His skill also was
excellent in Oratory and Divinity, as also in such manual Arts as lie in the
Suburbs of the liberal sciences, Painting, Graving, etc. so that we might
sooner reckon up those things wherein he had no skill, as those wherein he was
skilled: But his Genius chiefly disposed him for the writing of Histories,
writing a large Chronicle with great Commendations from the Norman Conquest to
the Year of our Lord 1250. where he concludes with this Distich: Siste tui
metas studij, Matthaee, quietas
Nec ventura petas, quae postera proferat aetas.
Matthew, here cease thy Pen in peace, and study on no more,
Nor do thou rome at things to come, what next Age has in store.


Yet, notwithstanding this resolution, he afterward resumed that Work,
continuing it to the Year 1259. a History impartially and judicially written,
neither flattering any for their Greatness, nor sparing others for their Vices,
no not so much as those of his own Profession: yet though he had sharp Nails,
he had clean Hands, strict in his own, as well as striking at the loose
conversation of others, and for his eminent austerity, was employed by Pope
Innocent the Fourth, not only to visit the Monks in the Diocese of Norwich, but
also was sent by him into Norway, to reform the Discipline in Holui, a fair
Covent therein, but much corrupted.

His History was set forth with all integrity about a hundred years ago, by his
namesake, Matthew Parker, (though some asperse it with a suspicion of forgery)
and afterward in latter and more exact Edition, by the care and industry of
Doctor William Wats, and is at this present in great esteem amongst learned men.

WILLIAM RAMSEY.
THis William Ramsey was born in Huntingtonshire, a County famous for the
richest Benedictines Abbey in England; yet here be would not stay, but went to
Crowland, where he prospered so well, that he became Abbot thereof. Bale says
he was a Natural Poet, and therefore no wonder if fault be found in the Feet of
his Versez; but by his leave, he was also a good Scholar, and Arithmetician
enough to make his Verse run in right Numbers.

This William wrote the Lives of St. Guthlake, St. Neots, St. Edmond the King,
and diverse others, all in Verse, which no doubt were very acceptable and
praiseworthy in those times; but the greatest wonder of him, and which may
seem a wonder indeed, was that being a Poet, he paid the vast Debts of others,
even forty thousand Marks for the engagement of his Covent, and all within the
compass of eighteen Months, wherein he was Abbot of Crowland. This was a vast
Sum in that Age, and would render it altogether incredible for a Poet to do,
but that we find he had therein the assistance of King Henry the Second; who,
to expiate the Blood of Becket, was contented to be melted into Coin, and was
prodigiously bountiful to many Churches as well as to this. He died about the
year 1180.

ALEXANDER NEQVAM.
ALexander Nequam, the learnedest Englishman his Age, was born at St. Albans in
Hartfordshire: His Name in English signifies Bad, which caused many, who
thought themselves wondrous witty in making Jests, (which indeed made
themselves) to pass several Jokes on his Surname, whereof take this one
instance: Nequam had a mind to become a Monk in St. Albans, the Town of his
Nativity, and thus Laconically wrote for leave to the Abbot thereof; Si vis,
veniam, sin autem, tu antem.

To whom the Abbot returned, Si bonus sis, venias, si nequam, nequaquam.

Whereupon for the future, to avoid the occasion of such Jokes, he altered his
Name from Nequam, to Neckam.

His admirable knowledge in good Arts, made him famous throughout England,
France, Italy, yea and the whole World, and that with incredible admiration,
that he was called Miraculum ingenij, the Wonder and Miracle of Wit and
Sapience. He was an exact Philosopher, and excellent Divine, an accurate
Rhetorician, and an admirable Poet, as did appear by many his Writings which he
left to posterity, some of which are mentioned by Bale.

That he was born at St. Albans, apears by a certain passage in one of his
Latin Poems, cited by Mr. Cambden, and thus Englished by his Translatour,
Doctor Holland.

This is the place that knowledge took of my Nativity,
My happy Years, my Days also of Mirth and Jollity.
This Place my Childhood trained up in all Arts liberal,
And laid the groundwork of my Name, and skill Poetical.
This Place great and renowned Clerks into the World has sent;
For Martyr blessed, for Nation, for Sight, all excellent.
A troop here of Religious Men serve Christ both night and day,
In Holy Warfare, taking pains duly to watch and pray.
He is thought by some, says Bale, to have been a Canon Regular, and to have
been preferred to the Abbotship of Gloucester, as the Continuater of Robert of
Gloucester will have it.

And Master Alisander that Chanon was er
Imaked was of Gloucestre Abbot thulk^yer.
Viz. 7 Reg. Regis Johannis.
But this may be understood of Alexander Theologius, who was contempory with
him: and was Abbot of St. Mary's in Cirencester at the time of his death.

Bishop Godwin, in his Catalogue of the Bishops of Lincoln, makes mention of a
passage of wit betwixt him and Phillip Repington Bishop of Lincoln, the latter
sending the Challenge.

Et niger and Nequam cum sis congnomine Nequam,
Nigrior esse potes, Nequior esse nequis.
Both black and bad, whilst Bad the name to thee,
Blacker thou may, but worse thou can not be.
To whom Nequam rejoyned, Phi not a foetoris, Lippus malus omnibus horis,
Phi malus, and Lippus, totus mains ergo Philippus.
Stinks are branded with a Phi, Lippus Latin for blear-eye,
Phi and Lippus bad as either, then Philppus worse together.


A Monk of St. Albans made this Hexameter allusively to his Name: Dictus erat
Nequam, vitam duxit tamen aequam.

The Elogy he bestows on that most Christian Emperor Constantine the Great,
must not be forgot: From Colchester there rose a Star,
The Rays whereof gave Glorious Light
Throughout the world in Climates far,
Great Constantine, Romes Emperor bright.


He was (says one) Canon of Exeter, and (upon what occasion is not known) came
to be buried at Worcester, with this Epitaph, Eclipsim patitur Sapientia, Sol
sepelitur,
Cui si par unus, minus eset flebile funus
Vir been discretus, and in omni more facetus,
Dictus erat Nequam, vitam duxit tamen aquam.
Wisdom's eclipsed, Sky of the Sun bereft;
Yet less the loss if like alive were left;
A man discreet, in matters debonair,
Bad Name, black Face, but Carriage good and fair.


Yet others say he was buried at St. Albans where he found repulse when living,
but repose when dead) with this Epitaph, Alexander, cognomento Nequam, Abbas
Cirecestriae, Literarum scientia clarus, obitt Anno Dom. 1217. Lit. Dom. C.
pride. Call. Feb. and sepultus erat apud Fanum S. Albani, cujus Animae
propitietur altissimus, Amen.

ALEXANDER ESSEBIE.
THis Alexander was born in Staffordshire, say some; in Somersetshire, say
others; for which, each County might strive as being a Jewel worth the owning,
being reckoned among the chief of English Poets and Orators of that Age. He in
imitation of Ovid de Fastis, put our Christian Festivals into Verse, setting a
Copy therein to Baptista Mantuan. Then leaving Ovid, he aspired to Virgil, and
wrote the History of the Bible, (with the Lives of some Saints,) in an Heroical
Poem, which he performed even to admiration; and though he fell short in part
of Virgtl's lofty style, yet went he beyond himself therein. He afterward
became Prior of Esseby-Abbey, belonging to the Augustines, and flourished under
King Henry the Third, Anno Dom. 1220.

ROBERT BASTON.
RObert Baston was born not far from Nottingham, and bred a Carmelite Friar at
Scarborough in Yorkshire: He was of such great Fame in Poetry, that King Edward
the Second, in his Scottish Expedition pitched upon him to be the Celebrater of
his Heroic Acts; when being taken Prisoner by the Scots, he was forced by
Torments to change his Note, and represent all things to the advantage of
Robert bruce, who then claimed the Crown of Scotland: This Task he undertook
full sore against his will, as he thus intimates in the two first Lines.

In dreery Verse my Rymes I make,
Bewailing whilst such Theme I take.
Besides his Poem De Bello Strivilensi, there was published of his writing a
Book of Tragedies, with other Poems of various Subjects.

HENRY BRADSHAW.
HEnry Bradshaw was born in the City of Chester, and bred a Benedictine Monk in
the Monastery of St. Werburg; the Life of which Saint he wrote in Verse, as
also (says my Author) a no bad Chronicle, though following therein those
Authors, who think it the greatest Glory of a Nation to fetch their Original
from times out of mind. Take a Taste of his Poetry in what he wrote concerning
the Original of the City of Chester, in these words; The Founder of this City,
as says Polychronicon,
Was Leon Gawer, a mighty strong Giant,
Which builded Caves and Dungeons many a one,
No goodly Building, ne proper, ne pleasant.
But King Leir, a Britain fine and valiant,
Was Founder of Chester by pleasant Building,
And was named Guer Leir by the King.


These Lines, considering the Age he lived in, (which Arnoldus Vion says, was
about the Year 1346.) may pass with some praise, but others say he flourished a
Century of years afterward, viz. 1513. which if so, they are hardly to be
excused, Poetry being in that time much refined; but whenever he lived, Bale
says, he was (the Diamond in the Ring) Pro ea ipsa aetate, admodum pius.

HAMILLAN.
SHould we forget the learned Hamillan, our Book would be thought to be
imperfect, so terse and fluent was His Verse, of which we shall give you two
Examples, the one out of Mr. John Speed his Description of Devonshire, speaking
of the arrival of Brute.

The God's did guide his Sail and Course, the Winds were at command,
And Totness was the happy shore where first he came on land.
The other out of Mr. Weever his Funeral Monuments in the Parish of St.
Aldermanbury in London, speaking of Cornwall.

There Giants whilome dwelt, whose Clothes were skins of Beasts;
Whose Drink was Blood; Whose Cups, to serve for use at Feasts,
Were made of hollow Wood; Whose Beds were bushy Thorns;
And Lodgings rocky Caves, to shelter them from Storms;
Their Chambers craggy Rocks; their Hunting found them Meat.
To vanquish and to kill, to them was pleasure great.
Their violence was rule; with rage and fury led,
They rusht into the fight, and fought hand over head.
Their Bodies were interred behind some bush or brake,
To bear such monstrous Wights, the earth did groan and quake.
These pestred most the Western Tract; more fear made these aghast,
O Conwall, utmost door that art to let in Zephyrus blast.
JOHN GOWER.
JOhn Gower, whom some make to be a Knight, though Stow, in his Survey of
London, unknighteth him, and says he was only an Esquire; however, he was born
of a knightly Family, at Stitenham in the North Riding in Bulmore-Wapentake in
Yorkshire. He was bred in London a Student of the Laws, but having a plentiful
Estate, and prizing his pleasure above his profit, he quitted Pleading to
follow Poetry, being the first renner of our English Tongue, effecting mich,
but endeavoring more therein, as you may perceive by the difference of his
Language, with that of Robert of Gloucester, who lived in the time of King
Richard the First, which notwithstanding was accounted very good in those days.

This our Gower was contemporary with the famous Poet Geoffry Chaucer, both
excellently learned, both great friends together, and both alike endeavored
themselves and employed their time for the benefit of their Country. And what
an account Chaucer had of this our Gower and of his Parts, that which he wrote
in the end of his Work, entitled Troilus and Cressida, do sufficiently
testify, where he says, O marvel, Gower, this Book I direct
To thee, and to the Philosophical Strode.
To vouchsafe, there need is, to correct
Of your benignitees and zeles good.


Bale makes him Equitem Auratum and Poetam Laureatum, proving both from his
Ornaments on his Monumental Statue in St. Mary Overies Southwark. Yet he
appears there neither laureated nor hederated Poet, (except the leaves of the
Bays and Ivy be withered to nothing, since the erection of the Tomb) but only
rosated, having a Chaplet of four Roses about his Head, yet was he in great
respect both with King Henry the Fourth, and King Richard the Second, at whose
request the wrote his Book called Confessio Amantis, as he relates in his
Prologue to the same Book, in these words, As it befell upon a tide,
As thing, which should tho betide,
Under the town of New Troie,
Which took of Brute his first joy,
In Themese, when it was flowende,
As I by Bote came rowende;
So as fortune her time set,
My liege Lord perchance I met,
And so befelle as I came nigh,
Out of my Bote, when he me sigh,
He had me come into his Barge,
And when I was with him at large,
Among other things seyde,
He has this charge upon me leyde,
And bbad me do my business,
That to his high worthiness,
Some new thing I should book,
That he himself it might look,
After the form of my writynge,
And this upon his commandynge
Mine heart is well the more glad
To write so as he we bad.
And eke my fear is well the less,
That none envy shall compass,
Without a reasonable wite
To feige and blame that I write,
A gentill heart his tongue stilleth,
That it malice none distilleth,
But preiseth that is to be preised,
But he that has his word unpeised,
And handles with ronge any thing,
I pray unto the heaven king,
Froe such tongues he me shilde,
And nethelesse this world is wild,
Of such ianglinge and what befall,
My kings heste shall not fall,
That I in hope to deserve
His thonke, ne shall his will observe,
And else were I naught excused.


He was before Chaucer, as born and flourishing before him, (yea, by some
accounted his Master) yet was he after Chaucer, surviving him two years, living
to be stark blind, and so more properly termed our English Homer. His death
happened Anno 1402. and was buried at St. Mary Overies in S. S^uthwark, on the
North side of the said Church, in the Chapel of St. John, where he founded a
Chauntry, and left Means for a Mass, (such was the Religion of those times) to
be daily sung for him, as also an Obit within the same Church to be kept on
Friday after the Feast of St. Gregory. He lies under a Tomb of stone, with his
Image also of stone over him, the hair of his head auburn, long to his
shoulders, but curling up, and a small forked beard; on his head a Chaplet,
like a Coronet of four Roses; an habit of purple, damasked down to his feet, a
Collar of Esses of Gold about his neck, which being proper to places of
Judicature, makes some think he was a Judge in his old age. Under his feet the
likeness of three Books, which he compiled, the first named Speculum
Meditantis, written in French: the second, Vox Clamantis, penned in Latin: the
third, Confessio Amantis, written in English, which was Printed by Thomas
Berthelette, and by him dedicated to King Henry the Eighth, of which I have one
by me at this present. His Vox Clamantis with his Cronica Tripartita, and other
Works both in Latin and French, Stow says he had in his possession, but his
Speculum Meditantis he never saw, but heard thereof to be in Kent.

Besides, on the Wall where he lies, there was painted three Virgins crowned,
one of which was named Charity, holding this device, En toy qui es fitz de Dieu
le Pere,
Sauue soit, qui gist sours cest pierre.
The second Writing Mercy, with this Decree, O bone Jesu fait ta mercy,
Al' ame, don't le corpse gisticy.


The third Writing Pity, with this device, Pour ta pite Jesu regard,
Et met cest a me en sauue guard.


And thereby formerly hung a Table, wherein was written, That whosoever prayed for
the Soul of John Gower, so often as he did it, should have a M. and D. days of
pardon.

His Arms were in a Field Argent, on a Cheveron Azure, three Leopards heads
gold, their tongues Gules, two Angels supporters, on the Crest a Talbot.

His Epitaph.
Armigeri Scultum nihil a modo fert sibi tutum,
Reddidit immolutum morti generale tributum,
Spiritus exutum se gaudeat esse solutum
Est ubi virtutum Regnum sine labe statutum.
All I shall add is this, That about fifty years ago there lived at
Castle-Heningham in Essex, a Schoolmaster named John Gower, who wrote a witty
Poem, called the Castle Combat, which was received in that Age with great
applause.

GEOFFERY CHAVCER.
THree several Places contend for the Birth of that famous Poet. 1. Berkshire,
from the words of Leland, that he was born in Barocensi sprovincia; and Mr.
Cambden avoweth that Dunington-Castle nigh unto Newbery, was anciently his
Inheritance. 2. Oxfordshire, where J. Pits is positive that his Father was a
Knight, and that he was born at Woodstock. 3. The Author of his Life, set forth
1602. proves him born in London, out of these his own words in the Testament
of Love.

Also in the City of London, that is to me so dear and sweet, in which I was
forth grown, and more kindly love have I to that place, than any other in
yerth, as every kindly creature has full appetite to that place of his kindly
ingendure, and to wilne rest and peace in that stead to abide, thilke peace
should thus there have been broken, which of all wise* men is commened and
desired.

For his Parentage, although Bale writes, he terms himself Galfridus Chaucer
nobili loco natus, and summae spei juvenis; yet is the opinion of some Heralds
(otherwise than his Virtues and Learning commemded him) he descended not of any
great House, which they gather by his Arms: And indeed both in respect of the
Name, which is French, as also by other Conjectures, it may be gathered, that
his Progenitors were Stranngers; but whether they were Merchants (for that in
places where they have dwelled, the Arms of the Merchants of the Staple have
been seen in the Glass-windows) or whether they were of other Callings, it is
not much necessary to search; but wealthy no doubt they were, and of good
account in the Commonwealth, who brought up their Sons in such sort, that both
he was thought fit for the Court at home, and to be employed for Matters of
State in Foreign Countries.

His Education, as Leland writes, was in both the Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, as appears by his own words, in his Book Entitled The Court of
Love: And in Oxford by all likelihood, in Canterbury or in Merton College,
improving his Time in the University, he became a witty Logician, a sweet
Rhetorician, a grave Philosopher, a holy Divine, a skilful Mathematician, and a
pleasant Poet; of whom, for the Sweetness of his Poetry, may be said that which
is reported of Stesicho^^us; and as Cethegus was called Suadae Medulla, so may
Chaucer be rightly called the Pith and Sinews of Eloquence, and the very Life
it self of all Mirth and pleasant Writing. Besides, one Gift he had above other
Authors, and that is, by the Excellencies of his Descriptions to possess his
Readers with a stronger imagination of seeing that done before their eyes which
they read, than any other that ever writ in any Tongue. But above all, his Book
of Canterbury-Tales, is most recommended to Posterity, which he makes to be
spoken by certain Pilgrims who lay at the Tabard-Inn in Southwark, as he
declares in the beginning of his said Book.

It befell in that season, on a day,
In Southwark, at the Tabert as I lay,
Ready to wend on my pilgrimage
To Canterbury, with full devout courage;
That night was comen into the Hosterie,
Well nine and twenty in a company,
Of sundry folk, by adventure yfall
In fellowship, and Pilgrims were they all,
That toward Canterbury woulden ride;
The Stables and Chambers weren wide,
And well we were eased at the best, etc.
By his Travel also in France and Flanders, where he spent much time in his
young years, but more in the latter end of the Reign of King Richard the
Second; he attained to a great perfection in all kind of Learning, as Bale and
Leland report of him: Circa postremos Richardi Secundi annos, Galliis floruit,
magnamque illic ex assidua in Literis exercitatione gloriam sibi comparavit.
Domum reversus Forum Londinense, and Collegia Leguleiorum, qui ibidem Patria
Jura interpretantur frequentavit, etc. About the latter end of King Richard the
Second's Days, he flourished in France, and got himself into high esteem there
by his diligent exercise in Learning: After his return home, he frequented the
Court at London, and the Colleges of the Lawyers, which there interpreted the
Laws of the Land. Amongst whom was John Gower, his great familiar Friend, whose
Life we wrote before. This Gower, in his Book entitled Confessio Amantis,
terms Chaucer a worthy Poet, and makes him as it were the Judge of his Works.

This our Chaucer had always an earnest desire to enrich and beautify our
English Tongue, which in those days was very rude and barren; and this he did,
following the example of Dantes and Petrarch, who had done the same for the
Italian Tongue* Alanus for the French, and Johannes Mea for the Spanish:
Neither was Chaucer inferior to any of them in the performance hereof; and
England in this respect is much beholding to him; as Leland well notes: Anglia
Chaucerum veneratur nostra Poetam;
Cui veneris debet Patria Lingua suas.
Our England honors Chaucer Poet, as principal;
To whom her Country-Tongue does owe her Beauties all.


He departed out of this world the 25th. day of October, 1400, after he had
lived about seventy two years. Thus writes Bale out of Leland, Chaucerus ad
Canos devenit, sensitque Senectutem morbum esse; and dum Causas suas Londini
curaret, etc. Chaucer lived till he was an old man, and found old Age to be
grievous; and whilst he followed his Causes at London, he died, and was buried
at Westminster.

The old Verses which were written on his Grave at the first, were these;
Galfridus Chaucer, Vates and Fama Poesis,
Maternae haec sacra sum tumulatus humo.


Thomas Occleue, or Okelefe, of the Office of the Privy Seal, sometime
Chaucer's Scholar, for the love he bore to the said Geoffrey his Master, caused
his Picture to be truly drawn in his Book, De Regimine Principis, dedicated to
Henry the Fifth; according to which, that his Picture drawn upon his Monument
was made, as also the Monument it self, at the Cost and Charges of Nicolas
Brigham Gentleman, Anno 1555. who buried his Daughter Rachel, a Child of four
years of Age, near to the Tomb of this old Poet, the 21th. of June 1557. Such
was his Love to the Muses; and on his Tomb these Verses were inscribed: Qui
fuit Anglorum Vates ter maximus olim, Galfridus Chaucer, conditur hoc Tumulo,
Annum si quaer as Domini, si tempor a Mortis, Ecce notae subsunt, quae tibi
cuncta notant; 25 Octobris 1400.

Aerumnarum requies Mors. N. Brigham hos fecit Musarum nomine sumptus.



About the Ledge of the Tomb these Verses were written; Si rogitas quis eram,
forsante Fama docebit,
Quod si Fama negat, Mundi quia Gloria transit,
Haec Monumenta lege.


The foresaid Thomas Occleve, under the Picture of Chaucer, had these Verses:
Although his Life be queint, the resemblance
Of him that has in me so fresh liveliness,
That to put other men in remembrance
Of his Person I have here the likeness
Do make, to the end in Soothfastness,
That they that of him have lost thought and mind,
By this peniture may again him find.


In his foresaid Book, De Regimine Principis, he thus writes of him: But
welaway is mine heart woe,
That the honor of English Tongue is dead;
Of which I wont was counsel have and reed:
O Master dear, and Fadre reverent:
My Master Chaucer Flower of Eloquence,
Mirror of fructuous entendement:
O universal fadre of Science:
Alas that thou thine excellent Prudence
In thy Bed mortal might not bequeath.
What eyl'd Death, alas why would she the sle?
O Death, thou did not harm singler in slaughter of him,
But all the Land it smerteth;
But natheless yet have thou no power his name slay,
But his virtue asterteth
Unslain fro thee; which ay us lifely herteth,
With Books of his ornat enditing,
That is to all this Land enlumining.


In another place of his said Book, he writes thus; Alas my worthy Master
honorable,
This Land's very Treasure and Richess!
Death by thy Death has harm irreparable
Unto us done: her vengeable duress
Dispoiled has this Land of the sweetness
Of Rhetorige; for unto Tullius
Was never man so like among us:
Also who was here in Philosophy
To Aristotle, in our Tongue, but thee?
The Steps of Virgil in Poesy,
Thou suedst eken men know well enough,
What combre world that thee my Master slough
Would I slain were.


John Lidgate likewise in his Prologue of Bocchas, of the Fall of Princes, by
him translated, says thus in his Commendation: My Master Chaucer, with his
fresh Comedies,
Is dead alas, chief Poet of Britain,
That whilom made full pitous Tradgedies,
The faule of Princes he did complain,
As he that was of making Sovereign;
Whom all this Land should of right prefer
Since of our Language he was the load-sterre.


Also in his Book which he writes of the Birth of the Virgin Mary, he has
these Verses.

And eke my Master Chaucer now is in grave,
The noble Rhetore, Poet of Britain,
That worthy was the Laurel to have
Of Poetry, and the Palm attain,
That made first to distill and rain
The Gold dew drops of Speech and Eloquence,
Into our Tongue through his Eloquence.
That excellent and learned Scottish Poet Gawyne Douglas, Bishop of Dunkold, in
the Preface of Virgil's Eneados, turned into Scottish Verse, does thus speak of
Chaucer; Venerable Chaucer, principal Poet without pere,
Heavenly Trumpet, orloge, and regulere,
In Eloquence, Baulme, Conduct, and Dyal,
Milkie Fountain, Clear Strand, and Rose Ryal,
Of fresh endite through Albion Island brayed
In his Legend of Noble Ladies said.


And as for men of latter time, Mr. Ascham and Mr. Spenser have delivered most
worthy Testimonies of their approving of him. Mr. Ascham, in one place calls
him English Homer, and makes no doubt to say, that he valueth his Authority of
as high estimation as he did either Sophocles or Euripides in Greek. And in
another place, where he declares his Opinion of English Versifying, he uses
these Words; Chaucer and Petrark those two worthy Wits, deserve just praise.
And last of all, in his Discourse of Germany, he puts him nothing behind
either Thucydides or Homer, for his lively Descriptions of Site of Places, and
Nature of Persons, both in outward Shape of Body, and inward Disposition of
Mind; adding this withal, That not the proudest that has written in any Tongue
whatsoever, for his time has outstript him.

Mr. Spenser in his first Eglogue of his Shepherds Calendar, calls him
Tityrus, the God of Shepherds, comparing him to the worthiness of the Roman
Tityrus, Virgil. In his Fairy Queen, in his Discourse of Friendship, as
thinking himself most worthy to be Chaucer's friend, for his like natural
disposition that Chaucer had; he writes, That none that lived with him, nor
none that came after him, durst presume to revive Chaucer's lost labors in
that imperfect Tale of the Squire, but only himself: which he had not done, had
he not felt (as he says) the infusion of Chaucer's own sweet Spirit surviving
within him. And a little before, he calls him the most Renowned and Heroical
Poet, and his Writings the Works of Heavenly Wit; concluding his commendation
in this manner: Dan Chaucer well of English undefiled,
On Fames eternal Bead-roll worthy to be filed;
I follow here the footing of thy feet,
That with thy meaning so I may the rather meet.


Mr. Cambden, reaching one hand to Mr. Ascham, and the other to Mr. Spenser,
and so drawing them together, utters of him these words, De Homero nostro
Anglico illud vere asseram, quod de Homero eruditus ille Italus dixit.

-- Hic ille est, cujus de gurgite sacro,
Combibit arcanos vatum omnis turba furores.
The deservingly honored Sir Philip Sidney, in his Defense Poesy, thus
writes of him, Chaucer undoubtedly did excellently in his Troylus and Crescid,
of whom truly I know not whether to marvel more, either that he in that misty
time could see so clearly, or we in this clear age walk so stumblingly after
him. And Doctor Heylin, in his elaborate Description of the World, ranketh him
in the first place of our chiefest Poets. Seeing therefore that both old and
new Writers have carried this reverend conceit of him, and openly declared the
same by writing, let us conclude with Horace in the eighth Ode of his fourth
Book; Dignum Laudi causa vetat mori.

The Works of this famous Poet, were partly published in Print by William
Caxton, Mercer, that first brought the incomparable Art of Printing into
England, which was in the Reign of King Henry the Sixth. Afterward increased by
William Thin, Esquire in the time of King Henry the Eighth. Afterward, in the
year 1561. in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, Corrected and Increased by John
Stow; And a fourth time, with many Amendments, and an Explanation of the old
and obscure Words, by Mr. Thomas Speight, in Anno 1597. Yet is he said to have
written many considerable Poems, which are not in his published Works, besides
the Squires Tale, which is said to be complete in Arundel-house Library.

JOHN LYDGATE.
JOhn Lydgate was born in a Village of the same name, not far off St.
Edmondsbury, a Village (says Cambden) though small, yet in this respect not to
be passed over in silence, because it brought into the World John Lydgate the
Monk, whose Wit may seem to have been framed and fashioned by the very Muses
themselves: so brightly reshine in his English Verses, all the pleasant graces
and elegancy of Speech, according to that Age. After some time spent in our
English Universities, he traveled through France and Italy, improving his time
to his great accomplishment, in learning the Languages and Arts; Erat autem non
solum elegans Poeta, and Rhetor disertus, verum etiam Mathematicus expertus,
Philosophus acutus, and Theologus non contemnendus: he was not only an elegant
Poet, and an eloquent Rhetorician, but also an expert Mathematician, an acute
Philosopher, and no mean Divine, says Pitseus. After his return, he became
Tutor to many Noblemens Sons, and both in Prose and Poetry was the best Author
of his Age, for if Chaucer's Coin were of greater Weight for deeper Learning,
Lydgate's was of a more refined Stantard for purer Language; so that one might
mistake him for a modern Writer. But because none can so well describe him as
himself, take an Essay of his Verses, out of his Life and Death of Hector, page
316 and 317.

I am a Monk by my profession,
In Berry, called John Lydgate by my name,
And wear a habit of perfection;
(Although my life agree not with the same)
That meddle should with things spiritual,
As I must needs confess unto you all.
But seeing that I did herein proceed
At his command, Hen. 5.
whom I could not refuse,
I humbly do beseech all those that read,
Or leisure have, this story to peruse,
If any fault therein they find to be,
Or error, that committed is by me;
That they will of their gentleness take pain,
The rather to correct and mend the same,
Than rashly to condemn it with disdain,
For well I wot it is not without blame,
Because I know the Verse therein is wrong,
As being some too short and some too long.
For Chaucer, that my Master was, and knew
What did belong to writing Verse and Prose,
Never stumbled at small faults, nor yet did view
With scornful eye the Works and Books of those
That in his time did write, nor yet would taunt
At any man, to fear him or to daunt.
Now if you would know further of him, hear him in his Prologue to the Story of
Thebes, a Tale (as his Fiction is) which (or some other) he was constrained to
tell, at the command of mine Host of the Tabard in Southwark, whom he found in
Canterbury, with the rest of the Pilgrims which went to visit Saint Thomas
shrine.

This Story was first written in Latin by Geoffry Chaucer, and translated by
Lydgate into English Verse; but of the Prologue of his own making, so much as
concerns himmself, thus: -- While that the Pilgrims lay
At Canterbury, well lodged one and all,
I not in sooth what I may it call,
Hap or fortune, in conclusioun,
That me befell to enter into the Town,
The holy Saint plainly to visit,
After my sickness, vows to acquit.
In a Cope of black, and not of green,
On a Palfrey slender, long, and lene,
With rusty Bridle, made not for the sale,
My man to forne with a void Male,
That by Fortune took my Inn anon
Where the Pilgrims were lodged everichone.
The same time her governor the host
Stonding in Hall, full of wind and bost,
Liche to a man wonder stern and fers,
Which spoke to me, and said anon Dan Pers,
Dan Dominick, Dan Godfray, or Clement,
Ye be welcome newly into Kent:
Though your bridle have another boos ne bell;
Beseeching you, that ye will tell
First of your name, and what cuntre
Without more shortly that ye be,
That look so pale, all devoid of blood,
Upon your head a wonder threadbare Hood,
Well arrayed for to ride late:
I answered my Name was Lydgate,
Monk of Bury, me fifty year of age,
Come to this Town to do my Pilgrimage
As I have hight, I have thereof no shame:
Dan John (quoth he) well brouke ye your name,
Though ye be sole, beeth right glad and light,
Praying you to soupe with us this night;
And ye shall have made at your devis,
A great Puddding, or a round hagis,
A Franche* Moile, a Tanse, or a Froise,
To been a Monk slender is your coise, Countenance.

Ye have been sick I dare mine head assure,
Or let feed in a faint pasture.
Lift up your head, be glad, take no sorrow,
And ye should ride home with us to morrow,
I say, when ye rested have your fill.
After supper, sleep will done none ill,
Wrap well your head, clothes round about,
Strong nottie Ale will make a man to rout;
Take a Pillow, that ye lie not low;
If need be, spare not to blow;
To hold wind, by mine opinion,
Will engender colles passion,
And make men to greven on her rops, Guts.

When they have filled her maws and her crops;
But toward night, eat some Fennel read,
Annis, Commin, or Coriander-seed,
And like as I have power and might,
I charge you rise not at midnight,
Though it be so the Moon shine clear,
I will my self be your Orlogere, Clock.

To morrow early, when I see my time,
For we will forth parcel before prime,
Accompany parde shall do you good. Verily.



But I have digressed too far: To return therefore unto Lydgate. Scripsit
partim Anglice, partim Latin; partim Prosa, partim Versu Libros numero plures,
eruditione politissimos. He writ (says my Author) partly English, partly
Latin; partly in Prose, and partly in Verse, many exquisite learned Books,
says Pitseus, which are mentioned by him and Bale, as also in the latter end
of Chaucer's Works; he last Edition, amongst which are Eglogues, Odes, Satyrs,
and other Poems. He flourished in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, and departed
this world (aged about 60 years) circiter An. 1440. and was buried in his own
Convent at Bury, with this Epitaph, Mortuus saeclo, superis Superstes,
Hic jacet Lydgate tumulaetus Vrna:
Qui fuit quondam celebris Britannae
Fama Poesis.
Dead in this World, living above the Sky,
Entombed within this Urn does Lydgate lie;
In former time famed for his Poetry,
All over England.


JOHN HARDING.
JOhn Harding, our Famous English* Chronologer, was born (says Bale) in the
Northern parts, and most likely in Yorkshire, being an Esquire of an eminent
Parentage. He was a man equally addicted to Arms and Arts, spending his Youth
in the one, and his Age in the other: His first Military Employment was under
Robert Vmfreuil, Governor of Roxborough-Castle, where he did good Service
against the Scots. Afterward he followed the Standard of King Edward the
Fourth, to whom he valiantly and faithfully adhered, not only in the Sunshine
of his Prosperity, but also in his deepest Distress.

But what endeared him the most to his Favor, and was indeed the Masterpiece
of his Service, was his adventuring into Scotland; a desperate Attempt, and
performed not without the manifest hazarding of his Life; where he so cunningly
demeaned himself, and insinuated himself so far into their Favor, as he got a
sight of their Records and Original Letters; a Copy of which he brought with
him to England, and presented the same to King Edward the Fourth: Out of these
he collected a History of the several Submissions, and sacred Oaths of Fealty
openly taken from the time of King Athelstane, by the Kings of Scotland, to the
Kings of England, for the Crown of Scotland; a Work which was afterward made
much use of by the English; although the Scotch Historians stickle with might
and main, that such Homage was performed only for the County of Cumberland, and
some parcel of Land their Kings had in England South of Tweed.

Now as his Prose was very useful, so was his Poetry as much delightful;
writing a Chronicle of our English Kings from Brute to King Edward the Fourth,
and that in English Verse; for which he was accounted one of the chiefest Poets
of his time; being so exactly done, that by it Dr. Fuller adjudges him to have
drunk as deep a draught of Helicon, as any in his Age: And another saying, that
by the same he deservedly claimed a Seat amongst the chiefest of the Poetical
Writers.

But to give you the better view of his Poetical Abilities, I shall present you
with some of his Chronicle-Verse, concerning the sumptuous Household kept by
King Richard the Second, cap. 193.

Truly I herd Robert Ireleffe say,
Clarke of the Green-cloth, and that to the Household
Came every day, forth most part always
Ten thousand folk, by his Messes told,
That followed the house aye as they would.
And in the Kechin, three hundred Seruitours,
And in each Office many Occupiours.
And Ladies fair, with their Gentleweomen,
Chamberers also and Lauenders,
Three hundred of them were occupied then;
There was great pride among the Officers,
And of all men far passing their compeers,
Of rich arraye, and much more costous,
Then was before, or since, and more precious, etc.
This our Poet Harding was living Anno 1461. being then very aged; and is
judged to have survived not long after.

ROBERT FABIAN.
RObert Fabian was born and bred in London, as witnesses Bale and Pits;
becoming one of the Rulers thereof, being chosen Sheriff, Anno 1493. He spent
his time which he had spare from public Employments, for the benefit of
posterity; writing two large Chronicles: the one from Brute to the Death of
King Henry the Second; the other, from the First of King Richard, to the Death
of Henry the Seventh. He was (says my Author) of a merry disposition, and used
to entertain his Guests as well with good Discourse as good Victuals: He bent
his Mind much to the Study of Poetry; which according to those times, passed
for current. Take a touch of his Abilities in the Prologue to the second Volume
of his Chronicle of England and France.

Now would I feign,
In words plain,
Some Honor said,
And bring to mind;
Of that ancient City,
That so goodly is to se,
And full true ever has be,
And also full kind,
To Prince and King
That has borne just rulynge,
Syn the first winnynge
Of this Island by Brute.
So that in great honor
By passing of many a shower,
It has ever borne the flower;
And laudable Brute, etc.
These Verses were made for the Honor of London; which he calls Ryme
Dogerel, and at the latter end thereof, excuses himself to the Reader in these
words: Who so him lyketh these Versys to read,
With favor I pray he will them spell;
Let not the rudenes of them him led
For to dispraue this Ryme Dogerell:
Some part of the honor it does you tell
Of this old City Troynouant;
But not thereof the half dell;
Connyng in the Maker is so adaunt:
But though he had the Eloquence
Of Tully, and the Moralytye
Of Seneck, and the Influence
Of the swyte sugared Armony,
Or that fair Lady Caliope,
Yet had he not connyng perfyght,
This City to praise in each degree
As that should duly ask by right.


Sir John Suckling, a prime Wit of his Age, in the Contest betwixt the Poets
for the Laurel, makes Apollo to adjudge it to an Alderman of London; in these
words; He openly declared it was the best sign
Of good store of Wit, to have good store of Coin,
And without a syllable more or less said,
He put the Laurel on the Alderman's Head.


But had the Scene of this Competition been laid a hundred and fifty years ago,
and the same remitted to the Umpirage of Apollo, in sober sadness he would have
given the Laurel to this our Alderman.

He died at London, Anno 1511. and was buried at St. Michael's Church in
Cornhil, with this Epitaph; Like as the Day his Course does consume,
And the new Morrow springs again as fast;
So Man and Woman by Natures custom
This Life do pass; at last in Earth are cast,
In Joy and Sorrow, which here their Time do wast,
Never in one state, but in course transitory,
So full of change is of the World the Glory.


Dr. Fuller observes, That none has worse Poetry than Poets on their
Monuments; certainly there is no Rule without Exceptions; he himself instancing
to the contrary in his England's Worthies, by Mr. Drayton's Epitaph, and
several others.

JOHN SKELETON.
JOhn Skeleton, the Poet Laureat in his Age, though now accounted only a Rhymer,
is supposed to have been born in Norfolk, there being an ancient Family of
that Name therein; and to make it the more probable, he himself was Beneficed
therein at Dis in that County. That he was Learned, we need go no further than
to Erasmus for a Testimony; who, in his Letter to King Henry the Eighth,
styles him, Britanicarum Literarum Lumen and Decus. Indeed he had Scholarship
enough, and Wit too much: Ejus Sermo (says Pitz.) salsus in mordacem, risus in
opprobrium, jocus in amaritudinem. Whosoever reads him, will find he has a
miserable, loose, rambling Style, and galloping measure of Verse: yet were good
Poets so scarce in his Age, that he had the good fortune to be chosen Poet
Laureat, as he styles himself in his Works, The King's Orator, and Poet Laureat.

His chief Works, as many as can be collected, and that out of an old Printed
Book, are these; Philip Sparrow, Speak Parrot, The Death of King Edward the
Fourth, A Treatise of the Scots, Ware the Hawk, The Tunning of Elianer Rumpkin:
In many of which, following the humor of the ancientest of our Modern Poets, he
takes a Poetical Liberty of being Satirical upon the Clergy, as brought him
under the Lash of Cardinal Woolsey, who so persecuted him, that he was forced
to take Sanctuary at Westminster, where Abbot Islip used him with much respect.
In this Restraint he died, June 21, 1529. and was buried in St. Margaret's
Chapel, with this Epitaph; J. Sceltanus Vates Pierius hic situs est.

We must not forget, how being charged by some on his Deathbed for begetting
many Children on a Concubine which he kept, he protested, that in his
Conscience he kept her in the notion of a Wife, though such his cowardliness,
that he would rather confess Adultery, than own Marriage, the most punishable
at that time.

WILLIAM LILLY.
TO this John Scelton, we shall next present you with the Life of his
Contemporary and great Antagonist William Lilly, born at Odiham, a great
Market Town in Hantshire; who to bet^ his knowledge, in his youth traveled to
the City of Jerusalem, where having satisfied his curiosity in beholding those
sacred places whereon our Savior trod when he was upon the Earth; he returned
homewards, making some stay at Rhodes, to study Greek. Hence he went to Rome,
where he heard John Sulpitius and Pomponius Sabinus, great Masters of Latin in
those days. At his return home, Doctor John Collet had new builded a fair
School at the East End of St. Paul's, for 153 poor men's Children, to be taught
free in the same School; for which he appointed a Master, an Usher, and a
Chaplain, with large Stipends for ever; committing the oversight thereof to the
Masters, Wardens and Assistants of the Mereers in London, because he was Son to
Henry Collet Mercer, sometime Major; leaving for the Maintenance thereof, Lands
to the yearly value of 120 l. or better; making this William Lilly first Master
thereof; which Place he commendably discharged for 15 years. During which time
he made his Latin Grammar, the Oracle of Free Schools of England, and other
Grammatical Works. He is said also by Bale, to have written Epigrams, and other
Poetry of various Subjects in various Latin Verse, though scarce any of them
(unless it be his Grammar) now extant, only Mr. Stow makes mention of an
Epitaph made by him, and graven on a fair Tomb, in the midst of the Chancel of
St. Paul's in London, containing these Words; Inclyta Joannes Londini Gloria
gentis,
Is tibi qui quondam Paul Decanus erat,
Qui toties magno resonabat pectore Christum,
Doctor and Interpres fidus Evangelij:
Qui mores hominum multum sermon disertae
Formarat, vitae sed probitate magis:
Quique Scholam struxit celebrem cognomine Jesu,
Hac dormit tectus membra Coletus humo.
Floruit sub Henrico 7. and Henrico 8. Reg. Obiit An. Dom. 1519.

Disce mori Mundo, vivere disce Deo.



John Skeleton (whom we mentioned before) whose Writings were for the most part
Satirical, mixing store of Gall and Copperas in his Ink, having fell foul upon
Mr. Lilly in some of his Verses, Lilly returned him this biting Answer; Quid me
Sceltone front sic aperta
Carpis, vipereo potens veneno?
Quid Versus trutina meos iniqua
Libras? Dicere vera number licebit?
Doctrinae, tibi dum parare famam,
Et doctus fieri studes Poeta,
Doctrinam ne habes, nec es Poeta.
With Face so bold, and Teeth so sharp,
Of Viper's venom, why do carp?
Why are my Verses by thee weighed
In a false Scale? May Truth be said;
Whilst thou to get the more esteem,
A Learned Poet fain would seem,
Skeleton, thou art, let all men know it,
Neither Learned, nor a Poet.


He died of the Plague, Anno 1522. and was buried in St. Paul's, with this
Epitaph on a Brass Plate, fixed in the Wall by the great North-Door: Gulielmo
Lilio, Pauliae Scholae olim Praeceptori primaerio, and Agnetae Conjugi, in
sacratissimo hujus Templi Coemiterio hinc a tergo nunc destructo consepultis:
Georgius Lilius, hujus Ecclesiae Canonicus, Parentum Memoriae pie consulens,
Tabellam hanc ab amicis conservatam, hic reponendam curavit.

Sir THOMAS MORE.
SIR Thomas More, a great Credit and Ornament in his Time, of the English
Nation, and with whom the Learned Foreigners of that Age, were proud to have
correspondence, for his wit and excellent parts, was born in Milk-street,
London, Anno Dom. 1480. Son to Sir John More, Knight, and one of the Justices
of the Kings Bench.

He was bred first in the Family of Archbishop Morton, then in
Canterbury-Colledge in Oxford; afterward removed to an Inn of Chancery in
London, called New-Inn, and from thence to Lincoln's Inn; where he became a
double Reader. Next, his Worth preferred him to be Judge in the Sheriff of
London's Court, though at the same time a Pleader in others; and so upright was
he therein, that he never undertook any Cause but what appeared just to his
Conscience, nor never took Fee of Widow, Orphan, or poor Person.

King Henry the Eighth coming to the Crown, first Knighted him, then made him
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and not long after L. Chancellor of
England; in which place he demeaned himself with great integrity, and with no
less expedition; so that it is said, at one time he had cleared all Suits
depending on that Court: whereupon, one thus versified on him, When More some
years had Chancellor been,
No more Suits did remain;
The same shall never more be seen,
Till More be there again.


He was of such excellency of Wit and Wisdom, that he was able to make his
Fortune good in whatsoever he undertook: and to this purpose it is reported of
him, that when he was sent Ambassador by his Master Henry the Eighth into
Germany, before he delivered his Embassage to the Emperor, he bid one of his
Servants to fill him a Beer-glass of Wine, which he drunk off twice; commanding
his Servant to bring him a third; he knowing Sir Thomas More's Temperance, that
he was not used to drink, at first refused to fill him another; telling Sir
Thomas of the weight of his Employment: but he commanding it, and his Servant
not daring to deny him, he drank off the third, and then made his immediate
address to the Emperor, and spoke his Oration in Latin, to the admiration of
all the Auditors. Afterward Sir Thomas merrily asking his Man what he thought
of his Speech? he said, that he deserved to govern three parts of the World,
and he believed if he had drunk the other Glass, the Elegancy of his Language
might have purchased the other part of the World.

Being once at Bruges in Flanders, an arrogant Fellow had set up a Thesis, that
he would answer any Question could be propounded unto him in what Art soever.
Of whom, when Sir Thomas More heard, he laughed, and made this Question to be
put up for him to answer; Whether Averia caepta in Withernamia sunt
irreplegibilia? Adding,, That there was an Englishman that would dispute
thereof with him. This bragging Thraso, not so much as understanding the Terms
of our Common Law, knew not what to answer to it, and so became ridiculous to
the whole City for his presumptuous bragging.

Many were the Books which he wrote; amongst whom his Vtopi bears the Bell;
which though not written in Verse, yet in regard of the great Fancy and
Invention thereof, may well pass for a Poem, it being the Idea of a complete
Commonwealth in an Imaginary Island (but pretended to be lately discovered in
America) and that so lively counterfeited, that many at the reading thereof,
mistook it for a real Truth: insomuch that many great Learned men, as Budeus,
and Johannes Paludanus, upon a fervent zeal, wished that some excellent Divines
might be sent thither to preach Christ's Gospel: yea, there were here amongst
us at home, sundry good Men, and learned Divines, very desirous to undertake
the Voyage, to bring the People to the Faith of Christ, whose Manners they did
so well like.

Mr. Owen, the British Epigrammatist, on this Book of Vtopia, writes thus;
More's Vtopia and Mercurius Britanicus.
More showed the best, the worst World's showed by the:
Thou show what is, and he shows what should be.


But at last he fell into the King's displeasure, touching the Divorce of Queen
Katherine, and for refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy; for which he was
committed to the Tower, and afterward beheaded on Tower Hill, July 6, 1635.
and buried at Chelsey under a plain Monument.

Those who desire to be further informed of this Learned Knight, let them read
my Book of England's Worthies, where his Life is set forth more at large.

HENRY HOWARD Earl of Surrey.
THis Honorable Earl was Son to Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, and Frances his
Wife, the Daughter of John Vere Earl of Oxford. He was (says Cambden) the
first of our English Nobility that did illustrate his high Birth with the
Beauty of Learning, and his Learning with the knowledge of diverse Languages,
which he attained unto by his Travels into foreign Nations; so that he
deservedly had the particular Fame of Learning, Wit and Poetical Fancy.

Our famous Poet Drayton, in his England's Heroical Epistles, writing of this
Noble Earl, thus says of him; The Earl of Surrey, that renowned Lord,
The Old English Glory bravely that restored,
That Prince and Poet (a Name more divine)
Falling in Love with Beauteous Geraldine,
Of the Geraldi, which derive their Name
From Florence; whether to advance her Fame,
He travels, and in public Justs maintained
Her Beauty peerless, which by Arms he gained.


In his way to Florence, he touched at the Emperor's Court; where he fell in
acquaintance with the great Learned Cornelius Agrippa* osb* famous for Magic,
who showed him the Image of his Geraldine in a Glass, sick, weeping on her Bed,
and resolved all into devout Religion for the absence of her Lord; upon sight
of which, he made this Sonnet.

All Soul, no earthly Flesh, why do thou fade?
All Gold, no earthly Dross, why look'*st thou pole
Sickness, how dare thou one so fair invade?
Too base Infirmity to work her Bale.
Heaven be distempered since she grieved pines,
Never be dry these my sad plantive Lines.
Perch thou my Spirit on her Silver Breasts,
And with their pains redoubled Music beatings,
Let them toss thee to world where all toil rests,
Where Bliss is subject to no Fear's defeatings;
Her Praise I tune whose Tongue does tune the Spears,
And gets new Muses in her Hearers Ears.
Stars fall to fetch fresh light from her rich eyes,
Her bright Brow drives the Sun to Clouds beneath.
Her Hairs reflex with red strakes paints the Skies,
Sweet Morn and Evening dew flows from her breath:
Phoebe rules Tides, she my Tears tides forth draws,
In her Sickbed Love sits, and makes Laws.
Her dainty Limbs tinsel her Silk soft Sheets,
Her Rose-crown'd Cheeks eclipse my dazzled sight.
O Glass! with too much joy my thoughts thou greets,
And yet thou show me day but by twilight.
He kiss thee for the kindness I have felt,
Her Lips one Kiss would unto Nectar melt.
From the Emperor's Court he went to the City of Florence, the Pride and Glory
of Italy, in which City his Geraldine was born, never ceasing till he came to
the House of her Nativity; and being shown the Chamber her clear Sunbeams
first thrust themselves in this cloud of Flesh, he was transported with an
Ecstasy of Joy, his Mouth overflowed with Magnificats, his Tongue thrust the
Stars out of Heaven, and eclipsed the Sun and Moon with Comparisons of his
Geraldine, and in praise of the Chamber that was so illuminatively honored
with her Radiant Conception, he penned this Sonnet: Fair Room, the presence of
sweet Beauties pride,
This place the Sun upon the Earth did hold,
When Phaeton his Chariot did misguide,
The Tower where Jove rained down himself in Gold,
Prostrate as holy ground I Will worship thee.
Our Ladies Chapel henceforth be thou named;
Here first Loves Queen put on Mortality,
And with her Beauty all the world inflamed.
Heaven's Chambers harbouriug fiery Cherubins,
Are not with thee in Glory to compare.
Lightning, it is not Light which in thee shines,
None enter thee but straight entranced are.
O! if Elysium be above the ground,
Then here it is, where naught but Joy is found.


That the City of Florence was the ancient Seat of her Family, he himself
intimates in one of his Sonnets: thus; From Tuscan came my Ladies worthy Race;
Fair Florence was sometimes her ancient Seat,
The Western Isle, whose pleasant Shore does face,
Whilst Camber's Cliffs did give her lively heat.


In the Duke of Florence's Court he published a proud Challenge against all
Comers, whether Christians, Turks, Canibals, Jews, or Saracens, in defense of
his Geraldines Beauty. This Challenge was the more mildly accepted, in regard
she whom he defended, was a Town-born Child of that City; or else the Pride of
the Italian would have prevented him ere he should have come to perform it. The
Duke of Florence nevertheless sent for him, and demanded him of his Estate, and
the reason that drew him thereto; which when he was advertised of to the full,
he grants all Countries whatsoever, as well Enemies and Outlaws, as Friends
and Confederates, free access and regress into his Dominions immolested, until
the Trial were ended.

This Challenge, as he manfully undertook, so he as valiantly performed; as Mr.
Drayton describes it in his Letter to the Lady Geraldine.

The shivered Staves here for thy Beauty broke,
With fierce encounters past at every shock,
When stormy Courses answered Cuff for Cuff,
Denting proud Beavers with the Counter-buff;
Which when each manly valiant Arm essays,
After so many brave triumphant days,
The glorious Prize upon my Lance I bare,
By Herald's Voice proclaimed to be thy share.
The Duke of Florence for his approved Valor, offered him large Proffers to
stay with him; which he refused: intending, as he had done in Florence, to
proceed through all the chief Cities in Italy; but this his Purpose was
frustrated, by Letters sent to him from his Master King Henry the 8th. which
commanded him to return as speedily as possibly he could into England.

Our famous English Antiquary John Leland, speaking much in the praise of Sir
Thomas Wiat the Elder, as well for his Learning, as other excellent Qualities,
meet for a man of his Calling; calls this Earl the conscript enrolled Heir of
the said Sir Thomas Wiat: writing to him in these words; Accipe Regnorum Comes
illustrissime Carmen,
Quo mea Musa tuum landavit moesta Viallum.
And again, in another place, Perge, Houerde, tuum virtute refer Viallum,
Dicerisque tuae clarissima Gloria stirpis.


A certain Treatise called The Art of English Poetry, alleges, That Sir Thomas
Wiat the Elder, and Henry Earl of Surrey were the two Chieftains, who having
traveled into Italy, and there tasted the sweet and stately Measures and Style
of the Italian Poesy, greatly polished our rude and homely manner of vulgar
Poesy from what it had been before; and may therefore justly be showed to be
the Reformers of our English Meeter and Style.

I shall only add an Epitaph made by this Noble Earl on Sir Anthony Denny,
Knight (a Gentleman whom King Henry the 8th. greatly affected) and then come to
speak of his Death.

Death and the King did as it were contend,
Which of them two bare Denny greatest Love;
The King to show his Love, began far extend,
Did him advance his Betters far above:
Near Place, much Wealth, great Honor eke him gave,
To make it known what Power great Princes have.
But when Death came with his triumphant Gift,
From worldly Cark he quit his wearied Ghost,
Free from the Corpse, and straight to Heaven it lift,
Now deem that can who did for Denny most;
The King gave Wealth, but fading and unsure,
Death brought him Bliss that ever shall endure.
But to return, this Earl had together with his Learning, Wisdom, Fortitude,
Munificence, and Affability; yet all these good and excellent parts were no
protection against the King's Displeasure; for upon the 12 th. of December, the
last of King Henry the 8th. he, with his Father Thomas Duke of Norfolk, upon
certain surmises of Treason, were committed to the Tower of London, the one by
Water, the other by Land; so that the one knew not of the others Apprehension:
The 15th. day of January next following, he was arraigned at Guildhall, London,
where the greatest matter alleged against him, was, for bearing certain Arms
that were said belonged to the King and Prince; the bearing whereof he
justified. To be short, (for so they were with him) he was found guilty by
twelve common Juriars, had Judgment of Death; and upon the 19th. day of the
said Month (nine days before the Death of the said King Henry, was beheaded at
Tower Hill) He was at first interred in the Chapel of the Tower, and
afterward, in the Reign of King James, his Remainders of Ashes and Bones were
removed to Framingham in Suffolk, by his second Son Henry Earl of Northampton,
where in the Church they were interred, with this Epitaph; Henrico Howardo,
Thomae Secundi Ducis Norfolciae filio primogenito, Thomae tertij Patri, Comiti
Surriae, and Georgiam Ordinis Equiti Aurato, immature Anno Salutis 1546.
abrepto. Et Francisae Vxori ejus, filiae Johannis Comitis Oxoniae. Henricus
Howardus Comes Northhamptoniae filius secundo genitus, hoc supremum Pietatis in
Parents Monumentum posuit, A. D. 1614.

Sir THOMAS WIAT the Elder.
THis worthy Knight is termed by the Name of the Elder, to distinguish him from
Sir Thomas Wiat the raiser of the Rebellion in the time of Queen Mary, and was
born at Allington Castle in the County of Kent; which afterward he repaired
with most beautiful Buildings. He was a Person of great esteem and reputation
in the Reign of King Henry the 8th. with whom, for his honesty and singular
parts, he was in high favor. Which nevertheless he had like to have lost about
the Business of Queen Anne Bullein; but by his Innocence, Industry and
Prudence, he extricated himself.

He was one of admirable ingenuity, and truly answered his Anagram, Wiat, a
Wit, the judicious Mr. Cambden says he was.

Eques Auratus splendide doctus. And though he be not taken notice of by Bale
nor Pits, yet for his admirable Translation of David's Psalms into English
Meeter, and other Poetical Writings, Leland forbears not to compare him to
Dante and Petrarch, by giving him this large commendation.

Bella suum merito jactet Florentia Dantem
Regia Petrarchae carmina Roma probat,
His non inferior Patrio Sermon Viattus
Eloquii secum qui decus omne tulit.
Let Florence fair her Dantes justly boast,
And royal Rome her Petrarchs numbered feet,
In English Wiat both of them does coast:
In whom all graceful eloquence does meet.
The renowned Earl of Surrey in an Encomium upon his Translation of David's
Psalms, thus writes of him, What holy Grave, what worthy Sepulcher,
To Wiat's Psalms shall Christians purchase then?


And afterward, upon his death, the said Earl writes thus: What Virtues rare
were tempered in thy breast?
Honor that England such a Jewel bred,
And kiss the ground whereas thy Corpse did rest, etc.


This worthy Knight being sent Ambassador by King Henry the Eighth to Charles
the Fifth Emperor, then residing in Spain, died of the Pestilence in the West
Country, before he could take Shipping, Anno 1541.

Dr. CHRISTOPHER TIE.
IN the writing this Doctors Life, we shall principally make use for Directions
of Mr. Fuller, in his England's Worthies, fol. 244. He flourished (says he) in
the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and King Edward the Sixth, to whom he was
one of the Gentlemen of their Chapel, and probably the Organist. Music, which
received a grievous wound in England at the dissolution of Abbeys, was much
beholding to him for her recovery; such was his excellent Skill and Piety, that
he kept it up in Credit at Court, and in all Cathedrals during his life: He
translated the Acts of the Apostles into Verse, and let us take a taste of his
Poetry.

In the former Treatise to thee,
dear friend Theophilus,
I have written the verity
of the Lord Christ Jesus,
Which he to do and eke to teach,
began until the day;
In which the Spirit up did him fetch
to dwell above for aye.
After that he had power to do
even by the Holy Ghost:
Commandments then he gave unto
his chosen least and most.
To whom also himself did show
from death thus to revive;
By tokens plain unto his few
even forty days alive.
Speaking of God's kingdom with heart
choosing together them,
Commanding them not to depart
from that Jerusalem.
But still to wait on the promise
of his Father the Lord,
Of which you have heard me e're this
unto you make record.
Pass we now (says he) from his Poetry, (being Music in words) to his Music,
(being Poetry in sounds) who set an excellent Composition of Music in four
parts, to the several Chapters of his aforenamed Poetry, dedicating the same to
King Edward the Sixth, a little before his death, and Printed it Anno Dom.
1353. He also did Compose many excellent Services and Anthems of four and five
parts, which were used in Cathedrals many years after his death, the certain
date whereof we cannot attain to.

JOHN LELAND.
THis famous Antiquary, Mr. John Leland, flourished in the year 1546. about the
beginning of the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, and was born by most probable
conjecture at London. He wrote, among many other Volumes, several Books of
Epigrams, his Cigneo Cantio, a Genethliac of Prince Edward, Naniae upon the
death of Sir Thomas Wiat, out of which we shall present you with these Verses:
Transtulit in nostram Davidis carmina linguam,
Et numeros magnareddidit art pares.
Non morietur opus tersum, spectabile sacrum,
Clarior hac fama part Viattus erit.
Vna dies geminos Phoenices non dedit orbi,
Mors erit in unius, vita sed alterius.
Rara avis in terris confectus morte Viattus,
Houerdum haeredem scripser at ante suum.
Dicere nemo potest recte periisse Viattum,
Ingenit cujus tot monimenta vigent.


He wrote also several other things both in Prose and Verse, to his great fame
and commendation.

THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.
THomas Churchyard was born in the Town of Shrewsbury, as himself does affirm
in his Book made in Verse of the Worthiness of Wales, taking Shropshire within
the compass, (to use his own Expression) Wales the Park, and the Marches the
Pale thereof. He was one equally addicted to Arts and Arms, serving under that
renowned Captain Sir William Drury, in a rode he made into Scotland, as also
under several other Commanders beyond Sea, as he declares in his Tragical
Discourse of the Unhappy Man's Life, saying, Full thirty years both Court and
Wars I tryde,
And still I sought acquaintance with the best,
And served the State, and did such hap abide
As might befall, and Fortune sent the rest,
When Drum did sound, I was a Soldier pressed
To Sea or Land, as Princes quarrel stood,
And for the same full often I lost my blood.


But it seems he got little by the Wars but blows, as he declares himself a
little after.

But God he knows, my gain was small I ween, For though I did my credit still
increase, I got no wealth by wars, ne yet by peace.

Yet it seems he was born of wealthy friends, and had an Estate left unto him,
as in the same Work he does declare. So born I was to House and Land by right,
But in a Bag to Court I brought the same,
From Shrewsbury-Town, a seat of ancient fame.


Some conceive him to be as much beneath a Poet as above a Rymer, yet who so
shall consider the time he wrote in, viz. the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, shall find his Verses to go abreast with the best of that Age. His
Works, such as I have seen and have now in custody, are as follows: The Siege
of Leith.
A Farewell to the World.
A feigned Fancy of the Spider and the Gout.
A doleful Discourse of a Lady and a Knight.
The Road into Scotland, by Sir William Drury.
Sir Simon Burley's Tragedy.
A Tragical Discourse of the Unhappy Man's Life.
A Discourse of Virtue.
Churchyard's Dream.
A Tale of a Friar and and a Shoomaker's wife.
The Siege of Edenborough-Castle.
Queen Elizabeth's Reception into Bristol.


These Twelve several Treatises he bound togegether, calling them Church-yard's
Chips, and dedicated them to Sir Christopher Hatton. He also wrote the Falls of
Shore's Wife and of Cardinal Wolsey; which are inserted into the Book of the
Mirror for Magistrates. Thus, like a stone, did he trundle about, but never
gathered any Moss, dying but poor, as may be seen by his Epitaph in Mr.
Cambden's Remains, which runs thus: Come Alecto, lend me thy Torch,
To find a Churchyard in a Church Porch:
Poverty and Poetry his Tomb does enclose,
Wherefore good Neighbors be merry in prose.


His death, according to the most probable conjecture, may be presumed about
the eleventh year of the Queen's Reign, Anno Dom. 1570.

JOHN HIGGINS.
JOhn Higgins was one of the chief of them who compiled the History of the
Mirror of Magistrates, associated with Mr. Baldwin, Mr. Ferrers, Thomas
Churchyard, and several others, of which Book Sir Philip Sidney thus writes in
his Defense of Poesy, I account the Mirror of Magistrates meetly furnished of
beautiful parts. These Commendations coming from so worthy a person, our
Higgins having so principal a share therein, deserves a principal part of the
praise. And how well his deservings were, take an essay of his Poetry in his
induction to the Book.

When Summer sweet with all her pleasures past,
And leaves began to leave the shady tree,
The Winter cold increased on full fast,
And time of year to sadness moved me:
For moisty blasts not half so mirthful be,
As sweet Aurora brings in Springtime fair,
Our joys they dim as Winter damps the air.
The Nights began to grow to length apace,
Sir Phoebus to the Antartique 'gan to fare:
From Libra's lance, to the Crab he took his race
Beneath the Line, to lend of light a share.
For then with us the days more darkish are,
More short, cold, moist, and stormy, cloudy, clit,
For sadness more than mirths or pleasures fit.
Devising then what Books were best to read,
Both for that time, and sentence grave also,
For conference of friend to stand in stead,
When I my faithful friend was parted fro;
I gat me strait the Printers shops unto,
To seek some Work of price I surely meant,
That might alone my careful mind content.
And then he declares how there he found the first part of this Mirror for
Magistrates, which yet took beginning from the time of King Richard the Second;
But he knowing many Examples of famous persons before William the Conqueror,
which were wholly omitted, he set upon the Work, and beginning from Brute,
continued it to Aurelius Bassianus Caracalla Emperor of Rome, about the year
of Christ 209. showing in his Writings a great deal of Wisdom and Learning. He
flourished about the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

ABRAHAM FRANCE.
THis Abraham France, a Versifier, about the same time with John Higgins, was
one who imitated Latin measure in English Verse, writing a Pastoral, called
the Countess of Pembroke' s Ivy-church, and some other things in Hexameter,
some also in Hexameter and Pentameter; He also wrote the Countess of Pembroke'
s Emanuel, containing the Nativity, Passion, Burial, and Resurrection of
Christ, together with certain Psalms of David, all in English Hexameters. Nor
was he altogether singular in this way of writing, for Sir Philip Sidney, in
the Pastoral Interludes of his Arcadia, uses not only these, but all other
sorts of Latin measure, in which no wonder he is followed by so few, since
they neither become the English, nor any other modern Language.

He began also the Translation of Heliodorus his Aethiopick History, in the
same kind of Verse, of which, to give the Reader the better divertisement, we
shall present you with a taste.

As soon as Sunbeams could once peep out fro the Mountains,
And by the dawn of day had somewhat lightened Olympus,
Men, whose lust was law, whose life was still to be lusting,
Whose thriving thieving, conveyed themselves to an hill top,
That stretched forward to the Heracleotica entry
And mouth of Nylus; looking thence down to the main sea
For seafaring men; but seeing none to be sailing,
They knew 'twas bootless to be looking there for a booty:
So that strait fro the sea they cast their eyes to the seashore;
Where they saw, that a Ship very strangely without any ship-man,
Lay then alone at road, with Cables tied to the main-land,
And yet full fraighted, which they, though far, fro the hill-top,
Easily might perceive by the water drawn to the deck-boards, etc.
His Ivy-Church he dedicated to the Countess of Pembroke, in which he much
vindicated his manner of writing, as no Verse fitter for it then that; he also
dedicated his Emanuel to her, which being but two lines take as follows: Mary
the best Mother sends her best Babe to a Mary:
Lord to a Ladies sight, and Christ to a Christian.


When he died, we cannot find, but suppose it to be about the former part of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

WILLIAM WARNER.
WIlliam Warner, one of principal esteem in his time, was chiefly famous for
his Albion's England, which he wrote in the old-fashioned kind of seven-footed
Verse, which yet sometimes is in use, though in different manner, that is to
say, divided into two: He wrote also several Books in prose, as he himself
witnesses in his Epistle to the Reader, but (as we said before) his Albion's
England was the chiefest, which he deduced from the time of Noah, beginning
thus: I tell of things done long ago, of many things in few:
And chiefly of this Clime of ours, the accidents pursue
Thou high director of the same, assist mine artless Pen,
To write the Jests of Brutons stout, and Arts of Englishmen.


From thence he proceeds to the peopling of the Earth by the Sons of Noah,
intermixing therein much variety of Matter, not only pleasant, but profitable
for the Readers understanding of what was delivered by the ancient Poets,
bringing his Matter succinctly to the Siege of Troy, and from thence to the
coming of Brute into this Island; and so, coming down along the chiefest
matters, touched of our British Historians, to the Conquest of England by Duke
William, and from him the Affairs of the Land to the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth; where he concludes thus, Elizabeth by peace, by war, for majesty,
for mild,
Enriched, feared, honored, loved, but (lo) unreconcil'd,
The Muses check my saucy Pen, for enterprising her,
In duly praising whom, themselves, even Arts themselves might err.
Phoebus I am, not Phaeton, presumptuously to ask
What, should thou give, I could not guide; guide; give not me thy task,
For, as thou art Apollo too, our mighty subjects threats
A non plus to thy double power:
Vel volo, vel nollem.


I might add several more of his Verses, to show the worth of his Pen, but the
Book being indifferent common, having received several Impressions, I shall
refer the Reader, for his* further satisfaction, to the Book itself.

THOMAS TVSSER.
THomas Tusser (a person well known by his Book of Husbandry) was born at
Riuen-hall in Essex, of an ancient Family, but now extinct; where, when but
young, his Father, designing him for a Singing-man, put him to
Wallingford-School, where how his Misfortunes began in the World, take from his
own Pen.

O painful time, for every crime,
What toosed ears, like baited Bears,
What bobbed lips, what yerks, what nips, What hellish toys?
What Robes so bare, what Colledge-fare?
What Bread how stale, what penny Ale?
Then Wallingford, how were thou abhorred,
Of silly boys?
From thence he was sent to learn Music at Paul's, with one John Redford, an
excellent Musician; where, having attained some skill in that Art, he was
afterward sent to Eaton-School, to learn the Latin Tongue, where, how his
Miseries increased, let himself speak.

From Paul's I went, to Eaton sent,
To learn straightways the Latin phrase,
Where fifty three stripes given to me,
At once I had,
For fault but small, or none at all,
It came to pass thus beat I was,
See Vdal, see, the mercy of thee
To me poor Lad.
Having attained to some perfection in the Latin Tongue, he was sent to
Trinity-Hall in Cambridge, where he had not continued long, but he was vexed
with extreme sickness, whereupon he left the University, and betook himself to
Court, and lived for a while under the Lord Paget, in King Edward the Sixth's
days; when, the Lords falling at dissension, he left the Court, and went to
Suffolk, where he married his first Wife, and took a Farm at Ratwade in that
County, where he first devised his Book of Husbandry, but his Wife not having
her health there, he removed from thence to Ipswich, and soon after buried her.

Not long after he married again to one Mrs. Amy Moon, upon whose Name he thus
versified: I chanced soon to find a Moon,
Of cheerful hue;
Which well and fine me thought did shine,
And never change, a thing most strange,
Yet keep in sight her course aright,
And compass true.


Being thus married he betook himself again to Husbandry, and hired a Farm,
called Diram Cell, and there he had not lived long, but his Landlord died, and
his Executors falling at variance, and now one troubled him, and then another,
whereupon he left Diram, and went to Norw^ch, turning a Singing-man under Mr.
Salisbury, the Dean thereof; There he was troubled with a Dissury, so that in a
138 Hours he never made a drop of Water. Next he hired a Parsonage at Fairstead
in Essex, but growing weary of that he returned again to London, where he had
not lived long, but the Pestilence raging there, he retired to Cambridge: Thus
did he roll about from place to place, but, like Sisiphus stone, could gather
no Moss whithersoever he went: He was successive a Musician, Schoolmaster,
Servingman, Husbandman, Grasier, Poet, more skilful in all, than thriving in
any Vocation. He traded at large in Oxen, Sheep, Dairies, Grain of all kinds,
to no profit. He spread his Bread with all sorts of Butter, yet none would
stick thereon. So that he might say with the Poet, -- Monitis sum minor ipse
meis.

None being better at the Theory, or worse at the Practice of Husbandry, and
may be fitly matched with Thomas Churchyard, they being marked alike in their
Poetical parts, living in the same time, and statur'd both alike in their
Estates, and that low enough in all reason. He died in London, Anno Dom. 1580.
and was buried at St. Mildred's-Church in the Poultrey, with this Epitaph: Here
THOMAS TVSSER, clad in earth does lie,
That sometime made the Points of Husbandry:
By him then learn thou may, here learn we must,
When all is done, we sleep, and turn to dust:
And yet, through Christ, to Heaven we hope to go,
Who reads his Books, shall find his Faith was so.


THOMAS STORER.
THomas Storer was a great writer of Sonnets, Madrigals, and Pastoral Airs, in
the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign, and no doubt was highly esteemed in
those days, of which we have an account of some of them in an old Book, called
England's Hellicon. This kind of writing was of great esteem in those days, and
much imitated by Thomas Watson, Bartholomew Young, Dr. Lodge, and several
others. What time he died is to me unknown.

THOMAS LODGE.
THomas Lodge, a Doctor of Physic, flourished also about the beginning of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth; He was also an eminent Writer of Pastoral Songs,
Odes, and Madrigals. This following Sonnet is said to be of his composing.

If I must die, O let me choose my Death:
Suck out my Soul with Kisses, cruel Maid!
In thy Breasts Crystal Balls embalm my Breath,
Dole it all out in sighs when I am laid;
Thy Lips on mine like Cupping-glasses clasp;
Let our Tongues meet, and strive as they would sting:
Crush out my Wind with one straight girting Grasp,
Stabs on my Heart keep time whilst thou do sing.
Thy Eyes like searing-Irons burn out mine;
In thy fair Tresses stifle me outright:
Like Circes, change me to a loathsome Swine,
So I may live for ever in thy sight.
Into Heavens Joys can none profoundly see,
Except that first they meditate on thee.
Contemporary with Dr. Lodge, were several others, who all of them wrote in the
same strain, as George Gascoigne, Tho. Hudson, John Markham, Tho. Achely, John
Weever, Chr. Midleton, George Turbervile, Henry Constable, Sir Edward Dyer,
Charles Fitz Geoffry. Of these George Gascoigne wrote not only Sonnets, Odes
and Madrigals, but also something to the Stage: as his Supposes, a Comedy;
Glass of Government, a Tragi-Comedy; and Jocasta, a Tragedy.

But to return to Dr. Lodge; we shall only add one Sonnet more, taken out of
his Euphues Golden Legacy, and so proceed to others.

Of all chaste Birds, the Phoenix does excel;
Of all strong Beasts, the Lion bears the Bell:
Of all sweet Flowers, the Rose does sweetest smell;
Of all fair Maids, my Rosalind is fairest.
Of all pure Metals, Gold is only purest;
Of all high Trees, the Pine has highest Crest;
Of all soft Sweets, I like my Mistress best:
Of all chaste Thoughts my Mistress Thoughts are rarest.
Of all proud Birds, the Eagle pleases Jove,
Of pretty Fowls, kind Venus likes the Dove:
Of Trees, Minerva does the Olive love,
Of all sweet Nymphs, I honor Rosalinde,
Of all her Gifts, her Wisdom pleases most:
Of all her Graces, Virtue she does boast;
For all the Gifts, my Life and Joy is lost,
If Rosalinde prove cruel and unkind.
ROBERT GREEN.
RObert Green (that great Friend to the Printers by his many Impressions of
numerous Books) was by Birth a Gentleman, and sent to study in the University
of Cambridge; where he proceeded Master of Art therein. He had in his time
sipped of the Fountain of Hellicon, but drank deeper Draughts of Sack, that
Helliconian Liquor, whereby he beggared his Purse to enrich his Fancy; writing
much against Viciousness, but too too vicious in his Life. He had to his Wife a
Virtuous Gentlewoman, whom yet he forsook, and betook himself to a high course
of Living; to maintain which, he made his Pen mercenary, making his Name very
famous for several Books which he wrote, very much taking in his time, and in
indifferent repute amongst the vulgar at this present; of which, those that I
have seen, are as follows) Euphues his Censure to Philautus; Tullies Love,
Philomela, The Lady Fitz-waters Nightingale, A Quip for an upstart Courtier,
the History of Dorastus and Fawnia, Green's never too late, first and second
Part; Green's Arcadia, Green his Farewell to Folly, Greene's Groats-worth of
Wit, etc. He was also an Associate with Dr. Lodge in writing of several
Comedies; namely, The Laws of Nature; Lady Alimony; Liberality and Prodigality;
and a Masque called Luminalia; besides which, he wrote alone the Comedies of
Friar Bacon, and fair Emme.

But notwithstanding by these his Writings he got much Money, yet was it not
sufficient to maintain his Prodigality, but that before his death he fell into
extreme Poverty, when his Friends, (like Leaves to Trees in the Summer of
Prosperity) fell from him in his Winter of Adversity: of which he was very
sensible, and heartily repented of his ill passed Life, especially of the
wrongs he had done to his Wife; which he declared in a Letter written to her,
and found with his Book of A Groatsworth of Wit, after his Death, containing
these Words;

THE Remembrance of many Wrongs offered Thee and thy unreproved Virtues, add
greater sorrow to my miserable State than I can utter, or thou conceive;
neither is it lessened by consideration of thy Absence (though Shame would let
me hardly behold thy Face) but exceedingly aggravated, for that I cannot (as I
ought) to thy own self reconcile my self, that thou might witness my inward
Woe at this instant, that have made thee a woeful Wife for so long a time. But
equal Heaven has denied that comfort, giving at my last need, like Succor as
I have sought all my Life: Being in this extremity, as void of help, as thou
have been of hope. Reason would that after so long waste, I should not send
thee a Child to bring the Charge, but consider he is the fruit of thy Womb, in
whose Face regard not the Father's so much as thy own Perfections: He is yet
Green, and may grow strait, if he be carefully tended; otherwise apt enough (I
fear me) to follow his Fathers Folly. That I have offended thee highly, I know;
that thou can forget my Injuries, I hardly believe; yet I persuade my self,
if thou saw my wretched estate, thou could not but lament it: Nay,
certainly I know thou would. All my wrongs muster themselves about me, and
every Evil at once plagues me: For my contempt of God, I am Contemned of Men;
for my swearing and forswearing, no man will believe me; for my Gluttony I
suffer Hunger; for my Drunkenness Thirst; for my Adultery, ulcerous Sores: Thus
God has cast me down that I might be humbled, and punished me for example of
others; and though he suffers me in this world to perish without succor, yet
trust I in the world to come to find Mercy by the Merits of my Savior; to whom
I commend thee, and commit my Soul.

Thy Repentant Husband for his Disloyalty, Robert Green.


In a Comedy called Green's Tu quoque, written by John Cook, I find these
Verses made upon his Death; How fast bleak Autumn changes Flora's Die;
What yesterday was Green, now is sear and dry.


THOMAS NASH.
THomas Nash was also a Gentleman born, and bred up in the University of
Cambridge; a man of a quick apprehension and Satyrick Pen: One of his first
Books he wrote was entitled Pierce Penniless his Supplication to the Devil,
wherein he had some Reflections upon the Parentage of Dr. Harvey, his Father
being a Rope-maker of Saffron-Walden: This begot high Contests betwixt the
Doctor and him, so that it became to be a well known Pen-Combate. Amongst other
Books which Mr. Nash wrote against him, one was entitled, Have with ye to
Saffron-Walden; and another called Four Letters confuted; in which last he
concludes with this Sonnet; Were there no Wars, poor men should have no Peace;
Uncessant Wars with Wasps and Drones I cry:
He that begins often knows not how to cease;
He has begun; I Will follow till I die.
I Will hear no Truce, Wrong gets no Grave in me:
Abuse pell-mell encounter with abuse;
Write he again, I Will write eternally;
Who feeds Revenge, has found an endless Muse.
If Death ere made his black Dart of a Pen,
My Pen his special Bailey shall become:
Somewhat I Will be reputed of amongst men,
By striking of this Dunce or dead or dumb:
Await the World the Tragedy of Wrath,
What next I paint shall tread no common Path.


It seems he had a Poetical Purse as well as a Poetical Brain, being much
straghitned in the Gifts of Fortune; as he exclaims in his Pierce Penniless.

Why is it damnation to despair and die,
When Life is my true happiness disease?
My Soul, my Soul, thy Safety makes me fly
The faulty Means that might my Pain appease.
Divines and dying men may talk of Hell,
But in my Heart her several Torments dwell.
Ah worthless Wit, to train me to this Woe!
Deceitful Arts that nourish Discontent,
Ill thrive the Folly that bewitched me so!
Vain Thoughts adieu; for now I will repent:
And yet my Wants persuade me to proceed,
Since none takes pity of a Scholar's need.
Forgive me, God, although I curse my Birth,
And ban the Air wherein I breath a wretch,
Since Misery has daunted all my Mirth,
And I am quite undone through Promise breach.
Oh Friends! no Friends, that then ungently frown,
When changing Fortune casts us headlong down.
Without redress complains my careless Verse,
And Midas ears relent not at my moan;
In some far Land will I my griefs rehearse,
Amongst them that will be moved, when I shall groan.
England adieu, the Soil that brought me forth;
Adieu unkind, where Skill is nothing worth.
He wrote moreover a witty Poem, entitled, The White Herring and the Red; and
two Comedies, the one called Summer's last Will and Testament, and See me and
see me not.

Sir PHILIP SIDNEY.
SIr Philip Sidney, the glory of the English Nation in his time, and pattern of
true Nobility, in whom the Graces and Muses had their domestical habitations,
equally addicted both to Arts and Arms, though more fortunate in the one than
in the other. Son to Sir Henry Sidney, thrice Lord Deputy of Ireland, and
Sisters Son to Robert Earl of Leicester; Bred in Christ's Church in Oxford,
(Cambridge being nevertheless so happy to have a College of his name) where he
so profited in the Arts and Liberal Sciences, that after an incredible
proficiency in all the Species of Learning, he left the Academical Life, for
that of the Court, invited thither by his Uncle, the Earl of Leicester, that
great Favorite of Queen Elizabeth. Here he so profited, that he became the
glorious Star of his Family, a lively Pattern of Virtue, and the lovely Joy of
all the learned sort. These his Parts so indeared him to Queen Elizabeth, that
she sent him upon an Embassy to the Emperor of Germany at Vienna, which he
discharged to his own Honor, and her Approbation. Yea, his Fame was so
renowned throughout all Christendom, that (as it is commonly reported) he was
in election for the Kingdom of Poland, though the Author of his Life, printed
before his Arcadia, does doubt of the truth of it, however it was not above his
deserts.

During his abode at the Court, at his spare hours he composed that
incomparable Romance, entitled, The Arcadia, which he dedicated to his Sister
the Countess of Pembroke. A Book (says Dr. Heylin) which, besides its
excellent Language, rare Contrivances, and delectable Stories, has in it all
the strains of Poesy, comprehends the whole art of speaking, and to them who
can discern and will observe, affords notable Rules of Demeanor, both
private and public; and though some men, sharp-witted only in speaking evil,
have depraved the Book, as the occasion that many precious hours are spent no
better, they consider not that the ready way to make the minds of Youth grow
awry, is to lace them too hard, by denying them just and due liberty. Surely
(says one) the Soul deprived of lawful delights, will, in way of revenge, (to
enlarge its self out of prison) invade and attempt unlawful pleasures. Let such
be condemned always to eat their meat with no other sauce, but their own
appetite, who deprive themselves and others of those sallies into lawful
Recreations, whereof no less plenty than variety is afforded in this Arcadia.

One writes, that Sir Philip Sidney in the extreme agony of his wounds, so
terrible the sense of death is, requested the dearest friend he had, to burn
his Arcadia; what promise his friend returned herein is uncertain; but if he
brake his word to be faithful to the public good, posterity herein has less
cause to censure him for being guilty of such a m^^^orious offense, wherewith
he has obliged so many ages. Hereupon thus writes the British Epigramatist.

Ipse tuam morient sede conjuge test jubebas,
Arcadium saevis ignibus esse cibum;
Si meruit mortem, quia flammam accendit amoris
Mergi, non uri debuit iste liber.
In Librum quaecunque cadat sententia nulla,
Debuit ingenium morte perire tuum.
In serious thoughts of Death 'twas thy desire
This sportful Book should be condemned with Fire:
If so, because it does intend Love-matters,
It rather should be quenched or drowned in the waters
However doomed the Book, the memory Of thy immortal Wit will never die.
He wrote also besides his Arcadia, several other Works; namely, A Defense of
Poesy, a Book entitled Astrophel and Stella, with diverse Songs and Sonnets in
praise of his Lady, whom he celebrated under that bright Name; whom afterward
he married, that Paragon of Nature, Sir Francis Walsingham's Daughter, who
impoverished himself to enrich the State; from whom he expected no more than
what was above all Portions, a beautiful Wife, and a virtuous Daughter.

He also translated part of that excellent Treatise of Philip Morney du
Plessis, of the Truth of Religion; and no doubt had written many other
excellent Works, had not the Lamp of his Life been extinguished too soon; the
manner whereof take as follows:

His Uncle Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester (a man almost as much hated as his
Nephew was loved) was sent over into the Low Countries, with a well appointed
Army, and large Commission, to defend the United Provinces against the Spanish
Cruelty. Under him went Sir Philip Sidney, who had the Command of the
cautionary Town of Flushing, and Castle of Ramekius, a Trust which he so
faithfully discharged, that he turned the Envy of the Dutch Townsmen into
Affection and Admiration. Not long after, some Service was to be performed nigh
Zutphen in Guelderland, where the English, through false intelligence, were
mistaken in the strength of the Enemy. Sir Philip is employed next to the Chief
in that Expedition; which he so discharged, that it is questionable whether his
Wisdom, Industry or Valor may challenge to it self the greatest praise of the
Action. And now when the triumphant Laurels were ready to Crown his Brows, the
English so near the Victory, that they touched it, ready to lay hold upon, he
was unfortunately shot in the Thigh, which is the Rendezvous of Nerves and
Sinews, which caused a Fever, that proved so mortal, that five and twenty days
after he died of the same; the Night of whose Death was the Noon of his Age,
and the exceeding Loss of Christendom.

His Body was conveyed into England, and most honorably interred in the Church
of St. Paul in London; over which was fixed this Epitaph: England, Netherland,
the Heavens, and the Arts,
All Soldiers, and the World have made six parts
Of the Noble Sidney; for none will suppose
That a small heap of Stones can Sidney enclose:
England has his Body, for she it bred;
Netherland his Blood, in her defense shed;
The Heavens his Soul, the Arts his Fame;
All Soldiers the Grief, the World his good Name.


To recite the Commendations given him by several Authors, would of it self
require a Volume; to rehearse some few not unpleasing to the Reader. The
reverend Cambden writes thus; This is that Sidney, whom, as God's will was, he
should be therefore born into the world even to show unto our Age a Sample of
ancient Virtues. Doctor Heylin in his Cosmography calls him, That gallant
Gentleman of whom he cannot but make honorable mention. Mr. Fuller in his
Worthies thus writes of him, His homebred Abilities perfected by Travel with
foreign accomplishments, and a sweet Nature, set a gloss upon both. Stow in his
Annals, calls him, a most valiant and towardly Gentleman. Speed in his
Chronicle, That worthy Gentleman in whom were complete all Virtues and Valors
that could be expected to reside in man: And Sir Richard Baker gives him this
Character, A man of so many excellent parts of Art and Nature, of Valor and
Learning, of Wit and Magnanimity, that as he had equalled all those of former
Ages, so the future will hardly be able to equal him.

Nor was this Poet forgotten by the Poets; who offered whole Hecatombs of
Verses in his praise. Hear first that Kingly Poet, or Poetical King, King James
the first, late Monarch of Great Britain, who thus writes; Armipotens cui jus
in fortia pectora Mavors,
Tu Dea quae cerebrum perrumpere digna totantis,
Tuque adeo bijugae proles Latonia rupis
Gloria, deciduae cingunt quam collibus arts,
Duc tecum, and querela Sidnaei funera voce
Plangite; nam vester fuer at Sidnaeus alumnus,
Quid genus, and proavos, and spem, floremque juventae,
Immaturo obitu raptum sine sine retexo?
Heu frustra queror? heu rapuit Mors omnia secum,
Et nihil ex tanto nunc est Hero superstes,
Praeterquam Decus and Nomen virtute paratum,
Doctaque Sidneas testantia Carmina lauds.


Thus translated by the said king: Thou mighty Mars, the Lord of Soldiers brave,
And thou Minerve, that do in wit excel,
And thou Apollo, who do knowledge have
Of every Art that from Parnassus fell,
With all your Sisters that thereon do dwell,
Lament for him who duly served you all:
Whom in you wisely all your Arts did mell,
Bewail (I say) his unexpected fall,
I need not in remembrance for to call
His Race, his Youth, the hope had of him ay,
Since that in him does cruel Death appall
Both Manhood, Wit and Learning every way:
But yet he does in bed of Honor rest,
And evermore of him shall live the best.


And in another place thus; When Venus sad saw Philip Sidney slain,
She wept, supposing Mars that he had been,
From Fingers Rings, and from her Neck the Chain
She plucked away, as if Mars never again
She meant to please, in that form he was in,
Dead, an yet could a Goddess thus beguile,
What had he done if he had lived this while?


These Commendations given him by so learned a Prince, made Mr. Alexander Nevil
thus to write; Harps others Praise, a Scepter his does sing,
Of Crowned Poet, and of Laureat King.


Divine Du Bartus, speaking of the most Learned of the English Nation,
reckons him as one of the chief, in these words; And (world mourned) Sidney,
warbling to the Thames,
His Swan-like Tunes, so courts her coy proud Streams,
That (all with child with Fame) his Fame they bear
To Thetis Lap, and Thetis every where.


Sir John Harrington in his Epigrams thus; If that be true the latter Proverb
says,
Laudari a Laudatis is most Praise,
Sidney, thy Works in Fames Books are enrolled
By Princes Pens, which have thy Works extolled,
Whereby thy Name shall dure to endless days.


Mr. Owen, the Brittsh Epigrammatist thus sets him forth: Thou writ'st things
worthy reading, and did do
Things worthy writing too.
Thy Arts thy Valor show,
And by thy Works we do thy Learning know.


I shall conclude all with these excellent Verses made by himself a little
before his Death; It is not I that die, I do but leave an Inn,
Where harbored was with me all filthy Sin:
It is not I that die, I do but now begin
Into eternal Joy by Faith to enter in,
Why mourn you then my Parents, Friends and Kin?
Lament you when I lose, not when I win.


Sir FVLK GREVIL.
NExt to Sir Philip Sidney, we shall add his great Friend and Associate, Sir
Fulk Grevil, Lord Brook, one very eminent both for Arts and Arms; to which the
genius of that time did mightily invite active Spirits. This Noble Person, for
the great love he bore to Sir Philip sidney, wrote his Life. He wrote several
other Works both in Prose and Verse, some of which were Dramatick, as his
Tragedies of Alaham, Mustapha, and Marcus Tullius Cicero, and others, commonly
of a Political Subject; amongst which, a Posthume Work, not published till
within a few years, being a two fold Treatise, the first of Monarchy, the
second of Religion, in all which is observable a close mysterious and
sententious way of Writing, without much regard to Elegancy of Style, or
smoothness of Verse. Another Posthume Book is also fathered upon him; namely,
The Five Years of King James, or the Condition of the State of England, and the
Relation it had to other Provinces, Printed in the Year 1643. But of this last
Work many people are doubtful.

Now for his Abilities in the Exercise of Arms, take this instance: At such
time when the French Ambassadors came over into England, to Negotiate a
Marriage between the Duke of Anjou, and Queen Elizabeth, for their better
entertainment, Solemn Justs were proclaimed, where the Earl of Arundel,
Frederick Lord Windsor, Sir Philip Sidney, and he, were chief Challengers
against all comers; in which Challenge be behaved himself so gallantly, that he
won the reputation of a most valiant Knight.

Thus you see, that though Ease be the Nurse of Poesy, the Muses are also
Companions to Mars, as may be exemplified in the Lives of the Earl of Surrey,
Sir Philip Sidney, and this Sir Fulk Grevil.

I shall only add a word or two of his death, which was as sad as lamentable.
He kept a discontented servant, who conceiving his deserts, not soon or well
enough rewarded, wounded him mortally; and then (to save the Law a labor)
killed himself. Verifying therein the observation, That there is none who never
so much despises his own life, but yet is master of another man's.

This ingenious Gentleman, (in whose person shined all true Virtue and high
Nobility) as he was a great friend to learning himself, so was he a great
favourer of learning in others, witness his liberality to Mr. Speed the
Chronologer, when finding his wide Soul was stuffed with too narrow an
Occupation, gave it enlargement, as the said Author does ingeniously consess in
his description of Warwick shire, Whose Merits (says he) to me-ward, I do
acknowledge, in setting his hand free from the daily employments of a Manual
Trade, and giving it full liberty thus to express the inclination of mind,
himself being the Procurer of my present Estate.

He lies interred in Warwick-Church, under a Monument of Black and White
Marble, wherein he is styled, Servant to Queen Elizabeth, Councellor to King
James, and Friend to Sir Philp Sidney. He died Anno 16 --. without Issue, save
only those of his Brain, which will make his Name to live, when others Issue
they may fail them.

Mr. EDMOND SPENSER.
THis our Famous Poet, Mr. Edmond Spenser, was born in the City of London, and
brought up in Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge; where he became a most excellent
Scholar, but especially very happy in English Poetry, as his learned, elaborate
Works do declare, which whosoever shall peruse with a judicious eye, will find to
have in them the very height of Poetic fancy, and though some blame his
Writings for the many Chaucerisms used by him, yet to the Learned they are
known not to be blemishes, but rather beauties to his Book; which,
notwithstanding, (says a learned Writer) had been more salable, if more
conformed to our modern language.

His first flight in Poetry, as not thinking himself fully fledged, was in that
Book of his, called The Shepherds Calendar, applying an old Name to a new Book;
It being of Eclogues fitted to each Month in the Year: of which Work hear what
that worthy Knight, Sir Philip Sidney writes, whose judgment in such cases is
counted infallible: The Shepherds Calendar (says he) has much Poetry in his
Eclogues, indeed worthy the reading, if I be not deceived; That same framing
his Style to an old rustic Language, I dare not allow, since neither
Theocritus in Greek, Virgil in Latin, nor Sanazara in Italian did effect it.
Afterward he translated the Gnat, a little fragment of Virgil's excellency.
Then he translated Bellay his Ruins of Rome; His most unfortunate Work was that
of Mother Hubbard's Tale, giving therein offense to one in authority, who after
wards stuck on his skirts. But his main Book, and which indeed I think Envy its
self cannot carp at, was his Fairy Queen, a Work of such an ingenious composure
as will last as long as time endures.

Now as you have heard what esteem Sir Philip Sidney had of his Book, so you
shall hear what esteem Mr. Spenser had of Sir Philip Sidney, writing thus in
his Ruins of Time.

Yet will I sing, but who can better sing
Than thou thy self, thine own selfs valiance?
That while thou livedst thou made the Forests ring,
And Fields resound, and Flocks to leap and dance,
And Shepherds leave their Lambs unto mischance,
To run thy shrill Arcadian Pipe to hear,
O happy were those days, thrice happy were.
In the same his Poem of the Rains of Time, you may see what account he makes
of the World, and of the immortal Fame gotten by Poesy.

In vain do earthly Princes then, in vain,
Seek with Pyramids to Heaven aspired;
Or huge Collosses, built with costly pain;
Or brazen Pillars never to be fired;
Or Shrines, made of the metal most desired,
To make their Memories for ever live,
For how can mortal immortality give?
For deeds do die, however nobly done,
And thoughts of men do in themselves decay,
But wise words taught in numbers for to run,
Recorded by the Muses, live for aye;
Ne may with storming showers be washed away,
Ne bitter breathing with harmful blast,
Nor age, nor envy, shall them ever wast.
There passes a story commonly told and believed, that Mr. Spenser presenting
his Poems to Queen Elizabeth, she highly affected therewith, commanded the Lord
Cecil, her Treasurer, to give him an Hundred Pound; and when the Treasurer (a
good Steward of the Queen's Money) alleged, that Sum was too much for such a
matter; then give him, quoth the Queen, what is reason; but was so busied, or
seemed to be so, about matters of higher concernment, that Mr. Spenser received
no reward: whereupon he presented this Petition in a small piece of Paper to
the Queen in her progress.

I was promised on a time,
To have reason for my rhyme,
From that time unto this season,
I received nor rhyme nor reason.
This tart reflect so wrought upon the Queen, that she gave strict order (not
witstout some check to her Treasurer) for the present payment of the hundred
pounds she first intended him.

He afterward went over into Ireland, Secretary to the Lord Gray, Lord Deputy
thereof; and though that his Office under his Lord was lucrative, yet got he no
Estate; Peculiari Poetis fato semper cum paupertate conflictatus est, says the
reverend Cambden; so that it fared little better with him, (than with
Churchyard or Tusser before him) or with William Xiliander the German, (a most
excellent Linguist, Antiquary, Philosopher, and Mathematician) who was so poor,
that (as Thuanus writes) he was thought, Fami non famae scribere.

Thriving so bad in that boggy Country, to add to his misery, he was robbed by
the Rebels of that little he had left; whereupon, in great grief, he returns
into England, and falling into want, which to a noble spirit is most killing,
being heartbroken, he died Anno 1598. and was honorably buried at the sole
charge of Robert, first of that name Earl of Essex, on whose Monument is
written this Epitaph.

Edmundus Spencer, Londinensis, Anglicorum Poetarum nostri seculi fuit
Princeps, quod ejus Poemata, faventibus Musis, and victuro genio conscripta
comprobant. Obiit immatur a morte, Anno salutis, 1598. and prope Galfredum
Chaucerum conditur, qui scqelisissime Poesin Anglicis literis primus
illustravit. In quem haec scripta sunt Epitaphia.

Hic prope Chaucerum situs est Spenserius, illi
Proximus ingenio, proximus ut tumulo.
Hic prope Chaucerum Spensere poeta poetam
Conderis, and versu! quam tumulo proprior,
Anglica te vivo vixit, plausitque Poesis;
Nunc moritur a timet, te moriente, mori.
These two last lines, for the worthiness of the Poet, are thus translated by
Dr. Fuller.

Whilst thou did live, lived English Poetry, Which fears, now thou art dead,
that she shall die.

A modern Author writes, that the Lord Cecil owed Mr. Spenser a grudge for some
Reflections of his in Mother Hubbard's Tale, and therefore when the Queen had
ordered him that Money, the Lord Treasurer said, What all this for a Song? And
this he is said to have taken so much to heart, that he contracted a deep
Melancholy, which soon after brought his life to a period: so apt is an
ingenious spirit to resent a slighting even from the greatest persons. And thus
much I must needs say of the Merit of so great a Poet, from so great a Monarch,
that it is incident to the best of Poets sometimes to flatter some Royal or
Noble Patron, never did any do it more to the height, or with greater art and
elegance, if the highest of praises attributed to so Heroic a Princess can
justly be termed flattery.

Sir JOHN HARRINGTON.
SIr John Harrington is supposed to be born in Somersetshire, he having a fair
Estate near Bath in that County. His Father, for carrying a Letter to the Lady
(afterward Queen) Elizabeth, was kept twelve months in the Tower, and made to
spend a Thousand Pounds e're he could be free of that trouble. His Mother also
being Servant to the Lady Elizabeth, was sequestered from her, and her Husband
enjoined not to keep company with her; so that on both sides he may be said to
be very indear'd to Queen Elizabeth, who was also his Godmother, a further tie
of her kindness and respects unto him.

This Sir John was bred up in Cambridge, either in Christ's or in St.
John's-Colledge, under Dr. Still his Tutor. He afterward proved one of the
most ingenious Poets of our English Nation, no less noted for his Book of witty
Epigrams, than his judicious Translation of Ariosto's Orlando Furioso,
dedicated to the Lady Elizabeth, afterward Queen of Bohemia.

The British Epigramatist, Mr. John Owen, in his second Book of Epigrams, thus
writes to him:

A Poet mean I am, yet of the Troop, Though thou art not, yet better thou can
do it.

And afterward in his fourth Book, Epig. 20. concerning Envy's Genealogy; he
thus complements him.

Fair Virtue, foul-mouthed Envy breeds, and feeds;
From Virtue only this foul Vice proceeds;
Wonder not that I this to you indite,
Against your rare Virtues, Envy bends her spite.
It happened that whilst the said Sir John repaired often to an Ordinary in
Bath, a Female attendress at the Table, neglecting other Gentlemen, which sat
higher, and were of greater Estates, applied herself wholly to him,
accommodating him with all necessaries, and preventing his asking any thing
with her officiousness. She being demanded by him, the reason of her so careful
waiting on him? I understand (said she) you are a very witty man, and if I
should displease you in any thing, I fear you would make an Epigram of me.

Sir John frequenting often the Lady Robert's House, his Wives Mother, where
they used to go to dinner extraordinary late, a Child of his being there then,
said Grace, which was that of the Primmer, Thou give them Meat in due season;
Hold, said Sir John to the Child, you ought not to lie unto God, for here we
never have our Meat in due season. This Jest he afterward turned into an
Epigram, directing it to his Wife, and concluding it thus:

Now if your Mother angry be for this,
Then you must reconcile us with a kiss.
A Posthume Book of his came forth, as an addition to Bishop Godwin's Catalogue
of Bishops, wherein (says Dr. Fuller) besides mistakes, some tart reflections
in Vxaratos Episcopos, might well have been spared. In a word (says he) he was
a Poet in all things, save in his wealth, leaving a fair Estate to a learned
and religious Son, and died about the middle of the Reign of King James.

JOHN HEYWOOD.
THis John Heywood was one of the first writers of English Plays, contemporary
with the Authors of Gammar Gurton's Needle, and Tom Tyler and his Wife, as may
appear by the Titles of his Interludes; viz. The Play of Love; Play of of the
Weather; Play between Johan the Husband, and Tib his Wife; Play between the
Pardoner and the Friar, and the Curate and Neighbor Prat; Play of Gentleness
and Nobility, in two parts. Besides these he wrote two Comedies, the Pinner of
Wakefield, and Philotas Scotch. There was of this Name, in King Henry the
Eighth's Reign, an Epigramatist, who, says the Author of the Art of English
Poetry, for the mirth and quickness of his conceits, more than any goqd
learning was in him, came to be well benefited by the King.

THOMAS HEYWOOD.
THomas Heywood was a greater Benefactor to the Stage than his Namesake, John
Heywood, aforesaid, he having (as you may read in an Epistle to a Play of his,
called, The English Travelers) had an entire hand, or at least a main finger
in the writing of 220 of them. And no doubt but he took great pains therein,
for it is said, that he not only Acted himself almost every day, but also wrote
each day a Sheet; and that he might lose no time, many of his Plays were
composed in the Tavern, on the backside of Tavern Bills; which may be an
occasion that so many of them are lost, for of those 220. mentioned before, we
find but 25. of them Printed, viz. The Brazen Age; Challenge for Beauty; The
English Travelers; The first and second part of Edward the Fourth; The first
and second part of Queen Elizabeth's Troubles; Fair Maid of the West, first and
second part; Fortune by Land and Sea; Fair Maid of the Exchange; Maidenhead
well lost; Royal King and Loyal Subject; Woman killed with kindess; Wise Woman
of Hogsdon, Comedies. Four London Prentices; The Golden Age; The Iron Age,
first and second part; Robert Earl of Huntington' s downfall; Robert Earl of
Huntington' s death; The Silver Age; Duchess of Suffolk, Histories; And Loves
Mistress, a Mask. And, as if the Name of Heywood were destinated to the Stage,
there was also one Jasper Heywood, who wrote three Tragedies, namely, Hercules
Furiens, Thyestes, and Troas. Also, in my time I knew one Matthew Heywood; who
wrote a Comedy, called The Changling, that should have been acted at Audley-end
House, but, by I know not what accident was prevented.

GEORGE PEEL.
GEorge Peel, a somewhat antiquated English Bard of Queen Elizabeth's date,
some remnants of whose pretty pastoral Poetry we have extant in a Collection,
entitled, England's Helicon. He also contributed to the Stage three Plays,
Edward the first, a History; Alphonsus, Emperor of Germany, a Tragedy; and
David and Bathsabe a Tragi-Comedy; which no doubt in the time he wrote passed
with good applause.

JOHN LILLY.
JOhn Lilly, a famous Poet for the State in his time, as by the Works which he
left appears, being in great esteem in his time, and acted then with great
applause of the Vulgar, as such things which they understood, and composed
chiefly to make them merry. Yet so much prized as they were Printed together in
one Volume, namely, Endymion, Alexander and Campasce, Galatea, Midas, Mother
Boniby, Maids Metamorphosis, Sapho and Phao, Woman in the Moon, Comedies; and
another Play called A Warning for fair Women; all which declare the great pains
he took, and the esteem which he had in that Age.

WILLIAM WAGER.
THis William Wager is most famous for an Interlude which he wrote, called Tom
Tyler and his Wife, which passed with such general applause that it was
reprinted in the year 1661. and has been Acted diverse times by private persons;
the chief Argument whereof is, Tyler his marrying to a Shrew, which, that you
may the better understand, take it in the Author's own words, speaking in the
person of Tom Tyler.

I am a poor Tyler, in simple array,
And get a poor living, but eight pence a day,
My Wise as I get it does spend it away;
And I cannot help it, she says; wot ye why?
For wedding and hanging comes by destiny.
I thought when I wed her, she had been a Sheep,
At board to be friendly, to sleep when I sleep:
She loves so unkindly, she makes me to weep.
But I dare say nothing, god wot; wot ye why?
For wedding and hanging comes by destiny.
Besides this unkindness whereof my grief grows,
I think few Tylers are matched to such shrows,
Before she leaves brawling, she falls to deal blows.
Which early and late does cause me to cry,
That wedding and hanging is destiny.
The more that I please her, the worse she does like me,
The more I forbear her, the more she does strike me,
The more that I get her, the more she does glike me.
Woe worth this ill fortune that makes me cry,
That wedding and hanging is destiny.
If I had been hanged when I had been married,
My torments had ended, though I had miscarried,
If I had been warned, then would I have tarried;
But now all too lately I feel and cry,
That wedding and hanging is destiny.
He wrote also two Comedies, The Trial of Chivalry, and The longer thou live,
the more Fool thou art.

NICHOLAS BRETON.
NIcholas Breton, a writer of Pastoral Sonnets, Canzons, and Madrigals, in
which kind of writing he keeps company with several other contemporary
Emulators of Spencer and Sir Philip Sidney, in a published Collection of
several Odes of the chief Sonneters of that Age. He wrote also several other
Books, whereof two I have by me, Wits Private Wealth, and another called The
Courtier and the Countryman, in which last, speaking of Virtue, he has these
Verses: There is a Secret few do know,
And does in special places grow,
A rich man's praise, a poor man's wealth,
A weak man's strength, a sick man's health,
A Ladies beauty, a Lords bliss,
A matchless Jewel where it is;
And makes, where it is truly seen,
A gracious King, and glorious Queen.


THOMAS KID, THOMAS WATSON, etc.
THomas Kid, a writer that seems to have been of pretty good esteem for
versifying in former times, being quoted among some of the more famed Poets, as
Spencer, Drayton, Daniel, Lodge, etc. with whom he was either contemporary, or
not much later: There is particularly remembered his Tragedy, Cornelia.

There also flourished about the same time Thomas Watson, a contemporary
immitater of Sir Philip Sidney, as also Tho. Hudson, Joh. Markham, Tho.
Achelly, Joh. Weever, Chapter Middleton, Geo. Turbervile, Hen. Constable, with some
others, especially one John Lane, whose Works though much better meriting than
many that are in print, yet notwithstanding had the ill fate to be unpublish'd,
but they are all still reserved in Manuscript, namely, his Poetical Vision, his
Alarm to the Poets, his Twelve Months, his Guy of Warwick, a Heroic Poem; and
lastly, his Supplement to Chaucer's Squires Tale.

Sir THOMAS OVERBVRY.
SIr Thomas Overbury, a Knight and Wit, was Son to Sir Nicholas Overbury of
Burton in Gloucestershire, one of the Judges of the Marches; who, to his
natural propension of ingenuity, had the addition of good Education, being bred
up first in Oxford, afterward, for a while a Student of the Law in the Middle
Temple; soon after he cast Anchor at Court, the Haven of Hope for all aspiring
Spirits; afterward traveled into France, where having been some time, he
returned again, and was entertained into the respects of Sir Rob. Carre, one
who was newly initiated a Favorite to King James; where, by his wise carriage,
he purchased to himself not only the good affection and respect of Sir Robert,
but also of diverse other eminent persons.

During his abode with Sir Robert Carre, he composed that excellent Poem of
his, entitled, A Wife; which, for the excellency thereof, the Author of the
Epistle to the Reader, prefixed before his Book, thus writes, Had such a Poem
been extant among the ancient Romans, although they wanted our easy conservation
of Wit by Printing, they would have committed it to Brass, lest injurious time
might deprive it of due eternity. Nor was his Poem of A Wife not only done to
the life, but also those Characters which he wrote, to this day not outwitted
by any.

But to return from the Work to the Workman; Mr. Overbury is by the King
knighted, and Sir Rob. Carre made a Viscount, and such a reciprocal Love passed
betwixt them, that it was questionable, whether the Viscount were more in
favor with King James, or Sir Thomas Overbury in the favor of the Viscount?
But what estate on earth is so firm, that is not changeable, or what friendship
is so constant, that is not dissolvable? Who would imagine this Viscount should
be instrumental to his death, who had done him so faithful service, and to whom
he had embosom'd his most secret thoughts? Yet so it was, for Sir Thomas, out
of an unfeigned affection which he bare to the Viscount, diswaded him from a
motion of a Marriage which was propounded betwixt him and the Lady Francis
Howard, who was lately divorced from the Earl of Essex, as a Match neither for
his credit here, nor comfort hereafter. This Counsel, though it proceeded from
an unfeigned love in Sir Thomas, yet where Beauty commands, all discretion
being sequestered, created in the Viscount a hatred toward him; and in the
Countess the fury of a woman, a desire of revenge, who persuaded the Viscount,
That it was not possible that ever she should endure those injuries, or hope
for any prosperity so long as he lived; That she wondered how he could be so
familiar, so much affected to his man Overbury; that without him he could do
nothing, at it were making him his right hand, seeing he being newly grown into
the Kings favor, and depending wholly upon his greatness, must expect to be
clouded if not ruined, when his servant that knew his secrets should come to
preferment. The Viscount, apt enough of his own inclination to revenge, being
thus further exasperated by the Countess, they jointly resolve upon his death,
and soon a fit opportunity came to their hands. He being by King James (and as
it is thought by the Viscount's Counsel) nominated to be sent Ambassador to the
Emperor of Russia, was by the said Viscount, whom he especially trusted,
persuaded to decline the employment, as no better than an honorable Grave;
Better lie some days in the Tower, than more months in a worse Prison; a Ship
by Sea, and a barbarous cold Country by Land. You are now (said he) in credit
at home, and have made trial of the dangers of travel, why then should you
hazard all upon uncertainties, being already in possession of that you can
probably expect by these means; promising him, that within a small time he
would so work with the King, that he should have a good of opinion him. But he
(says Dr. Fuller) who willingly goes into a Prison out of hope to come easily
out of it, may stay therein so long till he be too late convinced of his error.

And now having him in the place where they would, their next study to secure
their revenge, was closely to make him away; which they concluded to be by
poison. To this end, they consult with one Mrs. Turner (the first inventer of
that horrid Garb of yellow Ruffs and Cuffs, and in which Garb she was after
hanged) she having acquaintance with one James Franklin, a man skilled for that
purpose, agreed with him to provide that which should not kill presently, but
cause one to languish away by degrees, a little and a little. Sir Gervas
Yelvis, Lieutenant of the Tower, being drawn into the Conspiracy, admits one
Weston, Mrs. Turners man, who under pretense of waiting upon Sir Thomas, was to
act the horrid Tragedy. The Plot thus continued, Franklin buys certain
Poisons, viz. Sosater, white Arsenick, Mercury sublimate, Cantharides, red
Mercury, with three or four other deadly Ingredients, which he delivered to
Weston, with instructions how to use them. Weston, (an apt Scholar in the
Devil's School) tempers them in his Broth and Meat, increasing or diminishing
their strength according as he saw him affected. Besides these, poisoned Tarts
and Jellies are sent him by the Viscount. Nay, they poisoned his very Salt,
Sauce, Meat and Drink; but being of a very strong Constitution, he held out
still: At last they effected their work by a poisoned Clyster which they
administed unto him, so that the next day he died thereof; and because there
were some Blisters and ugly Botches on his Body, the Conspirators gave it out
he died of the French Pox.

Thus by the Malice of a Woman this worthy Knight was murdered, who yet still
lives in that witty Poem of his, entitled, a Wife; as is well expressed by
these Verses under his Picture.

A man's best Fortune, or his worst's a Wife:
Yet I that knew no Marriage, Peace, nor Strife,
Live by a good one, by a bad one lost my Life.
But God, who seldom suffers Murder to go unrevenged, revealed the same; for
notwithstanding what the Conspirators had given out, Suspicions grew high that
Sir Thomas was poisoned: Whereupon Weston is examined by the Lord Cook, who at
first stiffly denied the same; but being persuaded by the Bishop of London, he
tells all: How Mrs. Turner and the Countess came acquainted; what relation she
had, to Witches, Sorcerers and Conjurers; and discovers all those who had any
hand in it: whereupon they were all apprehended; some sent to the Tower, others
to Newgate. Having thus confessed, being convicted according to course of Law,
he was hanged at Tyburn; after him Mrs. Turner; after her Franklin, then Sir
Gervas Yelvis, upon their several Arraignments, were found guilty, and
executed. Some of them died very penitent: The Earl and his Countess were both
condemned, but through the King's gracious Pardon had their Lives saved, but
were never admitted to the Favor of the Court.

We shall conclude all with this his Epitaph written by himself.

The span of my days measured, here I rest,
That is, my Body; but my Soul, his Guest,
Is hence ascended, whither, neither Time,
Nor Faith, nor Hope, but only Love can clime;
Where being now enlightened, she does know
The Truth of all men argue of below:
Only this Dust does here in pawn remain,
That, when the world dissolves, she come again
Mr. MICHAEL DRAYTON.
MR. Drayton, one who had drunk as deep a Draught at Helicon as any in his
time, was born at Athelston in Warwickshire, as appears in his Poetical
Address thereunto, Poly-Olbion, Song 13. p. 213.

My native Country then, which so brave Spirits have bred,
If there be virtue yet remaining in thy earth,
Or any good of thine thou breathe into my Birth,
Accept it as thine own whilst uow I sing of thee,
Of all thy latter Brood th'unworthiest though I be.
He was in his time for fame and renown in Poetry, not much inferior, if not
equal to Mr. Spencer, or Sir Philip Sidney himself. Take a taste of the
sprightfu^ness of his Muse, out of his Poly-Olbion, speaking of his native
County Warwickshire.

Upon the Mid-lands now the industrious Muse does fall,
That Shire which we the Heart of England well may call,
As she herself extends (the midst which is Deweed)
betwixt St. Michael's Mount and Barwick-bordering Tweed,
Brave Warwick, that abroad so long advanced her Bear,
By her illustrious Earls renowned every where,
Above her neighboring Shires which always bore her Head.
Also in the Beginning of his Poly-Olbion he thus writes; Of Albions glorious
Isle the wonders whilst I write,
The sundry varying Soyls, the Pleasures infinite,
Where heat kills not the cold, nor cold expells the heat,
The calms too mildly small, nor winds too roughly great.
Nor night does hinder day, nor day the night does wrong;
The summer not too short, the winter not too long:
What help shall I invoke to aid my Muse the while? etc.


However, in the esteem of the more curious of these times, his Works seem to
be antiquated, especially this of his Poly-Olbion, because of the oldfashion'd
kind of Verse thereof, which seems somewhat to diminish that respect which was
formerly paid to the Subject, although indeed both pleasant and elaborate,
wherein he took a great deal both of study and pains; and thereupon thought
worthy to be commented upon by that once walking Library of our Nation, Mr.
John Seldom: His Barons Wars are done to the Life, equal to any of that
Subject. His Englands Heroical Epistles generally liked and received,
entituling him unto the appellation of the English Ovid. His Legends of Robert
Duke of Normandy. Matilda, Pierce Gaveston, and Thomas Cromwell, all of them
done to the Life. His Idea expresses much Fancy and Poetry. And to such as love
that Poetry, that of Nymphs, and Shepherds, his Nymphals, and other things of
that nature, cannot be unpleasant.

To conclude, He was a Poet of a pious temper, his Conscience having always the
command of his Fancy; very temperate in his Life, slow of speech, and
inoffensive in company. He changed his Laurel for a Crown of Glory, Anno, 1631.
and was buried in Westminster-Abbey, near the South-door, by those two eminent
Poets, Geoffry Chaucer and Edmond Spencer, with this Epitaph made (as it is
said) by Mr. Benjamin Johnson.

Do, pious Marble, let thy Readers know
What they, and what their Children ow
To Drayton's Name, whose sacred Dust
We recommend unto thy Trust
Protect his Memory, and preserve his Story,
Remain a lasting Monument of his Glory:
And when thy Ruins shall disclaim
To be the Treasurer of his Name,
His Name that cannot fade shall be
An everlasting Monument to thee.
JOSHVA SYLVESTER.
JOshua Sylvester, a very eminent Translator of his time, especially of the
Divine Du Bartus, whose six days work of Creation, gained him an immortal Fame,
having had many great Admirers even to these days, being ushered into the world
by the chiefest Wits of that Age; amongst others, the most accomplished Mr.
Benjamin Johnson thus wrote of him.

If to admire, were to commend my Praise
might then both thee, thy work and merit raise;
But, as it is ( the Child of Ignorance
And utter stranger to all Air of France)
How can I speak of thy great pains, but err;
Since they can only judge that can confer?
Behold! the reverend shade of Bartus stands
Before my thought, and (in thy right) commands
That to the world I publish, for him, this:
Bartus does wish thy English now were his,
So well in that are his Inventions wrought,
As his will now be the Translation thought,
Thine the Original; and France shall boast
No more those Maiden-Glories she has lost.
He has also translated several other Works of Du Bartus; namely, Eden, the
Deceit, the Furies, the Handicrafts, the Ark, Babylon, the Colonies, the
Columns, the Fathers, Jonas, Urania, Triumph of Faith, Miracle of Peace, the
Vocation, the Fathers, the Daw, the Captains, the Trophies, the Magnificence,
etc. Also a Paradox of Odes de la Nove, Baron of Teligni, with the Quadrains of
Pibeac; all which Translations were generally well received: but for his own
Works which were bound up with them, they received not so general an
approbation; as you may perceive by these Verses; We know thou do well
As a Translator,
But where things require
A Genius and a Fire,
Not kindled before by others pains,
As often thou have wanted Brains.


Mr. SAMVEL DANIEL.
MR. Daniel was born nigh to the Town of Taunton in Somersetshire; his Father
was a Master of Music, and his harmonious Mind (says Dr. Fuller) made an
Impression in his Son's Genius, who proved to be one of the Darlings of the
Muses, a most excellent Poet, whose Wings of Fancy displayed the Flags of
highest Invention: Carrying in his Christian and Surname the Names of two holy
Prophets; which, as they were Monitors to him, for avoiding Scurrility, so he
qualified his Raptures to such a strain, as therein he abhorred all Debauchery
and Profaneness.

Nor was he only one of the inspired Train of PhOebus, but also a most
judicious Historian, witness his Lives of our English Kings since the Conquest,
until King Edward the Third, wherein he has the happiness to reconcile brevity
with clearness, qualities of great distance in other Authors; and had he
continued to these times, no doubt it had been a Work incomparable: Of which
his Undertaking, Dr. Heylin in the Preface to his Cosmography, gives this
Character, speaking of the chiefest Historians of this Nation; And to end the
Bed-roll (says he) half the Story of this Realm done by Mr. Daniel, of which I
believe that which himself says of it in his Epistle to the Reader, that there
was never brought together more of the Main. Which Work is since commendably
continued (but not with equal quickness and judgment) by Mr. Trussel.

As for his Poems so universally received, the first in esteem is, that
Heroical one of the Civil Wars between the two Houses of York and Lancaster; of
which the elaborate Mr. Speed, in his Reign of Richard the Second, thus writes:
The Seeds (says he) of those fearful Calamities, a flourishing Writer of our
Age (speaking of Mr. Daniel) willing nearly to have imitated Lucan, as he is
indeed called our English Lucan, does not unfortunately express, though he might
rather have said he wept them, than sung them; but indeed so to sing them, is
to weep them.

I sing the Civil Wars, tumultuous Broils
And bloody Factions of a mighty Land,
Whose people haughty, proud with foreign spoils;
Upon their selves turn back their conquering hand
While Kin their Kin, Brother the Brother foils,
Like Ensigns, all against like Ensigns stand:
Bows against Bows, a Crown against a Crown,
While all pretending right, all right throw down
Take one Taste more of his Poetry, in his sixth Book of that Heroical Poem,
speaking of the Miseries of Civil War.

So wretched is this execrable War,
This civil Sword, wherein though all we see
be foul, and all things miserable are,
Yet most of all is even the Victory;
Which is, not only the extreme Ruiner
of others, but her own Calamity;
Where who obtains, cannot what he would do:
Their power has part that holp him thereunto.
Next, take notice of his Musophilus, or general Defense of Learning, Dedicated
to Sir Fulk Greuil; his Letter of Octovia to Marcus Antonius, his Complaint of
Rosamond, his Panegyric, Delia, etc. Besides his Dramatick Pieces; as his
Tragedy of Philotus and Cleopatra; Hymenis Triumph, and the Queens Arcadia, a
Pastoral; being all of them of such worth, that they were well accepted by the
choicest Judgments of those Times, and do yet remain in good esteem, as by
their often Impressions may appear.

This our Poet's deserts preferred him to be a Servant in ordinary to Queen
Anne, the most illustrious wife of King James I. who allowed him a fair Salary,
such as enabled him to keep a handsome Gardenhouse in Old-street nigh London,
where he would commonly lie obscure sometimes two Months together, the better
to enjoy that great Felicity he aimed at, by enjoying the company of the Muses,
and then would appear in public, to recreate himself, and converse with his
Friends; of whom the most endeared were the Learned Doctor Cowel, and Judicious
Mr. Cambden.

And now being weary of the Troubles of the City and Court, he retired into the
Country, and turned Husbandman, Renting a Farm or Grange in Wiltshire, nigh the
Devizes; not so much, as it is thought, for the hope of gains, as to enjoy the
retiredness of a Country Life: How he thrived upon it, I cannot inform my self,
much less my Readers, although no question pleasing himself therein, he
attained to that Riches he sought for, viz. Quiet and Contentedness; which
whosoever enjoys, reapeth the benefit of his labors. He left no Issue behind him
but those of his Brain, though living a good space of time with Justina his
wife: For his Estate, he had neither a Bank of Wealth, nor Lank of Want; but
living in a competent contented condition, and died (as it is conjectured)
about the latter end of King James I.

GEORGE CHAPMAN.
GEorge Chapman was one in his time much famed for the Fluency of his Muse;
gaining a great repute for his Translation of Homer and Hesiod, which in those
times passed as Works done without compare; and indeed considering he was one
of the first who brake the Ice in the Translation of such learned Authors,
reading the highest conception of their Raptures into a neat polite English, as
gave the true meaning of what they intended, and rendered it a style acceptable
to the Reader; considering, I say, what Age he lived in, it was very well
worthy praise; though since the Translation of Homer is very far outdone by
Mr. Ogilby. He also continued that excellent Poem of Hero and Leander, begun by
Christopher Marlow, and added very much to the Stage in those times by his
Dramatick Writings; as his Blind Beggar of Alexandria, All Fools, the Gentleman
Usher, Humorous Days Mirth, May Day, Mounsieur D'Olive, Eastward ho, Two wise
men, and all the rest Fools, Widows Tears, Comedies; Bussy D'Amboys, Byron's
Tragedy, Bussy D'Amboys Revenge, Caesar and Pompey, Revenge for Honor,
Tragedies; the Temple, Masque of the Middle Temple and Lincoln's Inn, Masks;
and Byron's Conspiracy, a History; in all seventeen.

ROBERT BARON.
OF this Robert Baron, we can recover nothing, save only those Dramatick Pieces
which he wrote to the Stage, and which no doubt passed with good applause in
those times. Of these are remembered his Don Quixot, or the Knight of the
Ill-favored Countenance, a Comedy; Gripus and Hegia, a Pastoral; Deorum Dona,
Dick Scorner, Destruction of Jerusalem, the Marriage of Wit and Science,
Masks and Interludes; and Myrza, a Tragedy.

LODOVIC CARLISLE.
TO Mr. Robert Baron we may add Lodovic Carlisle, as much about the same time,
and of like equal esteem; having written some not yet totally forgotten Plays,
viz. Arviragus and Felicia, in two pats; the deserving Favorite, the Fool would
be a Favorite, or the deserving Lover, Tragi-Comedies; Marius and Scylla, and
Osmond the Great Turk, or the Noble Servant, Tragedies; all which show him
(though not a Master) yet a great Retainer to the Muses.

JOHN FORD.
TO these we may add John Ford, a Dramatick Writer likewise of those times;
very beneficial to the Red-Bull and Fortune-Play-houses; as may appear by these
Plays which he wrote, viz. The Fancies, Ladies Trial, Comedies; the broken
Heart, Lovers Melancholy, Loves Sacrifice, it is pity she is a Whore, Tragedies;
Perkin Warbeck, a History; and an Associate with Rowley and Deckar in a
Tragi-Comedy called The Witch of Edmonton.

ANTHONY BREWER.
ANthony Brewer was also one who in his time contributed very much toward the
English Stage by his Dramatick Writings; especially in that noted one of his,
entitled, Lingua; which as it is reported) being once acted in Cambridge, the
late Usurper Cromwell had therein the Part of Tablus, the Substance of the Play
being a Contention among the Senses sor a Crown, which Lingua, who would have
made up a sixth Sense, had laid for them to sind; having this Inscription;

Which of the five that does deserve it best, Shall have his Temples with this
Coronet blessed.

This Mock-contention for a Crown, is said to swell his Ambition so high, that
afterward he contended for it in earnest, heading such a notable Rebellion, as
had almost ruined three flourishing Kingdoms.

But to return to Mr. Brewer; Besides this Lingua, he wrote Loves Loadstone,
and the Countrey-Girl, Comedies; the Lovesick King, and Landagartha,
Tragi-Comedies, and Loves Dominion, a Pastoral.

HENRY GLAPTHORN.
HEnry Glapthorn was one well deserving of the English, being one of the
chiefest Dramatick Writers of this Age; deservingly commendable not so much for
the quantity as the quality of his Plays; being his Hollander, Ladies
Privilege, and Wit in a Constable, Comedies; his Argalus and Parthenia, a
Pastoral; and Alberus Watlestein, a Tragedy; in which Tragedy these Lines are
much commended.

This Law the Heavens inviolably keep,
Their Justice well may slumber, but never sleep.
JOHN DAVIS of Hereford.
IN the writing of this Man's Life, we shall make use of Dr. Fuller in his
England's Worthies, who says, that he was the greatest Master of the Pen that
England in his Age beheld; for, 1. Fast writing; so incred^ble his expedition.
2. Fair writing; some minutes consultation being required to decide whether his
Lines were written or printed. 3. Close writing; a Mystery which to do well,
few attain unto. 4. Various writing; Secretary, Roman, Court and Text.


The Poetical Fiction of ^riareus the Giant, who had an hundred hands, found a
Moral in him, who could so cunningly and copiously disguise his aforesaid
elemental hards, that by mixing, he could make them appear an hundred; and if
not so many sorts, so many degrees of writing. He had also many pretty
excursions into Poetry, and could flourish Matters as well as Letters, with his
Fancy as well as with his Pen. Take a taste of his Abilities in those Verses of
his before Coriat's Crudities, being called the Odcombian Banquet, wherein the
whole Club of Wits in that Age joined together, to write Mock-commendatory
Verses in Praise-dispraise of his Book.

If Art that often the Learned has stammer'd,
In one Iron Headpiece (yet no Hammer-Lead)
May (joined with Nature) hit Fame on the Cocks-comb,
Then it is that Headpiece that is crowned with Odcomb
For he, hard Head (and hard, since like a Whet-stone)
It gives Wits edge, and draws them too like Jet-stone)
Is Caput Mundi for a world of School-tricks,
And is not ignorant in the learned -- tricks
H'hath seen much more than much, I essure ye,
And will see New-Troy, Bethlem, and Old-Jury
Mean while (to give a taste of his first travel,
With streams of Rhetoric that get golden Gravel)
He tells how he to Venice once did wander;
From whence he came more witty than a Gander:
Whereby he makes relations of such wonders,
That Truth therein does lighten, while Art thunders,
All Tongues fled to him that at Babel swerved,
Lest they for wunt of warm months might have starved.
Where they do revel in such passing measure,
(Especially the Greek, wherein's his pleasure.)
That (jovially) so Greek he takes the guard of,
That he is the merriest Greek that 'ere was heard of;
For he as' twere his Mothers twittle twattle,
(That Is Mother Tongue) the Greek can prittle prattle.
Nay, of that Tongue he so has got the Body,
That he sports with it at Ruff, Gleek or Noddy; etc.
He died at London in the midst of the Reign of King James I. and lies buried
in St. Giles in the Fields.

Doctor JOHN DONE.
THis pleasant Poet, painful Preacher, and pious Person, was born in Do^^^n, of
wealthy Parents, who took such care of his Education, that at nine years of Age
he was sent to study at Hart-Hall in Oxford, having besides the Latin and
Greek, attained to a knowledge in the French Tongue. Here he fell into
acquaintance with that great Master of Language and Art, Sir Henry Wootton;
betwixt whom was such Friendship contracted, that nothing but Death could force
the separation.

From Oxford he was transplanted to Cambridge, where he much improved his
Study, and from thence placed at Lincolns Inn, when his Father dying, and
leaving him three thousand pound in ready Money; he having a youthful desire to
travel, went over with the Earl of Essex to Cales; where having seen the issue
of this Expedition, he left them and went into Italy, and from thence into
Spain, where by his Industry he attainted to a perfection in their Languages,
and returned home with many useful Observations of those Countries, and their
Laws and Government.

These his Abilities, upon his Return, preferred him to be Secretary to the
Lord Elsmore, Keeper of the Great Seal; in whose Service he fell in Love with a
young Gentlewoman who lived in that Family, Niece to the Lady Elsmore, and
Daughter to Sir George Moor, Chancellor of the Garter, and Lieutenant of the
Tower, who greatly opposed this Match; yet notwithstanding they were privately
married: which so exesperated Sir George Moor, that he procured the Lord
Elsmore to discharge him of his Secretariship, and never left prosecuting him
till he had cast him into Prison, as also his two Friends who had married him,
and gave him his Wife in Marriage.

But Mr. Done had not been long there before he found means to get out, as
also enlargement for his two Friends, and soon after through the mediation of
some able persons, a reconciliation was made, and he receiving a Portion with
his Wife, and having help of diverse friends, they lived very comfortably
together; And now was he frequently visited by men of greatest learning and
judgment in this Kingdom; his company desired by the Nobility, and extremely
affected by the Gentry: His friendship was sought for of most foreign
Ambassadors, and his acquaintance entreated by many other strangers, whose
learning or employment occasioned their stay in this Kingdom. In which state of
life he composed his more brisk and youthful Poems; in which he was so happy,
as if Nature with all her varieties had been made to exercise his great Wit and
Fancy; Nor did he leave it off in his old age, as is witnessed by many of his
divine Sonnets, and other high, holy and harmonious Composures, as under his
Effigies in these following Verses to his Printed Poems, one most ingeniously
expresses.

This was for youth, strength, mirth, and wit, the time
Most count their golden age, but times not thine:
Thine was thy later years, so much refined,
From youths dross, mirth, and wit, as thy pure mind,
Thought, like the Angels, nothing but the praise
Of thy Creator in those last best days.
Witness this Book, thy Emblem, which begins
With love, but ends with sighs and tears for sins.
At last, by King James's his command, or rather earnest persuasion, setting
himself to the study of Theology, and into holy Orders, he was first made a
Preacher of Lincoln's End, afterward advanced to be Dean of Paul's, and as of
an eminent Poet he became a much more eminent Preacher, so he rather improved
then relinquisht his Poetical fancy, only converting it from humane and worldly
to divine and heavenly Subjects; witness this Hymn made in the time of his
sickness.

A Hymn to God the Father.
Will thou forgive that sin where I begun,
Which was my sin, though it were done before?
Will thou forgive that sin through which I run,
And do run still, though still I do deplore?
When thou have done, thou have not done,
For I have more.
Will thou sorgive that sin which I have won
Others to sin, and made my sin their door?
Will thou forgive that sin, which I did shun
A year or two, but wallowed in a score?
When thou have done, thou have not done,
For I have more.
I have a sin of fear, that when I have spun
My last third, I shall perish on the shore;
But swear by thy self, that at my death thy son
Shall shine as he shines now, and heretofore;
And having done that, thou have done,
I ask no more.
He died March 31. Anno 1631. and was buried in St. Paul's-Church, attended by
many persons of Nobility and Eminency. After his burial, some mournful friends
repaired, and as Alexander the great did to the Grave of the most famous
Achilles, so they strewed his with curious and costly flowers. Nor was this
(though not usual) all the honor done to his reverend ashes; for some person
(unknown) to perpetuate his memory, sent to his Executors, Dr. King, and Dr.
Momford, an 100 Marks toward the making of a Monument for him; which they
faithfully performed, it being as lively a representation as in dead Marble
could be made of him, though since by that merciless Fire in 1666. it be quite
ruined.

I shall conclude all with these Verses, made to the Memory of this reverend
person.

He that would write an Epitaph for thee,
And do it well, must first begin to be
Such as thou were; for none can truly know
Thy worth, thy life, but he that lived so.
He must have wit to spare, and to hurl down,
Enough to keep the Gallants of the Town.
He must have learning plenty, both the Laws
Civil and Common, to judge any Cause;
Divinity great store above the rest,
None of the worst Edition, but the best:
He must have Language, Travel, all the Arts;
Judgment to use, or else he wants thy parts:
He must have friends the highest, able to do,
Such as Maecenas and Augustus too;
He must have such a sickness, such a death,
Or else his vain descriptions come beneath:
He must unto all good men be a friend,
And (like to thee) must make a pious end.
Dr. RICHARD CORBET.
THis reverend Doctor was born at Ewel in Surrey; a witty Poet in his youth,
witness his Iter Boreale, and other facetious Poems, which were the effects of
his juvenal fancy; He was also one of those celebrated Wits, which with Mr.
Benjamin Johnson, Mr. Whitaker, Sir Joh. Harrington, Dr. Done, Mr. Drayton,
Mr. Davis, whom I mentioned before, and several others, wrote those mock
commendatory Verses on Coriats Crudities; which, because the Book is scarce,
and very few have seen it, I shall give you them as they are recited in the
Book.

I do not wonder, Coriat, that thou have
Over the Alps, through France, and Savoy past,
Parcht on thy skin, and foundered in thy feet,
Faint, thirsty, lousie, and did live to see it.
Though these are Roman sufferings, and do show
What Creatures back thou had, could carry so;
All I admire is thy return, and how
Thy slender pasterns could thee bear, when now
Thy observations with thy brain engendered,
Have stufft thy massy and volumnious head
With Mountains, Abbeys, Churches, Synagogues,
Preputial Offals, and Dutch Dialogues:
A burden far more grievous than the weight
Of Wine or Sleep, more vexing then the freight
Of Fruit and Oysters, which lade many a pate,
And send folks crying home from Billings-gate.
No more shall man with Mortar on his head
Set forward toward Rome: no, Thou art bred
A terror to all Footmen, and to Porters,
And all Laymen that will turn Jews Exhorters,
To fly their conquered trade: Proud England then
Embrace this luggage, which the man of men
Has landed here, and change thy Welladay
Into some homespun welcome Roundelay.
Send of this stuff thy Territories thorough,
To Ireland, Wales, and Scottish Edenborough;
There let this Book be read and understood,
Where is no theme, nor writer half so good.
He from a Student in, became Dean of Christ-Church, then Bishop of Oxford,
being of a courteous carriage, and no destructive nature to any who offended
him, counting himself plentifully repaired with a Jest upon him. He afterward
was advanced Bishop of Norwich, where he died Anno 1635.

Mr. BENJAMIN JOHNSON.
THis renowned Poet, whose Fame surmounts all the Elogies which the most
learned Pen can bestow upon him, was born in the City of Westminster, his
Mother living there in Harts-horn-lane, near Charingcross, where she married a
Bricklayer for her second Husband. He was first bred in a private School in St.
Martin's-Church, then in Westminster-School, under the learned Mr. Cambden, as
he himself intimates in one of his Epigrams.

Cambden, most reverend head, to whom I owe
All that I am in Arts, all that I know.
How nothings that, to whom my Country owes,
The great renown and name wherewith she goes.
Under this learned Schoolmaster he attained to a good degree of learning, and
was statutably admitted in St. John's-Colledge in Cambridge, (as many years
after incorporated a honorary Member of Christ-Church in Oxford) here he staid
but some small time, for want of maintenance; for if there be no Oil in the
Lamp, it will soon be extinguished: And now, as if he had quite laid aside all
thoughts of the University, he betook himself to the Trade of his
Father-in-law; And let not any be offended herewith, since it is more
commendable to work in a lawful Calling, then having one not to use it. He was
one who helped in the building of the new Structure of Lincoln's Inn, where,
having a Trowel in his hand, he had a Book in his pocket, that as his work went
forward, so his study went not backward.

But such rare Parts as he had could be no more hid, than the Sun in a serene
day, some Gentlemen pitying such rare Endowments should be buried under the
rubbish of so mean a Calling, did by their bounty manumise him freely to follow
his own ingenious inclinations. Indeed his Parts were not so ready to run of
themselves, as able to answer the spur; so that it may be truly said of him,
that he had an elaborate wit wrought out by his own indudustry; yet were his
Repartees for the most part very quick and smart, and which savored much of
ingenuity, of which I shall give you two instances.

He having been drinking in an upper room, at the Feathers-Tavern in Cheap
side, as he was coming down stairs, his foot slipping, he caught a fall, and
tumbling against a door, beat it open into a room where some Gentlemen were
drinking Canary; recovering his feet, he said, Gentlemen, since I am so luckily
fallen into your company, I will drink with you before I go.

He used very match to frequent the Half-Moon-Tavern in Aldersgate Street,
through which was a common Thorough fare; he coming late that way; one night,
was denied passage, whereupon going through the Sun-Tavern a little after, he
said, Since that the Moon was so unkind to make me go about, The Sun henceforth
shall take my Coin, the Moon shall go without.

His constant humor was to sit silent in learned Company, and suck in (besides
Wine) their several Humors into his observation; what was Ore in others, he
was able to refine unto himself.

He was one, and the chief of them, in ushering forth the Book of Coriats
Crudities, writing not only a Character of the Author, an explanation of his
Frontispiece, but also an Acrostick upon his Name, which for the sutableness of
it, (though we have written something of others mock Verses) we shall here insert
it.

Try and trust Roger, was the word, but now
Honest Tom Tell troth puts down Roger, How?
Of travel he discourses so at large,
Marry he sets it out at his own charge;
And therein (which is worth his valor too)
Shows he dare more than Paul's Churchyard durst do.
Come forth thou bonny bouncing Book then, daughter
Of Tom of Odcombe, that odd jovial Author,
Rather his son I should have called thee, why?
Yes thou were born out of his traveling thigh,
As well as from his brains, and claim'st thereby
To be his Bacchus as his Pallas: he
Ever his Thighs Male then, and his Brains She.
He was paramount in the Dramatick part of Poetry, and taught the Stage an
exact conformity to the Laws of Comedians, being accounted the most learned,
judicious, and correct of them all; and the more to be admired for being so,
for that neither the height of natural parts, for he was no Shakespeare, nor the
cost of extraordinary education, but his own proper industry, and addiction to
Books, advanced him to this perfection. He wrote fifty Plays in all, whereof
fifteen Comedies, three Tragedies, the rest Masks and Entertainments. His
comedies were, The Alchimist, Bartholomew Fair, Cynthia's Revels, C^se is
altered, The Devil is an Ass, Every Man in is humor, every Man out of his
humor, The Fox, Magnetic Lady, New Inn, Poe^aster, Staple of News, Sad
Shepherd, Silent Woman, and A Tale of a Tub. His Tragedies were, Cateline's
Conspiracy, Mortimer's Fall, and Scianus. His Masks and Entertainments, too
long here to write, were thirty and two, besides a Comedy of Eastward, hoe? in
which he was Partner with Chapman.

These his Plays were above the vulgar capacity, (which are only tickled with
downright obscenity) and took not so well at the first stroke, as at the
rebound, when beheld the second time, yea, they will endure reading, and that
with due commendation, so long as either ingenuity or learning are fashionable
in our Nation. And although all his Plays may endure the test, yet in three of
his Comedies, namely, The Fox, Alchymist, and Silent Woman, he may be compared
in the judgment of the learned men, for decorum, language and well-humouring
parts, as well with the chief of the ancient Greek and Latin Comedians, as the
prime of modern Italians, who have been judged the best of Europe for happy
vein in Comedies; not is his Bartholomew-Fair much short of them. As for his
other Comedies, Staple of News, Devil's an Ass, and the rest, if they be not so
sprightful and vigorous as his first pieces, all that are old will, and all
that desire to be old, should excuse him therein; and therefore let the Name of
Ben Johnson shield them against whoever shall think fit to be srvere in censure
against them. Truth is, his Tragedies, Seianus and Cateline seem to have in
them more of an artificial and inflate, than of a pathetical and naturally
Tragic height; yet do they every one of them far excel any of the English ones
that were writ before him; so that he may be truly said to be the first
reformer of the English Stage, as he himself more truly than modestly writes in
his commendatory Verses of his Servants Richard Broom's Comedy of the Northern
Lass.

Which you have justly gained from the Stage,
By observation of those Comic Laws,
Which I, your Master, first did teach the Age.
In the rest of his Poetry, (for he is not wholly Dramatick) as his Underwoods,
Epigrams, etc. he is sometimes bold and strenuous, sometimes Magisterial,
sometimes lepid and full enough of conceit, and sometimes a man as other men
are.

It seems the issue of his brain was more lively and lasting than the issue of
his body, having several Children, yet none living to survive him; This he
bestowed as part as an Epitaph on his eldest Son, dying an Infant.

Rest in soft peace, and asked, say,, Here does lie
Ben Johnson his best piece of Poetry.
But though the immortal Memory still lives of him in his learned Words, yet his
Body, subject to mortality, left this life, Anno 1638. and was buried about the
Belfrey in the Abbey-Church at Westminster, having only upon a Pavement over
his Grave, this written: O Rare Ben Johnson.

Yet were not the Poets then so dull and dry, but that many expressed their
affection to his Memory in Elegies and Epitaphs; amongst which this following
may not be esteemed the worst.

The Muses fairest Light in no dark time,
The Wonder of a learned Age; the line
That none can pass: the most proportioned Wit
To Nature; the best Judge of what was fit:
The deepest, plainest, highest, clearest Pen:
The Voice most echoed by consenting men;
The Soul which answered best to all well said
By others; and which most requital made:
Tuned to the highest Key of ancient Rome;
Returning all her Music with her own;
In whom with Nature, Study claimed a part,
And yet who to himself owed all his Art;
Here lies Ben Johnson, every Age will look
With sorrow here, with Wonder on his Book.
FRANCIS BEAVMONT and JOHN FLETCHER.
THese two joined together, made one of the happy Triumvirate (the other two
being Johnson and Shakespeare) of the chief Dramatick Poets of our Nation, in
the last foregoing Age; among whom there might be said to be a symmetry of
perfection, while each excelled in his peculiar way: Ben Johnson in his
elaborate pains and knowledge of Authors, Shakespeare in his pure vein of wit,
and natural Poetic height; Fletcher in a Courtly Elegance and Gentile
Familiarity of Style, and withal a Wit and Invention so overflowing, that the
luxuriant Branches thereof were frequently thought convenient to be lopt off by
Mr. Beaumont; which two joined together, like Castor and Pollux, (most happy
when in conjunction) raised the English to equal the Vthenian and Roman
Theaters; Beaumont bringing the Ballast of Judgment, Fletcher the Sail of
Fantasy, but compounding a Poet to admiration.

These two admirable Wits wrote in all two and fifty Plays, whereof three and
forty were Comedies; namely, Beggars Bush, Custom of the Country, Captain
Coxcomb, Chances, Cupid's Revenge, Double Marriage, Elder Brother, Four Plays
in one, Fair Maid of the Inn, Honest man's Fortune, Humorous Lieutenant, Island
Princess, King and no King, Knight of the burning Pestle, Knight of Malta,
Little French Lawyer, Loyal Subject, Laws of Candy, Lovers Progress, Loves
Cure, Loves Pilgrimage, Mad Lover, Maid in the Mill, Monsieur Thomas, Nice
Valor, Night-Walker, Prophetess, Pilgrim, Philaster, Queen of Corinth, Rule a
Wife and have a Wife, Spanish Curate, Sea-Voyage, Scornful Lady, Woman's Prize,
Women pleased, Wife for a Month, Wit at several weapons, and a VVinters Tale.
Also six Tragedies; Bonduca, the Bloody Brother, False One, the Maids Tragedy,
Thiery and Theodoret, Valentinian, and Two Noble Kinsmen, a Tragi-Comedy, Fair
Shepherdess, a Pastoral; and a Masque of Gray's Inn Gentlemen.

It is reported of them, that meeting once in a Tavern, to contrive the rude
Draught of a Tragedy, Fletcher undertook to kill the King therein, whose Words
being overheard by a Listner (though his Loyalty not to be blamed herein) he
was accused of High Treason, till the Mistake soon appearing, that the Plot was
only against a Dramatick and Scenical King, all wound off in Merriment.

Yet were not these two Poets so conjoined, but that each of them did several
Pieces by themselves, Mr. Beaumont, besides other Works, wrote a Poem,
entitled, Salmacis and Hermaphroditus, a Fable taken out of Ovid's
Metamorphosis; and Mr. Fletcher surviving Mr. Beamont, wrote good Comedies of
himself; so that it could not be laid to his Charge what Ajax does to Ulysses;
Nihil hic Diomede remoto,
When Diomedes was gone,
He could do naught alone.


Though some think them inferior to the former, and no wonder if a single
thread was not so strong as twisted one, Mr. Fletcher (as it is said) died in
London of the Plague, in the first year of King Charles the First, 1625.

WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.
THis eminent Poet, the Glory of the English Stage (and so much the more
eminent, that he gained great applause and commendation, when able Wits were
his Contemporaries) was born at Stratford upon Avon in Warwickshire, and is the
highest honor that Town can boast of. He was one of the Triumvirate, who from
Actors, became Makers of Comedies and Tragedies, viz. Christopher Marlow before
him, and Mr. John Lacy, since his time, and one in whom three eminent Poets may
seem in some sort to the compounded. 1. Martial, in the warlike sound of his
Surname, Hastivibrans, or Shakespeare; whence some have supposed him of military
extraction. 2. Ovid, the most natural and witty of all Poets; and hence it was
that Queen Elizabeth coming into a Grammar School, made this extemporary Verse.
Persuis a Crab-staff, Bawdy Martial, Ovid a fine Wag. 3. Plautus, a most exact
Comedian, and yet* never any Scholar, as our Shakespeare (if alive) would
confess himself; but by keeping company with Learned persons, and conversing
with jocular Wits, whereto he was naturally inclined, he became so famously
witty, or wittily famous, that by his own industry, without the help of
Learning, he attained to an extraordinary height* in all strains of Dramatick
Poetry, especially in the Comic part, wherein we may say he outwent himself;
yet was he not so much given to Festivity, but that he could (when so disposed)
be solemn and serious; so that Heraclitus himself might afford to smile at his
Comedies, they were so merry, and Democritus scarce forbear to sigh at his
Tragedies, they were so mournful.

Nor were his Studies altogether confined to the Stage, but had excursious into
other kinds of Poetry, witness his Poem of the Rape of Lucrece, and that of
Venus and Adonis; wherein, to give you a taste of the loftiness of his Style,
we shall insert some few Lines of the beginning of the latter.

Even as the Sun with purple-colour'd face
Had taken his last leave of the weeping Morn,
Rose-cheek'd Adonis hy'd him to the Chase,
Hunting he loved, but Love he laughed to scorn.
Sick thoughted Venus makes amain unto him,
And like a bold-fac'd Suiter'gins to woo him.
Thrive fairer than my self (thus she begins)
The fields chief flower, sweet above compare,
Stain to all Nymphs, more lovely than a man;
More white and red than Doves or Roses are:
Nature that made thee with herself at strife,
Says that the world has ending with they life, etc
He was an eminent instance of the truth of that Rule, Poeta non fit, sed
nascitur; one is not made, but born a Poet; so that as Cornish Diamonds are not
polished by any Lapidary, but are pointed and smoothed even as they are taken
out of the Earth, so Nature itself was all the Art which was used on him.

He was so great a Benefactor to the Stage, that he wrote of himself eight and
forty Plays; whereof 18 Comedies, viz. As you like it, All Is well that ends
well, A Comedy of Errors, Gentleman of Verona, Loves labor lust, London
Prodigal, Merry Wives of Windsor, Measure for measure, Much ado about Nothing,
Midsummer Nights Dream, Merchant of Venice, Merry Devil of Edmonton, Mucedorus,
the Puritan VVidow, the Tempest, Twelf-Night, or what you will, the taming of
the Shrew, and a winters Tale. Fourteen Tragedies, viz. Anthony and Cleopatra,
Coriolanus, Cymbeline, Hamlet, Julius Cqesar, Lorrino, Leir and his three
Daughters, Mackbeth, Othello the Moor of Venice, Romeo and Juliet, Troylus and
Cressida, Tymon of Athens, Titus Andronicus, and the Yorkshire Tragedy. Also
fifteen Histories, viz. Cromwell's History, Henry 4. in two parts, Henry 5.
Henry 6. in three parts, Henry 8. John King of England, in three parts,
Pericles Prince of Tire, Richard 2. Richard 3. and Oldrastes Life and Death.
Also the Arraignment of Paris, Pastoral.

Many were the Wit-combats betwixt him and Ben Johnson; which two we may
compare to a Spanish great Gallion, and an English Man of war: Mr. Johnson,
(like the former) was built far higher in Learning, solid, but slow in his
performances; Shakespeare, with the English Man of war, lesser in Bulk, but
lighter in sailing, could turn with all Tides, tack about, and take advantage
of all Winds, by the quickness of his Wit and Invention. His History of Henry
the Fourth is very much commended by some, as being full of sublime Wit, and as
much condemned by others, for making Sir John Falstaff the property of
Pleasure for Prince Henry to abuse, as one that was a Thrasonical Puff, and
emblem of mock Valor; though indeed he was a man of Arms every inch of him,
and as valiant as any in Age, being for his Martial Prowess made Knight of the
Garter by King Henry the 6th.

This our famous Comedian died An. Dom. 16 -- and swas buried at Stratford upon
Avon, the Town of his Nativity; upon whom one has bestowed this Epitaph,
though more proper had he been buried in Westminster Abbey.

Renowned Spencer, lie a thought more nigh
To learned Chaucer, and rare Beaumont lie
A little nearer Spencer, to make room
For Shakespeare, in your threefold, fourfold Tomb,
To lodge all four in one Bed make a shift
Until Doomsday; for hardly will a fifth
Betwixt his day and that, by Fates be slain
For whom your Curtains may be drawn again.
If your precedence in Death do bar
A fourth place in your sacred Sepulcher,
Under this sacred Marble of thine own,
Sleep rare Tragedian Shakespeare! sleep alone,
Thy unmolested Peace in an unshar'd Cave,
Possess as Lord, not Tenant of thy Grave,
That unto us, and others it may be
Honor hereafter to be laid by thee.
CHRISTOPHER MARLOW.
CHristopher Marlow was (as we said) not only contemporary with William
Shakespeare, but also, like him, rose from an Actor, to be a maker of Comedies
and Tragedies, yet was he much inferior to Shakespeare, not only in the number
of his Plays, but also in the elegancy of his Style. His Pen was chiefly
employed in Tragedies; namely, his Tamberlain the first and second Part, Edward
the Second, Lust's Dominion, or the Lascivious Queen, the Massacre of Paris,
his Jew of Malta, a Tragi-comedy, and his Tragedy of Dido, in which he was
joined with Nash. But none made such a great Noise as this Comedy of Doctor
Faustus with his Devils, and such like tragical Sport, which pleased much the
humors of the Vulgar. He also begun a Poem of Hero, and Leander; wherein he
seemed to have a resemblance of that clear and unsophisticated Wit which was
natural to Musaeus that incomparable Poet. This Poem being left unfinished by
Marlow, who in some riotous Fray came to an* untimely and violent end, was
thought worthy of the finishing hand of Chapman, as we intimated before; in the
performance whereof, nevertheless he fell short of the Spirit and Invention
with which it was begun.

BARTON HOLYDAY.
BArton Holyday, an old Student of Christ-Church in Oxford, who besides his
Translation of Juvenal with elaborate Notes, writ several other things in
English Verse, rather learned than elegant; and particularly a Comedy, called
The Marriage of the Arts: Out of which, to show you his fluent (but too
Satirical Style) take these Verses made by him to be spoken by Poeta, as an
Execration against Women.

O Women, Witches, Fayries, Devils,
The impure extract of a world of Evils;
Natures great Error, the Obliquity
Of the Gods Wisdom; and th'Anomaly
From all that is good; I Will curse you all below
The Center, and if I could, then further throw
Your cursed heads, and if any should gain
A place in Heaven, I Will rhyme 'em down again
To a worse Ruin, etc.
CYRIL TVRNER.
CYril Turner* was one who got a Name amongst the Poets, by writing of two old
Tragedies, the Athei'sts Tragedy, and the Revenger's Tragedy; which two
Tragedies, says one,

His Fame unto that Pitch so only raised,
As not to be despised, nor too much praised.
THOMAS MIDLETON.
THomas Midleton was one who by his Industry added very much to the English
Stage, being a copious Writer of Dramatick Poetry. He was Contemporary with
Johnson and Fletcher, and though not of equal Repute with them, yet were well
accepted of those times such Plays as he wrote; namely, Blurt Mr. Constable,
the chaste Maid in Cheapside, Your fine Gallants, Family of Love, More
Dissemblers than Women, the Game at Chess, the Mayor of Quinborough, a mad
world my Masters, Michaelmas Term, No Wit like a woman's, the Roaring Girl, any
thing for a quiet Life, the Phoenix and a new Trick to catch the old one,
Comedies; The world tossed at Tennis, and the Inner Temple, Masks; and Women
beware Women, a Tragedy. Besides what, he was an Assoiate with William Rowley
in several Comedies and Tragi-Comedies; as, the Spanish Gypsies, the Changling,
the Old Law, the fair Quarrel, the Widow: Of all which, his Michaelmas-Term is
highly applauded both for the plot and neatness of the style.

WILLIAM ROWLEY.
WIlliam Rowley was likewise a great Benefactor to the English Stage, not only
in those Plays mentioned before with Thomas Midleton, but also what he wrote
alone; as, A Woman never vexed, a Comedy; A Match at Midnight, and All Is lost by
Lust, Tragedies; and joined with Webster, two Comedies, The Thracian wonder,
and A Cure for a Cuckold; with Shakespere, The Birth of Merlin, a Tragi-Comedy;
and The Travels of the three English Brothers, a History, wherein he was joined
with Day and Wilkins.

THOMAS DECKER.
THomas Decker, a great pains-taker in the Dramatick strain, and as highly
conceited of those pains he took; a high-flyer in wit, even against Ben Johnson
himself, in his Comedy, called, The untrussing of the humorous Poet. Besides
which he wrote also, The Honest Whore, in two Parts; Fortunatus; If this ben't
a good Play the Devil's in it; Match me in London; The Wonder of a Kingdom; The
Whore of Babylon, all of them Comedies. He was also an associate with John
Webster in several well entertained Plays, viz. Northward, hoe? The Noble
Stranger; New trick to cheat the Devil; Westward, hoe? The Weakest goes to the
Wall; And A Woman Will have her will: As also with Rowley and Ford in the Witch
of Edmunton, a Tragi-Comedy; And also Wiat's History with Webster.

JOHN MARSTON.
JOhn Marston was one whose fluent Pen both in a Comic and Tragic strain,
made him to be esteemed one of the chiefest of our English Dramaticks, both for
solid judgment, and pleasing variety. His Comedies are, the Dutch Curtezan; the
Fawn; What you will. His Tragedies, Antonio and Melida; Sophonisba; the
insatiate Countess: Besides the Malecontent, a Tragi-Comedy; and the faithful
Shepherd, a Pastoral.

Dr. JASPER MAIN.
HE was in his youth placed a Student of Christ-Church in Oxford, a Nursery of
many and excellent good wits, where he lived for many years in much credit and
reputation for his florid wit and ingenious vein in Poetry, which diffused
itself in all the veins and sinews thereof; making it (according to its right
use) an Handmaid to Theology. In his younger years he wrote two very ingenious
and well approved Comedies, viz. the City Match, and the Amorous War, both
which, in my judgment, comparable to the best written ones of that time; Nor
did he after his application to Theology, of which he was Doctor, and his
Ecclesiastical preferment, totally relinquish those politer Studies to which he
was before addicted, publishing Lucian's Works, of his own translating, into
English, besides many other things of his composing, not yet published.

JAMES SHIRLEY.
MR. James Shirley may justly claim a more than ordinary place amongst our
English Poets, especially for his Dramatick Poetry, being the fourth for number
who has written most Plays, and for goodness little inferior to the best of
them all. His Comedies, in number twenty two, are these; The Ball, the Bird in
a Cage, the Brothers, Love in A Maze, the Constant Maid, Coronation, Court
Secret, the Example, the Gamester; Grateful Servant, Hide-Park, Humorous
Courtier, Honoria and Mammon, Opportunity, the Lady of Pleasure, the
Politician, the Royal Master, the School of Complements, the Sisters, the witty
fair one, the Wedding, and the young Admiral: His Tragedies six, viz. Chabet
Admiral of France, the Cardinal, Loves Cruelty, the Maids Revenge, the Traitor,
and the martyred Soldier. Four Tragi-Comedies, viz. Dukes Mistress, the
Doubtful Heir, the Gentleman of Venice, and the Imposture, four Masks, Cupid
and Death, Contention of Honor and Riches, the Triumph of Peace, and the
Triumph of Beauty; Patrick for Ireland, a History; and the Arcadia, a Pastoral.

PHILIP MASSINGER.
PHilip Massinger was likewise one who in his time was no mean contributer unto
the Stage, wherein he so far excelled as made his Name sufficiently famous,
there being no less than sixteen of his Plays printed, viz. The Bondsman, the
bashful Lover, the City Madam, the Emperor of the East; the Great Duke of
Florence, the Guardian, Maid of Honor, New Way to pay Old Debts, the Picture,
the Renegado, and the merry Woman, Comedies: The Duke of Millain, Fatal Dowry,
Roman Actor, Unnatural Combat, and the Virgin Martyr, Tragedies.

JOHN WEBSTER.
John Webster was also one of those who in that plentiful age of Dramatick
Writers contributed his endeavors to the Stage; being (as we said before)
associated with Thomas Decker, in several Plays, which passed the Stage with
sufficient applause, as also in two Comedies with William Rowley; besides what
he wrote alone, the Devil's Law-Case, a Tragi Comedy, and the white Devil, and
Duchess of Malfy, Tragedies.

WILLIAM BROWN.
MR. William Brown was a Gentleman (as I take it) of the Middle Temple, who
besides his other ingenious Employments, had his excursions to those sweet
delights of Poetry, writing a most ingenious Piece, entitled, Britain's
Pastorals, it being for a Subject of an amorous and rural Nature, worthily
deserving commendations, as any one will confess who shall peruse it with an
impartial eye. Take a view of his abilities, out of his Second Book, first Song
of his Pastorals, speaking of a deformed Woman.

And is not she the Queen of Drabs,
Whose Head is perriwigg'd with scabs?
Whose Hair hangs down in curious flakes,
All curled and crisp'd, like crawling Snakes;
The Breath of whose perfumed Locks
Might choke the Devil with a Pox;
Whose dainty twinings did entice
The whole monopoly of Lice;
Her Forehead next is to be found,
Resembling much the new-plough'd ground,
Furrowed like stairs, whose windings led
Unto the chimney of her head;
The next thing that my Muse descries,
Is the two Mill-pits of her Eyes,
Mill-pits whose depth no plum can sound,
For there the God of Love was drowned,
On either side there hangs a Souse,
And Ear I mean keeps open house,
An Ear which always there did dwell,
And so the Head kept sentinel,
Which there was placed to descry,
If any danger there was nigh,
But surely danger there was bred
Which made them so keep off the head;
Something for certain caused their fears,
Which made them so to hang their ears;
But hang her ears; Thalia seeks
To suck the bottle of her cheeks, etc.
THOMAS RANDOLPH.
THis Famous Poet was born at Houghton in Northamptonshire, and was first bred
in Westminster-School, then Fellow in Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge; He was one
of such a pregnant Wit, that the Muses may seem not only to have smiled, but to
have been tickled at his Nativity, such the festivity of his Poems of all
sorts. Yet was he also sententiously grave, as may appe^r by many of his
Writings, not only in his Necessary Precepts, but also in several other of his
Poems; take one instance in the conclusion of his Commendatory Verses to Mr.
Feltham, on his excellent Book of Resolves.

Amongst thy Resolves, put my Resolves in too;
Resolve who will, this I resolve to do,
That should my Errors choose another line
Whereby to write, I mean to live by thine.
His extraordinary indulgence to the too liberal converse with the multitude of
his applauders, drew him to such an immoderate way of living, that he was
seldom out of Gentlemen's company, and as it often happens that in drinking high
quarrels arise, so there chanced some words to pass betwixt Mr. Randolph and
another Gentleman, which grew to be so high, that the Gentleman drawing his
Sword, and striking at Mr. Randolph, cut off his little finger, whereupon, in
an extemporary humor, he instantly made these Verses: Arithmetic nine digits
and no more
Admits of, then I have all my store;
But what mischance has taken from my Left Hand,
It seems did only for a cipher stand,
Hence, when I scan my Verse if I do miss,
I will impute the fault only to this,
A fingers loss, I speak it not in sport,
Will make a Verse a foot too short.


That he was of a free generous disposition, not regarding at all the Riches of
the World, may be seen in the first Poem of his Book, speaking of the
inestimable content he enjoyed in the Muses, to those of his friends which
dehorted him from Poetry.

Go sordid earth, and hope not to bewitch
My highborn Soul, which flies a nobler pitch;
Thou can not tempt her with adulterate show,
She bears no appetite that flags so low, etc.
His Poems published after his death, and ushered into the World by the best
Wits of those times, passed the Test with general applause, and have gone
through several I lmpressions; To praise one, were in some sort to dispraise
the other, being indeed all praiseworthy. His Cambridge Duns facetiously
pleasing, as also his Parley with his Empty Purse, in their kind not outdone
by any. He was by Ben. Johnson adopted for his Son, and that as is said upon
this occasion.

Mr. Randolph* having been at London so long as that he might truly have had a
parley with his Empty Purse, was resolved to go see Ben. Johnson with his
associates, which as he heard at a set-time kept a Club together at the
Devil-Tavern near Temple Bar; accordingly at the time appointed he went
thither, but being unknown to them, and wanting Money, which to an ingenious
spirit is the most daunting thing in the World, he peeped in the Room where
they were, which being espied by Ben. Jonhson, and seeing him in a Scholars
thredbare habit, John Bo-peep, says he, come in, which accordingly he did, when
immediately they began to rhyme upon the meanness of his Clothes, asking him, If
he could not make a Verse? and withal to call for his Quart of Sack; there
being four of them, he immediately thus replied, I John Bo peep, to you four
sheep,
With each one his good fleece,
If that you are willing to give me five shilling,
It Is fifteen pence a piece.


By Jesus, quoth Ben. Johnson, (his usual Oath) I believe this is my Son
Randolph, which being made known to them, he was kindly entertained into their
company, and Ben. Johnson ever after called him Son.

He wrote besides his Poems, the Muses Looking-glass, Jealous Lovers, and Hey
for Honesty, down with Knavery, Comedies; Amyntas, Pastoral, and Aristippus, an
Interlude.

Sir JOHN BEAVMONT Baronet.
SIr John Beaumont was one who Drank as deep Draughts of Helicon as any of that
Age; and though not many of his Works are Extant, yet those we have be such as
are displayed on the Flags of highest Invention; and may justly Style him to be
one of the chief of those great Souls of Numbers. He wrote besides several
other things, a Poem of Bosworth Field, and that so Ingeniously, as one thus
writes of it.

Could divine Maro, hear his Lofty Strain;
He would condemn his Works to fire again.
I shall only give you an Instance of some few lines of his out of the
aforesaid Poem, and so conclude.

Here Valiant Oxford, and Fierce Norfolk meet;
And with their Spears, each other rudely greet:
About the Air the shined Pieces play,
Then on their Swords their Noble Hand they lay.
And Norfolk first a Blow directly guides,
To Oxfords Head, which from his Helmet slides
Upon his Arm, and biteing through the Steel,
Inflicts a Wound, which Vere disdains to feel.
But lifts his Faulcheon with a threatening grace,
And hews the Beaver off from Howards Face;
This being done, he with compassion charmed,
Retires ashamed to strike a Man disarmed.
But strait a deadly Shaft sent from a Bow,
(Whose Master, though far off, the Duke could know:
Untimely brought his combat to an end,
And pierced the Brains of Richards constant Friend.
When Oxford saw him Sink his Noble Soul,
Was full of grief, which made him thus condole*
Farewell true Knight, to whom no costly Grave
Can give due honor, would my Tears might save
Those streams of Blood, deserving to be Spilt
In better service, had not Richard;s guilt
Such heavy weight upon his Fortune laid,
Thy Glorious virtues had his Sins outweigh'd.
Dr. PHILEMON HOLLAND.
THis worthy Doctor, though we find not many Verses of his own Composing, yet
is deservedly placed amongst the Poets; for his numerous Translations of so
many Authors: insomuch that he might be called the Translator General of his
Age; So that those Books alone of his turning into English, are sufficient to
make a Country Gentleman a Competent Library for Historians. He is thought to
have his Birth in Warwickshire, but more certain to have his Breeding in
Trinity College in Cambridge; where he so Profited, that he became Doctor of
Physic: and practiced the same in Coventry in his (if so it were) native
Country. Here did he begin and finish the Translation of so many Authors, that
considering their Voluminousness, a Man would think he had done nothing else;
which made one thus to descant on him.

Holland with his Translations does so fill us,
He will not let Suetonius be Tranquillus.
Now as he was a Translator of many Authors, so was he very Faithful in what he
did; But what commended him most in the Praise of Posterity, was his
Translating Cambdens Britania, a Translation more then a Translation: he adding
to it many more notes then what were first in the Lattin Edition, but such as
were done by Mr. Cambden in his Life time, discoverable in the former part with
Astericks in the Margent; But these Additions with some Antiquaries obtain not
equal Authenticalness with what was set forth by Mr. Cambden himself.

Some of these Books (not withstanding their Gigantick bigness) he wrote with
one Pen, where he himself thus pleasantly versified.

With one sole Pen, I writ this Book,
Made of a Gray Goose quill:
A Pen it was when I it took,
And a Pen I leave it still.
This Monumental Pen he kept by him, to show Friends when they came to visit
him, as a great Rarity.

THOMAS GOFF.
THomas Goff was one whose Abilities raised him to a high Reputation in the Age
he lived in; chiefly for his Dramatick Writings: Being the Author of the
Courageous Turk, Rageing Turk, Selimus and Orestes Tragedies; the Careless
Shepherdess a Tragi-Comedy, and Cupids Whirligig a Comedy.

THOMAS NABBES.
THomas Nabbes was also one who was a great Contributer to the English Stage,
chiefly in the Reign of King Charles the First; His Comedies were The Brides,
Covent Garden, Totnam Court, and the Woman-hater Arraigned. His Tragedies, The
Unfortunate Mother, Hannibal and Scipio, and The Tragedy of King Charles the
First; besides two Masks, The Springs Glory, and Microcosmus, and an
Entertainment on the Princes Birthday, an interlude.

RICHARD BROOM.
RIchard Broom was a Servant to Mr. Benjamin Johnson, a Servant (says one)
suitable to such a Master; having an excellent Vain fitted for a Comique
Strain, and both natural Parts and Learning* answerable thereunto; though
diverse witty only in reproving, say, That this Broom had only what he swept
form his Master: But the Comedies he Wrote, so well received and generally
applauded, give the Lie to such Detractors; three of which, viz. His Northern
Lass, The Jovial Crew, and Sparagus Garden, are little inferior if not equal to
the writings of Ben. Johnson himself; besides these three Comedies before
mentioned he wrote twelve others, viz. The Antipodes, Court Beggar, City Wit,
Damoyselle, Mock Marriage, Love Sick Court, Mad Couple well Matched, Novella,
New Exchange, Queens Exchange, Queen and Concubine, Covent Garden Wedding, and
a Comedy called the Lancaster Witches, in which he was joined with Heyward.

Now what Account the Wits of that Age had of him, you shall here from two of
his own Profession in Commendation of two of his Plays; and first those of Mr.
James Shirley on his Comedy the Jovial Crew.

This Comedy (ingenious Friends) will raise
It self a Monument, without a praise:
Begged by the Stationer, who, with strength of purse,
And Pens, takes care, to make his Book sell worse*
And I dare calculate thy Play, although
Not Elevated unto fifty two;
It may grow old as time or wit, and he
That dares despise may after envy thee.
Learning the file of Poesy may be
Fetched from the Arts and University:
But he that writes a Play, and good must know,
Beyond his Books, Men, and their Actions too.
Copies of Verse, that makes the new Men swear,
Reach not a Poem, nor the Muses heat;
Small Brain Wits, and wood may burn a while,
And make more noise then Forests on a Pile.
Whose Finers shrunk, ma' invite a Piteans Stream,
Not to Lament, but to extinguish them,
Thy fancies Metal, and thy stream's much higher,
Proof against their wit, and what that dreads the Fire.
The other of Mr. John Ford on the Northern Lass.

Poets and Painters curiously compared
Give life to fancy, and Atchieve reward,
By immortality of name, so thrives
Arts Glory, that All, which it breaths on lives.
Witness this Northern Piece, The Court affords
No newer Fashion, or for wit, or words.
The Body of the Plot is drawn so fair,
That the Souls Language quickens with fresh Air.
This well Limbed Poem, by no rule, or thought
Too dearly prized, being or sold, or bought.
We could also produce you Ben. Johnsons Verses, with other of the prime Wits
of those times; but we think these sufficient to show in what respect he was
held by the best Judgments of that Age.

ROBERT CHAMBERLAIN.
THis Robert Chamberlain is also remembered amongst of the Dramatick Writers of
that time for two Plays which he Wrote; the Swaggering Damosel, a Comedy: and
Sicelides a Pastoral. There was also one W. Chamberlain who wrote a Comedy
called Loves Victory.

WILLIAM SAMPSON.
ABout the same time also Flourisht William Sampson, who wrote of himself two
Tragedies; The Vow Breaker, and the Valiant Scot: and joined with Markham a
Tragedy called Herod and Antipater, and how to choose a good Wife from a Bad, a
Tragi-Comedy.

GEORGE SANDYS, Esquire.
THis worthy Gentleman was youngest Son of Edwin Sandys Archbishop of York,
and born at Bishops Throp in that County. He having good Education, proved a
most Accomplished Gentleman, and addicting his mind to Travel, went as far as
the Sepulcher at Jerusalem; the rarities whereof, as also those of Egypt,
Greece, and the remote parts of Italy: He has given so lively a Description,
as may spare others Pains in going thither to behold them; none either before
or after him having more lively and truly described them. He was not like to
many of our English Travelers, who with their Breath Suck in the vices of
other Nations, and instead of improving their Knowledge, return knowing in
nothing but what they were ignorant of, or else with Tom. Coriat take notice
only of Trifles and Toys, such Travelers as he in his most excellent* Book
takes notice of, the one says he Do Toys divulge -- The other carried on in
the latter part of the Distick. -- Still add to what they hear,
And of a Molehill do a Mountain rear.


But his Travels were not only painful, but profitable, living piously, and by
that means having the blessing of God attending on his endeavors, making a
holy use of his viewing those sacred places which he saw at Jerusalem; Take an
instance upon his sight of that place where the three wise men of the East
offered their Oblations to our Savior.

Three Kings to the King of Kings three gifts did bring,
Gold, Incense, Myrrh, as Man, as God, as King;
Three holy gifts be likewise given by thee
To Christ, even such as acceptable be;
For Myrhah, Tears; for Frankincense impart
Submissive Prayers; for pure Gold, a pure Heart.
He most elegantly translated Ovid his Metamorphosis into English Verse, so
that as the Soul of Aristotle was said to have transmigured into Thomas
Aquinas, so might Ovid's Genius be said to have passed into Mr. Sandys,
rendering it to the full height, line for line with the Latin, together with
most excellent Annotations upon each Fable. But his Genius directed him most to
divine subjects, writing a Paraphrase on the Book of Job, Psalms, Ecclesiastes,
Canticles, etc. as also a divine Tragedy on Christ's Passion. He lived to be a
very aged man, having a youthful Soul in a decayed Body, and died about the
year 1641.

Sir JOHN SVCKLING.
SIR John Suckling, in his time, the delight of the Court and darling of the
Muses, was one so filled with Phoebean fire* as for excellency of his wit, was
Worthy to be Crowned with a Wreath of Stars, though some attribute the strength
of his lines to savor more of the Grape than the Lamp; Indeed he made it his
Recreation, not his Study, and did not so much seek fame as it was put upon
him: In my mind he gives the best Character of himself in those Verses of his
in the Sessions of the Poets:

Suckling next was called, but did not appear,
But strait one whispered Apollo in the ear,
That of all men living he cared not for it,
He loved nor the Muses so well as his sport.
And prized black eyes, or a lucky hit
At Bowls, above all the Trophies of wit.
But Apollo was angry, and publicly said,
'Twere fit that a fine were set upon's head.
Besides his Poems, he wrote three Plays, the Goblins a Comedy, Bren^va^ a
Tragedy, and Aglaura a Tragi-Comedy, He was a loyal person, to his Prince, and
in that great defection of Scotch Loyalty in 1639. freely gave the King a
hundred Horses. And for his Poems, I shall conclude with what the Author of his
Epistle to the Reader says of them, It had been a Prejudice to posterity, and
an injury to his own Ashes, should they have slept in Oblivian.

Mr. WILLIAM HABINGTON.
HE was one of a quick wit and fluent language, whose Poems coming forth above
thirty years ago, under the Title of Castara, gained a general fame and
estimation, and no wonder, since that human Goddess by him so celebrated, was a
person of such rare endowments as was worthy the praises bestowed upon her,
being a person of Honor as well as Beauty, to which was joined a virtuous
mind, to make her in all respects complete. He also wrote the History of the
Reign of King Edward the Fourth, and that in a style sufficiently florid, yet
not altogether pleasing the ear, but as much informing the mind, so that we may
say of that Kings Reign, as Mr. Daniel says in his Preface to his History of
England, That there was never brought together more of the main. He also wrote
a Tragi-Comedy, called, the Queen of Arragon, which as having never seen, I can
give no great account of it.

Mr. FRANCIS QVARLES.
FRancis Quarles, son to James Quarles, Esquire was born at Stewards at the Parish
of Rumford, in the County of Essex, and was bred up in the University of
Cambridge, where he became intimately acquainted with Mr. Edward Benlowes, and
Mr. Phineas Fletcher, that Divine Poet and Philosopher, on whose most excellent
Poem of the Purple Island, hear these Verses of Mr. Quarles, which if they be
as delightful to you in the reading, as to me in the writing, I question not
but they will give you content.

Man's Body's like a House, his greater Bones
Are the main Timber; and the lesser ones
Are smaller splints: his ribs are laths daubed over
Plastered with flesh and blood: his mouth's the door,
His throat's the narrow entry, and his heart
Is the great Chamber, full of curious art:
His midriff is a large Partition Wall
'Twixt the great Chamber, and the spacious Hall*
His stomach is the Kitchen, where the meat
Is often but half sod for want of heat:
His Spleen's a vessel Nature does allot
To take the skum that rises from the Pot:
His lungs are like the bellows, that respire
In every Office, quickening every fire*
His Nose the Chimny is, whereby are vented
Such fumes as with the bellows are augmented:
His bowels are the sink, whose part's to drein
All noisome filth, and keep the Kitchen clean:
His eyes are Crystal windows, clear and bright;
Let in the object and let out the sight.
And as the Timber is or great, or small,
Or strong, or weak, it is apt to stand or fall:
Yet is the likeliest Building sometimes known
To fall by obvious chances; overthrown
Often times by tempests, by the full mouthed blasts
Of Heaven; sometimes by fire; sometimes it wastes
Through unadvised neglect: put case the stuff
Were ruin-proof, by nature strong enough
To conquer time, and age; Put case it should
Nere know an end, alas, our Leases would;
What have thou then, proud flesh and blood, to boast?
Thy days are evil, at best; but few, at most;
But sad, at merriest; and but weak, at strongest;
Unsure, at surest; and but short, at longest.
He afterward went over into Ireland, where he became Secretary to the
Reverend James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh: one suitable to his disposition,
having a Genius biased to Devotion; Here at leisure times did he exercise
himself in those ravishing delights of Poetry, but (always with the Psalmist)
his heart was inditing a good matter; these in time produced those excellent
works of his, viz. his Histories of Jonas, Esther, Job, and Sampson; his Sions
Songs and Sions Elegies, also is Euchyridion, all of them of such a heavenly
strain, as if he had drank of Jordan instead of Helicon, and slept on Mount
Olivet for his Pernassus. He had also other excursions into the delightful
walks of Poetry, namely, his Argalus and Parthenia, a Science (as he himself
says) taken out of Sir Philip Sidney's Orchard, likewise his Epigrams,
Shepherds Oracles, Elegies on several persons, his Hierogliphicks, but
especially his Emblems, wherein he has Out-Alciated Alcialus himself. There
has been also acted a Comedy of his called, The Virgin Widow, which passed
with no ordinary applause. But afterward the Rebellion breaking forth in
Ireland (where his losses were very great) he was forced to come over; and
being a true Loyalist to his Sovereign, Was again plundered of his Estate here,
but what he took most to heart (for as for his other losses he practiced the
patience of Job he had described) was his being plundered of his Books, and some
rare Manuscripts which he intended for the Press, the loss of which, as it is
thought, facilitated his death, which happned about the year of our Lord, 1643.
to whose memory one dedicated these lines by way of Epitaph.

To them that understand themselves so well*
As what, and who lies here, to ask, I Will tell,
What I conceive Envy dare not deny,
Fat both from falsehood, and from flattery.
Here drawn to Land by Death, does lie
A Vessel fitter for the Sky,
Than Jason's Argo, though in Greece
They say, it brought the Golden Fleece.
The skilful Pilot steered it so,
Hither and thither, too and fro,
Through all the Seas of Poverty,
Whether they far or near do lie,
And fraught it so with all the wealth
Of wit and learning, not by stealth,
Or privacy, but perchance got
That this whole lower World could not
Richer Commodities, or more
Afford to add unto his store.
To Heaven then with an intent
Of new Discoveries, he went
And left his Vessel here to rest,
Till his return shall make it blessed.
The Bill of Lading he that looks
To know, may find it in his Books.
Mr. PHINEAS FLETCHER.
THis learned person, Son and Brother to two ingenious Poets, himself the
third, not second to either, was son to Giles Fletcher, Doctor in Law, and
Ambassador from Queen Elizabeth to Theodor Juanowick Duke of Muscovia; who
though a Tyranick Prince, whose will was his Low, yet settled with him very good
Terms for our Merchants trading thither. He was also brother to two worthy
Poets, viz. George Fletcher, the Author of a Poem, entitled, Christ's Victory
and Triumph over and after Death; and Giles Fletcher, who wrote a worthy Poem,
entitled, Christ's Victory, made by him being but Bachelor of Arts,
discovering the piety of a Saint, and divinity of Doctor. This our Phineas
Fletcher was Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, and in Poetic fame
exceeded his two Brothers, in that never enough to be celebrated Poem,
entitled, The Purple Island, of which to give my Reader a taste (who perhaps
has never seen the Book) I shall here add two Stanza's of it.

Thrice happy was the worlds first infancy,
Nor knowing yet, not curious ill to know:
Joy without grief, love without jealousy:
None felt hard labor, or the sweating Plough:
The willing earth brought tribute to her King:
Bacchus unborn lay hidden in the cling
Of big swollen Grapes; their drink was every silver spring.
And in another place, speaking of the vanity of ambitious Covetousness.

Vain men, too fondly wise, who plough the Seas,
With dangerous pains another earth to find:
Adding new Worlds to the old, and scorning ease,
The earths vast limits daily more unbind!
The aged World, though now it falling shows,
And hasts to set, yet still in dying grows,
Whole lives are spent to win, what one Deaths hour must lose.
Besides this purple Island, he wrote diverse Piscatorie Eclogues, and other
Poetical Miscelanies, also a Piscatory Comedy called Sicelides, which was acted
at Kings-Colledge in Cambridge.

Mr. GEORGE HERBERT.
THis divine Poet and person was a younger brother of the Noble Family of the
Herberts of Montgomery, whose florid wit, obliging humor in conversation,
fluent Elocution, and great proficiency in the Arts, gained him that reputation
at Oxford, where he spent his more youthful Age, that he was chosen University
Orator, a place which required one of able parts to Manage it; at last, taking
upon him Holy Orders, not without special Encouragement from the King, who took
notice of his extraordinary Parts, he was made Parson of Bemmerton near
Salisbury, where he led a Seraphick life, converting his Studies altogether to
serious and Divine Subjects; which in time produced those his so generally
known and approved Poems entitled, The Temple.

Whose Vocal notes tuned to a heavenly Lyre,
Both learned and unlearned all admire.
I shall only add out of his Book an Anagram, which he made on the name of the
Virgin Mary.

MARY.
ARMY.
And well her name an Army does present,
In whom the Lord of Hosts did pitch his Tent.
Mr. RICHARD CRASHAW.
THis devout Poet, the Darling of the Muses, whose delight was the fruitful
Mount Sion, more than the barren Mount Pernassus, was Fellow first of
Pembrook-Hall, after of St. Peters-Colledge in Cambridge; a religious pourer
forth of his divine Raptures and Meditations, in smooth and pathetick Verse.
His Poems consist of three parts, the first entitled, Steps to the Temple,
being for the most part Epigrams upon several passages of the New Testament,
charming the ear with a holy Rapture. The Second part, The delights of the
Muses, or Poems upon severral occasions, both English and Latin; such rich
pregnant Fancies as showed his Breast to be filled with Phoebean Fire.

The third and last part Carmen Deo nostro, being Hymns and other sacred Poems,
dedicated to the Countess of Denbigh, all which bespeak him, The learned
Author, of Immortal Strains.

He was much given to a religious Solitude, and love of a recluse Life, which
made him spend much of his time, and even lodge many Nights under Tertullian's
roof of Angels, in St. Mary's Church in Cambridge. But turning Roman Catholic,
he betook himself to* (...) so zealously frequented place, Our Lady's of
Lo^^etto in Italy; where for some years he spent his time in Divine
Contemplations, being a Canon of that Church, where he dyed.

Mr. WILLIAM CARTWRIGHT.
MR. William Cartwright a Student of Christ Church in Oxford, where he lived in
Fame and Reputation, for his singular Parts and Ingenuity; being none of the
least of Apollo's Sons, for his excelling vein in Poetry, which produced a
Volume of Poems, published not long after his Death, and ushered into the World
by Commendatory Verses of the choicest Wits at that time; enough to have made a
Volume of it self: So much was he reverenced by the Lovers of the Muses. He
wrote, besides his Poems, The Ordinary, a Comedy; the Royal Slave, Lady Errant,
and The Seige, Or, Loves Convert, Tragi-Comedies.

Sir ASTON COCKAIN.
SIr Aston Cockain lays Claim to a place in our Book, being remembered to
Posterity by four Plays which he wrote, viz. The Obstinate Lady, a Comedy;
Trapolin supposed a Prince, Tyrannical Government, Tragi-Comedies: and
Thersites an Interlude.

Sir JOHN DAVIS.
THis worthy Knight, to whom Posterity is indebted for his learned Works, was
well beloved of Queen Elizabeth, and in great Favor with King James. His
younger Years he addicted to the study of Poetry, which produced two excellent
Poems, Nosce Teipsum. and Ochestra: Works which speak themselves their own
Commendations: He also wrote a judicious Metaphrase on several of David's
Psalms, which first made him known at Court: afterward addicting himself to
the Study of the Common Law of England; he was first made the Kings Sergeant,
and after his Attorney General in Ireland.

THOMAS MAY.
THomas May was one in his time highly esteemed, not only for his Translation
of Virgils Georgicks, and Lucans Pharfalia into English, but what he has
written Propria Minerva, as his Supplement to Lucan, till the Death of Julius
Caesar: His History of Henry the Second in Verse; besides what he wrote of
Dramatick, as his Tragedies of Antigone, Agrippina, and Cleopatra; The Heir, a
Tragi-Comedy; the Old Couple, and The Old Wives Tale, Comedies; and the History
of Orlando Furioso; of these his Tragi-Comedy of The Heir is done to the life,
both for Plot and Language; and good had it been for his Memory to Posterity,
if he had left off Writing here; but taking disgust at Court for being
frustrated in his Expectation of being the Queens Poet, for which he stood
Candidate with Sir William Davenant, who was preferred before him, out of mere
Spleen, as it is thought for his Repulse, he vented his Spite in his History of
the late Civil Wars of England; wherein he shows all the Spleen of a Male
contented Poet, making thereby his Friends his Foes, and rendering his Fame
odious to Posterity; such is the Nature of Malice, that as the Poet says,
Impoison'd with the Drugs of cruel Hate,
Draw on themselves an unavoided Fate.


CHARLES ALEYN.
CHarles Aleyn was one and that no despicable Poet, as may be seen by his
Works, which still live in Fame and Reputation, writing in Heroic verse the
Life of King Henry the Seventh, with the Battle of Bosworth; and also the
Battle of Crescy and Poictiers, in which he is very pithy and sententious: I
shall only give you two instances, the first out of his Battle of Crescy.

They swell with love who are with valor filled,
And Venus Doves may in a Headpiece build.
The other out of his History of King Henry the Seventh.

Man and Money a mutual Falsehood show,
Man makes false Money, Money makes man so.
GEORGE WITHERS.
GEorge Withers was one who loved to Fish in troubled Waters, being never more
quiet then when in Trouble, of a restless Spirit, and contradicting
Disposition; gaining more by Restraint then others could get by their Freedom,
which his ungoverned (not to say worse) Pen often brought him unto, so that the
Marshalsea and Newgate were no Strangers unto him. He was born in Hantshire (if
it be every whit the more honor to the County for his Birth) a prodigious
Pourer forth of Rhyme, which he spued from his Maw, as Tom Coriat formerly used
to spue Greek, and that with a great pretense to a Poetical Zeal, against the
Vices of the Times; which he mightily exclaimed against in his Abuses Stripped
and Whipped, his Motto, Britains Remembrancer, etc. with other Satirical Works
of the like nature: He turned also into English Verse the Songs of Moses, and
other Hymns of the Old Testament; besides these he wrote a Poem called
Philaret, the Shepherds Hunting, his Embleins, Campo Musae, Opo-Balsamum, the
Two Pitchers, and others more then a good many, had not his Muse been more
Loyal than it was; he was living about the Year 1664. when I saw him, and
suppose he lived not long after.

ROBERT HERRIC.
RObert Herric one of the Scholars of Apollo of the middle Form, yet something
above George Withers, in a pretty Flowery and Pastoral Gale of Fancy, in a
vernal Prospect of some Hill, Cave, Rock, or Fountain; which but for the
Interruption of other trivial Passages, might have made up none of the worst
Poetic Landskips. Take a view of his Poetry in his Errata to the Reader in
these lines.

For these Errata's, Reader thou do see,
Blame thou the Printer for them, and not me:
Who gave him forth good Grain, tho he mistook,
And so did sow these Tares throughout my Book.
I account him in Fame much of the same rank, as he was of the same Standing,
with one Robert Heath, the Author of a Poem, Entitled, Clarastella, the
ascribed Title of that Celebrated Lady, who is supposed to have been both the
Inspirer and chief Subject of them.

JOHN TAILOR the Water-Poet.
SOme perhaps may think this Person unworthy to be ranked amongst those Sons of
Apollo whom we mentioned before; but to them we shall answer. That had he had
Learning according to his natural Parts, he might have equaled, if not
exceeded, many who claim a great share in the Temple of the Muses. Indeed, for
ought I can understand, he never learned no further then* his Accidence, as we
may learn from his own Words in one of his Books.

I must confess do want Eloquence,
And never Scarce did learn my Accidence;
For having got from Possum to Posset,
I there was gravel'd, could no further get
He was born in Gloucestershire, where he went to School with one Green; who,
as John Tailor says, loved new Milk so well, that to be sure to have it new,
he went to the Market to buy a Cow; but his Eyes being Dim, he cheapned a Bull,
and asking the price of the Beast, the Owner and he agreed; and driving it
home, would have his Maid to Milk it, which she attempting to do, could find no
Teats: and whilst the Maid and her Master were arguing the matter, the Bull
very fairly pist into the pall; whereupon his Scholar John Tailor wrote these
Verses.

Our Master Green was over-seen
In buying of a Bull,
For when the Maid did mean to milk,
He pist the Pail half full.
He was afterward bound Apprentice to a Waterman of London, a Laborious Trade:
and yet though it be said, that Ease is the Nurse of Poetry, yet did he not
only follow his Calling, but also plied his Writings, which in time produced
above fourscore Books, which I have seen; besides several others unknow to me;
some of which were dedicated to King James, and King Charles the First, and by
them well accepted, considering the meanness of his Education to produce works
of Ingenuity. He afterward kept a Public House in Phoenix Alley by Long-Acre,
continuing very constant in his Loyalty to the King, upon whose doleful Murder
he set up the Sign of the Mourning Crown; but that being counted Malignant in
those times of Rebellion, he pulled down that, and hung up his own Picture,
under which were writ these two lines.

There Is many a King's Head hanged up for a Sign,
And many a Saint's Head too, then why not Mine?
He dyed about the Year 1654. upon whom one bestowed this Epitaph.

Here lies the Water-Poet, honest John,
Who rowed on the Streams of Helicon;
Where having many Rocks and dangers past,
He at the Haven of Heaven arrived at last.
THOMAS RAWLINS.
THomas Rawlins my old Friend, chief Graver of the Mint to King Charles the
First, as also to King Charles the Second till the Year 1670. in which he died.
He was an Excellent Artist, perhaps better then a Poet, yet was he the Author
of a Tragedy called The Rebellion, which has been acted not without good
Appluse; besides some other small things which he wrote.

Mr. THOMAS CAREW.
THis learned Gentleman Mr. Carew, one of the Bedchamber to King Charles the
First, was in his time reckoned among the chiefest for delicacy of wit and
Poetic Fancy, which gained him a high Reputation amongst the most ingenious
persons of that Age. He was a great acquaintance of Mr. Thomas May, whom none
can deny to be an able Poet, although Discontent made him warp his Genius
contrary to his natural Fancy, in commendation of whose Tradi-Comedy called The
Heir, Mr. Carew wrote an excellent paper of Verses. His Books of Poems do still
maintain their fame amongst the Curious of the present age.

Col. RICHARD LOVELACE.
I Can compare no Man so like this Colonel Lovelace as Sir Philip Sidney, of
which latter it is said by one in an Epitaph made of him, Nor is it fit that
more I should acquaint,
Lest Men adore in one
A Scholar, Soldier, Lover, and a Saint.


As for their parallel, they were both of noble Parentage, Sir Philip's Father
being Lord Deputy of Ireland, and President of Wales; our Colonel of a
Vicount's name and Family; Scholars none can deny them both: The one Celebrated
his Mistress under the bright name of Stella, the other the Lady Regent of his
Affections, under the Banner of Lucasta, both of them endued with transcendent
Sparks of Poetic Fire, and both of them exposing their Lives to the extremest
hazard of doubtful War; both of them such Soldiers as is expressed by the Poet.

Undaunted Spirits, that encounter those
Sad dangers, we to Fancy scarce propose.
To conclude, Mr. Lovelace's Poems did, do, and still will live in good Esteem
with all knowing true Lovers of Ingenuity.

ALEXANDER BROOM.
ALexander Broom our English Anacreon, was an Attorney in the Lord Mayors
Court; who besides his practice in Law, addicted himself to a Joyvial strain in
the ravishing Delights of Poetry; being the ingenious Author of most of those
Songs, which on the Royalists account came forth during the time of the Rump,
and Oliver's Usurpation; and were sung so often by the Sons of Mirth and
Bacchus, and played to by the sprightly Violin. Take for a taste a verse of one
of his Songs.

Come, come, let us drink,
It Is in vain to think,
Like fools, on grief or Sadness;
Let our Money fly,
And our Sorrows die,
All worldly care is Madness:
But Sack and good Cheer,
Will in spite of our fear,
Inspire our Souls with Gladness.
I shall only add his Poem which he made on the great Crier at
Westminster Hall, by which you may judge of his Abilities in Poetry.

When the Great Crier in that greater Room,
Calls Faunt-le-roy, and Alexander Broom,
The people wonder (as those heretofore,
When the Dumb spoke) to hear a Crier Roar.
The kitling Crew of Cryers that do stand
With Eunuchs voices,, squeaking on each hand,
Do signify no more, compared to him,
Then Member Allen did to Patriot Pim.
Those make us laugh, while we do him adore;
Their's are but Pistol, his Mouths Cannon-Bore.
Now those same thirsty Spirits that endeavor,
To have their names enlarged, and last for ever,
Must be Attorneys of this Court, and so
His voice shall like Fame's loudest Trumpet
blow
Their names about the world, and make them
last,
While we can lend an Ear, or he a Blast.
He wrote besides those airy Fancies, several other Serious Pieces; as also a
Comedy called the Cunning Lover.

Mr. JOHN CLEVELAND.
THis eminent Poet, the Wit of our age, was born at Hinckley, a small Market
Town in the County of Leicester, where his Father was the Reverend and Learned
Minister of the place. Fortes creantur e fortibus, and bred therein under Mr.
Richard Vines his Schoolmaster, where he attained to a great perfection in
Learning, by choicest Elegancies in Greek and Latin, more elegantly English; so
that he may be said to have lisped wit, like an English Bard, and early ripe
accomplished for the University.

From a loving Father and learned Schoolmaster, he was sent to Christ College
in Cambridge, where he proved such an exquisite Orator, and pure Latinist, as
those his Deserts preferred him to a Fellowship in St. John's. There he lived
about the space of nine Years, the Delight and Ornament of that Society; what
service as well as reputation he did it, let his excellent Orations and
Epistles speak: To which the Library owes much of its Learning, the Chapel
much of its pious Decency, and the College much of its Renown.

He was (says Dr. Fuller) a general Artist, pure Latinist, exquisite Orator,
and (which was his Masterpiece) eminent Poet; whose verses in the time of the
Civil War begun to be in great request, both for their Wit and Zeal to the
King's Cause, for which indeed he appeared the first, if not only Champion in
verse against the Presbyterian party. His Epistles were pregnant with
Metaphors, carrying in them a difficult plainness, difficult at the hearing,
plain at the considering thereof. His lofty Fancy may seem to stride from the
top of one Mountain to the top of another, so making to it self a constant
Level and Champian of continued Elevations.

These his eminent parts preferred him to be Rhetoric Reader, which he
performed with great Applause; and indeed, what was it in which he did not
excel? This alone may suffice for his Honor, that after the Oration which he
addressed to that incomparable Prince of Blessed Memory, Charles the First; His
Majesty called for him, gave him his hand to Kiss, and (with great expressions
of kindness) commanded a Copy to be sent after him, whither he was hasting that
night.

Such who have Clevelandiz'd, that is, endeavored to imitate his Masculine
style, yet could never go beyond his Poem of the Hermophrodite; which though
inserted into Mr. Randolphs Poems (one of as high a towering Wit as most in
that age;) yet is well known to be Mr. Clevelands; it being not only made after
Mr. Randolph's death, but has in it the very vein and strain of Mr.
Cleveland's Writing, walking from one height to another, in a constant Level of
continued Elevation. And indeed so elaborate are all his other pieces of
Poetry, as to praise one were to detract from the rest, and are not to be the
less valued by the Reader, because most studied by the Writer: Take but a taste
of the Loftiness of his style, in those verses of his called Smectymuus.

Smectymnttuus! the Goblin makes me start,
In The name of Rabbi Abraham, what art?
Syriack? or Arabic? or Welsh? what skilt?
Up all the Brick-layers that Babel built.
Some Conjurer translate, and let me know it;
Till then it is fit for a West Saxon Poet.
But do the Brotherhood then play their prizes,
Like Mummers in Religion with Disguizes?
Out-brave us with a name in rank and file,
A name which if it were trained would spread a mile;
The Saints Monopoly, the zealous Cluster,
Which like a Porcupine presents a Muster.
Thus he shined with equal Light and Influence, until that great defection of
Loyalty overspread the Land, and Rebellion began to unvizaard it self; of
which no Man had more sagacious Prognostics, of which take this one-instance;
when Oliver Cromwell was in Election to be Burgess for the Town of Cambridge,
as he engaged all his Friends and Interests to oppose it; so when it was
passed, he said with much passionate zeal, That single vote ruined both Church
and Kingdom; such fatal events did he presage from his bloody Beak: For no
sooner did that Harpey appear in the University, but he made good what was
predicted of him, and he amongst others, that were outed for their Loyalty, was
turned out of his Fellowship at St. John's; out of which Loyal College was then
ejected Dr. Beal the Master, thirteen Batchellors of Divinity, and fourteen
Masters of Art, besides Mr. Cleveland.

And now being forced from the College, he betook himself to the Camp, and
particularly to Oxford the Head quarter of it, as the most proper and
proportionate Sphere for his Wit, Learning, and Loyalty; and added small Luster
to that famous University, with which it shined before.

Here he managed his Pen as the highest Panegyrist (witness his Rupertismus,
his Elegy on the Bishop of Canterbury, etc.) on the one side to draw out all
good inclinations to virtue: and the smartist Satyrist, exemplifi'd in the
Rebel Scot, the Scots Apostasy, which he presented with such a Satirical Fury,
that the whole Nation fares the worse for it, lying under a most grievous
Poetical Censure. Such also were his Poem of The mixed Assembly, his Character
of a London Diurnal, and a Committee-Man; Blows that shakes triumphing
Rebellion, reaching the Souls of those not to be reached by Law or Power,
striking each Traitor to a Paleness, beyond that of any Loyal Corpse, that bled
by them; such Characters being as indelible as Guilt stabs beyond Death.

From Oxford, his next stage was the Garrison of Newark, where he was Judge
Advocate until the Surrender thereof; and by an excellent temperature of both,
was a just and prudent Judge for the King, and a faithful Advocate for the
Country. Here he drew up that excellent Answer and Rejoinder to a Parliament
Officer, who had sent him a Letter by occasion of one Hill, that had deserted
their side, and brought with him to Newark the sum of 133l. and 8d. I shall
only give you part of Mr. Clevelands Answer to his first Letter, by which you
may give an Estimate of the rest.

Sixthly, Beloved it is so, that our Brother and Fellow Laborer in the Gospel
is Start aside; then this may serve for an use of instruction, not to trust in
Man, or in the Son of Man. Did not Demas leave Paul, did not Onesimus run from
his Master Philemon? Also this should teach us to employ our Talents, and not
to lay them up in a Napkin; had it been done among the Cavaliers, it had been
just, then the Israelite had spoiled the Egyptian: but for Simeon to plunder
Levi, that -- that -- etc.

This famous Garrison was maintained with much courage and resolution against
the Besiegers, and not surrendered but by the King's special Command, when first
he had surrendered himself into the hands of the Scots; in which action of that
Royal Martyr, we may conclude our Cleveland Vates, both Poet and Prophet: For
besides his passionate resentment of it in that excellent Poem, the Kings
disguise; upon some private intelligence, three days before the King reached
them, he foresaw the pieces of Silver paying upon the banks of Tweed, and that
they were the price of his Sovereigns Blood, and predicted the Tragical events.

Thenceforth he followed the fate of distressed Loyalty, subject to the Malice
and Vengeance of every Fanatic Spirit, which seldom terminates but in a Goal,
which befell this learned Person, being long imprisoned at Yarmouth; where
living in a lingering Condition, and having small hopes of coming out, he
composed an Address to that Idol at White Hall, Oliver Cromwell, written with
such Towering Language, and so much gallant Reason, as looked bigger than his
Highness, shrinking before the Majesty of his Pen, as Felix trembled before
Paul. So obtaining his Liberty, not by a servile Submission, but rather a
constrained Violence, neither injuring his Conscience, nor betraying his Cause.

And so now with Daniel being delivered out of the Lions Den, he was courted to
several places, (which contended as emulously for his abode, as the seven
Grecian Cities for Homers Birth;) at last he settled in Gray's Inn, which when he
had enobled with some short time of his residence, an intermitting Fever seized
him, whereof he dyed, on Thursday Morning, April the 29. 1658. from whence his
Body was brought to Hunsden-House, and on Saturday being May Day, was buried at
Colledge-hill-Church; His dear Friend Dr. John Pearson (afterward Lord Bishop
of Chester) preached his Funeral Sermon, who rendered this Reason; why he
cautiously declined all commending of the Party deceased, Because such praising
of him would not be adequate to any expectation in that Auditory; seeing some,
who knew him not, would think it far above him, while those, who knew him must
needs know it far below him.

Many there were who sought to eternize their own Names by honoring his; some
by Elegies, and other Devices, amongst the rest one made this Anagram upon his
name.

JOHN CLEAVELAND.

HELICONIAN DEW.
The difficult Trifle (says one) is rather well endeavored, than exactly
performed* More happy were those Wits, who descanted on him and his works in
Verse, although so eminent a Poet was never interred with fewer Elegies than
he; for which we may assign two Reasons, One that at that time the best Fancies
of the Royal Party were in restraint, so that we may in part think their Muses
confined, as well as their Bodies. Secondly, not to do it to the height, were
in a manner to dispraise him. However I shall adventure to give you an instance
in two, whereof the first of Mr. Edward Martin of London.

Ye Muses do not me deny;
I ever was your Votary.
And tell me, seeing you do daign
TO inspire and feed the hungry Brain;
With what choice Cates? With what choice Face?
To Cleaveland's fancy still repair?
Fond Man, say they, why do thou question thus?
Ask rather with what Nectar he feeds us.
The other by Mr. A. B. printed before Mr. Cleveland's Works.

Cleaveland again his sacred head does raise,
Even in the dust crowned with immortal Bays,
Again with verses armed that once did fright
Lycambe's Daughters from the hated Light,
Sets his bold foot on Reformations neck*
And triumphs over the vanquished Monster Smec;
That Hydra whose proud heads did so increase,
That it deserved no less an Hercules.
This, this is he who in Poetic Rage,
With Scorpions lashed the Madness of the age;
Who durst the fashions of the times despise,
And be a Wit when all Manking grew wise.
When formal Beards at Twenty one were seen,
And men grew Old almost as soon as Men:
Who in those days when reason, wit, and sense
Were by the Zealots grave Impertinence
Ycliped Folly, and in Ve-ri-ty
Did savor rankly of Carnality.
When each notch'd Prentice might a Poet prove.
For warbling through the Nose a Hymn of Love,
When sage George Withers and grave William Prin,
Himself might for a Poets share put in:
Yet then could write with so much art and skill,
That Rome might envy his Satyrick Quill;
And crabbed Persius his hard lines give ore,
And in disdain beat his brown Desk no more.
How I admire thee Cleaveland! when I weigh
Thy close wrought Sense, and every line survey!
They are not like those things which some compose,
Who in a maze of Words the Sense do lose.
Who spin one thought into so long a thread,
And beat their Wit too thin to make it spread;
Till it is too fine for our weak eyes to find,
And dwindles into Nothing in the end.
No; they are above the Genius of this Age,
Each word of thine swells pregnant with a Page.
Then why do some Men's nicer ears complain,
Of the uneven Harshness of thy strain?
Preferring to the vigor of thy Muse
Some smooth weak Rhymer, that so gently flows,
That Ladies may his easy strains admire,
And melt like Wax before the softning fire.
Let such to Women write, you write to Men;
We study thee, when we but play with them.
Sir JOHN BERKENHEAD.
Sir John Berkenhead was a Gentleman, whose worth and deserts were too high for
me to delineate. He was a constant Assertor of his Majesty's Cause in its
lowest Condition, painting the Rebels forth to the life in his Mercurius
Aulicus and other Writings; his Zany Brittanieus who wrote against him, being
no more his Equal, than a Dwarf to a Giant, or the goodness of his cause to
that of the Kings; for this his Loyalty he suffered several Imprisonments, yet
always constant to his first Principles. His skill in Poetry was such, that one
thus writes of him.

Whilst Laurel sprigs another head shall Crown,
Thou the whole Grove may challenge as thy Own.
He survived to see his Majesty's happy Restoration, and some of them hanged
who used their best endeavor to do the same by him. As for his learned
Writings, those who are ignorant of them, must plead ignorance both to Wit and
Learning.

Dr. ROBERT WILD.
HE was one, and not of the meanest of the Poetical Caslock, being in some sort
a kind of an Anti-Cleaveland, writing as high, and standing up as stiffly for
the Presbyterians, as ever Cleaveland did against them: But that which most
recommended him to public fame, was his Iter Boreale, the same in Title though
not in Argument, with that little, but much commended Poem of Dr. Corbets
mentioned before. This being upon General Monk's Journey out of Scotland, in
order to his Majesty's Restoration, and is indeed the Cream and flower of all
his Works, and looked upon for a lofty and conceited Style. His other things
are for the most part of a lepid and facetious nature, reflecting on others,
who as sharply retorted upon him, for he that throws stones at other, it is ten
to one but is hit with astone himself; one of them playing upon his red face
thus. I like the Man that carries in his Face, the tinsture of that bloody
Banner he fights under, and would not have any Man's countenance; prove so much
an Hypocrite to cross a French Proverb.

His Nose plainly proves,
What pottage he loves.
Hear one of their reflections upon him, on his humble thanks, for his
Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience.

When first the Hawkers bawled 'ith' streets Wild's name,
A lickerish longing to my Pallat came;
A feast of Wit I looked for, but, alas!
The meat smelt strong, and too much Sauce there was, etc.
Indeed his strain, had it been fitted to a right key, might have equaled the
chiefest of his age.

Mr. ABRAHAM COWLEY.
THis Gentleman was one, who may well be be styled the glory of our Nation,
both of the present and past ages, whose early Muse began to dawn at the
Thirteenth year of his age, being then a Scholar at Westminiser-School, which
produced two little Poems, the one called Antonius and Melida, the other
Pyramus and Thisbe; discovering in them a maturity of Sense, far above the
years that writ them; showing by these his early Fruits, what in time his stock
of worth would come to. And indeed Fame was not deceived in him of its
Expectation, he having built a lasting Monument of his worth to posterity, in
that complete Volume of his Works, divided into four parts: His Mistress, being
the amorous Prolusions of his youthful Muse; his Miscelanies, or Poems of
various arguments; his most admired Heroic Poem Davideis, the first Books
whereof he composed while but a young Student at Trinity-Colledge in Cambridge;
and lastly, that is, in order of time though not of place, his Pindaric Odes,
so called from the Measure, in which he translated the first Ithmian and Nemean
Odes, where as the form of those Odes in the Original is very different, yet so
well were they approved by succeeding Authors, that our primest Wits have
hitherto driven a notable Trade in Pindaric Odes. But besides these his English
Poems, there is extant of his writing a Latin Volume by it self, containing a
Poem of Herbs and Plants: Also he Translated two Books of his Davideis into
Latin Verse, which is in the large Volume amongst the rest of his Works.

Mr. EDMOND WALLER.
THis Gentleman is one of the most famed Poets, and that not undeservedly of
the presentage, excelling in the charming Sweets of his Lyrick Odes, or amorous
Sonnets, as also in his other occasional Poems both smooth and strenuous, rich
of Conceit, and eloquently adorned with proper Similies: view his abilities in
this Poem of his, concerning the Puissance of our Navies, and the English
Dominion at Sea.

Lords of the Worlds great Wast, the Ocean, we
Whole Forests send to reign upon the Sea;
And every Coast may trouble or relieve;
But none can visit us without our leave;
Angels and we have this Prerogative,
That none can at our happy Seat arrive,
While we descend at pleasure to invade
The bad with Vengeance, or the good to aid:
Our little world the image of the great,
Like that amidst the boundless Ocean set,
Of her own growth has all that Nature craves,
And all that is rare as Tribute from the waves.
As Egypt does not on the Clouds rely,
But to her Nyle owes more then to the sky;
So what our Earth, and what our Heaven denies,
Our ever constant friend, the Sea supplies.
The taste of hot Arabia's Spice we know,
Free from the Scorching Sun that makes it grow;
Without the worm, in Persian Silks we shine,
And without Planting drink of every Vine;
To dig for wealth we weary not our limbs,
Gold, though the heaviest metal, hither swims.
Ours is the Harvest where the Indians mow,
We plough the deep, and reap what others Sow.
I shall only add two lines more of his, quoted by several Authors.

All that the Angels do above,
Is that they sing, and that they love.
In sum, this our Poet was not Inferior to Carew, Lovelace, nor any of those
who were accounted the brightest Stars in the Firmament of Poetry.

Sir JOHN DENHAM.
SIr John Denham was a Gentleman, who to his other Honors had this added; that
he was one of the Chief of the Delphick Quire, and for his Writings worthy to
be Crowned with a wreath of Stars. The excellency of his Poetry may be seen in
his Coopers Hill, which whosoever shall deny, may be accounted no Friends to
the Muses: His Tragedy of the Sophy, is equal to any of the Chiefest Authors,
which with his other Works bound together in one Volume, will make his name
Famous to all Posterity.

Sir WILLIAM DAVENANT.
SIr William Davenant, may be accounted one of the Chiefest of Apollo's Sons,
for the great Fluency of his Wit and Fancy: Especially his Gondibert, the Crown
of all his other Writings; to which Mr. Hobbs of Malmsbury wrote a Preface,
wherein he extolleth him to the Skies; wherein no wonder (says one) if
Compliment and Friendly Compliance do a little biass and over-sway Judgment. He
also wrote a Poem entitled Madagascur, also a Farrago of his Juvenile, and
other Miscelaneous Pieces: But his Chiefest matter was what he wrote for the
English Stage, of which was four Comedies, viz. Love and Honor, The Man is the
Master; the Platonic Lovers; and The Wits. Three Tragedies; Albovine, The
Cruel Brother, and The unfortunate Lovers. Two Tragi-Comedies, the Just
Italian; and the Lost Lady. And Six Masks, viz. Brittania Triumphans; The
Cruelty of the Spaniards in Peru; Drakes History First Part; Siege of Rhodes in
two Parts, and The Temple of Love; Besides his Musical Drama's, when the usual
Plays were not suffered to be Acted, whereof he was the first Reviver and
Improver by painted Scenes after his Majesty's Restoration; erecting a new
Company of Actors, under the Patronage of the Duke of York.

Now this our Poet, as he was a Wit himself, so did several of the Wits play
upon him; amongst others Sir John Suckling in his Session of the Poets has
these Verses. Will. Davenant ashamed of a Foolish mischance
That he had got lately Traveling into France;
Modestly hoped the Handsomness of's Muse,
Might any Deformity about him excuse.
And Surely the Company would have been content,
If they could have found any President;
But in all their Records either in Verse or Prose,
There was not one Laureat without a Nose.


His Works since his Death have been fairly Published in a large Volume; to
which I refer my Reader.

Sir GEORGE WHARTON.
HE was one was a good Soldier, Famous Mathematician, and an excellent Poet;
always Loyal to his Prince: For whose Service he raised a Troop of Horse at
his own Charge, of which he became Captain himself; and with much Gallantry and
Resolution behaved himself. Nor was he less serviceable to the Royal Cause with
his Pen, of which he was a resolute Assertor: Suffering very much by
Imprisonment, even to the apparent hazard of his Life. He having so Satyrically
wounded them in his Elenctichus, as left indelible Characters of Infancy upon
their Actions. His Excellent Works collected into one Volume, and Published in
the Year, 1683. By the Ingenious Mr. Gadbury, are a sufficient Testimony of his
Learning, Ingenuity and Loyalty; to which I refer the Reader.

In sum, as he participated of his Masters Sufferings; So did he enjoy the
Benefit of his Restoration, having given him a Place of great Honor and Profit,
with which he lived in Credit and Reputation all the days of his Life.

Sir ROBERT HOWARD.
SIr Robert Howard, of the Noble Family of the Earls of Berk-shire, a Name so
reverenced, as it had Six Earls at one time of that Name. This Noble Person to
his other Abilities, which Capacitated him for a Principal Office in his
Majesty's Exchequer; attained to a considerable Fame by his Poetical Works:
Especially for what he has written to the Stage, viz. The Blind Lady; The
Committee; and The Surprizal, Comedies; The Great Favorite, and The Vestal
Virgin, Tragedies; Enforced Marriage, a Tragi-Comedy, and The Indian Queen a
Dramatick History.

WILLIAM CAVENDISH Duke of New Castle
THis Honorable Person, for his eminent Services to his Prince and Country,
preferred from Earl to Duke of New Castle; was a Person equally addicted both
to Arms and Arts, which will eternize his Name to all Posterity, so long as
Learning, Loyalty, and Valor shall be in Fashion. He wrote a splendid Treatise
of the Art of Horsemanship, in which his Experience was no less than his
Delight; as also two Comedies, The Variety, and the Country Captain. Nor was
his Duchess no less busied in those ravishing Delights of Poetry, leaving to
Posteriry in Print three ample Volumes of Her studious Endeavors; one of
Orations, the second of Philosophical Notions and Discourses, and the third of
Dramatick and other kinds of Poetry, of which five Comedies, viz. The Bridalls;
Blazing World; Cavent of Pleasure; The Presence; and The Sociable Companions,
or Female Wits.

Sir WILLIAM KILLIGREW.
SIr William Killigrew, was one whose Wings of Fancy displayed as high
Invention, as most of the Sons of Phoebus of his time; contributing to the
Stage five Plays, viz. Ormardes, The Princess, or Love at first sight;
Selindra, and the Seige of Vrbin, Tragi-Comedies; and a Comedy called Pandora.
To whom we may join Mr. Thomas Killigrew, who also wrote five Plays, viz. The
Parsons Wedding; and Thomaso, or the Wanderer, Comedies; the Pilgrim a Tragedy;
and Clarasilla, and The Prisoners, Tragi-Comedies.

JOHN STVDLEY.
WAs one who besides other things which he wrote, contributed to the Stage four
Tragedies, viz. Agamemnon, Hyppolitus, Hercules Oetes, and Medea, and therefore
thought worthy to have a Place amongst the rest of our English Poets.

JOHN TATHAM.
JOhn Tatham was one, whose Muse began to bud with his Youth* which produced
early Blossoms, of not altogether Contemptible Poetry, in a Collection of
Poems entitled Fancys Theater; which was ushered into the World by diverse of
the Chief Wits of that age. He was afterward City Poet, making those Speeches
and Representations used at the Lord Mayors show, and other Public Meetings.
He also contributed to the Stage four plays, viz. The Scots Fegaries; and The
Rump, or Mirror of the late times, Comedies; the Distracted State, a Tragedy,
and Love crowns the End; a Tragy-Comedy. Here a taste of his juvenile wit in his
Fancys Theater speaking in the Person of Momus.

How now presumptuous Lad, think thou that we
Will be disturbed with this thy Infancy Of Wit? --
Or does thy amorous Thoughts beget a flame*
(Beyond its merit) for to court the name
Of Poet; or is it common now a days
Such slender Wits dare claim such things as Bays? etc.
THOMAS JORDEN.
COntemporary with him was Thomas Jorden, and of much like equal Fame;
indulging his Muse more to vulgar Fancies, then to the high flying wits of
those times, yet did he write three Plays, viz. Mony's an Ass; and The Walks of
Islington and Hogsden, Comedies; and Fancys Festivals, a Mask.

HVGH CROMPTON.
HE was born a Gentleman, and bred up a Scholar, but his Father not leaving him
Means enough to support the one, and the Times in that Condition, that without
Money Learning is little regarded; he therefore betook him to a Gentile
Employment, which his Learning had made him capable to do; but the succession
of a worse fate disemploying him, as he himself says in his Epistle to the
Reader of his Book, entitled, Pierides, or the Muses Mount, he betook him to
his Pen, (that Idleness might not sway) which in time produced a Volume of
Poems, which to give you a taste of the briskness of his Muse, I shall instance
in a few lines, in one or two of them.

When I remember what mine eyes have seen,
And what mine Ears have heard,
Concerning Muses too too young and green;
And how they have been jear'd,
TO expose my own I am afear'd.
And yet this fear decreases, when I call
To my tempestuous mind,
How the strong loins of Phoebus Children all,
Have fallen by Censures mind:
And in their road what Rocks they find.
He went over afterward into Ireland, where he continued for some time; but
whether he dyed there or no, I am not certain.

EDMUND PRESTWICH.
EDmund Prestwich, was one who deservedly comes in as a Member of the Noble
Society of Poets, being the Author of an ingenious Comedy called the Hectors,
or False Challenge; as also Hippolytus a Tragedy; what ever he might have
written besides, which may not have come to my knowledge.

PAGAN FISHER.
PAganus Piscator, vulgarly Fisher, was a notable Undertaker in Latin Verse,
and had well deserved of his Country, had not lucre of Gain and private
Ambition over-swayed his Pen, to favor successful Rebellion. He wrote in Latin
his Marston-Moor; A Gratulatory Ode of Peace; Englished afterward by Thomas
Manley, and other Latin pieces, besides English ones, not a few, which (as we
said) might have been meriting, had not those worldly Considerations
over-swayed the Dictates of his own Conscience. But this his temporizing with
the Times, preferred him to be Poet Laureat (if that were any Preferment) to
that notorious Traitor Oliver Cromwell; to whom being Usurper, if his Muse did
homag^, it must be considered (says Mr. Phillips) that Poets in all times have
been inclinable to ingratiate themselves with the highest in Power, by what
Title so ever.

However it was, I have heard him often confess his Unhappiness therein: and
imparted to me a design he had, of committing to memory the Monuments of the
several Churches in London and Westminster; not only those mentioned by Stow
and Weaver, but also those who have been erected since, which might have been
of great use to Posterity, had it been done before the great Conflagration of
the Fire, thereby preserving many Monuments, endangered since to be lost, but
Death interposing hindered him of his Design.

EDWARD SHIRBVRN, Esquire
EDward Shirburn (says a learned Author) was intimately knowing as well of the
ancient Greek and Latin, as of the choicest of modern Poets, both Italian,
French, and Spanish; and in what he has elegantly and judiciously Translated
either of the former or latter; in the Translating of which he has discovered
a more pure Poetical Fancy, than many others can justly pretend to in their
Original Works. Nor was his Genius confined only to Poetry, his Version of
those Books of Manilius, which relate merely to Astronomy, is a very Noble
Work, being set forth with most exact Notes, and other learned and proper
Illustrations. Besides many other genuine Pieces which he wrote.

JOHN QVARLES.
JOhn Quarles, Son to Francis Quarles, Esquire may be said to be born a Poet, and
that his Father's Genius was infused into him; nor was he less Loyal in his
Principles to his Prince, writing besides several other Works, an Elegy on the
Lord Capell, and A Curse against the Enemies of Peace; of which I remember
those were the two last lines.

That all the world may hear them hiss and cry,
Who loves no peace, in peace shall never die.
He was also addicted to Arms, as well as Arts, and, as I have been informed,
was a Captain in the King's Army, but then Loyalty suffering an Eclipse, he
came up to London, and continued there till the great Sickness, which swept
away of the Pestilence no fewer than 68586 persons, amongst whom this
unfortunate Gentleman was one, tho to my knowledge, to prevent it, he might
have been kindly welcome to his worthy Kinsman, Mr. William Holgate of
Saffron-Walden in Essex, but Fate had decreed it otherwise.

JOHN MILTON.
JOhn Milton was one, whose natural parts might deservedly give, him a place
amongst the principal of our English Poets, having written two Heroic Poems
and a Tragedy; namely, Paradise Lost, Paradise Regained, and Sampson Agonista;
But his Fame is gone out like a Candle in a Snuff, and his Memory will always
stink, which might have ever lived in honorable Repute, had not he been a
notorious Traitor, and most impiously and villanously belied that blessed
Martyr King Charles the First.

JOHN OGILBY.
JOhn Ogilby was one, who from a late Initiation into Literature, made such a
Progress therein, as might well style him to be the Prodigy of his time,
sending into the world so many large and learned Volumes, as well in Verse as
in Prose, as will make posterity much indebted to his Memory. His Volumes in
Prose were his Atlas, and other Geographical Works, which gained him the Style
and Office of the King's Cosmographer. In Verse his Translations of Homer and
Virgil, done to the Life, and adorned with most excellent Sculptures; but above
all, as composed Propria Minerva; his Paraphrase upon Aesop's Fables, which for
Ingenuity and Fancy, besides the Invention of new Fables, is generally confessed
to have exceeded what ever has been done before in that kind. He also set
forth King Charles the Second his Entertainment through London, when he went to
his Coronation, with most admirable Cuts of the several Pageants as he passed
through, and Explanations upon them. And that which added a great grace to his
Works, he printed them all on special good Paper, and had them printed on very
good Letter.

Sir RICHARD FANSHAW.
THis worthy Gentleman, one of Apollo's chiefest Sons, was Secretary to King
Charles the Second, when Prince of Wales, and after his Restoration, his
Ambassador to Spain, where he died. His Employments were such, as one would
think he should have had no time for Poetical Diversions, yet at leisure times
he Translated Guarim's Pastor Fido into English Verse, and Spencer's Shepherds
Callendar into Latin Verse.

ROGER BOIL, Lord Braghil, Earl of Orrery.
THis Noble Person, the credit of the Irish Nobility for Wit and ingenious
Parts, and who had the command of a smooth Style, both in Prose and Verse; in
which last he has written several Dramatick Histories, as Mustapha, Edward the
Third, Henry the Fifth, and Tryphon, all of them with good success and
applause, as writing after the French way of Rhyme, now of late very much in
Fashion.

THOMAS HOBBS of Malmsbury.
THis noted Person, who gave occasion for so many Pens to band against him, is
of the more consideration, for what he has either judged or writ in Poetry;
but his Leviathan, which he wrote in Prose, caused the Pen of a no less than a
learned Bishop to write against him. He wrote a Preface to Davenant's
Gondibert, where no wonder if Complement and friendly Compliance do a little
bias and over-sway Judgment. His Latin Poem De Mirabilibus Pexi, wants not
due Commendation. After many bustles in the world, he sequestered himself wholly
to Malmsbury, where he died better informed (as I have heard) of the Deity,
than in the former part of his life he seems to have been.

Earl of ROCHESTER.
THis Earl for Poetical Wit, was accounted the chief of his time; his Numbers
flowing with so smooth and accute a Strain, that had they been all confined
within the bounds of Modesty, we might well affirm they were unparalled; yet
was not his Muse altogether so loose, but that with his Mirth he mixed
Seriousness, and had a knack at once to tickle the Fancy, and inform the
Judgment. Take a taste of the fluency of his Muse, in the Poem which he Wrote
in Defense of Satyr.

When Shakespeare, Johnson, Fletcher ruled the Stage,
They took so bold a freedom with the Age,
That there was scarce a Knave, or Fool in Town,
Of any note, but had his Picture shown;
And (without doubt) tho some it may offend,
Nothing helps more than Satyr, to amend
Ill Manners, or is trulier Virtues Friend.
Princes may Laws ordain,, Priests gravely preach,
But Poets most successfully will teach.
For as the Passing Bell frights from his meat
The greedy Sick-man, that too much would eat;
So when a Vice ridiculous is made,
Our Neighbors Shame keeps us from growing bad.
But wholesome Remedies few Palats please,
Men rather love what flatters their Disease.
Pimps, Parasites, Buffoons, and all the Crew
That under Friendship's name weak man undo;
Find their false service kindlier understood,
Than such as tell bold Truths to do us good.
Look where you will, and you shall hardly find
A man without some sickness of the Mind.
In vain we wise would seem, while every Lust
Whisks us about, as Whirlwinds do the Dust.
Here for some needless gain a Wretch is hurld
From Pole to Pole, and slav'd about the World;
While the reward of all his pains and cares,
Ends in that despicable thing, his Heir.
There a vain Fop mortgages all his Land
To buy that gaudy Play-thing, a Command;
To ride a Cock-horse, wear a Scarf at's --
And play the Pudding in a May Pole Farce.
Here one, whom God to make a Fool thought fit,
In spite of Providence, will be a Wit:
But wanting strength t'uphold his ill made choice,
Sets up with Lewdness, Blasphemy, and Noise.
There at his Mistress feet a Lover lies,
And for a Tawdry painted Baby dies;
Falls on his knees, adores and is afraid
Of the vain Idol he himself has made.
These, and a thousand Fools unmention'd here,
Hate Poets all, because they Poets fear.
Take heed (they cry) yonder mad Dog will bite,
He cares not whom he falls on in his fit:
Come but in's way, and strait a new Lampoon
Shall spread your mangled fame about the Town
This Farl died in the Flower of his Age, and though his Life might be somewhat
Extravagant, yet he is said to have dyed Penitently; and to have made a very
good End.

Mr. THOMAS FLATMAN.
MR. Thomas Flatman, a Gentleman once of the middle Temple, of Extraordinary
Parts, equally ingenious in the two Noble Faculties of Painting and Poetry; as
by the several choice Pieces that have been seen of his Pourtraying and
Limning, and by his Book of Poems, which came out about Fourteen or Fifteen
Years ago, sufficiently appears: The so much Celebrated Song of the Troubles
of Marriage, is ascribed to him.

Like a Dog with a Bottle tied close to his Tail,
Like a Tory in a Bog, or a Thief in a Jail, etc.
MARTIN LVELLIN.
THis Gentleman was bred up a Student in Christ-Church in Oxford; where he
addicted his Mind to the sweet Delights of Poetry, writing an Ingenious Poem,
entitled, Men Miracles, which came forth into the World with great applause.
The times being then when there was not only Cobling Preaching, but Preaching
Cobblers; he followed the practice of Physic, and whether he be yet living is
to me unknown.

EDMOND FAIRFAX.
EDmond Fairfax, a most judicious, elegant, and approved Poet, and who we
should have remembered before: But better out of due place, than not at all.
This judicious Poet Translated that most exquisite Poem of Torquato Tasso, the
Prince of Italian Heroic Poets, which for the Exactness of his Version, is
judged by some not inferior to the Original it self. He also wrote some other
things of his own Genius, which have passed in the World with a general
applause.

HENRY KING Bishop of Chichester.
THis Reverend Prelate, a great lover of Music, Poetry, and other ingenious
Arts; amongst his other graver Studies, had some Excursions into those pleasing
Delights of Poetry; and as he was of an Obliging Conversation for his Wit and
Fancy; so was he also very Grave and Pious in his Writings; Witness his Printed
Sermons on the Lords Prayer, and others which he Preached on several Occasions.
His Father was John King, Bishop of London; one full fraught with all Episcopal
Qualities; who died Anno 1618. and was Buried in the Quire of St. Paul's, with
the plain Epitaph of Resurgam: But since a prime Wit did enlarge thereon, which
for the Elegancy of it, I cannot but commit it to Posterity.

Sad Relic of a blessed Soul, whose Trust
We Sealed up in this religious Dust.
O do not thy low Exequies suspect,
As the cheap Arguments of our neglect.
'Twas a commanded Duty that thy Grave
As little Pride as thou thy self should have.
Therefore thy Covering is an humble Stone,
And but a Word Resurgam
for thy Inscription.
When those that in the same Earth Neighbor thee,
Have each his Chronicle and Pedigree.
They have their waving Penons, and their Flags,
Of Matches and Alliance formal Brags.
When thou (although from Ancestors thou came,
Old as the Heptarchy, great as thy Name;)
Sleep there inshrin'd in thy admired Parts,
And have no Heraldry but thy Deserts.
Yet let not them their prouder Marbles boast,
For they rest with less Honor though more Cost.
Go search the World, and with your Mattock wound,
The groaning Bosom of the patient Ground:
Dig from the hidden Veins of her dark Womb,
All that is rare and precious for a Tomb.
Yet when much Treasure, and more time is spent,
You must grant his the Nobler Monument;
Whose Faith stands over him for a Hearse, and has
The Resurrection for his Epitaph.
This worthy Prelate was born in the same County, Town, House, and Chamber with
his Father; Namely, at Warn-hall nigh Tame in Buckingham-shire, and was Bred up
at Christ-Church in Oxford. in Anno 1641. when Episcopacy was beheld by many in
a deep Consumption, and hoped by others that it would prove Mortal. To cure
this, if was conceived the most probable Cordial to prefer Persons into that
Order, not only unblameable for their Life, and eminent for their Learning; but
also generally, beloved, by all disegaged People; and amongst these, King
Charles advanced this our Doctor, Bishop of Chichester.

But all would not do, their Innocence was so far from stopping the Mouth of
Malice; that Malice had almost swallowed them down her Throat. Yet did he live
to see the Restitution of his Order, live a most religious Life, and at leisure
times Composed his generally admired and approved Version of David's Psalms into
English Meetre.

THOMAS MANLEY.
THomas Manley was (says my Author) one of the Crowd of Poetical writers of
the late King's Time. He wrote among other things the History of Job in verse;
and Translated into English, Pagan Fisher his Congratulatory Ode of Peace.

Mr. LEWYS GRIFFIN.
HE was born (as he informed me himself) in Rutland-shire, and bred up in the
University of Cambridge; where proving an Excellent Preacher, he was after some
time preferred to be a Minister of St. George's Church in Southwark; where
being outed for Marrying two Sisters without their Friends Consent, He was
afterward beneficed at Colchester in Essex; where he continued all the time
during a sore Pestilence raged there. He wrote a Book of Essays and Characters,
an excellent Piece; also The Doctrine of the Ass, of which I remember these two
lines.

Devil's pretenses always were Divine,
A Knave may have an Angel for a Sign.
He wrote also a Book called The Presbyterian Bramble; with several other
Pieces, in Defense of the King and the Church. Now to show you the Acuteness of
his Wit, I will give you an Instance: The first year that Poor Robin's
Almanac came forth (about Six and Twenty Years ago) there was cut for it a
Brass Plate; having on one side of it the Pictures of King Charles the First,
the Earl of Strafford, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Earl of Darby, the
Lord Capel, and Dr. Hewit; all six adorned with Wreaths of Laurel. On the other
side was, Oliver Cromwell, Bradshaw, Ireton, Scot, Harrison, and Hugh Peter's,
hanging in Halters: Betwixt which was placed the Earl of Essex, and Mr.
Christopher Love; upon which plate he made these Verses.

Bless us, what have we here! What sundry Shapes
Salute our Eyes! have Martyrs too their Apes?
Sure it is the War of Angels, for you would Swear
That here stood Michael, and the Dragon there.
Tredescan is out-vy'd, for we engage
Both Heaven and Hell in an Octavo Page.
Martyrs and Traitors, rallied six to six,
Half fled unto Olimpus, half to Styx.
Joined with two Neuters, some Condemn, some Praise,
They hang betwixt the Halters and the Bays;
For 'twixt Nolls Torment, and Great Charles's Glory,
There, there is the Presbyterian Purgatory.
He died (as I am informed) at Colchester, about the Year of our Lord 1670.

JOHN DAVNCEY.
JOhn Dauncey, a true Son of Apollo, and Bacchus; was one who had an Excellent
Command of his Pen, a fluent Style, and quick Invention: nor did any thing come
amiss to his undertaking. He wrote a complete History of the late times; a
Chronicle of the Kingdom of Portugal; the English Lovers, a Romance; which for
Language and Contrivance, comes not short of either of the best of French or
Spanish. He Translated a Tragi-Comedy out of French, called Nichomede, equal in
English to the French Original; besides several other things, too long to
recite. His English Lovers was Commended by diverse of sound Judgment; amongst
others, Mr. Lewis Griffin, our forementioned Poet, made these verses in
commendations of it.

Rich Soul of Wit and Language, thy [high strains
So plunge arid puzzle unrefined brains;
That their Illiterate Spirits do not know,
How much to thy Ingenious Pen they owe.
Should my presumptuous Muse attempt to raise
Trophies to thee, she might as well go blaze
Bright Planets with base Colors, or display
The Worlds Creation in a Puppet-Play.
Let this suffice, what Calumnies may chance,
To blut thy Fame, they spring from Ignorance.
When Old Orpheus drew the Beasts along,
By sweet Rhetoric of his learned Tongue,
'Twas deafness made the Adder sin; and this
Caused him, who should have hum'd the Poet, hiss.
RICHARD HEAD.
RIchard Head, the Noted Author of the English Rogue, was a Ministers Son, born
in Ireland, whose Father was killed in that horrid Rebellion in 1641. Whereupon
his Mother with this her Son came into England; and he having been trained up
in Learning, was by the help of some Friends, for some little time brought up
in the University of Oxford, in the same College wherein his Father had
formerly been a Student. But means falling short, he was taken away from
thence, and bound Apprentice to a Latin Bookseller in London; attaining to a
good Proficiency in that Trade. But his Genius being addicted to Poetry, and
having Venus for his Horoscope, e're his time were fully out, he wrote a Piece
called Venus Cabinet Vnlock'd: Afterward he married, and set up for himself:
But being addicted to play, a Man's Estate then runs in Hazard, (for indeed that
was his Game) until he had almost thrown his Shop away. Then he betook himself
to Ireland, his Native Country; where he composed his Hic and Vbique, a noted
Comedy; and which gained him a general Esteem for the worth thereof. And coming
over into England, had it Printed, dedicating it to the then Duke of Monmouth;
But receiving no great Encouragement from his Patron, he resolved to settle
himself in the World, and to that purpose, with his Wife took a House in
Queens-Head Alley, near Paternoster Row; and for a while followed his
Business, so that contrary to the Nature of a Poet, his Pockets began to be
well lined with Money: But being bewitched to that accursed vice of Play, it
went out by handfuls, as it came in piece by piece. And now he is to seek again
in the World, whereupon he betook him to his Pen; and wrote the first part of
the English Rogue: which being too much smutty, would not be Licensed, so that
he was fain to refine it, and then it passed stamp. At the coming forth of this
first part, I being with him at three Cup Tavern in Holborn, drinking over a
glass of Rhenish, made these verses upon it.

What Gusman, Buscon, Francion, Rablais writ,
I once applauded for most excellent Wit;
But reading thee, and thy rich Fancies store,
I now condemn what I admired before.
Henceforth Translations pack away, be gone,
No Rogue so well-writ as the English one.
There was afterward three more parts added to it by him, and Mr. Kirkman with
a promise of a fifth, which never came out.

He wrote several other Books besides, as The art of Whedling; The Floating
Island; or a Voyage from Lambethania to Ramalia; A discovery of O Brazil;
Jacksons Recantation, The Red Sea, etc. Amongst others, he had a great Fancy in
Bandying against Dr. Wild; (although I must confess therein over Matched) yet
fell he upon him tooth and nail in Answer to his Letter directed to his Friend
Mr. J. J. upon Occasion of his Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience;
concluding in this manner.

Thus Sir you have my Story, but am Sorry
( Taunton excuse) it is no better for ye,
However read it, as you Pease are shelling;
For you will find, it is not worth the telling.
Excuse this boldness, for I cannot avoid
Thinking sometimes, you are but ill Employed.
Fishing for Souls more fit, then frying Fish;
That makes me throw, Pease Shellings in your Dish.
You have a study, Books wherein to look,
How comes it then the Doctor's turned a Cook?
Well Doctor Cook, pray be advised hereafter
Don't make your Wife the Subject of our Laughter.
I find she is careless, and your Maid a slut,
To let you grease your Cassock for your gut.
You are all three in sault, by all that is blessed;
Mend you your manners first, then teach the rest.
He was one who met with a great many Crosses and Afflictions in his Life; and
was (as I am informed) at last cast away at Sea, as he was going to the Isle of
Wight.

JOHN PHILLIPS.
JOhn Phillips, the Brother of Edward Phillips, the Famous Continuator of Sir
Richard Bakers Chronicle; and Author of The New World of English Words. He was
also Nephew to the before mentioned John Milton, the Author of Paradise lost,
and Paradise Regained; so that he might be said to have Poetical Blood run in
his Veins. He was Accounted one of the exactest of Heroical Poets either of the
Ancients or Moderns, either of our own or what ever other Nation else; having a
Judicious command of Style both in Prose and Verse. But his chiefest Vein lay
in Burlesque, and facetious-Poetry, which produced that Ingenious Satyr against
Hypocrites.

He also Translated the Fifth and Sixth Books of Virgils Aeniedes into English
Burlesque; of which that we may give you a Draught of his Method, take these
few lies.

While Dido in a Bed of Fire,
A newfound way to cool desire,
Lay wrapped in Smoke, half Cole, half Dido,
Too late repenting Crime Libido,
Mensieur Aeneas went his waise,
For which I con him little praise,
To leave a Lady, not in the Mire,
But which was worser, in the Fire.
He Neuter-like, had no great aim,
To kindle or put out the flame.
He had what he would have, the Wind;
More than ten Diao's to his mind.
The merry gale was all in Poop,
Which made the Trojans all cry Hoop!
He it was who wrote that Jovial Almanac of Montelion; besides several other
things in a serious Vein of Poetry. Nor must we forget his Song made on the
Tombs at Westminster; which for a witty drolling Invention, I hold it to be
past Compare, being Printed in a Book called The Mysteries of Love and
Eloquence.

You may reckon among these his Elegy upon our late Sovereign, and his
Anniversary to His Majesty; Composed all by Dr. Blow.

Mr. JOHN OLDHAM.
MR. John Oldham, the delight of the Muses, and glory of those last Times; a
Man utterly unknown to me but only by Works, which none can read but with
Wonder and Admiration; So Pithy his Strains, so Sententious his Expressions, so
Elegant his Oratory, so Swimming his Language, so Smooth his Lines, in
Translating out-doing the Original, and in Invention matchless; whose praise my
rude Pen is not able to Comprehend: Take therefore a small Draught of his
Perfections in a Funeral Elegy, made by the Laureat of our Nation, Mr. John
Dryden.

Farewell, too little and too lately known,
Whom I began to think and call my own;
For sure our Souls were near allied; and thine
Cast in the same Poetic Mould with mine.
One common note on either Lyre did strike,
And Knaves and Fools we both abhorred alike:
To the same Goal did both our Studies drive,
The last set out the soonest did arrive.
Thus Nisus fell upon the Slippery place,
While his young Friend performed and won the race.
O early ripe! to thy abundant store,
What could advancing age have added more?
It might (what Nature never gives the young)
Have taught the numbers of thy Native Tongue.
But Satyr needs not those, and wit will shine
Through the harsh cadence of a rugged line,
A noble error, and but seldom made,
When Poets are by too much force betrayed,
Thy generous Fruits, though gathered e're their Prime,
Still showed a quickness; and maturing time;
But Mellows what we write to the dull sweets of Rhyme.
Once more, hail and farwell, farwell thou young,
But all too short Marcellus of our Tongue;
Thy brows with Ivy, and with Laurels bound;
But flat and gloomy Night encompass thee around.
This wittily learned Gentleman was of Edmund-Hall in Oxford, and dyed in the
Earl of Kingston's Family in the prime of his Years; whose life had it been
lengthened, might have produced as large a Volume of learned Works, as any this
latter, Age have brought forth.

ANd thus have we given you an Account of all the most Eminent English Poets
that have come to our knowledge; although, we question or but many and those
well deserving have slipped our Pen, which if these our Labors shall come to a
Second Impression, as we question nothing to the contrary, we shall endeavor
to do them right. In the mean time we shall give you a short Account of some of
the most eminent that are How (or at least thought by us so to be) living at
this nine, and so conclude, beginning first with

Mr. JOHN DRIDEN.
POet Laureat and Historiographer to his Royal Majesty; whose Poetry has
passed the World with the greatest Approbation and acceptance that may be,
especially what he has written of Dramatick, viz. The Maiden Queen; The Wild
Gallant; The Mock Astrologer; Marriage Alamode; The Amorous Old Woman; and The
Assignation, Comedies; Tyranick Love; and Amboyna, Tragedies; and The Indian
Emperor; and two Parts of the Conquests of Granada; Historical Drama's. Besides
several other Pieces, which speak their own worth, more than any Commendations
my Pen can bestow upon them.

Mr. ELKVNAH SETTLE.
AN Ingenious-Person, who besides his other Works has contributed to the Stage
two Tragedies, viz. Cambises, and The Empress of Morrocco, which
notwithstanding the severe censure of some, may deservedly pass with good
Approbation.

Sir GEORGE ETHERIDGE,
THe Author of Two Comedies, viz. Love in a Tub; and She Would if she Could;
which for pleasant Wit, and no bad Occonomy, are judged not unworrhy the
applause they have met with.

Mr. JOHN WILSON.
THe noted Author of that so Celebrated a Comedy entitled The Cheats; which
has passed the Stage and Press with so general an applause, also another
Comedy called The Projections and the Tragedy of Andronicus Commenius.

Mr. THOMAS SHADWELL.
ONe whose Pen has deserved well of the Stage, not only for the number of the
Plays which he has writ; but also for the sweet Language and Contrivance of
them. His Comedies are, The Humorist; The Sullen Lovers; Epsom Wells, etc.
Besides his Royal Shepherdess, a Pastoral Tragi-Comedy; and his Tragedy of
Psyche, or rather Tragical Opera, as vying with the Opera's of Italy, in the
Pomp of Scenes, Marchinry and Musical performance.

THOMAS STANLEY.
THomas Stanley Esquire, of Cumberlo-Green in Hartford shire; a general
Scholar, one well known both in Philosophy, History, and Poetry. Witness his
learned Edition of Aeschylus, and his lives of the Philosophers; But for that
which we take the most notice of him here, his smooth Air and gentile Spirit in
Poetry; which appears not only in his own Genuine Poems, but also from what he
has so well Translated out of Ancient Greek, and Modern Italian, Spanish, and
French Poets; So that we may well conclude him to be both the Glory and
Admiration of his time.

EDWARD PHILLIPS.
EDward Phillips Brother to John Phillips aforesaid, the Judicious Continuator
of Sir Richard Bakers Chronicle; which will make his name Famous to Posterity,
no less than his Genuine Poems upon several occasions, in which he comes not
far short of his Spritely Brother.

Mr. THOMAS SPRAT.
MR. Thomas Spart, whose Judicious History of the Royal Society, for the
Smoothness of the Style, and exactness of the Method, deserves high
Commendations; He has also writ in Verse a very applauded, tho little Poem,
entitled The Plague of Athens.

WILLIAM SMITH.
WIlliam Smith the Author of a Tragedy entitled Hieronymo; as also The Hector
of Germany.

Mr. JOHN LACEY.
MR. John Lacy, one of the noted'st Wits of these Times, who as William
Shakespeare and Christopher Marlow before him, rose from an Ator to be an
Author to the Stage, having written two ingenious Comical Pieces, viz. Monsieur
Ragou, and The Dumb Lady.

Mr. WILLIAM WHICHERLY.
MR. William Whicherly, a Gentleman of the Inner Temple, who besides his other
learned Works, has contributed largely to the Stage, in his Comedies of Love
in a Wood, The Gentleman Dancing Master, The Country Wife, etc.

Sir ROGER L'ESTRANGE.
AND so we have reckoned up all the most Eminent-Poets which have come to our
knowledge, craving pardon for those we have omitted. We shall conclude all with
Sir Roger L' Strange, one whose Pen was never idle in asserting the Royal
Cause, as well before the King's Restoration, against his open Enemies, as
since that time against his Feigned Friends. Those who shall consider the
Number and Greatness of his Books, will admire he should ever write so many,
and those who have Read them, considering the Style and Method they are writ
in, will more admire he should Write so well. And because some people may
imagine his Works not to be so many as he has Written, we will give you a
Catalogue of as many as we can remember of them.

Collections in Defense of the King. Tolleration Discussed. Relapsed Apostate.
Apology for Protestants. Richard against Baxter. Tyranny and Popery. Growth of
Knavery. Reformed Catholic. Freeborn Subjects. The Case Put. Seasonable
Memorials. Answer to the Appeal. No Papist. The Shammer Shamm'd. Account
Cleared. Reformation Reformed. Dissenters Sayings in Two Parts. Notes on
College. Citizen and Bumkin in Two Parts. Further Discovery of the Plot.
Discovery on Discovery. Narrative of the Plot. Zekiel and Ephraim. Appeal to
the King and Parliament. Papist in Musquerade. Answer to the Second Character
of a Popish Successor.
These Twenty Six, with diverse others, he writ in Quarto; Besides which he
wrote diverse others, viz.

The History of the Plot, in Folio. Quevedo's Visions Englished, Octavo.
Erasmus's Coloquies Eng. Oct. Seneca's Morals, Oct. Cicero's Offices in
English. The Guide to Eternity, in Twelves. Five Love Letters from a Nun to a
Cave, etc. The Holy Cheat. Caveat to the Cavaliers. Plea for the Caveat and the
Author.
Besides his indefatigable pains taken in writing the Observator, a Work, which
for Vindicating the Royal Interest, and undeceiving the People, considering the
corruption of the Times, of as great use and behoof as may be, men's minds
having been before so poisoned by Fanatical Principles, that it is almost an
Herculean Work to reduce them again by Reason, or as we may more properly say,
to Reason. Of which useful Work he has done already Two large Volumes, and a
Third almost completed, his Pen being never weary in Service of his Country.

But should I go about to enumerate all the Works of this worthy Gentleman, I
should run my self into an irrecoverable Labyrinth. Not is he less happy in his
Verse than Prose, which for Elegancy of Language, and quickness of Invention,
deservedly entitles him to the honor of a Poet; and therefore I shall forbear
to write more of him, since what I can do upon that account, comes infinitely
far short of his deservings.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 4. for Arts read Acts, l. 25. r. estimation, p. 17. l. 1. r.
Havillan, p. 24. l. 6. r. Son, p. 44. l. 5. r better, p. 82. l. 29. add it, p.
88. l. 18. r. this, l. 20 add my, p. 117. l. 28. r. London, p. 119. l. 21. r.
'twas, p. 127. l. 14. r. of, p. 128. l. 28. r. Athenian, l. 30. r. both, p.
133. l. 9. r. his, p. 143. l. 2. r. still, p. 168. l. 18. r. unknown, p. 174.
l. 20. r. Ap. p. 178. l. 25. r. fare, p. 187. l. 13. r. infamy; besides several
other literal mistakes which I would desire the Reader to Correct with his Pen.


