THE Glorious Progress OF THE GOSPEL, AMONGST THE Indians in New England.
MANIFESTED By three Letters, under the Hand of that famous Instrument of the
Lord Mr. JOHN ELIOT, And another from Mr. Thomas Mayhew jun: both Preachers of
the Word, as well to the English as Indians in New England. WHEREIN The riches
of Gods Grace in the effectual calling of many of them is cleared up: As also
a manifestation of the hungring desires of many People in sundry parts of that
Country after the more full Revelation of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, to the
exceeding Consolation of every Christian Reader. TOGETHER, With an Appendix to
the foregoing Letters, holding forth Conjectures, Observations, and
Applications. By I. D. Minister of the Gospel.

Published by EDWARD WINSLOW

Mal. I. II. From the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down of the same,
my Name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incence shall be
offered unto my Name, and a pure Offering; for my Name shall be great among the
Heathen, says the Lord of Hosts. LONDON. Printed for Hannah Allen in
Popes-head-Alley. 1649.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Parliament of England AND THE COUNCIL OF STATE.
Right Honorable,
THat former Narative called, The clear Sunshine of the Gospel, breaking forth
upon the Indians in New England; dedicated to your Honors by diverse Reverend
and eminent Ministers of the Gospel in and about the City of London, found
such acceptance in your House, as it begat a debate amongst your selves, how
the parliament of England might be serviceable to the Lord Jesus, to help
forward such a work begun; which conduced so abundantly to the glory of God,
and good of men in the salvation of their souls. And in order thereunto your
Honors were pleased to refer it to the Committee of foreign plantations, to
prepare and bring in an Ordinance for the encouragement and advancement of
Learning and Piety in New England, as appears by your Order March 17. 1647.
This Honorable Committee with great readiness and cheerfulness took it into
their serious consideration, and presented the result of their mature debates
to this honorable House: But so many and weighty have been the occasions and
businesses of the House, that however the nature of the work and my duty (being
appointed Agent though unworthy) on the behalf of New England to this
Parliament: yet durst not press too hard to interrupt the great affairs your
Honors have been in hand withal. Nevertheles, I do now crave leave, humbly to
acquaint you, that what was then judged deficient in the power granted to the
Feoffees in that Ordinance, is since corrected and amended, and attends your
Honors leisure for completing and finishing the same.

Undoubtedly the common enemy of man's salvation has rejoiced that this work so
happily begun, has not as yet received that countenance and encouragement from
hence, which your Honors intended and resolved many months since. Nevertheles,
I trust the most wise God has turned this appearing loss into gain, by
affording your Honors and the Nation a more clear account of the real and
glorious Progres of the Gospel among those poor Indians in AMERICA, by such
Intelligence I very lately received from thence, under the hands of those
Reverend and learned Ministers, which are principally employed in preaching the
Gospel to them in their own Language. And as I am daily and earnestly called
upon to publish the same, that the whole Nation may be acquainted therewith: So
I took it to be my duty to present it in the first place to this honorable
House, and the Council of State; that your Honors might perceive how these
poor Creatures cry out for help; Oh come unto us, teach us the knowledge of
God, tarry longer with us, come and dwell amongst us, at least depart not so
soon from us. And others of them whose dwellings are near the Habitations of
the English, (whose hearts God has touched) calling for and demanding a free
and full participation of all the Ordinances of Jesus Christ All which, and
much more is evidently held forth in the following Narrative, which I have with
all faithfulness collected and transcribed, according as I received the same
from persons that were Actors therein, and are of known Integrity.

There are two great questions Right Honorable, which have much troubled
ancient and modern writers, and men of greatest depth and ability to resolve:
the first, what became of the ten Tribes of Israel, that were carried into
Captivity by the King of Siria, when their own Country and Cities were planted
and filled with strangers? The second is, what Family, Tribe, Kindred, or
people it was that first planted, and afterward filled that vast and long
unknown Country of America? Now however I confess questions are sooner asked
then resolved; yet let me ac^uaint your Honors, that a godly Minister of this
City writing to Rabbi-ben-Israel, a great Dr. of the Jews, now living at
Amsterdam, to know whether after all their labor, travells, and most diligent
enquiry, they did yet know what was become of the ten Tribes of Israel? His
answer was to this effect, if not in these words, That they were certainly
transported into America, and that they had infallible tokens of their being
there. Unto which if I may take the boldness to add what my self, with many
others in New England have observed in the practice of the Indians there, in
relation to some things enjoined in the ceremonial Law of Moses, about the
purification of weomen, which no men at this day do observe, no^ beside the
Jews were ever known in that strictness to observe, as these Indians there
daily do: As also if the principles of the most grave and sober amongst them,
not only in reference to a Deity, the soul of man, the immortality of the
soul, and an eternity after death in happiness or misery; but also their
manifold daily expressions, bewailing the loss of that knowledge their
Ancestors had about God, and the way of his Worship; the general deluge, and of
one man only that ever saw God, which they hold forth to be a long time since,
(even with the greatest expression of length of time that may be) which
certainly I believe to be Moses. As also if many other Circumstances well known
to many, (but not fit to be at large expressed in any Epistle) be duly
considered, It is not less probable that these Indians should come from the
Stock of Abraham, then any other Nation this day known in the world: Especially
considering the juncture of time wherein God has opened their hearts to enter
tain the Gospel, being so nigh the very years, in which many eminent and
learned Divines, have from Scripture grounds, according to their apprehensions
foretold the conversion of the Jews. However Right Honorable, the work of
communicating and increasing the light of the Gospel is glorious in reference
to Jews and Gentiles. And as God has set a signal mark of his presence upon
your Assembly, in strengthening your hands to redeem and preserve the civil
Rights of the Commonweal: so doubtless may it be a comfortable support to
your Honors in any future difficulties, to contemplate, that as the Lord
offered you (in this design) an happy opportunity to enlarge and advance the
Territories of his Sons Kingdom: So he has not denied you (as I am confident
he will not) an heart to improve the same; and in as much as lies in you to
make all the Nations of the Earth, the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ;
that so your Honors may still preserve your interest in his favor, which is
and shall be the prayers of

Your Honors most humble Servant, EDWARD WINSLOW.

THE GLORIOUS PROGRESS of the Gospel amongst the Indians in New England,
IN the year of our Lord, 1646. it seemed good to the most high God, to stir
up some reverend Ministers of the Gospel in New England, to consider how they
might be serviceable to the Lord Jesus, as well toward the Natives of that
Country, (as to their own Congregations and Churches, over which the Lord had
set them) in bringing them to a right understanding of God and hemselves; and
so by degrees to hold forth unto them that Salvation by Jesus Christ to all
that should believe and obey his Commands; persuading themselves, that God
might have a select people amongst these Heathens, and that for that end
amongst many others he had planted so many Christian Congregations so near
them. And however the English were not wholly negligent this way, but had in
sundry parts of the Country long before brought diverse to a pretty competency
of right understanding in the mystery of salvation, who lived orderly, and dyed
hopefully; yet till such time as they were more generally acquainted with our
conversation amongst our selves, and with our demeanor toward them, as well in
peace, as in such wars they had unavoidably drawn upon themselves; whereby
they had such experience of the justice, prudence, valor, temperance, and
righteousness of the English, as did not only remove their former jealousies
and fears concerning us, and convict them of their own uneven walking; but
begat a good opinion of our persons, and caused them to affect our Laws and
Government.

Till now (together with the want of language) we had but some few that were
wrought upon; But in this acceptable year of the Lord, (being it seems the
appointed season for their visitation) God having stirred up these Ministers to
seek a Blessing upon their endeavors, and direct them in a right way; they
found the answer of their prayers by the good acceptance they had amongst the
poor Indians where they first went, etc. who soon became in love also with our
Religion, and mightily hungered and thirsted after the Knowledge of God in
Christ, as was published and made apparent to this Nation by a short Treatise,
called, The day-breaking, if not the Sunrising of the Gospel with the Indians
in New England.

In the year 1647. being here upon some special service for the Country,
Letters came to my hands with some Papers from Mr. Tho. Shepard, Pastor of the
Church at Cambridge there, which held forth a greater warmth of heavenly heat
upon their (former frozen) spirits; which I communicated to some eminent
Ministers of and near the City of London; viz. Mr. Marshall, Mr. Downham, Mr.
Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Whitaker, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Case, Mr. Galamy, Mr. Sydrack
Simpson, Mr. Ash, Mr. Greenhill, Mr. Carter, and Mr. Bolton: And such was the
esteem these reverend men had of it, as by two several Epistles under their
hands they recommended it to the Parliament of England, as a thing worthy their
notice, care, and furtherance: And secondly, to the godly and well-affected of
this Nation, who pray for, and rejoice in the thrivings of the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus. This Narrative was also published, and called, The clear Sunshine
of the Gospel breaking forth upon the Indians in New England.

In the year 1648. our Letters miscarried many of them, in that the Ship that
brought them was taken by the Prince of Wales, to the Countries great
prejudice, as well as many other Vessels and their lading formerly; by which
miscarriage I was wholly hindered from giving any further account till this
instant, 1649.

And now having received some Letters, and others brought to me by diverse of
quality here residing at present, that appertain to New England; and being
exceedingly pressed to publish them by many godly and well-affected of the City
and parts adjacent, I shall by Gods help publish them all, or so many of them
as concerns the Indian work; and if any doubt my faithfulness herein, (as I
hope none will that know me) I shall most willingly show them the Originalls
themselves. And before I come to this years Letters, I received from Mr. Eliot,
shall begin with one came to my hands, (dated Nov. 1647.) after the last
Treatise was put out. And I the rather take this course, lest the young man
should be discouraged in his labors so hopefully begun; his name is Mr.
Mayhew, who teaches the Word both to English and Indians upon an 'Island
called formerly Capawack, by us Morthas Vineyard, by which you may see it is not
one Minister alone that labors in this great work: His Letter follows:

SIR,
THe encouragements I met withal touching the Indians conversion, Mr. Mayhews
Letter from Capawack, November 18, 1647.
next unto Gods glory, and his gracious promises was, the notable reason,
judgment, and capacity that God has given unto many of them; as also their
zealous enquiring after true happiness, together with the knowledge I had of
their tongue, besides several providence which has advantaged my progress
therein; as for instance:

1. There was one Ieogiscat about 60. years of age, who was sick of a consuming
disease, insomuch as the Indian Pawwawes gave him over for a dead man: Upon
which resolution of all the Such as cure by devil'i^h sorcery, and to whom the
devil appears sometimes.
Pawwawes in the Island, the sick distressed Heathen upon a Lords day came unto
me (the rest of the English being then present) to desire me to pray unto God
for him: And so when I had by reasoning with him convinced him of the weakness
and wickedness of the Pawwaws power; and that if health were to be found, it
must be had from him that gave life, and breath, and all things; I commended
this case unto the Lord, whereof he rejoiced, gave me thanks, and he speedily
recovered unto his former strength.

2. In this present year 1647. the eldest son of one Vakapenessue, a great
Sagamore of the Island, being very sick, took occasion to send for me to come
unto him; and when I came unto him, I found him not more weak in body, then
strong in earnest desires, that I should pray unto God for him; so I instructed
him, and prayed for him: And when I had ended, of his own accord he spoke these
words, Taubot mannit nu^ quam Cowin. viz. I thank thee God, I am heavy to
sleep; and so I left him holding forth good affections: But shortly after he
was changed altogether, and contrary to the persuasion of other Indians of
several Towns, sought again unto Witches. The Heathen seeing this, they
forsook the The Indians so call their houses.
Wigwam, saying, We leave the house for the Devil and them that would tarry.
This news being brought me, I much mervailed thereat, yet sent him this
message, viz. Tell Saul: (for the sick man was by the English so called) that
when I was with him, I thought as then I told him, that he would live, because
he sought for life unto the living God, where if any where it was to be found:
But tell him now, that I think he will dye. I also added the example of
Ahaziah, who because he had the knowledge of the great God, and sought unto an
inferior God; God was angry with him, and killed him: And so for that this
Saul was informed of the true God, and is fallen from him to the earthen gods
here below; that God will kill him also; and so it shortly came to pass.

3. Not long after a A Prince or Ruler amongst them.
Sagamore, called, Towanquattick; had his eldest son, whose name is
Sachachanimo, very sick of a Fever; this young man sent for me to come unto
him; and when I came, his father and himself desired me to pray for him, the
which I did in their own language, and promised to come again unto him very
shortly, if he mended not, and use some other means also for his recovery:
When I came again unto him, I found him very ill, asked him (together with his
friends) whether they were willing I should let him blood? acquainting them
that we used so to do in such cases. After some consideration, they consented
thereunto, notwithstanding the Pawwaws had told them before, that he should
dye, because he sought not unto them: so I bound his arm, and with my
Penknife let him blood; he bled freely, but was exceeding faint, which made
the Heathen very sad; but in a short time, he begun to be very cheerful,
whereat they much rejoiced, etc. So I left them, and it pleased the Lord the
man was in a short time after very well.

In these providence the Lord has manifested both mercy and judgment, and it
is, that he may raise up the Tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up
the breaches thereof, and raise up its ruins, and build it as in the days of
old, that they may possess the Covenant of Edom, and of all the Heathen which
are called by my Name, says the Lord that does this.

But I pray you take notice of a speech of Towanquatticks (beingthe Father of
the young man recovered) who lamenting the loss of their knowledge said unto
me, * An indian speech worthy our consideration.
That a long time agon, they had wise men, which in a grave manner taught the
people knowledge, but they are dead, and their wisdom is buried with them: and
now men live a giddy life in ignorance till they are white headed, and though
ripe in years, yet then they go without wisdom unto their graves. He also
told me; that he wondered the English should be almost thirty years in the
Country, and the Indians fools still; but he hoped that the time of knowledge
was now come; wherefore himself with others desired me to give them an Indian
meeting, to make known the word of God unto them in their own tongue. And when
he came to me to accomplish his desire thereabout, he told me, that * The
better sort of them are full of such like expressions, affecting to speak in
Parables.
I should be to them, as one that stands by a running River, filling many
vessels: Even so should I fill them with everlasting knowledge. So I undertook
to give them a meeting once a month; but as soon as the first exercise was
ended, they desired it oftener then I could well attend: but once a Fortnight is
our settled course. This I present to your consideration; entreating you to
present us unto the Lord for wisdom, to preach unto the Heathen the
unsearchable riches of Christ, that so the root of Iesse standing for an
Ensign of the people, the Gentiles may seek unto it, and his rest shall be
glorious, Amen.

Great Harbor in the Vineyard 18. of the 9. 1647. Yours in the best Bonds Tho.
Mahew, junior.


In the next place, I shall present you with some Letters of that painful yet
unwearied Minister of the Gospel, Mr. John Eliot, who notwithstanding his
faithful labors in teaching that Church or Congregation of the English, over
which the Lord has set him at Roxbury in the Government of the Massachusetts,
yet takes all occasions, (neglecting no opportunity, whether more remote, or
near at hand) to advance the glory of God, in calling those poor heathen to
the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, and satisfying those hungry souls by
administering the bread of life unto them: And however I cannot give you his
first large Letter (as he terms it) being sent by way of Spain, and by that
means not yet come to my hands, yet take his second in his own words, which
will minister abundance of sweet consolation to every Christian Reader, that
God should in these latter times so magnify his glorious grace in extending
his everlasting mercies to those poor naked Indians. His Letter follows.

Worthy Sir,
YOur cordial and faithful endeavors, etc. I am bold now Mr. Eliots 2.
Letter in 48. concerning the progress of the Gospel among the Indians.
by the way of Virginia, to trouble you with a few lines, to express the
thankfulness of my heart unto you, for that one part of your care, love, and
labor in furthering this work of preaching Christ to these poor Indians, and
declaring to them the way of eternal life and salvation; which work I bless
the Lord goes on not without success, beyond the ability of the Instruments:
It is the Lord, the Lord only who does speak to the hearts of men, and he can
speak to theirs, and does, (blessed be his name) so effectually, that one of
them I believe verilyis gone to the Lord; a * A precious testimony of an indian
woman conceived to dye a Christian.
woman, who though she was not the first that came into the knowledge of Christ
and the Gospel, yet she was the first of ripe years that has dyed since I
taught them the way of salvation by Jesus Christ, and the only one. And though
of the living I will not say much, yet of the dead I may freely speak; After I
began to preach unto them, her husband and she did quickly come in; and after
she came, she was a diligent hearer; and out of desire to live where the word
of God was taught, they fetched all the corn they spent, sixteen miles upon
their backs from the place of their planting: She was industrious, and did not
go about to English houses a begging, as sundry do, (though it is well
reformed now with many of them) but kept home, kept her children to labor,
making baskets to sell, etc. She quickly learned to spin well (for I got some
wheels, but want means to supply them and order them.) Her life was blameless
after she submitted to the Gospel, and was exemplary: She was the first woman
that asked a question (by another man propounded for her) which was this; When
my Husband prays in his house, my heart think^th what he prays; whether is
this praying to God a right or no? I thought it a sit question for a woman. She
dyed of a sickness she took in childbed: I several times visited her, prayed
with her, asked her about her spiritual estate? She told me she still loved
God, though he made her sick, and was resolved to pray unto him so long as she
lived, and to refuse powwawing. She said also, that she believed God would
pardon all her sins, because she believed that Jesus Christ dyed for her; and
that God was well pleased in him, and that she was willing to dye, and believed
to go to Heaven, and live happy with God and Christ there.

It may be you may mervell at, and scarce credit such expressions: but they are
the points of Catechism which I constantly teach the Children; and the
Children can very readily answer me in them; and they be truths now familiarly
known by the attentive hearers, whereof she was one. And moreover of her own
accord, she called her children to her, especially two up-grown daughters,
which she had before she married this man, and said to them, I shall now dye,
and when I am dead, your Grandfather and Grandmother, and A precious dying
speech of an indian woman to her children.
Unckles, etc. will send for you to come live amongst them, and promise you
great matters, and tell you what pleasant living it is among them; But do not
believe them, and I charge you never hearken unto them, nor live amongst them;
for they pray not to God, keep not the Sabbath, commit all manner of sins and
are not punished for it: but I charge you live here, for here they pray unto
God, the word of God is taught, sins are suppressed, and punished by Laws; And
therefore I charge you live here all your days. And soon after this she dyed,
and it fell out indeed as she had said, for there was earnest sending and
soliciting for the maids to live with them: so that the case was propounded to
me on a Lecture day; and their Father in law opposed it, not only as adjudging
it evil, but because of their mothers charge; and by this means I came to
know the Story. And though they do, as you know, abhor the remembrance of
their dead friends; yet when I take occasion to speak of her, and my reasons of
hope that she is gone to heaven, they entertian it with joy, and sometimes with
tears: I have been too tedious in this Story, yet I doubt not but it will be
acceptable unto you.

For the further progress of the work amongst them, I do Note what hinders
the progress of the Gospel amongst them.
perceive a great impediment; Sundry in the Country in diverse places would
gladly be taught the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, and would pray unto
God, if I could go unto them, and teach them where they dwell: but to come to
live here among or near to the English, they are not willing, because they have
neither tools, nor skill, nor heart to fence their grounds; and if it be not
well fenced, their Corn is so fpoyled by the English Cattle, and the English
so loath to restore when they want fence, that its a very great discouragement
to them and me; so that few come to dwell at the near places where I ordinarily
teach, only some strangers do come to hear, and away again: So that I plainly
see, the way to do them good must be this. A place must be found (both for this
and sundry other reasons I can give) some what remote from the English, where
they must have the word constantly caught, and government constantly exercised,
means of good subsistence provided, encouragements for the industrious, means
of instructing them in Letters, Trades, and Labors, as building, fishing, Flax
and Hemp dressing, planting Orchards, etc. Such a project in a fit place, would
draw many that are well minded together: but I fear it will be too chargeable,
though I see that God delights in small beginnings, that his great name may
be magnified.

Few of our Southern Indians incline this way, only some of Tihtacuit. Young
Ousamequin is an enemy to praying to God, and the old man too wise to look
after it. Our Cutshamoquin has some subjects in Marthas Vineyard, and they
hearing of his praying Examples in Superio^ very prevalent.
to God, some of them do the like there, with some other ingenious Indians,
and I have entreated Mr. Mahew (the young Scholar, son to old Mr. Mayhew) who
preaches to the English, to teach them; and he does take pains in their
Language, and teaches them not without success, blessed be the Lord. And
truly I think all the Ministers that live near them should do well to do the
like. I have earnestly solicited many so to do, and I hope God will in his time
bow their hearts thereunto. But I perceive our Western Indians up into the
Inland do more earnestly embrace the Gospel. Shawanon the great Sachym of
Nashawog does embrace the Gospel, and pray unto God. I have been four times
there this Summer, and there be more people by far, then be amongst us; and
sundry of them do gladly hear the word of God, but it is near 40. miles off,
and I can but seldom go to them; whereat they are troubled, and desire I should
come oftener, and stay longer when I come.

There is a great fishing place upon one of the Falls of Merimack River called
Pautucket, where is a great confluence of Indians every Spring, and thither I
have gone these two years in that season, and intend so to do the next Spring
(if God will.) Such confluences are like Faires in England, and a sit season it
is to come then unto them, to teach them to know God, and Jesus Christ, and
call upon his name. For whereas there did use to be gaming and much evil at
those great meetings, now there is praying to God, and good conference, and
observation of the Sabbath, by such as are well minded; and no open profaneness
suffered as I hear of, and my coming amongst them is very acceptable in
outward appearance. This last Spring I did there meet old Papassaconnaway, who
is a great Sogamore, and has been a great Witch in all men's esteem (as I
suppose your self have often heard) and a very politic wise man. The last
year he and all his sons fled when I came, pretending fear that we would
kill him: But this year it pleased God to bow his heart to hear the word; I
preached out of Malachi I. 11. which I thus render to them; From the rising of
the Sun, to the going down of the same thy name shall be great among the
Indians, and in every place prayers shall be made to thy name, pure prayers,
for thy name shall be great among the Indians. Whence I showed them, what mercy
God had promised to them; and that the time was now come wherein the Lord did
begin to call them to repentance, and to believe in Christ for the remission of
their sins, and to give them an heart to call upon his name, forsaking their
former ways of pawwawing, and praying to the Devil, etc. And when I had done
preaching, they began to propound questions, and one of them propounded this;
If it be thus as you teach, then all the world of Indians are gone to hell to
be tormented for ever, until now a few may go to Heaven and be saved; Is it
so? These principles of a twofold estate after this life, for good and bad
people, Heaven and Hell, I put amongst the first questions that I instruct them
in, and catechize the children in; and they do readily embrace it for a truth,
themselves by their own traditions having some principles of a life after this
life, and that good or evil, according to their demeanor in this life. After
a good space, this old Papassaconnoway speak to this purpose, that indeed he
had never prayed unto God as yet, for he had never heard of God before, as now
he does. And he said further, that he did believe what I taught them to be
true. And for his own part, he was purposed in his heart from thenceforth to
pray unto God, and that he would persuade all his sons to do the same,
pointing at two of them who were there present, and naming such as were absent.
His sons present, especially his eldest son (who is a * The same
signignification with Sagamore viz one b^aring ^le among them.
Sachim at Wadchuset) gave his willing consent to what his father had promised,
and so did the other who was but a youth. And this act of his was not only a
present motion that soon vanished, but a good while after he spoke to Capt.
Willard, who tradeth with them in those parts for Bever and Otter Skins, etc.
that he would be glad if I would come and live in some place thereabouts to
teach them, and that Capt. Willard would live there also: And that if any good
ground or place that he had would be acceptable to me, he would willingly let
me have it. I do endeavor to engage the Sachims of greatest note to accept
the Gospel, because that does greatly animate and encourage such as are
well-affected, and is a damping to those that are scoffers and opposers; for
many such there be, though they dare not appear so before me.

Thus you see by this short intimation, that the sound of the Word is spread a
great way; yea, farther then I will speak of; and it appears to me, that the
Fields begin to look white unto the Harvest. Oh that the Lord would be pleased
to raise up many laborers into this Harvest! But it is difficult, not only in
respect of the language, but also in respect of their barbarous course of life
and poverty; there is not so much as meat, drink, or lodging for them that go
unto them to preach among them, but we must carry all things with us, and
somewhat to give unto them: So that the coming of Jesus Christ into these
parts of the world, is not as he formerly came amongst the Gentiles, a poor
underling, and his servants poor, living upon the Gospel where it was accepted
among the rich Gentiles: But Christ will come unto these, rich, potent, above
them in learning, riches, and power; and they shall flock unto the Gospel,
thereby to receive external benificence and advancement, as well as spiritual
grace and blessings. And thus I bend my self to do to my poor ability: I
never go unto them empty, but carry somewhat to distribute among them; and so
likewise when they come unto my house, I am not willing they should go away
without some refreshing, neither do I take any gratuity from them unrewarded;
and indeed they do account, that they have nothing worth the giving unto me;
only once when I was up in the Country, a poor creature came to me as I was
about to take Horse, shaking me by the hand, and with his other hand thrust
something into my hand, I looked what it was, and it was a pennyworth of * A
beade they make, and is highly esteemed among the Indians, equal to money with
u^.
Wampom, upon a strawes end; I seeing so much hearty affection in so small a
thing, I kindly accepted, only inviting him to my house, that I might there
show my love to him.

There is another great fishing place about threescore miles from us, whether I
intend (God willing) to go next Spring, which belongs to the forenamed
Papassaconnaway; which journey, though it be like to be both difficult and
chargeable for horse and men, in fitting provisions, yet I have sundry reasons
which bow and draw my heart therennto. I desire your prayers to the Lord for me
and for them, that the Lord would open my mouth to speak in his Name to their
understandings, that with their hearts they may embrace that message which from
the Lord I shall bring unto them.

They have no means of Physic at all, only make use of Pawwawes when they be
sick, which makes them loath to give it over: But I find, by Gods blessing, in
some means used in Physic and Chyrurgery, they are already convinced of the
folly of Pawwawing, and easily persuaded to give it over utterly as a sinful
and diabolical practice: but I much want some wholesome cordialls, and such
other medicines as I have here mentioned in the in closed.

The Indians about us which I constantly teach, do still diligently and
desirously attend, and in a good measure practice (for the outward part of
Religion, both in their families and Sabbaths) according to their knowledge;
and by degrees come on to labor. I should be over-tedious and troublesome to
you to run into particulars, only let me give you a taste of their knowledge
by their Questions, a few whereof I did sometimes set down, though I have
slipped many, and very material ones; these questions being asked at sundry
times, and at sundry meetings of the Indians.

Quest. How many good people were in Sodom when it was burnt?

I know not how to pray to Christ and the Spirit, I know a little how to pray
to God?

Does the Devil dwell in us as we dwell in an house?

When God says, Honor thy Father, does he mean three Fathers? our Father, and
our Sachim, and God.

When the Soul goes to heaven, what does it say when it comes there? And what
does a wicked Soul say when it comes into Hell?

If one sleep on the Sabbath at meeting, and another awaketh him, and he be
angry at it, and say, its because he is angry with him that he so does, Is not
this a sin?

If any talk of another man's faults, and tell others of it when he is present
to answer, is not that a sin?

Why did Christ dy^ in our stead?

Seeing Eve was first in sin, whether did she dye first?

Why must we love our enemies, and how shall we do it?

How does Christ redeem and deliver us from sin?

When every day my heart thinks I must dye, and go to hell for my sins, what
shall I do in this case?

May a good man sin sometimes? Or may he be a good man, and yet sin sometimes?

If a man think a prayer, does God know it, and will he bless him?

Who killed Christ?

If a man be almost a good man, and dies; whither goes his soul?

How long was Adam good before he sinned?

Seeing we see not God with our eyes, if a man dream that he sees God, does
his soul then see him?

Did Adam see God before he sinned?

Shall we see God in Heaven?

If a wicked man pray, whether does he make a good prayer? or when does a
wicked man pray a good prayer?

If a man repent, does God take away his sins, and forgive him?

Whether did God make hell before Adam sinned?

If two families dwell in one house, and one prays, and the other not, what
shall they that pray do to them that do not?

Did Abimeleck* know, Sarah was Abraham's wife?

Did not Abraham sin in saying she is my sister?

Seeing God promised Abraham so many children, like the stars for multitude,
why did he give him so few? and was it true?

If God made hell in one of the six days, why did God make Hell before Adam
had sinned?

Now the Indians desire to go to Heaven, what shall we do that we may go
thither when we dye?

How shall I bring mine heart to love Prayer?

If one man repent, and pray once in a day, another man often in a day; whether
does one of them go to Heaven, the other not? or what difference is there?

I find I want wisdom, what shall I do to be wise?

Why did Abraham buy a place to bury in?

Why does God make good men sick?

How shall the Resurrection be, and when?

Do not Enlishmen spoil their souls, to say a thing cost them more then it
did? and is it not all one as to steal?

You say our body is made of clay, what is the Sun or Moon made of?

If one be loved of all Indians good and bad, another is hated of all saving a
few that be good, does God love both these?

I see why I must fear Hell, and do so every day. But why must I fear God?

How is the tongue like fire, and like poison?

What if false Witnesses accuse me of murder or some soul sin? What punishment
is due to liars?

If I reprove a man for sin, and he answer, why do you speak thus angerly to
me: Mr. Eliot teaches us to love one another, is this well?

Why is God so angry with murderers?

If a wise put away her husband because he will pray to God, and she will not,
what must be done in this case?

If there be young women pray to God, may such as pray to God marry one that
will not pray to God? or what is to be done in this case?

Whether does God make bad men dream good Dreams?

What is Salvation?

What is the Kingdom of Heaven?

If my wife do some work in the house on the night before the Sabbath, and
some work on the Sabbath night, whether is this a sin?

If I do that which is a sin, and do not know it is a sin, what will God say
to that?

Whether is faith set in my heart, or in my mind?

Why did Christ dye for us, and who did kill him?

By these questions you may see they somewhat savor the things of God and
Christ, and that their souls be in a searching condition after the great
points of Religion and Salvation. And I will say this solemnly, not suddenly,
nor lightly, but before the Lord, as I apprehend in my conscience, were they
but in a settled way of Civility and Government cohabiting together, and I
called (according to God) to live among them, I durst freely join into
Church Fellowship amongst them, and could find out at least twenty men and
women in some measure fitted of the Lord for it, and soon would be capable
thereof: And we do admit in charity some into our Churches, of our own, of
whose spiritual estate I have more cause of fear, then of some of them: But
that day of Grace is not yet come unto them. When Gods time is come, he will
make way for it and enable us to accomplish it. In the mean time, I desire to
wait, pray, and believe. But I will proceed no further at this time to trouble
you with these things, though I doubt not but they will be acceptable tidings
to your heart, and will be an occasion of quickening your prayers for them, and
for me also, that utterance may be given me, and further knowledge of their
language, wherein for want of converse, I can make but slow progress. Thus
commending you to the Grace, guidance and protection of God in Christ, I rest,

Yours to be commanded in Jesus Christ, IO. ELIOT.
Roxbury this 12. of Nov. 1648.

In the next place I shall offer a second Letter of his, written to a Gentleman
of New England, here residing at present, upon his urgent occasions; wherein
the Reader may have further light concerning this great work now begun. Take
his Letter as it follows.

Sir,
YOur faithful and true love to Jesus Christ is expressed evidently to my
heart, among other ways very much in your solicitous thoughts and care about
the good of these poor Indians, and the furtherance of their conversion. God
guided your discretion very seasonably in the Letters and Tokens you were
pleased to send to those leading men, which reallity of love was very
thankfully accepted by them, and they desire thanks to be returned for it, etc.

Your project for their Apparel which you first mention, is very fitting, but
all the difficulty will be to get so much cloth as you speak of: Yet this they
do; some old things I have gotten and given them, and some they buy; and they
carefully keep them till meeting times, and many of them at such times are
pretty handsome, both men, women, and children also: And whereas some good
people may think fitting to send some gifts that way for them, you shall find
directions here enclosed, what will best suit with their condition.

Your next project for employment of them in planting Orchards and Gardens, it
suiteth very well with my apprehensions, and I have encouraged them that way,
and have promised them many hundred trees, which I reserve in nurseries for
them, and hope they shall set them out, or some of them the next Spring. The
only remora the fensing in of an Orchard, we yet being upon the fencing in of
a great Corn field, where they have made (I think) 200. rod of ditching
already, setting two rayles in the top, and are to stone up the banks as they
raise stones in planting: And when the field is fenced, then they shall fence
Orchards, but they are hindered for want of Tools, and by bad Tools
discouraged; their skill also being weak though the tools were good, but of
30. or 40. I have scarce any left. But we must endeavor to get a Magazine for
them of all manner of Tools, etc. They had Sawyers at work last winter, and
will have more this winter (I hope) for they saw very good board and planke,
and could I be amongst them oftener, they would both attend it better, and do
things more orderly.

They are willing to follow my advice in any reasonable thing* only I am
confident of what you write, they must not be bent too hard at first, and I
find not many that do so duly consider that point as your self; but because
they be not in all points of labor as the English be, think all is too little
or no purpose. Its hard to look upon the day of small things with patience
enough. I find it absolutely necessary to carry on civility with Religion: and
that makes me have many thoughts that the way to do it to the purpose, is to
live among them in a place distant from the English, for many reasons; and
bring them to co-habitation, Government, Arts, and trades: but this is yet too
costly an enterprise for New England, that has expended it self so far in
laying the foundation of a Commonweal in this wilderness.

For their Schooling, a Gentleman in London (whose name I could never learn)
did give ten pounds toward it the last year, which I thus disposed of; five
pounds I gave to a grave woman in Cambridge, who taught the Indian children
last year; And God so blessed her labors, that they came on very prettily.
The other five pounds I gave to the Shcool-master of Dorcester, and thither the
Children of those Indians that lived thereabout went, with a like good
success, it not better, because the children were bigger and more capable.
This 10. l. bill Captain Harding paid here, and was to take it at London: but I
hear nothing from him, no do I know whether the Gentleman will continue his
gift: I fear for want of means both these Schools will fall; and the
Children like to lose all that they have gotten the first year, which is a
work had need be closely followed: because they are to learn our language as
well as to read; only I take my constant course of catechizing them every
Lecture day, and I thank the Lord, they are (many of them) very ready in their
answers in the principles of Religion. And in that exercise I endeavor also to
use them to good manners.

Some of S^dbury Indians, some of Concord Indians, some of M^sti^k Indians, and
some of Dedham Indians are ingenious, and pray unto God, and sometimes come to
the place where I teach to hear the word. Linn Indians are all naught save
one, who sometimes comes to hear the word, and tells me that he prays
to God: and the reason why they are bad is, partly and principally because
their * Bad Governor have an evil infl^nce upon the p^pl,
Sachim is naught, and cares not to pray unto God: But I am overwearisome unto
you, and therefore will go no further at this time; only this one thing more,
whereas it has pleased you to allow 40. s. to the payment of a man who should
direct the Indians about their labor, and in planting of Orchards; I shall be
so bold as to appoint such as have deserved it to call for it, and it shall be
employed God willing to their best furtherance as near as I can. And thus
desiring God, etc. I remain.

Yours to be commanded any thing in Christ Jesus John Eliot.
Roxbury this 13. of the 9. 1649.

Another Letter Courteous Reader dated in February last, I received also from
this our Indian Evangelist (if I may so term him) and because it is
replenished with many pithy questions of the Indians, which imply a further
progress in knowledge; and sundry other considerable passages worthy
observation, and very delightful to a Christian spirit, I thought it my duty
to publish it to the world, that so it might be a means to stir up all that
are faithful in Christ Jesus by prayer and otherwise to help forward this
precious work begun, so much conducing to the glory of God, and the good of
men. His Letter follows.

Much respected and longed for in the Lord,
WEre you not about the Lords business, an Instrument in his hand to manage
some special affairs wherein his glory is much concerned, your long absence
could not but be imbittered with manifold troubles to your own spirit, as it is
like to be with losses and inconveniences to your outward estate; but I trust
the Lord will have a special regard to all, etc. I perceive others to be
silent in giving you information about the progress of the Lords work amongst
the poor Indians, and therefore I thought it necessary to do it, knowing it
will add to your comfort to hear that the Lord is still at work, but I have
done it more largely already in Letters by Mr. Usher, by way of These Letters
and Passengers are not yet come n^ England
Maligo, as also by Mr. Bracket of Braintree, by the way of Virginia, in
Letters both to your self, and also to Mr. Pel^am, etc. I only write now by
this Ship, lest it coming in before the other Ships, you should receive some
discouragement concerning the work, as if it were sunk in the beginning; but
blessed be the Lord it is not so, although the progress is yet small: It is a
day of small things, an Embrio which the Lord expects should be furthered by
the prayers of the Saints and Churches: And therefore I earnestly beg your
prayers, that the Lord would thrust forth more Laborers into this Harvest; and
because the means is exceeding small and inconsiderable for so vast an
enterprise as this is: there is the more eminent need of Faith and Prayer, that
the Lord himself, by his special grace, favor, and providence, would appear
in this matter: for the Lord must reign in these latter days, and more
eminently and observably, overtop all Instruments and means: And I trust he
will mightily appear in this business, as in other parts of the world.

I have intimated in my other Letters, what good hopes I have of sundry of
them, and that they begin to enquire after baptism They shall ask the way (...)
and Church Ordiuances, and the way of worshipping God as the Churches here do;
but I showing them how incapable they be to be trusted therewith, whilst they
live so unfixed, confused, and ungoverned a life, uncivilized and unsubdued to
labor and order; they begin now to enquire after such things. And to that end,
I have propounded to them that a sit place be found out for Cohabitation,
wherewith they may subsist by labor, and settle themselves in such a way: And
then they may have a Church, and all the Ordinances of Christ amongst them.
These and other things tending that way, I have propounded to them, and they
seem to me to accept them gladly, and the longer they consider, and the more
they confer together of them, the more acceptable they are unto them: And I
waiting to see how the Lord would carry on this work by the wise and gracious
eye and hands of his providence, I took this to be one special and eminent
smile of God, upon the
work that he had stirred up, the Parliament of England to take it into
consideration, and to order the Committee of Lords and Commons for foreign
Plantations to think of some meet way how they might best advance it: And
indeed the way you mention in your Letter which they have taken, (whcih I trust
is perfected long before this time,) I conceive to be a way of God, and not
only very acceptable to me, but honorable to themselves, and the Nation, to be
engaged in so pious and charitable a work, if means may hereby be procured to
a through carrying on the same.

I have also intimated in my other Letters, and sent word again in this, what
manner of It would be neither pleasing n^r (...), and ther^o^e are let out.
provisions of all sorts will be necessary to be sent over, and that special
care be had that the tools for labor of all sorts may be of a good temper and
well made; otherwise they will be discouraged; etc. the particulars as well for
Physic and Surgery, as for Clothing and Instruments for labor of all sorts
is enclosed therein: But I will trouble you no further at this time with what I
have written in my other Letters, hoping the Lord will bring them to your
hands: only I shall intimate such things as have occurred since the writing of
my former Letters.

There is an Indian living with Mr. Richard Calicott of Dorchester, who was
taken in the Pequott Wars, though belonging to Loug Island; this Indian is
ingenious, can read; and I taught him to write, which he quickly learnt, though
I know not what use he now makes of it: He was the first that I made use of to
teach me words, and to be my Interpreter. Now of late, the Lord has stirred up
his heart to join unto the Church at Dorchester, and this day I am going to the
Elders, meeting, to the examination and Trial of this young man, in
preparation for his admission into the Church.

Likewise since I purposed to write to you of these matters, I have taken care
to note such Questions as they propound, and I shall here set down such as have
been propounded by them since my last Letters: For by them you may guess at
the progress they make in knowledge.

Questions.
Why have not beasts a soul as man has, seeing they have love, anger, etc. as
man has?

How is the spirit of God in us? and where is it principally present? The
indwelling of the spirit in us is mysterious.
Why does God punish in hell for ever? man does not so, but after a time lets
them out of prison again. And if they repent in hell, why will not God let them
out again?

What is Faith?

Whether do you think I have Faith?

A choice spirit looks after his prayers.
How shall I know when God accepts my prayers?

How does Christ make peace betwixt God and man? And what is the meaning of
that point?

Why did the Jews give the Watchmen money to tell a lie?

If I hear Gods Word when I am young, and do not believe, but when I am old I
believe: what will God say?

In wicked dreams does the soul sin? See Eccles. 6. 7.


Does the soul in Heaven know things done here on earth?

Does the soul in Heaven remember what it did here on earth before he dyed?

Who first gave Laws to men?

What is Law?

If my heart be full of evil thoughts, A soft and serious spirited Christian
eyes his thoughts.
and I repent and pray, and a few hours after it is full again, and I repent
and pray again; and if after this it be full of evil thoughts again, what will
God say?

Why did the earth shake at Christ's Resurrection?

What means this, That God will not hold him guiltless that takes his name
in vain?

What force of wicked men is lawful, and what is not?

What if a Minister wear long hair, as some other men do, what will God say?

If a man will make his Daughter marry a man whom she does not love, what will
God say? Forced marriages scrupled by Indians.


Why does Christ compare the Kingdom of heaven to a net?

Why does God so hate them that teach others to commit sin?

SIR,

J Am now straightened in time, and must hasten away my Letters: I can proceed
no further at present, and therefore with earnest desires of your Prayers, I
commit you to the gracious protection of the Lord, who has hitherto helped,
and will never fail those that trust in him.

Yours in any service I can in Jesus Christ John Eliott.
Roxbury this 2. of the 12. 1648.

AN APPENDIX TO THE foregoing Letters, holding forth Conjectures, Observations,
and Applycatious of them.
THe works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that love them, says
the Psalmist, Psalm. 111. 3. The word which we render, sought out, has a mighty
Emphasis in it. It Is a word used sometimes to Denote the Elaborate care of
digging and searching into mines. And sometimes its made use of to express the
accurate labors of those who comment upon Writings. Indeed there is a golden
mine in every work of God; and the foregoing Letters to a gracious eye, are as
a discovery of a farmore precious mine in America, then those Gold and Silver
ones of India: For they bring tidings of the unsearchable ri^hes of Christ
revealed unto poor souls in those parts.

Or if thou will (Reader) thou may eye this Work of God as a full text:
affording matter, both for Theoretick, and practick conclusions.

I must profess for my self, I could not pass over so rich a mine without
diging nor let pass so full a text (as this work of God in America) without
some short comment: which the request of the worthy Publisher of these precious
papers, has prevailed with me to affix, and publish as an Appendix.

The palpable and present acts of providence, do more then hint the approach
of Jesus Christ: And the General consent of many judicious, and godly Divines,
does induce considering minds to believe, that the conversion of the Jews is
at hand. Its the expectation of some of the wisest Jews now living, that about
the year 1650. Either we Christians shall be Mosaic, or else that themselves
Jews shall be Christians. The serious consideration of the preceding Letters,
induces me to think, that there Conjectures.
may be at least a remnant of the Generation of Jacob in America, (peradventure
some of the 10. Tribes dispersions.) And that those sometimes poor, now
precious Indians (mentioned in those Letters) may be as the first fruits of the
glorious harvest, of Isreal's redemption. The observation is not to be slighted
(though the observer * Mr. Shepherd in the clear Sunshine, and page 33.
modestly said it was more cheerful then deep) that the first Text out of
which Mr. Eliot preached, was about the dry bones, Ezekiel. 37. 9. 10. That by
prophesying to the wind, the wind came and the dry bones lived: It may be there
is not much weight in the observation, that the word which the Indians use for
wind, is Waubon: and that an Indian of that name is, and has been very
sedulous for their conversion: Yet to me there is ground for a very weighty
thought; that, that portion of Scripture should be first of all openned to
them, which clearly foretold the conversion of Israel, i. e. The 10. Tribes
universally understood, and peculiarly meant by the name or notion of Israel,
when distinct from Judah, as in that prophesy it is) Why may we not at least
conjecture, that God by a special finger pointed out that text to be first
openned, which immediately concerned the persons to whom it was preached:
Especially, if (as some credibly affirm) that the Jews of the Netherlands
(being entreated thereunto) inform that after much inquiry they found some of
the ten Tribes to be in America. When our Lord came to Nazaret, and standing up
to read: Its said there was delivered unto him the book of Isaias, and he
openned the book, and found it written, The spirit of the Lord is upon me, etc.
The bringing of that Scripture to our Lords hands so providentially, was a hint
(at least) that the present hearers were in an eminent manner concerned in that
prophecy. What ever may be in this observation (which I humbly offer to the
searching thoughts of judicious persons) I am much inclined to conjecture, that
there is a sprinkling at least of Abraham's seed in these parts, The reasons of
my inclination hereunto are these.

1. They have (at least) a traditionall knowledge of God, as the maker of
heaven and earth. Its true, they talk of other Gods; but yet they hold that the
chief God is he, who made all things. Which agnition of God, was peculiar to
the Jews, in opposition to the Gentiles: Hence it was, that when they were
Captives in Babylon: this was that Character, by which they were taught to
distinguish the true God (which the Gentiles knew not) that he was the Maker of
all things, Jer. 10. 16.

2. What ever they attribute unto others, this they peculiarly attribute unto
this God, viz. that all things both good and evil, are managed by his
Providence, and if they do but hurt themselves, they say it is a note of Gods
displeasure: Hence

3. Before ever any of them received any instruction from our English, by
tradition they were taught, and did upon observation of a bad year, or other
ill success, meet and weep as unto God; acknowledging it to be his h^nd of
displeasure upon them: And on the other side, upon a good year, or good
success in any business, as of War, etc. they used to meet and make a kind of
acknowledgement of thanks to God for it.

4. It is very observable; that they are careful to preserve the memory of
their Families, mentioning Unckles, Grandfathers, and Grand-mothers, etc. and
much studying the advancing of their houses and kindred. A thing which has a
great tang of, and affinity to the Jews care of preserving the memorial of
their Tribes.

5. Those of them who have been wrought upon, tell of some face of Religion,
Wisdom, and manners which long ago their Ancestors had, but that it was lost.

6. (To omit other grounds of this conjecture.) The better and more sober sort
of them, delight much to express themselves in parables. * See page 5.
A thing peculiar to the Jews, as those who read their writings, or consider
Christ's manner of expressing himself, will easily see.

These and the like considerations prevail with me to entertain (at least) a
Conjecture, that these Indians in America, may be Jews (especially of the ten
Tribes.) And therefore to hope that the work of Christ among them, may be as a
preparatory to his own appearing.

If these reasons prevail not with thee (Reader) to give quarter to my
conjecture^ yet I cannot but persuade my self, that the former Letters soberly
and duly weighed, will cause thee to subscribe with me to this conclusion,
that, the work of God among the Indians in America, is glorious, and to be
admired by all those, who look after and rejoice in the appearance of our Lord
Jesus, Surely the Sun of Righteousness is risen, with healirg virtue under his
wings, upon those poor hearts, who sat in darkness, and the shadow of death.
And these godly persons who fled into America for shelter from Prelaticall
persecution, do now appear to be carried there by a sacred and sweet
providence of Christ, to make known his name to those poor souls, who have
been Captives to Satan these many Ages. The Christians when scattered abroad,
went to and fro preaching the word. And I wish from my soul, that all these
Ministers of the Dispertion (as I may call them) in New England; would stir
up themselves to this work of the Lord, which (now it seems) he intended in his
carrying of them thither. Surely these tidings as they are grounds of rejoicing
to others a far off; so they should be much more encouragements of putting to
the hand of such as are there unto this harvest of the Lord. And so much the
rather, because the Gospel in its advancement amongst these Western Indians,
appears to be not in word only (as it was by the Spaniards among their
Indians) but also in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance: Do
not these true reports show what manner of entrance the Gospel has 1 These. 1.
among them: and how they turn unto God from Idels (from their pawwawes) to
serve the living and true God, and to look for his son from Heaven, * See the
Woman's speech page 7.
etc.

(Reader) I entreat thee to bear with me, if in Commenting upon this work of
God, I offer a few notes to declare that in truth this work of God is not only
in the Letter, but in the Spirit and power of the Gospel. These things I note
(and pray do thou) to Observation.
this purpose.

1. The questions which are moved by the Indians coming and come in, are such
as are of great and weighty concernment; And such as indeed evince a more then
common working of the spirit by the word on them. Such are those that concern
spiritual joining in prayer, and a knowledge of Gods acceptance thereof.
Those questions also that relate to the marrying of the godly with the wicked:
(much like that of the Corinthians to Paul. 1 Cor. 7. and 2 Cor. 8.) and those
that concern the evil of thoughts and dreams, etc. See and consider the
Questions.

2. The full casting off their Pawwaws; and not seeking to them: Although they
much idolized them, and albeit they know not as yet, any means of help when
sick, but them.

3. Their sweet and affectionate melting under the word of grace: and their
exceeding hungring and thirsting after the enjoyment thereof. Together with
enquiry after Syon, and their great joy they declare in their hopes thereof.
Vide page 27.


4. Lastly, and especially the real and undeniable evidences of the work of
grace in power upon some particular persons mentioned: and particular that of
the woman in whom I cannot but note these things

1. Her desire to live by the ordinance of the word, although page 6, 7.
with great trouble.

2. Her Exemplarines of life, after the Lord did work upon her.

3. Her resolutions to love God, though he made her sick. Oh! could she love
God, except he loved her first?

4. Her belief that God was well pleased with her in Christ, and hereupon her
willingness to dye, in assurance of going to Heaven.

5. Her care of her Children upon her first knowing of God: and her charging
them not to live with their kindred, pressing it chiefly with this, that they
prayed not, and that they committed sin, and were not punished: Oh holy and
high attainment! to see an evlil in sinning and not being punished. This was
the great evil threatened. Hosea 9. 14.

What do all these things declare? but this: That Christ has made the day of
his power to arise upon those poor souls: In making Application.
them a willing people: And what improvement should we make of this comment
upon the work of the Lord, if not this or the like;

First, To study and search into the works of the Lord, to see how he
counterplots the enemy in his designs: In making the late Bishops persecuting
of the Godly tend to the promoting of the Gospel.

Secondly, To take heed of dispising the day of small things. It being Gods way
to lay most glorious works upon little and despicable foundations: And to
advance the Treasury of the Gospel in earthen vessels, even to the ends of the
Earth,

Thirdly, To be ashamed of, and bewail our want of affection to, and
estimation of that glorious Gospel, and those great things of Christ: which
these poor Heathens upon the little Glymmerings and tastes so exceedingly value
and improve.

Fourthly: Does not the observation of the preceding reports, clearly confirm
the Doctrine of the Sabbath, and the practice of prayer: Oh tremble ye
Sabboth-slighters, and duty-dispisers, Christ has witnesses against you in
America! Be ashamed ye pretended- Men and fathers in Christ for coming short
of Babes and Children! In truth the very light of Nature will condemn you.
Prayer in all ages (and that not mental, but verbal, and express) has been
that by which the Deity has been agnized and worshipped. The converted
Heathens in New-Eng and, go beyond you, O ye Apostate Christians in England!

Lastly, be encouraged to put to your helping hand unto the work of the Lord.
And to that end,

1. Arise ye heads of our Tribes in Old England, and extend your help to
further Christ's laborers in N.-England. Rather ste^l from your sleep an hour,
then suffer that good Ordinance to lie asleep so long; which if drawn into an
Act, will exceedingly further this blessed work. Surely if you were petitioned
to in the name of Christ, and his Gospel, to give money out of your own purse
to exalt him in furthering it. Durst you deny it? How much less can you deny
the passing of an Act to enable some to receive and dispose what others would
gladly give. The work is so clear, that you need not many hours to debate it:
And I hope you are so willing that I shall not need more words to press it,
only let me add this that as Ministers, so Statists do find personal
examples, the most powerful motives to practick doctrines.

2. Rouse up your selves my Brethren; ye Preachers of the Gospel, this work
concerns you. Contrive and plot, preach for, and press the advancement
hereof. Its clear you may do much: Let not this be your condemnation, that you
did nothing.

3. Come forth ye Masters of money, part with your Gold to promote the Gospel;
Let the gift of God in temporal things make way, for the Indians receipt of
spiritualls. If you give any thing yearly, remember Christ will be yout
Pensioner. If you give any thing into bank, Christ will keep account thereof,
and reward it. You hear of what things are necessary in order to the
advancement of that one thing necessary. Rest assured of this, what ever you
give will be well and wisely improved. And as far as the Gospel is mediately
advanced by your money, be sure you will be remembered.

But to wind up all, Fall down O all ye who love the Lord Jesus: and bow your
knees t^ his father and yours in his name, to prosper the progress made of the
Gospel among the Indians in N-England. Pray that an effectual door may be
openned there. Remember Mr. Eliot. Forget not Mr. Mayhew, and all other that
labor in the work. Pray for them that Christ's work may prosper in their hands.
Christ calls upon you by these Letters, and says. The harvest is great, but
the Laborers are few, pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest to send forth
Laborers into his vineyard. If you thus hear Christ, and obey his voice, you
shall accomplish the end of this Appendix, and exceedingly rejoice the heart of
the Author thereof, who is

An unworthy Labourer in Christ's work here, and an ardent desirer of further
progress thereof in New England. J. D.

FJNJS.

