STATVTA PACIS: Or A perfect Table of all the Statutes (now in force) which any
way concern the Office of a JUSTICE of Peace.

Clearly also setting down the several duties of Sheriffs, Head-officers of
Corporations, Stewards in Leets, Constables, and other Officers, so far forth
as the said Statutes do in any sort concern them.

Faithfully collected, and alphabetically digested under apt Titles.

By E. W.

Horace. Quicquid praecipies esto brevis, ut cito dicta
Percipiant animi dociles, teneantque fideles.
LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher and J. Young. An. Dom. 1644.

The Preface.
ALleit this Table holds forth to public view a perspicuous Compendium of such
a form of subordinate government, for the tranquillity and quiet of this
Realm, as no part of the Christian world has the like, as Sir Edward Cook
affirms in the last part of his Institutes, cap. 31. Nevertheless, the
Author thereof would not have been guilty of so much presumption, as to have
suffered it to see the light, had he not been earnestly importuned so to do by
a worthy friend of his, very well experienced in that kind of Government; upon
this assurance, that it might be useful, not only for him that made it, as
most Tables are; but likewise for all others, that desire to he acquainted with
the jurisdiction of Justices of Peace; as well those who are to govern by it,
as others that are to yield obedience unto it. For in this little volume you
may readily discover the substance of all the Statutes (now in force) which any
way concern the Office of a Justice of Peace, alphabetically digested under
proper Titles, and set down in order of time, as they were made.

In tenui, sed non tenuis fructusve, laborve.

Howbeit, professing it self nothing else but a Table, let the Reader be
admonished not to depend too much upon the letter thereof; but rather to have
recourse to the Statutes at large, when and as often as he shall make the least
scruple or doubt of any thing therein abridged: Nevertheless, it is
confidently believed, that he shall find the sense of the Statutes therein
mentioned, to be as plainly and fully reported as can possibly be expected from
a Table: And forasmuch as a Just. of P. receives Instructions for the execution
of his Office, not only from statute law, but likewise from his Commission and
Oath of Office, behold them also here premised; to the end that upon view of
all of them together, he may be clearly directed what course to run. The
Commission, as it was reformed Ter. Mich 32, and 33. Eliz. by all the then
Judges of England, ( as is testified by Sir Edward Cook, ubi supra) hereafter
follows in these words;

Carolus Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, fidei
defensor, etc.
Praedilecto and fideli A. B. etc. necnon C. D. E. F. etc. salutem.
Sciatis, quod assignavimus vos, conjunctim and divisim, and quemlibet vestrum
Justiciarios nostros ad pacem nostram in Comitatu nostro B. conservandam, ac ad
omnia ordinationes and statuta pro bono pacis nostrae, ac pro conservatione
ejusdem, and pro quieto regimine and gubernatione populi nostri edita, in
omnibus and singulis suis articulis in dicto Comitatu nostro (tam infra
libertates, quam extra) juxta vim, formam, and effectum eorundem, custodiendum,
and custodiri faciendum. Et ad omnes, contra formam ordinationum vel statutorum
illorum aut eorum alicujus, in Comitatu praedicto delinquentes, castigandum and
puniendum, prout secundum formam ordinationum and statutorum illorum suerit
faciendum, Et ad omnes illos qui alicui, vel aliquibus de populo nostro de
corporibus suis, vel de incendio domorum suarum, minas fecerint, ad
sufficientem securitatem de pace vel bono gestu suo erga nos and populum
nostrum inveniendam coram vobis, seu aliquo vestrum venire faciendum: Et si
hujusmodi securitatem invenire recusaverint, tunc eos in prisonis nostris
(quousque hujusmodi securitatem invenerint) salvo custodiri faciendum.

Assignavimus etiam vos, and quoslibet duo, vel plures vestrum (quorum aliquem
vestrum A. B. C. D. E. F. etc. unum esse volumus) Justiciarios nostros ad
inquirendum per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de Comitatu praedicto
(per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit) de omnibus and omnimodis feloniis,
veneficiis, incantationibus, sortilegiis, art magica, transgressionibus,
forstallariis, regratariis, ingrossariis, and extortionibus quibuscunque: Ac de
omnibus and singulis aliis malefactis and offensis (de quibus Justiciarii pacis
nostrae legitime inquirere possunt, aut debent) per quoscunque and
qualitercunque in Comitatu praedicto factis five perpetratis, vel imposterum
ibidem fieri vel attemptari contigerit: Ac etiam de omnibus illis qui in
Comitatu praedicto in conventiculis contra pacem nostram, in perturbationem
populi nostri, seu vi armata ierunt, vel equitaverunt, sen imposterum ire vel
equitare praesumpserint: Ac etiam de omnibus iis, quiibidem ad gentem nostram
mayhemandum vel interficiendum in insidiis jacuerunt, vel imposterum jacere
praesumpserint: Ac etiam de hostellariis, and aliis omnibus and singulis
personis, qui in abusu ponderum vel mensurarum, five in venditione victualium,
contra formam ordinationum and statutorum, vel eorum alicujus inde pro communi
utilitate Regni nostri Angliae and populi nostri ejusdem editorum deliquerunt,
vel attemptaverunt, seu imposterum delinquere, vel attemptare praesumpserint in
Comitatu praedicto: Ac etiam de quibuscunque Vicecomitibus, Ballivis,
Seneschallis, Constabulariis, custodibus Gaolarum, and aliis Officiariis, qui
in executione Officiorum suorum (circa praemissa seu eorum aliqua) indebite se
habuerint, aut imposterum indebite se habere praesumpserint; aut tepidi,
remissi, vel negligentes fuerint, aut imposterum fore contigerit in Comitatu
praedicto: Et de omnibus and singulis articulis and circumstantiis, and aliis
rebus quibuscunque, per quoscunque and qualitercunque in Comitatu praedicto
factis five perpetratis, vel quae imposterum ibidem fieri vel attemptari
contigerit, qualitercunque praemissorum vel eorum alicujus concernentibus
before veritatem: Et ad indictamenta quaecunque sic coram vobis, seu aliquibus
vestrum capta five capienda, aut coram aliis nuper Justiciariis pacis in
Comitatu praedicto facta five capta (and nondum terminata) inspiciendum: Ac ad
processus inde versus omnes and singulos sic indictatos, vel quos coram vobis
imposterum indictari contigerit (quousque capiantur, reddant se, vel
utlagentur) faciendum and continuandum: Et ad omnia and singula felonias,
veneficia, incantationes, sortilegia, arts magicas, transgressiones,
forstallarias, regratarias, ingrossarias, extortiones, conventicula,
indictamenta praedicta, caeteraque omnia and fingula praemissa secundum leges
and statuta Regni nostri Angliae (prout in hujusmodi casu fieri consuevit aut
debuit) audiendum and terminandum, and ad eosdem delinquentes and quemlibet
eorum, pro delictis suis, per fines, redemptiones, amerciamenta, forisfacturas,
ac alio modo (prout secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae, aut
formam ordinationum vel statutorum praedictorum fieri consuevit aut debuit)
castigandum and puniendum.

Proviso semper, quod si casus difficultatis super determinatione aliquorum
praemissorum coram vobis, vel aliquibus duobus vel pluribus vestrum evenire
contigerit; tunc ad judicium inde reddendum (nisi in praesentia unius
Justiciariorum nostrorum, de uno vel de altero Banco, aut unius Justiciariorum
nostrorum ad Assisas in Comitatu praedicto capiendas assignatorum) coram vobis
vel aliquibus duobus vel pluribus vestrum minime procedatur.

Et ideo vobis, and cuilibet vestrum mandamus, quod circa custodiam pacis,
ordinationum, statutorum, and omnium and singulorum caeterorum praemissorum
disigenter intendatis, and ad certos dies and loca quae vos vel aliqui
hujusmodi, duo vel plures vestrum (ut praedictum est) ad hoc provideritis,
super praemissis faciatis inquisitiones, and praemissa omnia and singula
audiatis, and terminetis, ac ea faciatis and expleatis in forma praedicta;
facturi inde quod ad justiciam pertinet, secundum legem and consuetudinem Regni
nostri Angliae: Salvis nobis ametciamentis, and aliis ad nos inde spectantibus.

Mandamus etiam tenore praesentium Vicecomiti nostro B. quod ad certos dies and
loca (quae vos vel aliqui hujusmodi duo vel plures vestrum, ut praedictum est,
ei ut praedictum est, scire feceritis) venire faciat coram vobis, vel hujusmodi
duobus vel pluribus vestrum (ut dictum est) tot and tales probos and legales
homines de Balliva sua (tam infra libertates quam extra) per quos rei veritas
in praemissis melius sciri poterit and inquiri.

Assignavimus denique te praefatum I. C. custodem Rotulorum pacis nostrae in
dicto Comitatu nostro: Ac propterea tu, ad dies and loca praedicta, brevia,
praecepta, processus, and indictamenta praedicta, coram te and dictis sociis
tuis venire facias, ut ea inspiciantur, and debito fine terminentur, sicut
praedictum est.

In cujus rei testimonium, etc. Datum, etc.
As concerning the Oath of Office, Justices of Peace were at first enjoined to
take it, by the Statute of 13. R. 2.7. which Statute you may hereafter see in
Title Justices of Peace, Clause 16. And afterward by the Statutes of 1. Eliz.
1. and 7. Jac. 6. they were also ordained to take the Oaths of Supremacy and
Obedience, which Oaths you shall also hereafter find in Title Recusants, 8,
and 88. The Oath of Office is this that follows;

Ye shall swear, That as Justice of the Peace in the County of B. in all
articles in the Kings Commission to you directed, ye shall do equal right to
the poor and to the rich, after your cunning, wit, and power, and after the
laws and customs of the Realm, and statutes thereof made: And ye shall not
be of counsel of any quarrel hanging before you: And that ye hold your
Sessions after the form of Statutes thereof made: And the issues, fines and
amerciaments that shall happen to be made, and all forfeitures which shall fall
before you, ye shall cause to be entered without any concealment or
imbezzelling, and truly send them to the Kings Exchequer. Ye shall not let,
for gift or other cause, but well and truly you shall do your Office of
Justice of the Peace in that behalf: And that you take nothing for your Office
of Justice of the Peace to be done, but of the King, and fees accustomed, and
costs limited by the Statute: And ye shall not direct or cause to be directed
any Warrant (by you to be made) to the parties, but ye shall direct them to the
Bailiffes of the said County, or other the Kings Officers (or ministers) or
other indifferent persons to do execution thereof. So help you God.

Lastly, for conclusion of this Preface, I conceive it not impertinent to annex
thereunto the substance of two Statutes, necessary to be known by every
Justice of Peace before he enters upon his Office; the first is 2. H. 5. Stat.
2. Cap. 1. which provides, That Justices of Peace shall be made of the most
sufficient persons dwelling within the Counties, by the advice of the
Chancellor, and of the Kings Counsel; and that no foreign dweller shall
exercise such Office, except Lords, Justices of Assise, and chief Stewards of
the lands and Seigniories belonging to the Duchy of Lancaster. And concerning
their residence in the Country, see more hereafter in Title Justices of Peace,
20. The other Statute is 4. H. 7. cap. 12. whereby the King commands all
Justices of Peace diligently to exercise their Office; to the end, that his
people by that means living in peace, and enjoying their own, husbandry may
flourish. He also charge all, both poor and rich, that shall suffer any
grievance from others (wherein a Justice of Peace may intermeddle) that they
forthwith make complaint thereof to the next Justice of Peace, and having no
remedy there, to the Justices of Assise, if it be not long before their coming
into that Country; but if it be, then to the Chancellor for the time being,
and then the King will send for the Justice so neglecting his duty; and in case
he shall find him guilty thereof, will cause him to be put out of the
Commission, and otherwise punished according to his demerits, etc.

An Alphabeticall Table, by the perusal whereof the Reader may the better
acquaint himself with the Titles contained in this Book.
A ABjuration 1 Actions popular 1 Alehouses 4 Aliens 10 Almes-houses 10
Archery 10 Apprentices 12 Armor 12 Arrests 12 Arrow heads 13 Artificers 13
Assise of Ale and Beer 13 Attainders 13

B Badger 13 Bailiffes 14 Bailinent 15 Bakers 17 Barges 17 Bastardie 17 Beer 18
Bell-metall 18 Benhurst hundred 18 Bigamie 18 Boat-men 18 Books 21 Bows 23
Brass 23 Bridges 25 Brewers 26 Buggery 27 Burglary 27 Burning of houses etc.
28 Butchers 29 Butter 29 Buts 30 Buying of Tiles 30

C Calves 30 Captains 30 Carre-men 41 Carrier 41 Cattle 41 Certificate 44
Cerciorari 44 Challenge 45 Champertie 45 Cheese 45 Citation 45 Clergy 45 Clerk
of the Peace 48 Clerk of the Crown 48 Clerk of Assise 48 Clerk of the Market
48 Cloth 48 Coin 48 Commons 48 Commissions 48 Conies 49 Conjuration 49
Conspiracy 49 Conspirators 49 Convictions 49 Cooks 49 Copper 49 Corn 49
Coroners 51 Costermongers 52 Cottages 52 Covin 53 Counterfeit letters etc. 53
Counterfeiters of the Ks. seal or coin 53 Coupers 53 Crosse-bowes 54 Currier 54
Cursing 54 Custom, Customers 54 Cutpurse 54 Cutting out of tongues, etc. 54
Cutting of a pond head 54

D Deeds 55 Deer 55 Divine Service 55 Dying, Dyers 55 Drapery 55 Drover 59
Drunkenness 59

E Ecclesiastical Court 60 Egyptians 61 Embracery 62 Endictments 62 Enquests
62 Escapes 62 Escheators 62 Estreats 63 Excommunicate persons 64 Extortion 64

F Faires 64 Fasting-dayes 64 Feasants 64 Felony 65 Felons goods 67 Fighting
and quarrelling 67 Fish, fishers, fishing, 68 Fish days 73 Fishmongers 75
Force, forcible entry 75 Forests 77 Forestallers 77 Franchises 80 Fruiterers
80 Fuel 80

G Games 81 Jail, Gaolers 81 Gold, Goldsmiths 81 Grain 82 Green wax 82 Guns
82 Gunners 85

H Habeas corpus 85 Hares 85 Hats 85 Hawks 85 Herring 92 Highways 92
Holidayes 97 Horse bread 98 Horses 98 Hospitals 103 Hostlers 102 Houses of
Correction 103 Huy and Cry 103 Hunters, Hunting 105

I Jesuits 108 Images 108 Imbezelling of a Record 108 Imbracery 108 Indictments
108 Informations 109 Ingrossers 110 Inholders 110 Inmates 111 Inquests 111
Inrolements 111 Inventories 111 Jurors 112 Justices of Peace 113

K Kidder 119 Kings Bench 119

L Laborers 119 Lader 132 Larcenie 132 Latten 132 Leather 133 Letters of
Administration 144 Liberties 144

M Mainprise 145 Maintenance 145 Malt 150 Marches 148 Mariners 149 Markets 149
Marshals of the Kings Bench 149 Marshalsie 149 Marshes 149 Masons 149 Matrimony
149 Measures 152 Millers 152 Money 152 Mortuaries 153 Murder 154

N News 156

O Oatmeale 156 Oaths 156 Old field dike in the Isle of Ely 156 Ordinary 156
Outlawed persons 157 Outlawries 157

P Pannell 157 Pardon 157 Parks 158 Parliament 159 Partridges 160 Paving 160
Penal Statutes 160 Perjurie 160 Petty Treason 162 Pewter 162 Physicians 162
Pillory 163 Plague 163 Plays 165 Ponds 167 Poor people 167 Poulters 172
Powdike in Norfolk 172 Poisoning 172 Presentiments 172 Priests 172 Prisons,
Prisoners 173 Probat of Wills 175 Process 175 Prophecies 175 Purveyors 176
Putting out of eyes 188

Q Quarrelling 188 Quarter Sessions 188

R Rape, Ravishment 188 Record 190 Recusants 190 Regrators 224 Riots 224
Robbery 229 Rogues 229 Rome 230

S Sacraments 230 Sacrilege 237 Schoolmasters 237 Scotland 237 Seminary
Priests 237 Servants 237 Service divine 237 Sewer 237 Sheep 238 Sheriffs 238
Shipwrights 243 Shoemaker 243 Silver 243 Skinners 243 Soldiers 243 Stabbing
244 Stewards of Lects 244 Strangers 244 Supersedeas 244 Sundays 245 Swans 245
Swearing 245

T Tanner 246 Testimonial 246 Tiles 246 Tin 247 Tithes 248 Toll 248
Transportation 248 Treason 249 Trespass 249

V Vagabonds 250 Victual, Victuallers 259 Vintners 261 Under-Sheriffe 262
Usury 262

W Wages 264 Wagoner 264 Wainman 264 Wales 264 Warrens 265 Watches 265 Watermen
266 Wax 266 Wears 266 Weights 266 Wild foul 283 Wines 283 Witchcraft 285
Witness 286 Wood 286 Wool 286 Writs 286

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 40. line 7. read 33. and l. 33. r. 39. p. 52. l. 5, and 6. r. land, being
freehold and inheritance. p. 56. l. 4. r. 39. El. p. 69. l. 10. r.
conservators of the Statutes. p. 70. l. 32. r. former. page 88. l. 26. r.
Stewards in Leets. p. 103. l. 6. r. felons. p. 105. l. ult. r. before himself.
p. 116. l. 12. r. Banneret. p. 120. l. 5. r. within like time, shall. p. 150.
l. 11. r. of this Statute. and l. 12. r. after it. p. 152. l. 22. r. from the
King. p. 163. l. 19. r. of them. p. 167. l. 21. r. by two. p. 225. l. 33. r.
13. H. 4. p. 236. l. 32. r. 26. p. 238. l. 20. r. by the. p. 252. l. 28. r. as
shall be assigned by six or more of the privy Council, whereof the Lord
Keeper, etc.

STATUTA PACIS: Or A perfect Table of all the Statutes (now in force) which any
way concern the Office of a Justice of Peace.
Abjuration, see Title Bailment 1. Hunters 1. Recusants 51, 52, 58, 61, 62, 69.
and Weights 18.

Actions popular, and Informations.
I. STat. 4. H. 7. cap. 20. bona fide.

II. Here the defendant attainted of collusion shall suffer two years
imprisonment to be prosecuted within one year.

III. No release of a common person shall in this case discharge an action
popular.

IV. Yet no collusion is in this case averrable, where the point of the same
action, or the collusion it self has been tried by verdict.

V. Stat. 18. El. 5. An Informer shall exhibit his suit in proper person, and
pursue it by himself, or by his Attorney in Court, and that by way of
information or original action, and shall have no deputy; and all this in
pain of 10. l. and the pillory.

VI. A note of the time of exhibiting the Information shall be truly taken, and
from thenceforth it shall be accounted to be of record, before which time no
process shall issue out upon it.

VII. The Clerk that makes out the process shall endorse the Informers name,
and also the statute upon which the information is grounded, in pain of xl. s.

VIII. No Jury shall appear at Westminster for a trial upon any penal law,
when the offense was committed above 30. miles from Westminster, except the
Attorney general, for some reasonable cause, require the same, Clause 17, 18.

IX. No Informer shall compound with any defendant before answer; nor then, but
by consent of Court, in pain of 10. l. and the pillory.

X. Where the Informer delays or discontinues his suit, or otherwise is
nonsuit, or overthrown, the Court shall assign costs to the defendant, to be
immediately levied by execution issuing out of the same Court.

XI. Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Just. of Ass. and Just. of Peace in their
Sessions have power to hear and determine these offenses.

XII. This Act shall not restrain Actions brought for maintenance, Champerty,
buying of Titles, or Imbracerie, nor any certain person, or body politic, to
whom any forfeiture or penalty is especially limited, nor certain officers,
which have lawfully used to exhibit Informations 15. and 18.

XIII. Stat. 31. El. 5.

XIV. In popular Actions the offense shall be laid to be done in the County,
where indeed it was done; or otherwise, if the defendant traverse and disprove
that point, the plaintiff shall be barred. 18.

XV. This Act does not restrain officers, which have lawfully used to exhibit
informations, nor Actions brought for Champertie, buying of Titles, extortion,
offenses against the stat. of 1. El. 11. (concerning the light landing of
Merchandise and custom of sweet wines) concealing of Customs, etc. corrupt
Usury, Forestalling, Regrating, or Engrossing, when the penalty shall amount
to 20. l. or above: For in all these cases the offense may be laid in any
County. 18.

XVI. Popular Actions, where the King only has the forfeiture, shall be
commenced within two years; where he has only a part, and the Informer the
rest, within one year; and in this last case upon default of prosecution, the
King has two years after that one year: but this is to be understood, where
a shorter time is not limited by any stat.

XVII. All suits for using unlawful games, or any Art or Mystery without being
brought up in it, and for not having Bows and Arrows according to the
statute, shall be prosecuted at the Assizes or Sessions of the County, or at
the Leete, within which the offense was committed, and not elsewhere. 18.

XVIII. Stat. 21. Jac. 4. Actions popular shall be prosecuted before Just. of
Ass. Nisi prius. G.D. Oyer and Ter. or of P. only in the Counties, where the
Offenses were committed, except for Recusancie, maintenance, Champertie, buying
of Titles, concealing of Customs, etc. or transporting of Gold, Silver,
Munition, Wool, Wool fels, or Leather.

XIX. Upon default of proving, that the Offense was committed in the same
County, the defendant shall be found not guilty.

XX. The Informer shall make oath, that the offense was committed in the same
County, where the Action is laid, and within one year before the suit
commenced.

XXI. The defendant in a popular Action may plead the general issue, and yet
give special matter in evidence.

Alehouses. Drunkenness.
I. Stat. 5. and 6. E. 6.25. None shall keep Alehouse without License granted
either in Sess. or by 2. Just. (1. Qu.) in pain of 3. days Imprisonment
without Bail and not to be enlarged without Recognisance by himself and two
Sureties, that he shall not keep Alehouse any longer; the certificate of which
recognisance and offense shall be a sufficient conviction at the Qu. Sess. to
fine him. xx. s. 30.

II. The Qu. Sess. or two such Justices have power to put down Alehouses at
their discretion, and to take Bond and surety of Alehouse-keepers by
Recognisance, that they use not unlawful games, or other disorder in their
houses, for which Recognisance the parties bound shall pay 12. d. and whereof
certificate shall be made at the next Qu. Sess. by the two Justices, that take
it, in pain of five marks.

III. Just. of P. have power to inquire after the breach of this last
Recognisance, to award process thereupon, and to hear and determine the same
at their discretions.

IV. This Act shall not restrain the selling of Ale and Beer in Towns where
Faires are kept, during the time of the Fair. 34.

V. Stat. 1. Jac. 9. No Innekeeper, Victualler,

VI. The penalties aforesaid are given to the poor of the parish, where the
offense is committed, and are to be levied by the Constable, and Churchw. by
distress, which (after six days) may be sold to satisfy the penalty: and
for default of distress the party delinquent must suffer imprisonment, till
he pay the penalty.

VII. Here, every officer that neglects to levy the said penalties, or to
certify (within 20. days) the default of distress shall forfeit likewise to
the poor xl. s. to be levied (upon warrant from one Justice) by distress, and
fale, as aforesaid, and upon default of distress shall incur commitment, as
before.

VIII. The Officers, or other parties receiving these penalties shall be
accomptable to the succeeding Officers, and other parishioners.

IX. None shall intermeddle to put this Act in execution within either of the
Universities, save only the Magistrates of the same.

X. Stat. 4. Jac. 4. None shall sell Ale or Beer to an unlicensed
Alehouse-keeper, save only for the expense of his household, in pain of 6. s.
8. d. for every Barrel, and so more or less according to that proportion.

XI. This Offense shall be prosecuted in the Qu. Sess. and the forfeiture
shall be equally divided betwixt the prosecutor and the poor of the Parish.

XII. The Officer that shall levy the poores Moity shall deliver it to the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Parish, or one of them, and they shall in
convenient time make distribution thereof to the poor, in pain that both the
Officer and they shall forfeit respectively double the value of that Moity, to
be recovered and employed, as aforesaid.

XIII. Stat. 4. Jac. 5. Jac. 9. and in case he be not able to pay it, shall
remain in the stocks six hours. 6.7. and 28.

XIV. Here the officer which neglects to levy the said penalty shall forfeit
10. s. to be levied and employed, as aforesaid.

XV. A towne-dweller, which is convict to sit tippling in any Inn, Victualling
house, or Alehouse, by the view of one Justice, or the proof of two witnesses,
shall forfeit ten groates, to be levied and employed, as aforesaid, and being
not found able to pay it, shall remain in the stooks four hours. 24.

XVI. These offenses, as also those mentioned in 1. Jac. 9. shall be inquired
of, heard, and determined at the Assizes, at the Sessions, in corporate towns,
and in Leetes.

XVII. One convicted the second time of drunkenness shall be bound in ten
pounds with two sureties to the good behavior. 25.

XVIII. All Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, Ale-cunners
and Sidemen, shall be charged in their oaths to present the said offenses. 27.

XIX. This Act shall not restrain Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, nor the two
Universities.

XX. None shall be twice punished for one offense.

XXI. The offenders against this Act shall be prosecuted within six months.

XXII. Stat. 7. Jac. 10. An Alehouse-keeper lawfully convicted for any of the
offenses forbidden by the stat. of 1. Jac. 9. or 4. Jac. 5. shall be disabled
to keep Alehouse within three years after. 26.

XXIII. Stat. 21. Jac. 7. One witness, or the parties own confession, shall
be sufficient to prove the breach of 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5. and the oath of
the party confessing shall be sufficient to convince any other.

XXIV. No person whatsoever shall sit tippling, in any Inn, Alehouse or
victualling house, in pain of the forfeiture mentioned in 4. Jac. 5. to be
levied and employed, as there is expressed. And here the view of one Justice,
the parties own confession, or proof by one witness, shall be sufficient
conviction. The delinquents oath shall likewise be taken to convince any other.

XXV. The like view, proof, or confession shall convince a drunkard, as well
for the penalty of 5. s. as for the binding of him to the good behavior
according to 4. Jac. 5.

XXVI. An Alehouse-keeper offending against 1. Jac. 9. or 4. Jac. 5. according
to the alterations of this Act is disabled to keep Alehouse within three
years after.

XXVII. All Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, Ale-cunners,
and Sidemen shall be charged in their oaths to present the offenses committed
against 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5. according to the alterations of this Act.

XXVIII. Stat. 1. Car. 4. The Inne-keeper, Jac. 9. to be proved, levied and
employed, as in that statute is appointed.

XXIX. Vintners which do also keep Innes, or Victualling houses shall be
taken to be within this Act, as also within the stat. of 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac.
5.

XXX. Stat. 3. Car. 3.

XXXI. Here the officer, that neglects to execute the warrant, or to punish the
offender, shall suffer imprisonment without bail, or pay 40. s. to be employed
as aforesaid.

XXXII. In this case if the Alehouse-keeper offend the second time, he shall be
committed to the house of correction for one Month, and for the third offense
shall not be thence enlarged, but by order of Sessions.

XXXIII. The Offender once punished by this Act shall not be again punished
by 5. and 6. E. 6.25. and contra.

XXXIV. This Act shall not restrain the selling of Ale and Beer in Faires.

Aliens, S. Archerie, 9. and Brass, 9. and Victual, 3.

Almes-houses, S. Poor people, 15.

Archerie.
I. Stat. 33. H. 8.9. Parents, and Masters shall provide for each of their sons
and maleservants (betwixt the ages of 7. and 17.) a Bow and two shafts, and
cause them to exercise shooting, in pain of 6. s. 8. d.

II. Sons and maleservants (betwixt the ages of 17. and 60.) shall be
furnished with a Bow and two Arrows, and practice shooting therewith, in pain
of 6. s. 8. d.

III. None under the age of 24. years shall shoot at any standing mark
(except at Rovers, changing his mark every shoot) in pain of 4. d. a shoot,
and none above that age shall shoot at any mark of 11. score distance or
under, in pain of 6. s. 8. d. a shoot.

IV. None under the age of 17 years shall shoot with a Bow of Ewe, except his
parents be worth 10. l. per Annum in lands, or 40. marks in goods, in pain of
6. s. 8. d.

V. The Inhabitants of every town shall continue their Buts in good repair,
in pain of 20. s. for every three months default.

VI. For every Bow made of Ewe, the Bowyer not inhabiting in London or the
Suburbs thereof shall make four, and the Inhabitant there two Bows of other
wood, in pain to forfeit for every such Bow unmade 3. s. 4. d. 12.

VII. Fletchers of London may sell seasonable timber to foreign Fletchers
without prejudice.

VIII. Artificers of Archerie (not Freemen, nor paying scot and lot) shall
remove their abode from London, and the Suburbs thereof to what other place
they shall be assigned by his Majesty's Council, the Lord Chancellor,
Treasurer, Privy Seal, or one of them, in pain of xl. s. for every day they
make their abode contrary to this Act.

IX. Aliens shall not convey Bows and Arrows out of the Realm without his
Majesty's License, in pain of Imprisonment without bail, until they shall
make fine to the King, to be set by (at least) two Justices in Sessions, or
give security for the same; neither shall they use shooting, in pain to
forfeit their Bows and Arrows to be taken from them by any of the Kings
Subjects.

X. Justices of Ass. G.D. and of P. in Sess. and Stewards in Leets shall hear
and determine the Breach of this Act.

XI. The one Moity of all these forfeitures is given to the prosecutor, and the
other, where there is no Leet, is given to the King, and where there is a Leet,
to the Lord of that Leet.

XII. Stat. 8. El. 10. H. 8.9. which enjoynes to make Bows of other wood then
Ewe, shall not bind any Bowyer dwelling in London, West minster, or Southwarke.

S. Arrowheads 1. Actions popular 17.

Apprentices, S. Laborers.

Armor, Armed men.
I. Stat. 2. E. 3.3. None shall come with force and Arms before the Kings
Justices, or other his Ministers, nor go or ride armed in affraie of peace, in
pain to forfeit their Armor, and to suffer imprisonment at the Kings pleasure.

II. Justices of P. and other officers have power to put this Act in execution,
and the Justices of Ass. shall inquire of their default in that behalf.

III. Stat. 7. R. 2.13. None shall ride in Harness, contrary to 2. E. 3.3. in
pain to forfeit the same.

IV. Stat. 20. R. 2.1. The statutes of 2. E. 3.3. and the 7. R. 2.13. shall be
duly observed, upon the pains contained in the said Stat. of 2. E. 3.3. and
besides to make fine to the King.

S. Recusants. 125.

Arrests, S. Sheriffs.

Arrow-heads.
I. Stat. 7. H. 4.7. Justices of Peace have power to punish such as make
defective Arrow-heads.

Artificers S. Laborers. 20.

Assise of Ale and Beer, S. Victual 5.7. and Weights.

Attainders, S. Certificate 1.

Badger, Lader, Kidder, Carrier, Drover, Transporter of Grain etc.
I. STat. 5. El. 12. Qu.) in pain of 5. l. which License shall remain in
force for one year only from the date thereof. And all Licenses otherwise
granted shall be void.

II. The Justices of Peace in Sess. shall (at their discretions) take
Recognisances of Badgers etc. that they shall not forestall or ingrosse, or put
in practice any Act contrary to 5. and 6. E. 6.14.

III. The Clerk of the Peace shall write and enter the License and
Recognisance, and his Fees shall be, viz. for writing the License 12. d. for
writing the Recognisance 8. d. and for entering them both into a Register Book
4. d. which Book he shall bring to every Sessions.

IV. This shall not give liberty to any Badger, etc. to buy grain out of the
Market (to sell again) unless there be special words in his license to
warrant the same, in pain to forfeit for every time so offending 5. l.

V. The one Moity of these forfeitures is given to the Queen, and the other to
the Informer.

VI. The Queens Moity shall be estreated according to the usual manner, and
the Informers levied by fieri facias, or Capias; But when the suit is wholly
the Queens, the whole forfeiture shall be estreated for her use.

VII. Justices of P. have power to hear and determine these offenses in
Sessions, by inquisition or verdict; or otherwise upon the oath of two
witnesses (at their discretions) and to make process thereupon.

VIII. This Act shall not restrain Purveyors of Cities and towns corporate;
neither yet the Inhabitants of the Counties of Westmerland, Cumberland,
Lancaster, Chester, and York.

IX. Stat. 13. El. 25. The Statute of 5. El. 12. is confirmed.

S. Forestallers, 5.12.

Bayliffes, S. Sheriffs.

Bailement.
I. Stat. 3. E. 1.15. Persons outlawed,

II. Persons guilty of Larcenie by enquests (taken before Sheriffs or
Bailiffes) or of petty Larcenie (not before detected, nor accessory to any
felony) or only guilty of some light suspicion, are baileable by good
sureties, for which the Sheriff shall be answerable.

III. Stat. 5. E. 3.8.

IV. Stat. 3. H 7.3. Two Justices (1. Qu.) have power to let to bail persons
baileable by law, until the next Quar. Sess. or G.D. and shall there certify
the same in pain of 10. l.

V. Stat. 1. and 2. P.M. 13. E. 1.15.

VI. None arrested for Manslaughter or felony, or suspicion of the same, (being
baileable by law) shall be let to bail, save only in open Sess. or by two
Just. (1. Qu.) being both present at the time of such bailement, which then
shall be certified (together with the examination of the Prisoner, and the
Information of the Accusers) under their own hands at the next Jail delivery,
and the said examination and Information shall be taken before the bailement.

VII. The said Justices have power to bind by Recognisance all such as can
declare any thing material against the Prisoner to appear at the next Jail
delivery, and shall there make certificate of the said Recognisance.

VIII. The Justices that offend any Branch of this Act are liable to be fined
by the Justices of Jail delivery.

IX. This Act shall not restrain Justices within London and Middlesex to let
to bail I risoners, as heretofore they have used, only they shall certify
their examinations, Bonds, and bailements at the next Jail delivery of their
Jurisdiction, in pain to be fined, as aforesaid.

X. Every Habeas Corpus or Certiorari for the Removal of a Prisoner shall be
signed by the Chief Justice or one of the Justices of the Court out of which
the Writ issues, in pain of five pounds to be forfeited by the Writer.

XI. Stat. 2.3. P.M. 10. One accused of Manssaughter or Felony, which, for want
of bail, is to be sent to the Jail, must be examined by the Justice, before
he sends him thither, and the Accusers must be bound over to give in evidence
against him, whose Information must also be taken and committed to writing
within two days after at the farthest, and all certified in at the next Jail
delivery, as by the stat. of 1.2. P.M. 13. is limited, upon the penalty
therein expressed.

Bakers, S. Victual 2.10. Weights 2, 4, 5, 9.

Barges, S. Boatemen.

Bastardie.
I. Stat. 18. El. 3. Qu.) may take order as well for the punishment of the
mother, and reputed father of a Bastard Child, as also for the relief of the
Parish, where it is borne, by charging the said mother, and father with the
sustentation thereof, by payment of money weekly, or otherwise.

II. If the mother or father perform not the said Justices order, they shall
suffer imprisonment without bail, except he, she or they give security to
perform it, or else to appear at the next Quarter Sess. and also to abide the
order of the greater part of the Justices there, if any shall be there made; if
not, then to perform the order made by the two Justices. 5.

III. Stat. 7. Jac. 4.

IV. Stat. 21. Jac. 27. child, unless she can prove by one witness (at least)
that it was still-borne.

V. Stat. 3. Car. 4. All Justices of Peace within their several limits and
Sess. may do and execute all things concerning that part of 18 Eli. 3. which
concerns Bastards, that by the Justices of Peace in the several Counties are
by the said statute limited to be done.

Beer, S. Corn, 1.

Bell-metall, S. Brass, 15.

Benhurst hundred in Com. Berk.

S. Hue and Cry, 8.

Bigamie.
I. Stat. 1. E. 6.12. A Bigamus being a felon shall be admitted to his Clergy,
as well as any other.

II. Stat. 1. Jac. 11. A Bigamus shall suffer death as a Felon, unless he or
she have had no notice, that the husband or wife was living within seven years
before, or the Marriage severed by divorce.

III. This felony shall cause no corruption of blood, or loss of dower, or
inheritance.

Boatmen, Watermen, Barges, Boats, etc.
I. Stat. 26. H. 8.5. Justices of the Peace within the Counties of Gloucester
and Summerset in Sess. shall bind keepers of Ferries over Severne by
Recognisance with good sureties, that they shall not transport any Passenger
out of England into Wales, or the Forest of Deane, or from thence into England
before Sun rising, or after Sun set, unless such as they know, and will answer
for; And besides the parties so offending shall thereby incur fine and
imprisonment.

II. Stat. 2. and 3. P. M. 16.

III. Two Watermen shall not carry any, but where one of them has exercised
that profession two years before that time, and has been allowed by the
greater part of the said Overseers, under their known seal, in pain to be
committed to one of the Counters by the said Overseers for one month, or for
less time, as the offense may deserve.

IV. No single man, which is no householder, nor retained as an Apprentice, or
as a servant for one year at least shall exercise that profession, betwixt the
places aforesaid, in pain of like imprisonment.

V. The Lord Mayor, and Aldermen of London, and the Justices of Peace within
the Counties adjoining to the River of Thames, upon complaint of any two of the
Overseers, or of any Watermans Master, have power not only to hear and
determine any offenses committed against this Act, and to enlarge any Waterman,
unjustly imprisoned by the said Overseers, but likewise to inflict punishment
upon the Overseers themselves, in case they shall unjustly punish any person by
color of this Act.

VI. A Wherry that is not twenty two foot and a half long, and four foot and
an half broad in the Midship, and sufficient to carry two persons on one side
tight, shall be forfeit; in which Case the King and Queen shall have the one
Moity, and the Informer the other.

VII. The Waterman, that withdraws himself in time of pressing, it being
proved by two witnesses before the said Mayor, Aldermen, or Justice, and two of
the said Overseers, shall suffer a fortnights imprisonment, and shall be
prohibited to row any more upon Thames for a year and a day after.

VIII. The Overseers shall not only call the Watermen before them, direct them,
and Register their names, but likewise examine their boats before they be
lanched, whether they have due proportion and goodness according to this Act.

IX. If the Overseers refuse or neglect their office, they shall forfeit 5. l.
whereof the King and Queen shall have one Moity, and the Informer the other.

X. The Court of Aldermen shalll assesse the Fares of Watermen, which being
subscribed by two of the Privy Council (at least) shall be set up in
Guildhall, Westminster Hall, etc. And the Waterman that takes more then
according to the Fares so assessed, shall for every such offense suffer half a
years imprisonment, and forfeit 40. s. viz. the one Moity to the King and
Queen, the other to the Informer.

XI. Stat. 1. Jac. 16. viz. the one Moity to the King, and the other to the
Informer.

XII. This Act shall not restrain Watermens sons of convenient growth and
strength, and formerly trained up in rowing, but that they may be allowed to
serve as Apprentices, and to carry passengers from place to place at the age of
sixteen years.

XIII. The eight Overseers shall yearly upon the first of March, and the first
of September cause openly to be read in their Common Hall, all their orders
made, or to be made; in pain that every of them for every such default shall
forfeit twenty nobles, viz. the one Moity to the King, and the other to the
Informer.

Books, Images.
I. Stat. 3. and 4. E. 6.10. All popish Books in times past used for service
of the Church shall be utterly abolished and forbidden to be used within the
Kings Dominions.

II. All persons whatsoever having in their custody any popish Books, or
Images carved or painted, which have been taken out of, or yet do stand in any
Church or Chapel, shall destroy the said Images and deliver the said Books
to the Major, Bayliffe, Constable or Churchwardens of the town, where such
books then shall be, to be delivered over to the Archbishop, Bishop,
Chancellor, or Commissarie of the same Diocese, to the intent the said Books
should be by them openly burnt, or otherwise defaced, in pain to forfeit, for
the first default 10. s. for the second 4. l. and for the third imprisonment at
the Kings will.

III. The officer shall within three months deliver over the said Books unto
the Archbishop, Bishop, etc. and they shall within forty days after burn or
deface the same, or cause them to be burned or defaced, in pain to forfeit
respectively 40. l. a piece, whereof one Moity is given to the King, and the
other to the Informer.

IV. Justices of Assise, and Just. of P. in Sess. have power to inquire, hear
and determine these defaults, and offenses.

V. Images upon Tombs shall remain, unless the dead person have been
commonly taken for a Saint.

VI. Primers set forth by H. 8. purged from sentences of invocation, or prayer
to Saints, shall be still retained.

S. Recusants, 17.123.124.

Bows, S. Archerie.

Brass, Latten, Copper, Bellmetall, Pewter, etc.
I. Stat. 19. H. 7.6. None shall sell,

II. None shall cast or work Brass or Pewter, but according to the goodness
of metal wrought within London, in pain to forfeit the same, viz. one Moity
to the King and the other to the finder.

III. Hollow ware of Pewter called lay metal shall be wrought after the Assise
of Lay metal in London, and shall be marked, in pain to forfeit the said
wares, or (being sold) the price of the same to be divided as aforesaid.

IV. None shall use (in the selling of Brass or Pewter) any false beams or
weights, in pain to forfeit 20. s. to be divided betwixt the King and the
prosecutor, and in case he be not able to pay it, he shall be (by the head
officer) committed to the stocks, till the next Market day, and then stand upon
the Pillory.

V. Searchers of Brass and Pewter in every City and Borrough shall be
appointed by the head officers of the same; and in every County by the Just. of
P. at their Mich. Sessions. And in default of Searchers in Cities and Boroughs
any other person (skillful in that mystery) by oversight of the head officers
may take upon him the search of defective Brass, which being found either by
him or the other searchers, shall be equally divided, as aforesaid.

VI. Stat. 4. H. 8.7. The Statute of 19. H. 7.6. is confirmed, and besides it
is enacted, that in Cities and Boroughes search of defective Tin and Pewter
shall be made by the. Wardens of the Craft of Pewterers, and in towns, where
no Wardens are, searchers shall be appointed by the head-officers there, which
said defective Ware shall be forfeited and divided, as in the former statute.

VII. Stat. 25. H. 8.9. None shall buy or take by exchange any wares made of
Tin or Pewter out of the Realm, in pain to forfeit them, and also the value
thereof in money.

VIII. Officers may search and seize wares brought into this Realm contrary to
this Act.

IX. No stranger borne shall work any Pewter or Tin in England in pain to
forfeit the same.

X. No Pewterer shall teach his trade in a foreign nation, in pain to lose
the Privilege of an Englishman.

XI. Licenses and Placards to wandering Brasiers and Pewterers shall be void.

XII. The penalties mentioned in 19. H. 7. and in this present Act shall be
equally divided betwixt the King and the finder. Stat. 33. H. 8.4.

XIII. Stat. 33. H. 8.4. The statute of 25. H. 8.9. is confirmed.

XIV. None shall withstand the search of Brass, tin, pewter, etc. in pain
of 5. l. to be divided, as in the former Statutes.

XV. Stat. 33. H. 8.7. and 2. E. 6.37.

Bridges.
I. Mag. Cart. 9. H. 3.15.

II. Stat. 22. H. 8.5. Qu.) shall in Sessions inquire, hear and determine the
annoyances of Bridges, and of the highwayes adjoining within 300 foot next
unto the said Bridges, and shall also charge such as should repair them by
sending forth process, or setting pains, as they shall think fit.

III. When it cannot be known, what precinct should repair a Bridge, or way,
they shall be repaired by the County, Riding, or Corporation, within which they
are situate, and if they happen to be situate in two of such precincts, the
Inhabitants there shall repair their several parts respectively.

IV. The said four Just. have power to call before them the Constables, or two
able men of every parish, and by their assent to make a tax and Collectors to
levy the same by distress and Sale, and also to make Survey ours of the said
decayed Bridges, and ways, unto whom the Collectors shall pay the money
levied, which said Collectors and Surveyours shall render an Account unto the
said Justices upon pain of Imprisonment without Bail.

V. The said Just. may in this case send process out of their jurisdiction,
which the officers, to whom it is directed, shall obey and serve, in pain to
be fined by the said Justices.

VI. This Act shall not extend to the five Ports nor to the members of the
same: save only, that their officers shall have such power to reform annoyances
of Bridges and ways there, as the Just. of P. have elsewhere by force of this
Act.

VII. The said Just. shall allow to the said Collectors and Surveyors their
reasonable charges.

VIII. Stat. 3. Ja. 23. An Act for the new making and keeping in repair of
Chepstow Bridge.

Brewers.
Stat. 23. H. 8.4. The forfeiture of a Brewer, that does sell his vessels of
Ale, and beer for more then they shall be assessed at by the Justices of the
County, or the head officers of a Corporation within their several limits
respectively, is x. s. for any vessel greater then a Barrel, 6. s. for a
Barrel, 3. s. 4. d. for a kilderkin, 2. s. for a firkin, and 12. d. for every
less measure to be equally divided betwixt the K. and the prosecutor.

S. Purveyors, 56. Victual, 2.10. weights, 4.7.13.

Buggery.
I. Stat. 25. H. 8.6.

II. Justices of P. have power to enquire, hear, and determine this offense.

III. Stat. 5. El. 17. The Statute of 25. H. 8.6. is revived.

Burglary, House-breaking.
I. Stat. 3. and 4. E. 1.

II. Stat. 23. H. 8.1. Stat. 4. and 5. P.M. 4.

III. Stat. 25. H. 8.3. Clergy shall not be allowed to a Burgler, that stands
mute, Stat. 1. E. 6.12.

IV. Stat. 5. and 6. E. 6.9. the house, or precincts of the same; So it is also
for Burglarie committed in Boothes, or Tents. Stat. 18. El. 7.

V. Stat. 39. El. 15. Clergy shall not be allowed to any that feloniously
takes away any thing in the day time, amounting to the value of 5. s. out of
any dwelling house or outhouse, although no person be within or near the same.

S. Clergy. Felony, 15.

Burning of Houses, etc.
I. Stat. 23. H. 8.1. Clergy shall not be allowed to the principal or
Accessory that is found guilty of the malicious burning of a dwelling house or
a Barn of grain. Stat. 4. and 5. P.M. 4.

II. Stat. 25. H. 8.3. Nor to the wilful Burner of a house (according to the
tenor of 23. H. 8.1.) which stands mute, or makes peremptory Challenge of above
xx. Stat. 4. and 5. P.M. 4. Includes the Accessarie also.

III. Stat. 37. H. 8.6. For the malicious burning of waynes or Carts laden,
Heaps of wood, or the frame of a house, the offender shall suffer as in case
of Felony, and shall forfeite his goods and profits of his lands during his
life, but his wife shall have her Dower, and his heir the inheritance, only out
of profits of the lands the heir shall satisfy damages to the party grieved.

S. Bailement, 1. Clergy.

Butchers.
I. Stat. 51. H. 3.

II. Stat. 4. H. 7.3.

III. Stat. 3. and 4. E. 6.19.

Note that the Statute of 24. H. 8.9. which prohibiteth Butchers to kill
weaning Calves under the age of two years is expired. See 21. Jac. 28.

S. Forestallers, 5. Leather, 13. Victual, 2.10. Weights. 14.

Butter, Cheese.
I Stat. 3. and 4. E. 6.21.

II. Stat. 21. Jac. 22. The Statute of 3. and 4. E. 6.21. shall not extend to
the Retaylers of Cheese in London, Westminster, or Southwark, having served
seven years in that trade, and not uttering above 4 wey of Cheese, or 4.
barrels of Butter at one time, without fraud.

III. Justices of P. in Sessions have power to restrain the retailing of Butter
and Cheese, during which restraint those that retail shall be liable to the
penalty of 3. and 4. E. 6.21. and 5. and 6. E. 6.14. which see in Forestallers.

S. Corn. 1.

Butts, S. Archerie.

Buying of Titles, S. Mainteynance.

Calves, S. Leather. 12. Captains, Soldiers, Musters, Mariners.
I. STat. 1. E. 3.5. No man shall be compelled to arm himself otherwise then
in times past, neither shall any man be compelled to go out of the Shire, save
where necessity requires, and the sudden coming of strange enemies into the
Realm, and then it shall be done as in times past for the defense of the Realm.

II. Stat. 1. E. 3.7. Whereas Commissioners have heretofore prepared men of
Arms, and conveyed them to the K. in Scotland, Gascoine, or else where, at the
Charge of the Shires, whereby the Commons have been much impoverished: The
King will, that it shall be done so no more.

III. Stat. 18. E. 3.7. Men of Arms, Hoblers,

IV. Stat. 25. E. 3.8.

V. Stat. 18. H. 6.19.

VI. Officers shall arrest Soldiers, which within their term limited come on
this side the Sea without Letters Testimonial of their Captain, and shall
retain them, until the cause of their return be tried.

VII. Justices of P. have power to hear and to determine their offenses.

VIII. Stat. 7. H. 7.1. A Captain,

IX. It is felony for a Soldier retained to depart from his Colors without
License, for which he shall not enjoy the benefit of his Clergy, 15.

X. Justices of P. have power to enquire, hear, and determine this offense of
departing without License, and the trial thereof shall be in the same County,
where the Soldier is apprehended, 15.

XI. This Act shall not be prejudicial to Captains: when Soldiers die, or
otherwise depart without any default of theirs; so that they therewith acquaint
(at Land) the Tresurer of the wars within ten days after, or (at Sea) the
Admiral at their next meeting with him.

XII. Stat. 3. H. 8.5. This act is in all parts the same with 7. H. 7.1. save
only that it shall not extend to Captains and Soldiers in Barwick, Wales,
Calis, and other places in France: nor to Captains having under them Retinue
of Soldiers, or for non-payment of the Kings wages to Captains household
servants.

XIII. Stat. 2. and. 3. E. 6.2. A Soldier that makes away his horse or Arms
(proof thereof being made before the chief Commander) shall suffer
imprisonment without Bail, until he has satisfied the party, at whose charge
he was sent out.

XIV. If such a Soldier escape from the Army without punishment, he shall be
liable to the same to be inflicted upon him by any Justice of P. in those
parts, where he shall be apprehended, unless he bring sufficient testimony
from the Commander, that the horse, or Arms were otherwise lost, or employed
in the Kings service.

XV. It is felony (without benefit of Clergy) for a Soldier retained, to
depart without license of his Commander, whereupon Jusitces of P. may proceed as
in case of felony.

XVI. The Commissioner or Captain, that licenceth any person retained, and
assumeth another for gain, or which gives to any license to depart without
warrant from the Commanders, shall forfeit xx. l. to the K. for every person so
let go.

XVII. The Lieutenant general, or other officer, which receives more wages for
Soldiers then there is cause, and does not every month (by a note in writing)
acquaint the Treasurer of the Army with every Soldiers entry into pay, death,
or departure, shall forfeit 5. l. to the K. suffer one months Imprisonment,
and lose his place.

XVIII. None but the Commander shall license any in pain of Imprisonment both
of the Licencer and Licenced at the discretion of the said Commander.

XIX. The Lieutenant general shall command this Act to be proclaimed in the
Army once every month, and every Governor in his Fortress once every three
months.

XX. Every person which shall inform the Lieutenant of any of these offenses,
shall have a months pay, belonging to him that is faulty.

XXI. This shall not prohibit officers to retain yearly 6. s. 8. d. for the
Coat of a yeoman; and 13. s. 4. d. for that of a Gentleman, neither shall it be
prejudicial unto them, when the lack of Soldiers is not through their
default, nor when they have under them a retinue of Soldiers, nor for
nonpayment of the K. wages to their household Servants; neither shall it extend
to prohibit relief of tenants or friends toward service in war, or the
detaining of Soldiers wages upon lawful Causes.

XXII. Stat. 4. and 5. P. and M. 3. He which absenteth himself from the
Musters, or does not bring thither his best furniture, shall by the
Commissioners be committed to Prison without Bail, unless he immediately
agree to pay xl. s. to the K. and Q. which shall within two months be
estreated in the Exchequer by the said Commissioners, or any two of them.

XXIII. Commissioners and others in authority taking any reward to discharge
Soldiers, shall forseite ten times so much.

XXIV. The one moity of the abovesaid forfeitures is given to the K. and Q. and
the other to the prosecutor.

XXV. A Captain or other officer, which detaines his Soldiers wages shall
forfeit three times so much unto the same Soldier.

XXVI. Just. of Ass. Just. of P. and Stewards in leets have power to hear and
determine these offenses, and the Just. of Ass. or P. upon Conviction of the
offender may commit him to prison without Bail, until he has satisfied the
abovesaid penalties to the K. Q. and prosecutor, or where there is no
prosecutor to the K. and Q. alone.

XXVII. Offenses committed during the time of Service, shall be heard and
determined by the chief Commander.

XXVIII. This Act shall not discharge service of wars incident to the tenure
of Land.

XXIX. The offender of this Act shall not be twice punished for the same
offense.

XXX. None shall under color of Service of war incident to the tenure of
land exact any other thing, then what shall be employed in present service, and
shall be restored again to the owner, when the service is done, at least so
much thereof, as shall not be spent or lost in the service.

XXXI. Inhabitants within Cities, Boroughes and Corporations shall be mustred
at home by the head officer and one other (at least) to be joined with him by
Commission, or otherwise.

XXXII. Stat. 5. El. 5. The Stat. of 18. H. 6.19 shall in all points extend to
Mariners and Gunners, as well as to Soldiers.

XXXIII. Stat. 39. El. 17. setting down the place, where they landed, the
place whither they are to pass, and the time of their passage, or having a
testimonial exceed the time therein limited above fourteen days; or
Counterfeit a testimonial, or produce one which they know to be counterfeited;
shall in all these cases suffer as Felons without benefit of Clergy, 51.

XXXIV. Just. of Ass. G. D. and of P. in their Sess. have power to proceed
against these offenders as in case of felony without Clergy, unless some
sufficient man (allowed by the Justices) will enter into a Recognisance of x.
l. to the Q. to retain the offender for one whole year, and to bring him to
the next Sess. of P. and G. D. after the year ended. And if he within the year
depart that service without license, he shall afterward suffer as a felon
without Clergy.

XXXV. Soldiers or Mariners, which fall sick in their passage home, shall be
excused, though they exceed the time limited in their testimonial, So that
they perform this Act in convenient time after their Recovery.

XXXVI. If, when they come home, they cannot get work, the two next Just.
(upon their complaint) shall take order, that they may be provided of work, or
otherwise shall tax the whole hundred for their Relief until work may be had.

XXXVII. The Soldier or Marrinet (licenced by a Just. of P. to whom he shall
make his poverty known) having not wherewithal to bear his charges home, may
ask and take Relief, So it be in his direct way home, and within the time
limited by his License.

XXXVIII. These offenses shall cause no Corruption of Blood.

XXXIX. Stat. 43. El. 3.

XL. The Constable. or Churchw. of every parish have power to levy the tax of
exery person refusing to pay it, by distress, and Sale, and (in their default)
the said Justice or Justices next adjoining.

XLI. The tax being thus levied, the Constable. or Churchw. shall deliver it
quarterly (ten days before every quarter Sess.) to the high Constable. of their
Division, who shall deliver it over to the Treasurers of the County at the same
quarter Sess.

XLII. The Treasurers shall be Subsidy men, viz. of x. l. in lands or xv. l.
in goods, and shall not continue in their office above one year, rendering up
their Accounts yearly at Easter Sess. or within ten days after, to their
Successors.

XLIII. The officer or his executor, etc. that fails in payment of the Sums
levied, shall forfeit viz. the Churchw. or Constable. xx. s. and high Constable xl.
s. which the Treasurers have power to levy (by distress and Sale) in
augmentation of their Stock.

XLIV. The Treasurer or his executor, etc. that has been negligent to execute
his office, or to render the Account within the time above limited, shall be
fined by the I. of P. in the Sess. 5 l. at least.

XLV. The maimed Soldier or mariner, which was pressed, shall repair (if he be
able to travel) to the Treasurers of the County, where he was pressed, if he
were not pressed, then to the Treasurers of the County, where he was born, or
where he last dwelt by the space of three years, at his election. But if he be
not able to travel, then to Treasurers of the County, where he lands.

XLVI. He shall bring to any of the Treasurers aforesaid a Certificate under
the hand and Seal of the chief Commander, and of the Captain, under whom he
served, containing the particulars of his hurts and services; which Certificate
shall be also allowed by the Muster-Master, General, or the Receiver general
of the Muster-Rolls under one of their hands.

XLVII. Upon such a Certificare the Treafurers aforesaid may allow him Relief
to maintain him until the next Q. Sess. at which the more part of the
Justices may allow him a pension, which the Treasurers shall pay him quarterly,
until it shall be revoked, or altered by the said Justices, And this
Allowance to him, that has not borne office, shall not exceed x. l. To an
officer, under a Lieutenant xv. l. and to a Lieutenant xx. l.

XLVIII. When Soldiers, or Mariners arrive far from the place where they are
to receive relief, the Treasurers there, shall give them relief and a
Testimonial, whereby they may pass from Treasurer to Treasurer until they
shall come at the place required, and this shall be done, upon the bare
Certificate of the Commander, and Captain, although they have not as yet
obtained any allowance thereof from the said Muster-Master, or Receiver
general of the Muster Rolls.

XLIX. The Treasurers shall register their Receipts and disbursments and enter
the names of the parties relieved, and also the Certificates, by warrant
whereof the disbursments are made, The Muster-Master also, or Receiver
aforesaid shall register the names of the parties, and the Certificates by him
allowed; And the Treasurer returning or not allowing the Muster-Masters
Certificate shall hereupon subscribe, or endorse the cause of his disallowance.

L. Justices of P. in Sess. have power to fine a Treasurer, that wilfully
refuses to give relief, which any two of them (appointed by the rest) may levy
by distress, and Salc of his goods.

LI. A Soldier or Mariner, that begs or counterfeits a Certificate shall
suffer punishment as a common Rogue, and shall lose his pension if he have any,
3.3.

LII. The Surplusage of this Contribution shall be employed by the more part of
the Justices in Sess. upon charitable uses, according to Statutes made for
relief of the poor, and punishment of Rogues.

LIII. In Corporations the Justices there shall put this Act in execution and
not the Justices of the County, and shall be liable to fines, as well as other
Justices, if they misuse their power therein, and shall appoint a Collector of
this tax, which shall have the power, and be subject to the penalties limited
(by this Act) to high Constables of Counties.

LIVE. The forfeitures accruing by this Act shall be employed as the Surplusage
abovesaid, or otherwise kept in angmentation of the Stock, as the more part of
the Justices in Sess. shall direct.

LV. When out of the County, where the party was pressed, a fit pension cannot be
satisfied, it shall be supplied by the Counties, where he was born, or where he
last dwelt by the space of three years.

LVI. This Act shall not prohibit the City of London to make a tax (if need
require) differning from that above limited (35.) so that no parish pay above
3. s. weekly, nor above or under 12. d. weekly one parish with another.

S. Boatmen, 7. Felony, 16. Recusants, 112.

Carman, S. Holidays, 2.

Carier, S. Badger, Holidaies, 2.

Cattle, Sheep.
I. Stat. 3. H. 6.2.

II. Stat. 25. H. 8.13.

III. If any happen to have more sheep then two thousand by reason of any
executorship or Marriage, they shall not be impeached by this Law, So that
within one year after they put off so many, that at the end of that year they
may not have above two thousand: neither shall a Child during his nonage (nor
any person for him) be endamaged by this Act, which Child shall have by legacy
above 2000. Sheep given him.

IV. Justices of P. have power to hear and determine the offenses committed
against this Act, but shall not set a less fine, then is limited by the same.

V. Every temporal Subject may keep upon his own demeasne lands as many Sheep
as he will, or for the maintenance of his house, above the number of 2000.
notwithstanding this Act.

VI. How Fouldcourse and quillets of Lands in Norfolk and Suffolk shall be
used, and to which quillers this Statute shall extend, see the Statute at large.

VII. A thousand of Sheep (meant by this statute) shall be accounted after the
rate of fixscore to the hundred.

VIII. None shall take to farm above two Farms together, unless both the
Farms be situate in the same parish where he dwells, in pain to forfeit 3. s.
4. d. for every week he takes the profits of them.

IX Spiritual persons shall keep Sheep, as they have used to do,
notwithstanding this Act.

X. Stat. 3. and 4, E. 6.17. None shall buy any Cattle but in open fair or
Market, and not sell the same again in the same fair or Market in pain to
forfeit double the value thereof.

XI. Stat. 2. and 3. P. and M. 3. He that keeps above 120. Sheep or 20.
Beasts upon several pasture ground apt for milch kyne, and not commonable
shall yearly for every 60, Sheep or 10. Beasts keep one milch cow, and for
every 120. sheep or 20. Beasts rear up one Calfe in pain to forfeit for every
Cow or Calf not so kept or reared xx. s. viz. the one moity to the K. and Q.
the other to the prosecutor, if he co^mence his suit within one year after the
offense committed.

XII. Just of P. in Sess. have power to hear and determine the Breach of this
Statute.

XIII. This Act shall not bind those, which keep sheep or feed Beasts only for
their own provision.

XIV. Stat. 8. El. 3.

XV. This Statute shall not extend to Corruption of Blood or forfeiture of
Dower.

XVI. Just. of G. D. and Just. of P. have power to hear, and determine this
offense.

XVII. The aforesaid goods forfeited shall be divided betwixt the Q and the
prosecutor.

XVIII. Stat. 7. Jac. 8 the Statute of 2. and 3. P. and M. 3. Shall extend as
well to grounds which have been or shall be made several after, as to those
made several before the making of the same Statute.

See But chers. 3. Forestallers. 7.10.

Certificate.
I. Stat. 34. H. 8.14. All Clerks of the Crown, Clerks of Assise, and
Clerks of the Peace shall certify the effect of all Indictments, outlawries,
convictions, or Attainders (taken before them) into the Kings Bench within 40.
days after the taking of them, if it be then term time, if not, then within
20. days after the beginning of the Term next ensuing, in pain to forfeit for
every default 40. s. to be divided betwixt the K. and the prosccutor.

II. The Clerk of the Crown shall certify the effect of such indictments,
etc. unto Just. of G. D. or Just. of P. which write for the same, in pain to
forfeit for every name not certified, 40 s.

III. This Act shall not extend to Clerks of the Crown, P. or G. D. or to
Prenotaries in Wales, Chester, Lancaster, or Duresme.

Certiorari.
State. 6. H. 8.6. The Justices of the Kings Bench have power to remand
Prisoners and Indictments (removed thither by writ) into the country where the
offenses were committed, and also to command the Just. of G. D. and of P. to
proceed there against them according to Law.

See Bailement, 10. Supersedeas, 3.

Challenge.
Stat. 22. H. 8.14 None arraigned for Petty Treason, Murder or Felony shall be
admitted to any peremptory challenge above the number of xx.

Champerty, S. Maintenance.

Cheese, S. Butter, weights, 37.

Citation, S. Ecclesiastical

Court, 8.

Clergy.
I. Stat. 3. E. 1.2.

II. Stat. 4. H. 4.3.

III. Stat. 4. H. 7.13.

IV. A convict person shall be marked openly before the Judge upon the brawne of
his left thumb, viz. with an M. for Murder, and with a T. for any other Felony.

V. He that is within orders upon asking of his Clergy, shall show his orders,
or his Ordinaries Certificate.

VI. Stat. 23. H. 8.1. burglary, Robbery, or houseburning, nor their
accessaries shall be admitted to the benefit of Clergy.

VII. A Clerk within orders, being principal or Accessory to any of hte
offenses abovesaid, shall not be admitted to his purgation nor be enlarged by
the Ordinary, until he shall have bound himself with two good sureties before
two Just. (1 Q.) to be of good behavior.

VIII. The Ordinary may degrade a Convict person, and send him to the Kings
Bench, where the Justices shall have power to give Judgment upon him,
according to which he shall be executed.

IX. Stat. 25. H. 8.3. None shall have benefit of Clergy, which being accused
of any of the offenses mentioned in 23. H. 8.1. are found guilty, stand mute,
challenge above xx. or answer not directly, although the offense were committed
in another County then where they are tried.

X. Stat. 28. H. 8.1. Such as be within holy orders shall receive no other
benefit of Clergy then others do Stat. 32. H. 8.3.

XI Stat. E. 6.12. All Felons shall have the benefit of Clergy save only such
as are found guilty of Murder, poisoning, Burglary, Robbery, Horsestealing, or
sacrilege, or which upon their Arraignement for any of the same offenses
confess the same, stand mute, or make no direct answer thereunto. see 2.3. E.
6.33.

XII. A Pecre of the Realm for his first offense of Felony, though he cannot
read, shall be admitted to his purgation, as a Clerk convict.

XIII. Stat. 4.5. P. M. 4.

XIV. Stat. 8. El. 4.

XV. Stat. 18. El. 7.

XVI. He that shall be admitted to his Clergy, shall notwithstanding that,
answer for other felonies.

XVII. Stat. 1. Ia. 8.

XVIII. This Act shall not extend to charge any with stabbing or thrusting when
it is done only Se defendendo, by misfortune, or in chastising his Child or
servant with no purpose to commit Manslaughter.

S. Burglary.

Clerk of the Peace.
I. Stat. 37. H. 8.1. The Custos Rotulorum shall appoint the Clerk of the
Peace, who may execute the same Office, by a deputy if he please.

II. This Act shall not restrain the Archbishop of York, the Bishops of
Duresme, or Ely, nor any other, who by the Kings Letters Patents, or otherwise,
have (before the making of this Act) power to choose a Clerk of the Peace
within any precinct or liberty.

S. Badger. 3. Certificate. 1.

Clerk of the Crown, S. Certificate.

Clerk of Assise S. Certificate.

Clerk of the Market, S. Weights.

Cloth. S. Drapery.

Coin, S. Money.

Commons, S. Horses.

Commissions, S. Just. of P.

Conies, S. Hunting.

Conjuration, S. Witchcraft.

Conspiracy, S. Laborers, 3. Masons.

Conspirators.
I. Who be Conspirators, See Stat. 33. E. 1.

II. Their punishment, and what Justices shall inquire of them, viz. Just. of
both the Benches, and of Assise, See Stat. 28. E. 1.10. Mainteynance, 8.

S. Felony.

Convictions, S. Certificate, 1.

Cooks, S. Victual.

Copper, S. Brass.

Corn.
I. Stat. 2. P. M. 5. and the other to the prosecutor.

II. If one licenced to transport Corn, victual, or wood, transport more then
his license will warrant, he shall forfeit the treble value and suffer one
years imprisonment without Bail.

III. He that has license to transport Corn, victual or wood, shall imbark
all at one place, in pain to forfeit the same, and besides all his goods: The
one Moity to the King and Queen, and the other to the prosecutor.

IV. Justices of Peace (within three years after the abovesaid offenses shall
be committed) have power to hear and determine the same, and also to examine
the Masters and Mariners of ships concerning the premises.

V. This Act shall not restrain lthe transportation of Grain when Wheat is
sold for 6. s. 8. d. Rye for 4. s. and Barley for 3 s. the quarter (save only to
the K. and Q. enemies) nor the victualling of ships, nor be prejudicial to the
Admiralls jurisdiction.

VI. Stat. 13. El. 13. The Lord presidents, and the Counsels in the North and
Wales, the Justices of Assise in their Circuits, and the Justices of Peace in
their Sessions have power to license or prohibit the transportation of Corn
at their discretions, Provided their order be first approved by the Queen or
her Council, which also may be countermanded by the Q. proclamation, if there
be cause for it.

VII. Stat. 3. Car. 4.

S. Badger, Forestallers, 6.10.

Corners.
I. Stat. 3. E. 1. Officium Coronatoris, Statute at large.

II. Stat. 3. H. 7.1.

III. Stat. 1. H. 8.7.

IV. Justices of Peace have power to enquire of, and punish the defaults and
extortions of Coroners.

V. Stat. 1.2. P. M. 13.

Costermongers, S. Victual, 10.

Cottages.
I. Stat. 31. El. 7. None shall erect, or convert a Building to be a Cottage
for habitation, unless he lay four acres of land of an Inheritance so near
unto it, that they may be conveniently occupied with it, in pain to forfeit to
the Q. Majesty x. l. for every such erection or Conversion, and 40. s. a month
for the Continuance.

II. No owner or occuptier of any Cottage shall place or willingly suffer any
more families then one to co-habite therein, in pain to forfeit to the Lord of
the Leet x. s. for every month he so continues them together.

III. Justices of Assise, Justices of Peace in their Sessions and Lords of
Leets have power to hear and determine these offenses.

IV. This Statute shall not restrain the erecting, making or continuing of
Cottages in Market towns, or for Laborers in mines or quarries within one
Miles distance from the said Mines or Quarries, or Seafaring men within one
Miles distance from the Sea or a Navigable River, or for a Keeper, Warrener,
shepherd, Herds man, or impotent person.

Covin, Collusion, S. Actions popular, 1, 2, 3, 4.

Counterfeit Letters, or tokens.
I. Stat. 33. H. 8.1. A person convict of getting into his hand money or goods
by a false token, or Counterfeit letter, shall suffer such corporal
punishment, as shall be prescribed by them, before whom he shall be so
convicted, death only excepted.

II. The Lord Keeper, the Star Chamber, Justices of Assife, Justices of P. in
Sess. and Just. of P. in Corporate towns, have power to hear and determine
this offense.

III. Two Just. of P. (1. Qu.) have power to commit or bind over such an
offender to the next Assise or Sess.

IV. The party grieved (notwithstanding the punishment inflicted) is left to
his remedy at law for the Recovery of his goods against the party offending.

Counterfeiters of the Kings Seal or Coin, S. Bailment, 1.

Coopers.
1. Stat. 8. El. 9. Coopers shall sell their Ale, Becre, and Soap Vessel at
such rates, as shall be prescribed by I. of P. in their Sess. after Easter, in
pain to forfeite 3. s. 4. d. for every Vessel otherwise sold.

Crossebowes, S. Gunnes.

Currier, S. Leather.

Cursing, S. Swearing.

Custom, Customers, S. Actions popular, 15, 18. Recusants, 75, 94.

Cutpurse, S. Robbery.

Cutting out off tongues, etc. S. Felony, 5.

Cutting off a pond head, S. Fishing.

Deeds, S. Inrolment.

Dear, S. Hunting.

Divine Service, S. Sacraments

Dying and Dyers, S. Drapery.

Drapery, Clothing.
I. STat. 3.4. E. 6.2. Just.

II. An overseer so by them chosen, shall undertake that office, in pain of
xl. s. and none shall interrupt him in the execution of his office in pain of
xx. l.

III. The forfeitures for defaults in Cloth making (mentioned in this Statute)
shall be recovered in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record or before Just. of
P. in their several limits within one year after the offense committed, and
the one Moity thereof shall be given to the King, and the other to the
Overseer, that discovers the said defaults, vide Stat. 5.6. E. 6.6.

IV. Stat. 23. El. 9. may command logwood (which some deceiptfully use for
Dying of Cloth) to be seized and openly burnt.

V Stat. E. 11. A Just. of P. of the County or Head officer of a Corporation
(being also a Just. of P. there) have power to call before them, and examine
the Servants of persons supected to use logwood in dying, and (if they shall
find cause) to bind over to the next Qu. Sess. both the evidence, and party
offending, and upon the Delinquents refusal to be bound shall commit him to
prison till he find sureties: They shall also certisie in at the same Sess. the
examinations by then taken, where, if the party offending be convicted, he
shall suffer the Pillory and forfeit xx. l. the one Moity to the Q. and the
other to the prosecutor.

VI. Stat. 39. El. 20. None shall stretch, or strain any Clothes made on the
North side of Trent in pain of five pounds, nor use any Engine to that purpose
in pain of xx. l.

VII. Northern Clothes shall be made of such weight, length, and breadth, as by
former Statutes is provided upon the pains in the same Statutes contained.

VIII. A seal of lead shall be set to every Northern Cloth expressing the
length and weight thereof, in pain to forfeit the same: And here, the offender
shall also forfeit for every yard, that it wants of due length, 4. s. and for
every pound, that it wants of due weight, 2. s.

IX. Overseers shall be appointed and sworn in the County by two Just. of P.
and in Corporations by the head officer calling to him the next Just. of P. to
make search once a month at least for defects in Northern Clothes, and if
they shall find any stretched, strained or sealed with false seals, they shall
make presentment thereof at the next Qu. Sessions: And here, he that denies, or
withholds any faulty Clothes shall for the first offense forfeit x. l. for the
second xx. l. and for the third (being thereof lawfully convicted by verdict
and two witnesses) shall suffer the Pillory.

X. The Overseer, that refuses to appear, or to undertake that office, shall
forfeit 5. l. the one Moity to the Queen, the other to the officers that made
him overseer.

XI. The overseers shall fix a Seal of lead tosuch Clothes expressing the
length and breadth of the same together with the word Searched, which shall
exempt them to be searched else where.

XII. If any (save the said overseers) set to or take away any seal from the
said Clothea without warrant, they shall forfeit to the Queen for the first
offense x. l. and for the second (being thereof lawfully convicted by verdict,
and two Witnesses) xx. l. and besides suffer the Pillory.

XIII. Justices of P. Headconstables and overseers shall search and seize ropes,
wrinches and other Engines used for the unlawful stretching of Northern
Clothes, and none shall withstand them upon the forfeitures above mentioned for
resisting the Overseers, 9.

XIV. The Justice, that shall be found negligent in the due execution of this
Act, shall forfeit 5. l. And this and all other forfeitures of this Act (except
that mentioned Clause, 10.) shall be divided into three parts, whereof the
Queen is to have one, the Informer another, and the poored of the place, where
the offense is committed, the third.

XV. Justioes of P. have power to hear and determine these offenses in their
Sess. and Just. of Assise to convict the Just. of P. that are negligent upon
proof by two witnesses, but upon neglect of justice by the said Justice of P.
and Just. of Assise the abovesaid penalties are recoverable in any other Court
of Justice, and in that case the one half thereof shall go to the Q. and the
other to the Informer.

XVI. The owners of Northern Clothes brought up to be sold in London shall
cause them to be brought to Blackwell Hall to be searched dry without wetting,
in pain of xl.s. but here the Searcher shall not make his search at such
times, when it may be a hinderance to the owners market, in pain of v. l.
These penalties are likewise given to the Queen, and the Informer.

XVII. Stat, 7. Jac. 7. The Sorrer, Carder, Kember, the true owner, shall
incur whipping, and the stocks, to be inflicted upon them in the Country by
any two Just. of P. and in a Corporation, by the Head officer and another
joined with him; And here also the Receiver there of shall incur the like
punishment, and those also in Essex, which use a Reel less then two yards
about.

XVIII. Stat. 7. Jac. 16.

XIX. Stat. 21. Jac. 18. Diverse good provisions for the well ordering of Cloth,

XX. Any two Just. of P. may call before them any person suspected for making
deceiveable Cloth, and if upon confession of the party or testimony of two
witnesses they shall find any guilty thereof, and make Certificate accordingly
under their hands and seals to the Churchwardens, and Overseers of the parish,
where the offense is committed, those officers shall levy the penalties
forfeitedby distress, the delinquent shall suffer imprisonment.

See Laborers. 54. and Weights. 35.

Drover, S. Badger, Holidays. 2.

Drunkenness, S. Alehouses.

Ecclesiastical Court.
1. STat. 21. H. 8.5. Nothing shall be given for the Probate of a Will or for
letters of Administration when the goods of the Dead exceed not 5. l. save only
6 d. to the Scribe, or Register; Nevertheless the Judge shall not refuse to
prove such a testament being exhibited unto him in writing with wax ready to be
sealed, and proved communi forma, but shall dispatch the aprty without delay.

II. For the Probate of a Will, and all other things concerning the same, when
the goods of the dead exceed 5. l. but not xl. l. the Judges Fee is 2. s. 6. d.
and the Registers for registring of it, 12. d. and when they exceed xl.l. the
Judges Fee is 2. s. 6. d. as before, and the Registers as much: or the
Registers may refuse the 2. s. 6. d. and take a 1. d. for every ten lines of
the Will, each line being conceived. to contain ten Inches in length: And for
these fees they shall dispatch the party without any frustratory delay.

III. For letters of Administration, when the goods of the dead exceed 5. l.
but not xl. l. the Officers Fees are only 2. s. 6. d.

IV. Lands devised to be sold. shall not be accounted any of the Testators
goods.

V. The Judge shall not refuse to receive an Inventory indented which the
executor or administrator tenders him in Court together with his oath to
verify the same.

VI. The Fee for the copy either of a will or Inventory is the same with that
above allowed to the Scribe for Registring the will, or else the Scribe or
Register may take a x. d. for every ten lines of the length aforesaid.

VII. The officer that takes more then his due Fee shall forfeit that excess
to the party grieved, and besides x. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the
said party grieved.

VIII. Stat. 23. H. 8.9.

See Tithes.

Egyptians.
1. Stat. 1. 2. P. and M. 4.

II. Their continuing in England, or Wales by the space of a month, shall be
adjudged Felony without Clergy.

III. Hi that obtaines License, letter, or Pasport for them, shall forfeit xl.
l.

IV. The forfeitures aforesaid shall be equally divided betwixt the K. and Q.
Majesty's, and the prosecutor.

V. Stat. 5. El. 20.

VI. This act shall not include Children within fourteen years of Age, nor
People in Prison, so they void the Kingdom within foureteen days after tehy
shall be enlarged, or reform their course of life.

VII. None borne within this Kingdom and Wales shall be compellable to void
the Land by the Stat. of 1.2. P. M. 4. but only to leave their naughty Course
of life.

Embracery, S. Maintenance.

Enditements, S. Indictments.

Enquests, S. Jurors.

Escapes, S. Felony. 7.

Escheators.
1. Stat. 23. H. 6.17. An Escheator shall not take above xl. s. for the
execution of one Writ in one County, and that only when his labor and Costs
require it, otherwise he ought to take less.

II. Stat. 12. E. 4.9. None shall take upon him to be an Escheator or Deputy to
an Escheator, unless the Escheator himself has Freehold within the County
worth xx. l. per Annum, in pain of xl. l.

III. His Deputy or Farmor shall be a sufficient man, and shall Certify into
the Exchequer his deputation within twenty days next after it is made, upon
the like pain of forty pound.

IV. Justices of P. in Sess. have power to hear and determine these defaults,
and to give Judgment for the recovery of the said forfeitures, which are to be
distributed betwixt the K. and the prosecutor.

V. This Stat. shall not restrain Corporations, which have power by their
Charter to appoint Escheators.

VI. Stat. 1. H. 8.8. per Annum in pain of xx. l.

VII. Stat. 33. H. 8.22. per Annum, above 15. s. viz. for his own Fee 6. s. 8.
d. for writing the office 3. s. 4. d. for the charges of the Jury 3. s. and for
the officers above, that are to receive the office, 2. s.

Estreates.
1. Stat. 9. E. 3.5. Just. of Ass.

II. Stat. 31. E. 3.3.

III. Stat. 42. E. 3.9. The party Chargeable by the Estreats of green wax,
upon payment thereof shall see the schedules themselves under seal and totted,
for default whereof, if he shall be afterward damnified, the Sheriff shall
pay him treble damages, to be recovered before Just. of P. or other Justices,
and shall besides make fine to the King.

S. Indictments, 5. Jurors, 9. Iuft. of P. 18.

Excommunicate persons, S. Bailment, 1. Fighting, Sheriffs, 4.

Extortion, S. Actions popular, 15.

Faires, S. Horses, 11, etc. 16, etc.

Fasting days, S. Fishdayes.

Feasants, S. Hawks.

Felony.
I. STat. 9. H. 3.22. Annum diem et vastum in Felons lands, and then they shall
be delivered to the Lords of whom they are holden.

II. Stat. 3. E. 1.12. Notorious Felons,

III. Stat. 1. E. 2.

IV. Stat. 5. H. 4.4.

V. Stat. 5. H. 4.5.

VI. Stat. 8. H. 6.12.

VII. Stat. 1. R. 3.3.

VIII. Officers shall not seize the goods of any arrested, or imprisoned for
suspicion of Felony before his conviction, in pain to forfeite double the
value of the goods so taken.

IX. Stat. 3. H. 7.14.

X. Stat. 6. H. 8.6. The I. of the K. B. have power to remitt out of that Court
Prisoners committed for felony or Murder, to be tried in the country where the
offense was committed

XI. Stat. 21. H. 8.11. After Attainder of a Felon, the Justices before whom
the Felony was tried, shall by a Writ of Restitution command the stolen goods to
be restored to the right owner.

XII. Stat. 22. H. 8.11. It shall be Felony to break downPowdike in Norfolk,
and Oldfield dile in the Isle of Ely.

XIII. Just. of P. there have power to hear and determine this Offense.

XIV. Stat. 24. H. 8.5. There shall be no forfeiture of lands or goods for the
killing of any person, that attempteth to Murder, rob, or burglarily to break
any Mansion House.

XV. Stat. 31. El. 4. It shall be Felony to imbesill any warlike habiliments,
or victuals provided for Soldiers, and others to the value of xx. s. worth,
unless the delinquent be not prosecuted within one year after the offense
committed, or otherwise shall discharge himself by lawful proof.

XVI. For this offense none shall incur corruption of Blood, or forfeiture of
Inheritance, or Dower.

XVII. Stat. 43. El. 13. In the Counties of Cumberland, Northumberland,
Westmerland, and the Bishopric of Duresime, the carrying away, or detaining of
any person against his will, the assenting, or aiding to the taking or
detaining of any person, the receiving or carrying of Black Maile, the giving
of black Maile for protection, or the burning of Barnes, or stacks of grain
shall be adjudged Felony without Clergy, which the I. of Ass. G.D. and P. have
power to hear and determine.

XVIII. The names of persons outlawed there for felony shall be delivered by
the Clerks of the P. to all Sheriffs, Majors, and other Head officers to be
proclaimed throughout all the said Counties; And with them none shall converse,
in pain to suffer six months Imprisonment, andnot to be enlarged, till surety
be given for the good behavior during one whole year after such Imprisonment.

XIX. I. of Ass. G. D. Oy. and Term. and of P. have power to punish the
negligence of officers in this behalf.

XX. This Act shall not impeach the authority of the Lord Wardens of the
Marches.

S. Bailment, 3.6.7.11. Clergy. Hunters, 5. Laborers. 1. Masons, Matrimony, 1.
Murder, 5.

Felonsgoods, S. Felony, 8.12.

Fighting and quarrelling.
I. Stat. 5.6. E. 6.4. None shall use chiding words in the Church or
Churchyard, in pain of Suspension for so long time as the Ordinary shall think
fit, viz. of a lay man ab ingressu Ecclesia, and of a Clerk a Ministerio
officii.

II. He that uses violent hands there, is thereby excomunicate ipso facto.

II. He that is convicted of striking with a weapon there (or of drawing it,
with an intent to strike) before I. of Ass. of Oy. and T. or of P. in Sess. by
verdict, his own Confession, or two lawful witnesses, shall by Judgment of
the said Justices have one of his Ears cut off, and in case he want Ears,
shall be burned upon the Cheek with the Letter F. and shall stand excommunicate
Ipsofacto.

S. Maintenance, 7. etc.

Fish, Fishers, Fishing.
I. Stat. 13. E. 1.47. Salmons shall not be taken betwixt the Nativity of our
Lady, and Martlemas, nor young Salmons betwixt the midst of April, and
Midsommer.

II. Overseers of this statute shall be appointed, and sworn to enquire after
the offenders, who for the first time shall be punished by burning their Nets or
Engines; for the second by a quarter of a years imprisonment; for the third by
a whole years imprisonment: and as the offense increases, so shall the
punishment.

III. Stat. 13. R. 2.19. No Fisher shall use any Engine, by which the fry of
Fish may be destroyed, upon the pains mentioned in the Stat. of 13. E. 1.47.

IV. Salmons in Lancashire shall not be taken betwixt Michaelmas, and Candlemas.

V. Conservators shall be sworn to see this statute observed, and the
offenders punished.

VI. Stat. 17. R. 2.9. Just. E. 1.47. and of 13. R. 2.19. and shall have power
to search all Wears, least by their straitness the fry of fish might be
destroyed.

VII. Just. of P. have power to appoint and swear under conservators to hear
and determine in Sess. offenses of this kind, and to punish the offenders by
Imprisonment, and fine, whereof the under conservator, which informs, is to
have half.

VIII. The Mayor or Warden of London has like power in Thames, from Stains to
London, and in Medeway, as far as the Citizens grant extends.

IX. Stat. 22. E. 4.2.

X. Stat. 11. H. 7.23.

XI. Stat. 1. El. 17. Salmons, then 16. Trowts, then 8. and Barbells, then 12.
or use any engine, to take fish, other then an Angle, or a net, or tramell of
two inches and an half meshe, in pain to forfeit 20. s. the fish wrongfully
taken, and the net or Engine wrongfully used.

XII. All persons having jurisdiction of Conservancy upon streams or waters,
and Lords of leets have power upon the oaths of twelve men to hear and
determine these offenses, and shall have all the forfeitures, which accrue
thereupon,

XIII. The steward of a Leet shall give this statute in Charge to the Jury, in
pain of xl. s. to be divided betwixt the Queen and the Informer.

XIV. Here, if the Jury wilfully forbear to present offenses of this kind, the
Steward or Bayliffe shall impannell another Jury to enquire of their default,
which being found, the first Jury shall forfeit xx. s. a piece.

XV. Upon default of presentment in leets within one year, Just. of P. in
Sess. Just. of Oy. and Term. and Just. of Ass. in Circuits have power to hear
and determine the said offenses.

XVI. This Act shall not restrain the taking of Smelts, Leches, Mineis,
Bulheads, Gudgions, or Eeles with nets or Engines formerly used, so that no
other fish be taken therewith; nor shall extend to abridge any Farmer
privilege of Conservancy lawfully enjoyed, or of Fishing in Tweede, Vske or
Wye, or in waters set to farm by the Q. Majesty, So that the spawne, or Fry of
fish be not therein wilfully destroyed.

XVII. Stat. 5. El. 5.

XVIII. No purveyour shall take any Seafish brought out of a Subjects Ship
without the parties consent, in pain to forfeit the double value thereof, and
here also it shall be lawful to withstand the Purveyour; But Composition Fish,
and Regal Fish are excepted.

XIX. None shall buy any herrings of any stranger borne, being not sufficiently
salted, Packed, and Casked, in pain to forfeit the said Herrings, or value
thereof; But here those Herrings, that happen by Shipwreck are excepted.

XX. The Stat. of 5.6. E. 6.14. shall not extend to hinder the buying of Sea
Fish unsalted or Mud fish out of English Bottomes.

XXI. When the offenses aforesaid shall be committed at land, or within any
haven or Peer, Just. of P. Majors and other head-officers in their Sess. have
power to hear and determine them by the oaths of 12. men, or otherwise by
Information or the the parties Confession.

XXII. Here, the forfeitures abovesaid happening in Corporate towns shall
wholly accrue to the Corporation, but happening elsewhere in the Country
prosecuted merely at the Qu. Suit, by Information or otherwise, shall totally
accrue to the Qu. And in these two Cases the suit ought to be commenced within
one year next after the offense committed, but being prosecuted by an Informer
they shall be divided betwixt the Qu. and the Informer; And here the suit ought
to be commenced within six months.

XXIII. Stat. 1. Jac. 23. In the Counties of Somerset, Devon and Cornwall, it
shall be lawful for the Huors of Fish to go upon any man's ground near the
Sea Coast, to discover fish, and for Fishermen to dry their Seanes and Nets
there, without danger of committing trespass.

XXIV. Stat. 3. Jac. 12. None shall erect a Wear, or Wears along the Sea
shore, or in any Haven or Creek, or within five Miles of the mouth of any
Haven, or Creek, or shall willingly destroy any Spawne or Fry of Fish, in pain
of ten pound to be divided betwixt the K. and the prosecutor, neither shall any
fish in any of the said places with any Net of a less Mash then three Inches
and a half betwixt knot and knot (except for the taking of Smoulds in Norfolk
only or with a Canvas net, or other Engine, whereby the Spawne or fry of fish
may be destroyed, in pain to forfeit the said net or Engine and 10. s. in
money to be divided betwixt the poor of the parish, and the prosecutor, and to
be levied in Corporations by the Head officers, and in other places by
distress, and sale of goods upon warrant of a Just. of P. directed unto the
Constable, and Churchwardens of the same parish for that purpose.

S. Hawks. 11. Hunters. 1. Lahourers, 46.

Fish Days.
I. Stat. 2.3. E. 6.19.

II. Justices of G. D. and of P. have power to hear and determine this
offense, and the forfeiture above said shall be divided betwixt the K. and the
Informer being prosecutor, within three months after the offense committed.

III. This Act shall not restrain any person having the K. License to cate
flesh, or being aged, weak, sick, in prison, Lieutenant of the Kings Army, or
Governor of a Fort, nor any woman with Child, or in Childbed.

IV. Stat. 5.6. E. 6.3.

V. When the Holyday Even happens Sunday, the Saturday is to be fasted.

VI. Stat. 5. El. 5. None shall eat flesh upon days usually observed as
fish-dayes, in pain of 3. l. or three months imprisonment without bail: And
they that wittingly suffer any such offense to be committed within their house,
and do not discover it to an officer, that may punish it, shall forfeit xl. s.

VII. These forfeitures shall be divided into three parts, whereof the Queen
shall have one, the poor of the parish another, and the Informer the third.

VIII. Notwithstanding this Act, licenses may be granted upon just causes, on
these conditions following, viz. To a Peer or his Lady if he pay yearly for it
to the poor of the parish, where he dwells, 26. s. 8. d. to a Knight or his
Lady, if he pay 13. s. 4. d. and to any other inferior person, if he pay 6. s.
8. d. But here, no license must extend to the eating of Beef, at any time, or
to the cating of Veale betwixt Michaelmas and May day.

IX. The Minister of the parish may grant a License to a sick person during the
time of his sickness, and if the sickness continue above eight days, shall
in the presence of one of the Churchwardens register the same and have 4. d.
for the Registring of it, but here, if he grant the License without just cause,
he shall forfeit five Marks.

X. Justices of P. Majors and other Chief Officers have power in Sess. (within
their several Jurisdictions) to hear and determine these Offenses, as well by
the oaths of twelve men, as otherwise by Information.

XI. If any shall by preaching or otherwise avouch, or notify, that any eating
of fish, or forbearing of flesh is necessary for the saving of the soul, or
the service of God, otherwise then as other Politic laws be, shall be
punished as a spreader of false news. See News.

XII. Stat. 35. El. 7.

Fishmonger, S. Victual, 2.

Force. Forcible Entry.
I. Stat. 5. R. 2.7.

II. Stat. 15. R. 2.2. P. taking sufficient power and going to the place so
kept by force, may commit the offender to the next Jail, there to remain
convict by the Justices record, till he has made fine, and Ransom to the
King; And herein the Sheriff, and all others shall be Assistants, in pain of
Imprisonment, and great fines making.

III. Stat. 8. H. 6.9. The Stat. of 15. R. 2.2. shall be duly put in execution,
both against forcible entry, and also against forcible detainer, although it be
after peaceable entry; and all this, at the Costs of the party grieved.

IV. When complaint of any such entry, or detainer shall be made to any
Justice, or Justices of P. he or they by precept shall command the Sheriff to
summon a sufficient Jury, and having by them made Inquity of the force
committed shall cause the tenements to be reseised and that as well in the
absence, as presence of the party offending; And here the Alienation of
Tenements (so entered into or detained by force) for maintenance shall be
adjudged void.

V. If the Jurors make default Issues are to be set upon them by the Sheriff
thus, xx. s. upon the first precept, xl. s. upon the second, C. s. upon the
third, and for every default after the double.

VI. The Sheriff or Bailiffe that shall neglect his duty here in shall forfeit
xx. l. to be recovered against him as well before the Justices aforesaid, as
before Just. of Ass. by Indictment, or Bill, and to be divided betwixt the K.
and the prosecutor.

VII. In an assise of Novel disseisin, or Action of trespass against the party
guilty of forcible entry, forcible detainer, or Alienation, as aforesaid, the
party grieved shall recover treble damages.

VIII. Head officers and Just of P. of Corporations have like power within
their Franchises, that other Just. of P. have within Counties.

IX. This Statute shall endamage none, where peaceable possession has been
enjoyed by the space of three years.

X. Stat. 32 H. 8.33.

XI. Stat. 31. El. 11.

XII. Stat. 21. Iac. 15. Upon force or detainer, Elegit, Statute merchant, or
staple, Coppiholders, or Guardians by Knight service, as unto those that Claim
Free hold or Inheritance.

S. Maintenance. 14.

Forests, S. Horses. 5. Hunters.

Forestallers, Regrator, Ingrossers.
I. Stat. 5.6. E. 6.14. He that shall buy, or contract any Merchandise,
Victual, or other thing (in the way) before it shall be brought (by land or by
water) unto any Port, rode, Fair or Market, where it should be sold, or shall
dissuade prople from bringing any such commodity to any such place, or (being
brought) shall persuade them to enhaunce the price thereof, shall be adjudged a
Forestaller.

II. A Regrator is he, that buys any grain, victual or other commodity in a
Fair or Maket and sells the same again in the same Fair, or Market, or some
other Fair or Market, within four Miles.

III. An Ingrosser is he, that buys or gets into his hands any grain growing
upon the ground or other commodity above mentioned, with an intent to sell the
same again.

IV. The party guilty of any of the offenses abovesaid, shall forfeit for the
first offense the value of the goods so bought or had, and suffer two months
Imprisonment without Bail, for the second, the double value, and six months
Imprisonment without Bail, and for the third shall forfeit all his goods, be
set upon the Pillory, and suffer imprisonment at the K. pleasure.

V. This Act shall not restrain the buying of Barley or oats to be converted
into Malt, or oatmeale, nor the Provision of Victualling any town corporate,
Ship, Castle, Fort, or of Barwick, Holy-Iland, etc. or any Fishmonger,
In-holder, Victualler, Butcher, Poultrer, or peopledwelling within one Mile of
the main Sea, which use to buy and sell fish, for any thing concerning their
several Mysteries or trading, they retayling the same again at reasonable
prices; nor any Badger, Lader, Kidder, or Carrier, assigned to that office by
three Just. of P. and delivering the Commodity out of his hand, within one
month after he buys it; nor the taking of any thing reserved upon any lease,
so that all these things be done without fraud or forestalling.

VI. He that buyeth grain in any market for change of seed, shall bring as
much the same day, and sell it, if he can, according to the present Price of
grain there, in pain to forfeit double the value of the grain so bought.

VII. He that byues any Cattle, and sells the same again alive within five
weeks, shall forfeit double the value thereof, during which time he ought to
keep them upon pastrue, which he has either by grant or prescription.

VIII. Justices of P. in Sess. have power to hear and determine the aforesaid
offenses by Inquisition, presentment, Bill, or Information, or by the Testimony
of two Witnesses, and to extract the one half of the forfeitures to the use of
the King, and cause the other half to be levied to the use of the prosecutor
by Fieri facias or capias, and when the prosecution shall be at the Kings suite
only, to extract the whole to the Kings use.

IX. None shall be punished twice for the same offense.

X. This Act shall not restrain the Transporter of Grain or Cattle from Port
to Port (allowed by three Justices of P. and not fore-stalling) so that he
imbark the same within 40. days after he buys them, and brings back from some
Just. of P. or Head-Officer, a Certificate of their unlading agreeable to his
Cocket.

XI. The offenses against this Statute shall be prosecuted within two years.

XII. This Act shall not restrain a Drover allowed by there Just. of P. (1.
Qu.) and selling his Cattle at 40. miles distance from the place where he
bought them: Howbeit such allowance ought not to continue above one year.

Vide Stat. 31. E. 1. Stat. of Clothes. 25. E. 3.3. and Stat. 2. R. 2.2.

And also, Actions popular, 15. Badgers, 2. Weights, 18.

Franchises, S. Liberties.

Fruiterers, S. Victual, 10

Fuel.
Stat. 7. E. 6.7. A Justice of P. has power to commit to the Pillory such as
are not able to pay the forfeitures for breaking the Assise of Fuel.

For the Assise of Fuel, and the penalty of breaking the same, Sec 43. El. 14.

Games, S. Plays.

Jail, Gaolers, S. Prisons.

Gold, Silver, Goldsmiths.
I. STat. 8. H. 5.3.

II. Just. of P. have power to hear and determine these offenses, and the
prosecutor shall have one third part of the forfeiture.

III. Stat. 2 H. 6.14.

IV. Justices of P. have power to hear and determine these offenses.

V. Stat. 18. El. 15.

S. Actions popular, 18. Felony, 4.

Grain, S. Corn.

Green Wax, S. Estreats.

Guns and Crosse-bowes.
I. Stat. 33. H. 8.6. None shall shoot in, or keep in his house any Crosse-bow,
Handgun, Hagbut, or Demy-hake, unless his lands be of the value of a 100. li
per Annum, in pain to forfeit x. l. for every such offense.

II. None shall shoot in or have any handgun under the length of one yard, nor
hagbut or demy-hake under the length of three quarters of a yard, in pain to
forfeit 10. li. And it shall be lawful for any man, having lands of 100. li.
per annum, to seize any such gun, or any Crossebow to his own use, but then he
ought to break them within twenty days after, in pain of xl. s.

III. None shall travel with a Crossebow bent, or Gun charged, except in time
of War, or shoot within a quarter of a milo of a City, Borough, or Market
town, except for the defense of himself or his house, or at a dead mark, in
pain of ten pound.

IV. None shall command his servant to shoot in any gun, or crosse-bow, except
at a dead mark, or in time of War, in pain of ten pound.

V. The penalties abovesaid shall be divided betwixt the King and the
prosecutor.

VI. Howbeit the followers of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Knights
Esquires, and gentlemen, and the Inhabitants of Cities, Boroughs, or Market
Towns, may keep in their houses, and use to shoot (but at a dead mark only)
with guns not under the lengths abovesaid: So may the owner of a Ship for the
defense of his Ship; And also he which dwells two furlongs distant form any
town, or within five miles of the Seacoast, and this last may shoot at any
wild beast or foul, save only Deore, Heron, Shovelard, Fesant, Partridge,
wild Swan, or wild Elkes.

VII. Those which have power from the King to take away Guns, and Crosse-bowes,
in Forests, Parks, and Chases, may retain the same notwithstanding this Act;
So may likewise Smiths and Merchants, that make or sell them, the several
lengths abovesaid being duly observed.

VIII. It shall be lawful for any person to convey the party offending against
this act before the next Just. of P. who upon due examination and proof shall
have power to commit him to prison, there toremaine till he has satisfied the
penalty, which in this case shall be divided betwixt the King and the party
that so takes the offender.

IX. Every Placard granted by the King, which expresses not at what Beasts or
Fowl the Grauntee shall shoot; and where the Grauntee enters not in a
Recognizance of twenty pound in the Chancery, to shoot at no other shall be
adjudged void.

X. Just. of P. in Sess. and Stewards of of Leets have power to hear and
determine these offenses.

XI. When the conviction is in Sess. the whole forfeitures is to be levied to
the Kings use: when in a Leet the one half is the Kings, and the other half
ought to be divided betwixt the Lord and the Prosecutor.

XII. Here if a Jury shall willingly conceal any thing the Just. or Steward
have power to impanel another Jury, by whom if the first Jury be found guilty
of concealment, they shall forfeit 20. s. apiece, viz. to the King if it be in
Sess. but if in a Leet, then the one half to the Lord, and the other half to
the Prosecutor.

XIII. Forfeitures arising by this act, shall be sued for, viz. by the King,
within one year, and by a common person within six months, otherwise they
shall be lost.

XIV. A servant upon command may use him Masters crosse-bow or gun (not
prohibited by this act) so as he shoot at no Foul, Dear, or other game, and
may be a license in writing carry it to any place to be amended.

See Hawks, 26. Hunters 11.

XV. Stat. 2.3. E. 6.14. None under the degree of a Baron shall shoot in any
handgun within any City or Town, at any Foul whatsoever, or with any
haile-shot, in pain of x. l.

XVI. This act shall not restrain those, which according to the value of their
land, are authorized to shoot by 33. H. 8.6. So that they forbear to use
haile-shot; And all others, which presume to shoot, shall present their own
names, viz. (in a Corporation.) to the Mayor or head Officer, and (in the
Country) to the next Justice of P. in pain of xx. s. and the said Just. or Head
Officer is to see them recorded at the next Sess. in the like pain of twenty
shillings, which forfeitures are to be divided betwixt the King, and the
Prosecutor.

See Hawks 26.

Gunners, S. Captains, 32. Laborers, 46.

Habeas Corpus, S. Bail. meant, 10.

Hares, S. Hunting.

Hats, S. Laborers, 47. etc.

Hawks, Hawking, Feasants, Partridges, etc.
I. Cart. For. 9. H. 3.13. Hawks, Sparrow hawks, Faulcons, Eagles, and Herons.

II. Stat. 34. E. 3.22. An Hawk taken up shall be delivered to the Sheriff,
who after Proclamation made, shall deliver her to the right owner.

III. If the Hawk were taken up by a mean man, and be challenged within four
months, the Sheriff shall retain her, but if by one, that may keep a Hawk,
the Sheriff shall restore her to him again.

IV. If any does take and conceal a Hawk, he shall answer the value thereof,
and suffer two years imprisonment.

V. Stat. 37. E. 3.19. He that steals and carries away a Hawk, not observing
the ordinance of 34. E. 3.22. shall be deemed a Felon.

VI. Stat. 11. H. 7.17. None shall take Feasants, or Partridges with Engines in
another ground without llicence, in pain of x. l. to be divided betwixt the
owner of the ground and the prosecutor.

VII. None shall take out of the nest any Eggs of Faulcon, Goshawk, Lannor, or
Swan, in pain of a year and a days Imprisonment, and to incur a fine at
the Kings pleasure, to be divided betwixt the King and the owner of the ground,
where the said Hawks Eggs shall be taken, but to the owner of the Swan, where
Swans Eggs are taken.

VIII. None shall be are any Hawk of English breed called an Eyesse, Goshauk,
Tassell, Lanner, Laneret, or Faulcon, in pain to forfeit the same to the King.

IX. He that brings an Eyesse hawk from beyond the Sea shall have a Certificate
under the Customers Seal where he lands, or if out of Scotland, then under the
Seal of the Lord warden or his Lieutenant, testifying that she is a fortaine
Hawk, upon the like pain of forfeiting the Hawk.

X. None shall take, kill or fear away any of the Hawks abovesaid from their
Coverts where they use to breed, in pain of x.l. to be recovered before Just.
of Peace and divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

XI. Stat. 5. El. 21.

XII. The party grieved shall in Sess. or elsewhere recover treble damages
against the Delinquent, and upon satisfaction shall have liberty to procure his
release of the behavior.

XIII. Just. of Oy. and Term. and A ssise, and Just. of P. and G. D. in Sess.
have power to hear and determine these offenses.

XIV. The said Just. of P. upon the offenders acknowledgement in Sess. and
satisfaction to the party grieved, shall have power torelease that behavior.

XV. Stat. 23. El. 10. None shall kill or take any Fesants or partridges with
any net or Engine in the night time, in pain to forfeit for every Feasant xx.
s. and for every Partridge x. s. which if the offender pay not within ten
days, he shall suffer one Months Imprisonment without Bail; and enter into
Bond with good Sureties before some Just. of P. not to offend in the like kind
within two years after.

XVI. The forfeitures aforesaid shall be recovered in any Court of Record, and
divided betwixt the Lord of the liberty or manor, where the offense is
committed, and the prosecutor, but in case the Lord shall dispense with the
offender, the poor of the parish are to have his Moity, to be recovered by any
of the Churchwardens.

XVII. None shall hawk or hunt with his Spaniels in standing grain, or before
it is stocked (except in his own ground, or with the owners consent) in pain
to forfeit xl. s. to the owner of the said ground to be recovered as aforesaid.

XVIII. Just. of Ass. Just. of P. in Sess. and afterward in Leets, have power
to hear and determine these offenses. And one Just. of P. may examine such an
offender, and bind him over with good Sureties to answer it, at the next
general Sess. if the offense be not before determined at the Assizes, or in a
Leet.

XIX. This Act shall not restrain Fowlers, which unwillingly take Feasants, or
Partridges, and forthwith let them go at large.

XX. Stat. 1. Jac. 27.

XXI. Every person convicted as abovesaid, to keep a Grayhound, dog or net to
kill or take Deer, Hare, Fesant, or Partridge (unless he have inheritance of
10. l. per Annum, a lease for life of xxx. l. per Annum, or be worth 200. l. in
goods, or otherwise be the Son of a Baron or Knight, or heir aparant of an
Esquire) shall suffer imprisonment as aforesaid, unless he forthwith pay xl.
s. to the use abovesaid.

XXII. None shall sell, or buy to sell again any Dear, Hare, Feasant, or
Partridge (except Feasants or Partridges by them reared up or brought from
beyond Sea) in pain to forfeit for every Dear xl. s. Hare, x. s. Feasant xx.
s. and Partridge x. s.

XXIII. The forfeitures abovesaid shall be divided betwixt the prosecutor and
the Poor of the parish, where the offense is committed.

XXIV. Just. of Ass. I. of P. in Sess and two or more Just. of P. out of Sess.
have power to hear and determine these offenses.

XXV. None shall by any former law suffer punishment for the same offense, for
which he shall be punished by this Law.

XXVI. This Act shall not restrain one licenced in open Sess. to kill Hawks
meat; but the he shall there become bound by recognisance in xx. l. not to kill
any of the games prohibited by this Law, nor to shoot within 600 pace of a
Hearnery, within 100 pace of a Pigeon house, or in a Park, Forest or Chase,
Whereof his Master is not owner, or keeper; The Clerk of the P. his Eee for
such a license is 12.d.

XXVII. Stat. 7. Jac. 11. Every person convicted by his own confession, or by
two witnesses upon oath before two or more Just. of P. to have hawked at, or
destroyed any Feasant or Partridtge betwixt the first of July, and the last of
August, shall suffer one months Imprisonment without Bail; unless he
forthwith pay to the use of the Poor, where the offense was committed, or he
apprehended, xl. s. for every time so hawking, and xx. s. for every Feasant or
Partridge so destroyed, or taken.

XXVIII. He that shall be punished by this law shall not again be punished by
any other law for the same offense.

XXIX. This offense shall be prosecuted within six months after it shall be
committed.

XXX. It shall be lawful for the Lord of a manor or any having free warren,
Inheritance of xl. l. per Annum, Freehold of lxxx. l. per Annum, or goods worth
400. l. or their servants (licenced by them) to take Fesants or Partridges
within their own grounds or precinct, so they do it in the day time, and only
betwixt Michaelmas and Christmas.

XXXI. If any (of mean Condition) shall be convicted by his own confession or
by one witness upon oath, before two or more I. of P. to have killed, or taken
any Fesant, or Partridge with dogs, nets, or engines, he shall by the said
Justices be committed to prison without Bail, unless he forthwith pay to the
use of the poor, where the offense was committed xx. s. for every Feasant or
Partridge so killed or taken: and also become bound before one or more I. of P.
in a recognisance of 20. l. never to offend in the like kind again.

XXXII. Every Costable or head-borough (upon warrant under the hands of two or
more I. of P.) has power to search the houses of persons suspected to offend
against the Law, and the dogs or nets there found, to kill, and cut in pieces,
at pleasure, as things forfeited unto the said officers.

Hering, S. Corn, 1.

Highways.
I. Stat. 1. M. Parl. secund. cap. 5. Justices of the Counties of Dorset and
Sommerset shall assesse those Countries toward the repair of the Cawsey lying
between Shaftsbury, and Sherburne: See the slatute at large.

II. Stat. 2.3. P. M. 8. The Constables and Churchwardens of every parish shall
yearly upon Tuesday or Wednesday in Easter week call together some of their
neighbors, and then make choice of two within the parish to be Surveyours of
the Highwayes the year following, who shall forthwith take that office upon
them, in pain to forfeit, 20. s. a piece: The said Constable. and Churchw. shall
ten also nominate four days betwixt that time and Midsommer to be set apart
for the Amendment of the highwayes, and shall give public notice thereof in
the Church the next sunday after Easter.

III. The officers and days being thus appointed, every one having a team, or
a plowland either in arable or in pasture, is chargeabe to send two able men
with a Teame and tools convenient to work eight hours upon every one of
those four days, in pain to forfeit x. s. for every day default is made: And
every Cottager is bound to work himself or to find one to work for him as
aforesaid, in pain to forfeit 12. d. for every day.

IV. The Surveyours have power to appoint, instead of a team two able Laborers
to work as aforesaid, who shall not fail in pain of 12. d. a piece for every
day.

V. Stewards in Leets have power to inquire after the breach of this Act, and
to set Fines upon those that make default at their diseretion, and shall within
six weeks after Michaelmas deliver indented estreats thereof under their hands
and seals, viz. one to the Bailiffe or high Constable of the liberty and the
other to the Constables and Churchwardens of the parish, where the default was
made.

VI. In default of presentme^t thereof, in Leets, the Justices of P. in Sess.
shall enquire thereof, and set such fines as they or two of them (1 Qu.) shall
think fit, whereof the Clerk of the P. shall also deliver indented Estreates
under hisha^d, and seal, to the Constable. and Churchw. as aforesaid.

VII. Their Estreats shall be a sufficient warrant for the Bailiffe or chief
Constable. to levy the said Fines by way of distress; and if no distress can be
found, or the party do not pay the fine wihtin 20 days after lawful demand,
he or they shall forfeit double so much: All which fynes, and forfeitures shall
be employed toward the Amendment of the highways.

VIII. The Bailisse or high Constable. shall yearly betwixt the first of March and
the last of April render unto the Constable. and Churchw. unto whom the other part
of the Estreats was delivered a true Account of the moneys received by him in
pain of xl.s. And the said Constable. and Churchwardens have power to call the
said Bailiffe, or high-Const. before two or more Just. of P. (1. Qu.) to pass
his account, who have power to commit him until he shall have satisfied all
the arrerages by him received save 8. d. in the pound for his own Fee, and 12.
d. in the pound for the Fee of the Steward, or Clerk of the P. and in this Case
the succeeding Constable. and Churchw. have the same power, that their predecessors
had.

IX. Stat. 5. El. 13. It shall be lawful for Surveyors to turn a watercourse
(hurtful to the highway) into any man's ditch, or to take rubbish ready dug
in or near any man's Quary, and for default of gravel, etc. elsewhere, to dig
in any several ground, so they forbear to dig in houses, orchards, gardens,
and meadows, or to make a pit above ten yards broad: But if they fill not the
place again with earth (at he costs of the parish) within one month after it
shall be so dug, they forfeit five marks to the owner of the ground to be
recovered by Action of debt.

X. The hedges and ditches adjoining to the highway shall be kept low and
scowred, and the trees and bushes growing in the high way cut down by the
owners of the grounds, which shall be enclosed by the said hedges and Ditches.

XI. Instead of the four days appointed by the Stat. of 2.3. P. M. 8. six
days shall hereafter be observed.

XII. The Surveyors or one of them shall present every default within one month
after it shall be made, to the next I. of P. in pain of xl. s. and the said I.
of P. shall certify the same presentment at the next general Sess. in pain, of
5. l. where the Justices shall have power to enquite of the default; And shall
set such fine upon the delinquent as they or two of them (1. Qu.) shall think
fit.

XIII. Here the presentment of a Just. of P. in Sess. upon his own knowledge
shall be a good conviction, whereupon the Justices in Sessions or any two of
them (1. Qu.) may assesse a fine, as well as upon a verdict of 12 men; Howbeit
the Delinquent shall here be admitted to his traverse as in other Cases.

XIV. The Fines assessed in Sess. shall be estreated by the Clerk of the Peace,
levied, accounted, and employed, as by the Stat. 2. 3. P. M. 8. is provided.

XV. Stat. 18. El. 10. Stat. of 2.3. P. M. 8. or 5. El. 13. shall find two able
men to labor in the ways as by the said statute is appoined.

XVI. Every person having a Ploughland lying in several parishes, shall be
chargeable with a Teame or draught in that parish only where he dwells: Howbeit
having entire Ploughlands in several parishes, he shall for every one of them
find a Teame in the several parishes where they lie, although he be not
inhabitant there.

XVII. Every person not scowring his ditches or not keeping low his hedges,
trees, and bushes, according to the Stat. of 5. El. 13. shall forfeit for every
such default x.s. and for not scowring his ditches in the ground next adjoining
the highwayes, to the end the water may have passage the better, shall for feit
12. d. for every pole so left unscowred.

XVIII. None shall cast the scowring of his ditch into the highway, and suffer
it to lie there six months, in pain to forfeit 12. d. for every load, and it
shall be lawful for the Surveyers to make sluices, where any such Banks have
been heretofore cast up.

XIX. The penalties forfeited upon this stat. shall be levied by the Surveyors
for the time being by distress and sale of goods, and shall be employed
toward the Amendment of the Highways: but if the Surveyors neglect to do it
within one year after the offense commirted, the Constable. and Churchw. shall do
it, according to the provisions of the before recited Statutes.

XX. I. of Ass. Oy. and Term. Just. of P. in Sess. and Stewards of Leets have
power to hear, and determine the said offenses.

XXI. Certain provisions for the repair of Kings Ferry in the I Will of Shippey,
and of the ways leading thereunto.

XXII. Stat. 39. El. 19. An Ordinance for the Repair of the high ways in the
Welds of Sussex, etc. used for Iron works, wherein Just. of P. have power to
meddle. See the Statute at large.

S. Bridges.

Holy Days.
I. Stat. 1. Car. 1. All concourse of people out of their own parishes for any
pastimes whatsoever; as also bearbaytings, bull-baytings, Enterludes, Common
plays, and all other unlawful pastimes are prohibitedon the Lords day.

II. The offender against this law being thereof convicted by the view of one
Just. of P. (in the Country) or of a chief officer (in a Corporation) or by
his own confession, or by the oath of one witness before one such Just. or
officer, shall forfeit 3. s. 4. d. to the use of the poor where the offense is
committed, to be levied by distress, and sale of goods (upon warrant from the
same Just. or officer) by the Constable. or Churchw. of the same parish, and in
case no distress can be had, the offender shall sit in the stocks three
hours, but this offense ought to be prosecuted within one month after it
shall be committed; And if the officer be questioned, he shall plead the
general issue,

III. Stat. 3. Car. 1. No Carrier with his horse, Wagoner with his wagon,
Carman with his Cart, Waynman with his Wayne, or Drover with his Cattle shall
travel upon the Lords day, in pain to forfeit xx. s. for every such offense.

IV. No Butcher shall kill or sell any Victual upon the same day in pain of 6.
s. 8. d.

V. Here the conviction of the offender, and the levying and employment of the
forfeitures are the same with those of the former Statute; save only that here
two witnesses are not necessary, and the forfeitures may also be recovered by a
prosecutor in the Sess. of the County, or in the Court of the Corporation,
where the offense was committed, and in that case the Justice or head-officer
may allow the prosecutor part of the forfeitures, but not above a third part.

VI. This Action shall be prosecuted within six months; and here also the
officer may plead the general issue, etc.

S. Fishdayes, 4. Recusants, 98. Sacraments, 24.

Horse-bread, S. Inholders.

Horses.
I. Stat. 32. H. 8.13. None shall put to feed upon Forests, or common ground
any stoned horse being above 2. years old and not fifteen handful high from
the lower part of the hoof to the upper part of the Wither (every handful
being accounted 4. Inches standard measure) in pain to forfeit the same horse,
15.21.

II. It shall be lawful for any man to selse to his own use any stoned horse
of lesser statute put to feed upon any such common ground, as aforesaid, so
that first (by the Assistance of the keeper of the ground or Constable,
Bayliffe, Head-borough, or other such officer of the parish next adjoining)
such horse be brought to the next pound, and there (by the officer and in the
presence of three other sufficient men) be measured and found lower then that
stature.

III. Those that refuse to measure, or to be present at measuring of such
horse, shall forfeit xl. s. a piece for every such default, to be divided
betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

IV. A horse that makes an Escape into such Common shall not be questioned; so
he stay not above four days after notice thereof given at the owners house or
in his parish Church.

V. Forests and common grounds shall be driven yearly at Michaelmas or within
xv. days after, by the Keepers or officers aforesaid, in pain of xl. s. who
have also power to drive them at any other time of the year at their pleasure,
such power likewise have the owners of such grounds: And here, upon the drift,
if any unlikely Tits shall be found, they shall be killed.

VI. Just. of P. in Sess. have power to hear and determine these offenses. But
stewards of Leets only to take presentiments of them, which they shall certify
in at the next general Sess. or to the Custos Rotulorum within 40 days in
pain of 40. s.

VII. None shall put upon common grounds or common fields any scabbed or
infected horse, in pain to forfeit x. s. to the Lord of the Leet.

VIII. This statute shall not restrain keeping of horses under this Stature
upon Commons, where Mares are not usually kept.

IX. Stat. 1. E. 6.5. None shall convey, sell or deliver any horse into
Scotland or any other foreign Country without the Kings License, in pain to
forfeit such horse, and xl. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the
Prosecutor.

X. Wardens of the Marches, and Just. of P. in Sess. have power to hear and
determine these offenses, and it shall be lawful for any of the Kings Subjects
to arrest and imprison any Scotch man or other that shall convey any horse
contrary to this Act.

XI. Stat. 2.3. P. M. 7. Every owner of a Fair or Market shall appoint a
Toll-taker where Toll is taken, or a Book-keeper where no toll is paid, to sit
there from ten of the Clock in the forenoone till Sunset, in pain of xl. s.
for every default; And this Officer shall enter into a Book the names and
dwellings of the Buyer and seller, together with the Color and some pregnant
Mark of every horse there sold, in like pain of xl. s. for every default.

XII. The Toll-taker or Book-keeper shall (within one day after) deliver unto
the said owner a note of all the horses sold there that day, in pain of xl. s.
which note the owner shall subscribe, in the like pain of xl. s.

XIII. Sale of a stolen horse in a fair or market without entry in the Book,
as aforesaid, and without staying there in open view by the space of an hour
at least betwixt ten of the Clock, and Sun set, shall not alter the property of
the right owner. But that he may by virtue of this Act seize or replevy him,
wheresoever he finds him.

XIV. Just. of P. in Sess. shall have power to hear and determine the breach of
this Stat. and the forfeitures shall be divided betwixt the King and Queens
Majesty's and the prosecutor, 16, etc.

XV. Stat. 8. El. 8. The Statute of 32. H. 8.13. shall not restrain the keeping
of stoned horses of a lower stature in the Fen grounds of the I Will of Ely, or of
the Counties of Cambridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lincoln, Norfolk, or
Suffolk, so that those horses so kept, be not under thirteen handful high,
according to the standard in the same statute mentioned.

XVI. Stat. 31. El. 12. The seller of a horse in a Fair or Market, which is not
known to the Toll-taker, or Book-keeper, or does not produce one credible
person, that is well known unto him, to avouch the Sale of the same horse,
shall forfeit 5. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor, and
besides, the sale of such horse shall be void.

XVII. The names of the Buyer, Seller and voucher, and the price of the horse
shall be entered in the Toll-book, and a note thereof delivered to the buyer
under the Toll-takers, or Book-keepers hand, for which the Buyer shall pay 2. d.

XVIII. Just. of the P. in Sess. have power to hear, and determine these
offenses.

XIX. Notwithstanding such sale, and voucher, as aforesaid, the right owner, or
his executors may redeem a stolen horse, if they claim him within six months
after the stealing, at the Parish or Corporation where they shall find him, and
make proof by two sufficient Witnesses before the next Just. of P. in the
Country, or before the Head-officer of the Corporation, that the horse was his,
and repay to the Buyer such price for the horse, as the same Buyer shall upon
his own oath, before such Justice, or Officer, testify to have paid for him.

XX. An Accessory of a horse-stealer shall not have his Clergy.

XXI. Stat. 21. Jac. 28. The statute of 32. H. 8.13. shall not extend to the
County of Cornwall.

Hostlers, S. Inholders. Purveyors, 56. Victual, 2.

Hospitalls, S. Poor people, 15.

Houses of Correction, S. Poor people, 5. Vagabonds.

Hue and Cry.
I. Stat. 3. E. 1.9. All persons shall be ready to pursue felony, in pain of
Imprisonment, and great Fines making.

II. Stat. of Winchester 13. E. 1.1.2. and 28. E. 3.11. Fresh Suit shall be
made after selons from town to town, and from Country to Country, And if they
be not taken within 40 days the Hundred shall be answer able for the damages,
or two Hundreds, when the felony shall be committed in the division of those
two Hundreds.

III. Stat. 27. El. 13. The Hundred where fresh Suit shall cease shall answer
half the damages to the Hundred, wherein the felony shall be committed, to be
recovered in any Court at Westminster in the name of the Clerk of the P. of the
County, wherein the felony was committed, and here the death, or change of the
Clerk of the P. shall not abate the Suit.

IV. When in this case damages are recovered against one or some few
Inhabitants of the Hundred, and the rest refuse to contribute thereunto, two
Just. of P. (1. Qu.) dwelling within or near the same Hundred shall for the
levying thereof set a tax upon every parish within that Hundred, according to
which the Constables and headboroughs of every town shall tax the particular
Inhabitants, and levy the money upon them by distress, and sale of goods, and
deliver the money levied to the said Just or one of them.

V. No Hundred shall be chargeable, when any one of the malefactors shall be
apprehended,

VI. No Hue, and Cry shall be deeemed legal unless the pursuit be both by
horse and foot.

VII. No person robbed shall maintain an Action in this case unless with all
convenient speed he make the Robbery known to the next town village, or
hamlet, and within twenty days before the Action brought make oath before a
Just. of P. dwelling within or near the Hundred, where the Robbery was
committed, whether he know the parties that robbed him or any of them, And if
he know them, shall enter into sufficient Bond before the same Justice to
prosecute the person or persons, so by him known, by Indictment or otherwise
according to the Law.

VIII. Stat. 39. El. 25. A remedy for the Inhabitants of the Hundred of
Benhurst in the County of Berks for Recovery of such sums of money as shall
be gained from them by force of the Stat. of 27. El. 13.

S. Burglary, 1.

Hunters, Hunting.
I. Stat 1. E. 1.20. Trespassers in Parks, or Ponds shall give treble damages
to the party grieved,

II. If they be attainted to have taken tame Beasts, they shall be prosecuted
as Felons.

III. Stat. 21. E. 1. A Forester, Parker, or Warriner shall not be questioned
for killing a Trespasser,

IV. Stat. 13. R. 2.13. No lay man, per Annum, nor Clerk, which has not x. l.
Revenue per Annum, shall have, or keep any Greyhound, Hound, Dog, Ferret, net,
or Engine to destroy Dear, Hares, Conies, or any other Gentleman's game, in
pain of one whole years imprisonment, which I. of P. have power to inflict.

V. Stat. 1. H. 7.7. If any shall hunt within Forests, Parks, or Warrens in the
night time, or disguised, one of the Kings Counsel, or a Just. of P. to whom
information, here of shall be made, shall by his warrant; cause the offender to
be brought himself, or some other Counselor, or Just. of P. to be examined,
where if he conceal the fact such hunting shall be deemed felony; but being
confessed the offense is only finable at the next general Sess. And here a
rescous of the execution of any such warrant shall also be deemed felony.

VI. Stat. 19. H. 7. None shall keep any Deeres Haies or Buckstalles (save in
his own Forest or Park) in pain to forfeit for every month, they are so kept
xl. l. neither shall any stalk with any bush or beast to any Deer (except in
his own Forest or Park) in pain of x. l.

VII. None shall take an old Heron (without his own ground) in pain of 6. s.
8. d. nor a young Heron in pain of x. s. for which forfeitures every man that
will, may sue by Action of Debt or otherwise.

VIII. Any two Just. of P. in Sess. may examine the offenders abovesaid, and
commit them to Prison, till they shall have satisfied the said forfeitures,
whereof the said Justices are to have the tenth part for their pains.

IX. Stat. 3. Jac. 13. None shall (without the owners license) kill or chase
any Deer or Conies in any Parkes, or enclosed grounds, in pain to yield treble
damages to the party grieved, to suffer three months imprisonment, and to be
bound with good sureties to the good behavior for seven years after, or to
remain still in Prison, till he find such sureties; But here, the party grieved
(being satisfied) has liberty to release the behavior.

X. Just. of Oy. and Term. Just. of Ass. and Just. of P. in Sess. have power to
hear and determine these offenses, and Just. of P. in Sess. (upon Confession,
and satisfaction to the party grieved) have power to release the behavior.

XI. If any person, not having xl. l. per Annum in lands, or 200 l. in goods or
some enclosed ground used for Dear, or Conies worth xl. s. per Annum (at
least) shall use any Gun, Bow or Crossebow to kill any Deer, or Conies, or
shall keep any Buckstall, Ferret, dog, net, or other Engine, it shall be
lawful for any person (having lands worth 100 l. per Annum) to take such Gun,
etc. from any such person, and to convert the same to his own use.

XII. This Act shall not extend to any Park, or enclosed ground hereafter to be
made, and used for Dear or Conies, without the Kings License.

XIII. Stat. 7. Jac. 13. It shall be in the election of the party grieved,
Stat. 3. Ja. 13. is limited.

S. Hawks, 11.21.22.

Jesuits, S. Recusants.

Images, S. Books.

Imbracery, S. Embracery.

Imbezeling of a Record, S. Felony, 6.

Indictments.
I. STat. 1. E. 3.17. Indictments before Sheriffs,

II. Stat. 7. H. 5. A remedy against such as do indict or appeal others of
Treason or Felony supposed to be committed in a place within the County of
Lancaster, viz. Imprisonment, Fine, and Ransom S. Stat. 9. H. 5.1. 18. H.
6.12. and 33. H. 6.2.

III. Stat. 6. H. 6.1. Upon an Indictment of any person in the Kings Bench,
Capias shall be awarded against him, returnable (at least six weeks after
before any Exigent shall be Awarded.

IV. Stat. 8. H. 6.10. and 10. H. 6.6. Upon Indictments or appeals (before
Just. of P. or others) of persons dwelling in foreign Counties, the Exigent
shall be staid, till the return of a Capias, directed to the Sheriff of such
foreign County for the arresting of the party indicted.

V. Stat. 1. E. 4.2. Sheriffs shall deliver all Indictments,

VI. Stat. 37. H. 8.8. The words cum baculis, cultellis, arcubus, and sagittis,
shall not of necessity be put in an-indictment; but it shall be adjudged good
without those words or the like.

See Certificate, Certiorari, 1. Murder, 4, 5.

Informations and Informers, S. Actions popular.

Ingrossers, S. Forestallers.

Inholders.
I. Stat. 21 Jac. 21. The Statute of 32. H. 8.41. together with other statutes
concerning horsebread is repealed.

II. Inholders and Hostlers shall make no horsebread, shall sell their hay,
provender and victuals at reasonable prices, and shall take nothing for litter.

III. This Act shall not restrain those, that dwell in a thorough fare (which
is no market town, and wherein there is no Baker) to make horsebread, according
to the just Assise.

IV. Just. of Oy. and Term. I. of P. sheriffs in turns and stewards in Leets
have power to hear and determine these offenses.

V. If any Inholder or Hostler, which has power (by this Act) to make
horsebread, observe not the Assise, or if he or any other offend this Law in
any other kind whatsoever, for the first offense they shall be fined, for the
second suffer a months imprisonment without bail, for the third be set upon
the Pillory, and for the fourth shall be forejudged from ever keeping an Inn
again.

See Alehouses, 5, 15, 26, 28. Butter, 1. Forestallers, 5.

Inmates, S. Cottages.

Inquests, S. Jurors.

Inrolments.
Stat. 27. H. 16.8. Bargains, and sales to raise an use of Inheritance, or
Freehold, must be by Deed indented and enrolled within six months in some
Court of Record at Westminster, or in the County where the Land lies, before
the Custos Rotulorum, two Just. of P. and the Clerk of the Peace, or two of
them, whereof the Clerk to be one; and here, the Fee to be paid for such
Inrolment, when the land is not worth xl. s. per Annum, is 2. s. and when it is
worth more, x. s. to be equally divided betwixt the Justice, or Justices then
present, and the Clerk of the P. who ought to inroll them in Parchment, and
deliver them up to the Custos Rotulorum within one year after.

See Stat. 5. El. 26. Concerning the inrolment of Deeds in the Counties of
Lancaster, Chester, and the Bishopric of Duresme, and in Corporate towns
there.

Inventories, S. Ecclesiastical

Court
I. Stat. 5. E. 3.10. Justices have power to imprison a Juror sworn before
them, that shall be attainted to be Ambidexter; and besides he shall be
ransomed at the Kings will.

II. Stat. 25. E. 3.3. An indictor shall not be put on Enquests upon delivering
of Endictees.

III. Stat. 34. E. 3.8. A corrupt Juror shall be fined, and suffer one years
Imprisonment; And here, the prosecutor shall have half the Fine, and the party
grieved his damages.

IV. Stat. 38. E. 3.12. If a Juror be attainted to have taken any thing by way
of corruption, he shall suffer one whole years imprisonment and forfeit ten
times so much as he has so taken, to be divided betwixt the King and the
prosecutor, and all Embracors in that kind shall incur the like punishment:
Howbeit theso offenses shall not be prosecuted by Justices ex officio, but at
the suit of the party grieved, or some other.

V. Stat. 11. H. 4.9. Jurors in indictments shall be teturned by the Sheriffs,
or Bay liffes, and not nominated by any other.

VI. Stat. 2 H. 5.3. Jurors ought to have lands worth xl. s. per annum ultra
reprise; And in the County Palatine of Lancaster, there lands ought to be worth
5. l. per annum. S. stat. 7. H. 5.1.18. H. 6.12.33. H. 6.2.

VII. Stat. 3. H. 8.12. Panells of Jurors returned by the Sheriff to inquire
for the King shall be reformed by the Just. in Sess. (1 Qu.) at their
discretions, and the Sheriff shall return that Panell reformed, in pain of
xx. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor, who shall not lose
his part by the Kings pardon.

VIII. Stat. 27. El. 7. No Sheriff,

IX. No Clerk shall estreat any issues against any Juror without such
addition, in pain to forfeit 5. marks to the King, and as much to the party
grieved.

See Actions Popular, 8. Justices of P. 25.28.

Justices of Peace.
I. Stat. 27. E. 1.3.

II. Stat. 1. E. 3.16.

III. Stat. 2. E. 3.2. Oy. and Term. or Justices of G. D.

IV. Stat. 4. E. 3.2.

V. There shall also be assigned good and lawful men in every County to keep
the peace, and such as shall be indicted or taken by them and are not bailable
by Law, shall not be let to mainprise by the Sheriff or any other Minister, nor
otherwise delivered then at the common law.

VI. the Just. of G. D. shall have power to deliver the Gaoles of those that
stand indicted before the Keepers of the Peace, which Keepers shall send those
indictments before the said Just. of G. D. and shall have power to punish
Sheriffs, Gaolers, and others, which do any thing contrary to this Act.

VII. Stat. 18. E. 3.2. Two or three of the best of Reputation in the Counties
shall be assigned keepers of the Peace by the Kings Commission, who (together
with other wise, and learned in the Law) shall have power to hear and
determine Felonies, and Trespasses done in the same Counties, and to inflict
punishment, according to Law and reason.

VIII. Stat. 34. E. 3.1. There shall be assigned in every County for the
keeping of the Peace, one Lord, and three or four of the most worthy of the
County with some learned in the Law, who shall have power to arrest and
Chastise, rioters, Barretors, and other offenders according to the law, and
their own discretions, to bind people of evil fame to the good behavior, and
to hear and determine felonies and trespasses done in the same County.

IX. All general inquiries heretofore granted within any seigniories for the
mischiefs done there, shall from henceforth cease and be repealed.

X. The fines imposed by I. of P. for trespasses shall be reasonable and just.

XI. Stat. 42. E. 3.4.

XII. Stat. 12. R. 2.10.

XIII. Every Justice of P. shall have for his wages 4. s. a day, and the Clerk
of the P. 2. s. for so longtime as the Sessions shall last, to be paid by the
Sheriff out of the Amerciaments arising at the same Sessions.

XIV. No steward of any Lord shall be assigned in any Commission, neither shall
any association be made to the Justices of Peace after the first Commission.

XV. Judges and Sergeants at Law shall not be bound to attend the Sessions, but
when they may conveniently intend it.

XVI. Stat. 13. R. 2.7. Stat. of 12. R. 2.10. which prohibits the stewards of
Lords to be Justices, the most sufficient Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of
the Law shall be put in Commission, and sworn to put in execution without
favor all statutes which concern their office.

XVII. Stat. 14. R. 2.11. There shall be 8. Justices of Peace assigned in every
County.

XVIII. Double estreats of Amerciaments, at the Sessions shall be made
containing the names of all the Justices there present, and the number of days
they sit, and one of them delivered to the Sheriff, out of which he is to
answer the Justices their wages by indenture, according to which the Sheriff
shall be again allowed the wages in the Exchequer upon his account; But no
Duke, Earl, Baron, or Baronet (although he be Justice of Peace, and hold Sess.
with the other eight) shall have any wages allowed him.

XIX. Stat. 17. R. 2.10. In every Commission of Peace two men of Law of the
same County shall be assigned to go and proceed to the deliverance of Thieves,
and Felons.

XX. Stat. 2. H. 5.4. Justices of the Peace in every Shire named of the Quorum
shall be resiant within the same Shire (except Lords, Judges, Sergeants at law,
and the Kings Attorney) and shall keep their Sessions sour times in the year,
viz. in the first week after Michaelmas, Epiphany, Easter and the translation
of Saint Thomas, being the third of July, and more often if need require.

XXI. Stat. 11 H. 6.6. No suit before Justices of P. shall be discontinued by a
new Commission of Peace.

XXII. Stat. 14. H. 6.4. Just. of Peace in Middlesex are not compellable to
keep their Sess. above twice in the year, notwithstanding the stat. of 12. R.
2.10. Yet may they keep them oftener, if need be, at their discretions.

XXIII. Stat. 18. H. 6.11. per Annum.

XXIV. If any be put into the Commission not having lands of that value, and
do not within one month after his notice thereof acquaint the Lord Chancellor
therewith, or do make warrant by force of such Commission, he shall forfeit to
the King xx. l. to be divided betwixt the King, and the prosecutor.

XXV. Stat. 3. H. 7.1.

XXVI. Just. of P. shall at the next general Sess. certify recognisances
taken for keeping of the Peace, where, if the party being called do not appear,
those Recognisances shall be certified into the Chancery, Kings Bench, or
Exchequer.

XXVII. Stat. 33. H. 8.10. and 37. H. 7. made in this present Parliament, and
shall then also advise amongst themselves, how the same may be best put in due
Execution.

XXVIII. All process, and proceedings shall be continued from Sess. to Sess.
And the said Justices shall in Sess. have power to enquire, hear, and determine
the breach of the said statutes as well by verdict as by any other information,
or Confession of the party, and to make process by Venire facias, Capias and
Exigent, under the Seal of the same Justices, or two of them, and also to
reform panels of Jurous, according to which the Sheriff shall make his Return,
upon the pain limited by the Stat. of 3. H. 8.12.

XXIX. Stat. 1. E. 6.7. Preferment of a Justice or Commissioner to a higher
dignity as to be a Duke, Archbishop, Marquis, Earl, Vicount, Baron, Bishop,
Knight, Judge, Serjeat at Law, or Sheriff, shall not diminish his power, 31.

XXX. No Suit before any Justices or Commissioners shall be discontinued by a
new Commission, or by the alteration of any of their names.

XXXI. Stat. 1. M. 8. None shall be Justice of Peace during his Shrevalty,
notwithstanding the statute of 1. E. 6.7.

XXXII. Stat. 2.3. P. M. 18. A new Commission of the Peace, or G. D. for the
whole County, shall not be a Supersedeas to a former like Commission granted to
a City, or town Corporate there, being no County.

XXXIII. Stat. 1. E. 1. and 7. Jac. 6. Recusants, 8.88.

Kidder, S. Badger.

Kings Bench, S. Poor People, 15.

Laborers, Artificers, Servants, Apprentices.
I. STat. 21. H. 8.7.

II. This Act shall not extend to Apprentices nor servants under the age of
eighteen years.

III. Stat. 2.3. E. 6.15. bread and water; for the second offense he shall
forfeit 20. l. and that not paid within six days as aforesaid, shall suffer
the Pillory; and for the third offense shall forfeit xl. l. and that not paid
within time limited shall again suffer the Pillory, lose one of their ears,
and be ever after taken as men infamous, and not to be credited.

IV. Just. of Ass. Just. of P. Majors, Bayliffes, and Stewards in Sess Leets
and Courts have power to hear and determine these offenses.

V. Stat. 5. El. 4. None shall hire, or be hired for less time then one whole
year in the Arts of Clothier, Woollen Weaver, Tucker, Fuller, Clothworker,
Sherman, Dyer, Hosier, Tailor, Shoemaker, Tanner, Pewterer, Baker, Brewer,
Glover, Cutler, Smith, Farrier, Currier, Sadler, Spurrier, Turner, Capper, Hat
or Feltmaker, Fletcher, Arrowhead-maker, Butcher, Cook, or Miller.

VI. Every person unmarried, or under the age of 30. years (though married)
having been brought up in any of the Arts above said by the space of three
years, and not worth in lands xl. s. per Annum, or in goods x. l. (and so
allowed under the hands and seals of two Just. of P. the Head officer or two
discreet Burgesses of the place, where the party so brought up has lived by
the space of one whole year) nor already retained in husbandry, the Arts
abovesaid, or any other Art or Mystery, or in any service (upon request of any
person using the same Art) shall not refuse to serve for the wages limited by
this statute, and being so retained shall not depart from his or their service
without one quarters warning before two lawful witnesses, or some lawful
cause to be proved before one Justice of P. or Head officer, in pain of
imprisonment without bail; but upon submission to perform the service, they
shall be enlarged without Fees, which Commitment and enlargement two Just. of
P. the Head officer or two Burgesses as aforesaid, unto whom complaint shall be
made, have power to command, as in their discretions, and upon due proof shall
be thought fit.

VII. Every person between the ages of 12. and 60. not already retained in any
service, nor employed about husbandry, Mines, Glass, Coal, Fishing, Sailing,
provision of grain or Meal for London, nor Gentleman, born, nor Scholar, in an
University, or School, nor worth xl. s. per Annum in lands, or x. l. in goods,
nor having a Father, Mother, or other ancestor (whose heir he is) worth x. l.
per Annum, in lands, or xl. l. in goods, shall be compelled to serve in
husbandry, and shall not depart that service, otherwise then as is before
limited, upon the pain above expressed.

VIII. None shall put away his servant before the end of his term without a
quarters warning, or some lawful cause to be proved by two sufficient
Witnesses before the Just. of Oy. and Term. Just. of Ass. Just. of P. in Sess.
a Head Officer, or two discreet Aldermen, or Burgesses, in pain of xl. s.

IX. No servant having served in one City or town shall go to serve in
another, without a Testimonial, viz. (in a town corporate, under the seals
of the town, and two householders there, and (in the Country) under the seals
of the Constable, or Constables and two householders there; which testimonial
shall be made and delivered to the party, and also registered by the Minister of
the place, where the servant last dwelt, for which the Minister is to have 2. d.

X. The form of the Testimonial is this.

Memorandum, that A. B. Servant to C. D. of E. in the County of F. Husbandman
or Tailor, etc. in the said County is licenced to depart from his said Moster,
and is at his liberty to serve elsewhere according to the Statute in that case
made and provided: In witness, etc.

XI. The servant which shows not such a Testimonial to the chief officer in
a Corporation, or to the Minister, or some officer in any other place, where he
is to dwell, shall suffer imprisonment till he procure one; and if he produce
not one within xx 1. days after his imprisonment, or show a false one, he
shall be punished by whipping as a vagabond; And the Master that retains a
servant without such a testimonial, shall forfeit five pounds.

XII. Those that work by the day or week shall continue at work, betwixt the
middle of March, and the middle of September, from 5. in the morning till
betwixt 7. and 8. at night, except two hours allowed for breakfast, dinner,
and drinking, and half an hour for sleeping from the midst of May, til the
midst of August, and all the rest of the year from twylight to twylight,
except an hour and a half allowed for Breakfast, and Dinner, in pain to have
one penny defalked out of their Wages for every hours absence.

XIII. None that takes work by Great shall leave the same before it be quite
finished, except for not payment of his Wages, the Queens service, license of
the Workmaster, or other lawful cause, in pain to suffer one months
imprisonment without Bail, and to forfeit five pounds to the party grieved,
besides his Costs, and damages to be recovered at the common Law for the loss
sustained.

XIV. None retained in service to work, shall depart without License, in pain
of one months imprisonment.

XV. Such Wages of Laborers, Artificers, and others as have been formerly
rated, or concern husbandry, shall be yearly assessed for the County by the
Sheriff and I. of P. in Sess. and in Corporations by the Head Officer at their
Easter Sessions, or within six weeks after and before the 12. of July following
shall be certified under their hands and seals into the Chancery: whereupon the
Lord Chancellor or Keeper shall send down printed proclamations thereof into
every County, and Corporation before the first of September then next
following, with the said Sheriff, Justices and Head officers shall before
Michaelmas after cause to be enrolled, and proclaimed; But here, when the old
Rates shall be certified to stand, no proclamation is needful, 56.58.

XVI. A I. of P. or chief officer, which shall be absent at the taxing of Wages
(being not let by sickness, or some other reasonable cause to be allowed by
the Justices upon Affidavit) shall forfeit x. l.

XVII. None shall give greater wages, then those so rated (as aforesaid) in
pain of 5. l. and ten days imprisonment, without Bail, and if any person
shall be convicted (before two I. of P. or a Head officer) of taking more
wages, he shall suffer 21 days imprisonment without Bail.

XVIII. Every retainer, promise, gift, or payment of wages, or other thing
contrary to the true meaning of this Act; and every writing and Bond to be made
for that purpose shall be voied.

XIX. If any servant, or other shall be convicted before two Just. of P. or a
Chief officer, as aforesaid, by his own Confession, or the testimony of two
honest men to have assaulted his Master, Mistress, Dame or Overseer, he shall
suffer one whole years imprisonment, or less, if the Justice, or chief
ossicer shall think fit: And if the party shall be thought to deserve a more
severe punishment, then to receive such open punishment (life and member
excepted) as the Just. in Sess. or the chief officer, and 4 of the discreetest
men in the Corporation shall think convenient.

XX. Artificers shall work in Hay time, and Harvest, in pain of Imprisonment
in the stocks two days and one night, which the Constable shall inflict upon
them in pain of xl. s.

XXI. It shall be lawful for Laborers (other then such as are retained in
Service according to this statute) to go to other shires to work in Hay time
and Harvest, so that they bring with them a testimonial under the hand and
seal of one Just. of P. or a chief officer, testifying that they have not
sufficient work in the place, where they lived the winte before, for which
testimonial they shall only pay 1. d.

XXII. Every unmarried woman (sit to serve) being above 12 years old and under
xl. shall by two I. of P. a Chief Officer or two Burgesses be compellable to
serve for convenient time and wages, in pain of Imprisonment.

XXIII. Husbandmen being householders and using half a plough land (at least)
in tillage, may take (by Indenture) Apprentices above the age of ten years and
under 18. to serve in husbandry, until the age of xxi. years (at least) or
24. years as the parties can agree.

XXIV. Every householder of the age of 23. years dwelling in a town
Corporate, and using there any art or mystery shall and may take an Apprentice
for seven years at least: Howbeit the term ought not to expire before the
Apprentice accomplish the age of 24. years.

XXV. Merchants, Mercers, Drapers, Goldsmiths, Iremongers, Embroyderers, and
Clothiers dwelling in Corporate towns shall take no Apprentices, but their
own Children, or such whose Parents have Inheritance, or Freehold of xl. s.
per Annum to be certified under the hands and seals of three Just. of P. of
the County, where such lands lie, to the Head officer of the said Corporation,
who shall cause the same to be recorded.

XXVI. Artificers in market towns not Corporate being householders, and of the
age of 24 years, may take other Artificers Children to serve as Apprentices.

XXVII. Merchants, Mercers, Drapers, Goldsmiths, Iremongers, Embroyderers, and
Clothiers dwelling in Market towns not corporate, shall take no Apprentices
but their own Children, or such whose Parents have inheritance or Freehold
worth 3. l. per Annum, to be certified under the hands and Seals of three
Just. of P. as aforesaid.

XXVIII. Smiths, Wheelewrights, Ploughwrights, Millwrights, Carpenters, rough
Masons, Plasterers, Sawyers, Lime-burners, Brickmakers, Bricklaiers, Tylers,
Slnters, Helyers, Tilemakers, Linen Weavers, Turners, Coopers, Millers,
Earthen Potters, Woollen Weavers, (of Huswifes Cloth only) Fullers, Wool
burners, Thatchers, and stringers may take Apprentices though their Parents
have no Land.

XXIX. None which has not served seven years in any Art or Mystery shall use
the same, or set any other to work thercin, which have not served out that
time, in pain to forfeit xl. s. for every month. See Actiors popular. 17.

XXX. Woollen Clothweavers (ohter then such as inhabit Cumberland,
Westmerland, Lancaster, or Wales, or in Cities, Corporations or Market towns)
shall take no Apprentices, nor teach any their art, save their own Children, or
such, whose parents have Inheritance, or Freehold worth 3. l. per Annum, to be
certified under the hands and seals of 3. l. of P. of the County where the
lands lie, in pain to forfeit xx. s. for every month; And the Indenture shall
within 3. months be registered in the parish, where the Master dwells, the Fee
of which registring is 4. d.

XXXI. Every Clothworker, Fuller, Sherman, Weaver, Tailor, and Shoemaker shall
for every three Apprentices keep one Journeyman, and for every Apprentice above
three another Journeyman, in pain of ten pounds.

XXXII. This Act shallnot prejudice worsted makers, nor worsted weavers, in
Norwich or Norfolk.

XXXIII. If any person fit to make an Apprentice refuse to serve upon demand,
one I. of P. Mayor or Head officer unto whom complaint there of shall be made,
have power o commit him to ward, until he shall be willing to serve
accordingly.

XXXIV. If there shall arise any difference betwixt the Master, and the
Apprentice, one I. of P. in the Country, or the Mayor or Head officer in a
Corporation, or Market town, shall have power to reconcile it, if they can; if
not, then to bind over the Master to the next Qu. Sess. where the I. of P. or
any four of them (1. Qu.) or the the Head officer with the consent of three of
his brethren shall (upon default found in the Master) in writing under their
hands and seals have power to discharge the Apprentice of his Service, and if
default shall be found in the Apprentice, then to inflict such punishment upon
him as in their discretions shall be thought fit.

XXXV. None shall be bound to enter into an Apprentyship, other then such as be
under the age of 21. years.

XXXVI. Justices of P. in their several Divisions, and Head officers in towns
corporate shall meet twice every year, viz. once betwixt Michaelmas and
Christmas, and another time betwixt the Lady day and Midsommer to give order
for the due execution of this statute.

XXXVII. Justices of P. and Head officers shall have 5. s. for every day they
sit about the execution of this Statute, to be allowed them out of the Fines,
which accrue upon the Breach thereof, so that their sitting be only for matters
contained in this Statute, and not above 3. days at one time.

XXXVIII. The forfeitures abovesaid (except those otherwise limited) shall be
divided betwixt the Queen, and the prosecutor; And all Just. of P. or any two
of them (1. Qu.) and every Head officer shall have power to hear and determine
the breach of this statute upon Indictment or otherwise, and to award process
and execution accordingly, And shall yearly in Michaelmas term by Estreat
certify into the Exchequer the fines, which accrue upon this Statute in like
manner as they ought to do in other Cases.

XXXIX. This act shall not restrain the Cities of London and Norwich, from
taking of Apprentices, as in times past.

XL None shall take Apprentices otherwise then is limited by this Act, in pain
of ten pounds, and all indentures otherwise made shall be void.

XLI. An Apprentice shall be bound by his Indenture notwithstanding his non age
of 21. years.

XLII. The Inhabitants of Godalming in Surrey may take and use such Arts and
Apprentices as market towns may do by virtue of this Act.

XLIII. The Fines accrewing by this Act in towns corporate shall be appointed
by the Head officer to be collected (as other fines and Amerciaments) for the
use of the same towns.

XLIV. When an Apprentice departs from his Masters service into another County,
or Corporation, it shall be lawful for the Just. of P. or Head officers there
(being Justices of P.) to direct a Capias to the Sheriff, or other chief
officer for his apprehension, and being taken the said Just. of P. or Head
officer shall commit him to ward until he give good Security, that he will
honestly serve out his time.

XLV. Notwithstanding this Act high Constables have power to keep their Statute
Sessions, so that they there do nothing repugant thereunto.

XLVI. Stat. 5. El. 5. Every householder using the trade of the Seas, Fisher,
Gunner, or Shipwright may take Apprentices according to the custom of the City
of London, so that the Apprentice be seven years old, and the Indenture
enrolled in a corporate town, for which Inrolment the officer shall not take
above 12. d.

XLVII. Stat. 8. El. 11. None shall make any Hat or Felt with foreign stuff,
unless he has served Apprentice to that Art seven years at least, in pain
of forfeiting the Hats or Felts so made, and 5. l. for every moan the
continuance in so doing.

XLVIII. No Hatmaker shall have above two Apprentices at one time, nor them,
for less time then seven years a pecce, in pain to suffer one months
imprisonment for every one he keeps more, and to be for ever after disabled to
keep any more then one.

XLIX. This Act shall not restrain Hatmakers to employ their Children.

L. Stat. 1. Jac. 17. None shall make any Hat or Felt of any Stuff what
soever, which has not served an Apprentice seven years in that Art, in pain
of 5. l. for every month; neither shall he have above two Apprentices at one
time, or employ any Journeyman in that Art, which has not served the like time
upon the like pain.

LI.

LII. The forfeitures of this Statute, as also those of the 8. El. 11. shall be
divided betwixt the King, and the prosecutor.

LIII. Stat. 3. Jac. 9. None shall employ any Journeyman or apprentice in the
Art of Skinner, unlesle he use the same Art himself and has served seven
years therein as an Apprentice, in pain of forfeiting double the value of the
Skins dressed to be divided betwixt the King and the proecutor or Seisour.

LIVE. Stat. 1. Jac. 6. The statute of 5. El. 4. Shall give power to the
Justices of P. to rate the Wages of any Laborers, Weavers, Spinsters, and
workmen or workwomen whatsoever.

LV. The rating of such wages in Sess. by the more pact of the Justices within
any particular Ryding or Division (where general Sess. have been used
severally to be kept) shall be as effectual as those rated at the general
Sess. of the whole County.

LVI. The Sheriff and Head officers within their several precincts shall
cause the said rates to be proclaimed in such sort, as if they had been sent
down printed from the Lord Keeper, which all persons shall be bound to observe
upon the pains and penalties mentioned in the said Statute of 5. El. 4.

LVII. A Clothier convicted before the Justices of Ass. or P. in Sess. or
before two Just. of P. (1. Qu.) by his own confession or the evidence of two
Witnesses not to have observed the said Rates, shall forfeit x. s. to the party
grieved, to be levied upon warrant from the same Just. by distress and sale of
goods.

LVIII. None shall incur any danger for not making Certisicate of the Rates
into the Chancery according to 5. El. 4.

LVIX. A Clothier being also a Just. of P. shall not be a Rater of Wages for
any Artificer, that depends upon making of Cloth.

S. Masons, Poor people, 6. 20. etc.

Lader, S. Badger.

Larceny, S. Bailement. 2. Trespass.

Latten, S. Brass.

Leather Tanner, Currier, and Shoemaker.
I. Stat. 5.6. E. 6.15. None shall buy or ingrosse Leather, to the intent to
sell the same again, in pain to forfeit the same Leather, or the value there
of be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor, or Seisor.

II. This Statute shall not restrain Girdlers and other Artificers to sell
their necks, Wombes, and Shreds, nor the buying of so much Leather, as the
party which buys it has license to transport.

III. None shall transport any Shoes, Boots, Buskins, Stertups, or slippers,
in pain to forfeit the same, or the value thereof, to be divided betwixt the
King and the prosecutor or seisor.

IV. No Girdler or other cutter of Leather in London shall curry it in his own
house, in pain to forfeit the same Leather, to be divided betwixt the King and
the prosecutor.

V. Stat. 1. M. Parl. 2.8. No Artificer using the Mystery of Leather buying
shall buy any Leather and sell the same again to be transported, in pain to
forfeit the same to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

VI. Curriers of London shall use their own stuff, in pain to forfeit the
Leathers otherwise curried, to be divided as aforesaid.

VII. No Currier shall curry any hides betwixt Saint Jamestide, and the Lady
day, but only such as have been sufficiently dipped twice in the Pan, inpaine
to forfeit the same to be divided as aforesaid.

VIII. A Currier shall dress his Leather within the space of 5. days in
Summer, and of x. days in Winter, in pain to forfeit to the party grieved for
every hide otherwise dressed 10. s.

IX. Stat. 5. El. 22. None shall make Pelts, or buy any skins of Stag, Hind,
Buck, Do, Goat, Fawn, or Kid, except to make tawed or tanned Leather, or
parchment, or otherwise to convert them to his own use, in pain to forfeit the
value thereof, and besides 2. s. 6. d. for every pelt, or skin so made or
bought.

X. Stat. 18. El. 9. The penalty of transporting Leather.

XI. Stat. 1. Jac. 22. None shall gash any hide in pain of xx. d. nor water
them except in June, July, and August, nor put them to Sale being putrified, in
pain to forfeit for every hide so watered or put to sale 3. s. 4. d.

XII. None shall kill any Calfes under 5. weeks old in pain to forfeit for evey
Calfe so killed 6. s. 8. d.

XIII. No Butcher shall exercise the Mystery of a Tanner, in pain of 6. s. 8.
d. for every day he so continues both professions.

XIV. None shall be a Tanner, but such as have served seven years as
Apprentices, or hired servants in that trade, or the widow or children of a
Tanner having a tan fat left them and having been brought up in that profession
by the space of 4. years, in pain to forfeit all the Leather they tan, or the
full value thereof.

XV. None that uses the cutting, or working of Leather shall be a Tanner, in
pain to forfeit all the Leather he tans, or the value thereof.

XVI. None shall buy any rough Hides, or Calfeskins in the hair, but only such
as do and may lawfully tan them (except salt Hides for the necessary use of
Ships) in pain to forfeit them, or their just value, neither shall any
forestall hides, but buy them in open Fair, or Market (except of such as kill
beasts for their own provision) in pain to forfeit for every hide otherwise
bought, 6. s. 8. d.

XVII. None shall buy any tanned Leather unwrought but only such as will and
shall convert the same into made wares.

XVIII. This Act shall not restrain Artificers from buying tanned Leather
every Monday at Leaden Hall to be converted into made wares being first duly
searched, sealed, and registered, as hereafter is limited, nor Sadlers, and
girdlers from selling their Necks and Shreds of tanned red Leather.

XIX. The Tanner that overlimes his Hides, or uses in his tanning any thing
save Ashbark, Oakbark, Tapwort, Malt, Meal, Lyme, Culverdung, or Hendung, or
suffers them to be frozen, or to be parched with the fire, or sun, or tannes
hides which are rotten by long lying or otherwise, or continues not utter sole
Leather 12 months in the Woozes, and upper Leathers 9. months, or does
negligently work his hides in the Woozes, not renewing, and strengthening them,
as often as need shall require, or does work them in any other sort, then is by
this statute limited, shall forfeit every Hide so tanned and put to Sale, or
the full value of the same.

XX. No Tanner shall by mixtures raise any Hide for sole Leather, which shall
not be fit for that use, in pain of forfeiting the same.

XXI. None shall put to sale any tanned Leather red, and unwronght, but in open
Fair, or Market, unless the same has been searched and sealed in some Fair
or Market before; neither shall any offer to sell any such Leather before it be
searched and sealed, in pain to forfeit for every hide, otherwise put to sale
6. s. 8. d. and for every dozen of Calfeskins, or Sheepskins, 3. s. 4. d.
besides the hides and skins themselves, or the full value there of.

XXII. None shall put to sale any Leather insufficiently tanned, or dried, in
pain to forfeit the whole, or at least so much as shall be so misused.

XXIII. No Tanner shall hasten the tanning of his Leather by giving it unkind
heates with hot woozes, or otherwise, in pain of x. l. and and to stand upon
the Pillory three days, in the next market.

XXIV. None shall buy or ingrosse Bark to the intent to sell the same again in
pain to forfeit it, or the value thereof; neither shall any fell Oak trees apt
for barking, where Bark is worth 2. s. the Cart load (timber for the present
and necessary repair of houses, Ships and Mills excepted) but only between the
first of April and the last of June, in pain to forfeit the trees, otherwise
felled, or the double value of the same.

XXV. Purveyers of trees for the Kings use shall fell them only in barking time
(except for the present repair of the Kings houses or Ships) and shall take no
more thereof from the owner, then what may serve the Kings present occasion, in
pain to forfeit to the party grieved for every tree otherwise felled or the
Lops and tops thereof taken away xl. s.

XXVI. A Currier shall not curry a Hide or Skin, which is not sufficiently
tanned and dried, and that in his own house situate in some Corporate, or
Market town, and not else where, neither shall he gash, or any other way
spoil, or impair them, but work them sufficiently in all points, in pain to
forfeit for every skin, or hide, so spoiled (otherwise then by gashing) 6. s.
8. d. besides the value of the same skin, or hide; And for gashing them, to
forfeit to the party grieved twice so much, as he impaites them by gashing.

XXVII. No Artificer within London, or within three miles distance from it,
shall put any Leather to be curried save only to some person free of the
Company of Curriers in London, in pain to forfeit the same, or the value
thereof.

XXVIII. None within the aforesaid Jurisdiction of London shall use or put into
made wares any curried Leather, before the same be searched, and sealed, in
pain to forfeit for every Hide or Skin 6. shillings eight pence, and also the
value of every such Hide, or Skin.

XXIX. A Currier shall not use the Art of a Tanner, Cordwainer, Shoemaker,
Butcher, or of any other Artificer, which uses the cutting of Learther, in
pain to forfeit for every hide, or skin he currieth during that time, 6. s. 8.
d.

XXX. No currier (sufficient stuff being tendered unto him) shall refuse
sufficiently to curry Leather within eight days in summer and 16. days in
Winter, after he shall or may take it in hand, in pain to forfeit for every
Hide, or piece of Leather not curried accordingly, x. s.

XXXI. The Wardens of the Company of Curriers, or officers by them appointed,
shall within one day after request made unto the them search and seal Leather
curried, for which the Currier shall pay after the rate of a 1. d. for every
Dicker of hides, and of as much for every six dozen of Calfe skins; And the
Currier shall forfeit for every hide, not searched and sealed as aforesaid 6.
s. eight pence.

XXXII. Shoomakers shall make their boots, etc. of good and sufficient stuff,
sow them well, and not put them to sale upon Sundays, in pain to forfeit for
every such default, or offense 3. s. 4. d. and also the full value of all other
wares otherwise made or sold.

XXXIII. The Masters and Wardens of the Companies of Shoomakers, Curriers,
Girdlers, and Sadlers, within the jurisdiction of London aforesaid, or the more
part of them, shall once every quarter (or oftener if need reqire) make search
and view of all wares made of tanned Leather, in pain to forfeit 40. l. for
every years default to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor, and
shall also have power to seize all insufficent Wares found upon search.

XXXIV. The said Masters and Wardens shall only search the wares of such as use
their own professions, and Coachmakers shall be under the survey and search of
the Company of Sadlers.

XXXV. The Mayor, and Aldermen of London shall (within the said jurisdiction,
and upon the like pain of xl. l. to be imploiod as aforesaid) choose, and
swear 8. expert men out of some of the 4. Companies abovesaid, to be
searchers, and Sealers of all tanned Leather there, whereof one shall be
assigned to keep the Seal.

XXXVI. Head Officers and Lords of Liberties shall yearly in all other parts
of the Kingdom (upon the like pain of xl. l. to be employed as aforesaid,
appoint and swear two, three, or more, honest and skillful men to be searchers
and sealers of Leather, who shall have power to seal sufficient wares, and
likewise to seize, and retain, such as be insufficient, until they shall be
tried by Triers to be hereafter appointed by this Act.

XXXVII. There shall be appointed six triers of insufficient Leather, and
Leather wares, which shall be seized within the said jurisdiction of London;
And when any insufficient Learther, or wares made of Leather are seized within
any other jurisdiction, the chief officer, or the Lord of the Liberty, or his
Deputy, shall cause trial thereof to be made by the oath of six honest men
upon some Market day, and within 15. days after such seizure made.

XXXVIII. The Lord Mayor of London and the Head officer, and Lord or Deputy
aforesaid shall appoint Triers in their several jurisdictions, in pain of 5.
l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor; And those Triers shall
do their duties in that office without delay, in pain to forfeit for every
default 5. l.

XXXIX. Four of the Triers in London shall by yearly changed, and other four
placed in their rooms, and none shall continue that office here above one
year, and if any shall happen to be Trier two years together he shall not be
chosen again within three years after, in pain to forfeit for every month he
continues otherwise in that Office, x. l.

XL. No Searcher and sealer of Leather shall refuse within convenient time to
do his office, or allow any wares, which are insufficient, in pain of xl. s.
And shall not take Bribes, or exact more then due Fees, in pain of xx. l. nor
being lawfully elected shall refuse the office, in pain of x. l.

XLI. All red tanned Leather which shall be brought within the aforesaid
jurisdiction of London shall be carried to Leaden Hall before it be housed, and
there searched sealed, and registered by the officers aforesaid, for which if it
were sealed before (out of the said jurisdiction) they shall take half Fees
only.

XLII. None shall sell any tanned Leather within the abovesaid Jurisdiction of
London, before the Officers there have searched and sealed it, in pain to
forfeit the same, or the value thereof.

XLIII. None shall withstand the searchers and Sealers in the due execution of
their office, nor the seizing of insufficient wares, in pain of 5. l.

XLIV. The abovesaid Searchers and Searchers and Sealers shall register all
tanned Leather sold in Faires or Markets together with the Prices thereof, and
the names and dwelling places of the buyerand seller (being thereunto required
by the said Buyer and Seller) taking as well of the buyer as of the seller 2.
d. for every ten hides, backs or buts of Leather, and 2 d. for every six dozen
of Calfe skins or Sheep skins, and no more.

XLV. None shall sell any tanned Leather (red and unwrought) before it be
registered, in pain to forfe it the value thereof.

XLVI. None shall buy any tanned Leather before it be searched, and sealed, nor
carry it out of the Fair or Market before it be registered, in pain to forfeit
the same or the value thereof.

XLVII. The Currier within the jurisdiction of London aforesaid, which currieth
not his Leather sufficiently, and every other Artificer there (using tanned and
curried Leather) which puts into his Wares Leathers insufficiently tanned or
curried, shall forfeit for every such default the said Wares, and the just
value thereof.

XLVIII. No such Artificer shall sell any wares, but in open Shop, Fair, or
Market, where due search may be made, in pain to forfeit the wares otherwise
sold, and besides x. s. for every such offense.

XLIX. Here the sums of money aforesaid forfeited shall be divided into three
parts, whereof the King is to have one, the prosecutor another, and the City,
Corporation, or Lord of the Liberty, the third.

L. The Value of the wares forfeited within the jurisdiction of London, after
praisement shall also be divided into three parts, whereof one shall be given
to the seisor, another to the Chamber of London, and the third to the poor:
And in all other places, one third part to charitable uses, another to the Head
officer, or Lord of the Liberty, and the third to the Seisor or Seisors for
their pains.

LI. None shall buy any forfeited wares to sell them again, in pain to forfeit
for every parcel thereof 3. s. 4. d.

LII. This Act shall not prejudice the authority of the Universities, so that
their Officers observe the provisions of this Act, under the Penalties therein
contained.

LIII. The Hides or Skins of Ox, Steer, Bull, Cow, Calfe, Dear, Goats, and
Sheep being tanned or tawed, and salt hides are reputed Leather within the
Letter of this Statute.

LIVE. Justices of Ass. Just. of G. D. Just. of P. Stewards of Leets, the Mayor
of London, and Head officers within their several precincts have power to
hear, and determine these offenses.

LV. The Kings Steward of a Leet, or Liberty shall have the same authority and
be subject to the like penalties, that a Lord of a Leet has and is subject to.

LVI. It shall be lawful for all Artificers (save only Shoomakers between
September, and the twentieth of April) to use dry, curried and frised Leather,
being well tanned according to this Act.

LVII. This Act shall extend to Wales.

LVIII. If any Customer or other such Officer having notice of the transporting
of any Leather, do not use his best endeavor to seize it, or being
transported do not disclose it within forty days, he shall forfeit for the
first default 100. l. and for the second lose his place; And every such Officer
for making a false Certificate of the Arrival of any Leather shall also
forfeit 100. l.

LVIX. This Act shall not extend to Scottish Hides brought to Barwick.

LX. Licenses to dispense with the Offenses prohibited by this Act shall be
void.

LXI. Stat. 4. Jac. 6. There shall be no penalty for housing, buying or selling
Sheepskins unsealed.

LXII. None shall sell tanned Leather by weight, in pain to forfeit the same,
or the value thereof to be divided between the King and the prosecutor.

See Actions popular, 18. Laborers, 53.

Letters of Administration, S.

Ecclesiastical Court.

Liberties, and Franchises.
Stat. 27. H. 8.24. All Stewards, Bayliffes, and other Ministers of Liberties,
and Franchises which have used to attend the Just. of Ass. G. D. and of P.
shall do it still, and shall also make due execution of all Process directed
unto them: the said bayliffes likewise, or their Deputies shall give
attendance, and assistance upon the Sheriff at all Courts of G. D. for
execution of Prisoners there according to Justice. S. Sheriffs.

Maineprise, S. Bailment.

Maintenance, Champerty, Embracery, and Buying of Titles.
I. STat. West. 1.3. E. 1.25.

II. Stat. West. 1.3. E. 1.28.

III. Stat. West. 2.13. E. 1.48. Church, Land, or Tenement in Fee by gift, by
purchase, to farm, by Champerty, or otherwise, so long as the same thing is in
Plea, nor shall take any reward thereof, in pain to be punished at the Kings
pleasure both the buyer, and seller.

IV. Stat. 28. E. 1.11. None shall take upon him a business in Suit, with an
intent to have part of the things sued for; neither shall any upon any such
Covenant give up his right to another, in pain that the taker shall forfeit to
the King so much of his lands and goods as does amount to the value of the part
so purchased for such maintenance, to be recovered by any that will sue for the
King before the Justices, before whom the Plea hangs.

V. This statute shall not prohibit any to take Counsel at Law, for his Fee,
or of his parents, or next friends.

VI. Stat. 33. E. 1. He that shall be attainted of Champerty, or Maintenance
shall suffer three years imprisonment, and be fined at the Kings pleasure.

VII. Stat. 1. E. 3.14. None shall take upon him to maintain quarrels, and
parties in the Country, to the Let, and disturbance of the Common law.

VIII. Stat. E. 3.11. Justices of the Benches, Justices of Assise, and of nisi
prius shall hear, and determine, maintenance, Conspiracy, and Champerty.

IX. Stat. 20. E. 3.4. None shall maintain any quarrels, save only their own.

X. Stat. 1. R. 2.4.

Stat. 1. R. 2.7.

XII. Stat. 1. R. 2.9.

XIII Stat. 7. R. 2.15. E. 3.14.4. E. 3.11. and 1. R. 2.4. and 9. shall be duly
executed in all points.

XIV. Stat. 4. H. 4.8.

XV. Stat. 32. H. 8.9.

XVI. None shall buy any pretended right or Title in any land, unless the
seller has taken the profits thereof one whole year before, in pain that both
the buyer and seller shall each of them forfeit the value of the same land to
be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

XVII. None shall unlawfully maintain any Suit or action, retain any person for
Maintenance, Embrace Jurors, or suborn witnesses to the hinderance of Justice,
or the procurement of perjury, in pain to forfeit for every such offense x. l.
to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

XVIII. Howbeit purchasing of a pretenced Title by him that is already lawfully
possessed of the thing whereunto Title is made, is lawful.

XIX. Proclamations shall be made at the Assizes of the Statutes made against
Maintenance, Champerty, Embracery, and unlawful Retainers.

XX. The Offenders against this Act shall be prosecuted within one year.

See Actions Popular, 12.15.18. Force, 4.

Marches.
Stat. 31. H. 6.3. They may punish such as shall unlawfully (against the
provision of this Statute) attach men dwelling far off, to appear in the
Warden Courts of the Marches near Scotland.

Mariners, S. Captains, 32.35. etc.

Markets, S. Horses, 11, etc.

Marshalls of the Kings Bench, S. Bailement, 3.

Marshalsey, S. Poor people, 15.

Marshes.
Stat. 7. Jac. 20. Their power in recovering Marshgrounds in Norfolk, and
Suffolk.

Masons.
Stat. 3. H. 6.1. It shall be Felony to plot confederacies amongst Masons, and
those which assemble upon such confederacies shall suffer Imprisonment, and pay
fine and ransom at the Kings pleasure.

Matrimony.
I. Stat. 7. Jac. 11. It shall be Felony for any person to marry, which has
had notice that his or her former husband or wife was living, within seven
years before.

II. The Trial in this case shall be in the County where the party delinquent
shall be apprehended.

III. But this Statute shall not extend to question any for Felony, where the
former marriage was (before the latter) severed by divorce, or declared void,
in the Ecclesiastical Court, or was made before the age of consent, neither
shall the breach of statute draw after Corruption of blood, loss of Dower, or
disinherison of heir or heirs.

Malt.
I. Stat. 17. R. 2.4. Malt made in the Counties of Huntington, Cambridge,
Northampton, and Bedford, and brought to London, for the provision of the
Court, and City shall be well cleansed from Dust, and other filth: And Majors,
Bailiffes, and Wardens of towns and places, where it is sold, have power to
make search, and to see such defaults redressed.

II. Stat. 2. E. 6.10. None shall employ less time in the making, and drying
of Malt, except in the months of June, July, and August, then three weeks;
and in these months, less then seaventeen days; nor put to sale any Malt
mingled of good and bad, in pain to forfeit for every quarter otherwise ordered
or sold, 2. s. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

III. None shall put any Malt to sale before (by tredding, rubbing, and
Fanning it) he shall have conveniently taken out of every quarter half a peck
of Dust, or more, in pain to forfeit xx. d. for every quarter otherwise sold,
to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

IV. Justices of Peace in Sessions, and Stewards of Leets have power to hear
and determine these offenses as well by presentment of 12. men, as by
information of two Witnesses.

V. Baylisses and Constables of towns, and places, where faulty Malt is made
or mingled as aforesaid, have power to make search for it, and being found
(with the Advice of a Justice of P.) to make sale thereof at their discretions.

VI. None shall be punished by this Act, which only makes malt for his own
provision, nor unless the Action be prosecuted within one year.

VII. Stat. 39. El. 16.

VII. If any man shall be convicted by the testimony of two witnesses, or his
own Confession to have disobeyed the restraint aforesaid, he shall suffer
three days imprisonment, withont bail, and there shall still remain until he
shall (before some I. of P.) become bound by recognisance in xl. l. to obey the
said Restraint.

IX. Justices of P. of the County shall not execute this law within
Corporations; but only the Justices and chief officers of the same
Corporations.

X. Those which have Barley of their own growing, Tith Corn, or rent Corn,
may convert it into Malt notwithstanding this Statute.

XI. Maulsters shall not meddle with the execution of this Act.

S. Forestallers, 5.

Measures, S. Weights.

Millers, S. Weights, 12.

Money.
I. Stat. 25. E. 3.2. It shall be high Treason to counterfeit the Kings money,
or to bring into this Kingdom counterfeit money knowing it to be false.

II. Stat. 3. H. 5.7. Just. of Ass. and Just. of P. shall have power by
Commission the Kings to hear, and determine the offenses of bringing in of
false money as also of counterfeiting, washing, or Clipping it, and of every
other falsity concerning money.

III. Stat. 1. M. 6. It shall be adjudged high Treason to counterfeit foreign
Coin, current in England.

IV. Stat. 1.2. P. M. 11.

V. Stat. 5. Elizab. 11.

VI. Stat. 14. El. 3.

VII. Stat. 18. El. 1.

VIII. A Peer of the Realm guilty of this offense shall be tried by his
Peers.

Mortuaries.
I. Stat. 21. H. 8.6. None shall take, or demand for a mortuary any thing at
all, where (by the Custom) they have not been usually paid, nor upon the death
of a woman Covert, a Child, any person not keeping house, a wayfaring man, one
not residing in the place, where he happens to die, or where the goods of the
dead person (debts deducted) amount not to the value of x. marks, or above the
sum, 3. s. 4. d. when they exceed not xxx. l. or above 6. s. 8. d. when they
exceed xxx. l. and not xl. l. or above x. s. when they amount to xl. l. or
above, in pain to forfeit so much as they shall take above the several sums
limited by this Act, besides xl. s. to the party grieved to be recovered by
Action of Debt.

II. Mortuaries for wayfairing men, and all other, which die out of their place
of Residence, shall be paid only in the place, where they had their most
habitation at the time of their death, and no more but one Mortuary upon one
death.

III. Less Mortuaries already settled by Custom, shall not be increased by
this Act; And there also, persons exempted by this Act, shall not hereafter be
chargeable. See the stat. 29. H. 8.15.

Note that I. of P. may punish those for extortion which take more then this
statute allows, Vide Lambert, 435. and Rast in Tabula.

Murder.
I. Stat. 52. H. 3.25. Murder from henceforth shall not be judged before the
Justices, where it is found misfortune only, but it shall take place in such as
are slain by felony and not otherwise.

II. Stat. 6. E. 1.9.

III. An Appealor, which declares the deed, the year, the day, the hour, the
time of the King, the place where, the weapon by which the party was slain, and
prosecutes his Suit within a year and a day, shall not be barred for default
of fresh Suit.

IV. Stat. 2.3. E. 6.24.

V. An Indictment found against an Accessory to any such Murder, or Felony in
another County, then where the principal offense was committed, shall be as
effectual, as if it had been found in the same County; And the Justices,
before whom such Accessory shall be tried, or two of them, shall write to the
Custos Rotulorum, of the other County for a Certificate of the proceeding
against the Principal, and shall give Judgment accordingly.

S. Eastardy, 4. Clergy, Felony, 15.

News.

Stat. West. 1.3. E. 1.33. None shall report any false or slanderous nevves, or
tales whereupon discord may arise between the King, and his People, or the
great men of the Realm, in pain of Imprisonment, till he produce the Author.

See also 2. R. 2.5. and 12. R. 2.11. S. Pishdayes, 11.

Oatmeale, S. Forestallers, 5.

Oaths, S. Recusants, 8.88.

Sewers, 2. Sheriffs, 17.

Ordinary, S. Ecclesiastical Court.

Oldfeild Dike in the Isle of Ely, S. Felony, 13.

Outlawed persons, S. Bailement, 1. Sheriffs, 4.

Outlawries, S. Certificate.

Pannell, S. Jurors.

Pardon.
I. Stat. 2. E. 3.2. No Pardon shall be granted of Manslaughter, Robery,
Felony, viz. where one slays another in his own defense, or by misfortune.

II. Stat. 4. E. 3.13. and 10. E. 3.2. The statute of 2. E. 3.2. shall be duly
put in Execution.

III. Stat. 10. E. 3.3.

IV. If the party pardoned fail to procure such surety, or having procured
bear himself otherwise against the Peace then he ought, the pardon shall be
holden for none.

V. Stat. 14. E. 3.15. No pardon of the death of a man or other Felony shall be
granted, but only where the King may do it, saving the oath of his Crown, and
if any pardon be granted against the Statutes made before this time, it shall
be holden for none.

VI. Stat. 27. E. 3.2. Pardons, which have not in them the suggestion,
whereupon they are granted, and also the suggestors name, shall be void; so are
those likewise, which are granted upon false suggestions.

VII. Stat. 13. R. 2.1. In a Pardon the offense committed shall be specified,
otherwise it shall not be allowed.

VIII. No pardon of Treason or Felony shall pass without warrant of the Privy
Seal.

IX. If the offense pardoned be afterward found wilful murder, that Pardon
shall not be allowed.

X. Stat. 5. H. 4.2. If an approver shall commit felony after he is pardoned,
he that procured his pardon shall forfeit C. l. whose name shall also (for that
purpose) be inserted in the said Pardon.

Parks, S. Hunting.

Parliament.
I. Stat. 23. H. 6.11.

II. The Sheriff or other officer which levies more then is assessed shall
forfeit xx. l. to the King, and x. l. to the prosecutor.

III. Justices of both the Benches, Just. of Assise, G. D. and of P. have power
to hear, and determine these abuses, as well at the Suit of the King, as of
the party.

IV. This Assessment shall not be levied, but only in places, where it has
been formerly levied, and hereafter in every writ for that purpose, this Act
shall be inserted.

V. Stat. 35. H. 8.11. P. in every County of Wales, and Monmouthshire have
power to tax the Cities, Buroughs, and towns there, what proportion every of
them shall pay toward the Charges of their Burgesses for the Parliament.

VI. It appears by the preamble of this Statute that the Wages of a Knight of
the Parliament is 4. s. the day, and of a Burgess, 2. s. or more.

Partridges, S. Hawks.

Paving.
I. Stat. 13. El. 23. An Act made for the paving of certain streets, and Lanes
about Aldgate, and white Chapel in the suburbs of London, and for clensing
certain ditches thereabouts, and that I. of P. of London and Middlesex may
inquire, and assesse fines for defaults to the Queens use.

II. Stat. 23. El. 12. This Statute is an Addition of the former by virtue
whereof I. of P. there have power to make a Scavenger.

Penal Statutes, S. Actions Popular.

Perjury.
I. Stat. 5. El. 9. None shall suborne a Witness to give testimony in any
Court of Record concerning any lands, goods, Debts, or damages, in pain of xl.
l. And if the offender being convicted thereof has not wherewithal to
satisfy the said Forfeiture, he shall suffer six months imprisonment without
Bail, stand upon the Pillory one whole hour in the next or same market Town
where the offense was committed, and be for ever after disabled to give
Testimony in any Court of Record, until the Judgment given against him be
reversed by Attaint or otherwise. See Maintenance.

II. He that commits wilful perjury shall forfeit xx. l. suffer six months
Imprisonment without Bail, and be ever after disabled to give Evidence, until
the Judgment given against him shall be reversed as aforesaid; And here also,
if he has not wherewithal to discharrge the fine (in the Country) the
Sheriff, or (in a Corporation) the Head officer shall cause him to be set upon
the Pillory in some market place, and to have both his ears nailed.

III. The Forfeitures abovesaid shall be divided bet wixt the Queen and the
party grieved.

IV. Judges of the Courts where such offenses shall happen to be committed, I.
of Ass. G. D. and of P. have power to hear and determine the same offenses.

V. This statute shall be proclaimed at every Assise.

VI. This Act shall not extend to any Court ecclesiastical, but that they may
there proceed as in times past.

VII. This Act shall not restrain the pow-of the Star Chamber to punish
heinous Perjuries.

VIII. Howbeit, none served with a Process out of a Court of Record to
testify, as a witness (being tendered convenient charges, and having no
reasonable let) shall therein make default, in pain to forfeit x. l. and to
yield such further Recompense to the party grieved, as the Judge of the same
Court shall think fit, according to the damage sustained; which said sums
shall be recovered by the said party grieved in any of her Majesty's Courts of
Record by Action of Debt, wherein no wager, essoine, or protection shall be
allowed.

Petty Treason, S. Clergy.

Pewter, S. Brass.

Physicians.
I. Stat. 14. H. 8.5. None shall practice Physic in the Country without a
Testimonial of his sufficiency from the College of Physicians in London,
unless he be a Graduate of one of the Universities.

II. Stat. 1. M. 9. Sess. 1 Just. of P. Majors, Sheriffs, Bayliffes,
Constables, and other officers shall assist the President of the College of
Physicians in London, and all persons authorized by them for the due execution
of their Laws, and Statutes, in pain to run in Contempt of the Queens
Majestic, her heirs, and successors.

Pillory, S. Weights.

Plague.
I. Stat. 1. Jac. 31. The Mayor, Bayliffes, Head officers, or Just. of P. of a
Corporation or any two such Justices, have power to tax the Inhabitants there
toward the relief of those, which are infected with the Plague, and to make
warrant under their hands and seals for any person to levy the said tax upon
the goods of those, which shall refuse or neglect to pay the same; And if no
goods can be found to satisfy the tax upon the parties refusal of it, to
commit him to Prison there to remain until the tax be satisfied.

II. If the Corporation shall not be able to relieve the persons infected, upon
Certificate thereof to the Just. of P. of the County thereunto adjoining, or
any two of the said Justices shall have like power to tax, levy, and
imprison, as aforesaid, within five Miles distance of the said Corporation.

III. In towns, and places not corporate, or where there are no Justices, or
Head officers as aforesaid two Justices of P. of the County, shall tax, levy,
and imprision, as aforesaid, within five Miles distance of the town, or place
so infected.

IV. These taxes shall be certified in at the next Qu. Sess. of the
Corporation, or County respectively, and shall there be ordered, as by the
Justices there, or the more part of them shall be thought fit.

V. The Constable or other officer, which wilfully neglects to levy the tax
upon a warrant, as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such default x. s. to be
employed upon the charitable uses aforesaid.

VI. If any infected person residing in an infected house after command by a
Justice or other officer presume to come forth, the Watchmen may resist him,
and if any hurt happen to him thereupon, the Watchmen shall not be impeached
therefore.

VII. If any person having a sore upon him go abroad, and converse in Company,
he shall suffer as a Felon, and if he have no sore, he shall be punished, as a
vagabond according to the Statute of 39. El. 4. See Vagabonds, 3. etc.

VIII. No Attainder of Felony by virtue of this Act shall extend to Corruption
of Blood, or forfeiture of goods or Lands.

IX. It shall be lawful for the Just. of P. and Head officers to appoint
Scarchers, Watchmen, Examiners, Keepers, and Buriers, and to minister unto them
oaths for the due performance of their offices, and to give them other
directions as in their discretion shall be thought fit.

X. Justices of P. or Head officers shall not by force of this Act meddle in
the Universities, Cathedral Churches, or Colleges.

Plays and Games.
I Stat. 33. H. 8.9. None shall keep, or maintain a house or place of unlawful
games, in pain of xl. s. and none shall use, or haunt such places, in pain of
6. s. 8. d.

II. In every Placard to keep common Gaming the Games there to be used shall be
inserted, as also the persons, who shall play thereat, and every Placard
otherwise granted shall be void: The G antee also of such a Placard shall be
bound by recognisance in the Chancery with good sureties, not to use it
contrary to the from thereof.

III. It shall be lawful for Justices of P. in every County and for Head
Officers in Corporations (as well within Liberties as without) to enter and
resort into all such houses, and places, where such unlawful Games are
suspected to be used, and as well the Keepers thereof, as the resorters
thereunto, to arrest and imprison, until they shall severally give good
Security (at the discretions of the said Justices or officers) not to keep, or
use such games any more.

IV. Every Mayor, Sheriff, Bayliffe, Constable, and other Head officer within
every City, Borough, or town shall make due search (as aforesaid) once every
month at least, in pain to forfeit xl. s. for every such default.

V. No Artificer, or his Journeyman, No Husbandman, Apprentice, Labourer,
Servant at husbandry, Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or Servingman, shall play
at Tables, Tenis, Dice, Cards, Bovvles, Clash, Coyting, Logating, or any other
unlawful game out of Christmas, or then, out of their Masters house, or
presence, in pain of xx. s. And none shall play at Bowls in open places out
of his Garden or Orchard, in pain of 6. s. 8. d.

VI. All Informations, or suits upon this Statute shall be prosecuted within
one year, and the forfeitures thereof, which happen within a Leet or Liberty
shall be divided betwixt the King and the Lord thereof, and in all other places
betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

VII. Proclamation of this Act shall be made quarterly in every Market Town,
as also at every G. D. Ass. and Sess.

VIII. This Act shall not restrain a servant by his Masters License to play at
Cards, dice, or Tables with the Master himself, or other gentleman resorting
to the Masters house; and if the Master has Freehold of 100. l. per annum, he
may also license his servant to play at Bovvles, or Tenis.

IX. Stat. 2.3. P. M. 9. All Licenses to keep houses and places of unlawful
Games shall be void.

X. Stat. 3. Jac. 21. None shall in any stage play, Show, May Game, or Pageant
profanely use the name of God, Christ Jesus, the Holy Ghost, or Trinity, in
pain of x. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

S. Actions Popular, 17. Alehouses, 2. Holidays, 1.

Ponds, S. Hunters.

Poor People.
I. Stat. 43. El. 1. The Churchwardens of every parish, and 4.3. or 2.
householders there, (according to the greatness of the parish) to be nominated
yearly in Easter week or within one month after under the hands and seals of
two Justices of P. (1. Qu.) shall be called Overseers of the Poor for the same
parish.

II. These Officers or the greater part of them shall take order (with the
Consent of two such Just.) for the setting of poor people to work, and for
raising (by taxation) a convenient stock, to work upon, to relieve impotent
persons, to put forth Apprentices, and to perform all other things concerning
the premises.

III. These officers or such of them as shall not be let by some just excuse
(to be allowed two such Justices) shall meet monthly in the Church upon the
Sunday after Evening prayer, and there consider of some meet direction in the
premises; And shall within four days after the end of their year and other
Overseers nominated, yield up a true account to such two Justices, pay the
Surplusage thereof to their successors, and use all possible diligence in their
office, in pain to forfeit for every such default xx. s.

IV Where the Inhabitants of any parish are not able to relieve themselves,
two such I. may tax other parishes and places, and the whole Hundred also (if
need require) and where the whole Hundred is not able, Just. of P. in Ses^. may
tax the County in part or wholly at their discretions.

V. It shall be lavvfull for the said officers upon warrant from two such Just.
to levy such tax or surplusage by distress and sale of goods, and in default
of distress two of the said Just. have power to commit the party to Prison
there to remain without Bail, until it be discharged, and also to commit
persons, which refuse to work to the house of Correction.

VI. The said officers, or the greater part of them with the assent of two I.
of P. may bind poor Children Apprentices, viz. a man child till 24. years of
age, and a woman Child till 21. years, or Marriage.

VII. The said officers shall (with the Consent of the Lord of the Manor first
obtaind in writing under his hand and Seal) either of themselves or by virtue
of a Sess. order erect Cottages upon the wast and lodge Inmates therein,
notwithstanding the statute of 31. El. 7. But those Cottages shall not be
afterward otherwise employed then to lodge impotent persons therein, upon the
pains mentioned in the said statute of 31. El.

VIII. Justices of P. in Sess. shall rectify unjust taxes, whose order therein
shall be binding to all parties.

IX. The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother, and Children of every poor
person shall be assessed toward their relief, as the Just. of P. in Sess. of
the County where such Father, etc. dwells, shall limit and appoint, in pain to
forfeit 20. s. a month.

X. Officers in Corporate towns, and Aldermen of London, have in their
several precincts like authority that Just. of P. have in the Counties, which
said Just. are not to intermeddle in Corporations for the execution of this Law.

XI. When one parish extends into several Counties or Liberties, the Justices
or head Officers shall only intermeddle within their respective limits; but
the Churchwardens and Overseers shall have mixed Jurisdiction, and shall render
account (as aforesaid) to the Justices or head. Officers of both places.

XII. If it happen no Overseers to be appointed according to this Statute,
every Just. of P. or head Officer of that Division, or Corporation, shall
forfeit 5. l. to be levied by a Sessions warrant, and employed to the use of
the poor of the Parish, where such default is made.

XIII. The forfeitures of this Statute shall be employed to the use of the
poor, as aforesaid, and shall be levied by distress and commitment, as is
above remembered in the fifth clause.

XIV Justices of P. of every County and Corporation, or the more part of them,
at their Easter Sessions, shall yearly (or as often as they shall think fit)
rate every Parish at a certain sum, to be paid weekly; but so, as no parish
may pay more then six pence, nor less then a half penny, and (one Parish
being considered with another) not above two pence a piece, through the whole
County or Corporation; which sums so rated, the Churchwardens and Constab.
of every Parish, or any of them (or in their default a Just. of P.) have power
to assesse and levy by distress, sale and commitment, as aforesaid.

XV. Justices of P. shall then likewise rate every parish, toward the relief
of the Kings Bench and Marshalsie, and also of Hospitals and Almes-houses
situate within their several Jurisdictions, appointing only so much to the
said Hospitals and Almes-houses, that the Kings Bench and Marshalsie may each
of them receive at least 20. s. yearly out of every County: And the sums
thus to be assessed upon every Parish, the Churchwardens there shall collect
and pay over quarterly to the high Constable of that respective Division, ten
days before every quarter Sessions, and the high Constable shall every quarter
Sess. pay the same over to the two Treasurers of the County, or one of them, to
be yearly chosen by the more part of the Justices of P. and such Subsidie-men
as were taxed in the last rate of Subsidies at 5. l. lands, or 10. l. goods:
which Treasurers so chosen, shall yearly at Easter Sessions render a true
account to their successors, and pay the moneys in their hands to the L. Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, and the Knight Marshall, by equal portions. And
here, the Churchwarden or his Executors, etc. which fails in payment to the
high Constable. shall forfeit 10. s. and the high Constable. or his Executors, etc.
which fails in payment to the Treasurers, shall forfeit 20. s. to be levied
and employed by the said Treasurers, as aforesaid.

XVI. The stock of every County shall be ordered and disposed to charitable
uses, as the Justices or the more part of them shall think convenient.

XVII. The Treasurer that refuses to execute his office, to distribute
relief, or to account, as the more part of the Justices shall direct, shall be
fined by the same Justices, or (in their default) by the Judges of Assise,
three pounds at least, which fine shall be levied by sale of goods, upon the
prosecution of any two Justices authorized by the rest.

XVIII. A provision for the Island of Fowlenesse in Essex.

XIX. Upon an Action brought for the due execution of this Act, the defendant
may plead the general Issue, and yet give special matter in evidence; and
shall also recover treble damages, and his costs of suit.

XX. Stat. 1. Jac. 25. All persons, El. 2.) bind any children Apprentices, may
take, receive, and keep them as Apprentices. Stat. 21. Jac. 28.

XXI. Stat. 3. Car. 4. All persons, to whom the Overseers of the poor shall
(according to the Stat. of 43. El. 2.) bind any children Apprentices, may
take, receive, and keep them as Apprentices.

XXII. The Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor (mentioned in the Statute
of 43. El. 2.) may, with the consent of two or more Just. of P. (1. Qu.) within
their respective limits, wherein there shall be more Just. of P. then one, and
where no more shall be then one, with the assent of that one Justice, set up,
use and occupy any Trade, Mystery or Occupation, only for the setting on
work, and better relief of the poor of the parish, or place where they so
bear office respectively.

Poulters, S. Victual, 2. 10.

Powdike in Norfolk, S. Felony, 13.

Poisoning, S. Murder.

Presentiments, S. Indictments.

Priests, S. Recusants.

Prisons, Prisoners, Gaoles, Gaolers.
I. Stat. 4. E. 3.10.

II. Stat. 14. E. 3.10. Stat. 13. R. 2.15. and 19. H. 7.10.

III. The Jailer, which by dures compels a prisoner to become an Approver,
shall have judgment of life and member.

IV. Stat. 5. H. 4.10.

V. Stat. 14. El. 5.

VI. The Churchwardens, high Constables, head Officers, or Collectors
aforesaid, which herein shall be found negligent, shall forfeit 5. l. to be
divided betwixt the Queen and the prisoners.

VII. Justices of P. within the County shall not intermeddle within a
Corporation for the execution of this Act; but only the Mayor or head Officers
of the same.

VIII. Stat. 3. Jac. 10. An offender which is to be conveyed to the Jail,
shall bear all charges, both of himself, and of those which guard him.

IX. If he refuse so to do, upon warrant from a Just. of P. the Constable of
the township where he has any goods, (being within the same County) may sell
so much thereof, as in the discretion of the said Justice shall be thought
sufficient to satisfy the said charges; the appraisement thereof to be made by
the neighbors there, and the overplus to be rendered to the said offender.

X. If the offender has no goods to satisfy the charges, the Constables,
Churchward^ns, and two or three other honest Inhabitants, or (in case there be
no such Officers there) four of the principal Inhabitants of the Parish where
he was taken, shall make a tax, according to which (being allowed under the
hand of a Just. of P.) every Inhabitant shall pay the said charges; And upon
refusal, (by warrant from a Just. of P.) the Constable, Tythingman, or other
Officer, has power to levy the same by distress, and (after appraisement by
four Inhabitants there) to sell the same, rendering the overplus to the party
so refusing.

XI. Here if the Officer which distraines be sued, he shall plead
Justification, and upon verdict for him, or nonsuit of the Plaintiff, he shall
recover treble damages, besides costs of suit.

See Bailement, 1, 10. Cerciorari, Felony. 2, 3, 11.

Probat of Wills, S. Ecclesiastical Court.

Process.
Stat. 5. E. 3.11. Justices assigned to hear and determine felonies, may make
out process against felons appealed, indicted, or outlawed before them, into
foreign Counties for their apprehension.

See Supersedeas, 2.

Prophecies.
I. Stat. 5. El. 15.

II. Justices of Ass. Oyre and Term. and of P. have power to hear and
determine this offense, being prosecuted within six months, otherwise not.

Purveyors, Takers.
I. Stat. Magna Charta, 9. H. 3.19. No Constable of a Castle, or his Bailiffe
shall take Corn or Cattle of a foreign dweller without present payment, nor
of an Inhabitant, without payment within forty days. See Stat. 3. E. 3.7.

II. Ibidem, cap. 21. No Sheriff or Bailiffe of the Kings, or any other, shall
take the Horses or Carts of any man to make carriage, except he pay for
carriage with two horses, after the rate of 10. d. a day, and with three, 14.
d. a day.

III. No Demesne cart of any Spiritual person, Lord, or Knight, shall be taken
for carriage by the Kings Bailiffes; neither shall any wood be taken for the
Kings use, without the owners license.

IV. Stat. de Tallagio non concedendo, tempore H. 3. None of the Kings
ministers shall take any Corn, Hides, or any other goods, without the owners
consent. Stat. tempore E. 1.

V. Stat. 3. E. 1.1. None shall make purveyances of goods, carriages, Ships, or
Barges, without the owners consent.

VI. Stat. 3. E. 1.31. Purveyors, which take any thing for the Kings use upon
credence, shall, immediately after they have received money of the King, for the
discharge thereof, pay the Creditors, in pain to have the same (together with
damages) levied of their lands and goods, and also to make fine for the
trespass: And if they have neither lands nor goods, they shall suffer
imprisonment at the Kings will.

VII. None shall take more Horses or Carts for the Kings use, then need
requires; nor take reward to excuse any, in pain to be punished by the
Marshals, if he be of the Court; and if not (being thereof attainted) to pay
treble damages, and to remain in the Kings prison forty days.

VIII. Stat. 28. E. 1.2.

IX. Purveyors shall before they take any goods, show their warrant to the
owner, which warrant shall be under the Great or petty Seal, declaring also
their authority, and the goods, whereof they are to make purveyance; neither
shall they take any more then need requires.

X. Purveyors shall not take any thing for them that be in wages, nor for any
other; but shall make full answer in the Kings house and in the Wardrobe, for
all things taken by them, without making their larges elsewhere, or Liveries of
such things as they have taken for the King.

XI. A Purveyor (upon complaint made to the Steward or Treasurer of the Kings
house) being attainted to have offended in the premises, shall forthwith agree
with the party grieved, be put out of the Kings service for ever, and remain
in prison at the Kings pleasure.

XII. If a Purveyor be attainted to have taken any thing without warrant, he
shall be conveyed to the next Jail, and suffer as a Felon, if the value of the
goods do so require.

XIII. Concerning prices made in Faires, good Towns, and Ports, for the Kings
great Wardobe, the Purveyors shall have their common warrant under the Great
Seal.

XIV. This Act shall not diminish the Kings right for ancient prices due and
accustomed, as of Wines and other goods, See this Stat. confirmed, 18. E. 2.2.
and 4. E. 3.4.

XV. Stat. 4. E. 3.3. No purveyance shall be made, but only for the houses of
the King, Queen, or their Children.

XVI. Purveyances made for those houses shall be taken by ordinary striked
measure, and prised at the true value by the Constable, and other good men of
the place, according to their Oath, and without threats or dures; for which
express payment shall be made before the Kings departure out of the verge. See
this Statute confirmed, 10. E. 3.1.

XVII. Stat. 5. E. 3.2. Purveyances for the Kings, Queens, or Kings Childrens
houses, shall be made without menace by the Constables, and four discreet men
of the place, where they are to be taken, who shall also be thereto sworn; And
Tallies of the goods so taken shall be struck betwixt the Purveyors and the
owners thereof, in the presence of those Constables and praisers, under the
seals of the said Purveyors, according to which the said owners shall be
afterward paid; And if a Purveyor shall be attainted to have taken any thing
otherwise then is limited by this Statute, he shall be imprisoned, and suffer
as a Felon, if the value of the goods require it: And in every warrant of
Purveyance, the form and penalty of this Statute shall be inserted. See Stat.
25. E. 3.1.

XVIII. Stat. 10. E. 3.4.

XIX. Stat. 14. E. 3.1.

Stat. XX. 14. E. 3.19.

XXI. For the Purveyance of Castles, and Towns in Scotland and England,
Merchants shall be appointed by the Treasure without Commission; but none shall
be cmpelled to sell any thing against their will.

XXII. The Sheriff shall make Purveyance for a certain number of the Kings
horses, and Dogs, out of the issues of his Bailiwick.

XXIII. The Country shall not be charged with any more then to keep these
horses, viz. for every horse a servant, without bringing women, Pages, or dogs
with them.

XXIV. Stat. 18. E. 3.4. In Commissions for Purveyance, the fees of the Church
shall be excepted.

XXV. Stat. 25. E. 3.6. No purveyour shall take any timber growing about a man's
house, in paint of one years imprisonoment, and the loss of his Office.

XXVI. Stat. 25. E. 3.15. No Purveyour shall take more Sheep for the Kings house
before sheere-day, then shall be needful, in pain to suffer as Felon; and
this pain shall be inserted in every Commission of Purveyance.

XXVII. E. 3.12. When the value of the Purveyance exceeds not 20. s. present
payment shall be made for it; when it amounts to more, payment shall be made
for it within one quarter of a year after, upon a certain day, and at a place
convenient for the party that is to receive it.

XXVIII. Stat. 34. E. 3.2. No Purveyance shall be hereafier made, save only
for the King, Qucene, or Prince.

XXIX. Stat. 34. E. 3.3. As concerning Purveyances for the Qucene or Prince,
present payment shall be made for Poultry or other shall things; but for other
great purveyances, within a month or six weeks.

XXX. Stat. 36. E. 3.2.

XXXI. The heinous name of Purveyor shall be changed, and named Buyer.

XXXII. If the Buyer and Seller cannot agree, the goods shall be appraised by
the Lords, or Bailisses, Constables, and four men, containing the quantity of
the takings, the price, and of what persons: which takings shall be made
without dures or compulsion, in places of plenty, and in a convenient time.

XXXIII. Purveyors shall be men of sufficiency, and shall make no Deputies;
Their Commission shall be renewed every half year under the Great Seal;
which none is bound to obey, unless they pay ready money, as well for things
bought, as also for carringes.

XXXIV. Purveyance of Grain or Malt shall be taken by striked measure,
according to the Standard, and no more carriages to be used for it then shall
be needful.

XXXV. If any Purveyor or Buyer offend against this Statute, he shall suffer
punishment of life and member. See this Statute consirmed, 23. H. 6.1.

XXXVI. Stat. 36. E. 3.3. to yield to the party grieved treble damages, suffer
two years imprisonment, to be ransomed at the Kings will, and to abjure the
Court; and if the party grieved will not sue in this Case, any other that will,
shall have the third penny of what shall be recovered.

XXXVII. E. 3.4. Commissions shall be awarded to inquire of the behavior and
acts of such Buyers.

XXXVIII. Stat. 36. E. 3.5. None shall keep more horses of the Kings then shall
be committed to him.

XXXIX. None of the King or Queens houses shall make any Purveyor, but shall
buy provision, as others do, of those which are willing to sell.

XL. Stat. 36. E. 3.6. It is felony for any subjects servant to take any thing
by way of Purveyance without the owners notice. See Stat. 7. R. 2.8.

XLI. Stat. 1. R. 2.3. Prelates shall have their actions of Trespass against
Purveyors offending, and shall also recover treble damages.

XLII. R. 2.5. None shall take away any man's horse, or other thing whatsoever,
upon pretencde of hastice business, in pain of Imprisonment, till he agree
with the party grieved.

XLIII. H. 4.14. When the value of the thing taken exceeds not 40.s. the
Purveyor shall make present payment for it, in apine to lose his Office, and
also to pay as much to the party grieved.

XLIV. Stat. 1. H. 5.10.

XLV. Stat. 1. H. 6.2.

XLVI. Stat. 20. H. 6.8.

XLVII. None of the Kings Officers shall arrest or trouble any of the Kings
subjects for any such resistance, in pain of 20. l. to be divided betwixt the
King and the prosecutor.

XLVIII. Justices of P. have power to hear and determine the offenses
committed against this Act, and, upon conviction of the defendant, to award
damages to the Plaintiff.

XLIX. In every Purveyors Commission this Act shall be inserted, and shall also
be sent to the Sheriffs of every County to be proclaimed amongst other
Statutes of Purveyors, according to the Stat. of 1. H. 6.2.

L. Stat. 23. H. 6.1, 2. Every Purveyor before he receive his Commission shall
be sworn in the Chancery to take nothing of the Kings subjects, contrary to
the Statute of 36. E. 3.2, 3.

LI. The party grieved by taking, which (upon request) was not assisted by the
Praysor, Town, or Towns adjoining, may bring his Action of Debt against the
Town, or the Purveyor, which he likes best, and shall recover the treble value
of his goods so taken away, together with his costs and treble damages; And
none of the Kings Officers shall trouble any of the Kings subjects for the
execution of this Act, in pain to forfeit 20. l. to the party grieved, besides
his costs and damages, for which he may have a Writ of Debt, in which Action no
Wager of Law, Assoigne, Aid of the King, or Protection shall be allowed: And
the debt, damages, and executions recovered against a Purveyor in this Case (if
he has not whereof to pay them) shall be satisfied by the Sergeant of the
Catery, unto whom a Scine facias shall be directed for that purpose.

LII. These Statutes shall be sent to the Just. of P. in every County, to the
end they may be yearly proclaimed.

LIII. Stat. 23. H. 6.14. All Majors, Bailiffes, Constables, and other
Officers, shall (upon request made) arrest and imprison without bail all
Purveyors (except only the Kings or Queens) which take any goods or carriages
from any of the Kings subjects, in pain to forfeit 20. l. to be divided
betwixt the King, and the party grieved, in case he will sue for it; but if
not, then betwixt the King and the prosecutor: And the party offending, being
duly convicted thereof, shall yield to the party grieved the treble value of
the goods so taken, and double costs, and besides shall fine to the King for
the trespass committed.

LIVE. Here no Wager of Law, or the Kings Protection shall be allowed to the
Defendant.

LV. This Act shall not restrain the punishment ordained against the Kings
Purveyors.

LVI. Stat. 28. H. 6.2.

LVII. No Purveyor shall take any Horse or Cart, but by the consent of the
owner, or delivery of the Mayor, Sheriff, Bailiffes, or Constable, in pain to
be subject to an Action of Trespass, wherein the party grieved shall recover
treble damages.

LVIII. Stat. 27. H. 8.24. Children, as well within Liberties as without,
notwithstanding any grant to the contrary: Provided such Purveyors shall
observe the Statutes for them ordained, in every behalf.

LVIX. Stat. 2, 3. P.M. 6. No Commission of Purveyance shall continue in force
above six months.

LX. In every such Commission shall be inserted the proportion and number of
the things to be taken; as also the County or Counties where such purveyance is
to be made.

LXI. To every Commission shall be annexed blanks in parchment, according to
the number of the Counties into which it extends, and in every such blank shall
be fair written the proportion and number of the commodities there to be
taken, which shall also be subscribed by the high Constables, Constables, or
other Officers, which shall be privy to the delivery of the said goods.

LXII. The Purveyor shall make writings or dockets of all things by him taken,
and subscribing his name thereunto, shall deliver them to the Constables,
Headboroughs, or other Officers of the places, where he takes the same things,
in pain for every such default to suffer one years imprisonment, and to
forfeit a 100. marks, to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor; which
said dockets shall be by the said Officers delivered over to the Justices of P.
at their next general Sess. and by them certified to the Lord Steward,
Treasurer, or Comptroller of the King and Queens houses, if such purveyance
were for the house; but if for the Navy, then to the Treasurer, or Comptroler
of the Navy; And all this, to the end a true answer of the Purveyors Commission
may fully appear.

LXIII. This Statute shall not give liberty to Purveyors, or their Deputies, to
execute their office otherwise, then is provided and expressed in other
Statutes heretofore made, upon the pains and penalties in the same former
Statutes contained.

LXIV. Statutes made and provided for Purveyors, or Takers, shall also extend
to their under takers, deputies and servants.

LXV. All Commissions of Purveyance shall be written in English.

LXVI. Stat. 2, 3. P.M. 15.

LXVII. The Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, or their Commissary, together with two
Just. of P. of the County adjoining, have power to hear and determine this
offense.

LXVIII. Stat. 13. El. 21. may be made within five miles of Oxford and
Cambridge, by license from the Chancellor or Vice Chancellor, under their
seal of office; And by license under the hands and seals of the said
Chancellor or Vice Chancellor, and two Just. of Peace of the County adjoining,
Purveyors may take victual from such, as refuse reasonably to serve the said
Universities, notwithstanding the Stat. of 2, 3. P.M. 15.

LXIX. This Act shall be in suspense during the Queens abode within seven miles
of either of the said Universities.

S. Fish. 18. Leather, 25.

Putting out of eyes, S. Felony, 5.

Quarrelling, S. Fighting.

Quarter Sessions, S. Justices of Peace, 12.20.

Rape. Ravishment.
I. Stat. De Officio Coronatoris 3.4. E. 1. If any be Appealed of Rape, he must
be attached, if the Appeal be fresh, and they must see apparent sign of
truth, by effusion of blood, or an open cry made; and such shall be attached by
four or six pledges, if they may be found; but if the Appeal were without
cry, or any manifest sign or token, two pledges shall be sufficient.

II. Stat. West. 2.13. E. 1.34.

III. Stat. 6. R. 2.6.

III. Here the Husband, Father, or next of the blood shall have the sult,
wherein the Defendant shall not be received to wage battle.

IV. Stat. 3. H. 7.2.

V. Stat. 18. El. 7.

VI. To know a woman carnally under the age of ten years, shall be felony
without allowance of Clergy.

VII. Stat. 39. El. 9. H. 7.2. together with the Accessaries before that
offense committed, shall lose their benefit of Clergy.

Record, S. Felony, 6.

Recusants, Rome, Jesuits, Seminary Priests, etc.
I. Stat. 16. R. 2.5. If any shall purchase or pursue from the Court of Rome,
or elsewhere, any translations from one Spiritual promotion to another, or any
Processes, sentences of Excommunication, Bulls, Instruments, or any other thing
whatsoever derogatory to the King, his Crown, Realm, or Regalty, he and his
accessaries shall incur a Praemunire, viz. shall be attached by their bodies,
put out of the Kings protection, forfeit to the King all their lands and goods,
and if they cannot be found, process shall be made out against them by
Praemunire facias.

II. Stat. 25. H. 8.19. None shall sue any Appeal from Rome, nor execute any
Process from thence, in pain that both they and their accessaries shall
incur a Praemunire.

III. Stat. 28. H. 8.16. All Bulls, Breves, Faculties, and Dispensations
obtained from the Bishop of Rome, shall be void, and never hereafter used or
alleged in any places or Courts of this Realm, upon the pains contained in
the Statute of Praemunire, made in 16. R. 2.5.

IV. Stat. 1. El. 1. None shall affirm or maintain the Power, or Jurisdiction
of any foreign Prelate or Potentate within any of the Queens dominions, in
pain to forfeit all his goods and chattels; and if he be not worth 20. l. at
the time of his conviction, he shall forfeit all he has, and besides suffer
one whole years imprisonment without bail: And here for the second offense he
shall incur a Praemunire, and for the third shall be adjudged guilty of high
Treason: But this offense must be prosecuted within one year after it is
committed. See. 26.

V. If he be a Clergyman, Beneficed, upon the first conviction all his
Spiritual promotions shall be void.

VI. If he be imprisoned for this offense, (committed by words only) and be
not indicted for the same within six months after it is committed, he shall be
set at liberty.

VII. If a Peer of the Realm happen to be guilty of this offense, he shall be
tried by his Peers.

VIII. And here for the better observance of this Law, was the oath of
Supremacy established, in these words following;

I. A. B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Queens
Highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other her
Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or cases, as Temporal; and that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power,
Superiority, Pre-eminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within
this Realm; and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all fonaigne
Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authorities, and do promise, that
from henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance to the Queens
Highness, her Heirs and lawful Successors, and to my power shall assist and
defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies, and Authorities, granted
or belonging to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and Successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm: So help me God, and by the
Contents of this Book.

IX. Stat. 5. El. 1. None shall maintain the Jurisdiction of the Bishop or See
of Rome, within any of the Queens dominions, in pain to incur a Praemunire.

X. Just. of Ass. and Justices of Pain Sess. or any two of them, (1. Qu.) have
power to hear and determine this offense; and are to certify such
presentiments into the Kings Bench within 40. days after they receive them, if
it shall be then Term time; if not, then the first day of the Term then next
ensuing, in pain of 100. l. The Justices of the Kings Bench also, as well upon
such Certificate, as also before themselves, have power to hear and determine
the same offense.

XI. None compellable to take the oath of Supremacy by this Act, or by that of
1. El. 1. (which see in the Statutes at large) shall refuse to take it
accordingly, in pain to incur a Praemunire.

XII. If any refuse to take the same Oath upon the second tender, or being
formerly convicted of maintaining the jurisdiction of the Bishop or See of
Rome, as aforesaid, do commit the like offense the second time; in both these
cases they shall suffer as in case of high Treason: But here, there shall be no
corruption of Blood, disheriting of any heir, forfeiture of Dower, or
prejudice to the right of any, save only of the offender during his life.

XIII. This Act shall be published every Qu. Sess. by the Cl. of the P. and at
every Leete by the Steward there, and once every Term in the open Hall of
every Inn of Court and Chancery, at such times and by such persons as shall be
appointed by the Lord Chancellor or Keeper for the time being.

XIV. None of or above the degree of a Baron shall be compellable to take this
oath: And here also a Peer offending, shall be tried be his Peers. Provided
that none shall be compellable to take this oath upon a second tender, or be in
danger (by the refusal thereof) to incur the penalty of high Treason, save
only Clergymen, Officers of Ecclesiastical Courts, or such as shall not
observe the Rites of Divine Service, do deprave by words or writing the Rites
and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or do use to say or hear private
Mass.

XV. It shall not be lawful to slay one attainted in Praemunire.

S. after 26.

XVI. Stat. 13. El. 2. It shall be high Treason to obtain oor put in ure any
Bull of Absolution, or reconciliation from the Bishop of Rome, or to absolve or
be absolved thereby.

XVII. The comforters and maintatiners of such offenders shall incur a
Praemunire and their concealers misprision of Treason, unless within six weeks
they discover them to some of the Privy Council, or to one of the Presidents
or Vice-Presidents of the Councels established in the North, or Marches of
Wales.

XVIII. If any shall bring into any of the Queens Dominions any Agnus Dei,
Crosses, Prictures, Beads, or any such vain or superstitious thing, or
deliver, or offer the same to any person to be used; both the person so doing,
and the person so receiving the same shall incur a Praemunire; howbeit, if
the party unto whom tender thereof shall be made, apprehend the pary tendering
the same, and carry him before the next Just. of P. or not being able so to do,
within three days after discloseth his name, and the place of his abode, or
resort unto the Ordinary, or some Justice of P. within the same County; or
having received the same, does within one day after deliver it to some such
Justice of peace, then shall he not incur any prejudice by reason of this Act.

XIX. A Just. of P. shall disclose the offenses aforesaid to the Privy Council
within 14. days after he shall have notice of them, in pain to incur a
Praemunire.

XX. Here the trial of a Nobleman shall be by Peers.

See after 26.

XXI. Stat. 23. El. 1.

XXII. If any having notice of the said offenses, do not discover them within
20. days to some Just. of P. or other such Officer, he shall be adjudge guilty
of misprision of Treason.

XXIII. None shall say or sing Mass, in pain to forfeit 200. marks, to suffer
one years imprisonment, and not to be enlarged thence till that fine be paid;
And none shall hear Mass, in pain of onw whole years imprisonment, and 100.
marks.

XXIV. Every person not repairing to Church, according to the Stat. of 1. El.
2. ( which see in Sacraments 24.) shall forfeit 20. l. for every month they so
make default: and if they so forbear by the space of twelve months, after
certificate thereof made by the Ordinary into the Kings Bench; a Justice of
Assise, G. D. or Peace of the County where they dwell, shall bind them with
two sufficient sureties in 200 abl. at least, to the good behavior, from which
they shall not be released, until they shall repair to Church according to
the said Statute.

XXV. None shall keep a Schoolmaster which absents himself from Church, or is
not allowed by the Bishop or Ordinary, in pain of ten pounds for every month
he so keeps him: And such Schoolmaster shall be for ever after disabled to
teach youth, and shall suffer one whole years imprisonment without bail.

XXVI. The offenses against this Act, and the Acts of the first, fifth, and
thirteenth years of the Queens Reign, touching the acknowledging of her
Supreme government in causes Ecclesiastical, the service of God, coming to
Church, or establishment of true Religion within this Realm, shall be
inquirable before Justices of Oyer and Term. Assise, G. D. and P. in their
circuits and Sess. within one year and a day after every such offense
committed, except Treason, and misprision of treason.

XXVII. Provided, that any of the offenders aforesaid, which shall before
judgment submit and conform themselves to the Bishop of the Diocese, or in
open Assise or Sessions shall be discharged of every the offenses aforesaid,
(except Treason, and misprision of Treason) and of all pain and penalties
incurred for the same.

XXVIII. Of the forfeitures abovesaid, two third parts the Queen shall have,
one to her own use, the other for relief of the poor in the Parish where the
offense is committed, to be delivered without further warrant then of the
principal Officers of the Receipt of the Exchequer, and the other third part
the prosecutor shall have: And here the offender that is not able to pay the
forfeitures, or does not pay them within three months after judgment, shall be
committed to prison, and there remain until he have satisfied them, or shall
conform himself to go to Church.

XXIX. They that have on Sundays the Divine Service established usually read
in their houses, and are commonly present themselves thereat, and do not
obstinately refuse to come to Church, but four times in the year (at least)
are present at Divine Service in their own Parish Church, or some other open
Church, or Chapel of ease, shall not incur the penalty aforesaid, for not
coming to Church.

XXX. All covinous Grants to defrand the interest which the Queen, or any other
person may claim, by virtue of this Act, or of 13 El. 2. shall be adjudged
void.

XXXI. If a Peer of the Realm happen to be indicted for any offense, made
Treason, or misprision of Treason by this Act, he shall be tried by his Peers.

XXXII. This Act shall not abridge the Jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical Censures.

XXXIII. Stat, 27. El. 2. All Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, borne within any of the Queens dominions, and ordained
or made such by the pretended Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, which com into,
or remain in any of the said Dominions, shall be adjudged guilty of high
Treason; And their receivers, ayders, and maintainers, (knowing them to be
such, and at liberty) shall be adjudged Felons, without benefit of Clergy.

XXXIV. All others, brought up on Seminaries beyond Sea, and not as yet in
Orders, as aforesaid, which do not, within six months after Proclamation made
in London, (in that behalf) return into this Realm, and within two days
after such return, before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two Just. of P. of
the County where they shall arrive, submit themselves to the Queen and her
Laws, and take the Qath of Supremacy, shall also be adjudged guilty of high
Treason.

XXXV. They which give or send relief to any such Ecclesiastical person, or
Seminary, or to any brought up there, as aforesaid, shall incur a Praemunire.

XXXVI. These offenses shall be heard and determined in the Kings Bench, or in
any County, where they shall be committed, or the offender taken.

XXXVII. This Act shall not extend to any Jesuit, or other Ecclesiastical
person aforesaid, which within three days after his arrival shall submit
himself to some Archbishop, Bishop, or to some Just. of P. of the County
where he lands, and there take the Oath of Supremacy, and under his hand
acknowledge to continue in due obedience to her Majesty's Laws.

XXXIX. Here the trial of a Peer shall be by his Peers.

XL. If any, knowing a Jesuit or Priest to remain within any of the Queens
dominions, do not within twelve days discover the same to some Just of P. he
shall make fine, and suffer imprisonment during the Queens pleasure; And the
Just. of P. which does not within 28. days after disclose it to some of the
Privy Counoell, or to the President, or Vice President of the Councels in the
North, or Marches of Wales, shall forfeit 200. Marks; And such of those
Councels, to whom that information shall be made, shall deliver a writing under
their hands unto the party informing, testifying, that such information was
made unto them.

XLI. All Oaths, Bonds, and submissions, as aforesaid, shall within three
months be certified into the Chancery by the parties before whom they are
taken, in pain of 100. l.

XLII. None having submitted, as aforesaid, shall within ten years after come
within ten miles of the Court, in pain to lose the benefit of such submission.

XLIII. Stat. 29. El. 6. All Grants, Encumbrances, (according to the Stat. of
23. El. 1.) which are revokeable by the offender, intended for his maintenance,
left at his disposition, or in consideration whereof he and his family are to
be kept, shall be utterly void against the Queen, as to hinder the levying of
the forfeitures for not coming to Church, or saying, hearing, or being at
Mass, or the making of seisures for the same purpose.

XLIV. Every conviction for any offense before mentioned, shall be in the Kings
Bench, or at the Assizes or G. D. and not elsewhere; and shall by the Justices
there be certified into the Exchequer before the end of the term then next
following. 82.

XLV. The Queen may seize all the goods, and two third parts of the lands and
Leases of every offender not repairing to Church, as aforesaid, which after
their first conviction do not pay into the Exchequer, in such of the Terms of
Easter and Michaelmasse, as shall happen next after such conviction, the sum
then due for the forfeiture of 20. l. a month, and yearly after that, (in the
same Terms) according to the rate of 20. l. a month, for so long time as they
shall forbear to come to Church, according to the said Statute of 23. E. 1.
vide infra, 71, 72, 73, 83.

XLVI. An Indictment against such an offender shall be sufficient, although no
mention be therein made that the party is within the Realm.

XLVII. When an Indictment is found against such an offender, Proclamation
shall be made, that he shall render himself into the Sheriffs hands before
the next Ass. or G. D. which if he do not, that neglect shall be as sufficient
a conviction, as if upon the same Indictment a trial by verdict had proceeded.

XLVIII. But here upon the offenders submission (according to the said Stat. of
23. El.) or death, no forfeiture shall ensue, save only the arrerages due at
the time of such submission or death.

XLIX. The Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, and chief Baron, or any two of them,
shall assign a third part of the forfeitures of 20. l. a month, for the
relief and maintenance of the poor, houses of Correction, and maimed
soldiers.

L. This Act shall not extend to Grants Bona side, nor to continue any seizure
after the death of the offender, in such lands, wherein he had only an estate
for life, or in the right of his wife.

LI, Stat, 33. El. 1. within three months after such conviction they refuse to
conform and submit themselves, being thereunto required by a Just. of P. they
shall in open Ass. or Sess. abjure the Realm; and if such abjuration happen to
be before Just. of P. in Sess. they shall make certificate thereof at the next
Ass. or Jail delivery.

LII. If such an offender refuse to abjure, or go away accordingly, or do
return without the Queens license, he shall be adjudged a felon, and shall not
enjoy the benefit of Clergy; but if before he be required to abjure, he make
his submission, the penalties aforesaid shall not be inflicted upon him.

LIII. The form of the submission is as follows;

1 A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge, that I have grievously offended
God, in contemning ber Majesty's godly and lawful Government and authority, by
absenting my self from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to
the godly Statuies and Laws of this Realm, and in using and frequenting
disordred and unlawful Conventicles and Assemblies, under pretense of exercise
of Religion: And I am heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and
testify in my conscience, that no other person has, or ought to have any
power or authority over her Majesty: And I do promise and protest, without any
dissimulation, or any clour or means of any dispensation, that from henceforth
I will from time to time obey and perform her Majesty's Laws and Statutes, in
repairing to the Church, and hearing Divine Service, and do my uttermost
endeavor to maintain and defend the same.

LIVE. The Minister of the Parish, where the submission is made, shall presently
enter the same in a Book, and within ten days after certify it to the Bishop
of the Diocese.

LV. The offender that after such submission falls into a relapse, shall take
no benefit thereby.

LVI. The forfeitures of this Act, and of 23. El. 1. may be recovered by Action
of debt.

LVII. The third part of the penalties which accrue by this Act, shall be
bestowed as those of 29. El. 6.

LVIII. A Feme Covert shall not be compelled to abjure, but any other offender
that abjures, or (being required) refuses so to do, shall forfeit all his
goods, and his lands during life: howbeit here shall be no corruption of blood,
loss of Dower, or disherison of heir.

LVIX. Stat. 35. El. 2. Recusants above sixteen years of age, for that
purpose, and he, together with the said Constable. and Head Boroughs, is to
certify the same to the next. Qu. Sess. where the Just. of Peace shall cause
them to be enrolled.

LX. A Copyholder also shall in this case forfeit his estate during life, if
his estate continue so long, to the Lord of the Manor if he be no Recusant
convict, nor seized or possessed in trust to the use of a Recusant; for then
the Queen shall have the forfeiture.

LXI. A Popish Recusant (being no Feme Covert, nor having lands worth 20. Marks
per annum, or goods worth 40. l. which within the time above limited, does not
repair to the place of his abode, or does depart above five miles thence, or
within three months after his arrival there, does not make the submission
hereafter following, (being required so to do by the Bishop, a Just. of P. or
the Minister there) shall before two Justices of the Peace, or the Coroner,
abjure the Kingdom; which abjuration shall be by the said Justices or Coroner
certified in at the next Assizes, or G. D.

LXII. If such Popish Recusant depart not the Realm, within the time limited
by the said Justices or Coroner, or return without the Queens license, he
shall be adjudged a felon without Clergy.

LXIII. A Jesuit or Priest refusing to answer, shall be committed to prison,
and there remain, till he will answer the questions whereupon he was before
examined.

LXIV. This Act shall not restrain a Recusant (urged by Process or summons
without fraud) to travel without the abovesaid limits, so he return again in
convenient time, neither him that is compelled to render his body to the
Sheriff.

LXV. If such an offender before conviction, upon a Sunday, or some Festival
day, repair to Church, and there hear Divine Service, and before the Gospel
make the confession following, he shall be discharged of the penalties
inflected by this Act.

LXVI. The confession is this:

1. A. B. do humbly confess and acknowledge, that I have grievously offended
God, in contemning her Majesiies godly and lawful government and Authority, by
absenting my selfc from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to
the godly Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and I am heartily sorry for the
same, and do acknowledge and testify in my conscience, that the Bishop and See
of Rome, has not, nor ought to have any power or authority over her Majesty,
or within any of her Majesty's Realms or Dominions: And I do promise and
protest without any dissimulation, or any color or means of any Dispensation,
that from henceforth I will from time to time, obey and perform her Majesty's
Laws and Statutes, in repairing to the Church, and hearing Divine Service, and
do my uttermost endeavor to maintains and defend the same.

LXVII. The Minister of the Parish where such submission is made, shall
presently enter the same in a book, and within ten days after. certofie it to
the Bishop of the Diocese.

LXVIII. The offender that after such submission, falls into a relapse, shall
take no benefit thereby.

LXIX. Every married woman shall be bound by this Act, save only by the clause
of Abjuration,

LXX. Stat. 1. Jac. 4. All the aforesaid Statutes made in the time of Queen
Eliz. shall be duly put in execution, against all such as do not conform
themselves, as aforesaid.

LXXI. Where the Ancestor dies a Recusant, the heir being none, or conforming
himself, and taking the Oath of Supremacy before the Archbishop or Bishop of
the Diocese, the lands shall be freed from all penalties.

LXXII. If an heir (within age) after he shall have accomplished the age of
16. years, does still continue a Recusant, his lands shall not be freed, until
he do conform, and take the Oath of Supremacy, as aforesaid.

LXXIII. A third part of every Recusants lands, shall remain clear unto him
from seizure or extent, and the other two parts shall remain in the Kings
hands, (both before and after the Recusants death) until the King shall be
fully satisfied all the arrerages for the 20. l. a month, according to 23. El.
1.

LXXIV. None shall send any child, or other person, under their government,
beyond the Seas, to be instructed in the Popish Religion, in pain of 100. l.
and they which are so sent, shall be incapable (as to themselves only) of any
grant or Inheritance due unto them, or to others for their use.

LXXV. Ifa woman or child under the age of 21. years, be suffered to pass the
Seas, without the license of the King, or of six of the Privy Council, under
their hands, (except Saylors, Ship-boyes, or Merchants, Factors, or
Apprentices) the Officers of the Port shall forfeit their Offices, and all
their goods; the Owner of the Ship, his Ship and Tackle; and the Master of the
Ship, all his goods, and besides, shall suffer a years imprisonment without
Bail. 119.

LXXVI. None out of the Universities shall keep School, (except a Free School,
or in some persons house that is no Recusant, or by license of the Bishop or
Ordinary) in pain to forfeit 40. s. a day.

LXXVII. The forfeitures of this Act shall be divided bewixt the King and the
Prosecutor.

LXXVIII. Stat. 3. Jac. 4.

LXXIX. These forfeitures may be recovered before Just. of P. in Sess. or in
any other Court of record, and are to be divided betwixt the King and the
prosecuter.

LXXX. The Churchwardens and Constables of every Parish, or one of them, or if
there be none such, then the High Constable of the Hundred there, shall present
once every year at the General Sessions of Peace, the monthly absence from
Church of every Popish Recusant, and their children, being above the age of
nine years, and their servants, together with the age of their children, as
near as they can know them, in pain to forfeit respectively for every such
default 20. s. which presentment the Clerk of the Peace, or Town Clerk, shall
record without fee, in pain of 40. s.

LXXXI. If upon such presentment (being the first) the Recusant be convicted,
the Officer that presents him shall have 40. s. to be levied by warrant upon
the Recusants goods and estate, as the more part of the Justices of Peace shall
think fit.

LXXXII. Just. of Ass. G. D. and P. have power to hear and determine of all
Recusants and offenses, as well for not receiving the Sacrament, according to
this Act, as also for not coming to Church, according to former laws. And
likewise to make proclamation, that they shall render themselves to the
Sheriff, or Bailiffe of the Liberty where they are, before the next Ass G. D.
or Sess. respectively; which if they do not, that default, being recorded,
shall be taken for as sufficient a conviction of them as a trial by verdict.

LXXXIII. Every offender not repairing to Church, as aforesaid, after their
first conviction, shall pay into the Exchequer, in such of the Terms of Easter
and Michaelmas as shall happen next after such conviction, the sum then due
for the forfeiture of 20. l. a month, and yearly after that (in the same
Terms) according to the rate of 20. l. a month; except where the King shall be
pleased to take two third parts of their lands and leases in lieu thereof; or
that they conform themselves, and come to Church.

LXXXIV. Every conviction shall, before the end of the Term next following, be
certified into the Exchequer in such convenient certainty, that the Court may
thereupon award Process for the seizure of all the offenders goods, and two
parts of his lands and leases, in case the 20. l. a month be not paid, as
aforesaid.

LXXXV. The King may refuse 20. l. a month, and take two third parts of the
Recusants lands and leases: but here he shall not include the Recusants Mansion
house, nor demise his two parts to a Recusant, or to any other for a Recusants
use. And the Kings lessee for his two parts shall give such security against
committing of waste, as by the Court of Exchequer shall be thought sufficient.

LXXXVI. It shall be lawful for the Bishop of the Dioccsses, or two Justices
of P. (one Quorum) out of Sess. to tender the Oath hereafter following to any
person eighteen years old, or above, (except noble men and noble women) which
stands convicted or indicted of Recusancy, has not received the Sacrament
twice in the year next before; or passing through the Country, and examined
upon oath, confesses, or (at least) denies not, that he or she is a Recusant,
or that he or she has not received the Sacrament twice in the year next
before; which Bishop or Justices shall certify the name and dwelling of the
person so taking the same Oath, at the next general Sess. where the Clerk of
the P. or Town Clerk shall record them.

LXXXVII. If the parties refuse to answer upon oath, or to take the Oath
aforesaid, tendered unto them, the Bishop or Justices aforesaid shall bind them
over to the next Ass or Sess. where if they again refuse it, they shall incur
a Praemunire. except women covert, who in that case shall only suffer
imprisonment till they take it.

LXXXVIII. The tenor of the Oath is as follows:

1 A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify, and deelare
in my conscience, before God and the world, That our Sovereign Lord King
James, is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries: And, That the Pope, neither of himself, nor
by any authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other means with any
other, has any power or authority to depose the King, or to dispose of any of
his Majeslies Kingdoms or Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to
invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of
their allegiance and obedience to his Majesty, or to give license or leave to
any of them to bear arms, raise tumult, or to offer any violence or hurt to
his Majesty's Royal person, state, or government, or to any of his Majesty's
subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

Also, I do swear from my heart, That, notwithstanding any declaration, or
sentence of excommunication, or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope, or his successors, or by any authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him or his Sce, against the said King, his heirs
or successors, or any absolution of the said subjects from their obedience, I
will bear faith and true allegiance to his Majesty, his heirs and
successors, and him and them will defend, to the uttermost of my power, against
all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or
their persons, their crown and dignity, by reason or color of any such
sentence or declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavor to
disclose and make known unto his Majesty, his heirs and successors, all
treasons and traitorous conspiracies which I shall know or hear of, to be
against him or any of them.

And I do further swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure,
as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine and position, That Princes
which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or murdered by
their subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in my conscience am resolved, That neither the Pope, nor
any person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully
ministered unto me, and do renounce all pardons and dispensations to the
contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and
swear, according to these express words by me spoken, and according to the
plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any
equivocation, or mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. And I do
make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly; and truly, upon
the true faith of a Christian. So help me God.

LXXXIX. Unto this Oath the party taking it shall subscribe his name or mark.

XC. No indictment against a Recusant shall be reversed for lack of form, other
then by direct Traverse to the point of not coming to Church, or not receiving
the Sacrament, as aforesaid.

XCI. The party conforming himself shall from thenceforth be admitted to
discharge or reverse an indictment.

XCII. None shall go out of this Realm to serve any foreign Prince or State,
without first taking the Oath aforesaid, in pain to be adjudged a felon. And if
he has born office amongst soldiers before his departure out of the Realm,
he shall enter into bond unto the Kings use, with the condition following,
upon the like pain of being adjudged a felon.

XCIII. The condition is this:

That if the within bounden, etc. shall not at any time then after be
reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome; nor shall enter into, nor consent unto
any practice, plot, or conspiracy whatsoever against the Kings Majesty, his
heirs and successors, or any his or their estate and estates, Realms or
Dominions: but shall within convenient time after knowledge thereof had,
reveal and disclose to the Kings Majesty, his heirs and successors, or some
of the Lords of his or their honorable privy Council, all such practices,
plots, and conspiracies: That then the said Obligation to be void.

XCIV. None but the Customer and Controller of a Port, or their Deputies, shall
have power to take such bond, or to minister the Oath in such case; for which
bond they shall only take 6. d. and nothing for the Oath: And shall once every
year certify into the Exchequer every such bond, in pain of 5. l. and every
such Oath, in pain of 20. s.

XCV. To absolve or withdraw any of the Kings subjects from their natural
obedience to his Majesty, to reconcile them to the Pope or See of Rome, or to
move them to promise obedience to any pretended authority of the Sea of Rome,
or to any other Prince or State: Or to be absolved, withdrawn, reconciled, or
to make promise, as aforesaid, shall be adjudged high Treason.

XCVI. This last clause shall not extend to any reconciled, as aforesaid, (for
and touching the point of so beingreconciled only) that shall return into this
Realm, and within six days after, before the Bishop of the Diocese, or two
Justices of P. (jointly or severally) of the County where he shall arrive,
submit himself to the King and his laws, and take the Oath of Supremacy, and
also the Oath abovesaid; which said Oaths the said Bishop and Justices
respectively, shall by this Act have power to minister to such persons, and
shall certify them in at the next general Sess. in pain of 40. li.

XCVII. Here the trial of Treason shall be before Justices of Ass. and G. D.
of that County for the time being; and may also be before the Justices of the
Kings Bench: But Peers in this case shall be tried by their Peers.

XCVIII. If any person repaireth not every Sunday to some Church or Chapel,
proof thereof being made to a Justice of P. by the parties own confession, or
the evidence of one witness; the same Justice has power to call the party
before him; and if the party give not the Justice a good reason of his absence,
the Justice may give warrant to the Churchwarden of the parish under his hand
and seal, to levy xii. d. for every such default, by distress and sale of
goods; and in default of distress, the Justice may commit the offender to
prison, until he pay the forfeiture aforesaid, which shall be employed ployed
for the use of the poor: But this offense must be prosecuted within one month
after it is committed, and none punished by this Law, shall also be punished by
the forfeiture of 12. d. upon the Statute of 1. El. 2. which see in Sacraments
24.

XCIX. None shall keep or retain any person in their house, (servant or other)
which shall forbear to come to Church by the space of a month together, in
pain to forfeit 10. l. for every month they so keep them: Howbeit Children may
relieve their Father, or Mother; and Guardians their Wards or Pupils.

C. The Sheriff, upon a lawful Writ, may justify to break a house, for the
taking of a Recusant Excommunicate.

CI. The Justices of the Kings Bench, and Justices of Ass. and G. D. may hear
and determine all the offenses committed against this Act; and so may Justices
of P. all save Treason.

CII. The offenses made felony by this Act, shall not cause loss of Dower,
corruption of blood, or disherison of heir.

CIII. Here, if an action shall be brought against an Officer for the execution
of this Act, he may plead the General Issue, and yet give special matter in
evidence.

CIV. This Act shall not abridge the Jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical Censures.

CV. None shall be punished for his wives offense, neither shall any married
woman be chargeable with any penalty or forfeiture by force of this Act.

CVI. Six of the Privy Council (whereof the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer,
or Principal Secretary shall be one) have power to minister the Oaths
abovesaid to Noblemen (being 18. years old) and to Noblewomen also of like age
and unmarried, who shall take the same Oaths accordingly, in pain to incur a
Praemunire. Vide infra, 128.

CVII. The Warden of the Cinque Ports, or some authorized by him, shall take
the bond, and minister the Oath aforesaid, where any person passes beyond Sea,
out of them of any of their members.

CVIII. Stat 3. Jac. 5. The person that within three days notice shall
discover to a Just. of P. any that entertaines a Popish Priest, or any which
have heard or said Mass, shall have a third part of the forfeiture due for the
same offenses, if the whole exceed not 150. l. and then only 50. l. thereof to
be delivered unto him by the Sheriff or other, Officer, which shall have power
to levy the same.

CIX. No convicted Recusant shall come into the Court, without command from the
King, or warrant from the Privy Council under their hands, in pain of 100. l.
to be divided betwixt the King and the Discoverer.

CX. A Popish Recusant convicted, or indicted, or any person not coming to
Church by the space of 3. months together, which remains in London, or within
ten miles distance thereof, shall within ten days after such conviction or
Indictment depart from thence, and also shall deliver their names (in London)
to the Lord Mayor there, and (in the Country) to the next Just. of P. in pain.
of 100. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor: Howbeit this
clause shall not extend to Tradesmen, or such as have no other habitation then
in London, or within ten miles distance, as aforesaid.

CXI. It shall be lawful for a Recusant to go about his necessary occasions,
as far as a license (obtained from the King, or from three of the Privy
Council under their hands, or four of the next Justices of Peace, under their
hands and seals, with the assent in writing of the Bishop, Lieutenant, or any
deputy Lieutenant of the same County) shall give him leave, notwithstanding the
Statute of 35. El. 2. which lecence shall not be granted by the said Justices,
till the party has made oath of the true reason of his journey, and that he
will make no causeless stays.

CXII. No convicted Recusant shall practice the Common Law, Civil Law,
Physic, or Art of Apothecary or be an Officer of or in any Court, or bear any
Office amongst soldiers, or in a Ship, Castle, or Fortress, in pain of 100.
l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor. 130.

CXIII. No Popish Recusant convict, or whose wife is a Recusant convict, shall
exercise any public Office in the Commonwealth by himself, or his deputy,
unless he bring up his children in the true Religion, and together with his
children and servants, repair to the Church, and receive the Sacrament at such
times as by the Law are limited. 130.

CXIV. A married woman being a Popish Recusant convict, (her husband being
none) that does not conform her self, as aforesaid, by the space of one whole
year, before her husbands death, shall forfeit two third parts of her Dower or
Jointure, and shall be incapable of being Executrix or Administratrix to her
husband, and of enjoying any part of her husbands goods.

CXV. A Popish Recusant after conviction shall be reputed to all intents, as a
person excommunicate, until he shall conform, go to Church, receive the
Sacrament, and take the Oath of obedience, ordained by 3. Jac. 4. Howbeit he
may sue for his interest in lands not seized into the Kings hands.

CXVI. A Popish Recusant convict, which is married otherwise then in open
Church, and by a lawful Minister, according to the Orders of the Church of
England, shall not be tenant by the Counrtesie; And a woman (in this case)
shall be disabled to enjoy her Dower, Jointure, Widows estate, or any of her
husbands goods: And where the man cannot be tenant by the Courtesy, he shall
forfeit 100. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

CXVII. Every Popish Recusant shall within one month after the birth of his
child, cause it to be baptized by a lawful Minister, in pain to forfeit 100.
l. if he outlive the month; if not, then his wife is to pay the same
forfeiture, which shall be divided into there parts, whereof the King shall
have one, the prosecutor another, and the poor of the parish the third.

CXVIII. Every Popish Recusant shall be buried in the Church of Churchyard,
and according to the Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm, in pain that his
executor or administrator, or the party that caused him to be otherwise buried,
shall forfeit 20. l. to be divided into three parts, and disposed as aforesaid.

CXIX. A child (being no Soldier, Mariner Merchant, or Apprentice, or Factor
to a Merchant) shall not be sent or go beyond sea, without the license of the
King, or of six of the privy Council (whereof the principal Secretary shall
be one) in pain to be thereby incapable to enjoy any lands or goods by descent
or grant, until, being eighteen years of age or above, he take the said oath
of Obedience before some Justice of Peace of the County where his parents do,
or did dwell: And in the mean time, the next of his kin (being no Popish
Recusant) shall enjoy the lands and goods; but shall be accountable to the
other, in case he after conform himself, as aforesaid. And he that so goes out
of the kingdom without license, shall forfeit 100. l. to be divided and
employed as aforesaid.

CXX. A Popish Recusant convict, shall be disabled to present to a Benefice, or
to grant any avoydance of a Benefice; but in stead of him, the Chancellor and
Scholars of the Universities of Oxford or Combridge shall present within
several Counties respectively; for which see the Statute at large. Howbeit,
they shall not confer it upon a man already Beneficed.

CXXI. A Popish Recusant shall not be an Executor, Administrator or Guardian;
but the next of the kin (being no Recusant, and unto whom the land cannot
lawfully descend) shall have the wardship and tuition of an heir or orphan in
that case.

CXXII. A grant of the Kings Ward to a Popish Recusant convict shall be void.

CXXIII. None shall bring from beyond sea, print, sell, or buy any Popish
Primers, Ladies Psalters, Manuals, Rosaries, Popish Catechismes, Missals,
Breviaries, Portals, Legends or lives of saints, in what language soever they
shall be printed or written; nor any other superstitious books printed or
written in the English tongue, in pain to forfeit xl. s. for every such book,
to be divided into three parts, and employed, as aforesaid.

CXXIV. Two Justices of Peace, and all Majors, Bailiffes, and head Officers,
have power to search the houses and lodgings of Popish Recusants convict, and
of every person whose wife is a Popish Recusant convict, for Popish books and
relics, and to burn or deface such as they shall find in their custody; but
such as are of value shall be defaced in open Sess. and afterward restored to
the owner.

CXXV. All the Armor, Gunpowder, and Munition of a Popish Recusant convict,
shall be taken from him by warrant from four Justices of Peace at the general
Sess. (other then such weapons as shall be allowed unto him by the same
Justices) which said Armor and Munition shall be kept at the costs of such
Recusant, in such places where the said Justices shall appoint, and showed at
every Muster as his arms, together with his horse which he shall buy,
provide, and maintain for that purpose, according to his ability, as other
subjects do. And here, the Recusant that refuses to declare what armor or
munition he has, or to deliver it to such persons as shall have power to sease
it, shall forfeit the same to the King; and besides, shall upon warrant from
any Just. of Peace of that County, be imprisoned by the space of three months
without bail.

CXXVI. This Act shall not abridge Ecclesiastical censures.

CXXVII. Stat. 7. Ja. 6. Who shall take the oath of Obedience:

CXXVIII. It shall be lawful for any of the privy Council, or any Bishop
within his Diocese to require a Baron or Baroness of eighteen years of age or
above, to take the said Oath: And likewise for any two Justices of Peace (one
Quorum) to require any person of the age aforesaid, or above, and under the
degrees aforesaid, to take the same Oath.

CXXIX. If any Baron or Baroness stand presented, indicted, or convicted for
Recusancy, three of the privy Council (whereof the Chancellor, Treasurer,
Lord privy Seal, or principal Secretary shall be one) shall minister unto
them the said Oath. But if it be any other convicted person under those
degrees, or if the Minister, petty Constables, and Churchwardens of any
parish, or any two of them, shall complain to any Justice of Peace of any
person suspected for Recusancy; then any such Justice may in either of these
cases minister the said Oath, and upon refusal, shall commit the party to
prison, there to remain till the next Ass. or Sess. where, if he again refuse
to take it, he shall incur a Praemunire; except women covert, who shall only
be imprisoned, and there remain without bail, till they shall take the said
Oath.

CXXX. None refusing the said Oath shall be capable of any office of
Judicature, or other office (being no office of inheritance or ministerial
function,) or to practice the common Law, the civil Law, Physic, Surgery, the
art of Apothecary, or any liberal science for gain.

CXXXI. If a married woman, being a convicted Recusant, do not conform within
three months after conviction, she shall be committed to prison by a privy
Councellor or the Bishop of the Diocese, if she be a Baroness: but if any
other of a lower degree, then shall she be committed by two Justices of P. (one
Quorum) and there shall remain till she conform, as aforesaid, unless the
husband (for his wives offense) will pay unto the King x. l. for every month,
or yield the third part of all his lands, at the choice of the said husband.

CXXXII. None shall go himself, or send any person whatsoever beyond sea, to
be trained up in Popery, or any maintenance or relief to the party so sent, or
to any School or Religious house there, in pain (after conviction thereof) to
be adjudged unable to prosecute any suite in any Court of equity, to be
committee of any Ward, executor or administrator; to be incapable of any legacy
or deed of gift, or of bearing Office within this Realm: and besides, to
forfeit all his goods and chattels, and his lands also during life. But if he
conform within six weeks after his return, according to the Statutes in that
case provided, he shall not incur the penalties aforesaid.

CXXXIII. These offenses shall be heard and determined by the Justices of the
Kings Bench, Assise, Gaol delivery, and Oyer and Termin. of such Counties where
the offenders did last dwell, or whence they departed, or where they shall be
taken.

See Actions popular, 18.

Regrators, See Forestallers. Victual, 2.

Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies.
I. Stat. 17. R. 2.8. The Sherisses, and all other the Kings Officers, shall
supprese Riotors, and imprison them, and all other offending against the peace.

II. Stat. 13. H. 4.7. The Justices of Peace, or two of them (at least,)
together with the Sheriff or under-Sheriffe, shall by the power of the County
suppress Riots, Routs, and unlawful assemblies, arrest the offenders, and
record what shall be done: By which record of the said Justices, and Sheriff
or under-Sheriffe, the offenders shall stand convict, as by the Stat. of 15. R.
2.2. in case of forcible Entries: And if the offenders be departed, the said
Justices and Sheriff or under-Sheriffe shall within a month after make
enquiry thereof, and hear and determine the same according to law. See Force,
2.

III. If upon such inquiry the truth cannot be discovered in manner aforesaid;
then shall the said Officers, within one month after such inquiry, certify
the fact, together with the circumstances thereof, unto the King and his
Council; which certificate of theirs shall be in the nature of a presentment
by twelve, whereupon the offenders shall be brought to answer, and those that
be found guilty shall be punished at the discretion of the King and his
Council.

IV. If the offenders traverse the said certificate; then that, together with
the traverse, shall be sent into the Kings Bench, there to be tried.

V. If the Offencers upon the first precept do not appear before the Council,
or in the Kings Bench; a second precept shall issue forth, upon which if they
cannot be found; or if within three weeks after Proclamation made against them
in the next County Court after the delivery of the second precept, they do not
make their appearance before the Council in the Kings Bench, or in the
Chancery (in vacation time) upon return of the said Proclamation they shall
stand convict and attainted of the offense committed.

VI. Justices of Peace dwelling nearest the place where such offenses shall be
committed, and Justices of Assise for the time they shall be in their Session
(in case any be then committed) shall do execution of this act, in pain of
100. l.

VII. Stat. 2. H. 5.8. If default be found in the Justices of Peace or Assise,
H. 4.7. at the instance of the party grieved, the Kings Commission shall go out
to inquire as well of the truth of the case and original matter, as of the
defaults aforesaid, directed to sufficient men in the County, at the discretion
of the Lord Chancellor, which Commissioners shall presently return into the
Chancery the enquests and matters before them found.

VIII. Here, during the Sheriffs, or under-Sheriffes remaining in his Office,
the Coroners shall Impanell the Jury, each of them having lands worth 10. l.
per anuum at least; and upon each of which, for making default, the Coroners
shall return Issues, viz. for the first day 20. s. for the second 40. s. for
the third 100. s. and for every day after, double: And all this the Coroner
shall do, in pain of 40. l. But in case the Sheriff or under-Sheriffe,
reputed in default, be discharged of their office, the new Sheriff shall do
that which the Coroners are above enjoined to do, and shall incur the like
penalty, if they therein make default.

IX. The Lord Chancellor upon knowledge of any such offense shall send the
Kings Writ to the Justices of P. Sheriff, and under-Sheriffe of the same
County, to put the said Statute of 13. H. 4.7. in execution, upon the pain
therein contained: but although no such writ be sent, yet shall they not be
excused of the said pain, if they make not execution of the same Statute.

X. A Riot, etc. shall be repressed, and inquired of at the Kings charge, which
the Sheriff shall disburse by indenture betwixt the Justices of P. and him,
and shall be answered him again upon his account in the Exchequer.

XI. Persons guilty of heinous Riots shall suffer one whole years imprisonment
without bail; but petty Rioters shall be imprisoned, as shall seem best to
the King and his Council; And greater Fines shall be set upon Rioters then in
time past, in aid and supportation of the Justices, and other Officers in that
behalf.

XII. All the Kings liege people, upon warning, shall be assistant to the
Justices, Commissioners, Sheriff, and under-Sheriffe aforesaid, upon pain of
imprisonment, and to make fine and ransom to the King.

XIII. Bailiffes of Franchises shall cause sufficient men to be impannelled
upon such enquests, if any such be found within their liberties; And the
Ordinances and pains aforesaid shall extend to Corporations and Liberties,
where they have Justices of P. within themselves.

XIV. Stat. 2. H. 5.9. Capias, returnable in the Chancery at a certain day, by
which, if the parties offending, or any of them be taken, they shall be
committed to ward, or let to mainprife, at the discretion of the said Lord
Chancellor, and shall be proceeded against, as the Law requires; But if the
Sheriff return Non est inventus, a Writ of Proclamation (to be proclaimed two
County Court days) shall go out returnable in the Kings Bench at a certain
day, before which if they render not themselves, they shall be adjudged convict
and attainted of the offense suggested.

XV. If the offense be committed within the County Palatine of Lancaster, or
other Franchise, where there is a Chancellor and Seal; The Lord Chancellor of
England shall send a Writ to the said Chancellor, commanding him to make such
execution, as in this Act is comprised. 17.

XVI. Stat. 8. H. 6.14. Two Justices of P. of the Counties where Riots are
supposed to be committed, shall testify that the common fame runs in the
same Counties of the same Riots, before the Capias shall be awarded according
to the Stat. of 2. H. 5.9.

XVII. If the offense be committed within a Liberty, where there is a
Chancellor and a Seal, upon information of the Riot, etc. from a Justice of P.
and Sheriff there, the said Chancellor has power to award Writs of Capias and
Proclamation, as the Chancellor of England has.

XVIII. Stat. 19. H. 7.13. If any Riot, etc. be committed, the Sheriff upon a
Precept directed unto him, shall return 24. persons, whereof every one shall
have freehold within the same County worth 20. s. per annum, or Copyhold
worth 26. s. 8. d. per an. or Copyhold and Freehold together worth 26 s. 8.
d. per annum, for to inquire of the same Riot, etc. And shall return Issues
upon every Juror making default, viz. for the first day 20. s. and for the
second 40. s. And all this the Sheriff shall do, in pain of 20. l.

XIX. If the said Riot, etc. be not found, by reason of any maintenance or
embracery of the said Jurors, then shall the Justices and Sheriff, or under
Sheriff, (besides the Certificate they are to make, according to the Stat. of
13. H. 4.7.) certify the names of such maintainers and embraceors, together
with their misdemeanors, in pain to forfeit 20. l. a piece; which Certificate
shall have like force of proving the offense as a verdict of 12. men: And then
such maintainers and embraceors shall forfeit 20. l. a piece, and remain in
prison at the discretion of the Justices.

Robbery.
Stat. 8. El. 4. A Cutpurse, Pick-pocket,

S. Clergy. Felony. 15. Hue and Cry.

Rogues, S. Vagabonds.

Rome, S. Recusants.

Sacraments and Service Divine.
I. Stat. 50. E. 3.5. and 1. R. 2.15. None shall arrest Priests, or other
Clerks, while they attend Divine Services, in pain of imprisonment, and to be
ransomed at the Kings will, so that no collusion or fained cause be found in
them.

II. Stat. 1. E. 6.1. None shall speak or do any thing in contempt of the most
holy Sacrament, in pain of imprisonment, and to make fine and ransom at the
Kings will.

III. Three Just. of P. (1. Qu.) have power to take information by the oaths of
two lawful persons (at least) concerning the offense aforesaid, and to bind
over by Recognisance every Accuser and Witness in 5. l. a piece, to appear at
the next Sess. to give evidence against the offenders, who are there to be
inquired of before three such Justices or more, by the oaths of 12. men, and
also indicted, if the matter alleged against them shall be found true.

IV. Three such Justices or more, have likewise power to send out two Capias,
an Exigent, and a Capias utlagatum against such offenders into all Counties and
Liberties, and upon their appearance to determine the contempts and offenses
aforesaid, or to take bail for their appearance to be tried, as aforesaid.

V. The Justices also have power to direct a Writ, in the kings name, to the
Bishop of the Diocese where the offense was committed, by which he shall be
required to be present himself (or some for him, sufficiently learned) at the
arraignement of the offender, and to give advice concerning the offense
committed.

VI. This offense shall be prosecuted within three months, and the offender
shall be admitted to produce witnesses for his default.

VII. Stat. 2, 3. E. 6.1. ipso facto of all his Spiritual promotions,
whereupon every Patron may present; and for the third, to suffer imprisonment
during life: And if he be not beneficed, for the first offense he shall suffer
six months imprisonment, and for the second, imprisonment during life.

VIII. If any shall be convicted to have by enterludes, plays, songs, thymes,
or otherwise depraved the said books, or to have compelled or procured the
Minister to sing or say any other Church Service, or in any other form then as
aforesaid; or by any such means to have interrupted or let the Minister to sing
or say the said Service, they shall, for the first offense, forfeit x. li. to
the King; or (that not paid within six weeks after conviction) shall suffer (in
stead thereof) three months imprisonment without bail: for the second time
offending, shall forfeit xx. l. or (that not paid within six weeks, as
aforesaid) shall suffer six months imprisonment without bail: and for the
third time shall forfeit all their goods, and suffer imprisonment during life.

IX. Justices of Oyer and Termin. and Justices of Assise have power to hear and
determine these offenses: unto whom the Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese
may associate himself, if he please.

X. This shall not restrain any private man, or public Colleges to use the
said Service in such tongues as they understand, the holy Communion only
excepted; or any other to use Psalms or prayers taken out of the Bible at
convenient times, not letting thereby the said Service.

XI. The offenses aforesaid shall be prosecuted at the next Assise or Sessions
of Oyer and Terminer after they are committed: And here trial of Peers shall
be by Peers.

XII. Chief Officers of Cities and Corporations shall also hear and determine
these offenses within their several prccincts; and so likewise shall
Ecclesiastical Magistrates. Howbeit, none shall be punished above once for one
offense.

XIII. Stat. 5, 6. E. 6.1.

XIV. The Common prayer book now made perfect and annexed to this Act. together
with the addition of consecrating Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons,
shall be used and esteemed as by the Statute of 2, 3. E. 6.1. is ordained,
under the pains in the same Statute expressed.

XV. If any shall be convict by verdict of twelve men, before Justice of
Assise, Oyer and Terminer, or Peace in Sess. to have wittingly heard, or to
have been present at any other form of Common prayer, administration of
Sacraments, making of Ministers, or other rites then what are expressed in the
said book, or which are contrary to the said Statute of 2, and 3. E. 6.1. shall
for the first offense suffer six months imprisonment without bail; for the
second, twelve months imprisonment; and for the third, imprisonment during life.

XVI. Stat. 1. M. Sess. 2. cap. 3. he shall be by the Constables or
Churchwardens of the parish brought before a Just. of Peace, who, upon due
accusation, shall presently commit him to safe custody, and within six days
after, together with another Justice, shall diligently examine the fact; who,
if they find cause, shall commit him to the common Jail, there to remain for
three months, and from thence to the next quarter Sessions; at which, upon the
parties reconciliation, and entering into bond for the good behavior for one
whole year (at the discretion of the Justices in Session) he shall be released:
but if he persist still in his obstinacy, he shall remain in prison without
bail, until he shall reconcile, and be penitent for his offense.

XVII. He that rescues an offender in this kind, shall suffer like
imprisonment, as aforesaid; and besides, shall forfeit v. li. to the Queen.

XVIII. The inhabitants of a town that suffer such an offender to escape,
shall forfeit v. li. being presented before the Justices of Peace in Sess.
within the County or Corporation where the escape was made.

XIX. Justices of Peace, Assise, and Oyer and Terminer, and Majors, and head
Officers of Corporations, have power to hear and determine these offenses, and
to impose the fines aforesaid.

XX. This Act shall not restrain the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical laws.
Howbeit, none shall be punished twice for one offense.

XXI. Stat. 1. El. 2. E. 6.1. together with the addition of certain lessons to
be used on every Sunday in the year, and the form of the Letany altered and
corrected, and two sentences only added in the delivery of the Sacraments to
communicants.

XXII. If any Minister shall be convicted by the verdict of twelve men, his
own confession, or notorious evidence of the fact, to have refused to use the
said Church service; or to have used any other rite, ceremony, order, form, or
manner then is set forth in the said book, or to have depraved the same book,
or any thing therein contained, he shall forfeit (being a benefited man) for
the first offense, one whole years profit of all his spiritual promotions, and
suffer six months imprisonment: for the second, shall be deprived ipsofacto,
whereupon every Patron may present; and shall suffer one whole years
imprisonment: and for the third, shall be also deprived, as aforesaid, and
shall suffer imprisonment during life. And if he be not beneficed, for the
first offense he shall suffer one whole years imprisonment; and for the
second, imprisonment during life.

XXIII. If any shall be convicted to have by enterludes, plays, songs, rhymes,
or otherwise depraved the said book, or to have compelled or procured the
Minister to sing or say any other Church service, or in any other form then as
aforesaid: or by any such means to have interrupted or let the Minister to sing
or say the said service; they shall for the first offense forfeit 100. Marks to
the Queen, or (that not paid within six weeks after conviction) shall suffer
(in stead thereof) six months imprisonment: for the second offense shall
forfeit 400. Marks, or (that not paid within six weeks, as aforesaid) shall
suffer one whole years imprisonment: and for the third offense shall forfeit
all their goods and chattels, and suffer imprisonment during life.

XXIV. Every person shall resort to their parish Church, or (upon let thereof)
to some other, every Sunday and Holiday, upon pain to be punished by censures
of the Church, and also to forfeit xii. d. to be levied by the Churchwardens
there, for the use of the poor, upon the offenders goods by way of distress.

See Recusants, 98.

XXV. Justices of Oyer and Terminer and of Ass. and Majors and head Officers of
Corporations have power to hear and determine these offenses: unto whom the
Arch-Bish. or Bishop of the Diocese may associate himself, if he please.
Howbeit, note that by the Stat. of 23. El. 1. Justices of Peace have also power
to meddle therein; which see in Title Recusants, 27.

XXVI. None shall be impeached by this Act, unless the offense be presented at
the next Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, or Ass. after it is committed: and here
trial of a Peer shall be by Peers.

XXVI. This Act shall not restrain Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Howbeit, none
shall be punished twice for one offense.

Sacrilege, See Clergy.

Schoolmasters, See Recusants, 26, 67.

Scotland, See Corn, 1. Horses, 9, 10.

Seminary Priests, S. Recusants.

Servants, S. Laborers.

Service divine, S. Sacraments.

Sewers.
I. Stat. 23. H. 8.5. Dedimus for that purpose; or else before the Justices of
P. in Sess.

II. The form of the Oath is this:

Ye shall swear, That you, to your cunning, wit, and power shall truly and
indifferently execute the authority to you given, by this Commission of Sewers,
without any favor, affection, corruption, dread, or malice, to be borne to any
manner person or persons; And, as the case shall require, you shall consent,
and endeavor your self for your part, to the best of your knowledge and
power, to the making of such wholesome, just, equal, and indifferent Laws and
Ordinances, as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent
number of your fellows, being in Commission with you, for the due redress,
reformation and amendment of all and every such things as are contained and
specified in the said Commission; And the same Laws and Ordinances to your
cunning, wit, and power, cause to be put in due execution, without savor,
meede, dread, malice, or affection: As God you help, etc.

III. Stat. 13. El. 9. A Commission of Sewers shall continue in force ten
years, and the orders made by their Commissioners one year longer,: during
which time of one year, the Justices of Peace of that County, or six of them,
(2. Qu.) have power to execute such Commission and Orders as fully as the
Commissioners themselves, unless in the interim a new Commission be sent forth.

Sheep, S. Cattle.

Sheriffs.
I. Magna Charta, 9. H. 3.17. No Sheriff, Constable, Escheator, Coroner, or
any other our Bailiffes shall hold Pleas of our Crown.

II. Stat. 1. H. 4.11.

III. Stat. 23. H. 6.10. viz. for the Sheriff, 20. d. for the Bailiffe that
makes the arrest, 4. d. and for the Jailer, (when the party is committed) 4. d.
Neither shall any Sheriff, under-Sheriffe, Sheriffs Clerk, Steward, or
Bailiffe of Franchise, Servant, Bailiffe, or Coroner take above 4. d. for the
Copy of a Pannell.

IV. Sheriffs and other Officers shall let to Bail persons by them arrested
upon reasonable Sureties, having sufficient within the County (persons in ward
by Condemnation, exemption, Capias utlagatum, or Excommunicatum, surety of
Peace, or committed by command of the Justices, and Vagabonds refusing to
serve, only excepted.)

V. The said Officers shall take no bond of any arrested person, but for
appearance, and to themselves only, and shall not take for it more then 4. d.
and bonds otherwise taken (color officii) shall be void.

VI. Sheriffs shall make Deputies in the Kings Courts at Westminster, to
receive Writs to be delivered unto them.

VII. Sheriffs, under-Sheriffes, Clerks, Bailiffes, Gaolers, Coroners,
Stewards, Bailiffes of Franchises, and all other Officers, which do contrary to
this Act, shall forfeit for every such offense treble damages to the party
grieved, and besides 40. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

VIII. Justices of Assise of both the Benches, and of Peace, have power to
hear and determine these offenses.

IX. If the Sheriff return a Cepi Corpus, or Reddidit se, he shall be
chargeable to have the body of the party ready at the day of return mentioned
in the Writ.

X. The Warden of the Fleet, or of the Jail of the Kings Palace at
Westminster, shall not be prejudiced by this Ordinance.

XI. Stat. 11. H. 7.15. No Sheriff, under-Sheriffe, or Shire-Clerk shall enter
in the County Court any Plaint in the absence of the Plaintiff, or his
Attorney, nor above one Plaint for one cause, in pain of 40. s. to be divided
betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

XII. A Justice of Peace upon complain made has power to examine the abovesaid
Officers, and Plaintiff concerning the premises, and finding any of the same
Officers guilty, shall within three months after certify that examination into
the Exchequer, in pain of 40. s. upon which examination the said Officers
shall be convicted to pay the abovesaid forfeiture of 40. s. without farther
inquiry.

XIII. The Defendant in the County Court shall have lawful summons, and if the
Bailiffe be therein found faulty, he shall forfeit 40. s. And here also
examination and certificate shall be made by a Justice of Peace, as aforesaid.

XIV. Before the Sheriff issue forth any Estreats out of the County Court, two
Just. of P. (1. Qu.) shall view them, and there being two parts of them
indented and sealed by the said Justices and Sheriff, one of them shall
remain with the Justices, and the other with the Sheriff; and here the
Officer that collects them, shall make oath before the said Justices, to levy
no more then what is contained in them, in pain of 40. s. who may be convict
of that offense by the examination of one Just. of P. as aforesaid.

XV. The Justices of P. which are to have the controllement of the Sheriff and
his Estreats, shall be named at Michaelmasse Sess. by the Custos Rotulorum, or
(in his absence) by the eldest of the Quorum: And the said Justices of P. upon
information of the party grieved, may make out like Process against the
offenders, as in Actions of Trespass.

XVI. Stat. 27. El. 12. shall before one of the Justices of Ass. or the Custos
Rotulorum of the County, or two Justices of Peacethere, (1. Qu.) take the oath
of Supremacy, ( which see in Recusants 8.) and also the oath hereunder written,
in pain to forfeit treble damages to the party grieved, if he commit any act
contrary to the same oaths, or either of them.

XVII. The form of the other oath is as follows:

I A. B. shall not use or exercise the Office of under-Sheriffe corruptly,
during the time that I shall remain therein, neither shall or will accept,
receive, or take by any color, means, or devise whatsoever, or consent to the
taking of any manner of fee or reward, of any person or persons for the
Impanelling or returning of any Inquest, Jurie, or Tales, in any Court of
Record for the King, or betwixt party and party above two shillings, or the
value thereof, and such fees as are allowed and appointed for the same, by the
Laws and Statutes of this Realm: But will, according to my power, truly and
indifferently with convenient speed impanell all Jurors, and return all such
Writ or Writs touching the same, as shall appertain to be done by my duty or
Office, during the time that I shall remain in the said Office: So help me God.

XVIII. No Bailiffe of a Franchise, Deputy, or Clerk of a Sheriff or
under-Sheriffe, shall intermeddle with their several Offices before they have
taken the said Oaths, as aforesaid, (altering only the terms of Office) in
pain to forfeit 40. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

XIX. Justices of Ass. and Just. of P. in Sess. have power to hear and
determine the defaults and offenses aforesaid, and upon conviction to award
Process accordingly.

XX. Stat. 29. El. 4. No Sheriff,

XXI. This Act shall not extend to fees for Executions within Cities or
Corporations.

S. Bailement, 2. Indictments, 5. Jurors. Justices of P. 18.

Ship-Wrights, S. Laborers, 46.

Shoo-makers, S. Leather.

Silver, S. Gold.

Skinners, S. Laborers. 53.

Soldiers, S. Captains.

Stabbing, S. Clergy, 18, 19.

Stewards of Courts, S. Justices of P. 14, 16, 28.

Strangers, S. Aliens.

Supersedeas.
I. Stat. 21. Jac. 8. Process of the Peace or good behavior, shall not issue
out of the Chancery or Kings Bench, but upon motion in open Court, and good
cause alleged upon oath, which shall also be endorced upon the Writ: Howbeit,
if that cause shall be afterward disproved, the Judge or Judges of the said
Courts (respectively) shall commit the offender to prison, till he pay the
party grieved all his costs and damages.

II. All Writs of Supersedeas shall be void, unless such Process be likewise
granted upon motion, as aforesaid; and upon such sufficient sureties, as shall
appear to the Court upon oath to be Subsidie-men, assessed at 5. l. lands, or
10. l. goods; and also, unless the prosecution against the party for the Peace
or good behavior be bona fide: And here, false sureties procured for the
gaining of such Writs, shall be punished by the Judges.

III. Certioraries shall not be allowed, unless the Indictee will become bound
with sufficient sureties (such as the Justices of P. in Sess. shall think fit)
to pay to the prosecutor, within one month after conviction, such costs and
damages, as the said Justices shall assesse.

Sunday, S. Holy Days. Leather, 32. Recusants.

Swans, S. Hawks, 7.20.

Swearing, Cursing.
I. Stat. 21. Jac. 20.

II. Here, if an Officer be sued for the due execution of his Office, he may
plead the general Issue, and yet give special matter in evidence.

III. This offense shall be complained off and proved, as aforesaid, within
twenty days after it is committed: And this Act shall be read in every Church
twice in the year, upon Sunday after evening prayer.

Tanner, S. Leather.

Testimonial, S. Laborers, 9, 10, 11.

Tiles.
I. Stat. 17. E. 4.4. Tile-earth shall be cast up before the first of November,
stirred and turned before the first of February, and not made into Tile before
the first of March; And shall likewise be well tried and severed from stones,
malme, marle, and chalk.

II. A plain Tile shall contain in length ten Inches and an half; in
breadth, six Inches and a quarter; and in thickness, half an Inch and half a
quarter at least: A Roof or Creast-Tile, in length thirteen Inches, and in
thickness, as before, with convenient deepnesse accordingly: A Gutter and
Corner-Tile, in length ten Inches and an half, with convenient thickness,
breadth and deepnesse.

III. If any shall sell Tile otherwise made, he shall forfeit to the buyer the
double value thereof, to be recovered by action of debt; and besides shall make
fine and ransom at the Kings will.

IV. Justices of P. shall hear and determine these defaults and offenses as
well at the suit of the King, as of the party grieved; and shall not set less
fine upon an offender against this act, then after the rate of v. s. for every
thousand of plain tile, vi. s. viii. d. for every hundred of roof-tile, and ii.
s. for every hundred of corner or guttertile.

V. The said Justices have also authority to appoint searchers of Tile, who
shall diligently execute that office, in pain to forfeit to the King for every
default x. s. and shall have of every Tile-maker, for such search, after the
rate of i. d. for every thousand of plain Tile, ob. for every hundred of
roof-Tile, and qu. for every hundred of corner or gutter-Tile; and shall make
presentment of all defaults found at the next Sess. which shall be as
effectual in law, as a presentment of twelve men.

VI. None shall put any Tile to sale before such search be made, in pain to
forfeit the same: and the Justices of P. have also power to hear and determine
the defaults of the said searchers.

Tin, S. Brass.

Tithes.
I. Stat. 27. H. 8.20. If the Judge of an Ecclesiastical Court make complaint
to two Justices of Peace (one Quorum) of any contumacie or misdemeanour
committed by a defendant in any suit there depending for matter of Tithes, the
said Justices shall commit the said defendant to prison, there to remain till
he shall find sufficient surety to be bound (before them) by recognisance, or
otherwise, to give due obedience to the process, proceedings, decrees and
sentences of the said Court.

II. Stat. 32. H. 8.7. If in such a Court, after sentence for Tithes, the
defendant appealeth, the Judge there shall compel the party appellant by
process and censures ecclesiastical, to satisfy the other party his
reasonable costs; and in case of contumacie or disobedience, upon complaint
thereof, two such Justices shall proceed as aforesaid. Howbeit, here the Judge
shall take surety of the plaintiff to repay the costs, in case the cause pass
against him.

Toll, S. Fish, 17.

Transportation, S. Actions popular, 18. Corn, Leather, 58. Recusants, 75.

Treason, S. Bailment, 1.

Trespass.
I. Stat. 43. El. 7.

II. The Constable or other inferior officer that herein refuses or
neglects to do his duty, shall by any such Justice of Peace or head Officer
be committed to prison without bail, till he whip, or cause to be whipped the
party offending, as is above limited.

III. No Justice of Peace shall execute this Statute for offenses done to
himself, unless he be affociated with one or more Justices of Peace whom the
offense does not concern.

Vagabonds, Rogues.
1. Stat. 39. El. 4. Justices of Peace within every County and Corporation have
power in Sess. to give order for the erection of houses of correction, and also
for the maintenance and government of the same, and for the punishment of
offenders which shall be thither committed.

II. All Scholars and seafaring men which beg; All wandering persons which
either beg, use unlawful games and plays, feign themselves to have skill in
Physiognomie, Palinestry, or the like, or pretend to tell fortunes; All persons
that are, or pretend to be collectors for Gaoles and Hospitals; All Fencers,
Bearwards, common Players, and Minstrels wandering abroad (other then such as
shall be authorized by Noblemen under their hands and seals;) All Juglers,
Tinlkers, Pedlers, and petty chapmen wandering abroad; All laborers which
wander, and refuse to work for wages reasnably taxed, having not living
otherwise to maintain themselves; All persons delivered out of Gaoles, which
beg for their fees, or otherwise do travel begging; All Which wander abroad
begging, pretending loss by fire, or otherwise; And all such persons (not
being felons) wandering, and pretending themselves to be Egyptians, shall be
adjudged Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturd Beggars. 16.

III. If any such vagabond shall be taken begging, wandering, or misordering him
or her self, he or she, by the appointment of any Justice of P. Constable,
Headborow, or Tithingman there (the two last being assisted by the Minister,
and one other of the parish) shall be stripped naked from the middle upwards,
openly whipped till their body be bloody, and forthwith sent the next, way from
parish to parish, by the Officers of each parish, toward the place of their
birth: but if it cannot be known, then toward the place where they last dwelt,
by the space of one whole year before such punishment; and if that cannot be
known, then to the town through which they last passed without punishment; And
if it cannot be discovered where they were born, or last dwelt, as aforesaid,
then are they to be conveyed by the officer there to the house of Correction,
or common Jail of the County, to be employed in work, or placed in some
service, and so to continue by the space of one year: or in case they be not
able of body, that town is to keep them, till they may be placed in some
Almshouse within the same County.

IV. After which whipping, the vagabond shall have a testimonial under the
hand and seal of the said Justice, Constable, Head-borow, Tithingman, and
Minister, or any two of them, testifying the day and place of his punishment,
the place to which he is to be conveyed, and the time limited for his passage
thither; which time, if by his own default he exceeds, he shall from time to
time incur the like punishment, till he arrive at the place limited: the
substance of which testimonial shall be registered by the said Minister in a
book provided for that purpose, in pain of v.s.

V. If any such rogue seem dangerous, or will not be reformed, two Justices of
P. (one of Quorum) shall commit him to the house of Correction; and if at the
next quarter Sess. by the more part of the Justices there, he shall not be
thought fit to be delivered; he shall by them be banished; and at the charge of
that County shall be conveyed to such parts beyond the seas, as shall by six or
more of the privy Council for that purpose be assigned to her Majesty, her
heirs, and successors, whereof the Lord Keeper or Treasurer to be one; or
otherwise adjudged to the galleys of this Realm, as the said Justices shall
think fit: And if a rogue so banished return without license, he shall suffer
as a felon, to be tried in the County where he shall be apprehended. 17.

VI. If a Constable, Headborow, or Tithingman be found negligent in the due
execution of this act, they shall forfeit x. s. for every default; and none
shall make rescous against any Officer, or hinder the execution of this law, in
pain of v. li. and to be bound to the good behavior. 18.

VII. None shall transport such a rogue out of Ireland, Scotland, or the Isle
of Man, (being born in any of those places) in pain to forfeit xx. s. to the
use of the poor where he lands: And if any such shall be hereafter found in
England or Wales, they shall suffer punishment, and be conveyed the next way
home, as aforesaid; or (in case they came by sea) to the place where they
landed, from whence they are to be transported (at the charge of that County)
to the place from whence they came.

VIII. No impotent poor person shall pass to the Bath or Buxton without being
licensed to pass by two Justices of P. where they dwell, and provided with
relief both for their journey and abode there; and shall also return within the
time limited by their license, in pain to be reputed and punished as Rogues;
and the city of Bath or town of Buxton shall not be chargeable with any such.

IX. Justices of P. of the Counties shall not intermeddle in Cities or
Corporations, but only the Officers of the same, who shall have like power
there that the said Justices have in Counties.

X. This act shall not extend to restrain the power which the city of London
has in the government of St. Thomas Hospital in Southwark, or to prejudice
any jurisdiction or inheritance of John Dutton of Dutton, in the County of
Chester Esquire.

XI. The forfeitures and fines which shall accrue by this act (other then that
above otherwise limited) shall be employed for the maintenance of houses of
correction, or the relief of the poor where the offense shall be committed, at
the discretion of the said Justices of P. and may be levied by warrant under
the hands and seals of two Justices of P. by distress and sale of goods: And
here the confession of the offender, or proof by two witnesses before two such
Just. shall be sufficient conviction.

XII. Two Justices of P. (one Quorum) shall have full power to hear and
determine all causes which may come in question by reason of this act.

XIII. The Lord Chancellor, or Keeper for the time being, shall have power to
make Commissioners to enquire of money given toward the erection or
maintenance of houses of correction, stocks for the poor, or other such like
uses.

XIV. A seafaring man suffering shipwreck, not having wherewithal to relieve
himself, and having a testimonial under some Justice of P. his hand and seal
near the place where he landed, declaring the time and place of his landing,
the place of his dwelling or birth unto which he is to pass, and the time
limited for his passage, may, in the direct way home, and within the time so
limited for his passage, ask and receive necessary relief, without incurring
the penalties of this act.

XV. This act shall not extend to children under seven years old; nor to
glassemen, which travel without begging, by license under the hands and seals
of three Justices of P. (one Quorum) of the County through which they travel.

XVI. Stat. 1. Jac. 7. Statute of 39. El. 4.

XVII. In stead of banishing an incorrigible rogue, or committing him to the
galleys, (as was ordained by 39. El. 4.) he shall in open Sess. be branded in
the left shoulder with a burning iron, having a great Roman R upon it as broad
as a shilling; and from thence shall be sent to the place of his last dwelling,
or (if that cannot be known) to the place of his birth; after which time, if he
offend again, he shall suffer as a felon, without benefit of Clergy. 5.

XXVIII. Every person that sees or knows any rogue to beg, shall convey, or
cause him to be conveyed to the next Constable or Tithingman, in pain of x. s.
to be levied and employed as the forfeitures of 39. El. 4. and in default
thereof, then by the Lord of the Leet, or his officer, in like manner as the
persons authorized by the said Statute should have levied and employed the
same. And here also, if the Constable or Tithingman do not punish him
according to that Statute, he shall forfeit xx. s. to be also levied and
employed as by the same Statute is appointed.

XIX. This act shall not prejudice the jurisdiction or inheritance of John
Dutton of Dutton in the County of Chester Esquire.

XX. Stat. 7. Ja. 4. There shall be an house of Correction provided in every
Shire, to set rogues and other idle people to work.

XXI. The Justices in Sess. shall from time to time appoint a Governor for the
said house, who shall have power to set such rogues and idle people to work,
and to punish them by moderate whipping, or putting fetters or gyves upon them;
which rogues and idle persons shall not be chargeable to the Country, nor have
other allowance then what they shall deserve by their own labor.

XXII. The said Justices shall at least twice every year within their several
divisions (and oftener if need be) assemble and meet together for the better
execution of this Statute, and some four or five days before their meeting,
shall by warrant command the Constables and Tithingmen of every Hundred, Town,
and Hamlet (being assisted with other sufficient men) to make a general privy
search in one night within their several precincts, for the finding and
apprehending of rogues, etc. and such as shall be found, to bring to the said
meeting, to be examined, punished, or sent to the house or houses of
Correction, there to be set to work.

XXIII. The said Constables and Tithingmen shall appear at the said meeting,
and there give an account upon oath in writing, under the Ministers hand,
testifying what rogues etc. they have taken in the last search, or since the
last meeting, and how many have been punished, or otherwise sent to the house
of Correction: which if they neglect to do, or safely to convey such to the
house of Correction as by the said Justices warrant shall be committed thither,
they shall incur what fine the said Justices shall please to set upon them,
so it exceed not xl. s.

XXIV. The Governors of the houses of Correction shall have such a sum of
money yearly, as shall be thought fit by the more part of the Justices of P. in
Sess. the same to be paid quarterly before hand by the Treasurers of the
County, the Governors giving security for their continuance in the said
service.

XXV. If any lewd woman have a bastard, which may be chargeable to the parish,
the Justices of P. shall commit her to the house of Correction, there to be
punished, and set to work one whole year; and if she offend again, then is she
to be committed again, there to remain till she put in good sureties for the
good behavior, and not to offend so again.

Persons running away, and leaving their charge to the parish, shall be deemed
and punished as incorrigible rogues: And those that threaten so to do, (it
being proved by two witnesses upon oath before two Justices of P. of the same
division) shall be by the same Justices sent to the house of Correction, there
to be punished as sturdy rogues, (unless they will put in sufficient sureties
to discharge the town,) and not to be delivered but at such a meeting, as
aforesaid; or in open Sess.

XXVII. If the Governors shall not every quarter Sess. yield to the said
Justices a true account of all such persons as shall be committed to their
custody; if they suffer any within their charge to make escape, or to be
trouble some to the Country by going abroad, or otherwise, they shall incur
what fine the same Just. in Sess. shall think fit to impose upon them.

XXVIII. All fines which shall accrue by this act (other then those already
limited) shall be paid to the Treasurers of the County, and by them be
accounted for.

See Laborers, 11. Sheriffs, 4.

Victual, and Victuallers.
I. Stat. 12. E. 2.6.

II. Stat. 23. E. 3.6. All Butchers,

III. Stat. 6. R. 2.10. Stat. 11 R. 2.7. 1. H. 4.17. and 14. H. 6.6.

IV. Stat. 13. R. 2.8. Victuallers shall sell their victuals at such reasonable
prises as shall be set down by the Just. of P. in two of their Sess. to be
holden betwixt Easter and Mich. in pain to be punished at the discretion of
the said Justices, where no pain is already limited in certain. 9.

V. And here, Sheriffs, Stewards, Majors, Bailiffes, and all other, which have
power to keep Assise of Bread and Ale, shall take no fine or amercement for any
default touching the Assise, for which the offender ought by Law to have bodily
punishment.

VI. Stat. 23. H. 6.13. Justices of Peace shall twice every year cause all
Statutes concerning Victuallers (before this time made) to be openly proclaimed
in Sess.

VII. Stat. 12. E. 4.8. No person (other then Majors, Bailiffes, Lords of
Leets, or others in point of Charter) shall execute any Office of searching or
surveying of Wine, Ale, Beer, or any other Victual, or of the correction for
breaking the Assise thereof, in pain to forfeit 40. l. to be divided betwixt
the King and the prosecuter. And all Letters Patents of the King granted for
that purpose shall be void.

VIII. Stat. 3. H. 8.8. When a Victualler (in a City or Corporation) is chosen
to bear an Office, by reason whereof he ought also to have the Assising of
Victual, during that time, two other (being no Victuallers) shall be joined
and sworn with him, truly to Assesse and set prises and Assizes of Victual
there.

IX. Stat. 25. H. 8.2.

X. Stat. 2, 3. E. 6, 15. Butchers, Brewers,

XI. Just. of P. Majors, Bailiffes, and Stewards, in Sess. Leets and Courts,
have power to hear and determine these offenses.

See Alehouses, 5, 15, 26, 28. Butter, 1. Corn, Forestallers, 5. Purveyors, 56.

Vintners, S. Wines. Alehouses, 29. Under-Sheriffe, S. Sheriffs.

Usury.
1. Stat. 37. H. 8.9. None shall sell his wares or merchandise to any, and
within three months after buy the same again at a lesser prise, knowing them
to be the same wares; or by any corrupt bargain of wares, money, or other
thing, or by any mortgage of Land, take in gains for giving day of payment,
more then according to the rate of 10. per centum, for one whole year, in
pain to forfeit the treble value of the wares or money so put forth, or the
treble value of the profits of such lands mortgaged, to be divided betwixt the
King and the prosecutor; And besides shall suffer imprisonment, and make fine
at the Kings will.

II. Stat. 13. El. 8. All bonds, contracts, and assurances upon Usury, in
lending or doing any thing contrary to the Stat. of 37. H. 8.9. shall be void,
and all brokers, and soliciters thereof, shall be adjudged and used as
Counselors, Attorneys, or Advocates in any case of Praemunire.

III. He that takes no more then after the rate of 10. l. per centum, or
less, shall only forfeit the interest; to be recovered and employed, as the
forfeitures of 37. H. 8.9.

IV. Justices of Oyer and Terminer, of Ass. and of P. in their Circuits and
Sess. and Majors, Sheriffs, and Bailiffes of Cities, have power to hear and
determine all offenses committed against 37. H. 8.9.

V. This Statute of 37. H. 8.9. shall be construed largely and strongly against
the party offending by any way or devise, directly or indirectly.

VI. This Act shall not extend unto any allowances or payments for the finding
of Orphans, according to the ancient rates of London, or of any other City,
where order is taken for their custody and goods, as in London.

VII. The offender against the Stat. of 37. H. 8.9. may also be punished by the
Ecclesiastical Laws.

VIII. Stat. 21. Jac. 17. per centum for one whole year, in pain to forfeit
the treble value of the money, or other things so lent.

IX. No Scrivener, Broker, or Soliciter shall take or receive directly or
indirectly for brokage, above the rate of 5. s. for the loan of 100. l. for
one whole year, nor above 12. d. for making of a bond, in pain to for fet 20.
l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor; and also to suffer six
months imprisonment.

See Actions popular, 15.

Wages, S. Justices of P. 13, 18. Laborers, 15, etc. Parliament.

Wagoner, S. Holy Days, 2.

Waine-man, S. Holy Days, 2.

Wales.
1. Stat. 26. H. 6. Just. of P. in the Counties next adjoining to Wales, may
hear and determine the felonies committed in Wales, and in the Marches
thereof, and how they may proceed therein.

II. Stat. 27. H. 8.7. The said Justices may hear and determine certain
offenses (there mentioned) of Foresters in Wales about unreasonable customs,
and how they are to proceed therein.

III. Stat. 34. H. 8.26. In this Statute is set down by whom the Justices of
P. in Wales are to be appointed, how many there ought to be in every County,
what manner of men they ought to be, and how they ought to deal in their
office, concerning their Sess. Certificates, Fees, Amerciaments, and Fines,
together with diverse other matters there mentioned.

S. Boat-men, 1.

Warrens, S. Hunters.

Watches.
1. Stat. of Winchester, 13. E. 1.4.

II. Betwixt Ascension day and Michaelmas, Watch shall be kept all night, from
Sunsetting till Sunrising; viz. in a City with six men at every gate, in a
Borough with twelve men, and in every Town with six or four men, according to
the number of the inhabitants there; and if any stranger pass by them, he
shall be arrested till morning; and if he will not obey the arrest, they shall
levy Huy and Cry upon him.

III. Stat. 5. H. 4.3. Winchester shall be observed.

IV. In every Commission of Peace hereafter to be made, this article shall be
inserted, That the Justices of Peace shall have power in their Sessions to
enquire of Watches, and to punish them which shall be found in default,
according to the tenor of the said Statute.

Watermen, S. Boatmen.

Wax.
I. Stat. 11. H. 6.12. No Wax-Chandler shall sell or put to sale any Candles,
or other wares made of wax, at a dearer rate then that he may have only iiii.
d. in every pound of wares over the price of plain wax, in pain to forfeit all
such waxes put to sale, and the value of them sold; and besides, to make fine
to the King.

II. Justices of Peace, Majors, Bailiffes and Stewards of Franchises have power
to examine and search concerning the breach of this law, and also to hear and
determine the offenses committed against the same. Stat. 23. El. 8.

Wears, S. Fishing, 6, 26.

Weights and Measures.
I. Magna Charta, 9. H. 3.25. One measure and one weight shall be used
throughout England.

II. Assisa Penis and Cervisia, 11. H. 3.

A Table of the assise of Bread according to Troy weight, having twelve ounces
in a pound, and twenty penny weight in each of those twelve ounces.

Price of Wheat. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. s. d. l. oun. d.
l. oun. d. l. oun. d. 19 6 1 5 7 2 2 0 2 10 19 20 0 1 4 18 2 1 6 2 9 16 20 6 1
4 10 2 0 14 2 9 0 21 0 1 4 2 2 0 2 2 8 4 21 6 1 3 14 1 11 12 2 7 8 22 0 1 3 6 1
11 0 2 6 12 22 6 1 3 0 1 10 10 2 6 0 23 0 1 2 14 1 10 0 2 5 8 23 6 1 2 8 1 9 12
2 4 16 24 0 1 2 2 1 9 2 2 4 4 24 6 1 1 16 1 8 13 2 3 12 25 0 1 1 10 1 8 6 2 3 0
25 6 1 1 5 1 7 18 2 2 10 26 0 1 1 0 1 7 10 2 2 0 26 6 1 0 15 1 7 3 2 1 10 27 0
1 0 10 1 6 16 2 1 1 27 6 1 0 6 1 6 8 2 0 12 28 0 1 0 1 1 6 0 2 0 2 28 6 0 11 17
1 5 15 1 11 14 29 0 0 11 13 1 5 10 1 11 6 29 6 0 11 9 1 5 4 1 10 17 30 0 0 11 5
1 4 18 1 10 10 30 6 0 11 1 1 4 12 1 10 2 31 0 0 10 18 1 4 6 1 9 16 31 6 0 10 14
1 4 1 1 9 8 32 0 0 10 11 1 3 16 1 9 2 32 6 0 10 8 1 3 12 1 8 16 33 0 0 10 5 1 3
6 1 8 10 33 6 0 10 3 1 3 0 1 8 4 34 0 0 9 19 1 2 15 1 7 18 34 6 0 9 16 1 2 12 1
7 12 35 0 0 9 13 1 2 8 1 7 6 35 6 0 9 10 1 2 4 1 7 0 36 0 0 9 8 1 2 1 1 6 16 36
6 0 9 5 1 1 18 1 6 10 37 0 0 9 2 1 1 14 1 6 4 37 6 0 9 0 1 1 10 1 6 0 38 0 0 8
18 1 1 7 1 5 16 38 6 0 8 15 1 1 4 1 5 11 39 0 0 8 13 1 1 0 1 5 6 39 6 0 8 11 1
0 16 1 5 2 40 0 0 8 9 1 0 12 1 4 18 40 6 0 8 7 1 0 9 1 4 14 41 0 0 8 5 1 0 6 1
4 10 41 6 0 8 3 1 0 3 1 4 6 42 0 0 8 1 1 0 0 1 4 2 42 6 0 7 19 0 11 18 1 3 18
43 0 0 7 17 0 11 16 1 3 14 43 6 0 7 15 0 11 13 1 3 10 44 0 0 7 13 0 11 10 1 3 6
44 6 0 7 12 0 11 6 1 3 3 45 0 0 7 10 0 11 4 1 3 0 45 6 0 7 8 0 11 2 1 2 17 46 0
0 7 6 0 11 0 1 2 14 46 6 0 7 5 0 10 18 1 2 10 47 0 0 7 4 0 10 1^ 1 2 7 47 6 0 7
2 0 10 13 1 2 4 48 0 0 7 1 0 10 10 1 2 1 48 6 0 6 19 0 10 8 1 1 18 49 0 0 6 17
0 10 6 1 1 16 49 6 0 6 16 0 10 4 1 1 13 50 0 0 6 15 0 10 2 1 1 10 50 6 0 6 14 0
10 0 1 1 7 51 0 0 6 12 0 9 18 1 1 4 51 6 0 6 11 0 9 16 1 1 2 52 0 0 6 10 0 9 14
1 1 0 52 6 0 6 8 0 9 12 1 0 17 53 0 0 6 7 0 9 10 1 0 14 53 6 0 6 6 0 9 8 1 0 12
54 0 0 6 5 0 9 6 1 0 10 54 6 0 6 4 0 9 5 1 0 8 55 0 0 6 3 0 9 4 1 0 6 55 6 0 6
1 0 9 2 1 0 3 56 0 0 6 0 0 9 0 1 0 0 56 6 0 5 19 0 8 18 0 11 18 57 0 0 5 18 0 8
17 0 11 16 57 6 0 5 17 0 8 15 0 11 14 58 0 0 5 16 0 8 14 0 11 12 58 6 0 5 14 0
8 13 0 11 9 59 0 0 5 13 0 8 12 0 11 6 59 6 0 5 12 0 8 10 0 11 4 60 0 0 5 11 0 8
8 0 11 2 60 6 0 5 10 0 8 6 0 11 1

Note, that (by the Book of Assise now in use) Bakers Inhabiting Corporate
Towns (in regard they pay scot and lot there) are allowed six shillings in
every Quarter of the middle-prised wheat for their charge in baking; And
Country or foreign Bakers, only four shillings: For example, when the
middle-prise of wheat is 30. s. the Quarter, for the Assise of Town Bakers you
are to find in this Table the Assise of Bread answering to 36. s. but for the
Assise of foreign Bakers, that of 34. s. And therefore (in that case) the
penny white loaf put to sale by Town Bakers ought to weigh nine ounces, eight
penny-weight; but that uttered by foreign Bakers nine ounces, ninteene
penny-weight, as appears in the Table.

III. An English penny sterling (being now three pence) shall weigh 32. grains
of Wheat taken out of the middle of the ear, and 20. pence do make an ounce,
12. ounces a pound, 8. pound a gallon, 8. gallons a London Bushel, which is the
eighth part of a Quarter, Stat. 31. E. 1. See Rastall, Weights, 7, 8.

IV. Stat. of the Pillory and Tumbrell, 51. H. 3. If a Baker or Brewer be
convict not to have observed the Assise, for the first, second, and third fault
he shall be amerced, except the offense be grievous and often, and then shall
the Baker to the Pillory, and the Brewer to the Tumbrell, or some other
correction.

V. Six men shall be sworn truly to gather all the measures and weights of the
Town, and of Mills, and upon the measures and weights, as also upon every
loaf shall the name of the Owner be distinctly written: After this, 12.
lawful men shall be sworn to make true answer on the Kings behalf upon
Articles, hereafter following; And the Bailiffe shall be commanded to bring the
Bakers and Brewers with their measures, and all things underwritten.

VI. Then first the Jury shall inquire the first, second, and third prises of
Wheat sold the last Marker day, and also how Barley and Oats; and upon how much
increase or decrease of the price of Wheat, the Baker ought to change the
Assise of his Bread, and how much it ought to weigh according to the present
price of Wheat; and whether the Town have a Pillory of convenient strength.

VII. Again, they shall inquire of the Assise and price of Wine, and the
Vintners names, and how they fell, and whether they utter that which is
wholesome for man's body: Also of the Assise of Ale in the Court of the Town,
how it is, and whether it be observed; and if the Brewers be found to have sold
contrary to the Assise, they shall be amerced, or else judged to the Tumbrell.

VIII. They shall inquire likewise of such as use double, or false weights or
measures; of Butchers and Cooks, that sell unwholesome meat; and of
Forestallers, which buy any thing before the accustomed time of Marker.

IX. Stat. de pistorib^s, 31. E. 1.

X. If a Bakers Bread be found a farthing weight lacking in two shillings six
pence or under, he shall be amerced; and if it pass the same number, he shall
suffer the punishment of the Pillory, which shall not be remitted for gold or
silver: And every Baker shall have a mark of his own for his bread.

According to which proportion, it seems that if a Bakers bread wants not a
penny weight in six ounces, he shall not incur amerciament.

XI. Every Pillory or Stretch-neck must be made of convenient strength, so that
execution may be done upon offenders without peril of their bodies

XII. The toll of a mill shall be taken according to custom, and the strength
of the water, either to the 20. or 24. corn; also by a measure agreeable to the
Kings standard, and by the race, and not by heap or cantell: And if the Farmors
find the Millers their necessaries, they shall take nothing besides their due
toll, in pain to be grievously amerced.

XIII. The assise of Ale shall be assessed, proclaimed, and kept according to
the price of corn whereof malt is made; And the Brewer shall not increase more
in a gallon, but according to the rate of six pence rising or falling in a
quarter of malt: And if he break the assise, for the first, second, and third
time he shall be amerced, but for the fourth he shall incur the Pillory.

XIV. A Butcher that sels Swines flesh mezled, or dead of the morin, shall for
the first time be amerced; for the second incur the Pillory; for the third be
imprisoned and make fine; and for the fourth shall forbear the town: And in
this manner shall it be done to all that offend in like case.

XV. The standard of bushels, gallons, and else shall be signed with an iron
seal of the Kings; and no measure shall be in any town, unless it do agree
with the Kings measure, and be marked with the seal of the Shire town.

XVI. If any do sell or buy with measures unsealed, and not examined by the
Mayor or Bailiffes, he shall be grievously amerced.

XVII. All measures shall be viewed twice every year; and if any be convict of
a double measure, he shall be imprisoned, and grievously punished.

XVIII. The Standard bushels, and else shall be in the custody of the Mayor and
Bailiffes, and of six lawful persons of the town being sworn, before whom all
measures shall be sealed: and no grain shall be sold by the heap or cantell,
except it be oats, malt, and meal. 24.

XIX. No forestaller shall be suffered to dwell in any town; and if any shall
be convict of that offense, for the first time he shall be amerced, and lose
the thing so bought; for the second shall have judgment of the Pillory; for the
third shall be imprisoned and make fine; and for the fourth shall abjure the
town: And like judgment also shall be given against his accessaries.

XX. An Ordinance for measuring land. 34. E. 1. See the Statute at large.

XXI. Stat. 14. E. 3.12. one weight and one measure throughout the Realm of
England: And the Treasurer shall cause to be made certain standards of bushels,
gallons, and weights of brass, and shall send them into every County, where
such standards are not already sent: and thereupon shall be assigned two
sufficient persons in every County (or more, if need be) to survey weights and
measures according to the standard, who shall have power to hear, determine,
and punish all those that shall be thereof found guilty, and to command the
Sheriff to impriso^ them till they shall make fine to the K.

XXII. The said Officers shall every year, the next day after the feast of S.
Michael, deliver their estreats into the Exchequer, and take for their expenses
a fourth part of that they can levy, and shall answer the King the other three
parts: And the fourth part also of that they cannot levy, shall be answered
them in the Excheq. and the other three parts shall be levied for the Kings use.

XXIII. Stat. 25. E. 3.9. Auncell weight shall be quite put out, and weighing
shall be by equal balance. Stat. 34. E. 3.5

XXIV. Stat. 25. E. 3.10. Every measure shall be according to the Kings
standard, and shall be striked without heap, saving the rents of Lords: And the
King will assign certain Justices in every County to inquire, hear, and
determine upon the points aforesaid, and to inflict punishment according to the
trespass.

XXV. Stat. 27. E. 3.10. There shall be one weight and one measure; and none
shall use any deceit in weighing commodities by an uneven tongue of the balance,
or by putting hand, foor, or other touch, in pain to forfeit the value of the
commodities so weighed, to suffer one years imprisonment, and to be ransomed at
the Kings will; and the party grieved shall recover quadruple damages.

XXVI. There shall be Justices assigned to inquire of such trespasses, and to
do right as well at the K. suit, as at the suit of the party.

XXVII. Stat. 13. R. 2.9.

XXVIII. Stat. 15. R. 2.4.

XXIX. Stat. 9. H. 5. Parl. 2.8.

XXX. Stat. 2. H. 6.11. The tun of wine shall contain 252. gallons English
measure, the pipe 126. gallons, the barrel of Herrings or Eccles shall contain
30. gallons, the butt of Salmon 84. gallons; and so of other lesser vessel
after the same rate.

XXXI. None shall import or make any vessel contrary to this act, in pain to
forfeit the commodities therein contained to the lord of the town where they
are found, whereof the prosecutor shall have the fourth part.

XXXII. Justices of P. and Majors, and Bailiffes (having power to inquire of
the peace) have power to hear and determine these offenses.

XXXIII. Stat. 8. H. 6.5. Every City, Borough and Town within England shall
have a common balance, with common weights sealed, and according to the
standard of the Exchequer, upon the common costs of the said City, Borough or
Town, in the keeping of the head Officer, or Constable there, in pain that the
City for such default shall forfeit x. l. to the King; the Borough v. l. and
every other Town xl. s. 39, 48.

XXXIV. At this balance all the inhabitants may weigh gratis; but a forreiner
shall for every draught under xl. l. pay a farthing; for a draught betwixt xl.
li. and an hundred an halfpenny; and for a draught betwixt an hundred and a
thousand a penny; whereof the weights shall be maintained, and the officers
which attend that service rewarded, at the discretion of the said inhabitants.

XXXV. None shall buy woollen yarn, unless he will make cloth thereof; nor use
weight or measure, or any other thing in place thereof, which is not sealed
according to the standard, nor set any thing to the same by way of tacking or
hiding, or in any other manner, that may increase the measure or weight, or let
the balance to have his natural course, upon the pain mentioned in the Statutes
of 27. E. 3.10. and 13. R. 2.9.

XXXVI. Justices of P. Majors, Bailiffes, and Stewards of Franchises have power
to hear and determine these offenses.

XXXVII. Stat. 9. H. 6.8.

XXXVIII. Stat. 11. H. 6.8. The Stat. H. 5.10. ( which see in Purveyors, 44.)
and 8. H. 6.5. shall be duly put in execution.

XXXIX. In every City, Borough, and Town there shall be a common bushel
sealed, and according to the standard, in like manner and pain as in the said
Stat. of 8. H. 6.5. is specified, for a common balance. 48.

XL. All Ju. of P. Majors, and head Officers shall have power to hear and
determine the offenses committed against the said Statutes by examination or
inquisition, and as well at the suit of the King, as of the party grieved.

XLI. The Mayor of London, and all other Majors and Bailiffes, in their oaths
shall be charged to keep and execute all the said Statutes, and shall be
accountable in the Exchequer for all profits and forfeitures which shall grow
due thereupon to the King.

XLII. Stat. 1. R. 3.13. The contents of every vessel of wine and oil: And they
shall not be sold until they be gaged by an officer to be appointed by the
King for that purpose.

XLIII. Stat. 7. H. 7.4. ( or according to Rastal cap. 3.) Measures and weights
of brass shall be fent to every City and Borough, there to be kept as their
treasure, according to which all measures and weights in every County shall be
reformed.

XLIV. The Mayor or chief Officer of every such place shall have a special
mark wherewith he shall seal the said measures and weights; and shall take for
sealing of a bushel a penny, and of every other measure an halfpenny; for an
hundred weight a penny, for half an hundred an halfpenny; and for every lesser
weight a farthing.

XLV. If he refuses or delayeth to seal them, or does any thing contrary to
this act, he shall forfeit xl. s. to be divided betwixt the King and the party
grieved, and to be recovered by action of debt, wherein no wager of law shall
be admitted.

XLVI. Justices of P. have power to hear and determine the said defaults.

XLVII. Stat. 11. H. 7.4. Measures and weights of brass shall be sent to
Cities and Boroughs there especially named.

XLVIII. Only Cities, Boroughs, and Market Towns shall be enjoined to have
common balances, weights and measures, and all other towns shall be excused,
notwithstanding the Statutes of 8. H. 6.5. and 11. H. 6.8. above mentioned.

XLIX. The Majors and chief Officers of the said Cities, Boroughs, and Market
Towns, which shall have delivered unto them such weights and measures sealed
with the letter H. crowned, (or with the first letter of the name of the
present King of England for the time being) shall have authority and power to
sign like weights and measures unto any of the Kings subjects (duly requiring
the same) taking for the marking of every bushel only one penny.

L. None shall use any other weights or measures but such as are so marked.

LI. Majors and chief Officers shall at least twice every year view all
measures and weights within their jurisdictions, and break or burn them which
they find defective, and also inflict punishment upon the offenders; viz. for
the first offense vi. s. viii. d. for the second xiii. s. iiii. d. and for the
third xx. s. and besides, adjudge them to the pillory.

LII. Two Justices of Peace (one Quorum) have authority as well by examination
as inquiry, to hear and determine the defaults of Majors and other head
Officers, and also of buyers and sellers contrary to this act; and to set fines
and amerciaments upon the offenders at their discretions: and the defective
weights or measures are to be forfeited and burnt.

LIII. Eight bushels of corn raised and stricken shall be accounted a Quarter,
14. l. a stone of Wool, and 26. stone, a sack: Howbeit this Act shall not
extend to any person selling or buying by water measure within shipboard,
whereof every bushel shall contain five pecks raised and stricken.

LIVE. Within the Cinque Ports the Lord Warden or his Lieutenant shall order the
weights and measures.

LV. Stat. 12. H. 7.5. A Bushel shall contain 8. gallons of Wheat; and every
gallon 8. pounds of Wheat, Troy weight; and every pound 12. ounces; and every
ounce 20. sterlings, (or penny weights;) and every sterling shall weigh 32.
grains of Wheat, that grew in the midst of the ear of Wheat: And a standard
for the Kings treasury is to be made according to this Assise.

LVI. Whereas the weights and measures sent down to Cities and Boroughs last
year by the Stat. of 11. H. 7.4. were found defective, others more perfect
shall be sent thither at the charge of the said Cities and Towns, according to
which all other weights and measures shall be regulated, upon the pains in the
said Statute contained.

LVII. Stat. 16. Car. 19. There shall be one weight and one measure according
to the standard of the Exchequer throughout the Realm, and every measure of
Corn shall be striked without heap.

LVIII. Whosoever shall sell by, or keep any other weight or measure, whereby
any thing is bought or sold after six months after this Sess of Parliament,
shall forfeit for every such offense 5. s. being thereof lawfully convicted by
the oath of one witness before a Justice of P. Mayor, or other head Officer,
(in their several precincts respectively) who shall have power to administer
an Oath in that behalf, which said forfeiture shall be levied by the
Churchwardens, and Overseers of the poor (or one of them) where the offense
shall be committed, to the use of the poor there, by distress and sale of
goods, rendering the overplus to the party offending; And in default of
distress it shall be lawful for any Justices of P. Mayor, or other head
Officer, (in their several precincts respectively) to commit such offender to
prison, until he shall pay the sum so forfeited.

LVIX. The Clerk of the Market of the King or Princes household, and his
deputies, shall only execute their office within the verge, and not elsewhere:
And head Officers of Corporations, and Lords of Liberties, and their deputies,
may execute theirs in their several precincts, as they might have done before
this Act was made.

LX. If any of the Officers aforesaid shall seal any weight or measure which
is not agreeable to the said standard, or shall refuse to seal such as are
agreeable thereunto, (the party paying only such fees for the allowance
thereof, as are warranted by Statute, or some ancient custom) they and their
deputies (respectively) shall for every such offense forfeit 5. l. to be levied
as aforesaid, to the use of the poor where the offense was committed.

LXI. If they shall take any other fine, fee, reward, or sum of money, then
what are allowed by Statute, or some such ancient custom, for the signing or
examination of any weights or measures, which have been formerly marked or
sealed; or shall impose any fine or amerciament without a legal trial of the
offense; or shall otherwise misdemean themselves in the execution of their
office, and shall be thereof lawfully convict; they shall forfeit for the first
offense, 5. l. for the second, 10. l. and for every other offense, 20. l. to be
levied, as aforesaid, to the use of the poor, where the offense was committed.

LXII. He that is fined or amerced by this Act, shall not be again punished for
the same offense by force of any former Law or Statute.

LXIII. This Act shall not extend to the measure of Rent-corn, nor to
Water-measure.

LXIV. If any Officer authorized for the execution of this Statute shall be
impleaded for any act he shall do therein, he shall plead the general Issue,
not guilty, and yet give this Statute, or any other special matter in
evidence; And if he be found not guilty, or the Plaintiff be nonsuited, he
shall recover treble costs.

Wild Foul.
Stat. 25. H. 8.11. None shall destroy or take away the eggs of any wild Foul,
in pain to forfeit for every egg of a Crane or Bustard so taken or destroyed
20. d. of a Bitter, Herne, or Shovelard 8. d. of a Mallard, Tele, or other wild
Foul 1. d. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor: And here
Justices of P. shall have power to inquire, hear and determine offenses of
this kind, as they use to do in cases of Trespass.

S. Hawks, 19, 20. Hunters, 7.

Wines.
I. Stat. 7. E. 6.5. None shall utter Wine by retaile, in any other place then
in Cities, Boroughs, Port Towns, or Market Towns, or in Gravesend,
Sittingborne, Tuxford, or Bagshot, in pain to forfeit 10. l. for every day
that they sell Wine otherwise.

II. None shall utter Wine by retaile in any City, Borough, or Corporation, but
by license of the most part of the Common Council, Aldermen, Burgesses, or
Communalty there, under their common Seal; nor in any City, Borough, Port
town, or Market town not Corporate, or in Gravesend, Sitting-borne, or
Bagshot, without license of the Justices of P. of the County in Sess. under
their Seals; in pain to forfeit 5. l. for every day that they sell Wine
otherwise: which said Officers, Communalty, and Justices have power to continue
or change such licenses at their discretions; but shall not license above two
in one place, in pain to forfeit 5. l. a piece except in these hereafter
following, in which it shall be lawful to license more then two, viz. in
London 40 York 8 Norwich 4 Westminster 3 Bristoll 6 Lincoln 3 Hull 4
Shrewsbury 3 Exeter 4 Salisbury 3 Gloucester 4 Westchester 4 Hereford east 3
Worcester 3 South-hampton 3 Canterbury 4 Ipswich 3 Winchester 3 Oxford 3
Cambridge 4 Colchester 3 Newcastle 4

III. None shall sell or utter Wine by retaile to be spent in his or their
mansion house, or in any other place in their tenure, by any color, craft, or
engine, in pain of 10. l.

IV. The abovesaid forfeitures shall be divided betwixt the King and the
prosecutor.

V. Justices of P. within every County and Corporation in Sessions, Stewards in
Leets, and Sheriffs in their Turns, have power to enquire (by the oaths of
twelve men) of all offenses committed against this Act; in which case the
forfeitures, which shall thereupon grow due, shall be divided betwixt the King
and the poor of the Town or place where the presentment shall be found.

VI. This Act shall not prejudice the liberties of either of the Universities;
nor charge any person offending, unless the suit be prosecuted within a year.

S. Weights, 6.

Witchcraft.
I. Stat. 1. Jac. 12. If any shall be lawfully convicted to have used or
practiced the invocation or conjuration of any evil spirit; or to have taken
up any dead person out of their grave, or any part of such person to be used in
witchcraft or enchantment; or to have used witchcraft, whereby any person has
been killed, pined, or made lame; they, together with their accessaries, shall
be adjudged felons, without benefit of Clergy.

II. If any shall be lawfully convicted to have taken upon them by witchcraft,
enchantment, charm, or sorcery to discover any place of hidden treasure, or
where lost or stolen goods are become, or to provoke any person to unlawful
love, or to destroy or impair any cattle or goods, or to hurt or destroy any
person in their body, although the same be not effected: they shall for the
first offense suffer one whole years imprisonment without bail, and once in
every quarter of that year, at a Market or Fair, stand upon the pillory six
hours, and there openly confess the offense committed: and for the second
offense shall suffer as a felon without benefit of Clergy: But here shall be no
loss of dower, or disherison of heir; and in these cases a Peer (being an
offender) shall be tried by his Peers.

Witness, S. Perjury, 8.

Wood.
Stat. 35. H. 8.17. Two Justices of Peace appointed by the more part of the
other Justices, have power (in a form there set down) to set out between the
lord of a wood and his commoners (when they cannot agree) the lords part, which
(being as near a fourth part as can be laid out) the said lord or owner shall
enclose or sell at his pleasure.

See Corns.

Wool.
Stat. 2, and 3. P. and M. 13. Justices of P. about Hallifax in Yorkshire, have
power to punish such of the inhabitants there, as having bought wool, do sell
the same again in any other place, and not in Hallifax; or to the richer sort
there, or to such as sell it again, and not to the poor to be wrought into yarn.

See Actions popular, 18.

Writs, S. Process. Supersedeas.

FINIS.

