THE MYSTERY OF GOD, Concerning the whole Creation, MANKIND. TO BE Made known
to every man and Woman, after seven Dispensations and Seasons of Time are
passed over, According to the COUNCIL of GOD, Revealed to his Servants.

By Gerrard Winstanley,

Psalm. 145. 13. Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy Dominion
endures throughout all generations.

Romans 11. 26. And so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written, There shall
come out of Sion the Deliverer, that shall turn away ungodlines from Jacob.

London, Printed by I. C. for Giles Calvert, at the Black-spread-Eagle, at the
West end of Paul's, 1649.

To my Beloved Countrymen of the County of LANCASTER.
DEar Country men, when some of you see my name subscribed to this ensuing
Discourse, you may wonder at it, and it may be despise me in your heart, as
David's Brethren despised him, and told him it was the pride of his heart to
come into the Battle, etc. but know, that Gods works are not like men's, he
does not always take the wise, the learned, the rich of the world to manifest
himself in, and through them to others, but he chooses the despised, the
unlearned, the poor, the nothings of the world, and fills them with the good
things of himself, when as he sends the empty away. I have writ nothing but
what was given me of my Father; and at the first beholding of this Mystery, it
appeared to be so high above my reach, that I was confounded and lost in my
spirit; but God, (whom I believe, is my teacher, for I have joy and rest in
him) left me not in bondage, but set me at liberty, and caused me to see much
glory in these following truths; and when God works none can hinder. It may be
some things herein may seem very strange at the first reading and you may cry
out, an error; an error; for this is usual, when the flesh cannot apprehend
and be are a truth of God, it brands it for an error, and rejects it as a
wicked thing; as the Jews, because they could not behold God in Christ, did
break out in bitterness of spirit against Christ, calling him a deceiver, and
that he preached blasphemy, and error, and never rested till they had killed
him; and our Lord Christ told his disciples, that he had many things to speak
to them, but they were not able to bear them as yet. And this I speak in
experience, that many truths of God, wherein I now see beauty, my heart at the
first hearing rose against them, and could not bear them; and therefore, if
what I have writ meet with such hard entertainment in any of your hearts, it is
no wonder, for I know that the flesh that is in you, lusts after envy, but it
is part of your bondage which God will deliver you from in due time: You shall
find that I call the whole power of darkness by the name Serpent, which
dwells in, and has taken every man and woman captive, and that God through his
Son Christ will redeem his own workmanship, mankind, from it, and destroy
the Serpent only; but do not count this a slight thing; for when God lets you
see into the Mystery of this iniquity, in the least degree of it, it will prove
too hard for you, and you will be nothing but death, curse, and misery.
Therefore, as you desire that God would manifest love to you, and make you
free, be not offended to hear, that God, who is love it self, has a season to
manifest his love to others that are lost, and quicken them that were killed,
while you were made alive, and that fell further under death, when you that
were lost are redeemed an hour or two before them. Jesus Christ shed his blood
wilingly for them that did put him to death; and the Saints of God rejoiced,
that Paul their bitter persecutor, was received to mercy with themselves: Why
then should you be offended, and think you are miserable, if your persecutors
and enemies should in Gods time be delivered from under the curse, and partake
of the glory of the City, together with you. It is much for the glory of God
for him to redeem, not part only, but all mankind from death, which his own
hands made, it is his revealed will so to do, therefore let it be your joy that
the will of your Father is, and shall be fulfilled; and do not think the
Saints are made unhappy, and God dishonored, if he heal them that were lost,
and that did not enter into the City, in the beginning of the great day of
judgment, for as he is honored in saving you of the City that were lost: so he
will be honored in redeeming these that lie under the power of the second
death. and that entered not into the City, seeing there was no difference
between you and them, till the will of God made the difference, in taking you
at the first and leaving them till the last hour; for Christ gave himself a
ransom for all, to be revealed in due time. God does not reveal his love to
all at one time but when he will; and God has some thing to do after the
resurrection, as he has, and will yet do much before that day. Well, I leave,
not questioning, but if any of you be unsatisfied with what I have writ, that
you will speak to me, and I hope God will be my wisdom and strength to confirm
it; since I had writ it, I met with more Scriptures to confirm it, so that it
is not a spirit of private fancy, but it is agreeable to the written Word.
Farewell.

Your Countryman, that loves the life of your Soul, Gerrard Winstanley.

These Particulars, and such like are contained in this Discourse.
What Mankind was, is, and shall be.

What the Serpent is, that caused Adams fall, and whence he sprang.

The Serpent is not Gods Creature.

What the bondage of death is, that Adam or all mankind lies under.

What the good, and what the bad Angels are.

God has cast the twofold murderer out of heaven, and what that is.

God will subdue the Serpent, not under part, but under the whole Creation,
Mankind.

When all creatures, except Man, are to be dissolved into nothing.

Seven Dispensations which God will have Mankind to pass through before he
subdue the Serpent under the feet thereof, and what they are.

The City Sion, or the Elect, are in gathering up to God in six of those
dispensations, in every season of time; and in the seventh the mystery of God
shall be finished, and not till then.

The City Sion, or the Elect, shall first be taken up to God, afterward they
that were cast into everlasting fire, while the Elect were in gathering, shall
be redeemed, and partake of the glory of the City.

What is meant by everlasting fire, and the word, for ever and ever, so often
used in Scripture.

God is honored in the salvation of Believers, and in the loss and shame of
unbeleevers.

Gods judging the serpent, is mankinds redemption What the day of Judgment is.

Though lost man drink the top, yet the Serpent shall drink the dregs of Gods
judgment, before the Son can deliver up the Kingdom to the Father.

What the first and second death is, or the first resurrection, and second
death.

What the Books are that must be opened at the great day of judgment.

God has been judging the Serpent since Adams fall, and will still sit upon
the Throne till the last day be finished, and yet all but one day of judgment

God hates none but the Serpent and his seed; he loves every branch of
mankind, and in his own seasons will manifest his love to every one, though to
some at the ninth, some at the tenth, and some at the last hour.

God has given a time, times, and half time to the Serpent now in the latter
days to reign in these.

How the Serpent under the names of Beast, Whore and false Prophet, makes use
of that time God has given him.

The bitterness that is in men's spirits in these days, is the smoke of the
Serpents torment, the restlesnesse of that wicked one day and night, and
beginning of his sorrows.

Three scruples against this mystery of God answered

A seasonable advice in the close.

The Mystery of GOD, concerning the whole Creation, MANKIND.
What mankind is, was, ana shall be.
WHen God had made Adam, there was then two Beings, distinct the one from the
other, that is, God himself, that was an uncreated Being, and the Humane
Nature, that was a created Being: And though Adam was Genesis 1.
pure and spotless, yet he had no other wisdom, 31.
beauty, and power, but what God had created. God himself, who is the infinite
and endless Being, did not dwell bodily in Adam, as he did dwell Col. 2. 9.
bodily in the Humane Nature, Jesus Christ, the second Adam, in aftertimes;
but a pure created wisdom, beauty, and power, did rule, dwell, and act in that
created Humanity.

And after God had made Adam, he put him into a Garden, called Eden, which was
full of Trees, Herbs, Creatures, for pleasure and delight Genesis 2. 8, 9.
, that he should dress it, and live contentedly in the use of all things
therein; which indeed is the History to the creatures capacity.

Yet thereby God declares, That Adam himself, Cant. 4. 12. 16. Isai. 58. 11.
or that living flesh, mankind, is a Garden which God has made for his own
delight, to dwell, and walk in, wherein he had planted variety of Herbs, and
pleasant Plants, as love, joy, peace, humility, knowledge, obedience, delight,
and purity of life.

But all these being created qualities, and a Being distinct from the Being of
God; God knew and saw, that there would spring up as a weed, and the first
fruits of it likewise, an inclinable principle, or spirit of self-love aspiring
up in the midst of this created, living Garden, and in the Genesis 3. 6.
midst of every plant therein, which is indeed, aspiring to be as God, or to be
a Being of it self, equal to, and yet distinct from God; as we see by visible
experience in every creature, as Horses, Cowes, Bears, and the like, there
appears an inclinable disposition to promote it self, or its own Being: But
this is but the fruit or invention of the creature after he was made, Ecces. 7.
29.
God did not make it.

Now as the purest water being let stand, does in time putrify, so I say, God
knew that the first fruit that this created Being would bring forth, would be
an aspiring desire to be equal, or like Genes. 2. 17.
to God himself, which if the creature delighted in, and so ate, or satisfied
himself in his own fruit, he should die; but if he forsook his own invention,
and stuck close to God, acknowledgeing his Being to be his life, and all in
all, then he should live.

Therefore God made it under a law, that the creature might know himself to be
a creature, and acknowledge God his maker to be above, Gal. 4. 5.
to whose command he was to subject himself; for when God had made him a pure
living creature, very good, and a being distinct from the being of God, yet in
the image of God, like two trees from whence fruit should grow, for Adam would
bring forth fruit to maintain his created being equal with God; and God would
bring forth fruit to maintain his uncreated being, and to swallow up all other
beings into himself, and he to become all in all to every Creature that 2 Cor.
5. 4.
he made.

Now says God, I have made thee the Lord of all my Creatures, and for thy use
I made them; and thou may make use of any that pleases thine eyes, and eat
of the fruit of any tree that delights thy taste, excepting the tree of
knowledge of good and evil that stands in the middle of the Garden, and of
that thou shall not eat; for in that day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
die the death. And this is the Law or Covenant that I have made between me,
that am a Being of my self; and thee, that art a Being created by me.

Now when Adam had taken of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, that was
in the Garden of Eden, the History, and did eat of it: It declares, that he did
eat likewise, and especially of the forbidden fruit that aspired up in himself
the living Garden of Eden the mystery, and gave way with content and delight to
that aspiring selfishnesse within himself, to be as John 4. 34.
God, knowing good and evil; for eating implies delight and satisfaction: for
Adam did not only eat of the tree in Edens Garden, but he had a secret
tickling delight arising in him, to be a more knowing man then God made him,
and thereby began to reject God; and not being content with the Being God made
him in, which if he had been content with, he had acknowledged God all in all,
and the only infinite and one Being, that shall stand unmovable.

But he eats, delights in that aspiring Weed, (or Mystery of Iniquity) for
himself to have a Being above, equal to, or distinct from God: So that the
ground of Adams fall, arises up first in Adams heart, as fruit growing up from
a created Being; for in that it was in 1 Kings 8. 18.
his heart to do evil, God imputes it to him for evil.

Well, this selfishnesse in the middle of the living garden, Adam, is the
forbidden fruit, and this is called the Serpent, because it winds it self
into every creature, and into every created faculty, and twists it self round
about the Tree, Mankind.

And when Adam put forth his hand to take, and eat of the fruit of the Tree, in
the History, his hand was guided thereunto by this Serpent, whose secret
whisperings he delighted in: And truly this delight in self, was the eating,
and it was the chief forbidden fruit that grew up in the middle of the living
garden, Adam, which God forbad him to eat of, or delight in: But Adam did begin
to delight in that inward fruit of wickedness; and then by the motion thereof,
took the fruit of the Tree in the middle of Eden, and delighted his outward
senses therewith, and so brake the Law and Covenant of God, fell from his
purity, and died, according to the word of his Maker, That in the day thou Romans
8. 7
eatest, thou shall dye. And all the faculties and powers of that living
created Being, Adam, are now become absolute rebellions, and enmity it self
against the Being of Godl^

And that garden of pleasant plants, Adam, is become a stinking dunghill of
weeds, and brings forth nothing but pride, envy, discontent, disobedience Genesis
6. 5.
, and the whole actings of the spirit, and power of darkness.

And if the creature should be honored in this condition, then God would be
dishonored, because his command is broke, and yet the creature remains
glorious, therefore he died.

And if so be the creature be utterly lost and perish, and this garden should
never be so dressed, as to bring forth fruit to Gods delight, then likewise God
would suffer dishonor, because his work is spoiled in his hand, and there is
no hopes of recovery. But the work of God shall be restored from this lost,
dead, weedy, and enslaved condition, and the fruit of the created Being shall
utterly perish and be ashamed Jer. 18. 4.
.

And things being thus considered, God is pleased to lead us to see a little
into these two Col. 1. 13.
mysteries: First, the mystery of Iniquity, or work of the Serpent, which was
the aspiring Isai. 66. 5.
fruit of pride, and self-love, that sprung up in the created Being, to be as
God, and so to be an absolute Being of himself, as God is an absolute 2 These.
2. 4, 5.
Being of himself; and so this selfe-honouring would sit in Gods Temple, that
is, the humane 1 Cor. 15 25.
Nature, which God made a Garden for Himself to walk in; and if that Spirit of
Self-love Heb. 1. 13.
could not be destroyed, and the Humane Nature recovered from that bondage, God
would suffer much dishonor; because he being glorious and happy in himself,
has made a creature to be a vexation and scourge to him, and cannot subdue it.
And this mystery of iniquity, or power of darkness, has, does, and will fight
against the Being of God, till it be taken out of the way, and quite subdued;
as the Father has promised he will subdue it under the feet of his Son, the
Humane Nature.

Then secondly, God leads us to the mystery of himself, and makes us able to
see into the knowledge of that great work that he is in working: and that is,
to destroy this Serpent out of the flesh, and all Beings, that is enmity
against him, and to swallow up his Creature 1 Cor. 15. 28. 54.
Man into himself, that so there may be but one only pure, endless, and
infinite Being, even God himself all in all, dwelling and walking in this
garden, Mankind, in which he will plant pleasant fruit trees, and pluck up all
weeds. Cant. 4. 16.

Since Adam fell, to this present day, we see the wisdom, power, and
affection that dwells and rules in Man, leads him any way, either to just or
unjust actions, so that Self may be preferred, not caring whether God be
honored, yea, or no.

Now the mystery of God is this, he will destroy Isai. 61. ^.
and subdue this power of darkness, under the feet of the whole Creation,
Mankind, and Luke 4. 18.
every particular branch, Man and Woman, deliver him from this bondage and
prison, and dwell Jer. 23. 6
in his own House and Garden himself; so that the wisdom, power, love, life,
beauty, and Spirit of truth that dwells and rules in Man, may be God himself,
even the Lord our Righteousness, and no other being or power, but himself.
And as God did dwell bodily in the Humane Nature, Jesus Christ, who was the
first manifestation of this great mystery of God, so Prove. 8. 22, 23.
when his work is completed, he will dwell in the whole Creation, that is,
every man and woman without exception, as he did dwell in that one branch,
Jesus Christ, who is the pledge, or first fruits.

And therefore you shall find, that when Adam had broke the Covenant, and died
by the Law, God did not denounce an utter destruction, without recovery to the
Creation, Mankind, which was his own work, which his own wisdom and power did
produce and bring forth. But he pronounces the final curse against the
Serpent, or man's work, which was the fruit that sprung up in, and was acted
both inwardly Genesis 3. 15
and outwardly by the Creation, or created Being, in rebellion against the
Being of God: Therefore sin is properly man's own act.

The words of the Father run thus, speaking to the Serpent: I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed, it stall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel: So that the Serpent must be killed;
for bruise his head, and he dies. Now the curse that was declared to Adam, was
temporary: That he should undergo sorrows, and suffer a bruising in his
out-member; but not a killing, though Adam had killed himself: so that he has
brought himself under the bondage; God will not strike him now he is down,
and make his death without recovery, but God will destroy death, and quicken
Adam, or Mankind again, Heb. 2. 14.
that we may all see our salvation is from God, though our misery was from our
selves, that so whosoever glories, may glory only in the Lord.

And now by the way mind one thing, That when this Serpent rules, and causes
the creature to act, such actings become the creatures loss and shame; but
when God acts in the creatures life, glory, and redemption; to advance Luke 9.
23.
self, and deny God, is the creatures death. But to deny self, and to
acknowledge God, is the creatures life; before Adam acted Rebellion, this
aspiring spirit of pride, to be as God, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
led the humane nature, to disobey God; And ever since the fall, the same
selfish spirit, leads every man and woman captive at his will, and inslaves
them in that prison, and bondage, and darkness, to walk in ways directly
contrary to the God of light: and yet many times persuades them, that they do
God good service; let a man read, hear, study, preach, pray, perform actions of
Justice; yet if God be not merciful to the man, this power of darkness will
deceive him; making him to conceit or think he pleases God, when the truth is,
he serves but self all the time, it is so full of secret strong delusions.

Therefore I say, the mystery of God is this, God will bruise this Serpents
head, and cast that murderer out of heaven, the humane nature, wherein it dwells
in part, as in the man Christ Jesus: And he will dwell in the whole creation in
time, and so deliver whole mankind out of that bondage.

This I see to be a truth, both in my own experience, and by testimony of
scripture, as God is pleased to teach me.

As first, by experience, I shall instance in my self, who am a branch of Adam;
or part of the humane creation: And I lay under the bondage of the Serpent, my
own invention, as the whole creation does from Adams fall, and I saw not any
bondage; but since God was pleased to manifest his love to me, he has caused
me to see that I lay dead in sin, weltring in blood and death, was a prisoner
to my lusts, for though through his grace, I saw pride, covetousness, envy,
uncleanness, ignorance, injustice, and the whole body of unbelief, working and
ruling in me; yet I was ashamed men should know it, this selfish spirit sought
to hide himself so close; and still made provision to have the will of these
lusts satisfied in me.

And before God manifested his love to me, I delighted in the favor of these
weeds, but since God revealed his Son in me, he lets me see, that those things
wherein I did take pleasure, were my death, my shame, and the very power of
darkness, wherein I was held, as in a prison; so that although I felt this
deadly body, or wicked one act within me, and although I have been troubled at
it, sighed and mourned, strove against it, and prayed against it; yet I could
not deny self, and the more I used means to beat him down, as I thought, the
more did this power of darkness appear in me, like an overflowing wave of
wickedness, drowning me in slavery, and I saw I was a wretched man, wrapped in
misery, I mourned that I was so rebellious against God, and I mourned to see I
had no power to get out of that bondage of selfishness. And so I continued till
God was pleased to pull me out of selfish striving and selfish actings, and made
all means lie dead before me, and made me dead to such means as I made use of,
and thought that deliverance must come that way: And so made me to lie down at
his feet, and to wait upon him, and to acknowledge, that unless God did
swallow me up into his own being, I should never be delivered, for I saw that
the power within me strived to maintain its being, against the being of God;
and all that while I was a stranger to God, though among men, I was a
professor, as I thought, of God.

But now God has set me free from that bondage, so that it rules not, though
sometime it seems to face me, like a daring corquered enemy, that cannot hurt.
And likewise God causes me to see with much joy and peace of heart, into this
mystery of himself, that his eternal council, which was grounded upon the Law
of love, himself, was not to destroy me, nor any of his own creation; but only
the Serpent, which is my work, or the first fruit that sprung up out of the
creation; which is our bondage, and that he himself will become my self, and
liberty, and the life and liberty of his whole creation. And in these two
things he has caused me greatly to rejoice.

First, I see and feel, that God has set me free from the dominion and
overruling power of that body of sin. It raines not as a King, Romans 8. 13.
though sometimes it appears creeping in like a slave, that is easily whipped
out of doors by strength of God.

Secondly, I rejoice in perfect hope and assurance in God, that although this
Serpent, or murderer do begin, by reason of any temptation, or outward
troubles, to arise, and endeavor to act in rash anger, in pride, in
discontent, or the like, as sometimes it does, yet every appearance of this
wicked one in me becomes his further ruin, and shall never rise to rule and
enslave me as formerly; for God thereby takes the occasion to call me up higher
into himself, and so makes me to see and possess freedom, in my own experience
from him, every day more and more; I am not still a captive, in a being of
darkness distinct from God, but God has freed me therefrom, and taken me up
into his own being; so that now his wisdom, his love, his life, his power, his
joy and peace, is mine, I glory here, I can glory no where else. And here I
wait upon God with a sweet peace, under reproaches, under losses, under
troubles of the world, being that dispensation of his patience which God will
have me wait upon him under, till I partake of the full enjoyment of this
inheritance, which I have fully, in hope and assurance, but in possession, but
in part.

And as God is pleased thus to deal with me, or with any branch of Adam, in the
same kind; so he has caused me to see, and to rejoice in the sight, that he
will not lose any of his work, but he will redeem his own whole Creation, to
himself, and dwell, and rule in it himself, and 1 Cor. 1. 13.
subdue the Serpent under his feet, and take up all his Creation, Mankind, into
himself, and will become, the only, endless, pure, absolute, and infinite
being, even infinitely for ever all in all, in every one, and in the whole,
that no flesh may glory in it self, but in the Lord only.

But this mystery of God is not to be done all at once, but in several
dispensations, some whereof are past, some are in being, and some are yet to
come; but when the mystery of God is absolutely finished, or, as the Scriptures
say, The Son has delivered up the Kingdom to the Father, this will be the
upshot or conclusion, 1 Cor. 15 24.
that Gods work shall be redeemed, and live in God, and God in it; but the
creatures 1 John 4. 15.
work without God, shall be lost and perish, Man, Adam, or whole Creation of
Mankind, which is Gods work, shall be delivered from Corruption, Bondage,
Death, and Pain, and the Serpent that caused the fall, shall only perish, and
be cast into the lake; and God will be the same in the latter end,
accomplishing what in the beginning he promised, that is, to bruise the
Serpents head, and subdue him under the feet of his Son, the humane nature,
wherein he will walk, as a Garden of pleasure, and dwell himself for ever.

I shall now in the next place mention some Scriptures as a Testimony that does
countenance this truth, that God will not lose any part of his Creation,
Mankind, but will redeem and preserve it, both in particular, and in whole, and
will destroy nothing but the Serpent, that wicked one, that would be a being
equal to, or above God; but Gods work shall stand, and the creatures work
shall perish and suffer loss.

The first Scripture I shall mention, is, 1 Cor. 3. 13. Every man's Work shall
be made manifest, 1 Cor. 3. 13.
for the day shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by fire: and the
fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is. That is, whether it be of
God, or of the Serpent. If any man's work abide, he shall receive a reward, that
is, he shall live in God, and God in him, because God in the man, was the
strength of his work, If any man's work shall be burned, he shall suffer loss,
but he himself shall be saved, (mark this) yet so, as by fire; not by material
fire of purgatory, but by the bright, and clear coming of God into this man,
whose indwelling presence, like fire, burns up the stubble of men's own
inventions, and purges the dross from the gold, and divides between the marrow
2 These. 2. 8.
and the bone, that is, makes a separation between his own work and man's work.

So likewise Rev. 20. 10. And the Devil, or murderer, that deceived the
Nations, was east into the lake of fire and brimstone, and v. 14. And death and
hell were cast into the lake of fire: the Nations were not cast in at this time,
for this Scripture I believe points out the great day of Judgment, when Nations
shall be delivered out of that fire, and there shall be no more curse, death,
sorrow, nor pain lie upon any part of the Creation, but all tears shall be
wiped from its eyes, and the Serpent only shall perish in the Lake; for after
that the City-work is finished, and the number of the Elect gathered in, and
established in glory; then the dispensations of God, who is the tree of Rev.
21. 24.
life, send forth a healing virtue to the Nations, and then the Nations
likewise that are Rev. 22. 1. 2.
saved, or those that were lost, while the City or Elect was in gathering, do
now bring their glory into the City likewise; for every man shall be saved,
says God through Paul, without exception, though some at the ninth hour, some
at the tenth hour, and some at the last hour; and this salvation of every
man, or the making of the whole creation, a pure River of the water of life,
clear as Cristall, proceeds from the throne of God and the Lamb, that is, from
the judgment seat of God, judging, condemning, and killing the Serpent, and so
restoring his own creation to purity and life.

So likewise 2 Cor. 5. 4. For we in this Tabernacle do groan, being burdened,
not for that we would be uncloathed, but clothed upon: that mortality might be
swallowed up of life. By mortality here, is not meant the laying of the body
in, or raising of it out of the dust or grave, but it is the very death which
Adam, by disobeying, fell under, and that is the death of his purity, or pure
being, which is a falling from God into a being directly opposite to the being
of God; as rottonness of flesh, is death to soundness of flesh, darkness is the
death to light; for whereas before the fall, Adam knew God, loved and
acknowledged God, and was in every part so pure, as God said, Behold, it is all
very good, but after the fall he became envious, proud, disobedient, full of
all lusts and concupiscence of evil, even as we find by experience our
bondage; and so from a friend, he fell to be enmity against God, of a pure
creature, he became unclean, and of a Child of Gods delight, he fell to be a
Child of wrath; and of a pure garden, he became a stinking Ephesians: 2. 3.
dunghill; and this is the death or mortality, which not only Adam in
particular, but all the branches of Adam, men and women, lie under. Even under
a corrupt Being.

Now this rottenness, or death, under which the whole Creation is fallen, and
lies in bondage too, it is that Serpent, or power of darkness which Paul
desires might be swallowed up of life; that is, that God, who is life, would be
pleased to come and dwell in him, and in his creation, and so cast out that
mortality, or strong man that is so strongly armed: and this is the Serpent
that God has pronounced the dreadful curse against; for this is man's work,
and it must be destroyed. I conceive God calls it man's own invention, because
it was the first fruit that the creature brought forth; after he was made, and
left to himself, even this aspired and sprung up in him, to which he gave
consent to promote Self, and become as God.

I shall only mention one Scripture more, though I believe I could bring above
a hundred Scriptures that do countenance this truth. And if you seriously
mind what you read, you shall find that this is the Royal blood that runs
through the golden veins of the writings of the Prophets and Apostles: It is
Romans 8. from verse. 19. to 26. but for shortness sake I shall mention only the
21. Romans 8. 19.
and 22. verses, Beeause the creation it self also shall be delivered (as well
as we that are members of the elected City) from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the children of God: For we know (by our
experience) that the whole creation (of which we are branches) groaneth and
travelleth in pain together until now. By Creature, or whole Creation, I see
it to be a clear and soul-comforting truth, to be only mankind, for whose
use, or for the time that God has determined to finish this great design, to
make his garden Man, a garden of pleasure to himself, when he has plucked up
all the weeds, and so husbanded the ground, that weeds shall never grow again.
I say, all the time, God has made all other creatures for man's use, or rather
to serve his own providence, while he is in working this great mystery about
man, and when the work is finished, then all other creatures shall be
dissolved into nothing as at first; for as God is a Spirit, he delights in
spiritual things, but these outward Rev. 6. 14.
creatures were made for the pleasure, profit, and use of man, while he is
carnal, and Heb. 1. 11, 12.
stands in a Being distinct from God: and when man is made spiritual, and
swallowed up in life, or taken up into the Being of God, there will then be no
more use or need of these outward creatures, as Cattle, Corn, Meat, Drink, and
the like; nor of Sun, Moon, nor Star, nor of Creature-light, either
literal or mystical; for God and the Lamb shall dwell in the City, and in
the whole Creation, and be the light thereof, as the Lord Christ said, In that
Rev. 21. 23.
day you shall know, that I am in my Father, and John 14. 20.
you in Me, and I in you. And, labor not for the meat that perishes, but for
that which endures to eternal life.

Some may say, If this be true, that God will save every one, then I will live,
and take my pleasure in sin, and eat, drink, and be merry, and take all
delights while I live, for I am Gods workmanship, and he will not lose his own
work, I shall be saved.

But if he will not lose his work, yet thy work shall perish, think upon that;
and truly I believe that the Serpent in thee, will make such a merry
conclusion, and cry down this truth of God for an error presently in others,
because it bears testimony of his destruction, as the Jews called Christ a
deceiver, or a man of errors John 7. 12.
, and killed him, because he bore witness that their deeds were evil.

Well, make that conclusion and take liberty to sin, yet for all that know,
thou enslaved creature, that thou shall be brought to judgment, and thou shall
not escape punishment; for though sin be sweet in thy mouth, as it was in
Judas, to take the 30 pieces of silver, and to act treachery against his
Master, it will be bitterness in the belly, as it was to him; for the jealousy
of the Lord shall burn hot against thee, so that thou shall call upon the
mountains Rev. 6. 15, 16.
to cover thee from his presence, and wish that thou had never been born; and
all the sorrows spoke of in Scripture, shall overtake thee, and such
presumptuous sinners as thou art; and thy joy shall be turned into mourning,
and thou shall be cast into the everlasting fire, which God has prepared and
appointed Mat. 25. 42.
for the Serpent and his seed, or for the Devil and his Angels: and while thou
art in it, the worm of thy gnawing conscience shall never die, nor the fire of
Gods wrath, or the sense of his anger upon thee, shall never go out, and shall
be a pain more intolerable, then the plucking out of the right eye, or the
cutting off the right hand.

But now lest scruples should arise in others, as though I writ contradictions,
or as though I made God changeable. First, to bid a sinner depart into
everlasting fire, and yet afterward take him out again. Now to give answer
hereunto.

First know, that this was and is the great mystery, work, and counsel of
God, after he had made a visible creature, in a pure Being, distinct from
himself, his purpose being to destroy all the inventions and actings of this
creature, that did spring up and arise from the creatures Being, as a creature,
and not from Gods acting in the creature: and God foresaw that the first
buddings of this creature would be a desire to maintain it Self, or
Creature-Being, and so cast God off; therefore God made him under a Law, that
if his creature did consent to that selfish desire, he should die; if not, he
should have lived a pure Being still, though distinct from God, yet under his
protection, as a Creator. Now every thing that is in, or about the Creature,
that is of God, shall stand; but every thing that is in, or from the creature,
that is not of God, shall fall and perish.

Therefore to proceed a little further, that this truth may shine in its own
beauty, God does teach me to see, that every action, or dispensation of God, is
called a Spirit, or an Angel, and every action, or aspiring principle that rise
up in Adam, which led him to disobedience, it pleased God that it should have a
Being, and likewise be called a Spirit, but it is a dead Being, and a Spirit of
darkness, quite opposite to the God of Light and Life, and God gives it the
name of Serpent, Dragon, Murderer, wicked one, and unclean Spirit, because it
twisted it self into the middle of the Creation, and was an aspiring to be
like God, but God did not make the nature of it; for it was the first fruits of
a created Being, without God.

Now God is pleased to make known himself in diverse dispensations in the
carrying on of this great work of his.

As first, he declares himself by way of a Law, In the day thou eatest, thou
shall die; now 2 Cor. 3. 6.
this Law, though it was holy, just, and good, yet it was a killing word, or
the killing Letter, for it took hold of Adams disobedience, and flew him; so
that word, Thou shall dye, because flesh, for all flesh broke the Covenant in
Adam, and all flesh died, and all humane flesh was cast under that dispensation
of death, and the more we stir to climb up to God by the works of the Law,
the more we entangle our selves in death; for by the works of the Romans 3. 20.
law no flesh shall be saved.

And here is two murderers which mankind is to be delivered from, before it
can live again; First, this word of the Law, which is holy, just, and good,
which ties the creature only to acknowledge the Being of God, and no other:
when the creature began to mind another Being, this righteous Law killed him;
for it is not the King, but the Kings Law that hangs an offender; and if the
rigorous Law stands still in force, no flesh can be saved, because every man
and woman are selfish, and minds a sinful Being, opposite to God, therefore
the condemning power of the Law is to be taken away.

The second murderer is the Creatures own invention, or aspiring spirit to be
as God, knowing good and evil, or to maintain Self, and this killed the
creature, and threw him under the curse of the righteous Law, because this
would be a Being equal with God, and acknowledge another being besides God,
whereas there is no other righteous Being to be acknowledged, but only God, or
what is in God, or God in it.

Now in the first discovery of Gods counsel and purpose to the Creature, if he
be redeemed, this compound murderer must be cast out of heaven by a strong
hand, and outstretched arm of God, so that the Being of God might be
preserved, the Law of God kept pure, and yet fallen man redeemed. As first,
this dispensation of death, Do this, and live; Do not this, and die, must be
cast out of Heaven, that is, out of Gods hand, and God must not, in the
redeeming of him, appear to the creature under that dispensation: for if he
do, it will still hold the lost creature under death and bondage: and if the
creature were made pure again, and left still to deal with the Law by his
created strength only, as Adam was, truly he would fall again; for a mere
created strength, being distinct from God the Creator, would fall again; for no
Being can stand pure, but such a created Being as God is pleased to dwell
bodily in; for every opposite Being will seek to advance it self.

Therefore if God redeem his creature from death, he must appear absolutely a
God of Isai. 25. 12.
love, under no other dispensation but the law of love, doing all in, and for
the creature, and 2 Cor. 3. 7.
thus in the Gospel he does; for this is the Spirit that quickens and saves the
creature: and 1 John 4. 9.
when this Word of Love was made Flesh, it was the first discovery from God, to
assure the creature of his redemption from death; and this was when Jesus
Christ, or God was manifested in flesh, working, doing, suffering all things
for the creature, pardoning, accepting, and taking the creature freely into
communion with God, by Gods own power, and for his own name sake, promising
never to remember disobediences any more, but would blot out that handwriting,
the Law, of Do and live, not do and die. And now the killing letter, or
murderer is cast out of heaven, out of Gods hand, God will never have that to
stand between him and his creature any more; but he himself, who is the Law
of Love, even Love it self, will dwell and rule a King of Righteousness in
the Creature, and be the Creatures wisdom, 1 John 4. 8. 15.
strength, life, joy, and comfort, and his All in All.

But secondly, the other murderer, which is worse then this, must be cast out
of heaven too, or else the creature cannot live, and that is the Serpent, or
this aspiring spirit in him to promote Self: for so long as the creature Rev.
12. 8, 9.
acknowledges any other being but Gods, he is lost; and truly I think none can
be ignorant of this, that the spirit of selfishnesse is in himself, and in
every man and woman, therefore it must be cast out of this heaven, Mankind,
before it can live again to God.

When Jesus Christ, or God in Man appeared, John 1. 14.
then the word of Love was made flesh, That the seed of the woman shall break
the Serpents head. And when Jesus Christ fought the great battle, or rather
God and the Serpent Rev. 12. 7.
did fight in heaven, that is in the creation, the man Christ Jesus, and God,
or the anointing, prevailed, he cast the Serpent out of heaven, out of that
humane flesh which he took up as a part for the whole, or as an earnest of the
Fathers love to all the rest; for I believe that all temptations that Jesus
Christ met withal, Mat. 4. etc.
(for in all things he was tempted like unto us) they were but the strivings of
the Serpent, as he did strive in Adam that fell, to maintain its being opposite
to God; but Jesus Christ, or the anointing in flesh, being not a created power,
but the power of God in that created 2 Cor. 5. 19.
humanity, did not consent as the first Adam did, for he with strong hand
resisted the whispering of the Serpent, and would acknowledge no other Being
but God, and so prevailed, and cast the Serpent out of flesh, and has obtained
a legal power to quicken whom he will, or Joh. 5. 21
to cast the Serpent out of what man or woman he will: so that it is this
anointing that sets us at liberty from the bondage of sin and the Serpent, and
he himself becomes our life and strength, and the Lord our Righteousness.

And when Michael our Prince had prevailed Rev. 12. 10.
over the Dragon, then there were voices and Songs heard in heaven, that is, in
the creation, Mankind; Now is come salvation and strength, and the Kingdom of
our God, and the power of his Christ; for the accuser of our Brethren is cast
down, which accused them before God day and night. This song, I conceive, was
sung by the Elect, the City Sion, or Saints of God, who are first enlightened,
and they sing Glory to God in the name of the rest that shall be redeemed; for
the Serpent that accused the Creation before God, is cast out in part for the
whole, or a part for an earnest penny to the whole.

So that now mark, The Law of God that did accuse and condemn the offending
creature, this is cast out of Gods hand, and hereafter he will be a God of
love, in an entire dispensation of love; I speak as God does manifest himself
now under the Gospel and as he ever will be when the creature is perfectly
redeemed.

And the Serpent, which is the Sting, or Worm to the Creatures conscience,
because it was still acting a self-being, opposite to God, and then accusing
the creature before God day and night, by the force of a condemning Law, for
disobediences, which is the creatures bondage and misery; for the spirit of sin
within, this enslaves him, and the condemning Law, this casts him from God, and
so throws the sinner under utter darkness and sorrow. I, but for the
creatures comfort, this Serpent is cast out of heaven, the Creation likewise,
and though for the present many poor creatures lie under the bondage, yet the
time is drawing near that they shall be delivered, and the wicked one himself,
the Serpent, shall be cast into the Lake, and perish for ever. Indeed the
Serpent would have Gods created work to die with him, for he knows he must dye
irrecoverably, but God will redeem his creature, and the Serpents head only
shall be bruised, which will be his death.

Well, this twofold murderer is cast out of Heaven, that is, the condemning
Law is cast out of Gods hand by Jesus Christ, the Law of grace and love; and
the Serpent is cast out of the creation in part, and shall be cast out of the
whole when the Mystery of God is finished by the power of the same anointng,
Jesus Christ; for God the Father is reconciled, and he has taken the creature
into fellowship with himself: For God was in the Man Christ Jesus, reconciling
2 Cor. 5. 19, 20.
the world, that is, mankind, to himself, not imputing their sins to them.

Now this Mystery, or work of God is finished fully and completely in a
twofold sense, but not in a third, as yet; and when this third term is
finished, then the whole work is finished, and not till then.

First, in Gods everlasting counsel and purpose, this work was done from all
eternity, before the foundation of the world was laid, and God declared so
much, when he uttered this word, I will put enmity between thee and the woman,
and between thy seed and her seed, he shall break thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel. Here the Curse and Death is sealed up to the Serpent, but
here is Mercy and Redemption sealed up to the creature; the creature shall be
redeemed, but he shall go through bruisings, or pain:

Secondly, it is completely done in action, in the pledge and earnest-penny.
When God was manifested in flesh, in the Man Christ Jesus, who was born of a
woman. And this is the first fruit of the Fathers love manifested and sealed up
to the whole Creation, Mankind, Col. 1. 9. 1 John 4. 15.
that as he dwells bodily in that part of humane nature, Jesus Christ, so in
time, according to his own counsel and pleasure, he will dwell bodily in the
whole creation likewise; therefore says Christ, I go to my Father and your
Father, to my God and your God; and he does not only speak to his twelve
Disciples, but to all others that shall believe through their word. And when
the Kings of the Earth, and the Nations are healed by the leaves of the Tree
Rev. 22. 1, 2.
of Life, and so bring in their glory into the City Sion, as it shall be in the
latter end; I believe Rev. 21. 24.
there will not be a man that partakes of humane nature, nor woman neither,
that shall not partake of faith and so believe in God through Christ the
anointing, that fills all, and is all in all.

But now in the third sense, the work is not yet completed in the whole
Creation; for God is pleased to do this work in length of time, by degrees,
calling some at one hour, and some at another, out of the Serpents bondage,
Acts 17.
and the times and seasons God has reserved to himself.

Therefore in the further clearing of this Truth, God is pleased to show forth
six dispensations or discoveries of himself more, which he will have the
creature to pass through before he finish his work, to cast the Serpent,
Death, and Hell, into the Lake, and before he Rev. 20. 14.
himself appear to be the Tree of Life on each side, and in the middle of the
pure River of the water of Life: which I conceive is the Rev. 22. 1.
whole creation, Man, perfectly redeemed; which River proceeded out of the
Throne of God, and of the Lamb; take notice of that.

The second Dispensation, for there are seven Dispensations in the whole* the
first I have spoken of already, which was, when God gave the Law to Adam, as
soon as he had made him: And now the second lies in that first promise, or
manifestation of love to the Creature, and curse to the Serpent, in these
words, The seed of the woman shall bruise the Genesis 3. 15.
Serpents head, and this continued from Adam till Abraham.

Then the third dispensation or discovery of God is more clear then the
former, for to Abraham he speaks more particularly; he does Genesis 18. 18.
not still say in general terms, The seed of the woman, etc. But in thy seed,
Abraham, all nations of the earth shall be blessed, and so points-out more
directly in what lineage and generation of mankind, God would first appear in
to bruise the Serpents head; and this dispensation continued from Abraham till
Luke 1. 55.
Moses time, and our Fathers embraced these promises, and rejoiced in them.

The fourth dispensation is from Moses, till God manifested himself in flesh,
or till Jesus Christ was born of Mary, that was one of the house of David, of
the lineage of Abraham; and this dispensation is more then the former, for Heb.
10. 7.
God, by types, figures, ceremonies, and shadows, did more manifestly set
forth his love to his creature, and his wrath to the Serpent; when the
sacrifice was slain and offered, God received an atonement, it being a type of
Gods in-dwelling in flesh, or a shadow of Christ, the Lamb, the substance of
all those sacrifices.

And when Achan that troubled Israel was Josh. 7. 26.
put to death in the valley of Achor, the fierceness of Gods wrath was turned
away. And I believe God does teach us by the Prophet Hosea 2. 14. where he
says, I will give the valley Hos. 2. 14.
of Achor for a door of hope, which was the place of Achans death; so when the
Serpent, who is our trouble, is subdued and killed in the valley, humane flesh,
then the dispensation of Gods anger is turned away from us.

The fifth dispensation is from the time that God was manifested in flesh, in
the person Jesus Christ, to the time that he appeared in the flesh and person
of his Saints likewise; and this is more clear then the former, for Jesus the
anointed, was the substance of all those types and shadows of the Mosaicall
Law, for now God does manifestly appear to dwell in flesh, in his creature, and
he has broke the Serpents head, and cast him out of heaven (his creation) and
now this Jesus Christ is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world,
that is, destroys the Serpent, who is the sin that dwells in mankind, for now
the life of God does visibly appear to swallow up the death of the creature,
and a manifest beginning to set the creature free from bondage; and this
dispensation of God was spoke of by the Prophets very often before it appeared,
that a Child should be borne, a Virgin should have a son, which should be
called Emmanuel, God with us; and God would bring forth his branch, and the
Redeemer should come out of Sion, that is the anointing that is in Sion the
Church, shall in Gods time go forth to heal the Nations likewise; now God
throws down the shadows of the Law and draws his creature to eye Jesus, the
anointed, or God manifested in flesh, and this is the appearance of visible
Gospel, or of God himself, Rev. 5. 19.
bringing glad tidings to men, and so worthily deserving everlasting honor and
praise from all creatures.

The sixth dispensation is, from the time that God appeared in the flesh of
Saints, till the perfect gathering up of the Elect, which is called the
Resurrection day, or the great day of Judgment. And this is still more clear
then the former, for though God appeared in the person Jesus Christ, who was a
branch of mankind, yet we might still be in doubt, and lie under death still,
if he there remain; But God did not appear in the man Christ Jesus only, but
in the Saints likewise, according to his promise by Joel, in the latter days,
I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, upon my Sons and Daughters, and
young men shall see visions, and old men shall dream dreams, and this was
fulfilled in the Apostles, for the same spirit of Christ was sent down upon
them, Acts 2. And I know, says Paul, that I have the spirit of Christ; And
know ye not that the anointing dwells in you, except ye be reprobates. And
again, We, says Paul, that have received the first fruits of the Romans 8. 23.
spirit, we groan within our selves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
redemption of our bodies.

Now the Apostles in their first preaching, they preached Jesus, the anointed,
or the Lamb, or God manifested in flesh, and this Acts 4.
they saw and heard, and they could not but speak in the name of Jesus, and God
commanded them so to do.

But when God had fully declared himself in that dispensation, he sent forth
his Apostles then to preach more spiritually; and now, says Paul, though
formerly we have known Christ 2 Cor. 5. 16.
after the flesh, that is, God only manifested in that one man Jesus, the
anointed, yet henceforth know we him no more, (in such a restraint) for now the
mystery of God, which has been hid from ages and generations past, is now
revealed to his Saints in these last days, Col. 4. 27
which is Christ, or the anointing in you, the hope of glory; not only God
manifested in the man Christ Jesus, but the same anointing, or tree of life in
you likewise, according to that of the Prophet, A King shall reign in the
earth, Jer. 23. 6
that is, in mankind, and his name shall be called the Lord our righteousness:
and again, The anointing 1 John 2. 27.
which ye have received abides in you, and ye need not that any teach you, for
the same anointing teaches you of all things. And truly I believe, that
whosoever preaches from his book, and not from the anointing, and so speaking
in experience what he has seen and heard from God, is no Minister sent of God,
but an hireling, that runs before he be sent, only to get a temporal living;
therefore O England, mind what thou do, leave off to embrace hirelings, that
come in their own name, and John 5. 43.
receive such in love whom Christ has sent in his name, and his Fathers.

And in this dispensation we are to note two things; first, when as John the
Baptist prophesied, it was neither light nor dark, for it was between the
legal worship that was falling, and gospel truths that were rising, upon the
very parting of time between the shadows of the Law of Moses, and the
appearance of Christ the Lamb, who was the substance thereof; and troubles and
vexations began to arise in and among the strict professors of the Law, so that
they could not be satisfied till they had killed John 7.
Christ, whom they called the man full of errors, that deceived the people.

So now the Church is at a stand, and the worship is partly light, and partly
dark; some resting upon the bare letter, according to the example of Christ,
and the Apostles only, which is a worship after the flesh, and was true, and
was of God in the time of its dispensation.

And others do acknowledge God, not exemplarily, but by the faith, the name, and
anointing of Jesus Christ, ruling, teaching, acting, and dwelling in them;
therefore think it not strange, though some old professors, and the
book-hirelings especially, be offended hereat, and brand the Saints for men
full of errors, and seek to suppress their testimony; it was so then, it will
be so now, for the same spirit of the world, the Serpent, does still persecute
the same anointing of God in this, as in the former dispensation; but you
Saints of God, be patient, wait upon God, this troubled sea, the Serpent,
shall not over-whelm you, for stronger is he that is in you, then he that is in
the world; rejoice, Mat. 24.
the time of your redemption draws near.

And again, think it not strange to see many of the Saints of God at a stand,
in a wilderness, and at a loss, and so waiting upon God to discover himself to
them; many are like the tide at full Isa. 32. 12. etc.
Sea, which stands a little before the water runs either way; and assure your
selves, I know what I speak, you must be dead to your customs before you can
run in the Sea of truth, or the River of the water of life; some walk still
according to example, and have either seen nothing, or very little of the
anointing in them; and some walk more in spirit and truth, as the same
anointing of the Father, which dwells bodily in Christ, teaches them, and
leads them into all truth. John 16. 13.


The same anointing unites Christ and the Saints, and makes them but one
mystical body: 1 Cor. 12. 13.
I pray not for these alone, says Christ, but for all that shall believe
through their word, John 17. 20.
that they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they
also may be one in us, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect
in one, that is in thee, who art the only pure and holy being.

Secondly, not, that under this dispensation is the time that the elect, which
is so much spoken of in the Scriptures, are to be gathered into one City, and
perfected, and this anointing is the Angel which God has sent forth in these
last days, to gather together his elect, from one end of heaven to the other,
or out of every nation, kindred, tongue and people, in the earth. And where it
is said, that God will send forth not his Angel, but his Angels, to gather his
elect together, it points out the Ephesians. 4. 13.
several measures, or dispensations of the anointing, to every Saint, as God
will, according to the measure of the gift of Christ.

Now sometime God calls his elect by the name of one, in the singular number,
and hereby God declares his first born, Jesus Christ, who is the head in the
name of the whole body. As the Prophet writes, behold my Servant whom I have
chosen, mine elect, in whom my soul delights: God has not chosen the
Serpent, or creature-invention to dwell in flesh, for this he has rejected, and
takes no delight in. But he has chosen the anointing, or his own power and
name to dwell in flesh, and Esa. 42. 1.
this he delights in, therefore Jesus the anointed, is called the Son of God,
in whom he is well pleased.

And sometimes God calls his elect in the plural number, as many, and then he
declares Mat. 24. 22. 31.
the mystical body, or the City, Sion, or those that he has given to Christ,
and whose names Rev. 13. 8. etc.
are written in the Lambs book. And in this 6. general dispensation, these
only shall be gathered Rev. 20. 15.
into the City, and whosoever is not writ in the Lambs book of life, shall not
enter in at this time and season of the Father, though there is a time and
season known to the Father, when they shall be healed likewise, and enter in;
and eat of the heavenly Manna, the Rev. 22. 2.
tree of life, that is in the middle of the City.

Now this City Sion, which consists of head and members; Jesus Christ and his
Saints, who are all baptized into, and knit together by one spirit of God, the
anointing. And this City God will redeem first, or he will subdue the Rev. 21.
8. etc.
Serpent under the feet of this his Son first: All that do his Commandments,
that is, have Rev. 22. 14. 15.
faith and love, these shall enter into the City, but the fearful and
unbeleevers, murderers, Idolaters, and every one that loves, and makes a lie,
are without, and are cast into the lake which burns with fire and brimstone,
which is the second death, or the death of the Serpent, and the Serpent ruling
in man is the first death which God redeemes us from.

All those that were not found writ in the Rev. 20. 15.
Lambs book of life, were cast into the lake of fire. Or as Matthew calls it,
into everlasting fire. Or as Matthew calls it, into everlasting fire, and shall
lie under that dispensation of wrath for ever, that is, all the time of this
dispensation, or till the day of judgment be ended, that the Serpent, Death,
and Rev. 22. 3.
Hell, are cast into the Lake of fire, and that there shall no more curse lie
upon the Creature Rev. 20. 14.
, but from the judgment seat, or Throne of God; the whole Creation being
redeemed, shall flow forth a pure River of the water of life; for every
Dispensation is called a full period, or term of time, and an everlasting
season.

All this time that God is gathering together his elect, he has given a time,
times, and half time to the Serpent. Which in those threefold shapes and a
half, or in those three days and half, he is called the Beast, or the Whore,
and this time is given him to make war, and to fight against the Prince of
Princes Dan. 8. 24, 25.
, and his Saints, and to overcome them, and to waste and destroy the holy
people mightily.

And this appointed time is the year wherein the Beast lives, and God gives
all advantages Rev. 16. 17.
to the Beast, as riches, outward liberty, worldly power, and generally humane
Authority into his hand. And puts no weapons into the hands of his Saints; but
faith, or the anointing, to fight against the reproaches, slanders, Rev. 12. 15.
oppressions, poverties, weakness, prisons, and the multitude of temptations
which the Beast, through her wit, malice, and power, casts upon the Saints,
like a flood of water to drown them. And to overthrow the work of God by great
hand, if it were possible.

Likewise the Serpent stirs up some, whom she deceives, to be seeming
professors, outwardly religious, having a form of godliness, but through
hypocrisy, pride, and selfishnesse, might dishonor God, discourage the tender
Lambs of Christ, and bring an ill report upon the ways of God.

And hence it is that Israel of old were trampled upon by the Gentiles that
were not in covenant. And hence it is, that the Beast must Rev. 11. 2, 3.
tread the holy City under foot 42 months. That in the day of judgment it may
be said, that the Serpent had fair play given him, he had all advantages, he
had a long time given him to engage war. I, but God did beat him with his own
weapons, and encounters Rev. 14. 11, 12.
with all the temptations, malice and hypocrisy of the Serpent, by the faith
and patience of his Saints, and thereby fairly destroys him, himself may be
judge.

But in the latter days, when the time, times, and half draws to an end,
then God sends forth several dispensations, or Angels, as assistances to this
sixth and great Dispensation, to pour out Vials of wrath upon all the glory of
the Beast, and curses all his glory by seven degrees, and sounds forth seven
Trumpets of glory to God, one after another; which implies perfection of ruin
upon every particular, blasting, cursing, or downfall of the Rev. 16.
Beast.

And when these days appear, then the rage of the Serpent increases, because
his time grows short, and his violence, wrath, reproach, oppression,
provocations and murders against the Saints are multiplied, and times grow very
bad: for now iniquiry abounds, and the love of many in whom the Serpent dwells,
waxes cold, and extremely bitter, and mad against the Saints, in whom the
anointing dwells, so that they gnash their tongues with vexation of spirit, and
the smoke of their torment ascends upwards (toward God and his Saints, that
are above, not so much downward to such like themselves) and that for ever and
ever. By the doubling of this word, ever and ever, he declares that this misery
continues until the sixth Dispensation be Rev. 14. 11, 12.
ended, that is, the one for ever; and all the time of the great day of
judgment, that is the second for ever, and so they have no rest, day nor
night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever receives the mark of
his name; here is the patience of the Saints, here are they that keep the
Commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus: for truly the faith and patience
of the Saints are tried to some purpose, while the Beast thus rages, and swells
with malice against them.

And I believe it will appear more generally visible in time, to me it appears
very plain, that the great bitterness, envy, reproachful languages, and
expressions of malicious wrath, in and among men and women in these days,
against others whom they brand Sectaries, by several names, will prove part of
the smoke of her torment, and part of the restlesnesse of her Spirit day and
night, which is the beginning of her sorrows; for this is the raging Sea that
casts out its own shame: and men in whom Jude 13.
the Serpent dwells, speak evil of that they know not.

Now all the time of this sixth Dispensation, God is declaring his great power,
in pulling what firebrarnds he will out of the Serpents hand, and he will take
here one, and there one, as he pleases himself. And let the Serpent put forth
all his wit and power, he shall not hinder the salvation of one man or woman,
whom God has chosen, and purposes to deliver from his bondage; but he will
save under every dispensation whom he will, and bring them into Sion, Neither
shall the Serpent, nor any of his seed, ever attain communion with God by all
his wit, learning, study, actings and power, but he shall perish, and all
creatures in whom the Serpent reigns and acts, shall be lost and ashamed 1
Cor. 3. 15.
in their work, yet every man shall be saved in the end, yet so, as by fire.

And here mind two things, First God is honored in the salvation of believers,
because he has undertaken to pull them out of the Serpents hand, and to bind
that strong man, and to bring in the City to himself, and to appear in them
first; therefore it is said, That judgment begins at the House of God first,
that is, God judges, condemns, and casts the Serpent out of his elect, and
saves the whole, and every member of that City, before he judge, condemn, and
cast the Serpent out of them, that did not enter into the City, but were
without, Rev. 20. 15.
because their names were not written in that Lambs Book of life.

Now for God to save some at one hour, and some at another, both when he will,
and whom he will, and those scattered sheep of the House of Israel whom God
has chosen, these shall enter into the City, though all the wit and power of
the Serpent strive to hinder them from entering, And those whom God has not
chosen, shall not enter into the City, though all the learning, study, and
selfish and meritorious actings of the Serpent, strive to enter in never so
much: It makes much for the honor of his Wisdom, Power, and Luke 13. 24.
Name.

Secondly, God is honored in the loss, death, or as the word is interpreted,
damnation of unbeleevers; for faith, or the anointing, which is born of God,
and whereby the Saints overcome the World, is the power of God dwelling and
ruling in Man: And unbelief is the Serpent, which is born of the flesh, and
persecutes Christ till the time of the Gentiles be fulfilled; and this power of
darkness is that which dwells and rules in the children of disobedience.

Now both these are grinding at the Mill, and are at work for life in humane
flesh; and it advances the glory of God, That they shall live in whom his
Divine power dwells, though they be full of weakness in themselves, and though
they be compassed about with diverse temptations, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
being despised of all, and regarded of none, but are the weak, the poor, the
foolish things of the world. And it makes for the glory of God, that
unbeleevers, in whom the power of the Serpent dwells, shall die, though they
have all advantages, and means outward, as may be, and though they strive much
by learning, study, and actings, as Israel of old did, who attained not to
righteousness, though he sought after it greatly, because he Romans 9. 32.
sought for it as it were by the works of the Law, and not by faith, that is,
he sought for it in the strength of the Serpent, or selfishnesse, but not in
the strength of God.

Well, this sixth Dispensation is the gathering time, wherein God sums up the
whole number of his elect; and as every believer has fought his fight, kept
the faith, and finished his course, they return to dust; and the unbeleever he
returns to dust, for as the one dies, so dies the other; and as in this world
all things come alike to all, we cannot tell either love or hatred by any thing
that happens in this life; and both return to dust alike, as if there were no
other reckoning to be made of either.

And so from Adams time, til the whole number of the elect be taken up to God,
out of Rev. 7. 9.
every nation, kindred, tongue, and people, out of which God in all ages of the
world is pleased to choose some to be Members of his Son, or Citizens of Sion,
and has appointed in his Council, that mankind shall increase in the world,
and act a while, and then return to dust, and one generation pass away, and
another come in the place; but when the elect are gathered as wheat into Gods
storehouse, and the City made complete, and the chafe burned in the fire, and
none enters into the City, but such whose names are written in the Lambs book
of life; and none enters into the lake of fire, but such as are not writ in the
Lambs book; so that Gods will under this dispensation is done; then follows
immediately the great day of judgment* or the resurrection of men's bodies out
of the graves.

And this day of judgment is the 7. dispensation of God, and this day winds up
the whole mystery of God, and makes the eternal council of God completely
manifest and true; That the Serpents head is bruised, and the whole creation,
Adam, redeemed from the bondage of death, and in this dispensation we are to
mind two things.

First, in this great day of the Lord he raises up the bodies of believers, and
unbelievers out of the dust again, wherein he has reserved them all the time
of the battle, between the anointing and the Serpent, as a man would keep his
jewels in a box for an appointed time.

Secondly, God brings every man to judgment, John 5. 29.
and rewards every man according to his work, some rises to the resurrection of
life, and others to the resurrection of loss and Rev. 20. 12.
death: and the books were opened, as John writes; that is, first the book of
the mystery of iniquity, or the nature of the Serpent in flesh laid open, and
made manifest to be a power and spirit of darkness, that strived to be a being
equal with God, nay, above God; but being weighed in the balance, it is found
too light.

And then the book of the mystery of God, or the anointing of God in flesh,
this is made manifest, and laid open to be the great power of God, and the
spirit of truth, which has advanced God to be the only one infinite being;
even God, all in all, and that besides him there is none.

And then another book was opened, that is, the book of life and death, or the
book of the Law, and of Judgment, which gives the sentence, Come ye blessed,
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the Mat. 2. 5 34.
world: and to unbeleevers, Go ye cursed into everlasting fire: And now every
man is judged according to his works; the anointing, or the righteous one, is
rewarded with life, and all they in whom the anointing did dwell, who are the
elect City, and spouse of Christ, are called blessed, and taken up into Gods
Kingdom, that is, into love never to fall again.

But the Serpent, the wicked one, is rewarded with death, and all those
disobedient ones, in whom the Serpent dwelt, are cast into the everlasting
fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels; this is a second part in the day
of judgment, which is a trying of every man's work, and the establishing the
City, which is the Lambs wife, in perfect glory, and in justly condemning the
rest: and here God is glorified in the salvation of believers, and in the
damnation, or loss of unbelievers; for his work stands, and abides trial; but
man's work suffers loss, and is ashamed: But this is not the end, for as yet
the Son has not delivered up the Kingdom to the Father, for he must reign till
all enemies be subdued, but death, curse, and sorrow is not yet quite subdued;
for it reigns over part of the Creation still, even over those poor creatures
that were lost, or that did not enter into the City, but were cast into the
lake of fire. The Serpent as yet holds Rev. 20. 15.
a power, for there is part of Gods work not yet delivered from his bondage:
And the Serpent would be glad, and it would be some ease to his torment, if any
of Gods work might die and perish with him. As I have heard some say, that they
would be content to suffer the misery of a new war in England, so that such as
they mentioned, might suffer as well as they; this is the spirit of the
Serpent. I, but the Serpent only shall perish, and God will not loose a hair
that he made, he will redeem his whole creation from death. The spirit of
darkness cannot bear this speech, therefore reader observe thy heart, as thou
read, it will either close with a tender spirit of pity and love herewith,
or else swell and fret against it.

Therefore in the third part of this great day of judgment, after the City work
is finished, Rev. 21. 24.
and the trial over, then does the tree of life, God himself that dwells in
the City, and is the light, and life, and glory of it, send forth
dispensations, or Angels, bringing love to heal the Nations, and to bring
their glory into the City; likewise that for the present lies under the
dispensation of wrath, and throws the Serpent that deceived them, death, and
hell, into the Lake, but there is no mention that the nations are cast therein,
in this last casting in, for they are redeemed from it; as the tree of life
brought forth fruit every change of time, and age of the world, to heal the
elect, the lost sheep, or City; so in this last and great day it brings forth
leaves to heal the Nations, or such as were not of the City; their turn to
receive mercy comes, though it be at the last hour; And then all Israel, or
whole creation, Romans 11. 26.
that groaned under the bondage of death, shall partake of the glorious
manifestation of the Sons of God, for now the deliverer comes out of Sion, and
shall turn away ungodliness Rev. 22. 1. 3.
from Jacob.

Therefore says John, I saw a pure River of the water of life, clear as
Cristall, proceeded out of the throne of God, and the Lamb. Now I conceive
clearly that this pure River, is the whole creation, mankind, fully and
completely delivered from death, and curse, as in that 3. verse. And this pure
redemption proceeds from the throne of God and the Lamb, that is, from the
judgment seat of God, judging, condemning, and bruising the Serpents head, and
so setting his own work, mankind, free from that death and bondage.

I shall mention one Scripture more that countenances this truth: And I looked,
and Rev. 14. 14. etc.
behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sat like the Son of man; having
on his head a Crown of gold, and in his hand a sharp sickle: And another Angel
came out of the Temple, crying with a loud voice to him that sat on the cloud,
saying, thrust in thy sickle and reap, for the harvest of the earth is ripe;
and he that sat on the cloud, thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the earth
was reaped. And then another Angel came out of the altar, and cried in the same
manner, to him that had the sickle, as you may read.

By a white cloud, I conceive is meant the City Sion, or spouse of Christ, that
is arrayed in pure and white, in whom there is no spot, for she is perfectly
redeemed; by him that sat upon this white cloud, is meant the whole anointing,
or the great manifestation of God in one person, Jesus Christ; And the several
Angels that cried one after another, are several dispensations, or discoveries
of God, that proceed from Christ at several times, and seasons.

Therefore the City being made white, now 2 These. 2. 7. 8.
the manifestations of Gods love begin to appear toward the earth, or
nations, which entered not into the City; now the time and season Rev. 19. 21.
requires, that the sickle of Christ should be thrust into the earth, that is,
that the brightness of Jesus Christ, the Lamb, might appear and shine forth
upon the Nations also, as it did shine upon the City,

And we see the conclusion in the 20. verse, And the wine press was trodden
without the City, (mind that) and blood came out of the wine press, even unto
the horse bridles, etc. This phrase I conceive points out the utter ruin and
destruction of the Serpent, that held the earth or Nations which were without
the City, in bondage. But now the anointing, or the great dispensation of the
love of God, has reaped the earth as well as the City, and destroyed the
Serpent there, as well as in the City; the wine press, or the bruising of the
Serpents head, and shedding his blood, was without the City; and so both City
and Country, City and whole earth of mankind, is made a pure River of the water
of life, which proceeds from the throne of God and the Lamb.

But here arise 3. scruples: First, is not God changeable says one, In saying,
go ye cursed into everlasting fire; and yet afterward takes them out again?

I answer, this fire is the dispensation of Gods wrath; and it is everlasting,
without end to the Serpent; it was prepared for him and his Angels; and though
God bid the unbeleevers depart into it; yet he did not say, you shall lie
there, and never be redeemed.

But the scruple lies in the word everlasting, which I as well as you have
taken it to be a misery without end to the creature. But I answer, that in
scripture phrase, every dispensation of God was called an everlasting time; as
in the day of Moses, every service in the Temple that Aaron was to perform, God
said Levit. 16. 29.
it should be a Statute and a Law for ever, which notwithstanding ended to be a
Law in Number. 10. 8.
the beginning of the next dispensation, or the appearance of Christ in the
flesh; and so, though God send unbelievers to lie under the dispensation of his
wrath, and call it everlasting fire, it is but for the time of his
dispensation, while he is finishing City work, and judging and rewarding every
man, that is, the Serpent, and the anointing, according to their works: and
after this, comes in their healing time and season, and these times and seasons
the Father Acts 1. 7.
has reserved to himself, the Son knows them not.

A second scruple is this; Shall a man be ever delivered out of hell? out of
hell, says some, there is no redemption.

I answer, first, that there is no Scripture, as says, out of hell there is no
redemption, therefore the scruple is raised upon it without ground; indeed the
Prophet speaking, how that the living praise God, and the dead cannot, has
these words in preferring life before death: The grave cannot praise thee,
death cannot Isai. 38. 18.
celebrate thee, they that go down into the pit, cannot hope for thy truth.

But secondly, to answer more directly, let us consider what hell is, and then
whether any shall be delivered out that is there: Hell is called death, or a
condition below life; and this is twofold, either a death of purity, far below
the nature of God, or a death of sorrows, which is a condition far below the
comfort and joys of God. Now every man and woman, as they are branches of
Adam, have no purity in them, and therefore are in a hell far below the life
and nature of God; and likewise they are unavoidably subject to the sorrows of
that death, as an effect following the cause, therefore unavoidably subject to
a condition far below the comfort and joys of God. This is the condition of
every man and woman, and they have no power for to deliver themselves, for God
only is our Redeemer.

And then it follows, that a man may be in hell, and yet may be delivered out;
for as in all this discourse past, it appears, that as we spring from Adam, we
do all lie under the bondage, and death, and power of the Serpent, which is one
part of hell, and yet God delivers his elect from out of it; and therefore it
follows clear, that if men are capable of so much mercy, being Gods
creatures, as to be delivered from sin and death, which is one part of hell; or
of a condition below God, they are capable to be delivered through the mercy of
the same God, from the sorrows and pains that follow sin, both which are but
the bondage of the Serpent, which God will deliver his creature from: this
twofold death is the Serpents head, which God will bruise.

A third scruple is, concerning the day of Judgment: Some think it is but one
single day, of twenty four hours long; nay, some make it less, but the
length of the twinkling of an eye, because the interpretation of Scripture runs
thus, That in the twinkling of an eye, at the sound of the last Trumpet, the
Dead shall be raised up to judgment. But to answer this phrase, Twinkling of
an eye, it only shows that the day of judgment is very short in comparison
of the days bypast; like that in Rev. 8. 1. And there was silence in Heaven
for the space of half an hour, which is not a direct half hour, according as
men account, but it declares a very short time.

Therefore I conceive, this is not a single day, of 24. hours, but a longer
time; while the Judge sits upon the judgment seat, judgeing the Serpent, so
long time it is called a day of judgment, because that is the work of this
day, or term of time, or the full length of that dispensation; as formerly it
was called the Day of Moses, which was the time while that dispensation of the
Law continued in force, whereof Moses was the Mediator; and so Abraham desired
to see my Day, says Christ, and Heb. 4.
saw it, that is, the day and time that Christ reigns as King in the power and
law of Love, in and over the Saints, and this Paul calls the Day of Christ's
rest.

And this in the truth of it, is that which we call the Sabbath Day, or Day of
a Christians rest; and it is not one day in seven, still typical, as the
Jewish Sabbath was, but it is the constant reign of Christ in and over the
Saints, which is their rest, and which indeed is the substance of the Jewish
typical Sabbath; as David says, Let the earth rejoice, the LORD reigns. And,
a King shall reign in the earth, says Jeremy, and his name shall be called,
The LORD our Righteousness. Now Christ, or the Anointing, does not reign one
single day in the seven in his Saints, but every day constantly, which is the
substance of the Jewish single Sabbath; therefore I wish that the
Gentile-Christians could understand, that what the Jews did in the type, these
are to perform in the substance, and it is not for the Gentiles to worship in
Types, as did the Jews.

Again, the time of the indignation, or while God suffers the Beast to reign,
is called, The Day of the Beast; and God has given her Dan. 11. 36.
three Days and a half to tread the holy City under foot, or the space of 42
months, which is Rev. 11. 2. 9.
three shapes, three discoveries of the reign of the Beast, or three degrees
and half of the Serpents reformation from bad to worse, from open profaneness
to close hypocrisy; and not the single days of a week. And so here it is
called the Day of Judgment, from the work and business of the day, or full
length of that Dispensation, so that the great and general day of judgment,
from the time that the bodies of believers and unbelievers are raised out of
the grave, till the Son deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, I believe is a
long time, of diverse years; the full length or shortness of it, God only
knows, and reserves the time and season of that secret to himself; but it is
called the day of judgment, while the work Acts 17.
of judgment lasts; as in our language it is called the Day of Assizes, though
the Sessions or business continue diverse days.

Now all this day the condemned creatures lie under the dispensation of wrath,
under the curse, and under weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth for anguish,
and this Hell, Sorrow, or Punishment, or Death, is everlasting, because it
continues the full time of the dispensation, and the worm never dies all the
time, the fire and sense of wrath shall never go out all the time, the fire of
lust shall still be burning, and the smoke of blasphemy shall ascend upward,
Rev. 14.
and they shall have no rest day nor night, and the fire of Gods wrath shall
still be scorching and consuming, which shall be an intolerable pain to the
creature.

Therefore if any man or woman take liberty to sin, let them know this is a
truth, they shall be condemned and die, and depart into everlasting fire, and
punished in that Hell, lie under the dispensation of wrath, and lie at Gods
mercy for delivery, so that those that will not now wait upon God in his time
of long-suffering, or in the dispensation of his patience; they shall wait upon
God whether they will or no in the dispensation of wrath, in sorrow, which is
intolerable, which is the second death. The first death I conceive, and I
clearly see a truth in it, is Adams death, or Adams bondage to the Serpent; the
second death is the Serpents death, after God has judged him, which is to lie
under the wrath of God without end.

Now he that has part in the first resurrection, that is, to be delivered from
the bondage of the Serpent, and raised up from the death of sin, and so made
alive to God through the Anointing; over such a man, the second Death, or the
endless dispensation of wrath, which is prepared for the Serpent, shall have
no power. But if a man have not part in the first resurrection, and so enter
not into the City new Jerusalem, he shall then taste of the second Death, which
is the everlasting fire, prepared for the Serpent and his seed, and it shall
have power over him, and he shall lie under it for ever, that is, till the
dispensation change, or till the mystery of God be finished, that the Serpent,
Death, and Hell is subdued, and cast into the Lake, and the whole Creation be
set free, and the Son deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, and God become all
in all, as at the beginning he was, before any opposite power appeared against
1 Cor. 15. 27.
him.

But does not God sit upon the Throne of judgment before this great day of
Judgment appear? Yes, God and the Lamb have sat upon the judgment seat, or
Throne, ever since Adam delighted in his own fruit, or consented to the
Serpent, and God has been judging the Serpent, and bruising his head in every
dispensation of his, ever since that time, and casting the Serpent, that strong
Man, out of his Elect.

And by the pouring out of the seven Vials, and the sounding of the seven
Trumpets, declares how God has been subduing the Beast, the Whore, and the
false Prophet, which has been the several appearances of the Serpent under
those names, by which he has made war with Christ and his Saints, so that
Dan. 8. 24.
God has been about this work of judging the Serpent long before this day of
judgment Rev. 19. 20.
came.

Then it seems God has two judgment days: No, it is all one; for from Adams
time till the Son deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, God has sat upon the
Throne, judging the serpent; but it pleased God so to establish his counsel,
that he would not finish this mystery in a short time, but in several degrees
of times and seasons, which he has reserved in his own power: And this great
and last day, is the conclusion of this work, that the serpent shall be subdued
under the feet of the whole Creation, and be destroyed everlastingly, as it is
written, Judgment begins at the House of God; 1 Pet. 4. 17.
and if it begin at us, says Peter, who are his Temple, his little Flock, his
Royal Nation, his peculiar people, what shall the end be of them that obey not
the Gospel? Why truly they must come to judgment too, but in the last day, or
in the end of time; so that it is not two judgment days, but all one day.

And so to wind up all, I shall desire men to mind one thing, That though God
has in Scripture declared seven great dispensations, or discoveries of his
Counsel, and each one clearer then the other; yet in every one of these God
sends forth several other dispensations, or Angels, for the carrying on of the
work of that time, or season, which are discoveries of his glory; for
whatsoever comes from God is a Spiritual power, not a dead work, but a living.

As whatsoever came first from Adam, it was a spiritual power, as pride,
discontent, envy, and the whole body of unbelief, which slighted the being of
God, and seeks to prefer a Creature-being before him. This discovery of Adam
was a spiritual power, which is the very bondage which all creatures lie under,
and it is an unclean and dead power, but not a living power.

But whatsoever comes from God, is a particular Angel, or lesser dispensation,
as an assistant to the greater. As for example, when God took flesh, and
appeared in the Man Christ Jesus, it was the fifth great dispensation, and the
Angel of Gods presence, and Michael our Luke 22, 8.
Prince, that stands before God for us. Yet his sufferings in that day, or
season of time, was called the Dispensation of Gods patience, wisdom and love,
etc. The strength of patience is an Angel of God.

I mention this, because I know in my own experience, that if God set it home
to others, as I find, it quiets the heart under what condition soever. If thou
lie under sorrows for sins, now know, that it is Gods dispensation to thee,
wait patiently upon him, he will work a good issue in his time, but not in thy
time. If thou lie under the temptations of men, of losses, of poverty, of
reproaches, it is Gods dispensation to thee, wait with an humble quiet spirit
upon him, till he give deliverance. If thou lie under darkness, emptiness,
and in a lost and wildernes-condition wait patiently (it is his dispensation to
thee) till God speak; for he will speak peace when thou think least of it.
If thou be filled with joy and peace through believing, wait with an humble
thankful heart still upon God, it is his dispensation to thee, and assure thy
self, that now God begins to dispense out love to thee, he will still be
feeding thee in dispensations, or discoveries of his love; and he will never
let thee lie under the sense of anger any more, for his freedom is a freedom
indeed, to a full satisfaction; the peace that he gives, none can, nor shall
take away: And be sure he will never take it again, For the gifts and callings
of God are without repentanct. And this is all I have to say concerning this
truth. And I have done.

FINIS.

