MAXIMS OF REASON: OR, THE REASON OF THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.

BY EDMOND WINGATE, late of Grayes-Inn, Esquire.

LONDON: Printed by R. and W. L. for W. Lee, A. Crook, D. Pakeman, H. Twiford,
G. Bedell, T. Dring, J. Place, and are to be sold at their Shops. MDCLVIII.

TO THE READER.
READER,
I Am determined, the common Apologies (importunity of Friends, and written
first for my private advantage,) shall have no room in this letter: It is more
agreeable to my nature, to acknowledge that these leaves had their Principles
and Origination from a mere design of Public good: if any thing shall appear
grateful, let the intention be encouraged; if there be defects, let Humanity
be considered: If there be Errors, let frailty be pardoned: If my Labors may
be hints and incitements to persons of larger abilities to expose to the World,
the Nobler products of their more improved Reason, in discourses of this
Nature, I shall esteem my self recompensed above the damage of the sharpest
censure.

It will not be of concernment to offer here my reflections upon the first
Rudiments of all Commonwealths; being agreed that since our Nature and the
Powers of our Souls were degraded in Adam; there is an absolute necessity that
our Passions, and Exorbitancies should be charmed and confined by Politic
Combinations, Civil Appointments and Laws; without these the World would be
but an Arena sine Calce, a great Bedlam.

It Is without complement to my profession, when I affirm that this Nation was
eminently blessed with the choicest Composures; and had as great a share of
wisdom infused into the Fundamental and Architectonical principles, upon which
our Government is built, as any Society under Heaven can boast of: Observe the
harmony betwixt the Laws and the Genius of the people, The Religious ties and
sacred confinements of Royalty, the strict Guards set upon propriety, the
flourishing wealth, and peaceful fruitions of those Estates with which our own
Virtue or Industry, or the benignity of Providence endowed us, all these are to
be reckoned as the amiable fruits of those Sanctions which the wisdom of our
Forefathers transmitted to us.

Now all Laws that are Just and Prudent, ought to be viewed as Radii and
Effluxes from the Eternal Wisdom, having their Exemplar Cause and bright Idea
in God himself: The mediate Author of these is humane Reason, exalted and
purified by Learning and Experience, and enlightened by the Divine Spirit; I
presume there is no fear of Sosinians in Law, and that attempts may be made
without danger, to discover how the vast multitude of Cases, that Follies, or
Passions, or Necessities of men have obliged us to be acquainted with, are all
accountable and reducible to some few Theses; which being prime Emanations and
Grand Maxims of Reason, govern and resolve the subordinate Miscellanie of
queries, and may serve for a Clue and Conduct, through the Labyrinth of that
perplexed variety; Saving us the labor of Chargeing our Memories with every
particular, which in the result is less apt to profit, then to burden and
confound us.

I do not despair but that every Student who seriously intends to become his
Gown, shall find some satisfaction in noting the same Key to open so many
Locks; when he sees such a number of Cases obeying, one ruling Axiom,
attesting its Supremacy, as they are strung upon the thread of the same Reason:
But whatever the success be, if my Lord Verulam speaks true, that it deserves
praise to make wishes that are not absurd, it will easily be granted, that when
such Wishes are pursued with endeavors, if they merit nothing else, they may
certainly lay claim to pardon.

EDMOND WINGATE.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
COURTEOUS READER,
BE pleased to mend with thy pen the numbers of some pages in this Book;
namely, from folio 192, to folio 325, and then will the Table at the end of
this Book exactly agree with the printed pages, which otherwise in those
folio's will be 10 short.

THE ORDER Of the Maxims of Reason; Or the Reason of the COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.
Maxims, viz. From Theology.
I. SVmma ratio est, quae pro Religione facit.It is the highest Reason that
makes for Religion, fol. 3 II. Nunquam prospere succedunt res Humanae, ubi
negliguntur Divinae. Humane Laws never succeed well, where Divine Rites are
neglected, fol. 6 III. To such Laws as have Warrant in holy Scripture, our Law
gives credence, and e contr. fol. 6 IV. The Jurisdiction of the
Ecclesiastical Law, ought to be bounded by the Common Law, fol. 7 V. Dies
Dominicus, non est juridicus, fol. 7 VI. Gravius est divinam, quam Temporalem
laedere Majestatem, fol. 8 VII. The Law disfavoureth an Excommunicate person,
fol. 9 From Grammar.
VIII. The Rules from Grammar are infinite, in the Etymoligy of words, and in
the construction of them; what their nature is single, what joined with others,
etc. fol. 11 IX. In conjunctivis oportet utrumque in disjunctivis sufficit
alteram partem esse veram, fol. 13 X. Words in Construction must be referred to
the next Antecedent, where the matter it self does not hinder it, fol. 15 XI.
The Law delights in apt Expressions, fol. 16 XII. Nomina si nescis, perit
cognitio rerum, fol. 18 XIII. M^la Grammatica, non vitiat chartam, fol. 18 XIV.
Qui haeret in littera hae^et in Cortice, fol. 19 XV. Talis interpretatio fienda
est, ut evitetur absurdum and inconveniens, and ne judicium sit illusorum, fol.
21 XVI. Quoties in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi nulla expositio contra
verba expressa fienda est, fol. 24 XVII. Maledicta expositio est, quae
corrumpit textum, fol. 26 XVIII. Nimia subtilitas in lege reprobatur, fol. 26
From Logic.
XIX. Cess^nte causa, cessat effectus, fol. 29 XX. Remoto impedimento, emergit
actio, and e contr. fol. 38 XXI. Things are construed according to that which
was the cause thereof fol. 41 XXII. Cujus est dare, ejus est disponere fol. 53
XXIII. Vltra posse, non est Esse, and vice versa fol. 54 XXIV. Nemo potest plus
juris ad alium transfer quam ipse habet fol. 56 XXV. Things are construed
according to that which was the beginning of them fol. 62 XXVI. Derivata
Potestas, non potest esse major primitiva fol. 66 XXVII. Vnam quodque
Dissolvitur eo modo, quo Colligatum est: Nihil tam conveniens naturali
aequitati, unumquodque dissolvi eo ligamine quo ligatum est fol. 68 XXVIII.
Things grounded upon an evil void beginning, cannot have good perfection fol.
72 XXIX. Quod non habet Principium, non habet finem fol. 79 XXX. He that
claims Paramont a thing, shall never take benefit, nor hurt by it fol. 79
XXXI. Things are to be Construed, secundam subjectam materiam fol. 85 XXXII.
According to the End fol. 91 XXXIII. Qui adimit medium, dirimit finem fol. 94
XXXIV. According to the effect fol. 96 XXXV. He that cannot have, or perform
the effect or consequence of a thing, shall not have the thing it self fol.
104 XXXVI. Non officit Conatus, nisi sequatur effectus fol. 107 XXXVII. Acta
exteriora, indicant interiora secreta fol. 108 XXXVIII. Inutilis Labor, and
sine fructa, non est effectus Legis, and e contr. fol. 110 XXXIX. Lex non
Praecipit inutilin fol. 112 LX. Debile Fundamentum fallit opus, and e contr.
fol. 113 LXI. Things incident are adherent to their Superiors or Principalls
fol. 127 LXII. Quod tacit intelligitur, de esse non videtur fol. 137 LXIII.
Things by reason of another, are in the same plight fol. 141 From personal
things.
LXIV. Personal things, cannot be done by another fol. 150 LXV. They cannot be
granted, or transferred over as matters of pleasure, ease, trust, and authority
fol. 153 LXVI. They being once suspended, or discharged for a time, are for
ever after Extinct fol. 154 LXVII. They dye with the person fol. 155 LXVIII.
Things do enure diversely according to the diversity of the time fol. 157 LXIX.
Quod prius est tempore, potius est jure fol. 159 L. According to the diversity
of the same person fol. 160 LI. According to the diversity of several persons
fol. 162 LII. Relation, is of great force in Law fol. 165 LIII. Verba
posteriora propter certitudinem addita, ad priora, quae rertitudini indigent,
sunt referenda, fol. 167 LIVE. No man can do an Act to himself, fol. 168 LV. The
Law favors Privity, fol. 172 LVI. Equal things cannot drown one another,
and e contra, fol. 190 LVII. Things are to be construed, secundum aequalitatem
rationis, fol. 190 LVIII. In quo quis delinquit, in eo de jure, est puniendus,
fol. 202 LIX. Omne Majus Continet in se minus. fol. 206 LX. Additio probat
minoritatem, fol. 211 LXI. A matter of higher nature determines a matter of
lower nature, and e contra, fol. 212 LXII. The more worthy thing draws unto
it things of less worthiness, fol. 215 LXIII. Accessarium sequitur Principale,
fol. 218 LXIV. Things accessory are of the nature of the Principal, fol. 226
LXV. A man's one words are void, when the Law speaks as much, or otherwise,
fol. 231 LXVI. Expressio eorum quae tacit in sunt, nihil operatur, fol. 235
LXVIJ. Part quacunque integrante sublata, tollitur totum, fol. 236 LXVIJJ. Ex
tota materia, emergat Resolutio, fol. 238 LXJX. Parts simul sumptae componant
totum: and totum comprehendit suas parts, fol. 241 LXX. Entire things cannot
be severed, fol. 242 LXXI. Argumentum a Divisione, est fortissimum in lege,
fol. 260 LXXII. Generals must go before, and the specialls must follow after,
fol. 261 LXXIII. The more worthy shall be set before the less worthy, fol. 261
LXIV. Sicut natura non facit saltum, Ita nec Lex, fol. 263 LXXV. A digniori
fieri debet Denominatio, and Resolutio, fol. 265 LXXVI. The Law requires
decency and order, fol. 267 LXXVII. Negatio Conclusionis, est Error in Lege,
fol. 268 LXXVIII. The Law respects the Bonds of Nature, fol. 268 LXXIX. Nemo
praesumitur alienam posteritatem suae praetulisse, fol. 285 The Law.
LXXX. The Law esteems and judges of all things according to their nature and
quality, fol. 286 LXXXI. In persons, the Law looks at the Excellency of some,
and gives them singular privileges above others, as to the King, Queen, Noble
men, and Peers of the Realm, etc. fol. 292 LXXXII. The Law gives greater
privileges to men, then to women, fol. 313. and, LXXXIII. It tendreth the
weakness and disability of other persons, as of those out of the Realm, Feme
Coverts, Enfants, etc. fol. 313 LXXXIV. It tendreth the ignorance of men
unlettered, fol. 322 LXXXV. It favors strangers, that are neither parties,
nor privies, fol. 323 LXXXVI. Res inter alios acta, alteri nocere non debet,
sed quandoque prodesse potest, fol. 327 LXXXVII. Nemo punitur pro alieno
delicto, fol. 336 LXXXVIII. The Law favors things done in another right,
fol. 338 LXXXIX. It disfavoureth other persons, as Villains, Outlawes, Exiles,
Aliens, and especially Aliens Enemies, fol. 343 XC. How the Law tendreth Ages,
fol. 348 XCI. The Law in things, respects every thing according to
worthiness, fol. 250 The Law.
XCII. It respects life and liberty most, and the person above the
possessions, fol. 353 XCIII. it respects things in the realty, more then
those in the personalty, fol. 359 XCIV. It respects Freehold and Inheritance
more then it does Chattels, fol. 362 XCV. It respects matters of Record more
then other transactions, fol. 368 XCVI. It respects Conveyances by Livery,
and which pass Estates of the land, then those that pass by Grant, or are
belonging to, or issuing out of land, fol. 371 XCVII. It favors a matter in
the right more then a matter in possession, fol. 373. yet XCVIII. It favors
possession where the right is equal, fol. 375 XCIX. It respects matters of
profit and Interest largely, of pleasure, skill, trust, authority, and
limitation strictly, fol. 376. and C. Therefore these may be Countermandants,
so cannot those, fol. 381 CI. It respects matter of substance more then
matter of circumstance, fol. 382 yet CII. For memory and solemnity, substances
are to be expressed under circumstances. fol. 393 CIII. It respects things
executed and done more, then Executory, and to do, etc. fol. 395 CIV.
Possibility of things, fol. 403. and CV. Therefore nothing to be void, which by
possibility may be made good, fol. 406 CVI. Id certum est, quod certum reddi
potest, fol. 408 CVII. Res non per se invicem, sed per pecuniam estimantur, and
non pecunia, per res, fol. 411 The Law.
CVIII. It favors mutual recompense, fol. 411 CIX. De minimis non Curat Lex,
fol. 418 CX. It yeildeth favor in actions when there is no damage of them, 1.
Necessity, fol. 420 CXI. 2. Convenience, fol. 428 CXII. 3. Conformity, fol. 429
CXIII. 4. Color, fol. 431 CXIV. It prizeth the Acts of God and of the Law,
more then those done by the party, fol. 432 CXV. Vtique fortior, est dispositio
Legis, quam hominis, fol. 446 CXVI. It reputeth that a man will deal for his
own advantage best, fol. 153 and CXVII. Therefore it beleiveth against the
party whatsoever is to his prejudice, fol. 459 CXVIII. When several remedies
are given, the party to whom the Law gives them has election which he will
take, fol. 473 CXIX. Cujus est divisio, alterias est Electio, fol. 478 CXX.
Nemo prohibetur pluribus defensionibus uti, fol. 479 CXXI. Consensus tollit
Errorem, fol. 481 CXXII. Volenti non fit injuria, fol. 482 CXXIII. Quilibet
potest renunciare juri, per se introducto, fol. 483 CXIV. Omnis Ratihabitio
retro-trahitur, and mandato seu licentiae aequiparatur, fol. 485 CXXV. Nemo
tenetur accusare seipsum, fol. 486 CXXVI. Nec se infortuniis, and periculis
exponere, fol. 487 The Law.
CXXVII. Countenanceth things done more in the time of Peace, then in the time
of War, fol. 487 CXXVIII. It countenanceth things done in the day, more then in
the night, fol. 488 Things are to be streightened according to the nature of
them.
CXXIX. 1.Sometimes a whole day is sufficient fol. 481 CXXX. 2. Sometimes a
whole year, fol. 489 CXXXI. 3. Sometimes to the last part of the day, fol. 490
CXXXII. 4. When no time is limited, the Law appoints the most convenient
time, fol. 491 CXXXIII. The third Offense is esteemed most heinous, fol. 494
CXXXIV. The place ought to be convenient, fol. 494 Maxims, Taken out of
Morality.
CXXXV. The Law favors Charity, fol. 497 CXXXVI. De mortuis nil nisi bonum,
fol. 498 CXXXVII. It hates malice and oppression, The Law.
fol. 499 CXXXIX. It hates Vice, fol. 499 CXL. Interest Reipublicae, ne
maleficia remaneant impunita, fol. 501 CXLI. It favors Justice and Right,
fol. 502 CXLII. That which is not tortious in it self, cannot be tortious to
any, fol. 508 CXLIII. Interst Reipublicae ne Curia Domini Regis, deficeret in
Justitia, fol. 545 Law.
CXLIV. It favors common Right, fol. 547 CXLV. It suffers things against
Principles of Law, rather then the party be without remedy, fol. 549 CXLVI. It
hates wrong, fol. 563 so as CXLVII. None shall take benefit or advantage of
their own wrong, fol. 568 CXLVIII. The Law of it self prejudiceth no man, fol.
575 CXLIX. Especially for things which cannot be imputed to their own folly or
neglect, fol. 581 CL. Nemo debet rem suam sine facto, vel defectu suo amittere,
fol. 592 CLI. It drives not a man to show, take notice of, or do that which by
intendment he knows not, or should, or cannot do, fol. 593 CLII. Nor to do that
which were in vain for him to do, fol. 600 CLIII. Non licet, quod dispendio
licet, fol. 603 Law.
CLIV. It favors truth, faith, and certainty, fol. 604 CLV. It disfavoureth
impossibilities, fol. 606 CLVI. Non cogit ad Impossibilia, and Impotentia
excusat Legem, fol. 609 CLVII. It disfavoureth falsehood, fraud, and covin,
fol. 6^0 CLVIII. Ju^, and frans, nunquam cohabitant, fol. 680 CLIX. Quando
aliquid prohibetur fieri, ex directo prohibetur, and per obliquum, fol. 618
CLX. Rectum est Index sui, and obliqui, fol. 620 CLXI. It disfavoureth
Improbabilities, fol. 620 CLXII. It disfavoureth Incertainties, by the which
the truth may be inveighed, fol. 621 CLXIII. Impersonalitas non concludit, nec
ligat, fol. 634 CLXIV. Generale, nihil certi implicat, fol. 635 CLXV. Dolosus
versatur in generalibus, fol. 636 CLXVI. 1. Variance, fol. 636 CLXVII. 2.
Contrariety and Repugnancy, fol. 638. and therefore CLXVIII. 3. It will not
drive a man to justify or show that which he goes about to defeat, or makes
against him, fol. 646 CLXIX. Non potest adduci exceptio ejusdem rei, cujus
petitur dissolutio, fol. 647 CLXX. None shall take exception to an Error, or
Act, which operateth to his own advantage, fol. 648 CLXXI. Nemo tenetur armare
adversarium suum contra se, fol. 665 CLXXII. It favors diligence, and
therefore hates folly and negligence, fol. 665 CLXXIII. Negligentia semper
habet infortunium Comitem, fol. 669 CLXXIV. Vigilantibus non Dormientibus L^ges
subveniant, fol. 672 CLXXV. It favors speedying of men's Causes, fol. 673
CLXXVI. It hates Delays, fol. 674 CLXXVII. It hates unnecessary
Circumstances: And Frustra fit per plura, quod fieri potest per pauciora, fol.
675 CLXXVIII. Expedit Reipublicae, ut sit finis Litium fol. 676 CLXXIX. Circuit
of Action fol. 680 CLXXX. Matter of Vexation fol. 680 CLXXXI. Pendente Lite,
nihil innovetur fol. 681 CLXXXII. Unfitness, and multiplicity of Suits fol.
682 The Law.
CLXXXIII. It construeth things with equity and moderation fol. 685 CLXXXIV. It
restrains a general Act, or Rule, and sometimes a particular Contract, if it
be mischeivous or inconvenient fol. 687 CLXXXV. Nemo bis punitur, pro eodem
relicto fol. 695 CLXXXVI. It flies, and preventeth all occasions of Evil fol.
696 CLXXXVII. It moderateth the stricknesse of the Law it self fol. 702
CLXXXVIII. Verba semper accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu, fol. 705 CLXXXIX. It
construeth things according to common possibility or Intendment fol. 703 CXC.
Stabit Presumptio donec probetur in Contrarium fol. 712 CXCI. Ad ea quae
frequentius accidunt, jura adaptantur fol. 716 CXCII. Frequentia Actus multum
operatur, fol. 719 CXCIII. It always construeth things to the best, fol. 720
CXCIV. Every Act to be lawful when it stands indifferent, whether it should
be lawful or not, fol. 722 CXCV. Non praestat impedimentum, quod de jure non
sortitur effectum, fol. 727 CXCVI. Praetextu liciti non debet admitti
illicitum, fol. 728 The Law.
CXCVII. It favors things for the Commonwealth, fol. 729 CXCVIII. It
favors public Commerce, fol. 738 CXCIX. It favors Honor and Order, fol.
739 CC. It favors public quiet, fol. 742 CCI. Conventio, seu beneficium
privatorum non potest publico juri derogare, fol. 746 CCII. Minime mutanda
sunt, quae certam habuerunt Interpretationem, fol. 748 CCIII. A Communi
observantia, non est recedendum, fol. 752 CCIV, Eventus varius res nova semper
habit, And therefore it has new Inventions and Innovations, fol. 756 CCV.
Communis Error, facit jus, fol. 758 CCVI. So does a Custom which is
reasonable: unreasonable e contr, fol. 758 CCVII. Licet consuetudo sit magnae
Authoritatis, nunquam tamen praejudicat manifestae veretati, fol. 762 Wife.
CCVIII. The Husband and Wife are one person in Law, fol. 763 CCIX. The wife is
of the same condition with her husband, fol. 764 CCX. They cannot sue one
another, or make any Grant one to another, or the like, fol. 765 CCXI. Upon a
joint Purchase during the Coverture, either of them takes the whole, fol. 766
CCXII. The husband is the woman's head, fol. 767 CCXIIJ. All that she has is
her husbands, fol. 768 CCXIV. Her will ought to become his will, and to be
subject unto it, fol. 770
Maxims of Reason: OR, THE REASON OF THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.
Laws are divided into Native and Positive.

Native are such Laws as are in us of themselves, and are therefore
unchangeable and not to be abrogated: These are likewise twofold, viz. The law
of Nature, and the Law of Reason.

The Law of Nature is that Law, Co. l. 7. 12. b. in Calvin's case. Doct. and
Stud. l. 1. cap. 1^
which God at the time of the Creation of ye nature of man infused into his
heart for his preservation and direction: This is that Law, which is called Lex
aeterna or the Moral Law, and administreth common principles of good and evil,
as That men should live peaceably together; That we should not do that to
another, which we would not have another do to us; suum cuique tribuere; That
Justice should be duly ^dministred to all, and the like: This was termed by the
Ancient Philosophers Original Justice, which in Adams innocence was clear and
lightsome, but since his fall (both in himself and his posterity) much
darkened and encumbered with original sin. This is also the Law, whereof Saint
Paul makes mention in his Epistle to the Romans, where he says, When the
Gentiles, which have not the Law, Romans 2.14, 15.
do by nature the things contained in the Law; These, having not the Law, are a
Law unto themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their hearts,
their conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts in the mean while
accusing or excusing one another.

The Law of Reason is that Law, which deduceth conclusions from known
Principles by ratiocination or discourse of sound reason, which Principles are
termed Rules or Maxims of Reason.

Positive Laws are such Laws, as are framed by the light of the two former,
for the regular Government of some particular Common wealth; And therefore
these Laws are sundry and diverse according to the several constitutions of
particular places and Countries; of this sort is the Common Law of England,
which being the Municipal Law of this Nation, and receiving its light
(principally) from the Law of Reason, is many times directed and controuled by
the Rules and Maxims thereof: Now of these Maxims, some are taken out of
foreign Sciences, as Theology, Grammar, Logique, Physiques, Moral
Philosophy, Politics and Oeconomiques; The rest are proper to the Law it self,
as Law-constructions and Fictions in Law; All which will more plainly appear by
the Precepts and Examples hereafter following.

I Maxims of Reason taken out of THEOLOGY.
1 Summa Ratio est, quae pro Religione facit. It is the high Reason that makes
for Religion.
Statutes which restrain Alienation of Ecclesiastical livings, bind the King
though not named.
1 REgularly Statutes bind not the King, Co. l. 8. 14. a. In the case of
Ecclesiastical persons. Co. l. 11. 70. a Magdalen College Case. Co. l. 2. 44.
b. In the Bishop of Winchesters Case.
unless he be particularly named, yet the King is included within the general
words of 13 El. 10. which prohibit Ecclesiastical persons to make grants of
their Livings; because the Parliament which made that Statute, adjudged such
grants to be causes of dilapidations, and decay of spiritual livings, and
hospitality, and of the utter impoverishment of successors, Incumbents in the
same; whereupon would necessarily follow decay of true Religion, and the
spiritual worship of God: For it is recorded in History, that amongst the ten
Persecutions, which the Primitive Church suffered, there were two the most
grievous, the one under Dioclesian, the other under Julian the Apostate, the
first endeavored to destroy all the Professors and Preachers of the Word of
God (occidit omnes Presbyteros) but notwithstanding that Religion still
flourished (for sanguis Martyrum est semen Ecclesiae) yet that was a grievous
Persecution: But the Persecution under the other (viz. Julian) was much more
grievous and dangerous, because (as the History says) occidit Presbyterium;
for it robbed the Church, and spoiled spiritual persons of their revenues; And
thereupon ensues great ignorance in Religion, and the service of God, and
therefore great decay of the Christian profession; for none will apply
himself, or his children, or any other committed to his charge, to the study
of Divinity, when after long and painful study they shall have nothing to live
upon. See more in the Books at large.

Ecclesiastical livings are in Abeyance.
2 The Fee simple of a Parsonage or Vicarage is said to be in Aveyance, and
this was provided by the providence and wisdom of the Law; Co. Inst. pars 341.
a.
for that the Parson and Vicar have curam animarum, and were bound to celebrate
Divine Service, and administer the Sacraments, and therefore no act of the
predecessor should make a discontinuance to take away the entry of the
successor, and to drive him to a real action, whereby he should be destitute
of maintenance in the mean time.

Co. ibid.
3 Upon consideration of all the Books of the Law, Ecclesiastical persons
cannot injure the Church.
this diversity is well observed by Sir Edw. Cook, that a Parson or Vicar for
the benefit of the Church, and his successor, is in some cases esteemed in Law
to have a Fee simple qualified; But to do any thing to the prejudice of his
successor in many cases the Law adjudgeth him to have in effect but an estate
for life. Bract. f. 226.
Causae Ecclesiae publicis causis aequiparantur, And Ecclesia fungitur vice
minoris; meliorem facere potest conditionem suam, deteriorem nequaquam. Brit
143.
Vide Co. Inst. pars 1, 2. b. 4.

Littl.. 146. Co. Inst. pars 1. 102. b. 40 E. 3. 27. 5 E. 4. 8. 6 E. 3 51, 52.
10 E. 4. 2. a. 21 H. 7. 2^.
4 An Abbot, Prior, Bishop, Dean, Archdeacon, Prebend, Ecclesiastical persons
cannot disclaim.
Parson, Vicar, or other sole Corporation, that is seized in auter droit,
cannot disclaim, because they alone cannot divest any fee, which is vested in
their house or Church: For an Abbot and Prior had their Convent, the Bishop his
Chapter, the Parson and Vicar their Patron and Ordinary, and the like of other
sole Corporations, without whose assent they could pass away no Inheritance.
And the reason of this was, because the wisdom of the Law would never suffer
one sole person to be trusted with the disposition of the Inheritance of his
house or Church. Ecclesiae suae conditionem meliorem facere possunt sine
consensu, deteriorem non possunt sine consensu. Vide infra Max. 178. Pl. 1.

Co. l. 6 49. b. Boswels Case. Co. Inst. pars 1 344. a. Glan. l. 13. cap. 18,
19, 20. Mirror c. 5. 5. Bract. 238. 240, 244, etc. 291. Fleta l. 83. c. 11, 16,
17. Britt. 222, 223, 224. 6 E 3. 28. 39. 52. 39 E. 3. 24. 43 E. 3. 25. 45 E. 3.
Quare impedit. 39. 31 E. 1. Quare impedit. 186.
5 By the Common Law there ought to be in every Parish Persona idonea to serve
the Cure; The Parson or Vicar ought to be Persona idonea.
for so it appears by the words of the Quare impedit, quod permittat
praesentare idoneam personam, which Epithete idonea includes ability in
erudition and doctrine, honesty in his conversation, and diligence in his
function, and all this to instruct the People of God in true Religion, and good
conversation, and to avoid contention: And to the intent that he, who has so
great a charge, may effectually and peaceably intend it, the Common Law
provides, that after Institution he shall not be subject to actions, and so
neglect his duty by losing his time in suits and vexations of Law: Not to be
removed after institution by a common person, nor after induction by the King.
And therefore (at the Common Law) if a stranger had presented his Clerk, and
he had been admitted and instituted to a Church, whereof any subject had been
lawful Patron, the Patron in that case had no other remedy to recover his
Advowson, but by a writ of right of Advowson wherein nevertheless the
Incumbent was not to be removed: And so it was also (at the Common Law) if an
usurpation had been had upon an Infant or a feme covert, having an Advowson by
descent, or upon tenant for life, etc. the Infant, feme covert, and he in the
reversion were driven to their writ of right of Advowson: for (at the Common
Law) if the Church were once full, the Incumbent could not be removed; And
plenarty generally was a good plea in a Quare impedit, or an Assize of Darrein
presentment: And the reason of all this was, to the intent that the Incumbent
might quietly intend and apply himself to his spiritual charge: F. N. Br. 36.
k. 143. a. Stat. 35. E. 3. 3. 13. R. 2. 1. 4 H. 4. 21.
Howbeit (at the Common Law also) if any had usurped upon the King, and his
presentee had been admitted, instituted, and inducted (for without induction
the Church had not been full against the King, the King might have removed him
by Quare impedit, and been restored to his Presentation; for therein he has a
prerogative, Quod nullum tempus occurit Regi; nevertheless (in that case also)
he could not present, for the pleanarty barred him of that, neither could he
remove him any way but by Action, to the end the Church might be the more quiet
in the mean time, neither yet did the King recover damages in his Quare
impedit at the Common Law. But now the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 5. has
altered the Common Law in these cases, And by that Statute the King is bound,
though not named, 35 H. 8. 60.
because it concerns the Church and Religion.

A Juris utrum taken against one tenant.
6 Where a Juris utrum is brought against several tenants by several summons in
the writ, F. N. Br. 50. m.
it may be taken against one tenant only, for that parcel, and after against
the others; but it is otherwise in an Assize of Novel disseisin, if it be not
in some special case.

In a Quare Impedit, a Nonsuit peremptory.
7 In a Quare impedit if the Plaintiff be nonsuit after appearance, Co. Inst
pars 1 139 a.
the defendant shall make title, and have a writ to the Bishop; and this is
peremptory to the Plaintiff, and is also a good bar in another Quare
impedit: and the reason of this is, for that in this case the defendant (in
favorem Ecclesiae) has the said writ by judgment of the Court; And therefore
the Incumbent, that comes in by that writ upon such nonsuit, shall never be
removed, that being a flat bar as to that presentation: And the same Law and
for the same reason it is in case of a discontinuance, etc.

A general accusation against a Parson or Vicar not good.
8 In a Quare impedit against the Bishop it is not a good plea to allege, that
the presentee is a Schismatic in general, Co. l. 5. 58. b. Specots case.
but he ought to express Schism in particular, because it concerning the cure
of souls is traversable, and requires more care and circumspection: It is
otherwise for the putting a Coroner out of his office; for there a general
suggestion in the writ, that he is persona minus idonea, is enough, and not
traversable. But the reason is, because this is but the keeper of the Rolls of
the Crown; the other has the cure and guard of souls.

Entire services remains after purchase of part by the Lord.
9 There is a diversity concerning entire services to be reduced to the Lord,
as a spur, horse, or the like; Co. l. 6. 1. b. in Bruertons case. Co. Inst.
pars 1. 149. a.
for when they accrue to the sole benefit of the Lord, and to the charge of the
tenant, if the Lord purchase part of the land, the whole service is thereby
extinct: But when such entire services are reserved for works of devotion,
piety, or charity, as to marry a poor virgin yearly (as you have it in 24 H. 8.
Br. tenures 53) or to find a Preacher in such a Church, or to provide ornaments
for such a Church (which tenure is in 35 H. 6. 6. In such case, albeit the Lord
purchase part, yet the entire service remains.

Protection.
10 A spiritual person shall have a protection cum clausula nolumus to protect
him, his goods, his farmers, Co. Inst. pars 1 131. b.
and their goods from the Kings purveyors and carriages. See the Stat. of 14 E.
3.

Privilege of Clergy.
11 Before the Statute de articulis cleri cap. 15. Co. l. 11. 29. b. Alex.
Poulters case.
he that confessed the felony could not have the privilege of Clergy,
because he could not make his purgation; And although the Statute speaks only
of Abjuration, and of an Approver, yet the Judges (in favorem Ecclesiae) extend
it to all other confessions upon the Arraignement of the offender.

Tithes not extinct by unity of possession.
12 If the Parson of a Church purchase a Manor within his Parish, here, by
this purchase and unity of possession, the Manor, Dyer 43. p. 21. 30 H. 8.
which was tithable before, is now made non decimabilis, because he cannot pay
tithes to himself: but if the Parson make a lease of his Parsonage and Rectorie
to a stranger; in this case, the Parson himself shall pay tithes of his Manor
to the Lessee of the Rectorie, or if the Parson make feofment of the Manor,
the feoffee shall pay tithes to the feoffor being Parson, because tithes cannot
be extinct by any unity of possession as rent charge may, which is issuing out
of land; but tithes are due by the law of God ex debito, for the manurance and
tillage of the occupier, in whosoever hands the land comes, unless it be in the
hands of the Parson himself: And therefore if the Parson let part of his Glebe
land for years or life reserving rent, the lessee shall pay the Parson tithes,
because they are due of common right. vide Br. dismes 17.

2 Nunquam prospere succedunt res Humanae, ubi negliguntur Divinae. Humane
Affairs never succeed well, where Divine Rites are neglected.
Co. Inst. pars 1 246. a. 1.
1 Laches shall not prejudice an Infant in point of descent, Laches shall
prejudice an Infant.
etc. but it shall be adjudged in him if he present not to a Church within six
months; for the law respects more the privilege of the Church (that the
Cure may be served) than the privilege of Infancy.

F. N. Br. 160. c. d.
2 Men of Religion ought not to appear at the Sheriffs turns, Clergy men not
subject to personal charges.
nor the leet of any other without great cause, and if they be distrained to
come to them they may have a writ out of the Chancery for their discharge: All
other clerks also within orders (though not beneficed) have the like
privilege: And the reason of this is, to the end they should attend their
function.

Co. l. 11. 70. b. in Madg. Col. case. M. 10 H. 6. 8.
3 I. S. brings an action of debt against I. Rector of T. in com. B. the
defendant says, A Parson ought to be resident.
that before the day of the writ purchased he dwelt at B. in com. N. Et non
allocatur; for a Parson shall be intended by Law to be always resident upon
his benefice for the cure of souls, which he has there, and the Parson, who
has cure of souls and is a non-resident, non est dispensator sed dissipator,
non speculator sed spiculator; And therefore no such thing shall be presumed.

F. N. Br, 175.
4 A Parson to the end he may give his continual attendance upon that sacred
function, is freed from all personal charges, The like.
that may hinder him in his calling: And therefore he shall not be chosen
Bailiffe, Reeve, Beadle, or other officer for land annexed to his Church; And
all this by the course of the Common Law: F. N. Br. 34. l.
for the same reason it is, that if a Parson have a Parsonage, and after take
another benefice without a dispensation, the first benefice is void, and the
Patron thereof may present; for this avoydance is called a Cession, because the
taking of the last makes him neglect the first.

F. N. Br. 175. Br. Dismes 16
5 To the end that Religion may not be neglected, Tithes due only to the Parson
of common right
but preserved and daily increased the Common Law gives to the Parson (of
common right) the tenth of all manner of yearly increase, which are called
Dismes, or Tithes, the due payment whereof tends much to the continuance and
establishment of the true Religion, and the due worship of God; Co. l. 2. 44.
b. The Bishop of Winchesters case.
And therefore albeit a mere lay man may prescribe in modo decimandi, yet he
cannot so do in non decimando; because he is but in special cases capable of
tithes at the Common Law; and therefore without special matter showed it shall
not be intended, that he has any lawful discharge; And for this cause in
favor of holy Church (although it may have lawful commencement) the law will
not suffer such prescription in that case, nor put it to the trial of lay men,
who will perhaps rather strain their consciences for their private benefit,
that give the Church the duties, that belong to her. Vide infra 186. 11.

Co. l. 5. 63. a. 44 E. 3. 19.
6 The Inhabitants of a Town (without any custom) may make ordinances or
bylaws for reparation of the Church, By-Lawes.
and in that case the greater part shall bind all the rest without any Custom.
The Chamberlain of Londons case.

Prisot.
3 To such Laws as have warrant in holy Scripture, our Law gives credence, and
contra.
Co. Inst. pars 1 128. b.
1 In the reign of King Alfred, Outlawed persons had capita Lupina.
and until a good while after the Conquest no man could have been outlawed
but for felony, and then the outlawed person was said to have Caput Lupinum,
because he might be put to death by any man, as a Wolf that hateful beast
might; and in ancient time the head of either of them being brought to the
chief place of the County or Franchise where they were killed, the party so
killing them was to have a Mark for his pains: Howbeit in the beginning of the
reign of E. 3. it was resolved by the Judges (for avoiding of inhumanitie and
effusion of Christian blood) that it should not be lawful for any man, but the
Sheriff only (and that upon lawful warrant) to put to death any outlawed
person, though it were for felony, in pain to suffer death, as in case of
killing another man.

One attainted of a Praemunire.
2 It was lawful for any man to put to death a man attainted of a Praemunire,
because he was also without the Kings protection, Co. ibid. 129. b
and therefore subject to be destroyed as the Kings enemy: but this was taken
away by the wisdom of Queen Eliz. and her Parliament (5 El. 1.) as a liberty
not becoming a Christian Commonwealth.

Lepers.
3 The Law of England for removing of Lepers (by the writ de leproso amovendo)
from the society of men to some solitary place is grounded upon the law of
God. Levit. 13.44, 45, 46. Numb. 5.1, 2. Co. ibid. 135. b


4 In Cholmeleys case in the 2 Rep. fol. 51. Co. l. 11. 70. b. in Magdel.
College case.
where a reversion expectant upon an estate in tail was granted to one for the
life of the tenant in tail, A Monkish life condemned.
it was said, that by possibility this grant for life may take effect; for
tenant in tail having no issue may become a Monk and enter into religion, and
then the grantee may have it during his natural life: but it was there
resolved, that such superstitious and irreligious profession shall not be
presumed in law.

A Law against Charity void.
5 If a Statute be made directly against the Law of God, Doct. and Stud. l. 1.
cap. 6.
as if it should be ordained, that none should give Alms to any, in what
necessity soever he were, or the like, such Statute ought to be adjudged void.

6 Such Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, Co. l. 5. part. 1. 32. b. in the
case of the Kings Ecclesiastical Law.
and Synodals provincial, Ecclesiastical Laws.
as have been allowed by general consent and custom within the Realm, and are
not contrariant or repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of the Realm,
nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings Prerogative royal, are still in force
within this Realm, as the Kings Ecclesiastical Laws of the same.

4 The Jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Law, ought to be bounded by the
Common Law.
Spiritual Laws.
1 The Spiritual Laws mentioned in Littleton (Sect. 648) are such
Ecclesiastical Laws as are allowed by the Laws of this Realm, Co. Inst. pars
1 344. a. Co. l. 5. pars 1. 32. b. Jurisdiction. Stat. 35 H. 8. 19 33 H. 6. 34.
32 H. 6. ^8.
viz. which are not against the Common Law (whereof the Kings prerogative is a
principal part) nor against the statutes or customs of the Realm, Prerogative
and (regularly) according to such ecclesiastical Laws the Ordinary and
other Ecclesiastical Judges do proceed in causes within their Conisance, and
this Jurisdiction was so bounded by the Ancient Common Laws of the Realm, and
so declared by Act of Parliament.

5 Dies Dominicus non est juridicus.
The Lords day.
1 In all the four terms the Lords day is not Dies juridicus, Co. Inst. pats 1
135. a.
for that ought to be consecrated to divine service.

Pleas.
2 No plea shall be holden Quindena Paschae, F. N. B. 17. f.
because it is always the Lords day, but it shall be crastino quindenae
Paschae.

Fin^^.
3. Upon a fine levied with proclamations according to the Statute of 4 H. 7.
24. if any of the proclamations be made on the Lords day, Finches Ley page 7.
all the proclamations are erroneous, for the Justices may not sit upon that
day, being a day exempt from such businesses by the Common Law for the
solemnity of it; to the intent that all people may apply themselves that day
to prayer and serving of God.

1 El. Dyer 168 12 E. 4. 8.
3 If a writ of Scire facias out of the Common place bear Test upon the Lords
day, it is error, because it is not dies dominicus in Banco. Error.


4 No sale upon the Lords day shall be said a sale in Market overt to alter the
property. Sale.


6 Gravius est divinam quam Temporalem laedere majestatem.
Co. l. 11. 29. b. Poulters case.
1 Regularly, Clergy.
a man shall (by the Common law) have the benefit of Clergy for any felony;
Howbeit, if a felon be also an Heretic, Jew, Sarazen or Infidel, he shall not
have it.

F. N. B. 269. b. Br. Heresy 1. Co. l. ^. 58. a. Specots case.
2 Heresy is an offense committed against the Majesty of God by a presumptuous
oppugning of an Article of Faith, or the like; Heresy.
And therefore (at the Common law) this offense was punished by a more terrible
and grievous mulct, than any other felony whatsoever, (and indeed than Treason
it self;) viz. by fire and faggot: Howbeit, to determine, what is Heresy,
falls not within the Conusance of temporal Courts, but is wholly left to the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; for it appears by the writ de haeretico
comburendo, that (at the Common law) before an heretic could be committed to
the Lay-power to be burnt, he was to be convicted in a Provincial Synod before
the Archbishop and his Clergy, and then if he did either refuse to abjure the
heresy, or having abjured it, upon a relapse were convicted again by such a
Synod) of that or any other heresy, he was then delivered to the secular power
to be punished by fire and faggot, and no Sanctuary could privilege him:
Frowick Lect.
Howbeit by the Statute of 2 H. 4. 15. any Bishop had power to do as much
within his Diocese, and if the Sheriff were present at his conviction, the
Bishop might deliver him to the Sheriff to be burnt, and that without the
Kings writ; but that Statute was repealed by 25 H. 8. cap. 14. and thereby that
offense made presentable at Sheriffs Turns and Leets, and from th^nce to be
certified to the Ordinary, which Statute the 25 H. 8. was also repealed by 1
E. 6. 12. from which time until 1, 2 P. M. 6. (which revived 2 H. 4. 15.) an
heretic was punishable at the Common Law as above is expressed: but by 1 El.
1. the Statute of 1, 2 P. M. was repealed, and then by 1 El. the Queens
Commissioners (heretofore called the High Commission Court) had power to judge
of heresy, but they were thereby also restrained to adjudge nothing Heresy,
but what was so adjudged by the holy Scriptures, the four first General
Councils, or the Parliament with the assent of the Clergy in their
Convocation: Howbeit at this day the Jurisdiction of Bishops being taken away,
and that clause of 1 El. repealed by a later Act, it seems (at present) there
is no law to punish that offense. See more concerning heresies in the Statutes
of 5 R. 2. 5. 2 H. 5. 7. 31 H. 8. 14. and 34 H. 8. 1. being all repealed by 1
E. 6. 12. See also Li. Intr. 264, and 340. Rast. Ph. 319. 10. H. 7. fol. 17.
and Doct. and Stud. L. 2. cap. 29. Howbeit, observe, that the said Statutes
made in the reigns of H. 4. and H. 5. were chiefly intended against such as
did then begin to discover the Pride, Lucre, and errors of the Church of Rome,
and in dirision were termed Lollards, as you may read at large in the Book of
Martyrs and elsewhere in diverse other authors, as Sleiden, Brightman, etc. The
Kings command against Law not to be obeyed by the Judges.


Stat. 18. E. 3. Stat. 3. 8.
3 One part of the Judges oath is, that they shall not deny right, though it be
by command from the King, which if they break, they will be found guilty
Laesae Majestatis divinae; And therefore in such case they ought rather to
disobey the Kings commands then thereby incur the high displeasure of
Almighty God, for Gravius est divinam, etc. And to the end that the Judges
might be the better protected from this danger, Stat. 2. E. 3. 8.
the prudence of former times has ordained diverse Laws, whereby the Justices
have power to proceed, Stat. 20. E. 3. 1.
notwithstanding any command from the King to the contrary, no, though it be
under the Great or Privy Seal: And therefore if the King write to the Justices
to prorogue an Assize, because the defendant is in his service, F. N. B. 153. h.
yet the Justices ought to proceed, and not to cease for any such letter: so
likewise in an Assize the Bishop certifies Bastardie, 29 E. 3. 14. Judgment 117
and the Kings letter is sent to the Justices to cease, because the certificate
was suspicious, notwithstanding which letter they took the Assize; and
afterward, albeit the Chancellor reversed the taking of the Assize; in the
Council, because they obeyed not the letter, yet notwithstanding that the
Justices gave Judgment upon the Assize: 22 F. 3. 12. Judgment 185
Also in dower the tenant was essoined, and had farther day given, at which the
King sends a letter to excuse the tenants apperance, alleging that he was at
Callis in his service. Howbeit the Justices gave no regard to it, but proceeded
notwithstanding that letter.

Nor by the Sheriff.
4 The Sheriff also, 14 E. 3. Returns del Viscont, 8^.
who is but an Officer or Minister to the superior Courts of Justice, ought
not to desist from the due execution and return of writs directed unto him
notwithstanding any command to the contrary from the King, least he likewise
incur the like danger by breaking his oath; And therefore we read in 14 E. 3.
that N. de B. being attainted of disseisin with force, An Exigi facias went
forth against him to the Sheriff, who returned, that the King had certified him
by writ, that he had pardoned the trespass and imprisonment, commanding him
that he should desist, and that therefore he had not executed the writ;
whereupon says Wilby, the writ ought first to have been sent to us, that we
might have commanded the Sheriff to cease, for the Sheriff ought not for any
such writ to have ceased to serve the Exigi facias without commandment from the
same Court, out of which it issued, and thereupon the Sheriff was amercied,
Dyer 170. 1 and 2 Eliz.
and another Exigi facias issued out: Nor by the Escheator.
The Escheator also ought not to desist from the execution of his office,
notwithstanding any such command to the contrary from the King: And therefore
we find in 1 Eliz. That after the death of the Lord Powes a Mandamus being
directed to the Escheastor of Salop to find the office, he takes the
presentment of the Jury in p per, and adjournes them over to another day to
take it in Parchment and by Indenture, before which day the Queen sends a
Supersedeas at the suit of one Herbert and his wife, And it was adjudged, that
the Escheator ought not to have obeyed that Supersedeas.

7 The Law disfavoureth an excomunicate person.
Excommunication. Jury.
1 It is a good plea in abatement of a writ to say, Litt. 201. Co. Inst. pars 1
133. b. Co. ibid. 158. a.
that the Plaintiff is excommunicate. Doct. and Stud. l. 1. cap. 6.

2 The old Books have said, that if a man be excommunicate, he ought not to
serve of a Jury.

Jews.
3 A Jew born in England took wife a Jew borne also in England, Co. ibid. 31. b.
and Rot. Parl. 26 E. 1. Rot. 1.
the husband was converted to the Christian faith, purchased lands, and
enfeoffed another, and died, the wife brought a writ of Dower, but was barred
thereof, and the reason yielded in the record is this, Quia vero contra
justitiam est, quod ipsa dotem petat vel habeat de tenemento, quod fuit viri
sui, ex quo in conversione sua noluit cum eo adhaerere, and cum eo converti,
etc.

4 Infidels are accounted in Law to be perpetui inimici, Infiels.
with whom a Christian ought to have no peace, but perpetual enmity and
hostility, according to that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.15. Quae autem concordia
Christo cum Belial? Co. l. 7. 17. a. b. in Calvin's case
aut quae portio fideli cum infideli? And the Law says, Judaeo Christianum
nullum serviat mancipium, nefas enim est quem Christus redemit Blasphemum
Christi in servitutis vinculis detinere: Regist. 282. Infideles sunt Christi
and Christianorum inimici, and herewith agrees the book in 12 H. 8. fol. 4.
where it is holden, that a Pagan cannot have or maintain any action at all;
and upon this ground there is a diversity between the Conquest of a Country
of a Christian Prince, and the Conquest of a Country of an Infidel; The power
of a Conqueror.
for if a Prince obtain a Christian Country by Conquest, seeing that he has
vitae and necis potestatem, he may at his pleasure alter and change the Laws
of that Nation; but until he do make an alteration, the ancient Laws thereof
shall remain: Howbeit if a Christian Prince should conquer a Country of an
Infidel, and bring them under subjection, there ipso facto the Laws of the
Infidel are abrogated; for they be not only against Christianity, but against
the Law of God and nature, contained in the Decalogue: And in that case until
certain Laws be established amongst them, the Prince by himself or such
Judges as he shall appoint, shall judge them and their causes according to
natural equity and original Justice, in such sort as Kings in ancient time did
within their Kingdoms, before any certain municipal Laws were established:
But where a Prince has the Government of a Nation by descent, seeing that by
the Laws of the Nation he does inherit that Authority, he cannot change the
Laws thereof without the consent of the People assembled in Parliament.

II Maxims of Reason: taken from GRAMMAR.
8 The Rules from Grammar are infinite, in the Etymology of words, and in the
Construction of them, what their nature is single, what joined with others,
etc.
A Lease with condition to take the profits.
1 IF a man make a Lease for years reserving a rent, with a condition, Co. Inst
pars 1 203. a.
that if the rent be behind, the Lessor shall re-enter, and take the profits,
until thereof he be satisfied; in this case the profits shall be accounted as
parcel of the satisfaction, and during the time that he so takes the profits,
he shall not have an action of debt for the rent, for the satisfaction whereof
he so takes the profits: but if the condition be, that he shall take the
profits, until he be satisfied and paid of the rent (without saying thereof)
or to the like effect, there the profits shall be accounted no part of the
satisfaction, but only to hasten the Lessee to pay it, and until he be
satisfied he shall take the profits to his own use.

Commencement of a Lease.
2 If a lease be made, Habendum sibi a die confectionis, Col. l. 5. 94. a. in
Barwicks Case.
the day of the making is excluded; for (a) vel (ab) is dictio significativa
primi termini a quo, sicut dictio (usque) termini ad quem, and (a) vel (ab)
accipitur excl sive. Vide infra 1^. and Max. 34. 2.

Possession derived.
3 Possessio is derived a Pos and sedeo, Co. l. 6. 57. b. in Bredimans Case.
because he that is in possession may sit down in repose and quiet: so also
seisina is derived a sedendo, for until he has seisin all is Labor, Dolor,
and vexatio spiritus; but when he has seisin, he may sit down and rest:
Howbeit, Quaere, whether or no possessio be derived of Post and sedeo, because
he that has possession sits down last, and seisina seems to be derived of
the French word seiser, which signifies to lay hold on.

Tempus semes^^e.
4 Tempus semestre being spoken in the singular number (as appears in the
Dictionaries) signifies half a year or six months, Co. l. 6. 62. a. in
Catesbies Case.
viz. such six months, qui conficiunt dimidium anni, and there is a great
diversity in our common speech between a Twelve-moneth (being ye singular
number which includes a whole year according to the Calendar, and twelve months
(in the plural number) which shall be computed according to 28 days for every
month, Vide 31. 13.

Co. l. 8 85. b. in Sir Richard Pexhals Case
5 A. devises to B. 100 Sheep and ten Bullocks, Devise.
and 10 l. issuing and payable yearly out of his lands; here, the last (and)
disjoynes the rent from the Sheep and Bullockes: It is otherwise; if he had
devised them thus, 100 Sheep, ten Bullockes, and 10 l. yearly; for then the
(and) connexeth them all together, and then they are all to be paid yearly out
of the lands.

Co. l. 10. 133. a Osborns Case.
6 Words, which pass under the name of Latin, are of four sorts, Latin words,
Sensible, and Insensible.
the first is good and congruous Latin allowed by Gramarians; And this (without
question) is within the Statute of 36 E. 3. 15. which ordaines, that all pleas
shall be entered and enrolled in Latin. The second sort are such words as these,
Messuagium, Tostum, Gardinum, Bruera, Jampna, etc. These and the like are
allowed not only in Pleas, but also in original writs; for these are such
words as are known to the Sages of the Law, and are also within the Statute of
36 E 3. such words as are called words of Art, and are frequent also in other
Sciences, as amongst the Civilians, Reprisalia, Feuda, Shopa, Sollaria, etc.
who use many times to explain them by Anglice, etc. as Sollaria anglice
Warehouses; The Physicians also use Brothium for broth, and the like: The
third sort is false and incongruous Latin, this shall abate an original writ,
but shall not make a Judicial writ, count, pleading, or judgment vicious (for
false Latin shall in such cases be amended:) And therefore (a fortiori) such
Latin or false English shall not avoid a grant or deed, when the intention of
the parties may appear, M. 3, and 4. El. R. 1350. M. 44, and 45. R. 1031. 9 H.
6, 7. 9 H. 7. 16. 2 H 4 8. M. 11. Jac.
as in a bill or bond, Octogenta, Septungenta, Wiginti, Sewteene, or the like,
shall be taken for Octoginta, Septingenta, Viginti, Seaventeene etc. Also when
there is no latin for a word, as for a Stirrup, Velvet, etc. Strapedia,
Velvetum, etc. may be used, because they have the countenance of latin, so also
Operimentum for a Rugge: Howbeit, in such case, (for explanation sake) it will
be fit also to insert the word Anglice, as Operimentum anglice a Rugge, Duas
virgatas velveti, anglice, of velvet, etc. The fourth and last sort are
insensible words, as in a case of a Replevin, P. 36 El. Gawins case, Vitrium
for Vitrum, glass: yet (in that case) the Court did incline only to adjudge
it false latin, because it had the countenance of latin, and the Court was
sufficiently ascertained, that glass was meant by it.

P. Co. 85. b. in Partridges Case.
7 If I give you a quart of wine, you shall not have the quart-pot, Phrase of
speech.
but if I give you an Hogshead of wine, you shall have the Hogshead; for the
phrase of the language expresses the intent; so 11 acres belonging to a
Message will sufficiently declare, which 11 acres are meant, although land is
not properly said to belong to an house, but the house to land.

Co. l. 2. 72. a. the Lord Cromwels Case.
8 Note, in Docwras case, 27 H. 8. 18. a. in Littl. cap. conditions, 14. Where a
Proviso makes a condition, and where not.
El. Dyer 311. 4. and 5. P. M. Dyer 152, that this word Proviso makes a
condition: But when the Proviso depends upon another sentence, or has
reference to another part of the deed, it never makes a condition, but a
qualification or limitation of the sentence, or part of the deed, unto which it
referres; as in 5 El. 22. inter Air and Orme, a notable case: so in 7 H. 6. a
lease without impeachment of wast, provided, that he shall not make voluntary
wast: In Littl. Sect. 220. A grant of rent charge, provided, that the grantee
shall not charge his person: Tramingtons case in the K. B. P. 16. El. Rot. 273
there a Proviso tending to a qualification, and to explain a precedent
sentence; makes not a condition: And 3, 4. P. M. 150. Parkers case, a Proviso
amounts to a covenant see 28 H. 8. Dyer. 13 b.

Utrumque.
9 Three were bound in an obligation thus, Dyer 19. 114. 28 H. 8.
Obligamus nos and utrumque nostrum per se pro toto and in solid. The question
was, whether or no this obligation was several; And one of the Judges was of
opinion that it was not several; because utrumque is properly of two, viz.
both; And it should have been quemlibet nostrum, etc. when more than two are
bound: Howbeit it seemed to the Court that the obligation was good and several,
Vide 31. 12.

Confirmation.
10 If the disseisee confirm the estate of the disseisor, Littl. Sect. 519 and
520.
though it be but for an hour he shall have a lawful estate in fee simple for
ever, quia confirmare est firmum facere.

Exposition of illa.
11 If the King or a common person grant omnia illa messuagia in tenura Johannis
Brown scituat. in Wells, Co. l. ^. 33. a. Dodingtons Case.
whereas in truth they lie in D. in this case, because the grant is general and
is restrained to a certain Town, the Patentee or Grantee shall not have any
lands out of that Town, unto which the generaltie of the grant referres, and
this case is the stronger, because of the Pronoune illa, for omma illa
messuagia etc. makes necessary reference as well to the town, as to the
tenure of I. B. so that if either fail, the general grant is void; for illa
is not satisfied, until the sentence be ended, and illa governs the whole
sentence to the full point. Vide infra max. 10. cap. 5.

Commencement of a Lease.
12 Indentures of demise were engrossed bearing date the 26 of May Anno 25. Co.
l. 5. 1. a. Claytons Case.
Eliz. to have and to hold for three years from henceforth and the Indentures
were delivered at 4 of the clock in the afternoon of the 20 day of June Anno
praedicto Eliz. In this case, from henceforth shall be accounted from the time
of the delivery of the Indentures, and not by any compatation from the date,
for from henceforth, is as much as to say, from the making, or from the time of
the delivery of the Indentures, or a confectione presentium; because the
confection or making of the Lease commenceth by the delivery, and these words
from henceforth or any other words of the Indenture are not of any force or
effect until the delivery, Quia traditio facit loqui tantum. Vide supra 2.

9 In Conjunctivis oportet utrumque, Bract. l. 2. fol. 19. a.
in disjunctivis sufficit alteram partem esse veram.
Conjunction copulative.
1 If lands be given in tail upon condition, Littl. Sect. 364
that if the tenant alien in fee, fee tail, or for term of life etc. and also
if all the issues of tenant in tail die without issue, that then it shall be
lawful for the donor and his heirs to re-enter: Tail.
here, the right of the intaile may this way (after discontinuance) be
preserved to the issue in tail (if any be) so that upon entry of the donor and
his heirs the estate tail shall not be defeated for such condition. Condition.
And yet in this case if the tenant in tail or his heirs make any
discontinuance, he in the reversion or his heirs after the estate tail
determined (for default of issue) may enter into the land by force of that
condition, and shall not be put to his Formedon in reverter. Note, Co. Inst.
pars 1 224. b.
that here Littleton does purposely make parcel of the condition in the
copulative. 1 viz. that the tenant in tail should alien, etc. and all the
issues die, etc. for if a gift in tail be made to a man and the heirs of his
body, and if he die without heirs of his body, that then the donor and his
heirs shall re-enter, this is a void condition; for when the issues fail, the
estate determines by express limitation, and (consequently) the adding of the
condition to defeat that, which is determined by the limitation of the estate,
is void; and in this case the wife of the donee shall be endowed: And therefore
Littleton to make the condition good, added an alienation, which amounted to a
wrong, and restrained not the alienation only (for then presently upon the
alienation the donor, etc. might re-enter and defeat the estate tail) but
adds, and die without issue, to the end that the right of the estate might be
preserved, and not defeated by the condition, but might be recovered again by
the issue in tail in a Formedon.

Co. ibid. 125. a. pl. Co. 107. in Fulmerstons Case.
2 Note, that in a condition consisting of diverse parts, Conjunction copulative
and disjunctive.
in the copulative (as above in the case of Littleton) both parts must be
performed; but otherwise it is, when the condition is in the disjunctive; for
in disjunctivis sufficit alterum esse verum, what then if the condition or
limitation be both in the copulative and disjunctive, as if a man make a lease
to the husband and wife for the term of 21 years, if the husband and wife or
any child between them so long live, and then the wife dies without issue,
shall the lease continue or determine during the life of the husband? The
answer is, that it shall continue; for the disjunctive refers to the whole,
and disjoyneth not only the latter part as to the child, Pl. 30. El. in C. B.
Truepennies Case.
but also to the barn and feme; so as the sense is, if the barn, feme, or any
child shall so long live. So if an use be limited to certain persons, until
A. shall come from beyond Sea, and attain to his full age, or die; here, if he
does come from beyond Sea, or attain to his full age, the use shall cease.

Co. l. 10. 59. a The Bishop of Sarums Case.
3 In Avowry exception was taken to the bar, Negative pregnant. Pleading.
because where the avowant had alleged by matter in fact, that the office
(for which the annuitie was due) had been granted to such person or persons as
pleased the Bishop of Sarum, etc. the defendant in his bar had pleaded in the
negative, that the said office had not been granted but for the life of one,
etc. and therefore the defendant ought to have concluded, and hoc quaerit, quod
inquiratur per patriam, whereas he concluded all his plea with, and hoc paratus
est verificare, etc. sed non allocatur; for the Avowant alleged not that the
said office had been granted, etc. to diverse persons, but to such person or
persons as pleased the Bishop; Et in disjunctivis sufficit alterum esse verum:
so that the defendant did not traverse what the Avowant had alleged.

Pl. Co. 5. b. Fogasses Case.
4 The Statute of 1 El. 13. Disjunctive.
(for the payment of Subsidies for Merchandise) is in the disjunctive, viz. the
subsidy not paid, or the Collector not agreed with: And therefore if either of
these be done the intent of the Statute is performed.

Pl. ibid. 9. a.
5 The Statute of 26 H. 8. 3. is in the disjunctive, Disjunctive.
viz. that every Parson, Vicar, etc. which before they enter upon their
benefice do not satisfy, content or pay, or compound or agree to pay to the
King the first fruits, etc. shall be taken as intruders; And therefore although
they do not pay down the first fruits immediately, but agree to pay them, or
(as the Common use is) give bond for them, it is sufficient.

Dyer 43. 22. etc. 30 H. 8.
6 A Merchant having paid custom for certain Clothes, Custom concealed.
ships them for beyond sea, and in a tempest the Mariners (for the safeguard
of themselves and the ship) were forced to throw the Clothes over board, and
coming back to the same port, they asked the Customer whether or no they might
(having that misfortune) transport as many more Clothes without paying Custom,
the Customer told them he thought they might, which they did accordingly;
hereupon an Information being brought, the issue joined was, Quod Customarium
and Subsidium non fuerunt solut. nec cum Collectore concordat. Sed omnino
concelat. and substract. contra formam statuti, etc. And it was found by the
Nisi prius at Guild Hall, Quod Customarium and Subsidium, etc. non concelat.
and substract. contra formam statuti, etc. And here it was doubted whether the
verdict was for or against the King; for the verdict had been perfect if it
had been, Quod non fuerunt concelat. aut substract. if the Jury had intended to
find for the defendant; but now their intent (as it seems) was to acquit the
defendant of the concealment, but not of the Subtraction.

10 Words in construction must be referred to the next antecedent, where the
matter it self does not hinder it.
Remainder where good or void.
1 If a man gives land to A and haeredibus de corpore suo, Co. Inst. pars 1. 20.
b.
the remainder to B in forma praedicta, that is a good estate to B. because in
forma praedicta does include the other; Co. ibid. 385. b.
But if a man lets lands to A. for life, the remainder to B. in tail, the
remainder to C. in forma praedicta, this last remainder is void for the
uncertaintie; Howbeit if the remainder had been, the remainder to C. in eadem
forma, this had been a good estate tail, for, Idem semper proximo antecedenti
refertur.

Release.
2 M. releaseth to N. Omnimodas actiones tam reales quam personales, Co. l. 8.
154. b. Althams Case,
sectas, quaerelas, and demanda quaecunque, nec non totam dotem suam ac titulum
and actionem dotis sibi contingent. post mortem T. viri sui de aliquibus terris
and tenementis suis in W. quae vel quas illa praefata M. vel executores sui
versus ipsum N, etc. Here, the words of Relation (Quae vel quas) do refer as
well to the special words Dowers, etc. as to the general words Actions, etc.
and Demands; for it would be against reason, that they should refer to the
general words, which are more remote, and not to the words of qualification,
which are nearer unto them.

Pretended rights.
3 The Statute of 32 H. 8. 9. provides, Pl. Co. 88. 6. in Partridges case
that none shall buy rights of titles in land, unless such person, etc. have
been in possession of it, or of the reversion or remainder of it, or have
taken the rents and profits of it by the space of one whole year next before;
Here, these words by the space of one whole year, shall be only referred to
the sentence next before viz. the taking of the rents and profits.

Abbey Lands. Leases.
3 The Statute of 31 H. 8. 13. ordaines, Pl Co. 107. a, Fulmerstons case.
that farmers of Abbey lands, which had then Leases in being, should enjoy them
for 21 years from the time of the making of such leases, if so many years were
therein limited; or else they should enjoy them for so many years, as in such
lease or leases were expressed, so that the same lease or leases exceeded not
21 years; Here, this last sentence, so that, etc. relates to the clause next
going before it, and not to the first: Ad proximum antecedens fiat relatio.

Alienation of an entail.
4 Sir Th. Cheyney in 1 El. devises, etc. to H. his son, Co. l. 5. 68. a. The
Lord Cheyneys case
and to the heirs male of his body, remainder to Th. Cheyney of D. and the
heirs male of his body upon condition, that he or they or any of them shall
not discontinue: The question was, whether or no H. the son was included
within these words he or they; And it was resolved by Wray and Anderson after
conference had with other Judges, that those words should not be referred to
the grant made to H. the son, but only to the grant made to Th. Chapter of D.

Tithes.
5 Qu. El. grants to I. S. Totam illam portionem decimarum, Co. l. 4. 35. a.
Bozoms case.
etc. in L. in com. N. cum omnibus aliis decimis suis quibuscunque in L. in
dict. com. N. nunc vel nuper in occupatione I. C. Here, these last words nunc
vel nuper, etc. refer to the whole sentence, and not to the later part of it
only, viz. cum omnibus aliis, etc. 1 Because the first words are Totam illam
portionem Decimarum, etc. So that this pronoune illam shows plainly; that
there ought to be subsequent words to explain, and reduced, into certainty,
what portion by the intention of the Qu. shall be granted, The reference of
illam.
viz. that which was in the occupation of I. C. And therefore this pronoune
illam is not satisfied, until you come to the full end of the sentence: 2 This
Conjunction cum omnibus aliis, etc. couples the last words with the former, and
makes the subsequent words refer to the whole sentence, Vide supra Max. 8
Case 11.

Dyer 46. b. P. 31, and 32. H. 8.
6 An Indictment found in this manner, that Eliz. fuit in pace, Indictment.
etc. quousque A. vir prefatae Eliz. de D. in com. S. yeoman did kill her, is
good; for the addition yeoman must of necessity refer to the husband because
a woman cannot be a yeoman: But an Indictment, Quousque Alicia S. de D. in
commit S. uxor I. S. Spinster, etc. is not good again Alice S. for there
Spinster being an indifferent addition both to man and woman must refer to I.
S. being the next antecedent, and so the woman has no addition: 9 E. 4. 48.
so likewise an indictment against I. S. serviens I. D. de D. in com. Midd.
yeoman, is not good; for servant is no addion, and yeoman, refers to the
Master, which is the next antecedent.

Dyer 15. b. 28 H. 8.
7 A man makes a lease for life, the remainder in tail, In forma p^dicta.
the remainder to I. S. in forma praedicta, this shall not refer to the
estate, which is the next before, but to the first estate because there wants
the word heirs to cause him to have an estate tail.

Dyer ibid.
8 A man is bound to abide the award of I. S. who awards, Relation of time.
that the one party shall pay before such a feast 10 l. to the other, and that
then the other shall make him a release. This word then shall not be referred
to the feast, but to the time of payment of the money.

Dyer ibid.
9 In a Cui in vita brought by a feme, the writ is, Cui in vita.
Cui ipsa in vita sua contradicere non, etc. this word sua shall not be
referred ad proximum antecedens viz. ipsa, but to the baron.

11 The Law delights in apt expressions.
Co. Inst. pars 1 302. a.
1 Whenever a Confirmation does enlarge or give an estate of Inheritance there
ought to be apt words (as Littl. expresses them Sect. 533) used for the same.
Apt words.


Co. ibid. 297. a.
2 If a disseisor make a lease for 100 years, Confirmation.
the disseisee may confirm parcel of those years, but then it must be by apt
words; for he must not confirm the lease, or demise, or the estate of the
Lessee; for in that case (though it should be but for an hour) it gives the
disseisor fee simple for ever (as you have it in Littl. Sect. 519 and 520.) and
then also the addition of parcel of the term would be repugnant, if the whole
were confirmed before; but the confirmation must be of the Land for part of the
term.

Co. l. 1 85. a. in Corbets Case.
3 Judges ought to know the intention of the parties by certain and sensible
words, Certain and uncertain words.
which are agreeable and consonant to the Rules of Law, And therefore if land
be given by deed to two, to have and to hold to them and haeredibus, this is
void for the insensibility and uncertainty; And albeit they have a clause of
warranty to them and to their heirs, this shall not make the first words,
which are uncertain and without sense, to be of force and effect in law,
although his intent appear; for his intent ought be declared by words certain
and consonant to law.

Co. l. 6. 26. a. Sharps Case.
4 If one says thus, unto another, Improper words.
I do here demise unto you my house for term of your life; this is a good
beginning, if actual livery be made accordingly, or if he use apt words, which
may amount to so much; but without livery or such words, such a demise does
amount but to a Lease at will. Vide Thorough goods case Co. l. 9. 137. b.

Co. l. 6. 43. a.
5 In Sir Anthony Mildmayes case it was observed, Compendiousness.
that in the Proviso there (to restrain the tenant in tail from alienation)
found at large by the speceial verdict, there were more then a thousand words,
whereas (in our books) when the tenant in tail was restrained from alienation,
there were under twelve words: Haec fuit candida illius aetatis fides and
simplicitas, quae pauculis lineis omnia fidei firmamenta possuerunt: Co. l. 10.
30. b. S^tions Hospital.
It may be also observed, that the Statutes made before the reign of H. 8. were
short and concise, but from his time (especially from the twentieth year of
his reign) they are much more prolix and voluminous, whereas Laws and
Precepts ought to be short and significant, to the end they may be easily
understood, and the better retained in the memory, according to that of
Erasmus in his religious Colloquie, Praestat pauca avide discere, quam multa
cum taedio devorare; And that of Horace; Quicquid praecipies esto Brevis, ut
cito dicta
Percipiant animi dociles, teneantque fideles.


Franchise. Prescription.
6 A Prescription to have all wild Swans, which are ferae naturae, Co l. 7. 18.
a. The Case of Swans.
and not marked, nidificant. gignent. and frequentant. within such a Creek, is
insufficient; so is also such a prescription for a Warren, viz. to have all
Phesants and Partridges nidificant. gignent. and frequentant. within such a
Manor, but he ought to say, that he has Free warren of them within the
Manor; for albeit they be nidificant. etc. within the Manor, yet he cannot
have them Jure privilegii but only so long as they are within that place:
Howbeit a Prescription thus alleged is good, viz. that within such a Creek
there has been time out of mind, etc. a game of wild swans not marked,
nidificant, etc. And then to prescribe, that such an Abbot and all his
predecessors, etc. have always used to have and take to their own use some of
the said wild Swans, and their signets within the said Creek, such a
prescription (I say) is good; for albeit Swans are Royal fowl, yet this way a
man may prescribe in them, because that may have lawful beginning, viz. by the
Kings grant.

Debet and detinet.
7 The form of a writ of debt shall be sometimes in the debet and detinet, and
sometimes in the detinet only, F. N. Br, 88. b. F. N. B. 119. b.
and then if it be the debet it shall abate: It shall be always in the debet
and detinet, when he that makes the bargain or contract or borrows the money,
or he, to whom the obligation is made, brings an action against him that is
bound, or is party to the bargain contract or borrowing, and also when the
action is brought for money: But if a man sell 20 quarters of wheat for an
horse, here if he bring a writ of debt for the horse, the writ shall be in the
detinet only: And the Rule of the Register is, Fitz. ibid. m.
quod in brevi debito, de catallis nunquam dicetur quod ei debet: Also if a
writ of debt be brought by executors upon a duty due to their testator, the
writ shall be, quos eis detinet, and not debet and detinet, because they were
not party to the contract: so likewise if a writ of debt be brought against
executors by the creditor upon a duty by their testator, the writ shall be
quos ei detinent, and not debent and detinent, albeit he demand money, as 20 l.
or any other sum.

Annuity.
8 In a writ of annuitie the form, is Quem ei debet, F. N. Br. 152. a.
when any thing that is not money is demanded. It is otherwise in an action of
debt, Non est factum
for if it be for money, the demand shall be in the debet, but if it be for any
thing else, it shall be in the detinet and not in th debet: And in debt also if
a man demand money and ten quarters of wheat, then the form of the writ shall
be, Praecipe A. quod just, etc. reddat B. december libras, etc. quas ei debet,
and december quarteria frumenti, quae ei injuste detinet, etc.

9 If a man be taken in execution by the Sheriff upon a ca. sa. and the
Sheriff takes bond of him for his apperance and rendering himself true
prisoner, Pl. Co. 66. a. Dive and Manninghams case.
contrary to the Statute of 23 H. 6. 10. In an action of debt brought by the
Sheriff against the obliger, it is no apt conclusion for the obliger to say,
judgment se action, but he ought to conclude with nient son fait; for the
Statute says, if an obligation be taken in another form, then is contained in
that Statute, that it shall be void, and if it be void, it was void from the
beginning, and therefore never his deed. Vide plus ubi supra.

F.N.Br. 151. g.
10 When a writ of Customs and services is in the right only, Customs and
services.
then the demandant shall count of the seisin of his Ancestor, and the writ
shall be in the debet only; but when he comes of his own seisin, then the
writ shall be in the debet and solet.

Co. Inst. 1. 291. a.
11 If A. be accountable to B. and B. releaseth him all his duties, Account.
Release.
this is no bar in an action of account; for duties extend to things certain,
and what shall fall out upon an account is uncertain: And albeit the latin word
is debita, yet duties do only extend to all things due, which be also
certain; And therefore discharges Judgments in personal actions, and
executions also.

F.N.Br. 8. c.
12 Where a feme is endowed of parcel of her Dower, Dower.
and would demand the rest against the same tenant and in the same town; In
this case, for the recovery thereof she shall have a writ of right of Dower, and
not a writ of Dower unde nihil habet; for the words of this writ will not
serve, because she has already received part of her Dower; And therefore she
must of necessity sue a writ of right of Dower to recover the residue.

Co. l. 11. 55. a. 4 in Edward Laws case.
13 An Ejectione firmae lies not of a Close, Ejectione firmae.
although it has a certain name, as Dovecot Close, containing three acres,
but it ought to be of so many acres, and ought also to show of what nature
those acres are, as Land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood, etc. and the certainty ought
to be comprised in the Court, because he shall recover the possession by Habere
facias possessionem, and shall ensue the form of other writs of like nature, as
a Writ of ward or Ejectment de guard, or the like, shall not be of a Close by a
certain name, but ought to be by the certainty of acres containing withal the
quality of the soil, as Land, Meadow, Pasture, Wood, etc.

12 Nomina si nescis perit cognitio rerum.
Co. Inst. 1. 68. b
1 Right Interpretations and Etymologies are necessary; for, Etymology.
Ad recte docendum primum oportet nomina inquirere, quia rerum cognitio a rerum
nominibus dependet: And herewith agrees that which is said, Primo excutienda
est verbi vis, ne sermonis vitio obstruatur oration, sive lex sine argumentis.

Co. ibid. 86. b.
2 By the Etymology of the word Soccagium, Soccage.
Littleton declares the nature of tht tenure, and distinguishes it from
Knight service, whereby it appears that names of things are diligently to be
observed for distinction sake, and to avoid confusion, Nomina si perdas, certe
distinctio rerum perditur.

Co. l. 5. 122. a.
3 In Longs case in the 5. Rep. a wound may be as properly said to penetrate as
a bullet, quia penetro derivatur a penitus and intro.

13 Mala Grammatica non vitiat chartam.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 146 b. and 223. b
1 Sir Edward Cook observes, that Littl. Sect. 220. A double Negative.
in a grant of an Annuity inserts a Proviso for the discharge of the Grantors
person, with a double Negative, viz. nec aliquid in eo specificatum non
aliqualiter se extendat, etc. Here nec and non do in a Grammatical construction
amount to an affirmative; for. Negatio destruit negationem, and ambo faciunt
affiamativum; yet the Law that principally respects substance does judge the
Proviso to be a Negative according to the intent of the Parties, and not
according to Grammatical construction, to the end the Proviso may take effect:
Howbeit observe that in Greek and French a double negative makes the negation
more forcible; And therefore Quere, whether Littleton being much acquainted
with the Law-french does not express that Latin according to the French
Phrases.

False Latin.
2 Falsa Orthographia aut grammatica non vi^iat concessionem, Co. l. 9. 48. a.
in the Earl of Shr^wsburies case.
and semper ille numerus and sensus abreviationum accipiendus est, ut concessio
non sit inanis: And therefore if the King grant Tot. ill. Manner. de D. and C.
if it be (in truth) but one Manor, then those abreviations tot. ill. Manner.
shall be taken in the singular number for Totum illud Manerium; but if they be
in truth two distinct Manors then they shall be taken in the plural number,
for Tota illa Maneria, for otherwise the grant would be void. In 32 E. 32. 3. A
Scire facias rehearses, that a fine was levied de maneriis B. and H. and the
conclusion was Quare praedictum Manerium de B and H. ingressus est, and it was
adjudged good with averment, that B. and H. were (indeed) but one Manor.

One Office in two persons.
3 Letters Patents made to John Periont and W^llim Took de officio unius
Auditorum curiae suae Wardorum was adjudged good; Co. l. 11. 3. a. Auditor
Earls Case.
for albeit the statute enacts, that there shall be two persons, which shall be
called Auditors of the Lands, etc. so as there shall be two persons and they
called two officers, yet it is but one office, and they are both but unus
officiarius, and so the Statute it self says, Those two persons called
Auditors shall be called the fourth officer of that Court; And therefore the
grant de officio unius Auditoris, or unius Auditorum is good enough: The like
case is adjudged in 9 E. 4. 1. upon the grant de efficio unius Clericorum de
Corona in Cancellaria, etc. according to the Rule Mala grammatica, etc.

False Latin.
4 An Indictment or Count shall not be quasht for false Latin or false
Orthographie, Co. l. 5 121. a. Longs case.
so that a proper Latin word may be known by it, as Praefato, Reginae,
Mamilla, Diffamo, diffinitio, for Praefatae, Mammilla, Defamo, Definitio.

14 Qui haeret in littera haeret in Cortice. Vide Pl. Co. 109. b. etc.
1 Although by the words of the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 4. Co. Inst 1. 356.
a. and 283. a.
upon a recovery by default against baron and feme, Recovery by default.
a quod ei deforceat is not allowed them, because the baron is not properly
tenant for life, but seized only in the right of his wife, and therefore out
of the words of that Statute; yet the contrary has been often adjudged; for,
Westminster. 2. 4.
the Law of England respects the effect and substance of the matter, and not
every nicitie of form or circumstance; Aspices juris non sunt jura, and paru
differunt, quaere concordant.

2 A man seized of lands in fee levied a fine to the use of himself for life,
and after to the use of his wife, Co. ibid. 365. b. No discontinuance. St. 11.
H. 7. 20.
and of the heirs male of her body by him begotten for her Iointure, and had
issue male, and afterward he and his wife levied a fine and suffered a Common
recovery, the husband and wife died, and the issue male entered by force of the
Statute of 11 H. 7. 20. this was no discontinuance to bar the issue male, but
his entry was adjudged lawful, and yet this case is out of the letter of that
Statute; for she neither levied the fine, etc. being sole, nor with any other
after taken husband, but it is by her self with her husband, that made the
Iointure.

B A man is seized of lands in right of his wife, and they two levy a fine,
and the conusee grants and renders the land to the husband and wife in special
tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the wife, they have issue, the
husband dies, the wife takes another husband, and they two levy a fine in
fee, and the issue enters, this is directly within the letter of the Statute
of 11 H. 7. 20. And yet it is out of the meaning thereof, because the state of
the land moved from the wife, so as it was the purchase of the husband in
letter, and not in meaning.

Co. ibid. 381. b.
4 By the letter of the Statute of Gloucester 6 E. 1. cap. 3. Discontinuance.
A fine levied by the husband alone of the wives land shall bar the heir,
for the statute seems to intend all alienations except by fine, because it is
there said, whereof no fine is levied in the Kings Court; Howbeit by the
meaning of that Statute the heir shall not be barred, Gloc. 3.
for such a fine would work a wrong to the wife, but the fine meant by the
Statute is a fine levied by the husband and wife together, for such a fine is
lawful and works no wrong, and a fine by the husband only would work the
same mischief, for which the Statute ordaines remedy, and therefore shall not
bar the heir, though it be with warrantie, unless the heir have assets by
descent, etc.

Co. l. 5. 5. b. The Lord Montjoys case.
5 Donee in tail is restrained by a particular Act of Parliament, Warranty no
bar.
quod non faceret aliquid in nocumentum, etc. haered. etc. nisi pro juntur.
uxor, etc. reddend. verum and antiquum reddit, etc. Here, if the ancient
reservation was of gold, he cannot reserve silver, if two farms were anciently
let to several tenants for several rents, he cannot let them both to one man
for one entire rent, nor demise parcel of the farm rendering rent pro rata, nor
reserve it payable at two feasts, when it was before payable at four: Howbeit,
he may reserve eight bushels of wheat, instead of a quarter reserved before;
for they are all one in quality, value, and nature.

Co. l. 6 65. b. Sir Moile Finches case.
6 The change of the name of a thing cannot alter the thing it self,
Reservation of rent.
but the new name may be used by the owner in conveyances, praecipes, etc.
without prejudice; And therefore in Sir Moile Finches case in the 6. Rep. it
was agreed, that Exceter-house in the Strand, and Dorset-house in Fleet Street
having then within three years before gained those names, might be well enough
known to their neighbors by the same names, and distinguished from all other
houses, and might also by those names be demanded in praecipes, etc. so in a
praecipe brought of a Manor in com. Bed. by the name of the Manor of Asple,
whereas it had been formerly and was still called Asple guise; here, the
tenant, after the view, demanded judgment of the writ, unto which the
demandant said, the Manor put in view was also known by the name of Asple; 41
E. 3. tit. Maint. de brief 49. 8 H. 6. 32.
and it was adjudged, that such a name gotten by the knowledge of the Country
is sufficent, Change of names.
without the true and proper name; for in this sense it is true: De nomine
proprio non est curandum, dum in substantia non erretur, quia nomine mutabilia
sunt, res autem immobiles.

Co. l. 9. 110. b. in Meriel ^reshams case.
7 Albeit Covina, of it self and ex vi termini, Corin.
ought to be betwixt two, yet when it is coupled with fraud, which may be
committed by one alone, the Court shall adjudge upon the matter, and not upon
the strict Etymology of the word; for, Plerunque dum proprietas verborum
attenditur, sensus verborum amittitur.

Co. l. 11. 34. a. in Alexander Powlters case.
8 The Statute of 23 H. 8. 1. House-burni^
takes away Clergy from the House-burner; the Statute of 1 E. 6. 12. gives the
benefit of Clergy to all felons, save only for Murder, Poisoning, Burglary,
Robbery, Horse-stealing, and Sacrilege, so as House-burning being in this
Statute casus omissus, such an offender seems thereby to be allowed his
Clergy; Nevertheless, because the Statute of 25 H. 8. 3. takes away Clergy
from the House-burner, that stands mute, challenges above 20, or answers
not directly, albeit the offense be committed in another County then where the
offender is tried; And likewise because the Statute of 4. and 5. P. and M. 4.
takes away Clergy from the accessories of that offense; it is adjudged, that
according to the intention of the makers of the Statute of 1 E. 6 House-burning
is included within the meaning of that Act, although it is a penal Law and
quite left out of the letter of the same Act.

Letters omitted.
9 In 17 El. Dyer, 342. a. Co. l. 9 48. a. The Earl of Shrewsburies case. Co. l.
2. 17. a. Lauds case.
The four first letters in the name and style of H. 7. viz. H. R. A. F. (for
Henricus Rex Angliae, Franciae, etc. were left out of his Letters patents made
to Simon Digby, yet adjudged good; And in the 38 H. 6. 33. A count, in which it
was alleged, that T. W. resignavit, etc. in manus J. Episcopi, etc. and loci
illius Ordinarii, And exception was taken, because it was not in manus Johannis
Episcopi, seeing the Letter J. signified nothing: but yet the Count was
adjudged good.

Wast.
10 The Statute of Gloucester cap. 5. Co. Inst. 1. 54. b
which gives an action of wast against the Lessee for life or years (which lay
not against them at the Common Law) speaks of one that holds for term of
years in the Plural number, and yet it appears by Littleton Sect. 67. that
although it be a penal Law, whereby treble damages and the place wasted shall
be recovered, yet a tenant for half a year being within the same mischief,
shall also be within the same remedy, although it be out of the letter of that
Law.

11 Vide Pl. Co. 109. b. and sequent.

Indictment.
11 False latin shall not quash an Indictment or a Count; Col. l. 5. 121. a. 4.
in Longs case.
for albeit an original writ shall abate for false Latin (as it is holden in 9
H. 7. 16. 2 H. 4. 8. 44. E. 3, 18. 10 E. 3. 1.) yet Judicial writs or a fine
shall not be impeached for false Latin, as is held in 9 E. 3. The same Law of
an Indictment as praefato reginae for praefatae, mamilla for mammilla, etc.
Vide supra 13, 4.

False Latin.
12 In the 14 of E. 3. the King grants license to found in Oxford, Co. l. 11. 8.
b. Doctor Ayries case.
an Hall under the name of the Hall of the Scholars of Oxford, the Founder
calls it the Hall of the Queen: They present to a Church by the name of
Provost, Fellows and Scholars of the College of the Queen in the Universitie
of Oxford: The Incumbent devises the Rectorie, which they confirm by the name
of Provost, Fellows, and Scholars of the Hall or College of the Queen in the
Universitie of Oxford: Misnamer of a College.
Notwithstanding these variances ye presentation and confirmation are both
good; for a small variance is not to purpose, if the description be such that
no other can be intended, as Abbot Richerd grants by the name of Richard.

15 Talis interpretatio fienda est, ut evitetur absurdum and inconveniens, and
ne judicium sit illusorium.
Pluralities of Benefices.
By the Statute of 31 H. 8. 13. Co. l. 4. 79. a. Digbies case.
if a Parson or Vicar having one benefice with cure of souls (being worth
eight pounds per annum or above) take another, and be instituted and inducted
in the possession of the same, etc. the first shall be void; Here, albeit the
Statute says plainly instituted and inducted, yet if he be only instituted
into it, he shall lose the first before induction; and this is in regard of the
great inconvenience, that would ensue, if the first benefice should not be void
by institution to the second by force of the said Act; for then one may be
instituted to diverse benefices with cure, the great charge whereof it is not
possible for one to discharge, and yet none can be presented to any of them,
which would be inconvenient.

Co. l. 4. 81. b. Sir Andrew Corbets case.
2 Sir Andrew Corbet devises some of his lands to Richard Corbet and others,
Devise of Profits to raise a sum.
until 800 l. shall be levied and received out of the profits of them (besides
all charges) to be employed for the preferment of his two daughters Marg. and
Mary; Robert Corbet son and heir conceals the will, enters into the lands,
and enjoyes them fi^e years and dies, after whose death (the will being
discovered) Richard Corbet enters into the lands and raises 640 l. and
imployes them according to the will; but the question here arising was, whether
the profits, taken by Robert Corbet, and which the devisees might have taken,
shall be accounted parcel of the sum of 800 l. And in this case it was
resolved, that albeit the words be, until the sum of 800 l. shall be levied,
etc. yet it is as much in Law as if the words had been, shall or may be levied:
And it was also held in case of a lease, or limitation of use, until such a
sum shall be levied; that was as much to say as, until such a sum may be
levied, for otherwise great mischief would ensue; because in as much as he in
reversion or remainder shall not enter until the sum be levied, it shall be in
the power of those, who are appointed to levy it, to defer the levying of
it, and so to exclude him in the reversion or remainder from taking the profits
of the land for ever which would be inconvenient.

Co. l. 4. 9^. a. D^uries case.
3 If a Baron retains two Chaplains according to the Statute of 21 H. 8. 13.
and they purchase dispensation, Chaplains.
and are advanced according to the Statute; Here, if the Baron discharge one of
them from his service; he cannot retain another during the life of the
Chaplain discharged; for by that means he may advance as many Chaplains as he
will, even without number, by which the Statute would be defrauded. A like case
to this was adjudged in C. B. 28 El. and after affirmed in B. R. in a writ of
error.

Co. l. 5. 10. a. Housteads case
2 A feme sole makes a lease at will, and after takes Baron; Tenant at will
Here, the will is not determined by the intermariage; for albeit the feme by
taking the baron has submitted her felfe to the will of her husband as her
head; yet in as much as it may be prejudicial to the husband to have the lease
determine (for then he should lose the rent payable at the next rent day after
the marriage) and because it will rather tend to the benefit, than to the
prejudice of the feme, if the lease continue; And also for that it may be a
great prejudice to husbands who marie women, that have tenants at will, for the
l^sse of their rents: for these causes it was resolved, that without express
matter done by the husband after the marriage to determine the will, it shall
not determine.

Co. l. 5. 68. The L rd Cheyneyes case.
5 Sir Th. Cheyney 1 El. devises, Devise.
etc. to H. his son and the heirs male of his body, the remainder to Th.
Chapter of D. and the heirs male of his body, with condition, that he or they or
any of them shall not discontinue, etc. the question was whether T. Chapter should
be received to prove by witnesses, that it was the intent of the divisor to
include his son within these words he or they; And it was resolved by Wray
and Anderson upon conference with other Judges, that he shall not; for the
construction of wills ought to be collected out of the words of the will in
writing and not by collateral averment without, because that would be subject
to much inconvenience, in as much as it would not then be possible for any man
to know by the written words of the will, what Construction to make, or what
advise to give, when whatsoever shall be in that case done may be controled by
collateral averments out the will.

^ 1 H. 6. 41. Co. Inst. 1. 275. b.
6 If a man be disseised by two and releaseth to one of them, Transmutation of
estates.
he shall hold his Companion out; but if tenant for life be disseised by two
and he releaseth to one of them, this shall enure to them both, for he to whom
the release is made has a longer estate than he that releaseth, and therefore
the release cannot enure to him alone to hold out his Companion, Descent 29. 13
E. 4.
for then should the release enure by way of entry and grant of his estate, and
(consequently) the disseisor to whom the release is made should become tenant
for life and the reversion revested in the Lessor, which strange transmutation
and change of estates in this case the Law will not suffer.

The l ke.
7 If a man grant lands to A. in fee, Littl. 720, 722. Co. Inst. 1. 377. Justice
Richels Case, Temps R. 2.
upon condition that if he alien in fee, his estate shall cease and be void,
and that immediately from thenceforth the estate of the land shall remain to
B. and his heirs; here the estate to A. is good, and he may lawfully alien
notwithstanding the condition; for his estate being an estate of Inheritance in
lands and tenements, it cannot cease or be void before it be defeated by
entry, and then if this remainder should be good it must give an entry upon the
alienee unto him that had no right before, which would be inconvenient and
against the express rule of Law, because an entry cannot be given to a
stranger to avoid a voidable act, as appears by Littleton in his Chapter of
Conditions.

An Infants will.
8 Because Littleton says ( Sect 123) that the Guardian in Soccage shall render
an account of the marriage money to the heir or his executors; Here, from this
word executors some have collected, Co. Inst. 1. 89. b
that an Infant of the age of 14 may make a will; but the meaning of Littleton
in that place is, that if after the marriage he accomplish the age of 18 years,
he may then make a will and constitute executors to administer his goods and
chattels; for at that age he has power by the Law to make a will, and these
words are to be understood as they may stand with Law and Reason.

Subsequent statutes, expounded by the equity of former.
9 The Statute of Gloucester in 6 E. 1. cap. 3. ordaines, Co. l. 8. 52. b. 4. in
Syms case. Pl. Co. 110. in Fulmerstons case.
that where the tenant by the Courtesy aliens his wives Inheritance with
warrantie, if assets descend to the heir, he shall be barred for the value of
the Inheritance so descended, and if lands after descend, that then the tenant
shall recover against the heir of the seisin of his mother, viz. out of the
residue of his mothers lands so much as the assets afterward descended shall
amount unto; Here, albeit at the making of the said Act (being in 6 E. 1.)
there were no entailed lands (for all Inheritance was then ( viz. before Westminster.
2. being 13 E. 1.) fee simple absolute or conditional) yet entailed lands are
since taken to be within the equity of the said Act of Gloucester, but not to
retain or recover (as in case of fee simple lands) the lands entailed, but
only the lands which should so descend; because otherwise there would be
occasion of new suits and contention, which would be inconvenient; for if the
tenant after assets descended might retain or recover the lands entailed, then
if the assets were aliened, the issues inheritable to the estate tail might by
writ of Formedon in Descender recover the entailed lands again, which would
beget a new suit and no way answer the intention of the said Act, being indeed
a good provision for fee simple lands, but not for lands entailed without such
a Construction by equity, as aforesaid; And therefore in case of entailed lands
so aliened with warrantie, the tenant shall have a Scire facias out of the
rolls of the Justices, before whom the suit depends, to recover the lands
descended according to the provision of the said Act of Gloucester, which
prevents the aforesaid inconvenience, and in just and proportionable equity
agrees with the case of Fee simple lands, and the Intention of the same Act.
Vide infra 178. 22. and 38. 5.

Interpretation of statutes.
10 For the sure and true interpretation of all statutes in general (be they
penal or beneficial, Co. l. 3. 7. b. 3. in Heydons case,
restrictive or enlarging of the Common Law) four things are to be considered:
1 What the Common Law was before the making of the Statute: 2 What was the
mischief and defect, for which the Common Law did not provide: 3 What remedy
the Parliament has resolved and appointed to cure that disease of the
Commonwealth: 4 The true reason of the remedy: And then it is always the
office of the Judges to make such construction, as may repress the mischief,
and advance the remedy, and also to suppress such subtle inventions and
evasions, as may continue the mischief, and pro privato commodo; and to add
force and life to the cure and remedy, according to the true intention of the
makers of the Act pro bono publico: And upon this ground in Heydons case in the
3 Report the statute of 31 H. 8. Co. l. 3. 8. a. 3.
cap. 13. of Monasteries was by all the Barons of the Exchequer adjudged (by
the general words thereof) to extend to Copihold or Customarie estates; and by
them this Rule was then also agreed, That when an Act of Parliament alters the
service, tenure, interest of the land, or other thing in prejudice of the Lord,
or of the Custom of the Manor, or in prejudice of the tenant, there the
general words of such an Act shall not extend to Copiholds; but when the Act is
generally made for the common good and no prejudice may accrue by reason of the
alteration of any interest, service, tenure, or custom of the Manor; In such
case many times Copihold and Customarie estates are within the general purview
of such Acts.

16 Quoties in verbis nulla est ambiguitas, ibi nulla expositio contra verba
expressa fienda est.
Co. Inst. 1. 147 a. Co. l. 7. 24. a. Buts case.
1 If a rent be granted out of the Manor of Dale, Rent.
and the grantor grant over, that if the rent be behind, the grantee shall
distraine for the same in the Manor of Sale, this is no grant of rent, only
but a penalty in the Manor of Sale, and one reason thereof is, because the
Law needs not to make construction, that this shall amount to a grant of a
rent, for here the rent is expressly granted to be issuing out of the Manor of
Dale, and the parties have expressly limited, out of what land the rent shall
issue, and upon what land the distress shall be taken, and the Law will not
make an exposition against the express words and intention of the parties,
when this way stands with the Rule of Law.

Co. l. 2 55. a. Bucklers c. se.
2 A grants land to B. Habendum tenementa praedicta from Christmas next for
life; Here, this grant is void, Grant in futuro.
for an estate of franktenement cannot commence in futuro, and the Law will
make construction upon the whole grant; And therefore albeit the habendum be
void and so (in effect) is no habendum (and thereupon the estate should pass
by the premises as in case of repugnancie or the like) yet here no estate
shall pass by implication of Law against the express limitation of the
party; although his limitation be void.

Co. l. 5. 118. Edriches case.
3 A seized of Land in fee, Rent.
grants a rent out of it with clause of distress to B. for the life of C. and
dies, the heir lets the land (thus charged) to D. for life, the remainder to
E. in fee, the rent is behind for diverse years in the life of D. who dies, and
also C. B. distrains him in the remainder for all the arrearages incurred in
the life of D. In this case, he in the remainder shall be charged with them by
the last branch of the Statute of 32 H. 8. 37. by which an action of debt is
given to the tenant pur auter vie after the death of Cesluy que vie against the
tenant in demesne (who ought to have paid the rent when it was first due) and
against his executors and administrators; and also that he shall distraine for
the same arrearages upon such lands, etc. out of which the said rents, etc. are
issuing in such manner and form as he ought or might have done if Cesty que
vie had been alive, Here, (I say) the latter part of this branch does expressly
charge him in the remainder with the payment of the arrearages; And the Judges
in that case said, that they ought not to make any interpretation against the
express letter of the Statute; for nothing can so well express the intent of
the makers of an Act, as the direct words themselves (for index animi sermo)
and it will be dangerous to give liberty to make construction in any case
again the the express words, when the intent of the makers appears not to the
contrary, and when no inconvenience may happen upon it: And therefore in such
cases, A verbis legis non est recedendum.

Devise.
4 Land was devised to A. for life, Co. l. 6. 6. b. Wilds case.
the remainder to B. and the heirs of his body, the remainder to C. and his
wife and after their discease to their children, C. and his wife having then
issue a son and a daughter: And after the divisor dies, also A. dies and B.
dies without issue, C. also and his wife die, and the son has issue a
daughter and dies; Here, the question was, whether the daughter of the son
should have the land, or no: And it was resolved, that she should not, because
in this case at the Common Law C. and his wife had but an estate for life with
remainder to their children for life, and then the cause or reason why they by
the will should have an estate tail is only grounded upon the intent of the
divisor: Howbeit, it was resolved, that such an intent ought to be manifest and
certain, and not obscure and doubtful, because it will not then admit of any
strained construction farther than the words themselves do import by a proper
and genuine interpretation according to the Rules of Law.

Devise.
5 If I devise lands to my son Thomas to hold to him and the heirs male of
his body for the term of 500 years, Co. l. 10. 87. a. Leonard Loves Case.
Dyer 7. pl. 8. 28 H. 8.
his heir shall not have them but his executors, for this term is but a
chattel and cannot be intailed, and such a devisee may alien the term, if he
please: And Cook Chief Justice held, that such a devise is but an estate for
years, because it is so in express words devised, and that (in this case)
against express words, no inference or interpretation shall be admitted.

Tales.
6 Tales de circumstantibus shall not be granted in an Assize by the Statute of
35 H. 8. 6. Co. l. 10. 105. a. Denbawdes Case.
because by the express words of that Act they are only grantable in every
writ of Habeas corpora or distringas with Nisi prius, and no exposition can in
this case be made against express words; for viperima est ista expositio quae
corrodit ventrem textus.

7 If feme tenant for life take husband, who makes wast, Co. l. 5. 75. b.
Cliftons Case.
and the feme dies; Here, the husband is not punishable for that wast; because
the Statute of Glocest. 6 E. 1. cap. 5. is thus recited in the writ of wast,
Wast.
Quare cum de communi, etc. provisum sit, quod non liceat alicui vastum, etc.
facere de terris, etc. sibi demissis ad terminum vitae vel annorum, etc. So
that the land being not demised to the husband, but he holding it only for her
life and in her right, he shall not be chargeable for wast after the death of
the wife, by the express words of the Act, as it is recited in that writ.

Devise.
8 A devise of land by will is good without Probat, Dyer 53. b. 11. 34 H. 8.
because the Statute of wills ordaines only that it shall be in writing, and
enjoynes no Probat; and therefore if it be in writing and proved by witnesses,
it is good without Probat.

Tail of the King.
9 If tenant in tail of the gift of the King, Co. Inst. pars 1 373. 1.
the reversion to the King expectant, is disseised, and the disseisor levy a
fine, and five years pass, this shall bar the estat tail, notwithstanding
the Proviso in the Statute of the 32 H. 8. cap. 36. So likewise if a collateral
ancestor of the Donee release with warrantie, and the Donee suffer the
warrantie to descend without entry made in the life of the ancestor, this also
shall bind the tenant in rail, because the words of that Statute are, had,
done, or suffered by or against any such tenant in tail; And in this case he
is not party, or privy to any act either done or suffered by or against him.

17 Maledicta est expositio, quae corrumpit textum.
Co. l. 2. 24. a. Baldwins Case
1 The Earl of Cumberland demises land to Anne and to one Anthony Baldwin her
son and to the heirs of the said Anthony, Demise.
Habendum to them from the date for 99 years; Here, albeit heirs are
mentioned in the premises, yet is not the Habendum repugnant unto them, but
they have a joint estate for years, for it cannot be repugnant as to Anthony,
and yet good to Anne: Viperima est ista expositio, quae corrodit ventrem textus.

Co. l. 11. 70. a. Magd. College Case. Grants to the King. Stat. 13 El. 10.
2 Grants to the King are restrained by the general words of 13 El. 10. for the
words are, to any person or persons, Grants to the King of Church Livings.
body politic or corporate, and the King is a person, as it is said in 10 H.
7. 18. and a body politic, as appears in Plowd. fol. 213 and 234. Now
therefore if the King be clearly included in the letter, if he shall be
excluded out of the Act, it must be by construction of Law, and (in this case)
the Law will make no such construction; for the Queen, Lords, and Commons, who
made the Act, have adjudged (as in the preamble appears) that long leases made
by Colleges, etc. are unreasonable and against reason (much more estates in
fee simple.) And the Law, which is the perfection of reason, will never expound
the words of that Act against reason, for maledicta est expositio, etc.

18 Nimia subtilitas in lege reprobatur.
Co. l. 5. 121. a. Longs case.
1 Exception was taken to an Indictment, Indictment.
because it was said to be taken coram W. S. Coronatore Dominae Reginae infra
libertatem dictae Dominae reginae villae suae de Cossam praedict. super visum
corporis, etc. and does not allege to what places the said liberty does
extend, or whether part or any of the town of Cossam be within the liberty,
and so it did not appear, that the Coroner had any Jurisdiction in the place,
where the inquisition was taken, nor where the murder was committed, nor where
the dead body lay, for all is alleged by the indictment to be at Cossam:
Howbeit, the indictment was adjudged sufficient, notwithstanding this
exception; for although it be true (by the Rule of Law) that indictments ought
to be certain, yet it is to be observed, that there are three sorts of
certainties, 1 To a common intent, 2 To a certain intent in general, 3 To a
certain intent to each particular; The first suffices in bars, which are to
defend and excuse the party; the second is required in indictments, counts,
replications, etc. because they are to excuse or charge the party; the third
is rejected in Law, as too nice and curious, for Talis certitudo certitudinem
confundit: And in this present case the indictment is certain enough in
general, viz. that Cossam is within the liberty of Cossam: but to imagine that
the liberty may extend out of the town, and yet the town it self to be out of
the liberty, is a captious and strained intendment, which the Law does not
allow.

Misnomer.
2 In a conveyance of lands in Kent certain lands lying in Beamston were
excepted by the name of the Manor of Beamston, Co. l. 6. 6 4. b. Sir Moyle
Finches case.
whereas it had (indeed) formerly been a Manor but was none at that time, yet
was it adjudged to be well excepted: And in the Argument of this point it was
said, that the Law favors not advantages of misnaming, otherwise then as the
strict rule of Law requires, no not in writs, which may be abated and new ones
purchased, much less in grants or other conveyances, in which case they cannot
have new ones; And therefore if two be joined in a writ, the one shall not
plead the Misnamer of the other, as it is agreed in 14 H. 6. 3. 33 E. 3.
Mainten. de brief 63.
In an action against baron and feme, albeit they are one person in Law, yet
the one shall not plead the Misnomer of the other, so in trespass in
Heldernesse at W. the defendant pleads (in respect of Misnomer) that it was
neither Town, Hamlet, or place known, etc. the Plaintiff replyeth, it was
without showing in certain, either that it was a Town, hamlet, or place known,
And all this in detestation of nice and dilatorie exceptions.

Nice constructions.
3 Cook Chief Justice of the C. Pl. in the Earl of Rutlands case in 8 Rep. 6
Jac. complains together with the other Judges of the same Court, Co. l. 8. 56.
b. The Earl of Rutlands case.
that then of late time diverse nice and strained constructions of Letters
Patents had been made, and many of them upon slight grounds had been brought in
question, with purpose to subvert the force and effect of them, which practice
(said they) did much tend to the dishonor of the King and wrong of the subject
and was clearly against the true reason and ancient Rule of Law, as did
manifestly appear in all their Books, because such nice and captious pretense
of certainty, confounds true and legal certainty.

Indictment.
4 In Mackallies case in the 9 Rep. exception was taken to the indictment, which
said, Co. l. 9. 66. be Mackallies case.
in Curia dicti Domini Regis in computatorio suo scituato in Parochia sancti
Michaelis in Wood-street London, and did not show in what Ward the said Parish
was; but it was not allowed; for (as it was holden in 7 H. 6. 36. b.) every
Ward in London is as an hundred in the Country, and every Parish in London as a
town in the hundred, and it is not necessary to declare in what hundred a town
is, neither yet in what Ward a Parish is; And therefore such nicety is to be
avoided as needless, Vide plus ibidem.

Exception to a Charter, etc.
5 Exception was taken against the confirmation of the Charter of Queens
College in Oxford, Co. l. 11. 20. a. and 22. a. Doctor Ayrays case.
ann. 8 Jac. because it was sub nomine Aulae Reginae, whereas the Charter it
self was Aulae Scholarium Reginae but not allowed: So in 17 E. 3. 48. one was
named Burgensis de novo castro super Tinam, and the exception was taken, that a
Burgess ought to be of a certain Town and not of a Castle, but it was not
allowed: Exception to a Charter, etc.
for the ancient Sages of the Law did always reject such niceties concerning
appellations and names, when the thing intended might be thereby well enough
known and distinguished.

III Maxims of Reason: taken out of LOGIC.
19 Cessante causa cessat effectus.
The Corporation failing, the land revests in the Donor.
IF Land holden of I. S. be given to an Abbot and his successors (or to any
other Corporation) In this case if the Abbot and all the Covent die so that the
body Politic is dissolved, Co. Inst. pars ^ 13 b. 2.
the Donor shall have again the land and not the Lord by Escheate; because in
the case of a body Politic, the fee simple is vested in their politic
capacity, created by the policy of man, and therefore the Law does annex a
condition in Law to every such gift and grant, that if such body Politic be
dissolved, the Donor or Grantor shall re-enter; for that the cause of the gift
or grant fails: But no such condition is annexed to the estate in fee simple
vested in any man in his natural capacity, but in case where the Donor or
Feoffor reserveth to him a tenure, and then the Law does imply a condition in
Law by way of Escheate.

Wedlock ceasing, the Dower cease.
2 The wife shall be endowed of the lands, etc. of her husband, ^o. ibid. 32. a.
4
if the marriage continue till his death; but if the husband and wife be
divorced a vinculo matrimonii, as in case of precontract, consanguinity,
affinity or the like (but not a mensa and thoro only, as for adultery) the
Dower cease, For, ubi nullum matrimonium, ibi nulla dos. See Dyer 13. a.

The tenure ended, the distress cease.
3 For the rent due the last day of the term, Co. ibid. 47. b. 3
the lessor cannot distraine, because the term is ended; and therefore some
use to reserve the last half years rent at the feast of St. John Baptist
before the end of the term; so as, if the rent be not then paid, he may
distraine between that and Michaelmas following.

The tenure ended, the estople cease.
4 If a man takes a lease for years of his own land by deed indented, the
estopel does not continue after the term ended; Co. ibid. 47. b. 4 m. 31. and
32. Eliz. Londons case. Co. l. 4. 54. a. 3.
for by making of the lease the estopel does grow, and consequently by the end
of the lease the estopel determines; and that part of the Indenture which
belonged to the Lessee, does after the term ended, belong to the Lessor, which
should not be, if the estopel continued. Vide 40. 32.

Co. ibid. 76. a. 1
5 If after the Lord has the wardship of the body and land, The Seigniory
extinct, the Wardship cease.
the Lord does release to the Infant his right in the Seigniory, or the
Seigniory descends to the infant, he shall be out of ward both for the body
and land, for he was in ward in respect he was not able to do those services
which he ought to do to his Lord, which now are extinct, and Cessante causa,
cessat causatum: And Littleton says, that tenure by Knight Service draws
unto it ward, marriage etc. So as there must of necessity be a tenure
continuing: Upon release of all debts, the Land in execution is also released.
So likewise if the Co^nusor in a Statute merchant be in execution and his land
also, and the Conusee release to him all debts, this shall discharge the
execution; For the debt was the cause of the execution, and of the continuance
of it, till the debt be satisfied, and therefore the discharge of the debt,
which is the cause, discharges the execution, which is the effect.

Co. ibid. 76. b. 3
6 If the tenant makes a feofment in fee of lands holden by Knights-service, to
the use of the feoffee and his heirs, The town performed, the Wardship cease.
until the feoffor pay unto the feoffee or his heirs an hundred pounds at a
time and place limited; The feoffee dies, his heir within age, the Lord shall
have the wardship of the body and lands of the heir of the feoffee, but it
shall be conditionally; for he cannot have a more absolute interest in the
wardship, than the heir has in the tenancie: Therefore if the feoffor pay the
money at the day and place, and enters into the land, in this case the
wardship both of the body and lands is divested; because the Lord has no
absolute interest in either of them, but that interest, which he has, does
depend upon the performance or not performance of the condition.

Littl. 103. Co. ibid. 78. b. 4
7 Littleton tells us, that by the Statute of West. 1. cap. 22. The Wardship of
the body severed from the Land, cannot have the benefit of the two years after
14.
If an heir female be within the age of 14 years, and not married at the time
of the death of her ancestor, then the Lord shall have the ward of the land
holden of him, until her age of 16 years, to the end within those two last
years he may tender her convenient marriage: yet (in this case) if the Lord
before the age of 14 grants over the wardship of the body, the grantee
thereof cannot enjoy the benefit of the two years, because he cannot hold the
land over; and the Lord, which has the wardship of the land only, shall also
lose the benefit of the two years, because he has the lands only, and cannot
tender any marriage; Therefore (in this case) the heir female shall enter into
her land at her age of 14 years: So if a tenant holds of one Lord by
prioritie, and of another by posteriority and dies, his heir female within
the age of 14 years, the Lord by posteriority shall have the lands but until
her age of 14 years, because the marriage belongs not to him: Also, if the
Lord marieth the heir female within the two years, her husband and she shall
presently after the marriage enter into the lands: For, cessante causa, cessat
effectus; and cessante ratione legis, cessat beneficium legis.

Co. ibid. 102. b. 3. 202. b. 1. Co. ibid. 103. a. 3. Littl. Sect. 147.
8 Where there is Homage Ancestrel betwixt an Abbot and Covent, and their
tenant, If that body be once dissolved, Homage ancestrel after alienation, gone.
though a new be founded of the same name, and all the possessions be granted
to them, yet the Homage Ancestrel is gone. So it is likewise, if a man in his
natural capacity holds by Homage Ancestrel, and sells the land to another,
although he repurchase the land again, yet is the Homage Ancestrel dissolved.

Co. ibid. 104. a. 4.
9 If Homage be due to be done by the tenant, The Land being aliened, the Homage
is gone.
if the tenant alien the land to another, the Alienor cannot be compelled to do
Homage.

The delay being pardoned, the amerciament is also gone.
10 The cause of an amerciament in a plea real, Co. Inst pars 1. 126. b. 4. a
Plowd. 401. Coals case. 37 H. 6 21. Co. l. 5. 49. Vaughans Case.
personal or mixed (where the King is to have no fine) is for that the tenant or
defendant ought to render the demand (as he is commanded by the Kings writ) the
first day: which if he do, he shall not be amerced; so that for the delay, that
the tenant or defendant does use, he shall be amerced: And albeit the
amerciament cannot be imposed, nor the King fully entitled thereunto, until
judgment be given, because by the judgment the wrong is discerned, yet a
pardon before judgment, shall, after Judgment given, discharge the party,
because the original cause, viz. the delay, etc. is pardoned.

A wife after coverture, a Niefe again.
11 If a Niefe marry a freeman, Co. Inst. pars 1 136. b. 2. 137. b. 3.
she is privileged during the coverture, but not absolutely enfranchised, for
if her husband die she is a Niefe again.

No Juror after his land gone.
12 If a Iuror (after his return) sells away his land, or if he, Co. ibid.
157. a. 1. and 2. 272. b. 2.
for whose life, or his wife in whose right he holds it die, or if an entry
be made upon his land for a condition broken, so as his freehold is
determined, in any of these cases he may be challenged for insufficiency of
freehold: for when his land is gone, his fear to offend, to have his lands
wasted, and the like, etc. (which is one of the reasons of Law) is also taken
away.

No damage fesant out of the soil.
13 If a man come to distrain for Damage fesant, Co. ibid. 161. a. 3. Co. l. 9.
22. b. 4. Case of Avowrie Co. ibid. 164. a. 3.
and see the beasts in his soil, and the owner chase them out on purpose
before the distress taken, the owner of the soil cannot then distraine them,
and if he does, the owner of the cattle may rescue them; for the beasts must be
damage fesant at the time of the distress.

Where coparceners shall join and relieve not.
14 If one coparcener die, her part shall descend to her issue, and one praecipe
shall lie against them, and this is propter unitatem juris, derived from one
common Ancestor; so, if a man has issue two daughters, and is disseised, and
the daughters have issue and die, the issues shall join in a praecipe;
likewise, the issues of two coparceners, which are in by several descents,
being disseised, shall join in an Assise: Howbeit, in the same case, if the
two daughters had been actually seized, and had been disseised, after their
deceases the issues shall not join: because (as to that purpose) the unitas
juris is severed; for now, several rights descended to them from several
Ancestors; and yet when they have severally recovered, they are coparceners
again, and one praecipe lies against them, and release made by one of them to
the other is good.

Frankmariage Hotchpot.
15 If lands given in frank-mariage be impleaded, Co. ibid. 177. b. 2.
the tenant shall not have aid against the other parcener; but if she put the
land into Hotchpot, she shall have it; for, then the lands are become as other
lands, which descended from the common Ancestor.

Prescription or Custom extinct by interruption.
16 If tenant by homage ancestrel makes a feofment in fee upon Condition, and
enters for the Condition broken, Co. ibid. 202. b. 1.
it shall be never holden by homage Ancestrell again: so it is, if a Copihold
escheat, and the Lord makes a feoffment in fee upon Condition, and enters for
the condition broken, it shall never be Copihold again; because (in both these
cases) the custom or prescription (which supported, and was the cause of the
tenure) is interrupted, and that being once broken, is become remediless.

The land evicted, the Annuity is gone. The marriage failing, the land revests.
17 If a man grant an annuitty ppruna acra terrae, Co. ibid. 204. a. 2.
if the acre of land be evicted by an elder title, the annuity shall cease: so
if it be pro decimis, and the grantee be disturbed, or pro consilio, or quod
praestaret consilium, and the grantee refuse to give counsel, the annuity shall
in these cases cease: likewise, if a woman give lands to a man and his heirs
causa matrimonii praelocuti, in this case if the man refuse to marry her, she
shall have the land again to her and her heirs; but it is otherwise in case
of a man.

Co. ibid. 238. a. 4.
18 If a disseisor make a gift in tail, A dying seized, and yet no descent to
take, etc.
and the Donee discontinueth the fee, and after disseise the discontinuee, and
dies seized, this descent shall not take away the entry of the diseissee; For
the descent of the Fee simple is vanished and gone by the Remitter, And albeit
the issue be in by force of the estate tail, yet the Donee died not seized of
that estate, and of necessity there must be a dying seized.

Co. ibid. 239. a. 2.
19 When the degrees are past so as a writ of Entry in the Post does lie, yet by
event it may be brought within the degrees again, A writ out of the degrees may
be reduced.
as if the disseisor enfeoffe A. who enfeoffes B. who enfeoffes C. or if the
disseisor die seized, and the land descends to A. and from him to B. and from
him to C. Now are the degrees past, and yet if C. enfeoffe A. or B. now is it
brought within the degrees again.

Co. ibid. 242. b. 1.
20 If the eldest son has issue and dies, A descent when privity of blood
fails.
and after his decease the younger son or his heir enters, and many
descents cast in his line; yet may the heirs of the eldest son enter, in
respect of the privity of blood, and of the same claim by one title; But if
the younger son make a feoffment in fee, and the feoffee dies seized, that
descent shall take away the entry of the eldest, in respect that the privity of
blood fails.

Co. ibid. 285. a. 4.
21 If an action of wast be brought by Baron and feme in remainder in special
tail, Death void^ the action.
and (hanging the writ) the wife dies without issue: the writ shall abate;
because every kind of action of wast must be ad exhaeredationem.

Co. ibid. 291. a. 4. Execut. 7.
22 If the body of a man be taken in execution upon a Ca. sa. and the
Plaintiff releaseth all actions, Release of debt excuses execution.
yet shall he still remain in execution; but if he release all debts, duties
or judgments, he is to be discharged of the execution; because the debt, or
the duty, or the judgment (which is the cause of the execution) is discharged.

Co. ibid 312 a. 1.
23 The Reason that Littleton gives of the difference between a rent-service
and a rentcharge is, Avowry for a rent service upon the person.
for that in rent-service the avowry shall always be made upon the person,
but in rentcharge never upon the person, but upon the Land charged; Now here
it may be said, that this reason is taken away by the Statute of 21 H. 8. 19.
For by that Statute the Lord needs not avow for any rent or service upon any
person in certain, and then by Littletons reason there needs no privity to
the attornment of a Seigniory, for (say they) Cessante causa and ratione legis,
cessat lex; As at the Common Law no aid was grantable of a stranger to an
Avowrie; because the Avowrie was made of a certain person; but now the Avowrie
being made by the said Act of 21 H. 8. upon no person; therefore the reason of
the Law being changed, the Law it self is also changed, and consequently in an
Avowrie, according to that Act, aid shall be granted of any man, and the like
in many other cases; which case is granted to be good Law: But albeit the Lord
(as has been said) may take benefit of the Statute, yet may he avow still at
his election upon the person of his tenant; and albeit the manner of the
Avowrie be altered, yet the privity (which is the true cause of the said
difference) remains as to an Attornment.

Littl. 568. Co. ibid. 316. a. 3.
24 If the reversion of Lessee for life be granted, Upon alienation the grantee
shall attorn.
and Lessee for life assign over his estate, the Lessee cannot attorne, but
the attornment of the Assignee is good, because (as Littleton says) it
behooves that the tenant of the land do attorne, and after the assignement
there is no tenure or attendance, etc. between the Lessee and him in reversion:
so likewise if Lessee for life assigns over his estate upon condition, he
having nothing in him but a condition shall not attorne, but the assignee may
attorne, because he is tenant of the land.

The assignee of tenant by possession shall ^attorn.
25 Tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct shall not be compelled to
attorne, for the inheritance, which was once in him: Co. ibid. 316. a, 4.
but his assignee shall be compelled to attorne, because then that privilege
is lost, the assignee having in him only a bare estate for life.

Release of quarrels is release of Act.
26 Quaerela (being derived a quaerendo) properly concerns personal actions,
or mixed at the highest; Co. ibid. 292. a. 3.
for the Plaintiff in them is called Quaerens; and yet if a man release all
quarrels, it is as beneficial as all actions; for by it all actions both real
and personal are released; because by the release of all quarrels all causes of
actions are released, albeit no action be then depending for the same.

Where the estate is defeasible, the tenant is not compel^able to attorn.
27 It is a general rule, that when the grant by fine is defeasible, Co. ibid.
318. a. 4. 36 H. 6. 24.
there the tenant shall not be compelled to attorne; As if an infant being
seized of a reversion, levy a fine thereof, this is defeasible by writ of
error during his minority; and therefore in this case the tenant shall not be
compelled to attorne; so likewise if before the Statutes of 4 H. 7. 24. and 32
H. 8. 36. a tenant in tail had levied a fine, the tenant could not have been
compelled to attorne, because it was defeasible by the issue in tail: But
those Statutes have given a farther strength to fines to bar the issue in
tail; and therefore the reason of the Common Law being thereby taken away, Co.
lib. 3. 86.
the tenant in this case shall be compelled to attorne, as it was adjudged in
Justice Windhams case.

A discontinuance reduced.
28 A. makes a gift in tail to B. who makes a gift in tail to C. C. makes a
f^ffoment in fee, and dies without issue, Co. Inst. pars 1 327. b. 3.
B. has issue and dies, the issue of B. shall enter; for albeit the feoffment
of C. did discontinue the reversion of the fee simple, which B. had gained upon
the estate tail made to C. yet could it not discontinue the right of entail,
which B. had, that being discontinued before: And therefore when C. died
without issue, then did the discontinuance of the estate tail of B. (which
passed by his livery) cease, and consequently the entry of the issue of B. is
lawful.

Disco^tinuance determined, the issue in tail may enter.
29 Tenant in tail makes a lease for the life of the Lessee, Littl. Sect. 620
Co. ibid. 333. a. 2.
and after sels the reversion to a stranger, the tenant for life dies, the
grantee of the reversion enters in the life of the tenant in tail, this as a
discontinance in fee, and here if the tenant in tail die, his issue cannot
enter, but is put to his Formedon, because the estate was executed in the
grantee of the reversion in the life of the tenant in tail: but in this case if
the lessee, for life had survived the tenant in tail, the entry of the issue
had been lawful; because by the death of the Lessee the discontinuance was
determined, and consequently the grant made of the reversion, gained upon that
discontinuance, is void also.

Discontinuance defeated.
30 When estates of lands, etc. which work discontinuances, Littl. 632. Co.
ibid. 336. a. 4.
are defeated, the discontinuances themselves are also defeated; As if the
husband be seized of land in right of his wife, and make feoffment of fee upon
condition, and die; here, if afterward the heir enter upon the feoffee for
the condition broken, the entry of the feme is congeable upon the heir;
because by the entry of the heir for the condition broken the discontinuance
is defeated.

Disco^tinuance defeated upon surrender.
31 If tenant in tail make a lease for life whereby he gains a new reversion,
if tenant for life surrender, Co. ibid. 338. a. 4.
the estate for life being drowned, the reversion gained, by wrong is vanished
and gone, and he is tenant in tail again, against the opinion obiter of
Portington 21 H. 6. 53.

Advowson usurpation.
32 If B. purchase an Advowson, Co. ibid. 349. b. 2.
and suffers an usurpation and six months to pass, and after the usurper
grants the Advowson to B. and his heirs, B. dies; his heir is not
remitted, because his right to the Advowson was remediless, viz. a right
without an action; for a remitter can never enure, but upon a right recoverable
by action.

Co. ibid. 356. a 1.
33 If a recovery had been had against tenant for life by default before the
Statute of West. 2. cap. 4. Quod ei defe^ceat. West. 2. cap. 4.
he was (at the Common Law) remediless; because he could not have a writ of
Right, in respect of the meanness of his estate: Littl. Sect. 674.
And therefore (then) if a feme Lessee for life of a house had lost by default,
and had after taken husband, and the recover or had let the house to the baron
and feme for their two lives, in this case the feme could not have been
remitted, because her estate was remediless, as aforesaid: But now since that
Statute she shall in that case be remitted, because she may now regaine her
estate by a Quod ei deforceat, given by that Statute: for when an Act of
Parliament or a custom does alter the reason or cause of the Common Law,
thereby the Common Law it self is also altered: Alterata causa and ratione
legis, alteratur and lex, and cessante causa and ratione legis, cessat and lex.

Co. l. 12. a. 2. per Popham. The Lord Buckhursts case.
34 A. enfeoffes B. with warranty; Writings to whom.
here A. shall have the writings which comprehend the warranty, and not B.
because if B. be impleaded, A. may be vouched; But if B. die without heir, the
warranty made to B. is vanished, and A. cannot be vouched; And therefore in
this case the writings belong to the Lord by escheat.

Co. l. 4. 38. b. 1. per Wray, in Tirringhams case. How and Redmans case in B.
R.
35 In case of common of vicinage one Commoner may enclose against another;
Common of vicinage.
for he that has such a common cannot put his cattle into the land of another,
but he ought to put them into his own land where they have common, and if they
stray into the other ground, he is excused of trespass, by reason of the
ancient usage, which the Law allows to take away suits, which may arise, if
actions shall be brought for every such trespass, when no separation or
enclosure is betwixt the Commoners. For, cessante causa, cessat effectus.

Co. l. 4. 62. b 2 Herlakendens case.
36 When a man makes a lease for life or years, Trees selled are the Lessors.
the Lessee has but a special interest or property in the trees (which are
great timber) as things annexed to the land, so long as they remain annexed
unto it: but if the Lessee or any other sever, hem from the land, the property
and interest of the Lessee is thereby determined, and the Lessor may take them
as things, which were parcel of his inheritance, and in which the interest of
the Lessee is determined.

15 E. 4. 20. b. Co. l. 5. 13. b. in the Countess of Shrewsburies case. Co. l.
5. 119 b. 3 In Whepdales case.
37 If the bailee of goods, as of a horse, etc. kill them, The bailee of goods
may lose the privity.
the Bailor shall have a general action of trespass against him; because by the
killing of them, the privity is determined, which restrains the action of
trespass in that case.

38 If the Lessee makes wast, Waste.
and before any action brought repaires the place wasted, and after the Lessor
brings an action of wast, the action is not maintainable; for the jurors ought
to see the wast, and cessante causa, etc.

Sir Drue Druries case. Co. l. 6. 74. b. 4.
39 When the heir within age is made Knight after tender of marriage made unto
him, although, whiles he is yet within age, Forfeiture of marriage not paid
after Knighthood.
he marry elsewhere, yet he shall not pay the forfeiture of the marriage; for,
by making of him Knight he is out of the ward and custody of the Lord; because
after he is Knight, he ought to be sui juris, and to employ himself in feats
of arms to defend the Kingdom, etc. And none shall pay the forfeiture of
marriage, but he that after refusal marries himself during the time that he is
in wardship: Howbeit the Lord shall immediately after his Knighthood have a
writ de valoremaritagii, such as in like case is used to be had after the
heirs full age of 21 years.

No protection for Wales.
40 Since the Statute of 12 E. 1. Calvin's case. Co. l. 7. 21. b. 3.
which incorporateth Wales into England, and makes it parcel of England in
possession, no protection, Quia moratur in Wallia, will now lie: because Wales
is now within the Realm of England.

No wardship after attainder
41 Sir Everard Digby by act executed in his life conveyed his lands to the use
of himself for life with diverse remainders over, Digbies case. Co. l. 8. 165.
b. 4. Co. l. 10. 85. a. 11.
and then was attainted and executed for the Power-Treason; The question was
whether ward of the body or of the third part of the lands should accrue to the
King by force of the Statutes of the 32 and 34 H. 8. And it was resolved, that
their could be neither wardship nor primer seisin in that case: because there
could be no heir; for although there may be wardship and primer seisin, where
there is no descent (as in case when a man grants all his lands (holden) by
deed executed in his life) yet there can be no wardship or primer seisin, but
where there is an heir, by reason of whom alone those rights accrue to the
King.

No dower by Guardian.
42 During the minority of the heir a writ of Dower lies against the Guardian
or he may endow the feme without suit; if he please: Co. l. 9. 16. b. 4. in
Anne ^edingfields case.
but after full age, although he hold the land over for the value of the
marriage, yet no writ of Dower lies against him, neither can he endow her;
because after the full age of the heir he is no longer guardian.

Nuisance removed.
43 In Assise de nusans, or Quod Permittat prosternere, Co. l. ^. 55 a. 1. in
Baltens Case. Co. l. 10. 84. b. 4. in Lovers Case.
etc. it is a good plea, that the Plaintiff himself, (either before the writ
purchased, or hanging the writ) has abated the nuisance.

All Soccage Land devised.
44 If there be tenant in tail to him and the heirs males of his body the
remainder in fee to another, of land holden by Knight Service in Capite, and
that is also seized of other lands in soccage in fee, and by his will in
writing he devises all his soccage lands and dies without issue male; in this
case the devise is good for all the soccage land; for the estate of the land
holden determines by his death, so that there was not any cause of ward at the
Common Law, so it is likewise, 13 El. Dyer 3.
if the estate of the land holden be defeated for a condition broken after the
death of the tenant.

Wood, or trees excepted.
45 If I. grant the Manor of D. except the wood, Co. l. 11. 49. b. 3. Liffords
case.
by this the soil it self is excepted; but if I. except all my trees growing
upon land or pasture out of any wood; there, by the exception of the trees the
soil it self is not excepted; But sufficient nutriment is reserved out of the
land to sustain the vegetative life of the trees; for without that the trees,
which are excepted, cannot subsist: But if the Lessor cut them, and by the
license of the Lessee root them up, in this case the Lessee shall have the
soil; for cessante causa cessat effectus.

After pardon no conspiracy.
46 If a man be falsely indicted of felony, Fitz. 115. g.
and after by Act of Parliament a general pardon is granted of felonies, etc.
Here, the party shall not have a writ of conspiracy, although he will plead to
the indictment and is acquit, and will not plead the Act, etc. because his life
was never put in jeopardie (which indeed ought to be the cause and ground of
the action of conspiracy) the felony being pardoned by the Act.

No attaint.
47 If a man recover outrageous damages by verdict, Fitz. 107. b.
and release parcel of the damages before Judgment, and has only Judgment
of the residue, the defendant shall not have attaint for those damages, which
are so released.

Goods bailed.
48 If a man have goods delivered unto him to deliver over to another, and
afterward a writ of detinue is brought against him, by him, Fitz. 138. m.
that has right to have the goods, etc. here, if the defendant, hanging the
action, deliver the goods over to him, unto whom they were given to be
delivered, this is a good bar of that action.

Fitz. 139. a. Mich. 34. E. 1.
49 After a divorce made betwixt Baron and feme, Divorce.
the feme shall have a writ of detinue for the goods given with her in marriage
not spent, Dyer. 13. 62. 28 H. 8.

Fitz. 152. ^.
50 The heir shall be charged by a writ of annuity upon grant of his father if
he have assets by descent; Annuity.
but an Annuity shall not be maintainable against the heir by prescription;
because it cannot be known, whether he had any thing by descent from the same
ancestor, by whom the annuity began, etc.

Plowd. 37. a. The Sheriff of Londons case.
51 If a prisoner in execution in Ludgate be suffered to go over the Bridge into
Surrey, though he have a keeper with him, Escape.
yet that is an escape; for, being in Surrey, which is another County, he was
without guard, and so consequently out of prison, etc.

Plowd. ibid. per Chomley.
52 If a woman be Warden of the Fleet, Prisoners enlarged by marriage, or descent.
and one imprisoned there marieth the woman, which is Warden; this shall be
judged an escape in the woman, and the law adjudgeth the prisoner to be at
large, because he cannot be lawfully imprisoned but under a Warden, and he
cannot be properly conceived under the ward of his wife; And therefore in that
case the law adjudgeth him to be at large. So if the Warden of the Fleet (who
has his office in fee) die seized, his son and heir being then prisoner
there, and the office descends upon him being in prison; here, the law will
adjudge him out of prison, although he has fetters upon his legs, he being
then without guard, it being impossible that he should keep himself in prison.

P. 13. E. 4. 8. Plowd. ibid.
53 If a Justice of Peace of one County pursue one into another County for
felony committed in the County where he is Justice, Power lost.
and he takes him in the other County; In this case he is his prisoner in the
County where he takes him, and ought there to be imprisoned, and he cannot send
or convey him to the Gaol of the County where he committed the felony, for he
is not his prisoner there, and being out of his proper County his authority
cease as to that other County: So if the Marshal hold plea of a thing done
out of the verge, or the Admiral of a thing done in the body of the County it
shall be void; for their authority extends to a certain place, and within a
certain precinct, and not elsewhere; and if he which takes Sanctuary goes out,
any man may take him; because he has lost his privilege.

Plowd. 72. b. Sir Thomas Popes case.
54 If the Conisee of a Recognisance (according to the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap.
6) sell several parts of his lands to several feoffees, No discharge by the
Conusees purchase of part.
reserving also part thereof to himself, if execution be sued against his
part, in an Audita quaerela he shall not compel any of the feoffees to
contribute; And therefore by the same reason the purchase of part by the
Conisee shall not discharge the execution; for the execution of the Conisee
shall be discharged in consideration that he shall be contributory if he were
Feoffee and not Conisee, and then in as much as he shall not be contributory,
if he were Feoffee and not Conisee, his purchase of part shall not discharge
the execution, being Conisee, quia cessante causa, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1 70. b. 3.
55 If the King had given lands to an Abbot and his successors to hold by
Knight Service, this had been good, Lands held by Corporations, in Knights
Service.
and the Abbot should have done homage and found a man, etc. or have paid
escuage; But there was no wardship or relief or other incident belonging
thereunto; yet if the Abbot with the assent of his covent had conveyed the land
to a natural man and his heirs, now wardship and relief, and other incidents
belonged of common right to the tenure: And so it is, if the King give lands to
a Major and Communalty and their successors to be holden by Knight Service; In
this case the Patentees shall do no homage, neither shall there be any wardship
or relief, only they shall find a man, etc. or pay escuage: But if they
convey over their lands to any natural man and his heirs; now homage, ward,
marriage, relief, and other incidents belong thereunto; quia cessante ratione,
legis cessat ipsa lex.

Lord and Villain.
56 If villanage be pleaded by the Lord in an action Real, Co. ibid. 127. b. 4.
18 E. 4. 6. and 7.
personal, or mixed, and it is found that he is no villain, the bringing of a
writ of error is no enfranchisement, because thereby he is to defeat the
former judgment, and if in the mean time the plaintiff or demandant bring an
action against the Lord, he need make no protestation, so long as the record
remains in force (for at that time he is free) but the Lord shall be restored
to all by the writ of error.

Waste.
57 If lands be given to two and to the heirs of one of them, Co. ibid 247. b.
3.
he that has the fee simple shall not have an action of wast upon the Statute
of Gloucester against the Ioyntenant for life, but his heir shall maintain an
action of waste against him upon that Statute: So that (in this case) the heir
shall maintain that action, which the Ancestor could not.

Dower,
58 If the husband alien his land, Co. Inst. pars 1 33. a. 4.
and then the wife is attainted of felony, now is she disabled, but if she be
pardoned before the death of the husband, she shall be endowed: Also if the
son endow his wife at her age of 7 years ex assensu patris, if she before
the death of her husband attain to the age of nine years, the dower is good.

Office, and Rent.
59 The King grants to one an office at will, Finch 8. Co. ibid. 42. a. 4 3 E.
4. 8.
and ten pounds yearly rent during life pro officio illo: here, if the King put
him out of his office, the rent shall cease, 21. 4.

Guardian in Soccage.
60 The executor or husband (after the death of the wife guardian in Soccage)
shall not retain the wardship; 7 El. 293. b. Finch 9. Co. Inst. pars 1 89. a. 1.
for the guardian has it not to his own use, but for the benefit of the
heir, and the executor or husband by common intendment bear not such
affection to the Infant, as the testator or his wife did, which was the cause,
that the law gave them the wardship.

A Pardon.
61 If a stroke be given the first day of May, 13 El. 401. Finch 9.
and the King pardon him the second day of May all felonies and misdemeanors,
the party smitten dies the third day of May, so as this is no felony till
after the pardon; yet is the felony pardoned; for the misdemeanors being
pardoned, all things pursuing it are also pardoned.

Livery.
62 The King has a Ward pur cause de guard, 13 E. 4 10. b. Finch 9.
and after makes Livery to the first Ward, the second Ward shall not sue
Livery.

Coparceners.
63 If two coparceners make a lease reserving a rent, Finch 9.
they shall have this rent in common, as they have the reversion: But if
afterward they grant the reversion, excepting the rent, they shall be from
thenceforth Ioyntenants of the rent.

Challenge.
64 It is no principal Challenge to a juror, 14 H. 7. 2. Finch 9.
that he has married the parties mother, if she be dead without issue; for the
cause of favor is removed.

Entry.
65 If an Infant tenant in tail make a feofment in fee, and die, Co. Inst. pars
1 337. a. 2.
his issue may enter; but if after the feofment made he be attainted of felony,
and dies, the entry of the issue is taken away, for his entry is not lawful in
respect of his estate only, but of his blood also, which is corrupted;
Formedon.
and therefore in that case he is driven to his Formedon.

Villain.
66 Si mulier serva copulata fit libero, etc. partus habebit haereditatem,
Bract. lib. 4. fol. 298. b. Idem l. 1. c. 6.
and matter nullam dotem, quia mortuo viro suo libero redit in pristinum statum
servitutis, nisi haeres ei dotem fecerit de gratia. Co. Inst. Pl. 1. 123. a. 2.

Co. Inst. pars 1 174. a. 4.
67 If one coparcener makes feoffment in fee, Coparceners.
and after her feoffee is impleaded, and voucheth the feoffor, she may have
aid of her Coparcener to deraign a warranty paramount; but never to recover
pro rata against her by force of the warranty in Law upon the partition; for,
by her alienation the unitas juris, that was betwixt them, is severed, and she
has dismissed her self to have any part of the land, as parcener; and as
parcener she must recover pro rata upon the warranty in law, or not at all.

Co. Inst. pars 1 2. b. 2.
68 If an alien purchase lands, Alien. Merchant.
etc. upon an office found the King shall have them, yet being a Merchant he
may take an house, and keep it so long as he uses commerce, and for that
purpose; but when he leaves so to do, dies, or departs the Realm, the King
shall have them.

Dyer 13. 61. 28 H. 8.
69 If a man make his executors and enter into religion, A Monk dereigned.
and after is dereigned; In this case he shall have again all his goods, which
his executors have not spent; for, cessante causa, etc.

Dyer 57. b. 1. 25 H. 8.
70 Cestuy que use for term of life (since the Stat. of R. 3.) makes a lease
for the term of the life of the lessor, and dies; In this case, the estate of
the Lessee is determined, Cestuy que use.
and he is (after the death of Cestuy que use) only tenant at sufferance. The
Lo. Zouches case.

20 Remoto impedimento emergit actio, and contra.
Co. Inst. pars 1 128. b. 2.
1 If the defendant plead an outlawry in the Plaintiff, Out lawry.
in disability of his person, and the Plaintiff after that plea pleaded,
purchase a charter of Pardon, because the charter has restored him to the law,
the defendant shall answer: So note, the disability abateth not the writ, but
dis-inableth the Plaintiff, until he obtains a charter of Pardon.

Co. ibid. 133. b. 3.
2 Excommunication may be pleaded in disability of the person; Excommunication.
yet if the demandant or Plaintiff purchase letters of absolution and show them
to the Court, he may have a re-summons or re-attachment upon his original,
according to the nature of his writ.

9 H. 7. 27. Co. ibid. 238. b. 2.
3 If a disseisor make a gift in tail, Entry revived.
and the donee has issue and dies seized, now is the entry of the disseisee
taken away: but if the issue die without issue, so as the estate tail which
descended is spent, the entry of the disseisee is revived, and he may enter
upon him in the reversion or remainder.

13 H. 4. 8, and 9. 33 H. 6. 5. b. per Moyle. 34 H. 6. 11. a. per Curiam. Co.
ibid.
3 If there be grandfather father and son disseiseth one and enfeoffeth the
grandfather, who dies seized, The like.
and the land discendeth to the father, now is the entry of the disseisee taken
away; but if the father dies seized, and the land discendeth to the son;
here, is the entry of the disseisee revived, and he may enter upon the son,
who shall take no advantage of the descent, because he did the wrong unto the
disseisee.

Co. ibid.
4 If a disseisor make a Lease to an Infant for life and he is disseised and a
descent cast, the Infant enters, The like.
the entry of the disseisee is lawful upon him.

Co. ibid 245 b. 1.
5 If the mulier enters upon the Bastard, Bastard Mulier.
and the Bastard recovereth the land in an assize against the mulier, now is
the interruption avoided, and if the Bastard die seized, this shall bar the
mulier.

Littl. 407. and 408. Co. ibid. 248.
6 If I am disseised by an infant within age, Entry revived.
who aliens to another in fee, and the alienee dies seized, and the tenements
descend, to his heir, the Infant being still within age; here, my entry is
taken away: way: but if the Infant within age enter upon the heir, that is in
by descent (as he well may because the descent was cast during his nonage) then
may I well enter upon the desseisor, because the infants entry has defeated
that descent.

The like.
7 If I be disseised and the disseisor makes a feofment in fee upon condition,
and the feoffee dies seized of that estate; Here, Littl. 409. Co. ibid. 248.
I cannot enter upon the heir of the feoffee: But if the condition be broken,
so that the feoffor does therefore enter upon the heir; Now may I well enter,
because by the entry of the feoffor the descent was utterly defeated.

The like.
8 If a feme inheritrix take baron and they have a son, Littl 636. Co. ibid.
338.
and the baron die, and she takes another baron, and the second baron lets the
land, that he has in right of his wife, to another for term of his life, and
after the feme dies, and then the tenant for life surrenders his estate to the
second baron: Littleton makes a Quaere, whether the issue of the feme may enter
during the life of the tenant for life, but after his death he holds it clear
he may: and my Lord Cook proves it plainly, that he may also enter upon the
baron immediately after the surrender.

Collateral and lineal warranty.
9 A collateral warranty does not give a right, Co. ibid. 372. a. 1. Littl. 708.
but only binds a right so long as the same continues; and therefore if the
collateral warranty be determined, removed, or defeated, the right is again
revived: as in this example, If tenant in tail has issue three sons, and
discontinue the tail in fee, and the second son releaseth by his deed to the
discontinuee, binding himself and his heirs with warranty, etc. and after the
tenant in tail dies, and the second son dies without issue; here, the eldest
son is barred to have any recovery by writ of Formedon, because the warranty
of the second brother is collateral unto him, in as much as he can by no
means convey unto himself (by force of the entaile) any descent by that
brother, and therefore as to the eldest brother it is collateral warranty; But
in this case if the eldest brother die without issue, then may the youngest
brother well have his writ de Formedon in descender, and shall recover the
land; because the warranty of the second brother is lineall to the youngest
son, in as much as he might have conveyed unto himself (by possibility) the
estate by his second brother, in case he had survived the eldest, etc,

The like.
10 If tenant in tail lets lands to a man for term of his life, Littl. 738. Co.
ibid. 387.
the remainder to another in fee, and a collateral ancestor confirms the
estate of the tenant for term of life, and binds himself and his heirs to
warranty for the term of the life of the tenant for life, and dies; and the
tenant in tail has issue and dies; in this case, the issue is barred of his
writ of Formedon during the life of the tenant for life, because of this
collateral warranty descended upon him: but after the death of the tenant for
life, the issue may have that writ, if he please.

Remainder.
11 If there be tenant for life, the remainder for life, Co. l. 5. 76. b. Pagets
case. 9 Eliz.
the remainder in fee, and the tenant for life make wast in the trees, and
after he in the remainder for life die, an action of wast is maintainable by
him in the remainder for the wast done in the life of the tenant for life: So
it is likewise, where he in the remainder for life (after the wast committed)
surrenders his estate to him in the remainder or reversion in fee: For, Remoto
impedimento.

Lease by tenant in tail.
12 If tenant in tail of lands in capite makes Leases, Co. l. 7. 7. b. and 8.
a. The Earl of Bedfords case.
not warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. 28. and dies, his heir under age; in
this case, although the King in right of the heir may avoid those Leases for
his time, yet if, after the Kings interest determined, the heir accepts the
rent, they shall be thereby made good again: So it is also of a subject that
is guardian in chivalry.

Co. ibid.
13 If a Bishop make a Lease, By a Bishop.
not warranted by the Statute (so that his successor may avoid it and dies) the
King shall avoid the Lease during the vacancy of the Bishopric; but after the
Kings interest determines, if the successor accepts the rent, the Lease is made
good again.

Co. l. 8. 71. b. 4 Grerebeyes case.
14 Land is given to Baron and Feme and to the heirs of their two bodies, the
Baron makes a feoffment in fee, Entry congeable.
and having issue of the Feme dies, the Feme also before entry dies; here, the
estate tail is discontinued, so that the issue cannot enter: but in this case
if the Feme had entered and recontinued the estate tail, then had the
discontinuance been purged, and the estate tail had been thereby revested in
the Feme, and would have from her descended upon the issue, and so his entry
had been congeable.

Fitz. 28. b.
15 A man shall not have execution against the Kings debtor, The Kings debtor.
that has a Protection, because the King ought to be paid first; yet if the
Plaintiff will undertake to pay the Kings debt, he shall have Judgment and
execution for both the debts.

Co. Inst. pars 1 33. a. 4.
16 If the husband alien his land, Dower.
and then the wife is attainted of felony, now is she disabled; but if she be
pardoned before the death of the husband, then is she again entitled to her
writ of Dower.

Co. ibid. 46. a. 4
17 If tenant in fee take wife, Dower.
and make a Lease for years and dies, the wife is endowed, she shall avoid
the lease, but after her decease, the Lease shall be in force again.

Co. ibid. 138. a. 4.
18 Regularly, Lord and Villain.
if the Lord sue against his villain a Praecipe quod reddat, etc. that is a
manumission; yet if tenant in tail of a Manor, whereunto a villain is
regardant, enfeoffe the recovery of the Manor and dies, the issue shall have
a Formedon aganst the villein, and after the recovery of the Manor he shall
seize the villain, and the bringing of the Formedon shall work no manumission;
for that he could not seize him, till he had recovered the Manor, which was
the principal; and at the time of the writ brought he was no villain.

Co. ibid. 59. a. 2
19 If lands holden by Knight Service be given to an Abbot and his successors;
albeit he holds the lands by Knight Service, Wardship revived.
and shall find a man conveniently arrayed for the war, etc. yet upon his
death no ward, marriage, or relief is due to the Lord; Howbeit, if the Abbot
with the consent of his Covent alien the lands to a man and his heirs, there
is then ward, marriage and relief revived, etc.

Littl. 632. Co. ibid. 336. a.
20 If the baron be seized of land in right of his wife, Entry congeable.
and makes feoffment in fee upon condition and die, if the heir do afterward
enter upon the feoffee for the condition broken, the entry of the feme is
congeable upon the heir; because by the entry of the heir, the discontinuance
was defeated.

Co. ibid. 174. a. 4.
21 If there be two Coparceners, To deraign warranty pa^^ ramount.
and one of them makes feoffment in fee of her part to a stranger with
warranty, if the feoffee be afterward imlpeaded, he cannot have aid of the
other Coparcener to deraigne the warranty paramount, but he may vouch the
feoffor, and she may have aid to deraigne the warranty paramount: And yet if
there be two Coparceners, and they make partition, and the one of them
enfeoffees her son and heir apparent and dies; in this case, if the son
be impleaded, albeit he be in by the feoffment of his mother, yet shall he pray
in aid of the other Coparcener to have the warranty paramount; for upon the
descent the warranty betwixt the mother and the son is by Law annulled, and
then he is in the same condition, as if the tenements had descended upon him.

22 Vide, M. 28. ca. 4. and 3. 5.

Entry.
23 If there be grandfather, father, and son, Co. ibid. 265. a. 4.
and the father disseise the grandfather, and make a feoffment in fee, the
grandfather dies, the father against his own feoffment shall not enter, but
if he die his son shall enter; for remoto impedimento, etc.

Protection.
24 Albeit a Protection be allowed by the Court for a year, Co. ibid. 131. b. 1.
yet if it be repealed by an Innotescimus, the Re-summons or Re-attachment
shall be granted upon the repeal within the year, for Remoto impedimento, etc.
And albeit some books hold the contrary, yet the later books are of that
opinion, for otherwise the repeal would serve for little purpose, if the Law
should not be so taken.

No accessory without a principal.
25 A. was indicted for felony, Co. l. 9. 119. b. 2 in the Lord Sanchiars case.
Temps E. 1. Tit. Mortdancester 46.
and B. of the receipt of A. A. Essoignes himself and is outlawed, B. was
taken, and putting himself upon the Inquest was found guilty, whereupon B. was
attainted and hanged, and the Lord entered, as in his escheate, and after A.
came and reversed the outlawrie, and pleading to the felony was found not
guilty, and so was acquit, whereupon the heir brings a Mortdancester against
the Lord by escheat, who comes and shows all this matter, unto which it was
demurred in Law, whereupon it was awarded, that the heir of B. should recover
seisin of the land, for if B. had been then alive, he should have gone quit by
the acquittal of A. because he could not be a Receiver of a felon, when A. was
no felon: And remoto impedimento, etc. Vide plus ubi supra.

21 Things are construed according to that, which was the cause thereof. Vide
31. 9.
Tenant by courtesy.
1 If the King give lands to a man and a woman and to the heirs of their two
bodies, and the woman die without issue; Co. Inst. pars 1 21. b. 4. 9 H. 3.
Dower, 202.
yet shall the man be tenant in tail after possibility, etc. But if the King
give land with a woman of his kindred in frank-mariage, and the woman die
without issue, the man in the Kings case shall not hold it for his life:
because the woman was the only cause of the gift; but otherwise it is in the
case of a common person.

Frankmariage
2 If lands be given to a man and a woman in special tail, Co. ibid. 7 H. 4.
16. a.
and they are divorced Causa praecontractus, both shall hold the lands for
their lives; 13 E. 3. Tit. Ass. 19 E 3. Ass. 83. 12. Ass. 22. 19 Ass. 2.
But in case of frankmariage, if they be so divorced, the woman shall enjoy the
whole land; because she was the cause of the gift. So if lands holden in Plowd.
Carzibs case.
soccage be given in special tail, and the Donees die the issue being within
the age of 14 years, 17 H. 3. Guard. 146. 27 E. 3. 29. Co. ibid. 29. b. 3 Co.
ibid. 42. a. 4
the next of kin of the part of the father, or of the part of the mother,
which can hap the custody shall have it; but in case of frank-mariage the
heir of the part of the mother shall have it, because she was the cause of the
gift as aforesaid. Co. ibidem 88. a. 4.

Formedon.
3 If a woman tenant in general tail makes a feoffment in fee, and takes back
an estate in fee, and take an husband and has issue, and dies, the issue may
in a Formedon recover the land against the father; because he is to recover by
force of the estate tail, as heir to his mother, and is not in that case
inheritable to his father; the estate tail being the cause and ground of his
title.

An Office.
4 A man may have an estate for life determinable at will; 3 E. 4. 8. b.
as if the King does grant an office to one at will, and also grant a rent to
him for the exercise of his office for term of life; this is determinable upon
the determination of the office, which occasioned the grant of the rent. 19. 59.

Co. ibid. 85. a. 2
5 If a man make a Lease for years of a villeine this cannot be done without
deed, neither can the Lessee assign it over without deed, Grant of a Villain
by deed.
because it is derived out of a freehold that lies in grant, which (indeed) is
the material cause of the grant: but a wardship is an original chattel (during
the minority) derived out of no freehold, and therefore as the Law creates
without deed, so may it also be assigned over without deed.

Co. ibi. 102. a 4 9 E. 2. execut. 249.
6 Upon a judgment in debt, Judgment, execution.
the Plaintiff shall not have execution, but only of that land, which the
defendant had at the time of the judgment; because the action was brought in
respect of the person, and not in respect of the land: But if an action of debt
be brought against the heir, and he alieneth, hanging the writ; yet shall the
land, which he had at the time of the Original purchased, be charged; for that
the action was brought against the heir in respect of the land.

Co. bid. 102. b. 1. 22 Ass. Pl. 32.
7 If a man be nonsuit, the land only, Amerciament, Issues of Jurors
which he had at the time of the amerciament assessed, shall be charged, and
not that, which he had at the finding of the pledges; for the amerciament is
not in respect of the land, but for his want of prosecution, which was a
default in his person: But the issues of a Iuror shall be levied upon the
feoffee, albeit they were not lost before the feoffment; because he was
returned and sworn in respect of the land.

8 A tenure of the King in Capite, Tenure in gross.
is said to be a tenure of the King, Bract. f. 87
as of his Crown, that is, as he is King: Co. ibid. 108 a. 4. ubi. Vide
praedict. Author.
And theref^r^ if one holds land of a common person in gross as of his
person, and not of any Manor, etc. and this Seigniory escheateth to the King
(yea, though it be by attainder of treason) he holds of the person of the
King, but not in Capite; because the original tenure was not created by the
King. Vide infra M. 25. ca. 10.

Co. ibid. 158. a. 3. 15 H. 7. 9. 14 H. 7. 31. 18 E. 4. 3.
9 If the cause of challenge alleged by the Plaintiff against the Sheriff be
p^rtiality to either party, Challenge.
and process be once awarded for such partiality, though there be a new
Sheriff, yet process shall never be awarded to him, but to the Coroners; and
therefore in that case the entry is, Ita quod Vicecomes se non intromittat: But
if the cause of Challenge be, for that the Sheriff was tenant to either party,
or the like, in that case the process shall be directed to the new Sheriff,
and not to the Coroners.

Co. ibid. 161. a. 2. 44 E. 3. 20. 6 R. 2. Refc. 11 11 H. 7. 4. 21 H 7. 40. 34
H. 6. 18. 16 E. 4. 10. Co. l. 9. fol. 22. Case of Avowry. Co. ibid. 169. b. 2.
15 H. 7. 14. 29 Ass. 23. 29 E. 3. 9. b.
10 If the Lord come to distreine cattle, Distress.
which he sees then within his fee; and the tenant or any other to prevent the
Lord to distreine, dri^es the cattle out of the Lords fee, into some other
p^ace not within his fee; yet may the Lord freshly follow and distreine the
cattle, and the tenant cannot make rescous: But if the Lord coming to
distreine had no view of the cattle within his fee, though the ^enant drive
them off purposely, or if the c^ttle of themsel^es after the view go out of
the fee, or if the tenant after the view remove them for any other cause, then
to prevent the Lord of his distress, then cannot the Lord distrein them out of
his fee, and if he does, the tenant may make rescous.

11 If there be three Coparceners, and they make partition, Rent in Coparcenary.
and one of them grant 20 s. per annum out of her part to her two sisters and
their heirs for egaltie of partition, the grantees are not joynttenants of
this rent, but the rent is in nature of coparcenary, and after the death of the
one grantee the moity of the rent shall descend to her issue in course of
cop^rcenary, and not survive to the other; for that the rent does come in
recompense of the land, and therefore shall ensue the nature thereof; and if
the grant had been made to them two of a rent of 20 s. viz. to the one 10 s,
and to the other ^0 s. yet shall they have the rent in course of coparcenary,
and shall also join in action for the same. Co. l. 5. 8. a. 2. Cases of Leases,
Justice Windhams case.

The like.
12 If two Coparceners by deed indented alien both their parts to another in
fee, Co. ibid. 169. b. 4. 38 E. ^. 26. b.
rendering to them two and their heirs a rent out of the land; In this case,
they shall not be joyn-tenants of that rent, but shall have it in course of
coparcenary; because their right in the land, out of which the rent is
reserved, was in coparcenary.

Joyn-tenants and tenants in common.
13 If two tenants in Common be disseised, Littl. 311. Co ibid. 195. b. 3.
each of them shall have a several assize for his moity because they claim and
are seized by several titles: but if 20 joyn-tenants be disseised, they shall
have but one assize in all their names; because they have but one joint title.

The like.
14 If there be three joyn-tenants, Littl. 312. Co. ibid. 196. a. 1.
and one releaseth to one of his companions all his right, etc. and after the
other two are disseised of the whole; In this case, the two others shall have
one assize in both their names for the two parts; because at the time of the
disseisin they held them by a joint title: but as to the other third part, he,
to whom the release was made, ought to have a several assize of that in his
own name; because of that part he is tenant in common, and has title to it by
force of the release, and not only by force of the jointure.

Coparceners.
15 If two Coparceners have issue, each of them a son, and die, Littl. 313.
Co. Inst. pars 1 196. a. 4.
and the sons before partition are disseised; in this case they shall join in
an Assize; for, although they claim by several titles in respect of the
several descents from their mothers, yet in as much as the land entirely
descended from their grandfather to their mothers, they are in Law accounted
Parceners, and a writ de partitione facienda lies betwixt them; and
consequently shall have but one Assize.

Tenants in common.
16 In real and mixed actions tenants in common shall sever in action, because
they have several freeholds, and claim by several titles; Co ibid. 195. b. 3.
198. a. 2.
but they shall have actions personal jointly in all their names, as an action
of trespass, of account against the Bailiff of their Manor, or the like; and
in this case also the survivor takes place; because these actions found in the
personalty, and not in the realty; and the trespass and damage done unto them
(which indeed is the cause of the action) is joint; and therefore ought to be
jointly prosecuted, and shall also jointly survive; and the same Law is of
Coparceners.

Mo^tgage.
17 If the feoffee in mortgage before the day of payment, Littl 339. Co. ibid.
209. b.
which should be made unto him, make his executors and die, and his heir
enters into the land as he ought, etc. It seems in this case that the feoffor
ought to pay the money at the day appointed to the executors, and not to the
heir of the feoffee; because the money at the first accrued unto the feoffee
in the nature of a duty, and it shall be intended, that the estate was made by
reason of the lending of the money by the feoffee, or in respect of some other
duty.

A mad man.
18 In criminal causes, as felony, Co. ibid. 247. b. 1. ubi vid. Pl. an. Plowd.
19. a.
etc. the act and wrong of a mad man shall not be imputed to him; for that in
those causes, Actus non facit reum, nisi men's sit rea, and he is said to be
Amens, that is sine mente: And therefore his madness being the cause thereof,
and not his intention, he is excusable. C. l. 4. 124. b. 2. Beverleys Case.

Entry, and ^laim.
19 Littleton says, that if a man having title to enter into lands, Co. ibid.
253. b. 1, 2.
dare not do it for fear of beating, mayming, or death; that then he ought to
approach as near the land, as he dare, to make his claim; yet in this case
every doubt or fear is not sufficient; for it must concern the safety of his
person, and not of his houses or goods, for the fear of burning his houses, or
of taking away or spoiling his goods; are not sufficient causes to make him
forbear to make his entry or claim upon the land, because he may recover the
same again, or (at least) damages to the value of them without any corporal
hurt: And here also, though the fear do concern the person, yet it must not
be a vain fear, but such as may justly cause a constant man to be afraid by
reason of some overt act, as if the adverse party lie in wait in the way with
weapons, or by words menace to beat, Bract. lib. 2. 16. b. Brit. 19. 66. etc.
maime, kill, or imprison him, etc. Talis enim debet esse metus, qui cadere
potest in virum constantem, and qui in se continet mortis periculum, and
corporis cruciatum.

Co ibid. 266. a. 3.
20 If the Donee in tail discontinue in fee, Discontinuance of an estate tail.
the reversion of the Donor is turned to a naked right; and here, if the Donor
release to the discontinuee, and the Donee die, and the issue in tail does
recover the land against the discontinuee, he shall recover no more then the
estate tail, and must then (by consequence) leave the reversion in the
discontinuee; for he can recover no more, than was due to him by the gift of
the Donor, which was the cause and ground of his title; neither yet in this
case shall the Donor have the reversion again, against h^s own release.

Co. ibid. 355. a. 2.
21 Whereas diverse hold opinion that upon a recovery had by default in an action
of Wast against tenant in Dower or by the courtesy, Waste.
a Quod ei deforceat lies not; because ye default is not the cause of the
judgment; For notwithstanding ye default there goes forth a writ to enquire
de vafto facto, and quod vastum predict, A. (the defendant) fecit: So as the
defendant may give evidence, and the jurors may find for the defendant, that no
wast was done; as in an assize, albeit it be awarded by default, yet may the
tenant give evidence, and the Recognitors of the Assize may find for the
tenant; And therefore in these or the like cases, the tenant or defendant non
amittit per defaltum, (as the Statute and Littleton speak) and they cite F.N.B.
in the point: Littl. Sect 674 675. West 2. c. 4. Fitz. 155. e.
Nevertheless others do hold the contrary, because albeit in the writ of wast
judgment is not given only upon the default, yet the default is the principal,
and the cause of awarding the writ to enquire of the wast, as an incident
thereunto; and the Law always has respect to the first and principal cause of
a thing, from whence it takes the first rise and being.

Co. ibid 364. a. 4. 10 H. 6. 10. 31 H. 6. Entry congeable 54.
22 Where Ioyn-tenants or Coparceners have one and the same remedy, if the one
enter, the other shall enter also; Joyn-tenants, and tenants a common.
but where the remedies be several, there it is otherwise; As if two
Ioyn-tenants or Coparceners join in a real action, where their entry is not
lawful, and the one is summoned and severed, and the other pursues and
recovereth the moity; the other Ioyn-tenant or Coparcener shall enter and take
the profits with her; because their remedy was one and the same, But where two
Coparceners be, and they are disseised, and a descent is cast, and they have
issue and die, if the issue of the one recover her moity, the other shall not
enter with her, because their remedies were several; and yet when both have
recovered, they are Coparceners again: So if two Ioyn-tenants seized of lands
(the one of full age, the other under age) be disseised, etc. And the disseisor
die seized and his issue enter, the o^e of the Ioyn-tenants being still under
age, And after that he comes to full age the heir of the disseisor lets the
lands to the same Ioyn-tenants for their two lives; This is a remittor of the
moity to him within age, because his entry was congeable; but the other
Ioyn-tenant has but an estate for life in the other moi^y by force of the
Lease, because his entry was taken away, Lit. l. 656.
etc. as you shall find it in Littleton Sect. 696. If A. and B. Ioyn-tenants in
fee be disseised by the father of A. who dies seized, his son and heir
enters, he is remitted to the whole, and his companion shall take advantage
thereof; Otherwise here in the case of Littl. for that the advantage is given
to the infant, more in respect of his person than of his right, whereof his
Companion shall take no advantage: But if the Grandfather had disseised the
Ioyn-tenants, and the land had descended to the father, and from him to A. and
then A. had died, the entry of the other would have been taken away by the
first descent, and therefore he should not have entered with the heir of A. etc.

Warranty that begins by disseisin.
23 If A. de B. be seized of an house, Littl. 368.
and F. de G. enter into the same house, clayming it to him and his heirs, and
make a feofment thereof with warranty to certain Barrettors in the Country to
be maintained by them; by reason whereof A. de B. dare not stay in the house,
but goes out; This is warranty that begins by disseisin; because that
feofment was the cause why A. de B. left the possession of the same house.

Tenant in tail, the reversion in the King.
24 If a subject make a gift in tail, Co. ibid. 372. b. 3.
the remainder to the King in fee, Albeit the words of the Statute of 34 H. 8.
cap. 20. be ( whereof the reversion or remainder at the time of such recovery
had, shall be in the King, etc. yet seeing the estate tail was not originlly
created by the King, the estate tail may be barred by a Common recovery: So
likewise if Prince H. son of H. 7. had made a gift in tail the remainder to
H. 7. in fee, which remainder by the death of H. 7. had descended to H. 8. So
as he had the remainder by descent; yet in this case also a Common recovery
would have barred the estate tail.

No fine before admitance.
25 Popham Chief Justice said, that it was adjudged in Sands his case, Co. l. 4
28. a. 3. Copihold cases. Hubbert and Hamons case.
that no fine was due to the Lord either upon surrender or descent until
admittance: For the admittance is the cause of the fine, and if after the
tenant deny to pay it, that is a forfeiture. And so it was also resolved by
Wray and Periam in a case betwixt Sir Nich. Bacon and Flatman.

The cause must be showed, why the Bishop refuses to admit.
26 If a Clerk be presented to a Bishop to be admitted to a Benefice, and he
refuses him in pretense of insufficiency or other defect; Co. l. 5. 58. a. ^.
Specots case.
In a Quare impedit the Bishop ought to allege some particular crime or cause
why he did not admit him, and not generally, quod non est idoneus, quod est
criminosus, schismaticus, inveteratus, or the like: For although it belongs not
to the Kings Court to determine schisms or heresies; yet the original cause of
the suit being matter, whereof the Kings Court has conusance, the cause of the
schism or heresy, for which the presentee is refused, ought to be alleged
in certain, to the intent that the Kings Court may consult with Divines, to
know whether it be schism or no, and if the party be dead, may thereupon
direct the Jury which is to try it.

Felons goods for flying cannot be forfeited by prescription.
27 If a man fly for felony, his own goods are not forfeited, Co. ibid. 109.
b. 1. Foxl^yes case.
until it be found by the indictment before the Coroner, in case of death, or
otherwise lawfully found upon record, that the felony was the cause of his
flight; For if the goods of any shall be forfeited, only by reason of this
flying, without more, then a man may have such goods so forfeited by
prescription, as he may have waifs, estrayes, treasure trow, etc. but in as
much as bona fugitivorum are not forfeited, until the flight be lawfully
proved upon record, and because things forfeited by matter of record cannot be
claymed by prescription, which is a matter in suit; for this cause they cannot
be claymed by prescription.

28 Deodands are the goods, which caused the death of the party killed by
misfortune, Co. ibid. 110. b. 4.
and are not forfeit, Deodands not forfeited by prescription in England.
until it be found upon record, that they were the cause of his death, and
therefore they cannot be claimed by prescription no more than bona fugitivorum,
for which Vide supra, 27.

M. 30, and 31. El. Co l. 6. 47. b. Dowdales case Co. Inst. pars 1 261. b.
29 In an action upon the case upon Assumpsit, the Plaintiff counts, Trial of a
fact done in France
that the defendant at London did assume, that such a Ship should sail from
Melcomb Reg. unto Abiville in France safely without violence, etc. and that the
Ship sailing thitherwards was arrested by the King of France, upon the River of
Sum within the Kingdom of France, etc. And issue was joined whither the ship
was so arrested or not, and before Wray Chief Justice in London it was found
for the Plaintiff; and in arrest of judgment it was moved, that this issue
arising merely from a place, which was out of the Realm, could not be tried,
and that if it might be tried in England, the trial should be by a Jury taken
out of Melcomo, because by common intendment they might be best acquainted with
the arrest: But it was resolved, that, although it be true, that where the
contract and the performance thereof are both of them done or to be done beyond
sea, there will want trial in our Law; yet in this case the Assumpsit, which is
the ground and original cause of the action, being made at London, the trial
thereof must of necessity be there also: The like case was adjudged in P. 28.
El. betwixt Hugh Gynue Plaintiff, and Evangelist Constantine Defena^t.

Co. 7. 6. a 4. Calvin's case.
30 It is neither Coelum nor Solum, but Ligeantia and Obedientia, One may be
born in England, and yet not within the Kings allegiance.
that make the subject borne: for if enemies should come into the Realm, and
possess a town or fort, and have issue there, that issue is no subject to the
King of England; although he be born upon his soil, and under his meridian;
because he was not borne under the ligeance of a subject, nor under the
protection of the King, etc. And therefore when St^phano Ferrara de Gama and
Emanuel Jews Tinoco, two Portugals born, coming into England under Qu. El.
safe conduct, and living here under her protection, joined with Doctor Lopez in
treason within this Realm against her Majesty; In that case two points were
resolved; 1 That their indictment ought to begin, that they intended treason
contra Dominam Reginam, etc. omitting these words (naturalem Dominam suam) and
ought to conclude contra ligeantiae suae debitum: But if an alien enemy come to
invade this Realm, and be taken in war, he cannot be indicted of treason; for
the indictment cannot conclude contra ligentiae suae debitum, because he never
was in the Kings Protection, nor never owed any manner of ligeance unto him but
malice and enmity, And therefore such an alien enemy shall be put to death by
Martial Law. As it was in the case of Perkin Warbeck, Anno 15 H. 7. who by the
opinion of the Judges was to be executed by Martial Law, which was done
accordingly.

Co. l. 7. 15. a. 3. Calvin's case.
31 Albeit, since K. James took upon him the Crown of England, A Postnatus
cannot be noble in England, without creation.
a Postnatus in Scotland (or any of his posterity) be the heir of a Nobleman of
Scotland, and by his birth is legitimated in England, so that he may inherit
Land as well as a natural borne subject; yet he is none of the Peers or
Nobility of England, For his natural ligeance and obedience due by the Law of
nature, makes him a subject and no alien within England: But that subjection
makes him not noble within England; because Nobility had his first original by
the Kings Creation, and not of nature.

Co. l. 7. 2. a. 4. Bulwers case.
32 Vide 3 E. 3. Tit. Assize 446. In debt if a man count of a lease, Lease made
of Land in another country.
for years in one County, of land in another County, he ought to bring his
action in the County where the Lease was made, and not where the land lies: for
the contract made by the Lease is the ground and cause of the action.

The action to be laid, where the cause began.
33 The Plaintiff counts, Co. ibid. 1. Bulwers case.
that H. H. recovered against him 20 l. in Banco, and died before execution,
and that the Defendant deceptive outlawed him after Judgment in the name of H.
H. and thereupon imp^isoned him in Norfolk, laying his action in that County
where he was imprisoned; whereupon the Defendant making objection, that the
action ought to have been laid where the wrong did begin by the purchase of the
cap. ad satisfact. exigit, cap. utlag. viz. in London, It was resolved, that
the action was well laid in Norfolk, where the Imprisonment, the most visible
wrong, was, being (indeed) the chief ground and cause of the action.

Waste and a writ of right of ward, to be brought in where the land lies.
34 If a Lease be made in one County, Co. ibid. 2. b. Bulwers case. 14 E. 3. 3.
and the land lies in another, the action of wast shall be brought where the
land lies, and not where the Lease was made, although the term be past; for
the land and damages, or damages only for the wast, which is local, shall be
recovered, and are the ground and cause of the suit. So also in all actions
real, if any issue arise upon the land, 29 E 3. 3. 38 H. 6. 14. 22 R. 2. Breve
937.
or in any action, in which the possession of the land, or a thing local, or
that which arises upon the land by reason thereof, is to be recovered, all
these shall be brought in the County where the land lies; As in a writ of right
of ward of land, or a writ of intrusion of ward, they shall be brought in the
County where the land lies, although the refusal or the Seigniory be in
another County: Likewise in a writ of right of ward of the body only, that
shall be brought in the County where the land lies; for it is in the right and
sawours of the land: 21 E. 3. 42. 30 E. 3. 25. 9 E. 3. 12, 13. 10 E. 3. 7.
But the writ of Ravishment of ward shall be brought where the Ravishment was,
and not where the land is, or where the body is carried; for that action is
founded upon the Ravishment, etc. 36 H. 6. 14. 22 R. 2. Bre. 937. and 12 Eliz.
Dyer. 289.

Condition of Vici^age.
35 If the Commons of the Town of A. and of the Town of B. are adjacent, Co. l.
7. 5. b. 3. Sir Miles Corbets case.
and ought to have Common promiscue the one with the other because of vicinage,
and within the Town of A. there are fifty arcres of Common, and in the Town of
B. 100 acres of Common; In this case the Inhabitants of the Town of A. cannot
put more cattle into their Common of 50 acres than it will well keep without
any respect at all to the Common within the Town of B. nec e converso; for the
original cause of this condition by reason of vicinage was not for profit but
to prevent suits in Champion Countries for the reciprocal escapes of the one
Town into the other.

Condition precedent and subsequent.
36 In all cases when an interest or estate commenceth upon a Condition
precedent, Co. l. 7. 10. a. 1. Ughtreds case.
be the Condition or Act to be performed by the Plaintiff or Defendant or any
other, or be the condition in the affirmative or the negative; there the
Plaintiff ought to show it in his Count, and aver the performance of it; for
there the interest or estate commenceth in him by the performance of the
Condition, and is not in him till the Condition be performed: but it is
otherwise when the interest or estate passes presently and vests in the
grantee, and is to be defeated by matter ex post facto, on Condition
subsequent, be the Condition or Act to be performed by the Plaintiff or
Defendant or by any other, and be the Condition in the affirmative or the
negative; there the Plaintiff may count generally without showing the
performance of it; and it shall be pleaded by him that will take advantage of
the Condition or matter ex post facto; for every one ought to allege that,
which makes for him, and is for his advantage, but none shall be compelled to
produce that which makes against him. Vide infra 25. 20.

A Copiholder may lop trees.
37 The Lord of a Copihold Manor, Co. l. 8. 63. Swaynes case.
within which the Copiholders might by custom lop the timber trees for
estovers and necessary repair of fences, etc. makes a Lease thereof to A. for
21 years, excepting the timber trees; A Copihold tenant having lands upon which
such timber grew, surrendered his estate to another, who was admitted by A. the
Lessee of the Manor, and lops the trees for necessary repair of fences: Now
the question was, whether the Copihold tenant being admitted by A. who had no
interest of the trees by reason of the exception, Co. l. 4. 21. a Browns case,
fol. 23. b Clark, and Pennyfathers case. and fol. 24. a. P. 26. Eliz. and 29.
b. 2. Buntings case.
had power to lop them, because Nemo potest plus juris ad alium transfer,
quam ipse habet: And it was resolved that he might lawfully lop them, because
the estate of a Copiholder is not derived out of the estate or interest of the
Lord of the Manor (for the Lord is but as it were an Instrument to convey the
grant of the Copihold) but the Custom of the Manor (after the grant is made)
is that, which establishes and makes it firm to the Grantee: So that although
the grant be new, yet the title of the Copiholder to the profit of the trees is
ancient, and so ancient, that by force of the Custom it exceeds the memory of
man. Vide Co. 4. 27. b. Taverners case, and 28 b. Westicks case. Vide 30. 22,
23.

Co. l. 9. 81. Agnes Gores case.
38 Gore (the husband of Agnes) being sick, It may be murder, though not
intended.
Roper the father of Agnes procures an Electuary of Martin the Apothecary by
the advice of Doctor Gray into which Agnes secretly puts Rats-bane to poison
her husband, and the 18 of May gives part thereof to her husband, who thereupon
became very sick, Roper also and another eating part thereof became very sick;
at last Martin (being taxed for making the Electuary in that manner) the 21 of
May stirs it, and also eats part thereof, and dies the next day: And it was
resolved by all the Judges of England, that this was murder in Agnes, and that
this case did not differ from Sanders case in the Commentaries, Plowd 474.
although Martin by stirring it made the poison more forcible; for the
stirring, etc. without putting in the poison could not be the cause of his
death; and the Law joins the murderous intention of Agnes in putting the
poison into the Electuary to kill her husband with the event, which insued
thereupon, viz. the death of Martin; for the putting in of the poison was the
cause, and the poisoning and death of Martin was the event, Quia eventus est
qui ex causa sequitur, and dicuntur eventus, quia ex causis eveniunt. So if A.
puts poison into wine with an intention to kill B. and C. conceiving it to be
sugar, stirs it, drinks it, and dies, this is murder in A. It is otherwise
where Rats-bane is laid with an intention to kill rats, and one takes it, eats
it and dies; for there was no felonious intent, etc.

Co. l. 9. 85. a. Connyes case.
39 Upon grant of a Manor; An Infant shall do his services, etc.
attornement of an infant (being tenant of the same Manor) is good, and in a
Per quae servitia against an infant, that has the tenancy by descent, he shall
not have his age; because at first the Lord departed with the land in
consideration that the tenant should hold of him, perform services, pay a
yearly rent, etc. and the tenant is in Law called tenant paravaile, because
the Law presumes that he has benefit and avail above the services which he
does, and the rent which he pays to the Lord: And therefore it is against the
reason and purpose of the creation of the tenure, that, when the heir has the
tenancy paravaile by descent, he should not pay the annual rent, etc. which was
reserved upon the Creation of the tenancy: And this is the reason, that the
heir of the tenant, who has the tenancy by descent, may be distreined for the
rent, etc. arrere during the minority, and shall not therefore have his age,
etc.

Co. l. 9. 113. a. Maryes case.
40 For every feeding of the Cattle of a stranger upon a Common, Trespass for
common, and contra.
the Commoner shall not have an Assise, nor action upon the case (as his case
lies) but the depasturing ought to be such, per quod le Commoner, etc. Common
de pasture, etc. for his Cattle, etc. habere non potuit, sed proficium suuminde
per totum idem tempus amisit, etc. So that if the trespass be so little that
he has not any loss, but that still sufficient remains for him to depasture
his cattle: In that case the Commonor shall not take the Strangers Cattle
damage fesant, neither shall he have any action for it: but the tenant of the
soil may in that case have an action. So if a servant be beaten, the Master
shall not have an action for that battery, except that by reason thereof he
loses his servants service; but the servant for every slight battery may have
an action; and the cause of this diversity is, for that the Master receives no
damage by the personal battery of his servant, but by reason of a per quod, and
per quod servitium, etc. amisit; So that the original Act is not the cause of
his action, but the consequent upon it, viz. the loss of his service; and the
same reason holds in the case of a Common, as above said.

A release of remainder of a temr, good.
41 Quando diversi desiderantur actus ad aliquem statum perficiendum, Co. l. 10.
49. a. 14 Lampets case.
plus respicit lex actum originalem, quia cujusque rei potissima pars est
principium: And therefore if A. possessed of a Lease for the term of 500 years
demiseth the term to B. for life, the remainder to C. and the heirs of his
body, and makes B. his executor, and dies, and after B. is possessed of the
Lease, C. releaseth to B. all his right in the term; In this case, although it
was objected, that the release was void, because C. at the time of the release,
had no estate in him, but only a possibility, the whole estate and term of
years being in B. so that after the death of B, C. might enter upon the Lease
again notwithstanding the release; yet it was resolved, that C. by that
release had extinguished all his right and title in the term, and had fixed it
in B. because the devise by A. and the assent of B. the executor (appearing by
his acceptance of the release) were as the original and fundamental causes of
the interest of C. and the death of B. is but a mean to bring the Lease in
possession, and gives nothing at all; for that the whole interest accrues by
the devise, and is executed by the assent of the executor, and therefore C. had
not only a possibility, Fulwoods case. Co. l. 4. 66. b.
but likewise such an interest as might well be released, etc. But in that case
a grant by C. to a Stranger had been void.

The Commissioners of Sewers.
42 Every Statute, Ordinance, and Provision, Co. l. 10. 140. a Kigheleyes case
which is to be made by force of the Commission of Sewers ought to consist of 4
causes. 1 The Material cause, which is the substance. 2 The Formal cause, and
that is the manner with convenient circumstance, 3 The Efficient cause, and
that is their authority according to their Commission. 4 The Final cause and
that is pro bono publico, and nunquam pro privato. The consideration whereof
will be as so many Sea-marks to direct the Commissioners how to steer in the
execution of their charge, and how to order the liberty which is given them by
the Statute of 23 H. 8. 5. viz. to make such Ordinances, etc. according to
their own wisdoms and discretions, etc. which words are meant and ought to
be interpreted, according to Law and Justice, For every Judge or Commissioner
ought to have duo grana salis, viz. unum sapientiae, ne sit insipidus, and
alterum conscientiae, ne sit diabolus; And discretion is well described to be,
scire per legem quid sit justum.

Fine in a Leet ought to be distinct, and not joint.
43 In a Leet, a fine of 6 li. put upon all the Jurors jointly, Co. l. 11. 42.
b. Godfreyes case.
by the Steward, (because they would not present a thing, which by the custom
of the Manor they ought to present) is not duly imposed, but ought to have
been assessed upon them severally; for that the cause, which occasioned the
fine, is several, because the refusal of each of them is several and personal,
and the refusal of one is not the refusal of another; and therefore if some of
them refused, and the rest be ready to present, only those that refuse are to
be fined, etc.

Damage feasant.
44 If a man take beasts damage fesant, Fitz. 69. g.
and the other offers sufficient amends, and he refuses, etc. Here if he sue a
replevin, etc. for the Beasts, he shall recover damages only for the detinue
of them, and not for their taking; for that the cause of taking them was
lawful.

Fitz. 79. h.
45 The Peace ought no be granted against any without good cause; Binding to the
Peace.
and therefore by the ancient course of the Law the party complaining used to
make oath before a Master of the Chancery, that he was in fear, etc. of some
corporal damage, and did not take that oath for malice against his adversary:
the like ought to be observed by the Justices of the King's Bench, and of Peace.

Fitz. 95. d.
46 If a man win another money with false dice, Cheating at Dice.
he that is deceived may have an action of Deceit against the party so
deceiving him; And in this case although the Defendant do not entice the
Plaintiff to play, yet it seems he may well maintain that action against the
Defendant; because the excitation to play at dice, is not the cause of the
action, but the casting of the false dice, etc. by which he won the money,
etc.

Fitz. 104. l.
47 If a man acknowledge a Statute Staple, Dures.
or Statute Merchant by dures, etc. he may have an Audita quarela to avoid it,
because the imprisonment was the cause thereof.

Plowd. 19. a. Fogassaes case.
48 If a man by dures be compelled to seal a bond, Dures, or other compulsion.
he shall avoid it: So if a man's arm be drawn by compulsion, and by that
occasion the weapon in his hand kills another, that is not felony; Likewise if
an infant under the years of discretion, or a man de non sane memory kill a
man, they shall be excused, because their ignorance, and not any wicked
intention was the cause thereof.

M. 20. H. 7. 12. per Read. Plowd. 26. b. 4. Colthrist, and Bivishams.
49 If one retain another to serve a year for 20 s. wages; here, Wages for a
years service.
if the servant demand the 20 s. he ought to show that the time is past, viz.
that the year is expired, and he ought to plead certain, because his action is
given in respect of the year past, and of a thing done in time, and the time
is parcel of the cause of the demand, and precedes the demand.

Plowd. 98. a. Matters of the Crown.
50 In Olivers case in the Commentaries, All principal in Murder.
those that stood by and abbetted the Murderers, were as well principals, as
those that killed him; because the number of them then present, and ready to
strike him, shall be adjudged the cause of his terror, and of the abatement of
his courage, and an occasion to make him despair of defending himself, and by
consequent that terror was the cause of receiving his wounds, and the wounds
the cause of his death.

Plowd. 99. b. 101. a. Matters of the Crown.
51 Amongst the matters of the Crown in the Commentaries, Murder, though the
party, intended not killed.
diverse persons having a malicious intention to murder Doctor Ellis, killed his
servant unto whom they bare no former malice; yet was it adjudged Murder,
because of their murderous intention, which was the cause of his death; it is
otherwise when one having no malicious intent, joins himself with others,
that commit a murder, for that is but Manslaughter in him, that so suddenly
joins with them.

44 E. 3. 14. b. 14 Ass. Pl. 20. Finch 10.
52 A man makes me swear to bring him money to such a place, Terror.
or else he will kill me, I bring it accordingly, this is felony. So if he make
me swear to surrender my estate unto him, and I do so afterward, this is a
disseisin to me.

21 E. 4. 68. b. Finch 10.
53 One imprisoned till he be content to make an Obligation at another place,
and afterward he does so, being at large; The like.
yet he shall avoid it by dures of imprisonment.

3 E. 3. 84. Finch 10.
54 Outlawry in trespass is no forfeiture of land, Outlawry in trespass in
forfeiture.
as Outlawry of felony is; for although the not appearing be the cause of
Outlawry in both, yet the force of the Outlawry shall be esteemed according to
the heinousness of the offense, which is the principal cause and foundation of
the process.

Villenage.
55 A man and a feme sole have a villein, Finch 10.
and afterward enter-marry, and the villeine purchases land, they shall not
have the land by entierties, but by moities Jointly or in Common, as they had
the villein.

An action for goods bailed.
56 If one deliver goods to another, 22 H. 6. 1. Co. l. 10. 51. b. Lampets case.
and after the Bailor release to the Bailee all actions, the Bailee dies, in a
writ of Detinue brought against his executors, they shall not take advantage of
that release; for that determines by the death of the Bailee, and the action
given against the executors is a new action (although of the same nature)
grounded upon their own deteiner.

Election of an Annuity, or distress.
57 If a rent charge be granted to A. and B. and their heirs, Co. Inst. pars 1;
146. a. 1.
A. distreineth the Beasts of the Grantor, who sueth a Replevin, A. avoweth for
himself and makes Conusance for B. A. dies and B. surviveth, Here B. shall
not afterward have a writ of Annuity, for, the election and avowry for the
rent of A. barreth B. of any election to make it an annuity, albeit he assented
not to be the avowry; because in that case the act of one joyn-tenant barreth
the other, and the election takes his rise from several causes, viz. the land
or the person; and therefore when the election once fixes upon the land, it
cannot afterward charge the person: It is otherwise when a man may have
election to have several remedies for a thing, that is merely personal or
merely real from the beginning: 28 E. 3. 98 b. 27 E. 3. 89. b.
As if a man may have an action of account, or an action of debt at his
pleasure, and he brings in an action of account, and appears to it, and
after is nonsuit; yet may he have an action of debt afterward because both
actions charge the person: The like Law is of an Assise, or of a writ of Entry
in the nature of an Assise, and the like. 15 E. 4. 16. 10 E. 4, 5. Co. Inst.
pars 1 295. a. 3.


Wager of law.
58 In an action of account against a receivour upon a receipt of money by the
hand of another person for account render (unless it be by the hands of his
Wife or Commoigne) the defendant shall not wage his Law; because the receipt is
the ground of the action, which lies not in privity betwixt the Plaintiff and
Defendant, but in the notice of a third person, and such a receipt is
traversable: 33 H. 6. 24. 13 H. 7. 3. a. 22 H 6. 41. 1 H. 6. 1. b. 8 H. 6. 11,
etc.
But in an action of debt upon an arbitrament, and in an action of Detinue by
the bailment of another hand, the Defendant shall wage his Law, because the
Debet and the Detinet is the ground of those actions, and the contract or
bailment, though it be by another hand, is but the conveyance, and not
traversable.

Descent to Daughters, and yet no Copar^eners.
59 Land is given to a man and his wife and the heirs of their two bodies, and
they have issue a daughter, the wife dies, Littl. 662, 663.
the husband takes another wife and has issue another daughter, and
discontinues the tail, and after disseiseth the discontinuee, and so dies
seized; Here, the land shall descend to both the daughters; but yet they are
not Coparceners; because they are in by several Titles, viz. the eldest is
remitted by force of the intaile to the one moity, and the other has Fee
simple by force of the descent from her father: but in this case, the eldest
shall out the youngest by her action of Formedon.

Recovery in value.
60 If the heir of the part of the mother of land, Co. Inst. pars 1 13. a. 1.
Pl. Co. 292. 515
whereunto a warranty is annexed, is impleaded and vouch over, and judgment is
given against him, and for him to recover in value, and dies before execution,
the heir of the part of the mother shall sue execution to have in value against
the vouchee; for the effect ought to pursue the cause, and the recompense shall
ensue the loss.

Co. ibid. 201. b. 3.
61 He that will take advantage of a re-entry for non payment of rent, must make
demand of the same upon the land; Demands upon the land.
because the land is the principal debtor; for the rent issues out of the
land, and in an Assise for the rent the land shall be put in view; and if the
land be evicted by a title paramount, the rent is avoided, and after such
eviction, the person of the Feoffee shall not be charged therewith; for the
person of the Feoffee was only charged with the rent in respect of the grant
out of the land, etc. Howbeit Homage, or any other special corporal service,
must be done to the person of the Lord, and the tenant ought by the Law of
convenience to seek him, Co. ibid. 210. a. 1.
to whom the service is to be done, in any place within England; for that and
the like services are due and issue out of the land in respect of the person,
etc.

F. N. Br. 150. d.
62 If a man recover in value against the baron by warranty of the ancestor, yet
the feme of the baron shall be endowed; Dower.
because the recovery was had by force of the warranty made, and not by reason
of any eigne title to the land.

Dyer 13. 62. 28 H. 8. 19 E. 3.
63 If land be given in Frank-marriage, Divorce.
and after the Donees are divorced, the party by whom the cause of the Divorce
was first moved, shall lose the land; as if the feme sued for it, the baron
shall have it, and e contra. Tamen quaere; for one book says, that the land
shall be divided betwixt them. per Fitzherbert.

F.N.B. 121. p.
64 If a man be condemned in trespass or debt upon an obligation, Capias pro
fine
(where he denies his deed) at the suit of the party, and after he that is
condemned is taken by Capias pro fine at the suit of the King, and committed to
the Jail; here, if the Jailer suffer him to escape, the party shall have an
action of debt against the Jailer for this condemnation, and yet he was not
committed to him at his suit, but at the suit of the King: Howbeit, within the
year after the condemnation and judgment given, this suit for the King shall
serve as well for the party as for the King, because the King was entitled to
it by the party, for his suit and judgment was the cause of the Kings fine: It
is otherwise after the year, because it will be intended they are agreed, and
then the party is put to his Scire facias, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1 245. b. 2.
65 If a Bastard eigne after the deceease of the father enters, Bastard Mu^^
and the King seiseth the land for some contempt supposed to be committed by
the Bastard, and the Bastard dies, and his issue is upon his petition restored
to the possession, for that the seizure was without cause; In this case, the
Mulier is barred for ever; for the possession of the King, when he has no
cause of seizure, shall be adjudged the possession of him, for whose cause he
seized: But if after the death of the father the Mulier be found heir and
within age, and the King seiseth; In that case, the possession of the King is
in right of the Mulier, and vesteth the actual possession in the Mulier, for
that she was the cause, that occasioned the seizure, and consequently the
Bastard eigne is in such case fore-inclosed of any right for ever: So it is
likewise, when the King seiseth for a contempt or other offense of the father
or any other ancestor; for in that case also, if the issue of the Bastard eigne
upon a petition be restored, for that the seizure was without cause, the Mulier
is not barred, for the Bastard could never enter, and consequently could gain
no estate in the land, but the possession of the King shall be adjudged in the
right of the Mulier, and the rather for that the father or other ancestor of
the Mulier was the cause of the seizure.

Dyer 100. a. 70 1 Mar.
66 If the King grant land by Charter probis hominibus villae de Islington,
rendering rent, Kings Chanc^
this is a good and perpetual Corporation for that intent, but if the King
release or give them the rent and fee-farme, it seems the Corporation is ipso
facto dissolved, for the rent and farm were the cause of their incorporation.

22 Cujus est dare ejus est disponere.
A proviso imports a condition.
1 A. bargains and sels the Manors of D. (unto which an Advowson was
appendant) with the appurtenances unto B. and his heirs, provided always, Co.
l. 2. 71. b. 2 The Lord Cromwels case.
that B. regrant the Advowson to A. during his life; B. dies, not having
regranted the Advowson to A. who enters for the Condition broken: Here, whereas
it was amongst other things objected, that this Proviso could not import a
Condition, because the Bargainor did only covenant with the Bargainee, and
therefore the Bargainee should also be understood only to Covenant with the
Bargainor, and so that Proviso only to import a Covenant and not a Condition:
It was resolved, that it had the force of a Condition; because it was not
unjust or unequal, that the Bargainor from whom the land moved, should annex
what Condition soever he pleased to the estate of the land: for Cujus est dare,
etc.

Feofment to the use of a Will.
2 If a man seized of lands in fee makes feoffment to the use of such person and
persons, and for such estate and estates, Co. l. 6. 18. a. 1. Sir Edward Cleres
case.
as he shall apppoint by his will; here, by operation of Law the use rests in
the feoffor, and he is seized of a qualified fee, viz. until declaration and
limitation be made according to his power; so also when a man makes feoffment
to the use of his last will, he is in the mean time seized to the use of
himself and his heirs.

Legiantia naturalis and acquisita.
3 Legiantia naturalis may be properly said to be pura and indefinita, Co. l. 7.
5. b. 4. Calvin's case.
but Legiantia acquisita, may be limited according to the will of the King that
grants it, as to an alien and his heirs, or to him and the heirs of his body,
or to him for life only, or upon Condition, etc. for Cujus est dare, etc.

A stranger may take advantage of a condition.
4 If A. grants lands to B. for life, the remainder to C. for life, Plowd. 24.
b. 4. and 31. a. 4. Colthrist, and Beinshin, ibid. 34. ^^1.
and if C. die, living B. that then they shall remain to D. for life: here,
although it was objected, that the remainder to D. was void, because limited to
commence upon a Condition, whereof none can take advantage but privies; yet it
was adjudged good; For that God has committed all wordly things to the order
and dispose of men; So that when any does lawfully enjoy such things, he may
order or convey, or give them where, when, and how he pleases according to his
intent and meaning, so that his intent be not against Law, against Reason, or
repugnant: And therefore in this case when the Lessor appoints the remainder to
the Defendant ut supra, his intent is plainly discovered thereby, and reason
requires that his intent should be performed, viz. that the remainder should
take effect in manner and form as he has appointed.

Liberty given to the tenant to pay which he will.
5 If there be Lord, and Tenant, and the Lord holds by a Capon, Plowd. 96. a. 4.
Woodlands case.
or an Egg, or 12 d. rent, Here the Lord shall not come to the land and take a
Capon, and Egg, or 12 d. being arrere, although he find it there, but the
only remedy is to distrein for it; Howbeit in that case if the Tenant have 20
Capons, 20 eggs, or 20 s. of Silver, it is in the power of the Tenant to give
the Lord which Capon, Egg, or twelve pence he pleases: So that the liberty is
not given to the Lord to take, which of them he will; but to the Tenant, who is
to pay the thing.

Hedgboot, etc. by assignment.
6 The Lessor covenants, Dyer 19. 115^ 28 H. 8.
that the Lessee shall have sufficient Hedgeboot, etc. by the assignement of
the Lessors Bailiffe: Here, it was said (by Baldwin and Fitzherbert) that the
Lessee might take such boots by the Common Law, and therefore that he might
take them without assignement, because it is no more than what the Law gives
the Lessee privilege to do: but Shelley contra, because it being in the
Lessors power to grant the lease upon what terms he pleased, the Lessee shall
be bound by it, albeit the covenant be in the Affirmative and only on the
Lessors part, and not in the Negative (by way of Covenant or Proviso) on the
Lessees part: For Modus and coventio vincunt legem, and the Lessee accepted of
the Lease upon those terms. Quere.

Dyer 136. Pl. 17. 3, 4, P.M.
7 The uses of a fine or recovery may be declared by Indenture or otherwise, as
well after as before such fine or recovery; Uses of a Recovery.
for so in Arthur Bassets case 3, 4. P. M. the uses of a Recovery were by the
Indentures declared four years after the Recovery, and held good enough; for
Cujus est dare, etc.

23 Ultra posse non est esse, and Vice Versa.
Co. l. 6 58. a. 4. in Bredimaus Case.
1 A Right (without any estate in Possession, A right or remainder after an
entall no assets.
Reversion or Remainder) for which good remedy by actionis given, is not to be
esteemed Assets before it be recovered, and reduced into possession. So
likewise an estate (as in rent-seck,) which descends, and for which the heir
has no remedy, is not Assets, until he has gained seisin; for, want of
right and want of remedy are in the same equipage: and therefore a man shall
not be remitted to a Right, that is remediless, as appears in the Marquess
of Winchesters case in the third Report: And in M. 12. and 13. El. betwixt
Terling and Trafford it was adjudged, that the Reversion expectant upon an
estate tail was not Assets; because it lay in the Will of the Tenant in Tail
to docke and bar it at his pleasure, and the Reversioner had no power to
prevent it.

Co. l. 7, 8. a. 3. The Earl of Bedfords case.
2 In the Earl of Bedfords case in the 7 Report, Voidable Leases made good by
acceptance, it is otherwise of void things ab initio.
when voydable Leases, being void for a time, shall be always avoided, and
when not, this diversity was taken and resolved by the Court, viz. when the
interest of him, that makes the avoidance, is but for part of the term; So
that it appears there remains yet a residue, and when he, that makes the
avoidance, avoides all the interest, so that it appears no residue can
remain: As in the principal case there, which was to this effect, Tenant in
Tail of lands in Capite makes Leases not warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8.
28. and dies, his heir under age; Here, the King in right of the heir may
avoid those Leases during his time only; for, after the interest is
determined, the heir may make them good again by acceptance of the rent: So
it is also of a Subject, that is Guardian in Chivalry: Also if a Bishop since
the Statute of 13 El. let voidable Leases and die, 2 E. 3. 8.
the King during the vacancy may avoid them; but the Successor may make them
good again by acceptance of the rent: But if the Patron of the Church of D.
grant the next avoidance to another, and after and before the Statute of 13 El.
the Parson, Patron and Ordinary make a Lease for years rendering rent, and the
Parson dies, the Grantee presents his Clerk, who is admitted, instituted and
inducted, and dies: this lease was absolutely avoided and could not stand good
against the second successor, etc.

Co l. 5. 12. b. 2. Sanders case.
3 If a man having land in which there is a Cole mine (not open) lets the same
to another for term of life or years, An exception of great timber, Mines,
etc. void.
if the Lessee grant unto another all his interest in the land cum omnibus
profic. etc. (except and semper reservat, sibi and haeredibus suis toto
benefic. and profic. Miner Angl. Cole mines praedict. parcel terrae ac omnibus
arboribus Maerearii, etc. This exception is void, for by the exception of the
profits of the Mine or of the Mine it self the land is not excepted, and then
(by consequent) he has excepted that, which he cannot have or take: As if a
man assign over his term, except the Timber Trees growing upon the land, or
the marle, or the clay within the ground, this is void; for he cannot except a
thing, which does not by Law belong unto him.

Where no interest, no entry
4 If the Baron within age make feofment in fee of his Wives land, and dies, his
heir shall not enter to avoid this feofment, Co. l. 8. 43. b. 1. Whittinghams
Case.
because nothing descended unto him from the Baron; for the Law does not
respect what estate the Ancestor granted, but what estate he had before the
grant, and what right or title the Ancestor left to descend to the heir: And
therefore if an infant being tenant in tail make feofment in fee, and die
without issue, his collateral heir cannot enter to avoid that feoffment; for
although by his feoffment he granted Fee simple, yet, when he died without
issue, nothing descended to the heir, in respect of which he might enter: So
also if lands be given to one and the heirs female of his body, and he has
issue a son, and makes feofment in fee, and dies within age without issue
female, the son shall not enter for the said infancy, because no right in
that case descended unto him: So likewise if an infant be tenant pur auter vie,
and make feofment in fee, Cestuy quae vie, die, neither the infant nor his
heir shall ever enter upon the feoffee, but he in the reversion or remainder,
etc.

Discontinuance.
5 An estate tail cannot be discontinued, but where he, Co. Inst. pars 1 338.
b. 4.
that made the discontinuance, was once seized by force of the tail (except it
be by reason of warranty, etc.) according to the Rule in Philosophy, Omnis
privatio presupponit habitum: for he cannot discontinue that, which he never
had. Neither can a person discontinue the Fee simple of his Parsonage; because
the entire fee and right thereof was never in him. Vide M. 52. Ex. 8.

Remainder of rent void.
6 If I grant a rent out of my land, the remainder in fee, Pl. Com. 35. 2.
this remainder is void, because the rent was newly created by the grant, and
not in esse before. In Colth. and Bivishams case.

Rent not extinct.
7 A man makes a Lease for term of life, Dyer 31. a. 210
and afterward the Lessor makes a Lease of the same land for 20 years,
rendering rent, the term to begin after the death of Lessee for life,
afterward Lessee for life grants his estate to the Lessor, who during the life
of the tenant for life makes feofment to a stranger in fee, who suffers a
recovery, and Lessee for life dies, and for the rent avowry was made by the
recoverors, and the question was whether or no the rent was extinct by the
feofment, and the better opinion seems to be, that it was not extinct, because
it was not in esse at the time of the feofment made.

Abbot, etc. disclaim, bar to the successor.
8 If an Abbot, Prior, Bishop, Co. Inst. pars 1 103. a. 1.
or other sole Corporation levy a Fine or acknowledge the Action in a Praecipe
quod reddat, the Successor shall be bound pro tempore, but he may have a Writ
of Right, and recover the land: Howbeit in a Quo warranto at the suit of the
King against an Abbot, Bishop, or, etc. for Franchises and Liberties, if the
Abbot, etc. disclaim in them, this shall bind the Successor; So likewise if an
Abbot, etc. acknowledge the Action in a Writ of Annuity, this also shall bind
the Successor, because he cannot falsify it in an higher Action. Vide supra M.
1. case 4.

24 Nemo potest plus juris ad alium transfer quam ipse habet.
Co. Inst. pars 1 265. a. 2. Littl. 446.
1 These words which are commonly put into releases, A release before interest
void.
viz. (quae quovis modo in futurom habere potero) are as void in Law; for no
right passes by a release but the right, which the Releasor has at the time
of the release made; And therefore if there be father and son, and the father
be disseised, and the son living (the father) releaseth by his deed to the
disseisor all his right, which he has or may have in the same tenements,
without clause of Warranty, etc. and after the father dies, etc. The son may
lawfully enter upon the possession of the dissessor; because he had no right at
all at the time of the release made, all the right being then in the father;
and therefore in this case after the decease of the father, the son may enter
into the land against his own release; for, Nemo potest plus juris, etc.

Co. ibid. 275. b. 3.
2 If Tenant in Fee simple being disseised by two release to one of his
disseisors, Release to disseisors enures only to one of them.
he to whom the release is made shall hold out his Companion; because the right
of the disseisee, and the estate gained by the dssseisor are of equal extent,
viz. both in Fee simple: but if Tenant for life be disseised by two, and he
release to one of them, this shall enure to them both: because Tenant for life
by his release can but convey unto them his own estate: and by consequent he,
to whom the release is made, has a longer estate than he that releaseth, and
therefore such a release cannot enure to him alone, to hold out his companion;
For then should the release aver by way of entry or grant of his estate, and
consequently the disseisor, to whom the release is made, should become Tenant
for life and the reversion revested in the Lessor, which strange transmutation
and change of estates in this case the Law will not suffer.

Co. ibid. 276. a. 3.
3 If two Ioyn-tenants in Fee simple be disseised by two, By Join tenants good
only to one.
and one of the disseisees releaseth to one of the disseisors all his right, he
shall not hold out his companion; because he had but power to release a moity.

Co. ibid. 309. b. 2.
4 If the Conisee of a fine before any attornment, No distress.
by deed indented and enrolled, bargaineth and sells the Seigniory to
another; here the Bargainee shall not distreine, because the Bargainor could
not do it.

Co. ibid. 314. a. 3. Littl. 562.
5 If there be Lord and Tenant, A Seigniory suspended.
and the Tenant make a Lease to a man for term of his life, saving the
reversion to himself, and the Lord grant the Seigniory to the Tenant for life
in fee, and lie in the reversion attorne, as he ought, etc. In this case, some
think, that the Tenant for life cannot grant the Seigniory over, because he
took it suspended, 5 E. 3. Twongs case.
and it was never In esse in him: but if the tenant make a Lease for life for
or years to the Lord, there the Lord may grant it over, because the Seigniory
was In esse in him, and the Fee simple of the Seigniory was not suspended; but
if the Lord disseise the Tenant, or the Tenant enfeoffe the Lord upon
Condition, there the whole estate in the Seigniory is suspended; and therefore
in that case he cannot during the Suspension grant over his Seigniory.

Littl. 619. Addition, but approved for law, per Cook. Co. Inst. pars 1 332.
b. 4.
6 If Tenant in tail let this land to another for years, No discon^nuance.
and after grants the reversion to a third person in fee, and the Tenant for
years attornes to the Grantee, and the term is expired during the life of the
Tenant in tail, whereupon the Grantee enters, and after the Tenant in tail
has issue and des; In this case, this grant of the reversion makes no
discontinuance, Co. Inst. pars 1 332. b. 4.
notwithstanding the grant is executed in the life of the Tenant in tail;
because at the time of the Lease made for term of years, no new Fee simple
was reversed in the Lessor, but only the reversion of the estate tail
remained in him, in like sort as it did before the Lease made.

Joyn-tenants grant moities.
7 If there be two Ioyn-tenants, Co. ibid. 337. b. 1.
and the one is of full age and the other within age, and both they make a
feofment in fee, and he of full age dies, Here, the infant shall not enter
into the whole, but shall enter or have a dum fuit infra aetatem for the moity
only; because no more could pass from him by the feofment.

An estray.
8 If an estray happen within the Manor of the wife, 43 E. 3. 8, 10. H. 6. 11.
39. 8. 5. 17. Co. ibid. 381. b. 2.
if the husband bie before seizure, the wife upon seizure shall have it and not
the executors, because the property could not be in the husband before seizure,
and therefore the executors could derive to themselves no title in it from the
husband.

The heir not bound to warranty.
9 The heir shall never be bound to any express warranty, Littl. 734. Co.
ibid. 385. b. 3.
but where the Ancestor was bound by the same warranty; for if the Ancestor
were not bound, it cannot descend upon the heir: And therefore if Tenant in
tail seized of divisable lands, alien them in fee to his brother, who
afterward devises the same lands to another with warranty against him and his
heirs, and dies without issue; This warranty shall not bar the heir in
tail of his Formedon; because this warranty did not descend to the issue in
tail, for that the Uncle of the issue in tail was not himself bound to the
warranty in his life time, neither yet could he warrant the Lands in his life
time, in as much as the devise could not take effect till after his death: And
now because the Uncle in his life time was not bound to warranty, such warranty
cannot descend from him to the issue in tail, etc. For nothing can descend from
an Ancestor to his heir; but that, which was first in the Ancestor: So
likewise if a man make feoffment in fee, and bind his heirs to Warranty, this
is void, as to the heir; because the Ancestor himself was not bound, etc.

Tenant in tail cannot grant any remainder of estate.
10 He in the remainde in tail bargains and sels his land, Co. l. 2. 51. b. 4.
52. a 2. Sir Hugh Chomleys ease.
and all his estate, etc. by indenture enrolled, etc. to I. S and his heirs
male, etc. to have and hold for the life of the tenant in tail the remainder
to Qeen Eliz. etc. Here, the remainder to the Queen is void; for when he in the
remainder has granted all his estate to I. S. he cannot limit any farther
remainder of it to the Queen; because a remainder is but a remnant of the
estate of the Grantor, and the Queen cannot have any such remnant of estate,
when he had granted away all his estate before to to I. S. And therefore it was
agreed Hill. 35. El. in Blithemans case, that if tenant in tail in
consideration of fatherly love covenant by Deed to stand seized to the use of
himself for his own life, and after his death to the use of his eldest son
in tail, and after this Covenant, the Covenantor takes feme and dies, in this
case, the feme shall be endowed; for when tenant in tail has limited the use
to himself for his own life, he cannot limit any remainder over, because an
estate for his own life is as long, as he himself can limit by the Law, and
therefore the limitation of the remainder is void, and by consequent the Dower
good, etc.

Entty taken away from issue in tail.
11 The Baron seized to the use of himself and his wife for life, Co. l. 3. 61.
a. 3. Lincoln College case.
and the heirs of the body of the Baron dies; the issue in the life of the
feme, then Tenant of the Frank-tenement (for so the pleading was) which shall
be intended by disseisin, for no surrender or forfeiture was alleged, 4 H. 8.
suffers a common rocovery with single voucher, by agreement, that the
recoverors shall enfeoffe Litster and others to diverse uses, and that the feme
shall release to them with Warranty, which was done accordingly: 11 H. 8. the
feme dies, after that the issue dies, and afterward his issue in the third
degree enters; The question was, whether the collateral warranty shall bind
for the recovery came not in question, because by the pleading it shall be
intended, that the issue was seized by another Title then the intaile, and so
the single voucher not material) or whether the warranty shall be adjudged void
by the Statute of 11 H. 7. 20. And in this case it was resolved, that the
warranty shall bind the Demandant, and was not void by that Statute; because
when the first issue, by the common recovery (had against him by his own
agreement) had disabled himself to take benefit of the forfeiture given by the
Statute, after his death another issue claiming from him shall not take benefit
of it; for if the Ancestor, being in esse at the time of the forfeiture, could
not enter, much less shall any person, which was not in rerum natura, nor had
the immediate interest, Title, or Inheritance at the time of the forfeiture,
ever enter or take benefit of that Act: And although there was error in the
recovery, yet the Warranty of the feme shall bar the first issue of his writ
of Error, because by his own act he has barred himself of the entry, which
the Statute prescribes; and the like in effect was adjudged in Sir Geo. Brownes
case, Co. ibid. 51. b. ^
where the issue in tail in the life of his mother, having the reversion in
fee, levies a fine without proclamations; for there the issue against his own
fine could not enter, although it was erroneous.

Copihod Custom.
12 Custom has so established and fixed the estate of the Copiholder, Co. l.
4. 24. b. 1. Murrel and Smiths case.
that by the Severance of the Inheritance of the Copihold from the Manor, the
Copihold is not destroyed; for in as much as the Lord himself cannot out the
Copiholder, no more shall any claiming under him have power to do it; because,
Nemo potest plus juris, etc.

A release by bail not good.
13 In debt Marshall was bail for the Defendant, Co. l. 5. 70. b. Hoes case.
Co. Inst. pars 1 265. b. 2.
and before Judgment, the Plaintiff releaseth to Marshall all actions, duties
and demands, and after judgment was given against the Defendant, upon whose
default Scire facias issued out against Marshall, who pleads the said general
release: but it was adjudged, that the release was not effectual to bar the
Plaintiff, because the words of the bail being conditional, viz. Si contigit
Defend, etc. non solvere, etc. there cannot be by the bail any present and
certain duty, before judgment given; for before that, it cannot be known to
what sum the debt and damages will amount; neither is he, that bailes, at
first bound in any certain sum, but his recognisance being general, it shall
be reduced to a certainty by the Judgment.

A release not good.
14 In Trin. 4. El. Rot. 1207. in Com. Banco, Co. ibid. 71. b. Dyer 5. El. 217.
it was adjudged that by a release of all actions, suits. and quarrels a
covenant before the breaking of it is not released; because there is not any
cause of action, nor any certain duty before the breaking of it, etc.

Payment of rent by a termor no seisin.
15 A. devises rent to B. for life out of the Manor of D. and devises the
Manor it self to C. for years, Co. l. 6. 57. a. 4. Bredimans Case.
C. enters and pays the rent during the term; but after the term the
Terre-tenant refuses to pay the rent, whereupon B. brings an Assise: And in
this case it was adjudged by Coke and the other Justices of the C. Pl. that the
payment of the rent by the tenant for years was not seisin to bind the
Terre-tenant after the term determined; because (ex Etymologia and vi termini)
he who has not seisin in the land charged, cannot give seisin of the rent;
for, Nemo potest plus juris, etc. And for the same reason a Praecipe lies not
against a Termor, because he cannot render seisin.

16 The Testator possessed of a Mill for 50 years devises it to M.M. after the
death of his wife, Acceptance a good bar.
Co. l. 8. 96. a. 1. Mannings case
who in the mean time was to have the occupation of it during her life, paying
unto M. M. 7 l. per annum, and he makes his wife his executrix and dies, the
wife administers, enters, and pays the rent: Here, the payment of the rent by
the executrix was sufficient assent to the legacy, and then she having given
her assent to the first devise, it lay not in her power to bar him, that was
to have the future devise; for she could not transfer more to another, then
she had her self; because after that (by her assent) she had executed the
second devise, she could not afterward otherwise dispose of it to discharge
other Legacies, Debts, or the like, etc.

Remainder in tail of a lease, cannot grant it.
17 If A. possessed of a term for 500 years devises it to B. for life, Lampets
case. Co. l. 10. 47. b. 3 and l. 466. b. Fulwoods case.
the remainder to C. and the heirs of his body; in this case C. during the
life of B. cannot grant the remainder to another; because the whole term is in
B. and C. has but an executory interest, depending upon a possibility, viz.
enjoy it after the death of B. But here, ( B. being executor) a release of his
interest to him is good. Vide supra 21. 41.

Release of a Conisee or heir apparent void.
18 If the Conisee of a Statute or Recognisance release to the Terre-tenant all
his right in the land; yet he shall sue execution; Co. l. 10. 50. b. Lampets
case. 27 E. 3. Execut. 130. and 25 Ass. Pl. 7. and Pl. Co. 72. Sir Thomas Popes
case.
because at the time of the release made he had no interest in the land; for
that the body is the Debtor and not the land, but in respect of the body, and
the land is not charged with the debt before execution sued; So likewise a
release of the son to the disseisor of the father in the life of the father
is utterly void; because the son has no right at all in the life of his
father. Vide supra 1.

A joyn-tenant can grant but his moity.
19 Albeit Ioyn-tenants are (by Littleton) said to be seized per my and per
tout, yet can they not singly dispose of more, then the part, Co. Inst. pars 1
186. a. 2. Littl. 288.
that belongs unto them, as to enfeoffe, give, or demise, or to forfeit or lose
by default in a Praecipe: So likewise if my villein and another purchase lands
to them two and their heirs, I can but enter into the moity; And where all the
Ioyn-tenants join in a feofment, every of them in Judgment of Law does give
but his respective part: So if an Alien and a Subject purchase lands jointly,
the King upon office found shall have but a moity.

The like.
20 If two Ioyn-tenants make a feofment in fee upon Condition, Co. Inst. pars 1.
Ibid. 3. Plowd. Brownings case.
and that for breach thereof one of them shall enter into the whole, yet he
shall enter but into a moity, because no more in judgment of Law passed from
him; And so it is also of a gift in tail, or a Lease for life, etc. Likewise,
if two Ioyn-tenants make a feofment in fee, and one of the Feoffors dies, the
Feoffee cannot plead a feofment from the Survivor of the whole; because each of
them gave but his part.

A confirmation of a rent void.
21 If a man grant a rent charge issuing out of his land to another for term of
his life, and after he confirms his estate in the said rent, Littl. 548. Co.
Inst. pars 1 308. a. 3.
to have and to hold to him in Fee tail or in Fee simple, this confirmation is
void, as to enlarge his estate; because he, that confirms, had not any
reversion in the rent.

Confirmation by Patron and Ordinary.
22 If the Parson of a Church charge the Glebe by his deed, Littl. 528. Co.
Inst. pars 1 300. b. 3.
and after the Patron and Ordinary confirm the same grant; in this case, if
the Patron be Tenant in Fee simple, the grant is good; but if he has the
Advowson only for life or in tail, then shall the grant stand no longer in
force, than for his life, and the life of the Parson, that granted it: And in
this case if the Bishop be Patron, he cannot confirm alone, but the Deane and
Chapter must confirm also; For the Advowson or Patronage is parcel of the
possession of the Bishopric, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1 300. b. 3.
23 A Parson of D. is Patron of the Church of S. as belonging to his Church, The
like.
and presents B. who by the consent of A. and the Ordinary grants a rent charge
out of the Glebe, this is not good to make the rent charge, perpetual without
the assent of the Patron of A. etc.

Co. ibid. 266. a. 3.
24 If the Donee in tail discontinue in fee, Release by Dower to the
discontinuee.
and the Donor release to the Discontinuee and die, and after the issue in
tail does recover the land against the Discontinuee; In this case, the issue
in tail shall leave the reversion in the Discontinuee; for the issue in tail
can recover but the estate tail only, which descended unto him from his
Father, and the Donor cannot have the reversion again against his own grant,
and therefore (by consequent) it shall be left in the Discontinuee, etc.

Co. ibid. 8. a. 2, 3.
25 If an Alien comes into England and has issue two sons, Betwixt Brothers
no inheritable blood.
these two sons are indigenae Subjects borne; because they are borne within
the Realm: Howbeit, if one of them purchase lands in fee, and dies without
issue, his brother shall not be his heir; for there was never any inheritable
blood between the father and them, and where the sons can by no possibility
be heir to the father, the one of them shall not be heir to the other: And
therefore some have holden, that if a man, after he be attainted of Treason, or
Felony, have issue two sons, that the one of them cannot be heir to the
other; because they could not be heir to the father, for that they never had
any inheritable blood in them, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1 a. 3.
26 If Less for life make a Deed of feofment, Lessor attorney to lessee to make
livery.
and a Letter of Attorney to the Lessor to make Livery, and the Lessor makes
Livery accordingly, notwithstanding the Lessor shall enter for the forfeiture,
because the Lessor for life had a Frank-tenement in him, whereupon the Livery
might work; but if Lessee for years make a feoffment in fee, and a Letter of
Attorney, to the Lessor to make Livery, and he make Livery accordingly, this
Livery shall bind the Lessor, and shall not be avoided by him; for the Lessor
cannot (in this case) make Livery as Attorney to the Lessee, because the Lessee
had no Freehold, whereof to make Livery, but all the Freehold was in the Lessor.

Dyer 5. b. 1. 26 H. 8.
27 A man seized of devisable land before the Statute of Uses, Rent devisable.
makes a Lease for years rendering rent, and devises that rent to a stranger
and dies, and the stranger is seized of the rent and dies; In this case, the
executors, and not the heir of the devisee shall have the rent; because the
rent was but a Chattel in the devisee.

Dyer 90. b. 8. 1 Mar.
28 If there be Lessor and Lessee, Trees sold by the Lessor,
and the Lessor sells all his trees growing in such a close; Here, nothing
passes to the Vendee; for albeit the Lessor has a general property in them,
yet the special property thereof is in the Lessee; because the wood and trees
are parcel of the Lease, who shall by force of his Lease have the shade and
fruit thereof, as also the branches, and loppings for fuel and mending of
fences, And therefore if the Lessor fell trees without the license or will of
the Lessee, a good action of trespass lies for the Lessee against him: So
likewise in 5 H. 4. 59. the heir in Chivalry being in ward, fells trees in the
land in ward, and the Guardian brings trespass against him; and he pleads the
special matter in bar. Sed non allocatnr per curiam, etc.

25 Things are construed according to that, which was the beginning of them.
Vide Max. 63. 21.
Privilege of tenant by the courtesy.
1 Tenants after possibility of issue extinct, Co. Inst. pars 1 28. a. 2.
although upon the matter he be but a Tenant for life, yet has he 8
privileges incident to his estate, which the Law allows not to a bare Tenant
for life; in respect of the inheritance, which was once in him, which
privileges you may see, Co. In. part 1. 28. a. 2.

The like.
2 If a woman Tenant in tail general takes an husband and has issue, which
issue dies, and the wife dies also without any other issue; Co. ibid. 30. a. 1
there, albeit the estate in tail be determined, yet shall the hushand be
Tenant by the Courtesy; because he was entitled to be Tenant per Legem Angliae
at first (upon having the issue) before the estate in tail was spent: And
although in this case the estate be not consummate until the death of the
wife, yet it has such a beginning after issue had in the life of the wife, as
is respected in Law for diverse purposes; for 1 After issue had he shall do
homage alone, and is become Tenant to the Lord, and the Avowry shall be made
only upon the husband in the life of the wife: 2 If after issue 34 E. 2. Cui
in vita 13. 2 E. 2. Cui in vita 26. 10 E. 3. 12. Dyer 21. El. 3^3. 29 E. 3. 27.
the husband makes a feofment in fee, and the wife dies, the feoffee shall
hold it during the life of the husband, and the heir of the wife shall not
during his life recover it in a sur cui in vita; for it could not be a
forfeiture; because the estate, at the time of the feofment, was an estate of
tenancy by the Courtesy initiate, and not consummate: And it is adjudged in 29
E. 3. that the Tenant by the Courtesy cannot claim by a Devise, and waive the
estate of his tenancy by the Courtesy, because (says the Book) the Freehold
commenced in him before the Devise for term of his life.

A Voyage Royal.
3 When the King makes Voyage Royal into Scotland to subdue the Scots, Co. ibid.
71. a. 4. Littl. 96. Co. ibid. 70. a. 1 Co. ibid. 108. a. 4. Vide infra 10.
etc. M. 43. 12. Co. ibid. 164. a. 4. etc, Bracton l. 1. 66. Britt. cap. 71.
Fleta l. 5. c. 9. and 6. c. 47.
the Law accompteth the beginning of the forty days to be after the King
enters into the foreign Nation, for then the War begins, and till he
come there, he and his host are said to go toward the War, and no military
service is to be done, till the King and his host come thither.

Tenure in Capite.
4 If one holds land of a common person in gross as of his person, and not of
any Manor, etc. and this Seigniory escheateth to the King (yea, though it be
by attainder of Treason) he holds of the person of the King, but not in
Capite; because the original tenure was not created by the King. 3 E. 3. B.
tenures 94. 30 H. 8. 43. 28 H. 8. B. livery 57, etc.

Descent in Capita and stirpes.
5 In case of Coparceners, sometimes the descent is in Stirpes, viz. to Stocks
and Roots, and sometimes in Capita, to Heads; As if a man has issue two
daughters and dies, this descent is in Capita, viz. that each daughter shall
inherit alike, as Littleton says, Sect. 241. But if a man has issue two
daughters, and the eldest daughter has issue three daughters, and the youngest
but one daughter; All those four shall inherit, but the daughter of the
youngest shall have as much as the three daughters of the eldest, Ratione
Stirpium, in respect of their mothers estate, from which theirs took beginning,
and not Ratione Capitum; for in judgment of Law every daughter has a seveaal
Stock or Root. So if a man has issue two daughters, and the eldest has issue
diverse sons and diverse daughters, and the youngest has issue diverse
daughters, the eldest son of the eldest daughter shall only inherit, and all
the daughters of the youngest; for this also is not in Capita, but in Stirpes;
and in this case the eldest son is Coparcener with the daughters of the
youngest, and shall have one moity, viz. his mothers part: So that men
descending of daughters may be Coparceners, as well as women, and shall jointly
implead and be impleaded, etc. Vide 26. 2.

Littl. 2^2. Co. ibid. 178. b. 2.
6 The Lands in Frank-mariage to be put into Hotchpot, Frankmariage Hotchpot.
and the Lands in Fee simple which descend, ought to move from one and the same
person; for if they moved from several Ancestors; they cannot be put into
Hotchpot, etc.

Co. ibid. 187. a. 4. 39 H. 6. 45. 21 R. 2. judge. 63. M. 33. E. 3.
7 If Lands be given to a man and a woman and their heirs before marriage, the
husband and wife have moities between them: Lands given to Batre and feme.
but if it be after marriage, each of them takes the whole; And therefore in
this last case, if the husband be attainted of Treason, or sells away the
land, after her husbands death, she shall recover the whole; as it fell out in
the case of William Ocle, who was attainted for murdering, E. 2. Finch. 41.

Co. ibid. 209. b. 2. 18 E. 4 18. 19 H. 6. 54. 20 E. 3. account Pl. 70.
8 In a Mortgage the agreement precedent ought to guide the payment subsequent,
and therefore in case the feoffee die, The condition of a mortgage must be
performed.
and it is agreed between the feoffor and the executors of the feoffee, that at
the day and place the whole sum shall be paid, and that afterward some part
thereof shall be restored, this is no performance of the Condition; for hereby
the state shall not be divested out of the heir, which is a third person,
without a true and effectual payment, and not by a shadow and color of
payment. Co. l. 5. 96. Goodales case.

Co. ibid. 248. b. 1. Littl. 410. Pl. Co. Dame Hales case. 6 E. 3. 41. etc.
9 Littleton says, that a descent, Descent by entry into Religion.
which happens upon the disseisors entering into Religion, shall not take away
the entry of the heir: yet his entry into Religion is not the cause of the
descent, but his profession; for albeit he enter into Religion, yet before he
be professed, no descent can happen; But in this case the Law does respect the
original act, and that is his entry into Religion, which was his own act, and
whereupon the profession followed, by which profession the descent happened; for,
Cujusque rei potissima pars, principium est, And again, Origo rei inspici
debet; and therefore Littleton attributes the cause of the descent rather to
the deisseisors entering into Religion, which was the first act to procure a
descent, than to his profession, which followed thereupon.

Co. ibid. 372. b. 3. T. 23 El. in the Court of Wards.
10 To prevent the barring of an estate tail, An entail, and the reversion in
the King.
when the reversion is in the King, according to the Stat. of 34 H. 8. 20. it
is necessary that the estate tail should be created by a King, and not by any
Subject, albeit the King be his heir to the reversion: And therefore if the
Duke of Lancaster had made a gift in tail, and the reversion descended to the
King, yet was not that estate restreined by that Statute, and so of the like.
Co. l. 5. 15, 16. in Wisemans case. Vide 21. 8.

33 Ass. Pl. 7.
11 If a servant (departed out of his Masters service) kill his Master upon a
malice that he bare him, whilst he was his servant, Malice prepence.
it is petty Treason. Finch 10.

10 El. Dyer, 266. b.
12 A erects a Shop upon the Kings Freehold, No possession against the King.
the King grants the land to B. in fee, A. before entry or seizure of the Shop
by the Kings Patentee, continues the possession and dies seized: This is no
descent to toll the Patentees entry: For by his first erecting of the Shop he
could gain nothing against the King. Finch 11.

Co. lib. 2. 93. a. 3. Binghams case. 6. E. 3. 410.
13 It was said in Binghams case in the 2 Report, The original act considerable.
that when diverse accidents are requisite to the consummation of a thing, the
Law in many cases respects rather the beginning and original cause, then any
thing else, As in 6 E. 3. 41. if a man present to another man's Church in the
time of war, and thereupon the presentee is admitted, instituted, and
inducted in time of peace; Here, the Law gives such regard to the original act,
viz. the presentation, that all, which follows thereupon, although it be done
in time of peace, Co. l. 1. 106. Shelleyes case.
shall be avoided; And upon the same reason was Shelleys case adjudged in the 1
Report fol. 106.

Grant by baron without feme, not good.
14 If land be given to Baron and Feme, Co. l. 3. 5. b. 3. Owen and Morgans
case. Co. l. 3. 34. b. 4. Butler and Bakers case.
and to the heirs of their two bodies engendered, and the Baron alone suffers a
common recovery, this shall not bind the estate tail; And albeit in this case
the Baron, which suffers the recovery survives the Feme, that is not material;
for the Law shall adjudge upon the case, as it was at the time of the recovery.

Tenure according to limitation.
15 If Land be given to a man and his heirs to hold by Soccage during his life,
and after his decease to hold by Knight Service; Littl. 698, 699, 700.
Here shall be no ward, because the tenure by Knight Service begins in the
son, and the Father during his life holds by Soccage: And e converso, if
lands be given to a man and his heirs to hold by Knight Service during life,
and after his decease in Soccage; Here likewise shall be no ward, because
immediately upon the death of the tenant, the Knight Service determines, and
then also the tenure in Soccage begins in the son.

Warranty that begins by disseisor, not good
16 If the son purchases land, Co. l. 4 37. a. Tirringhams Case.
and lets the same to his father for term of years, the father enfeoffes
another in fee, and binds himself and his heirs to warranty, the Father dies,
by which the warranty descends to the son; this warranty shall not bar the
son from his entry or recovery by assise, etc. because this warranty begins
by disseisin: In like manner is it, if the father or any other Ancestor be
tenant at will, by Elegit, by Stature Merchant, or Statute Staple, and make
feofment with warranty as aforesaid, etc. Such warranty shall not bar,
because it begins by disseisin, etc. There is the same reason of Guardian in
Knight-serice, or in Soccage, which make such feofment with warranty. So also
if the father and son be Ioyn-tenants in fee, and the father make feofment
with warranty, etc. and dies; this shall not bar the son of his moity,
causa quae supra.

Common appendant, due of common right.
17 The beginning of common appendant by the ancient Law was in this manner; 37
H. 9 34. per totam curiam. 29 H. 8. 4.
when the Lord of a Manor did enfeoffe a man of arable land to hold of him in
Soccage, viz. per servitiam Socae (as every such tenure at the beginning, as
Littleton says, was) the feoffee ad manutenendum servitium Socae, was to have
Common in the Lords wastes for such necessary beasts, as were to plow and
compass his land; and therefore such Common appendant is due of common right,
and begins by operation of Law, and in favor of tillage; so that none need
prescribe in it, as it is held in 4 H. 6. and 22 H. 6. as a man should, if it
were against common right. And this is the reason, that it is only appendant
to ancient arable land Hide and Gain, and only for Horses, Oxen, Cowes, and
Sheep, whereof the first two serve to till the land, the other to compass it;
And therefore it is against the nature of such Common to be appendant to Meadow
or Pasture, and if a man will prescribe to have Common belonging to a Mease,
Meadow and Pasture, this cannot be Common appendant, but appurtenant; unless
he having Common appendant belonging to land, has of late time peradventure
built an house upon it, and converted it to Meadow and Pasture for his
conveniencie, and the better advancement of tillage, which was the original
cause of the Common. For in this case the Common remains appendant, and it
shall be intended in respect of the continual usage of the Common in such
manner, that at the beginning all was arable; but in pleading he ought to
prescribe to have it appendant to the land, etc.

Co. l. 4. 117, 118. Actons case.
18 The Baroness of Monteagle in her widoow-hood reteins one Cartmel to be her
Chaplein, according to the Stat. of 21 H. 8. A Baroness may retein Chaplains in
her widdowhood.
Cartmel has the benefice of Claycotton above 8 l. per annum, the Baroness
takes to husband band the Lord Compton, and afterward Cartmel having obtained
a dispensation with Confirmation, etc. is admitted, instituted, and inducted to
the vicarage of G. Here, because Cartmel accepted of the vicarage, when the
Baroness was covert Baron, being married to one not under the degree of a Baron
(for in case of such marriage a Proviso of that Statute saves the privilege of
a Baroness) the question was whether the first benefice was not void: And it
was resolved, that Cartmel after the marriage might have a dispensation, and
hereupon might have another benefice without danger of losing the first; for
although a Baroness married to a Peer cannot during the Coverture retain a
Chaplain, yet when a Baroness being a widow has retained one or two
Chaplains according to the Statute, this retainer is the principal matter,
which at first had good beginning, and so long as the Baroness continues a
Baroness, the Chaplains may well accept two benefices by the express letter
of the act; for it suffices that at the time of the retainer the Baroness was
a widow; because, by that the express words (being widow) are satisfied.

Co. l. 6. 43. b. Blakes case.
19 Eden brings a writ of Covenant against Blake for not repairing an house,
Accord with satisfaction good plea.
the Defendant pleads accord betwixt him and the Plaintiff, and execution of it
in satisfactione, etc. decasus reparationum praedict. upon which the Plaintiff
demurres; Here, albeit it was objected; that this action of Covenant being
founded upon the Deed, could not be discharged without matter of as high
nature, viz. by Deed, and not by any accord or matter in pais; yet it was
resolved per totam Curiam, that the plea of the Defendant was good: For there
is a diversity, when a duty accrues by the Deed in certainty, tempore
confectionis scripti, as by Covenant, Bill or Obligation to pay a sum of
money; here, this certain duty takes his essence and operation originally and
only from the writing: and therefore ought to be avoided by matter of as high
nature, viz. by writing; but when no certain duty accrues by the Deed, but a
wrong or default subsequent together with the Deed do give action to recover
damages, which are only in the personalty, for such wrong or default accord
with satisfaction is good plea.

Co. l. 7. 10. a. 1. Vghtreds case. Pl. Co. 32. b. 3. Colthrist and Bevisham
per Hind.
20 In all cases when an interest or estate commenceth upon a Condition
precedent, there the plaintiff ought to show it in his count, Conditions
precedent and subsequent.
and aver the performance of it; for there the interest or estate commenceth
in him by the performance of the Condition, and is not in him till the
Condition be performed: It is otherwise when the interest or estate passes
presently by vesting in the Grantee, and is to be defeated by matter ex post
facto, or Condition subsequent; for there the Plaintiff may count generally
without showing the performance of it, and the Condition or matter ex post
facto shall be pleaded only by him, Co. l. 9. 25. b. 3. In the case of the
Abbot de Strata Mercella. 6 E. 3. 32. Jo. Darcies case. 30 H. 8. Die. 44. 4^ E.
3. 32. 43 Ass. Pl. 10. 1, 2. Ph. M. Dyer 108.
that will take advantage of it. Vide supra 21. 36.

21 When the King grants any Privileges, Liberties, Franchises shall not die.
Franchises, etc. which were such in his own hands, as parcel of the flowers of
his Crown (such as are Bona and cattalla felonum, fugitivorum, utlagatorum,
etc. bona and cattalla waviata, extrahur' deodanda, wreccum maris, etc. within
such possessions; Here, if these come again unto the King, they are drowned in
the Crown, and he has them again in jure Coronae; but when a Privilege,
Liberty, Franchise, or Jurisdiction was at the first erected and created by
the King, and was no such flower before in the Garland of the Crown; here, by
the accession of them again to the Crown, they are not extinct, nor the
appendance of them severed from the possession: As if a Fair, Market, Hundred,
Leet, Park, Warren, or the like; are appendant to Manors, or in gross, and
after they come again to the King, they remain (as they were before) in esse
not drowned in the Crown; for at first they were created, and newly erected by
the King, and were not in esse before, time and usage having made them
appendant: And this diversity was agreed per totam Curiam, 11 H. 4, 5. 15 E. 4.
7. 4 E. 3. 42. 10. H. 7. 21.

A Charter to be interpreted, as the law was when it was made.
22 When an ancient grant is general, obscure, or ambiguous, Co. ibid. 28. a. 3
it shall not be now interpreted, as a Charter made at this day; but it shall
be construed, as the law was taken at the time, when such ancient Charter was
made, and according to the ancient allowance upon record, 33 Hen. 6. 22. 10
Hen. 7. 13. and 14. 16 Hen. 7. 9. 12 Hen. 4. 12. 14 Hen. 6. 12. 35 Hen. 6. 54.
9 Hen. 7. 11. 6 E. 3. 54 and 55. 7 E. 3. 40. and 41. 18 E. 3. Conisance 39. 34.
Ass. 14. 40. Ass. 21.

A Coparcener being outlawed by the other parceners, shall hold, as before.
23 If there be two Coparceners, and the one disseiseth the other, Co. Inst.
pars 1 167. b. 2. Bracton l. 4. fol. 216. Britt. f. 112. a. Ibid. vide Parl.
author.
and the Diseissee brings an Assise, or if the one Coparcener recover against
the other in a Nuper obiit, or a rationabili part, it has been said by some,
that the Judgment shall be, that the Demandant shall recover and hold in
severalty: but Britton is to the contrary; for he says, Et si ascuns des
parceners soit enget ou disturb de seisinie per ses autres parceners; Un ou
plusors, al dissiesi vaudra assise per severale pleynte sur ses parceners, and
recovera; Mes veny a tener en severalty, mes en comune, selon ceo que evant le
fist; Et si deux parceners ou plusors soyet disseisies per les autres
parceners, chescun parcener avera sa assise en severalte, and recoverout a tene
en comune, and tout issint serra juge en touts autres brefs de possession enter
parceners, etc. And this seems reasonable; for she must have her Judgment
according to her playnt, and that was of a moity, and not of any thing in
severalty; and the Sheriff cannot have any Warrant to make any partition in
severalty, or by Metes, or Bounds.

Joyn-tenants shall do the like.
24 If one Ioyn-tenant or Tenant in Common disseise another, Co. Inst. pars 1
187. a. 2.
and the disseisee bring his Assise for the moity; in this case, though the
Plaintiff prays it, yet no Judgment shall be given to hold in severalty; for
then at the Common Law (before the Statutes of 31 H. 8. cap. 1. and 32 H. 8.
cap. 32. by which they are compellable to make partition) there might have been
by compulsion of Law a partition between Ioyn-tenants and Tenants in Common;
but that could not be; because by the Rule of Law the Plaintiff must have
Judgment according to his plaint and demand, which was of a moity, and not of
any thing in severalty.

Feoffor, Feoffee, condition, diversity.
25 If a man make a feofment in fee upon Condition that the Feoffee before such
a day shall re-enfeoffe the Feoffor, Co. Inst. pars 1 221. b. 3.
and the Feoffee take wife, enters into Religion and is professed, or make
foefment in fee, in all these cases the Feoffor may enter presently before the
day, yea, albeit before the day the wife die, the Feoffee be deraigned or take
back the estate; for in all these cases that disability in the Feoffee gives to
the Feoffor present advantage of re-entry; for the Feoffee being once disabled
is ever disabled: Howbeit, it is otherwise in the case of the Feoffor; for if a
man make a feofment in fee upon Condition, that if the Feoffor or his heirs
pay a sum of money before such a day, and the Feoffor commits Treason, is
attainted, and executed, now is there a disability on the part of the Feoffor,
for he has no heir, but if the heir be restored before the day, he may
perform the Condition, as it was resolved in Sir Thomas Wiats case Trin. 18.
Eliz. in C. B. Otherwise it is if such a disability had grown of the part of
the Feoffeet And the reason of this diversity is, because the estate of the
land did originally flow from the Feoffor, and therefore there remains still
in him an ayery right to have the land again: So it is also if the Feoffor
enter into Religion and is professed, and before the day is deraigned, he may in
that case also perform the Condition, causa qua supra.

Dyer 149. 82. 3, 4 Ph. M.
26 A feofment was made before the Statute of 27 H. 8. Estate to Baron and Fear
joyntenancy.
to the use of a man and a woman unmaried, and of the heirs of their two
bodies, and after they intermarrie, and after marriage, the husband bargains
and sells the whole land in fee to one of the Feoffees, and dies without issue,
and after the Statute of 27 H. 8. is made, the feme claims the whole by the
survivour, as Tenant in tail after possibility, etc. And per Curiam, without
argument, she shall have but a moitie; because the Baron and Feme had at first
moities as Ioyn-tenants, by reason of the Ioyn-tenancie made before marriage,
etc.

26 A derived power cannot be greater than that, from which it is derived.
Derivata potestas non potest esse major primitiva.
Co. Inst. pars 1 162. b. 2.
1 If there be Lord and Tenant, and the rent is behind, Executors shall not
recover ^^reares.
and the Lord grant away his Seigniory and dies, the executors shall have no
remedy for these arrearages; because the Grantor himself had no remedy for
them, when he died in respect of his grant; And the words of the Statute of 32
H. 8. 37. (which gives remedy for the recovery of arrearages of rent) are
these (in like manner as the Testator might or ought to have done.) Et sic de
similibus.

Co. ibid. 164. a. 4.
2 If a man has issue two daughters, Coparoeners inherit a like.
and the eldest has issue three daughters, and the youngest only one
daughter; here, all these shall inherit, but the three daughters of the eldest
shall have no more, than the daughter of the youngest, viz. a moity; because
they can enjoy no more, than she was to have, through whom they claim, and
that is but a moity, etc. Vide supra 25. 5.

Littl. 435.
3 The Attorney of one that is disseised cannot make claim off from the land,
if the disseisee himself durst have gone to the land. The Attorney cannot do
more then his Master.
Finch 11.

Littl. 583. Co. ibid. 321. b. 1. Sir Moile Finches case. Co. 6. 68. b. 3.
4 If there be Lord and Tenant, and the Lord grants his Seigniory by fine to
another in fee; here, A fine of a Seigniory not good without attornment,
without attornment nothing passes; And therefore in this case if the Conisee
die before attornment, his heir shall not have it; for the heir shall not be
in any better estate, than his Ancestor was, from whom he derives his title: So
also it is, if the Conisee of a fine before attornment bargain and sell the
Seigniory by Deed indented and enrolled, the Bargainee shall not, distrein;
because the Bargainor, from whom the Seigniory moved had never actual
possession.

28 Ass. Pl. 4.
5 The Bailiffe of a Disseisor shall not say, The Bailiff shall not say more
then his Master.
that the Plaintiff never had any thing in the land; for the Master himself
shall not have that plea; because he is not Tenant of the Freehold. Finch 11.

2 E. 4. 16.
6 The servant shall be estopped to say, the Freehold is his Masters, by
recovery against his Master, though the servant himself be a stranger to it;
for he shall not be in better condition than he, in whose right he claims.
Finch 11.

Tenant in tail in remainder cannot falsify a recovery
7 A. is Tenant in tail, remainder to B. in tail, Co. lib. 1. 62. Caples case.
B. grants a rent charge, A. suffers a common recovery, and dies without issue;
Here, the Grantee of the rent shall not have it; because he cannot falsify the
recovery, being suffered by one that could not be chargable with the rent; for
if B. in the remainder cannot do it, may less the Grantee, that claims under
B.

An Infant not remitted.
8 If a man by Covin disseise the Discontinuee of Tenant in tail with an intent
to enfeoffe the issue in tail, being within age, 19 H. 8. 8. per six Justices.
Co l. 3. 78. a. Fermors case.
although the Infant was not conscious of the Covin, etc. yet shall he not be
remitted; because the Infant, that is in by him, who acted the Covin, shall be
in the same plight with him, that performed the covenous act.

A Copihold a firm estate.
9 Custom has so established and fixed the estate of the Copiholder, Co. l. 4.
24. b. Murrel and Smiths case.
that by the severance of the inheritance of the Copihold from the Manor the
Copihold it self is not destroyed; For, in as much as the Lord himself cannot
out the Copiholder, much less shall he, that claims under him do it.

Executors shall lose arrerages.
10 If the son be Lord and the father Tenant by certain rent, Co. l. 4. 49.
a. Ognels case.
the rent is arreare, the Tenant dies and the tenancie descends to the son;
in this case if the son also dies, the executors of the son shall not have
an action of debt for the arrearages incurred in the sons life; because the
son himself by no possibility could have such an action; for that the tenure
was altogether in the realty, and the Tenant could not be charged in any
personal action for those arrearages.

The like.
11 If A. has rent service or rent charge in fee, or for life, Co. ibid. 50. b.
4 Co. l. 5. 12. b. 1. Sanders case.
and the rent is arreare, and after A. grants over the rent to another, and the
Tenant attorns, and after A. dies; in this case, the executors of A shall not
recover the arrearages by force of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 27. For by the
grant, the over arrearages were lost, and were not due to the Testator at the
time of his death, and the Statute says, the executors shall recover them,
etc. in as large and ample manner as the said Testator might or ought to have
recovered them, etc.

Waste in a Cole-mine.
12 A. demiseth a lease to B. for years, Co. l. 5. 113. a. Mallories case. Co.
Inst. pars 1. 321. b. 1. M. 36, and 37 El. in Co. B. Rot. 420. Owseys case.
wherein there is a Cole Mine not opened; Here, if B. open the Mine, it is
wast; And therefore if after the Mine is open B. assign his term to C. and C.
takes the benefit of the Mine, C. also commits wast, albeit the Mine was
open before; for Derivata potestas non potest esse major primitiva.

Grant of a reversion not good without attornment.
13 If a Lease for life or years be made rendering rent, etc. and after the
reversion is granted to B. by fine, and before attornment B. disseiseth or outs
the Lessee, and enfeoffes C. the Lessee reenters, this shall not amount to an
attornment in Law, to make privity to C. and so to enable him to distraine for
the rent; for he shall not be in better estate than his Feoffor was; it is
otherwise, if the Lessee had expressly attorned to the Feoffee. Co. l. 6. 68.
Sir Moile Finches case.

Demise durante viduitale.
14 If a Feme seized of lands durante viduitate, Co. 5. 116. a. Olands case.
make a Lease for years, and the Lessee sow the land, and afterward the Feme,
that made the Lease, takes Baron; Here, the Lessee shall not have the grain;
for although his estate be determined by the act of a stranger, yet he shall
not be in better case, than his Lessor, from whom he derives his interest.

Tenant in tail cannot demise longer then the estate lasts
15 If Tenant in tail make a Lease for lives according to the Statute of 32
Hen. 8. 28. and after die without issue, Co. l. 8. 34. a. Pains case per Curiam.
this Lease being derived out of the estate tail, shall not continue longer
than the estate tail ( against the opinion in Dyer, 33 Hen. 8. fol. 48.) For,
Cessante statu primitivo cessat and derivativus.

Co. 8. 135. b. Sir John Nedhams case.
16 The Ordinary has not power to give authority to another to sell the goods
of the dead; Ordinary cannot sell.
because he himself has not any such authority. 9 El. Dyer 255. Co. l. 9. 39.
a. Hensloes case.

Co. 9. 76. b. 2. Combs case.
17 A Copiholder may surrender by Attorney; A Copihold may be surrendered by
attorney.
but then that Attorney must pursue the manner and form of the surrender in all
points according to the Custom, as the Copiholder himself ought to do; as if
the surrender ought to be done by the rod, or by any other thing or in any
other manner, the Attorney ought to observe it accordingly; for his power shall
not exceed the power of the Copiholder, that gives him his authority.

Co. l. 11. 87. a. 4 The case of Monopolies.
18 In the 11 Report, The grant of a Monopoly void.
one reason why the grant of the Monopoly of making Cards to Edward Darcie was
adjudged void, was; because he had no skill to make them; and therefore, albeit
the grant extended to his Deputies, and that he might appoint Deputies, which
might be expert, yet if the Grantee himself be unexpert, and so the grant void
as to him, he shall not make any Deputy to supply his place; because, Quod per
me non possum, nec per alium.

27 Things are dissolved, as they be contracted. Unum quodque dissolvitur eo
modo, quo colligatum est: Nihil tam conveniens naturali aequitati, unumquodque
dissolvi eo ligamine quo ligatum est.
Bract. l. 5. 413. Fleta l. 2. c. 12. Co. Inst. pars 1 54. b. 1. and Inst. 2.
part. W. 2. cap. 24.
1 Bracton says, Writs not changed without Act of Parliament.
that writs original (both formed and of course) which are extant in the
Register, had their first authority by act of Parliament, and therefore without
an act of Parliament they cannot be altered or changed, which is proved by
Westminster. 2. cap. 24. whereby remedy is provided in many cases. Bractons words
are these, Sunt quaedam brevia formata in suis casibus, and quaedam de cursu,
quae concilio totius regni sunt approbata, quae quidem mutari non possunt,
absque eorundem contraria voluntate, etc. Co. l. 8 48. a. John Webbes case.

Co. Inst. pars 1 131. a. 4. Ibid. See more authorities.
2 If after a Protection is allowed by Innotescimus, A Protection must be
disallowed by the Chancellor.
the Defendant tarry in the Country without going to the service, for which he
was retained, above a convenient time after he had the Protection, or otherwise
repair from the same service, upon information thereof to the Lord Chancellor,
he shall repeal the Protection in that case by another Innotescimus, but a
Protection shall not be avoided by a bare averment of the party in that case;
because the record of the Protection must be avoided by matter of as high
nature.

Co. Inst. pars 1 204. a. 4. 3 E. 6. Dyer 65, 66. 4 Mar. 138.
3 If a man makes a feofment in fee or for life ad faciendum or faciendo, or ea
intention, or ad effectum, or ad propositum, What words make a condition, and
what not.
that the Feoffee shall do, or shall not do such an act, none of these words
make the estate of the land conditional; for in judgment of Law they are no
words of Condition to make an estate of inheritance or Freehold defe^sible,
which took effect by Livery (except it be in the Kings case, or in the case of
a will:) But if a Lease for years be made with such a clause, or thus, Quod
non licebat, to the Lessee, dare, vendere, vel concedere statum and sub poena
forisfacturae, H. 40. Elizabeth Brown and Ayers case. Plowd. Co. 142 Browning
and Bestons case. Co. ibid 214. b 3. 1. ibid. per auth.
this amounts to make the Lease for years defeasible, and so was it adjudged
in Queen Elizabeth's time in the Court of Co. Pl. and the reason of the Court
was, That a Lease for years was but a contract, which may begin by word, and
may also by word be dissolved.

4 If a man make a gift in tail or a Lease for life upon Condition, Where an
estate shall cease upon condition, and where not.
that if the Donee or Lessee goes not to Rome before such a day the Gift or
Lease shall cease or be void, the Grantee of the reversion shall never take
advantage of this Condition, because the estate cannot cease before an entry;
but if the Lease had been but for years; there the Grantee might have taken
advantage of the like Condition; because the Lease for years ipso facto by the
breach of the Condition without any entry was void; for a Lease for years may
begin without Ceremony, and so may end without Ceremony; but an estate of
Freehold can neither begin nor end without Ceremony. Co. l. 3. 64. b. 4. and
65. a. 1. Pennants case.

Things that lie in grant not surrendered without deed.
5 Rents, Advowsons, Conditions, Reversions, Remainders, Co. ibid. 338. a. 3.
and all other things, that lie in grant, as they cannot be granted without
Deed, so shall they not be surrendered without Deed.

6 An Obligation or other matter in writing cannot be discharged by an
agreement by word. Finch 11. Doct. and Stud. li. 1. cap. 12. 19 E. 4. 1. b.
Vide infra 25.

An annuity by prescription.
7 In an Annuity growing by prescription rien arrere is a good plea; for this
prescription is a matter in fait: 5 H 7. 33. Finch 12. 4 H. 7. 7. b.
but in an Annuity by Deed it is no good plea, without showing an Acquittance.

Matter pleaded against the King.
8 When a man avoides the Kings Title by as high a matter of Record as the King
claims, he may have it by way of Plea, without being driven to his Petition,
though the King be entitled by double matter of Record; As one is attainted of
Treason by Parliament, and an office finds his lands, whereby the King seiseth
them, the party may allege restitution by Parliament, and a repeal of the
former Act. Finch 12. Co. l. 4. 57. a. 4. In the Sadlers of Londons Case.

Power of revocation annulled by feofment or release.
7 A. by Indenture enfeoffs B. of two acres to the use of A. for life, remainder
in tail to C. remainder to D. in fee, with proviso, Co. l. 1. 113. a. Albanies
case.
that if E. die without issue, A. by Indenture sealed, etc. in the presence of
4 witnesses may alter the uses, etc. A. of one acre enfeoffes F. and for the
other acre A. by Indenture renounceth, surrenders, releaseth, etc. unto B. C.
and D. the said Power, Condition, Authority, etc. E. dies without issue, A. by
Indenture revokes the first uses, and limits new ones: And it was resolved,
that A. had by the said feofment and release barred himself of limiting other
uses; for as the Proviso and Covent aforesaid did commence by Deed, so by Deed
may they be annulled and defeated, because in all cases when any thing
executory is created by a Deed, the same thing by consent of all persons, which
were parties to the creation of it, may be again by their Deed annulled; And
therefore Warranties, Recognisances, Rentcharge, Annuities, Covenants, Leases
for years, uses at the Common Law, and the like, may by a Deed of Defeasance
(with the mutual consent of all those that were parties to the creation of
them) be annulled discharged and defeated; for it would be strange and
unreasonable, that a thing, which is created by the act of the parties, shall
not be again by their act with their mutual consent dissolved.

Blood no valuable consideration against the Statute of 13 El 5.
10 Nature and blood are not valuable considerations to satisfy the Statute of
13 El. 5. Co. l. 3. 81. a. 4. Twines case.
and therefore if he that is indebted to five several persons (to each of them
in 20 l.) in consideration of natural affection gives all his goods to his
son or cofin, in this case in as much as the other shall lose their due
debts, etc. which are things of value, the intention of the act was, that the
consideration in such case should be valuable; for equity requires, that such a
gift, which shall defeat others of their due debts, shall be upon as high and
as good a consideration, as those debts are, which are so to be defeated.

A right cannot be transferred.
11 By the Rule of the Common Law, a right or title, Co. l. 4. 1. a. Vernon^
case.
which any has to any Lands or Tenements of inheritance or Frank-tenement,
cannot be barred by acceptance of any manner of collateral satisfaction or
recompense, As if A. disseise B. Tenant for life or in fee of the Manor of
Dale, and after gives the Manor of Sale to B. and his heirs in full
satisfaction of all his right in the Manor of Dale, which B. accepts, yet B.
may nevertheless enter into the Manor of Dale, or recover it in any real
action; for the right of Inheritance or Frank-tenement which is supposed
originally to commence by Livery, shall not be transferred or be extinct
without some Ceremony, as first by re-entry upon the Disseisor, and then by
giving Livery, or by that, which does tant amount, viz. by release or
confirmation to him, 13 H. 7. 13. 20.
etc. And therefore it is commonly said in our Books, that accord with
satisfaction, is a good Plea in personal Actions, where Damages only are to be
recovered, but not in Real Actions.

Co. l. 4. 55. b. and 56. a. In the Case of the Sadlers in London. 29 Ass. 31.
Pierce Partifields case.
12 In Pierce Partifields case cited in the case of the Sadlers of London in the
4 Report, fol. 55. An office found for the King cannot be quasht but by
petition, matter of record of as high nature.
b. it was found by office by force of a Diem clausit extremum after the death
of one that held houses of the King in London, that the Tenant died without
heir, whereupon the King grants them to Pierce P. for life, who sueth a writ to
the Major, to put him into possession, the Major returns, that the Tenant made
his Will and gave them to his wife for her life, who was yet in life, and
seized of the said houses together with one Jo. Digle her then husband, P. P.
outs Digle and his wife, who thereupon bring a Scire facias against P. P. who
demands Judgment of the Writ; because in as much as he was but Tenant for
life, and the reversion was in the King, they ought to sue the King, which they
could not do but by petition: And it was adjudged by all the Justices assembled
in the Chancery that the Writ should abate, and that Digle and his wife should
sue by petition; because, for as much as the Kings Title was found by inquest
of office upon oath, the Title of the Subject ought also to appear by Record of
as high nature, viz. by like inquest of office upon oath, and not by return of
the Major only; for albeit that return be matter of Record, yet is it not of
so high and great regard in the Common Law as an office found by oath.

Co. l. 4. 55. a The Case of the Sadlers in London.
13 At the Common Law, The like.
when the King was seized of any estate of Inheritance or Frank-tenement by any
matter of Record, were his Title by matter of Record judicial, as attainder,
etc. or ministerial, as office, or by conveyance of Record by assent, as fine,
Deed enrolled, etc. or by matter in fact and found by office of Record upon
oath, as alienation in Mortmaine, purchase by Alienee, the Kings villein,
escheat by death without heir, etc. he that had right could not have any
traverse, whereupon he might also have an Amoveas manum, but was always put to
his petition of right to be restored to his Frank-tenement and Inheritance;
Howbeit he might have his Monstrance de droit, and was not forced to his
petition, when the King was entitled by matter in fact (as Villein, Mortmaine,
Escheat, Alien, etc.) found by office, and by the same office the Title of the
party did also appear, as if a Disseisor did alien in Mortmain, or to an
Alienee, or to the Kings Villeine, or did die without heir, in all these cases
the party grieved might have his Monstrance de droit at the Common Law; And so
are the Books to be understood in 9 E. 3. 51. 13 E. 4. 8. a. 4 E. 4. 21.

33 E. 3. title Travers 36. Co. ibid.
14 It was found by office that T. by the Kings License married the Kings Niefe,
The like,
and that certain Lands descended to the same Niefe; which the Baron had
aliened without the Kings leave (his wife being the Kings Niefe) to another,
and for that cause the land was seized, whereupon the Alienee comes into the
Chancery, and shows all the case as it was found by office; And therefore
because all the truth of the case ( viz. the Niefe married by his License, the
descent to the Niefe after the Coverture, etc.) did appear in the Office, it
was awarded, that the Baron for that cause should hold by the Courtesy, and
that the Feme by his alienation should be put to her Action and thereupon by
award the Alienee had restitution.

The like.
15 It was found by Office that I. held of the King, 30 Ass. Pl. 28. Co. ibid.
56. a.
and that M. his daughter and heir was of full age and had Livery; and by
another Office it was also found that the same I. had another daughter K. which
was yet within age, whereupon a Scire facias went out against M. and her
husband, etc. who said that the land was given to I. and to his first wife the
Mother of M. in tail, and that K. was his issue of another wife, and so M.
sole heir; but by award of all the Judges, all the land was seized into the
Kings hand, because the entaile was not found by any Office, but only that M.
was general heir.

A Noble woman by marriage made ignoble.
16 If a Woman be noble (as Duchess, Countess, Baroness, Co. l. 4. 118. b 4
Acton. case. Co. l. 6. 53. b. 2. The Countess of Rutlands Case.
etc.) by descent, although she marie under the degree of Nobility, yet her
birthright remains; For that is annexed to her blood, and is Character inde
lebilis: But if a Woman attain Nobility by marriage ( viz. of a Duke, Earl,
Baron, etc.) and after the death of her first husband take another under the
degree of Nobility, by this last marriage with one, that is ignoble, she has
lost the dignity, unto which she attained by her first marying one of the
Nobility; for, eodem modo quo quicquid constituitur, dissolvitur, And Quando
mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili, desinit esse nobilis.

Ecclesiastical Law founded by the Common Law.
17 If it be demanded, what Canons, Constitutions, Co. l. 5. Part 1. 32. b. The
case of the Kings Ecclesiastical Law.
Ordinances, and Synodals provincial are still in force within this Realm, the
answer is, that it is resolved and enacted by authority of Parliament, That
such of them as have been allowed by general consent and custom within the
Realm, and are not contrariant or repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and
Customs of the Realm, nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings Prerogative
Royal, are still in force within this Realm, as the Kings Ecclesiastical
Laws of the fame; Now therefore as consent and custom has allowed those
Canons, etc. So no doubt by the general consent of the whole Realm, any of the
same may be corrected, enlarged, explained, or abrogated.

Writing annulled by writing.
18 Although Indentures being made for the declaring of the uses of a subsequent
Fine, Co. l. 5. 26. a. The Earl of Rutlands case.
Recovery or other assurance to certain persons, and within a certain time,
and to certain uses, are but directory, and do not bind the estate or interest
of the land, yet if the Fine, Recovery; or other assurance be pursued,
according to the Indentures, no naked averment shall be taken against those
Indentures, viz. that after the making of the Indentures and before the
assurance, it was concluded and agreed by mutual consent of the parties, that
the assurance should be to other uses: But if any other agreement or limitation
of uses be made by writing, or by any other matter as high or higher; then
shall the last agreement stand; for every contract or agreement ought to be
dissolved by matter of as high nature, as that by which such agreement was
contracted; because Nihil tam conveniens, etc.

Outlawry reversed by error upon an Indictment.
19 One Eaton was indicted in B. R. for the death of a man, Eatons case. 18 H.
7. Co. l. 5. 111. a. Foxleyes case.
whereupon an exigent was awarded into the County of Lincoln, Eaton dies, and
was never convict or attainted; yet his executors being a writ of Error to
reverse the award of the exigent; For in as much as the King was entitled by
matter of Record, it ought to be avoided by matter of as high nature.

Co. l. 7. 45. K^rns case.
20 If two claim as heirs to one man of one and the same Land, No traverse
without office.
holden of the King, and one is found by office, the other cannot traverse that
office, without first finding another office, which finds him heir also.

Co. l. 8. 25. b. 4. The Princes case.
21 The Charter of E. 3. The Duchy of Cornwall.
( Anno 11 Regni sui) by which lands were annexed to the Duchy of Cornwall,
being past by the consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, retained the
force of an Act of Parliament, and therefore those lands cannot be disannexed
but by Act of Parliament.

Co l. 9. 79. a. b. 12. H. 4. 23. 9 H. 7. 4. 4 H. 8. Dyer, 1. etc. Henry Petoes
case.
22 If a man be bound in a Statute to do any collateral Act, Writing discharged
by writing.
as to make a feofment, to render a true account, or the like; here accord with
execution by money or any other thing, is not satisfaction to save the
forfeiture of the Condition; for the contract being made by writing to perform
such a collateral Act, it cannot in that case be altered without writing: But
if a man by contract or Assumpsit (without Deed) be to deliver a horse, or to
build an house, or to do any other collateral thing; there money may be paid
by accord in sasatisfaction of such Contract; for as a Contract upon
consideration may begin by parol, so by accord by parol for any valuable
consideration it may be dissolved.

Co. l. 10. 86. b. 4 Leonard Loveis case.
23 Uses and Powers in contingencie and possibility may be by mutual assent of
the parties revoked and determined; for, Uses and powers revoked, etc.
as they may be raised by Indenture, So by proviso or limitation annexed unto
them in the same Indenture, they may be extinguished and destroyed, either
before or after their being.

Co. Inst. pars 1 115. a. 3.
24 Albeit a man cannot prescribe or allege a Custom against a Statute, A
prescription saved.
because it is matter of Record being (indeed) the highest proof and matter of
Record in Law; yet a man may prescribe against an Act of Parliament, when his
Prescription or Custom is saved or preserved by another Act of Parliament, etc.

Dyer 25. b. 160 28 H. 8.
25 A man is bound by Indenture to pay a sum of money, Payment no plea without
an acquittance
and in an action of debt upon that Deed the Defendant says he has paid the
sum, but shows no acquittance; In, this case, the plea is not good, for
this Indenture is like a simple Obligation, where payment is no plea without an
acquittance; It is otherwise where the Obligation has a Condition, per
Mountagu. Vide supra. 6.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 131. a. 4.
26 By the Statute of 13 R. 2. 16. Protection.
If after a protection is allowed by Innotescimus, the party stay in the
Country without going to the Service, for which he was retained; above a
convenient time after he has such protection, or repair from the said
Service, upon information thereof to the Lord Chancellor, he shall repeal such
protection by another Innotescimus; Howbeit such a protection shall not be
avoided by a bare averment of the party in that case, because the Record of the
protection must be avoided by a matter of as high a nature.

28 Things grounded upon an evil void beginning, cannot have good perfection.
Co. Inst. pars 1 19 a. 4. 30 E. 1. Form. 65. Temps, E. 1.
1 Before the Statute of West. 2. cap. 1. Alienation by tenant in tail before
issue, no bar to the donor.
Alienation by the Donee in tail after issue had did bar the Donor of his
reversion: but if he had aliened before issue had, and had after had issue,
although that alienation would have barred the issue, because he claimed a Fee
simple, yet in that case if the issue had died without issue, Dower of a
Ibid. 62. 19. E. 2. Form. 61. Plowd. 246. Co. 7. 35. Nevils case. Co. Inst.
pars 1 35. a. 3.
the Donor might re-enter, for that he aliened before any issue, at what time
he had no power to alien to bar the possibility of the Donor.

2 Tenant for life of a Carve of land, the reversion to the father in fee,
reversion ex assensu patris, not good.
the son and heir apparent of the father endoweth his wife of this Carve; by
the assent of the father, the Tenant for life dies, the husband dies; here,
the reversion was a tenement in the father, and yet this is no good endowment
ex assensu patris; because the father at the time of the assent, had but a
reversion expectant upon a Freehold, whereof he could not have endowed his own
wife; and albeit the Tenant for life died, living the husband, yet quod initio
non valet, tractu temporis non convalescet.

^imony makes the Presentation, etc. void.
3 A Villein at this day purchases an Advowson in fee, Co. ibid. 120. a. 2.
the Church becomes void, the Lord for 100 l. given by A. B. Clerk presents
him to the Church, and his Clerk is admitted, instituted, and inducted, yet
this gains not the Advowson to the Lord: for by the Statute of 31 El. cap. 6.
the presentation, admission, institution, and induction in that case are made
void, and not only voidable, as they were before the Statute: And so it is
also if any other on the behalf of A. B. had given or contracted with the Lord
in consideration of any valuable thing to present A. B. to the said Church,
albeit it had been without the consent or knowledge of A. B. yet it should not
have vested the Advowson in the Lord, causa qua supra.

Dereignment purges profession.
4 If the wife, after the husband has entered into Religion, alien, Co. ibid.
132. b. 1.
the land, which is her own right, and after her husband is dereigned, the
husband may enter and avoid the alienation.

Marriage of Priests.
5 In times past if a secular Priest had taken a wife, Co. ibid. 136. a. 3.
and had issue and died, that issue had been lawful and should have inherited
as heir to his father, etc. For, (as it was then holden) the marriage was not
void, but voidable by Divorce, and after the death of either party no Divorce
could have been had: But in those days if a man had married a Nun, or a Monk
had married, those marriages were holden void; the Nun and the Monk being (as
Littleton says Sect 202.) dead persons in Law, and therefore their issue could
not have inherited. 21 H. 7. 39. 19 H. 7. Bastardie 33. 5. E. 2. Nonability 26.
47 E. 3. casu ultimo.

Rescuous lawful.
6 If the Lord destrain the Tenant for rent before it be due, Co. ibid. 160. b.
3. v. ibid. Pl. author.
the Tenant may justify to make rescous, and it shall not be adjudged
disseisin of the rent; So it is also of a rent charge.

Livery of an estate in futu^o, void.
7 If a Lease for years be made to begin at Michaelmass, Co. ibid. 217. a. 4.
the remainder over to another in fee, if the Lessor make Livery of seisin
before Michaelmass, the Livery is void; because Livery of seisin must pass a
present Freehold, and not in futuro; for if it should work at all, it must
take effect presently, and cannot expect.

Release to lessee for years void.
8 If a man let to another his land for term of years, Co. ibid. 270. Littl.
459.
if the Lessor release unto the Lessee all his right, etc. before the Lessee
enter into the same land by force of that Lease, such a release is void;
because the Lessee had not possession in the land (but only; interesse
termini) at the time of the release made: It is otherwise, if the Tenant had
been in possession, or in case of a Lessee for life.

Patron shall ^ot charge the Glebe.
9 Regularly, the Incumbent may charge the Glebe, Co. ibid. 300. b. 3. Littl.
528.
if the Patron and Ordinary join with him in the grant, or consent thereunto
either by Precedent License, or subsequent confirmation: yet in this case, if
the Patron be but Tenant in tail or for life, or the Ordinary be Patron, the
charge shall not be perpetual; for in the first case the issue in tail,
reversioner, or remainder shall avoid it, and in the other case, the License or
Confirmation of the Ordinary is not available to charge the land without the
consent of the Dean and Chapter: but shall be avoided by the Successor of the
Ordinary.

Co. Inst. pars 1 300 b. 3.
10 A. Parson of D. is Patron of the Church of S. as belonging to his Church, A
grant of a rent not good.
and presents B. who by the consent of A. and of the Ordinary, grants a rent
charge out of the Glebe, this is not good to make the rent charge perpetual,
without the assent of the Patron of A.

Co. ibid. 301. a. 1.
11 If the Disseisor make a Charter of Feofment to A. with a letter of Attorney,
Confirmation void.
and before Livery the Disseisee confirms the estate of A. or the Deed made to
A. this is clearly void, though Livery be made afterward.

Co. ibid. 323. b. 4.
12 If the Tenant of the Land, A void release of a rent.
out of which a rent charge is issuing, pay the rent to a Stranger that has no
right thereunto, and the right owner release to him, this release is good;
because he thereby admits himself to be out of possession: But if the
Tenant had given him any thing in name of attornment, and the right owner had
released to him, this release had been void; because an Attornement only, can
be no disseisin of the rent; and therefore in that case the release had not
good footing, nor whereon to work.

Littl.. 633, 634. Co. ibid. 336. b. 4.
13 If Feme Inheretrix have a Baron under age, Nonage.
who during his nonage aliens the Feme of Land, and dies; In this case the Feme
may enter: So likewise if two Ioyntenants under age make feofment in fee, and
one of them dies, the Survivour may enter, etc.

Littl. 660. Co. ibid. 348.
14 If Tenant in tail make feofment in fee to the issue in tail, Estate in tail
not chargable.
within age, by force whereof he is seized, if the Tenant in tail die, the
issue is remitted; and therefore in this case, if the issue in tail, being at
full age, does in the life of the Tenant in tail, grant a rent charge issuing
out of the land to a stranger, and after the Tenant in tail dies, the issue in
tail shall hold the land discharged.

Co. ibid. 349. a. 3.
15 If the heir apparent of the Disseisee, disseise the Disseisor, A rent
charge not good.
and grant a rent charge, and then the Disseisee dies, the Grantor shall hold
it discharged; for there a new right of entry descends unto him, and
therefore he is remitted, and shall avoid the charge: So likewise if the Father
disseiseth the Grandfather, and grants a rent charge and dies; now is the
entry of the Grandfather taken away; and here, if the Grandfather dies, the
Son is remitted and shall avoid the charge.

Finch 12.
16 If an Infant or Feme covert make their will, and publish it, A Will void.
and after die of full age or sole, yet is the will nothing worth. 10 Eliz.
Dyer 344.

Finch (...).
17 One disseised of two acres in D. releaseth all his right in all his lands in
D. and delivers it to a stranger to be delivered over to the Disseisor as his
Deed, such a day; A void release
before which day the Disseisor disseiseth him of another acre in D. and then
the release is delivered over unto him: yet nothing of the right of this third
acre passes by the release.

Co. l. 2. 55. Bucklers case.
18 A. Tenant for life makes a Lease for 4 years to B. to begin presently, A
Lease for life void.
and after makes a Lease for life to C. to begin at Midsummer following, and
after Midsummer B. attorns; here, the Lease for life to C. is void, because an
estate of Frank-tenement cannot commence in futuro, and then the attornment,
though it were after Midsummer, shall not make the reversion to pass, the
grant thereof in futuro being void at the beginning; for, quod ab initio non
valet, tractu temporis non convalescet.

Co. l. 2. 57. Beckwiths case
19 A Feme Inheretrix covenants by Indenture without the knowledge A void sine.
or consent of the Baron to acknowledge a Fine to certain Conisees and uses in
the said Indenture mentioned, and afterward the Baron covenants also by
Indenture without the knowledge of the Feme to acknowledge a Fine to other
Conisees and uses in that Indenture also mentioned, and afterward the Baron
and Feme, join in a fine to the Conisees in the Indenture of the Feme
mentioned; Here, the Limitations and Declarations of Uses in both the
Indentures are void, and the said Fine was by construction of Law to the use of
the Feme and her heirs, as if no use at all had been declared, for, the Feme
alone, albeit she be owner of the land, yet being sub potestate viri; cannot in
respect of her Coverture without her Baron, limit the use, and on the other
side, the Baron, who has not any estate in his own right, cannot against the
good liking of the Feme limit any use; because he is not owner of the land; so
that the one is not sui juris and has the estate; and the other is sui juris,
and has not the estate; And therefore when they differ in limitation, all they
do must needs be void.

A void deed, or contract.
20 When a Deed has two deliveries, Co. l. 3. 35. b. Jennings and Brags case,
in Butler and Bakers case.
if the person at the first delivery had power and ability in Law to contract,
but could not perfect it, until an impediment should be removed, before the
second delivery; in that case, the contract is good; as if the Disseisee make
an Indenture purporting a Lease for years, and deliver it to a stranger out of
the land as a scroul, and command him to enter into the land, and to deliver it
upon the land as his Deed to the Lessee, which is done accordingly, this is a
good Lease: But if the person at the first delivery had not power or ability in
Law to make the Lease or Contract, and before the second delivery he attains,
to such power, there the Lease or contract is not good; as if at the time of
the first delivery the Lessor be an Infant or Feme covert, and at the time of
the second delivery they become of full age or sole, in both these cases the
Deed does not bind; because at the time of the first delivery they were not
persons that had ability in Law to make a Contract.

A void jointure
21 If the Baron make feofment in fee to the use of himself for life, Co. l. 4.
2. b. 1. Vernons case.
and after to the use of B. for his life, and after to the use of the Feme for
life, for her Ioynture, that is not within the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. to
bar the Feme of her Dower, albeit B. die, living the Baron: So also if the
estate be made to A. for life, and after to the Feme for her Ioynture, neither
is that within the Act, although A. die before the Baron; for in these and the
like cases; in as much as at the time of the limitation of the estates they
were out of the Act, (for that it was not then certain, that the estate of the
Feme should take effect immediately after the death of the Baron, as it ought
to do by the said Act) no subsequent event can make them within the Act; For,
Quod ab initio non valet, tractu temporis non convalescet; and quae malo sunt
inchoata principio, vix est ut bono peraguntur exitu.

A failer of Action.
22 A. seized of the Manor of D. in fee had communication with B. of demising
the said Manor unto him, C. gives it out, Co. l. 4. 18. Sir Gilbert Gerrards
case.
that he had a Lease for 90 years in the Manor, whereupon B. desists from
taking the Manor by demise, and thereupon A. brings an action of slander
against C. And it was adjudged that those words would not bear it. And in this
case, though it appeared by the Defendants bar, that he had no title or
interest in any such Lease, yet because the matter alleged in the Count did
not maintain the Action, the bar could not make it good.

A grant of tithes not good by misnamer of the tenant.
23 Q. Eliz. by Letters Patents grants to I. S. Totam illam portionem Co. l. 4.
35. 4. Bozouns case.
decimarum and garbarum suarum in L. in Com. N. cum omnibus aliis decimis suis
quibuscunque in L. in dicto Com. N. tunc vel nuper in occupatione I. C. and
grants further that those Letters Patents shall be of force and effect against
her self and her Successors, Non obstante male nominando. vel male recitando
praedict. portionem decimarum, etc. Et non obstante aliquibus defectis in male
recitando vel non nominando alicujus tenentis sive occupatoris, etc. And all
this was found by special verdict, and besides, that I. C. never had any Tithes
in L. in his occupation; and thereupon one question was, whether the defect of
mistaking? the Farmer was not supplied by the non obstante; and it was
resolved, that it was not; Because when the words of the grant are not
sufficient ex vi termini to pass the thing granted, but the grant is utterly
void, there a non obstante cannot make the grant good; for when the Queen
grants Totam illam portionem, etc. nuper in tenura I. C. here the addition of
I. C. is of the substance of the grant, and in as much as I. C. never had the
portion in his occupation, the grant must needs be void ex vi termini, and
therefore the non obstante, cannot make it good.

Co. l. 4. 62. b. 4. Herlakendens Case.
24 If I let my land for life, and after give the trees, A void grant of trees.
and after the Lessee dies, yet the Donee cannot take them; because at the time
of the grant, the Lessee had the property in them, as annexed to the land. 21 H.
6. 46. d. per totam Curiam.

Co. l. 4. 90. a. 3. Druries case. Stat. 21. H. 8. 13.
25 If a Countess (that by the Statute may retain two Chaplains capable of
dispensations to enjoy two benefices) does first retain two, and after a
third, Reteiner of a Chaplain void.
the two first are only capable of dispensations; for they only are her
Chaplains according to the Statute, and the other at the Common Law; And
therefore in this case, if the two first die, yet is not the other capable of a
dispensation; because at the time of his retainer he was not capable; for he
ought to be newly retained again to make him capable thereof: So likewise if
the Son and heir apparent of a Baron retein a Chaplain, and give unto him his
Letters under his hand and seal, and after his father dies, and this Chaplain
purchases a dispensation, this retainer and those Letters will do him no good;
because they were not available at the first to make him capable, Et quod ab
initio non valet, tractu temporis non convalescet.

Co. l. 4. 107. b. 3. Adams and Lamberts case. H. 6. and 7. E. 6. Dyer 81.
26 Pope Urbane at the request of Ralph Baron of Greystock, A void foundation of
a College.
founded a College of a Master and six Priests to be resident at Greystock,
and assigns to each of the Priests five marks per annum, besides their bed and
chamber, and to the Master 40 l. per annum; And upon the Statute of 1 E. 6. 14.
it was certified in the Book of First Fruits and and Tenths, Rectoriam and
Collegium de Greystock: But it was resolved by all the Justices, that this
reputative College was not given to the King by the said Act, because it had
no lawful beginning, nor so much as the countenance of a lawful beginning;
for the Pope cannot found or incorporate a College within this Realm, nor
assign or give License to assign any temporal livings unto it; but it ought
to be done by the King himself, and by no other.

Co. l. 5. 42. Codwels case.
27 In appeal of Mayhem betwixt John Codwel Plaintiff, A void Panel.
and Thomas Parker Defendant, the parties descend to issue, and the Jury finds
for the Plaintiff, and now it was moved in arrest of Judgment, that there was
variance betwixt the Panel of the Venire facias and the Distringas, and Postea,
in the name of one of the Jury, that appeared and gave the verdict; for, in the
Panel of the Venire facias, he was named Palus Cheale, And in the Distringas
and in the Postea it was Paulus Cheale: And because the name of a Iuror in the
Venire facias was mistaken, the Judgment was arrested: But if he had been well
named in the Panel upon the Venire, and misnamed in the Distringas or Postea,
upon examination it might have been amended: because the Venire facias, and
Panel are the beginning and ground of the other subsequent Process.

A void Presentation.
28 D. was seized of a Manor, Co. l. 6. 50. a. 4. Boswels case. 16 E. 3. Tit.
Quare impedit 67. Adams case.
unto which an Advowson was appendant, and dies, the Manor descends to E. an
Infant, the Church becomes void; A. presents during the nonage of E. who at
full age enfeoffes F. of the Manor, and after the Church becomes void again,
and F. presents, whereupon the Assignee of A. brings a Quare impedit; And it
was adjudged, that by the feofment of E. when he had attained his full age, the
Manor passed to the Feoffee, but not the Advowson; because by the usurpation,
the Infant was out of possession of the Advowson, and he had but a right in it,
the usurpation being only voidable by action, which could not be transferred
to a stranger; And therefore, the Advowson being not at all granted to F. he
shall not gain it afterward by an usurpation.

A void grant of the Office of the Auditors of the Court of Wards.
29 Queen Eliz. in the 31 year of her Reign grants unto Walter Took and
William Curle Officium unius Auditorum Curiae suae Wardorum, Co. l. 11. 4. a.
4. Auditor Curles Case.
etc. habend. dictis Waltero and Willielmo and alteri eorum conjunctim and
divisim pro termino vitarum suarum and eorum alterius diutius viventis, etc.
And afterward King James in the 4 year of his Reign during the lives of the
said Walter Took and William Curle, grants the Reversion of the said Office to
John Church-hill and John Took: And in this case King James his grant was
adjudged void; because that Office being partly judicial, and partly
ministerial, could not in respect of the Judicial part be granted in Reversion;
for which the Rule is, officia judicialia non concedantur, antequam vacent; And
therefore being void at first, it shall not be made good afterward; for albeit
William Curle one of the first Grantees, and John Church-hill one of the last
Grantees happen to die, yet shall not John Took enjoy the Office by virtue of
King James his grant; because, quod ab initio non valet, etc.

A void grant of a Surveyorship.
^0 John Bishop of Sarum grants the office of Surveyour of the Manor of
Sherborne unto Edward Green and John Green for their lives together with the
fee of 6. l. 13. s. 4. d. per annum, Co. l. 10. 61. b. 4. The Bishop of Sarums
case.
whereas the office formerly used to be granted only to one; Edward Green
dies, as also the Bishop, the fee is behind, and John Green distreins for it,
but could not maintain the Avowry, because the grant was void by the Statute of
1 Eliz. not printed, (which restrains Ecclesiastical persons from making
unusual grants, etc.) and in this case, albeit Edward Green being dead, and
John Green alone had the office, when he distrained, yet the grant being void
at first, shall not be made good by any subsequent Act, that happens after, to
bind the Successor to perform it. Quia quae malo sunt inchoata principio, vix
est ut bono peragente exitu, and quod initio non valet, etc.

A void grant to a College.
31 A Grant by the Master and Fellows of a College to Queen Eliz. contrary to
the Statute of 13 El. 10. being thereby made void, Co. l. 11. 7^. a. 4.
Magdalen College case.
could not afterward be made good by the Statute of 18 El. 2. (for
Confirmations of Grants made unto her) because that can by no means be made
good, which was merely void at the beginning. Neither shall the general words
of 18 El. enable any person to make any conveyance, which by the Common Law was
disabled, as if an Infant had conveyed land to the Queen by Deed enrolled, or
had levied a Fine to her before the Statute of 18 El. and then that Act had
been made; yet the estates granted had not been confirmed by that Act; because
the Infant during his minority was absolutely disabled to make such a Grant;
and therefore notwithstanding that Statute, he might have reversed the Fine by
a Writ of Error, as it was adjudged M. 32 and 33 Eliz. in B. R. by Wray and all
the Court, in Vaughans case. So likewise if a man seized of land in fee, had
granted the land after his death, Co. l. 11. 78. a. 3 The same case
to the Queen her heirs and successors, the said Statute of Confirmation had
not made such a grant good, because it was against the Rules of Law. 38 H. 6.
33. The Abbess of Sions case, and the Earl of Leicesters case Plow. 400, etc.
Quae malo sunt inchoata, etc. A void presentment.


Fitz. 35 f. 6.
32 A presentment made by a stranger to an Advowson, which is appropriate to an
Abbey, is void, be the presentment in the Abbots time or during the vacation;
and albeit the Clerk be afterward admitted, instituted, and inducted, yet
that cannot make the presentment, which was void at first, to take effect; For,
Quod initio non valet, etc. It is otherwise if the Abbot himself present, etc.

Co. l. 1. 15. b. 3. Sir William Pelhams case.
33 A tenant for life (remainder in tail, remainder in fee) bargains and sels
the land in fee to B. who after the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 31. A void
recovery, and forfeiture by tenant for life.
and before the Statute of 14 El. cap. 8. suffered a recovery, wherein A, was
vouched, and vouched over, etc. and after Judgment was entered and execution
sued upon that recovery; yet was the entry of the tenant in tail adjudged
congeable; for albeit the recovery was not had immediately against A. yet was
it adjudged a forfeiture within that Statute of 32 H. 8. and then the suffering
of the recovery being a forfeiture, it could not afterward be salved by
entering Judgment and suing execution thereupon.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 46. a. 4.
34 If the Patron grant the next avoydance, and after Parson, A void grant of
Glebe.
Patron, and Ordinary before the Statute, had made a lease of the Glebe for
years, and after the Parson dies, and the grantee of the next avoydance had
presented a Clerk to the Church, who is admitted instituted, and inducted, and
dies within the term, the Patron presents a new Clerk, who is also admitted;
instituted, and inducted; here albeit, he comes in under the Patron, that was
party to the Lease, and was Admitted, Instituted, and Inducted; yet because the
Lease had no good beginning, but was avoided by the Grantees Incumbent, who had
the whole estate in him, it shall not be again revived; but shall be extinct
for ever, and shall not be maintained against the last Incumbent,

Co. Inst. pars 1 31. b. 4.
35 If a man be Tenant in general tail, The last feme not endowed.
and take a wife and has issue by her, and she dies, and after he takes
another wife and dies, the last wife shall be endowed; because she may have
issue, which by possibility may inherit: But in this case if the husband during
his first wives life alien the land in Fee, and takes an estate back to him and
his wife, and the heirs of their two bodies, and the wife dies, the second
wife shall not be endowed; because during the Coverture (when her Title of
Dower should take beginning) he was seized of an estate tail special; and yet
here also the Issue, that he may have by the last wife, is inheritable.

Co. ibid. 9. a. 1.
36 B. having diverse sons and daughters, Grant to children before birth, not
good.
A. gives lands to B. and liberis suis, and to their heirs, the Father and
all his Children do take a Fee simple jointly by force of these words, their
heirs; but if he had no child at the time of the Feofment, the Child or
Children, born afterward shall not take.

Dyer, 58. a. 4. 35 H. 8.
37 Cestuy que use (after the Statute of 1 R. 3. 1. Cestuy que us^
and before the Statute of Uses) makes a Lease for years, and after during the
term makes Feofment of the land, and gives Livery, etc. In such case, nothing
passed by such Feofment, because he had nothing in Use or Possession, and then
the Statute of R. 3. would not aid him.

29 Quod non habet principium, non habet finem.
Where there can be no presentment by lapse.
1 If the Bishop be named in the Quare impedit, Co. Inst. pars 1 344. b. 4.
he shall never afterward present by lapse, and then shall neither the
Metropolitan, nor after him the King do it; For the Bishops presentment
falling, which was to be the first step and beginning, their power of
presenting, which should successively follow his, must needs also fail;
according to the Rule. Quod non habet principium, non habet finem.

Right without action no remitter, and contra.
2 Regularly, a man shall not be remitted to a Right remediless, Co. ibid. 349.
a. 4.
for the which he can have no action; And therefore Littleton says ( Sect.
661.) that the principal cause of a Remitter is, when the issue has no person
(but himself) against whom he may bring his Action, by which it appears,
that he ought to have just cause of Action; for neither an Action without a
Right, nor a Right without an Action can make a Remitter; as if Tenant in tail
suffer a Common Recovery, In which there is error, and after the Tenant in tail
disseiseth, the Recoveror, and dies; here the issue in tail has an action,
viz. a Writ of Error; but so long as the Recovery remains in force, he has
no Right, and therefore in that case cannot be remitted.

Idem.
3 If B. purchase an Advowson, Co. ibid. 349. b. 3.
and suffers an usurpation and six Months to pass, and the usurper grants
the Advowson to B. and his heirs; B. dies, his heir is not remitted; because
his Right to the Advowson was remediless, viz. a Right without an Action.

4 Vide infra M. 38. 1. 7. and 162. 49. Co. Inst. pars 1 31. a. 4.


30 He that claims Paramount a thing, shall never take benefit, nor hurt by
it.
Dos de dote peti non potest.
1 If there be Grandfather, Father, and Son, Co. Inst. pars 1 32. a. 4.
and the Grandfather is seized of thee acres of land in fee, and takes wife,
and dies, this land descends to the Father, who dies either before or after
entry; now is the wife of the Father dowable, yet shall she have the thirds but
of two acres only, and the wife of the Grandfather shall have for her Dower
the other acre entirely; because the Dower of the Grandmother is Paramount, the
Title of the Fathers wife, and the seisin of the Father, which descended to him
(be it in Law or actual) is defeated; and now upon the matter the Father had
but a Reversion expectant upon a Freehold; and in that case Dos de dote peti
non potest, although the Grandmother die, living the Fathers wife.

Dower according to the improved value.
2 If the wife be entitled to have Dower of three acres of March, Co. Inst. pars
1 32. a. 3.
every one of the value of twelve pence per annum, the heir by his industry
and charge makes it good meadow, viz. every acre worth ten shillings per
annum, the wife shall have her Dower according to the improved value, and not
according to the value, as it was in her husbands time: So it is likewise if
the heir improve the value by building; the like Law is, if the value be
impaired in the time of the heir; for then also she shall be endowed according
to the value at the time of the assignement, and not according to the value as
it was in her husbands time: And the reason of all this is, because she claims
paramount the improvement or impairing of it, and has Title to she quantity of
the land, viz. one just third part.

Co. Inst. pars 1 46. a. 3.
3 If Tenant in tail make a Lease for years reserving xx s. rent, Lease by
tenant in tail good in dower.
and after take a wife and die without issue; here as to him in the reversion,
the Lease is merely void, because he claims paramount the Lease: but if he
endow the wife of Tenant in tail of the land (as she may be though the estate
tail be determined) now is the Lease as to the Tenant in Dower (who is in, of
the estate of her husband) revived again, as against her; for, as to her, the
estate tail continues, and the Lease is paramount her Title.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 113. a. 3. Littl. 169.
4 If a man (by the Custom) devise that his executors shall sell his lands,
etc. and dies, the lands in this case descend to his heir, Feoffee in by
devise.
and the executors have no estate in them, but only a bare and naked power;
nevertheless a feofment from them shall amount to an alienation to vest the
land in the Feoffee; because the Feoffee by construction of Law shall be said
to be in by the Divisor, and not by the executors: So it is likewise, if a man
(by the custom) devise a reversion or any other thing, that lies in grant to
be sold by his executors, they may sell the same without Deed, causa qua supra.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 117. a. 2.
5 If lands be given to a Villain and to the heirs of his body, The Lords title
Paramount an entail to a villain, and so is the Kings to that of an Alien.
the Lord may enter and put out the villein, and the heirs of his body; for,
Quicquid acquiritur servo, acquiritur domino: And in this case the Lord gains a
Fee simple determinable upon the dying of the Villain, without issue of his
body and the absolute Fee simple remains still in the Donor. And if the Lord
enter, and after enfranchise the Donee, and after the Donee has issue, yet
that issue shall never have remedy either by Formedon or Entry, to recover
this land, by force of the Statute de donis, etc. For the Lord is in paramount
the entaile, and that Statute gives only remedy to the issues of the Donee,
that has capacity and power to take and retain the gift: And the Title of the
Lord remains as it did at the Common Law; for the Statute restrains acts
done only by the Tenant in tail: So it is also if lands be given to an Alien,
and to the heirs of his body, upon office found the land is seized for the
King, afterward the King makes the Alien a Denizen, who has issue and dies,
the King shall detain the land against the issue; because the Kings Title is
Paramount the entail, viz. by his prerogative. Vide infra 32.

Co. Inst. pars 1 148. b. 3.
6 If a man grant a rent charge out of two acres, A Title Paramount to rent.
and after the Grantee recovereth one of the acres against the Grantor by a
Title paramount, the whole rent shall issue out of the other acre. Doct. and
Stud. l. 2. cap 17.

Co. Inst. pars 1 148. b. 3.
7 If a man enfeoffeth B. of one acre in fee upon Condition, Title Paramount a
grant.
and B. being seized of another acre in fee, grants a rent out of both the
acres to the Feoffor, who enters into the one acre for the Condition broken,
the whole rent shall issue out of the other acre; because his Title is
paramount the grant.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 184. b. Littl. 286.
8 If two Ioyn-tenants be seized of an estate in Fee simple, Jus accrese^dendi
praefertur oneribus.
and the one grants a rent charge to another out of his part; here, the rent is
good during his life, but after his decease the Survivor shall avoid it;
because he comes in by the first Feoffor, and not under his companion: So
likewise if a man be possessed of certain lands for term of years in the right
of his wife and grants a rent charge and dies, Co. Inst. pars 1 185. a. 1.
the wife shall avoid the charge: And for the same reason it is, that if a
Ioyn-tenant charge the land with common of Pasture, Turbary, Estovers, or with
a Corodie, or with a way over the land, or the like, this shall not bind the
Survivour; For, jus accrescend^ prefertur oneribus, and Alienatio rei
praefertur juri accrescendi. Vide M. 15. Pl. 14.

Co. Inst. pars 1 185. a. 2.
9 One Ioyn-tenant in fee takes a Lease for years of a stranger Simile.
by Deed indented, and dies, the Survivour shall not be bound by the
conclusion; because he claims above it, and not under it.

Baron charge the Femes ^and.
10 If there be two Ioyn-tenants in fee, Co. Inst. pars 1 185. a. 2. Finch 13.
Dyer 187.
and the one makes a Lease for years, reserving a rent and dies, the
surviving Feoffee shall have the reversion, but not the rent; because he
claims in by the first Feoffor, which is paramount the rent: So it is also of
the wife, where the husband being Lessee for years, in her right, makes a
Lease of part of the term, reserving a rent. Inst. part 1. 318. a. 3.

Simile.
11 If a husband, wife, Co. Inst. pars 1 187. b. 4.
and a third person purchase lands to them and their heirs, and the husband
before the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 1. had aliened the whole land to a stranger
in fee, and died the wife and the other Ioyn-tenant were Ioyn-tenants of the
right, and if the wife had died, the other Ioyn-tenant should have had the
whole right by Survivour; for that they might have joined in a writ of right;
and in this case the discontinuance would not have barred the entry of the
Survivour because he claimed not under the discontinuance, but by Title
paramount above the same, by the first feofment.

A condition ^aramount a descent.
12 If a man be seized of lands in Fee or Fee tail upon Condition to render
certain rent, or any other Condition; Co. Inst. pars 1 240. a. b. Littl. 391,
392.
albeit such a Tenant die seized, yet if the Condition be broken in his life
time or after his decease, that descent shall not take away the entry of the
Feoffor or Donor, or of their heirs, because the tenancie was originally
charged with the Condition, which is paramount the descent; for the Condition
remains in the same essence that it was in at the time of the creation of it,
and the estate of the Tenant is conditional, in whose hands soever the tenancie
comes, etc. So it is likewise if such a Tenant upon Condition be disseised, and
the Disseisor die thereof seized, and the land descends to the heir of the
Disseisor; In this case, albeit the entry of the Tenant upon Condition that was
disseised, is taken away; yet if the Condition be broken, then may the Feoffor
or Donor, that made the estate upon Condition, or their heirs enter, Causa qua
supra; and also for that a Condition cannot be divested, or put out of
possession, as Lands and Tenements may.

^ower para^ount a des^nt.
13 If a Disseisor die seized, and his heir enter, who endoweth, Co. Inst. pars
1 240. b. 4. Littl. 393.
the Feme of the Disseisor of the third part of the Tenements, etc. In this
case, as to this third part, which is so assigned to the Feme in Dower,
presently after the Feme enters, and has the possession of the same third
part, the Disseisee may lawfully enter upon the possession of the Feme into the
same third part; because, albeit the heir entered, yet when the wife is
endowed, she shall not be in by the heir, but immediately by her husband, being
the Disseisor, for her life, and that, by a Title paramount the dying seized
and dscent: And therefore in judgment of Law, the descent, as to the Freehold
and Possession which the heir had, is taken away by the endowment; for that
the Law adjudgeth no mean seisin between the husband and the wife.

^wer para^unt, the ^^or title.
14 A man makes a gift in tail reserving twenty shillings rent, Co. Inst. pars
1 241. a. 4.
and dies, the Donee takes wife, and dies without issue, the heir of the
Donor enters and endoweth the wife, Here, the wife is not in by the heir of
the Donor, but by title paramount of the estate of her husband; And therefore
albeit the estate tail be spent, and the rent reserved thereupon determined,
yet after she is endowed, she shall be attendant to the heir, in respect of
the said rent.

15 If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Mesne grant by Fine the
Services of his Tenant to another in fee, Co. Inst. pars 1 321. b. 1. Littl.
583. Co. l. 5. 113. a. Mallories case. Temps E. 2. Attorn. 18. 39. H. 6. 38.
per Prisot.
The Lord Paramount may distrain without attornment.
and after the Grantee dies without heir; here, the Services of the Mesnalty
shall escheat to the Lord paramount; and in this case, if the services of the
Mesnalty be afterward behind, the Lord Paramount shall distraine the Tenant,
although the Tenant did never attorne, because the Lord Paramount comes to
the Mesnalty by a Seigniory paramount; and therefore there needs no
Attornement; As if, there be Lessee for life of a Manor, and he surrenders his
estate to the Lessor, there needs no Attornement of the Tenants, because the
Lessor is in by a Title Paramount.

Co. Inst. pars 1 327. b. 4.
16 A Discontinuance made by the husband, Discontinuance of the wives land takes
not away the ent^^ of him that has a title paramount.
did take away the entry only of the wife and her heirs by the Common Law,
and not of any other, which claimed by Title Paramount above the
Discontinuance; as if lands had been given to the husband and wife, and to a
third person and to their heirs, and the husband had made a Feofment in fee,
this had been a Discontinuance of the one moity, and a Disseisin of the other
moity; And if the husband had died and then the wife had died, the Survivour
should have entered into the whole; for he claimed not under the Discontinuance,
but by Title Paramount from the first Feoffor; And seeing the right by Law does
survive, the Law does give him a remedy to take advantage thereof by entry for
other remedy for that moity he could not have.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 338. b. 2.
17 If a Bishop be seized of a rent charge in fee, A title paramount avoid rent
and charges.
the Tenant of the land enfeoffes the Bishop and his Successors, the Lord
enters for the Mortmaine, he shall hold it discharged of the rent; for the
entry for the Mortmaine affirms the Alienation in Mortmaine, and the Lord
claims under his estate: But if Tenant for life grant a rent in fee, and
after enfeoffe the Grantee, and the Lessor enter for the forfeiture, the rent
is revived; because the Lessor does claim above the Feofment.

Co. Inst. pars 1 351. a. 3.
18 If a Feme Sole possessed of a Lease for years takes Baron, Chattels real
returns to the feme, if she survived.
who devises it by his Will or disposes not of it at all in his life time,
the Feme, if she survive, shall have it again, because her estate is paramount
the interest of the Executor; And there is the same reason of estates by
Statute Merchant, Statute Staple, Elegit, Wardships, and other Chattels real in
possession: So likewise if the husband charge the Chattel real of his wife, 7
H. 6. 2.
it shall not bind the wife if she survive him, causa qua supra.

Co. Inst. pars 1 385. a. 3.
19 If lands he given to two brethren in Fee simple, Title paramount by
^^^vivorship.
with a warranty to the eldest and his heirs, the eldest dies without issue,
the Survivour albeit he be heir to him, yet shall he neither vouch nor rebate,
nor have a Warrantia cartae; because his Title to the land is by relation above
the fall of the Warranty, and he comes not under the estate of him, to whom
the Warranty is made.

Co. l. 2 68. a. 1. Tookers case.
20 If the Lessee for life or years attorne upon any condition subsequent, the
condition is void; Attornment paramount, condition.
for if the reversion or remainder be once vested, it cannot be divested by any
condition annexed to the Attornement; because the Grantee thereof is not in by
the Lessee, but by the Grantor; but if one Attorn upon a condition precedent,
there it is no Attornement before the condition be performed.

Co. l 3. 83. a. 3 Vpton and Bassets case, in Twines case.
21 In Upton and Bassets case in 3 Report fol. 83. it was agreed, An ancient
right not ^^red.
that by the Common Law an estate made by fraud shall be avoided only by him,
that has a former Right, Title, Interest, Debt, or Demand, as in the 33 of H.
6. Sale in market overt by Covin shall not bar a more ancient Right, neither
shall a covenous Grant defeat an execution in respect of a former Debt, as it
is agreed 22 Ass. P. 72. But he that has only a later Right, Title, Interest,
Debt, or Demand, shall not (at the Common Law) avoid a precedent Grant or
estate made by fraud.

The Copiholder is in by him, that surrenders, and not by the Lord.
22 When a Copiholder surrenders to the use of another, Co. l. 4. 27. b. 2.
Taverns case. Co. l. 8. 63. Swains case. Co. ibid. pars 4 28. b. 3. Westwicks
case
and the Lord admits him, now he that is so admitted, is in by him that made
the surrender; For, in a Plaint in the nature of a writ of Entry in te per, he
shall be supposed in the per by him, that made the surrender; because the Lord
is but an instrument to make the admittance, and he, that is admitted, shall
not be subject to the charges and encumbrances of the Lord, for that the Lord
has but a customary power to make admittance, secundum formam and effectum
sursum redditionis: And therefore albeit the Lord grant the land over to
another by copy, that is done without warrant, and the Lord may notwithstanding
that, make admittance according to the surrender, and it shall be good, causa
qua supra. So also if the Lord after such surrender grants the land to Cestuy
quae use and to a stranger, all shall enure to Cestuy quae use, or if he admit
Cestuy quae use upon condition, the condition is void; For, after the
admittance he is in by him that made the surrender, and by the custom, which
is paramount the power of the Lord. Vide 21. 37.

The like.
23 If a man devise a term to I. S. and the Executors agree and assent, that I.
S. and I. D. shall have it, Co. ibid. 28. b. 4. Westwicks case
or that I. S. shall have it upon condition, in these cases, I. S. shall have
the term solely and absolutely; for after the assent of the Executors he is in
by the devise: So likewise it was adjudged in the case of one Bunting, Co.
ibid. 29. a. 4 Buntings case.
that if a Copiholder surrender into the Lords hands to the use of another for
life, and the Lord admit him to hold to him and his heirs, yet he, which is so
admitted, has but an estate for life; because he is in (after admittance) by
the surrender Vide 21. 37.

Issue in tail not barred.
24 In Formedon in descender if the Demandant be barred by verdict or demurrer,
Co. l. 6, 7. b. 3. Ferrers case.
yet the Issue in tail shall have a new Formedon in descender, upon the
construction of the Statute of West. 4. cap. 2. So also if he be barred in a
Writ of Error; upon the release of his Ancestor, his issue shall have a new
Writ of Error; For, he claims in, not only as heir, but per formam doni and
by the Statute, which are paramount the verdict or demurrer; and he shall not
be barred by the faint or false pleading of his Ancestor, so long as the right
of the entaile remains; And with this agrees 10 H. 6. 5. 3 Eliz. Sir Ralfe
Rowlets case, Dyer, 188.

The like.
25 If there be two Ioyn-tenants both within age, Litt. 634. Co l. 8. 43. a. 4.
Whittinghams case.
and they join in a feofment, in this case a joint right remains in them; and
therefore if one of them die, the right will survive, and the Survivour shall
have the right of the land as from the first Feoffor.

A condition Paramount.
26 If a man make a lease for years upon condition, Co. l. 8. 76. a. 2. In the
Lord Staffords case.
that if the Lessor out him within the term, that he shall have fee; in this
case, if the Lessor do out him, the interest of the term is turned into a
right, and yet there the Lessee shall have fee, and one reason thereof is;
because the Title of the Lessee is by force of the condition, which is
paramount the Ouster.

Title Paramount dscharges dower, etc. of debts, etc.
27 A Feme shall not be distrained for the Debts due to the King by the Baron,
in the lands which she held in Dower, Fitz. N.B. 150. q.
nor in the lands of the Inheritance of the Feme, nor in the lands, which she
has by purchase made by the Baron to him and the Feme, and their heirs;
because she claims by Title paramount the Debts; and if she be therefore
distrained by the Sheriff, she shall have a Writ to discharge her, which see,
Fitz. N. Br. 150 q.

Paramount and administration.
28 An Executor recovereth and dies intestate, Finch 13.
administration of the goods of the first testator is committed to I. S. Here,
I. S. shall not sue execution upon this recovery.

Finch ibid.
29 Dower cannot be assigned reserving a rent, Dower a title paramount.
or with a remainder over; for she is in from the husband, and not from him
that assigns Dower.

Co. l. 4. 53. a. 3. in Rawlins case.
30 If a man make a Lease for 21 years rendering rent with clause of re-entry, A
Lease Paramount.
and after the Lessee make a Lease to the Lessor for 6 years to begin two
years after, and afterward the rent being lawfully demanded is arreare; here,
the Lessor may lawfully re-enter and take advantage of the condition,
notwithstanding the acceptance of the said future interest, and by the re-entry
shall defeat the future interest, which vested in him.

Co. ibid.
31 If a man make Feofment in fee upon collateral condition, A paramount
feofment with condition.
and after the Feoffee redemise the land to the Feoffor, and afterward the
condition is performed; Here, the re-demise of the land (being no suspension of
the condition) is no impediment but that the Feoffor shall take advantage of
the condition, and shall thereby destroy the term, that he himself had
accepted, as it is holden, 20 E. 4. 19. 8 H. 7, 8. 20. H. 7. 4.

Fitz. ^6. c.
31 If the eldest son by the first venture present and die without issue, and
after the Church happens to be void, A descent paramount.
the youngest son of the second venture shall not present, nor have that
Advowson, so if there be two daughters of several venters, and after partition
one of them presents and dies, the other shall not have it: but if they make
partition to present by turn, and one of them die before any presentment is
made; in that case the other shall have the Advowson; for she then claims
paramount the descent from her sister, viz. immediately from their Ancestor.

Dyer, 54. 21. 34 H. 8.
32 Tenant in tail makes a feofment before the Statute of 27 H. 8. to the use of
his wife for life, Remitter.
the remainder to his son and heir in fee, and after the Statute is made, and
the Feoffor dies and his wife also, and the son enters; In this case, it
seems that the son is not remitted, for the Statute makes the possession in
him as the use was before; Howbeit it seems also, that his issue shall be
remitted, because he claims paramount the Statute, viz. per formam doni; for
the estate tail is still in being, and was not extinct by the Statute; And in
this case it is not material, whether the son (when he entered) was at full
age, Dyer 54. b. 22. 34 H 8.
or under age, for it seems he is not remitted albeit he were then under age:
for if Tenant in tail make a feofment to the use of himself and his heirs,
and the Feoffor dies, his issue within age, and then comes the Statute, here
the heir shall not be remitted, but (it seems) his issue may, causa qua
supra. Vide supra 5.

Dyer 54 b. 1. 34, and 35 H. 8
33 The Kings Tenant of lands holden in Capite before the Statute of Uses
suffers a common recovery to the use of his son and heir apparent and his
wife, and of the heirs of the body of the son, Wardship.
after which Statute the son has issue and dies, the issue within age; In
this case, the issue shall not be in ward during the life of the Feme for the
ancient use of the Fee simple, which was paramuont the Statute, remains still
in the father, albeit he expressed not any use in Fee simple, and then by the
Statute, the possession was vested in the son and the feme, as the use was,
and the Fee simple in the father, as he was Donor of the use, and not as one in
remainder of a new Fee simple, for that would have altered the case: And in the
same case, if the father had covenanted, that the son immediately after his
decease should have had, in possession or in use, all his land according to the
same course of Inheritance, as they then stood, and that all men seized or to
be seized, should stand seized to the uses and intents aforesaid, yet the son
should not be in ward, for it had been but a Covenant, which changes not the
estate of the Fee simple; which was paramount the Statute, as before is said.

Emblements sown.
34 If Tenant pur auter vie sow the land, and Cestuy que vie die, Dyer 316. 2.
15. Eliz.
the Tenant pur auter vie shall have the crop; So if the Baron sow the Femes
land, and the Feme die, the Baron shall reap the crop; Likewise if the Baron
make feofment in fee to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the use
of the Feme for life, with remainders over, and the Baron sow the land and die,
his executors shall have the crop, and not the Feme or Heir, because death
being the Act of God, it could not be foreseen or prevented: Howbeit, if the
Baron make feofment in fee, to the use of himself and his Feme for their lives
with remainders over, and the Baron sow the land and die, the Feme shall have
the crop, because she was Ioyn-tenant with her husband, and has it by Title
paramount the executor; So if the Baron sow the land and die, and the third
part is assigned to the Feme for Dower, she shall have the emblements
therewithal; because, she is in of her husbands estate paramount the Title of
the executor, and likewise shall be endowed de optima possessione of her
husband.

31 Things are to be construed, Secundam subiectam materiam.
Account by the Guardian.
1 It has been a question much controverted in the books of the Law, at what
age of the heir, Co. Inst. pars 1 89. a. 1. Stat. of Marlebridge 52 H. 3. 17.
a Guardian in Soccage was compellable to render an account, whether at 14, or
at 21. And the causes of that doubt have been both upon the words of the
Statute of Marlebridge cap. 17. and likewise upon the original writ of account
against such a Guardian: The words of the Statute are these, Cum ad legitimam
aetatem pervenerit, sibi respondeat, etc. 16 E. 3. Wast 100. etc,
And legitima aetas is 21 years: Also the writ of account reciting the said
Statute, says, Quare cum de communi concilio, etc. provisum sit, quod
custodes, etc. in Soccagio haeredibus, etc. cum ad plenam aetatem pervenerint
reddant rationabilem compotum, etc. 16 E. 2. account 120. 17 E. 2. ibid. 121.
2 E. 2. account. 14 E. 3. ibid. 3 Mar. 137. Kelway 131. Pl. 16 El. Rot. 436.
Littl. 123.
Whereupon it was gathered, that no action of account did lie against the
Guardian in Soccage at the Common Law, until the heir were of his lawful and
full age of 21 years: But legitima aetas (as the Statute has it) or plena
aetas (as the writ does render it) are to be understood secundam subjectam
materiam, viz. of the heir of Soccage land, whose lawful or full age, as to
the Custody or Wardship, is 14: and therefore upon consideration had of the
said Statute and of all the Books, it was adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas
P. 16. El. rot. 436. that the heir after the age of 14 years shall have an
Action of account against the Guardian in Soccage, when he will at his
pleasure, and with this agrees Littleton, Sect. 123.

Age, of Infant to make a will.
2 Because Littleton says Sect. 123 that the Guardian in Soccage shall render
an account of the marriage money to the heir or his executors, some have
inferred, Co. Inst. pars 1 89. b. 2.
that an infant of the age of 14 may make a will; but the meaning of Littleton
in that place is, that if after his marriage, he accomplish his age of 18
years, he may then make a will, and constitute executors for his goods and
chattells; for at that age he has power by the Law to make a Will, and the
words are to be understood Secundam subjectam materiam, and as they may stand
with Law and Reason. Vide supra 15. 21.

The Kings Councils.
3 The King of England is armed with diverse Councils, Co. Inst. pars 1 110. a. 2.
viz. Commune Concilium, which is the Court of Parliament; Another is called
Magnum Concilium, and this is sometimes applied to the House of Peers alone,
and sometimes out of Parliament to the Peers of the Realm, being Lords of
Parliament, who are called Magnum Concilium Regis: Thirdly, the King has a
Privy Council for matters of State: Fourthly, the King has another Council for
matters of Law, and they are his Judges of the Law: Now therefore, when it is
spoken generally of the Kings Council, it is to be understood secundum
subjectam materiam, as if matter of Law be concerned, then his Council at Law,
viz. his Judges are to be understood, if matter of State, his Privy Council,
etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1 302. b. 1.
4 If the Tenant for life, A feofment by two.
and he in the Remainder or Reversion in Fee join in a Feofment by Deed, the
Livery of the Freehold shall move from the Lessee, and the Inheritance from him
in the Reversion or Remainder, from each of them according to his estate.

Co. Inst. pars 1 303. b. 2.
5 Every man shall plead such pleas, Pleas proper
as are pertinent for him Secundum subjectam materiam, viz. according to the
quality of his case, Estate, or Interest, as Disseisors, Tenants, Incumbents,
Ordinaries, and the like.

Co. Inst. pars 1 200. b. 3.
6 One Tenant in Common may enfeoffe his Companion, Feofment Releases.
but not release; because the Freehold is several Ioyn-tenants may release, but
not enfeoffe, because the Freehold is joint: But Coparceners may both enfeoffe
and release, because their seisiin to some intents is joint, and to some
several.

Co. l. 3. 50. b. 4. Sir George Browns case.
7 The words of the Statute of 11 H. 7. cap. 20. Statute of 11 H. 7. 20.
interpreted, for discontinuances.
(which prohibits a Feme to alien the lands of her deceased husband) are these,
that she shall not discontinue, alien, release, or confirm them with Warranty,
where Warranty seems to be referred to any Discontinuance or Alienation, as
well as to release and confirmation; So that if a Feme Tenant in special tail
(after the decease of her husband) make a Lease for three lives (not warranted
by the Statute of the 32 H. 8. cap. 28.) without Warranty, he in the Reversion
or Remainder by force of the said Statute of 11 H. 7. shall not enter: but it
was adjudged in Sir Geo. Brownes case in the 3 Report, that in that case he
might enter, and that these words, with Warranty, shall be only referred to
Releases and Confirmations, which indeed do not make a discontinuance without
Warranty for the intent of the said Act of 11 H. 7. was not only to prohibit
every bar, but also every manner of discontinuance, which might put the
heir, to his real action; whereby he might perhaps be disinherited, or at
least greatly delayed; And therefore in regard Releases and Confirmations do
not make discontinuance without Warranty, these words, with Warranty, are to be
construed Secundum subjectam materiam, and shall be referred to them only, to
make them equivalent to such an estate, which passes by Livery, and which of
it self without Warranty makes a discontinuance.

Co. l. 4. 10. b. 4. Bevils case.
8 The Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 2. (which provides, 32 H. 8. 2. interpreted for
rents.
that none shall have any Avowry or Conusance for any rent suit, or service,
unless seisin were had within 40 years before the Avowry made) extends not to
any such Rent or Service, which by common possibility cannot happen or become
due within 60 years; as if the Seigniory consists upon Homage and Fealty
only; for the Tenant may live 60 years after he has done them: So also if
the Service be to cover the Hall of the Lord, or to go to War with him, when
the King makes War against his enemies, such casual Services, which by
common possibility cannot happen within 60 years, are not within that Act,
etc. Likewise writs of Escheat, Cessavit, or Rescous are not within those
branches of the same Statute, which limit the seisin of land, because in those
writs the seisin is not traversable, but the tenure, and in those writs of
Escheat and Cessavit, albeit they demand the land, yet need they not allege
any seisin in the same lands, etc. as the said Statute requires; because that
Act only extends to such a writ, where the Demandant or his Ancestors may have
seisin of the land in demand within the time of limitation prescribed by the
Act, and the Statute does not force them to any impossibility, etc.

Scandalum Magnatum.
9 The Lord Cromwell brings an Action de scandalo magnatum upon the Statute of 2
R. 2. cap. 5. against Vicar Delmy, Co The Lord Cromwels case.
for speaking these words unto him; You like of those that maintain sedition
against the Queens proceedings, unto which the Defendant pleades special
justification, that the Plaintiff procured two to prea h in his Church, which
enveighed in their Sermons against the Book of Common Prayer, and because the
Defendant did prohibit them, the Plaintiff said to the Defendant, Thou art a
false varlet, I like not of thee, to whom the Defendant said, It is no marvel
though you like not of me, for you like of those, (inuuendo the two, that
should have preached) that maintain sedition (innuendo seditiosam illam
doctrinam) against the Queens proceedings. And this was adjudged a good
justification; For, in case of slander for words, the sense of the words are to
be taken, and the sense of them does best appear by the cause and occasion of
speaking them, according to the Rule, Sensus verborum ex causa dicendi
accipiendus est, and sermones semper accipiendi sunt secundum subjectam
materiam: And therefore in this case the Council of the Defendant was said to
have done well in showing the special matter, whereby the sense of this word
(sedition) might appear upon the coherence of all the words, taken together,
viz. that the Defendant meant the seditious doctrine against the Queens
proceedings in the Act of 1 Eliz. by which the Book of Common Prayer was
established; and that he did not intend any such public or violent Sedition,
as was alleged by the Plaintiff, and as ex vi termini per se, the word it
self would import, etc. And it was said, Quae ad unum finem loquuta sunt, non
debent ad alium detorqueri, etc.

Common.
10 If Common be said to be appertaining to a Mease, Land, Co. l. 4. 37. a. 4.
and 38. a. 3. Tirringhams case.
Meadow, and Pasture, time out of mind, that shall be adjudged Common
Appurtenant, and not Common Appendant; for it is against the nature of Common
Appendant to be Appendant to Meadow or Pasture; And therefore in that case the
subject matter and the circumstance of the case ought to direct the Court to
give Judgment, whether the Common be Appendant or Appurtenant.

11 In Appeal of Murder against A. as principal, Co. l. 4. 43. b. 4. Bibithes
case.
and against B. as accessory before the fact, Accessory in manslaughter.
A. was found guilty of Manslaughter, but not of Murder; in this case B. was
acquit, because there cannot be an Accessory before the fact in Manslaughter,
which always happens upon a sudden debate or effray; for if it be
premeditate, it is Murder.

Joint warranties, or words.
11 Joint words of the parties shall by construction of Law be taken
respectively and severally according to the several interests of the Grantees;
as Warranty made to two of certain lands, Co. l. 5. 7. b. 4. 16 H. 6. 63, 64.
shall enure as several Warranties; in regard they are severally seized, the
one of part of the land, and the other of the residue in severalty; 6 E. 2.
Covenant. Br. 49.
So also a joint Covenant takes severally in respect of the several interests
of the Covenantees. Vide 16 Eliz. 337, 338. Dyer inter Sir Anthony Cook, and
Weston, in Justice Windhams case Co. l. 5. 7. b. 4. Co. ibid. Justice Windhams
case.
Sometimes also joint Words or Grants shall enure severally, in respect of the
incapacity or impossibility of the Grantees to take jointly, as a Lease made to
an Abbot and a secular man; or to two men or two women, and to the heirs of
their two bodies engendered; for in these and the like cases the inheritance is
several. Vide 19.

Co. l. 5. 103. a. Hungares case.
12 In Debt upon an Obligation brought by Hungate against Mese and Smith, A
joint obligation.
whereof the Condition was to perform an Arbitrament betwixt the Plaintiff on
the one part, and the Defendants on the other part, Ita quod Arbitrium
praedictum fiat and deliberetur utrique partium praedictarum, before such a
day, And the Defendants pleaded, that the Arbitrament was (indeed) made before
the day agreed upon, and was also delivered unto the Plaintiff, and unto Mese
one of the Defendants, but not unto Smith, whereupon the Plaintiff demurred,
and Judgment was given against the Plaintiff; for, in that case, it was
resolved, that sometimes the word uterque, is discretive, and has the quality
of severing, and sometimes collective, and has the property of joining
together, as if two or three be bound in an Obligation, and utrumque eorum this
word utrumque, makes the Obligation several; but in the abovesaid case it shall
be taken collective; And the Rule always to know, in which of these two senses
it shall be taken, is to consider the Subject matter, and to make construction
according to the congruity of Reason, Dyer 28. H. 8. 19. b.
and ut evitetur absurdum; as in the case of the 39 H. 6, 7. the Condition of
an Obligation was, si uterque eorum, viz. the Obliger and the Obligee Steterit
arbitrio Roberti Bozom, etc. And it was adjudged that each of them was bound
pro part sua, and not the one for the other; for that would be absurd and
against the congruity of Reason, And in the said case of Hungate, in as much as
both the parties were equally subject to the penalty and danger, reason
requires, that the Arbitrament should be delivered to both the parties, to the
end they may perform it, and avoid the danger of breaking it, etc. Vide supra
8, 9.

Co. l. 62. a. 2. Catesbyes case.
13 The time for the Bishop to collate by lapse is Tempus semestre, Tempus
Semestre.
half the year, according to the Calendar, and is not to be accounted
according to 28 days for each Month; for verba sunt accipienda secundum
subjectam materiam; and therefore because this computation of months concerns
those of the Church, it is great reason, that the computation shall be
according to the computation of the Church, wherewith they are best acquainted.
8. 4. Vide Dyer 327. 7.

Co. l. 7. 10. a. 3. Calvin's case.
14 In regard the King (albeit he be but one person, Allegiance due to the
natural capacity.
yet) has two several capacities in him the one natural, as he is a man, the
oath other politic, so called, because framed by the policy of man, if it be
demanded, to which of these capacities ligeance is due; The answer is, that it
is due to the natural person of the King, (which is ever accompanied with the
politic capacity, and the politic, as it were appropriated to the natural
capacity) and is not due to the politic capacity only, that is, to his
Crown or Kingdom distinct from his natural capacity; For every Subject is
presumed by Law to be sworn to the King, which is to his natural person, and
likewise the King is sworn to his subject (as it appears in Bracton l. 3. de
actionibus cap. 9. fol. 107.) which oath he takes in his natural person,
because the politic capacity is invisible and immortal, nay, that capacity
has no soul, being framed by the policy of man; And therefore in all
indictments of Treason, when any do intend or compass mortem and destructionem
Domini Regis (which must needs be understood of his natural body, his body
politic being immortal, and not subject to death, the indictment concludes,
contra ligeanciae suae debitum, by which it plainly appears, that ligeance is
due to the natural body of the King, that capacity being (indeed) the only
subject matter capable thereof.

Co. l. 8. 85. b. 3. Sir ^ichard Pexhul case.
15 If A. devises to B. ten bullocks and ten pounds issuing and payable out of
his lands and tenements quarterly at the most usual Feasts, etc. Here, these in
words payable quarterly, Ten Bullocks, and ten pound rent.
ought to be understood Secundam subjectam materiam, and to have reference to
the rent. for ten bullocks per annum cannot be delivered quarterly.

^ffices of ^^st personal.
16 The Office of Marshall of the Marshalshey cannot be granted for years; Co.
l. 9. 96. b. 4. Sir George Keynels case.
because it is an Office of great trust annexed to the person, and concerns
the administration of Justice, and the life of the Law, which is to keep such
as are in execution in salva and a^cta custodia, to the end they may the sooner
pay their debts; and this trust is indjvidu^l and personal, and shall not be
transferred to executors or administrators; for the Law will not confide in
persons unknown for the ordering of matters, which concern the administration
of Justice, etc.

Bond taken by the Sheriff.
17 In debt brought by Dyve against Maningham upon an obligation of 40 li. with
condition to save Dyve (bring then high Sheriff of the County of Bedford)
harmless, and to be ready at his command, Plowd. 65. b. 2. Dyve against
Maningham.
as his true prisoner, etc. the Defendant pleades the Statute of 23 H. 6. cap.
10. by which such bonds taken by the Sheriff color officii, are made void,
and farther says, that one Thomas Palley purchased a Liberari fac. out of a
recognisance to him made by the said Defendant, and procured it to be directed
to the said Sheriff of Bedford to be served and certified; and showed farther,
that the King had sent to the Sheriffs of London, Middlesex and Hertford,
other writs in form aforesaid, and that the same Sheriff returned the writ
into the Chancery, etc. In this case, one exception taken to the Defendants
plea was, for that there were di^ers Sheriffs named in it, and at last it is
said, that the same Sheriff returned the writ, etc. which was said to be
uncertain; but it was resolved to be certain enough, and that it shall be
referred to the Sheriff of Bedford; For, the return contained an extent of
land in the County of Bedford, and none could do that, but the Sheriff of
Bedford, and the whole sum of the execution was referred to ^im, and that
could not be so, unless the Sheriff of Bedfo^d had ^ade the return, etc.

Release of actions.
18 If a man be outlawed in an action personal by process upon the original,
and after brings his writ of Error; Here, if he, Co. Inst. pars 1 289. a. 2.
Littl. 503.
at whose suit he was out-^awed, will plead against him a release of all
actions personal, that seems to be (...) plea; for by the said action he shall
recover nothing in the personalty, but only to reverse the out-lawry; Howbeit,
in the same case, a release of the writ of Error is a good plea: And s^ note
that, an action real or personal does imply a recovery of some^hing in the
realty or personalty, or a restitution to the same; bu^ a writ implies neither
of them, etc.

^oint and several covenant
19 S. and his wif^ brings a Action of Covenant against B. upon Covenant made by
Indenture tri^artite, Co. l. 3. 18. b. 4. In Slingbies case.
in which B. Covenants with the Plaintifes, and with I. S. and his wife, and
assignatis suis, and cum quolibet and queli^et eor^m, that he was sole seized
of the land, etc. And in a writ of Error in the Exchequer Chamber it was
adjudged, that the Action would not lie; because the other Covenantees ought to
have joined with the other Plaintifes; and this diversity was agreed; when it
appears by the Count, that each of the Covenantees has or ought to have a
several interest or ^state, there the Covenant by these words (cum quolibet
eorum) is several; but when they have a joint interest, there the words ( cum
quolibet eorum are void, and signify nothing; As if a man let black acre to A.
white acre to B. and green acre to C. and Covenant with them, and quolibet
eorum, that he is right owner of them, etc. In this case in respect of the said
several int^rests, by the said words, and quolibet eorum, the Covenant is made
several: But if he demise th^se acres to them jointly, then those words cum
quolibet eorum, are void; for a man by his Covenant (unless in respect of
several interests) cannot first make the Covenant joint, and then make it
several by those or the like words, cum quolibet eorum; because albeit diverse
persons may bind themselves, and quemlibet eorum, and so the Obligation shall
be joint or several at the election of the Obligee, yet a man cannot bind
himself to three, and to every of them to make it joint or several at the
election of several persons for one and the same cause; for that the Court will
be in doubt, for which of them they should give Judgment, which the law will
not suffer, as it is held in 3 H. 6. 44. for there one brings a Repl^vin
against two of one ox, who made several avowries, each of them by himself in
his own right, and there by the advice of all the Justices both the Avowries
did abate for, his inconvenience, that if both the issues should be found for
the Av^wants, the Court could not give Judgment to them severally of one and
the same thing, etc. Vide 11.

Co. l 9 96. a. 3. ^n Sir Geo. Reynol^ case.
20 When two distinct matters of Record amount to an office, When a S^i^^ facias
and when not.
sometimes there ought to be a Scire facias, before ye King does seize; And
sometime not according to the several subject matter; As if it be found by
Office, that the Manor of D. is holden of the King, and it appears also by
fine upon Record, that the Manor of D. is aliened in Mortmaine; In this case
there ought to be a Scire facias, in which it may appear by averrement that it
is all one and the same Manor (for they may be two several Manors of one
name) and that he that aliened it was thereof seized; because both those
matters upon record without such averrement will not put the party to answer;
but when the identity of the thing appears to the Court, and that it cannot be
diverse; there the two matters shall then also amount to an office, and the King
may seize without a Scire facias; As in the case of Sir John Savage, who was
Sheriff of the County of Worcester for life by Letters Patents under the Great
Seal; for he being indicted of two voluntary escapes of Felons, it was holden
per Curiam in B. R. that those words amounted to an Office, and that the King
was seized without a Scire facias; And the reason was, because it appeared to
the Court, that there could be but one Sheriff in one County; and therefore
there was no need of any Scire facias in that case, etc.

Co. l. 7. 26. in Maun^ons case.
21 In a Quare impedit, Advowson ^tron.
when the Advowson is likely to come in question, the writ shall abate, unless
the Patron be therein named; but when the presentation only is to be recovered
and not the Advowson, neither yet the Patron to be put out of possession; In
that case the Writ is adjudged good without naming the Patron, etc. 7 H. 4 25.
27

Co. Inst. pars 1 52 a. 3.
22 If Lessee for life make a Deed of Feofment, Livery by the Lessor.
and a Letter of Attorney to the Lessor to make Livery, and the Lessor makes
Livery accordingly, notwithstanding all that, he shall enter for the
forfeiture, but if Lessee for years make a Feofment in Fee, and a letter of
Attorney to the Lessor to make Livery, and he makes Livery accordingly; this
Livery shall bind the Lessor, and shall not be avoided by him; for the Lessor
could not make Livery as Attorney to the Lessee; because he had no Freehold,
whereof to make Livery, but the Freehold was in the Lessor, etc.

23 If Tenant in tail make a Lease for years of lands, Fine by Tenant in
tail.
and after levy a fine. C^ ^^id. 332. b. 3.
this is a discontinuance, for a fine is a feofment of Record, and the Freehold
passes: but if Tenant in Tail makes a Lease for his own life, and after
levy a fine, this is no discontinuanc^, because the reversion expectant upon a
State of Freehold, which lies only in grant, passes thereby, etc.

24 Vide Max. 101. Pl. 7.

^orcible Entry ^^taint.
25 If a writ of forcible entry and detainer be brought against A. and five
more, and the Jury find all guilty of the forcible entry, Dyer. 141. 45. 3, 4,
P.M.
and only A. of the detainer; in this case, if the verdict be false, albeit
the original writ be entirely brought against all, yet the six shall have one
Attaint for the false verdict upon the forcible entry, and A. shall have
another single Attaint for the finding of the detainer.

Contract by a ^ervant.
26 A servant makes a bill, Dyer, 230. 56. 6. El.
testifying the buying of ware to the use of his Master, and this without
Seal, in which he binds himself to pay the debt; yet, In this case, debt
lies not against the servant, but only an Action upon the case; for it is the
debt of the Master, and the Assumpsit of the servant.

Copihold, Dower.
27 The Custom of a Manor is, that the Lord, the Surveyor, Dyer, 251. 89. 8
Eliz.
or his deputy may demise by copy, the Lord devises authority to two fo make
Customary estates for payment of his debts, and dies, they hold Court in their
own names, and grant copies in reversion according to the Custom, the Feme of
the Lord has one of the Copiholds assigned by the Sheriff upon recovery of
the third part of the Manor in Dower; And it was held, that she should avoid
the grant made by the two assigned, because she claims by Title of Dower,
which is paramount the devise.

32 According to the end.
Knight Service the defense of the Realm.
1 The Tenant in Knight Service, Co. Inst. pars 1 70. b. 2.
that is able to perform the Service himself, may nevertheless, if he
please, perform it by another, as well as he that is sick, or an Infant, or a
Corporation aggregate of many, etc, for Sapiens incipit a fine, and the end of
this Service is for defense of the Realm; And therefore if it be done by an
able and sufficient man, and the end, for which the Law ordained it, be
effected, it is duly performed, as it ought to be.

Tender to the heir female.
2 If the Lord tender a comoenable marriage to the heir female within the two
years, Co. Inst. pars 1 79. a. 1. 35 H. 6. tit. guard 71.
and she marry elsewhere within those two years, the Lord shall not have the
forfeiture of the marriage; because the only end, which the Statute of West. 1.
cap. 22. gives those two years, is for the Lord to make his tender ( Co. l.
6. 71. a. The Lord Darcies case) or rather, that he should not lose the
advantage of making his tender, And the benefit of those two years are given
unto him (as it were in lieu of the forfeiture, in case the heir female should
refuse his tender; for if he make tender within the two years, and she accept
the same, and marry, immediately after marriage she is out of ward.

Error sued against a villain.
3 If Villanage be pleaded by the Lord in an action real, mixed, Co. Inst. pars 1
127. b. 4. 18 E. 4. 6. and 7.
or personal, and it is found that he is no Villain, the bringing of a Writ of
Error is no enfranchisement; because the end of bringing that Writ against the
Villain, is not to commence any new suit against him, but only to defeat the
former Judgment.

4 If a Castle, that is used for the necessary defense of the Realm, Co. Inst.
pars 1 165. a. 4. Bract. l. 2. fol. 76. Fleta l. 5. c 9. Britton 186, 187. Co.
ibid. 31. b. 3
descend to two or more Coparceners, Castles for defense, and others.
this Castle might be divided by Chambers and Rooms as other houses be, but
yet for that it is pro bono publico and pro defensione regni it shall not be
divided; for as one says, Propter jus gladii dividi non potest, And another
says, Pur le droit del esche, que ne foeffre division, en aventure que la
force del Realm ne defaille par taut: But Castles ordained for another end,
viz. for habitation and private use, and not for the necessary defense of the
Realm, ought to be parted between Coparceners as well as other houses; and
wives may also be thereof endowed, but cannot be of Castles for defense, etc.

Co. ibid. 268. b. 2.
5 It is ordained by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap 19. That, Avowry upon distress
for rent.
if the Lord shall distraine upon the lands and tenements holden, etc. he may
then avow, etc. upon the same lands, etc. as in lands, etc. within his Fee or
Seigniory, etc. without naming any person certain, and without making Avowry
upon any person certain, etc. Here, albeit the purview of this Act be general,
yet all necessary incidents are to be supplied, and the Scope and end of the
Act to be taken; And therefore, though he need not to make his Avowry upon any
person certain; yet he must allege Seisin by the hands of some Tenant in
certain within forty years; for otherwise, rent, and other annual payments
are not recoverable, by the express limitation of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap.
2.

Co. Inst. pars 1 288. b. 1. Littl. 503.
6 If a man be outlawed in a personal Action by Process upon the Original, and
bring a Writ of Error, if he, Release of a^ actions no plea in erro^.
at whose suit he was outlawed, will plead against him a Release of all manner
of Actions personal, that seems to be no plea; for by that Action he shall
recover nothing in personaltie; But the end of the Writ of Error is only to
reverse the out-lawry.

Co ibid. 368. a. 3. Plowd. Com. 91. The Parson of Honylanes case Co. ibid.
369. a. 4.
7 If the Tenant in an Assise of an house desire the Plaintiff to dine with him,
which the Plaintiff does accordingly, License no seisin.
and so they be both in the house together, (and in truth) one pretends one
Title, and the other another Title; yet the Law, in this case, shall not
adjudge the possession in him, that right has; because the Plaintiff came not
thither to claim his right, but only to dine there at the instance of the
Tenant; And it would be to his prejudice if the Law should adjudge him in
possession, and (doubtless) a Trespasser he cannot be; for that he came
thither upon the Tenants invitation.

Co. ibid. 369. a. 4.
8 A Lease for years to another to the intent to try the Title in an Ejectione
firma, is out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 9. An ejectione firma no bought
title.
which prohibits the buying and selling of pretenced Rights or Titles; because
it is directed to a lawful end, and is in a kind of Course of Law; but if it be
made to a great man, or any other, with purpose to sway or countenance the
cause, that is to be taken within the same Statute, being chiefly intended for
the suppression of such abuses in the Commonwealth.

Co. Inst. pars 1 381. b. 3.
9 Such construction must be made of a Statute, that the end, Stat. of Gloc. 6
E. 1. 3.
for which it was ordained may be always pursued, in suppression of the
mischief and advancement of the remedy, as by this case it appears; A Fine
levied by the husband only is within the letter of the Statute of Gloucester 6
E. 1. cap. 3. but the mischief was, that the heir was barred of the
inheritance of his mother, by the warranty of his father without Assets, And
this Act intended to apply a remedy, viz, that it should not bar, unless
there were Assets; and therefore the mischief is to be suppressed, and the
remedy advanced.

31 E. 3. Joynder in aid, 10. Finch 13.
10 The Vouchee comes into the Court to be viewed, View of vouchee.
and being viewed, is awarded of full age; yet he shall not be driven to
answer, till he come in to the same intent by other process.

19 E. 4. 3. Finch, 13.
11 The Vouchee upon a Grand cape ad valentiam, Appearance of vouchee.
shall not loose the lands, though he cannot save his default; because the
process is only to this end, viz. that he should appear. Finch 13.

50 Ass. Pl. 2. Finch, ibid.
12 A man that is warned by Writ to answer to a matter, Not forced to answer to
two several things.
shall not be driven to answer any other matter than is contained in that writ
though the King be party; As if by Office it be found, that lands in Chief
descended to I. S. a fool natural, and that A. occupies them; whereupon a
Scire facias goes out against A. to answer, why the lands should not be seized
into the Kings hands for the Idiocy of I. S. upon which A. comes in and
pleads, that I. S. when he was of perfect memory, made a release to one B. who
enfeoffed A. This is good enough without showing any license of Alienation to
discharge himself for the purchasing of those lands.

Fine with Proclamations.
13 Tenant in tail general having issue a daughter, Co. l. 3. 50. b. 3. ^u
slowes case
levies a fine in Trinity Term, and dies in August following, the issue
immediately brings a Formedon, and hanging the Writ, the Proclamations are
made; yet in this case the issue is barred; for the end of making the
Proclamations is not to bar the entaile, because that is barred before by the
fine; but the only end of making the Proclamations (by the Statute of 32 H.
8.) is to distinguish the fine, that shall bar the estate tail, from a Fine
at the Common Law; for the Fine that shall bar such an estate shall be levied
according to the Statute of 11 H. 7. viz. with proclamations, etc.

Statute 32. H. 8. 17.
14 The Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 37. says, Co. l. 4. 51. b. 4 Andrew Ognels
case.
that the husband shall have an action of debt for the arrearages due in the
life time of his wife out of any estate, which he held in her right: And this
is to be understood as well of arrearages due before as after, marriage: for in
that Statute the end of naming the Feme (wife) is only to declare and describe
the condition of the Feme, and not to imply, that the arrearages ought to incur
after the coverture.

Where a Writ is to be returned, and where not.
15 There is an apparent diversity between a Capias in process, Co. l. 5. 90.
a. 3. Hoes case. Tres. 33 El. Mounts case.
and a Capias ad satisfaciendum; for if the Capias in process be not returned,
the arrest is torcious; because there the end of the arrest is, that the party
may appear and answer the Plaintiff: But in all Writs of execution, when the
Sheriff alone does execute them (as a Capias ad satisfaciendum, habere facias
sesinam or possessionem, fieri facias, liberat, etc.) if the execution be duly
served, it is good, although the Writ be not returned; for there the Plaintiff
has the end, and effect of his suit, and then nothing else is to be done on
his part afterward: But in case of an Elegit, because the extent is to be made
by inquest, and not by the Sheriff alone, that ought to be returned, otherwise
it is nothing worth.

Collation no disseisin.
16 If a Bishop collate without Title to a Church presentable, Co. l. 6. 50. a.
1. Boswels case.
and his Clerk is inducted, yet this shall not put the right Patron out of
possession; for that is nothing else but a provision, to the end divine Service
may be celebrated, until the Patron present, and it is no more than belongs to
his Office to do.

Dignity entailed forfeited.
17 If the Dignity of an Earldom had been intailed to the heirs male, Co. l.
7. 34. a. 4. Nevils case.
it might have been forfeited for Treason before the Statute 26 H. 8. cap. 13.
by reason of a secret Condition in Law annexed unto it; for Earls are created
for two purposes, viz. Ad consulendum Regi tempore pacis, and ad defendendum
Regem and patriam tempore belli; and therefore they wear a Cap of honor and a
Robe, as they are Councelors; and are girded with a sword, to represent them
gallant Champions and Cavaliers; Now then when such a person against his duty
and the end of his dignity, commits Treason against the King, his dignity
(though entailed) is forfeited by that Condition implicitly annexed to his
estate. Vide 42. 7.

The end to be pursued.
18 The Scope and end of every matter is principally to be considered, and if
the Scope and end of the matter be satisfied, Pl. co. 18. a. 1. Fogassues case.
then is the matter it self, and the intent thereof also accomplished: And
therefore in Fogassues case in the Commentaries, because the King had means of
being entitled to the Custom of the Woad, viz. by causing it to be weighed,
and the end and Scope of the Statute being in that case performed, he was not
to incur the penalty of forfeiting the Woad.

19 To let a prisoner in execution go at large upon bond, etc. is expressly
against the Statute of 23 H. 6. Plowd. com. 67 a. 4. Dive against Maningham.
cap. 10. Sheriffs bond void.
because the end and intent of making that Statute was to prevent all such
bonds, etc. made for that purpose: that abuse having been much practiced by
Sheriffs before the making of that Statute.

Dyer 48. 19. 32 H. 8.
20 If the Plaintiff importune a Iuror to appear and pass upon the verdict
according to his conscience, Juror.
albeit he was not summoned by the Sheriff or his ministers to appear, yet
this is not any unlawful practice or cause of challenge of the Iuror, because
the end why he was impanelled, was to discharge a good conscience upon the
verdict.

Co. l. 5. 87. a. 3. In Blumfields case.
21 In debt when the Plaintiff has had execution of the Defendants lands, and
after the lands are evicted, Execution.
in such case before the Statute of 32 H. 8. 5. the Plaintiff could not have
had a new execution, for the execution of lands was valuable, and accounted in
Law for a satisfaction, and to avoid infiniteness, there could be but one
valuable satisfaction or execution with satisfaction at the Common Law; but
execution of the body is not a valuable execution, and therefore the Plaintiff
after the Defendants death may have new execution, until he be fully
satisfied, for that is the end and fruit of his suit, Et finis rei attendendus
est, and fines mandatorum Domini Regis per rescripta sua (viz. brevia)
diligenter sunt observandi.

22 Hob. 8 case of Essoines.

33 Qui adimit medium di rimit finem.
Littl. 237.
1 Rescous, Replevin, Dissesin of re^^
and Enclosure are three sorts of Rent Service; because (as Littleton says)
the Lord is by them disturbed of the means to come by his rent.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 161. a. 4.
2 The turning of the whole stream that runs to a Mill is a disseisin of the
Mill it self (9 Ass. 19. Mirr. cap. 2. Sect. 15. Britt. 108. 114. Turning a
watercourse.
118. 141.)

Co. ibid.
3 If a man be disturbed to enter and manure his land, Disturbance.
this is a Disseisin of the land it self; for, Qui obstruit additum, destruit
commodum (26 Ass. 17. 3 E. 4. 2. per Littl. 49 E. 3. 14. b.) And therefore
where it is said, that a man shall not be punished for suing of Writs in the
Kings Court, be it of right or wrong, it is regularly true; Replevin.
but it fails in the special case of the Writ of Replevin for the cause
aforesaid, Fitz. N. B. 42. S. 22 E. 3. 15. 43. Ass. 40. 43 E. 3. 20. Faux
judgment 10. 8 E. 4. 15. per Moile 2 R. 3. 19.

Littl. 240. Co. ibid. 162. a. 3. Bract. l. 2. 16. Brit. 19. 88. Fleta l. 3. 5.
7.
If the Lord of a rent Service, Terrified from distraining.
or the Grantee of a rent charge or Seck, be going upon the way to distraine
for the rent, and the Tenant hearing it, forestalls his way, and threatens him
in such sort, that he dare not proceed for fear of the loss of life or
member; this is also a Disseisin of the rent, causa qua supra: But this must
not be vagus and vanus timor, sed talis, qui cadere possit in virum constantem,
and not in hominem vanum and meticulosum; talis enim debet esse metus, qui in
se continet mortis periculum, and corporis cruciatum.

Co. ibid. 172. b. 1. 13 E. 3. Leg. 50.
5 An Infant cannot make his Law of non summons (for, Infant shall, ^^wage.
according to the Maxim in Law, Minor jurare non potest) And therefore in that
case the default shall not grieve him, for seeing the mean to excuse the
default is taken away by Law, the default it self shall not prejudice him.

Co. ibid. 233. b. 3. 15 E. 4 3. 5 E. 4. 26.
6 If the Keeper of a Park fell or cut any Trees, Woods, The Keeper (...) a
Park making wast.
or Underwoods, and convert them to his own use, this is a forfeiture of his
office; for destruction of the vert is, by a mean, destruction of venison: So
it is also if he pull down any house, wherein the hey, wherewith the Deer are
fed, is usually put; for that also tends to the destruction of the Deer. 28
H. 8. Beudloes enter evesque de Londres and Hieron, Co. l. 9. 50. 95, 96. 99.

Escape.
7 If a Jailer, that has a prisoner in his custody upon execution, Co. ibid.
260. a. 3. Boytons case.
suffers him to go at large, though it be with a Keeper, he is liable to an
escape; for he ought to keep him in salva and arcta custodia, to the end he may
the sooner pay his debt. Co. l. 3. 43. b. 4.

Entry Release of all actions.
8 Where a man may enter, Co. Inst. pars 1. 286. a. 3. Co. l. 8. 152. a 1. Sir
Edward Althams case.
a release of all Actions does not bar him of his right, because he has
another remedy, viz. to enter: But where his entry is not lawful, there a
release of all actions is, by consequence, a bar of his right, because he
has released the mean, whereby he might recover his right; As if the
Disseisee release all Actions to the heir of the Disseisor, which is in by
descent, he has no remedy to recover the land; because he had no other means
to recover it, but by Action, and of that he is barred by his Release.

An Alien h^ndred of Trade.
9 To hinder an Alien from getting into his hands by Gift, Trade, Co. l. 7.
Calv. case 17. a.
or other lawful means any treasure, or other personal goods whatsoever, as
also an house for his necessary habitation, and conveniencie of trading, and
from maintaining any Action for the same, were in effect to deny unto him
Trade and Traffic, which is the life and support as of every Island, so more
especially of this Kingdom.

Release of all demands.
10 The reason, Co. l. 8. 154. a. 3. Sir Edward Althams case.
why a Release of all Demands does bar a man of all his Right, Title, and
Interest in any Lands, Tenements, G^ods, Chattels, etc. is because by such a
Release the means and remedies of recovering them are utterly extinct, and so
by consequence, the right and Interest in the things themselves.

Nusances.
11 If a man by erecting a Building or a Wood-pile does stop up or hinder the
light of his neighbors house, Co. l. 9. 58. a. 2. Aldreds case.
or if by building an Hogs cote near his neighbors dwelling house he much
annoyes the same, or makes the air infectious or unholsome, an Action upon the
case will lie in either of these cases; for hereby he hinders and interrupts
the peaceable dwelling of his neighbor, which is the principal end, for which
the house was at first erected.

A Legacy of a Lease.
12 A. possessed of a Lease for 500 years devises it to B. for life the
remainder to C. and his heirs and dies; Co. l. 10. 51. b. 3. Lampets case.
here albeit the whole term be in B. and C. has nothing but a possibility or
a future Interest, and therefore cannot grant it over; yet in as much as the
Legacy or Devise to C. is in esse and present, and therefore may be
discharged, the Interest also, which springs from the Legacy, may likewise be
discharged; for, Qui distruit medium, distruit finem, And therefore if o^e
devise to another 20 l. when he comes to the age of 24 years, and die, the
Legatorie after the age of 21 years may release this Legacy and devise, and
although he afterward attain to the age of 24 years, he shall be barred to
recover it; and yet in this case a Release of all suits and demands shall not
bar him.

An award.
13 A. is bound to B. to stand to the award of C. A. before the day of giving up
the award discharges C. to make any award; Co. l. 8. 82. Vivyors case.
In this case, the Bond is forfeit; For how can A. stand to the award, when by
revoking the Authority, which he had given to C. he hinders C. to make the
award, etc.

Joyn-tenants.
14 If there be two Joyn-tenants in fee, Co. l. b. 79. a. The Lord of
Aburgavenies case.
and one grants a rent charge in fee, and after releaseth to his Companion; In
this case, albeit he, to whom the Release was made, survive the other; yet
shall he not avoid the charge; because he which survives, by the acceptance of
the Release has deprived himself of the way and means of avoiding the said
charge; for, jus accrescendi, the right of survivour-ship was the only means
to have avoided it, and the right of survivour-ship is utterly taken away by
the release.

15 Dyer 170 b. 1. 1 and 2 El.
15 H. 8. Demise of a Forest.
in the 33 year of his Reign demiseth to Sir Richard Cromwell the Forests of
Waybridge and Sapley in Com. Hunt. with the appurtenances for 80 years at the
yearly rent of twenty nobles, with this clause, viz. that Sir Richard Cromwell
his Executors and Assigns should during the term maintain 100 Dear there,
and them or the like, should leave there at the end of the term; Now the Lord
North who had the Fee simple of the said Forests, attempted to take the Deer,
and give warrants there, but most of the Judges and Se^jeants of both houses
were of opinion he could not do it; for all the Game was included in the word
and name of the Forest, and the hundred Deer were not reserved to be killed,
or any of them; beca^se then the Lord North would have debarred the Lessee of
the means of preserving the Game, and (by consequent) of performing his
Covenant, the end of preser^ing them being only for the maintenance of the
Game and Forests.

Dye^ 240. 45. 7 El.
16 To build a new house upon the Wast or several grounds within a Forest is a
Parpresture and Nuisance to the Game, Forest. Nusance^
and finable at the discretion of the Justices of the Forest to suffer it to
stand, or otherwise they may demolish it at their pleasure; because it is a
prejudice to the food of the Deer, for the preservation whereof the Forest was
ordained.

34 According to the effect.
1 H. 6. 4. Finch 59.
1 A Deed delivered by an Infant, Delivery of a deed.
cannot be delivered again at his full age; for it took some effect before,
and was but voidable; But a Deed delivered by a Feme Covert, or a Release
delivered to one that has nothing in the land, may be deli^ered again, viz.
when she comes to be sole, or the party to have somewhat in the land: For the
first delivery was merely void, and took no effect at all.

Co. Inst. pars 1 46. b. 4. Co. l. 5. 1. Cla^^ns case.
2 If a lease be made by Indenture bearing date 26 Maii, When a lease shall
commence.
etc. to hold for 21 years from the date, or from the day of the date, it shall
begin on the 27 day of May: but if the Lease bear date the 26 day of May, etc.
to hold from the making hereof, or from henceforth, it shall begin on the day
in which it was delivered; for the words of the Indenture are not of any effect
till the delivery, and thereby, from the making, or from henceforth, take their
first effect: So also if the habendum before the term of 21 years without
mentioning when it shall begin, it shall be^in from the delivery; for there the
words take effect: but if it ^e a die confectionis, then it shall begin on the
next d^y after the delivery. Vide Max. 8. 2.

Co. Inst pars 1 48 a. 4. and Ibid. 56. b. 4. Thorough goods case.
^ If a man deliver a Deed of Feofment upon the land in name of ^eisin of all
the lands contained in the Deed, this is a good Li^ery; Livery of seisin.
but if a man only deliver the Deed of feofment upon the land without
mentioni^g that it is in name of Livery, etc. this amounts to no Livery of the
land for it has another operation to take effect as a Deed. Co. l. 6. ^6.
Sha^ps cas^. and l. 9. 137.

Co. ibid. 48. b. 3
4 If a m^n be disseised, and make a Deed of feofment, Livery of sei^^^ by
Attorney.
and a Letter of Attorney to enter and take possession; and after to make
Livery secund^m fo mam cartae, Co. l. 3. 35. Jennings and Braggs case.
this is a good feofment, albeit he was out of possession at the time of the
Charter made; for the Authority given by the Letter of Attorney is executory,
and nothing passed by the delivery of the Deed, till Livery of Seisin was made:
And in ancient Letters of Attorney power is given to others to take possession
for the Feoffor: But if a man be disseised, and make a writing of a Lease for
years, and deliver the Deed, and after deliver it upon the ground, A void
Lease.
the second delivery is void; for the first delivery made it a Deed; and in as
much as the Lease for years must take effect by the delivery of the Deed,
therefore the Deed delivered when he was out of possession was void: but so it
is not of a Charter of Feofment; for that takes effect by the Livery and
Seisin; And in the other case if the Lessor had delivered it as a Scrowle to be
delivered as his Deed upon the ground, this had been good.

5 A man has issue a Son and dies, and the wife dies also; Co. Inst. pars
1 13. a. 2.
Then lands are letten for life, Vesting, etc. as a purchaser.
the remainder to the heirs of the wife, the Son dies without issue; In
this case the heirs of the part of the Father shall inherit, and not the
heirs of the part of the Mother; because it took effect and vested in the
Son as a purchaser.

6 If there be Lord, Feme mesne, and Tenant, Co. ibid. 38 E. 3. 12.
and the mesne bind her self and her heirs by her Deed to the acquittal of
the Tenant, Acquital of Services.
the mesne takes husband, the Tenant by his Deed grants to the husband and
his heirs, that he and his heirs shall not be bound to acquital, the husband
and wife have issue and die, this issue being bound as heir to his mother,
shall not take benefit of the said grant of discharge, for that extends to the
heirs of the part of the father, and not to the heirs of the part of the
mother, and therefore the heir of the mothers part was bound to the acquital.

7 If the husband alien his land, Co. ibid. 33. a. 4.
and then the wife is attainted of Felony, Where the Feme shall have dower and
where not.
now is she disabled, but if she be pardoned before the death of the husband,
she shall be endowed; So if the Son endow his wife at the age of 7 years ex
assensu patris, if she before the death of her husband attain to the age of 9
years, the Dower is good; for in these two cases the right of Dower took
effect in the life time of the husband hy reason of the capacity, which the
wives had to take it: But otherwise it is of an original absolute disability;
as if a man take an Alien to wife, and after the husband alien the land, and
after she is made Denizen, the husband dies, she shall not be endowe^; because
her capacity and possibility to be endowed came by the Denization; otherwise it
were if she were naturalized by Act of Parliament; for that makes her as
absolutely capable, as if she were a subject borne.

8 If the Father convey his lands holden by Knight Service either of the King
or of any mean Lord, Wardship.
to his middle Son in tail, Co. ibid. 78. a. 3. 14 El. Die. 308. 3 Mar. Die.
130.
the remainder to the youngest Son in Fee, and dies, the eldest being within
age, and the King or Lord seize the body together with part of the land
according to the Statute of 32 and 34 of H. 8. in this case if the middle
brother die without issue, the King or the Lord shall not have any benefit of
the Statute against him in remainder; for the Statute was once satisfied, and
the Statute extends not to him in remainder. Co. l. 2. 93. 94. Binghams case,
and Northcots case. Co. l. 10. 80. b. Loveyes case.

^enures in ^occage.
9 When Littleton says, Co. ibid. 86. a. 3. and 108. b. 2. Littl. 118.
that every Tenure which is not Knight Service is Tenure in Soccage, he there
speaks of Soccage as it is largely taken, and so called ab effectu, that is,
all Tenures, which has the like effects and incidents belonging to them, as
Soccage has, are termed Tenures in Soccage, albeit originally service of the
Plough was not reserved; as if originally a Rose, a pair of gilt Spurs, a
Rent, or the like were reserved, or that the Tenant should hold the lands to be
Ultorem sceleratorum condemnatorum, ut alio suspendio, Ockam 31. a. 6.
alios membrorum detruncatione, vel aliis modis juxta quantitatem perpetrati
sceleris puniat, that is, to be a Hangman or Executioner. It seems in ancient
times such Offices were not Volunteers, nor to be hired for lucre, but were to
be bound thereunto by Tenure.

Co. ibid. 90. a. 3.
10 A Tenant holds land of a Bishop by Knight Service, Chattel vested.
which Seigniory the Bishop has in the right of his Bishopric, the Tenant
dies, his heir within age, the Bishop either before or after seizure dies;
neither the King, nor the Successor of the Bishop shall have the Wardship, but
his Executors, for albeit the Bishop has the Seigniory en auter droit, yet the
Wardship being but a Chattel; he has it in his own right, and a Chattel cannot
go in the succession of a Sole Corporation, unless it be in the case of the
King.

Littl. 350. Co. Inst. pars 1 216. b. 1. and 217. a. 4.
11 If land be granted to a man for term of five years upon Condition, An
estate upon condition to have f^^.
that if he pay to the Grantor within the two first years 40 marks, that then
he shall have fee, or otherwise but for the term of five years, and Livery of
Seisin is made unto him by force of the Grant; in this case the Grantee has
Fee simple conditional, etc. and if he do not pay to the Grantor the 40 marks
within the first two years, then immediately after those two years past, the
Fee and Frank-tenant is and shall be adjudged in the Grantor, etc. And the
reason of this case is grounded upon the effect that the Livery took at first:
for by the rule of Law a Livery of Seisin must pass a present Freehold to some
person, and cannot give a Freehold in futuro, as it must do in this case, if
after Livery of Seisin made, the Freehold and Inheritance should not pass
presently, but expect until the Condition be performed; And therefore if a
Lease for years be made, to begin at Michaelmas, the remainder over to another
in fee, if the Lessor make Livery of Seisin before Michaelmas, the Livery is
void, because if it should work at all, it must take effect presently, and
cannot expect: Co. ibid. 217. b. 1.
And there is a diversity (in the case above put) between a Lease for life, and
a Lease for years; for in case a Lease for life with such a Condition to have
Fee, the Fee simple passes not before the performance of the Condition, for
that the Livery may presently work upon the Freehold; but otherwise it is in
the case of a Lease for years: There is also a diversity between Inheritances,
that lie in grant; and Inheritances that lie in Livery; for if a man grant an
Advowson for years upon Condition, that if the Grantee pay xx s. etc. within
the term, that then he shall have Fee, the Grantee shall not have Fee until
the Condition be performed, and sic de similibus: But otherwise it is, where
Livery of Seisin is requisite; and therefore if the King make such a Lease for
years upon such a Condition, the Fee simple shall not pass presently; because
in that case no Livery is made. Vide 55. 109. and 35. 8.

Littl. 359. Co. ibid. 222. b. 3. and 227. b. 4.
12 If a man make a Deed of Feofment to another without Condition, and when he
gives Livery, Livery upon condition.
he clogs the estate with a Condition, in this case the estate takes effect by
the Livery, and not by the Deed of Feofment, and therefore shall be subject to
the Condition.

Co. ibid. 228. a. 1.
13 If a Deed be made and dated in a foreign Kingdom, of lands within
England, yet if Livery and Seisin be made, Livery upon foreign deed.
Secundum formam cartae, the land shall pass; for the land passes, and the
grant takes effect by the Livery, and not by the Deed.

Co. ibid. 271. b. 3.
14 There is a diversity between a Feofment of land (at this day) upon
confidence, or to the intent to perform his last Will; A feofment the use of a
Will.
and a Feofment to the use of such person and persons, and of such estate and
estates, as he shall appoint by his last Will: for, in the first case, the land
passes by the Will, and not by the Feofment, because after the Feofment the
Feoffor was seized in Fee simple as he was before: Co. l. 6. fo. 17. and 18.
Sir Edward Cleres case.
But, in the latter case, the Will pursuing, his power is but a direction of
the uses of the Feofment, and the estates pass by execution of the uses, which
were raised upon the Feofment: Howbeit in both those cases, the Feoffees are
seized to the use of the Feoffor and his heirs in the mean time.

^^mainder ^od though ^e particular ^^ate tail.
15 If the Lessor disseise A. Lessee for life, Co. Inst. pars 1. 298. a. 2.
and make a Lease to B. for the life of A. the remainder to C. in fee; here,
albeit A. re-enter, and defeat the estate for life, yet the remainder to C.
being once vested by good Title shall not be avoided: So it is if a Lease be
made to an Infant for life, the remainder in Fee, the Infant at his full age
disagrees to the estate for life, yet is the remainder good; because it was
once vested by good Title. And therefore although it be regularly true, that
when the particular estate is defeated, the remainder depending thereupon shall
be also defeated; yet that rule fails in these and the like cases: But in both
these cases there was a particular estate, at the time of the remainder created.

An estate s^tled by Attorn^ent.
16 If the Lord grants the services of his Tenant to a man, Littl. 552. Co.
ibid. 310. a. 3.
and after by a Deed bearing a later date, he grants the same Services to
another, and the Tenant attornes to the second Grantee; here, the last Grantee
shall have the Services; and albeit afterward the Tenant will attorne to the
first Grantee, it is clearly void, etc.

Devise by Tenant in tail not good.
17 If a man seized of lands in tail, Littl. 624. Co. ibid. 334. b. 3.
devises them to another in fee, and die, and the other enter, etc. this is no
discontinuance, because no discontinuance can be made by Tenant in Tail, but
such as is made and takes effect in his life time.

Severance of Jointure.
18 If two Ioyn-tenants within age make a Feofment in Fee, Littl. 634. Co. ibid.
337. a. 3. Co. l. 8. 43. a. 3.
and one of them dies, and the other survives, in as much as both the Infants
might have jointly entered in their lives, that right shall wholly accrue to him
that survives, and he shall enter into the whole, etc. but in this case if one
of the Ioyn-tenants had made a Feofment in Fee, and died, the right would not
have survived; because the severance of the Ioynture took effect in both their
lives time. Whittinghams case.

Warranty makes a discontinuance.
19 In many cases a Warranty added to a conveyance is said to make a
discontinuance ab effectu, Co. ibid. 339. a. 3. 9 E. 4. 19. 12. E. 4. 11. 21 E.
4. 97.
although he that made the conveyance was never seized by force of the estate
tail; because it takes away the entry of him that right has, as a
discontinuance does: As if Tenant in tail be disseised and dies, and the
issue in tail release to the Disseisor with Warranty; In this case the issue
was never seized by force of the tail, and yet this has the effect of a
discontinuance by reason of the Warranty.

Warranty of an infant void.
20 If a man of full age and an Infant make a Feofment in Fee with Warranty,
this Warranty is not void in part, Co. ibid. 367. b. 4.
and good in part, but it is good for the whole against the man of full age,
and void against the Infant: for, albeit the Feofment of an Infant passing by
Livery of Seisin be voidable, yet his Warranty, which takes effect only by
Deed, is merely void.

Judge Richels case.
21 Justice Richel in the time of R. 2. Littl.. 720, 722. Co. ibid. 378. 28, 29
H. 8. 33 a. Dyer. Co. l. 1. 85. b. 4. Corbets case.
gave his lands to his eldest Son, upon Condition that if he should alien
them in Fee, etc. that then his estate should cease and be void, and that they
should remain to the second Son and the heirs males of his body, etc. this
was a void limitation; because if the eldest Son should alien the lands in
Fee, etc. then is the Frank-tenement and the Fee simple in the Alienee, and
must needs settle and take effect in him and none other; and then how can it
remain to the second Son, etc. or how can the second Son enter upon the
Alienee, when he had no right before the Alienation, neither since the
Alienation could he possibly have any?

A fine cannot operate doubly.
22 If a man make a Lease for life upon Condition, Co. ibid. 378. b. 3.
that if the Lessor grant over the reversion, that then the Lessee shall have
Fee; here, if the Lessor grant the reversion by Fine, the Lessee shall not have
Fee; for when the Fine transferreth the Fee to the Conusee, that estate is so
settled, and takes such effect in him, that the same Fine cannot work an estate
in the Lessee also; for one Alienation cannot vest an estate of one and the
same land to two several persons at one and the same time.

Co. l. 2. 23. b. 4. Balwins case.
23 When things, that lie in grant, Premises and Habendum d^versity.
and take their essence and effect by the delivery of the Deed without other
Ceremony, are granted to one and his heirs, Habendum for years or life; there
the Habendum is repugnant and void; as if a man grant rent, Common, etc. out of
his land by the premises of the Deed to one and his heirs, Habendum for
years or life, the Habendum is repugnant; for Fee did pass by the premises
by the delivery of the Deed, and therefore the Habendum for years or for life
is void: Again, if one by Deed grant a rent in esse, or a Seigniory in the
premises to one and his heirs, Habendum to the Grantee for years or for
life: Here, albeit another Ceremony is requisite ( viz. Attornement) besides
the delivery of the Deed, yet in as much as they are things that lie in grant
and all the estates viz. in Fee, for years, or life, ought to have one and the
same Ceremony to pass them, viz. Attornement; for that cause the Habendum is
in that case also adjudged void. 3. when land is given by Deed in Fee by the
premises, Habendum to the Lessee for life, there also the Habendum is void;
because the same Ceremony is requisite to both the estates, and it shall be
taken most forcibly against the Feoffor. 4. When to the estate limited by the
premises a Ceremony is requisite to the perfection of the estate, and to the
estate limited by the Habendum nothing is requisite to the perfection and
essence of it, but only the delivery of the Deed; In that case, although the
Habendum be of a less estate then is mentioned in the premises, yet the
Habendum shall stand; as if land be given to a man and his heirs Habendum for
years; here to the Fee simple limited in the premises it is requisite to have
Livery and Seisin, and until Livery be had nothing passes but an estate at
will (if the Deed should go no further) but by the Habendum for years, the
estate takes effect immediately upon the delivery of the Deed, although Livery
of Seisin be never given.

Co. l. 4. 61. Porfe and Hemblings case 2 R. 2. Attornment, etc.
24 A Feme Sole makes a Lease for life rendering rent, Feme Sole Attornement.
and after by her Deed grants the Reversion to another, and after and before
Attornement marries with the Grantee; here, this marriage was not a counter-mand
of the Attornement, no more than if she had married with any other stranger;
because, in that case, when the Feme by her Deed sealed and delivered had
granted the reversion to another, that grant took such effect against her
self, yt she could not by any words, which she could use, counter-mand it
before or after the taking of the Baron.

Co. l. 4. 70. b. 4. ^indes case.
25 If a man bargain and sell lands to another by Deed indented, Fine and
Bargain and Sale.
and also levy a Fine of the same lands unto the Bargainee, and after the Deed
is enrolled according to the Statute; In this case, the Grantee shall be in by
the Fine, and not by the Deed enrolled; for when the Fee simple past by the
Fine to the Conusee and his heirs, the inrollement of the Deed indented
afterward cannot divest and turn the estate out of him, which was absolutely
established in him by the Fine; for then whereas he was in before in the per,
he shall be now in the post, which cannot be; And when the Common Law and
Statute Law concur, the Common Law shall be preferred.

Co. l. 4. 89. b. 4. Druries case. Co. ibid. 11^. a. Actons case.
26 When a Countess retains two Chaplains, A Countess but two Chaplains.
those two are each of them capable of a Dispensation by force of the Statute
of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. but when she has so retained two, the Statute is
executed; for she cannot have more than those, capable of a Dispensation and
the retainer of a third, in the life time of the two first, cannot divest the
capacity of Dispensation, which was at first vested in them by their retainer,
to make the third capable of a Dispensation within the Statute; albeit he
should survive both the first; because the retainer had an evil commencement to
take benefit of the Statute, for although a Countess may have as many
Chaplains as she pleases at the Common Law, yet she can not have more than two
capable of a Dispensation, by force of the Statute.

Presentee first and second in E 6 and Qu. Eliz. and Qu. Mary's time.
27 If two have Title to present by turn, Co l. 5. 10^. Winsors case.
and the one presents his Clerk, who is Admitted, Instituted, etc. and after
is deprived for crime, or heresy, etc. yet he shall not present again, but
this shall serve for his turn; So if he present mere laicus, which was
Admitted, Instituted, etc. although he be declared by sentence to be incapable,
and therefore void ab initio, yet because the Church was full until the
sentence declaratory came, that shall serve for his turn, because it was but
voidable; as in the case of Littleton, if the Lord marry his ward within age of
consent, and after he disagree unto it, and so was no marriage ab initio, yet he
shall not marry him afterward; So (27 H. 6. Guard 118.) if the Guardian marry
his Ward, and after they are divorced causa precontractus, yet he shall not
have the marriage of him again: But when the Admission and Institution are
merely void, then without question that shall not serve for a turn; 23 Eliz.
Dyer. Pl. ultimo.
as if his Presentee had been Admitted, Instituted and Inducted, but had not
subscribed to the Articles. etc. according to the Statute 13 El. by which in
such case the Admission, Institution and Induction are all void, etc. Likewise
where two were to present by turn, and one presented in E. 6. time his Clerk,
The principal case in Winsors case.
who in Queen Mary's time was deprived by sentence, and then the other
presented his Clerk, who in 1 Eliz. was also deprived by sentence, and by the
same sentence the first Presentee was restored, and after died; in this case
the Patron of the second Presentee shall not loose his turn; For although the
second Presentee was person for the time to all purposes, and the first
Presentee during the first deprivation was not Incumbent, yet when the second
sentence came, the first Presentee was Incumbent again by force of his first
Presentation, Admission, etc. and there needed no new Presentation, etc. and
therefore when this first Presentee dies (who was then in course the last
Incumbent) the Patron of the second Presentee must needs present in the next
turn; but if the first Presentee had died before the second sentence, or had
not reversed the first sentence, then the Patron of the last Presentee had
enjoyed his turn, and could not have presented again.

Tender of money, etc.
28 As concerning the tender of money upon a Mortgage, Bond, Co. l. 5. 114. b. 2
Wades case.
etc. upon a certain day therein limited, although the last time of payment of
the money by force of the Condition be such a convenient time before sunset,
as that the money may be told before the Sun be set, yet if tender be made unto
him, that ought to receive it, at the place specified in the Condition at any
time of the day, and he refuse it, the Condition is saved for ever, and the
Mortgager or Obliger need not to make tender of it again at the last instant
of the day, as aforesaid: for by the express letter of the Condition the money
is to be paid upon the day indefinitely, and the Law assigns the last instant,
to the end neither of the parties should lose their labor in attending the
payment, etc.

Plea of non est ^actum or judgment si ^ction.
29 In all cases when a Deed is only voidable at the time of the Action brought
(as for Infancy, Dures, Co. l. 5. 119. Whelpdales case.
or the like) the Defendant ought to plead Judgment si Action, and not, non
est factum (1 H. 7. 15.) So also when the Deed is void by Act of Parliament he
ought not to plead non est factum, but in construction of Law, the Deed is to
be avoided by special pleading, taking advantage of the Act of Parliament; for
albeit the Act says the Obligation or other Writing shall be void, yet the Law
implicitly requires order, which ought to be pursued by the Obligor, etc. As if
an Obligation be made to the Sheriff against the Statute of 23 H. 6. cap. 10.
or to one against the Statute of Usury, 13 Eliz. cap. 8. in those and the like
cases the Defendant ought to conclude, Judgment si Action and cannot plead non
est factum (7 E. 4, 5. 7 E. 6. Br. non est factum 14.) against the opinion of
Montague in Dyve and Maninghams case in the Commentaries: Pl. com. 66.
Again, when the Obligation or other Writing took at first effect, and was
once revera his Deed, but afterward before the Action brought became no Deed,
as by rasure, addition, alteration, breaking of the Seal or the like, in these
cases albeit it were sometimes his Deed, yet may the Defendant safely plead,
non est factum; for doubtless, at the time of the plea (which is in the
present tenures) it was not his Deed. In Dyer 36 H. 8. 59. In debt, the
Defendant pleades non est factum, and before the day of Appearance of the
Inquest, the mice had eaten the Label, unto which the Seal was fixed, by the
negligence of the Clerk, in whose custody it was kept; whereupon the Justices
commanded the Jury, that, if they found yt it was his Deed at ye time of ye
plea pleaded, they should then give a special Verdict, which they did
accordingly. If an Obligation be delivered to another to the use of the
Obligee, and the Obligee refuses it upon tender, in this case the delivery
has lost its force, and the Obligee can never agree to it afterward, and then
also the Obligor may safely plead, non est factum, against the opinion in Dyer,
1 Eliz. 167. So also if an Obligation be made to a Feme Covert, and the Baron
disagree to it, the Obligor may plead non est factum; for by the refusal the
Obligation loses its force, and becomes no Deed. And by these resolutions the
Quaere in Dyer, 2. Mar. 112. and the disagreeing opinions in 14 H. 8. 28. Dyve
and Maninghams case 66. 1 H. 7. 15. Dyer 1 Eliz. 167. and other places are well
reconciled.

30 A. Tenant for life the remainder to B. in Fee join in a Lease to C. this
immediately after the delivery takes effect in this manner, Where a Lease
enures by grant or confirmation.
it is the Lease of A. during his life, Co. l. 6. 15. Treports case.
and the Confirmation of B. and after the death of A. it is the Lease of B. and
the Confirmation of A. according to ye opinion of Dyer and Brown, M. 6. and 7
Eliz. 234, 235. and therefore in an Ejectione firma brought by C. if he count
of a joint Demise from A. and B. his count is not good. And in that case
although the Lease be by Deed indented, yet shall it not work any conclusion;
for when the Deed enures by passing of an interest (as in this case it does) it
shall not be taken for any conclusion, no more than a Lease for years of the
Tenant for life by Deed indented shall be an Estoppel after his death, because
at the beginning it took effect by way of passing an Interest.

Co. l. 6. 74. a. 3. Sir Drue Druries case.
31 When Tenant by Knight Service dies, his heir within age, Marriage d^ to the
Lord. Chattel ve^^
presently the value of his marriage, as a Chattel takes such effect and is so
vested in the Lord (24 E. 3. 25. V. N. Br. 27 E. 3.) that albeit such an heir
within age be made a Knight, and to that purpose in Judgment of Law is
esteemed of the full age of 21 years, yet shall the Lord have the value of his
marriage, as well as the custody of his land till his age of 21 years, which
last to remove all doubt, was expressly given to the Lord by Magna carta cap.
3.

Co. l. 7. 17. b. 3. Calvin's case.
32 If a King has a Kingdom by Title of descent where the Laws have taken good
effect and rooting, The King cannot alt^^
in as much as by the Laws of that Kingdom he does inherit it, Laws without
Parliament.
he cannot change those Laws of himself, without consent of Parliament: So
also if a King has a Christian Kingdom by Conquest, as King H. 2. had
Ireland, after King John had given unto them (being under his obedience and
subjection) the Laws of England, for the government of that Country, no
succeeding King could alter the same without Parliament.

A Recognisance charge a rent after release to the Terre-tenant.
33 The Grantee of a rent charge issuing out of land acknowledges a
Recognisance, and afterward releaseth to the Terre-tenant, Co. l. 7. 38. b. 3.
etc. Lillingstons case.
the Conusee sueth Execution and extends the rent, notwithstanding by the
release it is extinguished, for the Recognisance took effect to charge the rent
before the extinguishment, and therefore it shall be liable to the extent, in
whose hands soever it comes, and as to the Conusee, shall not be extinct.

A Chattel vested.
34 If the King has an Advowson in Fee, which is void, Fitz. 33. N.O. P.a.
and during the avoidance the King grants away the Advowson in Fee, the King
shall not present to this avoidance: But if the King has an Advowson by reason
of the temporalties of a Bishopric, which is void, and during the avoidance,
the King restores to the Bishop the temporalties, yet he shall present to the
Advowson, and not the Bishop for this avoidance; because the presentation was a
Chattel which vested in him before he restored the temporalties: So if the
heir sue Livery from the King, and has it; yet the King shall present to the
Advowson, which voided during the time, that the Advowson and land were in the
Kings hand, causa qua supra. Likewise if a man be seized of an Advowson in Fee
in gross, or appendant to a Manor, and the Advowson voides, and he dies, his
Executors shall have the presentation and not the heir; because it was a
Chattel vested and severed from the Manor; neither shall the heir in tail
have the presentation which falls in the life of the Tenant in tail, but the
Executors of the Tenant in tail, etc.

The like.
35 The Termor shall have the presentation, Fitz. 34. b. and N*
which happens during the term, albeit during the term he present not to the
Advowson: So if a Vicarage happen to be void, and before the Parson can present
he is made a Bishop, etc. yet he shall present to that Vicarage, because it was
a Chatttel vested in him.

Where the Guardian shall not have ravishment.
36 If the Guardian marry the heir after the age of 14 years, Fitz. 142. h.
and after the heir is taken by a stranger, yet the Guardian shall not have a
Writ of Ravishment, because he has had the effect of his marriage.

A Chattel vested.
37 If a man be Guardian in right of his Wife, Fitz. 142. i.
although his Wife die, yet he shall have the Wardship, because it is a Chattel
vested in him.

Feoffee upon condition not disabled.
38 If the Feoffee upon Condition be disseised, Co. Inst. pars 1 222. a. 3.
and after bind himself in a Statute Staple, or Merchant, or in a
Recognisance, or take wife, this is no disability in him of performing the
Condition; for that, during the disseisin, the land is not charged therewith,
neither is the land in the hands of the Disseisor liable thereunto; because, in
that case, if the wife die, or the Conusee release the Statute or Recognisance,
and after the Disseisee does enter; he may perform the Condition in the same
plight and freedom, as when the land was conveyed unto him.

Accceptance cannot make a void Lease good.
39 Where an Estate or Lease is ipso facto void by a Condition or Limitation,
Co. ibid. 215. a. 1.
no acceptance of the rent after can make it to have a continuance: Otherwise
it is of an Estate or Lease voidable by entry.

35. He that cannot have or perform the effect or consequence of a thing,
shall not have the thing it self.
Co. Inst. pars 1 16. b. 2.
1 If a man be called by Writ to the Parliament, No Peer unless he sit.
and the Writ is delivered unto him, and he sit in Parliament by force of that
Writ, he is for ever after a Baron or Peer of the Parliament, and thereby his
blood is ennobled to him and his lineal heirs; but if he die before he sits in
Parliament, he is no Baron or Peer neither shall he or his reap any benefit of
the Writ; because (being prevented by death) he cannot perform the effect or
consequence of the Writ, which is, personaliter interesse cum Rege and cum
Prelatis, magnatibus, etc. Super arduis and urgentibus negotiis etc. consilium
suum impensurum, etc.

Co. ibid. 8. b. 1. Bract. l. 2. fo. 88. Fleta l. 1. cap. 10.
2 An Infant within age, that is not in custody of another, An Infant (...)
cannot be Guardian.
cannot be Guardian in Soccage; because no Writ of account can lie against an
Infant. For, as Bracton says, Alium regere non potest, qui seipsum regere non
novit: Or as Fleta, Minor minorem custodire non debet, alios enim presumiter
male regere, qui seipsu^ regere nescit: And by ye like reason, An man non
compos mentis, a Lunatic, a man caecus and mutus, or surdus and mutus, or a
Leper removed by a Writ de leproso amovendo cannot be Guardian in Soccage.

Co. ibid. 89. a. 1.
3 A Guardian in Soccage shall not present to a Benefice in the right of the
heir; because he cannot be accomptable therefore, A Guardian cannot present to
a Benefice.
for that he can make no benefit thereof; for the Law does abhor Simony, or any
corrupt contract for Benefices; And therefore in that case the heir shall
present himself.

Co ibid. 100. a. 4.
4 If two Ioyn-tenants bring a Writ of Mesne, One Joyn-t^nant cannot forejudge.
and the one is summoned and severed, the other cannot fore-judge the Mesne;
for he ought to be attendant to the Lord Paramount, as the Mesne was, and that
can he not be alone without his companion: So it is also if there be two
Ioyn-tenants Mesnes, and in a Writ of Mesne brought against them, one makes
default, and the other appears, there can be no fore-judger.

Co. Ibid. 102. a. 3.
5 If Tenant in Frank-almoigne bring a Writ of Mesne against his Lord, the Lord
cannot disclaim in the Seigniory; No Disclaim^^ in Frankalmoigne.
because he cannot hold of any man in Frank-almoigne, but of the Donor and his
heirs.

6 If the Lord mayhim his Villain, No appeal by Lord against his Villain.
he shall be indicted for it at the Kings suit: but he shall not have an Appeal
of mayhim against his Lord, Littl.. 194. Co. ibid. 126. a. 4.
because he cannot in that case enjoy the damages recovered; for that upon
recovery and execution for the damages, the Lord may immediately take them from
him again. Vide infra 38. 1.

7 In a Quid juris clamat brought by two Executors, Nonsuit of one executor is
of both.
the nonsuit of the one is the nonsuit of both; because the Tenant cannot
attorne according to the grant. Co. ibid. 139. a. 4.


8 Regularly when any man will take advantage of a Condition, if he may enter
he must enter, In some cases neither entry nor claim necessary.
and when he cannot enter he must make a claim; Co. ibid. 218. a. 3, and 4.
And his claim is to proceed and as it were to make way for his entry: And the
reason of this is, because a Freehold and Inheritance shall not cease without
entry or claim: yet in some cases, when he cannot enter by reason of some
presentin-interest, which the Tenant has in the land, neither shall he then
make his claim, because he cannot enjoy the effect of his claim, viz. to
enter into the land: As in the case of Littleton Sect. 350. If land be granted
to a man for 5 years upon Condition, that if he pay unto the Grantor within
two years 40 marks, that then he shall have Fee, or otherwise but for the
term of 5 years, if in this case the Grantee do not pay unto the Grantor the
40 marks within the first two yeaaes, then immediately after those two years
past, the Fee and Frank-tenement is in the Grantor without entry or claim,
etc. Vide 34. 11. and 55. 109.

^ersity of ^ctione and ^ise.
9 If an Ejectione firma be brought, Co. ibid 285. a. 3.
and the term incurreth hanging the Action, yet the Action shall proceed for
damages only, because an Ejectione does lie after the term for damages only;
but if Tenant pur auter vie, bring an Assise, and Cesty que vie dies, hanging
the Writ, albeit the Writ were well commenced, yet the Writ shall a^ate;
because he cannot have the effect of a recovery in an Assise, which is to have
as well the Land as the Damages, and not Damages only, as in the case of an
Ejectione firma.

^o writ of Er^ atter re^se.
10 If Tenant in a real Action release unto the Demandant after recovery, all
his right in the land, Co. ibid. 289. a. 1. 9 H. 6. 47.
he shall not afterward have a Writ of Error; because he cannot have the
effect of that Writ, which is to be restored to the land.

^o attaint af^ release.
11 If Debt or Damages be recovered in a personal Action by false verdict, Co.
ibid. 26 H. 8. 3. b. 13 E. 4. 1, 2.
and the Defendant releaseth unto the Plaintiff all Actions personal, the
Defendant shall not afterward take any benefit by bringing a Writ of Attaint;
because he cannot have the effect of that Writ, which is to be restored to the
Debt and Damages, which he lost: The like Law is, where a Judgment is given
upon a false verdict in a real Action; for there also a release of all Actions
real, is a good bar in an Attaint, etc. for that (in these two last examples)
both the Writ of Error, and the Writ of Attaint do ensue the nature of the
former Action, etc.

No Audita ^^aerela after ^^lease.
12 If the Defendant in a personal Action does after Judgment entered release
unto the Plaintiff all Actions personal, Co. ibid.
he shall not afterward bring an Audita quaerela; because after he has
released to the Plaintiff all Actions personal, he cannot have the effect of
that Writ, which is to discharge himself of a personal execution.

No Formedon against tenant for life.
13 Tenant in tail discontinueth in Fee and dies; Co. ibid. 297. b. 3.
the Discontinuee makes a Lease for life, and grants the reversion to the
issue; In this case, the issue shall not have a Formedon against Tenant for
life, because, he cannot have the effect of that Writ, which is to recover an
estate of Inheritance; for the Lessee for life has not the Inheritance, but
the issue in tail himself has it.

No entry after ^elease.
14 If Feoffee upon condition make a Lease for life or a gift in tail, Co. ibid.
and the Feoffor release the Condition to the Feoffee, the Feoffor shall not
afterward enter upon the Lessee or Donee; because he cannot have the effect of
his entry, which is to regaine his ancient estate.

No action of ^^espasse for ^oile by Co^ies.
15 If a man plant Conies and Conie-burrowes in his own land, Co. l. 9. 104.
Boulstones case.
which afterward so increase and multiply, that they destroy the ground of his
neighbor thereunto adjoining, yet shall not his neighbor maintain an Action
upon the case against him that plants them, for the damage done by them;
because he cannot have the effect of his suit, which is to recover damages for
the trespass committed; for immediately after the Conies come into the
neighbors land, he may kill them; because they being ferae naturae, the other
that planted them has then no property in them, and it stands not with reason,
that a man should make satisfaction for the damage which goods do, that are
none of his.

To some titles ^o warranty ^^tends.
16 There are some naked titles, unto which warranty does not extend, Co. l. 10.
98. b. 4. Edward Seymors case. Co. Inst. pars 1. 389. a. 2.
as ye Title in case of exchange, condition upon Mortgage, etc. Mortmaine,
consent to the Ravishor, and the like; because for these no Action lies, in
which there m y be Voucher or Rebater.

Co. l. 11. 29. b. 3. Alexander Powlters case. Ibid. fo. 30. a. 3.
17 Before the Statute of Articuli cleri cap. 15. No Clergy ^ter confes^^
he that confessed the Felony could not have the benefit of his Clergy; because
in case of confession he could not have his purgation, etc. for by intendment
of Law he cannot (against his express and voluntary confession in Court) be
innocent: Confessus in judicio pro judicato habetur, and quodammodo su a
sententia damnatur.

Co. l. 11. 77. b. 1. Magdalen College case. 22 E. 3. Tit Coronae 276.
18 It is provided by the Statute of West. 2. cap. 12. In appeal a Monk can
have dam^^^
Quod se appellatus de felonia, etc. se acquietaverit, etc. restituant
hujusmodi appellatores damna appellatis. Yet if an appeal of death had been
brought against a Monk, who had been acquit, and thereupon had prayed his
damages according to that Act, he should not have been admitted any such
prayer; because he could not have the effect thereof, being by Law incapable to
take the damages.

Fol. 11. B. 9. N.
19 In a Writ of Right de rationabili part by one Coparcener against another
Voucher lies not; Voucher li^^^ not in cop^nery.
because the Demandant cannot have the effect thereof, viz. to recover in
value, in respect of the privity of blood betwixt them, etc.

F.N.B. 31. f. Co. Inst. pars 1. 127. a. 1.
20 In all originalls brought by a Subject, The King i^ not give pl^^es de
prosequendo.
wherein pledges de prosequendo are to be found, the preamble of the Writ is,
Rex vicecom. salutem, etc. Si A. fecerit te securum, etc. tunc summoneas, etc.
But at the Kings suit the preamble shall be, Rex vicecom. salutem, etc.
summonens per bonos summum, etc. and not, Si Rex fecerit, etc. for the King
shall not be bound to prosecute; because he is not subject to the consequence
thereof, viz. to be amercied if he do not prosecute; neither can he be
nonsuited; because he is always present in all his Courts. V. infr. 39. 4.

F. N. B. 48. q.
21 If a man brings a Writ of Right of Advowson against another, and hanging the
Writ, the Church becomes void, The Dem^dant shall (...) have a ^^mittas.
the Plaintiff shall not have a ne admittas, to the Bishop; nor a Quare
incumbravit, albeit the Bishop does encumber the Church, etc. for the Demandant
shall not recover the presentment upon this Writ, but the Advowson.

22 One Commoner shall not bring a Writ de admensuratione pasturae against
another Commoner, F.N.B. 125. d.
which has Common appurtenant, No Writ of admeasurement.
or in gross sans number; because such a Commoner cannot be admeasured, etc.

Pl. Co. 11 c. a. 1. Fulmerston and Stewards case. West. 2. cap. 21.
23 The Statute of Westminster. 2. ordaines, No Cessa^^^ for the bei^^
Quod fiant brevia de ingressu haeredi petentis, super haerodem tenentis, and
super eos, quibus alienata fuerint hujusmodi tenementa, etc. yet if the
Demandant in a Cessavit die, the heir shall not have a Cessavit; because he
cannot have the effect thereof, viz. to recover the arrerages; for that they
(by Law) belong not unto him, but unto the Executor.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 96. b. Littl. 137.
24 If a Tenant in Frankalmoigne withdraw his Service, Tenant in Frankalm^^^
not distrai^^ble.
the Lord shall not distraine, commence any suit, or seek any remedy for it, in
foro seculari, in any Temporal Court; because that Service, being Spiritual and
uncertain, shall be defined and recovered in foro Ecclesiastico, in the
Spiritual Court: It is otherwise of Tenure by Divine Service, which, although
it be Spiritual, yet being certain, shall be recovered in foro seculari, and
the performance or nonperformance thereof shall (upon a distress and Avowry)
be tried by a Jury of 12 men, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 46. a. 2.
25 The Termor for years (before the Statutes of Gloucester 6 E. 1. cap. 11. and
21 H. 8. cap. 15. The Term^^ could not f^fie.
) was not able by the Common Law to falsify a covenous recovery of the
Freehold; because he could not have the thing, that was recovered, viz. the
Freehold.

Co. l. 8. 118. a. 3.
26 The Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 21. Cessavit.
gives a Writ of Cessavit haeredi petenti super haeredem tenementum, and super
eos, quibus alienatum fuerit hujusmodi tenementum: yet in 33 E. 3. Tit.
Cessavit 42, in Doct. Bo^hams case.
where there were two Coparceners Lords, and Tenant by Fealty and certain
rent, the one Coparcener has issue and dies, in this case the Aunt and Neice
could not join in a Cessavit, because the Neice (though heir to her mother)
could not (in this case) have a Cessavit, in regard she could not have the
effect of it, viz. the recovery of the arrearages accrued in her Mothers time,
for that they did not belong unto her, but unto her Mothers Executor, etc.

Divorce.
27 Causa frigiditatis naturalis and perpetuae, Dyer. 178. 40. 2. Eliz.
is held a sufficient ground of divorce; whereupon such a Sentence was given,
H. 2. Eliz. in the Court of Audience betwixt Sabel and his wife at the suit of
the wife; And such another about the same time, betwixt Bury and his wife at
the suit also of the wife: who afterward married Carry and had issue, Bury also
married another woman and had issue, and therefore the Doctors of the Civil Law
would have had them co-habit again together, because (as they said) Sancta
Ecclesia decepta fuit in priori judicio.

36 Non officit conatus, nisi sequatur effectus.
Inheritances depend not upon uncertain words.
1 In Sir Anthony Mildmayes case in the 6 Report (which was a resolution against
perpetuities) it was resolved, that these words ( Attempt, Co. l. 6. 42. a. 3.
Sir Anthony Mildmayes case.
etc.) or (go about, etc.) or, (enter into communication, etc.) are words
uncertain and void, and God defend, that Inheritances and Estates should depend
upon such incertainties; for it is true, Quod misera est servitus, ubi jus est
vagum, and quod non definitur in jure, quid sit conatus, nec quid sit, a going
about or communication: And the Rule of Law decides this point, Non-officit
conatus, nisi sequatur effectus.

Resistance must be by some overt act.
2 If the Testator devise lands to I. S. for 60 years; Co. l. 8. 91. 2. 4.
Frances case.
if he shall so long live, provided if I. S. molest or hinder the Executor, so
that he cannot take and enjoy the goods of the Testator, that then his estate
shall cease; In this case a bare denial by Parol is not a breach of the
Proviso, but here ought to be some act done; as after request made by the
Executor, to shut the door against him, or to put his hands upon him, and to
resist him, or the like, so that by reason of some such open act he does not
permit the Executor to carry away the goods according to the Proviso. And Cook,
Chief Justice said, that in this case, it is not sufficient to say, Quod
praedictus Johannes non praemisit praedict. execut. etc. quiet habere,
removere and capere praedict. bona, or quod praedict. Johannes impedivit illum,
etc. but he ought to allege a special breach by reason of some special
disturbance or interruption in that case by some overt act, unto which the
other party may make a certain answer, and upon which a certain issue may be
taken, whereof the Jury may inquire, and the Court may judge, whether it were a
sufficient breach of the Proviso or not.

Cause of disfranchisement cannot be without some overt act.
3 Sir James Bag being a Capital Burgess of the Town of Plymouth behaved
himself contemptuously toward the Major there, Co. l. 11. 98. a. 3. Sir James
Baggs case.
and said unto him, You are a cosening knave, come kiss mine, etc. and
persuaded A. and B. Vintners, that they should not pay Wine-waight, etc.
whereupon the Major removed him; but upon complaint in the Kings Bench, a Writ
of Restitution was awarded to restore him; upon this ground (principally) for
that the cause of a disfranchisement in this case ought to be founded upon some
act, which he shall do against the duty of a Citizen or Burgess, and to the
prejudice of the Commonwealth of the City or Borough, whereof he is Citizen
or Burgess, and against his oath which he took, when he was made freeman
there: but words of contempt, or contra bonos mores, albeit they be against the
chief Officers, and his brethren, may be good causes to punish him, and to
commit him, till he put in sureties for the good behavior, but not to
disfranchise him: So likewise, if he intend or endeavor of himself, or
conspire with others to do any thing against the duty and trust of his freedom,
and to the prejudice of ye Commonwealth of the City or Borough, etc. but
puts it not in execution, this may be good cause to punish him, as
aforesaid; but not to disfranchise him: For, Non officit conatus nisi sequatur
effectus, and Non officit affectus, nisi sequatur effectus. And the reason of
this is, because when a man is a Freeman of a City or Borough, he has
Franktenement in his freedom for his life, and together with others (in their
politic capacity) has inheritance in the lands of the Corporation, and
interest also in their goods, and peradventure it may concern his trade and
means of life, and his credit and estimation; And therefore the matter, which
shall be cause of his disfranchisement, ought to be some act or deed done, and
not a bare endeavor or enterprise, whereof he may repent before the execution
of it, and whereupon no prejudice does ensue.

Co. ibid. b. 3.
4 Those which have offices of trust and confidence, Forfeiture of a Park
cann^^ be without some overt act.
shall not forfeit them by bare endeavors or intentions of doing acts,
although they declare them by express words, except the Act it self be put in
execution; As if the keeper of a Park shall say, I will kill all the Game
within my custody, or, I will cut down so many trees within the Park, etc.
but in the mean time kills none of the Game, nor fells any of the trees, this
is no forfeiture, etc.

Co. ibid. b. 4.
5 If a Bishop, Archdeacon, Parson, etc. cut down all the trees, Deprivation
cannot be without so^e overt act.
etc. this is a good cause of deprivation, and with this accords 2 H. 4. 3. So
if a Prior alien the land, which he has in jure domus suae, this is a cause of
deprivation, as it appears, 9 E. 4. 34. So likewise if a Prior suffer
dilapidations, that is a sufficient cause to deprive him, as it was holden 29
E. 3. 16. 20 H. 6. 36. Nevertheless if in these or the like cases there be but
an endeavor or enterprise without doing any such act, there can be no cause of
deprivation; for in such cases, Voluntas non reputatur pro facto.

37 Acta exteriora indicant interiora Secreta.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 257. b. 1. 10 H. 7, 12.
1 One may commit a forcible entry in respect of the armor or weapons, which he
has, that are not usually born, Forcible en^^ what, and when.
or if he do use violence and threats to the terror of another: And if three
or four go to make a forcible entry, albeit one alone use the violence, all are
guilty of force: So also if the Master comes with a greater number of
servants, then usually attend on him, it is a forcible entry.

Co. l. 8. 146. a. 4. The six Carpenters case.
2 When entry, authority, or license is given to any by the Law, Upon entry by
Law, if tre^passe be committed, he is a trespasser ab initio.
and he misuseth it, he shall be a trespasser ab initio; but where entry,
authority, or license is given by the party, and he misuseth it, there he shall
be punished for the misdeed; but shall not be a trespasser ab initio: And the
reason of this diversity is, because in case of general authority, or license
given by the Law, the Law judges by the act subsequent, quo animo, or to what
intent he entered; for, Acta exteriora, etc. but when the party gives authority
or license himself to do any thing, he can for no cause subsequent punish
that, which is done by his own license and authority: And therefore when as
the Law gives authority to enter into an Inn or Tavern, to the Lord to
distraine, to the owner of the soil to distrain damage fesant, to the
Reversioner, to see whether wast be committed, to the Commoner to enter into
the land to see his Cattle or the like ( vide 12 E. 4. 8. b. 21 E. 4. 19. b. 5
H. 7. 11. 9 H. 6. 29. b. 11 H. 4. 75. b. 3 H. 7. 15. 28 H. 6. 5.) Here, if he
that enters into the Inn or Tavern commit trespass, as if he carry any thing
away from thence; or if the Lord, that distraines for rent, or the owner for
damage fesant weary, or kill the distress, or if he that enters to view the
wast, do hurt to the houses, or stays there all night, or if the Commoner cut
down a tree, etc. In these and the like cases the Law will adjudge, that he
entered for that purpose; and therefore in as much as the Overt act, which he
does, is a trespass, he shall be adjudged a trespasser ab initio, as it
appears in all the aforesaid Books.

3 If a Purveyor take my Cattle for the Kings household by force of his
Commission, A purveyor a trespasser.
that is lawful; but if he sell them in the Market, Co. ibid. b. 3.
then is the first taking of them forcious, and with this accords, 18 H. 6. 19.
b.

The use of a recovery may be declaimed afterward.
4 In many cases an Act subsequent shall declare the intention of a general Act
precedent, as Peter Vavasor, octabis Hill. suffers a recovery, Co. l. 9. 11. a.
3 Dowma^s case.
and by indenture made 15 of February, between him and the recoverors limits
the uses and dies, Dowman and his wife, the daughter and heir of Peter, etc.
brings an Assise against him, unto whom the use was limited, but could not
recover, because the subsequent Indenture did sufficiently declare the
intention of the parties at the time of the precedent recovery: So if Tenant in
tail has issue two daughters, and die, and the eldest enter into the whole,
and after thereof make feoffment with warranty, this is lineall warranty for
the one moity, and collateral for the other; for the feofment subsequent does
declare the intention of the general entry, viz. that it was only for her
self, or otherwise it would be warranty, which should begin by disseisin for
the one moity; A distress sold makes it a trespass.
and with this agrees Littleton, cap. Garr. fol. 160. If the Lord come upon the
tenancy, and take and drive away an ox, if he impound him, the taking of him
shall be adjudged as for a distress, but if he kill him, that subsequent act
declares what his intention was ab initio, and so shall he be deemed a
trespasser, etc. as aforesaid, and with this agrees 12 E. 4. 8. b. 28 H. 6. 5,
etc.

Lord, Mesne, and Tenant distress.
5 If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, Co. l. 9. 22. b. 3. The case of Avowrie.
and the Mesne pays his rents and does his services due to the Lord, and yet
the Lord will distrain the Tenant peruvail, and put his cattle into the pound
for them; In this case the Mesne at the Tenants instance ought to take out his
cattle, and to put his own into the pound; and then if the Lord will not suffer
the Mesne so to do, the Lord shall be deemed a trespasser ab initio; for the
Lord does not then use the cattle in the nature of a distress, etc. and with
this accords 13 E. 4. 6.

Intention may be adjudged murder.
6 Roper the father of Agnes, the wife of Gore, Co. l. 9. 81. b. 3. Agnes Gore^
case.
in love to his son in law Gore, being sick, procured an Electuary of one
Martin an Apothecary by the advice of Doctor Gray, into which Agnes did
secretly put Rats-bane, with purpose to poison her husband, and May 18 gives
part thereof to her husband, who thereupon became very sick, Roper also eat
thereof, and likewise became very sick; add last of all, Martin being taxed
for it, stirs it and eats it, May 21. and May 22 dies: This was adjudged
murder in Agnes, albeit she intended nothing against Martin, and that
peradventure the stirring of it by Martin might make it have more force to kill
him: For, in this case the Law joins the murderous intention of Agnes in
putting the poison into the Electuary to kill her husband, with the event,
which ensued thereupon, viz. the death of Martin; for the putting of the poison
into the Electuary is the cause, and the death of Martin is the event, Quia
eventus est, qui ex causa sequitur, and dicuntur eventus, quia ex causis
eveniunt: And the stirring of the Electuary by Martin without the putting of
the poison therein by Agnes, would not have caused his death.

A delivery to the party without words.
7 An actual delivery of a writing sealed to the party himself, Co. l. 9. 136.
b. 4. Thorough go^d^ case.
without any words at all, is a good delivery: For, in traditionibus scriptorum
non quod dictum est, sed quod gestum est, inspicitur: It is otherwise when it
is delivered to a stranger.

Dyer, 98. b. 56. 1 Mar.
8 If two or more conspire to commit treason, as to levy war, Treason.
or the like, and some of them afterward put it in execution, this is Treason
in all; and so it was at the Common Law, before the Statute of 25 Edw. 3.

Dyer 192. 26. 2, 3, Eliz.
9 A. caused an Obligation to be written, and sealed it, Delivery of a Bond.
which writing was to the use and behoof of B. whom he intended to marry, and
upon the day of Marriage and before it, he delivers the writing to B. saying
these words, This will serve, and B. presently delivers it over to the Obligee
then present: This was adjudged a good Obligation; for Acta exteriora, etc.

Dyer 224. 30. 5 Eliz.
10 An offense shall not be adjudged Robbery, Robbery.
unless the Thief does not only take somewhat from the person, but likewise
put him in fear of death; and therefore in 5 Eliz. where a thief took 40 s.
from the person of another in the high way, without putting him in fear of
death, it was adjudged only bare felony, for which he had his Clergy, for by
not putting him in such fear, the Court adjudged it no more; Howbeit, by the
Statute of 8 Eliz. 4. Clergy is taken away from such an offender; yet that
Statute being an act of Continuance, and the long Parl. being suddenly broken
up, it has been doubted, whether or no that act and all other acts of
Continuance were expired for want of farther continuance; but by an Act made in
17 Car. for the farther relief of his Majesty's Army in the Northern parts,
that Act and all other Acts of continuance are to continue in force, until
some farther Act of Parliment be made for the continuance or discontinuance of
the same.

38 Inutilis labor and sine fructu, non est effectus Legis, and contra: And
therefore nothing can be given to a man, which he had before.
1 If the Lord mayhem his Villain, he shall be indicted for it at the Kings
suit; Littl. 194. Co. Inst. pars 1. 126. a. 4. and 127. b. 1.
The appeal^y a Villain against his Lord.
but in that case he shall not have an appeal of Mayhem against his Lord,
because he cannot enjoy the damages recovered in that suit; for that upon
recovery and execution for the damages, the Lord may immediately take them from
him again. Vide supra 35. 6.

2 In an action brought by a man or a woman, that are professed in Religion in
Normandy, Co. ibid. 132. b. 2.
or any other Foreign Country, Foreign profession not pleadable.
the Defendant shall not plead in disability of their person; because that
profession will want trial here in England: It is otherwise if they were
professed in England, for that might be tried by the Certificate of the
Ordinary.

3 If a man enfeoffeth another of an acre of ground with warranty, The heir
and youngest son vouched together.
and has issue two sons, Co. ibid. 376. a. 3.
and dies seized of another acre of land of the nature of Borough English, and
the feoffee is impleaded; Here, albeit the warranty descends only upon the
eldest son, yet may he vouch them both, the one is heir to the warranty, and
the other as heir to the land; For, if he should vouch the eldest son only,
then should he not have the fruit of his warranty, viz. a recovery in value,
and the youngest son only he cannot vouch, because he is not heir at the
Common Law, upon whom the warranty descends.

4 Counts and such as be in nature of Counts (as an Avowry, wherein the
Defendant is an Actor) need not to be averred; Co. ibid. 303. a, 4.
Negative pleas not to b^ averred.
but all other pleas in the affirmative ought to be averred, thus, Et hoc
parat. est verificare, etc. Howbeit pleas merely in the negative ought not to
be averred, because it were in vain to aver them, in regard they cannot be
proved.

The issue after discontinuance cannot enter.
5 If Tenant in tail release to his Disseisor, Co ibid. 318 a 4.
and bind himself and his heirs to warranty, and die, and this warranty
descends upon the issue, this works a discontinuance, so that the heir cannot
enter, but is put to his action; for if the issue in tail might enter, the
warranty (which is so much favored in Law) would serve for no purpose, but
would be utterly destroyed; whereas being put to his action, the Disseisor may
make use of his warranty by vouching the issue, and shall thereupon recover in
value, if other lands descended unto him in fee-simple, etc. Vide 15. 9.

It is vain to give a man what he had before.
6 It is a vain thing to give that to a man, which he had before, Littl.. 625.
Co. ibid. 335. a. 2.
because nothing can operate thereupon: As if land be given in tail, saving
the reversion to the Donor, and after the Tenant in tail by his deed infeoffs
the Donor in fee; this is no discontinuance of the estate tail; because the
reversion is not discontinued but remains in the Donor as it was before: So if
Tenant for life make a lease for his own life to the Lessor, the remainder to
the Lessor and a Stranger in fee; In this case, forasmuch as the limitation of
the fee should work the wrong, it enureth to the Lessor as a surrender for the
one moity, and a forfeiture, as to the remainder of the stranger; for, he
cannot give to the Lessor that which he had before, etc. So likewise, if there
be two Ioyntenants, and one of them enfeoffe his companion and a stranger, and
make livery to the stranger, this shall vest only in the stranger, because the
livery cannot enure to his companion, who was before possessed of the land, per
my, and per tout, etc.

Remainder granted for the life of the Tenant in tail void.
7 If there be Tenant in tail, remainder in tail, Co. lib. 2. 51. a. 3. Sir
Hugh Cholmleys case.
and the remainder in tail bargains and sells the land, and all his estate,
etc. by Indenture enrolled, etc. to I. S. to have for the life of the Tenant in
tail, and to his heirs males, the remainder to the Queen, etc. Here the
remainder to the Queen is void, because the Grantee for the life of the Tenant
in tail takes nothing; for the Grantee shall never have any benefit thereby:
And the remainder to the Qu: ought to take effect when the particular estate
ends; but that having no beginning can neither have ending Quod non habet
principium nec habet finem: And Vana est illa potentia, quae nunquam venit in
actum.

Wardship of an use.
8 In a writ of Ward the case was this; before the Stat. of 27 H. 8. Dyer 12. 28
H. 8. 54. etc.
a man enfeoffs I. S. of Knight Service land to the use of the Feoffor and his
heirs, after I. S. enfeoffs I. N. to the use of the Feoffor and his wife and
the heirs of the Feoffor, the Feoffor dies (living the wife) having a son
within age: In this case, the son shall be in Ward in the life of the Feme by
the Stat. of 4 H. 7. as heir of Cestuy que use, because the ancient use does
still remain in the son, notwithstanding it be in some sort altered in
respect of the Feme; for by the last feofment, the son had no more conferred
upon him then he had before, so as (notwithstanding the last Feofment) there
was still a reversion of use in the son, and not a new remainder; because a
thing cannot be given to a man, which he has already. Vide plus ibidem verse
fine. So Cestuy que use of two acres, one holden by priority, the other by
posteriority, makes a Feofment of both to his own use, this makes no equality
of tenure, Recovery. Feoffment.
because the ancient use which he had before, still remains; The Lord Rosses
case.

9 If one recover against me by a common recovery, Dyer 18. 105. 28 H. 8.
and after I infeoffe the recoveror, he shall be still seized to my use; for he
shall be adjudged in by the recovery, and not by the Feofment.

39 Lex non Praecipit inutilia: Vide M. 177. 5.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 389. b. 3. Littl. 743.
1 If Tenant in tail enfeoffe his Uncle in fee, Warranty destroyed.
who aliens to a stranger with warranty, to hold to him and his heirs, or to
him his heirs and assigns, and the Uncle afterward takes again an estate of
the land in fee; in this case the warranty is destroyed, because it were
needless for the Uncle to warrant the land to himself, and the Law will not
command or suffer things that are in themselves useless and unprofitable.

Co. l. 5 89. a. 4. Frosts case.
2 When a man is in the custody of the Sheriff by process of Law, A prisoner
in custody needs not be formally arrested.
and after another Writ is delivered unto him to take the body of him that is
so in his custody, he is immediately (by judgment of Law) in his custody by
force of the second Writ, albeit he make no actual arrest of him; for to what
purpose should he arrest him, when he is already in his custody? Et lex non
praecipit inutilia, quia inutilis labor stultus, etc.

Co. l. 6. 29. b. 2. Greens case.
3 When a Parson is admitted, instituted, and inducted to a Church, An Incumbent
not reading the Articles is out without sentence.
and does not read the Articles according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. 12. the
Benefice is thereupon void by force of that Statute, without procuring a
sentence declaratory to deprive him; for it will be needless to obtain such a
sentence, when the Living is already void, and open, for the Patron to present
another.

Co. l. 8. 61. a 3. Beechers case. Co. lib. 8. 126. a. b.
4 In judicial process, In a Judicial writ the plaintiff shall not find
pledges.
the Plaintiff shall not be enjoined to find pledges de prosequendo; for in
those process, although the Plaintiff be barred, nonsuited, or that the Writ
abate, yet shall he not be amercied, because such process are grounded upon a
judgment and record; And it is a needless and vain thing to bind the
Plaintiff to find pledges in such cases, where he cannot be amercied, Vide
supra 35. 20.

The case of the City of London.
5 That which appears plainly to the Court, That which appears need not be
averred.
ought not to be averred by the party: So in the City of Londons case, the
Constitution there made appearing to be agreeable to, and warranted by their
Charter, needed not to be so averred. So also no price of money, shall be
expressed in the Writ, because it appears of it self, 46 E. 3. 16. Likewise 12
H. 4. 17. The son within age brings an Assise of Mortdancester, he ought not
to aver, that it is within time of limitation; for it appears.

Co. l. 10. 67. b. 4. The case of the Churchwarden of St. Savior, etc.
6 In a special verdict concerning a Bargain and Sale, Demise, The
consideration not to be found by a Jury.
or the like, the Jurors shall not be constrained to find the payment of the
money, mentioned amongst the other considerations; for it shall be needless to
find that; which is affirmed to be already paid and satisfied in time before
the Grant, and is a personal consideration already executed; And this is true,
as well in the Kings case, as in the case of a Subject.

F. N. B. 38. l.
7 Where, in a writ of right of Advowson, Parson imparsonee shall not have a
writ to the Bishop.
etc. the Defendant claims the same Advowson as Parson imparsonee, albeit the
title be found for the Defendant, yet shall he not in that case have a Writ to
the Bishop, ad admittendum Clericum: For, in construction of Law, he is already
in the Benefice.

F. N. B. 106. g, h.
8 If a man recover in a Praecipe quod reddat against a Tenant by false Verdict,
No attaint before execution.
the Tenant cannot have an attaint before execution be had against him;
because in an Attaint, the judgment is, that he shall be restored, etc. and it
were improper and needless to give such judgment, when the Tenant still
retains the possession of the land. Note, that this is put as a quere in Fitz:
but he seems rather to favor this opinion, etc.

(...) tenants (...) need not ^verred ^nced.
9 In an action upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. 9. Pl. Co. 87. b. 3. Partridges
case.
against buying of pretenced Titles, if the Plaintiff shows by his count,
that neither the Defendant nor any of his Ancestors, nor any other by whom he
claims, etc. were in possession of the land, etc. nor of the reversion or
remainder, etc. nor received the rents or profits, etc. by the space of a
year, etc. The Plaintiff need not aver the title to be pretenced; for the
Statute it self makes the right of him which has not been so in possession,
to be pretenced; and therefore to aver that, which appears plainly by the
Statute it self and the Declaration, is needless and impertinent: So if it be
pleaded, ^eed of ^nment.
that the Lessee surrendered to the Grantee of the reversion, there is no need
of pleading attornment; for attornment is included in the surrender.

40 Where the foundation fails, all goes to the ground, Debile fundamentum
fallit opus, and contra.
^e shall be endow^
1 If a man be Tenant in fee tail general, Co. Inst. pars 1 31. b. 4. F.N.B.
149. f.
and makes a Feofment in fee, and takes back an estate to him and his heirs in
fee, and then takes wife, and has issue and dies, his wife shall not be
endowed; for that her title of Dower is grounded upon the estate in fee, which
her Husband had during the coverture; Now, that Fee-simple vanished by the
remitter of the heir in tail, and therefore her title of Dower must needs
vanish also: For, her issue has not the land by the descent of the Fee-simple,
but by force of the intaile; There is the same law, where the Tenant in tail
disseiseth the discontinuee, etc.

^ery void.
2 When a deed of Feoffment is void in it self, Co. ibid. 48. b. 1.
if livery be made according to the form and effect of that deed, the livery
is also void; As if A. by deed give land to B. to have and to hold after the
death of A. to B. and his heirs; this is a void deed, because he cannot reserve
to himself a particular estate, and if livery be made according to that deed,
the livery is likewise void; because the livery refers to a deed, that has
no effect in Law, and therefore cannot work, Secundam formam and effectum of
that deed, etc.

(...) action of ^st gone.
3 Regularly none shall have an action of Wast, Co. ibid. 53. b. 3.
unless he has the immediate estate of inheritance, and therefore if hanging
an action of Wast, an estate tail determines, and the Plaintiff becomes Tenant
in tail after possibility, etc. the action of Wast is gone.

^cting of ^ses shall (...) now for^the the land.
4 In ancient time, Co. ibid. 92. b. 4.
amongst diverse ways that lands might escheat or be forfeited to the Lords of
whom they were holden, this was one, if the Tenants did erect Crosses upon
their Houses or Tenements in prejudice of the Lords, to the end the Tenants
might claim the privilege of the Hospitalers, and so defend themselves against
their Lords, by such erecting of Crosses they were subject to forfeit their
tenancies; but now since it has pleased God by the light of the Gospel to
banish out of our Church and Commonwealth all such superstitious relics, the
danger of forfeiting Lands that way is also banished.

^mage may ^epealed.
5 Regularly it is true which Littleton says, Co. ibid. 103. b. 3. Littl.. 148.
that when a Tenant has once done homage to his Lord, he is excused for term
of his life to make homage to any other Alienee or heirs of the Lord; Howbeit
it fails in this case following; A. holds of B. as of the Manor of Dale,
whereof B. is seized in tail; B. discontinueth the estate tail, and takes
back an estate in Fee-simple; A. does homage to B. B. dies seized, and the
Issue in tail enters; In this case A. shall do homage again to the heir in
tail of B. because he is remitted to the estate tail, and the estate in fee,
that his father had (in respect whereof the homage was done) is vanished, and
therefore the homage it self is also vanished; for the heir in tail is in of
a new estate, in respect whereof A. ought to do a a new homage. So likewise it
is, when the Tenant has done homage, and the Manor is afterward recovered
from the Lord in a Praecipe quod reddat, etc. by a Stranger; In this case also
the Tenant shall do homage again to the Stranger; because the estate of him,
that received the first homage, is defeated by the recovery, etc. It is
otherwise when the Manor is aliened to a Stranger, or descends to the heir
without defeasance, as aforesaid, of the original estate.

Co. ibid. 128. b. 3.
6 When the ground or cause of an Action fails, Where t^^ ground o^ action fa^
all is goo^
there must needs the Action it self also fail, as if an outlawed person
brings an Action, the ground and cause of which Action is forfeited by the
Out-lawry (as in an Action of Debt, Detinue, or the like) there the Defendant
may plead the Out-lawry it self in bar of that Action, and shall thereby
conclude the Plaintiff: It is otherwise in real or personal Actions, where the
damages are uncertain (as in trespass of Battery, of Goods, of breaking his
Close and the like) and are not forfeited by the Out-lawry, for there the
Out-lawry must be pleaded in disability of the person.

Co ibid. 138. a. 4.
7 Tenant in Tail of a Manor, whereunto a Villain is regardant, No ma^sion by
(...) brought (...) Lord.
enfeoffeth the Villain of the Manor and dies; Here the issue after recovery
of the Manor in a Formedon against the Villain, may seize the Villain, and
the bringing of that Writ in this case shall work no manumission, because at
the time of the Writ brought he was no Villain, and the estate, by reason
whereof he might claim the privilege of manumission, being defeated, the
manumission it self is also defeated.

Co. ibid. 147. a. 4. 41 E. 3. 13. per Finchden.
8 A man by Deed grants a rent of 40 s. to another out of the Manor of D. to
have and perceive to him and his heirs, Rent o^ land er^^
and grants over by the same deed (or by another) that if the rent he behind,
the Grantee shall distraine in the Manor of S. Here, both the Manors are
charged, the one with the rent, the other with a distress, the one issuing out
of the land, the other to be taken upon the land; And in this case if the
Manor of D. be evicted by an eigne Title, all the rent is extinct, and so (by
consequence) both the Manors discharged, but if the Manor of S. be only
evicted, all the rent does still remain, etc.

Co. ibid. 158. a. 4.
9 If a Panel upon a Venire facias be returned, and also a Tales; Challe^
and the array of the Principal is challenged, if the Triors quash the array of
the Principal, they shall not try the array of the Tales; for now it is, as if
there had been no appearance at all of the Principal Panel; but if the Triors
affirm the array of the Principal; then shall they also try the array of the
Tales, etc.

Co. ibid. 223. b. 1. and 224. a. 3.
10 If a Feofment be made upon Condition that the Feoffee shall not alien in
Mortmaine, this is good, Good co^ons.
because the Condition is backed by a Statute Law; for such Alienations are
prohibited by the Statute of Mortmaine: And regularly whatsoever is prohibited
by Law, may be prohibited also by Condition, be it malum prohibitum or malum in
se. In ancient Deeds of Feofment in Fee, there was most commonly a clause, Quod
licitum sit donatorio, rem datam dare vel vendere, cui voluerit, exceptis viris
religiosis and Judaeis. If By-lawes made in inferior Courts be barred by the
Common Law in some Statute Law, or warranted by some lawful and reasonable
Custom of the place, or are good for the Commonwealth; although there be but
a few of the Jury that make them, yet those Orders, or By-lawes will bind all
the rest of the inhabitants within that Jurisdiction; by reason of the firm
foundation, upon which they are grounded, etc. So likewise if Tenements be
given in tail, upon Condition the Tenant shall not discontinue the tail,
Littl. 362.
this is a good Condition, because warranted by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap.
1, etc.

Release to one having only a right, or upon grant without attornement void.
11 Of a Disseisor make a Lease for life, Co. ibid. 266. a. 1.
the Disseisee may rele^se to the Lessee, and such a release shall stand good;
but if the Disseisor make a Lease for years, a release by the Disseisee to
such a Lessee is not good; because he has no estate of Freehold, upon which
the release may enure: Howbeit, if the Disseisor make a Lease for life, Co.
ibid. 267. a. 1.
the remainder to another for life; in Tail, or in Fee, a release by the
Disseisee to him in remainder is good; because of the remainder of the estate
that is in him, upon which the release may work: Co. ibid. a. 4.
It is otherwise in the last ca^e, if the Tenant for life in possession be
disseised; for then a release by the Disseisee to any of them in remainder
(having but a bare right in the land) has not good ground, upon which it may
work, etc. And therefore if lands be given to a man in tail, Litl.. 455.
reserving to the Donor and his heirs a certain rent, if the Donee be
disseised, and the Donor release unto the Donee all his right; albeit the rent
is extinct by that release, yet is the reversion still in the D^nor, because at
the time of the release made the Donee had but a bare right in the land; So
that if the Donee afterward enter upon the Disseisor, although he shall hold
the land discharged of the rent, yet shall he be Tenant in tail as he was
before. So likewise if there be Lord, and Tenant, and the Tenant makes a
Feofment in Fee of the land, Littl. Sect. 457
but the Feoffee never becomes Tenant to the Lord, in this case a release to
the Tenant is void; because at the time of the release made, the Tenant had no
right at all in the land, etc.

Releases good and void.
12 If a man let his land for term of years, Lit^^. Sect. 459. Co. ibid 270.
a. 3.
and the Lessor releaseth to the Lessee all his right, etc. before the Lessee
enters into the land by force of the Lease; such a release is void, because
before entry he has but interesse termini, and no possession, and therefore a
release, which enures by way of enlarging an estate cannot work without a
possession, for before possession there is no reversion; And yet if a Tenant
for twenty years in possession make a Lease to B. for five years, and B.
enter; a release to the first Lessee is good; because he had an actual
possession, and the possession of his Lessee is his possession; So it is if a
man make a Lease for years, the remainder for years, and the first Lessee
does enter, a release to him in the remainder for years is good to enlarge his
estate: Co. ibid. b. 2.
But concerning a release before entry there is a diversity betwixt a Lease for
life, and a Lease for years; for before the Lessee for years enter, a release
made to him is not good, as aforsaid; but if a man make a Lease for life, the
remainder for life, and the first Lessee dies, a release to him in the
remainder, and to his heirs is good to enlarge his estate; before he make any
actual entry; because he has an estate of a Freehold in Law in him, which may
be enlarged by release before entry, etc.

Release voi^.
13 If an Infant make a Lease for life, Co. ibid. 273. a. 2, 3.
and the Lessee grants over his estate with Warranty, the Infant at full age
brings a Dum fuit infra aetatem, the Tenant voucheth the Grantor, who enters
into Warranty, the Demandant releaseth to him and his heirs; Albeit here is
privity in Law, and a tenancy in supposition of Law, yet because he to whom the
release is made (in rei veritate) has no estate, it cannot enure to him by way
of enlargement; for how can that release work upon an estate, that is not, or
how can his estate be enlarged, that has not any? So if a Tenanthy the
courtesy grant over his estate, he is still Tenant as to an Action of Wast,
Attornement, etc. and yet a release to him and his heirs cannot enure to
enlarge his estate, that has no estate at all, etc.

Release for a time good for ever.
14 When a man is seized of any lands in Fee simple, Littl. Sect. 467. Co. ibid.
274. a. 3. and Littl. Sect. 473, 474.
a release to him of all the right that another has in the same lands, is good
without the word heirs; because he had Fee simple at the time of the release
made; Littl.. 519, 520.
and therefore a release unto him, in that case, for a day, or an hour, is a
release for ever to him, and his heirs, etc. as if there be Disseisor and
Disseisee, a release by the Disseisee to the Disseisor is good without the word
heirs, to establish the estate to him and his heirs, etc. There is the same
Law of a Confirmation.

Co. ibid. 276. b. 4.
15 If the Disseisor make a Lease for life, and the Lessee makes a Feofment in
Fee, and to Disseisee releaseth he the Feoffee, that release is good to prevent
the entry of the Disseisor upon the Feoffee; because the Disseisee had power to
enter upon the Feoffee before the release made: It is otherwise, where the
entry of the Disseisor is not congeable, as if a man make a Lease for life, and
the Lessee for life is disseised, and that Disseisor is also disseised, and he
in the reversion releaseth to the second Disseisor, the first Disseisor shall
enter upon the second Disseisor, and his entry is lawful, and if the lessee for
life re-enter, he shall leave the reversion in the first Disseisor; and the
cause is, for that the entry of the Disseisee (during the life of the Tenant
for life, and by consequent) at the time of the release made was not lawful.

Littl. 475. Co ibid. 277. a. 2,
16 A man that has a Son within age, is disseised, and die, Release to a^
Abator good and bad.
and after the Son being within age, the Disseisor also dies, and the land
descends to his heir, and a Stranger abates, and after the Son, when he
comes to full age, releaseth all his right to the Abator; In this case, the
heir of the Disseisor shall not have an Assise of Mortdancester against the
Abator, but shall be barred; because the Abator is armed with the right of the
Son of the Disseisee by his release, and the entry of the Son was
congeable, for that he was within age at the time of the descent cast: It is
otherwise, where a man of full age is disseised, and a descent cast, etc. for
then a release to the Abator, etc. is not good; because in that case, the entry
of the Disseisee being taken away, the release of the Disseisee to the Abator
wants a good foundation, upon which it may be grounded, viz. the title of
entry, which in the other case it has.

Co. Inst. pars 1 295. b. 3.
17 It is said of a Confirmation, Confirmation where good (...) bad.
that it cannot strengthen a void estate: Confirmatio est nulla, ubi donum
praecedens est invalidum, and ubi donatio nulla omnino, nec valebit
confirmatio: For a Confirmation may make a voidale or defeasible estate good;
but it cannot work upon an estate, that is void in Law.

Littl.. 521. Co. ibid. 297. a. 3.
18 If my Disseisor make a Lease for term of life, Confirmation not good.
the remainder over in Fee, and I confirm the estate of him in the remainder,
without any Confirmation made to the Tenant for term of life; In this case I
cannot enter upon the Tenant for life, because the remainder depends upon that
estate; and therefore if his remainder should be defeated, the remainder should
be also defeated; and it were not reasonable, that I should by my entry upon
the Tenant for life defeat the remainder against my own Confirmation; There is
also the same Law and Reason, if the Disseisor had made a Lease for life
reserving the reversion to himself, Co. ibid. 298. a. 1.
etc. for in that case neither could I have entered upon Tenant for life, least
I should have thereby also destroyed the reversion against my own Confirmation,
etc. And therefore it has been adjudged, that if a Disseisor make a Lease for
life, and after levy a Fine of the reversion, and the five years pass, so as
the Disseisee is for the reversion barred, he shall not afterward enter upon
the Lessee for life; Reported by Sir John Popham Chief Justice.
because then the Disseisee by entry upon the Tenant for life should also
regaine the reversion, which was irrecoverably lost by force of the Statute.

Co. ibid. 298. a. 2.
19 It is regularly true, that when the particular estate is defeated, Remainder
where defeat^ble and where not.
the remainder thee by shall be also defeated, nevertheless it fails in
diverse cases; Pl. Com. Colthirsts case.
for where the particular estate and remainder depend upon one title, there the
defeating of the particular estate is the defeating of the remainder: but where
the particular estate is defeasible, and the remainder by good title, there
although the particular estate be defeated, yet the remainder continues good:
As if the Lessor disseise A. Lessee for life, and make a Lease to B. for the
life of A. the remainder to C. in Fee, albeit A. enter and defeat the estate
for life, yet the remainder to C. being once vested by good title shall not be
avoided; for it were against reason, that the Lessor should have the remainder
again against his own Livery; So it is also, if a Lease be made to an Infant
for life, the remainder in Fee, the Infant at his full age disagrees to the
estate for life, yet the remainder stands good; for that it was once vested by
good title; And in both these cases, there was a particular estate at the time
of the remainder created.

A void remainder.
20 If the Lord grant by Deed his Seigniory to A. for life, Co. ^bid. 310. a. 1.
the remainder to B. in fee; A. dies, and then the Tenant attorns to B. this
attornement is void; because it is not according to the Grant; for then B.
should have a Remainder without any particular estate to support it; and the
particular estate being void for want of attornement, the Remainder, which
depends upon it, is also void.

Rev^rsion void.
21 Tenant in tail makes a Lease for life to A. for the life of A. and after
grants the reversion to B. in fee, the Tenant in tail dies, Co. ibid. 333. a.
2.
and after that A. dies; In this case the entry of the issue in tail is
lawful; because by the death of the Lessee the discontinuance is determined,
and consequently the grant made of the reversion, gained upon that
discontinuance, is void also.

Rent, Common, etc. charged upon the land, where good or void.
22 If Tenant in tail enfeoffe the heir in tail, being under age, Litl.. 660.
Co. ibid. 349. a. 1.
and when the heir is at full age he charge the land with a Rent, Common,
etc. and after the Tenant in tail dies, whereupon the heir is remitted; In
this case by the remitter the grant of the Rent, Common, etc. is determined;
because the Grantor had not any right of the estate in tail in him at the time
of the grant, but only the estate in Fee simple gained by the Feofment, which
is wholly defeated, and the state of the land, out of which the Rent, Common,
etc. issued, being defeated, the rent is defeated also: But if Tenant in tail
make a Lease for life, whereby he gains a new reversion in fee (so long as
Tenant for life lives) and he grants a rent charge out of the reversion, and
after Tenant for life dies, whereby the Grantor becomes Tenant in tail
again, and the reversion in fee defeated; yet because the Grantor had a right
in the entaile in him, clothed with a defeasible Fee simple, the rent charge
remains good against him, but not against his issue, etc.

The like.
23 If the heir apparent of the Disseisee disseise the Disseisor, Co. ibid. a 3.
and grant a rent charge, and then the Disseisee dies, the Grantor shall hold
it discharged; for his former estate being defeated by the remitter, the rent,
which was granted out of it, is also defeated: So also if the Father disseise
the Grandfather, and grants a rent charge, and dies, now is the entry of
the Grandfather taken away; if after the Grandfather dies, the Son is
remitted, and shall avoid the charge, etc.

A Discontinuance defeated as also all that depend^ there^pon.
24 If the Baron discontinue the land of the Feme, Litl.. 679. Co. ibid. 357. b.
4.
and afterward the Discontinuee lets the same land to the Baron and Feme for
life by Deed indented reserving rent, and for default of payment a re-entry,
etc. and because the rent is arreare, the Discontinuee reenters for this
entry, the Baron with the Feme cannot have an Assise of Novel disseisin,
because he is estopped, etc. but the Feme after the death of the Baron, shall
have such an Assise against the Discontinuee; because both the reversion of the
Discontinuee, and the estate for life made to the Baron and Feme being defeated
by the remitter of the Feme, the conditions, and rents, and all other things
annexed to, or reserved upon that estate for life, are also defeated.

Littl. 686, 687. Co. ibid. 360. a.
25 If an Abbot, Bishop or Deane, Charges upon land voidable.
etc. aliens the land belonging to his house, Bishopric or Deanary, etc.
without assent, etc. and after the Alienee charge the land; and then the
Abbot, Bishop or Deane, etc. by license resumes an estate again to him and his
Successors, and after the Abbot, Bishop or Deane, etc. dies; In this case the
Successor shall defeat the charge; because by his remitter he defeats the
estate, out of which it was granted, etc.

Littl. 690. Co. ibid. 361. b. 3.
26 If judgment be given against Tenant in tail upon a feigned or false
action, and the Tenant in tail die before execution, Tenant in tail. Feigned
recovery.
by which the lands descend to the Issue in tail, and then he that recovers
sues a Scire facias out of the judgment to have execution thereof against the
issue in tail; Here, if the issue plead to the Scire facias, and prove the
recovery to be false (which was the ground of the Judgment) he shall thereby
bar the Demandant to have execution of that judgment: It is otherwise when
the Tenant in tail voucheth and recovereth in value, etc. by reason of the
intended recompense, etc.

Co. ibid. 365. b. 3 366. a. 1. 380 a. 3. Littl. 725, 726.
27 Before the Statute of 11 H. 7. 20. Warranty defeated.
if a woman had been Tenant for life, the remainder or reversion to the next
heir, and the woman had aliened in fee with warrany, and died, this warranty
being collateral had barred the heir in remainder or reversion; howbeit in
that case if the heir that had the reversion or remainder had by entry in the
life of the woman avoided the estate so aliened, the warranty being annexed
unto that estate, had been avoided also.

Co. ibid. 385. a. 4.
28 If a man make a gift in tail at this day, Warranty ^^tinct.
and warrant the land to him, his heirs and assigns, and after the Donee make
a feoffment and dies without issue, the warranty is expired, as to any voucher
or rebater; for that the estate in tail, whereunto it was knit, is spent: It
had been otherwise, if the Feoffment had been made before the Statute De donis
conditionalibus; For then both the Donee and Feoffee had a fee-simple: And so
are our Books to be intended in this and the like cases. Co. l. 3. 62. 63.
Lincoln College case, and l. 10. 96. b. Seymors case.

Littl. sect. 741. Co. ibid 389. a. 3.
29 If Tenant in tail discontinue the tail in fee, The lik^
and the Discontinuee is disseised, and the brother of the Tenant in tail
releaseth by his deed to the Disseisor all his right, etc. with warranty in
fee, and dies without issue, and the Tenant in tail has issue and die; Now
is the issue barred of his action by force of the Collateral warranty descended
upon him; but if afterward the Discontinuee enter upon the Disseisor, then may
the heir in tail well have his action of Formedon, etc. because the warranty
is defeated; for when the estate, whereunto a warranty is annexed, is defeated,
(although it be by a mere stranger, as in the case abovesaid) the warranty it
self is also defeated: Sublato principali tollitur adjunctum, Littl. sect. 74^.
etc. So likewise if the Discontinuee make feoffment in fee, reserving rent,
and upon default, etc. a re-entry, etc. and a collateral warranty of an
Ancestor is made unto the Feoffee upon condition, etc. which Ancestor dies
without issue; In this case also, if the Discontinuee by entry for the
Condition broken, defeat the estate of the Feoffee, the warranty is also
defeated, and the issue may bring his Formedon as before. Finch 14.

Co. ib. 30. a. 1. Co. lib. 8. 34. Pains case.
30 If a woman Tenant in tail general takes an husband and has issue, which
issue dies, and the wife dies without any other issue, Tenant by (...)
Courtesy.
yet the husband shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, albeit the estate tail be
determined, because he was entitled to be Tenant per legem Angliae, before the
estate tail was spent, and for that the Land it self remains. But if a
woman make a gift in tail, and reserve a rent to her and to her heirs, and
after takes husband and has issue, and the Donee dies without issue, Rent
extinct and newly.
the wife also dies; In this case, the husband shall not be Tenant by the
courtesy of the Rent; for that the Rent newly reserved is by the act of God
determined, and no estate thereof remains: Howbeit, if a man be seized in fee
of a Rent, and makes a gift in tail general to a woman, she takes husband,
and has issue, the issue dies, the wife dies without any other issue, he
shall be Tenant by the Courtesy of the Rent, because the Rent remains, etc.

A lease for years determined.
31 A. Lessee for the life of B. makes a lease for years by deed indented, and
after purchases the reversion in fee, B. dies; Co. Inst. pars 1 47. b. 4.
In this case A. shall avoid his own lease, although it be by deed indented;
for he may confess and avoid the lease, which took effect in point of
interest, and determined by the death of B. because the estate which A. had in
the land for the life of B. (out of which the lease for years was derived)
being determined, the lease for years it self must needs also determine.

Leases for years.
32 If a man take a lease for years of his own land by deed indented, the
estoppel in this case does not continue after the term ended; Co. bid. M. 31,
32 Eliz. Londons case.
because as by the making of the lease the Estoppel does grow, so
(consequently) by the end of the lease, An estoppel determined.
the Estoppel is determined; For, that part of the Indenture, which before
belonged to the Lessee, does after the term ended, belong to the Lessor, which
should not be, if the Estoppel continued. 38 H. 6. 24. 30 E. 3. 21. Vide 19. 4.

Warranty may be granted and increase upon an estate for life, otherwise for
years. Accruer.
33 A man lets Lands for life upon Condition, to have fee, Co. ibid. 37 8. a.
4.
and warranteth the land in Forma praedicta, afterward the Lessee performs the
Condition, whereby the Lessee has fee; In this case the warranty shall extend,
and increase according to the estate: And so it is also, albeit the Lessor had
died before the performance of the Condition; for then also the warranty shall
rise and increase according to the estate; and yet the Lessor himself was
never bound to the warranty, but it has relation from the first Livery: And
the reason of this is, because a warranty being a Covenant real executory, may
extend to an estate in futuro having an estate whereupon it may work in the
beginning: But if a man grant a Seigniory for years upon Condition, to have fee
with a warranty in forma praedicta, and after the condition is performed, this
shall not extend to the fee; because the first estate was but for years, which
was not capable of a warranty; And so it is, if a man make a lease for years,
the remainder in fee, and warrant the land in forma praedicta, he in the
remainder cannot take benefit of the warranty, because he is not party to the
deed, and immediately he cannot take, if he were party to the deed, because he
is named after the Habendum, and the estate for years is not capable of a
warranty, etc.

Remainder grants Rent charge voydable.
34 A. is Tenant in tail, the remainder to B. in tail, Co. lib. 1. 62. b. 4.
Caples case.
B. grants a rent charge issuing out of the land to C. and his heirs, A.
suffers a common recovery and dies without issue; In this case C. shall not
have the rent, because the remainder of B. being defeated by the recovery, the
estate of his Grantee in the rent is also defeated.

A remainder must vest, either during the particular estate, or eo instante
that it determines.
35 A. seized of land holden in Socage devises it to D. for life, and after to
the next heir male of B. B. has issue C. A. dies, Co. lib. 1. 66. b. 4.
Archers case, per tot. Curiam.
B. enfeoffs D. with warranty; In this case, by the feoffment of the Tenant for
life, the remainder is destroyed; for every contingent remainder ought to rest,
either during the particular estate, or at least eo instante, that it
determines; because if the particular estate which should support the
remainder, be once determined in Deed or in Law, before the contingency fall,
the remainder it self must needs be also determined and void; Here therefore,
in as much as by the feoffment of B. his estate for life was determined by a
condition in Law annexed unto it, and cannot possibly be afterward revived,
for this cause the contingent remainder is destroyed as aforesaid, against the
opinion of Gascoigne, 7 H. 4. 23. b.

Co. lib. 1. 135. a. 4. Chudleys case.
36 A. grants land to B. to the use of B. for the life of C. the remainder to
the heirs male of C. the remainder to the next heirs of A. B. makes a feoffment
to C. and his heirs; Here, by that feoffment, The like.
the estate for life is destroyed; and by consequent the remainders which
depend upon it, are destroyed also; for by the feoffment of the Tenant for
life, title of Entry was given for the forfeiture, and at that time he in the
next future remainder was not in esse to take it; and therefore the remainders
in futuro by this matter ex post facto were utterly destroyed and made void: So
if Tenant for life be, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. If in this
case Tenant for life make feoffment in fee during the life of I. S. the
remainder is destroyed; for otherwise there should be a remainder without a
particular estate, which cannot be.

Co. ibid. b. 3. 11 R. 2. Detinue 46.
37 A gift in tail was made to A. C. the remainder to the right heirs of A. S.
the Donee makes feoffment to B. in fee, and after A. S. dies, The like.
the right heir of A. S. shall never have that remainder; for the estate of the
Land was by the feoffment of the Tenant in tail divested and discontinued, and
all the estates vested in the Feoffee, neither was there any particular Estate
either in esse, or in right to support the remainder when it fell, etc.

Co. l. 2. 52. a. 4. Sir Hugh Cholmleys case.
38 If a man make a gift in tail, the remainder in fee, The like.
he in the remainder grants his remainder to another for life, the remainder to
the King in fee, upon condition that if he pay or tender 10 l. at the Rolls,
etc. that then the grant shall be void: The tenant in tail suffers a recovery,
and thereby destroys not only the estate tail it self, but likewise the
remainder in fee, and the estate for life granted by him in the remainder, and
so by consequent the remainder to the King, as also the condition, which depend
upon the estate for life, etc.

Co. lib. 2. 55. Bucklers case.
39 There is a diversity betwixt a grant made by the agreement of the parties,
which stands not with the rules of Law, Grant made upon a good ground and
contra; Diversity.
and can never by any subsequent (as by livery or attornment) be made good; and
a gr^^t, which is good at the beginning, but is to have his consummation and
perfection by some Ceremony subsequent: As in case of a Charter of feoffment,
if the Feoffee enter before livery he is not a Disseisor; for the Charter is
good, and the agreement of the parties is according to Law, and that may be
made good by livery of seisin subsequent: But if lands in lease for years be
granted to C. Habendum tenementa praedicta from Michaelmas next for life, and
after Michaelmas the Tenant attorns; In this case the grant to C. is void, and
cannot afterward be made good by attornment, and therefore if he enter, he is
made a Disseisor; for the Law will make construction upon the whole grant, and
an estate of Franktenement cannot commence in futuro: And therefore observe
well the difference betwixt a good beginning or foundation capable of a
structure, and an evil one, which wants a foundation whereon the structure may
stand, and be built, etc.

Co. lib. 4. 24. a. 1. Copihold cases. Clarke and Penyfathers case.
40 If a Disseisor or the feoffee of a Disseisor, or any other, Admittances of
copihold.
that has a forcious or feasible estate or interest subject to the action or
entry of another, holds Court, and makes any voluntary grant upon the
escheat or forfeiture of a Copi-hold; such voluntary grant shall not bind him
that right has; for when after re-continuance of the Manor by action or
entry, he shall have defeated the title of such Disseisor, etc. he shall also
avoid such voluntary grants: But if such a Lord, that is in by such defeasible
title, admit any of the Tenants upon surrender made to the use of another, or
gives admittance to the heir upon descent, such admittances are good, because
grounded upon the custom of the Manor, and therefore such acts are lawful,
and quodam modo judicial, which he may be forced to do in a Court of Equity;
and for that cause such admittances will bind those that right have, etc.

Copihold ^ce leased, ^e custom is ^estroyed.
41 If a Copihold estate be forfeit, or escheat, Co. l. 4. 3. 1. a. 3. Frenches
case.
or otherwise fall into the Lords hands, if the Lord make a lease for years
thereof, or for life, or any other estate by deed or without deed, or suffer if
(before any new grant thereof) to be extended upon a Statute, recognizance, or
the like; or if the Feme of the Lord have it assigned unto her in dower, etc.
In all these cases and the like, the custom which supports the Copihold tenure
being destroyed, the tenure it self is also destroyed, so that it shall never
after be granted by Copy, or holden by Copy of Court Roll; Howbeit after it
is so forfeited or escheated as aforesaid, the Lord may keep it as long as he
please in his hands before he makes any voluntary grant of it; and yet the
Custom shall be preserved, because it is all that while demised or demisable,
and so it ought to be by the Custom, etc.

^ease void ^on a void ^nsideration.
42 The Kings patentee for years assigns diverse parcells of the land to other
several persons, still reserving to himself part thereof, Co. l. 5. 94. a. 1.
Barwicks case.
and takes another lease in reversion for 21 years, the principal
consideration whereof was the surrender of the old lease (whereof he had
assigned diverse parcels to others, as aforesaid) And after 3 years of the last
lease were expired, in consideration of the surrender of the same last lease,
the King grants him another of all the same land for three lives: In this case,
the last grant of the lease for lives was adjudged void; because when the
Patentee took the second lease, the consideration thereof was the surrender of
the first lease, which could not be any good consideration, for that he had
before assigned diverse parcels of the land to others, and then the King was
deceived in his Grant, and (by consequent) the second lease was void; Now
therefore the surrender of the second lease (which was void) being the
consideration of granting the last lease for lives, that last lease, being
granted upon a consideration which was not valuable, must needs be void also.

^meys ac^ats.
43 If a Writ abate for Non-tenure of all, Co. l. 6. 10. a. 4. Spencers case.
the Demandant shall not have a new writ by Journeys accounts; because the
first writ was taken out without cause or ground (33 H. 6.) but a praecipe of a
Manor being abated for non-tenure of parcel, the Demandant shall have a Writ
by Journeyes accounts, because the Tenant is Tenant of the residue, for which
the Writ is brought, and it were hard to force the Demandant to discover, in
whom the estate of every parcel of the Manor stands. 4 E. 3. 159.

^dable lea^
44 When voidable leases, being void for a time, Co. l. 7. 8. a. 2. The Earl of
Bedfords case.
shall be ever after avoided, and when not, this difference is taken, viz. when
the interest of him that makes the avoydance, is but for part of the term, so
that after his interest determined, a residue of the term does still remain;
and when he, that makes the avoydance, so avoyds the whole interest, that no
part of the term at all does remain after such avoidance: As if Tenant in
tail of Lands in Capite make leases not warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8.
28. and die, his heir being under age; In this case, although the King in
right of the heir may avoid those leases for his time, yet if after the Kings
interest determined, the heir accepts the rent, they shall be thereby made good
again: But if the Patron of the Church of D. grant the prochein avoidance to
another, and after (and before the Statute of 13 Eliz.) the Parson, Patron, and
Ordinary had made a lease for years rendering rent, and the Parson had died, and
the Grantee had presented a Clerk, who had been admitted, instituted, etc. in
this case, that lease had been absolutely destroyed, and the Successor
(although the Patron, that was party to the lease, present him) shall avoid it,
etc.

Co. l. 8. 43. b. 4. in Whittinghams case. 4 H. 6. fol. 2.
45 A man seized of certain Lands in right of his wife, Deseasable (...) states.
makes feoffment by deed indented of it to certain persons upon condition, that
they shall let the Land again unto the Baron and Feme for their lives, with
diverse remainders over in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the Baron:
and after the Baron dies, the Feoffees let the Land to the Feme for life, the
remainders over in tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the Feme, whereas
it should have been to the right heirs of the Baron; In this case, when the
heir of the Baron enters for the condition broken, by his entry the feoffment
that made the discontinuance, is defeated, and so by consequence the
discontinuance it self is defeated also, so that the Feme may enter, and shall
be in as of her former estate.

Co. l. 8. 75. a. 3. in the Lord Staffords case. per Coke chief Justice.
46 When one estate is to increase upon another estate by force of a condition
precedent, the first estate ought to be permanent, Estates by ^^cruer.
which may serve as a firm foundation, whereon to build the future estate, and
not removeable at the will of the Grantor or Lessor: And therefore if a man
grant an Advowson to another at will, upon condition that if he do such an act,
he shall have fee; In this case, the estate at will is no such foundation as
the Law requires to support the increase of an estate of Franktenement or
Inheritance; for the Grantor may determine his will before the performance of
the condition, and so avoid his own grant, and a Lease at Will cannot support
a remainder over; So likewise if a man grant an Advowson, Rent, etc. for years
upon condition, if the Lessee within a year pay 10 s. he shall have for life;
and if he pay 20 s. within another year after he shall have fee, the Lessee
performs both conditions, yet shall he have but for life; for the estate for
life at the time of the Grant was but in contingency, which is no foundation
upon which a greater estate may increase; because a possibility cannot increase
upon a possibility, and the estate of Fee-simple cannot increase upon the
estate for years, for that is drowned by the accession of the estate for life.

Co. l. 8. 142. b. 1. in Doctor Druries case.
47 If a man has judgment in a Quare Imepedit, Quare I^^dit. Error.
and has a Writ to the Bishop, and the Bishop refuses to admit his Clerk;
Here the Plaintiff upon this collateral matter of refusal may have a Writ of
Quare non admisit; but if the Defendant reverse the Judgment by a Writ of
Error, and after the Plaintiff in the Quare Impedit brings his Quare non
admisit, the Defendant may plead no such record, and so bar the Plaintiff of
bringing that Writ ( Vide 26 E. 3. fol. 75. per Wilby and Hill.) In like
manner, Execution. Error. Escape.
if A. be taken by the Sheriff in execution at the suit of B. upon an
erroneous Judgment, and after make an escape, and after the judgment is
reversed by a Writ of Error, the action upon the escape is lost, etc.

Ibid. the principal case.
48 If the return of an Exigent be erroneous, Exigent ^^neous.
the Outlawry which is grounded thereupon, is erroneous also; because the Writ
of Exigent is the warrant by which they proceed to the Outlawry. Vide Proctors
case, 5 Eliz. Dyer 223.

Ibid. 143. b. 2. 38 H. 6. 4. and 12.
49 One that had cause of privilege in Banco, is arrested in London, Privilege
Supersede^
and delivers a Supersedias; notwithstanding which, the Recorder gives
judgment, and he is taken in execution, and is thereupon removed in Banco by a
Corpus cum causa; And here, because after the Supersedeas delivered, there was
a Nullity in the proceeding and judgment, the Court (without Writ of Error)
awarded, that he should be discharged of the Execution, etc.

Ibid. 143. a. 1.
50 If two Judgments are given, Two judgments. The first d^feated.
and the last depends merely upon the first, as upon his foundation, there if
the first fundamental judgment be reversed by Writ of Error or Attaint, the
last (which appears in the Record to depend upon it) shall be reversed also; as
in Assise and Redisseisin, so of a judgment upon the original, and another
judgment in a Scire facias; so also of a judgment against the Tenant, and
another against a Vouchee, and the like, etc.

Conusee of a Statute.
51 The Conusee of a Statute Staple in a writ of Detinue of the same Statute
upon garnishment recovers by erroneous Judgment against the Garnisee, and has
the Statute delivered unto him, Ibid. 142. b. 7 H. 6. 4^. a.
the Garnisee brings a writ of Error, Garnishment.
and the Conusee sues execution upon the Statute, and has it; Here, albeit the
Garnisee reverse the judgment, yet inasmuch as the Statute was executed, that
execution shall not be avoided by the reversall of the judgment, because the
judgment was only to have the Statute delivered, Judgment, Execution.
and the Execution upon the Statute is a thing executed, not at all depending
upon the judgment: And yet in this case (by the opinion of Coke Chief
Justice) the Garnisee shall have remedy upon the reversal of the judgment by
an Audita quaerela; Audita Quaerela.
because the cause and ground of the Collateral Action is disproved, and
annulled by the reversall of the first judgment, and the first Plaintiff
restored to his first action, upon which he may have his first and due remedy.

Executors have execution. The Will annulled.
52 Executors have judgment in account, Ibid. 143. b. 4. per Coke chief Justice.
and for the arrerages have the Defendant in execution, and afterward the
Testament was annulled, because the Testator was an Idiot, and the Record
spiritual was removed into the Chancery by Writ, and then sent into the Kings
Bench, where the Action was brought; And hereupon the Defendant brought an
Audita quaerela, Audita Quaerela.
for that the Testament was disproved, and it was resolved in the Exchequer
Chamber (an. 35 H. 8.) that the Audita quaerela would well lie.

A Melius Inquirend. erroneous.
53 It was found by Mandamus 2 Jac. that P. S. held the Manor of O. in Soccage
of Qu: Co. l. 8. 168. a. Paris Slaughters case.
Eliz. as of her Manor of N. In 7 Jac. a Melius Inquirendum was awarded
(reciting the former office) to enquire, whether the Manor of O. at the time
of the death of P. S. was holden of the King in Capite, etc. whereupon an
office was found, that at the time of the death of P. S. the said Manor of O.
was holden of Qu: Eliz. by Knight service as of her Manor of N. and that at
the taking of the inquisition it was holden of the King, etc. In this case the
Melius was repugnant in it self, because it was impossible for the Jury to
find the Manor holden of King James at the death of P. S. which was in the
fourth year of Qu: Eliz. for then it must needs be holden of the Queen, King
James being then King of Scotland, etc. Now therefore, albeit the Jury by the
Inquisition had rightly found the tenure of the Manor, and that their finding
thereof in that respect was good, and according to the truth of the case; yet
because it was not warranted by the Melius, which was the ground of their
Inquisition, all was adjudged insufficient and void, and a new Melius
inquirendum was awarded.

An Idiot examined in Chancery.
54 A man that is found an Idiot from his nativity by office, Co. l. 9. 31. b. 4
in the case of the Abbot of Strata Mercella.
may come into the Chancery and pray to be examined, or by his friends he may
pray to be brought thither, and if it be found upon examination that he is no
Idiot, the office thereof found, and all the examination, which was by force of
the Writ or Commission, are utterly void without any traverse, monstrance de
Droit, or any other suit.

Assumpsit de^ea^^d.
55 An Executrix in consideration, Co. lib. 9. 94. a. 4. Will. Banes case.
that the Plaintiff will forbear till Michaelmas to sue for a debt due by ye
Testator to the Plaintiff upon lone, promises to pay it at Michaelmas, and in
an Action upon the case brought against her upon that promise, pleads non
assumpsit; here, the consideration of forbearance is good, because although it
be no benefit to the promiser, yet is it damage to the Plaintiff: And yet in
this case if (in rei veritate) the debt were not due debt, Per Coke chief
Justice.
or the Executrix had not assets at the time of the promise, she may give that
in evidence, and shall be thereupon aided; for then (in truth) there was not
any consideration, upon which the assumpsit might be grounded; because to
forbear a debt, which was not due, or wherewith she was not chargeable, could
be neither benefit to the Defendant, nor damage to the Plaintiff.

Co. l. 9. 139. a. 3. and 141. a. 4. in Beamonts case. 7 H. 4. fol. 16.
56 Baron and Feme being Tenants in special tail, A marriage dissolved, an^ so
an intaile grounded thereon.
are divorced ( viz. by such a divorce, which dissolves the marriage ab inito,
and the Baron and Feme a vinculo matrimonii) in this case they have ever after
but an estate for their lives, because the marriage (which was the only means
whereby they might have had heirs inheritable of the estate tail) being
dissolved, the estate tail it self is thereby also determined, and extinct.

Co. l. 10. 76. a. 4. the case of the Marshalsea.
57 When a Court has jurisdiction of the cause, Erroneous proceeding in Court.
and proceeds inversa ordine, or erroneously; there no action will lie, either
against the party that sues, or against the Officer that executes the precept
or process of the Court: But when the Court has not jurisdiction of the
cause, there all the proceeding is coram non judice, and actions will lie
against them without any regard of the precept or process, etc. for the rule
is Judicium a non suo judice datum nullius est momenti: See the book at large.

Co. l. 10. 96. a. (...) Edw. Sey^^ors case. 24 E. 3. 28. in Caloys case.
58 Tenant in tail, Dower det^^mined.
the remainder in tail to A. the reversion in fee to himself, bargains and
sels the land to B. and his heirs; Here, by the deed indented and enrolled,
etc. the Bargainee has an estate descendable to his heirs, but determinable
upon the death of the Tenant in tail, and has also the reversion in fee
exepctant upon the estate in remainder in tail, and here likewise the Feme of
the Bargainee will be endowed: but in this case if the Tenant in tail die, the
Dower which depended upon that estate, shall determine also.

Co. l. 10. 96. b. 1. Edw: Soymors case.
59 Tenant in tail, Warranty d^termined.
the remainder in tail to A. the reversion in fee to himself, bargains and
sells the land to B. and his heirs, and afterward also levies a fine to B. and
his heirs with warranty, etc. In this case, albeit A. be the next heir to the
Tenant in tail, yet shall not this warranty bar his remainder; For every
warranty ought to be knit and annexed to an estate, for that a warranty has
his essence by dependancy upon some estate; Now in this case at the time of the
fine levied, the warranty was annexed to the Fee-simple determinable upon the
death of the Tenant in tail without issue, and also to the reversion in fee,
but does not extend to the estate of A. in the remainder; for that was not
displaced nor divested, but did still continue in him, because A. at the time
of the fine levied, and after was seized of his remainder: Now then if the
warranty at the time of the creation of it were annexed to an estate, the
Conusee by his Feoffment or other act cannot extend if farther than it was at
the time of the creation of it; And therefore when the estate tail (unto which
the warranty was annexed) is determined by the death of the Tenant in tail
without issue, the warranty (which has his essence by dependancy) is also
determined; because then there is no estate left to support it, etc.

30 E. 3. casu ultimo in Henry Pigots case. Co. l. 21. 27. b.
60 In Assise before Stouffe and others in the Country, A man unl^tered not
bound.
the Tenant pleads feoffment of the Plaintiff to him by deed of the land in
plea, to have and to hold to him and his heirs, comprehending a letter of
Attorney to deliver Seisin, Warranty void, as wel^ the de^d.
etc. and (in truth) the Plaintiff was a lay man not lettered, and the deed
with the warrant of Attorney was read unto him according to the form of an
estate tail, and upon the same intent he sealed and delivered the deed with the
letter of Attorney in it to deliver Seisin: In this case, the deed did not
bind the man unlettered, but was adjudged void: And therefore, albeit the deed
and the warrant of Attorney were two several clauses, and that the said warrant
was well and truly read unto him; yet because the same warrant did depend upon
the feoffment, and had relation unto the estate in fee, that warrant of
Attorney was adjudged void also, etc.

Warranty defeated.
61 If a man enfeoffe another of land with warranty by deed, F. N. B. 135. g.
if the Feoffee make feoffment over, and take back an estate in fee; Here, the
estate, unto which the warranty was annexed being destroyed, the warranty it
self is also destroyed, and in this case he shall not have a warrantia cartae;
because he is in, of another estate.

The father in by tort, the heir by remitter, the Feme not endowed.
62 If a man has title of action to recover land, and after he enters, F. N. B.
149. f.
and disseiseth the Tenant of the land, and dies seized, by which his heir
enters; here, the heir is remitted to the title that his Ancestor had, and the
Feme of the Baron that so dies seized, shall lose her dower; because that
estate which the Baron had, is determined; for that was an estate of fee by
tort, and the heir has an estate of fee, which was in his Ancestor by right,
etc.

Feme not endowed of the rents, but of the land.
63 If a man make a gift in tail, reserving rent to him and his heirs, F. N. B.
149. g.
and after the Donor takes Feme, and dies, and the Tenant in tail also dies
without issue; Here, the Feme of the Donor shall not be endowed of the rent,
because the rent is extinct; for it was reserved upon an estate tail, which is
determined: But in this case, albeit the estate tail of the rent is
determined, yet shall the Feme be endowed of the land; because that does still
continue, and is not determined, as is the rent.

A remainder must have an estate to support it.
64 By the rule of the Law a remainder ought to have a preceding estate to
support it: And if that preceding estate fail, Pl. Co. 35. a. in Colthrists
case.
the remainder fails also; As if a lease for life had been made to a Monk, the
remainder in fee, this remainder had been void; because the Monk had no
capacity to take the estate for life, and so the estate preceding, the
remainder is void, and then (ex consequente) the remainder is void also.

Appropriation disappropriate. Ancient Demesne restored.
65 A Church appropriated to a spiritual Corporation, 3 E. 3. 74. b.
becomes disappropriate, if the Corporation be dissolved. Finch 14.

66 A dissesor of Lands in ancient Demesne, 49 E. 3. 8.
the Lord confirms unto him to hold at the Common Law, the Dissesee re-entreth;
Now shall the land be ancient Demesne again; for the estate, whereupon the
confirmation should enure, is defeated. Finch 14.

Absque impetione vasti determined.
67 The privilege of Absque Impetitione vasti is annexed to the privity of the
Estate, (3 E. 3. 44. per Shard and Stove) so that if the estate, Co. l. 11. 83.
b. 3 Bowls case.
unto which that privilege is annexed, be changed, the advantage of that
privilege is lost (5 H. 5. 9. a.) And therefore if a man make a lease for
years without impeachment of wast, and after confirms the land to him for life,
he shall be ever after chargeable with waste, 28 H. 8. Dyer 10. b. If a lease
be made to one pur auter vie, without impeachment of wast, the remainder to him
for the term of his own life; Now is he punishable of wast, for the first
estate, unto which the advantage of Absque impetitione vasti was annexed, is
drowned and gone, and therefore that privilege is gone also: So it is likewise
of a Confirmation, etc.

Privilege of (...) by the cour^^sie lost by a^^nation.
68 It was adjudged in the case of one Ewens, M. 28. Co. ibid.
and 29 Eliz. that where the Tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct
granted over his estate, the Grantee was forced in a Quid juris clamat to
attorn; because by the assignment that privilege was lost; And this judgment
was affirmed in the Kins Bench in a Writ of Error, and with it also agrees 27
H. 6. tit. Aid in Statham.

No prohibition of wast by the alienee of the heir against tenant in dower.
69 The heir at the Common Law shall have a prohibition of wast against Tenant
in Dower; but if the heir grant over the reversion, Co. ibid.
his Grantee shall not have it; for it appears in the Register, fol. 72. that
such an Assignee in an action of Wast against Tenant in Dower shall recite the
Statute of Gloucester; and then (by consequent) he shall not have prohibition of
Wast at the Common Law, for then he should not recite the Statute. Vide F. N.
B. 55. 14 H. 4. 3. 5 H. 7. 17. b.

Co. Inst. pars 1 12. b. 4.
70 If a man be seized of lands as heir of the part of his mother, Privilege
(...) by a purcha^^ of the land.
and makes a feoffment in fee, and takes back an estate to him and his heirs,
this is a new purchase; and if he die without issue, the heirs of the part of
the father shall first inherit; because the estate, unto which the property of
descending to the heirs of the part of the mother, being by the change of the
same estate destroyed, that property it self is also destroyed; So likewise if
a man so seized mak^th a feoffment in fee, reserving a rent to him and to his
heirs, this rent shall go to the heirs of the part of the father, etc.

Co. ibid. 83. a. 2. Co. l. 4. 88. in Luthrels case.
71 If there be Lord and Tenant by Castle-guard, Castle-guard gone by a^^ nation.
and the Lord grants over his Seignory to another; In this case, the
Castle-guard is gone, because the Grantee has not the Castle, which is the
ground of the service: For the same reason it is, that if one holds of me as
of my Manor of D. by fealty and suit of Court, if I grant over the services of
this Tenant, the suit is gone, because the Grantee has not the Manor: But if
the Castle be wholly ruinated, Si castrum sit penitus dirutum, yet the tenure
remains by Knight service, and it goes in benefit of the Tenant, as to the
guarding of the Castle, until it be re-eedified; but ward and marriage
belongs unto the Lord in the mean time.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 53. b. 4.
72 After Waste done, Wast made dispunishable
there is a special regard to be had to the continuance of the reversion in the
same state, that it was in at the time of the Waste done; for if after the Wast
committed, the reversion grants it over, though he takes back the whole
estate again, yet is the Wast dispunishable; So likewise if he grant the
reversion to the use of himself and his wife, and to his heirs, yet the Wast
is dispunishable, and so of the like; because the estate of the reversion
continues not, but is altered; and consequently the Action of Wast for Wast
done before, (which consists in privity) is gone also.

Co. l. 5 28. a. 3. in Middletons case.
73 An Executor before probat may release an action, Executor may release before
probat, not the Administrator.
albeit before probat he cannot bring an action; for the right of action is in
him: So also if two Executors prove the Will, and the third refuse, yet he may
release: It is otherwise of an Administrator; for if A. release, and after take
administration, that shall not bar him; because the right of action was not
in him at the time of the release made.

Co. Inst. pars 1 76. b. 3.
74 If there be Lord and Tenant, A conditional wardship divested.
and the Tenant makes a feoffment in fee of Lands holden by Knight service to
the use of the Feoffee and his heirs, until the Feoffor pay unto the Feoffee
or his heirs 100 l. at a time and place limited; the Feoffee dies, his heir
within age; Here, the Lord shall have the wardship of body and lands
conditionally: For if the Feoffor pay the money, and enter into the land, the
wardship of both body and lands is divested. Vide pro ibid.

Dyer 155. Pl. 20 4, 5. P. M.
75 A. by Indenture enrolled in Chancery in consideration of money, Use upon an
use.
bargains and sels to B. the Manor of D. to have and to hold to B. and his
heirs, to the use of A. for life, the remainder to the use of B. in tail:
Here, because the first grant to B. is an use by the Statute of 27 H. 8. and
one use cannot be engendered out of another, the limitation of the two last uses
was adjudged void.

Dyer 186. 1. 2, 3 Eliz.
76 A man gives land to two, habendum eis pro termino vitae eorum, Cestuy que
(...)
and eorum alterius diutius viventis, ad usum A. B. pro termino vitae suae,
without more, and the two Lessees die: In this case, it seemed to the Court of
Common Pleas that the estate was determined, because the estate upon which the
use was created and raised was gone, etc. But Quaere, if such an estate had
been made before the Statute of 27 H. 8. of uses.

Dyer 205. 7. 3, 4 Eliz.
77 A writ of extent was awarded in the time of Queen Mary, Extent.
returnable Quindena Martini, and the Writ is executed in the life of the Qu:
but before the return she dies, and yet it was returned, and a liberate was
thereupon granted in the time of Queen Eliz. Quaere, whether or no the Extent
was returned without warrant.

Error.
78 In debt the Judgment was reversed, Dyer 130. 58. 6 Eliz.
because there was no warrant of Attorney entered, and this albeit the Writ of
Error was brought the same term, the record remaining still in the breasts of
the Justices, and the Plaintiff had prayed entry thereof: Note, that both the
first Action and the Writ of Error were brought in Banco Regis.

Lease void.
79 The Provost of Wels being Parson imparsonee of the Parsonage of Winsam,
leaseth the tithes for fifty years rendering rent, Dyer 239. 40. 7 Eliz.
which was also confirmed by the Deane and Chapter, but not by the Patron and
Ordinary, the Provostship was by Parliament united to the Deanary, cum primo
vacare contigerit. The Provost dies, the Deane accepts the rent, yet the lease
is not affirmed by such acceptance, for the Provosts lease was void by his
death, as it is of a Parson or Prebend; It was otherwise of a Bishop, Deane,
Abbot, etc. which were elective, and (before the Statute of 1 Eliz. not
printed) might make discontinuance; but if the lease above had been for life,
it had not been void before entry: Also the acceptance above was to no purpose,
for the reversion was determined, and the name of succession altered; As if
Tenant in Dower or other particular Tenant make a lease and die, and he in
reversion or remainder accept the rent, this is no affirmation, because the
reversion is altered.

80 Hob. 10 Doctor Leyfield against Tisdale.

41 Things incident are adhaerent to their Superiors, or Principals.
Deeds, etc. in whose custody to remain.
1 A man seized of Lands in fee has diverse Charters, Deeds, Co. inst. pars 1.
6. a. 2. The Lord Buckhursts case. Co. l. 1. 1, and 2.
and Evidences, and makes a feoffment in fee either without warranty, or with
warranty only against him and his heirs; In this case, the Purchaser shall
have all the Charters, Deeds, and Evidences, as incident to the lands, and
ratione terrae, to the end he may the better defend the land himself, having no
warranty to recover in value; for the evidences are (as it were) the sinews of
the land, and the Feoffor being not bound to warranty, has no use of them: But
if the Feoffor be bound to warranty, so that he is bound to render in value,
then is the defense of the title at his peril; and therefore the Feoffee in
that case shall have no deeds that comprehend warranty, whereof the Feoffor may
take advantage: Also he shall have such Charters as may serve him to deraign
the warranty paramount. Likewise he shall have all Deeds and Evidences, which
are material for the maintenance of the title of the land; but other evidences,
which concern the possession, and not the title of the land, as Court Rolls,
etc. the Feoffee shall have them, as concomitantia and incidentia to the
possession.

Land on the part of the mother.
2 If a man seized ol Lands as heir of the part of his Mother, Co. Inst. pars
1. 12. b. 4.
makes a feoffment in fee, reserving a rent to him and to his heirs, this rent
shall go to the heirs of the part of the Father (vide N.B. 40. 70.) but if he
had made a gift in fall, or a lease for life, reserving a rent, the heir of
the part of the Mother shall have the reversion, and the rent also, as incident
thereunto, shall pass with it; but the heir of the part of the Mother shall
not take advantage of a condition annexed to the same, because it is not
incident to the reversion, nor can pass therewith.

The like for service.
3 If a man had been seized of a Manor, Co. ibid.
as heir on the part of his Mother, and before the Statute of Quia emptores
terrarum had made a feoffment in fee of parcel, to hold of him by rent and
service, albeit they be newly created, yet for that they are parcel of the
Manor, they shall with the rest of the Manor descend to the heirs of the part
of the Mother, quia multa transeunt cum universitate, quae per se non transeunt.

Co. ibid.
4 If a man has a Rent-seck of the part of his Mother, The like for distress.
and the Tenant of the land grants a Distress to him and his heirs, and the
Grantee dies, the Distress shall go with the rent to the heir of the part of
the Mother, as incident or appurtenant to the rent; for now is the Rent-seck
become a Rentcharge.

Co. ibid. 19. b. 3.
5 By the Statute of Westminster. 2. The land incident to the tenant in tail.
the land is as it were appropriated (or incident) to the Tenant in tail, and
to ye heirs of his body; and therefore if an estate be made either before or
since the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. to a man and the heirs of his body,
either to the use of another and his heirs, or to the use of himself and his
heirs, this limitation of use is utterly void; for before the said Statute of
27 H. 8. he could not have executed the estate to the use: P. 14 Jac. in B. R.
And so it was adjudged in an Ejectione firmae between Cooper Plaintiff, and
Franklin, etc. Defendant,

Co. ibid. 22. b. 3.
6 The possibility of having heirs to inherit is so inherent and incident to a
man as long as he lives, A remainder to a man's right heirs is a limitation to
himself.
that it cannot by any act of his be severed from him during his life, except
when his blood is corrupt by attainder, T. 23 Eliz. Fenwick and Mitfords case.
etc. And therefore at this day, since the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. If a
man seized of lands in fee make a feoffment in fee, and depart with his whole
estate, and limit the use to his daughter for life, and after her decease to
the use of his son in tail, and after to the right heirs of the Feoffor: In
this case, although he departed with the whole Fee-simple by the feoffment, and
limited no use to himself, yet has he a reversion; for whenever the
Ancestor takes an estate for life, and after a limitation is made to his right
heirs, the right heirs shall not be purchasers: And here in this case, when the
limitation is to his right heirs, and right heir he cannot have during his
life (for, non est haeres viventis) the Law does create an use in him during
his life, until the future use comes in esse, and consequently the right
heirs cannot be purchasers; And there is no diversity when the Law creates the
estate for life, and when the party: And if the limitation had been to the use
of himself for life, and after to the use of another in tail, and after to
the use of his own right heirs, the reversion of the fee had been in him,
because the use of the fee continued ever in him; And the Statute does execute
the possession to the use in the same plight, quality, and degree, as the use
was limited.

Co. Inst. pars 1 22. b. 4.
7 If a man make a gift in tail, or a lease for life, Void remainder.
the remainder to his own right heirs, this remainder is void, and he has the
reversion in him; for the Ancestor, during his life, bears in his body (in
judgment of Law) all his heirs; and therefore it is truly said, that haeres
est pars antecessoris: And this appears in a common case; for if Land be
given to a man and his heirs, all his heirs are so totally in him, that he may
give the land to whom he will.

Co. ib. 23. a. 4.
8 Albeit Tenant in Frankmarriage is esteemed in Law a free tenure, till the
fourth degree be past, Frankmarriage. Fealty.
yet the Donees in Frankmarriage shall immediately make fealty; because fealty
is incident to every tenure (except Frankalmoigne) and cannot be separated from
it.

Co. ib. 47. a. 3.
9 If a man make a lease for years, Rent incident to the reversion.
and reserve a rent to him and his Executors, the rent shall end by his death,
because the heir has the reversion, and the rent is incident to the reversion.

Co. ib. 68. a. 1.
10 Fealty is incident to Homage, because it is a part of Homage, Fealty.
all the words of Fealty being comprehended within Homage. Mirror cap. 3.

Co. ib. 69. a. 1.
11 As fealty is incident to Homage, Fealty, Homage, etc.
so Homage and Knight service are incident to Escuage, and by the grant of
services Escuage passes with the rest.

^dship of Donee in^nt to the ^or.
12 If Tenant by Knight service makes a gift in tail, Co. ibid. 77. a. 1. in
Sir Thomas Wiats case. T. 18 Eliz. in C. Ba. per Cur.
and the Donee makes a Feoffment in fee, and the Donee dies his heir within
age, the Donor shall have the Wardship of him; because he is his Tenant in
right: But if the Feoffee die, his heir within age, the Donor shall not have
the Wardship of his heir, but the Lord paramount; because he is Tenant in fait
to him: Neither shall the Donor avow upon the Feoffee or his heir, for the
services due unto him; because he must in his Avowry show the reversion in fee
to be out of him by the Feoffment, and consequently the services incident to
the reversion are also out of him, but he shall avow upon the Donee and his
issue: And thus are all books that seem to be at variance either answered, or
reconciled.

^ure.
13 There can be no tenure without some service; Co. ibid. 92. b. 1.
because the service makes the tenure, and is incident unto it.

(...) services (...) Fealty se^able.
14 Of Incidents there be two sorts, viz. separable and inseparable; Co. ib.
93. a. 1.
Separable, as rents incident to reversions, etc. which may be severed:
Inseparable, as fealty to a reversion or tenure, which cannot be severed: For,
as all lands and tenements within England are holden of some Lord or other, and
either mediately or immediately of the King, so to every tenure (at the least)
fealty is an unseparable incident, so long as the tenure remains, and all other
services, except fealty, are severable.

^ident te^res, etc.
15 The tenure in Frankalmoigne is an incident to the inheritable blood of the
Grantor, Co. ibid. 99. a. 4.
and cannot be transferred or forfeited to any other, no more than a
foundership of an house of Religion (which is intended to be in Frankalmoign)
or Homage Ancestrell, or the writ of contra formam Feoffamenti, or the writ of
contra formam Collationis, or any other incident to their inheritable blood:
but it is no incident inseparable; for the Lord may release to the Tenant in
Frankalmoigne, and then the tenure is extinct, and he shall hold of the Lord
paramount by fealty, as in the case of Littleton, Sect. 139.

^stresse inci^nt to fealty.
16 If rent-service be behind, the Lord may distrain for the arreare, Co. ibid.
142. a. 3.
because fealty is incident to rent-service, and where fealty, etc. is incident
to the rent, there is a distress also incident thereunto.

(...) leases Fe^y insepa^le. ^nt not in^arably in^ent. ^alty inci^nt.
17 In the case of a gift in tail, lease for life, or years, Co. ibid. 143. a.
1.
the fealty is an incident inseparable to the reversion, so as the Donor or
Lessor cannot grant the reversion over, and save to himself the fealty or such
like service; but the rent may be excepted, because the rent although it be
incident to the reversion, yet is it not inseparably incident.

18 If a man makes a gift in tail without any reservation, Co. Inst. pars 1.
143. a. 2.
the Donee shall hold of the Donor by the same services that he holds over; but
otherwise it is of an estate for life or years; for there if he reserveth
nothing, he shall have fealty only, which is an incident inseparable to the
reversion.

^elease of and except ^e said rent.
19 If there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and rent, Co. ib. 150. a. 3. and 4.
and the Lord by his deed reciting the tenure, releaseth all his right in the
land, saving his said rent; In this case, the Seignory remains, and he shall
have the rent as a rent service, and also the fealty incident unto it; for in
saying, the said rent, it is as much as if he had said, the rent service,
whereunto fealty is incident.

^ant of ser^es, quid o^atur.
20 If the Donee hold of the Donor by fealty and certain rent, Co. ibid. 150.
b. 1.
and the Donor grant the services to another, and the Tenant attorne, some have
said, the rent shall not pass; because the rent cannot pass but as a rent
service, being granted by the name of services: And the fealty cannot pass;
because it is an incident inseparable to the reversion: But it seems that the
rent shall pass as a Rent-secke; because at the time of the grant it was a
rent service in the Grantor, and therefore there be words sufficient to pass
it to the Grantee; and it is not of necessity, that it shall be a Rent-service
in the hands of the Grantee, etc.

Co. ibid. 148. b. 3.
21 If a man makes a lease for life of Black acre, and White acre, Accrue^
Rent app^oned.
reserving two shillings rent, upon condition that if the Lessee does such an
act, etc. that then he shall have fee in Black acre, the Lessee performs the
condition; Here, albeit by relation he has the fee-simple ab initio, yet shall
the rent be apportioned, for that the reversion of one acre, whereunto the rent
was incident, is gone from the Lessor.

Littl.. 225. Co. ib. 150. a.
22 If there Lord and Tenant, Distress i^dent to feal^ and fealty (...) homage.
and the Tenant holds of the Lord by fealty and certain rent, and the Lord
grants the rent by his deed to another, etc. reserving the fealty, and the
Tenant attorns to the Grantee of the Rent; Here, such a rent in the hands of
the Grantee is not Rent-service, but Rent-secke; because the power of
distraining remains still with the Lord, as an incident to the fealty, which he
has reserved, etc. So it is likewise where the Tenant holds by homage, fealty,
Littl.. 226, 227. Co. ibid. 150. b.
and rent, and the Lord grants the rent, reserving the Homage, etc. but in this
last case, if the Lord grant away the Homage, saving unto himself the rest of
the services, and the Tenant attorn, etc. In this case, the Tenant shall hold
the land of the Grantee, and the Lord shall have the Rent, but as a Rent-seck,
and shall not distrain for it; because the power of distraining does (of common
right) go along with the Homage and Fealty, Co. ibid. 68. a. 1. Co. ibid. 151.
b. 1.
Fealty being an inseparable incident to Homage, and Distress the like to
Fealty, etc.

23 Incidens is a thing appertaining to, Definitio.
or following another as a more wrorthy or principal.

Littl.. 228. Co. ib. 151. b. 3, 4.
24 If a man let lands to another for term of life, reserving rent, Rent
sep^^^bly, fealty (...) separably ^^cident to the reversion.
if he grant the rent, etc. saving the reversion, etc. the Grantee has the
Rent as a Rent-seck, for which he cannot distrain; because the fealty (unto
which the Distress is incident) does still remain in the Grantor, as an
inseparable incident to the reversion; for, albeit the rent be also incident to
the reversion, yet it is separably incident, whereas Fealty is inseparably
incident unto it; so that although, when the rent was first reserved, it was
Rent-service, and so by consequent had Fealty and distress incident unto it,
yet being now by the grant fevered from the reversion and Fealty, it has lost
the privilege of distress, which always inseparably adheres to the Fealty,
etc. Nevertheless, in the said case, if the Lessor grant the reversion for
life, etc. the rent shall pass therewith as incident to the reversion, and the
Grantee shall then have it as a Rent-service, whereunto Distress is incident,
because it then passes by the grant of the reversion, as with the superior or
principal, and that without using these words in the Grant, cum pertinentiis,
etc.

Co. ibid. 192. a. 3. and 214. a. 2.
25 If two Ioyntenants make a lease for life, Jointenants.
reserving a rent to one of them, the rent shall enure to them both, because
the reversion remains in Ioynture; and therefore the rent, which is incident to
the reversion shall also enure in jointure, etc. unless the reservation be by
deed indented; for then he only to whom it is reserved, shall have it, etc. so
also a surrender to one shall enure to both.

Littl. 348. Co. ib. 215. b. 3.
26 If there be Lord and Tenant, Rent incide^ to the reve^on.
and the Tenant make a lease for life, reserving to him and his heirs an annual
rent, etc. and after the Lessor dies without heir, so that the reversion falls
to the Lord by way of Escheat, and the rent of the Tenant for life is behind;
In this case, the Lord by Escheat may distrain for the Rent arrear, Escheat.
albeit it was reserved to the Lessor and his heirs; for both Assignees in
Deed, and Assignees in Law shall have the rent; because the rent being reserved
of inheritance to him and his heirs, is incident to the reversion, and goes
with the same.

Co. ibid. 223. b. 4.
27 Albeit (as Littleton says, Sect. 362. Tenant in (...) barred by condition,
and (...) not.
) a Tenant in tail may by condition be barred from making any alienation and
discontinuance of his estate contrary to the Statute of Westminster. 2. yet cannot
that estate be so clogged by a condition, that the incidents which are by Law
annexed unto it, may be barred or severed from it. Co. l. 6. 41. a. 1. Sir
Anthony Mildmayes case and 42. b. 4. and l. 10. 38. b. 4. Mary Portingtons case.
Now the incident^ to an estate tail are, 1 To be dispunishable of waste. 2
That the Feme of the Donee shall be endowed. 3 That the Baron of the Feme Donee
(after issue) shall be Tenant by the Courtesy. 4 That the Tenant in tail may
suffer a common recovery: And therefore if a man make a gift in tail, upon
condition to restrain the estate from having any of these incidents, the
condition is repugnant and void in Law: And for this cause it is, that a
Collateral or lineall warranty with assets, in respect of the recompense, is
not restrained by the Statute of Donis conditionalibus, no more is a common
recovery in respect of the intended recompense: And Littleton there to the
intent to exclude the common recovery, says, Tiel alienation and
discontinuance, joining them together.

Descriptio incidentium.
28 They that have Conusance of any thing, Co. ibid. 227. b. 4.
are to have Conusance also of all incidents and dependants thereupon; For, an
incident is a thing necessarily depending upon another. Vide 64.

Stat. 21. H. 8. 19.
29 By the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 19. it is enacted, Co. ibid. 268. b. 1.
That if the Lord shall distrain upon the Lands and Tenements holden, etc. that
he may avow, etc. upon the same lands, etc. as in lands, etc. within his
Seignory, etc. without naming of any person certain, and without making avowry
upon a person certain: Here, albeit the purview of this act be general, yet
all necessary incidents are to be supplied, and the scope and end of the Act to
be taken; And therefore although he need not to make his avowry upon a person
certain, yet he must allege seisin by the hands of some tenant certain within
forty years, etc.

Incident servi^es shall not be discharged without speci^l words.
30 If there be Lord and Tenant, Co. Inst. pars 1. 305. b. 3.
and the Tenant holds of his Lord by the service of Fealty and xx s. rent, if
the Lord by his Deed confirm the estate of his Tenant to hold for xii d. or
for a penny, etc. In this case (says Littleton, Sect. 538.) the Tenant is
discharged of all the other services, and shall pay the Lord nothing, but what
is comprised within the same confirmation: Nevertheless, these words are thus
to be understood, that the Tenant shall not render any more rent or annual
service to the Lord, than is contained in the Deed; but other things,
notwithstanding the said confirmation, the tenant shall yield to the Lord, as
relief, aid pur file marier and aid pur fair fitz. Chivalier; because these
are incidents to the tenure, which do still remain, and shall not be
discharged without special words, by the general words of all actions,
services, and demands.

The like.
31 If a man hold of me by Knight Service, Rent-suit, Co. ibid.
etc. and I release to him all my right in the Seigniory, excepting the Tenure
by Knight Service, or confirm his estate to hold of me by Knight Service
only, for all manner of services, exactions, and demands; yet shall the Lord
have Ward, Marriage, Relief, Aid pur file marier, and pur fair fitz
Chivalier; for these be incident to the Tenure, which does still remain.

^he rent pas^th with the ^version, but ^t e converso.
32 Where a Lease for term of years or life, Co. ib. 317. a. 1. Littl. 572.
or a gift in tail is made to a man, reserving rent, etc. if the Lessor or the
Donor grant the reversion to another, and the Tenant attornes, the rent passes
to the Grantee, albeit the Deed of the grant of the reversion make no mention
of the rent, because the rent is incident to the reversion, but not e converso;
for if a man in this case will grant the rent, saving the reversion, albeit the
Tenant attorne, yet that rent is but a rent-secke, etc.

Co. ibid. 319. a. 3. 9 H. 6. 16. The Deane of Paul's case. 20 Eliz.
33 If the Lessor disseise Tenant for life, A rent incident or not incident to
a reversion. Diversity.
or ouste Tenant for years, and makes a Feofment in fee, by this the rent is
reserved; upon the Lease for life or years is not extinguished; but by the
regresse of the Lessee the rent is revived, because it is incident to the
reversion; And so it has been adjudged: But if a man be seized of a rent in
fee, and disseise the Tenant of the land, and make a Feofment in Fee, the
Tenant re-entreth, this rent is not revived: And to note a diversity between a
rent incident, and a rent not incident to a reversion, etc.

Littl.. 590, 591. Co. ibid. 324.
34 If I be seized of a Manor parcel in demesne and parcel in service, and I
give certain acres of land, Rent incident to the revers^on. A Donor cannot be
ousted of it.
parcel of the demesnes to another in tail, rendering rent; in this case, if I
be disseised of the Manor, and all the Tenants attorne, and pay their rents to
the Disseisor, and ye Tenant in tail also pay to him ye rent by me reserved,
and after the Disseisor dies, and his heir is in by descent; yet in this case I
may well distraine the Tenant in tail and his heirs for the rent so by me
reserved; because the rent reserved is incident to the reversion; and the
reversion of the land given in tail is still in me notwithstanding the
disseisin and descent; for as long as the Donee in tail is in possession, he
preserves the reversion in the Donor, and so long as reversion continues in the
Donor, so long do the rents and services (as incident thereunto) belong to the
Donor; neither can the Donor be put out of his reversion, unless the Donee be
put out of his possession, and if the Donee be put out of his possession,
consequently is the Donor put out of his reversion: But if the Donee make a
regresse and regaine his estate and possession, thereby does he ipso facto
revest the reversion in the Donor, etc. There is the same reason of a Lease for
life or years, rendering rent, etc.

35 He that has a remainder expectant upon an estate tail, Error may b^
brought by (...) Reversion^^, or rem^ind^^
shall have a writ of Error upon a Judgment given against the Tenant in tail,
Co. l. 3. 3. b. 4. The Marquess of Winchesters case.
albeit there was no such remainder at the Common Law: For when the Statute de
donis conditionalibus enabled the Donor to limit a remainder upon an estate
tail, all actions which the Common Law gave to privies in estate, are by the
same act, as Incidents, implicitly given also according to the rule of the
Common Law; And therefore as those in reversion or remainder, expectant upon an
estate for life, shall have a writ of Error by the Common Law, of a judgment
given against Tenant for life, although they were not made parties by aid,
prayer, voucher, or receipt; So also, since the Statute de donis
conditionalibus, shall he have, that has a reversion or remainder expectant
upon an estate tail.

Co. l. 4. 8. b. 3. Bevils case.
36 The seisin of a superior service is seisin of all inferior services,
Superior s^^vice seisin o^ inferior.
incident unto it, as seisin of Escuage is seisin of Homage and Fealty, and
seisin of Homage is seisin of Fealty, and seisin of Rent is seisin of Fealty,
where the Seigniory is by Fealty and Rent.

Co. l. 4. 23. a. 1. Deal and Rigdens case.
37 Where (by the custom of a Copihold Manor) plaints have been made in the
Court of the Manor in the nature of real actions, Plaints in (...) copihold
(...) to bar the (...) in tail.
if a recovery in such a plaint be had against Tenant in tail (admitting that
Copihold land may be intailed) that recovery shall work a discontinuance, and
shall take away the entry of the issue in tail,; for, in as much as plaints in
the nature of real actions are warranted by the custom, this is an Incident,
which the Law annexeth to the said custom, viz. that such a recovery shall
make a discontinuance; which agrees with the reason of the principal point in
Browns case, Co. l. 4. 21. a. And the like judgment was given in B.R.M. 36,
and 37 Eliz. betwixt Clun and Peale, Rot. 1417.

Copihold se^ered by cu^ome, conti^ue severed, ^lbeit surren^red together ^n
one copy.
38 If a Copiholder is seized by force of several Copies, Co. l. 4. 27. a. 4.
Taverners case per Cur. Co. ibid. 28. a. 2.
viz. of Black acre by 4d. rent, of White acre by vj d. and of Green acre by
xij d. rent, and he makes waste in part of Black acre, or makes feoffment of
it, or denies the rent of it, whereupon Black acre is forfeited; This is no
forfeiture of White acre, or Green acre; for although they are all in one and
the same hand, yet every of them is severally holden, and to every acre there
is a several condition (as an incident) implicitly annexed unto it, so that
the forfeiture of one, cannot be the forfeiture of any of the other; because
the several conditions in Law do ensue the several tenures: So likewise if
the Copiholder of the said three acres surrender them altogether in one
surrender to the use of A. and his heirs, and the Lord admit A. accordingly,
Tenendum per antiqua servitia, inde prius debita and de jure consueta, or to
the like effect, and A. commits forfeiture in Black acre, he shall forfeit
only that, and neither of the other; For the said Tenendum (reddendo singula
singulis) continues the several tenures; In like manner, if diverse several
Copiholds escheat to the Lord, and he re-grant them to another, Tenendum per
antiqua servitia, etc. they shall be severally holden, as they were before the
Escheat, etc.

Several times for several copies.
39 If a man has several Copihold lands holden by several services, Co. l. 4.
28. a. 1. Hubbert and Hamonds case.
the Lord ought to assesse and demand fines severally for each parcel so
severally holden; For, the Tenant may refuse to pay the fine for one parcel
and forfeit it, and may pay the fines for the other; because every several
tenure has a several condition in Law (as an incident) tacit annexed unto
it; And therefore the Lord ought for every several tenure, to assesse and
demand a several fine.

The office of Shire-clerk incident to the Sheriffs office.
40 Queen Eliz. grants to one Mitton the office of Clerk of the County Court,
or the Shire-Clerk of the County of Somerset with all fees, Co. l. 4. 33. a. 3.
Mittons case.
etc. for term of his life, and after the Queen makes Arthur Hopton High
Sheriff of the same County, who interrupts Mitton, claiming that which was
granted to him, as a thing incident to his office of Sheriff, etc. And it was
adjudged, that the County Court, and the entering of all the proceedings in it,
are so incident to the office of Sheriff, that they cannot by Letters Patents
be divided from it; and albeit the said grant was made to Mitton, when the
office of Sheriff was void; yet when the Queen makes a new Sheriff, he shall
avoid it, etc.

Exigenter incident to the chief Justice.
41 Tempore vacationis, Co. ibid. 2 El. Dy^r 175.
of the office of Chief Justice of the Common Bank, Queen Mary grants the
office of the Exigenter of London to one Scrogges, and it was holden void;
because it was incident to the office of Chief Justice of the County, which
the Queen could not have; And therefore the next Chief Justice shall avoid it,
etc.

Gaoles incident to Sheriffs.
42 Grants made (by the King) of the custody of the Gaoles of Counties are
void, Co. l. 4. 34. a. 1. in Mittons case, per touts les justices.
because the custody of Gaoles of Counties of right do belong, and are by the
Law annexed and incident to the office of Sheriff, as does very well appear by
the judgment in Parliament, Anno 14 E. 3. cap. 10. by which it is ordained,
that all Gaoles of Counties shall be rejoyned to the Sheriffs, and that the
Sheriffs shall again have the custody of the same Gaols, as in times past was
used, and that they should put in such Gaolers, for which they would answer,
etc.

Where a covenant binds and where not, betwixt Lessor and Lessee.
43 In a demise of Land, when a covenant extends to a thing in esse, Co. l. 5.
16. a. 4. Spencers case.
parcel of the Demise, the thing to be done by force of the Covenant, is
quodam-modo incident, and appurtenant to the thing demised, and shall run
with the land, and shall also bind the Assignee, although he be not bound by
express words,; But when the Covenant extends to a thing which has not
essence at the time of the Demise made, that which has not essence, cannot be
said to be incident or annexed to the thing demised, and therefore in that case
the Assignee shall not be hound to it, unless specially named; As if the
Lessee covenant to repair the houses, etc. this is parcel of the contract,
and extends to the supportation of the thing demised, and therefore is
quodam-modo incident and annexed to the houses, and shall bind the Assignee,
although he be not expressly bound by the covenant; But if the covenant be, to
build a brickwall upon parcel of the land demised, or the like, which was not
in esse at the time of the demise made, but was to be done afterward, this
covenant may bind the Covenantor himself, and his Executors or
Administrators, but shall never bind the Assign^e, because the Law will never
annex a covenant to a thing which has not essence, etc. It is otherwise. Co.
ibid. b. 3.
if the Covenantor for himself and his Assigns covenant to do it; for then
the Assigns are specially named, etc. Co. 5. 24. a. 4. The Deane and Chapter
of Windsor's case.

Co. ibid. 17. a. 4.
44 If a man demise or grant land to a Feme for years, The like.
and the Lessor covenants with the Lessee to repair the houses during the
term, the Feme takes Baron and dies, the Baron shall have an action of
Covenant, as well upon the covenant in Law by force of these words, Demise and
grant, as also upon the express covenant, because such a covenant runs with
the land, and is incident unto it: There is the same Law of a Tenant by Statute
Merchant, or Statute Staple, Elegit, or of a term sold by force of an
Execution; for, in that case also, the Vendee of the term shall have an action
of Covenant, as a thing incident to the land, albeit all these come to the
term by act in Law, etc. So likewise if a man grant to his Lessee for years,
that he shall have so many Estovers, as shall serve to repair his house, or to
burn within his house, or the like, during the term; this covenant is as an
incident and appertinent, that runs with the land, in whose hands soever it
falls.

Co. l. 5. 47. a. 2. Franklins case.
45 In a general pardon, when an offense is excepted, all the incidents and
dependants thereupon are also excepted, whether they be corporal, or
pecuniary, etc.

Co. lib. 6. 7. a. 1. Wheelers case.
46 If the King grant lands in fee, Tenendum de nobis, Fealty incident, thoug^
not named.
etc. per servitiu^ unius rosae rubae annuatim, etc. solummodo pro omnibus and
omnimodis aliis servitiis, etc. This tenure is soccage in chief, and in as much
as fealty is incident to every Rent-service, the Law annexeth fealty unto the
said rent, and then these words, pro omnibus aliis servitiis, are to be
understood of other services, which the Law does not imply, or add unto the
rent; so that then the tenure shall be by a Rose and fealty, etc.

Co. l. 6 70. a. 3 Sir Moyle Finches case.
47 If there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Rent, Seigniory e^tinct.
and the Lord disseises the Tenant of the land, and makes feoffment in fee, by
this the Seignory is extinct; but if a man make a gift in tail, or a lease for
life, etc. rendering rent, and disseise the Tenant in tail or for life, etc.
and make feoffment in fee; Here, albeit the estate passes to the Feoffee, yet
when the Donee or Lessee reenters, he shall revive the rent, as an incident to
the reversion: There is the same Law also of a lease for years, etc.

Co. l. 7 4. b. 3. Calvin's case.
48 Ligeance is a true and faithful obedience of ye subject due to his
Sovereign; Allegiance (...) Incident.
And this allegiance and obedience is an incident inseparable to every Subject;
for as soon as he is born, he owes by birthright ligeance and obedience to
his Sovereign.

Co. l. 7. 18. a. 3. Calvin's case.
49 There be regularly (unless it be in special cases) three incidents to a
Subject born: The like.
1 That the Parents be under the actual obedience of the King. 2 That the place
of his birth be within the Kings Dominion: And 3 The time of his birth is
chiefly to be considered, for he cannot be a Subject borne of one Kingdom,
that was born under the ligeance of a King of another Kingdom, albeit
afterward one Kingdom descend to the King of the other.

Co. l. 8. 54. a. 3. Syms case.
50 If a man be seized of an house in right of his wife, Estovers incident to a
house.
and another grants to the Baron and his heirs to have sufficient Estovers to
burn in the house; In this case the Estovers are incident and appurtenant to
the house, and shall descend to the issue of the Baron and Feme: So likewise,
if one has an house of the part of the Mother, and one grant to him and his
heirs competent house-boot to be burnt in the same house; Here, those Estovers
are incident to the house; and therefore, albeit that was a new purchase, yet
it shall go with the house to the heir of the part of the Mother.

Imprisonment incident to a Fine.
51 Unto every Fine imposed in Court, Imprisonment is incident; Co. l. 8. 59.
b. 3. ^eechers case.
And therefore in all actions, Quare vi and armis, as Rescous, trespass, vi
and armis, etc. if the Defendant upon judgment given against him, be fined, he
shall also be imprisoned; For, when the judgment is, quod defendens capiatur,
that is as much to say, as quod capiatur, quousque finem fecerit, etc.

A rent incident to a reversion.
52 If a man make a lease of three acres all of equal value per annum, Co. l.
8. 79. b. 3. Wiat Weilds case.
rendering 3 s. rent, and the Lessor grants the reversion of one acre, and ye
Tenant attorns, the Grantee shall have 12 d. rent; For, albeit there was but
one lease, one reversion, and one rent, yet that rent being incident to the
reversion, which was severable, shall therefore attend upon the reversion, and
upon every part of it.

Incidents to Corporations.
53 When a body politic is incorporated by prescription by a certain name,
then to implead, or to be impleaded, to grant and purchase, Co. lib. 10. 29. b.
4. The case of Suttons Hospital. Co. lib. 11. 77. a. 3. Magdalen College case.
etc. are things incident unto it.

Incidents inseparable.
54 If the Donee in tail holds of the Donor by fealty, and the Donor by deed
enrolled grants the fealty to the King, that grant is merely void; because
fealty is an incident inseparable to the reversion, as it was holden 26 Ass.
Pl. 66. So also if the founder of a College, etc. will grant his Foundership
to the King by deed enrolled, that is void; because it is inseparable to the
blood, as it was holden, Co. l. 11. 78. a. 3. the same case.
Tempore H. 8. B. R. tit. And therefore if before the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap.
2. (which was to make good all Grants made either by or to the Queen) a grant
had been made to the Queen of such inseparable incidents, as of a Foundership,
or of such services of Donee in tail, as aforesaid, that Act would not have
made such grants good, because such things are not grantable, etc.

Estovers.
55 Estovers or wood granted to be burnt in such an house, 12 Eliz. 381. Finch
15.
shall go to him that has the house, by whatsoever title he has it; for one
is inseparably incident to the other.

Fealty.
56 Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Homage, 7. E. 3. 11.
the Lord releaseth his fealty; this is void, for Fealty is incident to Homage.
Finch 15.

An office.
57 An office of skill and diligence, 12 Eliz. 379.
or an Annuity pro concilio impendendo, cannot be forfeited by attainder of
Treason. Finch 15.

Court Baron. Fair.
58 A Court Baron is incident to a Manor, 19 H. 8. Br. Incidents 34.
and a Court of Pipowders to a Fair: And therefore one cannot grant the Manor
or Fair, reserving those Courts, Finch 15.

Castle-guard.
59 Where one holds of a man to keep his Castle, 31 E. 3. Assise 441.
the Lord cannot grant his Castle-guard, reserving his Castle. Finch 15.

Covenant incident to the ^and.
60 It has been adjudged, Co. Inst. pars 1 384. b. 4.
that where two Coparceners make partition of land, and the one made a covenant
with the other, to acquit her and her heirs of a suit that issued out of the
land, the Covenantee aliened; In this case, the Assignee shall have an action
of Covenant, albeit he was a stranger to the Covenant, because the acquitall
did run with the land, and was incident unto it, in whose hands soever it
should come, 42 E. 3. per Finchden.

Covenant ^^ns with the ^and.
61 A. seized of the Manor of D. whereof a Chapel was parcel, Co. ib. 385.
a. 1.
a Prior with the assent of his Covent covenanteth by deed indented with A. and
his heirs to celebrate Divine Service in his Chapel weekly, for the Lord of
the said Manor, and his servants, etc. In this case, the Assignees shall have
an action of Covenant, albeit they were not named, for that the remedy by
Covenant does run with the land, to give damages to the party grieved, and is
(as it were) incident and appurtenant to the Manor: But if the Covenant had
been with a stranger to celebrate Divine Service in the Chapel of A. and his
heirs, there the Assignee shall not have an action of Covenant; for the
Covenant cannot be annexed to the Manor, because the Covenantee was not seized
of the Manor.

F. N. B. 138. l.
62 In some case the heir shall have an action of Detinue for Charters, albeit
he has not the land, as if I be enfeoffed with warranty, A detinue for
charters.
and I enfeoff another with warranty in fee; Here, my heir shall have a Writ
of Detinue for the deed, by which I was enfeoffed, to the end he may have the
advantage of the warranty, etc.

Co. l. 7. 9. b. 1. Calvin's case.
63 Ligeance and obedience on the Subjects part to his Prince, Ligeance
inseparably incident in all places to the subject.
is an inseparable incident to that power and protection whereby the Prince may
command, and ought to defend his Subject; And this ligeance and obedience,
which that power and protection thus draws after them cannot be local or
confined to any certain place or Kingdom, but follows the Subject whethersoever
he goes; And therefore it is truly said, Qui abjurat regnum, amittit regnum,
sed non Regem, amittit patriam, sed non patrem patriae, etc. for
notwithstanding the abjuration, he still owes the King his ligeance, and still
remains within his protection; because the King, if he please, may pardon and
restore him to his Country again, etc.

Littl.. 366. Co. Inst. pars 1. 227. b. 4.
64 If a man seized of lands in fee lets them for life without deed, A
condition incident to as estate for life.
rendering rent with clause of re-entry upon non-payment of the rent, whereupon
if the Lessor enter, and the Lessee bring an Assize of Novel Disseisin, the
Jurors may find the matter at large, and the Justices ought to adjudge it for
the Tenant; albeit (regularly) a condition is not valid without deed showed in
Court, and that the Lessor show no deed; for they that have conusance of a
thing, are to have conusance also of all incidents and dependence thereupon,
and (in this case) the condition is an incident necessarily depending upon the
estate for life, which was perfected by livery. Vide supra 28.

Dyer 2. 1, 2. 6 H. 8.
65 Emson avows for Rentcharge granted to him by a stranger, Rent and land
incident to the person.
who was seized of the land, where, etc. pro consilio impendendo, the
Plaintiff pleads in bar, that the Defendant was attainted of Treason and
committed to the Tower, and yet the Grantor had need of Counsel, and could not
have access, etc. and upon demurrer the Judgment was, that the Avowant should
have return; because the rent being incident to the person of Emson, could not
be granted over, or forfeited: So likewise land given by the King to a Duke to
support his dignity, cannot be granted over. See Max. 45.

Dyer 45. 35. and 36. 30 H. 8.
66 The King can by no way grant or sever the tenure and seigniory in Chief
from the Crown, Tenure in Capite.
for no Subject can take it of his grant with such a prerogative; And therefore
if the King make a release to his Tenant in Capite to hold by a penny, and not
in Capite, this is a void release, for that tenure is merely incident to the
person and Crown of the King, and has such a prerogative, that it cannot be
held of any Subject, as the Tenant in Frankalmoigne cannot hold of any other
than of the Donor and of his person, because it is a special tenure: Also, if
the King at this day make a gift in tail to hold of him in Capite, and after
he grant the reversion of that land to another in fee, neither the tenure nor
service pass to the Grantee, but remain in the King, because they are not
incident to the reversion, but to the person of the King.

Dyer 175. 25. 132 Eliz.
67 The office of Exigenter of London being void, Exigenter of London.
and Coke Chief Justice of the C. B. being then also dead, Queen Mary during
the vacation of the said places conferred by her Letters Patents the Exigenters
office upon Colshil, and then made Brown Chief Justice of that Court: But
Brown refuses Colshil, and admits Scrogges thereunto; And in this case it was
resolved by all the Judges and others (save the Justices of the Common Bench)
that the said office did not appertain to the Qu. to grant, but only in the
dispose of the Chief Justice for the time being, as an inseparable incident to
his person and place, and that by reason of common usage and prescription.

^ase of De^esnes.
68 A Prior makes a lease of the Demesnes of a Manor rendering rent, Dyer 233.
10. 7 Eliz.
the King after the dissolution makes a lease for years of the Manor; And it
was adjudged, that by the name of the Manor the rent and reversion of the
Demesnes passed.

^hattel vest^^.
69 A wardship fell to the Bishop of Durham by a tenure of him in Capite, who
dies before seizure, yet his Executors shall have it, Dyer 277. 57. 10 Eliz.
and not the King or Successor, for it was incident to his person, and a
chattel vested in him before his death.

42 Quod tacit intelligitur, deesse non videtur. V. 64. 11.
^opiholds.
1 When custom has once created Copiholds of Inheritance, Co. l. 4. 22. a. 3.
in Brownes case.
and that the land shall be descendable, then the Law does also direct the
descent according to the Maxims and rules of the Common Law, as incidents to
every estate descendable: So (5 E. 4. 7.) when uses have gained the eeputation
of Inheritances descendable, the Common Law shall direct the descent of them,
and that there shall be Possessio fratris of an use, as well as of other
Inheritances at the Common Law.

^ontract im^orts an As^umpsit.
2 Every contract executory imports in it self an Assumpsit; Co. l. 4. 94. a.
4. Slades case.
For when one agrees to pay money or to deliver any thing, he does thereby
assume and promise to pay or deliver it; and therefore when one sells any goods
to another, and agrees to deliver them at a day to come, and the other in
consideration thereof agrees to pay so much money at such a day; In this case
both the parties may have an action of Debt, or an action upon the case upon
Assumpsit: For the mutual executory agreement of both the parties imports in it
self, as well a reciprocal action upon the case, as an action of debt; And
with this agrees the Judgment in Read and Northwoods case, Pl. Co. fol. 128.

^xchange im^orts warran^^ and a con^ition.
3 In every exchange rightly made, Co. l. 4. 121 a. 4. Bastards case.
this word Excambium imports in it self (tacit) a condition, and also a
warranty, the one to give re-entry, the other Voucher and recompense, and all
in respect of the reciprocal consideration, the one land being given in
exchange for the other: but that is only a special warranty; for upon Voucher
by force thereof he shall not recover any other land in value, but that only
which was so given in exchange, etc. And as it is in case of warranty, so is it
also in case of the condition which the Law implies upon the exchange; for if
the exchange be betwixt A. and B. and A. aliens his exchanged land to another,
if the land which B. had in exchange, be evicted from him by an eigne title, B.
shall enter upon the alienee of A. etc.

^edi, and con^^ss^ implies ^arranty and (...) covenant.
4 If a man make a feoffment by this word, Dedi, Co. l. 5. 117. a. 3. Spencers
case.
which implies a warranty, the Assignee of the Feoffee shall not vouch: but if
a man make a lease for years by this word Concessi or Demisi, which imports a
covenant, if the Assignee of the Lessee be evicted, he shall have a writ of
Covenant; For the Lessee or his Assignee has the yearly profits of the land,
which increase by labor and industry, and if he should lose the land, he
should also lose his labor and cost, unless he were helped by implicit
covenant.

^ant of a ^ard.
5 If the Grantee of a Ward be impleaded, Co. l. 5. 18. a. ^. Ibid.
he shall vouch the Grantor; because this word Grant, in case of the grant of a
Ward (being a Chattel real) imports in it self a warranty, etc.

Co. l. 6. 36. b. 1. Bishop of Bathes case.
6 A. being Lessee for 60 years if he should so long live, Lessee from
Reversion^ has inter^s^ termini.
the reversion in B. and his heirs, B. grants a lease to C. Habendum; cum post,
sive per mortem, sursum redditionem, vel forisfacturam praedicti A. acciderit
vacare, etc. for 60 years: This last lease vesteth presently in C. in point of
Interest (and does not depend in contingency) to take effect in possession at
the end of the first term, if by any of these accidents the first lease shall
happen to be void; For, in this case, these words (which of them soever shall
first happen) are employed in Law; and the lease is not void for the
uncertainty, which of them will happen first, neither has the Lessee election
to choose which of them he pleases; as if the first Lessee surrender, the last
term takes place immediately after such surrender, etc.

Co. l. 7. 34. a. 4. Nevils case.
7 If the dignity of an Earldome had been entailed to the heirs male, A dignity
^^^feitable for treason before 26 H. 8. 13.
it might have been forfeited for Treason before the Stat. of 26 H. 8. cap. 13.
by reason of a secret condition in Law annexed unto it; for Earls are created
for two purposes, viz. Ad consulendum regi tempore pacis, and ad defendendum
Regem and patriam tempore belli; And therefore they wear a Cap and a Robe, in
token of Counsel, and are girded with a Sword, to represent them gallant
Champions, and Cavalliers: Now then when such a person against his duty, and
the end of his dignity commits Treason against the King, his dignity (though
entailed) is forfeited by that condition tacit annexed to his estate. Vide 32.
17.

Co. lib. 7. 40. Bedels case.
8 A man by Indenture between him and his wife of one part, Blood is a s^ficient
cons^deration to raise an use without expressing it (...)
his second son on the second part, and his third son of the third part, in
consideration of natural affection, and that the land may remain in his blood,
covenants to stand seized to the use of himself for life, after to his Feme
for life, after of the one moity to one son, and of the other moity to the
other son; In this case the use accrues to the Feme, although not named in the
considerations of the deed; because the express limitation of the use to her
(being his wife) imports in it self a sufficient consideration, etc. and the
rather because it is not repugnant to the deed: So also if I covenant, that in
consideration of fatherly love and affection to my eldest son, I will stand
seized to the use of my eldest son for life, or in tail, and after to the use
of my second son in tail, and after to the use to such an one my cousin in
fee; Here, albeit the consideration expressed in words respect only the eldest
son, yet the consideration apparent in the deed, in limiting the use to my
second son, or to my Cousin, is sufficient in Law to raise an use: In like
manner, if I covenant to stand seized to the use of my wife, son, or cousin,
this shall well raise an use without any express words of a consideration;
for, in that case, sufficient consideration appears, etc. Co. lib. 11. 25. a.
Henry Harpers case.

Co. l. 8. 34. b. 2. Pains case.
9 At the Common Law, if lands had been given to a woman, Tenant by (...)
courtesy.
and to the heirs of her body, and she had taken husband, and had issue, and
the issue had died, and the Feme also had died without other issue, by which
the inheritance of the land reverted to the Donor; In this case, the estate of
the Feme was determined, and yet the Baron shall be Tenant by the Courtesy;
for that is tacit employed in the grant.

Co. l. 8 82. a. 4. Vivyors case.
10 A. is bound to B. upon condition to stand to and abide the award of C. In an
action of Debt brought by B. against A. the Defendant pleads, that C. made no
award, the Plaintiff pleads, What is to (...) pleaded (...) an arbitrament
revo^^
that the Defendant discharged C. etc. In this case the Bond is forfeit, and
the Plaintiff need not aver, that C. had notice of the Countermand; for that is
employed in the words of the plea, Revocavit and abrogavit omnem authoritatem,
etc. because without notice it is no revocation of the authority; and
therefore, if there had not been notice, then the Defendant might have taken
issue, quod non revocavit, etc. and if no notice were given to C. it would have
been found for the Defendant; as if a man pleads, quod feoffavit, dedit, or
demisit pro termino vitae, that implies livery; for without livery it could not
be feoffment, gift, or demise for life: And therefore there is a diversity,
when two things are requisite to the performance of an act, and both things are
to be ^one by the same party, as in the case of feoffment, gift, demise,
revocation, countermand, etc. and when two things are requisite to be performed
by several persons, as upon the grant of a reversion, attornment is not employed
in it, and yet without attornment the grant has not perfection; but inasmuch
as the grant is made by one, and the attornment is to be made by another, it is
not employed in the pleading of the grant; but in the other cases both things
are to be done by one and the same party, etc. Bridges and Bentleys case, 21 H.
6. 3. accord. 28 H. 6. 6. and 6 H. 7. 10.

To use a manual occupation implies a ^rade.
11 James Wagoner was arrested at the suit of the Chamberlain of London, Co.
lib. 8. 129. a. 2. The case of the City of London.
upon the forfeiture of the pain of 5 l. for that he non existens libera
persona, etc. usus est manuali occupatione de Tallow-chandler etc. And upon the
return of the Habeas Corpus into the Kings Bench, the Court took advisement
upon that part of it, whereby it was averred, that he non existens, etc. usus
est manuali occupatione de Tallow-chandler, etc. and showed not that he sold
any Candles, etc. For if he made them for his own use, and sold none for
gain, he might well do it, as every one is permitted to bake or brew, etc. for
their own use, etc. but it seemed to be employed by the same averment, that it
was his trade, by which he got his living, viz. by selling the commodities of
his Trade, and not that he made them only for his own use; For it is not
properly said, that one uses a manual occupation, when he only does it for
himself, as he that brews or bakes for his own use, cannot be properly said to
use the occupation of Brewer or Baker, etc.

Malice praepence implied in indictments
12 If one kill a Minister of Justice in the execution of his office, Co. lib. 9
67. b. 3. Mackallies case.
the Indictment may well be general, viz. that the Prisoner felonice,
voluntary, and ex malitia sua praecogitata, etc. percussit, etc. without
alleging any special matter; for the evidence will well maintain the
Indictment, inasmuch as in this case the Law implies malice praepence: So if a
Thief, which offers to to rob a true man, kills the true man, in resisting the
Thief, this is murder of malice praepence; or if one kill another without any
provocation, or without any malice praepence that can be proved, the Law
adjudgeth that to be murder, and implies malice; And in both these cases they
may be indicted generally, that they killed de malice praepence; for malice
implied by the Law, being given in evidence, is sufficient to maintain the
general indictment: And so it was adjudged in Mackalleyes case, for killing
Fells a Sergeant of London.

Nuper implies the time past.
13 If a man plead, Co. l. 10. 59. b. 1. The Bishop of Sarums case. Co. l. 10.
75. b. 2. The case of the Marshalsea.
that such a grant made per Iohannem nuper Episcopum Sarum, etc. was void;
These words nuper Episcopum, etc. imply and import, that now he is not Bishop
of Sarum.

Jurisdiction of a Court prohibited.
14 When a Court is prohibited by Statute to hold plea of certain causes, if
one be sued there contrary to that Statute, he may not only have a Supersedeas
(in the nature of a prohibition) to cause the Judge to cease proceeding, but
likewise shall have an action upon that Statute against the party, that sues
contrary to the same Statute; notwithstanding that it is in course of legal
proceeding, and that the words of the Statute do not expressly give any such
action to the party; for, that way of relief is a benefit, which (as a
consequent) is implied in every such Statute.

Co. lib. 11. 76. a. 4. Magdalen College case.
15 By the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 2. Good con^^^^ration imp^^ed.
no conveyances of the Queen are confirmed, but such as are for the
satisfaction of debts, etc. and other good consideration; for so it is in the
preamble, and although (good) is omitted in the body of the Act, yet it is
necessarily employed, not only by the connection of the p^eamble to the purview,
but also by this word (consideration) which (as in 16 Eli^. Dyer 336.) is a
cause or occasion meritorious, requiring a mutual recompense in Deed or in Law.

Co. lib. 11. 86. b. 3. The case of Monopolies.
16 It appears by the Writ of Ad quod damnum (in F. N. B. 222. Monopoli^^
) that every gift or grant of the King has this condition, either expressly or
implicitly annexed unto it: Ita quod patria per donationem illam magis solito
non oneretur, seu gravetur; And therefore every grant, made in grievance, or
prejudice of the Subject, is void.

Co. l. 11. 98. a. 4. James Bags case.
17 There is a condition in Law tacit annexed to the freedom or liberty of a
Citizen, or B^rgesse, which if he break, A Freema^ a Corpora^
he may be dis-infranchised, as if he commit any act, which is against the duty
and trust of his freedom, and to the prejudice of the City or Borough, and
against the Oath which he took, when he was made Freeman, these are causes of
his removal.

Fitz. N. B. 134. f.
18 If the Tenant holds of his Lord by Homage Ancestrel, Homage Ancestrel imp^ a
warranty.
and is impleaded; Albeit he has no charter of it, yet shall he have a Writ of
Warrantia Cartae against the Lord, for that tenure implies a Warranty.

Fitz. ibid. g.
19 If a man without deed makes a gift in tail, Warranty a^plied.
or a lease for life rendering rent, and after he is impleaded in an action,
wherein he cannot be vouched; In that case he shall have a Writ of Warrantia
cartae against the Donor, or Lessor, or his heir, that has the reversion; for
the reversion, and the rent reserved makes a Warranty in Law by the Statute of
Bigamis, cap. ultimo, albeit he has no deed of it.

Fitz. ibid. h.
20 If a man grant land by these words, Dedi, concessi, Dedi implies a warranty.
etc. he shall be bound to Warranty during his life (but not his heirs, unless
he be thereunto especially charged by the Grantor) for these words, Dedi,
concessi, etc. imply a Warranty; and if the Feoffee be impleaded, he shall have
a Writ of Warrantia cartae against the Feoffor by force of those words in the
deed, etc. 4.

Dyer 26. 171. 28 H. 8.
21 Russell brings an action upon the case against A. for saying that he was a
false Thief, An action of the case for words.
and that such a night he would have robbed him to his damage, etc. And A.
comes, Et defend it vim, etc. and quoad propalationem, etc. querens non fuit
damnum in forma qua, etc. to which plea the Plaintiff demurred in Law, and
Judgment was given for him; because (by implication) the words are confessed,
and no damage can be more grievous, then taking away a man's good name, and a
Writ of Inquiry was awarded.

22 Vide Max. 19. Pl. 1.

Dyer 41. 4. etc. 30 H. 8.
23 In a Replevin the Plaintiff is nonsuit, Replevin. Second deliverance.
whereupon the Defendant had a Returno habendo, but about the same time the
Plaintiff prays a Writ of second deliverance, and had it, and both the Writs
were in the Sheriffs hands at one time unserved; In this case, the Writ of
second deliverance is a Supersedeas to the Returno habendo, by which it is
employed, that the Sheriff ought not to serve the Returno habendo.

Dyer 135. 13. 3, 4 P. M.
24 In a Quare Impedit the Plaintiff entitles himself to the next avoydance by
the grant of the right Patron to a stranger, An administration in Law.
who made two Executors, and died, and for that the Executors granted the next
avoidance to him, Et hoc absqueta ostentione literarum, without showing the
testament of the first Grantee: And in this case it seems he need not show
them, because albeit the Executors never proved the testament, yet their grant
of the next avoydance was good, for that it was an administration employed by
Law.

Debt for rent.
25 A lease for years is made of an house with diverse Implements rendering rent,
the Lessor enters and makes feoffment, Dyer 212. ^7. 4 Eliz.
the Lessee reenters, and for rent arreare the Feoffee brings debt, and
adjudged mainteinable, albeit there w^^ no privity; Howbeit, the regresse of
the Lessee is an attornment in L^^, whereupon it seems the Law creates a
privity: For, in this case, the rent was not extinct, but only suspended,
until the Termor by his regresse revived the reversion.

Ejectione Firmae.
26 In an Ejectione Firmae, of a lease of a Rectory, Dyer 304. 52. 14 Eliz.
the verdict passed for the Plaintiff, and it was moved in arrest of Judgment,
that it was not showed that the Parson was in life; Howbeit, because it was
averred by Implication in the Court by these words, Fuit and adhuc est
seisitus, etc. the Plaintiff had judgment.

Quare Impedit.
27 A Church was void by the taking of a second Benefice upon the Statute of 21
H. 8. 13. and lapse devolved to the Queen, Dyer 360. 7. 20 Eliz.
who presents A. who was admitted, instituted, and inducted, and afterward the
Queen presents B. A. dies, the Patron brings a Quare Impedit against B. and
counts of the avoydance and lapse supra, and that the Queen presented A. who
was admitted and instituted, and that the Church is now void by the death of A.
And the question was, whether or no this was sufficient without saying
Inducted: And it seemed it was, because the Plaintiff alleged, that the
Church was void by the death of A. which implies Induction, and then it was not
revocable.

28 Vide Hob. 5. Gardener against Bellingham. 8. Yardly against Ellill.

43 Things by reason of another are in the same plight.
Possessio fratris.
1 Albeit the Maxim in Law be, Co. Inst. pars 1 15. b. 3.
Possessio fratris facit sororem esse haeredem, yet if the Sister die, living
the Brother, her issue shall inherit before the brother of the half blood,
because he personates the Mother, and therefore shall succeed the brother in
the inheritance.

Acceptance of Rent.
2 Tenant in tail makes a lease for forty years, reserving a rent, Co. ibid.
46. b. 1.
to commence ten years after: Tenant in tail dies, the issue enters and
enfeoffs A. the ten years expire, the Lessee enters; if A. accepts the rent,
the lease is good, for he shall have the fame election, that the issue in tail
had, either to make it good, or to avoid it, etc.

Coparceners.
3 If there be two Coparceners of a reversion, Co. ibid. 53. b. 4.
and Waste is committed, and the one of them die, the Aunt and the Niece shall
join in an action of Waste.

Courtesy. Dower. Waste.
4 A Tenant by the Courtesy or in Dower, Co. ibid. 54. a. 1.
can hold of none but of the heir, and his heirs by descent; and therefore if
they grant over their whole estate, and the Grantee does Waste, yet the heir
shall have an action of Waste against them, and recover the land against the
Assignee.

Waste.
5 If Tenant for life grant over his estate upon condition, Co. ib. 54. a. 3.
and the Grantee does Waste, and the Grantor re-entreth for the condition
broken, the action of Waste shall be brought against the Grantee, and the place
wasted recovered, etc. 21.

Tenant at ^ill. ^aron and ^me.
6 If a woman make a lease at will reserving a rent, Co. ibid. 55. b. 4. Co.
lib. 5. 10. Hensteads case.
and then takes Hu^band, this is no countermand of the lease at will; but the
Husband and Wife shall have an action of Debt for the rent: And so is it if a
lease be made to a woman at will, reserving a rent, and the Lessee takes
Husband, this is no countermand of the lease, but the Lessor may have an action
of Debt, and distrain them for the rent: So if the Husband and Wife make a
lease at will of the wives land, reserving a rent, and the husband die, yet the
lease continues: In like manner, if a lease be made by two, to two others at
will, and the one of the Lessors and of the Lessees die, the lease at will is
not determined in either of these cases, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 58. b. 1.
7 Tenant for years, Tenant by Statute Merchant, Staple, Elegit, Domini pro
tempore.
at will, Guardian in Chivalry, etc. may be Lords of a customary Manor, as
well as those that have fee; for ^^^eit they be not properly seized, but
possessed, yet are they Domini pro tempore, not only to make admittances, but
to grant voluntary copies of ancient Copihold lands, which come into their
hands by forfeiture, escheat, or otherwise; Also admittances made by
Disseisors, Abators, Intruders, Tenant at sufferance, or others that have
defeasible titles, stand good against them that right have; because it is a
lawful act, and they are compellable to do it; Howbeit they cannot make
voluntary grants of Copies, as aforesaid, to bind the Disseisees, etc. because
they come in by wrong, and have estates that may he defeated.

Co. ibid. 58. b. 2.
8 In some special case an estate may be granted by Copy by one, Copiholds
grantable by an Executor.
that is not Dominus pro tempore, nor that has any thing in the Manor; As if
the Lord of a Manor by his Will in writing, devises that his Executors shall
grant the customary Tenements of the Manor according to the custom, etc. for
the payment of his debts, and dies, the Executor having nothing in the Manor,
may make grants according to the custom of the Manor.

Co. ibid. 59. b. 3.
9 If the Lord of the Manor for the time being be Lessee for life, Dominus pro
tempore, co^pellable to admit.
or for years, Guardian, or any, that has a particular interest, or Tenant at
will of a Manor (all which are accounted in Law Domini pro tempore) do take a
surrender into his hands, and before admittance the Lessee for life dies, or
the years, interest, or custody do end or determine, or the Will is
determined, though the Lord comes in above the lease for life or for years,
the custody, or any other particular interest or tenancy at will, yet shall he
be compelled to make admittance according to the surrender: And so it was
holden in the Earl of Arundels case, in 17 Eliz. See more of this Co. l. 4. in
the Copihold cases, and T^in. 1. Jac. Inter Shepland and Ridler, in Repl. in
Co. Ba. the case of Guardian in soccage adjudged.

Co. ib. 76. b. 1.
10 In many cases the heir shall be in ward, The Lord that have Wardship,
though not dying seized.
albeit the Tenant died not seized, etc. nor in the Homage of the Lord: As if
the Tenant makes a feoffment in fee upon condition, and the Feoffor dies,
after his death the condition is broken, the heir within age enters for the
condition broken; In this case the heir shall be in ward, and yet the Feoffor
had no estate or right in the land at the time of his death, but only a
condition, and which was broken after his decease: but because the condition
restores the Tenant to the land in nature of a descent (for he shall be in by
descent) by the same reason shall it restore the Lord to the wardship, etc.

Co. ib. 89. b. 4.
11 If a stranger enters into the lands of the Infant within age of 14 years,
and takes the profits of the same, A stranger Guardian is soccage accountable.
the Infant may charge him as Guardian in Soccage: And this does well agree
with the writ of account against a Guardian in soccage; for the words be, Idem
B. praefato A. rationabilem compotum suum de exitibus pervenientibus de terris
and tenementis suis in N. quae tenentur in soccagio, and quorum custodiam Idem
B. habuit, dum praedicta A. infra aetatem fuit, and dicitur; and true it is,
that in judgment of Law he had the custody of the lands, and is called Tutor
alienus, whereas the right Guardian in Soccage is called Tutor proprius;
Neither is it any plea for him to deny, that he is prochein amy, but he must
answer to the taking of the profits, as Littleton says, Sect. 124.

Co. ibid. 108. a. 4.
12 If one holds land of a common person in gross as of his person, and not
of any Manor, Tenure in Capite.
etc. and this Seignory escheateth to the King, (yea though it be by attainder
of Treason) he holds of the person son of the King, as he held before of the
person of the Subject, and not of the King in Capite; because the original
tenure was not created by the King: And therefore it is directly said, that a
tenure of the King in Capite is, when the land is not holden of the King, as of
any Honor, Castle, Manor, etc. But when the land is holden of the King as of
his Crown. Vide Dyer 44. 28. etc. 30 H. 8. and Mag. Car. cap. 31. and 25. 4.

Advowson appendant.
13 An Advowson is appendant to the Manor of Dale, Co. ib. 122 a. 1.
of which Manor the Manor of Sale is holden, the Manor of Sale is made
parcel of the Manor of Dale by way of Escheat; In this case, the Advowson is
still only appendant to the Manor of Dale.

Common appendant.
14 If Common appendant be claimed to a Manor, Co. ib. 122. a. 4.
yet (in rei veritate) it is appendant to the Demesnes and not to the services;
and therefore if a tenancy escheat, the Lord shall not increase his Common by
reason of that.

An Assise for ^ent after dis^eisin.
15 If the Tenant rescue the Distress, Co. Inst. pars 1. 160. b. 3.
and after is disseised of the tenancy; yet an assise lies against him, for
the Disseisin done of the rent by the Rescous; etc.

Coparcenary ^n other ^ands.
16 If one of the Parceners take Baron and die, Co. ib. 174. b. 4. etc.
the Baron being Tenant by the Courtesy is compellable by a writ de partitione
facienda, to make partition, and shall be jointly impleaded with the other
Coparcener; for he does continue the state of Coparcenary, as the other
Parcener does, etc. So likewise if there be two Coparceners, and one of them
does alien in fee, the Alienee and the other Coparcener are Tenants in common,
and several writs of Praecipe shall be brought against them, and yet the
Parcener may have a writ of partition against the Alienee at the Common Law,
which is a stronger case, than the case put of Tenant by the Courtesy.

The heir in Hotchpot.
17 If the Donees in Frankmarriage die before the lands be put into Hotchpot
with the other Coparcener, Littl.. 270. Co. ib. 178. a.
the heir of the Donees may well do it.

Descent shall not take away entry.
18 If a Dissesor make a lease to a man and to his heirs during the life of I.
S. and the Lessee dies, Co. ib. 239. a. 3.
living I. S. this shall not take away the entry of the Disseisee; because he
that died seized, had but a Freehold, and heirs in that case were added to
prevent an occupant: For an heir in that case shall not have his age, etc. as
it was adjudged in Lambs case, P. 16 Eliz. in Co. Ba.

Right left after recovery.
19 If the Disseisee disseise the heir of the Disseisor, Co. ib. 266. a. 4.
albeit the heir recover the land against the Disseisee, yet shall he leave
the proceeding right in the Disseisee: So if a woman that has right of Dower
disseise the heir, and he recover the land against her, yet shall he leave the
right of Dower in her.

Attornment.
20 If either the Grantor or ye Grantee of a Seigniory, rent, reversion, Co.
ib. 315. a. 4.
remainder, etc. die before attornment, the attornment is thereby
countermanded; But albeit the Tenant of the land die, or grant over his estate
to another, yet may he, that has his estate either by descent or grant attorn
at any time.

Wast main^einable.
21 Regularly, when the reversion is divested, Co. ib. 356. a. 4.
the Lessor cannot have an action of Waste; yet in some special cases an action
of Waste shall lie, albeit the Lessor had nothing in the reversion at the time
of the Waste done: As if Tenant for life make a feoffment in fee upon
condition, and Waste is done, and after the Lessee re-enter for the condition
broken; In this case, the Lessor shall have an action of Waste: So likewise if
Lessee for life be disseised, and Waste is done, the Lessee reenters; Here
also, an action of Waste shall be maintained against the Lessee, etc. 5.

Co. ibid. 366. b. 3.
22 A warranty that commenceth by disseisin is properly, Warranty that begins
by disseisin.
when the disseisin is done immediately to the heir, that is to be bound by
it; And yet if the Father be Tenant for life, the remainder to the same in fee,
the father by covin and consent makes a lease for years, to the end that the
Lessee shall make a feoffment in fee, to whom the father shall release with
warranty, and all this is executed accordingly, the father dies; Here, this
warranty shall not bind, albeit the Disseisin was not done immediately to the
son; for the feoffment of the Lessee is a disseisin to the father, who is
particeps criminis: So it is if one brother make a gift in tail to another,
and the Uncle disseise the Donee, and enfeoffeth another with warranty, the
Uncle dies, and the warranty descends upon the Donor, and then the Donee
dies without issue: Here, albeit the Disseisin was done to the Donee, and not
to the Donor, yet the warranty shall not bind the Donor: So likewise if the
father, the son, and a third person be Ioyntenants in fee, the father makes a
feoffment in fee of the whole with warranty, and dies, the son dies, the
third person shall not only avoid the feoffment for his own part, but also for
the part of the son, and he shall also take advantage, that (in this case) the
warranty commenced by disseisin, though the disseisin was done to another, etc.
Co. l. 5. 79. b. Fitzherberts case.

Co. ibid. 372. a. 4.
23 By the Statute of the 32 H. 8. cap. 36. Fine bars a^ entail in reversion.
a fine with proclamations according to the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 24. shall
bar the estate tail, but not him in the reversion or remainder, if he makes
his claim, and pursue his action within five years after the estate tail
spent, etc. Howbeit if a gift be made to the eldest son, and to the heirs of
his body, the remainder to the father and to the heirs of his body, the father
dies, the eldest son levieth a fine with proclamations, etc. and dies without
issue, this shall bar the second son; for, the remainder descended to the
eldest, and therefore what the father might have done by force of a fine, the
eldest son shall in this case also do, etc.

Co. lib. 3. 84. The case of Fines. Dalison, 2 El. and 7 Eliz.
24 If the Lessor enter for the condition broken, Debt for rent after
surrender, etc.
or if the Lessee surrender unto the Lessor; Here, the estate and term is
determined, and yet the Lessor shall have an action of debt for the arrearages
due before the condition broken, or the surrender made, as appears in Fitz. N.
B. 120. and 122. 30 E. 3. 7. 6 H. 7. 3. b. (contrary to the book of 32 E. 3.
tit. Bar 262. which is not Law) and this is in respect of the contract
betwixt the Lessor and the Lessee.

Co. lib. 3. 23. b. 4. Walkers case.
25 A man may prescribe in a Watercourse leading to his Grist-mill,
Prescription (...) a Waterhouse
albeit it was of late time changed from a Fulling-mill to a Grist-mil, Et vice
versa, because that alteration is not of the substance of the prescription, but
the Mill may be so described, to show the nature and quality of it; and
(doubtless) at first he might prescribe in the Watercourse before any Mill was
built.

Co. l. 4. 87. a. 1. Luttrels case. Co. ibid.
26 If a man have Estovers either by grant or prescription belonging to his
house, Prescription (...) Estovers, etc.
although he alter and change the rooms and chambers of the house, as to make
the Hall to be the Parlour, and the Parlour to be the Hall, and such like
alteration of the quality of the house, and not of the house it self, and
without making any new Chimneys, whereby the owner of the wood may suffer
prejudice, or albeit he make new Chimneys, or an addition to the house, yet
spend none of the Estovers in th^se new Chimneys, or in the part newly added,
does in none of these cases destroy the ancient prescription; for then many
prescriptions would be destroyed: There is the same law of Conduits,
Water-pipes, and the like: Also if a man have an ancient window in his Hall,
and after he convert his Hall to a Parlour or any other use, yet his neighbor
cannot stop it, for he can prescribe to have a light in such a part of his
house.

^ corporation ^ranslated en^oyes the ancient privileges.
27 If a Corporation has Franchises and Privileges by grant or prescription,
and after they are incorporate by another name, Co. ibid. b. 1.
as if they were Bailiffs and Burgesses before, now they are Major and
Cominalty; or Prior and Covent before, and after they are translated to a Deane
and Chapter, etc. Although in these cases, the quality and name of their
Corporation is changed, and especially in the case of the Prior and Covent (for
of Regular, which are dead persons in the Law, they are made Secular) yet the
new Corporation shall enjoy all the Franchises, Privileges, and Hereditaments
which the old Corporation had, be it by grant or prescription; for no man can
be prejudiced by it, etc.

A stranger ^ound by a cu^tome.
28 In debt against an Administrator upon an Obligation, Co. l. 5. 83. a.
Snellings case.
the Defendant pleads, that the custom of London is, that the Administrator
shall be bound to pay a debt upon a simple contract, as upon an Obligation,
etc. and that he had already paid I. S. etc. And in this case it was adjudged,
that the Plaintiff being a stranger, was as well bound by that custom, as if
he had been a Citizen. Vide 1 E. 4. 6. accord.

Presentation ^o an Advow^on.
29 Winsor Plaintiff has an Advowson of two parts, Co. l. 5 102. Winsors case.
the Defendant of the third, the Plaintiff presents one, the Incumbent dies,
then in the time of E. 6. he presents one Parry, who in the time of Queen Mary
was deprived, quia conjugatus, etc. whereupon the Defendant presents his
Clerk, who 1 Eliz. was also deprived by Juell and other High Commissioners,
and the first sentence adjudged void, and Parry restored, the Clerk of the
Defendant dies, Parry also dies, the Defendant presents, because his Clerk was
deprived, whereupon the Plaintiff demurres; And in this Quare Impedit judgment
was given against the Plaintiff; for albeit the Clerk of the Defendant was
Parson for the time, to all purposes, and during the first deprivation Parry
was not Incumbent; yet when the second sentence came, then was Parry incumbent
again by force of the first presentation, institution, and induction, and
there needed no new institution, etc. And by force of the second sentence the
Presentee of the Defendant was removed, and Parry restored: And therefore when
Parry dyed, which was the last Presentee of the Plaintiff, the Defendant shall
present as in his turn, and by force of the second sentence Parry was Parson in
the same plight and condition that he was in upon his first presentation,
notwithstanding the presentment of the other by the Defendant, etc.

^nferiour Courts.
30 When a writ of right is directed to the Lord of a Manor, Co. l. 6. 11. a.
Jentlemans case.
or his Bailiffs, or a Iusticies, or other Vicontiel Writs are directed to the
Sheriff, etc. that shall not change the nature or jurisdiction of those
Courts, as to make the Lord or Sheriff (to whom those Writs are directed) to
be Judges of those Courts respectively, which were not so before; but the
Suitors do still remain Judges thereof; Neither yet shall the direction of
those Writs to the Lord or Sheriff, as aforesaid (albeit they are in
themselves matter of Record) constitute the Lord or Sheriff to be Judges of
Record, or a Court Baron, Hundred Court, or County Court, to be Courts of
Record; For upon a Judgment given in any of those Courts, a writ of False
judgment lies, and not a writ of Error, etc.

No change by ^emise of the ^ing.
31 When the King demises his Crown to the next Successor, Co. lib. 7. 29. b.
4. Discontinuance of process, per mort de la Roygne.
upon the general resummons by the Kings writ (which begins thus, Mandamus
vobis, quod ad sectam nostram animumque ligeorum populi nostri, etc.) the
original and issue (if any be joined) is revived; for that is a full record,
and ought to be entered; it is otherwise of the process before issue joined,
voucher, garnishment, etc. yet they shall be also revived upon a special writ,
reciting all the special proceeding: And it appears by the book of Entries,
tit. Reattachment, 499. that if the Issue be joined, and the Jury returned, and
a day given for trial, before which day the King dies, yet by special
resummons all shall be revived, for the Jury was returned of record, and the
record thereof was made full and perfect, etc.

Co. lib. 11. 64. a. 2. Doctor Fosters case.
32 It is ordained by the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 2. Statutes for going to
Church.
That every person shall resort to their Parish Church, or (upon let thereof)
to some other every Sunday and Holiday, etc. And by the Statute of 23 Eliz.
cap. 1. That every person not repairing to Church according to 1 Eliz. 2. being
thereof lawfully convict, shall forfeit twenty pound for every month they so
make default, and that of the forfeitures aforesaid, the Queen, etc. shall have
the two third parts, viz. the one to her own use, the other for relief of the
poor, etc. and the other third part the prosecutor shall and may recover by
action of debt, etc. And by the Statute of the 29 Eliz. cap. 6. it is enacted,
That every such offender once convicted, shall afterward in Easter and
Michaelmas Terms, pay unto the Exchequer twenty pound for every months
absence from Church, etc. and if default be thereof made, etc. the Queens
Majesty, etc. shall and may by process out of the Exchequer seize all the
offenders goods, and two parts of his lands, etc. And lastly, by the Statute of
35 Eliz. cap. 1. It is ordained, etc. that for the more speedy recovering, etc.
of the forfeitures, etc. payable to the Queen, etc. by virtue of this Act, and
of 23 Eliz. 1. all and every such forfeitures, etc. shall be recovered, etc. by
action of debt, etc. in the Kings Bench, the Common Pleas, or Exchequer, as
other debts may be recovered, etc. Here albeit the Statutes of the 29 and 35.
seems to alter the law of the 23. in respect of part of the penalty given to
the prosecutor by the 23. and being all of it mentioned, as given to the Queen
in the other two subsequent Acts: Yet the Act of the 23. remains in full force
according to the tenor of the same, notwithstanding ye said subsequent Acts;
because those two Acts do not give the penalty to any new person, but to the
same person to whom the Statute of the 23. gives it, viz. to the Queen, etc.
and they are but acts of addition (especially that of the 35.) to give a more
speedy remedy, than was given by that of the 23. etc. As in a Writ of Mesne,
the process at the Common Law was Distress infinite, and although the Statute
of Westminster. 2. cap. 9. gives a more speedy process, and in the end a Forejudger,
yet the Plaintiff may take which process he will, either at the Common Law, or
upon the said Statute, because both are in the affirmative. Vide ibid. many
authorities accordant, etc.

Co. ibid. 4.
33 In many cases the designation of one person in a late Act of Parliament,
Grant of Ward.
shall not exclude another person which was authorized to do the same thing by
an Act precedent. It is provided by the Statute of the 8 H. 6. cap. 16. that
after office found, etc. he which found himself grieved, might (within the
month) after traverse, and to take the lands and tenements to farm, and that
then the Chancellor, Treasurer, and other Officer shall demise unto him to
farm, until, etc. (Vide 13 E. 4. 8.) And now by the Statute of the 1 H. 8.
cap. 16. he has liberty by the space of three months: And after the Statute
of the 32 H. 8. cap. 40. gives authority to the Master of the Wards, with the
advice of one of the Council to make a lease of the Wards lands, or of an
Idiots, during the time that they shall remain in the Kings hands: Here, albeit
the last designs another person, yet does it not utterly take away the first:
For, if before any lease made by the Master of the Wards, the Chancellor and
Treasurer make one according to the Statute of 8 H. 6. then cannot the said
Master demise the lands: So also if the Master grant them first to another, the
Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. cannot demise them to the party grieved, as
Stanford holds Praer. fol. 69. a. and b. where he mentions the rule, Leges
posteriores prio^es contrarias abrogant. In 43 Ass. Pl. 9. the Statute of 13 E.
3. de Mercatoribus, which gives assise to the Tenant by Statute Merchant,
takes not away the Assize, which the Tenant of the Franktenement had before,
but both may well stand together; So in 33 H. 8. Dyer 50. if it should be
enacted, that the youngest son should have an appeal of the death of his
father, that would not exclude the eldest son of his fuit, because there are no
words of restraint, etc.

^ncient De^esne.
34 In a writ of right Close, if the writ of the Demandant abate, F.N.B. 19. d.
and thereupon he brings a writ of false judgment in the Common Pleas, and
there the judgment being re^ersed, the writ is awarded good, then shall the
Demandant hold plea there, and a judicial writ shall issue out of that Court
in nature of the protestation made in the first writ, and if the protestation
were in the nature of an assise of Mortdancester, the Justices shall direct a
writ to the Sheriff to summon the Jurors to come out of the ancient Demesne to
the Common Pl. and the whole matter shall be tried and determined in that
Court,: And albeit judgment be given of that land in the Common Pleas, yet
shall the land still remain ancient Demesne, as it was before.

^resentation ^y lapse.
35 If a man present to an Advowson, and after the Incumbent dies, F.N.B. 31. ^.
and the Ordinary presents by lapse another Incumbent, and after that Incumbent
also dies; now may the right Patron present again, and if he be disturbed, he
shall have an assise De Darrein presentment, notwithstanding those mean
presentiments.

Disturbance (...) present.
36 If a disturber presents to an Advowson, F.N B. 32. ^.
and the Patron brings an assise of Darrein presentment, and hanging the Writ
the Incumbent dies, if the disturber present again another Incumbent, and dies,
yet the Patron shall have an assise of Darrein presentment upon the first
disturbance by Journeys accounts against the heir of the disturber: And so if
the disturber present two or three times within the six months, the true
Patron shall have an assise de Darrein presentment upon the first disturbance.

Presentation ^y Coparce^ers.
37 If two Coparceners make partition to present by turn, F.N.B. 34. i.
albeit the one Coparcener usurp upon the other, and presents in her turn,
this presentment shall not put her out of possession; but she shall have her
turn, when it falls again, and shall have a Quare Impedit, or Scire facias
upon the Composition (if it be upon record) if she be disturbed to present.

Presentation ^y an Abbot.
38 If in the time of the vacation of an Abbey or Priory, F.N.B. 34. m.
a Church happens to be void, which is of the patronage of the Abbey or Priory,
and a stranger usurps and presents unto it, this usurpation shall not prejudice
the Successor; but that at the next avoydance of the said Church he may
present, and have a Quare Impedit: It is otherwise, when the usurpation is made
in the time of his Predecessor, for that puts the succession out of
possession, if the six months be past.

^ction of De^eipt.
39 If a man loose land by default in a Praecipe quod reddat, and die, F.N.B.
98. q.
his heir shall have an action of Deceit, as well as the father, and shall
have restitution.

The like.
40 If a man have execution by default upon a recognizance in a Scire facias
sued against one, and the Defendant dies, F.N.B. 98. r.
his Executors shall have a Writ of Deceit, and shall be restored.

(...) warrantia ^artae.
41 If a man has a Warrantia cartae hanging, F.N.B. 135. l.
albeit the Plaintiff that has the Action against him, who brings the Writ De
warrantia cartae be nonsuited in his action, that shall not abate the Writ De
warrantia cartae; For, he may have that Writ, although he had no action sued
against him for the land, etc.

^ecogni^ance. ^udita quae^a.
42 Rosse was bound in a Recognizance of 1000 Marks to Pope, Pl. Co. 72. Rosse
and Popes case.
and Curson, according to the Statute of the 23 H. 8. cap. 6. and after Rosse
and his wife by fine give to the Conisees the fifth part of the Manor of
Burton Constable and other lands in the County of York in fee; And after Pope
(as Survivor) sues execution of the said Recognizance in London against Rosse,
and his body was taken, and the said Rosse, supposing the said fine of those
lands in the County of York would have discharged him of the recognizance,
brought his A^dita quae^ela, containing the whole matter, upon which Writ and
Declaration Pope demurred in Law: And in this case, it was adjudged, that the
Audita quaerela would not lie, nor that the purchase (by the Conusees) of
parcel of the land, that Rosse had at the time of the recognizance
acknowledged, could discharge the recognizance; because the person was properly
charged with it, and not the land, but in respect of the person, etc.

Finch 15.
43 The custom of Gavelkind is not changed, Gavelkind Ancient Demesne.
though a fine and recovery be had of the same at the Common Law; for this is a
custom by reason of the land, 6 E. 6. Dyer 72. Finch 16.
and therefore runs always with the land: But otherwise it is of land in
ancient Demesne, partable amongst the Males; for there the custom runs not
with the land simply, but by reason of the ancient Demesne: And therefore
because the nature of the land is changed by the fine and recovery from ancient
Demesne to land at the Common Law, the custom of parting it amongst the Males
is also gone.

F.N.B. 21. b. Finch ibid.
44 If an erroneous recovery he had of lands in Borough English ye youngest
son shall have a Writ of Error, Borough ^^glish.
because the land it self goes to him: so shall all the sons of lands in
Gavelkind.

42 E. 3. 3. Finch ibid.
45 Two Coparceners make partition, Parceners.
and one covenants with the other to acquit the land: Now if the Covenantee
aliens his part, the Alienee shall have a writ of covenant.

Co. Inst. pars 1 171. a. 2.
46 If the annual value of the land be equal at the time of the partition, and
after become unequal by any matter subsequent, Partition.
as by surrendering, ill husbandry, or the like, yet the partition remains good.
Judicis officium est, ut res, ita tempora rerum
Quaerere, quaesito tempore, tutus eris.


Co. inst. pars 1. 23. a. 11.
47 Whosoever is seized of land, Feoffment^ his own (...) the old (...) maines.
has not only the estate of land in him, but the right to take the profits,
which is in nature of the use, and therefore when he makes a feoffment in fee
without valuable consideration to diverse particular uses, so much of the use,
as he disposes not, is in him as his ancient use in point of Reverter: As if a
man be seized of two acres, the one holden by Knight service in priority, and
the other by the same service in posteriority, and makes a feoffment in fee of
both acres to the use of himself and his heirs, the old use continued in him,
and the priority and posteriority remain: So it is of lands of the part of the
Mother; for if one make a feoffment in fee of them to the use of himself and
his heirs, the use shall still go to the heir of the part of the Mother,
which could not be, if it were not the old use, but a thing newly created; The
like law of lands, of the custom of Borough English, Gavelkind, etc.

Fitz. N. B. 1. 156. b.
48 If Tenant by Receipt upon default of Tenant for life appear, Tenant by
^^ceipt.
and to received and pleads, and after loses by action tried, etc. Yet the
Tenant for life may have a Quod ei deforceat upon the Statute of West. 2. cap.
4. for the judgment is given against him for his default.

Dyer 2. 1, 2. 6 H. 8.
49 If a Rentcharge be granted out of land pro consilio impendendo, Rent
charg^ Prison in (...)
and the Grantee is afterward attainted and committed to prison, yet he shall
not lose the rent; for he may give counsel as well in prison as at large.

Dyer 30. 20^. 28 H. 8.
50 The Feoffees to an use made a lease for life rendering rent, Cesty que ^s^
before the Statute of Uses; in this case, Cestuy que use (who now has the
reversion in possession) shall distraine and make Avowry for the rent, without
attornment: So it is if they had granted a rent upon condition, the Grantee
(after the Statute) should have holden by the condition, in such plight as he
did before.

Law-day. Warren.
51 There are three Coparceners of a Manor, Dyer 30. 203.
and the King grants them a Law-day, and they afterward make feoffment of the
Manor, yet shall they still retain the Law-day: So if a man has a Manor, and
the King grants him free Warren within his Manor, if he afterward enfeoff the
King of his Manor without the appurtenances, he shall still retain the Warren;
For a man may have Warren or a Law-day in another land, per tot. Cur.

Action upon the case.
52 In an action upon the Case the Plaintiff was non s^it, Dyer 32. 5. 28, and
29 H. 8.
whereupon the Defendant by the Statute of 23 H. 8. 15. had judgment to
recover his costs, and after the record was removed by Error in B. R. by the
Plaintiff, and hanging that suit, the Defendant brings an action of Debt in C.
B. upon a new original, and counts upon the record of an action upon the Case:
Error.
And this matter was pleaded by the Defendant in this action, etc. And the
better opinion of the Court was, that the action was maintainable
(notwithstanding the writ of Error) because it was brought upon a new original.

Frankalmoign.
53 Albeit the Lyturgie or book of Common Prayer was altered by the Statutes of
2 and 3 Edw. 6. cap. 1. 5 and 6 Edw. 6. cap. 1. Co. Inst. pars 1. 95. b. 2.
and 1 Eliz. cap. 2. yet the tenure in Frankalmoign remains the same, and such
Prayers and Divine Service shall be said and celebrated, as in all times shall
be authorized by Parliament; C^mmon Prayer.
yea although the tenure be (as Littleton has it, Sect. 137.) A chanter un
Mess, etc. ou a chanter un placebo and dirige, yet if the Tenant say Prayers
in such a form as is lawfully authorized, it suffices: And as Littleton says,
Sect. 119. in case of soccage, the changing of one kind of temporal services
into other temporal services alters neither the name nor the effect of the
tenure, so the changing of Spiritual services into other Spiritual services,
neither alters the name or effect of the tenure in Frankalmoign: For albeit
the tenure in Frankalmoigne was reduced by the said Statutes to a certainty
contained in the book of Common Prayer, and now since to an uncertainty again
by extemporary Prayers; Yet seeing the original tenure was in Frankalmoigne,
and the change was, and is by general consent in Parliament, whereunto (as is
presumed) every man is party, the tenure remains as it was at first.

Tenements devisable.
54 Tenements in London divisable by custom, come into H. 8. Dyer 155. 21. 4,
5 P. M.
hands by the dissolution of Abbeys, and after the King grants them to hold in
chief by Knights service; In this case, a Devise of the whole is still good
against the heir; but quaere, whether it be so against the King for wardship or
primer seisin, by reason of the saving in the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 1.

Verdicts returned.
55 The Clerk of the Assise may, Dyer 163. 54.
notwithstanding the death of both the Justices of Nisi prius, deli^er in Court
the Records of the Verdicts taken before the same Justices in the Circuit, etc.

Death of a Defendant.
56 In a Replegiare, or an Assise against two, Dyer 175. 24.
judgment shall not be arrested by the death of one of the Defendants after
the last continuance, but shall be entered against the Survivor.

Partition.
57 Ioyntenants and Tenants in Common cannot since the Statute of 31 H. 8. 1.
make partition by Parol, Co. lib. 6. 12. Morrices case.
no more than they could before, for albeit by that Statute they are
compellable to make partition, yet it alters not the Common Law in that case.

Assets.
58 In debt upon an obligation against the heir, it is no plea to say, Dyer
179. 43. Dyer 204. 2.
that the Executors have assets. Vide Dyer 207. 15.

Dyer 217. 61. 4 Eliz.
59 A Veni^e facias with Proviso was returned, served, Venire facia^
and pu^ upon the file, and two hours after a Pluries venire facias, which was
afterward pursued by the Plaintiff was also returned and filed, each party
also pursue their Habeas Corpora, which are likewise retur^ed; Howbeit the
Plaintiff failed of his Jurat. continuand. yet this was adjudged no
discontinuance because the continuance by the Defendant sufficed,
Discontinuance.
and there is no diversity by the entry of the o^e, or of the other.

Dyer 229. 49. 6 Eliz.
60 A Feme dies before Livery sued, Tenant by courtesy. Partition.
yet (in this case) the Baron shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, and shall sue
livery.

Dyer 243. 55. 8 Eliz.
61 If there be three Coparceners, and one of them aliens her part, another of
them brings a writ of Partition against the Alienee, and the third Coparcener
upon the Statute; per Curiam it shall abate, because in this case a writ of
Partition lies at the Common Law, as it did before the Statute.

Dyer 326. 3. 16 Eliz.
62 The Qu. was seized of Whaddon Chase in Com. Bucks, De malefactoribus in
pa^^^
and the Lord Gray was Lieutenant there in fee, and he and his Ancestors, and
their Keepers had by prescription used to hunt stray Dear in the Demesnes of
the Manor of Salden adjoining, as in Purlewes, the Manor of S. comes into the
Queens hands, who grants it to Fortescue in fee wi^h free Warren within the
Demesnes thereof, Ita quod nullus intret in warrennam illam ad fugandum fine
licentia F. And it was held, that the unity of possession in the Queen of the
Chase and the Manor of S. did not extinguish the purlew, and that the clause
of Ita quod, etc. was not to be intended against the Queens Keepers, but other
Subject only: So that, whereas Fortescues servant killed the servant of the
Keeper for chasing there; it was not justifiable by the Statute de
Malefactoribus in pa^cis and Warrennis.

44 Personal things cannot be done by another.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 66. b. 3.
1 A single Corporation consisting of one person only may do Homage; as a
Bishop in right of his Bishopric, Corporation^ single and aggregate.
an Abbot or Prior in right of his Monastery, etc. But no Corporation aggregate
of many persons capable (be the same Ecclesiastical or Temporal) can do
Homage, as a Deane and Chapter, Major, and Cominalty, and the like; because
Homage must be done in person, and a Corporation aggregate of many cannot
appear in person; for albeit the bodies natural, whereupon the body politic
consists, may be seen, yet the body politic or corporate it self cannot be
seen, nor do any act but by attorney, and homage must ever be done in person,
etc.

Littl.. 92. Co ib. 68 a.
2 The Steward or Bailiff of a Manor may take fealty for the Lord: Homage
pe^sonal.
but Homage cannot be made, save unto the Lord himself in person: and
therefore Bracton says ( lib. 2. fol. 80.) Sciendum est, quod non per
procuratores, nec per literas fieri poterit homagium, sed in propria persona
tam Domini, quam tenentis, capi debet and fieri.

C^. ibid. 1^4. b. 4.
3 The service of Homage is so nearly annexed to the person, Homage personal.
as well of the Lords side, as of the Tenants, that the Tenant ought to seek
the Lord, to the end he may do him Homage, if the Lord be within England: And
therefore Bracton says ( lib. 2. 8.) Et sciendum est, quod ille qui hom^gium
suum facere debet, obtentu reverentiae quam debet Domino suo, adire d^bet
Dominum suum, ubicunque inventus fuerit in regno vel alibi, si possit commode
adiri, and non tenetur Dominus quaerere suum tenentem, and sic debet h^magium
e^ facere, etc. There is the same law of Fealty: It is otherwise of rent, for
that is not personal, but may be paid and received by another, or tendered upon
the land, etc.

L^ttl.. 153. and 157. Co. ib. 107. 2. 3.
4 Grand Serjeancy is a service to be done to the royal person of the King, and
therefore cannot be performed by a Deputy, Grand S^r^ancy.
without the Kings special license, or in some special cases; because the high
and great offices, whereof that tenure does for the most part consist, ought to
be performed in proper person: Yet he that holds to serve him in his war,
or by Cornage may make a Deputy, etc.

^nfants joyn^enants.
5 If two Ioyntenants within age make feoffment in fee, Co. ib. 337. a. 4.
they may enter jointly in their lands, or may join in a writ of right, but
they cannot join in a Dum fuit infra aetatem; because the nonage of the one is
not the nonage of the other.

Livery.
6 If A. is to make a feoffment to B. and C. and their heirs without deed, and
A. makes livery to B. in the absence of C. in the name of both, Co. Inst. pars
1. 49. b. 3.
and to their heirs, this livery is void to C. because a man being absent
cannot take a Freehold by a livery, but by his Attorney being lawfully
authorized by deed to receive livery; unless the feoffment be made by deed,
and then the livery to one in the name of both is good.

Demise of goods.
7 If a man demise sheep or other stock of Cattle, Co. l. 5. 16 b. 4. Spencers
case.
or any other personal goods for a time, and the Lessee covenants for him and
his Assigns, at the end of the time, to deliver such like cattle or goods, as
good as the things demised were, or such a price for them, and the Lessee
assigns the sheep, or, etc. over; This covenant shall not bind the Assignee;
because it is but a personal contract, and there wants that privity, which is
betwixt the Lessor and Lessee and his assigns of land, in respect of the
reversion; for in case of a lease of personal goods there is not any privity,
nor any reversion, but merely a thing in action in the personalty, which cannot
bind any but the covenantor himself, and his Executors, and Administrators
which do represent him: So it is also, if a man demise an house and land for
years with a stock or a sum of money, rendering rent, and the Lessee covenants
for him, his Executors, Administrators, and Assigns to deliver the stock or
sum of money at the end of the term, yet the Assignee shall not be charged
with this covenant; for, albeit the rent reserved were increased in respect of
the stock or the sum, yet the rent does not issue out of the stock or sum, but
out of the land only; and therefore, as to the stock or sum, the covenant is
personal, and shall only bind the Covenantor, his Executors, and
Administrators, and not the Assignee, etc.

Revocation under a man's own hand personal.
8 There is a diversity betwixt conditions, Co. l. 7. 13. a. 1. Englefields case.
which are personal and individual, and cannot be performed by any other; and
conditions, which are not so inseparably annexed to the person, but that they
may be performed by any other; as it was resolved in the case of Thomas Duke of
Norfolk (who in Anno 11 Eliz.) conveyed his land to the use of himself for
life, and after to the use of Philip Earl of Arundel his eldest son in
tail, with diverse remainders over, with Proviso, that if he should be minded
to alter and revoke the said uses, and signify his mind in writing under his
own hand and seal, subscribed by three credible witnesses, that then, etc.
And after the said Duke was attainted of High Treason, etc. In that case, the
proviso or condition was not given to the Queen by the Act of 33 H. 8. because
the performance of it was personal, and inseparably annexed to the person, viz.
to signify his mind by writing under his own hand, which none could do, but
the Duke himself: It is otherwise of payment of money, delivery of a ring or
spurs of gold, or the the like; for they may be paid, delivered, or tendered by
others, etc. Vide 55. 109.

(...) Retraxit ^ersonal.
9 A Retraxit cannot be entered, Co. l. 8. 58. 2. Beechers case.
unless the Plaintiff or Demandant be in Court in proper person; for the entry
is, quod quaerens in propria persona sua venit and dicit, quod ipse placitum
suum praedictum ulterius prosequi non vult, sed ab inde omnino se retraxit,
etc. And therefore a Retraxit cannot be acknowledged by an Attorney.

Co. lib. 9. 75. b. 4. Combs case.
10 There is a diversity betwixt a general and absolute power and authority, as
owner of the land, Surrender by Attorney.
and a particular power and authority by him which has but a particular
interest; as a Copiholder being owner of the land according to the custom, may
surrender his Copihold land by Attorney; but if A. be Tenant for life, the
remainder in tail, etc. And A. has power to make leases for 21 years,
rendering the ancient rent, etc. he cannot make a lease by letter of Attorney by
force of his power; because he has but a particular power, which is annexed to
his person: And so it was resolved in the Lady Greshams case at the Assizes in
Suffolk, 24 Eliz. by Wray and Anderson Chief Justices, and Justices of Assise
there.

Co. lib. 9. 76. a. 1. Combs case.
11 Some things are so inseparably annexed to the person of a man, Villein.
that he cannot do them by another, as the making of Homage and Fealty: So it
is holden in the 33 E. 3. tit. Trespass 253. that the Lord may beat his
Villein for cause or without cause, and the Villein shall have no remedy; but
if the Lord command another to beat his Villein, the Villein shall have an
action of Battery against him that so beats him.

Co. Ibid.
12 If the Lord distrain the Cattle of his Tenant, Wrongful ^^^stresse.
when nothing is behind, the Tenant for the respect and reverence which belongs
to the Lord, shall not have an Action of Trespass vi and armis against the
Lord; but if the Lord in that case command his Bailiff or Servant to distrain
him, when nothing is arrear, the Tenant shall have an Action of Trespass vi
and armis against the Bailiffe or Servant, etc. 2 H. 4. 4. 11 H. 4. 78. 1 H. 6.
6. 9 H. 7. 14.

Fitz. N.B. 25. c.
13 It seems, that before the Statutes, No Attorney allowed by the common Law.
which grant that a man may make an Attorney, etc. the Justices would not
suffer either Plaintiff or Defendant, Demandant or Tenant to make attorney in
any suit, or in any Court, etc. because the words of the Writ command the
Defendant to appear, which ought always to be understood in proper person; and
at this day also a man's real suit at a Leet, or Sheriffs turn, cannot be done
by Attorney, but ought always to be in proper person, etc. Howbeit before those
Statutes the King by his Prerogative might have granted to a man to make an
Attorney in every action or suit, as well to the Tenant or Defendant, as to the
Demandant or Plaintiff, and might have directed his writs or letters to the
Justices for that purpose, etc.

F.N.B. 25. d.
14 If the Tenant for term of life be impleaded in a praecipe quod reddat, No
receipt by attorney.
he in reversion may pray to be received to defend his right in default of the
Tenant, or upon his faint pleading,; but in this case he cannot pray by his
Attorney to be received without a Writ out of the Chancery directed to the
Justices for that purpose, upon some cause alleged in the said Writ, etc.

22 E. 4. 34. Finch 16.
15 A man cannot excuse himself of a contempt (as of not serving the Kings
process, Answer of a contempt pe^sonal.
of rescuing a Prisoner from the Sheriff or other Officer, or the like) by
Attorney, but he ought to appear thereupon in proper person, etc.

Co. l. 9. 96. b. 4. Sir George Reynels case.
16 The office of Marshal of the Marshalsie cannot be granted for years; because
it is an office of great trust annexed to the person, The office o^ the Marsh^^
personal.
and concerns the administration of Justice, and the life of the Law, which is
to keep such as are in execution in salva and arcta custodia, to the end they
may the sooner pay their debts; And this trust is individual and personal, and
therefore cannot be transferred to Executors or Administrators; For the Law
will not confide in persons unknown; for the ordering of Matters, which concern
the administration of Justice, etc. 45. 6.

^ersonal ser^^ce not ap^ortioned or ^ultiplyed.
17 If a man hold land by the personal service of being Sewer, Co. l. 8. 105. b.
4. in John Talbots case.
Carver, Butler, etc. to his Lord, or when the Tenant is bound by his tenure,
Ad convivandum Dominum suum and familiam suam semel in anno, or ad aequitandum
cum Domino suo, in Com. N. sumptibus suis propriis (vide 10 E. 3. 23. in John
de Bromptons case) by alienation of parcel of the land, the service shall not
be apportioned or multiplied; because such services are personal, and are to be
personally performed by one man only: Howbeit purchase of parcel by the Lord
shall extinguish them.

^ilizers office ^ersonal.
18 The office of Filizer cannot be extended upon a Statute, Dyer 7. b. 28 H. 8.
10.
or Elegit, albeit it is a Franktenement, for which an Assise lies; because it
is an office of trust and personal.

^everal torts, ^everal actions.
19 An action upon the Case was brought by two, Dyer 19. 112. 28 H. 8.
for that the Defendant called them two false Knaves and Thieves; Here, the
action was not well brought jointly, for that the wrong done to the one, was
not the wrong done to the other; and therefore they ought to have severed in
actions, as in case of false imprisonment.

A thing in action cannot ^e transferred.
20 The reason why a thing in action cannot be transfered or granted over to
another, is, because it is so annexed to the person, Dyer 26. a 16^. 28 H. 8.
and 282. 28. 11 Eliz. and 300. 36. 13 Eliz.
that it cannot be severed from him, nor by any means prosecuted but in his
name, as an Obligation, Statute, Recognizance, or the like: So if a man has an
Advowson, and when it is void, the Patron grants proximam nominationem,
Presentationem, and Institutionem, cum primo and proxime vacuerint; In this
case, the Grantee shall not have that Presentation, because it is a thing in
action, which the Patron could not transfer, but the next to it he shall have,
which was the first that could be granted.

45 They cannot be granted or transferred over, as matters of pleasure, ease,
trust, and authority.
To hunt, way, ^o diet, etc.
1 A license to hunt in my Park, to go to Church over my ground, 12 H. 7. 25. 7
H. 4. 36.
to come into my house to eat and drink with me, cannot be granted over: So of
a way granted for life over my ground. Finch 17.

Personal offices of trust.
2 The Patentee for life of an office of trust, 11 E. 4. 1.
as to be a Chamberlain of the Exchequer, Squire of the body, etc. cannot be
assigned over, unless it be specially limited in his Patent, that he may: And
the reason, why (regularly) he cannot assign it over to another, is, because
he may grant it to one in whom the King cannot confide, or that will be
negligent, etc. Finch, ibid.

Offices of skill.
3 The Keepership of a Park, Stewardship, 12 Eliz. 179.
Bailiwick of Husbandry, etc. for life cannot be granted over, because they are
offices that require skill and diligence. Finch, ibid.

An act.
4 A. licenceth B. to do an act; B. cannot grant this license to another. Br.
licenses, 25.
Finch, ibid.

A warrant of ^ttorney.
5 A warrant of Attorney is made to one to deliver seisin, 12 H. 8. 12.
he cannot grant that authority over to another. Finch, ibid.

^rbitrators.
6 Arbitrators cannot assign their power over; Co. l. 5. 78. a. 1. Samons case.
And therefore they ought to make so certain an end of the difference, that
they may leave nothing to be further determined either by the parties
themselves, or others; for they being Judges of the case, their judgment ought
to be certain.

Office of Marshal.
7 The office of Marshal of the Marshalsie being an office of trust, Co. l. 9.
96. b. 4. in Sir George Reynels case.
etc. cannot be transferred to another, but ought always to be granted for
life, and to be executed by none but the Grantee himself; And therefore a
lease for years of that office is void, for then it may fall into the hands of
Executors or Administrators; and in matters concerning the administration of
Justice, the Law will not repose confidence in persons unknown, etc. Vide 44.
16.

Dyer 7. b.
8 A Filizers office cannot be aliened, Filizer.
because it is an office of trust and personal. Vide 44. 18.

Hob. 13. Sir Daniel Norton and Simmes.
9 A Sheriff in making an Vnder-sheriffe does implyedly give him power to
execute all the ordinary offices of the Sheriff himself, Sheriff.
that may be transferred by Law, as serving of Process, Executions, or the
like; Howbeit, the Vnder-sheriffe cannot deal in a Writ of Redisseisin,
because in that the Sheriff is a Judge, nor in a Writ of Waste, where the
Sheriff is commanded to go to the place wasted, because these are places of
trust, and personal to the Sheriff himself.

Hob. 134. Coventry and Woodhal.
10 The putting of an Apprentice to one man rather than to another, Apprentice.
is a matter of great trust for his diet, health, and safety; And therefore (it
seems) that trust cannot be transferred without consent of all parties
interessed.

46 They being once suspended, or discharged for a time, are for ever after
extinct.
Pl. Co. 36. a. 3. Plats case. 5 E. 6. Br. Escape 45.
1 Where the Defendant is once imprisoned upon an execution, One in exe^^tion
enlarg^ A debtor, (...) Executor.
and makes an escape, the Plaintiff shall never after have remedy against him
again, but ought to take his remedy against the Sheriff; For, if a personal
thing be once in suspense, and the person of a man discharged of a personal
thing for a time, that is a discharge for ever; as if the Debtee makes the
Debtor and another, which survives the Debtor, his Executors, yet the debt is
extinct for ever, etc.

Dyer 140. Pl. 49.
2 A thing or action personal being once suspended (though but for an hour) is
extinct and gone for ever, A personal charge exti^ by suspen^^
when it is by the act and conent of the party himself, who has the thing
suspended, as a Rent-secke, Rentcharge, or the like, which are personal
duties, and against common right: So likewise if a Feme, Obligor, or Obligee
marry with the party, and after they are divorced, Causa praecontractus, the
debt is extinct, as it is ruled in 11 H. 7. So if a man grant to another a
Rentcharge of 10 l. out of the Manor of Dale, and the Grantee by his Will
devises, that the Grantor shall retain five years rent for a legacy of 50 l.
and dies; whereby the rent is suspended for those five years: In Dyer fo. 140.
it seems to be the better opinion, that both the land and person are for ever
after discharged thereof.

Dyer 371. 6. 23 Eliz.
3 In debt upon the condition of an Obligation consisting of diverse points, if
the issue be joined upon the breach of one point, Obligation extinct.
which is found against the Plaintiff, and whereupon he is barred; Albeit all
the other points of the condition are broken, yet he shall never sue the
obligation again.

Hob. 10. Friar against Gildridge.
4 Where there were an Obligee and two Obligors, Debt extin^^
the Obligee made the wife of one of the Obligors his Executrix, and died, the
Executrix administered; In this case the action of Debt against the other
Obligor is (at least) suspended, and then the Rule is, A personal action once
suspended, is for ever after extinct. Vide infra 54. 36.

Hob. 131. Robins and Barns.
5 In a Quod permittat prosternere quandam domum, Nusan^e.
that by being new built, hindered a light of the next house by over-hanging;
upon the issue and verdict it appeared, that the Defendant had built the said
house upon the old foundation of an house which had been built there before,
and had been pulled down (because ruinous) by one, that was then owner of both
houses: And it was the opinion of the Court, that the unity of possession of
both houses in one man did suspend that easement, so as the Defendant could not
be charged with any damage, but for what should be caused, by making it hang
over more than it did before; for that easement being once suspended, is gone
for ever; albeit the houses come afterward into several hands.

47 They dye with the person.
^ste.
1 If the Tenant does Waste, and he in the reversion dies, Co. Inst. pars 1.
53. b. 4.
the heir shall not have an action of Waste for the Waste done in the life of
the Ancestor, nor a Bishop, Master of an Hospital, Parson, or the like, for
Waste done in the time of the Predecessor: So if Lessee for years does Waste
and dies, an action of Waste lies not against the Executor or Administrator,
for Waste done before their time, etc.

^^^ion of ac^^pt.
2 Albeit in an action of account against a Guardian in Soccage, Co. ib. 90. a.
2.
etc. the Defendant cannot wage his Law, yet in respect of the privity of the
matters in account, and the discharge resting in the knowledge of the parties
thereunto, an action of account lies neither against the Executors of the
Accomptant, nor at the Common Law for the Executors of him, to whom the account
is to be made, but that is helped by the Statute of West. 2. cap. 23. Rot.
Parl. 50. E. 3. nu. 123.
And it has been attempted in Parliament to give an action of account against
the Executors of a Guardian in Soccage, but never could be effected.

^^nity and (...) charge.
3 An annuity is a yearly payment of a certain sum of money granted to another
in fee, for life or years, Co. ib. 144. b. 3.
and charging the person of the Grantor only, but does not enure to the
Grantee only; for his heir, and his and their Grantee shall have a writ of
Annuity; but if a Rent charge be granted to a man and his heirs, he shall not
have a writ of Annuity against the heir of the Grantor, albeit he has assets,
unless the grant be for him and his heirs.

^^cisor. ^ease.
4 If a Disseisor make a lease for life, the remainder in fee, Co. ib. 275. b. 2.
and the Disseisee releaseth unto the tenant for life all his right, this
release shall enure to him in remainder; because as to this and some other
purposes, they are but as one Tenant in Law; Howbeit if the Disseisee release
all actions to the Tenant for life, after the death of the Tenant for life, he
in the remainder shall not take benefit of this release; for it extended only
to the Tenant for life, and ended with his life, as it was adjudged in Edw:
Althams case, Co. l. 8. 148. So also if the Disseisor make a lease for life,
and the Disseisee release all actions to the Lessee, this enureth not to him in
the reversion, etc.

^taile in an ^cale.
5 In a writ of right, when the trial is by Battle, Co. ib. ^94. b. 4.
neither the Tenant nor Demandant shall fight for themselves, but shall find
each of them a Champion to fight for them; because if either the Demandant or
Tenant should be slain, no judgment could be given for the lands and tenements
in question: It is otherwise in an appeal; for here the Defendant shall fight
for himself, and so shall the Plaintiff also; because there, if the Defendant
be slain, the Plaintiff has the effect of his suit, viz. the death of the
Defendant, etc.

^^mment in life of ^^tor and ^^ntee.
6 Upon the grant of any thing, whereunto attornment is necessary, Co. ibid.
309. a. 4.
as of a Seigniory, rent, reversion, remainder, etc. the attornment must be
made during the lives both of the Grantor, and also of the Grantee; for if
either of them die before attornment the grant is void: And the reason hereof
is, for that every grant must take effect (as to the substance thereof) in the
lifetime both of the Grantor, and of the Grantee whereas (in this case) if the
Grantor dies before attornment, the seigniory, rent, reversion, remainder,
etc. descends to his heir, and therefore after his decease the attornment
comes too late; so likewise if the Grantee dies before attornment, an
attornment to the heir is void, for nothing descended to him; and if he should
take, he should do it as a purchasor, whereas, heirs were added but as words
of limitation of the estate, and not to take as purchasors, etc.

Co. lib. 2. 36. a. Sir Rowland Heywards case.
7 If a man for good consideration bargain, sell, Election.
and demise a reversion of land to the use of another for years, and the
Grantor or Cestuy que use die before attornment or enrollment, the grant is in
this case void or good at the election of Cestuy que use, void, if taken at the
Common Law by way of grant, because then there wants attornment, but good, by
way of Bargain and Sale according to the Statute of Uses, (27 H. 8. cap. 10.)
and because the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 16. (of Enrolments) extends not unto
it, for that no estate of Franktenement p^sseth, but only an estate for
years; And notwithstanding the death of the Grantor, and Cestuy que use
(either one or both) the Executors or Administrators of Cestuy que use have
power (as well as Cestuy que use himself) to choose, by which way they will
claim, whether by way of grant at the Common Law, or by way of Bargain and
Sale according to the said Statute of Uses, because Cestuy que use had
immediately upon the grant a present interest in him, which he or (in case he
had died) his Executors before election might have assigned over, and for that
he claims one and the same thing by two several ways, it being in his or his
Executors power to choose which of them they please: It is otherwise, where the
election is to choose one of two several things, by one and the same way or
title; for then nothing passes before election, and that election must be made
during the life of the parties: And therefore if I have three horses, and I
give unto you one of my horses, in this case the election ought to be made in
the life of the parties; for in as much as none of the horses is given in
certain, the certainty (and therefore the property) commenceth by election: And
with this agrees Bullocks case in the 10 of Eliz. 281. The Bishop of Sarum
having a great Wood of 1000 acres (called Berewood) enfeoffs another of an
house, and of 17 acres parcel of the said wood, and makes livery in the house;
here, nothing passes of the wood before election, and therefore his heir
could not make election, etc.

Co l. 8. 6^. a. 1. in Jo: Trollops case.
8 If the Bishop make Certificate, and die before it be received, Certificat^ a
Bishop.
the Certificate is worth nothing, but the Successor ought to certify a new.
Fitz. 55.

Co. lib. 9. 87. a. 4. Pinsons case.
9 An action of Debt lies not against Executors upon a contract for the eating
and drinking of the Testator; for that action dies with him, Wager of Law.
Executors.
because in that case, the Executors cannot wage their Law, as the Testator
might have done; for a man shall never have an action against Executors, where
the Testator might in his life time have waged his Law, because they cannot
have the benefit of Law-wager, as he might have had, etc. 15 E. 4. Vide infra
14.

Co. lib. 11. 1. The Lord De la Wares case.
10 Of the family of the Lord De la Ware, there was Grandfather, Dignity
restrained for life.
Father, and Son, the Grandfather 3 H. 8. was summoned to the Parliament by
Writ, and after in 3 E. 6. it was enacted, that the father should be disabled
during his life from claiming any dignity, but was afterward by Qu: Eliz.
called to the Parliament, and sat in the House as a puisne Lord, and died,
after whose death the son sued in Parliament to be restored to the place of
his Grandfather, viz. betwixt the Lord Berkley and the Lord Willoughby of
Ersby, and it was granted him: For there was a diversity taken betwixt a
disability personal and temporary, and a disability absolute and perpetual: As
if a man be attainted of Treason or Felony, this is absolute and perpetual
disability by corruption of Blood, and shall bar any of his posterity to
claim any hereditament in Fee-simple as heir unto him, or to any other
Ancestor paramount him: But when a man is only disabled by Parliament (without
any attainder) to claim any dignity for his life, this is a personal
disability for his life only, and his heir after his death may claim as heir
to him or to any of his Ancestors above him, etc. And upon this diversity,
Thomas Lord De la ware, Anno 39 Eliz. was restored to the place in Parliament
originally belonging to his Family.

Wast by Baron.
11 Where a lease is made to the Baron and Feme for term of life or years, the
Feme shall not be punished for Waste, F.N.B. 59. ^.
committed by the Baron after the Barons death. M. 3. E. ^.

Battery.
12 When a corporal hurt or damage is done to a man, 12 H. 8. 12.
as to beat him, etc. if he or the party beaten die, the action is gone. Finch
17.

Covenant by Lessor.
13 The Lessor covenants to pay quit-rents during the term, 1, 2 P.M. 114.
Finch 17.
and dies, his Executors shall not pay them; for it is a personal covenant
which dies with the person.

Debt against Executors.
14 In debt against Executors, who plead fully administered, Dyer 32. 2 28, and
29 H. 8.
and they gave in evidence to the Inquest, that they had paid diverse debts upon
contracts made by the Testator, whereas this suit was upon an obligation,
whereupon the Plaintiff demurres: And it seemed to the Justices that there was
no cause to delay it, because they were not compellable to pay such debts, for
that they die with the person, and the Plaintiff had judgment de bonis
testatoris.

Quit-rents.
15 The Lessor covenants with the Lessee to pay and bear all quitrents, etc.
not naming his Executors or Assigns: If the Lessor die, Dyer 114. a. 60 1, 2
P. M.
his Executors are not bound, according to the opinion of diverse Justices,
Tamen quaere.

Covenant employed and express.
16 If there be Tenant for life, remainder in fee, Dyer 257. 13. 9 Eliz.
and Tenant for life demise for 15 years and die, he in remainder enters, and
the termor brings covenant against the Executors of the Lessor upon the Demise
only, which is but an employed covenant; and it was adjudged it would not lie,
albeit the lease were by Indenture, unless it had been broken in the life of
the Testator, it is otherwise also of an express covenant: But an employed
covenant is personal, and dies with him. Vide Stat. 32 H. 8. 34. Note, that if
the heir out the termor of the father, covenant lies against him upon the
demise for the privity. Vide Max. 55.

License to retaile wines.
17 Queen Mary grants to one license to sell Wines by retaile with a non
obstante, the Statute of 7 E. 6. 5. and does not limit how long, Dyer 270. 22.
10 Eliz.
but there is a commandment in the Patent to the Officers to permit him to do
it during his life: And it was held by Dyer and Sanders, that it was durante
bene-placito only, and that the pleasure determined by the death of the Queen,
the commandment ceased also by her death.

Warden of the Fleet.
18 Whitacres brings an action of Debt against the Executors of the Warden of
the Fleet upon an escape in the life of the Testator, Dyer 322. 25. 15 Eliz.
and it was adjudged it would not lie; because the offense was but trespass,
which died with the person; And by the Common Law debt did not lie against the
Warden, but an action upon the Case, until the Statute of 1 R. 2. 12. which
gives debt against the Warden, but speaks neither of Heir or Executor: It is
otherwise, where the recovery is in the life of the Warden.

48 Things do enure diversely according to the diversity of the time.
Purchase by Inhabitants.
1 The Parishioners, or Inhabitants, or probi homines de Dale, Co. Inst. pars 1.
3. a. 2.
or the Churchwardens; are not capable to purchase lands (but goods they are)
unless it were in ancient time, when grants were allowed to pass by such
names.

Grant to commoners.
2 An ancient grant by the Lords to the Commoners in such a waste, Co. ibid.
that a way leading to their Common should not be straightened, was good; but
otherwise it is of such a grant at this day: And so in ancient time a grant
made to a Lord, and hominibus suis tam liberis quam nativis, or the like, was
good; but they are not of capacity to purchase by such a name at this day, etc.

Co. l. 9 28. a. 3. in the case of the Abbot of strata Marcella.
3 When an ancient grant is general, obscure, or ambiguous, A charter
interpreted, as the Law was, when it was made.
it shall not be now interpreted, as a Charter made at this day; but it shall
be construed, as the Law was taken at the time, when such ancient Charter was
made, and according to the ancient allowance upon record. Vide ibid. many
authorities in the point. Vide supra, 25. 22.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 21. b. 3.
4 If the Donor give lands in liberum maritagium, reserving a rent,
Frankmarriage, the fifth degree.
this reservation shall take no effect till the fourth degree be past, but
after that time the rent shall be paid according to the reservation. Littl.
Sect. 19. Finch 18.

Co. ib. 147. b. 1.
5 If a man grant a rent out of Black-acre to one and to his heirs, Rentcharge
and seck.
and grant to him, that he may distrain for this in the same acre for term of
his life, this is a rent charge for his life, and a rent seck afterward,
Diversis temporibus. Co. l. 7. 24. b. 3. Buts case.

Co. ib. 171. a. 3.
6 Judicis officium est, ut res ita tempora rerum
Quaerere, quaesito tempore, tutus eris.
Co. ib. 178. a. 4.
7 A gift in Frankmarriage was before the Statute of Westminster. 2. Frankmarriage out
of use.
a Fee-simple, and since that Statute, a Fee-taile; So as it is true, that the
gifts do continue (as Littleton says, Sect. 271.) but not the estates; for the
estate is changed, as appears in the same Author, Cap. Feetaile: And albeit
Littleton says ( Sect. 271.) that such gifts have been always since used and
continued; yet now they are almost grown out of use, and serve now principally
for Moot-cases, and questions in law, that thereupon were wont to rise.

Co. l. 5. 119. b. 1. in Whelpdales case.
8 When an obligation was once a deed, Non est fact^^, when a deed was, and is
no deed.
and after before action brought becomes no deed, either by rasure, addition,
or other alteration, or by breaking the seal, etc. In this case, although it
were once a deed, yet the Defendant may safely plead Non est factum; for
without question, at the time of the plea, which is in the present tense, it
was not his deed. 36 H. 8. Dyer 59. in an action of Debt upon an obligation
against Hawood, the Defendant pleads non est factum, and before the day of
appearance of the Inquest, the Mice had eaten the Label, unto which the seal
was fixed, by the negligence of the Clerk, in whose custody it was; Here, the
Justices charged the Jurors, that if they found the deed to be deed of the
Defendant at the time of the plea pleaded, they should then give a special
verdict, which they did accordingly.

Co. l. 6 15. a. 1. Trepors case.
9 If A. Tenant for life, and B. in remainder in fee, Lease and confirmation.
join in a lease to C. Immediately after the delivery of the deed it is the
lease of A. during his life, and the confirmation of B. and after the death of
A. it is the lease of B. and the confirmation of A. according to the opinion of
Dyer and Brown, Mich. 6, and 7 Eliz. fol. 234, 235.

Co. l. 6. 22. Ambrosia Gorges case.
10 If a man marry an Inheritrix of lands holden of the King in Capite, and has
issue by her a Daughter, and afterward the Feme die, A daughter i^ ward during
the life of her father.
the Daughter shall not be in Ward, because she is yet heir apparent to her
Father; But if the Father take another Wife, and has issue a Son, then shall
the Daughter be in ward to the King, because the Son is now his heir apparent,
and not the Daughter: And no heir apparent shall be in ward during the life of
the Father.

Co. l. 7. 18. a. Calvin's case.
11 The time of the birth of a man or woman is chiefly to be considered to make
them a Subject borne, or not, Ante-nati and Post-nati.
and is (as it were) of the essence of a Subject born: For a man cannot be a
Subject to the King of England, unless at the time of his birth he was under
the ligeance and obedience of the King of England, albeit the Kingdom of the
King under whose ligeance he was borne, do afterward descend to the King of
England: And this is the reason, that Ante-nati in Scotland (for that at the
time of their birth they were under the ligeance and obedience of another King)
are aliens borne, in respect of the time of their birth, etc.

^^ttle in ^und, tender (...) late.
12 Tender of the rent upon the land before the Distress, Co. l. 8. 147. 2. 4.
The 6 Carpenters case.
makes the Distress tortious; tender after the Distress and before the
imparkment makes the detainer, but not the taking tortious; tender after the
imparkment makes neither the one nor the other tortious; for then it comes too
late, in regard the cause is then put to the trial of the Law to be there
determined.

13 Distinguenda sunt tempora, and concordabis leges. Co. l. 9. 16. b.
Anna Bedingfeilds case.

^state to the ^st issue in ^ile.
14 Thomas Bowls in consideration of marriage with Anne Hide, Co. lib. 11. 80.
a. 4. Jews Bowls case.
covenants to stand seized of the Manor of D. to the use of himself and Anne
for their lives, and after to their first issue male, and the heirs male of
his body, and after to the heirs male of the bodies of Thomas and Anne, etc. In
this case, before issue had, Thomas and Anne were seized of an estate tail
executed sub modo, viz. until issue, and then by operation of Law, the estates
were divided, viz. Thomas and Anne became Tenants for life, the remainder in
tail to the issue, the remainder to the heirs male of Thomas and Anne, etc.

^landerous ^ords.
15 A man brings an action upon the Case for these slanderous words Thou art an
arrant Knave, a Cosener, and a Traitor, Co. l. 10. 131. a. 1. Ja. Osborns case.
being all spoken together at one and the same time, and upon not guilty
pleaded, the Jurors find for the Plaintiff, and assesse damages generally for
all the words, herein they did well; for all those words taken together, make
but one scandal, and albeit no action lies for these words, Thou art an arrant
Knave, a Cosener, spoken apart by themselves, yet being spoken at one and the
same time, and coupled with the other words, and a Traitor, which are indeed
actionable, they aggravate them and make them worse: Howbeit, if at one time
the Defendant calls the Plaintiff Traitor, and at another time he calls him
arrant Knave and Cosener, and the Plaintiff brings an action upon the Case, and
alleges the said several words spoken at several times, as several causes of
action; the^e, if upon not guilty pleaded, the Jurors assesse damages entirely,
judgment shall be arrested for all; for he grounds his action upon two several
scandals, whereas one of them is not actionable, etc.

(...) perquisite ^y the pur^hase of a ^illein.
16 If a man has a Villein in right of his wife, Co. Inst. pars 124. b. 1.
and the Villein purchase land, he shall have that perquisite in her right; but
if the Villeine purchase it after issue had, then the Baron shall have the
perquisite to him and his heirs; because by the issue he is entitled to be
Tenant by the Courtesy in his own right.

49 Quod prius est tempore, potius est jure. Vide Max. 62. Pl. 10. 19.
^emitter.
1 One of the reasons of a Remitter is, Co. Inst. pars 1 347. b. 3.
because that title which is first and more ancient is always more sure and
worthy: And therefore many books in stead of Remitter, say, that he is En son
primer estate, or en son melior droit, or en son melior estate, etc. or the
like: For, Quod prius est, verius est, and quod prius est tempore, potius est
jure, etc.

Confirmation ^st, best.
2 The Lessee for life made a lease for thirty years, Co. ib. 296. a. 3.
and after the Lessor and Lessee for life made a lease for 60 years to another,
which lease for sixty years the Lessor did first confirm, and after the
Lessor confirmed the lease for thirty years, and after the Tenant for life died
within the thirty years: In this case, the lease for thirty years was
determined by the death of the Tenant for life, and the Lessee for sixty years
might enter; for that albeit the lease for sixty years was the later in time,
yet was it of greater force in Law; because the Lessor, who had power to
confirm which of them he would, did first confirm the second lease. Inter Unwel
and Lodge, temps Eliz.

Co. l. 4. 89. b. 4. Druries case.
3 If a Countess retain two Chaplains, The first Di^pensations; Wast void.
those two are only capable of dispensation according to the Statute of 21 H.
8. cap. 13. And therefore if the Countess retains a third, that cannot divest
the capacity of dispensation, which was vested in the two first; For albeit the
Countess may entertain as many Chaplains as she will, at the Common Law, yet
can she not have more then two capable of Dispensations by force of the
Statute; and reason requires, that he which has longest served, shall be first
preferred; For, qui prior est tempore, potior est jure.

F.N.B. 142. f.
4 If a man purchase diverse lands by one feoffment, Priority of wardship.
which are holden severally of diverse Lords by Knight Service, and after he
dies, his heir within age, that Lord which shall first hap the Ward, shall
have him, because there is no priority: But if he purchase land, which is
holden by Knight Service of one Lord, and after purchase other land holden of
another Lord by the like service, and after die, his heir within age; In this
case, that Lord shall have the Ward of the heir, of whom the land, which be
first purchased, is holden; for that he held of him by a more ancient feoffment
( viz. by priority) then he held of the other Lord of whom he held by
posteriory, etc.

Co. l. 4. 66. b. 3. Fulwoods case.
5 If a man be bound in two Statutes, A former ^^^tute first fo^^
and the last Statute is first extended and put in execution* Yet the first
Conusee upon extent shall be first served, and the last Conusee shall stay till
the first be satisfied.

Dyer 32. 2. 28, and 29 H. 8.
6 In debt against Executors, who plead fully administered, Debt aga^^^^
Executors.
and it was given in evidence by the Defendants, that they had paid diverse
debts upon contracts made by their Testator, and showed not that they were paid
before the Plaintiffs writ purchased, whereupon the Plaintiff demurres, and
that was the chief reason why Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Dyer 133. a. 1. 3, 4 P.M.
7 A man being Patron of a Benefice in right of his wife grants proximam
advocationem to another, Grant of the next avoydance.
after which grant the Incumbent makes a lease of the Benefice for 60 years,
reserving rent to him and his Successors under the value in the Kings books;
afterward the Patron, Grantor, and his wife together with the Ordinary
confirm the Lease, and then the Incumbent is deprived for marriage, and the
Grantee presents his Clerk, who enters upon the Lessee to avoid the lease; In
this case, it seems his entry is congeable, because the Grant preceded the
lease.

Dyer 232. 5. 7 Eliz.
8 If debt be brought against the Ordinary for the debt of the intestate, after
notice he cannot dispose of any of the goods to others, Ordinary.
before he has satisfied that debt, for which the action was brought against
him.

Dyer 276. 52. 10 Eliz.
9 A Scire facias was brought by Basset against the Corporation of Torrington in
Com. Devon to repeal their Patent of Faires and Markets; But it was held, Scire
facia^.
that a Puisne Patentee shall not have a Scire facias to repeal a more ancient
Patent, but e contra.

10 Vide Hob. 7. Spendlowes and Burket, concerning the grant of an avoydance,
and a lease of a Prebendary in Lincoln.

50 According to the diversity of the same person.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 8. a. 1. in Calvin's case. Co. ib. 129. a. 3.
1 A man seized of lands in fee has issue an Alien, Alien not (...) heritable.
viz. born out of the Kings ligeance, that issue cannot be his heir propter
defectum subjectionis, albeit he be born within lawful marriage; neither yet
shall he inherit to his Father or any other, although he be made Denizen by the
Kings letters Patents: Nevertheless, if the same man be naturalized by act of
Parliament, he shall not then be accounted in Law alienigena, but indigena, and
shall be capable of inheriting, etc.

^uption of ^d for a (...).
2 The same man may have some children capable of inheriting his land after him,
and others incapable, Co. ib. 8. a. 2.
according to the several conditions, in which he stood at the several times,
when he had those children: Co. ib. 129. a. 3
As if an Alien be made Denizen, the issue which he has after the denization
shall be his heir, and not the issue which he had before: So also, if a man
has issue a son before his attainder, and obtains his pardon, and after
the pardon has issue another son; here, at the time of the attainder, the
blood of the eldest was corrupted, and therefore he cannot be heir; but if he
die living his father, the younger son shall be heir; for he was not in esse
at the time of the Attainder, and the pardon restored the blood, as to all
issues begotten afterward, etc.

^lain free (...) a time.
3 If Villenage be pleaded by the Lord in an action real, mixed, Co. ib. 127. b.
4
or personal, and it is found, that he is no Villein, the bringing of a Writ of
Error is no enfranchisement, because thereby he is to defeat the former
judgment: and if in the mean time the Villain bring an action against the
Lord, the Lord need make no protestation, so long as the record remains in
force, for at that time he is free, etc.

^^^is utrum ^^rranty.
4 If a Juris Utrum be brought by a Parson of a Church, Co. ib. 370. a. 4
the collateral waranty of his Ancestor is no bar, for that he demanded the
land in the right of his Church in his politic capacity, and the warranty
descends on him in his natural capacity, etc.

^^rranty. ^fession.
5 If a collateral Ancestor release with warranty, Co. ib. 392. b. 3
and enter into religion, now does the warranty bind; but if afterward he be
deraigned, then is the warranty defeated.

^nt extin^shed.
6 One that has a rent charge going out of the wives land, 14 H. 8. 6. Finch 18.
releaseth it to the husband and his heirs; Yet, in this case, the husband
shall not have the rent: but the release shall enure unto him by way of
extinguishment only, as seized in right of his wife.

^^ant and ^firmation.
7 The Parson of Weston in Com. Glocest. An. 9 El. demised his Rectory to W.
Hodges, then Patron of the same Rectory, for 50 years, Co. l. 5. 15. a. 3
Mewcomes case. Trin. 30 Eliz. in the Exchequer.
who Anno 14 Eliz. by his deed assigned it over to Sir John Throgmorton, and
the Bishop confirms the lease, Anno 17 Eliz. in the life of the Lessor; And in
this case it was resolved, that the assignment of the saidlease so granted by
the Patron, imports in it self both a grant, and also a confirmation of the
term; so that a deed of the same thing, by the same person, to the same
person, and at the same time, shall enure to two several purposes, viz. to a
grant of the interest, as Lessee, and to the confirmation of the same interest,
as Patron: So also if Tenant for life grant a Rentcharge to him in the
reversion in fee, and the Reversioner by his deed grant it over to another and
his heirs, this is a good grant and confirmation also to make the rent good
for ever, in respect of the several relations that are in him in the reversion,
viz. as Grantor of the rent, and as Reversioner in fee: In like manner, if the
Disseisor make a lease for life, the remainder to the Disseisee, and the
Disseisee grant the remainder over, this is a good grant and confirmation also,
etc.

(...) contract. ^stardy.
8 If a man marry with a woman that was formerly contracted with another, and
has issue by her, Co. l. 6. 66. a. 4 in Sir Moyle Finches case.
that issue in truth and in Law bears the surname of the Father: but if
afterward the Baron and Feme be divorced causa praecontractus, then has the
issue lost the surname of the Father; because Cognomen majorum est ex sanguine
tractum, and then is the issue a Bastard, and Nullius Filius.

^ember of ^^rliament.
9 A Member of Parliament, while he continues a Member, Dyer 60. a. 22, 23. 36
H. 8.
is freed from arrests of his person; but when he cease to be a Member, he
may be arrested again, and albeit be being a Member be arrested upon an
execution for debt, yet that is no discharge of the debt, but after the
Parliament he may be taken again by execution upon the same judgment.

Dyer ibid.
10 Regularly, Seizure of Villein.
the Lord may seize his Villein wheresoever he finds him, yet if he abide a
year within ancient Demesne, his condition is altered, and the Lord cannot
seize him: So while the Villein remains in the Kings presence, the Lord cannot
seize him, but afterward out of his presence he may; And these privileges the
Law gives to Villeins in favorem libertatis.

51 According to the diversity of several persons. Vide infra, 86.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 46. a. 3.
1 If Tenant in tail make a lease for years, reserving xx s. rent, Lease by
^^nant in (...) good, and (...) to severa^ ^sons.
and after take a wife and die without issue; now as to him in the reversion
the lease is merely void; but if he endow the wife of Tenant in tail of the
land (as she may be, though the estate tail be determined) now is the lease as
to ye tenant in dower (who is in, as of the estate of her husband) revived
again, as against her; For, as to her the estate tail continues, and she
shall be attendant for the third part of the rent and services, etc. So it is
if Tenant in tail make a lease for years ut supra, and dies without issue,
his wife enseint with a son, he in the reversion enters, against him the
lease is void; but after the son is born, the lease is good, if it be made
according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28. and otherwise is voidable.

Co. ibid. 46. a. 4.
2 The King made a gift in tail of the Manor of Eastfarleigh in Kent to W. to
hold by Knights service; W. made a lease to A. for 36 years, The like.
reserving 13 pounds rent; W. died, his son and heir of full age, all this
was found by office: As to the King, this lease is not of force; for he shall
have his primer seisin, as of lands in possession, but after livery the Lessee
may enter: And if the issue in tail accept the rent, the lease shall bind
him, and shall be good as to him, etc. And so it was adjudged in Austens case,
Pa. 2, and 3 Ph. and M. as Mr. Plowden reported to the Lord Coke.

Co. ibid.
3 If tenant in fee take wife, and make a lease for years, and dies, Lease
voi^ to the Fe^^
the wife is endowed, she shall avoid the lease, and it shall be void as to
her; but after her decease the lease shall be in force again against him in
reversion, etc.

Co. ib. 107. a. 2.
4 Tenure by Cornage of a common person, is Knight Service, Cornage.
but of the King, is Grand Serjeancy; so as the royal dignity of the person of
the Lord makes the difference of the tenure.

Co. ib. 188. a. 1.
5 If an husband, wife, Joyntena^^ of a right, (...) differing ^^tures.
and a third person had purchased lands to them and their heirs, and the
husband before the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 1. had aliened the whole land to a
stranger in fee, and died; In this case, the wife and the other joyntenant were
joyntenants of the right, but in several manners according to their several
interests, viz. the wife had right of action, and the other Ioyntenant right of
entry; For at the Common Law the alienation of the husband was a discontinuance
to the wife of the one moity, and a disseisin to the other joyntenant of the
other moity: Howbeit these differing rights might well stand together in
jointure; for they are joyntenants of the right, because they may join in a
writ of right, etc.

Co. ib. 202. a. 3
6 If a man seized of lands in right of his wife, Entry of sev^ral persons
^^veral effects
makes a feoffment in fee by deed indented, upon condition that the Feoffee
should before a certain day demise the lands to the Feoffor for his life, Co.
l. 8. 43, 44. Whittinghams case.
etc. If the condition be broken, the Feoffor may re-enter, and shall be again
seized as in his former estate, viz. in right of his wife: But in case the
Feoffor die before entry, albeit the heir of the husband enter for the
condition broken, yet it is impossible for him to have the estate, that the
Feoffor had at the time of the condition made; for the Feoffor had an estate in
the right of his wife, which commenced by the coverture, and with the coverture
was dissolved; And therefore when the heir enters for the condition broken,
and defeateth the Feoffment, his estate does vanish, and the estate is
thereupon immediately vested in the wife, etc.

Issue in tail. Particeps criminis.
7 If Tenant in tail and his issue disseise the Discontinuee of Tenant in
tail: and Tenant in tail die, whereby the lands descend to the issue; Co.
Inst. pars 1. 357. b. 2.
In this case, the issue shall be remitted, and shall be in as Tenant in tail
against every stranger, and shall deraign the first warranty; but not against
the Discontinuee, because he was Particeps Criminis, 11 E. 4. 2. Finch 18.

Feoffment good against all but him that right has.
8 A Lessee for years may make a Feoffment, Co. ib. 367. a. 3. Littl.. 698.
and by his feoffment a Fee-simple shall pass, and if a warranty be annexed to
such an estate, albeit such a warranty cannot bar the Lessor, or his heirs,
because it commenceth by disseisin; yet between the parties such a warranty
stands good; for thereupon the Feoffee may vouch the Feoffor or his heirs, as
by force of a lineal warranty: And therefore if a Lessee for years or Tenant by
Elegit, Statute Merchant, Statute Staple, etc. or a Disseisor incontinent make
a feoffment with warranty, if the Feoffee be impeached, he shall vouch the
Feoffor, and after him his heir also; because this is a covenant real, which
binds him and his heirs to recompense in value, if they have assets by descent
to recompense; for there is a feoffment de facto, and a feoffment de jure; And
a feoffment de facto made by them, that have such interest or possession as is
aforesaid, is good between the parties, and against all men, save only against
him that has right, etc.

The like.
9 If before the Statute of 1 R. 3. cap. 9. Littl.. 701. Co. ib. 369. a. 1
a man had granted a message with the appurtenances to certain Barretors for
maintenance by a feoffment with warranty, by reason whereof the true Tenant
durst not abide in the house, this warranty commenceth by disseisin, and shall
not bind him that right has; but some have said it shall be of force between
the Feoffor and Feoffee, etc.

Lineal and collateral warranty.
10 If a man has issue two sons, and is disseised, Littl.. 707. Co. ib. 371.
b. 4.
and the eldest son releaseth to the Disseisor by his deed with warranty, etc.
and dies without issue, and after the father dies, this is a lineal warranty to
the younger son; because the land by possibility might have descended from the
eldest to the younger son; but in that case, if the younger son release to the
Disseisor with warranty, and dies without issue, that is a collateral warranty
to the eldest son, and also to the issue of his body; because the eldest son by
no possibility, could convey the title of the land to himself by means of the
younger: But in the same case, if the eldest son die without issue of his
body, then the warranty is lineal to the issues of the body of the younger:
And so the warranty that was collateral to some persons, may become lineal to
others: And therefore if Tenant in tail has issue three sons, and discontinue
the tail in fee, and the second son releaseth by his deed to the Discontinuee
with warranty, etc. and after the Tenant in tail die, and the second son die
without issue, this is collateral warranty to the eldest son; but in case the
eldest son die also without issue, it becomes a lineal warranty to the
youngest, etc.

Difference. Bars, respects, several.
11 An Act of Parliament or the Common Law may make an estate void as to one
person, and good as to another person; For example, Littl.. 708. Co. l. 1. 87.
b. 1. Corbets case.
if lands be given to the Baron and Feme, and to the heirs of their two bodies,
and the Baron levy a fine with proclamations, and has issue, and die; this
fine by force of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 36. shall bar the issue in tail,
but it shall not bind the Feme, so that in respect of one it is a good bar,
and in respect of another it is no bar: So also in a praecipe, if one be
vouched; In that case, having regard to the Demandant, the Vouchee is Tenant,
and a release to him from the Demandant is good, but having regard to a
stranger, he is not Tenant. and therefore a release to him from a stranger is
not good: Likewise, if one be possessed of a term for years as Executor, and
surrender it; here, as to one respect the term is extinct, and as to another
respect it is assets, etc.

Co. l. 5. 60. a. 4. in Gooches case.
12 If a fraudulent conveyance be made to avoid a debt, Fraudulent conveyance.
the grant is void, as to the Creditor by the express provision of the Statute
of 13 Eliz. cap. 5. but as to all other persons it stands good.

Co. lib. 6 78. b. The Lord of Aburgavennies case.
13 A. and B. are joyntenants for life, A charge upon one of the Joyntenants.
and judgment is given for C. against A. in an action of Debt, A. releaseth to
B. before execution; here, albeit B. is now in by the Lessor, and not by A. and
the estate of A. as to all strangers, is determined, yet as to C. who has the
judgment (whereby the moity of A. was charged with the execution) the estate
of A. (during the life of A.) has continuance: But in case A. die before
execution, B. shall hold it discharged, etc.

Co. ibid. 79. a.
14 If there be two joyntenants in fee, Joyntenants, Rentcharge.
and the one grants a Rentcharge in fee, and after releaseth to the other; In
this case, albeit to some intent he, to whom the release is made, is in by the
first Feoffor, and no degree is made betwixt them, yet as to the Grantee of the
Rentcharge, he is in under the Ioyntenant that releaseth, and he that
surviveth shall not avoid it after the decease of him that releaseth. Vide M.
30. c. 8.

Co. ibid.
15 A. and B. are Ioyntenants for life, The like.
the reversion to C. judgment is given against A. in an action of Debt, A.
releaseth to B. B. dies, C. enters; Yet, as to him that has the judgment, the
estate of A. (so long as A. lives) has continuance.

Co. ibid.
16 If the Baron being seized of a Rent or Common in fee, The like for Dower.
release to the land Tenant, this rent is extinct, yet having regard to the
Feme it has continuance; for she shall be endowed thereof. See there many
authorities in the point; and Co. l. 7. 38. b. 3. Lillingstons case.

Co. l. 6 79. b. 4. Sir Edward Phittons case.
17 In the general pardon of 43 Eliz. there was this proviso, General pardon.
that any Clerk might make a Capias utlagatum at the suit of the Plaintiff
against outlawed persons, to the intent to compel the Defendant to answer, and
that the party shall sue a Scire facias, before the pardon in that behalf
shall be allowed; but this is only as having regard to the Plaintiff; for as
to the King; it is an absolute pardon, and grant of his goods, Lord and Villain.
etc. so that the pardon was available to discharge the Defendant against the
King, but not to discharge him against the party Plaintiff: As a Villain is
disabled against his Lord, but not as to any other.

Co. lib. 8. 45. Whittinghams case.
18 If a Bastard be seized of lands in fee, and make feoffment thereof, Bastard.
Feoffment. Livery.
and after die without issue: In this case, if livery were made by the Bastard
himself in person, and so the feoffment executed by himself, it shall stand
good; but if livery were made by attorney, the lands shall escheat, etc.

Co. lib. 8. 145. Davenports case.
19 A. has a Rectory, unto which a Vicarage is appendant, Grant of the next
avoydance.
for certain years yet in being, and grants the next avoydance of the Vicarage
to B. and after surrenders the Rectory to him in reversion; In this case,
albeit as to all strangers, the estate of the Rectory is determined by the
surrender, yet as to the Grantee of the next avoidance of the Vicarage it has
continuance, and if the avoidance happen within the term, the Grantee shall
present, etc. So also if the Lessee for years grant a rent, Surrender after
grant of a rent.
and then surrender; yet for the benefit of the Grantee, the term has
continuance; albeit in rei veritate it is determined.

^^owrie, ^uo War^^nto.
20 In Avowrie, Co. l. 9. 29 b. 1. In the case of the Abbot of Strata Mercella.
Co. l. 11. 50. a 2 Richard Liffords case.
it is not necessary to show to the Plaintiff by what title such a Franchise is
claimed; but when a Quo Warranto is brought by the King, the Lord of the
liberty ought to show his title.

^xception of ^rees.
21 If Lands be demised to one for life, exceptis quercubus, ulmis, and fraxinis
adhunc crescend: ultra crescentiam 21 annorum, etc. The Lessor may sell the
great Timber so excepted, and then (fictione juris) as to the Lessee the Trees
are divided from the franktenement, but as to all others they are parcel of the
inheritance of the Lessor.

^everance of ^rees.
22 If Tenant in Tail sells the Trees to another; Co. ibid.
that is a Chattel in the vendee, and his Executors shall have them, and in
such case (fictione juris) they are severed from the land; but if Tenant in
Tail die before actual severance, as to the issue in Tail they are parcel of
his Inheritance, and shall go with it, neither may the Vendee then take them;
and yet as to the Tenant in Tail himself, they were severed for a time.

^annor, ^anted, ex^^pt an acre.
23 A man makes a Lease of a Manor, 1. 2. P. M. 104. Finch. 18.
except an Acre this Acre is no part of the Manor, as to the Lessor, but as to
him, that has right to demand the Manor by an eygne title, it remains
parcel, and therefore he shall make no foreprise thereof in his Writ.

52 Relation is of great force in Law.
^ncestor and ^eir; and the ^estator, and ^xecutor Cor^^laiiva.
1 If a man make a Lease for life to one, Co. Instit. pars 1. 54. b. 4. and 319.
b. 1.
the remainder to his Executors for 21 years, the term for years shall vest in
him; for even as Ancestors and heirs are Correlativa, as to inheritance: (as if
an estate for life be made to A. the remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to
the right heirs of A. the Fee vesteth in A. as if it had been limited to him
and his heirs) even so are the Testator and the Executors Correlativa, as to
any Chattel; And therefore if a Lease for life be made to the Testator the
Remainder to his Executors for years, the Chattel shall vest in the Lessee
himself; as well as if it had been limited to him and his Executors.

^rank-mar^age.
2 A. Enfeoffes B. upon Condition, Co. ibid. 219. b. 3.
that B. shall make an estate in Frank-marriage to C. with one such as is the
daughter of the Feoffor; In this Case, B. cannot make an estate in
Frank-marriage; because the estate must move from the Feoffee, and there is not
betwixt the Feoffee and the Daughter of the Feoffor the near relation of Blood,
which is required betwixt the Donor and the feme Donee in Frank-marriage; for
here the Daughter is not at all of the blood of the Feoffee.

^rotection and Subjecti^^ relata from ^e birth.
3 In matters of state, Subjectio, and Protectio are Relatives, Co. l. 7. 4. b.
3. Calvin's case.
and immediately upon the birth of a subject that relation begins; for ligeance
does not begin by the oath in a Leet; but comes into the world with a true
subject, and he owes it unto his Sovereign by birthright; so also is the
Sovereign bound from that very time to protect his subject: And therefore it is
truly said, that Protectio trahit subjectionem, and Subjectio protectionem: And
this is the reason, Co. ibid. 9. b. 1
that ligeance cannot be local, or confined within the bounds of England only;
for wheresoever the subject is, there likewise is to be found the foresaid
Relation; And therefore, Qui abjurat regnum, amittit regnum, sed non regem,
amittit patriam, sed non Patrem patriae: for, notwithstanding the abjuration,
he owes the King his ligeance, and he also remains within the Kings
protection: because the King (if he please) may pardon and restore him to his
Country again. Co. l. 7. 30. 4. 1. Discontinance of Process.


^^mmons and ^^summons ^^ta.
4 For Continuance of Process upon demise of the King, there shall never be
Resummons, or Reattachment, but where there was at first Summons and
Attachment; for these are Relatives, and answer in relation one to the other.

Co. l. 8. 85. b. 8. Sir Rich. Pexhals case.
5 If A. devise to B. 10. l per annum to be paid quarterly, Office and the Fee,
re^^^
and that B. shall keep his Courts, etc. A. has an estate for life in this
annuity; for officium and feodum are Relatives, and Concomitantia, and he shall
have the like estate in the Fee, that he has in the office.

Co. l. 10. 104. b. 2. Alfrid. in Denbawds case
6 At the time of granting the Tales the principal Array must stand; Quales and
Tales, rel^^
for Tales are words of similitude, and have reference to a resemblance, which
at that time ought to be in esse; and therefore if the Array be quashed, or all
the Polls challenged and tried out, no Tales shall be awarded; for at that time
they were not Quales; but in that Case a new Venire facias shall be awarded:
Howbeit if at the time of granting the Tales the principal panel did stand;
and after is quashed, as aforesaid; yet the Tales shall stand; for it
suffices, that they were Quales at the time of granting the Tales; and this
appears in 34 H. 6. Tit. Enquest. 30.

Co. l. 10. 116. b. 4. Rob. Pilfolds case.
7 This word Damna is taken in the Law in two significations, Damages, (...) the
Wron^ relata.
the one properly and generally, the other relative and strick; properly, as
when costs of suit are also included in it, etc. But when the Plaintiff shows
the wrong done unto him to the damage of such a sum, this is to be taken
relative, for the wrong which is past before the Writ brought, and they are
then to be assessed occasionis transgressionis praedictae, and cannot extend to
Costs of suit, which are future and of another nature, viz. to expenses in Law,
whereof no certainty can then be known.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 338. b. 4.
8 An Estate-tail cannot be discontinued, but where he, Disconti^^ance. Vid^ M.
23. and 5.
that made the discontinuance, was not once seized by force of the Tail (except
it be by reason of Warranty, etc.) according to the Rule in Philosophy, Omnis
privatio praesupponit habitum; Co. ibid. 341. b. 3.
for he cannot discontinue that estate, which he never had. Neither yet can a
Parson discontinue the Fee-simple of his parsonage, Co. ibid. 359. 24.
because the entire, and Fee-right thereof was never in him.

9 If a Feofment be made to two, Livery to (...) enures to both.
and livery is made only to one of them, but yet according to the deed; In
this case, the livery shall enure to both; because the deed, whereunto the
livery refers, is made to both; Verba relata hoc maxim operantur per
referentiam, ut in eis inesse videntur.

Pl. Co. 70. b. 2. in Kedwellies case against Brand.
10 Where Rent is reserved to be paid out of the Land at Dale upon Michaelmas
day, and if it be behind 40 days after, Place of p^^ment of R^^
that then it shall be lawful for the Lessor to re-enter; In this case, it
ought to be tendered at Dale a convenient time before Sunset upon the last of
the 40 days; for albeit it be not by express words, that if the Rent be
behind and unpaid at Dale by the space of 40 days, etc. yet it shall have
Relation to the place first named, and so the Law says, that the Rent shall be
paid at Dale the last of the 40 days, although it be not so expressed by plain
words, Vide 131. 5.

Dyer 14. 69. 28 H. 8. per Shelley, and Fitz-herbert.
11 The Termor-covenants by Indenture to build an House without words of
Executors, the Term expires, and he dies; In this case, Executors chargeable
without naming the^
the Executors shall be charged; for they are co-relatives with him, and
represent his person, it is otherwise of the heir, unless he be named: It is
so likewise of an Obligation, because it is a present duty. See also Dyer 22.
b. 139. 28 H. 8. Per curiam.

12 Two have a Term as Executors, Executors entirely possessed.
and one of them grants all that he has in the Land; Dyer 23. b. 146. 28 H. 8.
In this case, the whole Lease passes, because each Executor representing the
person of the Testator, has an Entire authority; Howbeit the Law is otherwise
of other Iointenants.

13 A. by Indenture enrolled demiseth the Manor of D. to B. and his Heirs in
fee farm rendering Rent with clause of distress, Dyer 157. Pl. 28. 4, 5. P. M.
Rent not ^tinct by a Fine.
and upon non-payment a re-entry, and by the same Indenture Covenants to make
such assurance, etc. according to the true intent, purport and meaning
expressed in the same Indenture, and by another Indenture bearing date the same
day, A. covenants to levy a Fine of the said Manor, etc. before such a feast,
etc. which Fine should be to the only use, intents, effects, and conditions
expressed in the former Indenture, and to none other, and livery of Seisin was
made upon the same Indenture accordingly, and after the Fine was also levied,
viz. come ^eo quae B. habuit ex dono A. with release and warranty according to
the course of Fines, etc. In this case the Rent was not extinct or touched by
the Fine; because the Fine had relation to the former Indenture.

Challenge.
14 If a Iuror be but a suitor to the Leet of the Plaintiff or Defendant, this
is a principal Challenge, Dyer 176. 27. 2 Eliz.
in respect of that relation betwixt them, which may procure favor.

Covenant.
15 A Feme has the third part of the Land of a Termor delivered unto her by the
Sheriff in Dower, the Termor gives, grants, Dyer 240. 43. 7 Eliz.
and assigns all the Land comprised in his Lease to A. and covenants, that he
had not done any act, but that the Assignee may enjoy it against every one, and
he was also bound by Obligation to perform the Covenants; In this case, the
Obligation is not forfeited, for the words, but that have Relation to the words
of the Lessee, viz. that he has not done any Act, and are not absolute words;
as if the Assignee should enjoy it against all men.

53 Verba posteriora propter certitu^inem addita, ad priora, quae certitudine
indigent, sunt referenda.
1 Sir Adam de Clydrow Knight, 6 E. 3. 12. Co. l. 8. 119. a 1. in Dr. Bonhams
case.
brings a praecipe quod reddat against John de Clydrow, Reference of words.
and the Writ was; quod just, etc. reddat manerium de Wicombe, and duas crucat
terrae cum pertinentiis in Clydrow; In this case, the Town of Clydrow shall not
relate to the Manor quia non indiget; for the Manor may be demanded without
making mention, that it lies within any Town, but cum pertinentiis, although
it comes after the Town, yet does it relate to the Manor, quia indiget, etc.
Vide 3 E. 4. 10.

The like.
2 If a man grant Rent in manerio de praecipiend. in C. Acres of Land parcel of
the same Manor with clanse of distress in the C. Acres; Co. l. 8. 154. b. 2.
Sir Edw. Althams case.
In this case the Rent shall only issue out of the C. Acres; and the general
words shall be construed according to the special words, according to the Rule
in Margery Mortimers case, 7 E. 3. fol. 10. a. Quando carta continet generalem
clausulam, posteaque descendit ad verba specialia, quae clausulae generali sunt
consentanea; interpretanda est carta secundum verba specialia.

Rent.
3 If a man grant Rent and go no farther, Co. ibid.
these words shall create an estate for life; but if the habendum he for
years, that shall qualify the general words.

^ail.
4 If a man give Lands to one and his Heirs, Co. ibid.
habendum to him and the Heirs of his body, he shall have but an Estate-fall,
and no Fee expectant; for the haben^um qualifies the general words Precedent.

5 A Feme has title of Dower in Lands in Wethersfield, and Gosfield, Co. l. 8.
154. 2. 4. Sir Ed. dw. Althams case.
and releaseth to the Reversioner omnes actiones, etc. sectas querelas, and
Demand quaecunque nec non totam dotem suam, ac titulum, ac actionem dotis sibi
contingent, etc. de aliquibus terris in Wethersfield, etc. this is only a
Release of her Dower in Wethersfield, and not in Gosfield.

^^peachment Wast.
6 If a man demise Land for life absque impetitione vasti, Co. l. 11. 82. b. 3.
Lewis Bowls case.
the Lessee may cut down the Timber Trees, and convert them to his own use; but
if it be absque impetitione vasti per aliquod breve de vasto; In that case, the
Action only shall be discharged, and not the property in the Trees, so that
the Lessor, after they are felled, may seize them, etc.

Co. l. 3. 83. a. 4 Twines case.
7 No purchaser shall avoid a precedent conveyance made by fraud and covin, What
is a good consideration within the Statute of 13 Eliz. 5.
but he that is a purchaser for money or other valuable consideration; For
albeit in the preamble of the Statute of 13 El. 5. it is said, For money or
other good consideration, and likewise in the body of the Act, For money or
other good consideration; Yet these words, good consideration, are to be
understood only of valuable consideration, and this appears well by the
clause, which concerns them, that have power of revocation; for there it is
said, For money or other good consideration paid or given, and this word, paid,
is to be referred to, money, and, given, is to be referred to good
consideration, so the sense is, For money paid, or other good consideration
given, which words exclude all considerations, of nature, blood, or the like,
and are to be understood of valuable consideration, which may be given; and
therefore he that makes the purchase of the land for valuable consideration, is
the only purchaser within that Statute: And this last clause does well expound
these words, other good consideration, mentioned before in the preamble and
body of that Act.

54 No man can do an act to himself.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 38. b. 4. and 39 a. 4.
1 A Feme Guardian in Soccage shall not endow her self De la plus beale,
without judgment; Feme, Dowe^
but after judgment she may (as Littleton says,. 49.) for then it is the act
of the Law, and not simply hers.

Co. ib. 48. b. 1.
2 If A. by Deed give lands to B. to have and to hold after the death of A. to
B. and his heirs, this is a void deed; Grant in f^turo void.
because he cannot reserve to himself a particular estate, and construction
must be made upon the whole deed.

Littl.. 168. Co. ib. 112. a.
3 A man cannot make any grant of lands, Baron can^^ grant to fe^^^.
etc. to his wife during the Coverture, because they are but one person in Law,
and a man cannot do an act to himself, etc.

Littl.. 212. Co. ib. 141. a.
4 A man cannot be judge in his own cause; No distress i^repleviable.
and therefore if a man will prescribe, that if any Cattle he Damage fesant
upon the Demesnes of his Manor, he may detain them, until he be satisfied
for the damage at his own will and pleasure; this custom is repugnant to
reason, and ought not to be allowed by the Judges: For, Malus usus abolendus
est, quia in consuetudinibus non diuturnitas temporis, sed soliditas rationis
est confideranda.

Co. ib. 141. a. 2. Finch 19.
5 A fine levied before the Bailiffs of Salop, was reversed, A Fine void.
because one of the Bailiffs was party to the fine, Quia nemo debet esse judex
in propria causa; Nemo potest esse judex etc. Hillar. 4. H. 4. Coram Rege,
Salop.

Littl.. 479, 480. Co. ib. 280. a. 1. and 307. a. 4. Littl.. 543, 544.
6 If there be Lord and Tenant, Extinguishment of rent, etc.
and the Lord releaseth to the Tenant his Seigniory, this must of necessity
enure by way of extinguishment; For, the Tenant cannot have service to be taken
of himself, neither yet can one and the same man be both Lord and Tenant: So
also if a Rentcharge be granted out of land, and the Grantee releaseth or
grants the rent to the Terre-tenant; in this case, the rent is extinct; for a
man cannot have land, and also rent issuing out of the same land, neither yet
can he pay the rent to himself: There is the same reason of Common of Pasture
released to the Tenant of the land, for that also works an extinguishment;
because a man cannot have Land, and a Common of Pasture issuing out of the same
land, etc.

Co. ib. 280. a. 3.
7 If there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Rent, Increasing, and
extinguishment.
the Lord grants the Seigniory for years, and the Tenant attorneth, the Lord
releaseth his Seigniory to the Tenant for years, and to the Tenant of the land
generally; the whole Seigniory is extinct, and the estate of the Lessee also:
but if the release had been to them and their heirs, then the Lessee had had
the inheritance of the one moity, and the other moity had been extinct: And the
reason of this diversity is, because when the release is made generally, it
cannot enure to the Lessee longer than for life, because it enureth by way of
enlargement, and being made to the Tenant of the land, it enureth by way of
Extinguishment, because he cannot do service to himself, and then there cannot
remain in the Seigniory a particular estate for life: But when the release is
made to them and their heirs, each one takes a moity, the one by way of
increasing of the estate, and the other by extinguishment.

^cceptance. ^ttornment.
8 If there be Lord and Tenant, Littl.. 558. Co. ib. 312. b.
and the Tenant lets the Tenements to a Feme for term of her life, the
remainder over in fee, the Feme takes Baron, and after the Lord grants the
services, etc. to the Baron and his heirs; In this case there can be no
attornment by parol, etc. because the Baron that ought to attorn, cannot attorn
to himself, but his acceptance of the grant of the Seigniory amounts to an
Attornment in Law.

The like.
9 If the Lord grant his Seigniory to the Tenant of the land and to a stranger,
the Tenant cannot properly and formally attorn to himself; Co. ib. 313. a. 1.
but his acceptance of the grant is a good attornment in Law to extinguish the
one moity, and to vest the other moity in the stranger.

10 If there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant take Feme, Littl.. 559. Co.
Inst. pars 1. 313. a.
and after the Lord grant the services to the Feme and her heirs; Acceptance.
Attornment.
Here can be no formal attornment, because the Baron cannot attorn to himself
and his wife in his wives right; yet his acceptance of the deed is a good
attornment in Law to vest the services in the Feme and her heirs; but during
the coverture they are suspended, etc.

Grant of the Seigniory to tenant for ^ife of the tenant.
11 If there be Lord and Tenant, Littl.. 562. Co. ib. 314. a. 1
and the Tenant make a lease to a man for term of his life, saving the
reversion to himself; Here, if the Lord grant the Seigniory to the Tenant for
life in fee, albeit as to all things concerning the right, the Seigniory has
his being (as if the Tenant die without heir, the tenancy shall escheat to the
Grantee, etc.) yet as to the possession during the particular estate, the
Grantee shall take no benefit of the Seigniory; and therefore during that time
he shall have no Rent, Service, Wardship, Relief, Heriot, or the like; because
these duties belong to the possession, and he cannot do or pay them to himself.

Remitter.
12 The principal cause, Littl. Sect. 661. Co. ib. 349. a. 4. Littl. 665. Littl.
680. 682, 683, 684, etc.
why a Tenant in tail in many cases is remitted, is because (as Littleton
says) there is no person, against whom he may sue his Writ of Formedon; for
none is Tenant of the Franktenement but himself, and against himself he cannot
sue, etc. There is the same reason also of other Remitt^rs. Finch 19. Co. l.
33. a. 3. in the Marq. of Winchesters case.

Voucher as^ignee.
13 If a man make a feoffment in fee to A. his Heirs and Assigns, Co. ib. 385.
b. 2.
A. enfeoffeth B. in fee, who re-enfeoffeth A. he or his Assigns shall never
vouch; because he cannot be his own Assignee; but if B. had enfeoffed the heir
of A. he might vouch as Assignee; for the heir of A. may be Assignee to A.
inasmuch as he claims not as heir.

Warranty.
14 If Tenant in tail make feoffment to his Uncle, Co. ib. 389. b. 3. and 390.
a. 1. Littl. Sect. 743.
and after the Uncle make a feoffment in fee with warranty, etc. and take again
an estate to him in fee, and then enfeoff a stranger without warranty, and die
without issue, and the Tenant in tail die; Here the issue in tail shall not
be barred by the warranty made to the first Feoffee; because that warranty by
the Uncles resuming an estate in fee of the land, is utterly defeated; For if
the warranty should have stood in force, then should the Uncle have warranted
it to himself, which could not be, etc.

^ self act ^^id.
15 A man cannot present himself to a Benefit, Finch 19. 8 H. 6. 29. 3 El.
Dyer 188
make himself; an Officer, sue himself, or summon himself; and therefore if
a Sheriff suffer a common recovery, it is Error, because he cannot summon
himself.

Finch 19.
16 A man cannot be judge and party in a Suit; No Judge of two Be^ch^ at once.
And therefore if a Justice of the Common Place be made a Justice of the Kings
Bench (though it be but hac vice) it determines his Patent for the Common
Place; for if he should be Judge of both Benches together, he should control
his own judgments; because if the Common Pleas err, that error shall be
reformed in the Kings Bench.

Co. l. 1. 174. a. 3. Diggs case.
17 If a man by Indenture covenant to stand seized to the use of himself for
life, the remainder to others in tail, The Feoff^^ in without (...) try or cla^^
etc. and also reserve unto himself power of revocation, and does revoke the
uses accordingly, immediately upon such revocation the uses so limited are
determined without entry or claim; because he himself was Tenant for life of
the land, and he cannot enter or make claim upon or against himself, etc. And
therefore it is agreed in the 20 E. 4. 18, and 19. that if a Feoffment be made
upon collateral condition, and before condition performed, the Feoffee demiseth
the land to the Feoffor, if after the Feoffor perform the condition, the land
shall be immediately in the Feoffor without entry or claim; because he himself
is already in possession thereof: So likewise if a Villain purchases rent
issuing out of the Lords land, that rent shall be in the Lord without entry or
claim, causa qua supra.

Co. l. 2. 51. b. 4. Sir Hugh Cholmleys case.
18 It is holden in 7 E. 3. that if the Advowson of the Church of Dale be
granted to the Parson of Dale, and to his Successors, None can present hi^ self.
this is void as to the Successor; because the Successor can never take any
benefit thereof by way of presentation; for he cannot present himself, etc.

Co. l. 4. 55. a. 1. The Sadlers case.
19 In all cases at the Common Law, No tra^^^ or action against the King.
when the King was seized of any estate of Inheritance or Franktenement by any
matter of record, he that right had could not by the Common Law have any
travers, or real action, upon which he might have an Amoveas manum; for that
the King by his Writ could not command himself; but he was put to his Petition
of right (in the nature of his real action) to be restored to his Franktenement
and Inheritance, 4 H. 6. 12. 24 E. 3. 23. 1 H. 7. 3. 4 E. 4. 21. 9 E. 4. 52.

Co l. 8. 68. b. 3. John Trollops case.
20 If a Bishop himself be sued, Bishop E^communi^^on.
and he pleads in disability of the party, Plaintiff, excommangement by himself
or his Commissary (who is as his Deputy) albeit it be for another cause than
that in question, yet that shall not disable the Plaintiff; because in this
case the Bishop himself is party; and with this agrees. 16 E. 3. Excom. 5. 5
E. 2. Excom. 27. 5 E. 3. 8. 8 E. 3. 69. 18 E. 3. 58. 9 H. 7. 21. b. 10 H. 7. 9.

Co. l. 8. 118. a. 1. Doctor Bonhams case.
21 The President and five elect of the College of Physicians in London, ought
not to be Judges to give Sentence or Judgment, Judge and party.
Ministers to make summons, and parties to have the moity of the forfeiture;
albeit they have an Act of Parliament to protect them, viz. 14 H. 8. cap. 5.
For, Nemo debet esse judex in propria causa; imo iniquum est aliquem suae rei
esse judicem.

Co. ib. 118. b. 3.
22 If an Act of Parliament grant to any to hold or have Conusance of all manner
of Pleas arising before him within his Manor of Dale, The like.
yet he shall hold no plea, wherein himself is party; For Iniquum est, etc.

Co. 9. 123. b. 4. Anthony Lowes case.
23 The Duchy of Lancaster, before it was united to the Crown, Duchy of
Lancaster.
was holden of the King in Capite; but when they remained in one and the same
person, the ancient tenures of the Crown did sleep perpetuo somno, because the
King could not hold of himself.

F. N. B. 21. i.
24 In the Common Pleas, upon Error in Process, Error in (...) not revers^ in
the same Court.
or in default of the Clerks, the Justices there may reverse their own
judgment (so it be done the same term) without suing any Writ of Error: And
if it be deferred till another term, yet may it be reversed by the said Judges
upon a Writ of Error: But if it be Error in Law (which is the default of the
Justices themselves) that Court cannot reverse such a judgment, no not by a
Writ of Error; For, that Error is to be redressed in another Court before other
Justices by Writ of Error, because the Justices of the Common Pleas are not
competent Judges of their own error.

Conspiracy.
25 A writ of Conspiracy cannot properly lie against one single person; because
one person cannot be said to conspire with himself. F. N. B. 116. l.


None can be a prisoner to himself.
26 If the Warden of the Fleet, who has his office in fee, Pl. Co. 37 a. 3. The
Sheriffs of Londons case.
die seized, his Son and Heir being then in prison, and the office descends
unto him being so in prison; In this case, the Law will adjudge him out of
prison, albeit the Fetters be upon his legs; for that he cannot keep himself in
prison, and therefore shall be adjudged at large.

No donor to himself, Stat. 27 H. 8.
27 If A. seized of lands in fee before the Statute of uses (made Anno, Pl. Co.
59. a. 4. Wimbish and Talbois case.
27 H. 8.) had granted the same lands to Feoffees in trust to the use of
himself and his wife in tail, and afterward the Statute is made; Here, by
force of that Statute, the possession being conveyed to the use the Feoffors
are Donors, and not A. For it seems improper and repugnant, that A. should be
Donor to himself.

Feoffees of lands charged with a recognisance.
28 If the Conisor of a Recognizance (according to the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap.
6.) enfeoff the Conisee of parcel of the land, Pl. Co. 72. b 3. Rosse Vens Sir
Tho. Pope. in Audita quaerela. F. N. B. 104, n. and 105. c. Vide Dyer 193. 30.
2, 3 Eliz.
and a stranger of another parcel, and reserve parcel in his own hands; Here,
the Conisee shall not have execution against the stranger: For if one Feoffee
of the Conisor (where his land only is put in execution) may have an Audita
quaerela, against all the other Feoffees, to make their lands also to be put in
execution, and to be contributary to the entire charge; By the same reason, if
the Conisee himself be one of the Feoffees, the lands in the hands of the other
Feoffees shall not be chargeable with the execution; for that the Conisee
himself cannot be contributary with them (for his part) toward the satisfying
of the charge; because he cannot contribute to himself, neither can he be
contributary for a personal thing due to himself; Neither yet shall the Charge
be apportioned, but all shall be extinct as against the other Feoffees: Howbeit
against the Conisor himself, the Conisee shall have execution for the parcel
still remaining in his hand, etc.

Lands to be sold by Executors.
29 At the Common Law, Co. Inst. pars 1. 113. a. 3.
if lands had been willed to be sold by Executors, or had been devised to
Executors to be sold, if any of them had refused, the rest could not have sold
them: but now that is helped by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 4. viz. the first
by the express words of that Statute, and the other by the equity of the same:
Howbeit in neither of those cases, when the one refuses, can the other make
sale to him, that so refuses; because he is party and privy to the last will,
and remains Executor still.

The younger ^rother charge the land ^f the elder.
30 The younger brother disseiseth the elder, Dyer 5. 1. 25 H. 8.
who is barred in an Assise by a false oath, the younger charge the land, and
dies without issue, and the land descends to the elder brother; In this case,
the elder brother is without remedy, because there is none (but himself)
against whom he may bring the attaint, and therefore he shall still hold the
land charged.

^ythes.
31 If ye Parson of a Church purchase a Manor within his Parish; Dyer 43. 21.
30 H. 8.
Here, by this purchase and unity of possession, the Manor, which was
tytheable before, is now made non decimabilis, because he cannot pay tithes to
himself.

^itnesse.
32 It was resolved in the Common Bench, Co. Inst. pars 1 6. b. 4.
Pasch. 10 Jac. that a wife cannot be produced as a witness, either against or
for her husband, because they are one person in Law, Duae animae in carne una,
and he cannot be a witness to or for himself in his own cause.

Dyer 220. 14. 5 Eliz.
33 A recognizance was acknowledged to Sir Nicholas Bacon and two others before
Sir Nicholas himself, being then Lord Keeper, Recognisance
and it was adjudged void as to him, and good for the others.

Dyer 279. 10, 11 Eliz.
34 The Citizens of York were incorporate by R. 2. York City.
by the name of Major, Sheriffs, and Citizens, and claim to be so before by
prescription, and to have a custom to seize goods foreign bought, and foreign
sold; Now in a suit against them for seizing such goods, the Venire facias
issued to the Sheriff of the County, De vicinetu Castri Eborum, because it was
next adjacent to the City; for it was not thought fit to direct it to the
Sheriffs or Coroners of York, because they were Citizens and parties.

Dyer 304. 54. 14 Eliz.
35 The next avoydance is granted to three, Quare Impedit.
Habendum iis and uni eorum conjunctim and divisim, the first presents the
third, who is admitted, instituted, and inducted, and adjudged good; Howbeit,
if the Bishop had refused to admit him alone, his Quare Impedit, peradventure
would have failed, he having a joint Interest in the avoydance, and the
Habendum being void in Law, as it seems.

Hob. 10. Friar and Gildridg.
36 The Obligee made the wife of one of the Obligors his Executrix, Debt ext^^
and died, the woman Executrix administered, then her husband being one of the
Obligors, made her his Executrix, and died, leaving assets to pay the debt,
then she died, and a stranger took administration of the goods of the Obligee
unadministred, and brought his action against the surviving Obligor; but it was
adjudged per Curiam, that the action would not lie, because when one of the
Obligors made the Executrix of the Obligee his Executrix, and left assets, she
could not sue her self, but the debt was presently satisfied by way of
retainer, and (consequently) no new action could be had for that debt. Vide
supra, 46. 4.

Hob. 85. Day and Savage.
37 Trial of the Customs of London shall not be by Certificate from the Major
and Aldermen of that City (albeit it be by their Recorder) to the superior
Courts of Justice, Customs of London.
because they cannot be Judges and parties, when their Customs come in
question.

55 The Law favors privity. Vide Max. 47. 16.
Co. Inst. pars 1 28. a. 2.
1 Tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct has diverse privileges
annexed to his estate, Tenant in (...) after possi^^^^ty.
which a bare Tenant for life has not (for which see Co. Inst. pars 1. 27. b.)
nevertheless if he grant over his estate to another, his Grantee shall not
have them; for he has those privileges in respect of the privity of his
estate, and of the inheritance that was once in him: And therefore it was
adjudged in the case of one Evens, Mich. 28, and 29 Eliz. that where Tenant in
tail after possibility of issue extinct granted over his estate to another,
that the Grantee was compelled to atturn in a Quid juris clamat, as a bare
Tenant for life, Quid jur^^ clamat.
and is so to be named in the writ; For by the assignment the privity of the
estate being altered, the privilege was gone; and this judgment was affirmed
in a writ of Error: And herewith also agrees 27 H. 6. Aid, Statham, 29 E. 3.
1. b. Co. l. 11. fol. 83. b. Bowls case. Vide infra 116.

Co. ib. 35. a. 1.
2 If the husband make several feoffments of several parcels, Assignment Dower
by (...) Feoffee, and (...) the heir.
and dies: and one of the Feoffees assign dower to the wife of a parcel of
land in satisfaction of all the Dower, which she ought to have in the lands of
the other Feoffees; In this case the other Feoffees shall take no benefit of
that assignment; because they are strangers thereunto, and cannot plead the
same: But in the same case, if the husband died seized of other lands in
Fee-simple, and the same descended to the heir, and the heir endoweth the
wife of certain of those lands in full satisfaction of all the dower that she
ought to have, as well in the lands of the Feoffees, as in his own lands, this
assignment is good, and the several Feoffees shall take advantage of it: And
therefore if the wife bring a Writ of Dower against any of them, they may vouch
the heir, and he may plead the assignment which he himself has made in safety
of himself, lest they should recover in value against him; So as there is a
privity in this respect between the Heir and the Feoffees, and by this means
the assignment may be pleaded by the heir that made it.

Livery to the Lessee for years.
3 If a man let lands for years, the remainder over to another in fee, Co. ib.
49. a. ^. and 143. a. 2.
Albeit livery be not necessary for the Lessee for years, yet because the
immediate possession belongs to him, he must of necessity take the livery,
otherwise no estate can pass to him in remainder: And livery being accordingly
made unto him, it shall convey the estate to him, in remainder, by reason of
the privity of those estates; For, the particular estate and the remainders,
which depends upon it (though there be never so many) do all make in Law but
one estate; and therefore livery to the Lessee for years shall enure to him in
remainder, etc.

Waste.
4 The advantage of bringing an action of Waste consists in privity; Co. ib. 53.
b. 3, 4.
for if after the Waste done, the Reversioner grants away his estate, albeit
he afterward takes back the whole estate again, yet as the Waste
dispunishable; So likewise if he grant the reversion to the use of himself and
his wife, and of his heirs, yet the Waste is dispunishable, etc. because the
estate of the reversion (wherein the privity is to that purpose consisted)
continues not, but is altered, etc. If an estate tail determines, hanging the
action of Waste, so that the Plaintiff becomes Tenant in tail after
possibility, etc. the action of Waste is gone. If the Tenant does Waste, and he
in the reversion dies, the heir shall not have an action of Waste for the
Waste done in the life of the Ancestor; nor a Bishop, Master of an Hospital,
Parson, or the like, for Wast done in the time of the Predecessor: And so if
Lessee for years does Waste and dies, an action of Waste lies not against the
Executor or Administrator, for Waste done before their time: But if there be
two Coparceners of a reversion, and Waste is committed, and the one of them
die, the Aunt and the Niece shall join in an action of Waste, etc. Vide Inst.
116.

^mage.
5 If there be two Coparceners or Ioyntenants of a Seigniory, Co. ib. 67. b. 2.
if the Tenant does Homage and Fealty to one of them, he shall be excused
against the other; and this is by reason of the privity and entireness of
their estate.

Homage ex^inct.
6 In homage Ancestrel, Co. ib. 102 b. 3.
continuance of blood on the Lords side is not always necessary; for an Abbot,
Prior, Bishop, or the like, may be Lord by Homage Ancestrel; but yet there
ought to be privity of succession time out of mind in one and the same
politic body; for if that body be once dissolved, though a new one be bounded
of the same name, and all the possessions be granted to them, yet the Homage
Ancestrel is gone; Howbeit if a Prior and Covent be translated (Concurrentibus
hiis, quae in jure requiruntur) to an Abbot and Covent, or to Deane and
Chapter; In that case, because the privity is preserved, the Homage Ancestrel
does also remain; for albeit the name be changed, yet the body was never
dissolved, but in effect remains still, etc.

Homage ex^inct upon a^ienation.
7 If the Tenant that holds by Homage Ancestrel, Co. ib. 103. a. 3. Litt. Sect.
147.
aliens his land to another, the Alienee shall not hold of the Lord by Homage
Ancestrel, because the privity of the estate is altered, and the continuance of
it in the blood of the Tenant is dissolved: And if the Tenant take again an
estate in see of the land from the Alienee, he then holds by Homage, but he
shall not hold by Homage Ancestrel, causa qua supra: So it is also if the
Tenant make a feoffment in fee upon condition, and dies, his heir performs
the condition, and re-entreth; Here, the Homage Ancestrel is destroyed in
respect of the interruption of the continuance of the privity and estate, as it
was agreed in a Case between the Lord Cromwell, and one Andrews, Mich. 14, and
15 Eliz. But if the Tenant makes a lease for life, or a gift in tail, this is
a continuance of the privity and estate in the Tenant, in respect of the
reversion that remains in him; because in that case the sea was never out of
him, etc. Co. l. 8. 75. b. 3. The Lord Staffords case.

Co. ib. 103. b. 2.
8 If the Tenant by Homage Ancestrel alien his land, The like.
and the Alienee is impleaded, and vouch the Alienor, albeit he comes in (by
fiction of Law) to many purposes in privity of his former estate; yet to this
purpose he cannot come in, as Tenant by Homage Ancestrel, because of the
discontinuance of the estate and privity, for that the tenancy was not
continued in the blood of the Tenant: And therefore Britton says, Britt. 170.
a.
Et come ascun soit vouche per homage and le Seignior tend a averrer que le
tenement dount il est vouche, fuit translate horse del sanke del primer
purchassour per feoffment, ou per ascune autre translation; en tiel cas, soit
le tenant charge de voucher son feoffor, ou ses heirs, etc. Howbeit if the
land were recovered against the Tenant upon a faint title, and the Tenant
recover the same again in an action of an higher nature; Here the Homage
Ancestrel remains; because in that case, the right was a sufficient mean to
preserve the privity and continuance: So it is also if he had reversed it in a
writ of Error.

Co. ib. 103. a. 4.
9 If Cestuy que use after the Statute of 1 R. 3. 1. Cestuy q^^ use.
and before the Statute of Uses, (27 H. 8. 10.) had made a feoffment in fee,
upon condition, and entered for the condition broken, he should have detained
the land against the Feoffees for ever; for that the estate and privity was for
the time taken out of the Feoffees, and thereby dissolved for ever.

Co. ib. 117. a. 2.
10 The Lord shall not take advantage of any obligation, covenant, Things in
action.
or other thing in action made to the Villein, because they lie in privity, and
cannot be transferred to others: Neither shall the Lord have a thing in action
by Escheat; for the same reason, Co. l. 10. 48. a. 3. Lampets case: Co. Ibid.
Neither yet shall the Lord by voucher or otherwise take advantage of a
warranty made to a Villein his heirs and assigns, because it is in liew of an
action, and consists in privity, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 130. b. 1.
11 Albeit the Vouchee, Tenant by resceit, Prayee in aid, A protecti^^ cast for
v^^chee, etc.
or Garnishee be no Parties to the Writ, yet before they appear, a Protection
may be cast for them; because when the Demandant grants the Voucher or resceit
in judgment of Law, they are made privy; And although the Demandant
counterplead the Voucher or resceit, yet if it be adjudged for them, and so
they made privy in Law, a Protection may be cast for them, as aforesaid: And so
it is of the Garnishee, a Protection may be cast for him at the day of the
return of the Scire facias, etc.

Co. ib. 146. a. 1.
12 If a Rentcharge be granted to A. and B. and their Heirs, Joyntenants in
Avowry.
A. distraineth the beasts of the Grantor, and he sueth a Replevin, A. avoweth
for himself, and makes conusance for B.A. dies and B. surviveth; In this
case, B. shall not afterward have a Writ of annuity; because the election and
Avowry for the rent by A. barreth B. of any election to make it an annuity,
albeit he assented not to the Avowry, and this is by reason of the privity of
their estate, etc.

Co. ib. 170. b. 1.
13 Husband and Wife Tenants in special Tail have issue a daughter, the Wife
dies, Coparcen^^
the Husband by a second Wife has issue another daughter, both the daughters
enter (where the eldest is only inheritable) and make partition; here, the
eldest daughter is concluded during her life to impeach the partition; or to
say that the youngest is not Heir, and yet the youngest is a stranger to the
Tail; but in respect of privity of their persons, the partition shall conclude;
for a petition between mere strangers in that case is void: Howbeit the issue
of the eldest shall avoid this partition, as issue in Tail.

The like.
14 I. S. seized of Lands in Fee has issue two daughters, Co. ib. 170. b. 2.
viz. Rose bastard eigne, and Anne mulier puisne and dies, Rose and Anne do
enter, and make partition; In this case, Anne and her Heirs are concluded for
ever; and this is by force of the Privity, that is betwixt them.

^ccompt.
15 An action of Account must he grounded upon Privity; Co. ib. 172. a. 4.
for without Privity no Action of Account can be maintained, viz. either a
Privity indeed by the consent of the party as in such an action against a
Receiver, or Bailife (for against a Disseisor or other wronged doer no account
does lie) or a privity in Law (ex provisione legis) made by Law, as against a
Guardian in soccage, etc.

^lienation of (...) property in (...) ^^parcenary.
16 In coparcenarie, if one of the parts be evicted by an eigne title, Co. ib.
173. b. 2. Littl. Sect. 262.
she that so loses her part shall enter upon the rest to have recompense, etc.
because yet the Privity, which the Law creates betwixt them, does still remain,
but if one of the parceners sell her part, and then the part, which the other
parcener has, is evicted, etc. In that case, the parcener, that so loses her
part, shall not enter upon the Alienee; for that by the alienation the privity
is dissolved: Littl.. 260,
And therefore if a man has land in tail, and also as much in Fee-simple, and
has issue two Daughters, and die, and the Daughters make partition, so that
the entailed land is allotted to the eldest, and the Fee-simple land to the
youngest; Here, if the youngest Daughter alien the Fee-simple land to another
in fee, and has issue, and die, the issue may well enter into the entailed
land, and shall hold it in property with her Aunt; Yet shall not the eldest
sister enter into half of the lands in Fee-simple upon the Alienee; because by
the alienation the privity of the estate was destroyed, etc. So it is also, Co.
ib. 172. b. 4.
if the youngest Daughter had made a gift in tail; because the reversion
expectant upon an estate tail is of no account in Law; for that it may be cut
off by the Tenant in tail at his pleasure; Exchange.
It is otherwise of an estate for life, or years, etc. And what is said of
parcenary, is also true of exchange in point of eviction, etc.

^oparceners.
17 If a man is seized of a Carve of land by just title, Littl.. 262. Co. ib.
173. b.
and disseiseth and Infant within age of another Carve, and has issue two
daughters, and dies, and the Carve by good title is allotted to the eldest, and
the other to the youngest, who alieneth it to another in fee, and after the
Infant at full age enters upon the Alienee; In this case, the youngest daughter
has excluded her self from having any part of the Carve by good title; for
that by her alienation the privity was destroyed: Howbeit if the youngest
daughter before the entry of the Infant had only granted it for years, or
life, or in tail, saving the reversion, there peradventure it were otherwise;
because in that case the privity is not utterly destroyed, she having reserved
to her self the reversion and fee.

^viction in ^^parcenary.
18 In coparcenary, Co. ib. 173. b. 4.
if the whole estate in part of the purparty be evicted, that shall avoid the
partition in the whole, be it of a Manor, which is entire, or of acres of
ground, or the like, that be several; for in that case the privity remains, and
the partition implies (for this purpose) both a warranty and a condition in
Law, and either of them is entire, and therefore does give in this case an
entry into the whole: And so has it been resolved (in Bastards case, Co. l. 4.
fol. 121.) both in the case of partition, as also of an exchange. There is
likewise the same reason, when any estate of Freehold is evicted from the
Coparcener in all or part of her property; for then it shall be also avoided in
the whole: As if A. be seized in fee of one acre of land in possession, and of
the reversion of another expectant upon an estate for life, and he disseise the
Lessee for life, who makes continual claim; A. dies seized of of both acres,
having two daughters, partition is made, so as the one acre is allotted to the
one, and the other acre to the other, the Lessee enters, the partition is
avoided for the whole, and so likewise was it resolved in the case abovesaid.
Vide infra 100.

Co. ib. 186. b. 2.
19 If there be two Ioyntenants of an Advowson, Joyntenants of an advo^son.
and the one presents to the Church, and his Clerk is admitted and
instituted, this in respect of the privity shall not put the other out of
possession; but if that Ioyntenant that presented, dies, it shall serve for a
title in a Quare Impedit brought by the Survivor.

Littl. Sect. 304. Co. ib. 193. b. 1.
20 If there be three Ioyntenants, Joyntenant^ Release.
and one of them releaseth to another of his companions all his right in the
land without the word Heirs, this shall enure to that companion and his
heirs, to hold that part in common with the other Ioyntenant; and this is by
reason of the privity of their estate, and for that he, to whom the release is
made, is seized per my and per tout, of the fee and inheritance.

Co. ib. 193. b. 2.
21 If there be two Coparceners, Coparceners Release.
and the one has issue twenty daughters, and dies, the other may release to
any one of the daughters her whole part: And here, albeit she, to whom the
release is made, has not an equal part; Nevertheless, by reason of the
privity and the entireness of the estate the release is good, although it be
made without the word Heirs: But if there be two Ioyntenants of twenty acres,
and the one makes a feoffment of his part in eighteen acres, Ioyntenants
release.
the other cannot release his entire part, but only in two acres, because the
Ioyntenant is severed for the residue.

Littl. Sect. 334. Co. ibid. 205. b. 4. and 207. a. 1.
22 If a feoffment be made in Mortgage upon condition, Privity bet^^ Ancestor
an^ Heir, Test^^ and Exec^^ Intestate and Administrator, Ordina^^
that the Feoffor shall pay such a sum at such a day; albeit the Feoffor die
before the day of payment, yet may the heir redeem the Mortgage by the payment
or tender of the money; So also may the Executor or Administrator, or (in their
default) the Ordinary; although there be no mention in the deed of payment by
any of them: And all this by reason of the privity betwixt the Ancestor and
heir which is, and the Testator and Executor, and the Intestate and
Administrator, or Ordinary; for the heir is privy in blood, and the Executor,
Administrator, and Ordinary are privies in right.

Littl. Sect. 336. Co. ib. 207. b. 4. and 208. a. 2.
23 If a feoffment be made upon condition, Feoffee upon condition may red^^^
that the Feoffee shall pay xxl. unto the Feoffor upon such a day, etc. And if
payment be not made, that then it shall be lawful for the Feoffor, etc. to
re-enter. If the Feoffee sell the land to a stranger, payment or tender made by
either of the Feoffees shall be effectual to settle the estate in the last
Feoffee; for the first Feoffee may do it, because he was privy to the
condition; and the last may also do it, because he was privy in estate, and in
judgment of Law has an estate and interest in the condition for the salvation
of his tenancy.

Co. ib. 208. b. 3.
24 There is a diversity between a condition of an Obligation, Condition from
Obl^^ or Feoffee.
or a condition upon a feoffment, where the Act that is local is to be done to
a stranger, and where to the Obligee or Feoffor himself: As if one make a
feoffment in fee, upon condition that the Feoffee shall infeoff a stranger, and
no time limited, the Feoffee shall not have time during his life to make the
feoffment; for then he should take the profits in the mean time to his own use,
which the stranger ought to have, and there is no privity between the Feoffee
and the Stranger, and therefore he ought to make the feoffment as soon as
conveniently he may, and so it is also of the condition of an Obligation: But
if the condition be, that the Feoffee shall re-enfeoff the Feoffor, there the
Feoffee has time during his life, by reason of the privity of the condition,
that is between them, unless the Feoffee in this case be hastened by request,
etc.

Co. ib. 209. a. 3
25 For the redemption of an estate in Mortgage, Privies in (...)
the Executors or heir may make the tender; For albeit the heir be a third
person, yet is he no stranger; but he, and the Executors also are privies in
Law, etc. Vide Littl. Sect. 337.

Privies by deed.
26 If a man enfeoff another upon condition, Co. ib. 213. a; 4. Littl.. 345.
that he and his heirs shall render unto a stranger a yearly rent, etc. This is
not rent (properly so called) and the reservation is merely void, because there
wants privity: But if A. be seized of certain lands, and A. and B. join in a
feoffment in fee reserving a rent to them both and their heirs, and the Feoffee
grant, that it shall be lawful for them and their heirs to distrain for the
rent so reserved, this is a good grant of a rent to them both; because B. is
party and privy to the deed, as well as A. and the clause of distress is a
grant of the rent to A. and B. But if B. had been a stranger to the deed, then
B. had taken nothing etc.

Privies in blood, estate, and right. A re-entry cannot be transferred.
27 If an estate be made upon condition, and clause of re-entry, Littl. Sect.
347. Co. ib. 214. b. 4.
at the Common Law none shall take advantage of such re-entry, but only parties
or privies; As if a man let land to another for term of life by Indenture,
rendering rent to the Lessor and his heirs, and for default of payment a
re-entry, etc. If after the Lessor grant the reversion to another in see, and
the Tenant attorn, etc. In this case the advantage of re-entry is gone for
ever; For albeit, if the rent happen to be arrear, the Grantee of the reversion
may distrain for it, because it is incident to the reversion; yet shall he not
for that cause enter into the land, and out the Tenant; for that the advantage
of re-entry (at the Common Law) belongs only to the Lessor himself, and unto
his heir, as privy in blood unto him, and cannot by grant of the reversion be
transferred unto another; neither yet can it be left in the Lessor or his
heirs, because he has departed with his whole estate in the land: But if the
Lessor has died seized of the reversion, his heir should have taken advantage
of such re-entry; for that he is privy in blood unto him, as aforesaid. And
therefore there is a diversity between the reservation of a rent, and a
re-entry; for a rent cannot be reserved to the heir of the Feoffor, leaving
out the Feoffor himself; but the heir may take advantage of a Condition, which
the Feoffor himself could never do; As if I enfeoff another of an acre of
ground, upon condition, that if my heir pay to the Feoffee, etc. xx s. that he
and his heirs shall re-enter, this condition is good: and if after my decease,
my heir pay the xx s. he shall re-enter: for he is privy in blood, and shall
enjoy the land as heir unto me. So also if a Bishop, Archdeacon, Parson,
Prebend, or any other body politic or corporal; Ecclesiastical or Temporal,
make a lease, etc. upon condition, his successor may enter for the condition
broken, for they are privies in right: Likewise, if a man have a lease for
years, and demise or grant the same upon condition, etc. and die, his Executors
or Administrators shall enter for the condition broken; for they are also
privies in right, and represent the person of the dead.

^eoffor shall ^lead a deed ^oll.
28 If feoffment be made by deed Poll upon condition, Littl. Sect. 375.
and because the condition is not performed, the Feoffor enters; In this case,
if either the deed Poll be pleaded by the Feoffee, and by that means showed to
the Court, or that the Feoffor otherwise happens the possession of the said
deed albeit that deed properly belongs to the Feoffee, and not to the Feoffor;
yet because the Feoffor is privy unto it, he shall make use of it, and be
received to plead it.

Release.
29 If two men do trespass to another, who releaseth to one of them by his
deed, the other trespassor shall make use of that release, if he have it to
show; because they are parties and privies in the trespass; so likewise if two
be bound in an obligation, and the Obligee releaseth to one of them, both are
discharged, etc.

^^ir, Execu^^^, privies.
30 If an action of Debt upon an Obligation be brought against an heir, Littl..
376. Co. ib. 23^. a.
he may plead in bar a release made by the Obligee to the Executors; and yet
the deed does properly belong to the Executors and not to him; but because both
he and they are privies to the Testator, such a release shall enure as well to
him as to them, if he be able to produce it, otherwise it shall not avail him.

Littl.. 396, 397. Co. ib. 242. a.
31 If a man seized of lands in fee has issue two sons, and die seized, Privity
of blood and title.
and the youngest son enters by abatement into the land, and having issue dies
thereof seized, and the issue enters into the land, this shall not be a descent
to take away the entry of the eldest son, or of his heirs; because the Law
intends that the youngest son entered claiming the land as heir to his
father, and for that the eldest son claims also by the same title, viz. as
heir to his father; therefore he and his heirs may well enter upon the second
son and his heirs, in respect of the privity of blood between them, and of the
claim by one and the same title: But in the same case, if after the fathers
death the eldest son had entered, and then the youngest son had disseised the
eldest, and had died seized; that had been a descent to take away the entry of
the eldest or of his heirs; for that was a plain disseisin, and the privity of
blood shall not help that case, etc. So also where lands were given to the
husband and wife, and the heirs of their two bodies, and they had issue a
daughter, and the wife died, and the husband had issue by another wife, four
sons, and died, and the eldest son abated and died seized; This descent did
take away the entry of the daughter, because there wanted privity of title, for
that they claimed not by one and the same title: And in the first case, albeit
the eldest son has issue and dies, and that after his decease the youngest
son or his heir enters, and many descents be cast in his line; Yet may the
heirs of the eldest son enter, in respect of the privity of the blood, and of
the same claim by one title: But if the youngest son make a feoffment in fee,
and the Feoffee die seized, that descent shall take away the entry of the
eldest, in respect that the privity of the blood fails: And admit, that the
youngest son be but of the half blood to his brother, yet is he of the whole
blood to his father; and therefore if he enters by abatement, and dies
seized, it shall not bar his elder brother of his entry; Howbeit, if after the
decease of the Father, a Stranger does first enter and abate, upon whom the
youngest son enters and disseiseth him, and die seized, this descent shall
bind the eldest; for he entered by disseisin, and not by abatement, etc.

Co. ib. 243. a. 1
32 If a man be seized of lands in the nature of Burgh English, Privity of blood
and ^^tle.
and has issue two sons and die, and the eldest son, before any entry made by
the youngest, enters into the land by abatement, and dies seized, this shall
not take away the entry of the youngest brother, in respect of the privity of
blood betwixt them, and for that they claim by one title, etc.

Co. ibid.
33 If the father make a lease for life, The like.
and has issue two sons and dies, and the Tenant for life dies, and the
youngest son entrude, and die seized, this descent shall not take away the
entry of the eldest, causa qua supra: But if the father had made a lease for
years, it had been otherwise; for that the possession of the Lessee for years
makes an actual freehold in the eldest son, etc.

Co. ib. 243. a. 2.
34 If two Coparceners make partition to present by turn, The like.
and one of them usurp in the turn of the other, this usurpation shall not put
the other out of possession, because of the privity betwixt them, and for that
they claim by one title; and albeit they do severally present to the Ordinary,
yet the Church is not litigious for the same reason.

Co. ibid.
35 Upon a writ of Di^m clausit extremum, The like.
if the youngest son had been found heir, the eldest had no remedy by the
Common Law; because they claimed by one title, etc. but now that is helped by
the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 8.

Co. ib. 243. a. 3.
36 If two persons be in debate for tithes, Tithes un^^ one Pat^^^
which amount to above the fourth part, and one man is Patron of both Churches,
no Indicavit does lie, for that both Incumbents claim by one and the same
Patron, etc. Fitz. N. B. 45.

Mortdancester.
37 Assisa mortis antecessoris non tenet inter conjunctas personas, Co. ib. 242.
a. 4 Littl. Sect. 398.
sicut fratres and sorores, etc. For these are privy in blood; but it lies
against strangers, and then damages are to be recovered against a stranger, but
not against his brother.

Privity of blood and title.
38 If a man seized of lands in fee, has issue two daughters, Co. ib. 243. b. 2.
and die the eldest enters into the whole, and has issue and dies seized, and
her issue enters, and has also issue and dies seized, and the second issue
enters, and sic ultra. Yet the youngest daughter or her issue, as to her moity,
may enter upon whatsoever issue of the eldest, notwithstanding such descent,
because they claim by one and the same title, and by reason of the privity the
entry of the eldest shall be accounted in law the entry of them both, etc.
Howbeit in the same case, if both the sisters had entered after the death of
their father, and had been seized, and then the eldest sister had disseised the
youngest of her moity, and had issue, and died seized, and the lands had
descended to the issue of the eldest sister, then could not the youngest sister
nor her heirs have entered, etc. causa qua supra: So also if one Coparcener
enter claiming the whole, and make a feoffment in fee, and take an estate to
her and her heirs, and has issue, and die seized; this descent shall take away
the entry of the other sister, because by the Feoffment the privity of the
Coparcenary was destroyed, etc.

In joyntenants, privity in title.
39 If lands be given to two, and to the heirs of one of them, Co. ib. 247. b.
3.
he that has the Fee-simple shall not have an action of Waste upon the Statute
of Gloucester, against the Ioyntenant for life; but his heir shall maintain an
action of Waste against him upon the same Statute, so that the heir shall in
this case maintain an action, which the Ancestor could not: And this is in
respect of the privity betwixt the Ioyntenants, and for that they claim by one
and the same title; whereas after the decease of the Ioyntenant that had the
fee, the Survivor claims by one title, and the heir by another, viz. the one by
the first feoffment, and the other by descent from his father, etc.

40 If land be let to a man for term of life, the remainder for life, Littl..
416. Co. ib. 252. a. 3.
the remainder in fee, Privity in estate.
and the Tenant for life alien in fee, and he in the remainder for life make
continual claim before the dying seized of the Alienee, and after the Alienee
dies seized, and then he in the remainder for life dies before any entry made
by him; In this case, he in the remainder in fee shall take advantage of the
continual claim made by the Tenant in remainder for life, and may enter upon
the heir of the Alienee; because the right of entry, which the Tenant for life
in remainder had gained by his entry, shall go to him in the remainder in fee,
in respect of the privity of estate, and so it is also of him in the reversion
in fee in like case; for he is also privy in estate, etc.

The like.
41 If two Ioyntenants be disseised, Co. ibid.
and the one of them makes continual claim and dies, the Survivor shall take
benefit of his continual claim, in respect of the privity of their estate.

The like.
42 If Tenant in tail, the remainder in fee with warranty, Co. ibid.
have judgment to recover in value, and dies before execution without issue,
he in remainder shall sue execution; for he has right thereunto as privy in
estate.

Seigniory per ^qua servitia.
43 If a Seigniory be granted by fine to one for life, Co. ibid.
the remainder in fee, the Grantee for life dies, he in the remainder shall
have a per quae fervitia, for he has right to the remainder, and is privy in
estate.

Co. ib. 265. b. 4. Littl. Sect. 491. Co. lib. 8. 151. b. 3. Edward Althams
case. Co. ib. 266. a. 1. Littl.. 490. a. Infra 114. Co. ib. 284. b. 3.
44 In a precipe quod reddat, Privity of vouchee, etc.
a release from the Demandant to the Vouchee is good, and yet the Vouchee has
nothing in the land; but the reason of that is, because when the Vouchee
enters into the warranty, he becomes Tenant to the Demandant, and may render
the land to him, in respect of the privity between them; Howbeit a stranger
cannot release to the Vouchee; because in rei veritate he is not Tenant of the
land: And therefore if after the Vouchee has entered into warranty, and become
Tenant in Law, a collateral Ancestor of the Demandant releaseth to the Vouchee
with warranty, he shall not plead this against the Demandant; for that release
by a stranger is void, because there wants privity, etc. So also it is, if the
Tenant alien hanging the precipe, the release of the Demandant to the Tenant
the precipe is good, and yet he has nothing in the land, etc. Co. l. 1. 87. b.
Corbets case, per Walmsley.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 266. a. 1.
45 In time of vacation, an Annuity, that the Parson ought to pay, Release to
(...) Patron good.
may be released to the Patron, in respect of the privity: But a release to the
Ordinary only seems not good, because the Annuity is temporal.

Littl. 452. Co. ib. 267. b. 1.
46 A release of a right made to him in reversion or remainder, Privies in
estate.
shall aid and benefit him that has the particular estate, for years or life,
or an estate tail; So likewise shall a release of a right made to the
particular Tenant for life, or in tail, aid and benefit him or them in the
remainder, etc. because they are all privies in estate, etc.

Littl. Sect. 454. Co. ibid. 268. a.
47 If there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant is disseised, Release to privies
go^d.
and the Lord release to the Disseisee all his right in the Seigniory and in
the land; this is a good release, and the Seigniory is thereby extinct; and
this is by reason of the privity, that is between the Lord and the Disseisee.
And therefore there is an observable difference betwixt a Seigniory or
Rent-service, and a Rentcharge; For a Seigniory or Rent-service may be
released and extinguished to him, that has but a bare right in the land, and
the reason of this is in respect of the privity between the Lord and the Tenant
in right; For the Disseisee is not only in that case as Tenant to the Avowry;
but if he die, his heir within age, the heir shall be in ward, and if of full
age, he shall pay relief; and if he die without heir, the land shall escheat:
but there is no such privity in case of a Rentcharge, for there the charge
only lies upon the land: A Seigniory may likewise be released by the
Demandant to the Vouchee, Co. ib. 269. a. 1.
as also by the Donor to the Donee, after the Donee has discontinued in fee,
and this is merely in respect of privity without any estate or right, etc. And
therefore if the Donee in tail makes a feoffment in fee, and the Donor
release to him and his heirs all his right in the land, this shall extinguish
the rent; because the Lord must avow upon him, and yet the Tenant in tail after
the feoffment has no right in the land; but the reason is in respect of the
privity, and for that the Donor is of necessity compellable to avow upon him
only; For, if he should avow upon the Discontinuee, then it should appear of
his own showing, that the reversion, whereunto the rent is incident, should be
out of him, and consequently the Avowry should abate: And so it was resolved
Trin. 18 Eliz. in the Common Pleas, in Sir Thomas Wiats case: Much more then
shall a release made by the Donor to the Donee, being disseised, extinguish the
rent reserved upon the gift in tail; Littl.. 455.
because in that case the Donee had still a right in him; Howbeit this is also
in respect of the privity, that is betwixt the Donor and Donee; yet here by
such a release no right of the reversion shall pass to the Donee, because at
the time of the release he had nothing but a right in the land, etc. For a
release of a right in lands and tenements to one that has but abare right, Co.
ib. 267. a. 4. and 273. a. 2, etc.
regularly is void: And to make such a release available, he, to whom it is
made, must have either freehold in Deed or in Law in possession, or a state in
remainder or reversion in fee, or fee-tail, or for life, etc.

Release before entry ^oid.
48 A man lets his land to another for term of years, Littl. Sect. 459. Co. ib.
270 a. 3. 4.
and the Lessor releaseth to the Lessee all his right, etc. before the Lessee
enter into the land; that release is void, as to enlarge his estate, the Lessee
having only Interesse termini, and not possession of the land; but if such a
Lessee enter and have possession, then such a release unto him after entry
shall be avaylable to enlarge his estate, according to the limitation of the
same; by reason of the privity that is betwixt them, by force of the same
lease: Howbeit if a man make a lease for years to begin presently, reserving a
rent, if before the Lessee does enter, the Lessor releaseth all the right that
he has in the land, albeit this release cannot enlarge his estate, yet it
shall in respect of the privity extinguish the rent: And so it is also, if a
lease be made to begin at Michaelmas, reserving a rent, and before the day, the
Lessor releaseth all his right, etc. this cannot enure to enlarge the estate,
nevertheless it shall extinguish the rent in respect of the privity, as it was
resolved in the Exchequer 39, and 40 Eliz. between Sir Henry Woodhouse, and Sir
William Paston.

Release of Joyntenant of an advowson.
49 A man grants the next avoydance of an Advowson to two, Co. ib. 270. b. ^.
the one of them may before the Church become void, release to the other; For
albeit the Grantor cannot release to them to increase their estate, because
their interest is future, and not in possession; yet one of them to extinguish
his interest, may release to the other in respect of the privity: But after the
Church becomes void, then is such a release void; because it is then (as it
were) but a thing in action. Pasc. 38 Eliz. in Quare Impedit, per Denuet verse
l'evesque de Norwich in Com. Banco.

Release to tenant at will good: to tenant at sufferance, void.
50 A release to a Tenant at will is good; Littl Sect. 460, 461. Co. ib. 276. b.
3. 271. a. 132.
because between the Lessor and such a Lessee there is a possession with a
privity; but a release to a Tenant at sufferance ( viz. who comes to the
possession first lawfully, and then holds over) is utterly void; because he
has a possession without privity; As if Lessee for years hold over his term,
etc. a release to him is void; for that there is no privity between them, and
so are the books that speak of this matter, to be understood; for if a man
enters into land of his own wrong, and take the profits, his own words, That
he will hold it at the will of the owner, cannot qualify his wrong, but he
must needs be a Disseisor, and then a release to him is good; or if the owner
consented thereunto, then is he a Tenant at will, and that way also a release
is good: Howbeit, there is a difference, when one comes to a particular estate
in land by the act of the party, and when by act in Law; for if the Guardian
hold over, he is an abator, because his interest came by act in Law, etc.

Privies, their several kinds.
51 Privity in the understanding of the Law is fourfold, Co. ib. 217. a. 3.
1 Privies in estate, as between Donor and Donee, Lessor and Lessee, which
privity is ever immediate: 2 Privies in Blood, as the heir to the Ancestor, or
between Coparceners, etc. 3 Privies in Representation, as Executors, etc. to
the Testator. 4 Privies in tenure, as the Lord and Tenant, etc. which may be
reduced to two general heads, Privies in Deed, and Privies in Law. To these
also may be added Privies in right, as Prececessor and Successor, unless you
may rank them with Privies in Representation.

Release with^^t privity ^oid.
52 A release shall not enure by way of enlarging of an estate, Co. ib. 272. b.
4. etc. Little. Sect. 547.
unless there be privity of estate, as between Lessor and Lessee, Donor and
Donee, for if A. make a lease to B. for life, and the Lessee makes a lease for
years, and after A. releaseth to the Lessee for years, and his heirs; this
release is void to enlarge the estate; because there is no privity between A.
and the Lessee for years: So likewise if a man make a lease for 20 years, and
the Lessee make a lease for 10 years, if the first Lessor does release to the
second Lessee, and his heirs, that release is void: Likewise if the Donee in
tail, make a Lease for his own life, and the Donor release to the Lessee and
his heirs, this release is void to enlarge the estate, etc.

Co. ib. 273. a. 4.
53 If a man make a Lease for years, the remainder for life, Release to privies
in estate, good.
a release by the Lessor to the Lessee for years, and to his heirs, is good;
for that he has both a privity and an estate; and a release also to him in the
remainder for life and his heirs, Doct. Leyfields case.
is good also; for these are privies in estate, etc. But they ought to have the
Deed ready in their fist to plead. Co. l. 10. 93. a. 4.

Littl.. 470, 471. Co. ib. 275. a. 4.
54 If my Tenant for term of life lets the land to another for term of the
life of the Lessee, the remainder to another in Fee; The like.
Here, if I release to my Tenants Lessee for life, I am barred for ever, albeit
there be no mention of Heirs; because at the time of the release I had no
reversion, but only a right to have a reversion; for by such a Lease and the
remainder over, which my Tenant made, my reversion was discontinued or rather
divested, etc. And such release shall also enure to him in remainder, to take
advantage thereof; as well as the Tenant for life; because he and my Tenants
Lessee for life are privies in estate, etc. being (as it were) but as one
Tenant in Law solely seized in his Demesne as in fee, at the time of the
release made, etc. So likewise if a Disseisor make a Lease for life, Co. ib.
275. b. 2.
and the Disseisee does release all his right to the Lessee, this release shall
enure to him in the reversion, etc.

Co. ib. 279. b. 2.
55 If there be Lord and Tenant, The like.
and the Tenant makes a lease for life, the remainder in Fee, if the Lord
release to the Tenant for life the rent is wholly extinguished, and he in the
remainder shall take benefit thereof: So also if the heir of the Disseisor be
disseised and the Disseisor make a Lease for life, the remainder in fee, if the
first Disseisee release to the Tenant for life, that shall enure to him in
remainder, etc.

Co. ib. 285. b. 4.
56 A release of actions shall only extend to such as are privies to the Deed
of release and to none other; A release of actions extends only privies.
and therefore if the Disseisee release unto the Disseisor all actions real,
and the Disseisor makes a feofment in Fee, and an Assise is brought against
them, the Feoffee shall not plead the release to the Disseisor; for that he is
not privy to the release: So likewise, if a Disseisor make a Lease for life,
the remainder in Fee, and the Disseisee release all actions to the Tenant for
life; after the death of the Tenant for life, he in the remainder shall not
plead that release: Also if the Disseisee release all actions to the Disseisor,
and die, this is only a bar to the Disseisee during his life, for after his
decease his heir may have an action, as some have said (19 H. 6. 23. a.) And
hereby may appear a manifest diversity between a release of a right, Co. ib.
286. a. 4.
and a release of actions, etc. If the heir of the Disseisor make a Feofment in
Fee to two, and the Disseisee releaseth to one of the Feoffees all actions, and
that Feoffee dies, the Survivour shall not plead that release. etc.

Co. ibid. 297. b. 1.
57 If the Disseisor make a Lease for life to A. and B, Disseisee ^^firmes to
j^^ tenant of D^seisor.
and the Disseisee confirm the estate of A. B. shall take advantage thereof;
because of the privity; for the estate of A. which was confirmed, was joint
with B. and in that case the Disseisee shall not enter into the land, and
divest the moity of B. So likewise, if the Disseisor enfeoffe A. and B. and the
heirs of B. if the Disseisee confirm the estate of B. for his life, this
shall not only extend to his Companion: but also to his own whole Fee-simple,
etc.

^elease from Disseisee.
58 If a Feme Disseisoresse make a Feofment in Fee to the use of A. for life,
and after to the use of her self in tail, Co. ib. 297. b. 4.
and the remainder to the use of B. in Fee, and then takes husband the
Disseisee, who releaseth to A. all his right, this shall e^^are to B, and to
his own wife also; for they are all privies in estate, etc.

A Confirmation works not without privi^ie.
59 A Confirmation shall never enlarge an estate, Co. ib. 296. a. 2. and 305. a.
4. and b. 2. Littl. Sect. ^38
but when there is privity, neither yet shall it regularly abridge Services,
but where there is privity: As if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant
holds of the Lord by Fealty, and 20 s. rent, the Lord may by his Deed confirm
the estate of the Tenant to hold by 12 d. or by a penny, or by an half penny,
and in this case the Tenant is discharged from all other Services, but what are
contained in the said Confirmation; and this is in respect of the privity
between the Lord and the Tenant: but if there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, the
Lord cannot confirm the estate of the Tenant to hold of him by lesser
Services; for such a Confirmation is void; because there is no privity between
them, etc.

Attornment to one Joyntenant good.
60 If a reversion be granted to two by Deed, Co. ib. 310. a. 1. Co. l. 2. 67.
b. Tookers case.
and the Lessee attorne to one of them according to the grant, this Attornment
shall enure to both the Grantees, in respect of the privitie, etc.

Attornment to the part^cular tenant vests all the remainders.
61 If a reversion be granted for life, the remainder in tail, Co. Inst. pars 1.
310.
the remainder in fee; the attornment to the Grantee for life shall enure to
them in remainder, to vest the remainders in them; for they are privies in
estate, etc. And in this case, albeit the Tenant shall declare in express
terms, that he does only attorne to the Grantee for life, and that those in
remainder shall take no benefit by that attornment after his death, yet shall
the attornment be good to them all; for having attorned to the Tenant for life,
the Law (which he cannot control) does vest all the remainders, in respect of
the privity, etc.

Upon grant of a Seigniory, or rent service, the person to be charged ought to
attorne.
62 Upon the grant of a Manor or a rent service, Littl. Sect. 553. Co. ib. 311.
a. 1. and b. 2. Littl. Sect. 557.
none ought to attorne, but he, that is privy, and presently to be charged,
and without such attornment the grant avails not; As if a man be seized of a
Manor, which is parcel in demesne, and parcel in service, if he alien this
Manor to another; all that hold of the Alienor, as of his Manor, ought to
attorne to the Alienee, otherwise the services remain still in the Alienor:
But if the Lord make a Lease for years, or for life of a Manor, and the
Freeholders attorne to the Lessee; here, if afterward the reversion of that
Manor be granted, the Attornment of the Lessee for years or life shall bind
the Freeholders; for by their former Attornment, they have put the Attornment
into the mouth of the Lessee, their Attornment being involved within his. So
likewise, Littl. Sect. 554.
if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant lets his land to another for life,
or makes a gift in tail, saving the reversion; Here, if the Lord grants the
Seigniory to another, he in the reversion ought to attorne to the Grantee, and
not the Tenant for life, or in tail; for he is the true Tenant to the Lord and
not they, etc. Also if there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, Littl. Sect. 555.
and the Lord will grant the Services of the Mesne; In that case, albeit in the
grant he makes no mention at all of the Mesne, yet the Mesne ought to attorn
and not the Tenant peravaile, because he is the next privy in tenure, that
ought to be charged, etc. And therefore there is a diversity to be observed
between a rent service, and a rent charge or a rent seck; for, as to a rent
service, no man (as has been said) can attorne, Co. ib 311. b. 2.
but he that is privy, etc. So in case of a rent charge, it behooves, that the
Tenant of the Freehold does attorn to the Grantee, without respect of any
privitie: And this is the reason, that the Disseisor only in the case of a
grant of a rent charge, shall attorn; because he is Tenant of the Freehold;
but in case of a grant of a rent service, the Attornment of the Disseisee
suffices in respect of the privitie: And therefore if there be Lord and Tenant
by homage, fealty and rent, and the Tenant is disseised, and the Lord grants
the rent to another, the Disseisee attorneth this is void; but if he had
granted over this whole Seigniory, the attornment had been good; And the reason
of this diversity is; for that when the rent is granted only, it passes as a
rent seck, and consequently the Disseisor, being Terre-tenant, must attorne;
but when the entire Seigniory is granted, then the Disseisee in respect of the
privity may attorn, etc.

Littl.. 557. Co. Inst. pars 1. 312. a. 1.
63 If there be Lord and Tenant, Attornmen^ by the per^ chargeable, good.
and the Tenant let his Tenement to another for life, the remainder in Fee, and
after the Lord grants the services to another, etc. and the Tenant for life
attornes, this is good enough; for he that is privy, and immediately Tenant to
the Lord, must attorn, and that is, in this case, the Tenant for life: And so
on the other side, if a Seigniory be granted to one for life, the remainder to
another in Fee, the attornment to the Tenant for life is an attornment to him
in remainder also; because they are privies in estate, etc. Vide supra 61.

Littl. Sect. 562.
64 If there be Lord and Tenant, Attornmen^ by the re^^oner.
and the Tenant make a Lease for life, saving the reversion; Here, if the Lord
grant the Seigniory to the Tenant for life in Fee; in this case, he in the
reversion ought to attorne to the Tenant for term of life, because he is the
Tenant to the Lord, in respect of the privity, etc.

Litt.. Sect. 568. Co. ib. 316. a. 1.
65 Regularly upon the grant of a reversion the Terre-tenant shall attorn; yet
if Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy, Attornmen^ by Dower (...) Courtesy.
grant over his or her estate, and afterward the heir grant over the
reversion; in respect of the privity, the Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy
shall attorn and not the Grantee; and likewise by reason thereof they shall be
subject to an action of Wast, so long as the reversion remains in the heir;
albeit they have granted over their whole estate; because so long as the heir
keeps the reversion, they are to be attendant upon him; for that their
Grantee cannot ^e Tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy, etc. F. N. B. 55. e. 56.
a. f.

Littl. Sect. 571. Co. ib. 317. a. 1.
66 If land be let to a man for term of years, Attornmen^ by Lessee for life or
yea^^ good.
the remainder to another for term of life, reserving to the Lessor a certain
rent by year; and livery is made to the Lessee for years; in this case, if the
reversioner grant over his reversion, attornment made either by the Lessee for
years; or by the Lessee for life in remainder, shall be available to settle the
reversion in the Grantee, in respect of the privity of those estates, which
depend one upon another. P. 15. Eliz. in Brasbritches case in Co. Ba. per Dyer.

Littl. Sect. 574. Co. ib. 318 a. 1, 2. Co. l. 2. 67. a. Tookers case.
67 If two Ioyntenants let their land for life, reserving rent, Release of one
Joyntenant to another.
etc. if one of them release unto the other, that release unto the other, that
release is good, to settle the whole estate and rent in him, to whom the
release is made, without any attornment at all of the Tenant for life, in
respect of the privity between the Tenant for life and them in the reversion;
So it is also, albeit there be three or more Ioyntenants, and one of them
release to one of the other: Howbeit, there is a difference between these
releases; for the release in the ^^e case makes no degree, but he, to whom the
release is made, is supposed in from the first Feoffor; whereas in the other it
works a degree, and he, to whom the release is made, is in the per by him,
that made it, yet in neither of these cases is there any attornment requisite,
by reason of the privity: But if one Ioyntenant make a Lease for years,
reserving a rent and dies, the other Ioyntenant shall have the reversion,
because he claims paramount that Lease, as by the first Feoffor; Howbeit he
shall not have the rent, for that there is no privity between him and the
Tenant for years, as there was in the other case between the tenant for life,
and them in the reversion, etc.

Attornment by ^ne Joynte^ant good for ^oth.
68 If two joint Lessees for years, Co. ib. 319. a. 4.
or for life be ousted or disseised by the Lessor, and he enfeoff another;
Here, if one of the Lessees re-enter, this is a good attornment, and shall bind
both, in respect of the privity between the Ioyntenants; For an attornment in
Law is as strong as an attornment in Deed. Co. l. 2. 67. a. Tookers case.

Grant of a Seigniory by ^ne shall have ^n Assise before attornment.
69 If there be Lord and Tenant, Littl.. 579. Co. ib. 320. a. 2. Littl.. 580,
581, 582. v. Dyer R. 5. and 6.
and the Lord grants the Services by Fine; hereby the Services are immediately
in the Grantee by force of the Fine; Howbeit he cannot distraine for any part
of the Services without attornment, because an Avowry is in lieu of an action,
which he cannot have without privity, nor privity without attornment, neither
yet before attornment can he have an action of wast, a writ of entry ad
communionem legem, or in consimili casu, or in casu proviso, a Writ of Customs
and Services, a Writ of Ward, etc. But if a man make a Lease for years, and
grant the reversion by Fine, if the Lessee be ousted, and the Conusee
disseised, the Conusee without attornment shall maintain an Assise: for that
Writ is maintained against a stranger, where there needs no privity: And of
such things as the Lord may seize or enter into without suing any action, the
Conusee before any Attornment may take benefit, as to seize a ward or heriot,
or to enter into the lands or tenements of a ward, or escheated to him, or to
enter for an Alienation of Tenant for life or years, or of Tenant by Statute
Merchant, Staple, or Elegit, to his Disherison.

Discontinu^nce bars entry.
70 One of the chief reasons, why a Feofment in fee, gift in tail, Co. ib. 327.
a. 1.
or Lease for the life of the Lessee, made by the Tenant in tail, does make a
discontinuance to take away the entry of him in reversion or remainder, in case
the Tenant in tail die without issue, is, because the Tenant in tail, and he in
the reversion or remainder are privies in estate, etc.

Where it is no ^ane.
71 If Tenant in tail make a Lease for the life of the Lessee, Co. ibid. 333. b.
4. Littl. Sect. 620.
and afterward grant the reversion to another; and the Tenant for life
attorns, and dies, and the Grantee of the reversion enters in the life of the
Tenant in tall, and after the Tenant in tail dies; In this case, the issue
cannot enter, but is put to his Formedon; in respect of the privity between the
Tenant in tail and his issue, the Grantee of the reversion having seisin and
execution of the entailed lands in the life, and from the grant of the Tenant
in tail himself: Howbeit, if Tenant in tail make a Lease for life, and grant
the reversion in fee, and the Lessee attorn as before; and that Grantee
grants it over to another, and the Lessee attorneth again to the last
Grantee, and then the Lessee for life dies; so as the reversion is executed in
the life of Tenant in tail; yet this is no discontinuance, but that after the
death of the Tenant in tail the issue may enter; because the last Grantee was
not in of the grant of the Tenant in tail himself, but of the first Grantee,
between whom and the issue in tail there is no privity, etc.

^iscontinu^ce.
72 If at this day Tenant in tail make a Lease for life, Co. ib. 333. b. 4.
and after by Deed indented and enrolled according to the Statute, he
bargaineth and sells the reversion to another in fee, and the Lessee dies,
so as the reversion is executed in the life of Tenant in tail; Albeit the
Bargainee is not in the per by the Tenant in tail (but rather in by force of
the Statute) yet in as much as he claims the reversion immediately from him,
which is executed in his life time, this is a discontinuance: And so it is, and
for the same cause, if Tenant in tail had granted the reversion to the use of
another, and his heirs, etc. in respect of the privity between the Tenant in
tail and his issue, etc.

Co. ib. 351. a. 4.
73 If a woman grant a term to her own use, A trust goes to Executo^^, and not
to the Baron.
takes Husband and dies, the Husband surviving, shall not have this trust,
but the Executors or Administrators of the Wife, for it consists in privity.
P. 32 Eliz. in Canc. in Withams case, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1 352. a. 4.
74 In every Estoppel privity is required; Estoppels.
for it ought to be reciprocal, viz. ought to bind both parties; and therefore
(regularly) a stranger shall neither take advantage; nor be bound by an
Estoppel; But privies in blood, as the heir; Privies in estate, as the Feoffee,
Lessee, etc. Privies in Law, as the Lord by escheat, Tenant by the Courtesy,
Tenant in Dower, the Incumbent of a Benefice, and others that come under by act
in Law, or in the Post, shall be bound, and take advantage of estoppels, etc.

Littl.. 674, 675. Co. ib. 356. a. 3.
75 If a man let a house to a woman for life, For an act^^^ of wast pri^^ is
requisite.
saving the reversion to the Lessor, and after one sues a feigned action
against the woman, and recovers the house against her by default, so that the
woman may have against him a Quod ei deforceat, according to the Statute of
Westminster. the second; by this, the reversion of the Lessor is discontinued, so
that he cannot have any action of Waste either against the woman; because she
has not possession of the house, nor against the recoverer by feigned title;
for that there is no privity between the Lessor and him; but in this case, if
the Feme take Baron, and the recoverer lets the house to the Baron and Feme;
Here, the Feme is in her remitter by force of the first lease; and then if the
Baron and Feme make waste, the first Lessor shall have against them a writ of
waste; because in as much as the Feme is in her remitter, the Reversioner is
also remitted to his reversion, and so (by consequent) the privity and power of
bringing a writ of Waste is re-continued: For, when the reversion is divested,
the Lessor cannot have an action of Waste; because the writ is, that the Lessee
did waste ad exhaeredationem of the Lessor; and that inheritance must continue
at the time of the action brought. It is likewise to be observed, that in an
action of waste brought by the Lessor against the Lessee, the Lessee, in
respect of the privity cannot plead generally, Riens en le reversion, That the
Lessor has nothing in the reversion; but he must show how and by what means
the reversion is divested out of him; but if the Grantee of a reversion
brings an action of waste, the Lessee may plead generally, that the Lessor
has nothing in the reversion, because in that case there wants privity, etc.

(...) l. 698. (...) ^ib. 366. b. 3.
76 Regularly a warranty yt commenceth by disseisin, is, Warranty commecing
(...) disseisin, (...) not.
when the disseisin is done immediately to the heir that is to be bound; Yet
if the father be Tenant for life, the remainder to the son in fee, the father
by covin and consent makes a lease for years, to the end that the Lessee shall
make a feoffment in fee, to whom the father shall release with warranty, and
all is executed accordingly, the father dies; this warranty shall not bind,
albeit the disseisin was not done immediately to the son; for the feoffment of
the Lessee is a disseisin to the father, who is particeps Criminis;
Nevertheless by reason of the privity between the father and his Lessee, that
which is done by the Lessee, is conceived done by the father; for that they are
not only privies in estate, but likewise in this case, privies in combination:
So if father, and son, and a third person be Ioyntenants in fee, the father
makes a feoffment in fee of the whole with warranty, and dies, the son dies,
the third person shall not only avoid the feoffment for his own part, but also
for the part of the son, and he shall take advantage, that the warranty
commenced by disseisin, albeit the disseisin was done to another; because all
the three joyntenants were also privies in estate, etc. So it is also if one
brother make a gift in tail to another brother, and the Uncle disseise the
Donee, and enfeoffeth another with warranty, the Uncle dies, and the warranty
descends upon the Donor, and then the Donee dies without issue; Here, albeit
the disseisin was done to the Donee, and not to the Donor, yet the warranty
shall not bind him; for what was done, in this case, to the Donee, ought to be
adjudged done to the Donor, because all these were privies in blood, etc.

^^rticular e^^^te and re^ainder, one ^tate.
77 If there be Tenant for life, Co. ib. 369. b. 2.
the remainder in fee by lawful and just title, he in the remainder may obtain
and get the pretenced right or title of any stranger, and shall not thereby
incur the penalties of the Statute of the 32 H. 8. cap. 9. made against
buying such titles; because the particular estate and the remainder are in Law
accounted as one estate, in respect of the privity that is found between them.

^ontra formam ^llationis.
78 No man shall have a writ of Contra formam collationis, Co. ib. 384. b. 1.
but only the Feoffor and his heirs, who are privy to the deed, and privies in
blood. F. N. B. 211. c.

^ssignee may ^ouch.
79 If a man enfeoff A. and B. to have and to hold to them and their heirs, with
a clause of warranty, Co. ib. 384. b. 3.
Praedictis A. and B. and eorum haeredibus and assignatis; In this case, if A.
dies, and B. surviveth, and dies, and the heir of B. enfeoffeth C. he shall
vouch as Assignee, and yet he is but the Assignee of the heir of one of them;
for in judgment of Law (and in respect of the privity) the Assignee of the
heir is the Assignee of the Ancestor, and so the Assignee of the Assignee shall
vouch in infinitum, within these words (his Assigns.)

80 If a man enfeoffeth A. to hold to him his heirs and Assigns, Co. ib. 3 84.
b. 4.
A. enfeoffeth B. and his heirs, The like.
B. dies; Here the heir of B. shall vouch as Assignee to A. to his heirs of
Assigns, and Assigns of Assigns, and assigns of heirs (in respect of the
privity) are comprehended within these words (his Assigns) which seemed to be
a question in Bractons time: And the Assignee shall not only vouch, but also
have a Warrantia cartae.

Land warranted without the word heirs.
81 If a man does warrant land to another without this word (Heirs) his heirs
shall not vouch: And, regularly, Co. ibid.
if a man warrant land to a man and his heirs, without naming Assigns, his
Assignee shall not vouch; But if the father be enfeoffed with warranty to him
and his heirs, the father enfeoffeth the eldest son with warranty and dies;
Here, in respect of the privity, the Law gives to the son advantage of the
warranty made to the father; and the rather, because by act in Law the warranty
betwixt the father and the son is extinct.

Voucher, Rebutter.
82 If a man at this day be enfeoffed with warranty to him, Co. ib. 385. a. 3.
his heirs and assigns, and he make a gift in tail, the remainder in fee, and
the Donee makes a feoffment in fee; Here, that Feoffee shall not vouch as
Assignee; because no man shall vouch as Assignee, but he that comes in, in
privity of estate; but he must vouch his Feoffor, and that Feoffor shall vouch
as Assignee; Howbeit such an Assignee may rebutt.

Rebutter without privity.
83 If a warranty be made to a man and his heirs without this word (Assigns) he
grants over the land to another in fee, Co. ibid.
his Assignee shall not vouch, but the Assignee or any other Tenant of the land
may rebutt: And albeit no man shall vouch or have a Warrantia cartae, either as
party, heir, or assignee, but in privity of estate; yet any that is in of
another estate, be it by disseisin, abatement, intrusion, usurpation, or
otherwise, shall rebutt by force of the warranty, as a thing annexed to the
land, which sometimes was doubted among the Sages of our Law.

Release of a writ of Error.
84 If a man be outlawed in a personal action, Co. Inst. pars 1. 289. a. 2.
etc. and brings his writ of Error; if he, at whose suit he was outlawed, will
plead against him a release of all actions personal, this seems to be no plea;
because by the said action he shall recover nothing in the personalty, but
only to reverse the Outlawry: Howbeit in that case, a release of the writ of
Error is a good plea; For albeit the Plaintiff in the writ of Error is to
recover, or be restored to nothing against the party; Yet inasmuch as the
Plaintiff in the former action is privy to the record, a release of a writ of
Error to him is sufficient to bar the Plaintiff in the writ of Error of the
suit and vexation by the said writ of Error.

Co. ib. 48. a. 4. and 49. b. 3. Co. ib. 54. a. 1.
85 If there be diverse Feoffees, Livery to (...) Joyntenant good to bo^^.
and the Feoffor makes livery only to one of them according to the deed; In
this case, the land passes to them all in respect of the privity of their
estate, etc. So likewise, if there be two Ioyntenants of a Ward, and one of
them do waste, both shall answer for it, for the same reason.

Co. ib. 54. a. 1.
86 A Tenant by the Courtesy or in Dower, Wast against tenant in dower, and by
the Courte^^
can hold of none but of the heir, and his heirs by descent; and therefore if
they grant over their whole estate, and the Grantee does waste, yet the heir
shall have an action of waste against them, and recover the land against the
Assignee; but if the heir either before the assignment had granted, or after
the assignment does grant the reversion over, the stranger shall have an action
of waste against the Assignee; because then in both cases the privity is
destroyed, Co. ibid. a. 2.
etc. ( Vide infra 94.) Also if waste be done by a stranger, they shall answer
for it, etc.

Co. l. 2. 66. b. 4. Tookers case.
87 There are two Iointenants for life, Attornment (...) one Joyntenant good
(...) both.
the reversioner grants over his estate in fee, one of the Iointenants only
does attorn, this is a good attornment of both to settle the reversion in the
Grantee, in respect of the privity and entireness of their estate, Co. ib. 67.
a. 2.
etc. So if the Lessor disseise his two Lessees for life, and enfeoff another,
and one of the Lessees re-enter, this act of one of them is an attornment in
Law for both: If one Iointenant give seisin of rent, that shall bind his
companion, as it is agreed in 39 H. 6. 2. If a lease be made to two, and after
the reversion is granted to one of them, and he accepts the deed, this is
holden good attornment in Law for both. Baldwin 28 H. 8. Dyer 12. b.

Co. l. 3. 2. a. 4. The Marq. of Winchesters case.
88 Albeit by the general words of the act of attainder of all rights, Right of
act^on not forfe^ed by atta^^er.
etc. and hereditaments, etc. made against the Lord Norris in the 28 H. 8. all
his lands, etc. in demesne, reversion, or remainder, and also all his right to
lands and tenements, into which his entry was congeable, were given to the
King; yet neither a writ of Error, nor right of action to recover land were
given to him by the general words of the same act (although such a right is
truly a right and also an hereditament) because such a right, for which the
party has no remedy but by action only, to recover the land, is a thing which
consists only in privity, and which cannot escheat, or be forfeit at the
Common Law: Of this sort are the right of Formedon in descender, the right of
action upon a disseisin, and a descent cast, and the like. Co. l. 7. 13. a. 4.
in Englefeilds case.

Co. ib. 4. a. 3, 4.
89 Upon judgment given against Tenant for life, A reversioner shall bring
Error, etc.
or against Tenant in tail (since the Statute de donis conditionalibus) he in
the reversion or remainder may have a writ of Error, albeit he was not party
to the suit by aid prayer, voucher, or receipt; But he could not in that case
bring that writ till after the particular estate determined; Howbeit if he was
party and privy to the first record by aid prayer, voucher, or receipt, then
might he have a writ of Error presently during the life of the Tenant in tail
or for life; for that he was in that case party and privy to the first record,
etc.

Co. l. 3. 6. a. Cuppledikes case.
90 Baron and Feme are seized of lands to the use of them, Upon fine and
vouching tenant in tail the remainder is barred.
and the heirs male of the body of the Baron, the remainder in fee to another,
the Baron acknowledges the fine of the land in fee, and a stranger recovers
the land against the Conusee, who voucheth the Baron only, and he voucheth
over the common Vouchee, and judgment and seisin are given accordingly, the
Feme being still in life; This recovery shall bind the remainder; for here was
a lawful Tenant to the precipe, and albeit the Baron who had the estate tail,
was only vouched, and not the Feme, who had a joint estate with him; Yet the
Baron coming in as Vouchee, he comes in privity of the estate tail, and not of
any other estate, and then the recovery in value gives recompense both to the
estate tail which the Baron has, and also to the remainder over; because
although by the fine the estate tail, as also the estate of the Feme, and the
remainder were all divested or discontinued; yet the Baron as Vouchee shall be
in judgment of Law in of his estate tail; And the case is the stronger,
inasmuch as the estate of the Feme was put to a right; So that the Baron comes
in now, as sole Tenant in tail, and cannot be jointly seized with the Feme,
because she was not Vouchee; Neither yet can the Baron be in of any other
estate; for that he once had an estate tail, and now comes in as Vouchee; and
therefore in that case, in respect of the privity shall be said in, as of the
estate tail, and not otherwise: But if the wives inheritance had been joint
with her husbands, it might be doubted. 108. 28.

The like.
91 If A. be Tenant in tail, the remainder to B. in tail, Co. ibid.
the remainder to C. in tail, the remainder to D. in fee, A. makes feoffment in
fee, the Feoffee suffers a common recovery, in which B. is vouched, and he over
the common Vouchee; In this case A. is not bound, but B. and all the remainders
over are barred: For albeit by the feoffment of A. all the remainders were
discontinued, and the estates of B. C. and D. were converted to mere rights,
and that the remainder could never be remitted before the estate tail in
possession were re-continued; Yet in case of a common recovery (which is the
common assurance of the land) he that comes in as Vouchee shall be in judgment
of Law in, in privity of the estate, which he ever had; although the precedent
estate, upon which the estate of the Vouchee depended, were divested or
discontinued, etc.

Privities of estate, diversity.
92 There are three manner of privities, Co. l. 3. 22. b. 4. Walkers case.
viz. 1 In respect of the estate only. 2 Of the contract only. 3 Of the
estate and contract together: Privity of the estate only, as between the
Grantee of the Lessor and the Lessee, or (if the reversion escheat) between the
Lord by escheat and the Lessee, so also between the Lessor and the Assignee of
the Lessee, there is privity in estate only; for that there is no contract
betwixt them: Privity of contract only, which extends only to the person of
the Lessor and the person of the Lessee, as when the Lessee assigns over his
interest, notwithstanding such assignment the privity of the Contract still
remains between them (as to bring against the Lessee an action of Debt for rent
arrear, or the like) albeit the privity of the estate be removed by the act of
the Lessee himself: Privity of estate and contract together, is between the
Lessor and Lessee themselves, so long as the estate is continued betwixt them,
etc. Vide Dyer 4. b. 1. 24 H. 8.

The like.
93 Lord and Tenant, the Tenant makes feoffment in fee; Co. ib. 23. a. 4.
in this case, the privity which was between them in estate, or in tenure, is
gone; Nevertheless for the arrearages due, as well before, as after ye
feoffment until notice, etc. the privity between them as to the avowry does
still remain: And at the Common Law, before the Stat. of Quia emptores
terrarum, if the Tenant had made a feoffment to hold of the chief Lord, the
Feoffee by no tender that he could make, could compel ye Lord to avow upon him;
but the Lord might still avow upon the Feoffor, for that the privity did still
remain, and the Tenant by his own Act could not change the avowry of the Lord,
etc. Howbeit in the first case, if the Lord grant over his Seigniory, or if the
Feoffor die, there the privity as to the avowry is destroyed; for that is
personal, and holds only between the Lord and the Feoffor themselves in
person: So also if after the assignment of the lease, the Lessor grant over his
reversion, the Grantee shall not have an action of Debt against the Lessee; For
the privity of contract, as to the action of Debt holds only between the
Lessor and the Lessee themselves in person: So in the same case, if the Lessee
die, the Lessor shall not have an action of Debt against his Executors, for the
privity consists only between the Lessor and Lessee, etc.

Co. ib. b. 3.
94 If Tenant in Dower, Dower, Co^^tesie, Waste, etc.
or Tenant by the Courtesy assign over their estate, yet privity of action
remains between the heir and them, so that he shall have an action of Waste
against them for Waste done after the assignment: But if the heir grant over
the reversion, then the privity of the Action is destroyed, and the Grantee
cannot have any action of Waste save only against the Assignee; because
between them there is privity of estate; but between the Grantee, and the
Tenant in Dower, or Tenant by the Courtesy there is no privity at all, Vide
supra, 86.

Co. ib. b. 4.
95 If the Lessor enter for the condition broken, Privity of contract.
or the Lessee surrender to the Lessor; Now is the estate and term determined,
and yet the Lessor shall have an action of Debt for the arrearages due before
the condition broken, or the surrender made, as appears by F. N. B. 120, 122.
30 E. 3. 7. 6 H. 7. 3. b. (against the book of 32 Edw. 3. Tit. Bar 262. which
is not law) And this is in respect of the privity of the Contract, which still
remains between the Lessor and the Lessee, etc.

Co. ibid. Vagle and Glovers case.
96 If the Lessee for years assign over his Interest, The like.
and the Lessor by deed indented and enrolled according to the Statute, bargain
and sell the reversion to another, the Bargainee shall not have an action of
Debt against the Lessee; because there is no privity between them;
Nevertheless, after the assignment, the Lessor himself might have an action of
Debt against the Lessee himself for rent due after the assignment; because the
privity of the contract between the Lessor and Lessee does still continue, as
long as the Lessor retains the reversion: So likewise if an Executor of a
Lessee for years assigns over his interest, Co. l. 3. 24. a. 1. Overton and
Sydhals case.
an action of Debt lies not against him for Rent due after the assignment:
Also if Lessee for years assign over his interest and die, the Executor shall
not be charged for the rent due after his death; For by the death of the Lessee
the personal privity of the contract as to the action of Debt (in both these
cases) was determined,

Co. ibid. Brom and Hores case.
97 A. lets to C. 3 acres of land for years, rendering rent, Privity of estate
and contract.
the said C. assigns all his estate in one acre to another. A. suffers a
common recovery to the use of B. in fee, who brings an action of Debt against
the first Lessee, this action will well lie; for inasmuch as the Lessee
assigns his interest but for part, and remains possessed of the residue, not
only the Lessor, but also his Assignee, or he that claims under him, shall
have an action of Debt for the entire rent against the Lessee; because there
was not only privity of contract, but also privity in estate and contract
together; and therefore in this case, the action runs with the estate: So also
at the Common law before the Stat. of Quia emptores terrarum, if the Tenant had
made feoffment in fee of part of the tenancy; In that case there was no
apportionment, but the Lord or his Grantee shall avow upon the Feoffor, for
that he remains Tenant in respect of the residue: Howbeit, if he had made
feoffment of all, then the Grantee of the Lord shall not avow upon him, etc.

Co. ibid. Marrow and Tur^ins case.
98 In debt against two Administrators upon a lease made to their Testator, the
Defendants plead, that before the rent arrere, The like.
one of them had assigned all his interest to J. S. of which the Plaintiff had
notice, and accepted the rent, by the hands of the Assignee, due since the
assignement, and before this rent now demanded was due; Here, upon the demurrer
of the Plaintiff the judgment passed against him; because the privity of the
contract was determined by the death of the Lessee, and for that after the
assignment made by the Administrator, debt lies not for rent due after such
assignment. See Dyer 4. b. 1, etc.

^eb^^ter.
99 C. being possessed of a Mease with the appurtenances for 30 years, Co. l. 4.
52. a. 3. in Rawlins case.
demised all his interest therein to R. and after C. (having departed with his
whole interest in the Mease) by Indenture demised a Stable belonging to the
same unto W. for six years. And then R. re-demiseth the whole Mease with the
appurtenances to C. for 21 years; In this case, if W. be impleaded for the
Stable by C. W. shall rebutt and maintain the lease of the Stable for six years
against C. by way of conclusion; because all parties and privies in estate or
interest are bound by Estoppels.

Warranty and condition im^lied in ex^hange and ^^itition.
100 The warranty which is tacit employed in every exchange, Co. l. 4. 121. b.
1. in Bastards case.
runs only in privity; For none shall vouch by force thereof, but only such
as are parties to the exchange or their heirs and no Assignee; Howbeit an
Assignee may rebutt by force thereof, albeit the exchange be without deed, as
appears (3 E. 3. tit. Form. 44. 2 E. 2. Qui in vita, 16.) There is the same law
also in case of partition; and as it is in case of warranty, so it is also in
case of the condition, which the Law does also imply upon every exchange: And
therefore if A. exchange with B. and B. alien to C. who is evicted by title
paramount; In this case C. shall not enter upon the other; for as the warranty,
so also the condition runs in privity to such ^nely as are parties to the
exchange, and to their heirs, and does not extend to the Assignee; So likewise
none shall have a Contra formam feoffementi, but the Feoffee or his heirs;
Howbeit the Assignee may rebutt ( Vide F. N. B. 163. c. 22 H. 6. 50 b. 30 H. 6,
7. a. 10 H. 7. n. e.) but in the same case if the title of A. who aliened not,
be evicted, he shall enter into the land which he gave in exchange, albeit B.
had aliened it over, etc. Vide supra 18. and 78.

Joyntenants ^emise at will.
101 If two Ioyntenants make a lease at will, rendering rent, Co. l. 5. 10. b.
Hensteads case.
and one of them dies, all survives to the other, and the Lessee continues his
possession; Here, the survivor shall have an action for the whole rent, in
respect of the privity, etc. Fuit dit.

Grantees pre^^ntment to (...) avoydance ^od seisin for (...) Grantor.
102 A man seized of an Advowson in fee, Co. l. 5. 97. b. 4. The Countess of
Northumberlands case.
grants the next avoydance to another the Incumbent dies, the Grantee presents;
Here, albeit the Grantor nor his Ancestors, or those whose estate he has ever
presented, yet this presentment of the Grantee shall be adjudged sufficient
seisin in the Grantor and his heirs, and shall serve to make title in a Quare
Impedit; And this seems to be in respect of the privity between the Grantor and
the Grantee; for that the Grantee presents in the right and title of the
Grantor, etc. And therefore if the presentment be alleged in the Lessor or
Donor, and also in the Lessee or Donee, this is not double; for the presentment
of the Lessee or Donee is the presentment of the Donor or Lessor, and the
presentment of the Lessor or Donor is only traversable: So also if the Grantee
for years of a Seigniory, or a Guardian happen the seisin of the services, this
shall be good seisin for him in the reversion: And with this agrees F. N. B.
179. f. 45 E. 3. 26. 11 E. 3. Tit. Ass. 86.

lord para^^unt may ^arge tenant ^^avail.
103 At the Common Law the Lord was not compellable to take his rent of any
other then of him who was his immediate Tenant in privity, Co. l. 6. 58. a. 2.
in Brediman^ case.
and therefore at the Common Law the Lord paramount was not compellable to
accept his rent by the hands of the Tenant para^ail, or by the hands of a
Tenant for life, where the reversion was over. And that well appears by the
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 9. Capitalis Dominus fervitia and consuetudines sibi
debetas renuebat accipere permanus alterius, quam per manus proximi tenentis
suis, and sic tenentes in dominico amiserunt proficua tenementorum suorum; Non
habeat capitalis dominus potestatem distringendi tenentes in dominico, dum
praedictus tenens offerat ei servitia debita and consueta.

Co. l. 7. 7. b. 3. The Earl of Bedfords case.
104 If Tenant in tail of lands holden by Knight Service make leases not
warranted by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 28. and die, Guardian (...) Bishop
may (...) evict voida^^^ estates.
his heir within age; the Guardian in privity and right of the heir in tail
shall avoid those leases during the time that the heir is in Ward: So also if a
Bishop make a lease for years not warranted by the Statute, (so that the lease
is voydable by the Successor) and dies, the King shall avoid that lease, during
the vacation of the Bishopric, viz. in privity and right of the same
Bishopric; for that the Guardian in the one case, and the King in the other
are not strangers, but privies in right: Howbeit in the case of the Guardian,
he shall avoid the lease, as to his own interest only; but shall not prejudice
the heir of his election at his full age to confirm the same leases if he
please: For, Custos statum haeredis in custodia sua existentis meliorem non
deteriorem facere potest: So likewise, if the heir within age before the entry
of the Guardian, or the Ancestor being within age, make a lease for years
rendering rent,, the Guardian may enter in privity and right of the heir, and
shall avoid the lease; Howbeit the Lord by escheat shall not avoid voydable
estates made by his Tenant who was an Infant; for regularly none shall avoid
voydable estates by reason of infancy, but only such as are parties or
privies, viz. the Infant himself or his heirs, being privies in blood, and in
the case abovesaid the Guardian as privy in right, etc.

Co. l. 7. 13. a. 1. in Englefeilds case.
105 Thomas Duke of Norfolk, Power (...) vocation.
in Anno 11 Eliz. conveyed his lands to the use of himself for life, and after
to the use of Philip Earl of Arundel his eldest son in tail, with diverse
remainders over, and with proviso, that if he should be minded to alter, and
revoke the said uses, and should signify his mind in writing under his own
hand and seal, subscribed by three credible witnesses, that then, etc. and
afterward the said Duke was attainted of high treason: In this case, that
proviso or condition was not given to the Queen by the act of the 33 H. 8. cap.
20. because the performance thereof was personal, and inseparably annexed to
the person, viz. to signify his mind by writing under his own hand, which none
could do but the Duke himself; upon which point all the possessions of the
Dukedom so conveyed as aforesaid, were saved, and not forfeited by the
attainder. Vide 44. 8.

^o. ib. 13. a. 3.
106 The Templers held diverse of their possessions in Frankalmoign (which
tenure, as Littleton says, Privity st^^er then the ^^neral word (...) an Act
of ^^^liament.
is annexed in privity to the blood of the Donor) and after they were
dissolved, and by Parliament, Anno 17 E. 2. their possessions were given to the
Hospitalers, to hold them in the same manner as the Templers held; yet by those
general words they held not in Frankalmoign; because the privity of the tenure
on the Tenants part continued not, and that privity being personal and
inseparable, by the general words of the act was not transferred to the
Hospitalers: There is the same law of the impropriation of a Church, Founder^^
inseparab^^
which is also on incident inseparable to the house of Religion, whereunto the
Church is impropriate: And therefore it is adjudged P. 3. E. 3. that the
Hospitalers by the said Act of the 17 E. 2. should not have an Impropriation,
which was formerly inseparably annexed to the Corporation of the Templers;
because such a thing as that consisting in inseparable privity by the general
words of an Act of Parliament shall not be transferred to others.

Co. l. 7. 13. a. 4. Englefeilds case.
107 In tempore H. 8. Brook tit. Corodie 3. it is holden, Founders^^ inseparable
that a foundership, which is inseparably annexed in privity to the blood of
the Founder, shall not be forfeited by attainder.

^ivity in ^oud, estate ^^d law, di^^rsities.
108 There are three manner of privities, viz. privity in blood, Co. l. 8. 42.
b. 4, etc. in Whittinghams case.
privity in estate, and privity in Law: Privies in blood are meant of privies
in blood Inheritable, and that is in 3 manners, viz. inheritable, as heir
general, heir special, or heir general and special: Privies in estate are, as
Ioyntenants, Baron and Feme, Donor and Donee, Lessor and Lessee, etc. Privies
in Law are, as when the Law, without blood or privity of estate, casts the land
upon one, or makes his entry congeable, as the Lord by escheat, the Lord that
enters for Mortmaine, Lord of a Villain, etc. And first, privies inheritable,
as heir general, shall take benefit of Infancy; and therefore if an Infant
Tenant in Fee simple, make feofment and die, his heir shall enter; there is the
same Law also of him that is heir general and special; as if a man give lands
to another and the heirs male of his body, and the Donee within age make
feofment in Fee, his Son, that is heir general and special, shall enter: It
is so also of him, that is heir special and not general, as if, in the same
case, the Donee has issue two Sons, and the eldest has issue a daughter,
and the Donee dies, and the eldest Son within age makes feofment, and dies
without issue male, the youngest Son is special heir per formam doni, and
shall avoid the feofment of his brother, although he is not heir general;
because he is privy in blood; and has the land by descent. So if lands be
given to one and the heirs female of his body, and the Donee, having issue a
son and a daughter, makes feofment within age and dies; Here, the daughter,
being heir special (unto whom the right of entry descends) shall enter, and not
the son, unto whom nothing descends: So it is likewise of the heir in Borough
English; for in all cases, when any claims by descent, as heir special, he
shall take benefit of a right of entry, which descends unto him for the infancy
of his Ancestor: There is likewise the same Law, if his Ancestor were non
compos mentis at the time of making the feofment; because in those and such
like cases, the heir general cannot enter; for that no right or title descends
unto him; but the right descends to the heir special. Howbeit privies in estate
(unless it be in some special cases) shall not take advantage of the infancy
of the other; and therefore if Donee in tail within age make feofment in fee
and die without issue, the Donor shall not enter; because there was only
privity in estate between them, and no right accrued to the Donor by the death
of the Donee: So if there be two Ioyntenants in fee within age, and the one
makes feofment in fee of his moitie and dies; the survivour cannot enter by
reason of the infancy of his companion; because by his feofment the jointure
was severed, so long as the feofment remains in force; And therefore in such
case the heir of the Feoffor shall have a Dum fuit infra etatem, or shall enter
into the moity: But if there be two Ioyntenants within age, and they join in a
feofment; in that case a joint right shall remain in them, and therefore if
one of them die, the right shall survive, and the survivor shall have the right
of the land, as from the first Feoffor; which makes Littleton seem to hold (
cap. Discontinuance fol. 44.) that the Survivour may enter, in respect of the
right accrued unto him; For otherwise (indeed) this mischief would ensue, that
the heir of that Feoffor which died, cannot enter; for that the right survived,
nor yet the survivor, because he shall not take advantage of the infancy of his
companion, but shall be forced to his writ of Right, which without question he
may have; for that after the feofment, the Ioyntenants might have joined in it,
etc. Lastly, privies in Law, as Lord by escheat, Co. ib. 44. a. 4.
etc. shall never take advantage of the privity of infancy; because he is a
stranger to it; and when the Infant dies without heir, the feofment is
unavoydable. The same Law of Coverture and non same memory.

109 A. grants lands to B. in tail, Accruer of estate.
and farther that if B. or his heirs pay unto A. upon such a day at such a
place xx s. that then B. shall have an estate of Fee-simple in the lands to him
and his heirs; In this case, the privity of the estate ought to be continued,
and the condition ought to be performed by B. or his heirs, Co. l. 8. 75. b. 1.
The Lord Staffords case.
and the performance thereof is not available, if the estate be altered (and
this is proved by the Lord Lovels case in Pl. Com.) for if the Lessee for life
or for years, or Donee in tail, who has such a condition annexed to his
estate, alien before the Condition performed, or if the Lessee for life or
years surrender unto the Lessor, he shall never after take benefit of the
Condition; because the privity of the estate in such case ought to continue;
for that the increase of estate ought to enure upon the particular estate, as
upon a foundation: And therefore in this case, if Lessee for life or for years,
or the Donee alien all their estate, and take an estate again, and after
perform the Condition; yet nothing shall thereby increase unto him; because by
the absolute alienation the privity for a time was absolutely destroyed, which
by any taking again of the estate cannot be revived; as if a Coparcener after
partition makes feofment in fee, and then takes again an estate to her and her
heirs; in that case the privity of the estate to have aid to deraigne the
warranty paramount is destroyed (11 H. 4. 22. Vide 38. E. 3. 20. b.) but if
Lessee for life grant his estate upon Condition, and enter for the Condition
broken, and after that perform the Condition annexed to his estate, there
peradventure the fee shall accrue unto him; for the possibility was not
absolutely destroyed, and when he enters for the Condition broken, he is in by
his ancient estate; neither yet is it necessary that the particular estate
should continue to all respects; but, if such privity of estate continue, as is
capable of the increase of an estate, it suffices: And therefore if such a
Lessee for life make a Lease for years, or such a Lessee for years make a Lease
for a less term, or if such a Donee make a Lease for his own life or for
years; yet for the privity of estate, that still continues in them, they are
capable of a farther increase of their estate: Howbeit if such a Tenant in
tail make a Lease pur auter vic; there he is not capable of any increase;
because he has gained a new redersion in fee, and the first privity remains
not; And yet in that case if the Lessee for life die, then is the first privity
of the estate revived. So if a man make a gift in special tail with such a
condition of encreaser, as abovesaid, and after the Feme dies without issue: so
that he is now become Tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct; In
this case albeit the estate be changed, yet in as much as the privity does
still remain, he may by the performance of the Condition have fee afterward.
So also if a Lease be made to two with condition to have fee, and the one dies,
the survivour may perform the condition and have fee; but if the same
Iointenants have made partition of the term, the condition is destroyed; for
the estate in fee ought to increase to them jointly, and not in severalty, etc.
Vide 34. 11.

Co. l. 9. 17. b. 2. Anne Bedingfields case.
110 There is a greater privity, Voucher (...) Dower.
when the Feme is endowed of the immediate estate, which the heir of the Baron
has by descent, than when she is endowed either by a stranger, or of any other
estate; for, if the Feme be endowed of the immediate estate descended to the
heir of the Baron, if she be impleaded afterward, she shall vouch the heir,
and shall be newly endowed of other lands, which the heir has; but if the Feme
be endowed by the Alienee of the Baron or of the heir, if she be impleaded, she
shall not vouch the Alienee to be newly endowed; And this is the cause, that
when a Feme brings a Writ of Dower against the Alienee of the Baron, etc. and
he vouch the heir, the Demandant may testify, that the heir has lands
descended unto him in the same County, (for to another County the original does
not extend) and may pray, that she may be endowed of his estate; and this is
(for the benefit of the Voucher,) to be newly endowed. Vide in 4 E. 3. 36. and
6 E. 3. 11. The Tenant in a Writ of Dower voucheth the heir of the Baron, and
the Demandant testifies, that he has lands by descent, etc. in the same
County, and judgment was given against the heir; but if he had had none there,
it should have been given against the Tenant. In 6 E. 3. 20. The Feme of a
stranger brings a Writ of Dower, and the Tenant voucheth the heir, etc. the
Demandant shall not recover against the heir, because there wants privity: In
18 E. 3. 36. in Dower, the Tenant voucheth, and the Vouchee voucheth the heir
of the Baron of the Demandant, the Demandant testifies that the heir has
assets by descent in the same County; here, the Demandant shall not recover
against the heir, but against the Tenant only; for in this case, there is not
immediate privity betwixt the Demandant and the heir; because the Demandant
shall recover against the heir only, when the Tenant in Demesne voucheth him,
and not when the Vouchee of the Tenant in Demesne voucheth him.

Detainment of Charters no ^^ea.
111 No stranger, albeit he be Tenant of the land, Co. ib. 18. 2. 3.
and has the evidences conveyed unto him, may in a Writ of Dower plead
Deteinment de Chartres; for, this plea lies only in privity, viz. for the heir
of the Baron: And the heir also in this case may diverse ways be in the degree
of a stranger, so that he shall be disabled from pleading Deteinment of
Chartres; as 1 If the heir has the land by purchase; 2 If the heir did deliver
the Charters to the Feme (as it is resolved 7 E. 3. Dower 101.) 3 If the heir
be not immediately vouched, viz. by the Tenant in the Writ of Dower, but by his
Vouchee (18 E. 3. 36.) 4 If the heir comes in as Vouchee, having no lands in
the County, where the Dow^^ is demanded; 5 If he comes in as Tenant by receipt,
as appears in 16 E. 3. tit. Dower 57. and by many other books: And the reason
hereof is manifest by the true pleading of deteinment of Charters; for he, who
pleads that plea in bar of Dower, ought to plead, that he has been always
ready and yet is, to render Dower, if the Demandant will deliver unto him his
writings; now Tenant by receipt, or such a Vouchee, as is aforesaid, cannot
plead, that he has been always ready to render Dower; for that the Demandant
cannot recover against the heir in such cases ( viz. either being Vouchee, or
received) neither can he render unto the Demandant the Dower, which by the Law
does belong unto her, etc.

^laim within ^^e years by ^^urdance, ^c.
112 Upon a fine acknowledged of land according to the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap.
24. Co. lib. 9. 106. a. Margaret Podgers case.
The Guardian by nurture or in soccage may enter in the name of the infant, who
has right to enter into the same lands, and this shall vest the estate in the
infant without any commandment or assent; because there is privity between
them: So likewise he in the reversion expectant upon an estate for life or
years, or the Lord of a Tenant by copy, etc. may well enter (within that Act)
in the name of the Tenant for life, Lessee for years, or Tenant by Copy, and
also in their own right, as well to save their own Franktenement and
Inheritance, as also the said particular interests; for the Lessor, or the Lord
are not Strangers, because they are privies in estate: And as the entries of
those particular Tenants shall avail the Lessor and the Lord in those cases in
respect of the privity of their estates; So the entry of the Lessor or the Lord
in the like cases in the names of the particular Tenants shall avail the same
Tenants, in regard of the privity of their estates, and for the salvation of
their several rights, without any request precedent, or assent subsequent: for
in these cases the Lessor and the Lord pursue the title and claim, which they
have to the inheritance, by lawful entry within the five years, according to
the saying contained in the said Act: Howbeit he that is a mere stranger, and
has no right, shall not by his entry within the 5 years in the name of him,
that right has, avoid such a fine, unless he have some request or commandment
precedent, or assent subsequent to authorize him to do it; because the said Act
has appropriated the pursuit thereof, by way of action or lawful entry, unto
him that right has, either by interest, or privity, or else by request or
Commandment precedent, or assent subsequent, etc.

Co. l. 10. 43. b. 4. Jennings case.
113 At the Common Law recovery against Tenant for life with Voucher upon true
warranty and recovery in value shall bind him in remainder (as the books are in
19 E. 3. Recovery in value 20. 23. E. 3. Recovery against T^^ for life.
ibid. 13. 44. Ass. pl. 35. and 5 E. 4. 2.) And the reason hereof is, because
the particular estate and the estate in remainder (in respect of the privity)
make but one estate, and one warranty may extend to both, and therefore the
recompense in value shall also enure to both.

Co. l. 10. 48. a. 3. in Lampets case.
114 Albeit the wisdom and policy of the Sages of our Law has provided, that
no possibility, right, title, Right and title may be released, (...) not
transfered.
or thing in action shall be granted or assigned to strangers, to avoid
multiplicity of suits, oppression of the people (principally of the
Terre-tenants) and the subversion of the due and equal execution of Justice;
Nevertheless all rights, titles, and actions by the prudence and policy of the
Law, may be released to the Terre-tenant for the same reason of his repose and
quiet, and for the avoidance of suits and contentions, and to the end every one
should live in his calling with peace and plenty: And therefore a right or
title to the Frank-tenement or Inheritance (be it in presenti or futuro) may be
released in five manners; 1 To the Tenant of the Frank-tenement in Deed or in
Law, without any privity; 2 To him in remainder; 3 To him seized of the
reversion, without any privity, but an estate cannot be enlarged without
privity; 4 To him that has right, only in respect of privity; As if the
Tenant be disseised, the Lord may release his Services, in respect of the
privity and right, without any estate; 5 In respect of privity only, without
right; As if Tenant in tail make Feofment in fee, the Donee after the Feofment
has not any right, and yet in respect of the privity only, the Donor may
release unto him the rent and all services saving the fealty: So also the
Demandant in a precipe may release to to the Vouchee, or to the Tenant after
feofment, etc. Vide supra 44.

Co. l. 10. 92. a. 4. 93. a. b. Doct. Leyfields case.
115 It is a Maxim in the Law, that when he, Release, (...) not plead (...)
(where the^^ is privity) without ^^^ing it.
that is party or privy in estate or interest, or he, that justifies in the
right of him, who is party or privy, is forced to plead a Deed, albeit he, that
is privy claims but parcel of the original estate, yet in that case he ought
to show the original Deed to the Court; As if the King demiseth land to B. for
life, B. demiseth the same land to C. for years; here, if C. be impleaded, he
ought to produce in Court the Letters patents of the demise granted to B.
because B. and C. are privies in estate. Vide William Poles assise (3 H. 6. 20,
21, and 22.) which was in effect this; A. by indenture enfeoffes B. of the
Manor of Dale rendering unto A. and his heirs 5 marks rent per annum, with
clause of distress; A. grants to C. for life xxvi s. viii. d. per annum,
parcel of the same rent, who being first seized and then disseised, brings an
Assise of the said parcel granted to him, and because in the same Assise the
Plaintiff produced not the original indenture of the reservation of the whole
rent made to his Grantor, Judgment was given against him, albeit he claimed
but parcel of the said rent, and the reason thereof was in regard William Pole
the plaintiff was privy in the estate of the rent, and claimed by the first
grant. And in the case above put, the reason holds against the stranger, in
regard the Lessee might have bound the Lessor by Covenant to have showed forth
the Deed, when occasion should have required. In 35 H. 6. it was agreed, that
Guardian in Chivalry shall not plead a release made to his Tenant without
showing it forth: So in 14 H. 8. 4. It was agreed by all, that he, who is privy
in estate, as Feoffee, Lessee for years, etc. or that justifies, as servant to
him, that is privy, ought to show the Deed to the Court, which they plead, etc.
And in Debt against the heir, he shall not plead a release made to the
Executors without showing it; for there is privity betwixt them; and with this
agrees the 13 E. 2. Monstrans des faits 4^. Howbeit on the other side, where a
man is a stranger to the Deed, and claims not the thing comprised in the
grant, nor any thing out of it, nor does any thing in right of the Grantee, as
Bailife or Servant, there he shall plead the Patent or Deed without showing it:
If the Tenant plead the grant of the Lord with attornment, Co. ib. 94. 2.
he shall not show it, and sic de simlibus: But when he that claims the thing,
or any right or interest out of it, or justifies in right of the Grantee; there
he ought to show the first grant; as the second Grantee of a rent charge shall
show the first grant, and so shall his Bailife; and the Grantee of a rent
charge shall not plead the release of the Disseisee to the Disseisor without
showing it; for albeit he claim not the land of which the release is made, yet
he, that has rent out of land, has also right in the land, which by a release
of all his right shall be extinct, and therefore in such case he ought to
produce the Deed: And with this agrees the 20 H. 7. 6. and 14 H. 8. 5. The
Disseisee shall not plead a release to the Disseiser, neither of right in the
land, nor of rent issuing out of the land, without showing it; for, where one
claims the thing, unto which the release is made, or right or interest out of
it, the Law creates a privity in respect of his estate or right in the land,
viz. to this intent, that he shall not have benefit of the Deed without showing
it.

Impeachment ^f wast is gone ^y altering the ^^tate.
116 If an estate of land be granted, without impeachment of wast, Co. l. 11.
83. b. 3. Lewis Bowls case.
that privilege is individually annexed unto that estate (3 E. 3. 44. per
Shard and Stone.) If one, that has a particular estate without impeachment of
wast, change his estate, he loses that advantage (5 H. 5. 9. a.) If a man make
a Lease for years without impeachment of wast, and after he confirms the land
to him for his life, he shall be afterward chargeable for wast (28 H. 8. Dyer
10. b.) If a Lease be made to one pur auter vie without impeachment of wast,
the remainder to him for term of his own life; here, he is punishable of wast;
for the first is estate drowned and gone; and so it is also of a Confirmation.
The heir at the Common Law shall have prohibition of wast against the Tenant in
Dower; but if the heir grant over the reversion, his Grantee shall not have
prohibition of wast; For it appears in the Register fol. 72 that such an
Assignee in an action of wast against Tenant in Dower shall recite the Statute
of Gloucester; and therefore he shall not have prohibition of wast at the Common
Law; for then he should not recite the Statute. Vide F. N. B. 55. 14 H. 4. 3. 5
H. 7. 17. b. and supra 1 and 4.

^ouchee, etc. ^y have a ^rit of Er^^, etc.
117 If a man be vouched and enter into warranty and leaseth, F. N. B. 21. c.
he may have a Writ of Error, and shall assign the errors, which happened
between the Demandant and the Tenant, or between the Demandant and himself as
Vouchee: And so he in reversion, that prays to be received for default of the
Tenant for life, or for his faint pleading, if he be recovered and plead and
lose, he shall have a Writ of Error, and shall assign the error that happened
between the Demandant and Tenant, or between the Demandant and himself, that
so prayed to be received: So also if Tenant for life lose by default, he in the
reversion shall have a Writ of Error, albeit he neither was received, nor
prayed to be received; And he shall assign for error any matter, that happened
between the Demandant and Tenant, that so lost by default: And all this is in
respect of the privity and interest, which the Vouchee and Reversioner had in
the land so recovered by the Judgment.

F. N. B. 21. l. m. and n.
118 In a plea of land against the Tenant, if the Tenant die, Who may bring
writs (...) Error.
he that is heir to the Tenant for that land, shall have a Writ of Error, and
not he that is heir at the Common Law; as in Borough English, if the Tenant
lose the land by erroneous Judgment; the youngest son shall have the Writ of
Error; and so shall he that is heir in special tail; And this in respect of
the special privity and interest, which they have in the land: And for the same
reason it is, that in case land be lost by erroneous Judgment, the Tenant may
have a Writ of Error, and so also may the Vouchee have another Writ of Error
upon one and the same Judgment; and so may the Tenant, and the Tenant by
receipt, and all at one time hanging. Executors also or Administrators shall
have a Writ of Error upon a Judgment given against their Testator for debt or
damages: So likewise the heir shall have a Writ of Error to reverse an
out-lawry of Felony pronounced against his father, to restore him to the
privity of blood between his father and him. F.N.B. a. 22. b.
The Successor of an Abbot, Prior, Parson or such like bodies politic, shall
have a Writ of Error upon a Judgment, given against their Predecessor, of all
things, which touch the Succession or Corporation; but if a man recover against
a Parson, Bishop, or the like, debt or damages, by judgment or action
personal, their Executors shall have a Writ of Error upon such Judgment, and
not their Successors; because their Executors or Administrators have interest
in such things, and not the Corporation, etc. If a man sue execution
erroniously against the recongnisor upon a recognisance, the Feoffee of the
recognisor shall have a Writ of Error, etc.

F. N. B. 22. c.
119 In a praecipe quod reddat of land, if the Tenant disclaim, No writ of
E^ror upon di^claime.
whereby the Demandant recovers, in that case the Tenant shall not have a Writ
of Error, against his own Disclaimer; because by that plea he has waved all
the privity and interest, that he had in the land; but if the Tenant only
plead non-tenure, and thereupon it is found against him, so that the Demandant
recovers, in that case the Tenant shall have a writ of Error, etc.

F.N.B. 98. q. r.
120 If a man lose land by default in a praecipe quod reddat, and die, Heir and
^^cutor privies.
the heir shall have an action of deceit as well as the father, and shall have
restitution; for he is privy in blood: So likewise, if a man have execution by
default upon a recognisance in a Scire facias sued against one, and that
Defendant die; his Executors shall have a Writ of deceit, and shall be
restored; for they are privies in right, etc.

F.N.B. 108. a.
121 The Vouchee, or Tenant by receipt, or he in the reversion, Reversione shall
have ^taint or E^^
(where he joins to the Tenant for term of life by aid prayer) shall have an
attaint, if they lose by false verdict: And if the Tenant for life lose by
false verdict, he in the reversion shall have an attaint or Writ of Error,
living the Tenant for life; but this is by the Satute of 9 R. 2. cap. 3.

F.N.B. 108. b.
122 In trespass if the Defendant plead villanage in the Plaintiff, Attaint by
(...) heir in vill^nage.
and he says that he is free, and he is found free by false verdict, etc. and
after the Defendant dies, here, his heir shall have an attaint to avoid this
Estoppel, and false verdict, albeit it was given in an a ^^n personal. Sed
quaere de hoc.

Writ of Covenant by Assig^ee.
123 Fitz-Herbert says, F.N.B. 145. m. and 146. c.
the second Lessee shall have a Writ of Covenant against the Lessor, if the
Lease be made to him and his Assigns with waranty: And yet he says
afterward, the Assignee of the Lessee shall maintain a Writ of Covenant
against the Lessor; albeit in the Deed of Covenant there is no mention of any
Assignee. Ideo quaere de hoc.

Executor ^rivy.
124 At the Common Law if lands had been willed to be sold by Executors, or had
been devised to Executors to be sold, Co. Inst. pars 1. 113. a. 3,
if any of them had refused, the rest could not have sold them; but now that is
helped by the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 4. viz. the first by the express words
of that Statute, and the other by the equity of the same: Howbeit in neither of
those cases, when one refuses, can the other make sale to him that so
refuses; because he is party and privy to the last Will, and remains Executor
still.

The heir sued shall not have contribution.
125 If a man seized of 3 acres of land acknowledge a recognisance or Statute,
etc. and enfeoff A. of one acre, and B. of another acre, Co. l. 3. 12. b. 2.
Sir William Herberts case.
and dies, so that the third descends to his heir; In this case, if execution
be sued only against the heir, he shall not have contribution, no more than
the father should have had, if he had been living; for they are privies in
blood; And therefore it is said, that the heir fits in the seat of the
Ancestor, Et haeres est alter ipse; filius est pars patris; mortuus est pater,
sed quasi non est mortuus, quia reliquit similem sibi, etc.

Release of dower.
126 The Baron makes a Lease for life, and dies, Co. Inst. pars 1 265. a. 3.
a release made by the wife of her Dower to him in the reversion is good;
Albeit she has no cause of action against him in praesenti. And this is
because of the privity of estate, that is between the Tenant in Dower, and him
in the reversion, etc.

The privity of Executors for wardship.
127 Where the Statute of West. 1. cap. 22. Co. ib. 79. a. 2.
gives unto the Lord two years of the heir female after her age of 14, thereby
is implied, that if the Lord dies within the two years, yet his Executors or
Administrators (although not named) shall also enjoy the same; for, when the
Statute so vesteth an Interest in the Lord, the Law gives the same unto his
Executors or Administrators, because they are privies unto him in
representation. Then put case, that the Lord has the wardship of the body and
land of an heir female, and makes his Executor, and dies before her age of
fourteen years, whether the Executor shall in that case have the two years,
because the Executor is not Lord, nor named in the Statute: And (in this case)
my Lord Coke takes it, that the Executor, having the wardship of the body and
land, shall also have the two years, for that they were vested in the Lord, and
in respect of the privity, as aforesaid.

The privity of Executors.
128 Executors and Administrators might take benefit of the general pardon in 43
El. and might plead it, as well as the Testator himself. Co. l. 6. 79. b. in
Sir Edward Phittons case.
So 3 Eliz. Dyer, 201 upon the Statute of 23 H. 8. Executors shall have an
Attaint. 6 E. 6. Bendloes, Executors shall have restitution upon the Statute of
21 H. 8. Also Administrators shall have a Writ of Error upon the 27 Eliz. as it
was adjudged in 36 Eliz. in the Lord Mordants case in the Exchequer Chamber;
yet these three last Statutes speak only of the party, and not of his
Executors or Administrators. Vide 28 Ass. Pl. 7. 11 E. 3. Executors 77.

^he husband ^all not have things in acti^^.
129 Marriage is an absolute gift of all Chattels personal to the husband, and
also a gift of all Chattels real sub modo, Co. Inst. pars 1 351.
which the Feme has in possession and in her own right (for which see R. 93.
Ex. 5.) but Chattels real or personal, consisting merely in action the husband
shall not have by the intermarriage, unless he ^ecover them in the life of the
wife, albeit he survive her; As a writ of right of Ward, a Valor maritagii, a
forfeiture of marriage, arrerages of rent, a presentation to a Benefice, debts
by obligation, contract, or otherwise, which did accrue to the wife before
marriage; the husband (I say) shall not have these or the like, unless he and
his wife recover them, because they consist in privity; and therefore albeit
the husband survive the wife, yet he shall not have them, but the Executors or
Administrators of the wife: So if a Feme Sole be possessed of a Chattel real, and
be thereof dispossessed, and then takes husband, and dies, albeit the husband
survive, yet this right is not given to the husband by the intermarriage, but
the Executors, etc. of the wife shall have it: So it is likewise, where the
wife has but a possibility, and of Reliefs, etc. Howbeit now by the Statute of
32 H. 8. cap. 37. if the husband survive the wife, he shall have the arrerages
as well incurred before the marriage, as after, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 169. a. 3.
130 Between Ioyntenants there is a twofold privity, viz. in estate, Privity of
^ceners.
and in possession; between Tenants in common, there is privity only in
possession, and not in estate; but parceners have a three fold privity, viz. in
estate, in person, and in possession.

Co. Inst. pars 1 208. b. 3.
131 There is a diversity, Tender of ^ney to a st^ger.
where a condition concerns a transitory or local act, and is to be performed
to the Feoffee or Obligee, and where it is to be performed to a stranger; as if
A. be bound to B. to pay 10 l. to C. Here A. tenders to C. and he refuses; In
this case the Bond is forfeit, because there is no privity betwixt them, and A.
cannot compel C. to receive it; but if it were to be paid to the Obligee, upon
tender and refusal the bond is saved, by reason of the privity betwixt them.

Co. ib. 209 a. 2.
132 If a man be bound to A. in an Obligation with condition to enfeoff B. (who
is a mere stranger) before a day, The like.
the Obligor does offer to enfeoff B. and he refuses: Here the obligation is
forfeit, for the Obligor has undertaken to enfeoff B. and there wants privity
betwixt him and B. But if the feoffment h^d been to be made to the Obligee
himself, or to any other for his behoof, a tender and refusal shall save the
Bond* because of the privity betwixt them; So likewise if A. be bound to B,
with condition that C. shall enfeoff B. In this case, if C. tender, and D.
refuse, the obligation is saved; for it shall be intended that the feoffment
should be made for the benefit of the Obligee, which implies privity.

Co. ib. 245. a. 4.
133 A strangers entry (of his own head) upon the Bastard eigne to the use of
the Mulier, Bastard and ^^lier entry.
is not good without the Muliers consent thereunto afterward; Howbeit, the
entry of the Guardian in soccage or chivalry (of their own heads) without the
Muliers assent, is good to avoid the title of the Bastard eigne, because of the
privity, for they are no strangers.

Dyer 29 a. 194 28 H. 8.
134 Tenants in Common cannot make partition without deed, Partition.
but Coparceners may, because they are privies, and as one heir, and (by
consequent) have a threefold privity, viz. in estate, person, and possession.
Vide supra 130.

135 Vide Max. 114. c. 58. and Hob. 130. Oats and Frith.

56 Equal things cannot drown one another, and contra.
Co. Inst. pars 1 273. b. 3.
1 If a man make a lease for ten years, the remander for 20 years, A release of
Lessee for years to Le^ for years.
he in the remainder releaseth all his right to the Lessee for ten years; In
this case, the Lessee for ten years has an estate for 30 years; for one
chattel cannot drown another, neither yet can years be consumed in years.

^estate tail ^not drown, (...) be extinct.
2 If a gift be made to the eldest son, and to the heirs of his body, Co. ib.
372. a. 4.
the remainder to the father, and to the heirs of his body; the father dies,
the eldest son levieth a fine with proclamations, and dies without issue, Co.
l. 2. 61. a. in Wiscots case.
this shall bar the second son; because the father, while the remainder was
in him, might by levying a fine have barred the youngest son of taking any
benefit by it; and therefore, when the remainder descends to the eldest son, a
fine levied by him shall also be of like force to bar ye youngest; for that an
estate tail can neither drown, nor be extinct; because such an estate was
Fee-simple at the Common Law, and may by possibility endure for ever.

^ease for life ^y uphold a ^se for years
3 If a man lets lands to another for life, Co. Inst. pars 1. 54. b. 4.
the remainder to him for 21 years, he has both estates in him so distinctly,
as he may grant away either of them; for a greater estate may uphold a less in
the same person, but not e converso; and therefore if a man make a lease to one
for 21 years, the remainder to him for term of his life, the lease for years is
drowned, etc.

^ond annuls ^ontract, and Judgment a and.
4 A Statute Staple or obligation in nature thereof, Co. l. 6. 45. in Higgins
case.
is but an obligation recorded, and an obligation, be it of record, or not of
record, cannot drown another obligation: but if a man has a debt by simple
contract, and he takes an obligation for the same debt, or any part thereof,
the contract is determined (3 H. 4. 17. 11 H. 4. 9 E. 3. 50, 51.) So when a man
has a debt upon an obligation, and by ordinary course of Law has judgment
thereupon, the contract by specialty, which is of a meaner nature, is by
judgment of Law drowned and changed into a matter of record, which is of an
higher nature, etc. Vide 61. 7, 8.

^xtinguish^ent of a Seigniory.
5 If the Lord be Guardian of the land, Co. Inst. pars 1 367. a. 3.
or if the Tenant makes a lease to the Lord for years; or if the Lord be
Tenant thereof by Statute Merchant, Statute Staple, or Elegit, and makes a
feoffment in fee of the land to a stranger, he does hereby extinguish his
Seigniory; because by his own act he has vested the Seigniory and Tenancy into
one hand, by which means the tenancy is drowned, which before was but in
suspense: So if there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and rent, Co. l. 6. 70. a.
3. in Sir Moyle Finches case.
and the Lord disseise the Tenant of the land, and make feoffment in fee to
another, hereby the Seigniory is extinct.

^here joyn^ancy may (...) merged, ^d where ^ot.
6 If a man make an estate to three, and to the heirs of one of them, Co. l. 2
61. a. in Wiscots case.
there the one of them has Fee-simple, and yet the Ioynture continues; for it
is all but one estate created at the same time, and therefore the Fee-simple
cannot merge the Ioynture, which took effect with the creation of the remainder
in fee; but when 3 are Ioyntenants for life, and after one of them purchases
the fee, or the fee descends upon him, there the Fee-simple mergeth the estate
for life, and severeth the jointure; for the estate for life was in esse
before, and may be merged or surrendered, but so cannot the estate for life in
the first case, etc. Vide Pl. ibid.

^enure ex^ct.
7 Land was held of the Archbishopric by Knight Service, Dyer 154. 18. 4. 5 P.
M.
and in the time of E. 3. this land was given by fine to one Strangwayes in
tail, the remainder in fee to E. 3. the tenant in tail dies, his issue within
age: In this case (by Sanders and others) if the King will accept of the
remainder, the issue shall hold of none, nor be in ward to any; because the
tenure and service are goue and extinct by the Kings Fee-simple.

^chy of Lan^ster.
8 After the Duchy of Lancaster came into the Kings hands, Dyer 209. 22. 3 Eliz.
albeit the revenue were kept several, yet per nomen Regis nomen Ducis
dimergibatur; for he could not be Sovereign and Subject too. Vide 3 H. 6.

57 Things are to be construed, Secundum aequalitatem rationis.
Finch 20. Bract. l. 1. c. 3.
1 This Rule in Law imports a logical virtue, a kind of equity, as Bracton
calls it, where he says, Aequitas est rerum convenientia, quae paribus in
causis paria jura desiderat, and omnia been coaequiparat. Et dicitur aequitas,
quasi aequalitas: whose nature is to amplify, enlarge, and add to the letter
of the Law.

27 Eliz. Co. l. 3. 13. Sir Will. Herberts case. 11 H. 7. 12. b.
2 Upon a recognizance acknowledged by the Ancestor, Equal interests require
^qual contri^^tions.
or a judgment in an action of Debt given against him; If he die seized of two
acres, whereof one is holden in Borough English; or having issue two daughters,
which make partition; or if he die without issue, whereby part of his land
descends to the heir of his fathers part, and part to the heir on the part
of his mother: In all these cases, if one only be charged, he shall have
contribution against the other; for they are in aequali jure. Finch 20. Co. l.
2. 25. b. 4. The case of Banker.

26 Ass. Pl. 37.
3 If two, four, or more men being severally seized of lands, Equal exten^
join in a recognizance, all their land must be equally extended. Finch 20.

Finch, ibid.
4 This Rule does chiefly shine and show forth it self in the exposition of
Statutes, Exposition of Statutes.
by extending things there provided to mischiefs in the like degrees, etc.

Finch, ibid.
5 This Rule is also of great use for guiding the grounds and maxims of things,
which newly start up, Grounds of Law.
according to the rule of the Common Law.

23 H. 8. Fitz.
6 Uses at the Common Law were nothing, Uses regard^^ as estates.
yet in time gaining greater regard to be imputed amongst Inheritances, are now
demeaned as other Inheritances at the Common Law; so as possessio fratris shall
be of them; and of lands in Borough English, the use shall descend to the
youngest son: And now also these uses being turned into estates, shall be
demeaned in all respects, as estates in possession. Finch 20.

7 When custom creates Inheritance in Copyhold lands, Copihold (...)
Freehold.
and makes the lands descendable, Co. l. 4. 22.
then shall the Law direct the descents according to the Maxims and rules of
the Common Law, to have a possessio fratris, and the like: But not to
collateral things, as tenancy by the Courtesy, Dower, descent to toll an
entry. Finch 20.

Co. Inst. pars 1 24. b. 1.
8 Equity is a construction made by the Judges, Equity, a co^struction m^^^ by
the Judges
that cases out of the letter of a Statute, yet being within the same mischief,
or cause of making the same, shall be within the same remedy, that the Statute
provideth: And the reason hereof is, for that the Lawmakers could not possibly
set down all cases in express terms; Aequitas est convenientia rerum, quae
cuncta coaequiparat, and quae in paribus rationibus paria jura desiderat. And
again, Aequitas est perfecta quaedam ratio, quae jus scriptum interpretatur and
emendat, nulla scriptura comprehensa, sed solum in vera ratione consistens.
Aequitas est, quasi aequalitas. Bonus judex secundum aequum and bonum judicat,
Co. ib. 24. a. 4.
and aequitatem stricto juri praefert. Et jus respicit aequitatem. And
therefore the cases set down in the Statute of Westminster. 2. are there put only
for examples of estates tail, general and special, and not to exclude other
estates tail; For, Exempla illustrant, non restringunt legem. And this appears
by the words of the same Stat. Auxi sont diverse autres estates en le tail,
etc. And herewith also agreed Littleton. 21. Carbonels case, 33 Ed. 3. Tail 5.
3. E. ^. 32. 18 Ass. Pl. 5. 18 E. 3. 46. 1 Ma. Die. 46. The Lord Barkleys case.
Pl. Co. 251.

Co. ib. 53. b. 3.
9 Albeit the Statute of Gloucester, Wast and ^^struction co^vertible.
which provideth remedy against wast, speaks not of the exile of Villeins,
yet that also is comprehended under the general word of waste; so that exile or
destruction of Villeins, or Tenants at will, or making them poor, where they
were rich, when the tenant came in, whereby they depart from their tenures is
to be adjudged waste; for waste and destruction in their larger sense are words
convertible, etc.

^ivery of ^nds in ward.
10 A livery of lands out of the Kings hands is in the nature of a restitution,
which is to be taken favorably; Co. ib. 77. a. 4
For if livery be made of a Manor cum pertinentiis, the heir shall thereby
have an Advowson appendant; Howbeit it is otherwise in grants by Letters
Patents.

11 By the Statute of 2 E. 6. cap. 8. it is enacted, Co. ib. 77. b. 2.
That such persons as hold for term of years, ^tatute Mer^hant, Staple, ^legit,
etc. ^ithin 2 E. 6. 8.
or by copy of Court-roll, or have any rent, common, or profit apprender out
of any lands found in any office, whereby the King is entitled to the wardship
of the same lands, or to the forfeiture of lands upon attainder of treason,
felony, praemunire, or any other offense, may have, hold, enjoy, and perceive
their several estates, interests, and profits, although they be not found in
the office; Here, albeit those two estates only are saved by the letter of the
said Act; yet it being a beneficial Law, the estate of Tenant by Statute
Staple, Merchant, Elegit, and of Executors, that hold lands for payment of
debts, etc. are taken to be within the benefit of that clause: which was
doubted in 14 El. Dyer 319.

^ncertain te^ure found, ^ E. 6. 8.
12 Where an office is found by these words or the like, quod de quo, Co. ib.
77. b. 3.
vel de quibus tenementa praedicta tenentur, juratores praedicti ignorant, or
that the lands are holden of the King, sed per quae servitia juratores
ignorant, neither of these shall be taken for an immediate tenure of the King
in chief; but in such cases a melius inquirendum shall be awarded, as has been
accustomed of old time: And this provision is made by the Statute of 2 E. 6.
cap. 8. And here, albeit that Statute says no more; yet (by the equity of the
same Statute) if the first office find a tenure for the King per quae servitia,
etc. and upon the Melius the tenure is found for a Subject; In that case* the
first office has lost his force, and need not to be traversed; and the Melius
is in the nature of a Diem clausit extremum, or a Mandamus, etc. And this was
but a declaration of the ancient Common Law, as by these words of the same
Statute (as has been accustomed of old, etc.) it appears; but if upon the
Melius it be found again as uncertainly, as before is said, then it is in
judgment of Law a tenure in Capite, Howbeit if upon the Melius a tenure be
found for the King, Ut de manerio, etc. sed per quae servitia, etc. it shall be
taken for Knight Service.

^arons and Knights fees.
13 At or before the Statute of Magna carta, cap. 2. Co. Inst. pars 1 83. b. 3.
All Earldoms and Baronies were derived from the Crown, and were holden of the
King in Capite, and the King would not then suffer them to be divided, or
severed: And such entire Earldoms and Baronies are within that Statute to pay
relief according to the limitation thereof: Howbeit at this day Earls and
Barons are without such Earldoms and Baronies of the Kings gift in chief; For
at the creation of an Earl, he has sometimes an Annuity granted unto him, and
sometimes nothing at all, but rather gives somewhat for his Honor; So as such
Earls and Barons so created are clearly out of the Statute of Magna Carta, and
are to pay such reliefs as other men, that hold of the King in Capite: For as
the heir of a Knight shall not pay 100 s. relief, unless he has a Knights
fee, etc. so neither the Earl nor Baron shall pay any relief by that Statute,
unless he has an Earldom or Barony intended by the same Statute, etc.

^xecutors to ^ll lands.
14 By the Statute of 21 H. 8. cap. 4. it is provided, Co. ib. 113. a. 3.
that where lands are willed to be sold by Executors, though part of them
refuse, yet the residue may sell: And here, albeit the letter of the Law
extends only where Executors have a power to sell; yet being a beneficial
law, it is by construction extended also where lands are devised to Executors
to be sold.

Co. ib. 143. a. 4 Littl. Sect. 216.
15 The Law so regards equity and equality, Tenure of land.
that it will in diverse cases work according to them without any provision or
reservation of the party: And therefore, if before the Statute of Quia emptores
terrarum, a man had made a feoffment in fee, rendering rent to him and his
heirs, this was Rent-service, for which he might distrain of common right; And
if he had made no reservation at all of any rent or service; Yet the Feoffee
should then have holden of the Feoffor by such service, as the Feoffor held
over of his Lord next paramount: For, the Law in this case did create a tenure.

Littl. Sect. 222. Co. ib. 148. b. 3.
16 If a man seized of diverse lands, of some in Fee-simple, Rent-serv^^
apportionable.
and of the rest in tail, make a gift in tail, or a lease for life, or years of
all, reserving a rent, and die; Here, if the issue in tail avoid the gift or
lease, as to the entailed lands, the rent shall be apportioned; for seeing the
rent is reserved out of, and for the whole land; it is reason, that when part
thereof is evicted by an elder title, that the Donee or Lessee should not be
charged with the whole rent, but that it should be apportioned ratably
according to the value of the land.

Co. ib. 154. a. 1.
17 By the Statute of 7 R. 2. cap. 10. it is enacted, Equity upon 7 R. 2. ^^.
that an Assise of rents issuing forth of lands in diverse Counties shall be
taken in Confinio comitatus, which seems to be meant only of Counties that
border one upon another. Nevertheless, albeit the Counties do not join, but
have twenty Counties lying between them, yet the assise in Confinio comitatus
does lie, and the Justices shall sit between the said Counties: And where the
Statute seems to speak of two Counties only, the like Law is, when the rent
issues out of lands lying in more Counties than two.

Co. ibid. a. 3.
18 The Statute of Merton, cap. 2. (made 20 H. 3. Equity upon Merton. 20 H. 3.
) which gives the writ of Redisseisin, is as follows: Item si quis fuerit
disseisitus de libero tenemento and coram justiciariis Itinerantibus seisinam
suam recuperaverit per Assinam novae disseisinae, vel per recognitionem eorum,
qui fecerint disseisinam, and ipse disseisitus per Vicecomitem seisinam suam
habuerit, fi iidem disseisitores postea post iter justiciariorum, vel infra, de
eodem tenemento iterum eundem conquerentem disseisiverint, and inde convicti
fuerint, statim capiantur, etc. Here, albeit this Statute seems to intend only
lands and tenements, Littl. Sect. 233.
yet Littleton,. 233. Rent-sec^ (...) charge.
expounds it to extend also to a Rentcharge, or a Rent-seck; For although they
are against common right, yet a man may have a Freehold in them; And therefore
if a man grant omnia tenementa sua, a Rentcharge or a Rent-seck will also
pass thereby: Also by the same Statute the Assise seems to be limited to be
taken only coram justiciariis Itinerantibus; Howbeit Littleton (there)
speaks generally, and so is the Statute to be intended, viz. before any other
Justices, that have authority to take Assizes, and Justices Itinerant are only
set down there for an example: And albeit that Statute says, Recuperavit per
Assisam, etc. by the verdict of the Assise, as Littleton in the same Chapter
expounds it; or per recognitionem, etc. by confession; yet if the recovery be
upon a demurrer, or by pleading of a record and failer of it, or by any other
manner, such recoveries are also within the equity of the same Statute; And
therefore Littleton in the abovesaid Section speaks generally, Et recovera le
seisin del rent, intimating, that it ought to be understood of all manner of
recoveries in an Assise of Novel disseisin: Westminster. 2. ^ by equity, though pe^
And in that manner is the abovesaid Statute confirmed by Westminster. 2. cap. 26.
And here it is worthy observation, that this Statute is expounded by equity,
notwithstanding it is a penal Law; for by the said Statute of Westminst. 2.
double damages is given upon the recovery.

Co. ib. 174. a. 3. Co. l. 4. 121. b. 4 Bastards case.
19 There is a diversity between a recovery in value by force of a warranty upon
an exchange, and upon a partition; Exchange. Partition. Recovery.
for upon an exchange, he that loses, shall recover a full recompense for all,
that he so loses: But upon a partition, the patcener that loses shall only
recover the moity or half of that which is lost; to the end that the loss may
be equal. 48.

Equity of 32 H. 8. 32.
20 The Tenant by the Courtesy shall have a writ of Partition upon the Statute
of 32 H. 8. cap. 32. Co. ib. 175. a. 4.
as well as Ioyntenant or Tenant in common for life or years; For albeit he is
neither Ioyntenant nor Tenant in common (because a praecipe lies against the
Parcener or Tenant by the Courtesy) yet forasmuch as he is in equal mischief
as another Tenant for life, he shall be intended within the equity of that
Statute.

Division of lands. Hotchpot.
21 If a man seized of lands in fee, has issue two daughters, Littl. Sect. 267.
and gives part of them to one of his daughters in Frankmarriage, and dies; In
this case, albeit the lands undisposed of exceed in value the other lands,
given in Frankmarriage, yet shall not the Donee in Frankmarriage have any part
thereof, unless she will put her part in Hotchpot with the other lands, and
then they shall be equally divided between the sisters. And it seems by our
old books, Co. ib. 176. b. 3 Glanvil, l. 7. cap. 5.
that by the ancient Law there was also a kind of resemblance hereof concerning
goods: Si autem post debita deducta, Division of the testators goods.
and post deductionem expensarum, quae necessariae erunt, id totum, quod tunc
superfuerit, dividatur in tres parts, quorum una pars relinquatur pueris, si
pueros habuerit defunctus; secunda uxori, si superstes fuerit; Et de tertia
part habeat testator liberam disponendi facultatem, si autem liberos non
habeat, tunc medietas defuncto, and alia medietas uxori; Si autem sine uxore
decesserit, liberis existentibus, tunc medietas defuncto, and alia medietas
liberis tribuatur; Si autem sine uxore and liberis, tunc id totum defuncto
remanebit. Lambert, 119. 68.
And by the law before the Conquest it was thus provided; Sive quis in curia,
sive morte repentine fuerit intestatus mortuus, Dominus tamen nullam rerum
suarum partem (praeter eam, quae jure debetur) herioti nomine sibi assumito;
verum eas judicio suo uxori, liberis, and cognatione proximis, just pro suo
cuique jure distribuito.

Frankmarri^ge. Hotchpot.
22 If a man seized of 30 acres of land, each acre of equal value, Littl.. 273.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 179. a. 1.
has issue two daughters, and gives 15 acres to one of them in Frankmarriage,
and dies seized of the other 15 acres; In this case, the other sister shall
have the 15 acres so descended, and the Baron and Feme shall not put their 15
acres in Hotchpot with them, because the parts are already equal: but this is
to be thus understood, if they are of equal value at the time when the
Partition should be made: For, if the land given in Frankmarriage, be by the
act of God decayed in value, or if the remnant of the lands in Fee-simple be
improved after the gift, they may be cast into Hotchpot: And the Law will
adjudge of the value, as it is at the time of the Partition, unless it be by
the proper act or default of the parties, etc. And it seems to some, that in
case they be of equal value at the time of the partition, that then the
reversion in fee of the lands given in Frankmarriage shall only descend to the
Donee, for otherwise the other sister shall have more benefit than the Donee;
and so their parts would not be equal; and then their parts might be put into
Hotchpot, notwithstanding the 30 acres are all of equal value at the time of
the partition, which is against the reason that Littleton gives, Sect. 273, etc.

^rvivor of ^yntenants.
23 If there be two Ioyntenants in fee, Co. ib. 193. a. 3.
and the one lets his part to another for the life of the Lessor, and the
Lessor dies; some say, that his part shall survive to his companion; for that
by his death the lease was determined: Howbeit others hold the contrary, and
their reason is; First, because at the time of his death the jointure was
severed, for so long as he lived the lease continued: And secondly, because
notwithstanding the act of any one of the Ioyntenants, there must be equal
benefit of survivor, as to the Freehold; but here, if the other Ioyntenant had
first died, there had been no benefit of Survivor to the Lessor without
question; because at that time the jointure would have been severed; And this
last seems to be the opinion of Coke, for that he puts it last, according to
his own rule, and the course which he observes Littleton to use.

Co. ib. 341. b. 4.
24 A Bishop, Abbot, Dean, Master of an Hospital, Abbot, etc. Writ of right
Parson a J^^ utrum.
or any other such body politic or corporate, which has a sole seisin of
lands in fee in right of their several Corporations, if any such be ousted,
they shall (if need be) have a remedy agreeable to their right, viz. a Writ of
Right, which is the highest remedy, for that they have the highest estate: It
is otherwise of a Parson; because the entire fee and right is not in him; his
highest writ being a Juris utrum etc.

Co. ib. 365. b. 2.
25 Albeit the Statute of Gloucester, cap. 3. (made in 6 E. 1. Alienation by
Tenant by courtesy no bar.
for the relief of the heir against the alienation of the Father, Tenant by the
courtesy, with warranty, etc.) makes one by mention of a Writ of
Mortdancester, Cosenage, Aiel, and Besaiel; yet a Writ of Right, a Formedon, a
Writ of Entry ad communem legem, and all other like actions are within the
purview of that statute; for those actions are but put for examples. Again,
where it is said in the same Statute (if the Tenant by the Courtesy alien) yet
his release with warranty to a Disseisor, etc. is within the purview of that
Statute, because it is in equal mischief; and if that evasion might take place,
that Stat. should have been made in vain: So also if Tenant by ye Courtesy be
of a Seigniory, and the tenancy escheat unto him, and after he alieneth with
warranty, this shall not bind the issue, unless assets descend; for it is in
equal mischief, etc.

Co. ib. 313. a. 2.
26 Albeit the preamble of the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 20. Gifts of the King,
34 H, (...) 20.
extends only to gifts in tail made by the Kings of England before that Act
(viz. has given and granted, etc.) and the body of the Act refers to the
preamble (viz. that no such feigned recovery hereafter to be had against such
tenant in tail, etc.) So as this word (such) may seem to couple the body and
the preamble together; Yet in this case (such) shall be taken for such in equal
mischief, or in like case; and by diverse parts of the Act it appears, that
the makers of the Act intended to extend it to future gifts, and so is the Law
taken at this day without question.

Littl. Sect. 732. Co. ib. 383. b. 1.
27 Some do expound these words of the Stat. of Gloucester, cap. 3. Heritage in
Gloc. 3. i^ heritance by purchase, (...)
the heritage of his mother, to be the lands which the mother has by descent:
And that construction is true; but that Stat. (by the authority of Littleton,
Sect. 732.) extends also, where the mother has it by purchase in Fee-simple;
for so says Littleton himself, that this word (Inheritance) is not only
intended, where a man has lands by descent, but likewise where a man has a
Fee-simple by purchase; because his heirs may inherit him: And albeit it be
true, that the Statute extends to an estate in Frankmarriage acquired by
purchase, yet does it extend also to all estates in tail, as well by descent as
by purchase, Frankmarriage being put there but only for an example.

Littl.. 738. Co. ib. 387. a. 4.
28 If Tenant in Fee-simple, that has a warranty for life, Warranty life.
either by an express warranty, or by Dedi, be impleaded and vouch, he shall
recover a Fee-simple in value, albeit his warranty were but for term of life;
because in that case the warranty was annexed, and did extend to the whole
estate of the Feoffee in Fee-simple: But if Tenant in tail let the Tenements
for life, the remainder to another in fee, and a collateral Ancestor confirm
the estate of the Tenant for life for the term of his life only with
warranty, and die, and the Tenant in tail has issue and die, Here, the issue
is barred during the life of the Tenant for life by the Collateral warranty;
And, in that case, if the Tenant for life be impleaded and vouch he shall only
recover in value but an estate for life; because the warranty was annexed and
does extend to that estate only, etc.

^wo estates ^ade together ^f the same and.
29 If a man make a Charter of feofment of an acre of land to A. and his heirs,
Co. ib. 21. a. 2.
and also another Deed of the same acre to A. and the heirs of his body, and
deliver Seisin according to the form and effect of both Deeds; In this case, he
cannot take a Fee simple only (as some hold; because Livery was made according
to the Deed in tail, as well as to the Charter in fee; neither can the livery
enure only to the Deed of estate tail with a Fee simple expectant; because
livery was made, as well upon the Deed in Fee simple, as the Deed in tail: And
therefore others hold; that in this case, it shall enure by moities, viz. to
have an estate tail in the one moity, with the Fee simple expectant; and a Fee
simple in the other moity; And so the livery shall work immediately upon both
Deeds: And this last seems to be the opinion of Coke himself; being put last,
according to his own rule; which he often delivers in this part of his
Institutes.

^ower of ^ings entire.
30 Albeit of many Inheritances, that be entire, whereof, Co. Inst. pars 1. 32.
a. 1.
no division can be made by metes and bounds, a woman cannot be endowed of the
thing it self, yet a woman shall be endowed thereof in a special and certain
manner: As of a Mill a woman shall not be endowed by metes and bounds, nor yet
in common with the heir; but either she may be endowed of the third toll-dish,
or de integro molendino per quemlibet tertium mensem: And so of a Villain
either the third days work, or every third week or month: A woman shall also
be endowed of the third part of the profit of Stallage, of the third part of
the profits of a Fair, of the third part of the profits of the Office of the
Marshalsie, of the keeping of a Park, of a Dove-house, of a Piscary, viz.
tertiam piscem, vel jactum retis tertium; Of the third presentation of an
Advowson. A Writ of Dower also lies de tertia part exituum provenientium de
custodia Gaolae Abathiae Westminster. And herewith agrees reverend antiquity. De
nullo, quod est sua natura indivisibile, and secationem sive divisionem non
patitur nullam partem habebit, sed satisfaciat ei ad valentiam. Of the third
part of the profits of Courts, Fines, Heriots, etc. Also a woman shall be
endowed of tithes, and then her surest way is to take the third sheaf; for what
land shall be sown is uncertain.

^ower recove^d by parts.
31 Regularly the Feme ought to be endowed of an entire third part in severally
by metes and bounds; Co. ib. 32. b. 1. Littl.. 36.
And yet if a man solely seized of lands in Fee, take a wife and enfeoffe eight
persons, and dies, a Writ of Dower is brought against those eight persons, and
two confess the action, and the other six plead in bar, and descend to
issue. here, the Demandant shall have judgment to recover the third part of
two parts of the lands in eight parts to be divided; and after the issue is
found for the Demandant against the other six, the Demandant shall have also
judgment to recover against them the third part of six parts of the same land,
in eight parts to be divided.

^nsent of ^iage equal.
32 If a man of the age of 14 years marry a woman of the age of ten, Co. ib. 79.
b. 1.
at her age of twelve he may as well disagree, as she may, albeit he were of
the age of consent; because in the contracts of matrimony, either both must be
bound, or equal election of disagreement given to both; and so e converso, when
the woman is of the age of consent, and the man under.

^elivery of ^ods by a ^nkrupt (...) good. El. 7.
33 Delivery of goods by the Bankrupt to a Creditor after the Commission sealed,
according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. cap. 7. Co. l. 2. 25. b. 1. The case of
Bankrupts.
shall not be of force to avoid proportionable distribution of the same goods
together with all the rest unto the other Creditors, which are willing to
submit to the order of the Commissioners in that behalf; for the Statute
says, that the distribution shall be, To every one of the Creditors, etc. rate
and rate like, according to the quantity of his or their debt: So that one
shall not prevent the rest, but all may be in equali jure, according to that of
Cato, Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt, ut jure regantur.

Co. ibid. 35 H. 8. tit. Testaments Br. 119.
34 A man holds three Manors of three several Lords by Knight Service, each
Manor of equal value; here, Devise of 3 Manors ^^den by Knig^ Service.
he cannot devise two of the Manors, and leave the third to descend according
to the generalty of the words of the Statutes of the 32 and 34 H. 8. of Wills;
For then he should prejudice the other two Lords; but by a favorable and equal
construction of the said Statutes, he has power to devise only two parts of
each Manor; So that equality amongst them shall be observed.

4 E. 3. tit. Ass. 178 Co. ibid.
35 The Lord of a Manor shall not approve it all, Approveme^
albeit he leave sufficient Common in the lands of other Lords, according to
the Statute of Merton. cap. 4.

Co. ib. 48. E. 3, 5.
36 In Dower, Voucher in Dower.
if the heir be vouched in three several Wards within the same County;
execution shall be had against one only; but all shall be equally charged. 29
E. 3. 39. there is the like case. Co. l. 3. 13. a. 3. Sir Wiliam Herberts case.

Co. l. 3. 13. a. 4. in Sir William Herberts case. But it is Sir John Lanfords
case. 29 E. 3. 50
37 Four men were bound in a Recognisance of debt to A. and after one of the
Conusors dies, leaving his heir within age, A Recognisance by (...) and one di^
the Conusee brings a Scire facias against the three Survivours to have
execution, who plead, that the heir of the Conusor, who was dead, was within
age, and in as much as during his minority, he could not be charged, and the
Survivours ought not to be charged only, they demand Judgment, etc. And
because A. could not gainesay it; the Court awarded, that the Paroll should
stay; and this Judgment was afterward confirmed in the Kings Bench by a writ
of Error.

Co. ibid. b. 3.
38 If Judgment be given against two Disseisors in an Assise for the land and
damages and one of the Disseisors die, Judgment against two Disseisors, (...)
one dies.
the execution shall not be awarded against the surviving Disseisor; that was
party to the wrong, but the heir as well as the Disseisor shall be equally
charged 19 E. 3. tit. execution 81.

Co. ibid. b. 4.
39 Albeit at the Common Law no land was subject to an execution for the debt of
a Common person, Land not chargeable with debt.
but only by force of certain Statutes made for that purpose; yet the Judges
and Sages of the Law have always expounded general Statutes of that nature
according to the Rule of the Common Law (which is always grounded upon the
perfection of reason) and not according to any private and sudden conceit and
opinion: And therefore in as much as the said Statutes have subjected a man's
land to an execution for his debt, the Judges and Sages of the Law have
considered the rule and reason of the Common Law in case of the heir of an
Obligor; in which case the land was subject to an execution for debt by the
Common Law and accordingly do adjudge and resolve the cases, which arise upon
the said Statutes.

Co. ib. 1^. a. 1.
40 If two men alien land with warranty, Land equ^ charged.
the land of the one shall not be only rendered in value; neither yet, if one
of them die, the land of the Survivour shall be only rendered in value; but the
charge shall be laid equally upon them: For a Joint bond that binds the land
shall not survive, or lie only upon the Survivour; as in case of a joint
warranty, where two for them and their heirs warrant the land to another and
his heirs, the Survivour shall not be solely vouched; neither yet may the
Sheriff deliver the land to the one or the other at his pleasure; for in
executions, which concern the realty, and charge the land, the Sheriff cannot
make execution of the land to one only; So also if two are bound to warranty,
and both die, both the heir ought to be vouched, and both of them ought to be
equally charged.

^equality of third part. ^cending ^ands in ^ite) requi^ in a devise. and 34 H.
8.
41 Willam Barnerds and his wife being seized of the Manor of Hinton in tail,
being the wives jointure, and holden in Capite; Co. l. 3. 32. a. 4. Butler and
Bakers case.
And W. B. being also seized of lands in Fobing, both which amounted to the
full third part of all his lands; And W. B. being likewise seized of the Manor
of Thoby (holden also in Capite) which amounted to two third parts, etc. W. B.
devised to his wife the Manor of Th. upon condition, that she should waive her
former jointure, etc. W. B. dies, the wife in pais refuses her former
jointure: In this case, W. B. could not by the Statutes of Wills (32 and 34 H.
8.) devise the whole Manor of Thoby; because the Manor of H. and the lands in
F. were not a third part of the clear yearly value of all his lands, as they
ought to be according to the provision of the said Statutes; for that the clear
title and present possession of the Manor of H. was but in possibility, and
depended merely upon the will and pleasure of the wife; and she could not by a
bare refusal in pais divest her title to the jointure: But in that case, W. B.
had only power by those Statutes to devise two third parts of the Manor of H.
and also two third parts of the rest of his lands; to the end that the King
might have an equal and proportionable third part apparelled with like
accidents and circumstances, that the other two thirds parts were, according to
the true intent and meaning of the same Statutes.

^fine for ^ars within ^e Statute of 1 H. 7. 20.
42 If a Feme Tenant in tail accept a fine Sur conisance de droit come ceo,
etc. and thereby does grant and render the land for 1000 years, Co. l. 3. 51.
b. 2. in Sir George Browns case.
pretending that this is not within the words of the Statute of 11 H. 7. cap.
20. which prohibits discontinuance, alienation, release, etc. Yet that is
alienation within the intention of the same act; because within the same
mischief, etc.

^ses within ^e Stat. of H. 8. 10. ^ough not ^thin the let^ of that ^at.
43 If a man make a feofment to the use of himself for his life, Co. l. 4. 2.
a. 2. Vernons case.
and after to the use of his wife for her life for the jointure of the wife,
this estate in remainder is within the intent of the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap.
10. For albeit that Statute does only express these five forms, viz. 1 To the
Baron and Feme, and to the heirs of the Baron; 2 To the Baron and Feme and to
the heirs of their two bodies; 3 To the Baron and Feme, and to the heirs of the
body of one of them; 4 To the Baron and Feme for their lives; 5 To the Baron
and Feme for the life of the Feme: yet many other estates, not there
particularly expressed, are within that act; for the said particular forms are
but put there for examples, and not to exclude any other estate, which is to
the like effect, and accords with the intent of the makers of the same Act: So
likewise an estate in Fee simple conveyed to the Feme for her jointure, Co.
ibid. 3. b. 1. per Dyer in Villiers and Beuamonts case. 4 and 5. P. and M. 146.
and in satisfaction of her Dower is a jointure within the equity of the said
Act; for that is a competent livelihood to the Feme of an estate of
Frank-tenement, to take effect presently after the death of the Baron for all
the life of the Feme and more: And so it is resolved in Sir Morris Dennis case
8. Eliz. Dyer 248. And therefore the case of 6 E. 6. Dower Br. 69. (where it is
said, that an estate in Fee simple conveyed to the Feme for her jointure is not
within the Stat. of 27 H. 8.) is misreported, and ought to be intended that
such an estate is not within the Statute of 11 H. 7. cap. 20. which restraines
the alienations of Femes, etc.

^ubsequent ^tute may taken with ^he equity
44 It is frequent in our books, that an Act made of later time shall be taken
within the equity of an Act made long before: Co. ibid.
So the Statute of Malbridge, which was made Anno 52 H. 3. gives the ward of
the heir of the Tenant that holds by Knight Service, notwithstanding a feofment
made by collusion, at which time, of a Statute made long ^fore.
and for 200 years after and more, viz. until the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 17.
(which gives the ward of the heir of Cestuy que use) the heir of Cestuy que use
was not in ward; And yet it is holden in 27 H. 8. 9. if Cestuy que use since
the Statute of 4 H. 7. make feofment in fee by Collusion to defraud the Lord of
his ward, that is taken within the equity of the said Statute of Malbridge: Co.
ibid. 4. a. 4. and b.
So also the Statute De donis conditionabilibus made 13 E. 1. as to the
warranty of the Tenant in tail with assets, is taken within the equity of the
Statute of Gloucester cap. 3. made 6 E. 1. as it is held 11 E. 2. tit. garranty
Stath. and 38 E. 3. 23. For a Formedon in descender was given in lieu of a
Mortdancester: Likewise the Statute of Westminster. 2 cap. 25. made 13 E. 1. gives a
Certificate, but it gives not adjournment; Howbeit adjournment is taken by the
equity of the Statute of Magna Carta cap. 12. made 9 H. 3. as it is held 12 H.
4. 9. So the Statute of 7 R. 2. cap. 10. gives an Assise for rent in confinio
Comitatus, and Redisseisin is also taken in case of rent by the equity of the
Statute of Merton cap. 3. made 20 H. 3. Vide 1 E. 3. 25. b. So in Dyer 12 Eliz.
289. Pl. 60. The Bishop of London being one of the High Commissioners by force
of the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. was translated to the Arch Bishopric of
York, yet his authority (notwithstanding that preferment remains by force of
the Statute of 1 E. 6. cap. 7. So also, albeit lands were not devisable till
the 32 H. 8. yet if a man devise lands to a woman for term of her life, or in
tail, etc. for her jointure, and in satisfaction of her Dower, that is a
jointure within the Act of the 27 H. 8. For as an estate for life made to a
Feme for her jointure before marriage, when she is not his wife, is within the
equity of that Act, So an estate for life devised to a Feme for her life, which
takes effect after his death when the marriage is dissolved, is also within the
equity of the same Act; because such an estate stands well with the intent of
the makers of the same Act of 27 H. 8. Co. ibid. 5 ^l. Dyer 20. in the Court of
Wards.
and likewise with the nature of the jointure intended thereby: And therefore
if a man seized of certain lands in fee holden in Soccage, and of other land
in tail holden in Capite, devise by his Will in writing the third part of all
his lands to his wife in recompense of her Dower, and dies, and the wife enter
into the third part of the lands holden in Fee simple, that shall be a bar of
her Dower by force of the said Act of 27 H. 8. It is otherwise, where a man
devises land to his wife for term of her life, Co. ibid. 4. a. 3. M. 38. and
39 El. inter Leak and Randal in Cur. Gardorum.
etc. generally; for that cannot be averred to be for her jointure, etc.
because a devise imports a consideration in it self, and unless it be plainly
expressed in the will what it is for, it shall be taken only as a benevolence;
neither yet can any averment be taken out of the Will, unless it properly
arise, or may be collected out of the words contained in the same Will, etc.
Vide 51.

Co. l. 4. 57. a. 3. in the case of the Sadlers, etc.
45 Albeit the Statute of 36 E. 3. cap. 13. Equity of the Stat. of 36^ 3. 13.
gives travers and Monstrance de droit from Lands seized into the Kings hands
by offices returned only into the Chancery; yet by equity of that Statute; if
the offices be returned into the Exchequer, and not into the Chancery there
also the Subject may put in his traverse, or Monstrance de droit: as appears
by a president in Qu. Eliz. time, between the said Queen and one Collins and
Howstead.

Co. l. 4. 65. a. 4. in Fulwoods case.
46 Although the Stat. of Westminster. 2. cap. 18. which gives the Elegit, Equity es^
Stat of Ele^ W. 2. 18.
names only the Sheriff to execute it; yet by equity of the same Stat. the
Sergeant of the Mace in London, or any other immediate Officer to any of the
Kings Courts of Record may execute the same Writ in their several
jurisdictions, etc.

Co. l. 4. 106. b. 1. Adams and Lamberts case.
47 Albeit by the Stat. of the 1 E. 6. cap. 14. Equity of the Stat. of
S^stitious us^ 1 E. 6. 14.
only such estate (given to superstitious uses) as are to have continuance for
ever, seem to be given to the King; Yet other estates of less continuance, as
estates in tail, for life, etc. employed for such uses, are also given to the
King, by the equity of the same Act: And the rather, because Omne majus
continet in se minus.

^enant in ^wer shall ^ot recover ^cording to ^er loss.
48 If a man be seized in fee or in tail of three acres, Co. l. 4. 122. a. 2.
in Bastards case.
each acre of equal value, and dies, the heir endows the Feme of the third
acre, and after the Feme is impleaded by one that has title paramount, and she
voucheth the heir; Here she shall not recover in value according to her loss,
but only the third part of two acres which remain; for by the Law she ought to
have but the third part of that which her husband might keep and enjoy by good
title, etc. Vide plus, ib.

Discretion li^ited by rea^^n. 23 H. 8. 5.
49 The Commissioners of Sewers upon the Statutes of 6 H. 6. Co. l. 5. 99. b. 4.
in Rooks case.
cap. 5. and 23 H. 8. cap. 5. are not only to charge those that have lands
adjoining upon the Banks, Ditches, Gutters, etc. but likewise all others that
are in any danger, or shall receive any profit by yt, which is to be done in
that particular; wherein the said Commissioners have authority to proceed
according to their discretion; which nevertheless is to be limited and bounded
with the rule of Law, and Reason: For discretion is a science or understanding
to discern betwixt falsehood and truth, betwixt wrong and right, betwixt shadows
and substance, betwixt equity and colorable glosses and pretenses, and not to
proceed according to a man's own will and private affections; because Talis
discretio discretionem confundit, etc.

Common of ^i^^nage.
50 If the Commons of the Town of A. and of the Town of B. are adjacent, Co. l.
7. 5. b. 3. Sir Miles Corbets case.
and that the one ought to have common with the other because of vicinage, and
in the Town of A. there are 50 acres of Common, and in the Town of B. 100 acres
of Common; In this case, the Inhabitants of the Town of A. cannot put more
Cattle in their Common of 50 acres, than that will feed, without having any
respect to the Common within the Town of B. nec e converso; for the original
cause of this Common for cause of vicinage was not for profit; but for the
preventing of Suits in a Champian Country, by reason of the reciprocal escapes
out of the one Town into the other; And therefore if the Common of the Town of
A. will depasture 50 Cattle, and that of the Town of B. 100 Cattle, it can be
no prejudice to the one or to the other, if the Cattle of the one Town do
reciprocally escape and depasture out of the one Town into the other; For if
all their Cattle depasture promiscuously together, per my and per tout, that
can be no prejudice to the one or to the other, etc.

^an slaughter (...) the day or ^ght, diversi^.
51 It is a good exposition of a Statute to expound it according to the reason
of the Common Law: For example, at the Common Law, Co. l. 7. 6. b. 3. in
Milborns case.
if one had been slain in a Town in the daytime, viz. while there was yet full
daylight, and the Manslayer had escaped, the Town was therefore amercied, and
so it is holden in the 21 E. 3. Coronae 238. Dum quis felonice occisus fuit per
diem, nisi felo captus fuit, tota villata illa oneretur. And with this also
agrees 3 E. 3. Coronae 293. But if such a murder or homicide had been
committed in the night, the Town should not then have been amercied by the
Common Law; because then no folly could be imputed to the Inhabitants of the
Town for letting him escape, etc. For the Scripture says, The day is ordained
for man to labor in, Psalm. 104.
and the night to take his rest: And the Poet says, Ut jugulent homines,
surgunt de nocte latrones: And from this resolution of the Common Law, the
Statutes of Winchester 13 E. 1. and of 27 Eliz. cap. 13. are to be expounded;
For albeit no time be specified in those Statutes, when the robbery should be
committed, for which damages are to be answered by the Hundred; yet it is
adjudged in 29 Eliz. in the case between Milborn, and the Hundred of Dunmow in
Essex, that for a Robbery done before day, the Hundred shall not answer; but
only for that, which is committed in the day time betwixt light and light. And
howbeit at the Common Law (as is aforesaid) the Inhabitants in great Towns were
not to be amercied, albeit the Manslayer escaped, when the Murder or Homicide
was committed in the night; Yet at this day, since the said Stat. of
Winchester, by which it is enacted, that in Cities, and great Towns that are
enclosed, the gates shall be shut at Sunne-set, until Sunrising next morning.
Now the Inhabitants of such Cities and Towns are amerciable, if such Manslayer
escape, although the Murder or Homicide happen to be committed in the night,
as well as if it were committed in the day; For now that act has changed the
reason of the Law, and therefore the Law it self is also changed: Ratio est
anima legis, and mutata legis ratione, mutatur and lex: For at the Common Law
before the Statute, if a man were slain in the night (as is said before) there
was no fault to be imputed to the City or Town, but now if they do not keep
their gates shut according to the Statute, by reason whereof the offender
escapes, then is the fault and negligence in them; and this agrees with the
book in 3 E. 3. Coronae 299. which see also in Co. pro ut in margin. Vide 149.
35.

Co. l. 7. 32. The case of a fine per le Roy.
52 Inasmuch as the King is bound by the Stat. De donis conditionalibus, as it
is adjudged in the Lord Barleys case, in Pl. Co. 240. Stat. De d^ binds the K^
and there^ he takes b^fit of 4 H. 7. ^ 32 H. 8.
by which Act the King is restrained from alienation (for it is provided by the
same Act, Quod finis ipso jure sit nullus) Reason requires, that the King shall
take benefit of the Acts of 4 H. 7. and 32 H. 8. which enable the Tenant in
tail to bar his ^^^es; For it is agreed in all our Books, that the King shall
take benefit of any Act, although he be not named (12 H. 7. 21. 35 H. 6. 60.
Pl. Co. ubi supra) And it would be hard if the King being issue in tail of a
gift made to the Subject, should be in worse condition than if he were not King.

Co. l. 8. 173. b. Virgil Parkers case.
53 The Kings Tenant by Knight Service conveyeth half his land for the jointure
of his wife that shall be, Equality of the third (...) descending.
and after marriage he demiseth the other half for years for the payment of
his debts, and legacies, and devises 1000 l. to his younger Children: In this
case it was resolved that inasmuch as the advancement of his wife is as well
within the Statute of 27 H. 8. Co. l. 10. 84. a. 4. Leonard Leveis case.
as the payment of his debts, and the preferment of his children; and for that
the operation of that Statute does principally take effect by the death of the
Kings Tenant: For that cause, albeit the estate of the Feme has the
precedence, yet the Kings third part shall he taken equally out of both those
halfs, and not out of the half so demised only. And so it was also resolved,
M. 41, and 42 Eliz. between Remington and Savage, and the 23 Eliz. in Thynnes
case. And agrees also with the common experience of the Court of Wards.

Co. l. 95. a. 4. Connys case.
54 In a writ of Mesne the Parol shall not stay for the nonage of the Plaintiff;
for it is not reason, In a writ of Mesne the ^rol shall (...) stay for l^^y.
that the Infant shall be distrained for the services of the Mesne, during his
nonage (which indeed he cannot avoid.) and shall not have remedy till his full
age; but inasmuch as his nonage shall not privilege him from the payment of
the rent during his nonage, the Law also in that case, gives remedy to him
during his nonage, etc.

Co. l. 9. 133. b. 3 Matthew. Meves raze.
55 A. seized of Gavelkind land, Equality (...) the third (...) descending.
holden in soccage of I. S. and of other lands holden in Capite, devised part
thereof to B. the eldest son of his son (being dead) and the rest to his
youngest son, and dies, B. being within age: In this case, it was resolved,
that the King shall have his third part out of each several part, so that the
charge shall be equal, and shall not fall upon one of the parts only. Vide 35
H. 8. Br. Testam. 19 E. 3. Ass. 178. 21, and 22 Eliz. 366. b. Dyer.

Equity of executing a recognisance.
56 If a man be bound in a Statute Merchant, F. N. B. 103. b. Pl. Co. 72. Rosses
case. and Co. l. 3. 12. b. 4. Sir Will. Herberts case.
and after make a feoffment of parcel of his lands to one man, and of another
parcel of his lands to another man, and the Recognisee sues execution upon the
Statute, and has execution against one of the Feoffees; Here, that Feoffee
shall have an Audita quaerela against the other Feoffee, to show cause why the
Recognisee shall not have execution against the lands of that other Feoffee, as
well as against the lands which he has, etc.

Equity of a later statute from a former.
57 The Statute Merchant (made 13 E. 1. Pl. Co. 82. b. 3. Partridg, verse.
Strange and Croker.
) binds all the lands of the Conisor to the execution, and provides, that they
shall be delivered to the Conisee upon reasonable extent, but speaks not a
word, that they shall be delivered to the Extendors, in case they extend them
too high; yet they shall be delivered to the extendors by the equity of the
Statute of Acton Burnel made before ( viz. Anno 11 E. 1.) which says, that the
goods praised too high shall be delivered to the Praysers themselves at the
rate they set them, etc. ( Vide 44.) And yet the Statute Merchant is a penal
law.

A Judgment bars a new action.
58 If a man bring an action of Debt upon an Obligation, Co. lib. 6. 46. a. 2.
in Higgins case.
and he is barred by judgment, so long as that judgment stands in force, he
cannot have a new action; pari ratione, when he has judgment in an action
upon the same Obligation, so long as that judgment remains in force, he shall
not have a new action.

Copihold fines must be
59 If the fines of Copiholders of a Manor be uncertain, Co. l. 11. 44. a. 4.
in Richard Godfreys case.
the Lord cannot demand or exact excessive or unreasonable fines, but if he do
ye Copiholder may refuse to pay the fine, and the reasonableness thereof shall
be determined by the Justices, etc. Quam rationabilis debet esse finis non
definitur, sed omnibus circumstantiis inspectis pendet ex justiciariorum
discretione; And so it was adjudged in C. B. between Stallon and Brady, P. 9.
Jac. Rot. 1845. Vide Co. l. 4. 47. b.

reasonable.
60 An advowson descends to two Coparceners, Dyer 55. 5. 34, 35 H. 8.
one of them being within age, and in ward, the Guardian marries with the
elder, the Church is void, the Guardian presents in the name of both the
sisters, and the Church is void again when the younger sister comes to full
age; In this case, it seems the eldest shall have the Presentation, if the
younger sister will not join with her, for this shall be said the comment^ment
of the Turn, because the presentment was before in both their names: Quaere
tamen, because it may be imputed to the folly of the Baron, who would not
present in his and his wives name, when he had full power to do it, according
to Max. 117.

Coparceners. Presentment. Verdict.
61 If a Jury eat or drink before their agreement at their own costs, Dyer 55.
10. 34 and 35 H. 8.
that offense is unable, but if it be at the costs of either party, it is cause
of Error in the judgment that passes upon such a verdict, because it implies
affection and suspicion.

62 Vide Max. 178. 22.

Prohibition against committing of waste.
63 If a Parson of a Church and A. be Tenants in Common of a Wood, and A.
endeavors to make Waste, Co. l. 11. 49. a 2. in Richard Lifords case.
the Parson for the preservation of the timber trees shall have a prohibition
against him, that he shall not make Waste; and the reason thereof is said to
be, for that if the Parson of a Church will waste the inheritance of his Church
to his private use in felling the trees, the Patron may have a prohibition
against him; for the Parson is seized as in right of his Church, and the Glebe
is the Dower of his Church (for thereof it is said to be endowed, and so say
many ancient records) and therefore inasmuch as a prohibition lies against
him, reason requires that he shall have like remedy against him, who holds with
him in common. See likewise ubi supra, a notable case, wherein the Bishop of
Duresme is inhibited to commit Waste in the Woods belonging to his Bishopric,
at a Parliament holden at Carlisle in the 35 E. 1. by the ordinary remedy at
the Common Law by prohibition out of the Chancery, etc. Vide F. N. B. 49. 3.

11 H. 7. 12. b.
64 A man binds himself and his heirs in an obligation having heirs and leaving
lands both of the part of the father and of the mother; Lands equally charged.
In this case, both the heirs shall be proportionably charged. Co l. 2. 25. b.
4. In the case of Bankrupts.

Dyer 186. 68. 2 Eliz.
65 The Statute of 1 M. 7. ordaines, that all Fines, Fines.
whereupon proclamations are not duly made, by reason of the adjournment of
any term by Writ, shall be as good, as if that term had been holden from the
beginning to the end, and proclamations therein made according to the Statute
of 4 H. 7. 24. The said Statute of 1 M. speaks of the adjournment of the whole
term, yet if part of the term be only adjourned, that is taken to be within
the equity of the same Statute, as it happened in 2 Eliz. when in Tr. T. there
were but two days dies juridici.

Dyer 230. 56. 6. Eliz.
66 A Servant makes a bill, Contract by a servant.
testifying the buying of ware to the use of his Master, and this without seal,
in which he binds himself to pay the debt; In this case, debt lies not
against the Servant, but action upon the case; for it is the debt of the
Master, and the Assumpsit of the servant. Alfords case.

Hob. 91. the L. W. Howards case. 14 Jac.
67 In the Starre-Chanber in a cause between the Lord William Howard Plaintiff,
and Bell and others Defendants, Tenant right,
It was holden by Coke and Hobert, that the Tenants of a Manor claiming Tenant
right (which the Plaintiff being Lord of the Manor supposed to be void in Law)
might all join together in a peaceable manner, to defend the cause, being
common to them all; and therefore, though some particular persons were sued,
yet the rest might defend the suit upon their common charge: And the reason
was, for that, the title being one against all, There was in effect but one
defense, and one Defendant, for the trial of one man's case tried all; And
therefore the Courts of Justice do every day deny them to be witnesses one for
another in such general cases, as in cases of Common, Modus decimandi, and the
like, wherein also it is many times ordered for avoiding of multiplicity of
suits, that a trial be had in one man's case for all; Now therefore as they are
acknowledged parties to their prejudice in defense, so likewise reason
requires, that they should be in like manner allowed to be parties for their
advantage: And so it was said, it had been ruled in that Court before in the
case of the Lord Gray of Groby; yet the Lord Chancellor seemed to be of a
contrary mind, and cited a President to that purpose in 8 Eliz.

Hob. 120.
68 The Law does not allow any man to strike in private revenge of ill words,
And the reason of the wisdom of the Law in that case is, Words and blows.
because there is no proportion between words and blows; but he that is
stricken may strike again, per Hobert in the Lord Darcies case of the North,
against Gervase Markham.

58. In quo quis delinquit, in eo de jure, est puniendus.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 233. b. 2.
1 If a Keeper of a Park kill any Deer without warrant, A Parker forfeits his
off^^ for wast.
or fell or cut any Trees, Woods, or Underwoods, and convert them to his own
use, it is a forfeiture of his office; for the destruction of vert is, by a
mean, destruction of venison; So it is also if he pull down ye lodge, or any
house within the Park, wherein hay is used to be put for feeding of the Deer
or the like, it is a forfeiture of his Office; for, in quo quis delinquit, in
eo de jure est puniendus.

Co. l. 3. 11. b. 4. Sir William Herberts case.
2 At the Common Law, Goods liable for debt recovered, and the person for
Trespass.
if a common person had sued a Recognisance, or Judgment for debt or damages,
he could not have had the body or lands of the Defendant in execution; but in
such case should have had execution only of his goods and Chattels, or of
grain, or some other present profit, which grew upon the land; for which
purpose the Common Law gave the Sheriff power, either by a Levari facias, to
levy them upon his Lands and Chattels, or by a Fieri facias, upon his Goods
and Chattels; for, in as much as he failed to satisfy the debt and damages by
his Goods and Chattels, or ye issues and profits of his land, reason required,
that they only should be taken in execution, and not his body or lands: On the
other side, if a man commit any force; for as much as his body is a chief agent
therein, the Common Law does then subject his body to imprisonment, which is
the highest execution, whereby he loses his liberty until he has both
satisfied the party, and made fine to the King; and therefore it is a rule in
Law, that in all actions quare vi and armis, a Capias lies, and where a Capias
lies in process, there (after judgment) a Capias ad satisfaciendum lies, and
there also the King shall have a Capias pro fine; And with this agrees 8 H. 6.
9. 35 H. 6. 6. 22. E. 4. 22. 40 E. 3. 25. 49. E. 3. 2. and many other books;
Howbeit by the Statutes of Marlbridge cap. 23. and Westminster. 2. cap. 11. a Capias
was given in account (for at the Common Law the process in account was
distress infinite) and after by the Statute of 25 E. 3. cap. 17. Such process
was given in debt, as in account, etc. And as concerning the other abovesaid
Writs of execution, viz. a Levari facias, and a fieri facias, they ought to be
sued within the year after the Judgment, or the Recognisance acknowledged,
otherwise at the Common Law the Plaintiff or Conusee was driven to his writ of
debt: Howbeit now by the statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 45. a Scire facias is given,
and by the statute of West. 2. cap. 18. Cum debitum fuerit recuperatum, etc.
the Elegit is given for a moity of the land, etc. which was the first Act, that
subjected land to the execution of a Judgment or of a Recognisance, which is
in the nature of a Judgment ( F. N. B. 265. g.) And by the Statute of 13 E. 1.
De mercatoribus, 27 E. 3. cap. 9. and 23 H. 8. cap. 6. upon a Statute Merchant,
or Staple, all the lands which the Conusor has at the time of the Conusance,
shall be extended, in whose hands soever they afterward come, etc. Howbeit in
debt against the heir upon an obligation made by the Ancestor, the Plaintiff by
the Common Law shall have all the land, which descends unto him, in execution
against him, and yet he shall not have execution of any part thereof against
the father himself; but the reason hereof is, because otherwise the Plaintiff
would be without remedy; for the Common Law gives an action of debt against
the heir, and then if he might not have execution of the land against the heir,
he should reap no fruit by his action; because the Chattels of the debtor
belong to the Executors or Administrators, etc.

Goods too high appraysed, delivered to the appraysors.
3 The Statute of 13 E. 1. Pl. Co. 82. b. 3. in Partridge verse Strange and
Croker.
(called the Statute merchant) binds all the lands of the Conisor to the
execution, and provides, that they shall be delivered to the Conisee upon
reasonable extent, and speaks not a word of the delivering them to the
extendors, in case they extend them too high; yet they shall be delivered to
the extendors, in that case, by the equity of the Statute of Acton Burnel made
before ( viz. anno 11 E. 1.) which says, that the goods praised too high shall
be delivered to the Praysors themselves at the rate they set them; For reason
requires, that they should be punished by the same means, that they intended
to to punish others. Vide Max. 57. 44. and 57.

Adonibezek.
4 Quum autem fugerat Adonibezek, L. Jud. cap 1. ver. 6, 7.
persecuti sunt eum (Israelitae) and prehendentes eum, amputarunt pollices
manuum ejus, and pedum ejus, tum dixit Adonibezek septuaginta rege, pollicibus
mannum suarum, and pedum suorum amputatis; colligebant sub mensa mea;
quemadmodum feci, sic rependit mihi deus, etc.

59 Omne majus continet in se minus.
Co. Inst. pars 1 44 b. 1.
1 Albeit by the Statute of 13 El. cap. 10. Grants of Ecclesiastical persons.
Ecclesiastical persons are in express terms restrained from making any
estates of the lands, which they hold in right of their Bishoprics, Colleges,
Churches, etc. other then for one and twenty years, and three lives from the
making of them, yet may they make Leases for lesser term or fewer lives, etc.
25.

Co. ib. 45. b. 3.
2 In the Kings case this word Committo does amount sometimes to a grant as when
he says, Commissimus de W. de B. officium Seneschalliae, Commission imports a
Lease.
etc. quam diu nobis placuerit, and by that word also he may make a Lease; and
therefore a fortiori a common person may do the same.

Co. ib. 52. b. 1. Hill. 39 El. inter Stanton and Barnes in B. R. and Co. l. 3.
9. a. 3. Heydons case and l. 4. 23. a. Gravenors case.
3 A custom of a Manor, time out of mind used, Copihold grantable in fee may
be granted for a lesser term.
was to grant certain lands, parcel of the said Manor, in Fee-simple, and
never any grant was made to any and the heirs of his body, for life, or for
years; And the Lord of the said Manor did grant to one by Copy for life, the
remainder over to another, and the heirs of his body: And it was adjudged, that
the grant and remainder over was good; for the Lord having authority by
Custom, and an interest withal, might grant any lesser estate; because in
this case the Custom, that enableth him to the greater enableth him to the
lesser, Omne majus continet, etc. It is otherwise where one has but a bare
authority, etc. 17.

Co. ib. 68. a. 1.
4 Fealty is a part of Homage, and incident unto it; because all the words of
Fealty are comprehended within Homage.

Co. ib. 223. a. 3.
5 A man before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum might have made a feofment
in fee, and added further, Restrain^ to alien good.
that if he or his heirs did alien without license, that he should pay a fine,
at that time this had been good; So likewise it is said, that then the Lord
might have restrained the alienation of his Tenant by Condition; because the
Lord had then a possibility of reverter; And therefore it is so still at this
day in the Kings case; because he may reserve a tenure to himself, etc.

Littl.. 418. Co. ibid. 25 3. a. 4.
6 When a man makes a feofment of lands lying in several towns within the same
County, Claim in p^^ good for all (...) the same County.
Livery of Seisin given of the land lying in one of those towns in name of all
the rest, lying in the other towns, will pass the estate of all to the
Feoffee; And therefore a fortiori it seems good reason, when a man has title
of entry into lands or tenements lying in diverse towns within the same County
before any entry by him made, that by entry into parcel thereof in the name of
all, the seisin of all is vested in him, as well as if he had actually entered
into every parcel: For, if it be so in a feofment passing a new right, much
more it is for the restitution of an ancient right, as the worthier and more
respected in Law, etc.

Co. ibid. 260. a. 3.
7 If a man in prison shall not be bound by a recovery upon default for want of
answer in a Court of Record in a real action, A prisoner (...) bound for a
default.
which is mattter of Record; A multo fortiori a descent in pais, which is a
matter of Deed, shall not for want of claim bind him that is in prison, etc.

Co. ibid.
8 As the argument a minore ad majus does ever hold affirmatively, Major and
^nor: Negati^ Affirmative.
so the argument a majore ad minus, does ever hold negatively, and the reason
hereof is this, Quod in minori valet, valebit in majori; and quod in majori non
valet, nec valebit in minori.

Co. Inst. pars 1 262. Littl.. 441.
9 At the Common Law before the Statute of Non-claim (Anno 34 E. 3. cap. 16.)
and in the Stat. of 4 H. 7. cap. 24. One out of the Realm not barred by a
descent.
If a man that had tit^e of entry into lands, had not laid his claim within a
year and a day, after a fine le^yed of the same land, he had lost the land for
ever; Howbeit in that case, if he that had such right were out of the Realm at
the time of the fine levied, his title had been thereby saved: And if against a
fine which is a matter of record, the title of a stranger shall be in that case
saved, much more against a descent, which is a matter in fait, shall the entry
of him that is out of the Realm at the time of the descent cast, etc. be
preserved; so that he may well enter at his return, notwithstanding such
descent, etc.

^elease of all ^emands dis^argeth all ^ctions, etc.
10 If the Plaintiff after judgment release all demands, Co. ib. 291. a. 4 and
b. Littl.. 508.
the execution is discharged: Also by a release of all demands, all actions
real, personal, and mixed, are discharged. Likewise Appeals, title or right of
entry, Rent-service, Rentcharge, Rent-seck, Common of Pasture, etc. A
warranty, which is a Covenant real, and all other Covenants real and personal,
Estovers, all manner of Commons, and profits apprender, Conditions before they
be broken or performed, and also after; Annuities, Recognisances, Statutes
Merchant, and of the Staple, Obligations, Contracts, etc. All these and diverse
others by the word Demands, are released and discharged; because that word,
being of so large an extent, contains them all, etc.

^o disseisin of ^ent without ^ornment.
11 A Disseisor cannot disseise the Lord of the rents and services without the
attornment of the Tenants to the Disseisor; Co. ib. 322. b. 4.
For seeing an attornment is requisite to a feoffment, and other lawful
conveyances; A Fortiori, a Disseisor, or other wrong doer shall not gain them
without attornment; The like law is of an Abator and an Intruder.

^etenced ^ht.
12 Where the Stat. of 32 H. 8. cap. 9. Co. ib. 369 a. 4. Vide infra 40.
(made for the suppression of Maintenance) prohibiteth buying, selling, etc. of
any pretenced rights or titles in the plural number; nevertheless any one
right is within that Statute, etc. Pl. Co. 83. and 86. Partridges case. Vide 40.

^anslaughter.
13 By a pardon of murder, Man-slaugther is also pardoned. Finch 21. Finch,
ibid.


^taint.
14 An attaint supposing a Verdict to have passed before two Justices, whereas
it passed before four, is good enough.

^covery.
15 A recovery pleaded of three acres where it was of six, Finch, ibid.
is good enough.

^ndition.
16 A condition, that I shall not enfeoff I. S. is broken, Finch, ibid.
if I enfeoff I. S. and I. D.

^pihold.
17 A Copyholder of a Manor, Finch, ibid.
where the custom gives liberty to demise in fee, may demise for any less
estate without other prescription. Vide 3.

^^ise.
18 Where the custom is, 18 E. 3. 8.
that a man shall not devise his lands for any higher estate than for term of
life; Yet if a devise be made in fee, and the Devisee claim but for life, the
devise is good. Finch 21.

^iso.
19 By the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 1. 2, and 3 P. and M. Dyer 150. b.
that gives power to devise two parts of ones land, a devise of the whole had
been good for two parts, although the Stat. of Explanations (34 and 35 H. 8.
cap. 5.) had not been made. Finch 21.

^mes ^ure.
20 An estate of Fee-simple conveyed to the Feme for her jointure, Co. l. 4. 3.
b. Vernons case.
and in satisfaction of her Dower is a jointure within the equity of 27 H. 8.
For if an estate for life be a competent livelihood for her, much more an
estate in Fee-simple, etc. Sir Morris Denurs case. Dyer 8 El. 248.

^hold, wi^ estate.
21 Where the custom of a Copihold Manor is to grant Copihold lands for one,
two, or three lives, Co. l. 4. 29. b. 4.
there a grant to a Feme Durante viduitate is good; for that is a less estate,
and therefore included in the other, etc. Downs case.

^nt in^ con^
22 This word ( Attaint of murder) in the Statute of 3 H. 7. cap. 1. Co. l. 4.
46. a. 4. in Kath. Wrote^ case.
shall not be meant only of a person that has judgment of life, but also
extended to a person convicted by confession or verdict; for a person attaint
is a person convict and more. 36.

Co. l. 4 106. a. 4. in Adams. and Lamberts case.
23 Albeit by the express words of 1 E. 6. cap. 14. Superstitious uses.
Estates in Fee-simple (given to superstitious uses) seem only to be given to
the King, (for the words are, To the finding of a Priest to have continuance
for ever, etc.) yet that Stat. by construction extends also to every less
estate, as to an estate in tail for life, etc.

Co. l. 5. pars 1. 6. b. 4. The Kings Ecclesiastical law.
24 If by the proviso of 1 Eliz. cap. 2. The high Commission may censure
depravers of the Common Prayer.
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of Archbishops, Bishops, and other inferior
Officers is saved; so that they may still punish by deprivation and other
Ecclesiastical censures, all such as shall deprave the book of Common Prayer,
notwithstanding by the same Act there is other provision made for the
punishment of such offenders before temporal Magistrates; Much more shall high
Commissioners (authorized by another Statute of the same year, cap. 1.) have
power to inflict due punishment for the like offense; albeit in the said Act of
1 Eliz. cap. 2. there be no such provision made for them, as for Bishops, etc.
Because, Cui licet, quod majus est, non debet, quod minus est, non licere.

Co. l. 5. 6. b. 1. The Lord Mountjoys case.
25 The words of the Statute of 1 Eliz. concerning leases to be made by Bishops,
etc. are these, other then for the term of 21 years, Leases by t^^ Clergy.
or three lives (without saying, or under) and yet a lease for a less term is
good: There is also the same exposition of the Stat. of the 13 Eliz. cap. 10.
whereof the words (as to that point) are the same. 1.

Co. l. 5. 29. b. 4. in Princes case.
26 In Princes case, in the 5 Rep. it was said, Administration of bo^^ Notabilis.
that it was adjudged in a case between Vere and Jeffres in tempore Reg. Eliz.
That where one had goods only in an inferior Diocese, yet the Metropolitan
of the same Province pretending that he had bona Notabilia in diverse Diocesses,
committed the administration, etc. This administration was not void; but only
voidable by sentence; because the Metropolitan has jurisdiction over all the
Diocesses within his Province: But if an Ordinary of a Diocese commit the
administration of the goods, when the party has bona Notabilia in diverse
Diocesses, such administration is merely void, as well to the goods within his
own Diocese, as elsewhere; because he can by no means have jurisdiction of the
cause.

Co. l. 5. 91. a. 1. in Hoes case.
27 A man assigns a debt unto Queen Eliz. by deed enrolled in satisfaction of a
debt due to her from him, as Collector of the Fifteens, Three include (...)
with proviso, that if the Lord Treasurer, and the Barons of the Exchequer, or
any two of them, for some reasonable cause should disallow and revoke the same,
that then it should be void: In this case revocation by three of the Barons
shall be sufficient; for if three does it, two does it at least, etc.

Co. l 5. 115. a. 1. in Wades case.
28 If a man tender more money then he ought to pay, Tender (...) greater f^^^.
that is good enough; for Omne majus continet in se minus, and the other ought
to receive so much thereof, as is due unto him: Quando plus fit, quam fieri
d^bet, videtur etiam illud fieri, quod faciendum est: Et in majore summa
continetur minor.

29 In the general pardon of the 28 of Eliz. Burglary was excepted; Attainder
(...) Burglary ^doned.
and thereupon the Judges were then moved, Co. l. 6. 13. a. 4. in the cases of
pardon. H. 29 Eliz.
whether the attainder of Burglary was thereby also excepted; And it was
resolved that it was; For if Burglary it self was excepted, while it was yet
doubtful, whether it would be found Burglary, or no, and before it did appear
to the eye of the Law to be so; a fortiori when Burglary appears upon record by
judgment of Law, it shall be excepted.

Co. l. 6. 56. a. 1. in the Lord Chandos case.
30 By the grant of the Manor, without this word, of the reversion, By the
(...) Manor (...) version p^seth.
the reversion shall pass, albeit at that time the Grantor had not the Manor
in possession, but in revension; for this word Manor includes all estates, and
degrees of estates, of or in the Manor: As if A. gives the Manor of B. to B.
in tail, and after the Donor is attainted of treason, whereby the King is
seized of the reversion, and after by his Letters patents grants Manerium de D.
to another and his heirs; In this case albeit the King grants the Manor of D.
is in possession, yet the reversion shall pass; for the King has an estate (
viz. the reversion in fee) grantable in him, and the estate tail of the common
person need not be recited, etc.

The King not deceived.
31 If the King be Tenant pur auter vie, Co. l. 7. 12. a. 4. in Englefeilds case.
and makes a lease for forty years; Here, albeit the King (having but an estate
pur auter vie) cannot absolutely contract for a lease of forty years; yet
without any recital or mention of the estate for life, the lease is good; for
the lease for years is in judgment of Law, less than a lease pur auter vie,
and the King does no wrong or prejudice to any by such a demise, neither yet is
he deceived in his grant, because, in judgment of Law, that is a lease for
forty years, if Cestuy que vie shall so long live, etc.

Fine in a court Leet.
32 If for an amerciament upon an offense committed out of a Court Leet and
found by the Jury (whereof the Jury only have conisance and for which they
only are to impose the amerciament) the Lord of the Leet has power to
distrain, Co. l. 8. 41. a. 4. in Greisleys case.
etc. Much more for a fine imposed by the Steward in Court for some contempt,
etc. committed in the Court it self (and whereof the Steward only has
conisance) shall the Lord, etc. distrain the goods of the party offending, and
impound them, etc. or else make sale thereof at his election, etc.

A lease for years less than an estate for life.
33 If a man upon a grant reserve unto himself power to make leases, so that
they shall not exceed 21 years, or three lives; In that case, Co. l. 8 70 b. in
Whitlocks case.
he may make leases of 99 years, if any three shall so long live; because such
a lease exceeds not three lives, but is in truth less; for an estate for
years, which is but a Chattel, is less in estimation of Law, than an estate
for life, which is a Franktenement.

An Officer may make a Deputy.
34 When an Officer has power to make assigns, he has power, Co. l. 9. 48. b.
4. in the Earl of Shrewsburies case.
implicit, to make Deputies; For, Cui licet, quod majus est, non debet, quod
minus est, non licere. And therefore when an office of Stewardship, or the
like, is granted to one and his heirs, he may thereby make an Assignee, and (by
consequent) also a Deputy, etc.

An arrest within the liberties of London.
35 In Mackallyes case in the 9 Rep. exception was taken to the Indictment, viz.
that the precept was to arrest the Defendant, Co. l. 9. 67. a. 1. in Mackallyes
case.
Si inventus foret infra libertates Civitatis praedicti (viz. London) And the
Indictment was, Quid in parochia Sancti Martini Bowyer Row in Warda de
Farringdon infra Londinum praedict. the Sergeant arrested him, and so he
pursued not the precept; for the precept was infra libertates London: But
notwithstanding that exception the Indictment was resolved to be good; because
the said Parish and Ward in London shall be intended to be within the liberties
of London; For these words, liberties of London have a larger extent, than the
word London, and do include in them the City of London it self, etc.

Justices of the Kings Bench are Justices of Gaol delivery, and Oyer and
Terminer.
36 The Justices of the K. Bench are taken to be within the words of ye stat. of
2 E. 6. cap. 24. (which ordains, Co. l. 9. 118. b 2. in the Lord Sanchiers case.
that for the trial of accessaries in another County, than where the principal
was indicted, Certificat of the Indictment of the principal shall be made to
the Justices of Jail delivery or of Oyer and Terminer; before whom the
accessory is to be tried, etc.) for that the Justices of the K. Bench are the
sovereign Justices of Gaol delivery, and of Oyer and Terminer; and therefore
they are included within the same words; And upon the same ground it is holden,
in 7 E. 4. 18. and 4 H. 7. 18. that if an indictment of forcible entry be
removed into the Kings Bench, the Justices of that Bench shall award
restitution, and yet the S^at. of 8 H. 6. cap. 9. speaks only of Justices of
Peace; but the reason is, because the Justices of the Kings Bench have
sovereign and supreme authority in such cases: And therefore in the Lord
Sanchiers case in the 9 Rep. the Justices of the Kings Bench wrote (according
to the said Act of 2 E. 6.) to the Justices of Jail delivery in London, before
whom the Principal was tried, etc. who thereupon certified the record
accordingly, etc.

Co. l. 11. 60. a. 3 Doctor Fosters case.
37 The Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. which ordains, Attaint mo^^ than convi^^.
that every person, etc. being lawfully convicted of not going to Church, etc.
shall forfeit xx l. per mensem, etc. seems to intend only conviction by
verdict; because that being a penal Law shall not be understood by equity; Yet
in that case he, against whom any judgment is given, either upon a Nihil
dicit, or upon an insufficient plea pleaded, and demurrer thereupon, is convict
within the purview of the same Stat. For albeit this will not follow, Such a
man is convict, therefore he is also attaint, and judgment is given against
him; Yet this is a good consequence, Such a man is attainted, or adjudged,
ergo, he is convict: For he that is attainted, or against whom judgment is
given, is convict, and more, etc. 22.

F. N. B. 56. 1.
38 In a writ of Waste, if the premises thereof rehearse, Quare, Waste.
cum de Communi Concilio regni nostri Angliae provisum sit, quod non liceat
alicui facere vastum, etc. in terris, domibus, boscis, and gardinis; And in the
end of the same Writ it is alleged, quod defendens vastum fecit in terris
only, or in boscis only, or in houses only; yet is the Writ good; For omne
majus continet in se minus, etc.

F. N. B. 136. f.
39 If the Tenant holds by the services, Tenure.
by which the Mesne holds over, and also by some other, this is good equality
to have acquital, because it is such and more, etc.

F. N. B. 150. p.
40 Glanvile says, that ad ostium ecclesiae, Dower ad ^^um.
man cannot assign for dower more, than a third part, and if he does, the Feme
shall be admeasured; Howbeit he may well assign her less; Omne majus, etc.

Pl. Co. 83. a. 2. Partridges case. Co. Inst. pars 1. 369. a. 4.
41 Where the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 9. Pretenced title, etc.
prohibiteth the buying or selling of any pretenced rights or titles in the
plural number; yet the buying or selling of any one right or title is also
prohibited by the same Statute; for the singular is included in the plural. Pl.
Co. 86. b. 3. per Hales, Partridges case. Vide supra 12.

Pl. Co. 86. a. 4. in Partridges case per Hales.
42 The Statute of the 1 H. 5. cap. 3. recites, Entry into land.
that some people do of late use to forge diverse false deeds and muniments,
etc. And therefore it ordaines, that the party so grieved, may have his suit in
that case, etc. Here, that Statute speaks of false deeds, etc. in the plural
number; yet if a man forge one false deed only, he shall incur the penalty
of that Statute: So likewise the Statute of 5 R. 2. cap. 7. forbids, that none
shall make entry into any lands or tenements, except in case, where entry is
given by the Law; Yet if one enter only into one tenement, he shall be
punished; notwithstanding that Statute is in the plural number; for the plural
number contains in it the singular number and more, etc.

Pl. Co. 87. a. 3. Partridges case.
43 Where the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 9. prohibits the buying, Pretenced (...)
to a lease.
etc. of any pretenced rights, etc. a lease for years is prohibited, as well as
an estate in fee, in tail, or for life; for under the word (any) the less
estate shall be contained in the greater: So also the Statute of 23 H. 6.
Sheriffs.
cap. 10. prohibits that no Sheriff shall let to farm in any manner his
County, etc. whereby he is restrained to let to farm any part of his County,
because the less is contained in the greater, etc.

Co. l. 5 pars 1. 34. b. 4. in the K. Ecclesiastical law.
44 It was adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas by Dyer, Weston, Ecclesiastical
persons may resign to the King.
and the whole Court, that a Deane or any other Ecclesiastical person may
resign to the King, as diverse did to King E. 6. because the King has the
authority of the supreme Ordinary; For, Cui licet, quod majus est, non debet,
quod minus est, non licere.

Co. Inst. pars 1 129. a. 2,
45 If the King by his prerogative may make one, An alien ma^denizen.
that is an alien born, an absolute Denizen, viz. Quod ille in omnibus
tractetur, reputetur, habeatur teneatur, and gubernetur, tanquam ligens noster,
infra dictum regnum nostrum Angliae or^undus, etc. a fortiori he may grant to
such an Alien a particular denization, viz. Quod in quibusdam curiis suis
Angliae audiatur ut Anglus, and quod non repellatur per illam exceptionem, quod
sit Alienigena, and natus in partibus transmarinis, etc. to enable him to sue
only; or may grant him a denization sub condition, etc.

Devise for Executors shall sell.
46 If a man devises his land to A. for life, Co. ib. 112. b. 3.
and that after his decease it shall be sold by his Executors generally, and
make three or four Executors, and during the life of A. one of the Executors
dies, and then A. dies, the other two or three Executors may sell; for the
greater number includes the less, and the plural number of Executors still
remains, whereby the words of the Will are also satisfied; It is otherwise, if
(before the Statute of 21 H. 8. 4.) he had made but two Executors, and one had
died, or if he had made I. S. I. N. and I. D. his Executors by name, and one of
them had died, for then the words of the Will had not been satisfied, which in
such case giving but a bare power must be thereby observed: so also if he had
devised it to be sold by his sons in law (being three) and one dies, the other
two might have sold it, but not if there had been only two, and one die, or
refuse before sale. Vide Rule 110. 21. Isabel Goodcheaps case, 49 E. 3.

Arbitrament.
47 The submission to an award betwixt A. and B. was general, Co. l. 8 98. a. 2.
Baspoles case.
viz. of all actions, etc. and the award was, that A. should pay B. 20 pound:
And (in this case) it was objected, that it did not appear, that the matter of
the arbitrament was the matter only that was betwixt them, because the
submission was general of all actions, demands etc. And therefore if the
arbitrament were not made of all the matters in controversy, the Award was
void: But the Award was adjudged good, because when the submission is general
of all actions, etc. Generale nihil certi implicat; and therefore it stands
well with the generality of the words, that there was but one cause depending
in controversy betwixt them; And Omne majus continet in se minus. But it is
otherwise, where the submission is of certain things in special, etc.

Waste.
48 The Lessee covenants to cut no trees, Dyer 115. b. ^7 1, 2 P. M.
and gives bond to perform covenants, the Lessee cuts ten trees, and the Lessor
sues him upon the bond, and assigns for breach the cutting of twenty trees, he
pleads that he did not cut twenty trees, upon which they are at issue, and the
Jury found that he cut only ten; yet judgment was given for the Plaintiff;
for the other ten trees were but surplusage, and omne majus, etc.

Lease by a ^rebend.
49 A Prebend of Sarum makes a lease for seventy years, the Bishop, Dyer 338.
43. 17 Eliz.
Deane, and Chapter confirm (the Bishop being Patron and Ordinary) for 50 years
and no more; In this case, the demise and all contained in the Indenture was
adjudged good for 50 years.

60 Additio probat minoritatem.
^e is Fee-^^mple.
1 When you find it said in any Book, Co. Inst. pars 1. 189. a. 3.
that a man is seized in fee without saying more, it shall be understood in
Fee-simple; and not in Fee-taile, unless there be but unto it such an
Addition, Fee-taile, etc. And therefore in Heraldry the younger sons give the
differences. And in France by Monsieur (without any addition or other title) is
to be understood the Kings only brother, and by Madame (without more) the
Kings only sister; and therefore they are said in French to be Monsieur sans
queue, and Madame sans queue, viz. without any other addition or title: But if
there be in France any occasion of naming any other Lord or Lady, they are
always named with their proper and peculiar title, as Monsieur de Longeville,
Madame de Chevreuse, etc.

61 A matter of higher nature determines a matter of lower nature, and contra.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 83. a. 4.
1 If a Tenant by Castle-guard do serve the King in his war, Castle-gua^^
he shall be discharged against the Lord, according to the quantity of the time
that he was in the Kings host.

Co. ib. 115. a. 3
2 If there be any sufficient proof of record or writing against a prescription,
A record, or writing qua^eth a ^rescr^ption.
albeit such a record or writing exceed the memory or proper knowledge of any
man, yet are they within memory of man, and shall quash the prescription for a
matter in writing shall determine a matter in fait; and a record or sufficient
matter in writing are good memorials: and therefore it is said, litera scripta
manet, and when we will by any record or writing commit the memory of any thing
to posterity, the phrase is, tradere memoriae, etc.

21 H. 7. 5.
3 A man has liberties by prescription, The like.
and after takes a grant of those liberties by Letters Patents from the King,
this determines the prescription, for a matter in writing determines a matter
in fait. Finch 22. Co. l. 6. 45. a. 4. Higgens case. Vide ib. parl. auth.

33 H. 8. Dyer 50. Pl. 4.
4 If an offense, which is murder at the Common Law, Murder d^^ned by treason.
be made treason, no appeal shall lie of it; because the offense of murder is
drowned, and it is punishable as treason only, whereof no appeal lies, etc.
Finch 2^.

Co. ib. 41. b. 4.
5 If A. be Tenant for life, the remainder or reversion to B. for life, Tenant
for life may s^^render to the reversioner (...) life.
in this case A. may surrender to B. For, the estate of B. for term of his own
life, is higher than an estate for another man's life; and therefore if Tenant
for life enfeoff him in the remainder for life, this is a surrender and no
forfeiture; And generally from this ground it is, that estates of lower nature
are drowned in others of higher nature, when they meet together in one and the
same person: Hereupon also arises extinguishment between Lord and Tenant, etc.

Co. l. 541. a. 2. in Sparrows case.
6 If a man bring an action of Debt by bill in London, or Norwich, Suit in a
lower Court abates not (...) in an high^.
or in any other inferior Court, and after bring a writ of Debt in the Common
Pleas, that suit in the higher Court, which is purchased hanging the suit in an
inferior Court, shall not abate, as appears in 7 H. 4 8. and 3 H. 6. 15. Vide
43 E. 3. 22. and 7 H. 4. 44. Briminghams case.

Co. l. 6. 45. a. 2. in Higgins case.
7 After judgment upon an obligation for Debt, A Iudgmen^ destroys a bond.
so long as that judgment remains in force, the Plaintiff cannot have a new
action upon that obligation; For, as when a man has a debt by simple contract,
if he take an obligation for the same debt, or for any part thereof, that
taking of the obligation determines the former contract (3 H. 4. 17. 11 H. 4.
9. 9 E. 3. 50, 51.) So when a man has a debt upon an obligation, and by the
ordinary course of Law has judgment thereupon, the contract by specialty,
which is of a lower nature, is by the judgment of the Law changed into a
matter of record, which is of an higher nature. Vide 56. 4.

Co. l. 6. 45. a. 4. ibid.
8 If a man has an annuity by deed or prescription, The like.
and bring a writ of Annuity, and has judgment; So long as this judgment
remains in force, he shall never have a writ of Annuity more, albeit the
Annuity be of inheritance; but shall in that case have a Scire facias upon that
judgment; because the matter of specialty or prescription is altered by the
judgment into a thing of an higher nature. Vide 37 H. 6. 13. Judgment in an
action of forging a false deed is a good bar in another action upon the same
forger: But if recovery be in debt upon an obligation per Justicies; there
notwithstanding such judgment, the Plaintiff may have an action of debt upon
the same obligation in a Court of Record; For the County Court being not a
Court of Record, the obligation is not by a judgment in that Court changed
into any other thing of an higher nature; but so long as such judgment remains
in force, the Plaintiff shall not have any other action upon the same
obligation by Justicies in the same Court: M. 2. Jac. Roll. 3172. in Com. Banco.
11 H. 4. Br. Faits 19.
Howbeit if a man be indebted upon an obligation, and afterward acknowledge a
Statute Staple for the same debt, and in full satisfaction of the said
obligation, in that case the Creditor may sue which of them he pleases; for a
Statute Staple or obligation in nature thereof, is but an obligation recorded;
and an obligation, be it of record, or not of record, cannot drown another:
Also a bare obligation, and an obligation in nature of a Statute Staple, are
two distinct bonds made by assent of the parties without process of Law,
whereof the one has no dependence upon the other, but in an action brought
upon an obligation, the suit is grounded upon the obligation, as the edifice
upon a foundation, and the Plaintiff has judgment to recover the debt due by
the same obligation; so that by a judicial proceeding and act in Law, the debt
due by the obligation is transformed and metamorphosed into a matter of record;
And a judgment in a Court of Record is a higher matter, than a Statute Staple,
Statute Merchant, or any recognisance acknowledged by assent of parties,
without judicial proceeding.

No Oyer and Termin. where the K. Bench s^ts.
9 In the Lord Sanchiers case in the 9 Rep. it was moved, Co. l. 9 118. b. 3. in
the Lord Sanchiers case. and in the case of the Marshalsie. Co. li. 10. 73. b.
4.
whether the said Lord Sanchier might not, in the Term-time, be indicted,
arraigned, and convicted at Newgate before Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer,
for the County of Middlesex, and it was resolved that he could not; For the
Kings Bench is more than an Eire, and therefore in the Term-time no
Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, or of Jail delivery, by the Common Law,
may sit in the same County, where the Kings Bench sits; because in praesentia
majoris, cessat potestas minoris: And with this accords the 27 Assizes, Pl. 1.
But Carlisle and Inweng, the two Confederates of the Lord Sanchier, were
indicted and attainted in London, where the murder was committed, before
Justices of Oyer and Terminer, in the Term-time; because it was in another
County, than where the Kings Bench sat.

No Marshalsie where the K. Bench sits.
10 At the Common Law the Court of Marshalsie had jurisdiction of Pleas of the
Crown, and had a general authority in effect, Co. l. 10. 71. a. and 73. b. in
the case of the Marshalsie.
as Justices in Eire had; for they were in part the Vicegerents of the Chief
Justice of England within the Vierge: Howbeit after that by the Statute of 28
E. 1. cap. 5. the Justices of the Kings Bench were enjoined to follow the
Court, the general authority of that Court as to those purposes vanished;
because they being only the Vicegerents of the Chief Justice, in his presence
their authority ought to cease, for, in presentia majoris, cessat potestas
minoris, etc,

An entaile extinct in a Fee-simple.
11 Sir Thomas Wyat being seized of diverse Manors in tail, Dyer 115. 65, 66.
1, 2 P. M.
the remainder in H. 8. in fee in the beginning of Queen Mary's reign forfeits
them for treason, whereby they escheat to the Queen. In this case, the estate
tail was utterly extinct, and the Queen is in of her ancient Fee-simple
executed, for she cannot be in of the Fee-simple determinable upon the entaile,
because then there would be two Fee-simples in the Qu: which is absurd; And
therefore rather than so, the entaile shall be merged in the Queens ancient
Fee-simple.

Error.
12 An Exigent is returnable by the roll Octabis Mich. but the writ of Exigent
was returnable Mense, Dyer 211. 32. 4 Eliz.
and the Defendant was outlawed betwixt Octabis and Mense, and this was
adjudged error; because the roll is of more credit than the writ, and
determines it.

62 The more worthy thing draws unto it things of less worthiness.
Finch, 23.
1 The body of a man is more worthy than land, The body more worthy than land.
therefore land shall follow the nature of the person, as a Villein shall make
free land to be Villein-land; but Villein-land shall not make a free man to be
a Villein: So likewise the Kings land, which he has in his natural capacity,
Co. Inst. pars 1. 15. b. 3.
shall be demeaned according to the privilege and prerogatives of his body
royal: As if the King has issue a son and a daughter by one Venture, and a
son by another Venture, and purchases lands and dies, and the eldest son
enters and dies without issue, the daughter shall not inherit those lands, nor
any other Fee-simple lands of the Crown; but the younger brother shall have
them: Where note, that neither possessio fratris does hold of lands, which are
the possessions belonging to the Crown; neither yet does Half-bloud make any
impediment to the descent of lands of the Crown, as it fell out in experience
after the decease of E. 6. to Queen Mary, and from Queen Mary to Queen Eliz.
both which were of the half blood, and yet inherited not only the lands which
King Edward and Queen Mary purchased, but also the ancient lands parcel of the
Crown. A man, that is King by descent on the part of his mother, purchases
lands to him and his heirs, and dies without issue, this land shall descend to
the heir of the part of the mother; whereas, in the case of a Subject, the
heir of the part of the father shall have them: So King Henry the eighth
purchased lands to him and his heirs, having issue two daughters, Queen Mary,
and Queen Eliz. and after the decease of E. 6. the eldest daughter Queen Mary
did inherit only all the lands in Fee-simple; for the eldest daughter or
sister of a King shall inherit all his Fee-simple lands: So it is also if the
King purchases lands of the custom of Gavelkind, and die having issue diverse
sons, the eldest son shall only inherit those lands: And the reason of all
these cases is (as before is said) for that the quality of the person does in
these and many other like cases alter the descent, so as all the lands and
possessions, whereof the King is seized in jure Coronae, shall secundum jus
Coronae attend upon and follow the Crown; And therefore to whomsoever the Crown
descends, those lands and possessions shall descend also; For, the Crown and
the lands, whereof the King is seized in jure Coronae, are Concomitantia: And
the lands and possessions belonging to the Crown do follow and attend upon the
Crown, as upon the more worthy, etc.

Co. ib. 43. a. 4.
2 When the Royal body politic of the King does meet with the natural capacity
in one person, The King no minor.
the whole body shall have the quality of the Royal politic, which is the
greater and more worthy; For Omne majus trahit ad se quod minus est: And
therefore, in judgment of Law, the King, Co. ib. 16. a. 1.
as King, cannot be said to be a Minor; because in the Royal body politic
there can be no minority: So likewise if the right heir of the Crown be
attainted of Treason, yet shall the Crown descend to him, and (eo instante)
without any other reversal, the attainder is utterly avoided as it fell out in
the case of H. 7. etc.

Co. ib. 87. b. 3.
3 If a man be seized of a Rentcharge, Rent-seck, Things in grant follow land.
Common of p^sture, or such like inheritance which do not lie in tenure, and
dies, his heir being within the age of 24 years; In this case the heir may
choose his Guardian,; but if he hold lands in soccage together with such like
inheritances; Then shall the Guardian in soccage not only take into his hand
the lands holden in soccage, but such inheritances also; because he has the
custody of the heir, etc.

Co. ib. 114. b. 2.
4 Albeit a man cannot prescribe to have bona and catalla proditorum, Of felons
goods no perscription.
faelonum, etc. yet may they, or the like privileges be had obliquely (or by a
mean) by prescription; For a County Palatine may be claimed by prescription,
and by reason thereof to have bona and catalla Proditorum, felonum, etc.

^he grant of a ^annor pas^eth services., (...).
5 Whatsoever passes by livery of seisin, either in deed or in Law, Co. ib.
121. b. 2
may pass without deed, and not only the rents and services (parcel of the
Manor) shall with the demesnes (as the more principal and worthy) pass by
livery without deed; but likewise all other things regardant, appendant, and
appertinent to the Manor (as incidents and adjuncts to the same) shall
together with the Manor pass without deed, and all these shall so pass
without saying, cum appertinentiis.

Privileges ^^nct.
6 If A. be seized of a Manor, Co. ib. 121. b. 4.
whereunto the franchise of waife and stray, and the like are appendant, and
the King purchases the Manor with the appurtenances; Now are these Royal
franchises remitted to the Crown, and not any longer appendant to the Manor,
etc.

Common Law and Franchise.
7 When a matter alleged extends into a place at the Common Law, and likewise
into a place within a Franchise, Co. ib. 125. b. 3.
it shall be tried at the Common Law.

An Assise in Confi^io Comi^tus at the Common law.
8 Before the Statute of 7 R. 2. cap. 10. Co. ib. 154. a. 1.
no Assise in confinia Comitatus lay at the Common Law for the recovery of rent
issuing out of lands that lay in several Counties; but for a Common of Pasture,
Turbary, Piscary, Estovers, and the like in one County, appendant or
appurtenant to land in another County, an Assise in confinio Comitatus did lie
at the Common Law; because the land as the more worthy drew them to it; But
land could not be appendant or appurtenant to land; And so it is of a Nuisance
done in one County, to lands lying in another County; For, in that case also,
the like Assise did lie at the Common Law etc.

^elease of one ^ynter shall ^^e prejudice ^^e other.
9 If three Ioyntenants be disseised, and they arraign an Assise, Co. ib. 285.
a. 4. and Co. l. 2. 68. a. 4. in Tookers case. 30 H. 6. Bar. 59. 45 E. 3. 10.
and one of them release to the Disseisor all actions personal, this shall
bar that Ioyntenant, but it shall not bar the other two Plaintiffs; For
having regard to them, the realty shall be preferred, and Omne majus trahit ad
se minus dignum: And in a writ of Ward brought by two, the release of the one
shall not grieve the other, but shall enure to his benefit; For he shall
recover the whole Ward, and hold his Companion out, etc.

10 In Law there are three kinds of rights, Jus proprietatis, Co. ib. 266. a. 2.
Jus possessionis, and Jus proprietatis and possessionis, and this last is
anciently called Jus duplicatum, or Droit, Droit: For example, if a man be
disseised of an acre of land, the Disseisee has Jus proprietatis, the
Disseisor Jus possessionis, and if the Disseisee release to the Disseisor, he
then has Jus proprietatis and possessionis: And regularly it holds true,
that when a naked right to land is released to one, possessionis (...) draw jus
^^^rietatis.
that has Jus possessionis, and another by a mean title recover the land from
him, the right of possession shall draw the naked right with it, and shall not
leave a right in him, to whom the release is made: For example, if the heir of
the Disseisor be in by descent, and A. does disseise him, and the Disseisee
releaseth to A. Now has A. the mere right to the land; but if the heir of the
Disseisor enter into the land, and regain the possession, that shall draw with
it the mere right to the land, and shall not regain the possession only, and
leave the mere right in A. but by the recontinuance of the possession, the mere
right is therewith vested in the heir of the Disseisor: So likewise if the
Disseisee enter upon the heir of the Disseisor, and enfeoff A. in fee, and the
heir of the Disseisor recover the whole estate, that shall also draw with it
the mere right, and leave nothing in the Feoffee, etc. 19.

^^y must be (...) of the ^^ge.
11 The Lessor for years of a Mease, a Close, Co. l. 2. 31 b. in Bettisworths
case.
and other certain lands in Dale, makes a feoffment of all, and gives livery in
the Close in name of all, the Lessee being at the same instant residing in the
Mease; And it was adjudged, that this livery was void, as well for the Close as
for the Mease, and other lands so demised; For when the Message with the land
is entirely demised, the Message is the principal; because that serves for the
habitation of man, and in a Praecipe shall be first demanded before land, as
the more worthy, and the demand for rent arrear shall be made at the Message,
as at the more principal and notorious place within the Demise; So that the
Message being the more worthy and the Principal, and the land but as
accessory, without question the possession of the Mease by the Lessee for
years, at the time of the livery made, is good possession of the land demised
with it, etc.

Co. l. 2. 68. a. 4. in Tookers case.
12 In an action of Waste brought by two, Waste is (...) in the personalty.
release of all actions personal by one shall bar the other; for in Waste the
personalty is the principal. 9 H. 5. 15. per Cur. Vide supra 9.

Co. l. 11. 48. a. 2. in Lifords case.
13 If a man by deed indented bargain and sell, Land more worthy tha^ trees.
give and grant his Manor of Dale, and all his trees growing thereupon to
another, and the deed is not enrolled according to the Statute, in as much as
the Manor passes not to the Bargainee, neither shall the trees pass; albeit
they are granted by express words, and may pass without enrolment, and that a
man's own grant shall be taken most strongly against himself, etc.

Co. l. 11. 51. b. 4 in Lifords case.
14 If after a man has disseised me, The like.
I regain the possession of the land; after my regresse into it, the Law shall
adjudge, that the Franktenement still continued in me ab initio; And therefore
if the Disseisor, or his Feoffor, or his Disseisor cut down any trees, or
grass, or sow any grain, and sever them, or sell them to another; yet after my
regresse I may take them, wheresoever I shall find them; because the
re-continuance of the land, as the principal, shall regaine my property in them
as accessories; albeit they be carried from off the land, for the carrying of
them thence cannot alter my property in them, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 8. a. 4.
15 If a man buy diverse fishes, as Carps, Bremes, Tenches, Fish, Do^^ etc.
inciden^ the free-(...)
etc. and put them in his pond, and dies; In this case the heir shall have
them, and not the Executors, for they shall go with the Inheritance, and the
rather, for that they were at liberty, and could not be gotten without
industry, as by Nets and other Ingines; Otherwise it is, if they were in a
trunk, or the like: Likewise Deer in a Park, Conies in a Warren, and Doves in
a Dove-house, young and old, shall go to the heir.

11 H. 4. 31.
16 An Adulterer takes away another man's wife, Wife with^^ clothes.
and puts her in new clothes, the Husband may take the Wife with her clothes,
Finch, 22.

10 El. 323. b.
17 A box insealed with Charters shall go to the heir with the Charters, and
not to the Executors. Finch 22. A box with cha^ters.


Finch 23.
18 A base Mine, where there is Ore, shall be the Kings, A Mine (...) the Ore.
for the worthiness of the Ore.

Littl.. 478. Co. Inst. pars 1. 278. b. 4.
19 If a man be disseised by an Infant, who aliens in fee, The right lows the
p^session.
and the Alienee dies seized, and his heir enters, the Disseisor being still
within age, and then the Disseisee releaseth to the heir of the Alienee: In
this case, if the Disseisor enter upon the heir of the Alienee, as he may, he
shall enjoy the land for ever; for a bare right shall never be left in the heir
of the Alienee, but shall ever follow the possession, etc. So likewise if a man
makes a gift in tail, the remainder in fee, the Tenant in tail dies without
issue, a stranger intrudes, and he in the remainder brings a Formedon, and
recovereth by default, and makes feoffment in fee, the Intrudor reverseth the
recovery in a writ of deceit, and enters, he shall detain the land for ever:
So it is also when a Disseisor dies seized, and a stranger abates, and the
Disseisee releaseth to the Abator, etc. Here, if the heir of the Disseisor
enter, he shall detain the land for ever: For, Co. ib. 283. b. 3.
in all these cases the right to the possession shall draw the right of the
land to it; neither yet shall any of these be relieved by bringing their writ
of right, etc. And the rule to know, when the possession shall draw the right
of the land to it, and when not, is this; when the possession is first, and
then a right comes thereunto, the entry of him that has the right to the
possession, shall gain also the right, which (as appears in those cases before
put) follows the possession, and the right of possession draws the right
unto it: But when the right is first, and then the possession comes to the
right, Littl. 486. 48.
albeit the possession be defeated, yet the right shall remain: As if the
Disseisee enter upon the heir of the Disseisor, albeit the heir may recover
the possession of the land against the Disseisee in an Assise of Novel
Disseisin, or in a writ of Entry in the nature of an Assise; Yet shall the
Disseisee afterward recover the land again from the heir in a writ of Entry
en le per, of the disseisin made unto him by his Father, or otherwise in a writ
of Right; because the mere right of the land did still remain in the
Disseisee, etc. Co. ib. 266. a. 3.
So if a woman, that has right of Dower, disseise the heir, and he recover
the land against her, yet shall he leave the right of dower in her, etc.
Because when the naked right is precedent before the acquisition of possession
upon the defeasible estate, then (in consideration of Law) is the right more
worthy than the possession, but when ye possession is before the right, then is
the possession more worthy, etc. according to the Rule, Quod prius est tempore,
potius est jure. And this likewise holds true, when the mere right is
subsequent, and transferred by act in Law, for there also albeit the possession
be recontinued, yet that shall not draw the naked right with it, but shall
leave it in him: As if the heir of the Disseisor be disseised, and the
Disseisor enfeoff the heir apparent of the Disseisee, being of full age, and
then the Disseisee dies, and the naked right descends to the heir, and the
heir of the Disseisor recovers the land against him, yet does he leave the
naked right in the heir of the Disseisee: So if the Discontinuee of Tenant in
tail enfeoff the Issue in tail of full age, and the Tenant in tail die, and
then the Discontinuee recovers the land against him, yet does he leave the
naked right in the Issue: For in these cases also, as before, the right
although it seems to be subsequent to the possession, yet is it indeed before
it, in respect of the privity, viz. (in the first case) of blood between the
father and son, and (in the other case) of estate by force of the gift in
tail; because the right of the father is (by construction of law) the right of
the son, and the right of the Ancestor is the right of the issue in the tail.
10.

^ujus est solu^, ^us est usque ad ^lum.
20 The earth is more worthy than the other elements, Co. Inst. pars 1 4. a. 3.
because it was ordained for the habitation of man; and therefore it has in
Law a great extent upwards, not only of water, but a air, and all other
things even up to heaven; for, cujus est solum, ejus est usque ad coelum, etc.

^ember of ^arliament.
21 The person of a Member of Parliament is free from arrests, Dyer 60. a. 20.
because the King and all his Realm have an interest in his person pro bono
publico, and therefore the private commodity of any particular man is drowned
in it, and shall not be regarded, etc.

^ease of an ^use with ^plements.
22 A lease for years of an house with diverse Implements rendering rent, the
Lessor enters and makes feoffment, the Lessee reenters, Dyer 212. 37. 4 Eliz.
and for rent arreare the Feoffee brings debt, and adjudged maintainable,
albeit there was no privity, and this per 5 Henry 7. where the Devisee brings
Debt: And there the rent was not extinct, but only suspended, until the
Termor by his regresse revived the reversion; Neither yet (in this case) shall
there be an apportionment of the rent for the Implements, because Magis dignum
trahit ad se minus dignum. Vide Dyer 361. 15. 20 Eliz.

Dyer 216. 55. 4 Eliz.
23 The Statute of 1 Mar. dissolves the Court of Augmentations, Receivers office.
by this the receivers office of the said Court was also dissolved. Sir Robert
Chesters case: Howbeit the fee continued by a Proviso in the same Statute.

63 Accessarium Sequitur Principale.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 49. a. 3.
1 If an house or land belong to an Office, An office or Corodie draws land.
by the grant of the Office by deed, the house or land passes, as belonging
thereunto: So likewise if an house or chamber belong to a Corodie, by the grant
of the Corodie, the house or chamber passes, etc.

Co. ib. 56. a. 3.
2 If the Lessee at will by good husbandry and industry, Land drawn the profits.
either by overflowing, trenching, or compassing of the meadows, or digging up
the bushes, or the like, make the grass to grow in more abundance; Yet if the
Lessor put him out, the Lessee shall not have the grass; because the grass
being the natural profit of the earth, ought to go with it: So it is also,
albeit he sowes Hay-seed, and thereby increases the grass, etc,

Co. ib. 122. a. 2.
3 If a Manor be divided between Coparceners, An advows^^ after partition
remains appendant.
and every one has a part of the Manor without saying any thing of the
Advowson appendant, the Advowson remains in coparcenary, and yet in every of
their turns, it is appendant to that part, which they have, and so it is also
if they make composition to present against common right, yet it remains
appendant.

Co. ib. 131. b. 2.
4 The King by his Prerogative (regularly) is to be preferred in payment of his
duty or debt by his debtor before any subject, The Kings debt first p^^, except
in s^^ where a fine (...) due to the (...) and damages to the party.
although the Kings debt or duty be the latter; and the reason hereof is, for
that Thesaurus Regis est fundamentum belli, and firmamentum pacis: And
thereupon the Law gave the King remedy by the writ of Protection, Cum clausula
volumus, to protect his Debtor, that he shall not be sued or attached, until he
had paid the Kings debt; but hereof grew some inconvenience, because many times
to delay other men of their suits, the Kings debts were the more slowly paid:
For remedy whereof, it was enacted by the Stat. of 25 E. 3. cap. 19. That the
other Creditors might have their actions against the Kings Debtor, and also
proceed to judgment, but not to execution, unless that Creditor will take
upon him to pay the Kings debt, and then he shall have execution for both the
debts: Howbeit in some cases the Subject shall be satisfied before the King;
for (regularly) whenever the King is entitled to any fine or duty by the suit
of the party, the party shall be first satisfied, as in a Decies tantum against
a Iuror, or an Embraceor; for there the ten-fold damages shall be first
satisfied, and then the Kings fine; because this is as accessory to that: So
likewise if in an action of Debt, the Defendant deny his deed, and it is found
against him; in that case he shall pay a fine to the King, but the Plaintiff
shall be first satisfied; And so it is in all other like cases; The like course
was also taken in Bills preferred by Subjects in the Star Chamber; For if
costs and damages were there recovered by the party, they were answered before
the Kings fine, etc. Vide 189. 41.

Co. ib. 138. a 4.
5 If Tenant in tail of a Manor, whereunto a Villein is regardant, A Manor
draws the Villein.
enfeoff the Villein of the Manor, and dies, the issue shall have a Formedon
against the Villein, and after the recovery of the Manor, he shall seize the
Villein; Howbeit, before the recovery of the Manor he cannot seize the
Villein, for that the Manor was principal, etc.

Littl. 229 Co. ib. 152. a. 3.
6 If the Donor or Lessor of land grant his reversion to another, Rent and ^vice
inciden^ to the reversion.
etc. and the Tenant attorns the rent and service pass by this word
(reversion) because they are incident unto it; but by the grant of the rent the
reversion shall not pass; because the Incident shall pass by the grant of the
Principal, but not the Principal by the grant of the Incident, Accessarium non
d^cit, sed sequitur suum principale.

Scire facias ^llows the ^cord.
7 Where the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 5. Co. ib. 290. a. 2.
concerning executions of lands, etc. in case the said lands be evicted, gives
a Scire facias out of the same Court, from whence the former execution did
proceed, etc. to have execution of other lands, etc. If the record be removed
by writ of Error into another Court, and there affirmed, the Tenant by
execution, that is evicted, shall have a Scire facias (by the equity of that
Statute) out of the Court, into which the writ of Error was brought; because
the Scire facias must be grounded upon the record, and Accessarium sequitur
principale, etc.

^illein and ^dvowson ap^endant to a Manor.
8 Albeit a man cannot at all be put out of possession of his Villein in gross,
nor directly of his Villein regardant; yet may he per obliquum, Co. ib. 306. b.
4. etc.
and by a mean be put out of possession of his villein regardant to a Manor.
For by putting him out of possession of the Manor, which is the Principal, he
may likewise be put out of possession of the Villein regardant, which is but
accessory; And so it is also of an Advowson appendant to a Manor; And
therefore by the grant of a Manor without saying cum pertinentiis, the Villein
regardant, Advowson appendant, and the like do pass; For if the Disseisor
shall gain them, as Incidents to the Manor, whose estate is tortious, A multo
fortiori the Feoffee, who comes to his estate by lawful conveyance, shall have
them, as Incidents; And where the entry of the Disseisee is lawful, he may
seize the Villein regardant, or present to the Advowson, etc. before he enter
into the Manor; But it is otherwise where his entry is not lawful; And so are
our ancient Authors to be intended, and a point much controverted in our books
to be resolved. Vide Dyer 5, 6.

9 If the reversion of Lessee for life be granted, Co. ib. 316. a. 3. Littl.
568.
and Lessee for life assigns over his estate, Attornment ^ollows the ^and.
the Lessee cannot attorn, but the Assignee, for the attornment follows the
land: So likewise, if Lessee for life assigns over his estate upon condition,
the Assignee shall attorn, because he is Tenant of the land, etc.

The demesns, etc. follows the Manor.
10 Attornment of the Tenant of a Manor to a Disseisor of the Demesnes shall
dispossess the Lord of the rents and services, Co. Inst. pars 1. 323. a. 1.
parcel of the Manor; because both Demesns, rents and services make but one
entire Manor, and the Demesnes are the principal, etc.

A charge follows the land.
11 If there be 80 acres of Meadow, Co. ib. 343. b. 3.
which use to be divided yearly amongst diverse persons by lot or otherwise,
viz. thirteen acres thereof to A. 10 acres to B, etc. So as sometime the 13
acres lie in one place, and sometime in another, and so of the rest: In this
case, if A. being seized of these 13 acres in fee, grant a Rentcharge out of
those 13 acres generally, lying in the Meadow of 80 without mentioning, where
they lie particularly; There, as the estate of the land removes, the charge
shall remove also.

Advowson ^ollows the Manor.
12 Tenant in tail of a Manor whereunto an Advowson is appendant, makes a
discontinuance, Co. ib. 349. b. 2. 5 H. 7. 35. Co. l. 3. 3. a. 4. in the Marq.
of Winchesters case.
the Discontinuee grants the Advowson to Tenant in tail and his heirs, Tenant
in tail dies, the issue is not remitted to the Advowson; because the issue had
no action to recover the Advowson, before he recovered the Manor, whereunto
the Advowson was appendant: And so it is also of all other Inheritances
regardant, appendant, or appurtenant, a man shall never be remitted to any of
them before he recontinueth the Manor, etc. whereunto they are regardant,
appendant, or belonging, according to that of Britton, Null ne poit clamar droit
en les appurtenances, ne en les accessories, que null droit ad en le principal:
And also that of Bracton, Item, excipi potest, etc. quamvis jus habeat in
tenemento and pertinentiis, primo recuperare debet tenementum, ad quod pertinet
advocatio, and tunc postea presentet and non ante, etc. Et de haec materia in
Rotulo Sancti. Mich 3. H. 3. in com. Norf. de Tho. Bardolf, etc. But on the
other side, if a man be remitted to the principal, he shall also be remitted to
the appendant, or accessory, albeit it were severed by the Discontinuee, or
other wrong-doer: And therefore if there be Tenant in tail of a Manor,
whereunto an Advowson is appendant, and he enfeoffeth A. of the Manor with the
appurtenances, A. re-enfeoffeth the Tenant in tail, saving to himself the
Advowson, Tenant in tail dies, his issue being remitted to the Manor, is
consequently remitted to the Advowson, although at that time it was severed
from the Manor: Co. ib. 363. b. 3.
So it is in the same case, if Tenant in tail be disseised, and the Disseisor
suffer an usurpation; For here also, if the Disseisor enter into the Manor, he
is likewise remitted to the Advowson. 15.

Co. ib. 355. b. 4.
13 In any action for the recovery of the principal, Judgment (...) the
principal draws the accessories.
together with the accessory, a man shall never release the principal, and have
judgment of the accessory: In an action of waste, if the Defendant confess the
action, the Plaintiff may have judgment for the place wasted, and release the
damages; but he cannot have judgment for the damages, and release the place
wasted; because the place wasted being in the realty is the principal, and the
damages being in the personalty, are but as accessories; for without judgment
for the principal; the Plaintiff can have no title to the accessory; but having
judgment for the principal, he is thereby also entitled to the accessories,
and therefore may release them, etc.

Co. ib. 378. a. 4.
14 A man lets lands for life upon condition to have fee, Warranty ^creaseth
according to t^^ estate.
and warranteth the land in forma praedicta, afterward the Lessee performs
the condition, whereby the Lessee has fee: Here, the warranty shall extend and
increase according to the estate; And so it is likewise, albeit the Lessor had
died before the performance of the condition; for then also the warranty shall
rise and increase according to the state, and yet the Lessor himself was never
bound to the warranty, howbeit it has relation from the first livery, etc.

Co. ib. 363. b. 3.
15 If Tenant in tail be of a Manor, whereunto an Advowson is appendant, the
Tenant in tail discontinueth in fee, the Discontinuee grants away the
Advowson in fee, and dies, the issue in tail re-continueth the Manor by
recovery, he is thereby remitted to the Advowson, and shall present when the
Church becomes void, etc. 12.

Co. ib. 384. b. 4. 42 E. 3. 6. per Finchden.
16 It has been adjudged, Acquital follows the (...)
that where two Coparceners made partition of land, and the one made a covenant
with the other to acquit her and her heirs of a suit, that issued out of the
land, the Covenantee aliened; In this case the Assignee shall have an action of
Covenant, and yet he was a stranger to the Covenant; because the acquital as
accessory did run with the land, which was the principal.

Co. ib. 385. a. 2.
17 If a man make a feoffment in fee of two acres to one, Warranty follows the
fee.
with warranty to him, his heirs and assigns, if he make a feoffment of one
acre, that Feoffee shall vouch as Assignee; for the warranty, as accessory,
follows the land, as principal: And therefore there is a diversity between the
whole estate in part, and part of the estate in the whole or in any part: As if
a man has a warranty to him, his heirs, and assigns, and he make a lease for
life, or a gift in tail, the Lessee or Donee shall not vouch, as Assignee;
because he has not the estate in Fee-simple, whereunto the warranty was
annexed; but the Lessee for life may pray in aid, or the Lessee, or Donee may
vouch the Lessor or Donor, and by this means they shall take advantage of the
warranty: But if a lease for life, or a gift in tail be made, the remainder
over in fee, such a Lessee or Donee shall vouch as Assignee; because the whole
estate being out of the Lessor, the warranty by consequent does follow it; and
the rather, because the particular estate and the remainder do in judgment of
Law (as to this purpose) make but one estate, etc.

Grant of the Manor passes all liberties and incidents.
18 If the King grant to one and his heirs, Bona and Catalla felonum, Co. l. 3.
32. b 3. in Butler and Bakers case. Per Anderson and Periam sur conference ewe
ove diverse auters Justices, 25 Eliz. in Bakers case.
and fugitivorum, or utlagorum, fines, amerciamenta, etc. within such a Town or
Manor; In this case he cannot devise them to another, nor leave them to
descend for a third part, according to the Statutes of 32 and 34 H. 8. of
Wills; because they are of no yearly value; For the first branch of the 34 H.
8. ordains, that the hereditaments devisable by those Statutes should be of a
clear yearly value, etc. And therefore those Statutes extend not to such kind
of hereditaments. Nevertheless, if a man be seized of a Manor, unto which a
Leet, or Waife and Stray, or any other hereditament, which is not of any yearly
value, is appendant or appurtenant; Here, by the devise of the Manor with the
appurtenances, they shall pass as incidents to the Manor: For in as much as
those Statutes by express words enable him to devise the Manor, by consequent
they enable him to devise the Manor with all incidents and appendants unto it:
And it was never the intention and meaning of the makers of those Statutes,
that when the Devisor has power to devise the principal, he shall not have
power to devise that which is incident and appendant unto it, but that the
Manor, etc. shall be dismembered, and fractions made of things, which by lawful
prescription have been united and annexed together, etc.

Principal and accessorie.
19 If there be principal and accessory, Co. l. 4. 43. b. 2. in Syers case. and
Co. ib. 44. a. 1. in Bibiths case.
and the principal is pardoned, or has his Clergy, the accessory cannot be
arraigned; For the Maxim of Law is, Ubi factum nullum, ibi forcia nulla; and
ubi non est principalis, non potest esse accessarius. Then before there appears
to be a principal, one cannot be charged, as accessory; but none can be said to
be principal, before he be so proved and adjudged by Law; and that ought to be
by judgment upon verdict, or confession, or by outlawry; for it suffices not,
that (in truth) there is a principal, unless it appear so by judgment of
Law: And this is the reason, that when the principal is pardoned, or takes his
Clergy before judgment, that then the accessory shall never be arraigned,
because it appears not by judgment of Law that he was principal; and the
acceptance of the pardon, or prayer of the Clergy may be an argument, but can
be no judgment in Law, that he is guilty; Howbeit, if the principal after
attainder be pardoned, or has his Clergy allowed, there the accessory shall be
arraigned; because it then appears judicially, that there was then a Principal.
28, 29. 34, 35.

Land and tree. severed.
20 When a man makes a lease for life or years, Co. l. 4. 64. b. 2. in
Herlakendens case.
the Lessee has but a special interest or property in the trees (being great
timber) as accessories annexed to the land, so long as they are annexed unto
it: But if the Lessee or any other sever them from the land, the property and
interest of the Lessee is thereby determined, and the Lessor may take them as
accessory things, which were parcel of his Inheritance, and in which the
interest of the Lessee is determined, etc.

The like.
21 If I let my land for life. and after grant the trees, Co. ib. 62. b. 4.
and after that the Lessee dies, yet the Grantee cannot take them, as it was
holden per toram Curiam, in 21 H. 6. 46. d. because at the time of the Grant,
the Lessee had a property in them, as accessories annexed to the land, etc.
Vide Max. 25.

The like.
22 If trees (being great timber) be blown down by the wind, Co. ib. 63. b. 1.
the Lessor shall have them (for they were parcel of his Inheritance) and not
the Tenant for life or years; But if they be dotards, without any great timber
in them, the Tenant for life or years shall have them, etc.

Superstitious uses draw good uses.
23 When certain sums are limited to superstitious uses, Co. l. 4. 115. a. 2.
in Adams and Lamberts case.
and one use is separated and divided from the other, there the finding of one
of them only shall not give all the land to the King by the Stat. of 1 E. 6.
cap. 14. but only the sum appointed to the superstitious use, which was
employed within five years before the making of that Statute: but if one of the
uses depend upon the other, there the finding of the principal or any part
thereof shall give all the land to the King: As if land be given to the intent
that an Obit shall be found in such a Chapel, and that upon the Obit. 10 s.
shall be distributed and employed to the Priest; and 6 s. 8 d. to diverse poor
persons, that shall be present at it, and the residue of the profits to the
reparations of the Chapel: In this case, if the Obit be maintained in any part
within the five years, although the 6 s. 8 d. be not employed to the poor men,
nor any thing at all upon the reparations of the Chapel within the five years;
Yet all the land shall be given to the King by the said Statute; because all
the uses depend upon the first.

24 In suits in the Star Chamber (before the repeal of that Court) albeit the
suit was for the King, Co. lib. 5. 51. Halls case.
Upon censure or sentence, the King cannot pardon the damages or costs before
censure or sentence, contr^.
and the offense such as the King might pardon, yet when the censure was once
given, and damages given to the Plaintiff, then the Plaintiff had particular
interest in them by the censure which the King would not pardon: But if the
pardon had been obtained before the censure, there the pardon had discharged
all; for then the Court could not have proceeded to any censure of the
Principal, and by consequent neither of damages, which are but accessories:
There is the same law of a pardon before sentence in suits depending betwixt
party and party in the Court Christian for defamation, casting violent hands
upon a Clerk, or the like; for these being suits, pro salute animae, vel
reformatione morum; are in truth suits only for the King, although prosecuted
by the party: And therefore if in such a suit the Plaintiff has expended any
costs, and the King before sentence pardons the Defendant, in that case the
costs are lost, causa qua supra; It is otherwise, if he be not pardoned till
after sentence, for then costs being thereby given to the Plaintiff, he has a
particular interest in them, which the Kings pardon cannot frustrate, etc.

Co. l. 5. 96. b. 3. in Goodales case, being adjudged in Randals case, 23, and
24 Eliz. in the Court of Wards.
25 A. seized in fee of certain lands, A condition accessory to the estate.
by deed indented and enrolled according to the Statute, covenants with B. That
if B. pay unto A. his Heirs or Assigns 10 l. upon such a day at such a place,
that then A. and his heirs will stand seized of the said lands to the use of B.
and his heirs, A. having issue a son, makes his Will in writing, and makes C.
his Executor, and withal devises that C. shall have the land during the
minority of his son, and then dies, his son within age: In this case the
question was, to whom after the death of A. the Tenant ought to be paid, and it
was resolved, that it ought to follow the estate of the land, as an accessory
unto it, and shall not be paid unto C. either as Termor or Executor, because C.
could not be such an Assignee, as is meant by the words of the Covenant, having
by the devise only a particular interest in the land; Neither yet, if A. had
granted the land for life or years, could any such Lessee have been Assignee in
that case; because notwithstanding such grant the reversion still remained in
A. and the possibility of having the land again as in his former estate, in
case the condition were not performed; and therefore the payment thereof ought
to be made to his son and heir, or unto the Assignee of the Covenantors whole
estate, as if the Covenantor had made an absolute feoffment in fee, or else a
gift in tail, or lease for life, with the remainder over in fee, then the
Feoffee, Donee in tail, or Lessee for life, might be Assignees, to whom the
Condition ought to be performed; because in those cases the Covenantor departed
with the whole estate, unto which the Condition was annexed, etc.

^he estate ^ile not bar^d, the rever^o^ or remain^r not barred ^lso.
26 Whereas by the Statute of 34 H. 8. cap. 20. It is provided, Co. l. 8. 77. b.
4. in the Lord Staffords case.
that no common recovery had against Tenant in tail, who is party to the
recovery, shall bar his issues, when the King has the reversion, etc. by
this (Inclusive) the act preserves the reversions and remainders in tail of the
Kings grant; for they cannot be barred, but when the estate tail, upon which
they depend, is barred: And this is the reason, that when Tenant in tail is in
of another estate, and suffers a common recovery as Tenant, this shall not bar
any reversion or remainder; because it barreth not the estate of the Tenant in
tail, being party to the recovery, and upon whose estate such reversion or
remainder depends: For, quod non valet in principali, in accessoria seu
consequenti non valebit, and quod non valet in magis propinquo, non valebit in
magis remoto.

Ordinary subject to an a^tion.
27 If before the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 19. Co. l. 9. 39. b. 2. Hensloes
case,
an action lay at the Common Law against the Deputies or Committees of the
Ordinary (by the name of Executors) as appears by 38 E. 3. 26. and 42 E. 3. 2.
A multo fortiori, an action shall lie by the Common Law against the Ordinary
himself, who is the Principal, and from whom the Administrators do now derive
their power.

^rincipal and Accessory.
28 Albeit the Principal be attainted erroneously, Co. l. 9. 119. a. 4. in the
Lord Sanchiers case.
either for error in process, or because the Principal being out of ye realm,
etc. was outlawed, or because he was in prison at the time of the Out-lawry,
etc. yet shall the accessory be attainted; for the attainder of the Principal
stands good, until it be reversed; and with this agrees the resolution of all
the Justices in the Kings Bench, 2 R. 3. 12. And in the 18 E. 4. 9. the
Principal was erroneously outlawed for felony, and the Accessory was taken,
indicted, arraigned, convicted, attainted and hanged, and afterward the
Principal reversed the Out-lawry, and was indicted and arraigned, and found not
guilty, and thereupon was acquit: And in this case (forasmuch as there can be
no accessory, but where there is a principal, and here there was no principal)
the heir of the accessory shall be restored to the lands which his Father had
forfeited by that unjust attainder, either by entry or action at his election:
For now upon the matter by act in Law the attainder against his Father is
without any writ of Error utterly annulled; because by reversing the attainder
against the Principal, the attainder against the Accessory, which depended upon
the attainder of the principal, is ipso facto utterly defeated and annulled;
And this does notably appear in an ancient book, de tempore E. 1. tit.
Mortdancester, 46. where the case was this; A. was indicted of felony, and B.
of of the receipt of A. A. eloigns himself, and is outlawed, B. was taken,
and put himself upon inquest, and was found guilty, and was thereupon
attainted and hanged, and the Lord entered as in his escheat: After which time
A. came in, and reversed the Out-lawry, and pleaded to the felony, and was
found not guilty, wherey he was acquit; Hereupon the heir of B. brings a
Mortdancester against the Lord by escheat, and therein shows all this matter,
and so upon a Demurrer it was awarded, that the heir should recover seisin of
the land; For if B. had been living, he should have gone quit by the acquital
of A. because B. could not be a receiver of a Felon, when A. was no Felon. 19.
29. 34, 35.

^rincipal and ^ccessary.
29 The makers of the Statute of 4 and 5 P. and M. cap. 4. Co. l. 11. 35. a. 1.
in Alexander Powlters case.
observing that by the Statute of 25 H. 8. cap. 3. Clergy was taken from the
principal offender in the case of house-burning, etc. and not from any
accessory, have provided that the accessory before the fact (in that and other
cases there provided for) shall be also outed of his Clergy, which was taken to
be a good interpretation, made by that Parliament of all the Acts which
concerned that matter; For if the Principal shall have his Clergy, it would be
absurd to take away Clergy from the accessory; because if the Principal has
his Clergy before judgment, the accessory shall not be arraigned. Vide supra
19.

F. N. B. 32. a. primer.
30 If Baron and Feme present to an Advowson in right of the Feme, which is
appendant to the Manor of the Feme, Advowson appendant to an acre of land.
and after the Baron alien an acre, parcel of the Manor, together with the
Advowson in fee to a stranger, and dies, and after the stranger presents, and
then aliens the acre to another in fee; saving the Advowson to himself, and
after the Church becomes void; Here, the Feme shall present, and if she be
disturbed, she shall have an Assise of Darrein presentment, because the
Advowson was severed from the acre; but if the Advowson were appendant to the
acre, then ought the Feme to recover the acre, before she can present to the
Advowson.

F. N. B. 47. d.
31 If a man recover in a Quare Impedit in the Common Pleas, Quare non admisit
out of the Kings Bench.
and the record is removed by a writ of Error into the Kings Bench, and there
affirmed; In that case he shall have a writ to the Bishop there, and ought to
sue a Quare non admisit against the Bishop there, upon that record, etc.

F. N. B. 107. m.
32 An Attaint may be sued in the Common Pleas, The like for an attaint.
if the record be there, which is the principal, or it may be sued in the Kings
Bench upon false verdict given in the Common Pleas, if the record be removed
into the Kings Bench, etc.

Ibid.
33 A recovery was had in an Assise brought in the Kings Bench, The like.
and afterward the record was sent into the Common Pleas, and the party sued
an Attaint upon that record in the Common Pleas; For the record is the
principal, and the Attaint thereupon is accessory, which see in tit. Assise, 8
E. 2. Itinere Canc.

F. N. B. 115. f.
34 If the Principal die before verdict given upon the acquital, Principal and
Accessory.
or has a charter of pardon, and plead it, etc. In that case the Accessory
shall not have a writ of Conspiracy, because he is discharged by the death of
the Principal, or by the charter of pardon made unto the Principal, etc. 19.
28, 29.

Pl. Co. 99. b. 4. Matters of the Crown, etc.
35 Diverse persons were accused for murdering of a man, Principal and Accessory.
whereof some did actually murder him, and were fled, others stood by, aiding
and abetting those that committed the murder; and these last were taken, and
arraigned as principals, etc. Besides these, there was one Gittin indicted, as
accessory unto them all; but stay was made of his arraignment, until he might
be arraigned as Accessory to them all at one time; for he could not be
arraigned as Accessory to them that were escaped, because they were not yet
attainted, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 96. b. Littl. 137.
36 Where the Common or Statute Law gives remedy in soro seculari (whether the
matter be temporal or spiritual) the Conusance of that cause belongs to the
Kings temporal Courts only, Remedy is foro secul^i for spiritual things.
unless the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Court be saved, etc. As if an
Abbot or Prior hold of his Lord by Divine Service certain, and that service is
not performed, the Lord has his remedy in foro seculari; for if he distrain
for not doing it, he shall upon his avowry recover damages at the Common Law,
viz. in the Kings Temporal Court for the not doing of it; And if issue be taken
upon the performance of the Divine Service, it shall be tried by a Jury of
twelve men; because albeit the service be spiritual, yet the Seigniory, as also
the damages to be recovered, are temporal: It is otherwise of service by
Frankalmoign, which is always uncertain; Co. ib. 96. a. 4.
for there the right being merely spiritual, and the remedy only by the
Ecclesiastical Law, the Conusance thereof does belong to the Ecclesiastical
Court, etc.

Co. l. 11. 27. b. 3. in Henry Pigots case.
37 In 30 E. 3. casu ultimo, a deed of feoffment, A letter of ^torney void,
though read right to one unlettered.
in which a warrant of Attorney to deliver seisin was inserted, was read to him
that was to be the Feoffor, being a man unlettered, in the form of an estate
tail, but was (indeed) a feoffment in fee, and the warrant was read truly, as
it was writ, and both were sealed and delivered, and seisin given accordingly;
Howbeit, in this case, the deed was adjudged void, because read in another
form, etc. and the warrant of Attorney (albeit it were truly read) was adjudged
void also; because it depended upon the feoffment, and had relation to the
estate in fee. Vide 84. 8.

A Villeins estate, not the lands before ^ecovery of the Villein.
38 Servi fugitivi dicuntur esse in statu libero, Bract. l. 5. cap. 10. 3. fo.
7. a.
donec dominus versus eos sibi perquisirit per legem terrae, nec habebit
potestatem aliquam in eis vel liberis suis, terris, aut aliis bonis ipsorum,
donec corpus, quod principale est, disrationaverit.

A condition or ^ovenant runs ^ith the land.
39 A lease is made to Baron and Feme by indenture, Dyer 12. 65. 28 H. 8.
in which there is a Proviso, that if they or their Executors shall be disposed
to sell and alien the term, that then the Lessor shall have the first offer,
he giving for it as much as another will give: And here, the question was,
whether this was a condition or a covenant, and the better opinion seems to be,
that it is rather a condition than a covenant; Howbeit whether it be the one or
the other, it runs with the land: So as albeit the Feme joined not in the
Indenture, nor was party thereunto, yet if she survive the Baron, she shall
hold the land charged with the condition or covenant, as an accessory
thereunto: So in 38 E. 3. a feoffment was made by deed with diverse covenants,
and one of the Feoffees sealed it, and the other not, but yet occupied the
land, and survived, and it was resolved the Survivor should be bound by the
covenants and seal of his companion. Qui sentit commodum, sentire debet and
onus. Vide M. 236.

A penalty for ^ot singing ^asse, etc.
40 An Abbot with the assent of his Covent grants for them and their Successors
to a man and his heirs, Dyer 24. 149. 28 H. 8.
to find one of his Monks to sing Mass, Mattens, and Vespers every Holiday in
such a Chapel, and grants over, that toties quoties defectus fuerit in aliquo,
etc. that they will forfeit to him and his heirs five pound. In this case, if
by a failer of the service, the nomine poenae of 5 l. be forfeit, the heir
shall have an action of Debt for it, and not the Executors; for the heir
having an inheritance in the penalty, it follows the nature of the land given
to the religious house, as an accessory thereunto.

^isseisor and ^isseisee.
41 After regresse of the Disseisee, Dyer 31. 219. 28 H. 8.
the Disseisee shall have the grain of the Disseisor, albeit they be severed
from the land by the Disseisor, per totam Curiam, and in B. R. in Says case.

^rincipal and ^^ettor.
42 At the Common Law before the Statute of 2 and 3 Edw. 6. 24. Dyer 38. 50.
etc. 29. H. 8.
in an appeal of Robbery, the Abettors were to be prosecuted in the same County
where the Robbery was committed, and where the Principal was attainted, and not
where the abetment was proved to be; But that Statute has now settled it in the
County where the Abettors shall be taken.

^uardian.
43 If a man be seized of a Rentcharge, Rent-secke, Co. Inst. pars 1. 87. b. 3.
Common of pasture, or such like Inheritances, which lie not in tenure, and
die, his heir within the age of fourteen years: In this case, the heir may
choose his Guardian; But if he hold any land in Soccage, the Guardian in
Soccage shall take into his custody, as well the Rent-charges, etc. as the land
holden in Soccage, because he has the custody of the heir, which is the
Principal.

^^rrender.
44 By surrender of the Letters Patents themselves, Dyer 179. 44. 2 Eliz.
the Duplicate thereof (though it be also under the Great Seal) is also gone.

45 Vide Hob. 4. Musgrave against Wharton.

64 Things accessory are of the nature of the Principal.
40 Ass. Pl. 25.
1 A servant procures another to kill his Master, No accessory.
this is no petty Treason in the servant, because it is but felony in the
other, which is the principal. Finch 23.

7 H. 6. 19. b.
2 A Parson grants an Annuity with a Nomine poenae, A Parsons successor
chargeable.
the Successor shall be charged with the Nomine poenae due in his Predecessors
life, and not his Executors. Finch 23.

26 H. 8. Die. 7. Finch 23.
3 The profits of the office of a Filizer, Profits of a Filizers office not
chargeable. Lop not titheable.
etc. cannot be put in execution upon a recognisance, statute, etc. because the
office it self, being an office of trust, cannot.

26. El. Molins. Finch, 23.
4 Tithe is not payable of Oaks usually topped and lopped (though it be every
seven or eight years) for the branches are of the nature of the principal, viz.
the Oak it self, for which no tithe is to be paid.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 13. a. 1.
5 A man seized as heir on the part of his Mother, The effect ensues the cause,
and the recompense the loss.
makes a feoffment in fee to ye use of him and his heirs; Here, the use being
a thing in trust and confidence shall ensue the nature of the land, and shall
descend to the heir on the part of the Mother: So likewise if a man has a
Seigniory as heir of the part of his Mother, and the tenancy does escheat, it
shall go to the heir of the part of the Mother: Also if the heir of the Mothers
part of land, whereunto a warranty is annexed, be impleaded and vouch, and
thereupon judgment is given against him, and also for him to recover in value,
and dies before execution; Here, the heir of the Mothers part shall sue
execution to have in value against the Vouchee; for the effect ought to pursue
the cause, and the recompense shall ensue the loss.

Co. ib. 42. a. 4.
6 A man may have an estate for term of life determinable at will; An estate for
life deter^^^able at will.
As if the King does grant an office to one at will, and also grants a rent to
him for the exercise of his office for the term of his life, this is
determinable upon the determination of the office.

Co. ib. 53. a. 3.
7 If Glasse-windows (though glased by the Tenant himself) be broken down, or
carried away, it is waste; for the glass is part of the house: Waste.
And so it is of wainscot, benches, doors, windows, fornaces, and the like,
annexed or fixed to the house, either by him in the reversion, or the Tenant.

Co. ib. 122. a. 1
8 Nothing can be properly appendant or appertenant to any thing, Advowson
appendent (...) Demesnes.
unless the principal, or superior thing be of perpetual subsistence and
continuance; For example, an Advowson that is said to be appendant to a Manor,
is in rei veritate appendant to the Demesnes of the Manor, which are of
perpetual subsistence and continuance, and not to resists or services, which
are subject to extinguishment and destruction.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 124. a. 4.
9 If an Executor has a Villein for years, A perqui^^^ shall accr^^ the Execut^
Termor, (...)
and the Villein purchases lands in fee, and the Executor enters; In this case
the Executor shall have the whole fee-simple of the lands; Howbeit because he
had the Villein en auter droit, as Executor, to the use of the dead, it shall
be assets in his hands, as the Villein is: And therefore note a diversity
between the quantity of the estate, and the quality of it; for in this and the
lik cases, the Law respects not the quantity of the estate (for not only
Tenant in tail and Tenant for life of a Villein, shall have the perquisite of
the Villein in fee, but Tenant for years, and Tenant at will also shall have it
in fee) but it principally respects the quality of the estate; For in what
right the Executor has the Villein, in the same right shall he have the
perquisite: So it is also in the case of a Bishop, that has a Villein in right
of his Church; Also if a man has a Villein in right of his wife, he shall have
the perquisite also in her right: But if the purchase be after issue had, then
the Baron shall have the perquisite to him and his heirs; because by the issue
he is entitled to be Tenant by the Courtesy in his own right, etc.

Distress for owelty of partition.
10 Littleton says, 219. Co. ib. 144. b. 4.
that for a Rentcharge the Grantee has his election either to bring his writ
of Annuity, or to distrain, etc. Howbeit of a rent granted for owelty of
partition, a writ of Annuity does not lie; because it is of the nature of the
land descended, and therefore for that the Grantee shall only distrain, etc.

Assise and redisseisin.
11 If a man recover land in an Assise of Novel disseisin, Co. ib. 154. b. 3.
whereunto there is a Common appendant or appertenant, and after is
re-disseised of the Common, he shall have a re-disseisin of the Common; for it
was tacitly recovered in the Assise.

Coparcenary of rent for owelty, etc.
12 If there be three Coparceners, and they make partition, Co. ib. 169 b. 2.
and one of them grant 20 s. per annum, out of her part to her two sisters and
their heirs for owelty of partition; Here, the Grantees are not Ioyntenants of
this rent, but the rent is in nature of Coparcenary, and after the death of the
one Grantee, the moity of the rent shall descend to her issue, in course of
coparcenary, and shall not survive to the other, for that the rent does come in
recompense of the land, and therefore shall ensue the nature thereof; And if
the grant had been made to them two of a rent of 20 s. viz. to the one ten
shillings, and to the other ten shillings, yet shall they have the rent in
course of coparcenary, and join in action for the same.

Coparcenary of rent.
13 If two Coparceners by deed indented alien both their parts to another in
fee, Co. ib. 169. b. 4.
rendering to them two and their heirs a rent out of the land, they are not
Ioyntenants of this rent, but they shall have the rent in course of
coparcenary; because their right in the land, out of which the rent is
reserved, was in coparcenary.

Joyntenancy for life, and several Inheritances.
14 If land be given to two men and the heirs of their two bodies, Co. ib. 183.
b. 4.
they have joint estates during their lives, and afterward several
Inheritances; and therefore if one of them have issue and die, the other shall
have all the land during his life by right of Survivor, but after his death
that issue shall enjoy his fathers part: and if that issue die without issue,
the Donor shall enter into that moity, and not the issue of him that survived;
For in as much as originally the inheritance was several, the reversion is also
several; And therefore upon the several determination of the estate in tail the
Donor may enter; for as upon one joint and entire gift or lease. there is one
joint and entire reversion, so upon several gifts or leases, there be several
reversions, etc.

Rent reserved enures to both the Joyntenants.
15 If two Ioyntenants make a lease for life, Co. ib. 192 a. 3.
reserving a rent to one of them, the rent shall enure to them both; because
the reversion whereunto the rent is incident, remains still in jointure;
unless the reservation be by deed indented, and then he only, to whom it is
reserved, shall have it, etc. Vide Dyer 308. 75. Winters case.

Damages shall be several amongst Cop^rceners.
16 If three Coparceners recover land and damages in an Assise of Mortdancester,
albeit the judgment be joint, Co. ib. 198. a. 4.
viz. that they shall recover the land and damages; yet the damages being
accessory (though personal) do in judgment of Law depend upon the Freehold,
being the principal, which is several; And although the words of the judgment
be joint, yet shall it be taken for distributive; And therefore in that case it
two of them die, the entire damages do not survive, but the third shall have
execution according to her portion, etc.

A right may be forfeited.
17 The right of a particular estate (which is as accessory) may be forfeited as
well as the particular estate it self (which is the principal) and he that
has but a right of a Remainder, or reversion, Co. ib. 252. a. 2.
shall take benefit of such a forfeiture: As if Tenant for life be disseised,
and levy a fine to the Disseisor, he in the reversion or remainder shall
presently enter upon the Disseisor for the forfeiture: So it is also, if the
Lessee after the disseisin had levied a fine to a stranger; For, albeit to some
respects, Parts finis nihil habuerunt, yet is it a forfeiture of his right.

Co. ib. 252. b. 1.
18 The entry of a man to re-continue his inheritance or freehold, Several
disseisin must have several entries and actions.
must ensue his action for recovery of the same; As if three men disseise me
severally, of three several acres of land, being all in one County, and I enter
in one acre in the name of all the three acres, this is good for no more, but
for that acre which I entered into; because each Disseisor is a several Tenant
of the freehold, and as I must have several actions against them for the
recovery of the land, so mine entry must be several; And so it is, if one man
disseise me of three acres of ground, and lets the same severally to three
persons for their lives, etc. There the entry upon one Lessee in the name of
the whole, is good for no more, than that acre, which he has in his
possession: But if the Disseisor had letten severally the said three acres to
three persons for years, there the entry upon one of the Lessees, in the name
of all the three acres, shall re-continue and revest all the three acres in the
Disseisee; for that the Disseisee might have had one Assise against the
Disseisor, because he remained Tenant of the Freehold for all the three acres;
and therefore in that case one entry shall serve for the whole: So if one
disseise me of one acre at one time, and after disseise me of another acre in
the same County at another time, in this case my entry into one of them in the
name of both is good; for that one Assise might be brought against him for both
the Disseisins: But if I enfeoff one of one acre of ground upon condition, and
at another time I enfeoff the same man of another acre in the same County upon
condition also, and why the conditions are broken, and entry into one acre in
name of both is not sufficient; for that I have no right to the land, nor
action to recover the same, but a bare title, and therefore several entries
must be made into the same, in respect of the several conditions: But an entry
into one part of the land in the name of all the land subject to one condition
is good, although the parcels be several, and in several Towns: And so note a
diversity between several rights of entry, and several titles of entry, by
force of a condition.

Co. ib. 387. a. 4.
19 If Tenant in Fee-simple, that has a warranty for life, Warranty.
either by an express warranty, or by Dedi, be impleaded, and vouch, he shall
recover a Fee-simple in value; albeit his warranty were but for term of life;
because the warranty extended in that case to the whole estate of the Feoffee
in Fee-simple: But if Tenant in tail make a lease for life, the remainder in
fee, etc. And a collateral Ancestor confirms the estate of the Tenant for life
with warranty for term of life, of the Tenant for life, and dies; In this case,
if the Tenant for life be impleaded and vouch, he shall recover in value but an
estate for life, because the warranty does extend to that estate only.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 392. b. 4.
20 If a man make a gift in tail with warranty, All accessaries to an estate
tail are intailed, as well as the estate it self.
this warranty is also entaile^; And therefore a release made by Tenant in
tail of the warranty shall not bar the issue, no more than his release shall
bar the issue to bring an attaint upon a false verdict, or a writ of Error
upon an erroneous judgment given against the father; Neither yet can his gift
bar the issue of the deed, that created the estate tail, nor of any other
deed necessary for defense of the title; For these are accessaries to the
estate tail, and are as firmly entailed, as the estate it self, etc.

Co. l. 8. 79. b. 4. Wiat Weilds case.
21 A man is seized of a Message and forty acres of land, Common apportionable.
unto which he can prescribe to have Common in 200 acres of waste belonging to
the Manor of Dale, for all the cattle levant and couchant upon the said
Message and 40 acres: In this case, if he sell five acres, parcel of the forty
(whether the Common were appendant or appurtenant) the Alienee shall enjoy a
proportionable part of the Common, as belonging to the said five acres: For
albeit at the beginning, there was but one Common attending upon one tenancy,
yet in as much as it is attendant upon a tenancy, that is severable, and upon
every part thereof, the Common shall be severable as well as the tenancy, so
that the Alienee of part of the tenancy shall enjoy also a part of the Common
answerable to that part of the tenancy, etc. So likewise, if he that has such
a Common appertaining to his land, as aforesaid, demise parcel of the land to
another, the Lessee shall have common for his beasts levant and couchant, etc.

Joint cove^ants relate ^o joint inte^ests.
22 S. and his wife bring an action of Covenant against B. upon Covenant made by
Indenture tripartite, Co. l. 5. 18. b. 4. Slingsbies case.
in which B. covenants with the Plaintiffs, and also with I. S. and his wife,
Et assignatis suis, and cum quolibet, and qualibet eorum, that he was sole
seized of the land, etc. And in this case it was adjudged, that the action
would not lie singly for the Plaintiffs only, but I. S. and his wife ought
also to have joined in the action; because as their interests in the land was
joint, so also was the Covenant; And therefore these words, cum quolibet and
qualibet eorum, were void, and signified nothing: It is otherwise, when the
interests are several; for then the covenants, which have relation thereunto,
are also several; As if a man demise Black acre to A. White acre to B. and
Green acre to C. and covenant with them, and quolibet eorum, that he is right
owner of them, etc. Here, in respect of the several interests, by these words
(and quolibet eorum) the Covenant is made several; whereas if he had demised
those acres unto them jointly, the Covenant had been joint in respect of their
joint interest, etc.

23 A Lord of a Leet cannot distrain for the certainty, Co. l. 11. 44. b. 2.
and 45. a. 2. in Godfreys case.
belonging to the same Leet, unless he can prescribe, that he and those whose
estate he has, have formerly distrained for it; because the certainty being
against common right, and only for the private gain of the Lord, he cannot
have it without prescription; And (by consequent) as without prescription he
can have no right to the certainty it self, which is the principal: So neither
shall he have without prescription power to distrain for it, which is
Accessory: And for the same reason it is, that the Lord of a Court Baron shall
not distrain for an Amerciament there without prescription; for that the Court
it self (which is the principal) consists in prescription. It is otherwise in a
Court Leet; because for the Fines and Amerciaments of that Court distress is
incident of common right, etc.

^he Court Christian may ^ke a recog^sance of a ^ebt.
24 If a man acknowledge in Court Christian, F. N. B. 41. b.
that he owes to another 5 l. to be paid at a certain day, and after he pays it
not, he shall not be sued in Court Christian For that Debt; and if he be, he
shall have a prohibition and an attachment thereupon, etc. But if by reason of
matrimony or a Testament a man acknowledges a debt in Court Christian, if the
debt be not paid accordingly, he may be sued for it there, and a prohibition
lies not in that case; because, that Court having power to take a conusance of
matters matrimonial and testamentary, which are the principal, it may likewise
take Conusance of debts acknowledged thereupon, which are accessory, etc.

^^incipal and ^ccessary.
25 If a man cause one as Principal to be appealed of murder or felony, and
another as Accessory unto him, F.N.B. 115. a.
and after he is nonsuited in his appeal; In this case, the Accessory shall
have a writ of Conspiracy, as well as the Principal.

^he like.
26 If a Principal and one as accessory are indicted of felony, F. N. B. ibid.
and are taken and arrested, and the Principal is acquit; thereby the Accessory
is also discharged, and the Accessory shall have thereupon a writ of Conspiracy
against them, that conspire to indict him, etc.

^t of the ^bt upon a ^t. Merchant ^iable.
27 If a man make a Statute Merchant in 100 l. payable at diverse days, if he
fail of payment at any one of the days, F.N.B. 130. h. and 131. a. Co. l. 8.
153. a. in Althams case.
the party to whom the recognisance was made, may have execution for that day,
and shall not stay execution till all the days of payment be past; because a
Statute savers of the realty, Co. l. 10. 128. b. 3. in Cluns case.
and partakes of the nature of the land, and the profits thereof which are
severable: It is otherwise of an obligation, which is so to be discharged at
several payments; for that is merely personal, and entire, etc. Co. l. 47. b.
and 192. b.

F.N.B. 9. a.
28 A writ of Dower lies as well for a thing appendant or appurtenant to land,
as for the land it self, etc. Dower.


F.N.B. 50. a.
29 If a Parson has a Chapel annexed to his Parsonage, Glebe.
to which Chapel there is Glebe appurtenant, the Parson shall have a Juris
utrum as well of that, as of Glebe belonging to the Parsonage it self.

Co. l. 5. 81. b. 3. in Fords case. Co. l. 8. 153. a. in Althams case. and l.
10. 128. b. 3. in Cluns case.
30 If I sell unto you any thing for 100 l. to be paid by 20 l. per annum,
Annual sum not severable, rent otherwise.
in five years, I shall not have an action of Debt, until all the days be
incurred, because it is but one entire contract; But if a man make a lease of
lands for five years, rendering each year 20 l. there in case of a lease of
land for years, the years are several, and the land and the profits thereof
severable: And therefore the rent being severable as well as the land, etc. he
shall have an action of Debt for each year, etc. as it was adjudged in 25 E. 3.
8. Co. Inst. pars 1. 47. b.

Co. l. 2. 66. b. 4. in Tookers case.
31 There are two Ioyntenants for life, Attornment by one Joyntenant suffices.
the reversioner grants over his estate in fee, one of the Ioyntenants only
does attorn, this is a good attornment of both to settle the reversion in the
Grantee; because the estate of joint Lessees is entire (for every Ioyntenant is
seized per amy and per tout) and by consequent the reversion, which is
dependant and expectant upon such an estate, is entire also, etc.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 139. a. 4.
32 Some actions follow the nature of those, Actions.
whereon they are grounded, as the writs of Error, Attaint, Scire Facias, and
the like.

Co. l. 4. 47. b. in Waits case
33 The Feme shall not have more appeals than one for the death of the Baron;
but ought to join all, that she will charge, The wife (...) have but (...)
appeal.
in one and the same writ, and so also ought she to declare against all in one
and the same Court; for as the murder or death is only one, so ought the Writ
and Count to be one also: And therefore if one bring an appeal of death
against diverse, and all but one make default, yet the Plaintiff ought to bring
his writ, and likewise to count against all, etc.

Pl. Co. 72. b. in Rosses case.
34 If an execution be sued of the body and of the land, Execution (...) charged
by purchase of part of the land.
and afterward the Conisor enfeoffs the Conisee of parcel of the land, or
surrenders parcel of the land unto him, or the Fee-simple of parcel thereof
descends upon him; In all these cases, both body and land are discharged; for
by the execution against body and land, the land was de facto charged, and so
became debtor, and by the feoffment, surrender, or descent, the land was also
discharged; because a discharge of part of a thing in execution is a discharge
of all, be it by act of the party, or by act of Law; for the duty being
personal and entire, the execution (as accessory thereunto) is entire also, etc.

Co. l. 10. 109. b. 4. in Legates case.
35 If a Bailiff or other officer of the Kings Manor suffer any to intrude upon
any parcel of the Demesnes, No conce^^ment.
so that nothing is answered for it in particular unto the King, but only the
ancient rent of the Manor, etc. Yet that parcel so intruded upon, shall not in
Law be said to be concealed, nor pass by any such name in any grant of it from
the King; For, the Manor it self being in charge and account, by consequent
every part thereof is so also; And Turpis est pars, quae non convenit cum suo
toto.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 337. a. 4.
36 If two Ioyntenants within age make feoffment in fee, Joyntena^^ shall joy^^
action.
they may enter jointly in their lives, or join in a writ of right, because
entry or a writ of right follow the nature of the estate, which is joint; but
they shall not join in a Dum fuit infra aetatem, because that follows the
nature of their several persons, which (in that case) are the principals, for
the nonage of the one is not the nonage of the other, etc.

Rent partable as the land.
37 If Gavelkind land be let for years rendering rent, Dyer 5. b. 1. 26 H. 8.
the rent is partable as the land; It seems to be otherwise of a Rentcharge
granted out of the land, because that is collateral to the land, and entire:
per Fitz-herbert.

Principal and Accessory.
38 Mistress Sanders was accessory to the murder of her husband, Dyer 253. 103.
8 Eliz.
and because it was but murder in the principal that killed him, it could not
be petty Treason in his wife; It is otherwise, where the wife conspires with
her servant to kill her husband, Dyer 332. 25. 16 Eliz.
who does it in the absence of the wife, yet this is petty Treason in the wife,
being but accessory, because petty Treason in the servant.

65 A man's own words are void, when the Law speaks as much, or otherwise.
Vide M. 41. 6, 7, 9.
New invented settlements void.
1 If lands are given to a man to have and to hold to him and his heirs on the
part of his Mother, Co. Inst. pars 1. 13. a. 2.
yet the heirs of the part of the Father shall inherit; for no man can
institute a new kind of Inheritance, not allowed by the Law, and the words, On
the part of his Mother are void: So if lands are given to a man, and to his
heirs male, the law rejects this word, Male; because there is no such kind of
inheritance, etc.

No execution of the estate to the use.
2 By the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 1. Co. ib. 19. b. 3.
the land is as it were appropriated to the Tenant in tail, and to the heirs of
his body, and therefore if an estate be made, either before or since the
Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 10. (of uses) to a man and the heirs of his body,
either to the use of another and his heirs. or to the use of himself and his
heirs, this limitation of use is utterly void; For before the said Statute of
27 H. 8. he could not have executed the estate to the use: And so it was
adjudged in an Ejectione Firmae, between John Cooper Plaintiff, and Thomas
Franklin, and others Defendants. P. 14. Ja. in B. R.

A man's heirs remain in him during his life.
3 If a man make a gift in tail, or a lease for life, Co. ib. 22. b. 4. Binghams
case. Co. l. 2. 91. b. 2. and in Mitfords case. T. 31 El. ibid. recite cum
plur. ab author.
the remainder to his own right heirs, this remainder is void, and he has the
reversion in him; For the Ancestor during his life, bears in his body (in
judgment of Law) all his heirs; and therefore it is truly said, that Haeres
est pars antecessoris: And this also appears in a common case; for if land be
given to a man and his heirs, all his heirs are so totally in him, as he may
give the land to whom he will; So it is also if a man be seized of lands in
fee, and by Indenture make a lease for life, the remainder to the heirs male of
his own body, this is a void remainder; for the Donor cannot make his own right
heir a purchaser of an estate tail without departing with the whole estate out
of him, but by departing with the whole estate he may; As if a man make a
feoffment in fee to the use of himself for life, and then to the use of the
heirs male of his body, this is a good estate tail executed in himself, and
the limitation is good by way of use; because it is raised out of the estate of
the Feoffees, which the Feoffor departed with, etc.

Reversion in nature of a ^emainder.
4 If a man make a feoffment in fee to the use of himself in tail, Co. Inst.
pars 1. 22. b. 4.
and after to the use of the Feoffee in fee; In this case, the Feoffee is in by
the Common Law, not withstanding the express words of a remainder, and the
Statute of uses, 27 H. 8. cap. 10. For he has still a reversion but in nature
of a remainder, and yet the Feoffor has the estate tail executed in him by the
same Statute.

Delivery of a ^riting.
5 If a man deliver a writing sealed to the party to whom it is made, Co. ib.
36. a. 1. Co. lib. 9. 137. a. 1. in Thoroughgoods case.
as an escrow to be his deed upon certain conditions, etc. this is an absolute
delivery of the deed, being made to the party himself; for the delivery is
sufficient without speaking of any words (otherwise a man that is mute could
not deliver a deed) and tradition is only requisite; and therefore when the
words are contrary to the Act, which is the delivery, the words are of none
effect; For, non quod dictum, sed quod factum est, inspicitur: And hereof
though there has been variety of opinions, yet is the Law now settled,
agreeable to judgments in former times, and so it was resolved by the whole
Court of Common Pleas, H. 12. Jac. But it may be delivered to a stranger as an
escrow, etc. because the bare act of delivery to him without words works
nothing, etc.

Co. ib. 51. b. 3. Littl. 64.
6 In exchange, if the estates be not equal, albeit the parties agree, Exchange.
yet is the exchange void; for the agreement of the parties cannot make that
good, which the Law makes void.

Co. ib. 53. b. 2.
7 If a man make a lease for life, and by deed grant, Waste.
that if any waste or destruction be done, that it shall be redressed by
neighbors, and not by suit, or plea; Yet in this case, an action of waste
shall lie: because the place washed cannot be recovered without a plea.

Co. ib. 62 b. 3. Littl 82.
8 If a man let lands to another to hold to him and his heirs at the will of the
Lessor, these words (to the heirs of the Lessee) are void; Lease to one and his
heirs at will.
because in this case, if the Lessee die, and his heir enter, the Lessor shall
have an action of Trespass against him, and that before the Lessor enters; for
that by the death of the Lessee, the lease is absolutely determined.

Co. ib. 66. b. 2.
9 In the making of Homage the saving for other Lords ( Salve la foy, Homage.
que se doy, etc. and a mes autres Seigniors) is not of necessity, but only
added for explanation sake; For, the homage is referred only to the Tenements,
which the Tenant holds of that Lord, to whom he does the Homage.

Co. ib. 191. a. 2. 30 Ass. Pl. 8. Co. l. 4. 73. b. 1. Boroughs case.
10 Land given to two, Et uni eorum diutius viventi, Jointenancy.
they make partition, and one of them grants his part to a stranger; In either
of these cases if one of them die, the Lessor shall have again the moity of him
that dies; for, Uni eorum diutius viventi, are but idle words; because
(without them) the Iointenant by course of Law is to have all, in case he
survive. Finch 24.

Co. ib. 212. b. 4.
11 Where the condition is certain ( viz. for the payment of 20 l. or the like)
the Obligor or Feoffor cannot at the time appointed pay a lesser sum in
satisfaction of the whole; because it is apparent, Payment of a sum.
that a lesser sum of m^^ey cannot be a satisfaction for a greater.

Littl. 345. Co. ib. 213. a. 2.
12 If a man enfeoff another upon condition, A sum reserved to a str^^ger, no
ren^.
that he and his heirs shall render unto a stranger a yearly rent of 20 s. etc.
and that if he or his heirs fail to pay it, that then it shall be lawful for
the Feoffor and his heirs to re-enter. Albeit this reservation be by indenture,
whrein the 20 s. reserved is named to be an annual rent, yet is it never the
more a rent for that; because although the stranger be seized of it, and then
failer is made, yet can he not have Assise for it; and for that the estate
moved not from the stranger, neither yet was he party to the deed, etc. But
such a sum reserved in that case, is only a pain set upon the Tenant, which if
he pay not, etc. the Feoffor may enter, etc.

Co. ib. 224. b. 2.
13 If a gift in tail be made to a man, and to the heirs of his body, Issue
falling the D^^^^ may ^^ter.
and if he die without heirs of his body, that then the Donor and his heirs
shall re-enter, this is a void Condition; For, when the issues fail, the
estate determines by the express limitation, and consequently the adding of
the Condition to defeat that, which is determined by the limitation of the
estate, is void; and in that case the wife of the Donee shall be endowed, etc.

Littl. 446. Co. ib. 265. a.
14 These words in a release, Release of future inte^^^^ void.
Quae quovismodo in futurum habere potero, are void in Law: For no right
passes by a release, but only the right which the Releasor has at the time
of the release made; for if there be father and son, and the father is
disseised, and the son, living the father, releaseth by his deed to the
Disseisor all the right that he has, or may hereafter have in the land,
without clause of warranty, etc. and after the father dies, etc. the son may
lawfully enter upon the possession of the Disseisor, notwithstanding such
release; because he had no right in the land in the life of his father, but the
right descended unto him after the release made by his fathers death, etc.

A perpetuity void.
15 A man gives land to Mary and Joane (two sisters) Et haeredibus de corporibus
eorum legitime procreatis (by which they had a joint estate for life, and
several Inheritances) and the Donor intending, Co. l. 1. 84. b. 3. in Corbets
case. per Anderson. 8 Ass. Pl. 33.
that neither of them should break the jointure, but that the Survivor should
have all per jus accrescendi, added this clause, sub hac forma, quod illa, quae
illarum diutius vixerit, tenebit terram illam integram, etc. But in as much as
his intent was contrary to Law; for that cause, if the jointure were severed by
fine levied, the Survivor shall not have the part so severed, by reason of the
said clause, which he did insert of his own conceit and imagination repugnant
to law and reason, etc.

A will repugnant, void.
16 For the construction of Wills, Co. l. 1. 85. b. 4. in Corbets case.
this rule was taken by the Justices in the argument of Corbets case in the
first Report, that an estate, which by the rules of the Common Law cannot be
conveyed by act executed in the life of the Devisor by advice of Counsel
learned in the Law, cannot be devised by his last Will, he being intended at
that time to be inops consilii: As if a man devise land to another for ever,
there the Devisee has fee; because such an estate may be conveyed by act
executed, etc. But if he devise farther, that if the Devisee does not such an
act, that another shall have the land to him and his heirs, this were void;
because such a limitation, if it were by act executed, would be void, etc.

An authority revocable.
17 If a man be bound in an Obligation, to stand to, abide, observe, Co. l. 8.
82. a. 2. in Vinyors case.
etc. the rule, arbittement, etc. yet he may countermand it; for a man cannot
by his act make an authority, power, or warrant to be uncountermandable, which
by the Law, and of its own nature is countermandable; As if I make a letter of
Attorney to make Livery, or to sue an action in my name, or if I assign
Auditors to take an account, or make a Factor, or submit my self to an
arbitrament, albeit these are made by words expressly irrevo^able, or if I
grant, or am bound, that all these shall stand irrevocably, yet they may be
revoked: So if I make my testament irrevocable, yet may I revoke it; for my act
or my words cannot alter the judgment of the Law, and make that irrevocable,
which of his own nature is revocable, etc. And therefore if I be bound by
obligation to stand to the award of I. S. albeit if I discharge that
arbitrament, I shall forfeit my bond; Yet is my submission in that case
revocable; and so is the book in 5 E. 4. 3. b. which seems to be contrary in
that point, well reconciled, etc.

Restraint to demise, void.
18 The Charter of the Incorporation of Suttons Hospital restrains them to alien
or demise, but in a certain form; Co. l. 9. 30. b. 4. in the case of Suttons
Hospital.
this is only a precept and ordinance testifying the Kings desire, but binds
not in Law: So likewise in another part of the same Charter, the exemption of
the Ordinaries jurisdiction is but a clause declaratory; For being a
Lay-corporation, it neither can, or ought to be visited, etc.

A defective ^^^re.
19 In the case of Monopolies in the 11 Report, Co. l. 11. 85. b. 3. in the case
of Monopolies.
the Defendant being charged by the Plaintiff to have sold Cards, etc.
contrary to the privilege granted to the said Plaintiff by Letters Patents of
Qu. Eliz. etc. puts in this bar, that the City of London is an ancient City,
and that within it, time out of mind, etc. there has been a society of
Haberdashers, and that within the said City there was a custom, Quod quaelibet
persona de societate illa, usus fuit and consuevit emere, vendere and libere
m^rchandizare omnem rem and omnes res Marchandizabiles infra hoc regnum Angliae
de quocunque vel quibuscunque personis, etc. and pleaded farther, that he was
Civis and liber homo de civitate and societate illa, and that he sold playing
Cards, etc. as was lawful for him to do, etc. But the Justices gave no regard
to this Bar, because it was no more than what the Common Law would have said,
and then no such particular custom ought to have been alleged; For, in his,
quae de jure communi omnibus conceduntur, Consuetudo alicujus patriae vel loci
non est alleganda, and with this accords 8 E. 4, 5. etc.

Dyer 19. b. 115. 28 H. 8.
20 The Lessor covenants, Lessee may take boots without assignment.
that the Lessee shall have sufficient Hedg-boot by the assignment of his
Bailiff; In this case, for as much as this covenant is in the affirmative, and
flows from the Lessor, and is no more than what the Law gives a Lessee
privilege to do, per Baldwin and Fitzherbert, the Lessee may take Hedg-boot
without assignment. Tamen quaere, for Shelley is of another opinion, because
Cujus est dare ejus est disponere, and Modus and conventio vincunt legem, and
the Lessee also seems to be bound by the acceptance of the lease upon those
terms, Ideo quaere. Howbeit, if I let to one two acres of Meadow, and that it
shall be lawful for the Lessee to cut the grass by the assignment of the
Lessor; yet the Lessee may cut the grass without my assignment.

Dyer 179. 45. 2 Eliz.
21 A man seized in fee of lands in Borough English since the Statute of 27 H.
8. makes a feoffment in fee to the use of himself, Borough English.
and the heirs males of his body engendered, Secundum cursum communis legis, and
after dies seized accordingly, having issue two sons; In this case, the
youngest son shall have the land, notwithstanding the words before. Vide 26
H. 8. 5.

Dyer 230. 57. 6 Eliz.
22 The Lord by Knight Service releaseth and confirms to the Tonant to hold by a
Spur; In this case, Tenure.
the new reservation is void upon the estate before created; Howbeit the tenure
by fealty still remains.

Dyer 238. 36. 7 Eliz.
23 A Coroners Inquest indicts a man of murder, and quod fugam fecit, Coroners
Inquest.
and upon his arraignment he is acquit, and another found guilty, ut oportet,
and it was also found, that he did not fly, yet he shall forfeit his goods;
for upon his arraignment in this case, the flight shall not be given in charge,
because they were before forfeited by the Coroners Inquest.

Hob. 5. Crow and Edwards.
24 In debt upon an obligation of 60 l. for the payment of 31 l. 10 s. at
Coventry, issue was taken, that the money was paid at Coventry, Trial in
foreign County.
and yet by consent of parties, and a paper Rule of Court, the issue was tried
at London, and found for the Plaintiff, and judgment given; Howbeit, upon a
Writ of Error brought in the Exchequer Chamber the judgment was reversed; for
consent of Parties cannot change the Law.

Hob. 13. Sir Daniel Norton and Simmes.
25 If a Sheriff will make an Undersheriff, Sheriff.
provided that he shall not serve Executions above 20 l. without his special
warrant, this proviso is void, as being against Law and Justice: For albeit he
may choose not to make an Undersheriff at all, or may make him at his will,
and so remove him wholly, yet he cannot leave him an Undersheriff, and yet
abridg his power, no more than the King may, in case of the high Sheriff
himself. Vide 167. 52.

Hob. 120. Smales and Dale.
26 Albeit a Tenant in Common enter into the whole, Tenants in Common.
and claim all expressly, yet he cannot thereby dispossess his companion; for
the possession of him that so enters, is over all lawful, as well before such
claim as after, so as there is no possession altered by such claim, and then a
sole claim without more can never change the possession, and without a change
of possession (which the Law protects) it remains as before, and therefore a
Coparcener, Ioyntenant, or Tenant in common can never be disseised by his
fellow, but by an actual Ouster: For the same reason it is, that is a Tenant in
Common do alone bring an action of trespass against a stranger, his action
shall be abated, by pleading him Tenant in Common with another, albeit his
entry were made generally and expressly into all, which proves that the entry of
one serves for all, for else they could not join in an action of trespass.

66 Expressio eorum, quae tacit insunt nihil operatur.
upon the Qu. ^ant of the ^version, de^and must be upon the ^^nd.
1 Queen Eliz. lets for years rendering rent, Co. l. 4. 73. Boroughs case.
payable at the receipt of the Exchequer at Westminster. Seu ad manus balivorum, vel
rec^pturum, etc. with condition to be void for non-payment, etc. the Queen
grants the reversion in fee; Here, the demand of this rent ought now to be made
upon the land: For in the Queens case, the limiting of the payment of the rent
at the receipt of the Exchequer, or to the hands of the Bailiffs, etc. is no
more, than the Law would have ordered, if no place or person at all had been
named in the Patent; So that such a limitation (in the Queens case) operated
nothing; And therefore when the Queen alieneth the reversion to a Subject, it
is then as if no limitation at all had been made, where, or to whom the rent
should be paid; and then the payment ought to be upon the land, which is the
principal debtor, and so by consequent ought the demand also, etc. Expressio
eorum, quae tacit insunt, nihil operatur, and expressa non prosunt, quae non
expressa proderunt.

upon grant of ^ood, the lord, growing ^eedlesse.
2 If a man grant the Manor of Dal^ for years to another, Co. l. 5. 11. a. 4.
in Ives case.
except the wood and under-wood growing and being upon the said Manor, these
words (growing and being) are words of abundance; because without them the Law
will imply as much; for by the demise of wood and underwood upon the Manor, it
is implied, that they are growing; And therefore to demise all the wood upon
the Manor, and all the wood growing upon the Manor, is all one, etc.

Grant of paw^age in rever^^on.
3 If the King demise the herbage and pawnage of a Park to A. for life, and
after grant the reversion of the same to B. for life, Co. l. 8. 56. b. 1. in
the Earl of Rutlands case.
without saying quam cito the first demise Per mortem, sursum redditionem,
forisfacturam, vel aliquo alio modo quocunque expiraverit, etc. In this case,
there is no uncertainty in the last demise, when it shall take effect in
possession; for it shall begin when the first demise determines, Of an estate
^^r life in re^rsion.
because so much is implied in Law: And therefore if the King, reciting, that
another holds the Manor of Dale for his life, grants the said Manor to B. for
his life. In this case, the Law implies, that the second grant shall take
effect upon the determination of the first grant; there is also the same law of
a gift in tail, or a grant in fee, etc.

^rant of the ^^^t avoyd^^ce during a ^^rm.
4 A. possessed for 15 years of the Rectory of Sale, Co. l. 8. 145 a. 2. in
Davenports case.
unto which a Vicarage was appendant, grants the prochein avoidance of the
Vicarage to B. if it shall become void during the said term, etc. and dies
intestate, his Administrator surrenders the Rectory to him in rev^^sion, and
then before the expiration of the said 15 years the Vicarge becomes void: In
this case, notwithstanding the said surrend^, B. shall have the next avoydance;
because the limitation abovesaid, if it shall become void, etc. imports no
more, than what the Law would have said if it had been omitted; For if Tenant
for years grants the next avoydance, the Law will imply such a limitation, if
the Church shall become void during the term; And therefore, Expressio eorum
quae tacit insunt nihil operatur.

^^feitures for ^^ing Mass (...) Recusancie.
5 By the Statute of 23 Eliz. cap. 1. it is provided, Co. l. 11. 58. a. 1. in
Doctor Fosters case.
That every person that shall say or sing Mass, etc. shall forfeit the sum
of 200 marks, and that he, which willingly hears Mass, shall forfeit 100
marks, etc. without limiting to whom the forfeitures shall accrue; and then
follows the clause of forfeiting xx l. a month to the Queen, and after 10 l. a
month for keeping a Schoolmaster, etc. after which follows the clause of the
distribution of the forfeitures, viz. That all forfeitures of any sums of
money limited by that Act shall be divided into three equal parts, etc. And in
Doctor Fosters case in the 11 Report, it was objected, that this last clause of
distribution did only extend to the said forfeitures of 200 and 100 Marks,
etc. which were not given to any person in certain, but indefinitely and
generally, that they should be forfeit, without naming to whom; and therefore
the said clause of distribution did only refer to them; but ye xx l. per
mensem, for Recusancy was expressly given to the Qu: and so was not any of the
other forfeitures; And therefore that clause of distribution shall not extend
unto that, which was before given to the Queen, but unto those penalties only,
which were left indefinitely, and given to none: Howbeit it was answered, and
resolved, that the said branch of distribution shall extend as well to the
clause of the penalty for Recusancy, as to the clause of saying or hearing
Mass; because it is all one to say, he shall forfeit (generally) or he shall
forfeit to the Queen; for the Queen shall have them in both these cases, and
Expressio eorum, quae tacit insunt nihil operatur.

67 Part quacunque integrante sublata, tollitur totum.
Co. l. 3. 41. a. 3. in Ratcliffs case.
1 Lands in Fee-simple shall ever descend to the heir of the whole blood, and
never to the heir of the halfe-bloud; Blood co^ted shall ta^ inherit.
For in as much as the blood, which is between the heir and his Ancestor, is
that which makes him heir (for without blood none can inherit) it is great
reason, that he, which has the full and entire blood, shall inherit before
another, which has but a part of the blood of the Ancestor; because, Ordine
naturae, totum praefertur unicuique parti: And therefore Bracton says, Propter
jus sanguinis duplicatum, tam ex part patris, quam ex part matris, dicitur
haeres propinquior soror, quam frater de^alia uxore; And Britton says, that
Right of blood in that case makes the female exclude the male, according to the
Maxim, Possessio fratris facit sororem esse haeredem: And that of Aristotle,
libro topicorum, part quacunque integrante sublatur, tollitur totum; quod
verum est, si accipias partem integrante pro part necessaria, seu essentiali;
As in the case abovesaid the blood of the father and the mother, are but one
entire inheritable blood, and both of them are necessary and essential to the
procreation of an heir; And therefore, Deficiente uno, non potest esse haeres:
And upon this reason, it seems to Britton, cap. 5. If a man be attainted of
felony by judgment, that the heirs begotten after the attainder are excluded
from all manner of succession of heritage, as well on the part of the mother,
as on the part of the father; and the reason thereof is, because the son
begotten after the judgment had not two inheritable bloods in him; For, at the
time of his generation the blood of the father was corrupt; and then, Ex
leproso parente, leprosus generatur filius: And when the father is attainted of
Felony, the blood on his part being corrupted, the son (as it seems to him)
has but half the inheritable blood in him without corruption, viz. the blood
of the mother, and therefore he holds, that such a son shall not be
inheritable, no not to his mother: And with this agrees Bracton, lib. 3. cap.
13. Non valebit felonis generatio, nec ad hereditatem paternam, vel maternam;
Si autem ante feloniam generationem fecerit, talis generatio succedit in
haereditatem patris, vel matris,, a quo non fuerit felonia perpetrata; because
at the time of his birth he had two lawful bloods commixed in him, which could
not be corrupted by the attainder subsequent, but only as to him that
offended. See more of this matter. Co. Inst. pars 1. 8. a.

Co. l. 11. 39. a. 4. in Metcalfs case.
2 In an action of Account upon the judgment, quod Computet, No writ ^^or befo^
whole ^ment c^^pleated.
before the final judgment given for the arrerages and damages, a writ of
Error lies not, for in that writ these words, Si judicium inde redditum sit,
etc. are meant not only de principali judicio, but also de integro judicio,
viz. When all the matter within the original is determined, as in 34 H. 6. 18.
in Humphrey Bohuns case in a Quare Impedit brought against two, the one pleads
to issue, and the other confesses the action, upon which confession, judgment
is given, and he against whom the judgment was given, sues his way of Error to
remove the record into the Kings Bench, but Prisot and the whole Court denied
it; because the writ of Error was to rehearse all those which were parties to
the original writ, and then the writ says, Et si judicium inde redditum sit,
tunc Recordarium illud habeatis, etc. By which it appears, that the record
shall not be removed by writ of Error, before the whole matter be determined.

(...) like.
3 A writ of Trespass is brought against two, Co. ibid. b. 1.
and the one appears and pleads, so that he is attainted of the trespass, and
judgment is given against him; In this case the Defendant shall not have a
writ of Error; before the matter be likewise determined against the other, etc.
The Lord Cromwels case against Cawary and others, per Prisot, tempore H. 6.

(...) like.
4 In trespass by the Lord of S. against one for his Cattle taken, Co. ibib. b.
2. 32 H. 6. 5 and 6. b.
as to parcel the Defendant pleads not guilty, and as to the rest he pleads
another plea, whereupon the Plaintiff demurs, and after the issue was found for
the Plaintiff, upon which he had judgment; In this case, the Defendant shall
not have a wait of Error until the whole matter be determined, etc.

(...) like.
5 A man cast in a writ of Error, upon a Judgment given, Co. ibid. b. 3. 39 H.
6. Error 11.
where the judgment was given of the Principal and damages, but not of the
Costs; Howbeit the writ was rejected, because the writ is conditional, Si
judicium inde redditum sit, etc.

(...) like.
6 In Formedon brought by Fitz-williams against Copley, Co. ibid. b. 3. 12 Eliz.
Dyer 291.
the Demandant has judgment of part etc. And after the Tenant brings a
general writ of Error before the discussion of the residue, and earnestly
desired that the record might be removed into the Kings Bench; but the Court
would not grant it, before the whole matter in demand should be determined; for
the Justices of the Kings Bench should proceed without warrant, if they should
proceed upon a matter which is not determined, and whereupon no judgment is
given, and the whole record ought to be either in the Common Pleas, or in the
Kings Bench, also the original is inti^^, and cannot be here and there too, etc.

(...) Impe.
7 The next Advowson is granted to two, Dyer 279. 8. 11 Eli^.
who join in a Qu^^e Impedit. the one dies, this shall cause the writ to abate.

(...) not inhe^bl^.
8 Baron and Feme being Donees in special tail, Dyer 332. 27. 16 Eliz.
the Baron is attainted of treason, and executed, having issue, the Feme dies,
the issue shall not have the land, for he ought to make his conveyance by both,
per Curiam.

^ard.
9 If an award be made for the performance of diverse things on one side, and
nothing to be performed on the other, it is a lame award, Hob. 49. Nichol's
case.
and void, according to the book of 7 H 6.

^
10 A. brings an action of trespass against B. C. and D. B. pleads not guilty,
whereupon issue was joined: C. and D. make a justification, ^ob. 70. Parkers
case.
and thereupon after a replication a demurrer was joined; Hanging this
demurrer, the issue was tried against B. and damages given, and judgment
against him; after which judgment the Plaintiff entered a Nolle prosequi
against the Defendant C. and D. whereupon Error was brought by all the
Defendants against the Plaintiff; and the Error assigned was, for that the
Nolle prosequi had discharged all the Defendants; but it was held, that the
Nolle prosequi against C. and D. had not discharged B. and so no error, neither
yet should C. and D. have joined in this writ of Error, because there was no
judgment against them, nor they grieved, and the writ of Error is, Ad grave
da^^um, etc.

68 Ex tota materia emergat Resolutio.
Co. l. 3. 59. b. 1. in Lincoln College case.
1 It is the office of a good Expositor of an act of Parliament to make
construction of all the parts together, Discontin^ance by the husband of (...)
wives land.
and not of one part alone by it self; Nemo enim aliquam partem recte
intelligere possit, antequam totum iterum atque iterum perlegerit: For example,
albeit the first branch of ye Stat. of 11 H. 7. c. 20. makes the
discontinuance, alienation, warranty, and recovery made by the wife of the
Inheritance of her deceased husband to be utterly void and of none effect; Yet
the clause following being joined to the first, with this conjunctive, And that
it shall be lawful for any person. etc. to whom the said Inheritance, etc.
shall appertain, to enter, etc. does clearly expound the generality of the
words of the precedent branch; And therefore the sense of both together is,
that they shall be void and of none effect, by the entry of him, unto whom the
interest, title or inheritance after the decease of the Feme does appertain;
Howbeit they shall not be void, but stand in force between the parties
themselves, and against all others, save only against such as have title, etc.
and they only have power to make them void and of none effect by their entry,
as aforesaid; For, estates of Franktenement or Inheritance cannot be defeated
without entry, and therefore by entry they ought to be made void.

Co. l. 7. 42. a. 3. in Beresfords case.
2 Such an Exposition of a Deed must be made, An entail good, wi^^ menti (...)
the body ^^gotten.
that all the parts thereof may well stand together, and that withal it may
stand with the rule of Law: So if lands be given to the use of Aden, and of the
heirs male of the said Aden lawfully begotten, and for default of such issue,
to the use of diverse others in remainder, etc. Here, albeit there wants the
words (of the body) yet is this a good limitation of an estate tail; For,
otherwise it would be against the intent of the Donor, and all the remainders
over would be void; and if these words should be turned into Latin, they ought
to be rendered thus, Et haeredum masculorum de praefato Adeno legitime procreat.
and not haeredum masculorum praefati Adeni, which is clearly proved by the
subsequent clause, and for default of such issue, etc. For issue cannot be of
Aden, unless the words should be, De dicto Adeno, and so in this case the one
clause is well expounded by the other, etc.

Co. l. 8. 93. a. 1. in Frances case.
3 In Replevin the Defendant avows for damage fesant, The Plai^^ plea in (...)
destroyed, (...) yet recove^
the Plaintiff pleads in Bar, that the said lands were holden in soccage, and
that I. S. being thereof seized in fee by his last Will, devised them unto him
for sixty years, if he should so long live, etc. Unto which the Defendant
pleads, that it was true, there was such a devise made, but after the said
devise I. S. enfeoffed certain persons thereof to the use of the Plaintiff for
sixty years, if he should so long live, etc. whereupon the Plaintiff demurs:
And in this case it was resolved, that although it appeared, that the title, by
which the Plaintiff claimed in his bar to the Avowry, was utterly destroyed
(for the Plaintiff claims by the Will of I. S. which Will appears to be
afterward countermanded by the feoffment, which the Avowant afterward pleads,
and which the Plaintiff confesses by his demurrer) yet shall the Plaintiff
have judgment, because his Count is good, and the Avowant in his replication
to the bar of his Avowry, has done two things; For first, he has destroyed
the title, which the Plaintiff made by the Will; And again, he has given to
the Plaintiff another title, viz. to have the land for 60 years by force of the
uses declared upon the feoffment; And therefore in as much as upon the whole
record (according to which the Count ought to judge) it plainly appears, that
the Plaintiff has a lawful term in the Lands, and that the Defendant had
taken his Cattle wrongfully, for that cause judgment was given against the
Avowant, and for the Plaintiff, albeit the title, which the Plaintiff made for
himself, was destroyed, etc.

^etters Pa^ents and Acts ^f Parliament ^est expound^d by themselves.
4 The best Expositor of Letters Patents, and Acts of Parliament, Co. l. 8. 117.
a. 4. in Doctor Bonhams case.
are the Letters Patents, and the Acts of Parliament themselves, by the
construction and conference of all the parts together; Optima statuti
interpretatrix est (omnibus particulis ejusdem inspectis) ipsum statutum: Et
injustum est, nisi tota lege inspecta, una aliqua ejus particula proposita
judicare vel respondere.

The count made good by the bar; the bar by the replication, etc.
5 In Doctor Bonhams case in the eighth Report, Co. l 8. 120. b. 1. in Doctor
Bonhams case.
although it was admitted, that the Plaintiffs replication was not material,
and the Defendants had demurred thereupon; yet in as much as the Defendants had
confessed in the bar, that they had imprisoned the Plaintiff without cause,
the Plaintiff had judgment: And this is the diversity there taken, that when
the Plaintiff replies, and by his replication it appears, that he has no cause
of action, there he shall never have judgment; but when the bar is
insufficient in matter, or amounts to a confession of the point in debate, and
the Plaintiff replies and shows the truth of his matter to enforce his case,
and in judgment of Law it is not material; yet in that case shall the
Plaintiff have judgment: For it is true, that sometimes the Count shall be made
good by the bar, and sometimes the bar by the replication, and sometimes
the replication by the rejoinder, etc. Howbeit the diversity is, that when the
Count wants time, place, or other circumstance, that may be made good by the
bar, so it is also of the bar, replication, etc. as appears in 18 E. 4. 16.
b. But when the Count wants substance, no bar shall then make it good, so
likewise of a bar, replication, etc. and with this agrees 6 E. 4. 2. Bone
cas, and nota ibidem dictum Choke; Vide 18 E. 3. 34. b. 44 E. 3. 7. a. 12 E. 4.
6. 6 H. 7. 10. 17 H. 7. 3. 11 H. 4. 24, etc. But when the Plaintiff makes
replication, sur-rejoynder, etc. and thereby it appears, that upon the whole
record the Plaintiff had no cause of action, he shall never have judgment,
albeit the bar, rejoinder, etc. be insufficient in matter; for the Court
ought to make judgment upon the whole record, and every one shall be intended
to make the best of his own case: Vide Riegeways case in the third Report, 52.
And these diversities were also resolved and adjudged between Kendal and Helier
M. 25, and 26 Eliz. in B. R. and M. 29, and 30. in the same Court between
Gallis and Burbry.

^he like.
6 Albeit the replication be insufficient, Co. l. 8. 133. b. 1. in Turners case.
yet if the bar be also insufficient in matter, upon the whole record the
Plaintiff shall have judgment; It is otherwise, when by the replication it
appears, that the Plaintiff has no cause of action; for there the Plaintiff
shall never have judgment, although the bar be insufficient: As in Debt upon
an Obligation with condition to perform covenants in an Indenture, the
Defendant pleads performance of all the Covenants generally, when it appears to
the Court; that diverse of them are in the negative or disjunctive, and so the
plea in the general affirmative insufficient; Yet if the Plaintiff reply, and
show a breach of one of the Covenants, which by his own showing is no breach
(upon which the Defendant demurs) judgment shall be given against the
Plaintiff; because upon the whole record it appears, that the Plaintiff has no
cause of action; For the Obligation is endorsed with condition to perform
Covenants, so that the Plaintiff has no cause of action, until there be a
breach of Covenant, and by the showing of the Plaintiff himself there is not
any breach sufficient in Law to give him cause of action, and it is always
intended, that every one will show the best of his case, etc. But when the
bar of the Defendant is insufficient in substance, and the Plaintiff replies
and shows the truth of his case, whereby he produces no matter against
himself; but matter explanatory, or peradventure not material, there the Court
shall judge upon the whole record, and (the Count being good) for insufficiency
of the Bar without any regard to the replication, judgment shall be given
for the Plaintiff: As if a man plead a grant by Letters Patents in Bar, which
are not sufficient, the Plaintiff by replication shows another clause in the
said Letters Patents; which clause is not material, the Defendant demurers in
Law; In this case judgment shall be given against the Defendant, and sic in
simililibus.

Co. l. 8. 163. a. 3. in Black-amors case.
7 Among the misprisions remediless by the Statutes made for the amendment of
records, this is one, Misprisions (...) Clerks.
that albeit the verdict upon issue tried be given for the Plaintiff, yet if
upon the whole record it appears to the Court, that the Plaintiff has no cause
of Action, he shall never have judgment, and so it has been often adjudged.

Co. l. 9. 53. a. 2. in Hickmots case.
8 In debt upon an Obligation, A release pleaded wi^^ exception.
the Defendant pleads a release of the Plaintiff, etc. which was in this
manner. A. does acknowledge himself satisfied and discharged of all bonds,
debts, etc. made by B. (the Defendant) and it is agreed, that A. shall deliver
all such bonds as he has yet undelivered unto B. except one bond of 40 l. not
yet due, wherein B. and C. stand bound to A. etc. The Plaintiff replies, that
the obligation excepted, and the obligation in Curia prolata are one and the
same, whereupon the Defendant demurres: And in this case it was resolved, that
the exception extended to all the premises; because all the words before make
but one entire sentence, and the one depends upon the other; For it is reason,
that when Bonds are satisfied, that they should be delivered; and exceptio
semper ultimo ponenda est; It was also reason, that this bond of 40 l. should
be excepted, because it was not due when the release was made, etc.

Co. l. 10. 99. b. 3. in Beawfages case.
9 M. 10. Jac. upon a motion at the Bar it was resolved, Bond taken by the
She^^^^ not within (...) the Statute (...) 23 H. 6.
that an obligation to the Sheriff upon a Fieri facias, for the payment of the
money in Court, etc. was not void by the Statute of 23 H. 6. cap. 10. For the
first branch of that Statute is, that he shall let to bail by Writ or Bill,
etc. which he could not do before, as appears, 19 H. 6. 43. The second shows
the form of the body, etc. The third contains a penalty, that if the Sheriff
take an obligation in any other form, etc. than is there prescribed, that it
shall be void, so that upon consideration of all the branches together, and
upon their coherence and dependence one upon another, it plainly appears, that
the said Statute does extend only to obligations of such as are within their
guard and custody, and not otherwise.

Co. l. 10. 138. b 1 in Chester Mills case.
10 Always such construction ought to be made of an Act af Parliament, that one
part thereof may agree with the rest, Exposition an Act.
and that all may stand well together, etc.

Co. l. 11. 44. a. 4 in Richard Godfreys case.
11 The Justices shall assesse the Fines of Copiholders upon the due
consideration of all circumstances, Copihold Fines.
Quam rationabilis debet esse finis non definitur, sed omnibus circumstantiis
inspectis pendet ex Justiciariorum discretione: And so it was adjudged in
Communi Banco Inter Stallon Plaintiff, and Brady Defendant, P. 9. Jac. 1845.
Rot.

Co. l. 5. 79. b. in Fitz-herberts case.
12 Tenant for life, Warranty that com^ceth by d^sin.
the remainder to his son and heir apparent in tail, by covin and agreement
betwixt him, and A. and B. to the intent to bar his son of his remainder by a
collateral warranty, makes a lease for years to A. who makes feoffment in fee
to B. to whom the father releaseth with warranty, and all this is by covin and
consent betwixt the parties, to the intent aforesaid; After this the father
dies, and the warranty descends upon the son, being then of full age:
Resolved, per totam curiam, that this warranty shall not bar the son;
because the feoffment of the Lessee for years is disseisin, and the father
himself is particeps Criminis, and agreeing thereunto; then albeit the release
with warranty is made after the disseisin; yet in as much as the disseisin was
to such an intent and purpose, the Law will adjudge upon the whole Act, as it
is agreed in 19 H. 8. 12. If a man disseise another with intent to make
feoffment with warranty, albeit he make the feoffment twenty years after the
disseisin, yet the Law will adjudge upon the whole act, and the disseisin and
warranty shall be coupled together according to the intent of the parties; and
therefore in such case the law will adjuge the warranty to begin by disseisin,
albeit they are made at several tim^s: So if a man make a lease of lands in two
several Counties, reserving an entire rent, abeit the liv^ry be made at several
times (first in one County, and then in another) yet the rent is issuing out of
the lands in both Counties; So likewise if a man make a charter of feoffment of
certain lands with warranty, and deliver the deed, and after make livery of the
land secundum formam cartae; Here also, the Law will adjudge upon the whole
act; and albeit the deed be delivered at one time, and the livery of the land
at another time, and although a warranty ought to enure upon an estate, yet
upon the whole matter the warranty is good.

Eldest child.
13 The use of a recovery was limited by a Latin deed to the use of H. (viz. he
against whom the recovery was had) for life, Dyer 337. 36. 16 Eliz.
the remainder Seniori puero de corpore H. in tail, etc. Afterward H.
covenants by an English Indenture to levy a fine to the use aforesaid, wherein
the use was limited to the use of the eldest child of the body of H. etc. H.
has issue two children, whereof the elder was a daughter, and the younger a
son; And in this case, it was adjudged, that the daughter should have the
land; for albeit the word puero be indifferent to each sex; and then the Male
for dignity should be preferred, yet because the English indenture has
declared the construction to be the eldest child, the daughter shall have it.

Advowson.
14 The Rectory of West Bodwin ought to have come to E. 6. Dyer 350. 21. 18 Eliz.
by attainder of felony, to which the Advowson of the Vicarage was appendant,
and was concealed; Queen Eliz. grants the Rectory, Et omnia haereditamenta,
parcella, spectant, vel pertinent. dict. Rectoriae, and because the patent was
in tam amplis modo and forma, as the Felon had it, and also Ex certa scientia,
so as the Queen was not deceived, it was adjudged, that the Advowson passed
without special mention thereof.

69 Parts simul sumptae componunt totum: and Totum comprehendit suas parts.
^^int grants ^asse all.
1 Where all the Ioyntenants join in a feoffment, Co. Inst. pars 1. 186. a. 3.
every of them in judgment of Law does give his own part; And so by that means
the whole estate does pass to the Feoffee according to the feoffment; So it is
also, when all that have right, title, or interest in any thing, Littl. 534.
Co. ib. 302. a. b.
do join in a conveyance, the estate shall be thereby clearly settled in the
Grantee, as the Disseisee and the Disseisor, or his heir, the Lessee for years
or life, and the reversioner, and the like.

^^^ant of a Be^^fice.
2 The Parson, Patron, and Ordinary may charge the Glebe, Littl. 648. Co. ib.
343. b. 4. etc. F. N. B. 152. 8.
for they all have in them the Fee-simple thereof; So may the Patron and
Ordinary in time of vacation, and the Glebe of a Donative may be charged by the
Patron and Incumbent without the Ordinary, etc.

^^ant of a ^^rtgage.
3 A. enfeoffe B. upon condition, Co. l. 1. 146. b. Mayowes case.
the Feoffor and Feoffee by deed grants a Rentcharge to C. the condition is
broken, and the Feoffor enters; yet is the grant of the rent good; For, both of
them joining together in the deed, they had power to charge the land, etc.

Co. l. 4. 26. b. 1. in Nelwiches case, and Meals case. Co. l. 4. 24. b.
Murrels case.
4 If the Lord of a Copihold Manor grant the inheritance of all his Copiholds;
albeit no mention at all is made of the grant of the Manor, Grant of Copiholds.
yet the Grantee may keep a Copihold Court, and take surrenders, make
admittances, etc. It is otherwise, where he grants the Inheritance of some of
them, retaining the rest to himself; for in that case the Grantee cannot keep
Court; because those Copiholds are in that case severed from the Manor, etc.

F. N. B. 48. r.
5 A Parson shall have a Juris Utrum, Recovery of a Benefice.
where the lands or tenements are aliened by his Predecessor, or if recovery be
had against the Predecessor by default, or reddition, or Nient dedire of his
Predecessor: where he has not prayed in aid of the Patron and Ordinary; but
if he pray in aid of the Patron and Ordinary, and they join in aid, and
render the land or do not gainsay the Demandants action; in that case, the
Successor shall not have a Juris Utrum, because the entire estate was in them
three, and they altogether had power by Law to dispose of it.

Dyer 34. 20. etc. 28 and 29 H. 8.
6 Two were outlawed upon an appeal of Murder, Charter of pardon.
and they purchased their charter of pardon in these words, Donavimus,
remittimus, etc. W. B. and L. B. omnia and omnimoda Utlag. versus praef. W. and
L. vel versus eorum alterum promulgat, etc. And exception was taken by the
Kings Council, because the words of pardon were joint, whereas they should have
been Pardonavimus, etc. W. B. and L. B. and eorum alteri, etc. because each
felony was several, and the several contumacies should have had several
pardons; but the pardon was allowed, because (as it seems) it comprehended all
that both or either of them were guilty of. And such another pardon was also
allowed in 22 E. 4. Term. Rot. 19. but the book is mis-reported, and contrary
to the record.

7 Vide supra 27. 9.

70 Entire things cannot be severed.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 32. a. 1. and 164. b. 3.
1 Of Inheritances that are entire, Dower of entire things.
no division can be made by metes and bounds; And therefore a woman cannot be
endowed of the entire thing it self, but shall be endowed thereof in a special
and certain manner: As of a Mill not by metes and bounds, nor in common with
the heier, but of the third toll dish, or de integro molendino per quemlibet
tertium mensem: And so of a Villein, either of every third days work, or of
every third week, or month: So likewise a woman shall be endowed of the third
part of the profits of stallage, of a Fair, Park, Dove-house, Pischary, viz.
Tertium piscem, vel ictum retis tertium, and of the third part of the profits
of the office of the Marshalsie, Et de tertia part exituum provenientiam de
custodia Gaolae Abathiae Westminster. Of the third part of the profits of Courts,
Fines, Heriots, etc. Of the third presentation to an Addowson, etc.

Co. ib. 47. b. 3. and 292. b. 3. Littl.. 512, 513. and Co. l. 8. 153. a. 1. in
Edward Althums case, and l. 10. 12^. in Cluns case.
2 If a man demise lands for years reserving rent, Entire action and contra.
the Lessor may have several actions of debt for every year, or half-years rent
according to the Covenant, etc. So likewise upon a Recognisance to pay an
hundred pound at five several days, the Conifee presently after the first day
of payment shall have execution for that sum, and shall not tarry till the
last be past, because these touch the realty, and are of the nature of the
land, and the profits thereof, which are severable, and the several payments
upon the Recognisance, are in the nature of so many several judgments: So it
is also of a Covenant or promise; for after the first default an action of
Covenant, or an action upon the Case does lie; because these are also several
in their nature: But if a man be bound in a bond, or by contract to another to
pay a hundred pound at side several days, he shall not have an action of Debt
before the last day be past; for a bond or contract are merely in the
personalty, and entire, neither yet can a bond be sued above once, as a
covenant, etc. may. F. N. B. 130. h. and 131. a.

The like.
3 In trespass, or any action in nature of trespass, Co. ib 130 b. 2.
which is in Law several, and where every one may answer without the other,
there a protection cast for one, shall serve for him only, unless they join
in pleading; or if they plead several pleas, and one Venire facias is awarded
against all, there a protection cast for one shall put the plea without day for
all (and therefore in former times the Plaintiff used to sue out several Venire
facias in those cases for fear of a protection, etc.) But in every action or
plea, real or mixed, against two (where a protection does lie) or in debt,
detinue, or account, a protection cast for the one does put the plea without
day for all; for these actions are in their nature entire, in respect of the
joint privity and interest, that atttend them, etc.

The like.
4 If a real action be brought by several Praecipes against two or more, if the
Demandant be nonsuit against one, Co. ib. 139. a. 4.
he is nonsuit against all; For, as to the Demandant, it is but one entire
writ under one Test, etc.

^n Annuity ^^de a Rent-^harge.
5 A man grants a Rentcharge to another and his heirs, Co. ib. 144 b. 4.
the Grantee dies, and his wife recovers dower thereof against the heir; In
that case the heir cannot after such endowment bring a writ of Annuity for the
other two parts; for either the whole must be a Rentcharge, or the whole must
be an Annuity; because otherwise it would not be according to the deed of the
grant, which is entire without fractions, etc.

A rentcharge ^^tinguished ^^y purchase of ^art of the ^and.
6 If a man, which has a Rent-service, purchase parcel of the land, Littl.
222. Co. ib. 147. b. 4.
out of which that rent is issuing, that shall not extinguish the rent, save
only for the parcel; For Rent-service in that case is severable, and may be
apportioned according to the value of the land; because it issues out of the
profits of the land, and is due by common right: But if a man has a
Rentcharge to him and his heirs issuing out of land, and he purchases parcel
of that land to him and his heirs, the whole Rentcharge is extinct, and the
Annuity also; because a Rentcharge is entire, and issuing out of every part of
the land against common right: Co. ib. 149. a. 1.
So likewise if one holds his land of his Lord by ye service of rendering to his
Lord yearly at such a Feast an Horse, a Spur of gold, a Clove-gilliflower, or
the like, if in that case the Lord purchase parcel of the land, such service is
gone; because such things are in their nature entire, and cannot be severed or
apportioned. Vide Bruertons case, Co. l. 6. 1.

A rentcharge ^ecomes a ^ent-seck.
7 It is said, that if a man grant a rent out of three acts, Co. ib. 147. b.
1. and Co. l. 7. 24. b. 2. Buts case.
and grant over, that if the rent be behind, the Grantee shall distrain for the
rent in one of the acres, this rent is entire, and cannot be a Rent-seck out of
two acres, and a Rentcharge out of the third acre, and therefore it is a
Rent-seck for the whole, and yet he shall distrain for it in the third acre: So
if a rent be granted to two and their heirs out of an acre of land, and that it
shall be lawful for one of them and his heirs to distrain for it in the same
acre, this is a Rent-seck; For in as much as they stand jointly seized of one
entire tent, it cannot be as to one a Rent-seck, and as of the other a
Rentcharge; And this distress is as an appurtenant to the rent; And therefore
in that case the Survivor, or their Grantee of the rent may distrain for it,
etc.

^n entire rent-^harge multi^lied.
8 If the service of the Tenant be to render unto the Lord yearly at such a
Feast an Horse, a Red-rose, or the like entire annual service, Co. ib. 149. a.
1. and Co. l. 6. 1. Bruertons case.
which cannot be severed, and the Tenant alien part of the land to a stranger;
In that case, because the rent cannot be apportioned, it shall be multiplied,
and both the Feoffor and Feoffee shall pay each of them a Horse, Red-rose, etc.
And therefore if the Tenant, which holds by such service enfeoffs the father of
the Lord of part of the land, and that land afterward descends to the Lord;
Yet that shall not extinguish that annual entire service, but the Feoffor shall
still hold by a horse, etc. because the service was multiplied, and each of
them, viz. the Feoffor and the Feoffee held by a horse, etc.

Co. ib. 149. a. 2.
9 A. has a Common of pasture certain (as for ten beasts) in forty acres of
land, and twenty of those acres descend unto him; in that case, Common (...)
certain shall remain (...) descent of parcel.
the Common certain shall be apportioned: It is otherwise, if it be common of
pasture sans number; for that being entire and uncertain, cannot be apportioned
but shall still remain: So it is also of common of Estovers, Turbary, Piscary,
etc.

Co. ib. and Co. l. 6. 2. Bruertons case.
10 If three Ioyntenants hold by an entire yearly rent, as a horse, Rent entire
extinct by ^^covery of part.
a grain of wheat, or the like, and the Tenants cesse by two years, and the
Lord recovers two parts of the land against two of them, and the third saves
his part by tendering of the rent, etc. and finding surety, Albeit the Lord
comes to the two parts by lawful recovery, grounded upon the default and wrong
of the two Ioyntenants, yet shall the entire annual rent be extinct. Vide
infra, r. 114. c. 45.

Co. ib. and Co. l. 6. 1. Bruertons case.
11 If the Tenant holds by fealty and a bushel of wheat, Extinctly purchase
of part.
or a pound of Pepper, or of Common or such like, and the Lord purchases part
of the land, there shall be an apportionment, as well as if the rent were in
money; because such services will admit separation and division: But if the
rent were by one grain of wheat, or one pepper-corn, or one seed of common, by
the purchase of part, the whole shall be extinct; because these things are
entire, and will not admit division, or severance.

Co. ib. 149. b. 1. 2. and Co. l. 6. 1. in Bruertons case.
12 If there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Heriot service, Heriot servi^^
and Heriot ^stome.
and the Lord purchase part of the land, the Heriot-service is extinct; because
it is entire, and also of such value, that peradventure the land still
remaining in the Tenants hand, will not for the future be able to discharge it:
It is otherwise, where the Tenant holds by Heriot-custome; for there purchase
of part shall not extinguish the service, yet in that case also the Heriot is
entire; but Consuetudo vincit communem legem.

Littl. 223. Co. ib. 149. a. 4.
13 If the Tenant holds of his Lord by Homage, Fealty, Escuage, Fealty and
Homage remi^ after purchase.
and Rent, and the Lord purchase parcel of the land, In this case, the Rent and
Escuage shall be apportioned; but the Homage and Fealty shall still remain
entire for the residue of the land still remaining in the Tenants hand; because
he still holds the residue of the land of him, and then he must hold it by some
service or other, and therefore those services being in their nature
unseverable and entire, they shall totally remain, being indeed the freest and
least chargeable services that the Tenant can hold by, etc.

Co. ib. 150. a. 1.
14 Albeit in some cases a Rentcharge, The charge of a stature not
apportionable.
which is in his nature entire, may by act in Law be apportioned, as when the
Grantee of the rent comes to the land by descent, or the like; Yet in such
cases the writ of Annuity fails, because that writ being grounded upon the
grant by deed (which is entire) must be sued for the whole, and cannot be sued
for part: Also a rent in respect of the realty may be apportioned; but the
personalty is indivisible, and shall not be severed, no not by act in Law; As
if execution be sued of body and lands upon a Statute Merchant or Staple, and
afterward the inheritance of part of those lands descends to the Conusee; In
this case, all the execution is avoided; for the duty being entire, and
personal, cannot be divided, etc. Annua nec debitum judex non separat ipsum.

Co. ib. 15^. b. 2.
15 A Rent-service is of its own nature apportionable; Rent-service becomes
rent-seck.
Howbeit if it be changed from Rent-service to a Rent-seck by severance thereof
from the Seigniory, it thereupon becomes entire and unsev^^able according to
the nature of a Rent-secke: And therefore if there be Lord and Tenant by fealty
and certain rent, and the Lord by deed grant the rent in fee, fee-taile, or for
life, saving the fealty, the rent, which before was Rent-service, is by that
severance of it from the Seigniory made a Rent-seck; and then if the Grantee
purchase part of the land out of which that rent is issuing, the whole rent is
extinct.

16 If a man be seized of two acres of land in two several Counties, Co. ib.
153. b. 4.
and makes a lease of both of them, reserving two shillings rent; In this
case, albeit several liveries be made at several times, yet is it but one
entire rent in respect of the necessity of the case, and he shall distrain in
one County for the whole rent, and make one avowry for the whole, etc.

A County entire, for livery.
17 Every County is as it were an entire body of it self, Finch, 79. Littl.
418.
so that upon a feoffment of lands in many Towns in one County, livery of
seisin made in one parcel in any one of those Towns in the name of all,
suffices for all the lands in all the other Towns within the same County; but
upon a feoffment of lands in diverse Counties, there must be livery of seisin in
every County: For entry.
In like manner, Littl. 417. Co. ib. 252 b. 4.
if a man have cause to enter into lands lying in diverse Towns in the same
County, if he enter into one parcel thereof lying in one Town, in the name of
all the lands in the same County, by such entry he has as good possession of
all those lands, as if he had entered into every parcel; but if they lie in
several Counties, there must be several entries. Co. ib. 153. b. 4.
So likewise if a man de disseised of a rent issuing out of lands lying in
diverse Towns within one and the same County, he shall need to bring but one
Assise for the recovery of that rent, etc. But if the lands lie in several
Counties, he shall have several Assizes in confinio Comitatus, and in either
County shall make his pliant of the whole rent; Howbeit there shall be but one
Patent to the Justice. And this Assise in confinio Comitatus is given by the
Statute of 7 R. 2. Stat. 7. R. 2. 10.
For no Assise lay in that case at the Common Law, but the party might distrain
for the whole rent in either County.

The like for ^ervices.
18 If a man hold diverse Manors or lands in diverse several Counties by one
tenure, and the Lord is deforced of his services, Co. ib. 154. a. 2.
he shall have several writs of customs and services, viz. For every County
one writ returnable at one day in the Court of Common Pleas, and thereupon
Count according to his case by the Common Law: But if the Tenant in that case
do cease, the Lord shall not have several writs of Cessavit ut supra; For the
writ of Cessavit is given by Statute of West. 2. cap. 21. and the form and
manner of that writ is therein prescribed; for which cause it is holden in our
books, that in that case a Cessavit lay not at the Common Law, etc.

^ Villein, ad^owson, etc. ^ndivisible.
19 Of Inheritances some be entire, and some several, and of entire, Co. ib.
164. b. 3.
some be divisible, and some indivisible, etc. If a Villein descend to two
Coparceners, this is an entire inheritance; and albeit the Villein himself
cannot be divided, yet the profit of him may; for one Coparcener may have him
one day or week, and the other another day or week, etc. They may likewise have
an Advowson in coparcenary, and may present by turns; because that is also an
entire Inheritance, which cannot be divided.

^stovers, ^^ots, and ^ings uncer^in not divi^ble.
20 If a man have reasonable Estovers, as House-boot, Co. ibid. b. 4.
Hay-boot etc. appendant to his Freehold, they are so entire as they shall not
be divided between Coparceners: So if a Corodie uncertain be granted to a man
and his heirs, and he has issue diverse daughters, this Corodie shall not be
divided between them; It is otherwise of a Corodie certain, for thereof
partition may be made. Likewise Homage, Fealty, Piscary uncertain, Common sans
number, and the like, cannot be divided between Coparceners and the two last,
not only because they are entire, but also because it would be a charge to the
Tenant of the Soil, if such hereditaments should be devisible, the interest in
them being unlimited, etc.

Co. ib. 190. a. 3.
21 If a Corodie be granted to two men and their heirs; In this case, Grant of
a Corodie to two.
because the Corodie is uncertain, and cannot be severed, it shall amount to a
several grant, viz. to each of them one Corodie; for the persons be several,
and the Corodie is personal, and the grant shall be taken most strongly against
the Grantor.

Littl. 314. Co. ibid. 197.
22 If two Tenants in Common of lands in fee make a gift in tail or a lease
for life to another, rendering to them yearly a certain rent, Tenants in common
(...) join in an ^sise of an (...) thing.
and a pound of Pepper, and an Hawk, and an Horse, and they are seized of that
service, and afterward all the said services being arreate, they distrain for
it, and the Tenant makes rescous; In this case, as to the rent, and the pound
of Pepper, they shall have two several assizes, because those rents are
severable, and the two Tenants in Common claim and hold the reversion (unto
which the same rents are incident) by two several titles: But as to the Hawk
and Horse, albeit they be Tenants in Common, etc. they shall join in the
assise, because these things are entire and cannot be severed; for one of them
alone by himself cannot make his plaint in Assise for the moity of an Hawke,
or of an Horse; because the Law will never suffer a man to demand any thing
against the order of nature or reason, as it appears by Littleton, Sect. 129.
Lex enim spectat naturae ordinem.

Co. ibid. b. 3.
23 Tenants in Common shall join in a Quare Impedit, In an ad^^son, ward, etc.
because the presentation to the Advowson is entire: Also they shall join in a
writ of right of Ward, and ravishment of Ward for the body, for the same
reason.

Co. ib. 197. b. 4. 285. a. 4.
24 If two Tenants in Common be of the Wardship of the body, Release, ^o
prejudice.
and a stranger ravisheth the Ward, and one of the Tenants in common releaseth
to the ravisher, this shall go in benefit of the other Tenant in common, and he
shall recover the whole; Neither yet shall that release be any bar to him; for
that the Wardship of the body is entire, and cannot be severed; Co. l, 5. 97.
b. the Countess of Northumberlands case.
So it is also if there be two Ioyntenants of an Advowson, and they bring a
Quare Impedit, and the one does release, yet the other shall sue forth and
recover the whole presentment: Likewise two Tenants in Common shall join in a
detinue of Charters, and albeit the one be nonsuit, yet the other shall
recover.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 199. b. 4.
25 There is a diversity between Chattels real, Tenants i^ common. Ward.
Villein.
that are apportionable, and severable, as leases for years, wardship of lands,
interest of tenements by Elegit, Statute Merchant, Staple, etc. of lands and
tenements, and Chattels real entire, as Wardship of the body, a Villein for
years, etc. For if one Tenant in Common take away the ward, or the Villein,
etc. the other has no remedy by action; but he may take them again: Howbeit
for the other, he, that is outed, may have remedy against his companion that
outs him, viz. by Ejectione Firmae, Ejectment of Ward, Quare ejecit infra
terminum, etc.

Co. ib. 200. a. 3.
26 If two Tenants in Common be of a Manor, Waife. Estray.
to which Waife and Stray does belong, a stray does happen, they are Tenants in
common of the same, and if one does take the stray, the other has no remedy
by action, but only to take it again; unless by prescription they claim to
have them by turns, etc.

Co. ib. 215. a 3.
27 The Grantee of part of the reversion shall not take advantage of a
Condition, by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 34. A condition entire.
As if a lease be made of three acres, reserving a rent upon Condition, and the
reversion is granted of two acres, the rent shall be apportioned by the act of
the parties; but the condition is destroyed for that it is entire and against
common right: It is otherwise in the Kings case, etc.

^elease of (...) actions.
27 In mixed actions, as an action of Waste, Litt. 492.
etc. which are mixed both in the realty, and personalty, a release of all
actions real, or a release of all actions personal, is a good plea in bar;
because the action is in its nature entire, and therefore a release of part
shall annul all, etc. There is the same reason of an Assise of Novel disseisin,
a writ of Annuity, Quare Impedit, etc.

^^heritance and ^ehold entire ^erm not so.
28 If a Disseisor make a lease for a hundred years, Co. ibid. 285. a. 4. Co.
ib. 297. a. 2. and Co. l. 5. 6. in Foords Case.
the Disseissee may confirm parcel of those years, viz. Either the whole land
for part of the term, or part of the land for the whole term, etc. So likewise
if the Tenant for life make a lease for a hundred years, the Lessor may confirm
either for part of the term, or for part of the land; but an estate of
Inheritance or Freehold cannot be confirmed for part of the estate;
^nfirmation (...) part of a ^^me.
because those estates are entire, and not severable as years be: And
therefore if the Disseisee confirm the estate of the Disseisor, Litt. 519.
albeit in the deed of confirmation, the limitation be expressed to be in tail,
for years, for a day, or only for an hour, yet has the Disseisor a
Fee-simple, because his estate was before the confirmation entire and
unseverable.

^^eritance and ^ehold entire
29 If any Disseisor make a lease for life, the remainder in fee, Litt. 525.
Co. ibid. 297. a. 4. and b. 2.
if I confirm the estate of the Tenant for life, yet after his decease I may
well enter; because they are several estates, and nothing is confirmed but the
estate for life: So it is also when the several estates are in one and the same
person, as if the Disseisor make a gift in tail the remainder to the right
heirs of the Tenant in tail, or the remainder first for life, ^^nfirmation
^one jointe^^nt shall e^^e to both.
and then to the right heirs of the Tenant in tail; In these cases, if the
Disseisee confirm the estate of the Tenant in tail, it shall not extend to the
other estates, causa qua supra: But if the Disseisor make a lease for life to
A. and B. and then the Disseisee confirms the estate to A. Here B. shall take
advantage thereof; because the estate of A. which was confirmed, was entire and
joint with B. and therefore in that case, the Disseisee shall not enter into
the land, and divest the moity of B. So likewise if the Disseisor enfeoff A.
and B. and the heirs of B. and then the Disseisee confirms the estate for his
life, this shall not only extend to his companion, but to his whole Fee-simple
also; because to many purposes he had the whole Fee-simple in him, and the
confirmation shall be taken most strongly against him that made it, etc.

(...) confirmati^o Baron and ^e not good.
30 If I let land to a Feme sole for term of her life, Litt.. 525. Co. ibid.
299. a. 4.
who takes husband, and after I confirm the estate of the Baron and Feme to
hold for their lives; In this case the Baron did not hold jointly with his
Feme, but held in her right for the term of her life; because the wife had the
whole estate in her before for life, and Iointenants ought to come in by one
entire title, etc,

^^nment ^c.
31 If the reversion of three acres be granted, Co. ibid. 309 b. 4. and Co.
Litt. 5. 81. a. 4. in Foords case.
and the Lessee agree to the said grant for one acre, this is good for all
three: So it is also of an Attornment in Law, if the reversion of three acres
be granted, and the Lessee surrender one of the acres to the Grantee, this
attornment shall be good for the whole reversion of the three, according to the
Grant, etc. For the Grant being entire, the attornment must be entire also.

^nment and ^ory entire.
32 If here be Lord and Tenant, Co. ibid. 314. a. 4. Litt.. 563.
and the Tenant hold of the Lord by twenty manner of services, and the Lord
grants his Seigniory to another, if the Tenant pay de facto any parcel of any
of the services to the Grantee, this is a good attornment for all the services;
although the Intent of the Tenant was to attorne but for that parcel, only:
because, albeit there be diverse manners of services, which the Tenant ought to
perform, yet is the Signiory entire, and the Tenant having attorned for part,
it cannot be void for that part, and good it cannot be, unless it be for the
whole, etc. Neither can the Tenant attorne for a time, or upon Condition, etc.

Co. l. 5. 81. a. 4. in Foores Case. Litt.. 566. Co. ibid. 315. a. 3.
33 If there be many Iointenants, which hold by certain services, The like.
and the Lord grant to another the services, and one of the Iointenants attorne
to the grantee, this is as good, as if all had attorned, because the Signiory
is entire, for there cannot be an attornement in part, etc. So also a seisin of
a Rent by the Lands of one Iointenant is good for all, and a seisin of part of
a Rent is a good seisin of the whole, etc.

Co. ibid. 335. a. 1.
34 If the donee in tail enfeoffe the denor alone, Discontin^ by enfeoff^^^^
the Denot, (...) a stranger.
that makes no discontinuance: because the reversion in that case is not
discontinued, etc. But if he enfeoffe the donor and a stranger, this is a
discontinuance of the whole Land, because the stranger is then seized per my
and per tout, as well as the donor, etc.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 373. b. 2.
35 If Husband and Wife Tenants in special tail, Warrantie descending
i^tirely (...) the issue.
have issue a Daughter, and the Wife die, the Husband by a second Wife has
issue another Daughter, and discontinueth in Fee, and dies, a Collateral
Ancestor of the Daughters releaseth to the discontinuee with Warrantie, and
dies, the Warrantie descends upon both Daughters: yet the issue in tail
shall be barred of the whole: because in judgment of Law the Warrantie
descended upon each of them entirely.

Co. ibid. 390. a. 2.
36 If a Man makes a Feoffment in Fee with Warrantie to the Feoffee his heirs
ad assigns, Warrantie entire.
and the Feoffee re-enfeoffeth the Feoffor and his Wife, or the Feoffor and any
other stranger, the whole Warrantie remains still, because the Warrantie is
entire and not parted: So it is also if two do make a Feoffement with
Warrantie to one and his heirs and Assigns, and the Feoffee re-enfeoffe one
of the Feoffers, In this Case also the Entire Warranty does remain, etc.

Co. ibid. 367. b. 4. Litt.. 60.
37 If a Man of full age, The like.
and an Infant make a Feoffement in Fee with Warrantie, this Warrantie is not
void in part, and good in part, but it is good for the whole against the Man of
full age, and void against the Infant: For albeit the Feoffement of an Infant,
passing by livery of seisin, is voidable, yet the Warrantie, which takes
effect only by deed, is merely void, etc.

Co. lib. 1. 86. b. 3. in Corbets Case.
38 If a Man let Lands for years, the remainder in Fee, A Lease (...)
remainder^ entire Estat^.
and livery is made to the Lessee for years only, this shall convey the
Fee-simple to him in remainder, For albeit livery be not necessary to the
Tenant for years, yet it shall enure for the benefit of him in the remainder:
because the particular term, and all the remainders, which depend thereupon
(though never so many) do in judgment of Law make but one entire Estate, which
takes effect at one and the same time, etc.

Co. l. 3. 86. b. 3. Corbets Case.
39 Since the Statutes of Uses, 27 H. 8. A Condi^^^^ without f^ctions.
If a Man make a gift in tail, with proviso or upon Condition, that if the
donee does such an Act, that his Estate, shall cease during his life, or if a
Feofment in Fee be made with proviso, or upon such a Condition, that his Estate
shall cease during his life, these provisoes or Conditions are utterly void,
against Law: for such an estate tail or in Fee in Land being entire, and
without fractions, such a Condition or limitation annexed to such Estates ought
to destroy the whole Estate, unto which they are annexed, and not part thereof:
and he that enters for the condition broken, ought to have the same estate,
which he had, when he made the estate conditional, which was entire, and
without fractions, etc.

^o fractions (...) Estates.
40 If a man make feoffment in fee of land to the use of A. and his heirs
every Monday, Co. ibid. 87. a. 4. Per Walmasly.
and to the use of B. and his heirs every Tuesday, and to the use of C. and
his heirs every Wednesday, these limitations are void; For we find no such
fractions of estates in the Law,

^void Livery.
41 A man makes a lease for years of an house, Co. l. 2. 31. b. Bottisworths
Case.
and of a Close lying by it self, and of certain other lands in Dale, the
Lessor makes feoffment of all, and makes livery in the Close, the Lessee being
at that present in the house: In this case the livery was adjudged void for
all; because the demise being entire, the possession of the house is the
possession of all entirely demised with it, etc. So it had been also, if the
Close had been demised by the Lessee at will, but not for years.

^o fractions (...) bargain and ^le.
42 If a man be seized of a Manor, part in demesne, Co. l. 2. 35. b. 3. in S.
Roll. Haywards case.
part in lease upon Rent reserved, and part in Copihold, and by Indenture in
consideration of money, etc. demiseth, grants, bargaineth, sells, etc. unto
A. B. and C. the said Manor with the Appurtenances, and the reversions and
remainders thereof, etc. together with all rents reserved upon any demise, etc.
to have and to hold to them and to their Assigns immediately after the decease
of the owner of the Manor, for the term of seventeen years; In this case,
the grant ought to take effect entirely, as a demise at the Common Law, or
entirely by bargain and sale, by raising of an use by force of the Statute of
27 H. 8. and not for part by the Common Law, and for another part by raising of
an use; for thereby the Manor may be dismembered, which is against the express
demise and bargain; because both parties agreed, that a Manor should be
entirely demised and bargained, and also that a Man nor should be accepted by
the Lessee without any fraction or division thereof.

^^^tenancy (...) entire E^^^te. ^^^omment by ^e good for ^ll.
43 If there be two Iointenants for life, Co. l. 2. 66. b. 4. and 67. a.
Tookers Case.
and the Reversioner grants over his estate, whereupon one of the Iointenants
only does attorn; Yet this is a good attornment of both to vest the whole
reversion in the Grantee; because the estate of the joint Lessees being entire
(for every Iointenant is seized per my and per tout) the reversion, which is
dependant and expectant, upon such an estate is entire also; and therefore the
attornment by one of them, is attornment for both to convey the whole
reversion, etc. So if the Lessor disseise his two, Lessees for life, and
enfeoff another, and one of the Lessees re-enter this act of one of them is
attornmenf in Law for both: If one Iointenant give seisin of Rent, that shall
bind his companion, as it is agreed in 39 H. 6. 2. If a lease be made to two,
and after the reversion is granted to one of them, this is holden good
attornment in Law for both (Baldwin 28 H. 8. Dyer, 12. b.) And all this in the
respect of the entireness of their estate, etc.

(...) condition of ^^bond to per^^rm to Cove^ants is entire.
44 A. having an office and power to make Deputies, Co. l. 3. 83. b. 4.
Colstrits Case.
by Indenture betwixt him and B. and for a hundred pound paid, etc. makes
deputation thereof to B. and A. covenants with B. that if A. die before B. that
then the Executors of A. shall repay unto B. fifty pounds, with diverse other
Covenants in the said Indenture concerning the said office in the enjoyment
thereof; And A. was bound to B. in two hundred pounds for the performance of
Covenants, and in debt the breach was alleged for the non-payment of the said
fifty pounds, in as much as B. survived A. Here, albeit the said Covenant to
repay fifty pounds was lawful, yet in as much as the rest of the Covenants were
against the Statute of 5 E. 6. cap. 16. The bond which was a thing entire being
void for those un-lawfull Covenants, it was utterly void for all: And if the
addition of a Law-full Covenant should make the bond of force as to it the
Satute would then serve to little or no purpose, etc.

Co. l. 4. 9. a. 3. Bedils Case. Ibidem a. 4.
45 Seisin of any part of a service (as of part of a Rent, A reservatio^ of a
Rent entire.
of one days work, when it is done or the like) is actual seisin of all to
have an Assise: because the service in that case is entire, etc. So if a man
make a Lease for life, or a gift in tail, rendering the first years a quarter
of wheat, and after the yearly Rent of C. S. the seisin of the wheat is the
seisin of the Rent, whereupon he may have an Assise: for all is but one entire
reservation, etc.

Co. l. 4. 33. a. 2. in Mittons Case.
46 When the King makes a Sheriff durante beneplacito, The Shr^ffe^ Office
entire.
albeit he may determine his Office at his pleasure, yet he cannot determine it
in part, as for a Town, or hundred, or any other part, nor abridge the
Sheriff of any thing incident or appurtenant to his Office: for the Office is
entire, and so ought he to continue in his Intiretie without any fraction or
diminution whatsoever: unless it be by Act of Parliament, or that the King
makes any Town etc. A County of it self, and Constitutes there a Shriffe, and
all things incident to a Sheriff within the said Town: but he cannot
determine the Office of the Sheriff, or any part thereof without, but by
constituting a new Sheriff, viz. for the execution and administration of
Justice: because the Office is in its nature entire, etc.

Co. lib. 4. 52. Rawlins Case.
47 A possessed of an house, whereunto a stable was adjoining, A proviso entire.
for the term of 30 years, by deed indented in consideration of 25 l. fine to
be afterward paid, demised the same house and stable to B. for 21 years,
rendering unto A. 24 l. per annum quarterly, and also 5 l. quarterly at the same
feasts, until the said 25 l. fine should be paid, upon condition that if the
said sum of 25 l. or the said Rent should be arreare at any Feast etc. that
then it should be Lawful for A. to re-enter: And afterward and before any day
of payement B. re-demiseth the said stable unto A. for 10 years, who entered,
and after the Rent of 24 l. per annum is arreare, and Lawfully demanded, and
also the 5 l. parcel of the sum in gross was not paid: In this case, the
whole Condition, as also the re-entry of A. is suspended: For albeit the
condition stands upon two parts in the disjunctive, viz. Either for the payment
of Rent, or of a sum in gross (which was collateral) yet in as much as B.
re-demised part of the demise to A. (viz. the stable) whereinto A. entered, and
the Rent was hereby suspended, and hereupon the entire condition, both as to
the Collateral sum as also to the said Rent, was likewise suspended: because
although the condition comprehend two several things in the disjunctive of two
several natures, viz. The one a Rent issuing out of the land, which is
incident to the reversion, and may be suspended by the inter-medling with the
land: the other matter collateral to the land, which cannot be suspended by the
said re-demise: yet here there are not several conditions, but one entire
condition, which referres to two several branches: and therefore being
suspended in part it is suspended in all: And that the condition was entire, it
appears by the Conclusion thereof, viz. that for the non-payment of the one or
of the other, it should be Lawful for the Lessor to re-enter into all the
land: so that it is but one entire Condition and one entire entry, which is not
by the Acts of the Parties to be apportioned or divided etc. The like case was
adjudged p. 27 El. Rot. 185. inter Brightman and Somerford.

Co. lib. 4. 94. b. 2. in Slades Case.
48 A, and B. Bargain together, Annual payment of whea^
that A. for a certain consideration shall deliver unto B. yearly 20 quarters
of Barley during the life of B. in this case if A. fail of any one years
payment B. cannot have an action of Debt for it until all the years be
incurred; because an Action of Debt is entire and cannot be sued above once;
How beit he may in that case have an Action upon the case for it, etc. as it
was adjudged in the case between Redman and Pecke 2. and 3. P. and M. Dier. 113.

(...) condition entire.
49 A Condition annexed to an Estate is so entire, Co. l. 4. 119. b. 4. in
Damports Case.
that it will not admit any seperance from the Estate, unto which it is annexed
without the destruction of it, and being annull as to some persons, or for
part, it is annulled for all; As if A. demise Land to B. and his Assigns, with
condition, that neither B. nor his Assigns shall alien without the License of
A. If A. give B. License to alien the Land, to whom he pleases, and he
Assigns the Lease to C, neither C. nor any after-assignee is bound by that
condition; but the Condition is thereby absolutely determined; so that no
alienation, which may be made afterward shall be a breach of the Condition, or
give cause of entry to the Lessor; for the Lessor cannot dispense with an
alienation for one time, and yet the same Estate remain still subject to the
condition afterward: And albeit the proviso be, that neither the Lessor nor
his Assigns shall alien, yet when the Lessor licenceth the Lessee to alien, he
shall never defeat, by force of that proviso, the term, which is absolutely
aliened by his License; for the Assignee, (and so by consequent every
subsequent Assignee afterward) shall retain it in the same plight, that it
was in, when the Lessee granted it, then it was absolute and severed from any
condition, etc. And as the dispensation to one is a dispensation to all other
subsequent Assignees, so it is also as to persons; for in case of Iointure,
where the Estate is in more then one, a License of Aliening granted to one
shall enure to all, as it was adjudged in Crompton and Leeds case, T. 28. E.
Rot. 256. in the Co. Pl. Likewise if the Lessor License the Lessee to alien
part of the Land, he may alien the rest or any part thereof without License;
because a Condition cannot be divided, or apportioned by the Act of the
Parties, as it was holden by Popham Cl. Instit. against the opinion in Dier. 16
E. 334.

The like.
50 A Lease was made by Indenture for 21 years of 3 Manors A. B. and C.
rendering per annum. for A. 6. l. for B. 5 l. and for C. 10 l. to be paid at a
place out of the Land, Co. lib. 4. 120. a 4. in Dumports Case.
with a condition of Re-entry into all the three Manors for Default of payment
of the said Rents, or any of them; and after the Lessor by deed indented and
enrolled bargains and sels the Reversion of an house and 40 acres of Land,
parcel of the said Manor of A. to one and his heirs and afterward by another
deed indented and enrolled bargains and sels all the residue to another and
his heirs, and whether the second barginee might enter for the Condition
broken or not, was the Question; And it was adjudged (P. 14 E. Rot. 1015) that
he could not enter for the condition broken; because the Condition being entire
cannot be apportioned by the Act of the Parties, but, by the severance of part
of the reversion, was utterly destroyed, etc.

^n Exchange ^^tire, being a ^ondition in ^aw.
51 If A. give in exchange 3 acres to B. for other three acres, Co. l. 4. 121.
4. b. 2. in Bustares Case.
and after one acre is evicted from B in this case all the exchange is
defeated, and B. may enter into all his Land; for albeit the exchange had been
good, if A. had given but two acres, or one Acre, or less, yet in as much as
all the three acres were given in exchange for the other, and the Condition
(which was employed in the exchange) was entire, upon the eviction of that one
acre the condition in Law is broken, and thereupon entry given into all; for it
is the property of a Condition to defeat all, and not a part only, except the
Condition be restrained only to a part, as it is not in this case. And
therefore there is no diversity between an entire thing (as a Manor) and a
thing, that is severable, in point of exchange, etc. There is the same Law also
of a Partition, as it is agreed in 13 E. 4. 3. f. and. 42. Ass. pl. 22. in the
Earl of Pembrooks Case.

Co. l. 4. 121. a and 122. b. Bustards Case.
52 Baron seized of the Manor of Dale to the use of himself and his Feme, and
of the heirs of the body of the Baron, The like.
levies a fine to A. who enfeoffes B. who enfeoffes C. C. exchanges the said
Manor of Dale with B. for the Manor of Sale, the Baron dies, the Feme enters
into the Manor of Dale; In this case B. may re-enter into the Manor of Sale;
for as when the whole Estate in part is evicted, all the exchange is defe^ted,
so here, when the Estate of the Frank-tenant for the life of the Feme, which is
but parcel of the Estate, is evicted in all the Land, or in part, the whole
exchange is thereby defeated, by reason of the condition in Law annexed unto
it; for albeit a reversion expectant upon an Estate for life may be given in
exchange for Land in possession, yet when C. was seized of the Manor of Dale
in his Demesne as of Fee, and gives that in possession unto B. in exchange, as
aforesaid, after that the Feme enters and evicts the Estate for life, etc. B.
may re-enter into the whole Manor of Sale, which was so given in exchange;
because the Condition in Law (annexed to the exchange) being broken for part of
the Estate, is defeated for all; etc. So likewise if he in the reversion in Fee
disseiseth his Lessee for life, and then gives that Land in exchange to another
for other Land, and after the Lessee for life enters; In that case also the
other may re-enter into his Land again, and hereby defeat the whole exchange;
because the implied Condition is in his nature un-severable and entire.

53 A Lets to B. the Manor of Dale for 30 years, A surrender entire.
except all wood and under-wood growing and being upon the Manor, Co. lib. 5.
11. Jves Case.
after A. lets to B. all the wood and underwood, etc. for 62 years without
impeachment of wast, And after A. lets to B the Manor for 30 years from the
expiration of the former ease of 30 years, the first 30 years expire, the
Lessee cut the trees, the Lessor brings an Action of wast; And Judgment was
given for the Plaintiff for by the accept of the future Lease, the lease for 62
years was presently and actually surrendered, because it could not be
surrendered in part, and in force for the residue of the term; and the Lessee by
such acceptance affirmed the Lessor to have ability to make a new lease, which
he could not do so long as the first lease stood in force: so likewise if the
Lessee for 20 years accept a lease for three years to begin ten years after,
this is a present surrender of the whole term; for the last ten years cannot
be surrendered, and the first ten still remain in esse, because that would make
fractions, of the term, which is in its nature entire: Neither can he, that
has a lease for 20 years surrender the last ten years by any express
surrender, saving unto him the first ten years, etc.

Co. lib. 5. 11. b. 3. and 56. a. 1. Knights Case.
54 Two Houses are let to one man, An entire condition.
the one for 4 l. Rent per annum the other for 20 s. per annum, with proviso,
that if the said Rent of 5. l. be behind in part or in all, then the Lessor
shall re-enter; these Houses afterward escheate to the King, who after grants
that, upon which the ^0. s per annum is reserved, to I. S. the Rent thereof is
arreare; In this case, the Patentee cannot enter for the Condition broken;
because albeit the Rents were several, yet the Condition was entire by the
express reservation, and gives in entire re-entry into all for default of
payment of any part of the Rent; and therefore by the severance of any part of
the reversion all the condition (as to all common persons) is destroyed;
Howbeit the whole condition remains entirely in the King with the reversion of
the other House, and that is in respect of his prerogative, etc.

^he whole ^^rm one in^^^e day.
55 The Lessee for years brings an ejectione firm, Co. lib. 5. 74. b. 1. in
Wymarks Case.
the Defendant says that before the lease, the Lessor bargained and sold to
him in Fee by indenture enrolled within six months, whereby he was seized,
until diseised by the Lessor, who let the land, etc. The Plaintiff pleades
that the bargain, etc. was upon Condition, which was broken, etc. the
Defendant demurres, and shows cause according to the Statute, viz. Because
the Plaintiff showed not forth the Indenture of the Condition; And in this case
judgment was given for the Plaintiff; because when any deed is showed in
Court, the deed by judgment of Law remains in Court all the term, in which it
is showed; but at the end of the term if the deed be not denied, then the Law
adjudgeth it in the Custody of the Party, to whom it belongs; for all the
term in Law is but one day: and therefore the deed shall be intended to remain
in Court all the term, in which it is showed; for the term in that case is
Entire, and will admit of no fractions; And so by consequent the Plaintiff may
in such case take advantage of the Condition comprised in the deed showed forth
by the Defendant himself, so he do it in the same term, as aforesaid, etc.

^erdict and ^amages in^^^e.
56 Goods were cast super arenas, aqua salsa minime coopertas, Co. l. 5. 108.
a. 3. in Sir Henry Constables Case.
Manerii de B. infra fluxum and refluxum maris, and another parcel were
floting super aquas maris refluent. ex arenis ejusdem Manerii infra fluxum,
etc. The Patentee of the Manor and Fee of Holdernesse in Com. Ebor. brings an
Action of Trespass against him, that seized them to the use of the Lord
Admiral: And the Jury assessed damages entirely for all; In this case
judgment was given against the Plaintiff; because the Goods so floting upon
the Waters (called Flotsam) did not of right belong to him, but to the Lord
Admiral; And therefore the Verdict being entire, ( viz. given for both) and so
the damages of the wrecke being thereby made un-severable from those of the
Flotsam, the Plaintiff could take nothing by his wort. So in Trespass (21 H.
7. 34. b.) the Defendant justifies for part, and Pleads not guilty for the
residue, the Jury inquire of one of the things, and tax damages entirely; here,
the whole Court (against Fineux) adjudged it not good, 22 E. Dier. 369. accord.
M. 14 and 15 El. in Trespass by Pooly for his Servant beaten and his Close
broken, and said not, per quod servitium amisit, upon non culp. the Jury
assessed damages entirely, and it was adjudged not good. See 9 H. 7. 3. M. 30,
and 31 El. inter Moore and Bedle in Assumpsit, where the Plaintiff lays two
breaches, whereof one was insufficient, upon non assumpsit the Jury assessed
damages entirely; And in this case there were two resolutions, 1 It shall be
intended, that they gave damages for both; 2 Because the Plaintifs had no cause
for one of the allegations, ^^tire servi^^.
the judgment was to be reversed in the Exchequer Chamber, etc.

57 Concerning entire Services, Co. lib. 6. 1. in Bruertons Case.
and where they may be apportioned, ^arranty in^^^e.
and where not, see Bruertons Case, per tout, Co. l. 6. 1. and John Talbots
Case in the 8. Rep. fol. 108.

58 Warrantie is an Entire thing, which will not suffer partition, but shall
always either entirely remain, or be entirely annulled; Co. lib. 6. 126.
Morrices Case.
and therefore, if there be two Ioyntenants with Warrantie, and petition is
made between them by judgment, in a writ de partitione facienda, by force of
the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. 1. in this case, the Warrantie shall remain to
each of them entirely; because upon the Kings writ they are compellable by the
Statute (unto which every one is Party) to make partition, and so the Party
persuing his remedy according to the Act shall not receive any prejudice by
the operation of the same Act, unto which every one is party: but if they had
made partition by deed, by consent (since the said Act,) albeit they were
compellable by writ to make partition, yet in as much as they did not pursue
the Statute to make partition by writ, for that cause such partition remains
as it was before at the Common Law, and (by consequent) the Warrantie is gone,
(as it was agreed, in 29 El. 3. tit. Garr.) because the Warrantie is
indivisible, and cannot be parted as the Land may.

Co. lib. 6. 23. The Marqu. of Winchesters Case.
59 The Marcquesse of Winchester by will (as it was supposed, A will for Lands,
and Testament (...) goods being one writing are entire.
) devised diverse Lands, jewels, etc. To his reputed Sons, and also made them
Executors; They endeavoring to prove this will in the prerogative Court, A
suggestion was framed in the name of the Marquess his Son and heir, to have
a prohibition out of the Kings Bench, supposing that he was not of sanae
memoriae at the time of the making of the will, which was pleaded in the
Spiritual Court, in Arrest of the probat of the will, and thereupon a motion
was made in the Kings Bench to have prohibition generally to stay all the
proceedings in the Ecclesiastical Court, viz. as well for the Legacies and
bequests in the personalty, as for the Lands; and the reason and ground of that
motion was; for that the will concerning the Lands, and the Testament
concerning the goods, being all mixed together in one entire will, if those in
the Ecclesiastical Court should proceed concerning the Testament of the goods,
that would prevent and prejudice the trial in the Kings Bench; for if he was
of sanae memoriae at the making of the Testament of the goods, he could not be
of non sanae memoriae at the time of the making of the will of the Land, both
being made at one and the same instant; And the Common Law ought to determine,
what shall be said to be sanae and perfect memoriae at the time of making the
will concerning the Land, and therefore the prohibition shall be general, quod
fuit concessum per totam Curiam. And in the Argument of his case the Lord Coke,
being then Attorney general cited a case between L. Loyde and L. Loyde, in 38,
and 39 El. in the K. B. where it was ruled accordingly in terminis
terminantibus, and that no Consultation should be granted for any part, until
the whole matter should be tried in the same Court.

Co. lib. 8. 51. b. 3. in Syms's Case
60 In formedon in remainder the Tenant pleads in bar collateral Warrantie,
descended upon the Ancestor, Warrantie ^^tire.
unto whom the remainder was made, the demandant says, that the said Warrantie
descended also upon B. another Coheire of the Warrantie, and that the Warrantie
quoad medietatem tantum descended upon the demandant: nevertheless it was
resolved per totam curiam, that the demandant was barred for the whole; for the
Warrantie in that case is entire, and extends to all the Land, and is a bar
to every person, upon whom it descends, of all the right, which he has in the
Land, and if each of them had right in the Land jointly or severally, each of
them is barred, and if one of them only had right and the other nothing, he
that has the sole right shall be barred of all, etc. vide Pl. ibid. and 5 E.
2. Garr. 78. 4 H. 7. 18. b. 6 E. 3. 50. 11 H. 4. 20. 41 E. 3. 3. 10 H. 7. 13.

Co. l. 8. 105. b. 1. in John Talbots Case.
61 Diverse services, Entire servi^^
(by reason of their Entireness) upon alienation of parcel of the tenancie
shall be multiplied, sometimes also the Lord shall be contented with one entire
service amongst all the several alienees; And sometimes upon the Lords purchase
of parcel thereof such a service shall be either totally extinct, or else
totally preserved: And therefore when an entire thing (be it a valuable
Chattel, as a Horse, Ox, a golden Spur, a Bow and arrows, a Sword, a
Ganflet only, or the like, or matters of pleasure, as a Falcon, or other
Hawke, a Dog, or say other things of pleasure) shall be rendered or paid by the
Tenant to the Lord: in that case the entire service by the alienation of parcel
of the Tenancie shall be multiplied, so that each particular alienee shall
render the whole service, and yet upon purchase of parcel by the Lord the whole
is extinct, as it was resolved in Bruertons Case in the 6. Rep. fol. 1. So
likewise homage and fealty by alienation of parcel shall entirely multiply:
because when the Tenant makes homage or fealty, he does them for all the
tenements, which he holds of the Lord, so that those services extend to the
entire Tenancie, and to every part thereof, and albeit the Lord purchase
parcel, yet the homage and fealty do still remain for the residue: also
Knight Service, which is an entire service to be performed by the body of a
man, shall be multiplied upon alienation of parcel, and albeit the Lord
purchase parcel, yet it shall not be extinct, but shall entirely remain for
the risidue, quia par bono publico, and defensione regni, And the escuage shall
be apportioned: But the personal service to be Sewer, Carvex, Butler, etc. or
when the Tenant is held by his Tenure ad convivandum Dominum suum and Familiam
suam semel in Anno; and ad equitandum cum Domino suo in Comitatu N. sumptibus
suis propriis, etc. (vide 10 E. 3. 23. in John de Bromptons Case) by alienation
of parcel shall not be apportioned, or multiplied, for such services, which are
for the private Benefit of the Lord and are personal: to be done by one man,
shall not be multiplied: Because they are to be personally performed by one man
only, and multiplication of them would be a charge and prejudice to the Lord:
And these also in regard of their interinesse by the Lords purchase of parcel
shall be totally extinct: So it is also when the Tenure is to perform some
manual labor, as to cover or repair the Hall of the Lord, to make or repair
the Pale of his park, to plow or sow his Demesnes, to reap or cut down his
grain, or the like, these services and others like unto them shall not be
multiplied, albeit parcel of the Tenancie be aliened, yet amongst all the
alienees the whole service shall be performed; and if the Lord purchase parcel,
the whole shall be extinct, etc. There is the like Law also in Heriot-service:
For by alienation of parcel of the Tenancie it multiplies, and by the Lords
purchase of parcel the whole service is extinct: It is otherwise of
Heriot-custome: For in that Case notwithstanding the Lords purchase of parcel,
the entire service remains for the residue, because such custom is incident
to the whole Land, and also to every Part thereof, etc.

^respass in^^re, ^ccord.
62 In an Ejectione firmae against two or more, Co. lib. 9. 79. b. 4. in Henry
Peytoes Case.
an accord and Satisfaction for one shall also discharge all the other Ejectors
and Trespassors: for that action is entire, and cannot be discharged as to one,
and yet prosecuted against the rest.

^^igniory in^^^e.
63 There is the King Lord Paramont, the Mesne, Co. l. ^. 134. b. 3. in
Ascoughs Case.
who holds by Knight Service in Capite, and Tenant paravaile in Soccage: the
Mesne Grants the Mesnaltie to the use of himself for life, and after to the
use of the Tenant paravaile in tail: In this Case the mesnaltie is not
suspended during the life of the Mesne by force of that remainder in tail:
for, a remainder in tail or for life expectant upon an estate for life, or in
tail, shall never suspend a mesnaltie, Seigniory, Rent, etc. because albeit
the remainder vests presently, yet that cannot suspend the present
Frank-tenement of the Rent during the life of the first Tenant for life, who is
indeed the true Tenant to the Lord or to the reversioner, upon whom avowry
shall be made, etc. and as a Signiory, Rent, etc. cannot be suspended in part,
and in esse for part, in respect of the Land, out of which it is issuing, so
neither can a Signiory, Rent, etc. be suspended in remainder, and yet be in
esse for a particular Estate in possession, for then necessarily there must
ensue fractions of Estates, and particular Estates shall be created without
Donors or Lessors against the Rules and Maxims of the Law, etc. It is
otherwise, if the mesne grant his mesnaltie to one for life, or in tail, the
remainder to the Tenant peravaile in Fee; for in that case the mesnalty is
totally extinct; because there the Tenant peravaile has as high an Estate in
the inheritance of the Mesnaltie, as he has in the Tenancie, neither is there,
in that case, any possibility of reviving the Mesnaltie; and here also the
mesnaltie is not extinct for the Inheritance, and in esse for the particular
Estate for life or in tail in possession, but the mesnaltie by the remainder
in Fee is extinct in all; for otherwise this absurdity would follow; that there
would be a Fee-simple of the Tenancie peravaile, and also a Fee-simple of
Signiory perament, and but an Estate for life or in tail only of the
mesnaltie; and so a Tenancie in Fee-simple shall be only holden of a mesnaltie
for life or in tail, and a Signiorie in Fee shall be issuing out of a
mesnaltie for life or in tail only, which is impossible, and can by no means
be, etc. Vide 3 H. 6. 1. 15 E. 4. 12.

Co. l. 10. 128. a. 4. in Cluns Case.
64 If Tenant for life make a Lease for years rendering Rent at Easter, and the
Lessee occupy for three quarters of the year, A term in^.
and in the last quarter before Easter the Tenant for life dies, here shall be
no apportionment of Rent for three quarters of the year, because the time is
entire; and in respect thereof there shall be no apportionment, neither yet was
the Rent due before Easter. Howbeit in the same case if part of the land had
been avicted before Easter, and that Feast had incurred in the life of the
Lessor, there shall be an apportionment of the Rent; but not in respect of the
time, which does still continue but in regard, that part of the Land demised is
evicted, etc. Vide 27 E. 3. 84. b.

Co. l. 10. 134. b. 3. in Read and Redmans Case.
65 In Actions merely personal or personal and in some sort mixed with the
realtie, in which entire things are demanded, Actions Entire.
if there be diverse Plaintifes, and one be summoned and severed, the death of
him, which is so summoned and severed (where the entire thing survives to the
other) shall not abate the writ, as in a writ of ward of the body, or the like,
etc.

Co. lib. 11. 4. a. 2. in Auditor Curles Case.
66 The Office of Auditors of the Court of Wards (according to Statute of 22 H.
8. cap. 46.) cannot be granted in reversion; The Office of Auditor of the Court
of ward^ entire.
because they two make up one Judge or Judicial Officer of that Court, and as
none can give judgment of things in futuro, so neither may any be admitted a
judge in futuro, according to the Rule, Officia judicialia non concedantur
antequam vacent; And besides, great inconvenience might ensue thereupon; for
he; that is at the time of the grant sufficient to execute it, may perhaps,
when it falls, be un-capable and un-sufficient for it: And albeit that Office
be only in part judicial and in part ministerial, and ministerial Offices may
be granted in reversion; yet in as much as two persons have both of them but
one Office, and are as one Officer, that Office is by the said Act made so
entire, that it cannot possibly be divided; for, the King cannot make two
Auditors of the minister in^ Office, and other two to execute the Judicial
part, because then there would be four persons, which the Act restraines to
two; neither yet can the King make one Person to have the judicial voice, and
the other the ministerial Office; For then there would be two Officers, and two
Offices, whereas the Act makes but one Officer; and then also one of them shall
have a distinct Office and voice, whereas the Act joins them together in two
Persons; And therefore in as much as the ministerial part is so united with the
judicial part, and that jointly in two Persons, which make up one entire
Officer, that there is no possibility of severing the one from the other, as
the judicial part cannot be granted in reversion, so neither, can the
ministerial, etc.

Trespass entire though against many.
67 When in Trespass against diverse Defendants; Co. lib. 11. b. 1. in S John
Heydon. Case. Ibid. 7. a. 2. and 43 El. Rotulo 1694. inter Auste^ Pl. and
Willar. and Ald. Ded fen.
they plead non culp. or several pleas, and the Jury finds for the Plaintiff in
all, the Jurors cannot assesse several damages against the Defendants; because
it is but one Trespass, and also made joint by the Plaintifs writ and count; And
albeit one of them be the most malicious, and de facto does the greatest wrong,
yet all coming forth to do an unlawful Act, and being all of one party, the
Act of one is the Act of all, that are present and of the same party: And
therefore in such case if the hand of one of them only gives a mortal wound,
whereupon death follows, that is murder in all, that are present and of the
same party, albeit the others intended not to give a wound so mortal, as
appears in Mekallies Case in the 9. Report.

Copercenery ^inti^e.
68 If two Caperceners Tenants in tail lose by default, F. N. B. 155. h
albeit the default of the one is not the default of the other, yet in respect
of the entireness of their estate they shall join in a Quod ei deforciat,
etc. M. 46. 3 E.

An execution ^ntire.
69 If an execution be sued of the body and of the land, Pl. Co. Rosses Case.
and afterward the Conusor enfeoffs the Conuse of parcel of the land, or
surrenders parcel of the land unto him, or the fee-simple of parcel thereof
descends upon him, in all these cases, both body and land are discharged; for
by the execution against the body and land, the land was de facto charged and
so become debtor, and by the feofment, surrender, or descent the land was also
discharged; because a discharge of part of a thing in execution is a discharge
of all, be it by the Act of the party, or by Act of Law; for the duty being
personal is entire and so is the execution entire also, etc.

(...) Manor in^ire.
70 It is ordained by the Statute of the 25 E. 3. cap. 16. Pl. Co. 109. b. 3.
in Fulmerstons Case.
That by the execution of non-tenure of parcel no writ shall abate, but only
for the quantity of the non-tenure, which is alleged; Nevertheless, in a
praecipe quod reddat of a Manor; if the Tenant plead non-tenure of parcel, the
whole writ shall abate; because a Manor is an entire thing; And therefore the
Judges have taken it to be against reason, that by his Demand of the whole
Manor he should recover against him, that is but tenant of parcel thereof, for
which cause they have expounded that Statute only to extend to writs, where
things demanded are several, as acres are, and not to extend to writts, where
the things demanded are entire.

(...) venire facias ^tire.
71 In an appeal of death against diverse, they plead not guilty, Co. Inst. p.
1. 256. b. 3.
and one joint venire facias, is awarded; if one challenge peremptorily, he
shall be drawn against all; otherwise it is of several venire facias.

^n obligation ^tire.
72 In 9 H. 5. fol. 15. Co. lib. 11. 27. b. 2. in Henry Pigots Case.
One brings a writ of Debt of 20 l. against another and counts upon an
obligation of the same sum, the Defendant pleads, that he was a lay man, and
knew not letters, and he acknowledged himself to be bound to the Plaintiff by
the same deed in 20 s. which he has paid and thereof showed an Acquittance and
as to the residue of the sum in the said Obligation, obligation nient son
fait; And in this case, the Obligation was adjudged void for all; because, the
sum being entire, it could not be good for 20. s. and void for the residue of
20. l. but must needs be void for all.

Co. l. 11. 27. b. 3 and 28. a. 4. in Henry Pigots Case.
73 If there be two absolute and distinct Clauses or Covenants in a deed, and
one of them is read to a man not lettered, and the other not, A deed inti^^.
it is good for the Clause or Covenant that was read, and void for the other:
Howbeit if a deed contain diverse such absolute and distinct Clauses or
Covenants, if any one of them be altered by addition, interlineation, or
razure, this Mis-fensance ex post facto shall make the whole deed void (as it
is holden in 14 H. 8. 25, 26.) For albeit they are several Clauses or
Covenants, yet it is but one entire deed. 3 H. 7. 5. If two be bound in an
obligation, and after the seal of one of them is broken, this mis-fensance ex
post facto shall make the obligation void against both; because it is an entire
thing, that will not admit severance, etc.

Co. l. 5. part 2. 1. a. Claytons Case.
74 If Indentures of demise be engrossed bearing date the 26 of May, Days are
entire and a^mit no fra^^^ons.
to have and hold for three years from hence forth, and they are afterward
delivered at 4 of the Clock in the afternoon upon the 20 day of June then
next following; In this Case, the Lease shall commence upon the day of the
delivery; for, from hence forth shall have reference to the delivery (when the
deed took effect) and not to the date, and it shall not begin immediately after
the delivery, viz. at 4 of the clock in the afternoon, but that whole day
shall be part of the demise; because a day is (in judgment of Law) an entire
thing, that will admit no fractions, to avoid un-certainties, which are always
the mother of contention. And therefore the day of delivery is taken inclusive
viz. to the first day of the demise; so it is also if a Lease be limited to
begin a confectione, It is otherwise, when the lease is to begin a die
confectionis, or a die datus; for (in that case) the day it self is excluded,
etc. And so the doubt in 12 E. Dier 286. is well explained, and with this
resolution agrees 14 E. Dier 307. St. 27 H. 8. cap. 16.
The words of the Statute of Inrollements are (within six months after the
date of the same writings, etc.) and it was adjudged ( T. 21 E. in Co. Ba.)
that if such writings have date, the six months shall be accounted from the
date, but if they want date, then from the delivery; And therefore when the six
months are accounted from the date, the day of the date is excluded as it was
adjudged P. 4 E. Rot. 812. for, from the date, and from the day of the date are
all one, because (in that case) the entire day of the date is excluded; But it
seems by the resolution abovesaid, when they are accounted from the delivery,
the day of the delivery is to be totally included within the account, causa qua
supra.

Co. l. 7. 8. a. the Earl of Bedfords Case.
75 Tenant in tail makes Lease of Land holden voidable by the issue, and
dies, his heir under age, An advo^^ entire.
the King as guardian may during the un-age avoid that Lease, but it may be
recontinued by the heirs acceptance of the Rent after his full age: So it is
also where a voidable Lease is made by a Bishop; for albeit the King during the
Vacancie may avoid it, yet the successor by acceptance may recontinue it:
because in these Cases the term is partable, and may for part be avoided, and
for the presidue be continued: It is otherwise of entire things, when the whole
interest is avoided: as if the Patron of a Church grant the prochien avoidance
to another, and after and before the Statute of 13 E. the Parson, Patron,
Ordinary make a Lease for years rendering Rent, and the Parson dies, the
grantee presents one, who is admitted instituted and inducted and dies, this
Lease is avoided absolutely in all, and shall not hold good against the second
successor: So ( ^. E. 3. 2. E. 3. 8.
8.) an advowson by License is granted to a Prior and his successors, and is
afterward appropriate to the Prior, etc. here if the Feme of the grantor be
endowed of the Advowson and her Clerk inducted, the appropriation is defeated
for ever, etc. So if a Feme covert (as a Feme sole) levy a fine, by the entry
of the Bar on all is avoided, 7 H. 4. 23. yet if the Baron had not entered, it
had bound the Feme and her heirs.

In copercinerie eviction of part annuls all.
76 In the Copercenery in part of the Purparty be evicted, Co. Inst. pars 1.
173. b. 4.
that shall avoid the partition in the whole, be it of a Manor, that is
entire, or of acres of ground, or the like, that are several; for the partition
(in that Case) implies for this purpose both a Warrantie, and a Condition in
Law, and either of them is entire, and gives an entry (in this Case) to the
whole; Co. l. 4. 1. 12. Bustards Case.
And so it was resolved in Bustards Case Co. l. 4. 121. both in the Case of
exchange and partition.

^eerage in copercinencie.
77 If an Earldome, Baronie, Co. Inst. pars 1. 156. a. 3.
or other Peerage descend to Coparteners, the Lands shall be divided, as
amongst other Parteners, but the dignity (being entire) cannot be parted,
neither shall it descend to the eldest alone; but (in such Case) the King (who
is the sovereign of honor and dignity) may confer it upon which of the
Coheries he please.

A County entire.
78 A writ of Dower is brought against the Alienee of the Baron, Co. lib. 9.
17. b. 2. in Anus Benigfields Case.
and he voucheth the heir; In this Case, the Demandant may testise that the
heir has Lands descended unto him in the same County (for to another County
the original does not extend) and may pray, that he may be endowed of his
Estate: So in 4 E. 4. 36. and 6 E. 3. 11. The Tenant in a writ of Dower vouched
the heir of the Baron, and the Demandant testifies that he has Lands by
descent, etc. in the same County, and judgment was given against the heir:
But if he had none there, it should have been given against the Tenant. Vide
supra 55. 110.

An entire condition.
79 If there be an obligation with Condition, Dier. 16. 88. 28 H. 8.
that if I infeoffe another before such a Feast of the Manor of Dale,
discharged of all manner of Rents; In this Case, if a stranger has a Rent
issuing out of the said Manor, and I make a Feoffment, and at another day
afterward and before the Feast I purchase a release of the stranger, here the
Condition is not observed, in as much as the Manor ought to have bin
discharged at the time of the Feoffment simul and semel, because the Condition
was entire: But if the Condition be, that I pay 10. l. build an house, and go
of your errand to Paul's before such a Feast; In such Case, I may well do these
Acts upon several days before the Feast, because the Condition was not entire.

^ease to two.
80 If a Lease be made to two for lives term of their, Dier. 67. a 18. 3 E. 6.
and they make partition, and the one dies, his part shall revert to the
Lessor, because their lives are several, the life of the one not being the life
of the other: But in a Lease be made to two for term of years, with proviso,
that if the Lessees die within the term, that then the term shall cease, and
they make partition, or out of them, aliens his part, and dies; In this Case
the Lessor cannot enter into his part that dies, but the grantee or the
executors of the Lessee (if he made an alienation) shall have his part during
the life of the Survivor; because the term of years is entire, and cannot
cease as to one, and continue to the other.

^stresse.
81 An Honor is entire as well as a County or Manor, and therefore a distress
taken in the County of Wilts in a place which is parcel of the Honor of
Wallingford (the Castle and Court whereof is within the County of Berk) was
driven to that Castle and there impouded and upon a replevin delivered (since
the Statute of 1, 2. P. M. 12. Dier. 168. 20. 1 El.
) and held good; For afterward at the suit of the Defendant the Plaint was
removed by an Accedas ad Curiam directed to the Sheriff of Oxon, and the
Plaintiff counted of the taking in praedicto loco in Com. Wilts, and all held
good per Curiam.

Dier 227. 44. 6 El.
82 A general pardon discharged all post fines under 6 l. And for the fine
there were two writs of Covenant, Post-fine.
but only one concord of Lands in two Counties, and the Post-fine being
extracted entirely did exceed 6 l. but being divided it was under, which
division Sank-ford requested; but the Concord being entire, the Court adjudged
the Post-fine but one also.

Dier 246. 70. 8 El.
83 In a Replegiare against a Bishop and others, Challenge.
they were at several issues, but one venire facias was awarded, the Bishop
challenges the Array, because there was no Knight; and this challenge was held
good for all, because the venire facias was entire, albeit the issues were
several.

Dier 256. 11. 9 El.
84 Tenant for life surrenders the one Moitie, Entire reservation.
and the Lessor grants the whole Land to a stranger, Habendum the one Moitie
for life, and the other for 40 years after the death of the Tenant for life,
rendering 40 l. per annum. In this Case the Lessor may distraine and a vow for
the whole Rent presently, albeit the one Moitie be but terra revertens, and the
reason is for that the reservation is entire.

Dier 260. 22. 9 El.
85 In Debt upon a lease for years of several parcels, Non demisit pleaded.
the parties are at issue upon non dimisit, and it was found a demise of all
but one parcel, and damages assessed; Howbeit the Plaintiff could not have
judgment, because the Lease and Count were entire, and did contain all.

Hob. 66. Cox and Jenner.
86 Where two commit Trespass, Trespass.
a release to one of them of all actions real and personal, enures to both,
albeit he to whom the release is made, is not party to the suit, but is only
mentioned in the declaration with a simul tum, etc. because the Trespass is
entire, and therefore cannot be released to one, but must also be released to
all, that are guilty thereof. Vide Hob. 70 Parkens Case.

Ho. 180. Slowley and Sveley.
87 Where a man has a personal Action against two Defendants, Trespass.
if they plead severally, and he be non-suite against the one, before he has
judgment against the other, he shall be barred against both: for the Trespass
being entire, the non-suite works in nature of a release of the whole.

71 Argumentum a Divisione est fortissimum in Lege.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 213. b. 3.
1 An example or two of this Argument you shall find in Littleton, An impa^^^
Rent.
whereof the first is in Sect. 344. where he puts this Case: If a man enfeoffe
another upon Condition, that he and his heirs shall render unto a stranger and
his heirs an annual Rent of 20 s. etc. and upon failer of payment that the
Feoffor and his heirs may enter, this is a good Condition, yet the sum so
reserved cannot be properly called a Rent; For (says he) if it should be a
Rent; it ought to be either Rent-service, Rentcharge, or Rent-secke, but it is
not any of those: For if the stranger be once seized of it, and after be denied
it, he shall not have an Assise for it, because it is not issuing out of any
Tenements, etc. So that if it be arreare, the stranger has no other remedy,
but that the Feoffor or his heirs may enter, and yet if they do enter, then is
the Rent gone for ever; And therefore he concludes, that such a charge upon the
Landis not a Rent, but only a pain laid upon the Tenant of the Land and his
heirs, that in Case payment be not made according to the Indenture, they shall
lose the Land by the entry of the Feoffor and his heirs, etc.

An Estate during coverture.
2 Another example hereof you shall find Sect. 380, and 381. Co. ibid. 235. b. 1.
Where to prove that an Estate made to Baron and Feme during the Coverture is
an Estate unto them for their two lives, he uses this argument; Every man
(says he) that has an Estate of Frank-tenement in Lands or tenements, has an
Estate in them. either in Fee, or Fee tail, or for his own life, or pur auter
vie; But the Baron and Feme have not by such a Grant, Fee, nor Fee tail, nor
an Estate pur auter vie. Ergo, they have an Estate for the term of their lives:
Howbeit that is upon a Condition in Law, viz. If one of them die, or a divorce
be sued betwixt them, that then it shall be Lawful for the Lessor or his
heirs to enter, etc. And in this Case if they make wast the Feoffor and his
heirs shall have a writ of wast against them, supposing by his writ, Quod
tenet ad terminum vitae, etc. But in his Count he shall declare the special
manner of the Lease.

Common ratione commorantiae void.
3 In Trespass the Defendant justifies, Co. lib. 6. 60. a. 2. in Gatewands Case.
that all Inhabitants in any ancient mesuage within the Town of Dale have used
to have Common in the place where, etc. in Sale, ratione condonantiae, etc. And
this Custom was adjudged to be against Law: Because there are only four kinds
of Commons, viz. Appendant, appurtenant, in gross, and for vicinage, and
Common Ratione commorantiae is none of them, etc. 80. 18.

The Estate of the Duke of Cornwall.
4 Edward 3. Co. lib. 8. 27. a. 2. in the Princes Case.
gave unto the Black Prince the Dukedom of Cornwall, etc. Habendum and
tenendum eidem Duci, and ipsius and haeredum suorum Regum Angliae filiis
primogenitis, and dicti loci Ducibus in Regno Angliae haereditarie successoris,
etc. And it was resolved in 3 Jac. in the Princes Case, that that the Prince
had an estate of Fee-simple in that Dukedom; because every Estate of
Inheritance is either Fee-simple, or Fee-taile, but that Estate could not be
Fee-taile; for it is not limited or restrained, (either by express words, or
by words which do tout amount) to the heirs of the body of the Prince; because
he that is to inherit that Dukedom, ought to be the first borne Son of the
heirs of the Black Prince, be it heir Lineall or Collateral; and such heir
ought also to the King of England, etc. Vide infra 192. 3.

72 The Generals must go before, and the Specials must follow after.
^enerals be^e Specials.
1 In a write the General shall be put in demand and in Plaint before the
special, as Land before Pree, Pasture, Wood, Iuncarie, The Rule of the Register.
Marish, etc. Wood before Alders, Willowes, etc. Finch 24.

73 The more worthy shall be set before the lesser worthy.
^grees of ^hiness of ^d, etc.
1 An entire thing shall be demanded before the moitie part or parts, Co. Inst.
p. 1. 4. a. 2. and Co: l. 11. 82. a. 4. Bowls Case.
the thing of greater dignity before that which is of less, as a mesnage
before Land; for albeit Land be of more esteem then any of the other elements
(because it was principally made for man to rest on, which he cannot do in any
of the other elements) yet Land builded upon, is more worthy then any other
Land, because it is for the habitation of man, and in that respect has the
precedencie to be demanded in the first place in a praecipe; howbeit a Castle
shall be demanded before a mesuage or Manor; because it is more worthy then
they, being ordinarily an habitable for a Noble personage, etc. Finch 24. and
the Rule in the Register.

Finch. 25.
2 In a Replevin if it be of two chattels, one quick, Of Chattels.
and the other dead, the living thing shall be first demanded. Finch 25. and
the Rule in the Register.

Finch. ibidem.
3 Where one has the presentment to a Church two turns, Of present Action to a
benefice.
and another the third turn, he that had the third turn, bringing a Quare
Impedit shall not begin with his own turn first, but with the other two
turns.

Co. Inst. part 18. a. 3.
4 My Lord Cook well observes, Fee-simple the most worthy Estate.
that Littleton did worthily begin his Book with an Estate in Fee-simple,
because all other Estates being derived from that, it must needs be the most
worthy: for (says he) A principalioribus and dignioribus est inchoandum.

Co. lib. 2. 46. b. 1. in the Arch Bishop of Canterb. Case.
5 By the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. 13. It was enacted, Words of inferior rank
e^clude them of higher degree.
that all Monasteries, etc. Colleges, etc. which after that Act should happen
to be dissolved, renounced, relinquished, forfeited, given up, etc. or by any
other mean should come to the Kings highness, etc. should be vested, deemed and
judged by authority of Parliament in the very actual and real possession of
the King, etc. And afterward by the Act of 1 E. 6. cap. 14. The College of
Maid-stone in Kent was given to E. 6. Now the Question was, whether by the
General words of the Statute of 31 H. 8. That College was not to be deemed in
the Actual possession of E. 6. because the Edict of 1 E. 6. was a mean, by
which it came to the Kings hands, and therefore fulfilled these words of that
Statute, by any other mean: But it was resolved per totam Curiam, that the
Statute of 31 H. 8. could not be so understood; For when the Statute speaks of
dissolution, renouncing, relinquishing, forfeiture, giving up, etc. which are
inferior means, by which such Religious houses came to the King: then the
said last words (by any other mean) cannot be intended of an Act of Parliament,
which is the highest manner of conveyance, that may be: And therefore the
makers of that Act of 31 H. 8. would have put that in the beginning, and not in
the end after other inferior conveyances, if they had intended to have
extended the Act to that: But these words (by any other mean) are to be thus
expounded, viz. by any such inferior means: So likewise it has adjudged, that
Bishops are not included within the Statute of 13 El. cap. 10. For that Statute
begins with Colleges, Deanes and Chapters, Parsons, Vicars, and concludes with
these words, and others having spiritual promotions, these last words do not
include Bishops, causa qua supra: So also in the Statute of West. 2. cap. 41.
The words whereof are these: Statuit Rex, quod si Abbates, Priores, Custodes
Hospitales and aliarum Domorum Religiosarum, etc. These last words include not
Bishops, as it was holden Dier 1, and 2. P. and. M. fol. 109. Causa qua supra.

Co. l. 8. 133. a. 1. in Turners Case. Et Co. 9. 88. b. 4. in Pinchons Case.
6 An Executor or Administrator ought to execute his Office, Precedence debts
legac^
and to Administer the goods of the dead lawfully, viz. ought to pay all duties
Debts and Legacies in such precedence and order, as he ought to pay them by the
Law, and if he vary therefrom, he shall be taken to do in his own wrong: And
therefore he ought first to discharge Judgments, Statutes, and Recognisances,
then Debts and Duties by bond, after that Debts upon simple Contract, and last
of all Legacies, etc. Vide Co. lib. 5. 28. b. 4. Harrisons Case.

Co. l. 8. 157. a. 4. in Blackamores Case.
7 In an Original writ if the Feme be named before the Baron, it shall abate,
albeit that be nothing but want of form, Feme not for the (...)
etc.

8 Exceptio semper altius ponenda est. And therefore if a release run thus:
Exception ^ust come last
A. does acknowledge himself satisfied, etc. of all Bonds, Co. l. 9. 53. a. 2.
in Hickmots Case
etc. made by B. and it is agreed that A shall deliver all such Bonds as he
has un-delivered to B, except abond of 40 l. wherein B and C stand bound, etc.
Here the exception extends to all the premises, and it could not be inserted
sooner, because the proper place thereof is to come last, etc.

Reservation after the E^^ates.
9 The proper place of a reservation is to come after the limitation of all the
Estates; and therefore if A left to B Habendum pro uno anno, Co. l. 10. 107. a.
1. in Lofields Case.
etc. and si in fine anni both parties shall be agreed, that the Demise shall
be renewed or continued for a longer time, tunc habend. premissa for three
years, rendering yearly durante termino praedicto 40 l. etc. In this case the
Reservation shall extend as well to the first year, as to the other three
years; because the reservation was to be inserted after all the Estates: so
likewise if a man by deed indented demise lands to A, Habendum to him for life,
the remainder to B, and to the heirs of his body; and for default of such issue
to remain to C, in tail or for life, Reddendo inde to the lessor and his heirs
an annual rent, this reservation shall extend not to the last estate only, but
to the two former estates also: because it could not be conveniently inserted,
before all the estates were limited; for his proper place is to succeed them,
etc.

10 There is an order observed in the Register, F. N. B. 2. c.
when a man demands diverse parcels of Land in his writ, The method observed in
^rits.
which are of diverse natures, which parcel shall be first specified in the
writ, and which next to that, and so of the rest: for which order take these
two verses following for your direction. Mes. uagium Tossed. um Mol. endinum Col.
umbare Gar. dinum Ter. ra Pra. tum Pas. tura Bos. cus Brue. ra mora
Junca. ria Maris. cus Alve. tum Pis. caria Red. ditus sectare priora.


And if a man in his writ will demand ten messuages, and ten acres of land, and
ten acres of meadow, and ten of pasture, etc. and after in his writ will demand
the moity or third part of a message, or of an Acre of land, or of meadow, or
of pasture, etc. then the form of the writ is first to set down to whole, and
afterward the moity or third part, F. N. B. 33. m, and 34 v.
etc.

^^esentation turn.
11 If two sisters have an advowson, which happens to be void, the elder sister
shall have the first presentment, and so shall the baron of the elder sister,
if he be tenant by the courtesy, and the tenant in dower (in that case) shall
have but the third presentment, etc.

74 Sicut natura non facit saltum, Ita nec Lex.
^der in writs
1 In writs of Entry sur disseisin, if the degrees be not duly observed, Co.
Inst. p. 1. 238. b. 3.
and the writ framed accordingly, that error will make it abatable: As if a
man bring a writ of Entry sur disseisin in the Per, or in the Per y cui, or in
the Post, when it ought to be a writ of Entry sur disseisin in the nature of an
Assize, that is, an error whereupon the writ shall abate, etc.

Collations,
2 When a Quare impedit is brought against the disturber and the Bishop, and sir
months pass, Co. l 6. 52. a. 1 in Boswells case.
in that case the Bishop shall not collate by laps, neither yet if other six
months pass, shall the Metropolitan collate; for the Metropolitan shall never
present by laps, but when the inferior Ordinary might before have collation by
laps, and does increase his time; so that, in this case the first degree being
wanting, the other that follow, shall fail, etc.

awardship.
3 If the tenant make a feofment by collusion, Co. l. 9. 120. b. 4. in Quicks ca.
etc. the Lord ought to recover the land by wrii of right of ward before he can
have a writ for the ravishment of the ward, etc. H. N. B. 143. k. 12. H. 4. 13.
b. 33. H. 6. 16. per Priset.

Co. l. 10. 44. b. 4. in Jennings case.
4 If the reversioner in fee, and the tenant of a mean estate for life,
Proximity of Estates respected.
do both at one and the same time pray to be received, the mean estate for life
in respect of the immediatenesse and proximity thereof shall be preferred
before the reversion in fee, for the words of the statute of West. 2. cap. 3.
(which gives that receipt) being general, viz. admittantur haeredes vel illi,
ad quos spectat reversio, etc. the Law, which always respects order of
proximity, prefers the next (though little) estate, be it in remainder or
reversion for life, before the more remote (though great) estate in fee, etc.
And with this accords 24. E. 3. 32. in Pierce Grimsteads case.

Co. l. 11 99 a. 4 in James Baggs case.
5 If a Major and Aldermen of a Town corporate, Upon a fa^ return the Court
ca^^^ proceed.
which have power by Charter or presciption to dis-infranchise, do
dis-infranchise one of their members, and upon motion in the Kings Bench the
Judges there do award a writ unto them to restore him, or otherwise to signiffe
the cause, etc. and they certify sufficient cause to remove him, but it is
false: In this case, the Court cannot thereupon award another writ to restore
him, neither yet can any issue be taken thereupon; because the parties are
strangers, and have no day in Court: Howbeit the party grieves may well have an
Action upon the special matter against those that made the certificate, and
aver that it is false: And if it be found for him, and he obtain judgment
against them, so that if may appear to the Justices, that the causes of the
return are false, then shall they award a writ of restitution, and not before:
and this is proved by the reason of the Book in 9. H. 6. fol. 44. where it is
holden, that upon a Corpus cum causa, if the cause returned be sufficient, but
indeed false, the Court ought to remand the prisoner, and he is thereby put to
no mischief; for if they had no authority to imprison him, or that the cause
certified be false, he may have a Writ of false Imprisonment against them, etc.
Vide Fitz. Tit. corpus cum causa, p. 2. the case of 9. H. 6. well abridged.

F. N. B. 19. i.
6 In a Writ of false Judgment upon a Writ of right patent, No error before all
c^^fied.
etc. or a Writ of right close the plaintiff shall not assign his errors,
before all the Record be certified, viz. not only the original, but likewise
all the residue of the Record.

F. N. B. 20 e. and 22 f.
7 In a Writ of Error, when the Record is removed, When erro^ are to be ^signed.
the Plaintiff shall assign his Errors, before he shall have a Scire facias
against the Defendant ad audiendum errores, etc. Howbeit he shall have a Scire
facias before the Record shall be entered: for it shall not be entered before the
parties have day by the Scire facias, etc.

F. N. B. 38. o.
8 Upon a Quare Impedit, if the Sheriff return tarde, and the Defendant appears,
and the Plaintiff is demanded, and comes not in; Upon a (...) return no (...)
to the Bish^p
in this case the Defendant shall not have a Writ to the Bishop, etc. because
no Writ was served against him; for he ought to have the Writ served against
him, before he can have that privilege, etc.

F. N. B. 39. e.
9 When a man sues a Quare Impedit against another; A Certific^ of an acc^
before: (...) admitta^.
and after they hanging the suit, he sues a ne admittas to the Bishop, etc. and
after they accord in the Co. Pl. to present by turn to that advowson: in this
case a special Writ shall issue out of the Chancery to the Bishop to admit the
Clerk of him; who ought by that accord and composition to present to the first
turn; but first the King ought to send a Certiorare to the Justices of the
Com. Pl. to certify him in his Chancery of the accord there, and upon that
Certificate the King shall send his Writ to the Bishop, as aforesaid, etc.

A Writ de secunda super o^eratione.
10 In a Writ de admensuratione pasturae, F. N. B. 126. 1.
all the Commoners shall be admeasured, viz. as well those that were not
parties to the writ, as those that were: but yet if any of them which where not
parties, etc. surcharge the Common after admeasurement, they shall not forfeit
their cattle, (nor yet the value of them) which were in the pasture above the
due number, because they were not parties to the first writ; neither shall the
party that complains recover damages against them in that writ for such
surcharge: for a writ de secunda super oneratione lies not, save only against
him, against whom the first Writ was sued, etc.

11 In an Assise of Fresh-force in London against Jekef Foxley and Agnes his
wife, Matter of fact first to be found, and then that in Law to be resolved.
and eleven other, whereof ten appeared by Baily, Pl. Co. 91. a. 1. in the Case
of the Fresh-force in London against Foxley and others.
and plead, No such Agnes, the wife of Foxley in rerum natura, and demand
judgment of the plaint, and quod inquiratur per Assisam, and si, etc. Null.
tort. null. diss. etc. and the others plead the same plea by Attorney: And the
Plaintiffes, as to the plea in abatement of the Plaint demur in law, and as to
the other plea they pray the Assise: And whether the writ should abate or not,
was argued at Guild Hall by the Council of both parts before the Assise was
taken: but afterward the Council of the Plaintiffs perceiving that the matter
was argued before time, (for the Assise ought first to have inquired all the
matter, and if they had found the exception, and had also found a disseisor and
tenant, then would it have been time to have disputed what the Law have
determined in that case, and not before) they therefore prayed the Court when
the Assise was sworn, that they might first inquire of the matter pleaded in
abatement of the Plaint, which was done accordingly, etc. for the course
formerly run, was preposterous, and not suitable to such orderly proceeding, as
the Law requires: And so it was found, that there was no such Agnes, etc. and
yet the writ did not abate for the rest, etc.

75 A digniori fieri debet Denominatio and Resolutio.
Quod ei de^rceat for te^ant in Dow^r and by the ^ourtesie.
1 It has been a question in our Books, Co. Inst. p. 1. 353. a. 4.
whether upon a Recovery had by default, in an Action of Wast against tenant in
dower, or by the Courtesy, a Quod ei deforceat, lies by the Statute of West.
in cap. 4. For some have holden, that in an Action of Waste. although it be
brought against a tenant in Dower, or by the Courtesy, that have a Freehold;
yet the damages are the principal, because they were recoverable against the
tenant in Dower, and by the Courtesy, by the common Law; and the Statute of
Gloucester gave the place wasted but for a penalty; so as the nature of the
Action (say they) remains still to be personal; for that the damages are the
principal, etc But the best opinion is conceived to be, that albeit in that
Action the damages may be the more ancient recompense, yet (doubtless) the
place wasted (being in the realty) must needs be the more principal: And
therefore upon a Recovery had by default in an Action of Waste against tenant
in Dower, or by the Courtesy, a Quod ei deforceat, lies, as well as in any
other Action, etc. for a digniori fieri debet denominatio and resolutio, etc.

^^e Kings ^nnis-playes
2 If the King grant the office of the Tennis-Playes in Westminster, Co. l. 8.
45. b. 4. in John Webs Case.
by the name of the Kings Tennis-playes in Westminster. etc. this grant shall be
taken in a reasonable sense, viz. the Tennis-playes for the Kings Household, and
not only for the Tennis-play, when the King himself plays in his Royal
Person; for the King is the Head of his Household, and therefore a digniori
part the Tennis-playes for his household may be well called, The Kings
Tennis-plays, etc.

Co. l. 10. 47. b. a. in Lampets case.
3 A. Lessee for 500 years devises to B. for his life, Executor or Legatee.
Election.
and after his decease, the remainder to C, and to the heirs of his body, and
makes B. his executor, and dies, B. takes upon him the charge and enters: In
this Case, when the devise is ut supra to the executor for life, and after to
another, etc. and the executor enters generally, he shall have the Lease as
executor, which is his first and general authority, and not as Legatory,
without claim or demonstrartion of his election; albeit the testator was not
indebted to any, etc.

Co. l. 11. 38. b. 4. in Metcalfes case.
4 When a thing (whereof there are diverse degrees and qualitites) is
indefinitely mentioned in a Writ, Count, or other Record, Principal things
includ^ inferior.
the principal and most worthy thing shall be intended; as in 6. Eliz. Dier.
236. when a penalty is inflicted by Act of Parliament to be recovered in any of
the Kings Courts of Record, it shall be intended of the Principal Courts at
Westminster. 20. H. 6. 23. In account, supposing the Defendant to be his Receiver
from the feast of St. Michael, this shall be intended the principal Feast of
St. Michael the Archangel, and not of St. Michael de Monte Tumbe, so 13. H. 4.
4. 21. H. 6. 8. and 37. H. 6. 29. If the father and son are of one name, viz.
I. S. if I. S. be named generally in a Writ, Count, or other Record, this shall
be intended of the father, for he is the more worthy: Likewise, 10. E. 4. 11.
7. R. 2. Tit. Bar. 241. A man is bound to prove a thing, or a thing is to be
tried; this shall be by the most principal proof and trial in law, viz. by a
Jury; so if it be spoken of fee, it shall be intended fee-simple; Litt.. 193.
and Co. Inst. part. 1 124. b. 3.
or if of escuage, it shall be intended of the principal Escuage, viz. of
Escuage uncertain, Litt. fol. 21. And fee a notable case to this purpose in 5
E. 2. Resceit 165. were the Case was this: In admeasurement of Pasture against
a man and his wife, Judgment was given, that the admeasurement should be made,
and after it was made in pais, and returned in Banco 15. Hillar. at which day
the Baron made default, and the Feme came in Court before the judgment rendered
in the principal, and the prayed to be received: In this case, albeit it was
moved, that she came too late, viz. after the admeasurement awarded, which is a
judgment: yet thereunto Herle said, that it was no judgment upon the principal:
And where the Statute of West. cap. 3. is; Si uxor ante judicium venerit, etc.
Statutum debet intelligi de principali judicio. So also in 2 E. 3. Resceit 139.
In an Assise of Mortd. against Baron and Feme, the Assise was awarded by
default, and the Assise remained always pro defectu Juratorum, and then the
Feme prayed to be received; and it as objected, that judgment was given, that
the Assise should be taken: nevertheless the Feme coming in before final
judgment, was received; and with this accords 17. E. 2. ibid. 173. and 22. Ass.
pl. 22. After the Assise awarded, the Feme was received, 24. E. 3. 29. and
diverse other Books accord, etc.

Co. l. 11. 39. a. 4. in Metcalfes ease.
5 These words in a writ of Error, Si judicium inde redditum sit, No writ of
E^ror, before judgment (...) all.
etc. are intended not only de principali Judicio, but also de integro
Judicio, viz. when all the matter within the original is determined, as in 34.
H. 6. 18. in Humphrey Bohuns Case in Quare impedit brought by two; the one
pleads to the Issue, and the other confesses the Action, upon which confession
Judgment is given; and he against whom the Judgment was given, sues a writ of
Error to remove the Record into the Kings Bench: Here Prisot and tota Curia
say, this cannot be; for the writ of Error shall rehearse all those, that are
parties to the original writ, and then the writ says, Et si Judicium inde
redditum sit, tunc recordum illud habeatis, etc. which proves that it cannot be
removed, before the whole matter be determined, etc.

76 The Law requires decency and order.
The Homager must seek his Lord.
1 The tenant ought to seek the Lord to do him homage, Co. Inst. pars 1 104. b.
4. Bract. fol. 80. Britton. fo. 171
if the Lord he within England; for this service is personal, as well on the
Lords side, as on the tenants; and in this Case the Law requires decency and
order; And therefore Bracton says, Et sciendum, quod ille, qui homagium suum
facere debet, obtentu reverentiae, quam debet domino suo, audire debet dominum
suum ubicunque inventus fuerit in regno, vel alibi, si commode possit adiri,
and non tenetur dominus quaerere suum tenentem, and sic debet homagium ei
facere, etc. and there is the same Law for fealty, ec.

Causae Matri^onii praelocuti
2 If a woman give lands to a man and his heirs, Co. ibid. 204. a. 3. and 226.
a. 3.
causa matrimonii praelocuti: In this Case, if she either marry the man, or the
man refuse to marry her, she shall have the land again to her and to her heirs;
but on the other side, if a man give land to a woman and to her heirs, causa
matrimonii praelocuti, though marry her, or the woman refuse, he shall not have
the lands again; for it stands not with the modesty of women in this kind to
ask advice of learned Council, as the man may and ought, etc. And for the same
reason a woman may aver the cause, although it be not contained in the Deed,
yea albeit the feofment be made without Deed.

Order in pleading.
3 The order of good pleading must be observed, Co. Inst. pars 1. 303. a. 2.
which being inverted, great prejudice may grow to the party, tending to the
subversion of Law: Ordine placitandi servato, servatur and jus, etc. And
therefore first, in good order of Pleading, a man must plead to the
jurisdiction of the Court: Secondly, to the person, and therein first to the
person of the Plaintiff, and then to the person of the Defendant: Thirdly, to
the Court: Fourthly, to the Writ: Fifthly, to the Action, etc. which order and
form of Pleading you shall read in the ancient Authors, agreeable to the Law at
this day: and if the Defendant misorder any of these he loses the benefit of
the former: Again, the Count must be agreeable, and conform to the Writ, the
Bar to the Count, etc. and the Judgment to the Count; for none of them must be
narrower or broader then the other, etc.

4 If the King make a Lease for years, rendering Rent, Co. l. 4. 13. a. 3. in
Buroughs Case.
with condition to be void upon non-payment of the Rent, Re-entry gi^en to the
King without demand.
the King shall take advantage of that condition without any demand: For so
long as the Reversion and Rent continue in the King, the Law dispenses with
the demand, as a thing un-decent, it being against the dignity of the King to
wait upon his subject, or to demand any thing of him: It is otherwise, if the
King grant over the Reversion; for his grantee shall not take advantage of the
Condition, without demand of the Rent: But in the other Case the Law (which
always requires that decorum and conveniencie be observed) appoints the
subject to attend upon his Sovereign, and in that Case to perform the first
Act, although it be in the case of a Condition, which trencheth to the
destruction of his Estate: Howbeit this is only a personal Prerogative annexed
to the person of the King for order and decencies sake, and not in respect of
the nature and quality of the Rent, etc.

^o demand (...) the value of ^arriage.
5 One Of the reasons which the Lord Cook adds in the Lord Darcies Case, Co.
lib. 6. 71. b. 2. in the Lord Darcies Case.
why the fingle value of the marriage of a Ward in Knight Service should be due
to the Lord without demand, is this; If the Common Law (says he) would have
enforced the Lord to have made tender to his word, etc. it would also have
appointed all necessary circumstances for the performance of such a tender, as
a certain place, etc. where it should be done, and would not have left the
Lord, which is the superior, to find out the Ward which is the inferior; and
who may, if he will, take advantage of his own shifts, when there can be no
laches at all in the Lord, etc.

6 Amongst other reasons produced to prove, None but of the household shall sue
in the Marshal^^.
that in Suits prosecuted in the Marshalsie, Co. l. 10. 73. b. 2. in the Case
of the Marshalsie.
one of the parties (at least) ought to be of the Kings household; this is one,
because (says the Book) it would not be comely, that a Car-man or other
Mechanical person should at his pleasure sue another in that Court, and upon
that occasion take liberty to appear in Aula Regis, (where that Court was
originally kept) absque vestimentis aulicis; for those that appear in Court use
to wear garments suitable to that place: And therefore it is recorded by Luke
the Evangelist, cap. 7. verse. 25. Coepit de Johanne dicere ad turbam, etc. Quid
existis visuri, hominem mollibus vestibus amictum? Ecce qui vestitu magnifico
utuntur, etc. sunt in Palatiis Regis, etc. And the Common Law regards
convenience, and altogether dis-allowes indecorum, and every thing done contra
bonos mores.

77 Negatio Conclusionis est error in Lege.
Co. l. 10. a. 4. in Priddle and Nappers Case.
1 In Attachment upon a Prohibition, the Plaintiff counts against A.
proprietary of Tithes, Lands in the Priors hand^ not tithable.
that heretofore the Prior of Montecute was seized of twenty Acres of Land,
etc. before and at the time of the dissolution, and held those Acres; and also
the Rectory simul and semel, etc. Ratione cujus the Prior held the said Lands
discharged of Tithes: The Defendant conveys title to the Land, etc, Absque hoc,
that the Prior held them discharged of Tithes, etc. Here the plea of the
Defendant pro consultatione habenda (for he is in a manner, an Actor) was
insufficient, because he traverseth a thing not traversable: For the
prescription of the unity ought to have been traversed, and not the Conclusion,
viz. Ratione cujus; because as in Logic the conclusion of a Syllogism cannot
be denied, but either the major or minor Proposition; so neither in Law, which
is the perfection of Reason, etc.

Co. ibid.
2 In a Praecipe, Ancient Demesne,
one that pleads that the Manor of Dale is ancient Demesne, and that the Land
in demand is parcel of the Manor, and so ancient Demesne, there the Demandant
cannot say, that the Land in demand is not ancient Demesne; because that is the
Conclusion upon the two first preceding Propositions, viz. 1. That the Manor
is ancient Demesne. 2. That the Land in demand is parcel of the Manor; for
sequitur conclusio ex praemissis; and therefore it cannot be denied, and with
this agrees 41. E. 3. 22. 48. E. 3. 11. and many other Books.

78 The Law respects the Bonds of Nature.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 78. a. 2.
1 If before the Statutes of 32 and 34 H. 8. Wardship
the father had infeoffed any of his younger sons, or others for the making of
his wife a Ioynture, or for the advancement of his daughters, or for the
payment of his debts, Co. l. 6. 76. a. 3. in Sir George Cursors Case.
and after had enfeoffed and conveyed the Land to his heir, and had died, his
heir within age, his heir should not have been in ward, neither was it
Collusion upon the Statute of Marlbr. cap. 6, etc. because he was bound by the
law of Nature and Nations to provide for them; but now by force of those
Statutes he shall be in ward for his body, and for a third part of the Land,
etc.

No wardship ^uring the fa^hers life.
2 A. has issue B. a daughter, and his heir apparent, who being married to C.
has issue by him D a son; B. dies, Litt.. 114. Co. Inst. ibid. a. 3, etc.
and A. that holds Land by Knights-service, dies seized, and the Land descends
to D, as heir unto A. and within age: In this Case, the Lord shall have the
wardship of the Land, but not the wardship of the hody of the heir; for none
shall be in ward for his body to any Lord, during the fathers life; because the
Law of Nature requires, that the father during his life shall have the marriage
of his heir apparent, rather then the Lord, or any other person whatsoever. The
Law is the same, if D. had been a daughter: It is otherwise, where the father
dies, living the mother, when the Land holden by Knight Service, descends to
the son on the part of the father; because the Law in that Case confides more
in the father then in the mother, etc. Again, this privilege extends not to
any collateral heir, but only to the son or daughter being heir apparent: for
albeit a man shall have an Action of Trespass, Quare consanguinem and haeredem
coepit; and albeit the words be cujus maritagium ad ipsum pertinet; because the
well:-bestowing of his heir apparent in marriage is a great establishment of his
house; yet that is to be understood as against a wrong-doer; but not against a
Guardian in Chivalry, and the mother shall have the like writ for taking away
of her son and heir apparent; and yet the mother shall not bar the Lord by
Knight Service of his wardship of his body, as Littleton says, 114. Qui ex
filia tua nascitur, in potestate tua non est, sed patris sui, Fleta l. 5. cap.
6.

The like.
3 Put the case there be Lord and Feme-tenant by Knights-service of a Carve of
Land, Co. ib. 84. b. 2.
the Feme makes a feoffment in fee upon condition, and takes the Lord to
husband, and have issue a son; the wife dies, the issue enters for the
condition broken, the Lord enters into the Land as Guardian by
Knights-service, and makes his executors, and dies: In this Case, the
executors shall have the wardship of the Land during the minority of the heir,
but not the wardship of the body: For albeit the Lord seems to have a double
interest in the wardship of the body, one as Lord, and another as father; yet
as father, and not as Lord, in judgment of Law, he shall have the wardship of
the body of his son and heir apparent, in respect of nature, which was before
any wardship, in respect of Seigniories by Knights-service, began; And that
wardship, by reason of nature, cannot be waved, and claim made in respect of
the Seigniorie: And the executors of the father shall not have such a wardship,
which the testator had as father, neither can such a wardship be forfeited by
Outlawrie; 33 H. 6. 55. 6.
because it is due to the father in respect of privity of nature. 9.

4 If the Sheriff or other Officer be of kindred or affinity to the Plaintiff
or Defendant, Challenge to ^he Array and ^^rour.
and that such affinity continue; Co. ibid. 156. a 2. and 4.
this is a cause of challenge to the Array; as if the Sheriff marry the
daughter of either party, or e converso, this is a principal challenge; so if
there be affinity between the son of the Sheriff and the daughter of either
party, or e converso, or the like; albeit this is no principal Challenge, yet
is it a Challenge to the favor, etc.

5 If a Iuror be of blood or kindred to either party, ( Consanguineus, Co. ib.
157. a. 3
which is compounded of con and sanguine, ^o the Polles.
quasi eodem sanguine natus) this is a principal Challenge to the Polles,
because the Law presumes that one kinsman does favor another before a
stranger; and how remote so ever he is of kindred, yet the Challenge is good;
And if the Plaintiff challenge a Iuror for kindred to the Defendant, it is no
Counter-plea to say, that he is of kindred also to the Plaintiff, though he be
so in a nearer degree; for the words of the venire facias forbids the Iuror
to be of kindred to either party.

6 If a Body politic or incorporate (sole or aggregate of many) bring an
Action that concerns their Body politic or incorporate, Co. ibid.
The like.
if the Iuror be of kindred to any that is of that body (albeit the Body
politic or incorporate can have no kindred) yet for that those Bodies consist
of natural persons, it is a principal Challenge, etc.

Co. ibid. 4.
7 Affinity or affiance by marriage is a principal Challenge, The like and to
the favo^^.
and equivalent to Consanguinity, when it is between either of the parties; as
if the Plaintiff or Defendant marry the daughter or Cousen of the Iuror, or
the Iuror marry the daughter or Cousen of the Plaintiff or Defendant; and the
same continues, or issue be had: And if the son of the Iuror has married the
daughter of the Plaintiff, etc. albeit this be no principal Challenge, because
it is not between the parties, yet is it a Challenge to the favor, etc.

Co. l. 3. 38. b. 4. in Ratcliffes Case.
8 Martha Wilcocks, A maid conveyed away and married.
(one of the daughters and coheirs apparent of Eliz. the relict of William
VVilcocks, and then the wife of Ralph Ratcliffe) dwelling in her mothers house
at Hitchin, (being then under the age of sixteen years, and about fourteen,
went from thence at two of the clock in the morning (with the consent of the
said Ralph) to Bramfield, (being eight miles distant from Hitchin) and there
married Edw. Ratcliffe: And in an Ejectione firmae brought by Luke Norton upon
the demise of the said Edw. the issue was, whether Eliz. the mother had the
custody of Martha at the time of the said marriage; for if she had, then the
Land of the said Martha, (being in soccage) was to be lost for her life, by
force of the Statute of 4 and 5. P. and M. cap. 8. which prohibiteth the
conveying of a maid, etc. out of the custody, and contracting Matrimony with
her, without the consent of her father, if he be living; or of her mother, in
case her father be dead, etc. in pain for the man to suffer imprisonment, etc.
and for the maid to lose her land, as aforesaid, etc. And in that Case it was
resolved, that Eliz. the mother had the custody of the said Martha at the time
of the Marriage, within the provision of the said Act; for that Statute has
ordained two manner of new custodies, viz. by reason of nature, and by
assignation; And here the father of Martha being dead, she is by nature left in
the custody of her mother; neither yet was the assent of Ralph Ratcliff (the
husband) any thing at all material; for the Statute has annexed the custody to
the person of the mother, jure naturae, which is inseparable, and cannot by the
marriage be transferred to the Baron, but after the marriage remains only in
the mother, etc.

Co. l. 3. 39. a. 4. in Ratcliffes Case.
9 It is said, No wardship during the ^^thers life
that if there be Lord and Feme tenant by Knights-service; and the tenant make
a lease for life, and after the Lord and the tenant inter-marry, and have issue
between them a son, and the Feme dies, and after the father dies, the son
within age, here the executors shall not have the wardship, by reason of the
Seigniory; for the father has the wardship of his eldest son jure naturae,
which is inseparable, and cannot be waved, and he cannot have the wardship of
his son by the death of his wife, in respect of his Seigniory; for that was
inseparably vested in him as father, immediately upon the birth of the son jure
naturae: And Littleton says, that the father during his life shall have the
marriage of his son and heir apparent, and not the Lord, etc. 3.

Co. l. 6. 22. Ambrosia Gorges Case.
10 Viscount Bindon being seized of land in capite, had issue, The like.
Douglas his daughter and heir, who being married to Sir Arthur Gorge, had
issue by him Ambrosia a daughter, Douglas dies, and likewise Viscount Bindon,
Ambrosia being under age, afterward Sir Arthur Gorge takes another wife, and
has Issue a son, Ambrosia remaining still under age. In this case, Ambrosia
was not in ward, during the time she remained heir apparent to her father; but
after her father had a son, so that she remained no longer heir apparent; then
had Queen Eliz. the Wardship both of her body and Lands, etc.

Allegiance ^^ue by nature.
11 Faith, Co. l. 7. Calv. Case fol. 13. b.
obedience and ligeance are one to the Sovereign by the Law of Nature, which
cannot be changed or taken away; for albeit Judicial and Municipall Laws have
inflicted and imposed in several places and at several times diverse and several
punishments and penalties for breach or not observance of the Law of Nature
(for that Law only consisting in commanding or prohibiting without any
certain punishment or penalty) yet the very Law of Nature it self could never
be altered or changed: And therefore it is certainly true, that Jura naturalia
sunt immutabilia. And here with agrees Bracton lib. 1. cap. 5. and Doct. and
Student cap. 5. and 6. For example, 33. H. b. 55. 6.
If a man has a Ward by reason of a Seigniory, and is outlawed, he forfeiteth
the wardship to the King; but if a man has the wardship of his own Son or
Daughter, which is his heir apparent, and then is outlawed, he cannot forfeit
that wardship, because nature has annexed it to the person of the Father, as
it appears in 33 H. 6. 55. b. So likewise the Faith, Obedience, and Ligeance,
which we owe to our Sovereign cannot be taken away; For, bonus Rex nihil a
bono patre differt, and patria dicitur a patre, quia habet communem patrem, qui
est pater patriae. In the same manner, Maris and foeminae conjunctio est de
jure naturae, 35 H. 6. 57.
as Bracton and Doct. and Stud. in the places before quoted do hold: And
therefore if he that is attainted of treason or felony be slain by one, that
has no authority, or executed by one, that has authority, but pursues not
his Warrant; In this Case, 21 E. 3. 17. b.
the eldest son can have no appeal; for he must bring his appeal as heir,
which privilege, being ex provisione hominis, he loses by the attainder of
his Father: Howbeit his Wife (if he have any) shall have an appeal; because
she is to have her appeal as Wife, which she continues to be, notwithstanding
the attainder; for that maris and foeminae conjunctio is de jure naturae; And
therefore (it being intended to be of true and law-full matrimony) is
indissoluble: and this is proved by the book in 35 H. 6. fol. 57. So if there
be Mother and Daughter and the Daughter is attainted of felony, now can not
she be heir to her Mother, for the cause before said: yet after her attainder
if she kill her Mother, this is parricide and petite treason: For still she
remains her Daughter: because that is of nature. If a man be attainted of
felony or treason, 4 E. 4. 35 H. 6. 57. 2. Ass. Pl. 3.
he has lost the Kings Legal protection: for he is thereby utterly disabled to
sue any Action real or personal (which is a greater disability then an alien
in league has) and yet such a Parson so attainted has not lost that
protection, which by the Law of Nature is given to the King: for that is
indelebilis and immutabilis, and therefore the King may protect and pardon him;
and if any man kill him without warrant (albeit attainted as aforesaid) he
shall be punished by Law as a Manslayer: By the Statute of the 25 E. 3. cap.
22. a man attainted in a Praemunire, is by express words out of the Kings
protection generally; and yet this extends only to legal protection, as it
appears by Litt. fol. 43. for the Parliament could not take away that
protection, which the Law of Nature gives unto him; and therefore
notwithstanding that Statute the King may protect and pardon him: And although
by that Statute it was farther enacted, that it should be done with him as with
an enemy, by which words any man might have slain such a person (as it is
holden in 24 H. 8. Coron. Br. 197.) until the Statute made in 5 E. cap. 1. Yet
the King might protect and pardon him. A man outlawed is out of the benefit of
the Municipal Law; for so says Fitz. N. B. 161. Ut legatus est quasi extra
legem positus; And Bracton (l. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11. says that caput gerit
lupinum, etc. yet is he not out either of his natural ligeance, or of the Kings
natural protection; for neither of them is tied to municipal laws, but is due
by the law of Nature, which was long before any judicial or municipal laws:
And therefore if a man were outlawed for felony, yet was he within the Kings
natural protection: for no man but the Sheriff could execute him, as it is
adjudged in 2. Ass. Pl. 3. Every subject is by his natural ligeance bound to
obey and serve his Sovereign, etc. It is enacted by the Parliament in 23 H. 6.
cap. 8. that no man should serve the King as Sheriff of any County above one
year, and that, notwithstanding any clause of non obstante to the contrary,
that is to say, notwithstanding that the King should expressy dispense with the
said Statute; howbeit it is agreed in 2 H. 7. that against the express purview
of that Act, the King may by a special non obstante dispense with that Act; for
that the Act could not bar the King of the service of his subject, which the
law of nature did give unto him: One of the Chiefest grounds, according to
which the Case of the post-nati was resolved in 6 Jac. was, because obedience
and ligeance of the subject to the Sovereign is due by the law of Nature; for
if they be due by that law, and the same law be parcel of the laws of England
as well, as of all other Nations, and is immutable, and that post-nati and we
of England are united by birthright in obedience and ligeance (which is the
true cause of natural subjection) by the law of Nature, It clearly followed,
that Calvin (the Plaintiff in that cause) being borne under one ligeance to
one and the same King, could not be an alien borne: And there is great reason
(as it was then alleged) that the law of Nature should direct that Case,
wherein five natural operations were remarkable, 1 The King had the Crown of
England by birthright, being naturally procreated of the blood Royal of this
Realm; Secondly, Calvin the Plaintiff, was naturalized by procreation and
birthright, since the descent of the Crown of England; Thirdly, Ligeance and
obedience of the subject to the Sovereign due by the Law of Nature; Fourthly,
Protection and government also due by the Law of Nature: Fifthly, It was
presently said, that this Case of Calvin in the opinion of diverse was more
doubtful in the beginning, but the farther it proceeded the cleerer and
stronger it grew, and therefore that the doubt did arise from some violent
passion, and not from any reason grounded upon the Law of Nature, quia quanto
violentus motus (qui sit contra naturam) appropinquat ad suum finem tanto
debiliores and tardiores sunt ejus motus, sed naturalis motus, quanto magis
appropinquat ad suum finem, tanto fortiores and velociores sunt ejus motus: And
for as much as in case of an alien Borne, you must of necessity have two
federal ligeances to two several persons, but in this Case one person alone is
head of both, and the post-nati, and we now joined in ligeance so that one
head, (which was copula, and tanquam oculus of that Case) And ligeance of the
subjects of both Kingdoms being due to their Sovereign by one and the same
Law, viz. by the Law of Nature, the post-nati cannot be aliens of either
Kingdom, but ad invicem naturalized subjects of both; for, Non adversatur
diversitas regnorum, sed regnantium; non patriarum, sed patrum patriarum; non
coronarum, sed coronatorum: non legum municipalium, sed Regum Majestatum, etc.

Mother guardian.
1^ If the Grandfather has issue a Son, F. N. B. 1^
and the Son take Wife and has issue and die, the Mother of the issue shall
have the Wardship of the issue, which is her own Son, and not the
Grandfather; Albeit the issue may have the Land, which ought to descend unto
him from the Grandfather, and that the Mother shall not have it, etc.

No champerty in the Son.
13 The Statute of Articuli sup. cartas cap. 11. provides, Pl. Co. 88. b. 3.
Partriges case.
that no Minister, or other whatsoever, to have part of the things, which are
in Plea, shall undertake businesses, which are so in plea; yet if the Tenant
hanging a percipe quod reddat against him, enfeoffe his Son and heir
apparent, this shall be out of the danger of that Statute, as it is taken in 6
E. 3. 274. in a writ of Champertie (see it also in Fitz. Champertie 10.) and
the reason of this is, for that the Son cannot be said a Maintainer of the
Father; because he is bound to aid and assist his Father, when and as often as
he may, being enjoined so to do by the Law of nature, etc.

The Son may a bet his mother.
14 By the Statute of West. 2. cap. 12. it is ordained, Pl. Co. ibid.
that in an appeal it shall be inquired, who were the Abettors, and that they
shall render damages to the party acquit; Nevertheless, if the heir abet his
Mother to bring the appeal, although it is within the words of that Statute,
yet shall he be out of the danger of it, And so Herle took it, in 6 E. 3. 274.
For Common Law and reason say, that he ought to be aiding to his Mother, and
may also abet her.

Considerations to raise uses.
15 Affection for the provision of heirs male, that one shall engender, Finch,
25. Co. Inst. p. 1. 21. b. 1.
Brotherly love, etc. are good consideration to raise an use; But long
Acquaintance and familiarity, are not: Howbeit consideration of Marriage is more
favored in Law, then any other.

Maintenance.
16 The Son may maintain his Father and one Brother another, etc. Finch, ibid.


17 Brothers or Cofins shall not wage Battle in a writ of right, Finch, ibid.
etc.

The Wife may relieve her Husband.
18 A Statute, Finch, ibid.
that makes it Felony to receive or give meat and drink to one that
commits such or such an offense, (the party so receiving or giving having
knowledge thereof) stretched not to a Woman, that receives or gives meat and
drink to her Husband in such a Case, etc.

Privitie in Blood strongest.
19 You shall find three manner of Privities spoken of in the Law, Co. l. 8.
42. b. 4. and 44. a. 4. in Whittinghams Case.
viz. Privitie in Blood, Privitie in Estate, and Privitie in Law; Privite in
Blood is, that between the Ancestor the Heir, Privitie in Estate, as between
Iointenants, Baron and Feme, Donor and Donee, Lessor and Lessee, etc. Privies
in Law are, as when the Law without Blood or Privitie of Estate casts the Land
upon one, and makes his entry Congeable, as the Lord by escheate, the Lord that
enters for Mortmaine, Lord of a Villein, etc. Now of these three sorts of
privities, only the first (which is by blood, and therefore most natural)
shall take advantage of Infancy, Coverture, non sanae memoriae, etc. and not
the other two. And therefore if an Infant, Tenant in Fee-simple, make a
Feoffement and die, his Heir shall enter; There is the same Law also of heirs
special, and of heirs general and special, unto whom the right of entry
descends per formam doni, or by the Custom, as all Lands in Gavelkind,
Borough-English, etc. It is otherwise of privies in Estate, and in Law; And
therefore if the Donee in tale within age make feoffment in Fee and die without
issue, the Donor shall not enter; Because there was only privitie in Estate
betwee them, and no right accrued to the Donor by the death of the Donee: So if
there be two Iointenants in Fee within age, and the one makes Feoffment in Fee
of his moitie, and dies, the sur-vivor cannot enter by reason the Infancy of
his Companion; Because by his Feoffment the joyntenure was severed, so long as
the Feoffment remains in force; and therefore in such Case the Heir of the
Feoffor shall have a dum fuit infra aetatem, or shall enter into the moitie: In
like manner Privies in Law (as the Lord by escheate, etc.) shall never take
advantage of the Privitie of Infancy; because they are strangers to it: And in
that Case if an Infant Tenant make Feofment and die without Heir, the Feofment
is un-avoidable: here is the same Law of Coverture and non sanae memoriae, etc.

Co. l. 6. 76. b. 4. in Sr. Geo. Cursons Case.
19 It is said, that one of the Chiefest reasons, 32, and 34, 3^ H. 8. of Will.
that moved the Parliament in 32 H. 8. and in 34 and 35 H. 8. to give liberty
to dispose of the two third parts of Lands by will or otherwise for a Competent
livelihood of Wives, and Children, or for payment of Debts, was this; Because
these Cases were ordinary, usual, and necessary; And for that every man is in
his life time bound by the Law of God, of Nature, and of Nations, to make
provision for his Wife, and Children, and also for the payment of his Debts,
etc.

Co. ibid. 77. a. 2.
20 There is a nearer Relation between Father and Son, Father nee^ then
Grandfather.
then between Grandfather and Grandchild; And therefore if there be
Grandfather, Father, and diverse Sons, and the Grandfather in the life time
of the Father conveys his Land to some of the Sons, this is out of the Act of
32 H. 8. of Wills; For the Father ought to have the immediate care of his Sons
and Issues; But if the Father be dead, then the care of them belongs to the
Grandfather, and then if he convey any of his Lands to any of them, that is
within the said Statute.

Co. Inst. pt. 1. 123. b. 2. Litt.. 189.
21 It is regularly true, A Villein may sue his Lord.
that the Villain cannot bring any Action against his Lord, yet he may have
against his Lord an appeal of the death of his Father, or of any other of his
Ancestors, whose heir he is, etc. because the villain is both by duty and in
nature bound to pursue such an Action.

Co. lib. 3. 12. b. 2. St. Will. Herberts Case.
22 If a man seized of three Acres of Land, No contribution to the heir.
acknowledges a recognisance or Statute, etc. And enfeoffes A. of one Acre,
and B. of another, and the third descends to his heir: in this Case, if
execution be sued only against the heir, he shall not have contribution: For
he comes in the place of his Ancestor, and sits in his State: Haeres enim est
alter ipse and filius est pars patris, And as it is said, Mortuus est pater and
quasi non mortuus, quia reliquit similem sibi.

Co. Inst. p 1. 174. a. 4.
23 If one Copercener makes a Feoffment in Fee, and after the Feoffee is
impleaded and voucheth the Feoffor. The heir apparent shall derraigne the
warrantie from upon feof^^^ for the mother.
she may have aid of her Coperceuer to deraigne a Warrantie per amount, but
never to recover per rata against her by force of the Warrantie in Law upon the
partition; For (as Littleton says) by her alienation she has dismissed her
self to have any part of the Land as parcener, but if there be two Coperceners
and they make partition, and the one of them enfeoffs her Son and heir
apparent and dies, and after the Son is impleaded; Here, albeit he be in by
the Feoffment of his Mother, yet shall he pray in aid of the other Copercener
to have the Warrantie per amount, and to recover per rata, not only because
the Warrantie betwixt his Mother and him is by Law annulled, but likewise for
that he is alter idem with his Mother.

Dier 2. b. 1. 19 H. 8.
24 A fine levied by Tenant in tail after the Statute of 4 H. 7. 24. Issue in
tail barred by (...) fine.
and before the Statute of 32 H. 8. 36. did bind the issue in tail, and his
title was not preserved by any of the savings in 4 H. 7. because (albeit he
claimed per formam doni, yet) claiming thorough his Father, the Land came to
him in the nature of a descent.

Dier 128. b. 61 2, 3. P. M.
25 If any of the Kings subjects be beyond Sea, and is commanded by the King to
return home, and in contempt refuses so to do, Allegiance.
all his Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements shall be seized for the use of
the King; And this is by reason of the faith and allegiance, which he owes to
the King by the Law of Nature: And this was the Earl of Richmonds Case in 19
E. 2. in Scaccario.

The like.
26 If a Bastard were borne at Turney, Dier 224. 19. 5. Eliz.
when it was under the obedience of H. 8. he was a denizen by the Law of
Nature: So it is also of the issue of Aliens born within this Realm.

27 Vide Hob. Rep. page 1. The Earl of Clanrichards Case 10. Grisley against
Lother

Formedon.
28 In a cessavit brought by the Husband and Wife, Hob. 1. The E. of
Clanrichards Case.
or in a writ of Escheat, a consimili casu, or Action or Wast, because there is
a vested in them already either a Signiory or reversion actually, and therefore
the Land holden, or the present Estate to return, is come in possession,
therefore in these Cases, Reverter is to be made to them both, and so are the
Books in 3 H. 6. 2. 20 E. 3. Brief 372. Register 238. F. N. B. ^10. Also in a
Formedon in Reverter, wherein nothing is already revested, but the right only
returns, there the right may be laid to return, either to the Wife alone, or
to the Husband and Wife, as Douby resolves it 33 H. 6. 54. See also 18 H. 8.
20. 5 H. 3. 13. 38 E. 3. 16. and 18 E. 3. 3. where it was sometimes to the
Wife, sometimes to the Husband and Wife: But in a Formedon in descender upon a
descent to the Wife, there the descent must be made in the writ to the Wife
alone, because the descent follows the blood, and to that the Husband is a
stranger, and so are the Books in 19 H. 6. 46. and 53 H. 6. 10. where a
Formedon in descender was brought by two Husbands and their Wives, and made the
descent in blood to the Wives only, and yet concluded, that the right ought to
descend to the Husbands and Wives: And exception was taken to it, and ordered
by the Court, that it should be amended, and the descent made only to the
Wives.

Assumpsit.
29 In an Action upon an Assumpsit, Hob. 10. Grisley and Lother.
that A. would give to B. 100 l. if B. would give her consent, that A. might
marry her Daughter, and it was moved in arrest of judgment, that the action
would not lie, the consideration being to travel or charge, but only a bare
consent: howbeit, it was held by three Justices against one, that the
consideration was good, because the Mother has by the Law of Nature a special
stroke to incline the Daughters mind either one way or other, and the desire of
her consent and the working of it shows, that the Plaintiff so conceived it.

79 Nemo praesumitur alienam posteritatem suae praetulisse.
Collateral Warrantie.
1 If the Tenant in tail discontinue the tail and has issue and die, Co Inst.
p. 1. 373. a. 3. Litt. 709.
and the Uncle of the issue release to the discontinue with Warrantie, etc. and
die without issue, this is Collateral Warrantie, and shall bar the Issue in
tail, albeit the Uncle had no right at all to the land intailed; because the
Law presumes that the Uncle would not un-naturally dis-inherit his Lawful
Heir, being of his own blood, of that right, which the same Uncle never had,
but came to the Heir by another mean, unless he would leave him greater
advancement some other way; For nemo praesumitur, etc. And in this Case the Law
will admit no proof, against that which the Law presumes: And so it is
likewise of all other Collateral Warranties; no man is presumed to do any thing
against nature.

(...) conveyance ^ot within the ^^at, of Wills.
2 If a man make a voluntary Conveyance of his Land to the use of any of his
collateral blood, who is not his heir apparent, Co. l. 6. 77. a. 3. in Sr.
Geo-cusrons Case.
that is not within the Act of 32 H. 8. of Wills; For it cannot be intended,
that he will dis-inherit his heir on purpose to defeat the King of his Ward
(seeing every one hopes to live to see his heir attain his full age) much
less to defraud him of his Primer seisin. Vide Dier 307. 71.

80 The Law esteems and judges of all things according to their nature and
quality.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 91. b. 4.
1 Where the tenant holds of his Lord by fealty and a pound of pepper, or a
pound of Cummin, or a certain number of Capons, Certain services not do^bled
for relie^.
or hens or a pair of Gloves, or certain bushels of wheat, or the like; the
Lord shall have so much for relief as he receives in rent, viz. a pound of
pepper, a pound of Cummin, or the like: But if the tenant holds of the Lord
by doing certain work-dayes in Harvest, or to attend at Christmas, or the like,
he shall not double the same; for of corporal service or labor, or work of the
tenant, no relief is due. It being only payable, where the tenant holds by
such yearly rents or profits, which may be paid or delivered, etc.

Co. ib. 92 a. 2. Litt.. 128, and 129.
2 When the tenant holds by such yearly rents or profits, Not to be distrained
for presently.
as may be presently delivered, the relief is due to be paid to the Lord
immediately upon the tenants death; and upon non-payment thereof the Lord may
distrain for it presently: Howbeit if the tenant holds of his Lord by a Rose,
or by a bushel of Roses, to be paid at the Feast of St. John Baptist, if such a
tenant die in winter, the Lord shall forbear to distrain for the Relief, until
the season of Roses; for Lex spectat naturae ordinem, Lex non cogit ad
impossibilia. And therefore it is observed by my Lord Cook, that Littleton puts
a diversity between Corn and Roses; for Corn will last, and therefore the
tenant must deliver the Corn presently before the time of growth, and so of
saffron, etc. but Roses and other flowers that are fructus fugaces cannot be
kept, and therefore are not to be delivered, until the time of growing; neither
is the tenant driven by law artificially to preserve Roses; for the Law in
these cases respected nature, and the course of the year, etc.

Co. ib. 121. b. 4 and Co. l. 4. 36. b. 4. in Tyrringhams case. and Pl. Co.
168. Hill and Granges Case.
3 Prescription (although never so ancient) cannot make any thing appendant or
appurtenant, Things properly appe^dant and appurtenant.
unless the thing appendant or appurtenant agree in quality and nature with
the thing whereunto it is so appendant or appurtenant; as a thing corporeal
cannot properly be appendant to a thing corporeal, nor a thing in-corporeal to
a thing incorporeal; but things incorporeal which lie in grant, as Advowsons,
Villains, Commons, and the like may be appendant to things corporeal, as to a
Manor, house, or lands: so also may things corporeal be appendant to things
incorporeal, as Lauds to an Office: but yet these also ought to agree in nature
and quality: for Common of Turbary or Estovers cannot be appendant or
appurtenant to Land, but to an house to be spent therein; nor a Leet which is
temporal to a Church or Chapel, which is Ecclesiastical: Neither can a Noble
man, Esquire, etc. claim a seat in a Church by prescription, as appendant or
belonging to land, but to an house; for that such a seat belongs to the
house, in respect of the Inhabitancy thereof; and therefore if the house be
part of a Manor, yet in that case he may claim the seat, as appendant to the
house for the reason aforesaid.

Co. ibid. 129. a. 4.
4 A man cannot be naturalized either with limitation for life, Naturalization.
or intail, or upon condition; for that is against the absoluteness, purity,
and indelebility of natural Allegiance.

Co. ib. 130. a. 4
5 Corporations aggregate of many are not capable of the Protections of
Profecturae or moraturae; Corporati^^
because the Corporation it self is invisible, and rests only in
consideration of law.

Ca. ib. 144. b. 4
6 Littleton says ( 219) that the Grantee of a rent charge has election to
bring a writ of annuity, Rent-cha^^^
and so changing the person only to make it personal, or else to distrain upon
the land, and so to make it real; but this is to be understood with some
limitation; for of a rent granted for owelty of partition, a writ of Annuity
does not lie, because it is of the nature of the land descended: Also of such a
rent as may be granted without deed, a writ of Annuity does not lie, although
it be granted by deed, etc.

7 If there be two Ioynt-tenants, Co. ib. 192. b. 3. Litt.. 302.
and the one lets his moity to another for life. ^oynt-tenants
In this Case, the Ioynture is severed so, that if the Ioynt-tenant which still
retains the frank-rent of his moity, have issue and die, the issue shall have
that moity by descent; because a frank-tenant cannot by nature of Ioynture be
annexed to a bar^ reversion, etc.

Divine Ser^ice and frank-almoigne.
8 Where the Common or Statute Law gives remedy in foro seculari, Co. Inst. p.
1. 96. b. Litt.. 137.
(whether the matter be temporal or spiritual) the Connusance of that Cause
belongs to the Kings temporal Courts only, unless the Jurisdiction of the
Ecclesiastical Court be saved, etc. as if an Abbot or Prior hold of his Lord by
Divine Service certain, and that Service is not performed, the Lord has his
remedy in foro seculari, because the Service being certain, proof thereof may
be made in a temporal Court: It is otherwise of tenure in frank-almoigne; for
that Service being spiritual and uncertain, must be de^^ned and recovered in
foro Ecclesiastico, in an Ecclesiastical Court, unto which Court the Connusance
of that cause does properly belong, etc.

Tenants in common for Rent arrear.
9 If two tenants in common of Lands in fee make a gift in tail, Co. ibid. 197.
Litt.. 314.
or a lease for life, reserving a yearly rent, and a pound of pepper, and an
hawk, and an horse, and they are seized of that service; and afterward all the
said service being arrear, they distrain for it, and the tenant makes resc^us;
In this Case, as to the rent and pound of pepper they (...) have two several
Assizes, because the two tenants in common hold the reversion (unto which that
service is incident) by several titles: but as to the hawk and horse, albeit
they be tenants in common, etc. they shall join in the Assise; for one of them
above by himself cannot make his plaint in Assise for the moity of an hawk or
of an horse; because the Law will never suffer any man to demand any thing
against the order of nature, or reason, as it appears by Littleton 129. Lex
enim spectat naturae ordinem, etc.

Conditional ^eoffments ^or obligations.
10 If A. enfeoff B. of Black ac^e, Co. ib. 208. b. 4
upon condition that if C. enfeoff B. of White acre, A. shall re-enter; In this
Case, C. has time during his life to make the feoffment, if B. does ^o^ hasten
it by request, and so likewise of all Obligation: Howbeit in some Cases,
although the condition be collateral, as aforesaid, and is to be performed to
the Obligee, and no time limited, etc. yet in respect of the nature of the
thing, the Obligor shall not have time during his life to perform it: As if the
condition of an Obligation be, to grant an Annuity or yearly rent to the
Obligee during his life, payable yearly at the Feast of Easter, this Annuity or
yearly rent must be granted before Easter, or else the Obligee shall not have
it at that Feast during his life, and sic de similibus: And so it was resolved
by the Judges of the Common Pleas, in Andrews case: for which see Dier. 14.
Eliz. 311.

^he like.
11 If a feofment or bond be made upon condition, Co. ib. 210. a. 4
that the Feoffor or Obligor shall pay a certain sum of money to the feoffee or
obligee at such a day, but no place limited for the payment thereof; In this
case, the Feoffor or Obligor ought to seek out the feoffee or obligee to make
payment thereof accordingly, if he be to be found within England, etc. for in
case of an Obligation the Law was always clear, and in case of a feofment,
although it has been sometimes controverted, yet at this day that doubt is
settled, it having been oftentimes resolved, that seeing the money to be paid is
a sum in gross and collateral to the title of the land; the feoffor must
tender the money to the person of the feoffee; and it is not sufficient for him
to to tender it upon the land: otherwise it is of a rent, that issues out of
the land: Howbeit, if the condition of a bond or feoffment be to deliver twenty
Quarters of wheat, or twenty loads of timber, or the like, the Obligor or
Feoffor is not bound to carry the same about, and to seek the Feoffee or
Obligee; but the Feoffor or Obligor before the day must go to the Feoffee or
Obligee, and know where he will appoint to receive it, and there it must be
delivered. And so note a diversity between money and things ponderous, or of
great weight: Likewise if the Condition of a Bond or Feoffment be to make a
Feoffment, there it is sufficient for him to tender it upon the Land, because
the State must pass by livery, etc.

Co. ibid. 285. b. 3.
12 Every man shall plead such pleas as are proper for him, Pleas of a disseisor.
and apt for his defense to be pleaded: As a disseisor that has nothing in the
land may plead a release of Actions personal, because damages are to be
recovered against him, and therefore for his defense he may plead it. But a
release of Actions real he cannot plead, because he has no Estate in the land.
And none shall plead a release of Actions real in an Assise, but the tenant of
the land. Et sic de caeteris.

Co. ibid. 338. a. 3.
13 A particular Estate of things that lie in grant cannot commence without
deed, Things that lie in grant.
and consequently that Estate cannot be surrendered without deed; but albeit a
particular Estate be made of Lands by deed, yet may it be surrendered without
deed, in respect of the thing demised; because the particular Estate might have
been made without deed: And so on the other side, if one be tenant by the
Courtesy, or tenant in Dower of an Advowson, Rent, or other thing that lies in
grant, albeit there the Estate began without deed, yet in respect of the nature
and quality of the thing that lies in grant, it cannot be surrendered without
deed: And so if a Lease for life be made of Lands, the remainder for life,
albeit the remainder for life began without deed, yet because Remainders and
Reversions, though they be of lands, are things that be in grant, they cannot
be surrendered without deed, etc.

Co. ibid. 144. a. 3.
14 A Rent cannot be granted out of a Piscarie, a Common, No rent o^^ of things
incorporeal.
an Advowson, or such like incorporeal Inhabitants, but out of lands or
tenements, whereunto the Grantee may have recourse to distrain, or which may be
put in view to the Re-cognitors of an Assise. And although it be out of Lands
or tenements, yet it must be out of an Estate, that passes by the Conveyance,
and not out of a right, as if the Disseisee release to the Disseisor of Land,
reserving a rent, the reservation is void, and sic de similibus.

Co. l. 4. 43. b. 4. in Bibithes Case.
15 John Goffe, the brother and heir of R. Goffe, No accessor^e before the (...)
in mansl^^^hter.
brings an Appeal of murder of the said R. Goffe against Bibithe, as principal,
and against Hoell David, as accessarie before, and against David and Thomas, as
accessarie after: The principal pleads not guilty, and by nisi prius in the
County of Manmouth he was found guilty of manslaughter and not guilty of
murder: and in this Case it was resolved per Popham Chief Justice and totam
Curiam in the Kings Bench, that Hoell David was discharged: because there could
not be any accessory before the fact in Case of manslaughter: for
manslaughter ought to Ensue upon a sudden debate of effray, because, if it
be premeditate, it is murder.

16 A Feme sole devises land to A. and his heirs; A femes will revoked by
taking Bar^^
if A. survive him, Co. lib. 4. 16. b. 2. in Ferse and Hemblings Case.
they inter-marry, the Feme revokes, and often says (during the Coverture)
that A. shall not have it, and dies, whereupon the heir of the Feme enters: And
in this Case it was resolved, that the making of a Will is but the inception of
it, and that it takes not any effect until the death of the Devisor; for Omne
testamentum morte consummatum est, and voluntas est ambulatoria usque extremum
vitae exitum: And therefore it would be against the nature of a will to be so
absolute, that the party which made it being of sane and perfect memory, might
not have power to counter-mand it; and then this taking of Baron being the
Femes proper act, shall be accounted a counter-mand in Law, of the will; and
thereupon the heir of the Feme recovered the Land, etc.

Payment to a terme^, no seisin of rent.
17 A man devises a rent for life out of the Manor of Dale, Co. lib. 6. 57. a.
4. in Bredimans Case.
and devises the Manor for years, the termor enters, and pays the Rent:
after the Term ended, the Devisee brings an Assise against the Tetretenant: And
in this Case it was resolved per totam Curiam, that the payment of the rent by
the termor was not seisin to bind the Terretenant, after the determination of
the Term, in respect of the weakness and meannesse of the interest of the
tenant for years, who at the common Law could not prejudice nor draw in
question the estate of the frank-tenement, etc.

Common ratione commorantiae not good.
18 In Trespass, the defendant justifies, Co. lib. 6. 60. a. 3. in Gatewards
Case.
yt all Inhabitants in any ancient Message within the Town of Dale have used
to have Common in the place, etc. in Solo ratione commorantiae, And it was
adjudged per totam Curiam, that this Custom was against Law for diverse
reasons, amongst which this was one, that such a claim of a Common is against
the nature and quality of a Common; for every Common may he suspended or
extinguished; but such a Common as that shall be so incident to the person,
that no certain person shall be able to extinguish it: for so soon as he which
releaseth, etc. removes, the new Inhabitant shall have it again, 71. 3.

Allegiance not local.
19 In Calvin's Case, the plea of the Defendants, that confined the ligeance of
the Plaintiff Calvin to the Kingdom of Scotland only, Co. l. 7. 9. b. 2.
Calvin's case.
(Infra ligeantiam Regis Regni sui Scotiae, and extra ligeantiam Regis Regni
sui Angliae) and so did make one local ligeance for the natural subjects of
England, and another local ligeance for the natural subjects of Scotland, was
adjudged utterly unsufficient; because ligeance being a quality of the mind,
that follows the subject whithersoever he goes, it is against the nature
thereof to be local, or confined within any one particular Kingdom or
Country; And therefore it is truly said, Qui abjurat regnum, amittit regnum,
sed non regem; amittit patriam, sed non patrem patriae; for notwithstanding the
abjuration, he owes the King his ligeance, and still remains within the
Kings protection; because the King, if he please, may pardon him and restore
him to his Country again, etc.

^eisin of rent ^aversable.
20 There is a diversity, Co. lib. 9. 33. a. 3. in Backnals Case.
when the Lord in his Avowrie varies from the truth of the quality of the
services, by color of seisin and possession, which he has got of his tenant,
and when he varies from the truth of the quantity of the services, by reason of
seisin, which he has got of more then he ought to have of the same nature; for
where the Lord avowes, because the tenant holds of him certain land by fealty,
rent, and suit of Court, and alleges seisin of all, and for the rent arrear,
etc. whereas the true tenure was by fealty and rent only: In this case, the
seisin of the suit is not material, because it is of another quality and
nature, and the tenancy originally was not charged with any service of such a
quality as suit of Court: And therefore in such case the tenure is traversable.
But where the rent is 2 s. per annum, if the Lord has happed quiet and
voluntary seisin of more rent, then he ought to have, as of 3 s. etc. (without
any cohertion of distress) there, because the tenancy is charged with service
of such nature and quality, and for that it is not to be presumed, that the
tenant would willingly pay more rent, then he ought, the seisin is traversable,
and not the tenure, etc.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 117. a. 2.
21 If a man be Lessee of a Villain, for life, for years, or at will, Lessee,
Villain
and the Villain purchase lands in fee, if the Lessee enters into the Lands,
he shall hold the Lands as a Perquisite to him and his heirs for ever; for the
Law respected the quality and not the quantity of his Estate, etc.

22 A tenant holds of his Lord certain Lands in soc^age, Relief.
to pay yearly a pair of guilt Spurs, ^o. ib. 90. b. 4.
or five shillings in money a^ the Feast of Easter: In this Case the rent is
uncertain, and the tenant may pay which of them he will at the said Feast, and
likewise the tenant may pay which of them he will for relief; but if he pay it
not when he ought, then may the Lord distrain for which of them he will:
Howbeit if the tenure be to attend on his Lord at the Feast of Christmas, or to
pay ten shillings, there the relief must be ten shillings, because it is
against the nature of the other to be doubled.

Co. ib. 207. a. 2
23 If an Obligation of 100 l. be made for the payment of 50 l. at a day, and at
the day the Obligor tender it, Payment of money or wheat. Diversity.
yet in an Action of Debt upon the Obligation, if the Defendant plead the
tender and refusal, he must also plead, that he is yet ready to pay the money,
and tender the same in Court: But if a man be bound in 200 quarters of wheat
for the delivery of 100 quarters, and the Obligor tender at the day the 100
quarters, etc. he shall not (in such case) plea^ uncore prist, because although
it be parcel of the Condition, yet they being bona peritura, if will be a
charge for the Obligor to keep them; and therefore (in such case) he is not
bound to say, he is always ready to pay the same 100 quarters, etc. Vide Dier.
150. 84.

Co. ib. 207. a. 4
24 If a man make a single bond, Condition collateral.
or acknowledge a Statute or Recognisance, and afterward make a defeasance for
the payment of a lesser sum at a day, if the Obligor or Conusor tender the
lesser sum at the day, and the Obligee or Counsee refuses it, he shall never
have any remedy at Law to recover it, because it differs in quality from the
sum contained in the Obligation, Statute, or Recognisance, because if is no
parcel thereof, but contained in the defeasance made at the time, or perhaps
after the Obligation, Statute, or Recognisance: And in such Case, in pleading
of tender and refusal, the party shall not be driven to plead Uncore prist,
neither has the Obligee or Counsee any remedy by law to recover the sum
contained in such defeasance: so likewise it is, if a man make an Obligation of
100 l. with condition for the delivery of corn or timber, etc. or for the
performance of an Arbitrament, or the doing of any Act, etc. This differing in
nature from the sum contained in the Obligation, and being no parcel thereof is
collateral thereunto; And therefore in such Case also, a tender and refusal is
a perpetual bar. The like Law it is of tender and refusal of money upon a
Mortgage of Land; because the money is collateral, and differs in nature from
the land.

Dier. 5. b. 26. H. 8. 1, 2.
25 A man seized of land devisable by the custom, lets it for years, Rent
reserv^^ a chattel.
rendering rent, and devises the rent to a stranger, and dies, and the
stranger is seized of the rent, and dies also. In this case, the rent being in
its nature but a chattel, shall go to the executor of the Devisee, and not to
his Heir.

26 In debt against Executors brought in the County of Middlesex, Debt against
Executors.
the Defendants plead fully administered. Dier. 30. b. 206 28. H. 8.
The Plaintiff says, that they have Assets in Essex, and thereupon the
Defendants demurred; and judgment was given for the Plaintiff, because Assets
(in their nature) is a thing transitory, and not local; and if it had been in
issue and trial of a Jury of Middlesex, they might have found the Assets in any
County of England.

Rent-service apportionable.
27 Rent-service was apportionable at the Common Law before the Statute of Quia
Emptores terrarum, Co. Inst. p. 1.
because there are diverse kinds of Rent-service, which are not within that
Statute, and yet were apportionable by the Common Law; as if a man makes a
lease for life or years, reserving a rent, and the Lessee surrender part of the
land to the Lessor, or if the Lessor recover part of the land in an Action of
wast, or enters for a forfeiture, or grants part of the reversion to a
stranger, or if tenant by knight service by his last will in writing devises
two parts of his lands; In all these cases the rent shall be apportioned, and
yet they are not within the words of the said Statute; but the reason seems to
be, for that rent-service is of the nature of the land, and therefore partable,
as it is partable, according to Max. 64. It is otherwise of a rent charge,
because it is not of the nature of the land, being against common right, and
collateral to the land.

Livery out of ward.
28 A livery to be out of ward being in nature of a restitution, Co. ib. 77. a.
4.
shall be taken and expounded favorably; And therefore if livery be made of a
Manor cum pertinentiis, the Heir shall thereby have the Advowson appendant: It
is otherwise of Grants by Letters Patents.

Confirmation.
29 If a Lease for life be made to two, Co. Inst. p. 1. 299. b. 1.
to have and to hold the one moity to the one for life, and the other moity to
the other for life, and the Lessor confirm their estate in the land, to have
and to hold to them and their heirs; In this Case, they are tenants in common
of the Inheritance; for (regularly) the confirmation shall inure according to
the quality and nature of the Estate which it does enlarge and increase.

30 There being three Coperceners of land in Gavelkind in reversion, Dier. 128.
a. 58 2, 3. P. M.
depending upon an Estate for life, Partition.
the youngest aliens his part by fine in fee, the tenant for life dies, and the
eldest son enters into the whole, and then the second brother and the alienee
bring a joint writ of partition upon the Statute of 31 H. 8. 1. against the
eldest brother: But it was adjudged, that it was not maintainable; because they
were entitled to writs of partition of several natures, viz. the one to a writ
of Copercenarie at the Common Law, and the other to a writ of Partition by the
Statute, and therefore could not join.

^eprivation.
31 The President of Magdalen College in Oxford being deprived by the Bishop of
Winchester, their Visitor, Dier. 209. 20. 3, 4. Eliz.
could not have an Appeal to the Delegates, because the deprivation was
temporal, and not spiritual, and therefore out of the Statute of 25. H. 8. 19.
And so he was put to his Assise,

^^sance.
32 Tenant for life of an house brings an Action upon the Case against one, who
stopped the way in his land, Dier. 250. 88. 8 Eliz.
which time out of mind had been a passage betwixt the house and a Park, and
albeit the Park was the Lessors, and not the tenants for life, yet it was held
by the Count, that such an Action lay not for ye tenant for life, but an Assise
of Nuisance.

(...) in gross (...) rent.
33 The Lord Dacres lets certain land and stock to friends, Dier. 275. 49. 10
Eliz.
who covenant to pay 100 l. per annum to him and his wife, his heirs and
assigns, during the term, and also 2000 l. at a certain day for the
marriage-portion of his daughter, he dies, his son within age, and suffers more
then a third part of all his land to descend, after the Feme dies, And in this
Case it was adjudged, that the Queen should not have the 100 l. per annum, but
the executors of the Feme, because (in nature and quality) it is not a rent
which goes to the heir, but a sum in gross.

81 In persons, the Law looks at the excellency of some, and gives them
singular Privileges, and preheminences above others, as to the King, the Queen
his Wife, Noblemen, and Peers of the Realm; also unto persons of holy Church.
Co. Inst. pt. 1. 21. b. 3.
1 If the King give Land to a man with a Woman of his kindred in Frank-marriage,
and the Woman dies without Issue, Frank-marriage.
the man in the Kings Case shall not hold it for his life; because the Woman
was the cause of the gift; but it is otherwise in the Case of a common person.

Co. ib. 31. b. 4.
2 If a Common Person take an Alien to Wife and die, An alien.
albeit he were seized of Lands in Fee, or Fee tail; yet shall not his Wife be
endowed: but if the King take an Alien borne, and die, she shall be endowed by
the Law of the Crown, And yet Edmund brother to E. 1. married the Queen of
Navarre, Rot. Parl. 26 E. 1. Rot. 1.
and died; And it was resolved by all the Judges, that she should be endowed of
the third part of all the Lands, whereof her husband was seized in fee.

Co. ib. 90. a. 4. and F. N. B. 33. p. q. r.
3 If a Bishop has an Advowson, and the Church becomes void, Bishop Advowson.
and the Bishop dies, neither the Successor nor the Executors shall present,
but the King, because it is but a Chose in action.

Co. ib. and 388. a. 2. and F. N. B. 33. p. q. r.
4 A man holds the manor of D. whereunto an Advowson is appendant, of the King
by Knights-service, the Church becomes void, Advowson, Wardship, E^ecutors.
and then the Tenant dies, his heir under age, in this Case, the King shall
present, and not the Executors of the Tenant; And this is by reason of a
prerogative, that belongs to the King to provide for the Church being void,
for, where the tenure by Knight Service is of a Common Person, the Executors of
the Tenant shall present, etc.

Co. ib. 108. b. 2.
5 Tenure by rendering yearly to the Lord, a Bow, a Sword, Petty Serjeancie,
Soccage.
a Dagger, a Gantlet, or such other small things belonging to war, in Case of
a Common Person, is nothing else, but plain soccage, ab effectu; because it had
such effects and incidents as belong to soccage; and neither ward nor marriage,
etc. But in the Kings Case, in respect of the dignity of the Kings Person, it
obtains the Name of Petie Serjeancie, etc.

Co. ib. 118. a. 2. and Litt, 177, 178.
6 If a Villain purchase Land and alien it before the Lord enter, Villein
p^^chas Land, (...) goods seis^^
the Lord is barred for ever; For, before the Lord enters, he has neither jus
jure nec jus ad rem, but only a possibility of an Estate, which Estate he
must gain by his entry; And therefore if the Villain does by way of prevention
alien, before the Lord does enter, the Lord is for ever barred of the
possibility, which he had to enjoy the Land: Si autem servus vendiderit
feodum, Fleta, l. 3. c. 13 Britt. fol. 98. a. 19 E. 2. Dow. 171.
quod sibi and haeredibus perquisiverit, antequam Dominus seisinam inde
caeperit, valet donatio, and Dominus sibi ipsi imputer, quod tantum expectavit;
says Fleta: Howbeit if the Kings Villain purchases Land, and alieneth, before
the King (upon an Office found for him) does enter, yet the King after Office
found shall have the Land, Quia nullum tempus occurrit Regi; And yet after
Office found, the King shall not have the mean profits; because the title
commenceth by the seizure. Litt.. 178.
It is otherwise of Goods in the Kings Case; For if the Kings Villain acquire
any Goods or Chattels, the property of them is in the King before any seizure
or Office: And it is well said of an Ancient Author, Mirr. cap. 3. Britt. fol.
88.
Al Roy quant al droit de la Corone, on a franch Estate ne poet null temps
accurre, and another speaking in the Person of the King, says, Null temps nest
limit quant a mes droits, etc.

^^narty.
7 Where a Church is presentative, Co. ibid. 119. b. 4. and 344 a. 4.
it is full by admission and institution against any common Person, but against
the King it is not full before Induction.

^^een pur^^s sue.
8 By the Common Law the Wife of the King of England is an exempt Person from
the King, Co. ibid. 132. a. 4. and Co. l. 4. 23. b. 2. Clerk and Pennyfathers
Case.
and is capable of Lands and tenements of the gift of the King, as no other
Feme covert is, and may sue and he sued without the King; for the wisdom of
the Common Law would not have the King (whose continual care and study is for
the Public, and circa ardua Regni) to be troubled and disquited for such
private, and petty causes: So as the wife of the King of England is of ability
and capacity to grant and to take, to sue and to be sued, as a Feme sole by the
Common Law; Also the Queen of England has many other prerogatives, viz. She
shall find no pledges, for such is her dignity as she shall not be amerced:
^^ince.
Neither she nor the Kings Son are restrained by the Statute of 1 H. 4. c. 6.
concerning grants by the King: In a Quare Impedit brought by her, some say,
that plenarty is no plea, no more then in the Case of the King; ^^enarty.
Bai^^^e, Hundred.
If any Bailiffe of the Queens bring an Action concerning the Hundred, he
shall say, In contemptum Domini Regis and Regi^ae: The Queen shall pay no toll,
etc.

^enancie part ^^iened, di^^^ain in all.
9 If the Queens Tenant alien a certain part of his tenancie to one, Co. ibid.
133. b. 1.
and another part to another, the Queen may distraine in any one part for the
whole, as the King may do: but other Lords shall distraine but for the rate;
Ane therefore where the Queen so distraineth, there lies a writ de onerando
per rata portione: ^rit of right ^^rected.
Also the writ of right shall not be directed to the Queen no more then to the
King, but to her Bailif: otherwise it is when any other is Lord.

^yde counter^leaded.
10 In case of Aid prayer of the Queen, Co. ibidem.
it is Domina Regina inconsulta, and the cause of the Aid prayer shall not be
counterpleaded no more then in the Kings Case: And see where the aid shall be
granted of the King and Queen: and where, of the Queen only, and she of the
King: 14 E. 3. Voucher 110. 21 E. 3. 53. 22 E. 3. 3. b. 17 E. 3. 65. 10 E. 3.
17. 5 E. 3. 4. 15 E. 3. Aid del Roy, 66. 10 E. 3. 18. 26 H. 6. Aid le Roy 24.

^^otect Marle^^. distress.
11 A protection shall be allowed against the Queen, Co. ibidem.
but not against the King, neither shall the Queen be sued by petition, but by
a praecipe: The Queen is not bound by the Statute of Marlebridge for driving a
distress into another County.

^eath, treason ^^wag.
12 If any do compass the death of the Queen, Co. ibid. 133. b. 2.
and declare it by any over fact the very intent is treason, as in the Case of
the King: No man may marry the Queen Dowager without the Kings license.

^^shops Court (...) Rec. certif.
13 A Bishop being an Ecclesiastical Judge, Co. ibib. 134. b. 2.
and sometimes a Lord of Parliament, by reason of the Barony annexed to his
Bishopric the Law gives much Honor and Reverence unto him; And therefore
none but the Kings Courts of Record (as the Court of Common Pleas, the Kings
Bench, Justices of Goale-delivery, and the like) can write to the Bishop to
certify Bastardy, Mulierty, Loyalty of Matrimony, and the like Ecclesiastical
matter; For it is a Rule in Law, that none but the King can write to the Bishop
to certify; And therefore no Inferior Court, ^^feriour ^ourt.
as London, Norwich, York, or and other Incorporation can write to the Bishop:
but in those Cases the Plea must be removed into the Court of Common Pleas, and
that Court must write to the Bishop, ^^are Impe^^ Wales.
and then remand the Record again: and this is the reason, why a Quare Impedit
did lie of a Church in Wales in the County next adjoining, for that the
Lordships Marchers could not write to the Bishop: Neither shall Conusance be
granted in a Quare Impedit, because the Inferior Court cannot write to the
Bishop: And herewith agrees Antiquity: Bract. l. 3. 106. Fleta l. 5. c. 24.
Britton 248. b.
Nullus alius prae^er Regem potest Episcopo demandare Inquisitionem faciendam:
And another speaking of Loyalty of Marriage, Nec alius quam Rex super hoc
demandaret Episcopo, quod inde inquire^et: Episcopus alterius mandatum quam
Regis non debet obtemperare: And herewith also agrees Britton.

Co. ibid. 137. b. 3. and F. N. B. 79. a.
If a Villain remain in the Ancient Demean of the King a year and a day,
without claim or seizure of the Lord, Villein. Ancient Demesne no (...)
the Lord cannot have a writ of Nativo habendo, or seize him, so long as he
remains and continues there: And the reason of this was in respect of the
service he did to the King in Plowing and tillage of the Demeanes, and other
labors of Husbandry for the Kings benefit: Glanv. l. 5. c. 5. Fleta l. a. c.
44. Britton fol. 79. Mirr. cap. 2.
And herewith agree old books, which say, that his Immunity was sometimes
granted by common consent to the King for his profit, and for the help and
ease of his Villains: So likewise, Priest, Chapel.
if a Villain be a Priest of the Kings Chapel, the Lord cannot seize him in
the presence of the King, for the Kings presence is a privilege and protection
for him, 27 Ass. Pl. 49.

Co. ibidem.
15 If a Villain be professed a Monk, or a Wife a Nun, Villein.
the Lord cannot seize them, etc.

Co. ibid. 156. a. 3.
16 If a Peer of the Realm or Lord of Parliament be demandant or Plaintiff,
Tenant or Defendant, Lord Knight Jury.
there must a Knight be returned of his Jury, or else the Array may be quashed:
but if he be returned, albeit he appear not, yet the Jury may be taken of the
residue: And if others be joined with the Lord of Parliament, yet if there be
no Knight retured the Array shall be quashed against all: So also in the like
case in Attaint, there ought to be a Knight returned of the Jury: Note, That
this present Parliament, which commenced Anno 16. Can. Bishops were by Act of
Parliament excluded the house of Lords: Bishops.
and therefore Quere, whether at this day this Law holds in their Case or no;
Howbeit it seems still to hold, because they still retain their Baronies, in
respect whereof they enjoyed Places and had votes in that house, and
(doublesse) shall still retain diverse other Privileges, which of right belong
to Temporal Peers, that have Baronies: Tamen quaere.

Co. ibid. 156. l. 6. b. 3.
17 At the Common Law, Challenge peremptory.
any subject under the degree of a Peer of the Realm upon an Indictment or
Appeal of Treason or Felony against him, might (in favorem vitae) challenge
peremptorily, viz. 35. or any other number under three Iuries: But a Lord of
Parliament that being a Peer of the Realm, is to be tried by his Peers,
shall challenge none of them; because they are not sworn as other Jurors be,
Peer, (...) Challenge.
but find the party guilty or not guilty upon their faith or allegiance to the
King, and they are Judges of the fact, and every of them does separately give
his Judgment, beginning at the lowest, etc. How the Common Law has been
altered concerning peremptory Challenges, see Co. ubi in margin.

Co. ibidem.
18 A Peer of the Realm or a Lord of Parliament, as a Baron, Peer no ^^ror.
Viscount, Earl, Marquess, and Duke ( propter honoris respectum, in respect
of honor and Nobility) are not to be sworn on Iuries, and if neither party
will challenge him, he may challenge himself; For, by magna Carta it is
provided, Quod nec super eam ibimus, Lords, Common.
nec super eam mittemus, nisi per legale judicium parium suorum, aut per legem
terrae: Now the Common Law has divided all the subjects, into Lords of
Parliament, and into the Commons of the Realm; Trial per pares.
The Peers of the Realm are divided into Barons, Viscounts, Earls,
Marquesses, and Dukes; The Commons are divided into Knights, Esquires,
Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen, and Burgesses; and in judgment of Law any of the
said degrees of Nobility are Peers to another, as if an Earl, Marquess, or
Duke be to be tried for treason or felony, a Baron or any other degree of
Nobility is his Peer: In like manner a Knight, Esquire, etc. shall be tried
per pares; and that is by any of the Commons, as Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen,
or Burgesses; So as when any of the Commons is to have a trial, either at the
Kings suit, or between party and party, a Peer of the Realm shall not be
impanesse^ in any Case.

Words of con^^son: bind in ^he Kings case, and of a will.
19 If a man makes a Feoffment in Fee, ad faciendum, or faciendum, Co. ibid.
204. b. 4.
or ea intention, or ad effectum, or ad propositum, that the Feoffee shall do
or not do such an Act, none of these words make the State in the Land
conditional; For in judgment of Law they are no words of Condition, and so was
it resolved, Hill. 18 E. in Co. Banco: But this is to be understood in the Case
of a common person; for in the Kings case, these or the like words do create a
Condition: and so it is also in the Case of the will of a Common person, etc.

Condition not ^estroyed in ^^e Kings case.
20 A Common person being grantee of part of a reversion of Land, Co. ibid. 21^.
a. 3.
shall not take advantage of a Condition by force of the Statute of 32 H. 8.
cap. 34. As if a lease be made of three acres reserving a Rent upon Condition,
and the reversion is granted of two acres, the Rent shall be apportioned by the
Act of the parties, but the Condition is destroyed: for that it is entire, and
against Common right: Howbeit in the Kings Case the Condition in that Case is
not destroyed, but still remains in the King, notwithstanding such alienation
of part, etc.

The Kings E^^ate no de^ree.
21 In a Writ of entry sur disseisin an estate made to the King makes no degree;
Co. ibid. 239. a. 2.
and therefore if a dissessor by deed enrolled convey the Land to the King, and
the King by his charter grants it over, the disseisee cannot have a writ of
Entry in ^e per and cui, but in le post, etc.

^ying seized, (...) descent.
22 If there be Tenant for life, the remainder in tail, Cb. ibidem 4.
the remainder in Fee, and Tenant in tail disseiseth the Tenant for life, and
dies seized, this shall take away the entry of the Tenant for life: But if the
Kings Tenant for life be disseised, and the disseisor die seized, this descent
shall not take away the entry of the Lessee for life; because the disseisor
could gain no Estate against the King, and then he could not die seized of any
more, then a bare Estate of freehold during the life of the Lessee; And
Littleton says, Litt. 387.
that a descent of an Estate for term of another man's life shall not take away
an entry, etc.

^escent. ^^ant.
23 It is said; if the King die seized of Lands; Co. ibid. 246. a 2.
and the Land descend to his Successor, this shall bind the disseisee, though
he were an Infant at the time of the descent; because the privilege of an
Infant in that Case holds not against the King.

^vowson. under. Ma.
24 In a writ of right of Advowson brought by the King, Co. ibid. 294. b. 2. and
F. N. B. 31. d.
the Tenant shall not render the Di. Mark because nullum tempus occurrit Regi,
and therefore the King shall allege, that he or his Progenitor was seized
without showing any time; It is otherwise in the Case of a common person; for
then the Tenant shall tender a Di. Mark against him, that brings the writ, to
inquire of the seisin alleged in the Court, etc.

^at Attorn.
25 A grant of a Seigniory, Rent, Reversion, Remainder, Co. ibid. 309 b 2. and
F. N. B. 60. 1
etc. to the King or by the King to another, is good without attornment, and
this is by force of his prerogative.

^nt fine At^ in distrain
26 In case of a deed, nothing passes before attornment; Co. ibid. 314. b. 2.
in Case of a fine, the thing granted passes as to the State, but not to
distraine, etc. without attornment: but in the Kings Case, the thing granted
does pass both in Estate and in Priviti^ to distraine etc. without attornment
unless it be of Lands or tenements, that are parcel of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and lie out of the County Palatine.

Co. ibid. 318. a. 3.
27 Tenant for life shall not be compelled to attorne in a quid juris clamat
upon a grant of a reversion by fine, Quid juris clamat in Chi^ Attornment.
holden of the King in Chief without license; And the reason hereof is not,
because the Tenant of life must be charged by the fine (for his Estate was more
ancient, then the fine levied) but because the Court will not suffer a
prejudice to the King, and the King may seize the reversion and Rent, and to
the Tenant shall be attendant to another, etc.

Co. ibid. 33 5. a. 3.
28 If there be Tenant in tail, Descent. Co^ Recovery, (...) Bar.
the reversion or remainder in the King, In that Case the Tenant in tail
cannot dis-continue the Estate tail; but Tenant in tail, the reversion in the
King, might have barred the Estate tail by a Common Recovery, until the
Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 20. which restrains such a Tenant in tail; Howbeit
that Common Recovery neither barred nor dis-continued the Kings reversion, etc.

Co. ibid. 344. b. 4. and Co. l. 6. 49. b. 4. in Boswels Case.
29 At the Common Law before the Statute of W. 2. cap. 5. A writ of righ^ of
Advow^^
if a stranger had presented his Clerk, and he had been admitted and
instituted to a Church, whereof any subject had been lawful Patron, the Patron
had no other remedy to recover his Advowson, but by a writ of right of
Advowson, wherein nevertheless the incumbent was not to be removed: And so it
was also at the Common Law, if an usurpation had been had upon an Infant, or
Feme Covert, having an Advowson by descent, or upon Tenant for life, etc. the
Infant, Feme Covert, and he in the reversion were driven to their writ of right
of Advowson; For at the Common Law if the Church were once full, Plenarty.
the incumbent could not be removed, and plenarty generally was a good plea in
a Quare Impedit, or assise of Darreine presentment: Howbeit at the Common Law,
if any had usurped upon the King; and his presentee had been admitted;
instituted, and inducted (for without induction the Church had not been full
against the King) the King might have removed him by Quare impedit, Quare
Imp^dit.
and so have been restored to his presentation; for, therein he has a
prerogative, quod nullum tempus occurrit Regi, etc.

Co. ibid. b. 2. F. N: B. 34. c
30 If the King do present to a Church, Revoke p^sentation.
and his Clerk is admitted and justified; yet before induction the King may
repeal and revoke his presentations, etc.

Co. ibid. b. 3.
31 A tortious Act or entry, or a false, Entry. Fained. Recovery.
a feined recovery against Tenant for life or in tail, the reversion or
remainder in Fee to the King, shall never divest any Estate, remainder, or
reversion out of the King: It is otherwise in the Case of a common person.

Co. l. 4. 23. b. 2. In Clerk and Penni-fathers Case.
32 If the Queen be only Tenant for life of a Copi-hold Manor, Copi-hold.
Manor.
and a Copi-hold of in-heritance escheats unto her, the Queen may grant it, to
whom the pleases, and that shall bind the King his heirs and successors for
ever; for she was Domina pro tempore; And the custom of the Manor also shall
bind the King, etc.

Co. l. 4. 55. a. 4. in Sadl. Case.
33 When the Kings title and the title of a subject concur in commencement,
Titles concur.
the Kings title shall be perferred (as Weston holds, Pl. Co. 263. b.)

Co. l. 4. 58. a. 3. in the Sadlers Case.
34 When the Kings Tenant seized of Land in Fee dies without heir, Escheat.
the Fee and frank-tenement is presently (after his death and before office
thereof found) cast upon the King; for in such Case it ought to be in some
person or other, and if any person enter into the Land, and take any of the
profits, an information of Intrusion by the King may be perferted against him
before office or seizure; because the King immediately after the Tenants death
is in actual possession, and has not only a frank-tenement in Law, as a
Common person in such Case has: And as to that, this diversity is taken, that
when the Kings Tenant dies in possession without heir, so as in that Case
possessio est vacua, and in none, there the Law adjudgeth the King (unto whom
no laches can be attributed) in actual possession presently; but when another
is in seisin and possession at the time of the escheat, so that Possessio plena
est and non vacua, In that Case the King shall not be adjudged in possession,
The Kings Te^ant. ^lien. ^illein. Mortmaine.
until that seisin and possession be removed; as if the Kings Tenant be
disseised and die without heir, or if an Alien nee, or the Kings Villein, or
the Alienee in Mortmain be disseised and die without heir, and all that found
by Office, in those Cases the King shall not be in possession, until the
possession and seisin of the terretenant be removed: But if Land descend to the
King after the death of his Father, or of any other Collateral Ancestor, the
King shall be immediately in actual possession before entry or seizure: So
likewise if the King make a Lease for life, or a gift in tail, and the Lessee
dies, or the donee dies without Issue; In that Case, the possession shall be
actually in the King without any entry or seizure, and with this accords 9 H.
7. 2. 6. where it is expressly said, that when none is in possession, it shall
be adjudged in the King according to his title: and so the doubt, which Stamf.
makes Praerogative, 53. b. is well resolved.

Condition, ^emand.
35 If the King make a Lease for years rendering Rent with Condition to be void
upon non-payment of the Rent, Co. l. 4. 73. a. in Boroughs Case.
the King shall take advantage of that Condition without any demand, it being a
thing undecent and against the dignity of the King to wait upon his subject,
or to demand any thing of him: it is otherwise, if the King grant over his
reversion; For his grantee shall not take advantage of the Condition without
demand of the rent: and this is by reason of a personal prerogative (in this
Case) annexed to the person of the King, and not in respect of the nature and
quality of the Rent; for, that remains the same, whether paid to the King or
to a subject, upon the ground or elsewhere, etc.

^wo Houses ^mised.
36 Two houses are let to one man by one demise, Co. l. 5. 55. b. 3. and 56. a.
1. Knights Case.
rendering for the one 4 l. per annum, and for the other 20 s. per annum, with
proviso, that if the said Rent of 5 l. be arreare in part or in all, then the
Lessor to re-enter. The Inheritance of these Houses afterward escheats to the
King, ^he fold, ^ent. ^eare. ^ndition.
who after grants the reversion of that, upon which 20 s. per an. is reserved
to I. S. the Rent thereof is arreare; In this Case, the Patentee cannot enter
for the Condition broken; because by the severance of any part of the reversion
all the Condition (as to a Common person) is entirely destroyed: It is
otherwise in the Kings Case: for the Condition remains entirely in the King
with the reversion of the other House, and that is in respect of his
prerogative, etc.

^gs grants ^ourably in^^ted. ^ein. ^en. ^vowson.
37 The Law makes a difference between the Kings grants (who is always presumed
to intend Ardua regni pro bono publico omnium, Co. ibid. 36. a Knights Case.
and Co. l. 7. 14 a. in Englefeilds.
etc. and the grants of subjects, who have leisure to attend their private
affairs; for, the grants of a subject are always interpreted most strongly
against him, that makes them: but the Kings grants are always taken with a
favorable and beneficial interpretation, so that no prejudice may happen to
him by construction or implication upon his grant, otherwise then was truly
intended by it: And therefore if the King grant Land to I. S. and his heirs,
when in truth I. S. is the Kings Villein, this shall not enfranchise the
Villein by Implication: There is the same Law of an alien nee: 17 E. 3. 39. An
Advowson of a Prebendarie holden of the King was aliened to an Abbot and his
successors, and the King grants to the Abbot and his successors, that they
shall hold the Prebnedary in proper use; nevertheless he shall seize the
Advowson for alienation in Mortmaine, and shall destroy the Appropriation: for
he shall not be outed of his right to the Advowson by Implication: Debt Release.
And in 2 R. 3. 4. 21 E. 4. 46. and 34 H. 6. If two be undebted to the King,
and the King release to one of them, this shall not discharge the other, in 6
H. 7. 15. and 11 H 7. 10. If the King release all demands, right, Restr. to al^^
of Inheritance shall not be there by released: 21 H. 7. 7. The King grants
Lands in Fee, upon condition that the grantee shall not alien, this is good:
Howbeit in all these cases the Law is otherwise in the case of a common person,
etc.

Co. ibid. a. 4. Knights Case.
38 In many cases the King that claims by a subject, Rent-secke distraine.
shall be in better case (in respect of the dignity and prerogative incident by
the Law to the Royal person of the King) then the subject himself, by whom he
claims; As if the King had a rent secke by attainder of treason, or by grant,
etc. he shall distraine for it not only in the land charged, but likewise in
all his other lands, and yet the subject, by whom the King claims, shall not
distraine for it at all: If a subject has a recognisance or obligation,
Recognisan^ Oblig.
and afterward he is outlawed or attainted: in this case, the King shall
seize all the land of the Counsor, or obligor, whereas he himself could have
but a moity: if a subject demise land rendering rent, and a re-entry upon
default of payment thereof: in this case the subject shall not take advantage
of such a condition without demand of the rent, etc. but if the inheritance of
that land come to the King by Act of Parl. attainder, grant, Seize all.
Condition. Demand. Priority.
etc. he shall take advantage of the breach of such a condition without demand
of the rent, F. N. B. 142.
etc. if the King purchase a Seigniory, of which land was holden by posterity,
the King shall be in better condition then the subject, from whom the claims,
and in that case shall have the priority: and so shall his grantee also, etc.
as is holden in 24 E. 3. 65. Fitz. tit. guard. 27, 47.

Co. l. 5. 91. b. 3. in Semaynes Case.
39 In all cases when the King is party, Sheriff (...) open doore^.
the Sheriff (if no door be not open) may (after notice given of the cause of
his coming, and request made to have the door opened) break open the house of
the party, either to take him or to make other execution of the Kings process,
if he cannot otherwise enter into it, but so it is not, in the case of a
subject, etc. So for felony or suspicion of felony, the Kings officer may
break the house to take the felon; because in every felony the King has an
Interest, and where the King has Interest, Felony.
the writ is Non omittas propter aliquam libertatem; and therefore the liberty
or privilege of an house shall not hold out against the King: and besides it
concerns the Common Wealth that felons be apprehended, and in that respect
also the King has a special Interest, being the head of that body, etc.

Co. l. 5. 104. a. in Bakers case.
40 T. 42 E. in B. R. in Ejectione firmae, it was resolved, Demurre.
that if the Plaintiff show in evidence any matter in writing, Record, or
Sentence in the Ecclesiastical Court, whereupon Question in Law may rise, and
the defendant offers to demurre, etc. the Plaintiff cannot refuse to join in
demurrer, unless he will waive his evidence; so if the Plaintiff produce
witnesses, and the defendant admit their testimony to be true, he may demurre,
etc. So also may the Parliament demurre, mutatis mutandis: Howbeit upon
evidence in an information for the King his Council shall not be compelled to
demurre: But in that Case, the Court may direct the Jury to find the special
matter, and thereupon they shall adjudge the Law, as appears in 34 H. 8. Dier
53. And this is by reason of the Kings prerogative, who may also waive the
demurrer, and take issue at his pleasure, Nota been.

Co. lib. 5. 106. a. 4. and 108. b. 1. in Sir Henry Constables case.
41 Originally the Common Law gave unto the King all such things, as were In
nullius bonis, as Wrecke, viz. Goods, Things (...) liu^ bo^i.
quae naufragio ad terram appelluntur: Flotsan, viz. When the Ship is drowned
or otherwise perished, and the Goods flote upon the Sea: Wrecke.
Jetsam as when the Ship is in danger to be drowned, and to dis-burden the
Ship, the Goods are cast into the Sea, and after notwithstanding the Ship,
perishes: Estrayers.
Lagan (vel potius Figan) as when the Goods so cast out are so ponderous, that
they sink, and the Mariners to the end they might find them again fasten a
piece of Cork or a Boy to them, that will not sink, and therefore this
seems to be called Ligan a Ligando: It gave also to the King Estrayes (which
Bracton calls Animalia vagantia, and others Animalia vacantia, quia Domino
vacari debent: Also treasure trove, and the like; Because by the Rule of the
Common Law, when none could claim a property in any Goods, the King was to
have them by his prerogative: And therefore Bracton says, Sunt alia quaedam,
quae in nullius bonis esse dicuntur, sicut Wreccum maris, Bract. l. 3. c. 3.
Grossus Piscis, sicut Sturgio and Balena: and aliae res, quae Dominum non
habent, sicut animalia vagantia, and quae sunt Domini Regis propter
privilegium. Mare Clausum.
And note, that the King shall have Flotsan, Jetsan, and Lagan by his
prerogative, as well as wrecke; Albeit they be, in or upon the Sea: for the Sea
is of the Kings Ligeance, and parcel of this Crown of England, as it is holden
in 6 R. 1. protection 46. and Britton cap. 33. agrees well with the opinion of
Bracton, that wrecke, etc. are things in nullius bonis, and come into the hands
of the subject Originally by Kings grant, his words are these; Britt. c. 33.
Et ausi purchase lou per franchise grantee par nous de chooses trovves en nulluy
biens, si come de wrecke de near, and bestes estrayantes, of Conies, Levres,
and pessons, and Fesants, and Pertris, and autres Bestes sauvages, par
franchise de aver wrecke de mere trouve en son soil, and waife and estray
trouve en son fee, garrennes en ses demesnes terres, etc.

Lady Peer. ^rest.
42 A Countess by descent or marriage cannot be arrested for debt or trespass, 1
In respect of her dignity: 2 The Law presumes, Co. l. 6. 52. b. 3. in the Case
of Isabel Countess of Rutland.
that she has sufficient in Lands and Tenements, so hereby to be distrained;
for albeit in respect of her sex she cannot sit in Parliament, yet she is a
Peer and shall be tried by her Peers, as appears of 20 H. 6. cap. 9. which
was nothing else but a declaration of the Common Law: So it is also of a Baron,
that is a Peer of Parliament. 11 H. 4. 15. In homine repligiando against the
Lady Spencer, it appears, that the said Lady was a Peer of the Realm.

upon account Lady not ex^ined.
43 In 3 H. 6. 48. Co. ibid. 53. a. 1.
A Writ of debt upon arrerages of account was brought by the Lady of
Aburgavenie against another, the Defendant pleads Rien luy doit, and is ready
to make his Law, and prays by force of the Statute of 5 H. 4. cap. 8. that the
Parliament might be examined, which Act is general, viz. that examination
shall be made, which is always intended upon oath: And there Cokein, who gave
the Rule, said, La Dame d'Aburgavenie est un Peer del Realm, and ne sera bien
fait de luy fair venir d'estre examine: Car par mesme la reason nous Dames
fair venir chescun Duke on Countee d'Angliterre. Rolfe Sergeant, purquoy nou?
Sr. Le dit Statute est general, and est fait pur chescun home haut and base; A
que Cokein dit, le ley voit over diversity pur enter Seignior ou Dame, etc. and
auter Common Person: By which book it may be observed, that a Lady, which is
but the wife of a Baron is a Peer of the Realm, and is in equipage (as to
Nobility and privileges incident to their dignities) with Dukes, ^duo Juror.
Earls, etc.

44 In 48 E. 3. 30. Co. ibid. 53. a. 3.
Sir Ralfe Everden Knight brings a writ to the Chancery and also a writ of the
Privy seal to the Justices, rehearsing, that he was a Baron, and commanding
them to discharge him of his oath in juratis accessis and recognitionibus
quibuscunque; because the Barons ought not to be sworn upon Inquests and
Recognitions against their wills; and by good advise he was clearly discharged
thereof. See more examples to the same purpose, ubi in marg.

Co. l. 7. 25. b. 1. in Calvin's Case
45 Foedera percutere, to make Leagues, Peace and war^ Denization.
does only and wholly pertain to the King, and not to the subject; so also
does Bellum indicere: Likewise the King only without the subject may make not
only letters of safe conduct, but letters patents of Denization, to whom and
how many he please, and may enable them at his pleasure to sue any of his
subjects in any action whatsoever, real or personal, which the King could not
do without the subject, if the subject had any Interest given unto him by the
Law in any thing concerning an Alien borne: Nay, the Law is more precise
herein, then in a number of other Cases, of higher Nature; For the King cannot
grant to any other to make of strangers born, Denizens, it is by the Law it
self so inseparably and individually annexed to his Royal Person (as the Book
is in 20 H. 7. 8.) because the Law esteems it a point of high prerogative,
Jus majestatis, and inter insignia summae potestatis, to make Aliens borne,
subjects of the Realm, and capable of the Lands and Inheritances of England,
in such sort as any natural borne subject is: And therefore by the Statute of
the 27 H. 8. cap. 24. many of the most ancient prerogatives, and Royal Flowers
of the Crown, as Authority to pardon Treason, Murder, Manslaughter, and
Felony, Power to make Justices in Air, Justices of Assise, Justices of Peace,
and Jail-deliver, and the like, having been severed and divided from the
Crown were again remitted to the same: But authority to make Letters of
Denization, was never mentioned therein to be resumed; because there was never
any that claymed the same by any pretext whatsoever, being a matter of so high
a point of prerogative, etc.

Co. l. 7. 14. a. 4. in Englefeilds Case.
46 A. Seized of the Manor of Dale in Fee, A Coven^^, Power of Revocation.
Covenants with B. to stand seized to the use of himself for life, the
remainder to B. in tail, the remainder to B. in Fee, with proviso, that upon
delivery or tender of a ring to B. by himself or another, as the Estates shall
be void: A. is outlawed for treason, the King seiseth the Land, and lets a
Lease to D. for 40 years; Treason. Seizure.
and after the King gives a Commission under the Great Seal to E. to tender
the ring to B. according to the Condition: In this Case, if a Common Person had
enjoined the Kings Estate, by making such a Lease of 40 years, Demise by the
Kings power Revocation remains.
he had utterly deprived himself of revoking the Estate, and of taking
advantage of the Condition; because his Act shall be most interpreted against
himself: But (in that Case) the Kings demise shall not enure (to his special
prejudice) to two intents, viz. To a demise of Land, and also to a suspension
of his Condition, whereby he might defeat the Estate for life, and the other
Estates, that depend upon it; or to a demise in respect of his present Estate
pur auter vie, and also to a Confirmation in respect of his Condition (whereby
otherwise he might defeat all) as shall be also in Case of a Common Person: For
the Kings grant shall always be taken according to his express intention
comprehended in his grant, and shall not extend to any other thing by
Construction or Implication, when it appears not by his grant, that his Intent
extended unto it: and therefore in such Cases, the King ought to be truly
informed, and he ought to make a special and particular grant, which by
express words may enure to all such several intents, as are desired, etc.

Co. l. 7. 16. a. 4. in the Case of Swasn.
47 All White Swans not marked, Swans wild.
which have gained their liberty: and swim in an open and common River, may be
seized to the use of the King by his prerogative; Because Volatilium (quae sunt
ferae naturae) alia sunt regalia, alia Communia: Now a Swan is a Royal bird,
and therefore if the property thereof be not known, it belongs to the King by
his prerogative: And there was always an ancient Officer of the King, called
Magister deductus Cignorum, who continues even to this day: Nevertheless, the
subject may also have property in white Swans not marked, Swans not marked in
private waters.
as some may have Swans not marked in their private waters, the property
whereof belongs unto them, and not unto the King: And albeit they escape out of
their private waters, yet they may take them, and convey them home again: And
with this agrees Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 1. fol. 9. Si autem animalia fera
fuerint mansueta, and ex consuetudine eunt and redeunt, volant and revolant,
(ut sunt Cervi, Cigni, Pavones, Columbae, and hujusmodi) eo usque nostra
intelligantur, quamdiu habuerint animum revertendi. But if they once gain their
natural liberty, and do swim in open and common Rivers, the Kings Officer may
seize them in the open and common River for the King; because one white Swan
without such pursuit (as is aforesaid) cannot be known from another. And when
the property of a Swan cannot be known, (it being of its nature a Royal Fowl)
it belongs to the King, etc.

Duke of Corn^al.
48 In the Princes Case ( Co. l. 8. fol. 28. a.) It was resolved, Co. lib. 8.
28. a. 3. in the Princes Case.
that the Act of 11 E. 3. by force whereof the Kings eldest son was made Duke
of Cornwall, was such an Act. whereof the Judges and all the Realm ought to
take Conusance; because it concerned the King, and his firstborn son and heir
apparent to the Crown for the time being, perpetuis futuris temporibus;
Conusance of an Act of Parliament.
for every subject has interest in the King, and none of his subjects who are
under his Laws, are divided from him, being their Head and Sovereign; So that
the Kings affairs concern the whole Kingdom, and especially when the Prince,
the first begotten son of the King, and his Heir apparent to the Crown is
therein concerned: Corruscat enim Princeps radiis Regis Patris sui, and
censetur una persona cum ipso Rege, Treason against the Prince.
as it is declared in the Act of Parliament of 38 H. 6. And therefore if any
shall intend the death of the Prince, and shall make declaration thereof by
some overt Act, that is, Crimen laesae Majestatis, high Treason, by the ancient
Common Laws of England, and is so declared by the Statute of 25 E. 3. etc.

Prince.
49 1 H. 5. fol. 7. If the Prince, as Prince of Wales, Co. ib. b. 2.
has judgment to recover, and afterward the Crown descends to him, he shall,
as King, sue execution.

Queen. Conusance.
50 The Act of the 35 H. 8. Co. ibidem.
which concerns the Capacity of the Queen was such an Act, whereof the Judges
ought to take Conusance, because it concerned the Kings Wife, as it was
resolved in the Lord Barkleys Case, Pl. Co. 231.

^dges. ^rciaments
51 There are some persons which shall not be amerced, Co. l. 8. 61. b. 4. in
Beechers Case.
and therefore (by consequence) shall find no pledges, as the King, and also
the Queen, who (as to that) participates of the Kings Prerogative, F. N. B. 31.
f. 47. c. 101. a. 18 E. 3. 2. Br. amerciament 53.

^endment ^f a writ.
52 An Original writ by the Common Law was not amendable in the case of a common
person, for which see 13 E. 3. Tit. Amendment 63. Co. l. 8. 156. b. 2. in
Blackamores Case.
which was before any Statute made concerning Amendment, etc. And 16 E. 3. tit.
Variance 59. and 29 E. 3. Amendment 68. But in the Kings Case in a Quare
Impedit, where the Quare Impedit was praesentere for praesentare, and after
exception taken to it, and before answer, by the advice of the Chancellor, (out
of which Court that writ issued) and of the Justices of the Kings Bench, the
writ was amended in the Chancery, and the defendant was made to answer
thereunto by award, Vide 4 H. 6. 16. and 40. Ass. Pl. 26.

^e Kings ^arter shall (...) interpreted (...) fulfill the ^gs intent.
53 When the Kings Charter may be taken to two several intents, Co. l. 8. 167 a.
4. in the Earl of Cumberlands Case.
and both intents are of effect and good, in many Cases it shall be taken to
such an intent, as shall be most beneficial for the King; but if it may be
taken to one intent of effect and good, and to another intent void and of no
effect; it shall then be taken and construed to such an intent, as that the
Kings Grant may take effect, and that (in judgment of law) shall be understood
to stand with the Kings intent; for it was not his intent to make a void Grant:
And with this agrees the Book in 21 E. 4. 44. In the Abbot of Walthams Case,
and the resolution in the Earl of Cumberlands Case in the 8 Report. 167. where
the Case was, that E. 2. granted the Castle of Skipton, to Robert de Clifford
in tail, and H. 6. grants to Thomas Lord Clifford (Cousin and Heir of the body
of Robert the reversion of the said Castle, necnon Castrum, etc. Here, the
Kings intent appeared to be, that Thomas Lord Clifford should have all his
Estate in the Castle: And therefore whether it be taken to be a grant of the
Reversion, in case the former grant in tail was good, or of the possession, in
case that former grant was void, it is not material, in regard it appears
clearly by the express words of the Charter, that the King intended, he should
have it in possession, either the one way or the other: So if the King grant
Totum illud Manerium, sive firmam de D. or totam illam Rectoriam sive
Advocationem de D. In this Case also, whether the King has a Manor, or else a
Farm and no Manor, or a Rectory Impropriate, or else an Advowson, and no
Rectory, that which the King has, passes; for the effect of the Grant is,
that be it Manor or Farm, Rectory, Impropriate, or Advowson, that which the
King in truth has, passes by the Grant.

Co. l. 9. 38. b. 3. in Hensloes Case.
54 Of ancient time, before the Statute of 31 H. 3. cap. 11. Goods of an
Intestate.
when a man died intestate, and did make no disposition of his goods, nor
committed his trust to any in that behalf: In that Case the King (who as Parens
Patriae, has the supreme care to provide for all his Subjects: to the end,
every one may enjoy that, which he ought to have) did use by his Ministers to
seize the goods of the Intestate; to the intent, that they might be preserved
and bestowed for the burial of the dead, for the payment of his debts, for the
advancement of his wife and issues if he had any, and if not, then of those of
his blood: And this appears in Rotulis Clausis de 7 H. 3. M. 16. Bona
Intestatorum capi solebant in manus Regis, Ordinaries.
etc. And afterward this care and trust was committed to Ordinaries; for there
could be found none more fit to have such care and charge of the Intestates
transitory goods after his death, then the Ordinary, who all his life had (or
at least ought to have had) the care and charge of his immortal soul, as it is
said in Pl. Co. 280. in Greisbrooks Case; And therefore the Ordinary was in
that respect appointed in loco parentis, And this appears also by the
construction of John Stratford, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, at a Synod in
London, Anno Domini 1380. where he confessed, that the Administration of the
goods of an Intestate was granted to the Ordinaries, Consensu Regis and
Magnatum Regni, etc.

Co. l. 9. 49. a. 1 in the Earl of Shrewsbury's Case.
55 If the King grant the Office of Stewardship of the Manors of D. and S. to
an Earl, without power to make Deputies: Stewardship.
nevertheless, in respect of the meannesse of the Office in a base Court, and
of the dignity of his Person, being an Earl, it is implied in law for
convenience, that he may in that Case make a Deputy, for whom he ought to
answer, so that no prejudice may happen to the King: And his Deputy shall
execute Officium laboris, as to hold a Court Baron, and to enter Pleas,
Surrenders, etc. And need requires in Cases of difficulty, or which concern the
Kings profit, the Earl shall execute Officium fiduciae, Bracton lib. 1. cap. 8.
scientiae, and ingenii. For, Comites dicuntur a comitando, quia comitantur
Regem. Comites a comitatu, sive a societate, nomen sumpserant, qui etiam dici
possunt Consules: Reges enim tales sibi associant ad consuetudinem: And that
was the greatest title of Honor, that was from the Conquest, until the 11 of
E. 3. when the Black Prince was created Duke of Cornwall, and those which of
ancient time were created Earls, were of the blood royal; And even unto this
day, the King in all his appellations styles them. Per nomen charissimi
consangninei nostri, for which causes the Law gives unto them high and great
privileges: And therefore their bodies shall not be arrested for debt,
trespass, etc. because the Law intends, that they assist the King with their
Counsel pro bono publico, and keep the Realm in safety by their prowess and
valor: And for the same reason it is, that they shall not be put upon Iuries,
albeit that be for the service of the County: Also if issue be taken, whether
the Plaintiff be an Earl, or no, it shall not be tried by the Country, but
the Kings writ: Also the Defendant shall not have a day of grace against a Lord
of the Parliament; because he is conceived to attend the public: And all
these and many other do appear in our Books: 48 E. 3. 30. Regist. 179. F. N. B.
247. 48. Ass. Pl. c. 23. Ass. Pl. 24. 32 H. 6. 27. 35 H. 6. 46. So that, as
when such an Office descends to an infant, or to a man de non sanae memoriae,
they of necessity ought to exercise it by Deputy: so likewise an Earl for the
necessity of his attendence (which the Law intends) upon the King and the
Commonwealth, that Stewardship of a base Court shall be executed by Deputy:
Also if a Parkership be granted to an Earl, without words to make a Deputy, yet
he may keep it by his servants: And if a Duke have license to hunt in a Park,
the Law will allow him attendance suitable to his condition, etc.

Marshalsie. Seizure. Office. Scire facias.
56 It was found by Office in 9 Jac. that Sir George Reynel had forfeited the
Office of Marshal of the Marshalsie, Co. l. 9 95. b. 3. in Sir George Reynels
Case.
by diverse voluntary escapes; and it was resolved, that the King might seize
that Office, without suing out a Scire facias: And in that Case it was
observed, 1 That the King in some cases shall be in possession by seizure
without Office, as in 21 H. 7. and Stamf. in case of temporalties of a Bishop,
and of Priors aliens; because the certainty of them appears in the Exchequer. 2
He shall sometimes be in possession by Office without seizure, as of Lands,
Tenements, Offices, etc. which are local, o^ whereof continual profit may be
taken, as upon condition, attainder, wardship, etc. ( Vide 2 H. 7. 8. Stamf.
55. Dowries case in Rep. 3. and the Sadlers, Rep. 5.) And the Office albeit
false, yet cannot be avoided without traverse; for he cannot traverse the Kings
title in the information, Traverse. Advowson.
etc. 20 E. 4. 10. 3 The King shall be in possession by Office and seizure of
an Advowson, and thereof he is not in possession until presentment, admission,
and institution; And if the King, upon refusal, bring a Quare Impedit, the
owner may traverse the Kings title in that Action without traverse of the
Office; because it is not a manual, but an incorporal hereditament; also the
right to present is casual, and not continual. 4 The King shall be in
possession without office, where his tenant died without heir, 9 H. 7. 2. 5
When distinct matters amount to an office, in that case there ought to be a
Scire facias, before the King can seize. 6 When a common person is put to his
Action: In that Case the King upon office is put to his Scire facias, etc.

^o tenure re^erved. Capite.
57 When the King grants any land without reservation of any tenure, or absque
aliquo inde reddendo, or the like, Co. l. 9. 123. b. 3. in Anthony Lowes Case.
the Land by operation of Law shall be holden of the King in capite by
knights-service, according to the rate and proportion of Land holden by
knights-service, viz. more or less, according to the quantity of the Land, etc.

58 When any thing is due to the King, Co. l. 9. 132. a. in Holis Case.
he ought to have the full and complete effect of the thing so due unto him; As
if there be Grandfather, Father, and Son of Lands, whereof some are holden of
the King in capite by Knight Service in capite, and the residue of other Lords,
etc. And the Grandfather conveys all the Lands holden of other Lords, and part
of the capite Lands to the Father for life; the remainder to the Son in tail,
the remainder to the right heirs of the Grandfather; And the residue of the
capite Lands to four younger Sons (successively) for life, the remainer to the
right Heirs of the Grandfather: the Grandfather dies, the Father tenders his
livery, and dies before livery sued, or office found, the Son being of full age
and all this is found by office, and the Son continues the livery, the four
younger Sons being still in life. In this Case, albeit by the death of the
father before livery sued, the King has lost the privilege of having primer
seisin after the death of the Grandfather (as it was adjudged in Northcots
case, and in Hales case, in the 8 Rep. etc.) for here the Son shall not sue
livery, nor pay primer seisin, because they were due by the Father, after the
death of the Grandfather: and the Son (living the Father) is not within the
Statutes of 32 and 34 H. 8. for the Lands conveyed unto him; Nevertheless, in
the same Case, the King shall have primer seisin for the Lands conveyed to the
younger Sons, because they are within the three Cases, in which wardship and
primer seisin are given unto the King, by the said Acts, viz. Advancement of
his wife, preferment of his children, and payment of his debts: And the reason
hereof is, because when the said Acts give unto the King primer seisin, it is
intended of an actual and effectual primer seisin, and not of one which is
only Mathematical and Imaginary: for (as before is said) the King ought
always to have a full and complete effect of the thing, which is due unto him.
So also if the King has title to present by lapse hac vice, and he present,
and his Clerk is admitted and instituted, but dies before induction: In this
Case, the King shall present again; for he had not the full and complete effect
of his presentation, as it was resolved by Sir James Dyer and rotam Curiam, in
Gyles. his Case, 18 Eliz. in Co. Ba. Likewise if the King marry a daughter,
Marriage again.
which he has inward, infra annos nubiles, and before the age of consent, the
Baron dies, the King shall have the marriage of the Heir again; because the
first marriage was not complete, as it was resolved in Ambrosia Gores case in
the 6 Rep. fol. 22. King donor not barred.
And the King donor in tail before the Statute of West. 2. de donis, etc. was
not barred by the alienation of the Donee, post prolem suscitatam, without
Assets, albeit there were collateral warranty: Howbeit, in all these Cases a
common person shall be barred, etc.

Co. l. 10. 113. b 1. in Legates Case
59 When the King grants any thing upon a false insinuation, Grant upon false
suggestions void.
or suggestion such a grant of the Kings is void; for in that Case there is a
diversity between the King and a common person: For a Subject, that may intend
his private affairs, shall not in such Case avoid his Grant: but the King, who
intends the Public good, shall avoid his Jure Regio as it was said in 21 E.
3. 47. in the Earl of Kents Case: And this is an high and great Prerogative,
which the King has; that when he makes any Grant upon such false suggestions,
those Grants are void in Law: So also when upon false insinuations and pretexts
he makes any grant, as of a Monopoly, Monopolies
etc. which in truth is in the prejudice of the King and Commonwealth, the
King (Jure Regio) shall avoid such Grants, and such Letters Patents shall be by
judgment of Law cancelled: And therefore in Legates Case, in the 10 Rep. it is
wittily said of Perpetuities, Monopolies, and Patents of concealment,
Concealmen^
that they were born under an unfortunate Constellation; because as soon as
they were drawn in question, Perpetuities.
Judgment was always given against them, and never for them; they having
always two inseparable qualilies incident unto them, viz. to be troublesome
and fruitless.

^ent
60 If rent be payable at the Feast of Easter, Co. l. 10. 127. b. 4. in Cluns
Case.
and the tenant pay the rent in the morning, and the Lessor die before noon,
this payment is voluntary, and good satisfaction against the Heir, but not
against the King, 44 E. 3. 3.

^he King not ^^rred by Acts ^f Parliament
61 When the King has any Prerogative, Estate, Right, Title, Co. l. 10. 74. b.
4. in Magd. Coll. Case.
or Interest, by the general words of an Act of Parliament, he shall not be
barred of them, as in case of reasonable aid, the King has an Estate and
Interest in it, and therefore the general words of the Statute of West. 1. cap.
35. shall not extend unto it; Also the King has a Prerogative, quod nullum
tempus occurrit Regi, and therefore the general Acts of Limitations, or of
Plenarty shall not extend unto him: F. N. B. 7. b. and 32. c.
Likewise the King by his Prerogative may sue in what Court be will, and of
that Prerogative he is not barred by the general purview of the Statute of
Magna Charta, cap. 11. Et sic de similibus.

^arks. ^icence.
62 None can make a Park, Chase, or Warren, Co. l. 11. 87. b. 1. in the Case of
Monopolies
without the Kings license, because that were quodam modo to appropriate such
things as are ferae naturae, and in nullius bonis, to himself, and to restrain
them of their natural liberty, which he cannot do without the Kings license,
etc.

^ossessors of ^^e Kings ^oods, and ^^eir execu^^, etc. ac^^ptable.
63 The Earl of Devonshire, being Master of the Ordnance, Co. l. 11. 90. a. in
the Earl of Devonshire's Case
obtained a Privy Seal to convert to his own use, etc. All the unserviceable
Ordnance expressed in a Book, in regard the King was informed, that the Masters
did use to claim and enjoy them, as fees and avails belonging to their Office;
whereupon he sold them, made his executors, and died: And in this Case it was
resolved, that albeit the Earl claimed them to his own use, yet in regard the
grant was made upon a false suggestion, he was in his lifetime accountable to
the King for them; because in the Kings Case the Law makes a privity; for if
any take the Kings goods, or enter into his Lands by wrong, the King may charge
him in account (33 H. 6. 2. 4 H. 7. 6. 7 H. 7. 10. 15 H. 7. 17. 1 Eliz. 149.
Breretons case, and 40 Ass. Pl. 75) If goods be devised to the King, in whose
hands soever they come, the possessor shall be charged in account to the King,
and the King shall not be put to his Action of Trespass; for then by the death
of the party the King should be without remedy: but the King by his Prerogative
may have an Action of account against the executors of the party, as appears in
Littleton, fol. 28. And the King is not constrained to charge the Defendant, as
Bailiff or Receiver, as a common person ought; but the King may allege in his
Information generally, that he ad compotum Domino Regi reddend. tempore mortis
suae tenebatur in such sums of money due to the King, etc. as appears by many
presidents in the Exchequer, and in the Kings Bench; And therefore if the Earl
was in his lifetime bound to render an account unto the King, his executors
shall do it after his decease, etc. If one by Letters Patents, or by virtue of
his Office, has power to assesse Fines upon grants or admittances made to
Copiholders within such a Manor of the Kings, and he assesseth little fines
for the King, and underhand takes great sums, or other rewards of the
Copiholders to his own use, in deceit and prejudice of the King: In this case
he shall be charged to the King in account for all; for in truth all was due to
the King; and if he die, his executors in the Kings Case shall be charged; for
it is holden in 39 Ass. Pl. 18. that the Officers and Ministers of the King may
advantage him, but can never do any thing to his dis-advantage.

Co. l. 11. 90. b. 4. in the Earl of Devonshires Case.
64 M. 37. and 38 Eliz. None can ^^pose of the Kings trea^^^^ without h^^
license.
An Information was preferred in the Exchequer against Carey and Dodington,
executors of Sir Walter Mildmay, Knight, Chancellor of that Court, to render an
account of 1525 l. of the Queens treasure by him converted to his own use, etc.
the Defendants plead, that Sir Walter Mildmay non recepit, etc. ad
computandum, nec die mortis tenebatur Reginae in Compoto, etc. And the special
Verdict was, that the Treasurer and Undertreasurer of the Exchequer made a
warrant to four Tellors or two, to pay to Sir Walter Mildmay 100 l. per annum,
for his diet, and 40 l. per annum for his Attendance in the Vacation (by reason
that by the annexing of the Court of first fruits and Augmentation the
Chancellor was constrained to attend more than other Chancellors had formerly
done) And in 2 Eliz. the Queen directs a Privy Seal to the Treasurer,
Chamberlaines, and Undertreasurer of the Exehequer, commanding them or some of
them to pay to such as should be employed by her, etc. for their labors and
expenses, at their discretions, according to their merits, in as large manner,
as any Treasurer, Chamberlains, or Undertreasurer had done before: And in this
Case it was resolved, that no Officer nor all of them together can ex officio
dispose of the Kings treasure without the Kings warrant, although it be for the
honor and profit of the King; because the Kings treasure is the ligament of
peace, and the sinews of war, and of so high a nature, that the imbezeling of
treasure trove (although not found in the Kings Coffers) was treason; And
treasure and other valuable chattels are so necessary and incident to the
Crown, that, in the Kings Case, they shall go with the Crown to the successor,
and not to executors, as in case of common persons, as appears in 7 H. 4. 43.
and 44 E. 3. 42. Neither yet does every warrant serve for the issuing of the
Kings treasure; for it cannot be done by Parol, or by the privy Signet; but
ought to be done under the Great Seal, or Privy Seal: It was also further
resolved in this Case, that albeit Sir Walter had thus received the Queens
treasure to his own use; yet inasmuch as he received it without lawful warrant
(he knowing that it was the Queens treasure) the Law makes privity in the
Queens Case; and therefore she might charge him as an Accomptant: And so it was
also adjudged in the Exchequer in Jurdens Case, P. 31. Eliz. Rot. 150. Neither
yet is it of necessity, that the Kings money or goods should come into the
hands of the Testator; for if he were only a mean or Instrument, whereby the
King was put to loss or damage, he shall be charged with so much as he has so
endamaged the King, and shall be compelled at the Kings Suit reddere rationem
thereof, which is in nature of an Account, for which there is a notable
president in M. 30. E. 3. Rot. 6. Porters Case, which see in Co. l. 11. 92. b.
in the Earl of Devonshires Case. And therefore it was also resolved in Sir
Walter Mildmayes Case, that the Queen might either charge the executors of Sir
Walter, or those that made such unlawful warrant, at her election: And if they
were dead, their executors, etc. for in as much as they were in their lifetime
chargeable by the Law; in that Case, if they die before judgment against them,
without question their executors shall be charged; because where the Testator
is by the Law chargeable to satisfy the King for loss or damage done unto
him, his death shall not dispense therewith but that his Executors shall be
also chargeable to the King, etc.

F. N. B. 5. l.
65 In a Praecipe in Capite the Tenant shall not plead, Protesta^^
that the Tenements are not holden of the King, albeit the writ supposes as
much, but he ought to take it by protestation, and to plead other matter in
bar, if he have any matter to plead.

^ender Di. ^ark.
66 In a writ of Right, F. N. B. 5. m.
the Demandant ought to count of his own seisin, or the seisin of his Ancestor,
etc. yet the seisin is not traversable; but the tenant may tender a Di. mark,
to enquire of that seisin, etc. and if it be found with the tenant, that the
Ancestor was not seized, the Demandant shall be barred: Howbeit, if the King be
party Demandant, the Tenant shall not tender a Demi Mark to enquire of the
seisin; but he ought to plead in bar; and there the tenant shall not impar^
without the assent of the Kings servants.

The King may ^^cuse appea^^nce.
67 The King by a writ de warrantia diei may command the Justices to excuse the
Defendant of appearing at the day, F. N. B. 17. b.
whereunto he was adjourned to appear in proper person; And whether the Cause
alleged in the writ be true or false, it is not material, when the King
certifies, that he is in his service; for it seems by the words of the writ,
that the King by his Prerogative may warrant that default for a day: And so
also it seems that if the tenant in a Praecipe quod reddat at the great Cape
or petit Cape returned, make default, that before judgment upon that default
the King may command such a writ to the Justices rehearsing, that the tenant
was in his service, etc. and commanding them that his default should not turn
to his prejudice: And it stands with reason, that the King may do it; because
every one is bound to serve the King in his affairs, etc.

^^nipresence (...) his Courts.
68 If false Judgment be given for the King in any Action or Suit, F. N. B. 21.
b. and 107. q. and Finch 81.
the party grieved shall have a writ of Error, and assign Errors without suing
any Scire facias against the King ad audiend. errores, because the King is
always present in Court, and that is the cause, that the form of Entry in all
Suits for the King, is Edvardus Herbert Miles Attornatus Domini Regis
generalis, qui pro domino Rege sequitur, venit hic in Curia, etc. And does not
say, Dominus Rex per Edvardum Herbert Attornatum suum, etc. And therefore it is
also, that the King cannot be Nonsuit; that all Acts of Parliaments that
concern him, are general, and the Court must take notice of them, without
pleading them; for he is in all, and all have their part in him, etc.

^ake Attor^ys.
69 It seems, that before the Statutes, which ordain, F. N. B. 25. c. e. ^ and
26. a.
that a man may make Attorneys, etc. the Justices neither would nor could
suffer the Plaintiff or Defendant, Demandant or tenant, to make Attorneys in
any Action or Court whatsoever; yet the King by his Prerogative (even before
those Statutes) might grant to a man power to make Attorneys, and by his Writs
or Letters might command the Judges to admit and receive them, etc. and that
without any cause showed in the writ, etc.

^^e King can^^t be Joint^ant.
70 In the Register, there is the form of a writ, F. N. B. 32. g.
wherein a common person is joined with the King in a Quare Impedit, which runs
thus, Rex vice comiti, etc. praecipe R. de C. quod just, etc. permittat nos
and P. de T. praesentare, etc. But Fitz. says in his N. B. that the common
opinion in his time was, that the King should have the whole presentment sole,
and should have a sole Action, etc. although he seems to hold the contrary
himself, Ideo quaere.

^sent again.
71 If the King recover by a Quare Impedit, F. N. B. 34. f.
and after ratify the Estate of the Incumbent, yet at the next avoidance the
King shall present, because the Recovery and Judgment for him were not
executed.

^^^sent by (...).
72 In a Free Chapel of the Kings, F. N. B. 34. ^.
where the Dean ought to give the Prebends, if he make not collation within six
months unto them, then shall the King present unto them by Laps, as Ordinary.

F. N. B. 34. k.
73 If the Bishop make collation and die before induction, Not inducted
or instalment, and the King seize the temporalties, he shall have that
presentment, because the Church is not full against the King, until the Parson
or Prebend be inducted or installed.

F. N. B. 35. a.
74 If the Kings tenant has title to present to an Advowson, Advowson, Ward,
Present.
which is void, and the six months pass, and after the Kings tenant dies
before the Bishop presents by laps, and leaves his heir within age, and in ward
to the King; In this case, the Bishop shall not present by laps, but the King
shall have the presentment by reason of the ward, etc.

F. N. B. 35. p.
75 In a Quare Impedit for the King, Not stopped.
albeit the Defendant has a writ to the Bishop against the King, yet the King
may sue a new Quare Impedit against the party of the same avoidance, and make
another title.

F. N. B. 37. f.
76 The King may sue a Ne admittas, after the six months past, Ne admittas.
where he has a Quare Impedit, or an Assise de Darrein presentment depending,
because Nullum tempus occurrit Regi^; It is otherwise in the Case of a common
person; because the Bishop may then present by laps, the title of presentment
being devolved to him, etc.

F. N. B. 38. e.
77 In a Quare Impedit between two strangers, The Kings title.
if the title appears to the Court for the King, they award a writ to the
Bishop for the King accordingly.

F. N. B. 60. i.
78 Upon grant of a Reversion, Wast. Attornment.
(although it be by fine) the Grantee cannot bring an Action of wast against
the tenant before Attornment; but if the King grant a Reversion by his Letters
Patents, the Grantee may have an Action of waste before Attornment.

F. N. B. 85. a.
79 At the Common Law every man may go out of the Realm for Merchandising,
Peregrination, Ne exe^s reg^ absque lier (...) Regis.
or other Cause whatsoever pleased him, without the Kings license, and he was
not to be punished for it: Howbeit, because every man is by Law bound to defend
the King and his Realm; therefore the King at his pleasure may by his Writ (de
securitate invenienda, quod se non divertat ad parts exteras, sine licentia
Regis) command, that he shall not go out of the Realm without his license, etc.
And if he does it, he may be punished for dis-obeying the Kings Command: And it
seems, that this Commandment may be made by the Kings Writ under the Great
Seal, Privy Seal, or Privy Signet: For in this Case the Subject is bound to
take notice of every Seal the King has, as well as of the Great Seal: F. N. B.
ibid. c.
The King may do the like by his Proclamation, in Case he cannot be found to
have the Writ served upon him, which if he obey not, it is a contempt, for
which he shall make fine to the King: Note, that by the Statute of 5 R. 2. cap.
2. it was ordained, that none should go out of the Realm without the Kings
license, which continued in force until 4 Jac. and then by the Statute of 4
Jac. cap. 1. that Clause of that Statute was repealed: So that at this day it
seems, that the Subject has the same liberty that he had at the Common Law:
Dier. 296. 19.
yet by the words in the beginning of the writ, which are these; Rex A. de B
salut. etc. Quia datum est nobis intelligi, quod tu versus parts exteras
absque licentia nostra clam destinas te divertere. It seems he cannot go out of
the Realm unlicensed by the King, etc. As Dyer. observes 165. p. 6. Ideo quaere
de hoc.

Protection.
80 If after the King has granted to one his protection, F. N. B. 92. b. c.
any man takes his Goods, or enters into his Lands, etc. or beats his Servants,
etc. the party grieved shall have a special writ directed to the Seriffe to
inquire of them, and to certify it before the King, etc. And it seems, that
the King shall make process against them by venire facias, as upon an
Indictment, and that they shall make fine hereupon.

Sea-banks S^wers.
81 The King ought of Right to have and defend his Realm as well against the
br^akings in of the Sea, F. N. B. 133. a.
as against enemies that it be not drowned or wasted, and to provide remedy for
it: And also to provide that his subjects, have their passages throughout the
Realm by Bridges and safe Ways; And therefore if the Sea-bankes be broken, or
Sewers and Gutters be not scoured that the fresh waters may have their direct
Course, the King may and ought to make a Commission to inquire thereof, etc.
And to hear and determine those defaults: But now matters, that concern
Sewers, are regulated by direct late Statute, viz. 23 H. 8. 5. and 13 El. 9.
etc.

Priority. Wardship.
82 If a Man hold of the King by Posteriority, F. N. B. 142. f.
and of another man by priority, and after the King grants to the Queen the
Seigniory for term of life, and after the Tenant dies, his heir within age;
In this Case, the Queen shall have the wardship of the body, having no regard
to the Posteriority; Because the Reversion of the Seigniory remains still in
the King: It had been otherwise, if the King had granted it in remainder to
another in Fee, for then it seems, they should not have had the priority, etc.

Annuity.
83 If the King grant an Annuity to one for term of life or years, F. N. B.
152. k.
it ought to be expressed in the grant by whose hands he shall receive that
Annuity, as to say, by the hands of the Sheriff of S. or by our Baylife of the
Manor of S. and then the Sheriff or Baylife shall have allowance upon that
Patent showing, if he pay it; And if there be not such words in the grant of
the Annuity, then the grant is void; For he cannot sue to the King for it, and
no person is bound to pay it unto him, if he be not named and expressed in the
Patent, etc.

^yde. ^^ayer. Procedendo.
84 If a Man pray in Aid of the King, F. N. B. 253. e. f.
and the Aid is granted, then shall it be awarded, that he shall sue to the
King in the Chancery; And the Justices of the Common Pleas shall cease, until a
Writ De procedendo in loquela come unto them, etc. And then they may proceed in
the Plea, until it go on so far, that Judgment ought to be given, etc. For
the Plaintiff: And then also the Judges ought not to proceed to Judgment,
until another Writ De procedendo ad judicium be brought unto them; And if the
King certify the Justices by his writ, that the Lands are seized into the
Kings hands: then also shall they surcease until a writ De procedendo and
loquela be sent into them, etc. And if it appear to the Justices upon Record,
that the Tenements are seized into the Kings hands, or if it appear to the
Court by the pleading and showing of the Parties, that the King has an
Interest in the Land, or shall lose Rent, etc. or services, then the Court
ought to cease, until they shall receive a procedendo in loquela from the King,
etc.

F. N. B. 154. d. e.
85 If the King by his writ certify the Justices, Justices to surcease upon the
Kings Certificat.
that the Lands are in his custody by reason of the nonage of some heir,
taken by Inquisition, and returned into the Chancery, commanding them, that
they shall not proceed, Rege Inconsulto. In that Case, it seems that the
Justices ought to cease for the present: albeit there be no such Office found
nor returned: for they are bound to give credit to the Kings certificate,
albeit that it be not true, etc. And in Assise de Novel disseisin, if the King
send his writ to the Justices that the Defendant holds the Land put in view of
the Kings gift for term of life, by the Kings Charter, commanding them not to
proceed, Rege Inconsulto here, although the Tenant will not plead this, yet it
seems that the Justices ought to cease by that writ: So if the King rehearse
in the writ, that the Tenant is in his service in war beyond Sea, or in
Scotland, and that he holds by Charter of the Kings grant for term of life
commanding, that they shall not proceed, Rege Inconsulto, but to continue the
Assise, until a certain day; there also it seems, they shall surcease; Because
the Tenant cannot plead it; for if the Escheator will say, that he seized the
Land into the Kings hand, in an Assise brought by any person, the Court shall
surcease for that saying, and by force of the Kings Certificate, etc.

F. N. B. 106. c.
86 Men and Women of Religion are to be excused from appearing at the Sheriffs
turn or at Leets, unless it be for some great cause: Men of Religion.
And if they be distrained to come unto them, they may have a writ De
exoneratione sectae, etc. out of the Chancery, to discharge themselves of such
service, etc.

F. N. B. 159. c.
87 If Land descend to Coperceners, Suit of Copeceners.
for which only one suit ought to be done; In this Case, if the Land be holden
of the King, then all the Coperceners ought to make a suit, as well after the
partition as before, But if the Land be holden of another Lord, then the eldest
Sister or her Feoffee shall only make the suit, etc. And if the Lord do
distraine the other Coperceners for that suit, they shall have a writ De
exoneratione sectae, etc. to discharge themselves of it, etc.

Pl. Co. 76. b. in The Lord Willoughbies Case.
88 If the King direct his writ Coronatoribus in Com. L. this is to be
understood (in the Kings Case) Coronatoribus de Com. L. for the Kings writs, in
such Cases, The Kings Writ.
will admit a favorable construction, for the fulfilling of the Kings full
intent, etc.

Finch 81.
89 For the Kings prerogate, see Finch 81. etc. and elsewhere throughout his
whole Book, under the several heads, when there is any difference between this
Case an that of a subject.

Finch 83.
90 The King never dies, Demise. Le Roy.
but in Law it is said the demise of the King, and a gift unto the King without
more, trencheth to his Successors.

91 The particular prerogatives due to the King by the Common Law may be (for
that most part) referred to one of the eight heads hereafter following,
notified in the outward margent by their several and respective letters, as
follows, 1 Divine perfection. A 2 Infiniteness. B 3 Majesty. C 4
Soveraignity and power. D 5 Perpetuity. F 6 Justice. G 7 Truth. H 8
Omniscience. I


Idiot.
92 Because every subject is by Law in the protection of the King, Co. l. 4.
126. a. 2. in Beverleys Case.
who therefore is of right bound to defend his subjects persons and Estates;
and for as much as an Idiot is not able to govern himself or order his
Estate, The Law of England has provided the King to be his Tutor to Govern and
order both his person, and Estate; For the Statute of Praerogativa Regis (made
in the 17 of E. 2. cap. 9.) was nothing else, but a declaration of the Common
Law, etc.

Rent reserved.
93 It is a Maxim in Law, that the Rent must be reserved to him, Co. Inst. p.
1. 143. b. 4.
from home the State of the Land moves, and not to a stranger: but some do
hold, that it is otherwise in the Kings Case.

Upon a joint purchase tenement in common.
94 If Lands be given to A. de B. Bishop of N. and to a secular man, Co. ibid.
190. a. 4.
to have and to hold to them two and to their heirs; In this Case, they are
joyntenants; For each of them take the Lands in their natural capacity: But if
Lands be given to the King and to a subject, to have and to hold to them and to
their heirs, yet they are Tenants in Common and not Ioyntenants; For the King
is not seized in his natural capacity, but in his Royal and Politic capacity,
in Jure Coronae, which (in respect of the Majesty of his Kings Person) cannot
stand in jointure with the seisin of a subject in his natural capacity: And
therefore if there be two joytenants and the Crown descend to one of them, the
jointure is thereby severed, and they are become Tenant in Common, etc.

Grant in Mort^aine.
95 It appears by Littleton. 140. Co. ibid. 99. a. 3
(which my Lord Coke says is a secret in Law) that in the Kings license to
grant land to a Corporation there needs not any non obstante of the Statutes of
Mortmaine; for the King shall not be intended to be mis-conusant of the Law,
and when he licenseth expressly to alien to an Abbot, etc. (which is in
Mortmaine) he needs not make any non obstante of the Statutes of Mortmaine; for
it is apparent to be granted in Mortmaine, and the King is the head of the Law,
and therefore praesumitur Regem habere omnia Jura in scrinio pectoris sui, for
the maintenance of his grant to be good according to the Law. Descent of
^etrage to Fe^ales.


96 When an Earldome or Baronie descends to one Daughter or other heir Female,
she shall solely enjoy both the Dignity and Lands, Co. ibid. 165. a. 3.
but where it descends to more heirs Females then one, the Lands shall be
divided as amongst other Coperceners: Howbeit, in that Case, the dignity cannot
be divided, neither shall the Eldest have it, as to be a Countess, Baroness,
etc. But (in such case) the King, who is the Sovereign of Honor and Dignity
may for the uncertainty confer it upon which of the Daughters he please; this
is to be intended, when the Ancestor dies seized of Peerage in Fee-simple.
^ings in A^^n.


97 If the King grant his own recognisance, the suit shall be in the name of
the grantee; but if he grant an obligation forfeited for outlawrie, Dier 1. 7.
P. 4 H. 8.
the suit shall be in the Kings name. ^e like.
Fuit dit.

98 Bruerton, who was attained 28 H. 8. had certain obligations, Dier 30. b.
208 28 H. 8.
which were forfeited to the King, and the King grants them to his Wife,
without any words, that it should be lawful for the grantee to bring Actions
thereupon, yet the Feme brings an Information in her own name for the said
obligations; And upon demurrer thereupon it was adjudged, that the Action was
well brought, because the King only may grant a thing in Action.

Finch, as Ley French edition. Fol. 22.
99 The King may license things prohibited by Statute, The Kings ^cence.
as to coin money, which is made Felony by the Statute, and before that; it was
lawful for any one to do it, because it is but malum prohibitum, But malum in
se, as to levy a Nuisance in the high way, the King cannot license a man to do,
but after it is done he may pardon it: Howbeit, if the Statute says, that his
license shall be void, there the license shall have a clause of non obstante, 2
H. 7. grants 73.
viz. shall say, Notwithstanding any Statute to the contrary, otherwise it is
not good, as the Statute of 23 H. 6. 8. ordaines, that the Kings grant to be
Sheriff of any County longer then a year shall be void, notwithstanding that
his Patent shall have a Clause of Non obstante, yet with a Clause of Non
obstante such Patent shall be good, Dier 52. 1. 33 H. 8.
but not without that Clause: Howbeit neither without such a Clause nor with it
can he dispense with a Statute before it be made; And therefore a license to
carry Bell-mettal out of the Realm, notwithstanding any Statute made or to be
made, is not good, if a Statute be made after to prohibit it, for he cannot
dispense with an Act of Parliament before it be made: Howbeit he may in things,
wherein he has an inheritance or interest, as to grant to own to be discharged
of taxes and subsidies to be granted, this is good.

11 H. 7. 11. b. Finch ibid.
100 Statutes of restraint bind not the King, Kn^ght not bound by S^^.
unless they concern the Commonwealth, or he or the thing they concern be
specially named, as the Statute of West. 2. of entailes binds the King, because
it concerns the whole Com. Wealth; so likewise the Statute of 1 H. 5. cap. 5.
That in Indictments addition must be given to the party indicted, binds the
King, because Indictments are specially named: But if by Statute one be
attainted and his Lands forfeit, with a proviso that of such Lands as he was
seized to the use of any other, Cesty que use should enter upon him, for it is
not for the Common Wealth, neither yet is the King named therien.

Co. l. 4. 35. b. 1. in Bozouns Case.
101 When the king by the Common Law cannot make a grant, Non obstante.
there a non obstante of that Common Law will not against the reason of the
Common Law make the grant good; but when the king may lawfully by the Common
Law make a grant, and the Common Law only requires, that he be so instructed,
that he may not be deceived, there a non obstante supplying it, stands with the
reason of the Common Law, and shall make the grant of the good; And therefore
if the King grant a protection in a Quare Impedit or an Assise with a non
obstante of any Law to the contrary, such grant is void; for by the Common Law
a Protection lies not in either of those Cases, for the damage that may happen
to the Plaintiff by such great delay; And therefore in such Case a non obstante
shall not avail, where the King by the Common Law cannot grant the thing, as
it was Ruled in 39. H. 63. 9. Advowson.


Dier 226. 35. 6 El.
102 The King by his prerogative may make a Sheriff without the usual assembly
and Election in the Exchequer.

Dier 288. 54 12 El.
103 The King may demise a Manor, Q^. Imp.
except the Courts and perquisites, so cannot a Common Person.

Dier 351. 22. 18 El.
104 Some books are, that by an usurpation, the King shall be out of possession
and put to his writ of right of Advowson, But 35 H. 8. it is there, that the
King may gain possession by presentment and plenartie by 6 months, and that
against an infant, who is a purchasor. Vide Fitzh. Tit. Qu. Impedit 151. 8 E.
3. and M. 16 and Trin. 38 E. 3. and Stat. Westminster. 2. c. 5.

Hob. 126.
105 In a Quare Impedit, if the title appear to the Court to be in the King,
albeit he be no party to the suite, yet they ought to award a writ to the
Bishop in his behalf. The Chancellor, etc. of Camb. against Walgrave.

106 The Kings Certificate under his signet Manual was received as evidence in
Chancery without exception, Hob. 213. 3.
in the Case of the Lord Aubignye against the Lord Clifton.

82 Likewise the Law gives greater privileges to men, then to Women.
Wardship, ^ody, Father, ^ot Mother.
1 A. Tenant of Land holden by Knight Service, Litt.. 114. Co. Inst. p. 1. 84.
a. 3.
has issue B. a Daughter and his heir apparent, who being married to C. has
issue and dies, A. dies seized, and the Land descends to the issue within age;
In this Case the Lord shall have a wardship of the Land, but not the wardship
of the body of the heir; for none shall be in ward for his body to any Lord
during his fathers life: It is otherwise where the Father dies, living the
Mother, when the Land, holden by Knight Service descends to the issue on the
part of the Father, because the Law in that Case confides more in, and gives
more respect unto the Father then the Mother, etc.

Villein.
2 If a Villein takes a free woman to Wife, Litt:. 187.
and have issue between them, the issues shall be Villeins; but if a Niefe
takes a Freeman to her Husband, their issue shall be Free.

Feme no wit^esse.
3 In some Cases Women are by Law wholly excluded to bear testimony, as to
prove a man to be a Villein, Co. Inst. p. 1. 6. b. 4.
Mulieres ad probationem status hominis admitti non debent. Fleta l. 2. cap.
44. Fitz. title Villein 32. 36, and 37.

83 The Law tendreth the weakness and debility of other persons, as those out
of the Realm, in Prison, Femes covert, and other Women also: Likewise Infants,
Lunatiques, Idiots, and such as have other imperfections.
^ortion.
1 If Coperceners make partition at full age, and un-married, Co. Inst. p. 1.
166. a. 1. Litt.. 243. 256, etc.
and of sanae memoriae, of Lands in Fee-simple, it shall hold good and firm
for ever, albeit the values be un-equal: but if it be of Lands intailed, or if
any of the Perceners be of non sanae memoriae, it shall bind the parties
themselves, but not their issues, unless it be equal: Or if any be covert, it
shall bind the husband, but not the Wife or her heirs: Co. ibid. 170. b. 4.
and 171. a. 4. and Litt.. 258.
Or if any be within age, it shall not bind the Infant, etc. Howbeit if the
Feme covert after she becomes sole, do assent unto the partition it shall bind
her for ever: and therefore in that Case the partition is not void but only
voidable: There is the same Law of an Infant, that assents after he attaines
his full age, etc.

^emitter.
2 If Tenant in tail make a Feoffment in Fee upon Condition, Co. ibid. 202: b. 2.
and Formedon against the Feoffee, and the entry for the Condition is his own
Act, etc.

^escent.
3 A descent shall not take away the entry of an Infant: Litt.. 402. Co. ibid.
245. b. 4.
unless (his Mother being privement enseinte) the descent was cast before his
birth: for then there was not cause of entry at the time of the descent cast,
etc.

^escent.
4 A dying seized shall not take away the entry of a Feme Covert, Litt.. 403.
Co. ibid. 246. b. 1.


5 If a descent be cast during the life of one that is non compos mentis,
Litt.. 405. Co. ibid. 247.
etc. Descent.


Litt.. 436. Co. ibid. 259. a. 3.
6 A descent shall not take away the entry of a man in prison, Descent.
when the disseisin was made, and the descent cast during the time of his
imprisonment, neither yet is he (in that Case) enforced by law to make
continual claine by his servant, or any other by his warrant, or commandment;
For, things done by deputy are seldom well done, but every man will be willing
to see his own business most effectually speeded and performed: An the
reason, why in this and the like Cases a man imprisoned shall not be bound, is,
for that (by the intendment of Law) he is kept without intelligence of things
abroad; and also that he has not liberty to go at large to make entry or
claim, or to seek Counsel, Litt.. 438.
etc. So likewise if a Recovery by default be had against a man in prison, he
shall avoid it by writ of error: For a man in prison by process of Law ought
to be kept in salva, Co. ibid. 260. a. 3.
and arcta custodia, and by the Law ought not to go out, though it be with a
keeper and with the leave and sufferance of the Jailer: Howbeit imprisonment
must be Custodia, non poena; for Carcer ad homines custodiendos, non ad
puniendos dari debet, etc.

Descent.
etc. at the time of a disseisin, Litt.. 439.
and a descent cast; may enter at his return; because a man out of the Realm
(by intendment of Law) cannot have knowledge of the disseisin, etc.

Litt.. 441. Co. ibid. 262. a. 2.
8 At the Common Law before the Statute of Non-claime 34 E. e. cap. 6. or that
of making proclamations after a fine, Non claim Fine.
4 H. 7. cap. 24. one out of the Realm was not barred, albeit he made not
claim within a year and a day after a fine levied, etc.

Co. ibid. 290. a. 4.
9 If a man have a judgment given against him for debt or damages or be bound
in a recognisance, and dies, his heir within age, No exec^^^ against the
heir under age.
or having two daughters, and the one within age, no execution shall be sued of
the Lands by Elegit, during the minority: albeit the heir is not specially
bound, but charged as Terre-tenant: So also against an heir within age no
execution shall be sued upon a Statute Merchant or Staple, nor upon an
obligation or recognisance taken by force of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 6.
for it is excepted in the process against the heir: Neither if the heir
within age endow his Mother, shall execution be sued against her, during his
minority.

Litt.. 594. and 633.
10 At the Common Law, If a Feme Inheritrix had a Baron, Feme Inh^^trix.
who being under age, had aliened the Femes land in Fee, and died: In this Case
the Feme or her heir might have entered: which they could not have done (before
the Statute of 32 H. 28. cap. 8.) if the Baron had been of full age: for (by
the Common Law) the Feme was (in that Case) put to her Cui in vita, and her
heir to his Sur cui in vita; Descent.
because such Feoffment of the Baron did work a dis-continuance, etc.

Co. ibid. 337. a. 1.
11 If the Husband within age take a Wife a Feme Tenant in tail general, and
the Husband make a gift in tail, and dies within age, Feme Tena^^ in tail.
in this Case, the Wife may enter: or the heir of the Baron (in respect of the
new reversion descended unto him) may enter; but if the heir enter presently
thereupon his Estate vanishes, etc.

12 If Husband and Wife be both within age, Baron and Feme.
and they by deed intended join in a Feoffment, reserving a Rent, and the
Husband Co. ibid. 23.
In this Case, the Wife may enter, or have a Dum fuit infra aetatem: But if she
were of full age, she shall not have a Dum fuit infra aetatem, for the nonage
of her Husband; Albeit they be but one person in Law.

13 If two joyntenants being within age, make enfeoffment in Fee, Co. bid. 337.
b. 1.
and one of the Infants dies and the other survives; Infants j^ynt-tenants.
In this Case, the Dum fuit infra aetatem, but for the moity only.

Feofment.
14 When an Infant makes a feoffment being within age, Co. ibid. 337. b. 2, 3.
Litt.. 635.
he may meliorem enim conditionem facere potest minor deteriorem nequaquam:
Also a special heir shall take advantage of the Infancy of the Ancestor,
Borough-English.
as if tenant in tail of an Acre of the Custom of Borough-English make a
feoffment in fee within age: and dies, the youngest Son shall avoid it: for he
is privy in blood and claims by descent from the Infant: Special tail.
So likewise if Tenant in tail to him and the heirs Female of his body make a
feoffment in Fee and dies within age, having issuing a Son and a Daughter, the
Daughter shall void the feoffment: And so note (by the way) that a cause to
enter by reason of the Infancy, is not like to conditions, Warranties, and
Estoples, which even descend to the heir at the Common Law.

15 If Tenant in tail enfeoffe his heir apparent, Co. ibid. 350. b. 1. Litt..
664.
the heir being Feofment re^^^.
and after the Tenant in tail dies, this is no remitter to the heirs Because
it was his folly, that he, being at full age, would take such a feofment; But
such folly cannot be adjudged in the heir; if he had been within age at the
time of the feofment made, in respect of his tender years and want of
experience.

16 If tenant in tail enfeoffe a Feme in Fee, and die, and his issue within
age takes the same Feme to Wife, ^aile. ^eme. Remitter.
Litt.. 665.
this is a remitter to the Feme then has nothing; Because no folly can be
judged in him, being within age at ye time of the Espousals; It is otherwise,
if such heir were of full age at the time of the Espousals; For then the heir
has nothing but right of his wife, etc. There is the same Law, Co. ibid. 351.
b. 4.
where the Tenant in tail Enfeoffes his issue (being within age) and the wife
of the issue in fee, and dies; for in this Case also the issue is remitted,
etc.

17 If a Feme seized of lands in fee take Baron, Co. ibid. 351. b. 4. Litt..
666.
who aliens the Feme is remitted, and is seized of the Lands in her Demesne, as
of fee, as she was before; because the reprisal of the Estate shall be adjudged
in Law the act of the Baron, and not of the Feme: so that no folly can be
adjudged in the Feme, who was covert at the time of making the Lease: And in
this Case, the Lessor has nothing in the Reversion, because the Feme is seized
in fee, etc. And here, Litt.. 648, 669.
if the Lessor sue an Action of wast for wast committed by the Baron; albeit
the Baron cannot (against his own feofment and reprisal) bar the Lessor, by
showing the remitter to his Feme, etc. yet in such an Action if the Baron make
default to the great distress, and the Feme pray to be received, and is
received accordingly, she may well show the whole matter, and how she is in her
remitter, and so shall she bar the Lessor of his Action, etc. for regularly in
every Case, where the Feme is received for default of the Baron, she shall in
pleading have the same advantage that a Feme sole has, etc. There is the same
Law, if the Alienee had made the Lease by Deed indented, or by Fine, because in
taking a thing by Fine, the Feme is never examined, etc.

Co. ib. 353. a. 1
18 If a Feme covert be received in an Assise, and plead a Record, Assise.
Disseisor.
and fail, she shall not therefore be adjudged a Disseisor, as she should be,
if she were sole, etc. So if a Feme covert only levy a Fine executory, and a
Scire facias is brought against her and her husband, if she be received upon
the default of the husband, she shall bar the Conusee, which if she had been
sole, she could not do, etc.

Co. ib. 353. a. 3
19 In the acknowledging of a Fine by a Feme covert, Fine. Examination.
least she should be deceived or any way abused, her examination ought to be
secret, and to this effect, viz. whether she be content to levy a Fine of such
lands (naming them particularly and distinctly, and the state that passes by
the Fine) of her own voluntary free will, and not by threats, menaces, or any
other compulsory means.

Litt.. 677. Co. ib. 356. b. 3
20 If the Baron dis-continue the land of the Feme, Remitter.
and the Discontinuee lets the same land to the Feme for term of her life, and
gives her seisin thereof accordingly: In this Case, whether the Baron were out
of the Realm, when the Lease was made, or within the Realm, or whether the
Baron agree to the Lease, or no; nevertheless the Feme (in this Case) is
remitted: It had been otherwise, if she had been sole at the time of the Lease
made, for then she could not have been remitted, etc.

Litt. 696. Co. ib. 364. a. 4
21 If two Ioint-tenants of lands in fee, the one of full age, Remitter
the other under age, are disseised, and the disseisor dies seized, and his
Issue enters, one of the Ioint-tenants being still within age, and after he
attains his full age, the heir of the Disseisor lets the Lands to both the
Ioint-tenants for their lives; this is a remitter (as to the moity) to him,
that was within age; because his entry was congeable: But the other has but an
Estate for life in the other moity, because his entry was taken away by the
dying seized, etc. for the Infant (being favored in Law) had right of Entry,
whereas the other had only right of action, etc.

H. 7. cap. 20. Warrantie.
) if tenant in Dower had aliened the Land in fee with warranty, Litt.. 725, and
7^6. Co. ib. 380. a. 3
and that warranty had descended to the Heir, who was to inherit the land in
Dower, the Heir had been thereby barred to demand the same land: Howbeit if the
Heir were within age at the time of the warranty descended upon him: In that
Case, the Heir might enter and avoid the Estate either within age, or at any
time after his full age: but if he were within age at the time of the
alienation with warranty, and became of full age before the descent of the
warranty, the warranty did bar him for ever, etc.

23 Albeit Laches of a man non compos mentis may prejudice him for his entry
(as if he be disseised, Co. l. 4. 125. a. 4. in Beverleys Case.
and a descent is cast, Fine.
in this case he cannot enter) yet it shall not prejudice his right; as if a
man non compos mentis were disseised, and the disseisor had levied a Fine, in
this Case (at the Common Law) although the year and day had passed, yet he that
was non compos mentis, was not bound thereby, but that he might well enter: And
this is proved by the Statute de modo levandi Fines, made Anno 18. E. 1. which
was nothing else but a Declaration of the Common Law: There is the same Law of
an Infant, one in prison, or not within the four Seas, or of a woman not duly
examined; for in all these Cases a Fine was not binding at the Common Law,
although claim was not made within a year and a day, as appears by the same
Statute, etc. There is also the like exception of such persons in the later
Statute of Fines, with Proclamations made, 4 H. 7. cap. 24. which proves, that
the Lawmakers had in all Ages a special care to provide for persons that had
such defects and imperfections, etc.

Idiots King, Tutor.
24 In Case of Idiots or fools natural, Co. l. 4. 1^6. a 2. in Beverleys Case.
because (as Bracton says) Non the Law of England, (as well as the Law Civil)
has provided a Tutor for them, viz. the King, and has made provision for the
preservation both of their Inheritance, and also of their goods, as appears by
Britton. fol. 16. and likewise by Prerogativa Regis, cap. 9. made 17 E. 2.
which was nothing else but a Declaration of the Common Law: And albeit that
Statute only says, Quod Rex habebit custodiam terrarum fatuorum naturalium,
etc. yet the King shall have as well the custody of their bodies and goods, as
of their lands, and also of all other hereditaments, as well those which they
have by purchase, as others which they have by inheritance at the Common Law,
etc. And the reason of this is, because (as Fitz. N. B. says, 232.) the King
is bound of right by his Laws to defend his Subjects, their Goods and Chattels,
Lands and Tenements: And therefore every Subject being by the Law in the Kings
protection, an Idiot who cannot defend or govern himself, nor order his Estate,
ought of right to have both his person and estate protected and ordered by the
King, etc.

Executor
25 If an Infant be an Executor, Co. l. 5. 27. b. 2 in Russels case.
a Release or Acquittance

Executor.
26 An Administrator (durante minore aetate) cannot sell any of the Co, l. 5.
29. b. 3. in Princes case
or bona peritura, for he has his Office of Administration pro bono and
commodo of the Infant, and not for his prejudice; Also such an Administrator
cannot assent to any legacy, unless there be Assets to pay debts, etc. and
generally, he can do nothing to the prejudice of the Infant; for the words of
the letters of Administration are, Administrationem omnium and singulorum
bonorum ad opus, commodum, and utilitatem executoris durante sua minore aet^te,
and non aliter, nec alio modo committimus, etc.

27 Generally in all Actions real, Co. l. 6. 3. b. 1. in Markals Case.
which the Infant brings of his P^^ I^fancie ^^tolne de^^r.
albeit he has the land by descent, and that the tenant plead the deed or
warranty of his Ancestor, the parol shall not stay for his nonage: For by
presumption of Law, the granting of delay is in favor, and for the benefit of
the Infant, lest by default of good understanding of his estate, and of the
truth of the matter, he might be prejudiced of his right, which descends unto
him from his Ancestor: And therefore, in such case the Law will rather suffer a
delay, then hazard the right of the land, the possession whereof his Ancestor
has by negligence, or otherwise lost: But when the Ancestor dies seized, and
the land does descend unto the Infant, and he enters and takes the Explees and
profits; In this Case, it will he a prejudice to the Infant, if he should lose
the possession which he had, and shall be thereof delayed, until his full age:
It is otherwise, when only a naked right descends, unto him, for then he can
suffer no such prejudice, but rather may run a hazard, etc. And with this
agrees 12 E. 4. 17. in a writ of Entry sur disseisin, of a disseisin made to
the Infant himself: And 41 E. 3. tit. Age 39 in a Writ of Right of a
deforcement done to the Infant himself of land, which he had by descent: So
likewise in Escheat and Cessavit, and a writ of Right sur disclaimer brought by
an Infant, because he has the Seigniory in possession, which by Escheat,
Cesser, or Disclaimer he might lose: and in that Case also his Ancestor had no
right to the land, and therefore the Parol shall not stay for his nonage: In
like manner in a writ of Mesne brought by an Infant, because the cause of
Action, and the wrong begins in the time of the Infant himself, the Parol shall
not stay, etc. 21 E. 3. Age 85. Temp. E. 1. Age 119. 7 E. 2. Age 140. Also in a
Formedon in remainder, albeit the Infant demands Fee-simple, yet because his
Ancestor, whose Heir he is, was never in seisin, nor took explees, (and
therefore in such Case he shall allege explees only in the particular tenant,
who had the estate upon which the remainer depended) for this cause the tenant
(without plee) cannot pray, that the Parol may stay, in as much as the
remainder was never in the possession of any of his Ancestors, and the
Demandant himself is the first, in whom it will vest, and that shall have
seisin of the land in demand, etc. It is otherwise in a Form. in reverter,
causa qua supra.

Co. l. 6. 8. b. 1: in Ferrers case
28 At the Common Law before the Statute of West. 2. cap. 4. if one had suffered
a recovery in any real Action against him by default (if he were lawfully
summoned, Recovery by default.
and that there were no error in the proceeding) he had not any remedy but by
writ of Right: Howbeit the Law was otherwise in case of an Infant; for he was
therein excused by reason of his tenderness of age, and want of understanding.

Co. l. 7. 7. b. 4. in the Earl of Bedfords case.
29 When a Subject is Guardian in Chivalry, Voidable Leases.
he in the right of the heir within age, and in his Guard, shall avoid voidable
Leases, for so long time as he has interest in the Lands, by reason of the
Wardship: but this shall not prejudice the Heir of his election, to make the
Leases good by acceptance of the Rent, etc. when he shall attain his full age,
For, Custos statum haeredis in custodia sua existentis meliorem non deteriorem
facere potest: The Law is also the same, when the King is Guardian, etc.

Co. l. 861. b. 4. in Beechers ca.
30 Infants shall not be amercied, Amerc. Pledges.
and consequently shall not find pledges, by reason of the weakness of their
age: And therefore (in that Case) the entry is, Ideo in miserecordia, sed
perdonatur quia Infans. Vide 43 Ass. Pl. 45. 44 E. 3. tit. Amerc. 10. 3 E. 3
Enfant 14. 14 Ass. Pl. 17. 41 Ass. Pl. 14. 17 E. 3. 75. Bracton. fol. 254. F.
N. B. 195 h.

Co. l. 8. 99. b. 4. in Sir Richard Letchfords cas.
31 A Custom (that the Lord shall seize Copiholds after three Proclamations at
three Courts, and non-claim by the heir, Copiholds. Proclamation. Non-claim
etc.) shall not bind the Heir, that is, beyond Sea (extra Maria) at the time
of the Proclamations made; so it is also of an Infant, non compos mentis, or
one in prison; because (in judgment of Law) they are not bound to make claim,
neither yet (by intendment) can they have notice thereof; for, if these four
persons were excused (by the Common Law) though they made not claim within a
year and a day after a Fine levied, or a Recovery in a writ of Right (being
matters of record, and of extraordinary high esteem) in the Law) so that they
were not barred of their right, notwithstanding their non-claim: A Fortiori,
shall not Proclamations made in a base Court, and in a private corner be any
bar unto them, etc. Vide 5 E. 3. 222. and 7 E. 3. 335. Also, if in a real
Action a Recovery by default be had against a man in prison, it shall not bind
him, but he may reverse it by writ of Error, as appears 5 E. 3. 50. b. 4 E. 2.
Disceit 51. Littleton 102. b.

Co. l. 9. 76. b. 4. in Combs case
32 Where the custom is, Custom. Feofment Age 15.
that an Infant at the age of 15. may make a feofment, he cannot do it by
Attorney, because the Custom that inables any person disabled by the Law,
ought to be pursued, and an Infant cannot make any thing to pass out of him by
Attorney, Vide 11 H. 4. 33.

Co. l. 9. 85. a. ^. in Connys case.
33 Albeit the tenant of a Manor that is within age, may be distrained for rent
arrear, and neither in that Case, Distrain per quae servi^.
nor in a per quae servitia brought against him (when the tenancy descends)
shall have his age; because at first the Lord departed with the land in
consideration, that the tenant should hold of him, pay his rent, do his
services, etc. And although upon grant of the Manor by Fine, he may be
compelled to Attorn in such a writ; and if he Attorn upon grant thereof in
pais, the Attornment is good; yet in a writ of Customs and Services, (which is
a writ of Right in his nature, A writ of Custom and Serve. Age.
and in which Judgment final shall be given) against an Infant that is in by
descent, he shall have his age, although it be upon his own Cesser, because he
knows not what arrerages to tender before judgment, and that is a writ of
right in his nature, and if he make not true tender, he shall lose the land:
And so it was adjudged in 28 E. 3. 99. Vide 9 E. 3. 50. 14 E. 3. Age 88. 31 E.
3. Age 54. 2 E. 2. Age 132. And albeit such an Infant do attorn in a Per quae
servitia, Attornment.
that can be no mischief unto him; for notwithstanding his Attornment within
age, he may at his full age disclaim to hold of him, or may say, that he holds
not of him, or may acknowledge he holds of him, but by less or other services;
And with this seems to accord 26 E. 3. 63. 32 E. 3. Per quae servitia, 9. and
Age 33. Vide 2 E. 2. Age 77 and 78. 37 H. 8. Attornment Br.

Quid Juris clamat.
34 In a Quid Juris clamat brought by an Infant, the tenant says, 43. E. 3.
sol. 5. and 32. E. 3. cited per Coke, Chapter Justice, l. 9 85 b. 2. in Connys Case.
Waste.
And in this Case, because the Plaintiff was within age, and so could not
acknowledge the deed, during his nonage, it was adjudged that he should stay
until his full age; Nevertheless, in this Case, if when the Infant attains
his full age, the Defendant attorns by judgment of Court, Parol Demur. No
prejudice.
this shall not any way trench to the Infants prejudice: For albeit the
Attornment were after his full age, yet in as much as there was no Laches in
the Infant, but that he brought his writ de quid juris clamat to force the
tenant to attorn the delay, which was till his full age (which the Law provided
for his benefit) shall not turn to his prejudice: And therefore by judgment of
law, (which does wrong to none) he shall have as much advantage as well for the
arrerages of rent, as for waste done, as if the Tenant had Attorned at the time
of the Plea pleaded.

Devise. Tail. Conclusion.
35 There was a Clause annexed to an Estate tail devised by will to a Feme sole,
Co. l. 10. 42. b. 4. in Mary Portingtons Case, per Coke Chapter Justice.
that if she should apparently and willingly conclude and agree the Feme takes
husband, and they two conclude and agree with J. S. to suffer a recovery of the
Land, with intention to make void the Estate, and thereupon a common recovery
was suffered accordingly, etc. And in this Case Coke Chief Justice was of
opinion, Feme covert ^an pass nothing without ^xamination (...) writ.
that such conclusion of a Feme covert was of no force: neither yet could be
any cause of forfeiture: for no Feme covert shall be barred (by her confession)
of her inheritance or frank-tenement; but when she is examined by due course of
Law (15 E. 4. 8. 44 E. 3. 28. Vide 14 E. 4, 5.) And none has power to examine
a Feme covert without writ ( Vide 21 E. 3. 43. John de Holbornes Case.) And
this is the cause, that if Baron and Feme acknowledge a Statute or
Recognizance, this is void, as to the Feme, albeit she survive her Baron, as it
was holden P. 17 Eliz. in the Countess of Lennox Case: So if Baron and Feme
acknowledge a Deed to be enrolled, and it is enrolled accordingly, this also is
void, as to the Feme, (Vide 29 H. 8. Faits enroll. Br. 14. and 7 E. 4, 5. 16 H.
7. 5. and 21 E. 3. 43.) And the reason is, because no such writ is depending
against the Baron and Feme, upon which the Feme may by the Law be examined:
F.N.B. 104. k.
But if an Infant acknowledge a Statute or Recognisance, it is not void, but
voidable by Audita quaerela, Statute. Recognizance
during his nonage: And the cause of the diversity is, for that the Judge (in
case of an Infant) may by inspection know his age, but not know whether a woman
be covert or no. And the use is always upon a common Recovery against Baron
and Feme to examine the Feme, and to grant a Dedimus potestatem to take (upon
examination) her Conusance, as in Case of a Fine; for in that Case also there
is a writ, upon which she may be examined, Vide 44 E. 3. 28. Howbeit a common
Common Recovery.
shall not bind him; for an Infant has not such a disposing power upon the
Land, as Baron and Feme have, but is utterly disableo by Law to convey or
transfer his Inheritance or Frank-tenement to others, during his minority:
And at this day a common Recovery appears to be a Common Conveyance or
Assurance of Lands, etc.

Co. l. 11. 77. a. 4. in Magd. Coll. Case.
36 If an Infant had conveyed lands to Queen Eliz. by deed enrolled that grant
had not been established by the Act of 18 El. cap. 2. 18 El. cap. a. Grant al
Roy. Fine.
(which was made for the confirmation of grants made to the Queen from primo to
that time, etc. because the person of the Infant during his minority was
absolutely disabled to make any conveyance at all by the Common Law: So
likewise if an infant had levied a fine to Queen Eliz. and afterward the said
Act was made; yet the infant notwithstanding the Statute, might have reversed
such fine by writ of Error: And so it was resolved M. 32, and 33 El. in B. R.
per Wray Chief and totam Curiam in Vaughans Case; Co. ib. 78. a. 3.
There is the same Law, if Baron and Feme had made a grant of the Land of the
Feme to the Queen, Baron, Feme.
for neither had his been made good by the said Act to have bound the feme
(after the Coverture) or her heirs: Because the person of the feme covert is
dis-abled to convey her Land, unless it be by fine upon due examination, and
so also was it holden in the aforesaid Case of Vaughan.

37 If an infant has a Manor by descent, Advowson, Usurpation.
unto which an Advowson F. N. B. 34. x.
and suffers an usurpation to the Advowson, when the Church happens to be void,
and after grants the Manor in fee at his full age, and after that the Advowson
happens to be void again; In this Case, the infant shall present, and not the
feoffee: for the Advowson was severed by the usurpation, and yet the infant may
present.

Baron and Feme for life or years, Waste.
the Feme shall not be punished for wast done by the Baron, F.N.B. 59. i.
Finch, 26.
after the Barons death.

39 A man may have a Writ of account against a Feme, Account.
as receptrix F.N.B. 110. d.
or against a Chaplain: But a man shall not have a Writ of account against an
infant.

40 Women shall not be compelled nor distrained to come to ye Sherifs F.N.B.
161. a. b
or to Leets, and if they be distrained, Femes nemy jure in Lees Dit. Wayve.
they may sue the writ de exoneratione sectae, etc. to excuse themselves of
that service, and thereupon they may also have alias plura and attachment, etc.
And for as much as Femes shall not be sworn in Leets to the King, as men of
the age of twelve years or upwards shall be, when a Woman is outlawed she is
said to be waived and not outlawed; for she was never put nor sworn to the
Law, but a man is said to be outlawed, because he is, or ought to be sworn to
the Law, and then for contumacy he is put out of the Law, and so is said to be
ut lagatus, quasi extra legem positus: And by the Rule of the Register two
Women may join in such a writ, etc.

41 If an infant of tender age ( viz. under the years of discretion) kill a
man, Felony.
that is not felony in him: Pl Co. 19. a. 2. in Fogassues Case.
because he wanted discretion and understanding: and therefore the Law imputes
it to his ignorance, which he has at that age by nature, and so no default in
him; and therefore it is called, In voluntary ignorance: For he cannot be wise
and d^screet, though he would, but is ignorant by compulsion, and therefore
shall be excused: And such an Act is properly said to be ex ignorantia, where
involuntary ignorance is adjudged to be the cause thereof: Felony.
So if a man de non sanae memoriae kill another, albeit he has broken the
words of the Law, yet he has not broken the Law: because he has not any
memory, or understanding, but mere ignorance, which falls upon him by the hand
of God: and therefore the Law imputes it to involuntary ignorance and not to
him, so that he shall be excused for the doing of it, etc.

Stat. 11 H. 8. cap 20.
42 The makers of the Statute of 11 H. 8. 20. Pl. Co. 50. b. 3. in Winbish and
Talbois Case per Hales.
in consideration of the frailty and inconstancy of Women, ordained that Law to
restrain them from the alienation of ye Lands of their deceased Husbands: and
because they did conceive that they might (by flattering words) be easily
deluded and enticed to covin, therefore they ordained in that Act a penalty
against them, as a bridle of their inconstancy, to prevent them from being (in
that manner) seduced. etc.

Dower best possession.
43 A Woman shall be endowed of the best possession of her Husband, Finch 26.
as if the Husband holds of Jo. S. per iij. d. who held over of an other by xx.
d. and Jo. S. release to the Husband (so as now the Husband holds by xx. d.)
the wife being endowed of this land, shall hold only by the third part of iij.
d. and not of xx. d.

Dumb.
44 If a dumb person bring an Action he shall plead by prochiene amy. Finch
ibid.


Tender upon a Mortgage for an Idiot.
45 In Case of a mortage ( Littl. says. 334. Co. Inst. p. 1. 206. b. 4.
) if a stranger of his own head, that, has no Interest, etc. will tender the
moneys, etc. to the feoffee at the day appointed, the feoffee is not bound to
receive them, etc. yet if the tender ought to be made by an heir, that is and
Idiot, of what age soever, In that Case any man may make the tender for him, in
respect of his absolute dis-ability, and the Law in this Case is grounded upon
charity and so in like Cases.

^^^ant not out^^ed.
45 Minor vero, Bracton l. 3. fol. 125. r.
and quia infra aetatem 12 annorum fuerit utlagari non potest, nec extra Legem
poni, quia ante talem aetatem non est sub lege aliqua nec in decemi.

^^ant no ac^^^tant, ^or can make ^^th.
46 An infant under the age of 12 years shall not be charged in account as
Receiver or Bailiffe, Co. ibid. 128. Co. Inst. p. 1. 172. a. 3. Litt.. 258. Co.
ib. 172. b. 1.
because (by intendment of Law) before his full age he has not skill and
ability to raise or make any improvement or profit of the lands, Goods, or
Chattels committed to his charge, Neither shall an infant under that age be
sworn of an Inquest; for the Rule of Law is, Minor jurare non potest, And
therefore an infant, cannot make his Law of non summons, neither shall his
default in such Case grieve him: for seeing the mean to excuse the default is
taken away by Law; the default it self shall not prejudice him: Howbeit, an
Infant at the age of 12 years shall take the oath of Allegiance to the King,
an this was (as Bracton says) Secundum leges Sancti Edwardi, but indeed such
was the Law in the time of King Arthur. Howbeit, an Infant cannot wage his Law
in an Action of debt, no more then make oath of non summons, as aforesaid.

47 In Trespass by Will. de Walton against John Martin judgment was given,
^prisonment ^pited.
that the Parliament should recover damages, Co. Inst. p. 1. 289. a. 4
and quod praedict. Joannes capiatur. And the Record says, quod praedict
Joannes venit coram Domino Rege and reddidit se prisonae, and quia constat
Curiae per inspectionem corporis ipsius Joannis, quod idem Joannes est talis
aetatis quod poenam imprisonamenti subire non potest, idem dictum est ei, quod
eat inde sine die. Also Allen Abbot brought an appeal of Robbery against John
Boskiseleke Clerk and others, who pleaded Not-guilty, and were not found
guilty, whereupon judgment was given, that they should go quit, and praedict
Elena pro falso appello suo committatur prisonae, etc. (for by the Statute of
Westminster. 2. cap. 12. she ought to be imprisoned in that Case for a year) but the
Record says, Quia cadem Elena pregnans fuit, and in periculo mortis, ipsa
dimittitur per manucaptionem, etc. ad habendum corpus usque Quind. Mich. etc.

48 Vide Max. 135. 1. and for Infants see Dier 104: a. 10, etc. and Max. 149.
55. Dier 148. 75. and 338. 41.

Hob. 137.
49 A Lunatique shall not be charged with mean rates for default of Livery,
sued or tendered. Burchers Case.

84 The Law (in some Cases) tendreth the ignorance of men un-lettered.
7 E. 3. 9. Co. Inst. P. 1. 301. b. 4.
1 If a man make a lease to A. for years, Lease for life.
and after by his deed the Lessor voluit, quod haberet and teneret terram pro
termino vitae suae, this is adjudged by this verb (volo) to be a good
confirmation for term of his life; Benignae enim faciendae sunt
interpretationes cartarum propter simplicitatem Laicorum, ut res magis valeat
quam pereat. Co. lib. 5. 55. b. 2. in Knights Case.

Co. lib. 2. 3. a. Mansers Case. Dier ^. 16. El. 337, and 338. Pl. 39.
2 A man not lettered is not bound to seal and deliver any writing which shall
be tendered unto him; if there be not some present, Not bound t^ seal a dee^
unless read.
that can and do first read the deed unto him; if he require them so to do; and
if the deed be in Latin, French, or any other Language) which the party, that
should seal the writing, understands not (in that Case if the party desire
one to read it and expound it, and there is none present, that can or will do
it in a language, that the party sealing does understand he may well then
refuse to deliver it: So likewise, albeit a man can read, yet if the deed be
written in Latin, French, or some other language, that he understand not, and
he demand to have it expounded, but can not have it done accordingly: In that
Case also he may refuse to deliver it: For, Ignorantia est duplex, viz. facti
and juris, and rursum ignorantia facti (quoad rem nostram attinet) est duplex,
viz. Lectionis and linguae: Now ignorance in reading or of the language, quae
sunt ignorantiae facti, may excuse: but as it is commonly said, ignorantiae
Juris non excusat.

Co. l. b. 2. 9. a. Thorough goods Case. Co. l 4. 44. b. 3. in Sanches Case.
Co. l. 9 51. b. in the Earl of Shroesburys Case.
3 A writing read or expounded in another form then it purports, to one not
Lettered, is not his deed, though be seal and deliver it. Not bounds


4 An Indictment ought to be full express and certain, Indictment.
and shall not be maintained by argument or implication: because it is to be
found by the oath of Laymen.

5 Pleading ought to be precise, exact, and certain: Special Ve^dicts.
It is otherwise of special verdicts, which are to be found by Laymen: for the
Law requires no such preciseness in them, etc. In the Earl of Shroesburys
Case.

6 If three distinct obligations are written upon one and the same piece of
Parchement, Co. lib. 11. 27. b. 1. in Henry Pigots Case.
and one of them only is read to the obligee, Several Ob^^gations upon one
parchment.
and he being a man not lettered, seals and delivers the whole, this is good
for that obligation, which was read, but void for the rest: And this Case is
agreed by Brudnel and Pollard, in 14 H. 8. 26. So if there be two absolute and
distinct clauses in a deed, and one of them is read to the party not lettered,
and the other not, it is good for the clause that was read, and ab initio void
for the other.

Obligation of xx. l. etc. for xx. s.
7 In 9 H. 5. fol. 15. Co. ibidem.
One brings a writ of debt of xx l. against another and counts upon an
obligation of the same sum, the defendant pleads that he was a Layman, and
knew not letters, and he acknowledged himself to be bound to the Plaintiff by
the said deed in 20 shillings, which he has paid, and thereof shows an
acquitance, and as to the residue of the sum in the said Obligation, nient
son fait: And in this Case, for as much as the deed consisted upon an entire
sum, it was adjudged void for all: The same is also agreed in 14 H. 8. 26.
and 30 E. 3. 31.

Fee tail read for fee-simple.
8 In 30 E. 3. casu ultimo in an Assise before Sheriff and others in pais, Co.
lib. 11. 27. b. 3. in Hear. Pigots Case.
the Tenant pleads feoffement of the Plaintifs to him by deed of the Land in
plea, to have and hold to him and his Heirs, comprehending a letter of
Attorney to deliver seisin, etc. And in truth the Plaintiff was a Layman,
ignorant of Letters, and the deed with the letter of Attorney was read unto him
according to the form of an Estate tail, and for the same intent he sealed
and delivered the deed with the letter of Attorney in it to deliver seisin; And
in this Case, the feoffment was adjudged void, and the letter of Attorney also
(albeit it were truly read) because it depended upon the feoffment, and had
relation to the Estate in fee: Incidents to a deed.
And there Thorpe Justice said, that every deed ought to have writing, sealing
and delivery: and when any thing passed, from such as have no understanding but
by hearing only, there ought also to be reading added to the other three: And
(indeed) he that is not lettered is reputed in Law as one, that cannot see but
only hear, Blind.
and all his understanding is by hearing: So likewise a man, that is learned,
but cannot see, (as to purpose) taken in Law as a man not lettered; And
therefore if a man be learned, but blind, if the deed be read unto him in
another manner, etc. he shall avoid the deed: because all his understanding in
such Case is by his hearing, as it was resolved in Shuters Case, in the
Star Chamber, M. 9 Jac. who was a man of 115 years of age at the time of his
death. Vide John Pinchons Case in 37 E. 3. 3. cited in Cook ubi supra. Vide
63. 35.

85 The Law favors Strangers, that are neither parties nor privies.
lord. Tenant. ^eofment upon Condi^^on.
1 Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant makes a feofment in Fee upon Condition, the
Feoffor dies, Co. Inst. p. 1. 76. b. 1.
after his death the Condition is broken, and the Heir within age enters, for
the Condition broken; In this Case, albeit the Feoffor had no Estate or right
in the Land at the time of his death, but only a Condition, and which was
broken after his decease, yet the Heir shall be in ward, for the Lord was
neither party nor privy to the Conditional feoffment, and therefore there
could be no default in the Lord to bar him of his wardship.

Manor. ^ondition. ^dvowson. ^pendant.
2 A man seized of Land, whereunto Condition is appendant, Co. ibid. 122. b. 1.
is disseised; In this Case, the disseisee cannot use the Condition, until he
enters into the Land, whereunto it is appendant: But if a man be disseised of
a manor, whereunto an advowson is appendant, he may present unto the Advowson,
before he enters into the Manor; And the reason of this diversity is, because
in the Case of the Condition it should be a prejudice to the Tenant of the
soil; for if the disseisee might put on his cattle, the disseisor might do so
too, which would be a double charge to the Tenant; It is otherwise of an
Advowson, etc.

Co. ibid. 132 b 2.
3 Profession or entering into Religion is a Civil death, so that his heir shall
inherit; howbeit, Profession Tolleth not entry.
this shall work no prejudice or wrong to a stranger, that has a former right:
And therefore if the disseisor enters into Religion, and is professed, so as
the Land descends to his heir, yet this descent shall not toll the entry of
the disseisee, etc.

Co. ibid. 148 b. 3
4 If there be Lord and Tenant of 40 acres of Land by fealty and 20 shillings
Rent, if the Tenant makes a gift in tail; Rent suspended in all.
or a lease for life or years of parcel thereof to the Lord; in this Case the
Rent shall not be apportioned in any part, but the rent shall be suspended for
the whole: for a Rent-service (says Litt.. 222) may be extinct for part, and
apportioned for the rest, but (regularily) it cannot be suspended in part by
the Act of the party, and in esse for another part; So it is also, if the
Lessor enter upon the Lessee for life or years into part, and thereof disseise
or put out the Lessee, the Rent is suspended in the whole; In parts.
Howbeit, a Seigniory may be suspended in part by the Act of a stranger: As if
two joynt-tenants or coperceners be of a Seigniory, and one of them disseise
the Tenant of the Land, the other joynt-tenant or copercener shall distraine
for his or her moity; for it is no reason, that they (being strangers) should
suffer any prejudice by the Act of another etc.

Litt.. 222 Co. ibid. 149 b. 4
5 If a man has a Rent charge to him and his heirs, Rentcharge not extinct to
a stranger.
issuing out of certain Land, if he purchase any parcel thereof to him and his
heirs, all yt rentcharge is extinct; so as the unity of possession of parcel
of the Land and of the Rent (by the Act of the party) extinguisheth the whole
Rent: Howbeit, if the grantee of a Rentcharge grant the Rent to the Tenan^ of
the Land and to a stranger: In this Case the Rent shall not be totally extinct,
but only for the moity, etc.

Co. ibid. 208 b. 3. and Co. l. 2. 75. b. 3. Lord Cromwels Case. Co. ib. 128.
a. 3 Co. lib 6. 31. a. Bothies Case.
6 As concerning a Condition of an Obligation, Condition, Stranger. Feoffee.
Obligee:
and upon a Feofment, there is a diversity, where the Act, that is local; is to
be done to a stranger, and where to the obligee or feoffor himself: As if one
make a feofment in Fee, upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall enfeoffe a
stranger, and no time limited, the feoffee shall not have time during his life
to make the feofment: for then he should take the profits in the interim to his
own use, which the stranger ought to have: And therefore in that Case, Co.
ibid. and 218 b. 4.
he ought to make the feofment, as soon as conveniently he may: And so it is
likewise of the Condition of an Obligation: It is otherwise, when the Condition
is, that the feoffee shall re-enfeoffe the Feoffor: for there the Feoffe has
time during his life, unless he be hastened by request, and this is in respect
of the privity of the Condition between them: There is another diversity, when
the obligor or feoffee is to a stranger, and when a stranger is to enfeoff ye
feoffee or obligee: As if A. enfeoffe B. of Black-acre, upon Condition that if
C. enfeoffe B. of White-acre, A. shall re-enter: In this Case, C. has time
during his life, if B. does not hasten it by request: And so likewise of an
Obligation, etc. vide infra 11.

Co. ibidem.
7 There is another diversity, Stranger. Feoffee. Obligee.
where the Condition concerns a transitory or Local Act, and is to be
performed to the feoffee or obligee, and where it is to be performed to a
stranger; As if A. be bound to B. to pay ten pounds to C. A. tenders to C. and
he refuses it; In this Case the bond is forfeited, whereas, if the feoffee or
obligee refuse it upon tender, the bond is not forfeit, in respect of the
privity of the Condition, etc.

Co. ibid. 209. b. 2. and Co. l. 5. 96. Goodalls Case.
8 If it be agreed between the Mortgagor and the Executors of the Mortgagee,
that the Mortgagor shall in appearance pay the whole sum, Condition performed
payment of part.
but that afterward the Executors shall repay part thereof back to the
Mortgagor: This is no performance of the Condition; For the Estate of the Land
shall not be divested out of the heir, which is a third person, without a true
and effectual payment, and not by a color or shadow of payment; And the
agreement precedent ought to guide the payment subsequent.

Payment to the first or second feoffee at pleasure.
9 Upon a Condition for the payment of money to the feoffee his heirs or
assigns, if the feoffee make a feoffment over, Co. ibid. 210. a. 3.
it is in the election of the feoffor to pay the money to the first feoffee, or
to the second feoffee; And so if the first feoffee die, the feoffor may either
pay the money to the heir of the first feoffee, or to the second feoffee; For,
the Law will not enforce the feoffor to take knowledge of the second feofment,
nor of the validity thereof, whether the same be effectual or not, but at his
pleasure; because he is conceived to be a mere stranger unto it, and the first
feoffee and his heirs are expressly named in the Condition, etc.

A thing collateral in satisfaction.
10 Upon a Condition for payment of money there is a diversity, Co. Inst. p. 1.
212. b. 4.
when the money is to be paid to the party, and when to a stranger; For, when
it is to be paid to a stranger, there if the stranger accept an Horse or any
collateral thing in satisfaction of the money, it is no performance of the
Condition, because the Condition in that Case is strictly to be performed: But
if the Condition be, that a stranger shall pay to the obligee or feoffee a
sum of money, there the obligee or feoffee may receive an Horse, etc. in
satisfaction, etc.

Condition to enfeoffe the feoffor and his Feme, or the feoffor and a stranger.
11 If a feofment be made upon Condition, Litt.. 352. Co. ibid. 219. a. 4. and
220. a. 3. and b. 1.
that the feoffee shall regrant the Land to the feoffor and his Feme in tail,
the remainder to the right heirs of the feoffor, and no time is limited for the
doing of it, the feoffee has time to do it during his life, unless hastened by
Request; So it had been also if the Condition had been, to have re-enfeoffed
the feoffor and a stranger: because the feoffor, who is privy to the Condition,
is to take jointly with his Feme, or with the stranger: It is otherwise where
the Condition is to enfeoffee a stranger, or strangers only: for there it must
be done in convenient time, etc. But put Case (as it is in Littleton. 352.)
that the feoffor die before the Estate tail he conveyed according to the
Condition, so that the Feme does only survive to take it, whether is not the
feoffee (in that Case) bound to convey an Estate to the Feme (as Littleton
there says) as near the Condition as he can, in convenient time, or shall
have time to do it during his life: And it seems, that he ought to do it in
convenient time, etc. because the Feme is a stranger to the Condition; There
seems to be the same Law also in the other Case, if the stranger happen to
survive the feoffor, etc. Tamen quaere. Vide supra 6.

Feoffor. Stranger. Estate. Tail and re^ainder.
12 If a man make a feofment upon Condition, Co. ibid. 291. b. 1. and 220. a. 3
that the feoffee shall make a gift in tail to the feoffor, the remainder to a
stranger in Fee, there the feoffee has time during his life: because the
feoffor, who is party and privy to the Condition, is to take the first Estate:
but if the Condition were to make a gift in tail to a stranger, the remainder
to the feoffor in Fee, there the feoffee ought to do it in convenient time:
because the stranger is not privy to the Condition, and he ought to enjoy the
present profits of the Land, etc. Howbeit if the Condition be to grant an
Estate in fee to the feoffor and his heirs, or to the feoffor and his Feme in
tail, the remainder to the right heirs of the feoffor, (if in the first Case)
the feoffor, or (in the other Case) the feoffor and his Feme die before the
Estate settled, etc. by the feoffee, he has time during his life to do it to
the heir in Fee or in tail, unless hastened by Request: because the heir is
privy in blood to the feoffor, and (as to that purpose) represent his person,
etc.

^ondition be ^eaded with^^ the deed.
13 In all actions real, personal, and mixed, it is regularly true, Co. ibid.
225. a. 3. and 227. b. 3.
that the Condition of a deed cannot be pleaded to defeat a Freehold without
showing forth the same deed in Court: Howbeit a stranger which is not privy to
the condition, Co. ib. 225. a. 3
nor claims under the same, shall not after the condition is executed in
pleading, be enforced to show forth the deed: As if Land be morgaged upon
Condition, and the Morgagee lets the Land for years, reserving a rent, the
Condition is performed, the Morgagor reenters: In an Action of Debt brought
for the Rent, the Lessee shall plead the Condition and the re-entry, without
showing forth any Deed; because he is a mere stranger unto it, and by
intendment cannot come by it.

Litt.. 584. Co. ib. 321. a. 4
14 If the Reversion of a Tenant for life be granted by fine to another in fee,
and the Grantee dies before Attorment, Revers. gra^ed by fine. Action of wa^
without a tr^^.
and the Land descends to his Heir: In this Case, the Heir cannot distrain or
avow upon the Tenant for life, nor bring an Action of waste against him before
Attornment; there is the same Law also of the Assignee of such a Grantee, etc.
Howbeit if such a Grantee die without Heir, so that the Land escheats to the
Lord of the Fee: In that Case, the Lord shall bring an Action of waste, etc.
without attornment; because he is a stranger, and comes in merely in the Post.

Co ib. 338. b.
15 When a Reversion and a particular Estate, A lease, etc. drowned or has
contin^ance for the benefit of a stranger, etc.
or a Rent and the Land out of which it issues, etc. happens to come into one
and the same hand by Grant, Surrender, or otherwise: if the interest of a
stranger be therein concerned, the particular Estate, or Rent, etc. shall (in
consideration of Law) either be drowned or continued, when either the one way
or the other the stranger may reap a benefit, or prevent a prejudice: Howbeit
of Parties and Privies no such consideration shall be had: Litt.. 636.
As if a Feme inheritrix take Baron, and have issue a son, and that Baron die,
and she takes another Baron, and the second Baron lets the Land for life, and
after the Feme dies, and the tenant for life surrenders his Estate to the
second Baron, etc. In this Case, the son may immediately enter upon the second
Baron, for between the Lessee and the second Baron the Estate for life is
determined, and so likewise for the benefit of the issue it shall be adjudged
in Law to be: Also, if he in the Reversion after an Estate for life make a
lease for years, or grant a rentcharge, etc. and then the Lessee for life
surrenders: In this Case, the lease or rent shall commence presently, because
it is for the benefit of the Lessee for years, or the Grantee of the rent (who
are strangers, etc.) that it should so do. But if a Reversion be granted with
warranty, and the tenant for life surrender: In this Case, the Grantee shall
not have execution in value against the Grantor, who is a stranger, during the
life of the tenant for life, for as to the Grantor, the Estate for life
(notwithstanding such surrender) shall (in consideration of Law) be conceived
to have continuance, lest such a surrender might work a prejudice to the
Grantor that is a stranger: So if tenant for life surrender to him in
Reversion, being within age, he shall not have his age; for that would be a
prejudice to a stranger, who is to become Demandant in a real action, etc.
Also, if tenant for life grant a rentcharge, and after surrender, yet the rent
shall remain, during the life of the tenant for life; for otherwise it would
work a prejudice to the Grantee of the rent, who is a stranger. etc. and as to
that purpose the reversioner comes in under the charge. If a Bishop be seized
of a rentcharge in fee. the tenant of the Land enfeoffes the Bishop and his
successors, the Lord enters for the Mortmain, he shall hold it discharged of
the rent; for the Lord claims under the Mortmain, and it is for his benefit
that the rent should be extinct, etc. If a man makes a lease to A. for life,
reserving a rent of 40 s. per annum to him and his heirs, the remainder to B.
for life, the Lessor grants the reversion to B. in fee, A. attornes: In this
Case B. shall not have the rent, because although the fee-simple do drown the
remainder for life between them, yet as to a stranger it is in esse, etc. and
therefore B. shall not have the rent, but his heir shall have it.

After assignment no action of debt against the ex^ecuto, or administator.
16 If the executor of a Lessee for years assign over his Interest, Co. l. 3.
24. a. 2. in Overton and Sydhals Case. T. 37. El. in B.R.
an Action of debt shall not lie against him for Rent due after the
assignement: So if the Lessee for years assign over his Interest and die, his
Executor shall not be charged for Rent due after his death: because by the
death of the Lessee the personal privity of the contract as to the Action of
debt in both Cases being determined, the Executor becomes a mere stranger to
the said Leases, etc. There is the same Law also of an Administrator, as
appears P. 41 El. Rot. 2458. in C. B. Marrow and Turpins Case.

Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 39.
17 The makers of the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 39. Co. l. 7. 21. b. 3. in the
Lord Andersons case
(whereby the heir in tail is chargeable with the Kings debts, as well as the
heir in Fee-simple was at the Common Law) did not think fit to charge his
alienee, when the heir in tail before any process or extent had bona fide
aliened the Land; for, they had reason to favor the purchasor, farmor, etc. of
the heir in tail, more then the heir himself; because they are strangers to
the debts of the Tenant in tail, and come to the Land upon good consideration,
etc.

Rent
18 Lessee for years grants a Rentcharge, and surrenders, 1 El. 194. Finch, 27.
yet the Rent shall be paid during the years: So if he in the reversion grant
a Rentcharge during the term, and then the Lessee surrendreth unto him, he
shall pay the Rent during the term: for, the stranger that is the grantee of
the Rent) for his benefit shall say, that the term continues, or that it is
determined, etc.

86 Res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, sed quando que prodesse
potest. Vide supra, Max. 51. and 43, 62.
^^e for life ^^^^sion
1 If a man make a Lease for life, Co. Inst. p. 1. 319. a, 4.
and then grant the reversion for life, and the Lessee attornes, and after the
Lessor disseiseth the Lessee for life, and makes a feofment in fee, and the
Lessee reenters; this shall leave a reversion in the Grantee for life, and
another reversion in the Feoffee, and yet this is no attornment of the Grantee
for life, because he does no Act, nor gives assent to any, which might amount
to an attornment in law. But res inter alios acta alteri nocere non debet, etc.

^on^r Donce Dis-continu^nce.
2 If land be given in tail, saving the reversion to the Donor, Co. ib. 335. a. 1
and after the tenant in tail by his deed enfeoffes the Donor in fee, this is
no dis-continuance of the Estate tail, because the reversion being already in
the Donor, it cannot by the feoffment of the tenant in tail, be dis-continued;
but if a man make a gift in tail, the remainder in tail, reserving the
reversion to himself: In this Case, if the Donee enfeoffe the Donor, that is a
dis-continuance, because so there is a mean Estate, that otherwise would suffer
wrong, and yet would be remediless: there is the same Law also, where the
Donee enfeoffes the Donor, and a stranger, etc. for that is also a
discontinuance of the whole Land, etc.

^eme not ou^ed.
3 If a Feme covert be tenant for life, Co. ib. 335. a. 4
and the husband make a feofment in fee, and the Lessor enter for the
forfeiture; this shall not out the woman from her just right: for here, albeit
the reversion was revested, yet the dis-continuance did still remain at the
Common Law.

Co. ibid. 369. b. 2
4 If there be tenant for life, Statute of (...) H. 8. 9. Pretenced rights.
the remainder in fee by lawful and just title, he in the remainder may obtain
and get the pretenced right or title of any stranger, and shall not thereby
incur the penalty of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 9. not only for that the
particular Estate and remainder are all one, or that it is a mean to extinguish
the seeds of troubles and suits, but likewise because by the doing thereof
there can happen no prejudice to any stranger: Howbeit if a disseisor make a
Lease for life, lives, or years, the remainder for life, in tail, or in fee, he
in remainder cannot take a promise or covenant, that when the Disseisee has
entered upon the Land. or recovered the same, that then he should convey the
Land to any of them in remainder, thereby to avoid the particular estate, or
the interest or estate of any other: For, the words of the Proviso be (buy,
obtain, get, or have by any reasonable way or mean) and that is not by promise
or covenant to convey the land after entry or recovery; because that is neither
lawful, being against the express purview of the body of the Act, neither yet
reasonable, because it is to the prejudice of a third person.

Co ibid. 393 a. 2
5 If one man enfeoffe two with warranty, Warranty.
and the one releaseth the warranty, yet the other shall vouch for his moity.

Co. ibid. 298. a. 2.
6 If a Lease be made to an infant for life, the remainder in fee, Infant.
the infant at his full age dis-agrees to the Estate for life, yet the
remainder good; for that it was once vested by gooo title, and it is no reason,
that the practice betwixt the Feoffor and the Infant, should prejudice him in
remainder, who is a stranger, etc.

Litt.. 636. Co. ib. 338. a. 6
7 If a Feme inheritrix take Baron, and have issue a son, Feme. Inheritrix.
and the Baron die, and she takes another Baron, and the second Baron lets the
land which he has in right of his wife to another for term of life; and after
the Feme dies, and after the tenant for term of life surrenders his Estate to
the second Baron, etc. In this Case, the son of the Feme may immediately enter,
which he could not have done, if the tenant for life had not surrendered; And
therefore here, Res inter alios acta liberis prodest, etc.

Co. lib. 6. 1. b. Bru^rtons case
8 When the tenant holds by an entire service, Entire Service.
as by the payment of an horse, or an hawk, etc. yearly: In that Case, if the
Lord purchase any part of the Land, the whole service is extinct; but if the
tenant alien the Land in parcels to several men that shall give the Lord, who
is a stranger, an advantage and benefit; so that every one of the Alienees
shall pay an horse, hawk, or the like: For, Res inter alios actae nemini nocere
debent, sed prodesse possent, etc.

Co. lib. 2. 67. a 4. in Tookers Case.
9 If the reversion of two tenants for life, Attornment.
or the Rent or Seigniory of two joynt-tenants be granted by fine: In a Quid
juris clamat, quem redditum reddit, or a Per quae servitia against such
joynt-tenants, the one shall not be permitted to attorn without his companion;
because if the one attorn alone, he may prejudice his companion, as if he will
not claim to be dis-punished of waste, or condition to have fee, or a future
term, etc. for upon general attornment in Court of Record, the Lessee shall
lose all advantages, which are not claimed upon Record, because this question
is demanded of him, Quid juris clamat? etc. And therefore he shall have no more
then he claims upon Record: And for this cause one of the joynt-tenants alone
by himself shall not be permitted to attorn upon Record, in regard of the
manifest prejudice which might happen to his companion, in case it should be
attornment of both, etc.

Co. lib. 3. 29. a 3. in Butler and Bakers Case.
10 It is said, that as relations shall extend only to the same thing, Relation.
and to the same intent; so shall they also only extend between the same
parties, and shall never be strained to the prejudice of a third person, who is
neither party nor privy to the said Act; And therefore if a man make a
feoffment of a Manor by Deed, or without deed, and a long time after the
livery, the tenants attorn to the Feoffee: In this Case, the attornment by
necessity, and ut res magis valeat, shall have relation (by fiction of Law) to
pass the services ab initio; yet this relation shall not charge the tenants
for the arrerages in the mean time: So if Feoffee upon condition grant a
Rentcharge of the land, and after the Grantee brings a writ of Annuity; here
ab initio this was an Annuity between the Grantor and the Grantee; but as to
the feoffor, who is a stranger, and is entitled to enter for the Condition
broken, it shall have no relation to his prejudice: Likewise in 30 E. 3. 17. in
a Dum fuit infra aetatem (against Richard Spellow) the tenant says, that his
father was seized, and died seized and so prays his age, the Demandant
counterpleads the age, because the tenant and his father were jointly enfeoffed
and to the heirs of the father: And it was adjudged that the tenant should not
have his age; for albeit this refusal (of taking the land by purchase) shall
have relation, as to himself; yet as to the Demandant, who is a stranger, it
shall not have relation to delay his Action, when in truth the tenant had the
frank-tenement by purchase.

Devise of the third part descended.
11 W. B. and his wife were seized in tail of the Manor of Hinton, Co. l. 3.
29. b. 2 in Butler and Bakers Case.
(for the Ioynture of the wife) holden in Capite, and W. B. was also seized of
land in Fobbing, which Manor and Lands did amount to a full third part of all
his lands; he was likewise seized of the Manor of Thoby in Capite, which
amounted to the other two parts: VV. B. dev^seth Thoby to his wife, upon
condition, that she should take no former I^ynture, and dies, the Feme in pais
refuses the Manor of H. Here the question was, whether the will was good for
the whole Manor of Th. or but for a part, by the 32 and 34 H. 8. And it was
adjudged, that this refusal shall have only relation as to the Manor of H.
and not to the Manor of Th. and to the intent only that the Feme should not
be prejudiced by any thing concerning the Manor of Hinton; Howbeit that
relation shall not prejudice the heir, which is a third person, and upon whom,
by the death of the devisor, part of the Manor of Thoby descended, etc.

Mesnalty. ^ent-seck. ^eisin.
12 If a ^esnalty become rent-seck by surplussage, Co. l. 4 9. a. 4. in Bevils
case.
as if the tenant holds of the Mesne by two shillings, and the Mesne holds over
of the Lord by 12 d. and the Lord purchase the tenancy: In this Case, the
ancient seisin of the entire rent of 2 s. is sufficient for the surplussage,
being now changed to a rent-seck of 12 d. because the Mesnalty is extinct by
the Act of the Lord, and of the tenant peravail, and the nature of the rent of
the Mesne is not changed by his own Act, but by the Act of others: And
therefore albeit the rent is become seck, yet the Mesne shall distrain for it,
etc. as it is said in 2 E. 2. tit. Extinguishment 6.

^opihold sur^^nd before ^^mit.
13 The heir of a Copihold tenant may surrender to the use of another before
admittance, as any other Copiholder may; Co. l. 4. 24. b. 1 in Browns ca. and
fol. 23. a. Fitches Case.
but this shall not prejudice the Lord of his Fine due unto him by the custom
of the Manor upon the descent: So admittance of a Copihold tenant for life, is
an admittance of him in remainder to vest the Estate in him: Howbeit that shall
not bar the Lord of his Fine, which he ought to have by Custom, etc.

^^pihold. ^ease. ^eisor.
14 A Release by deed (and not by way of surrender) made by one, Co. l. 4. 25.
b. 3 in Kite and Queintons case
that has right to a Copihold, to one that is in possession thereof by lawful
admittance shall be effectual to extinguish that right, and to establish the
possession of the party so admitted, because in such Case the Lord cannot
suffer prejudice, for that he has his Fine; but if a Copiholder be outed by
wrong, there his release by deed to the disseisor, or any other wrong-doer;
shall not transfer his right, nor any way bar him thereof, because that would
tend to the prejudice of the Lord, being a third person: for so the Lord might
lose his Fine and services, etc. And therefore a release by deed in such Case,
is utterly void, etc.

Co. lib. 4. 24. b. in Marrels Case.
15 If the Lord of a Copi-hold Manor Alien the Inheritance of one of the
Copi-holds to another, Copi-hold severed from the Manor.
that shall not alter the nature of the Copi-hold, but that it shall still
retain the quality of Copihold land to descend to the next heir, etc. for,
Custom having once established and fixed that Estate, it cannot be changed by
the Act of the Lord: neither yet is it reason, that the Act of the Lord and the
alienee should in that Case prejudice the Copi-holder, who is a stranger:
Howbeit such a Copi-hold after such severance of it from the Manor can never
afterward be conveyed by surrender, or otherwise, but must still be left to
descend, etc.

Co. lib. 4. 118. a. 3. in Actons Case.
16 If a Baroness in her Widdow-hood retain a Chaplein according to the Statute
of 21 H. 8. c. 13. and after marry a Peer of the Realm; Retainer of a
Chaplain.
Albeit this seems to be casus omissus in that Act, yet shall not such marriage
be a Countermand of the retainer; for, Res inter alios acta, etc.

Co. l. 5. 99. b. 4.
17 Tenants at Will, Act of tenants.
or other particular Tenants or occupiers of Land cannot by their Act bind him,
that has the Inheritance. In Rookes Case.

Co. l. 6. 12. b. 4. Morri^^s Case
18 It is said, that if two joynt-tenants be with warranty, Joint-tenants,
Warranty, Severalty.
and one of them disseiseth the other, and the disseisee brings an Assise, and
upon his prayer has judgment to recover in severalty; In this Case, the
Warranty is gone: For, albeit he has partition by judgment, yet he, that is
bound by the Warranty, is neither party nor privy, or any way consenting unto
it: as he is, when the partition is made by force of the Act of Parliament.

Co. l. 6. 50. b. 2. in Boswels Case.
19 It is agreed per totam Curiam in 50 E. 3. 14. Presentment by term. Guardian.
b. that if Tenant for years, or Guardian bring a Quare Impedit, and the
Defendant has a Writ to the Bishop against the termor or Guardian, and his
presentee is admitted, instituted, and inducted; yet the Tenant of the
Franktenement is not put thereby out of possession, etc.

Co. l. 6. 51. b. 4. in Boswels Case.
20 No imcumbent shall be removed upon the Statute of West. 2. In Quare I^pedit
the I^cumbent (...)
cap. 2. by Quare Impedit, or Assise de darrien presentment purchased within
the six months, unless the incumbent be named in the writ, quia res inter
alios acta alteri nocere non debet; Although the incumbe^t be in by defeasible
title: And with his accords 9. H. 6. 32. For, quicunque aliquid statuerit,
part inaudita altera, aequum licet statuerit, haud equus fuerit.

Co. lib. 6. 57. Bredimans Case.
21 A man devises rent for life out of the Manor of D. and devises the manor
for years to another, Rent paid b^ the Lessee, (...) prejudice to the terre-te^
the termor enters and pays the Rent, after the term ended, the devisee of the
Rent brings an Assise against the Terre-tenant; And it was adjudged that the
payment of the Rent by the Tenant for years was not sufficient seisin to bind
the Terre-tenant after the term determi^ed: For, there is a diversity between
receiving and giving of seisin; because it is true, that he which has but a
term for years may take seisin to the benefit of him that has the
Frank-tenement: In 45 E. 3. 26. The grantee for years of a Common uses it,
this gives seisin to him in Reversion, 22 Ass. 84. accord 11 E. 3. Assise 86.
payment to the grantee for years of a Rent, is sufficient seisin for him in
Reversion: in M. 39, and 40. El. the Countess of Northumberlands Case in the
5. Rep. fol. 97. b. Presentment by the grantee for years of the procheine
avoydance is a sufficient title in a Quare Impedit for the Grantor: There is
the same Law of Lessee for life, tenant in Dower, by the Courtesy, Guardian,
Tenant by Statute Merchant, staple, etc. And this agrees with diverse opinions
in 7 E. 4. 20. 22 E. 4. 9. b. 16 H. 7. 18. a. 9 H. 7. 23. Br. Quare Impedit, 1
22. 13 El. Dier 300. But sicut beatius est, ita majus est dare quam accipere,
for the termor cannot give seisin of the Rent (as in the Case alone put)
because that would trench to the dis-advantage of the Terre-tenant, who is a
stranger: Howbeit he may take seisin, etc. for his benefit, according to the
Rule, Res inter alios acta alteri nocere debet, sed quandoque prodesse potest.

In Quare Impedit the Patron must be party.
22 John Hall brings a Quare Impedit against the Bishop of Bath and Wells, Co.
l. 7 25. b. 4. in Mauntons Case.
and Thomas Maunton Clerk defendant for disturbing him from presenting to the
Vicarage of W. And it was resolved, that the writ should abate; because the
Patron was not named in the writ; for so the Patronage might be recovered
against him, that has nothing in it: And it is no reason, that he, who is
Patron, should be dis-possessed and outed of his Patronage, when he is a
stranger and no party to the writ, and especially in this Case, when he may be
made party to the writ, etc. So in 42 E. 3. fol. 7. One brings a Quare Impedit
against another, the Defendant says, that he claims nothing in the Patronage,
but says that the Bishop presents him by laps, Judgment si tort. etc. And
there Belknap prayed a writ to the Bishop, because he dis-claimed in the
Patronage, but the Court could not grant it: because neither the Patron nor the
Bishop (who in that Case was in lieu of the Patron) were named in the writ: And
therefore it was adjudged, that the writ should abate: For, if such a writ
should be mainteinable, every Patron by covin between a stranger and the
incumbent might be outed of his advowson: And with this agreed, 9 H. 6. 30, 31.
etc. 3 H. 4. 2, and 3. 13 H. 8. 13. Howbeit in a Quare Impedit, when the
presentation only is to be recovered and not the Advowson, neither yet the
Patron to be put out of possession, In that Case, the writ is adjudged good
without naming the Patron, etc. as it was adjudged in 7 H. 4. 25. 37.

Joint-tenant Release. Continuance.
23 A judgment in debt is given against joint-tenant for life, Co. l. 6. 78. b.
in the Lord of Aburgavenies Case.
who releaseth to the other, who dies, the Reversioner enters, the Plaintiff
sues execution: And in this Case, it was adjudged, that notwithstanding the
death thereof lessee, and that the Lessor enters, and is in of his ancient
right; yet as to the Plaintiff the estate has continuance: And if the Baron
seized of Rent, Dower. Rent. Common.
Common, etc. in fee, releaseth to the Terre-tenant, that Rent, Common, etc. is
extinct: And yet having regard to the Feme they have continuance: for she shall
be thereof endowed, as it is adjudged in 5 E. 2. Dower 143. etc.

Rent in esse after release.
24 Dixwel and his Wife, Co. lib. 7. 38. Lillingstones Case.
and Sillingston and his Wife levy a fine of the Rectory of Litlington in Com.
Bed. the Conusees render a rent: charge of 30 l. per an. to several for life
to commence after his wives deceise, proviso, quod non extendit ad onerandum
personas les Conusees, etc. and then also render the Rectory to Dixwell during
his wifes life, the Remainder to Lillingston, etc. acknowledges a recognisance
to Duncombe of 500 l. in the nature of a Statute staple according to the
Statute of 23 H. 8. ye Wife Dixwel dies, Lillingston enters, Dixvvel releaseth
to Lillingston, Duncombe, sues a Cerciorari to the Clerk of the Stat. who
certifies the recognisance, whereupon the rent was extended, and upon a
liberate was delivered unto Duncombe, who brings an Action of debt against
Lillingston (who all that while was Tenant of the Rectory) and Duncombe averred
the life of Dixwell: And it was adjudged, that as to Duncombe (who is a
stranger) notwithstanding such release the Rent remains in esse; for, to some
purposes by the Common Law a rent extinct shall be in esse, as to a stranger,
etc. as if the Baron be seized of a rent in fee, and release to the
terre-tenant; yet the Feme shall be endowed, etc.

Co. l. 8. 133. a. 2. in Turners Case.
25 If an Executor, or Administrator compound with one, Administrator,
composition.
who has judgment of 100 l. for 60 l. this underhand composition shall not
prejudice another creditor, that is a stranger: For, an Executor and
Administrator ought to execute their office lawfully, in paying all duties,
debts, and legacies in such precedence as the Law requires: truly, in
converting nothing to their own use, dilligently, quia negligentia semper
habet infortunem comitem; And an Agreement between two shall not annoy a third
person. See Goodals Case, Co. lib. 5. 96. and supra R. 85. ex 8.

Co. lib. 8. 136. a. 1. in Sir John Nedhams case.
26 If the obligee make the obligor his Executor, Bishop. Obligor. Administrator.
this is (in Law) a release of the debt; because it is the Act of the obligee
himself, and with this accords 8 E. 4. 3. 21 E. 4. 2. b. etc. But if the
Archbishop Grant letters of Administration to the obligor, this shall not
extinguish the debt, but it shall still remain; for, the Act of the Archbishop
and the obligor shall not wrong the dead, who is (in that Case) as a third
person.

Co. l. 8: 138. a in Sir Francis Barringtons Case.
27 It appears by the preamble of the Statute of 22 E. 4. cap. 7. Statute of
22. E. 4. 7.
(which gives License of enclosing several woods in forests, etc. seven years
after they are felled for the better preserving of them from cattle) between
what persons and for or against whom that Act was made: And the parties to that
great contract by Act of Parliament are, the subjects having woods, etc. within
forests, chases, and perliens, on the one part, and the King and other owners
of forests, chases, and perliens, on the other part: so that the Commoners are
not any of the parties, between whom that Act was made: And therefore being
strangers unto it ought to receive no prejudice by it: So likewise the Act of 2
H. 5. being made between the King and the Priors aliens (whereby the Priories
aliens were given to the King) shall not extinguish the annuity of the Prior of
Castle-acre, which he had out of a Rectory parcel of a Priory alien: Albeit
there was not any saving in the Act: And M. 25, and 26 Eliz. in Boswells Case
in Curiam Wardorum, it was resolved, that when an Act makes any conveyance good
against the King, or any other person or persons in certain, this shall not
take away the right of any other, albeit there be no saving in the act to
preserve his right, etc.

Co. l. 8. 145. b. 2. in Davenports Case.
28 The Earl of Huntington being possessed for 15 years of a Rectory unto which
a Vicarage was appendant, Procheine, Avoidance infra (...).
grants the prochiene avoydance thereof, and dies, his Administrator
surrenders, and the Vicarage becomes void within the term: And in this Case it
was resolved, that the term (notwithstanding extinct by the surrender, yet) as
to the grantee (who was a person) had continuance, etc.

Co. l. 9. 135. b. 2. in Astoughs Case.
29 It is regularly true, Coperceners Disseisor.
that a Seigniory cannot be suspended in part and in esse for part, as it is
holden in 32 H. 8. Extinguishment, Br. 48. nevertheless, habet haec regula
plures fallentias; as if there be two Coperceners of a Seigniory, and one of
them dissieseth the Terre-tenant, or comes to the Land by defensible title, the
other may distraine her for her moity of the Signiory: for the practice of her
Copercener against the Terre-tenant cannot prejudice her in that Case.

Co. l. 9. 141. a. 2. in Beaumonts Case.
30 If a disseisor make a gift in tail, Tenant in (...) Fine no ba^
the Donee makes a feofment to A. and after levies a fine with proclamations to
B. who had nothing etc. This fine with proclamations shall bar the issues in
tail: because the issues in tail being privy shall not plead, quod parts
finis nihil habuerant: But it shall not bar by the disseisee: because the
fine as to him was void: So that (in this Case) as to the heirs in tail the
fine shall bind, but not as to the disseisee, who is a stranger: So likewise in
Beaumonts Case in the 9 Rep. fol. 141. the fine levied by the Baron, as to the
Issues in tail, was a bar, but not as to the Feme, who was a stranger unto
it: And therefore if there be Baron and Feme tenants in special tail, the
Reversion to the Donor, they have issue, the Baron levies a fine with
proclamations to a stranger and dies, the Feme enters; In this Case the Feme
has divested the whole Estate out of the Conusee, and revested the Estate
tail in herself, the immediate reversion to the Donor, and has left nothing
but a possibility in the Conusee: for the practice between the Baron and the
Conusee shall not bar the Feme, of her right, who is a third person.

Term not extinct by purchase of the fee.
31 A. possessed of an house in London for 31 years, devises, Co. l. 10. 52. a.
3. in Lampets Case.
that Isabel his wife shall enjoy the profits thereof, durante Viduitate, and
that then the residue of the term should remain to B. and dies, Isabel by
license of the executor enters into the house, and purchases the fee, and then
marries C. whereupon B. enters; And it was resolved, that he might so do; for
albeit the whole term was in Isabel, quousque, etc. so that by the purchase of
the Fee-simple, the interest of Isabel was extinct, yet that shall not defeat
the executory Interest of B. but that after the marriage of Isabel, and not
before, he may well enter, etc. Hammington and Rudyars Case, Tr. 28. Eliz. rot.
1674. cite per Co. Chapter Just. ubi in margin.

In an Act of Parl. the subject concerned
32 Whereas the Act of 32 H. 8. cap. 46. ordains, Co. l. 11. 3. b. 4. in Auditor
Curles Case.
that the King shall appoint two to be Auditors of the Court of Wards, who
shall be accounted as one Officer; In this Case, the King cannot appoint only
one to execute that Office; for that would be a wrong to the subject, who by
force of that Act are concerned in the appointment of that Officer, according
to the same Act, etc.

In a popular Action, the interest of the Informer not barred.
33 After a popular Action commenced, Co. l. 11. 65. b. 4. in Doctor Fosters
Case.
albeit the Kings Attorney will enter, Ulterius non vult prosequi, or if the
Defendant plead a special plea (wherein the Attorney General uses to reply
alone) albeit the Attorney will not reply or prosecute for the King, yet the
Informer may prosecute for his part; because the Informer by commencing that
Sult has made that Action, which was popular, to become his private Action,
which neither the King nor any other can release, as to the Interest of the
Informer, Tr. 31 Eliz. Stretton and Taylers Case, cite ubi in margin.

A Praecipe in C^^ite of lands ^ot holden ^tayed.
34 If the tenant will sue a Praecipe in Capite in the Kings Court for such
Lands as are holden of another Lord, the Law will not suffer it, F.N.B. 3. d.
but that Lord shall (in that Case) have a writ out of the Chancery directed to
the Justices of the Common Pleas, commanding them, that if it do not appear
unto them, that the Lands are holden of the King, but of another Lord, that
then they shall not proceed farther, etc. in that Plea, etc.

^ssise de Dar^in present^ent.
35 If tenant for term of years, life, in Dower or by the Courtesy, F.N.B 31. g.
suffer an usurpation to the Church, etc. and the term determines, or the
tenant dies, he in the reversion who is heir to the Ancestor that last
presented, shall have an Assise de darrein presentment, if he be disturbed: It
is otherwise, if his own tenant, to whom he himself was Lessor, suffer an
Usurpation; for then he shall not have such an Assise, etc. because (as it
seems) it will be then imputed to the Lessors folly that he would not restrain
the tenent from so doing, by the Covenant, etc.

^arrein pre^ntment.
36 In Darrein presentment between two strangers, F.N.B. 39. c.
the Assise finds title for another stranger that was not party to the writ: In
this Case that third party shall have a writ to the Bishop awarded him, albeit
he was not party; for, the writ is, Quis advocatus ultimo praesentavit, etc.

F. N. B. 61. b.
37 In a real Action, if the tenant make feoffment, Estrepement verse. tenant and
feoffee
hanging the Plea, and the Demandant is in doubt, that waste will be committed,
etc. the Demandant may have a writ of Estrepement, both against the tenant, and
also against his feoffee, etc. And it seems by the same reason, that he may
likewise have a writ of Estrepement against the tenant, and also against those
that are his servants, naming them by their names, etc. Albeit they have
nothing in the tenancy, etc. Tamen quaere.

F. N. B. 134. a. b.
38 In a Perambulatione facienda, Peramb^lati^^.
if it be made by the consent of both parties, being tenants in fee-simple, it
is binding to them and their heirs; but if tenant for term of life of a
Seigniory, and another who is tenant in fee-simple of another Seigniory
adjoining, sue such a writ or Commission, whereupon perambulation is made; It
seems, that that shall not bind him in reversion; neither yet shall
perambulation made by the assent of tenant in tail bind his heir.

F. N. B. 150. c.
39 If the tenant fore-judge the Mesne, yet the Feme of the Mesne shall be
endowed. Parsons One title. Two titles. Indicavit.


40 If two Parsons claim under one and the same Patron one of them may sue
spoltation against the other in the Court Christian, albeit the profits amount
to a fourth part or more: because the title of the Patronage comes not in
debate: But if they claim by several Patrons, and the tithes, or profits, or
pension spoiled amounts to a fourth part or more; then forasmuch as the Patron
of the Parson grieved (being a stranger) may suffer prejudice, he shall (in
that Case) have an Indicavit or Prohibition to remove the Suit into the Kings
Court, there to be tried at the Common Law; because then the title of the
Patronage will come in debate, etc. Vide Statute West. 2. cap. 5.

Pl. Co. 32. a. 3. in Colthirst and Beinshins case.
41 If a man demise land to A. for life, the remainder to B. for life, Remainder
void.
and if B. die, that then C. shall have the land, during the life of A. this
demise is void for the prejudice of the particular Estate; for things done in
prejudice of others shall be void; As in the Case of 21 E. 4. where the King
had granted to an Abbot, that he should not be Collector, when any tenths were
granted per Clerum Angliae: Exemption not void by Proviso.
And then the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury had grants a tenth to the
King, with a Proviso, that no Collector, which the Bishop would return, should
be discharged by any Letters Patents of Exemption made by the King; And the
Bishop returned the said Abbot Collector; And there it is holden, that the
Grant made by the Clergy in that point, viz. to charge persons exempt is void;
because it is in prejudice of others: And so also the abovesaid remainder to
C. shall rather be void, then a stranger shall suffer prejudice by it.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 117. a. 2.
42 If a Villain purchase Land, the Lord may seize it, The Lord shall not sei^^
common (...) number.
etc. but if he purchase a common Sans number, the Lord shall not have it; for
the Lord may surcharge the same, and that would trench to the prejudice of the
terre-tenant, who is a third person; there is the same Law also of a Corodie
uncertain, granted to a Villain, and of all other such like uncertain
inheritances.

Co. ib. 100. b. 1
43 If the tenant be disseised, The Act of Disseisor no prejudice.
and the disseisor in a writ of M^sne fore-judge the Mesne, this shall not
bind the disseisee: so likewise if the Mesne be disseised, and a fore-judgment
is had against the disseisor, this shall not bind the disseisee; for the words
of the Statute of West. 2. cap. 9. are, Quando tenens sine praejudicio
alterius, quam medii, attornare se potest capitali Domino.

44 Admittances made by Disseisors, Abators, Intruders, Co. Inst. p. 1. 58. b.
2.
Tenant at sufferance, Admittances per Dominos pro tempore.
or others, that have defeasible titles, are good and effectual in the Law: For
it is no reason, that the Lords competitors for the title of the Manor, should
by any Act they do prejudice the Copihold Tenants, who are strangers to the
difference betwixt them; for if they be admitted by any, who is Dominus pro
tempore, it suffices; howbeit such wrong-doers cannot grant voluntary Copies.

Advantage to strangers.
45 Lessee for life levies a Fine, come ceo, etc. to a Disseisor: Co. l. 2. 55.
b. 3. in Bucklers ca.
this is a forfeiture, and he in remainder or reversion shall take advantage of
it: Vide plus, ibid. It is said, that if the Disseisee levy a Fine to a
stranger, the Disseisor shall retain the Land for ever: For the Disseisee
against his own Fine cannot claim the Land, neither can the Conusee enter, for
the right of the Conusor cannot be trans-ferred to him, but by the Fine the
right is extinct, and the Disseisor shall take advantage thereof.

Both wardship and relief
46 If there be Lord and tenant by diverse tenures in Knight Service, and the
tenant is disseised of the one, Co. Inst. p. 1. 83. b. 4.
and the Disseisor dies seized, and the tenant dies seized of the other, his
heir within age, the Lord seiseth the Body and Lands of that Manor, and after
the heir at his full age recovereth the other Manor against the heir of the
Disseisor: In this Case, the heir shall pay relief for the Manor recovered,
and the descent cast shall not hinder it: for, res inter alios, etc. And so one
Lord of the heir of one tenant shall have both wardship during his minority,
and also relief at his full age.

Vllain professed or Neife married.
47 If a Villain be made a secular Chaplain, Litt.. 202. Co. ib. 136. b. 2.
yet his Lord may seize both him and his goods; and albeit the Lord cannot
seize his Villain that is professed in Religion; nor his Neife that is married to
a Freeman; not this, because Marriage is honorable and indissoluable; not
that, in favorem Ecclesiae, and because then he cannot live according to his
Profession and Religion; yet in both these last Cases, the Lord shall have his
Action in his Case, and shall recover what he is damnified; for albeit the
Profession and Marriage were lawful; yet when they work a prejudice to a third
person, an action lies against the Sovereign of the house and the husband, to
the value of the loss.

Ordinary. Administrator
48 The Ordinary was sued, after the administration committed, Dier. 247. 73. 8
El.
in plaint of a Debt in London, and Nihil habet being returned, upon suggestion
the debt was attached in the hands of one VV. who was indebted to the testator,
and after four defaults of the Ordinary, being returned, non est inventus, and
Oath made that the Debt was due, the Plaintiff had judgment and execution
against the said VV. against whom the Administrator also brings Debt, who
pleads the matter supra, whereupon the Plaintiff demurs, and it was adjudged,
that he should recover: for after the administration committed, Debt lies not
either against or for the Ordinary, and (indeed) it lay not at all until West.
2. 19. which is within memory, and cannot make a custom: And it stands not
with reason, that the undue actings of strangers should debar the Plaintiff
of his due Debt. Tofts Case.

87 Nemo punitur pro alieno delicto.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 145. b. 3.
1 In a Replevin, Replevin.
the Defendant cannot claim property by his Bailiffe or Servant, because if the
claim fall out to be false, he that claims shall be fined for his contempt,
which the Lord cannot be, unless he makes claim himself; And, Nemo punitur
pro alieno delicto.

Co. ib. 54. a. 1.
2 A Guardian shall not be punished for waste done by a stranger, Guardian.
it is so penal unto him; for he shall lose the wardship both of the body and
of the land, though the waste be but of the value of twenty shillings; and if
that suffices not to satisfy for the waste, then he shall recover damages of
the waste, over and above the loss of the ward, And, Nemo punitur, etc.

Co. l. 4. 33. b. 4 in Mittons Case.
3 Qeen Eliz. by her Letters Patents grants the Office of the Clerkship of the
County Court of the County of Sommerset to Mitton, and then constitutes Arthur
Hopton, Grant of the Clerk of the County.
High Sheriff of the same County, who grants that Office to another, and (upon
Mittons complaint) it was adjudged that he might: And one of the reasons of
that resolution was this; That in all writs to remove any Plea out of the
County Court into the Common Pleas, the King calls the County Court, the Court
of the Sheriff; and if the Sheriff do not by force of such writs certify the
Record, then shall issue out process of contempt against him and if the Record
be imbeziled, the Sheriff shall answer for it: And therefore it will be full of
danger and damage to Sheriffs, if others shall be appointed to keep the Entry
and Rolls of the County Court, and yet the Sheriff to be liable to answer for
them, as immediate Officer to the Court: for, Nemo punitur, etc. And therefore
the Sheriff ought to appoint Clerks under him of the County Court; for which he
shall at his peril answer, etc.

Co. l. 12. 5. b. 3. in Sanders Case.
4 In Fosters and Miles Case, p. 28. Eliz. in Com. Banco, Rot. 820. Waste.
it was said, that if Lessee for years devise his term to another, and makes
his executors, and dies, and then the executors make waste, and after assent to
the Devisee; In this Case, albeit between the executors and the Devisee that
has relation, and the Devisee is in by the Devisor; yet an action of waste
shall be maintainable against the executors in the t^nuit: So likewise if the
Grantee of a Term upon Condition make waste, and after the Grantor enter for
the Condition broken, the action of waste shall be maintainable against the
Grantee in the tenuit, etc. 30 E. 3. 16. accord.

Co. l. 11. 42. b. 3. in Godfreys Case.
5 At a Leet the Homage was jointly fined six pounds; Joynt-fine in Leet.
because they would not present according to their duty, etc. And it was
resolved, that the Fine so imposed upon the Jurors jointly was not legally
imposed; because, the refusal of any of them being several and personal, and
the refusal of one not the refusal of another; the Fine ought to have been
assessed upon them severally, and not jointly; for, if some of them did refuse,
and the rest were ready to present, etc. those that refused were only to be
fined. And theref^re the Case put Prisot in 35. H. 6. Examination 17. that if
one of the Enquest escape, after that they are sworn; so that they cannot give
their verdict, although the rest did not assent thereunto, yet all should be
fined, was utterly denied to be law; for Nemo debet puniri pro alieno delicto,
whereunto he was neither party, privy, assenting, nor consenting; because then
it might be said, Rutillius fecit, Aemilius plectitur: And it was said, that
that Case was either ill reported, or ill printed.

Waste.
6 If a stranger make waste of his own wrong after the writ of Estrepement
delivered unto the tenant, and against the tenants will; F. N. B. 61 h.
In that Case the tenant shall not be punished for that waste.

Joint-amerciament in Court. Baron. Co. Pl. etc.
7 In a Court Baron, F. N. B. 75. g, h i, k.
if two be amercied outragiously for one and the same trespass, they shall not
join in a writ de moderata miserecordia, for they ought to be severally
amercied, albeit the trespass was jointly committed; So it is also in a Plaint
sued by two, if they be nonsuited; for the amerciament ought to be several,
and they shall not join in a moderata miserecordia, because the one ought not
to be charged with the offense of the other: And therefore the course in the
Common Pleas is, when diverse Defendants are amercied, to make the Estreats of
the amerciaments several: Likewise, if diverse Demandants are amercied in a Plea
real for their Nonsuit, they set the Estreats severally upon them: And in
these Cases, in the Common Pleas, the course is, for the Clerk of the Warrants
to deliver those Estreats to the Clerks of Assise, and they to the Coroners,
who are to affeire them, and then to re-deliver them to the Clerks of the
Assise, and they to the Clerk of the Warrants, who makes the Estreats, and then
one of the Justices of the Bench, together with the Clerk of the Warrants, goes
with the Roll of the Estreats into the Exchequer, and there puts them in before
the Barons of that Court, from whence they issue to the Sheriff of every
respective County to be levied for the Kings use, and the Officer in the
Exchequer, that serves them, and so prepared them for every several County, is
called the Clerk of the Estreates.

(...) audita que^^l^. Nonsuit no ^^ejudice.
8 In an Audita querela brought by two, Co. Inst. p. 1. 139. a. 4.
concerning the personalty, the Nonsuit of the one is not the Nonsuit of the
other, because it goes by way of discharge and freeing of themselves: And
therefore the default of the one shall not hurt the other.

^^^as^avit.
9 In Debt against two Executors, Dier. 210. 23. 3 ^liz.
one appears and confesses the Action, the other makes default, and judgment
to recover de bonis Testatoris, in both their lands; to which purpose a Fieri
facias issues out to the Sheriff, who returns riens; but that he who made
default, had wasted before the receipt of the writ, whereupon a Scire facias
issued out against him only that had wasted the goods, and he making default,
upon Scire feci returned; Execution was awarded of his proper goods only, and
not of his Companions.

(...) to ac^^ su^^eties.
10 In a writ de Plegiis acquietandis, Dier. 157. 12. 9. Eliz.
the Plaintiff counts that he was bound with the Defendant as his surety, and
at his request to a stranger by Bill Obligatory, and that at the day assigned
the Creditor was not paid by the Defendant, whereupon at the Creditors Suit the
Plaintiff was arrested, and imprisoned, etc. And the Defendant cognovit
Actionem, whereupon Judgment was given, quod acquiete^ the Plaintiff versus
the Creditor of the sum and damages assessed by the Court, etc. Vide F. N. B.
137. c.

^avishment.
11 The Statute of West. 2. 35. Hob. 93. 7 Jac. Rot. 759 More and Hussy
(against ravishment of Wards) has two aspects in it, one civil, another
criminal; for it provides, that the Executor shall answer for the value, sed
non quoad poenam prisonae, for Nemo pro alieno facto est puniendus: It is so
likewise for husband and wife: For albeit the wife be only guilty, yet the
husband shall answer the damages, but shall not be subject to abjuration, or
immediate Imprisonment, which is to be perpetual. Howbeit, to the mediate
Imprisonment, viz. upon a writ of Execution for the damages and the value of
the Marriage, he shall be liable, as in other trespasses, where the wife only
is guilty of the fact.

88 The Law favors things done in another Right.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 52. a. 2.
1 Few or no persons are disabled in Law to be private Attorneys to deliver
seisin; for Monks, Infants, Femes covert, Attorney to deliver seisin, Persons
disabled.
persons attainted, outlawed, excommunicated, Villains, Aliens, etc. may be
Attorneys: So a Feme may be an Attorney to deliver seisin to her husband, and
the husband to the wife, and he in the remainder to the Lessee for life: And
the reason hereof is, for that the Attorney does nothing in his own right, but
in the right of another.

Co. ib. 52. a. 3.
2 If Lessee for life make a deed of Feoffment, Attorney to deliver seisin.
and a Letter of Attorney to the Lessor to make Livery, and the Lessor makes
Livery accordingly, notwithstanding such making of Livery, he shall enter for
the forfeiture; because he does it in another right, and the Lessee for life
had Freehold, whereof to make Livery: It is otherwise of Lessee for years,
because (in that Case) the Freehold being in the Lessor, and not in the Lessee,
the Lessor cannot do it as Attorney to the Lessee, etc.

Co. ib. a. 4.
3 If the Lessor make a deed of Feoffment, Lessee for years. Attorney to deliver
seisin.
and a Letter of Attorney to the Lessee for years to make Livery, and he does
it accordingly; this shall not drown or extinguish his Term, because he did it
as a Minister to another, and in another right: And that is accounted (in
Judgment of Law) the act of the Feoffor, and not of the Lessee; neither yet
does the Feoffee claim any thing from the Lessee, etc.

Co. ib.
4 If the tenant devise, that the Lord shall sell the Land, Devise.
and dies; and the Lord sells it accordingly; yet the Seigniory does still
remain; because the Lord sells the Land in another right, etc.

Co. ib. 88. b. 4.
5 A Guardian in soccage shall not forfeit his Interest by Outlawry, or
attainder of Felony or Treason; Guardian is Soccage.
because he has nothing to his own use, but only to the use, and in the right
of the heir, whose Guardian he is.

Co. ib. 112. a. 4. 10 H 7. 20.
6 If (after the Statute of 1 R. 3. cap. 1. Sale by Fe^^ to Baron.
and before the Statute of Uses in 27 H. 8. cap. 10.) Cestuy que use had
devised, that his Wife should fell his Land, and had made her Executrix, and
died, she had taken another husband: In that Case, she might have sold the Land
to her husband; for she does it in auter droit, and her husband would have been
in by the Devisor, etc.

Co. ib. 113. a. 3
7 If a man devise, that his Executors shall sell his Land: Devise of a
Reversion t^ be sold by e^ecutor.
In this Case, the Executors have no Estate or Interest in the Land, but only
a bare and naked power; yet this Feoffment amounts to an alienation to vest
the Land in the Feoffee: for they do it in auter droit; And the Feoffee shall
be in by the Devisor: So likewise if a man devises that a Reversion or other
thing that lies in grant, shall be sold by his Executors, they may sell the
same without Deed; for the Vendee shall be in by the Devisor, and not by the
Executors, Causa qua supra.

Co. ib. 117. a. 2 and 124. a. 4, etc.
8 If a man be Lessee of a Villain for life, for years, or at will, Villain.
and the Villain purchases the lands in fee, if the Lessee enters into the
lands, he shall hold the Lands as a perquisite to him and his heirs for ever;
For the Law respects the quality and not the quantity of his Estate: But if a
Bishop has a Villein in right of his Bishopric, and he purchases Lands, and
the Bishop enters, the Bishop shall have his perquisite to him and his
Successors and not to him and his heirs; Bishop.
for it came into his hands as in another right: So if Executors have a
Villein for years, Executors.
and the Villein purchases Lands in fee, and the Executors enter, they shall
have a fee-simple, but it shall be assets in their hands: For they have it in
right of the Testator, etc.

Villein. Executor. Lord, Debt. Trespass.
9 A Villein may (as Executor) have an Action of debt against his Lord, because
it is not to recover a debt to his own use, Lit.. 191, 192 Co. ibid. 124.
Finch 27.
but to the use of the Testator: neither yet shall the Lord take out of the
possession of such Villein, (who is Executor) the goods of the deceased,
because he is possessed of them in another right: And if the Lord do take them
the Villein shall maintain an Action of Trespass against him, and therein
recover damages against him to the use of the Testator, etc. for they shall be
assets in his hands, etc.

O^t-lawry no ^is-ability.
10 If an Executor or Administrator sueth an Action, Co. ibid. 128 a. 3 Finch 27
out-lawry in the Plaintiff shall not dis-able him, because the suit is in
auter droit, viz. In the right of the Testator and not in his own right: And
for the same a Mayor and Cominalty shall have no Action, though the Mayor be
outlawed, etc. So it is also of one excommunicated.

^bbot, etc. ^lien.
11 An Abbot, Prior, or Prioresse Alien, shall have Actions real, Co. ibid. a.
4. and b. 1.
personal,, or mixed for any thing concerning the possessions or goods of his
Monastery here in England, although he be an Alien borne out of the Kings
alleagiance; because he brings it not in his own right, but in the right of
his Monastery, and not in his natural, but in his politic capacity.

Monk etc. ^^ofessed in ^eligion.
12 A Monk or any other professed in Religion within the Realm shall have an
action in some Case, as if he be made an Executor, Co. ibid. 13^^ b. 3.
or if he be an Administrator, he shall maintain an Action, not in his own
right, but in the right of the dead: So if a Monk be made a Bishop, or a
Parson, or a Vicar, he shall have an Action concerning his Bishopprick,
Parsonage, or Vicarage, and sic de similibus: Likewise an Abbot, or Prior, or
any other Sovereign of an house of Religion, albeit they be professed and
therefore dead in Law, yet by the policy of Law, they are persons able to
purchase, and to implead and to be impleaded, to sue and to be sued, for any
thing, that concerns their house; For, they do it in auter droit, and
otherwise their house might be prejudiced, and other men also of their lawful
actions: And this is the ancient Law of England, as appears by the Mirror (c.
2.. 14.) in these words Des biens des gents de Religion, appent l'action al
Chiese en fon nosme par luy and son Covent: Also if a Monk, etc. be wounded,
beaten, imprisoned, etc. the Abbot and the Monk shall (in that Case) join in
an Action against the wrong doer; and if the writ be ad Damnum ipsius Prioris,
the writ is good, or if it be ad Damnum ipsorum, it is good also: Likewise if a
Monk be falsely and maliciously indicted of Felony and Robery, and afterward
is lawfully acquitted his Sovereign and he shall join in a writ of conspiracy,
or the like: And what is here spoken of a man professed in Religion, is also to
be understood of a Nun sanctimonialis, mutatis mutandis.

^an may his own ^^ors.
13 If A. be bound to the Abbot of D. A. is professed a Monk in the same Abbey,
and after is made Abbot thereof, Co. ib. 133. b. 2.
he shall take an action of debt against his own Executors, etc.

^^^^ons, and ^^ance.
14 Regularly, Co. ib. 139. a. 4
in personal actions there shall not be summons and severance, for the nonsuit
of one is the nonsuit of both, etc. Nevertheless, in such like actions
brought by Executors there shall be summons and severance; because the best
shall be taken for the benefit of the dead: And so it is in an action of
Trespass, as Executors, for goods taken out of their own possession: There is
the like Law also in account, as Executors, by the receipt of their own hands,
etc.

Co. ibid. 172. a. 2.
15 If an Infant be an Executor, upon payment of any debt, An Infant.
due to the Testator, he may make an acquittance, because it is in auter droit:
but (in that Case) a release without payment is void, etc.

Co. ibid. 187. b. 4.
16 Albeit Baron and Feme (as Littleton says. 291. Baron. Feme. Livery. Sale.
) be one person in Law, so as neither of them can give any Estate or Interest
to the other, yet if a Charter of feoffment be made to the Wife, the Husband,
as attorney to the feoffor, may make livery to the Wife; and so a Feme covert,
that has power to sell Land by will, may sell the same to her Husband; because
they are but instruments for others, and the Estate passes from the feoffor or
devisor.

Co. ibid. 189. b. 3. etc.
17 If Land be given to two Abbots and to two Successors, Grant to t^^ Abbots.
Tenant in Common.
they shall not take by survivor, but are ab initio Tenants in Common; for
albeit the words be joint, yet in regard of their several capacities, whereby
they hold it in several auter droits, the Law does adjudge them to be severally
seized: So it is also of a secular body politic or corporate, as if Lands be
given to two Bishops, to have and to hold to them two and their Successors:
Albeit the Bishops were never any dead persons in Law, but always of capacity
to take; yet seeing they take this purchase in their politic capacity, as
Bishops, they are presently Tenants in Common; because they are seized in
several rights, etc. The like Law is of two Parsons, and their Successors, or
of any other such like Ecclesiastical body Politic, or Incorporate, etc.

Co. ibid. 190. a. 3.
18 If Land be given to an Abbot and a secular man, An Abbot, Bishop, or Parson,
and Secular man.
to have and to hold to the Abbot and his Successors, and to the secular man
and his heirs, they are Tenants in Common, in respect of their several rights
and capacities: So it is likewise if Lands be given to the Parson of Dale and a
Layman, to have and hold to the Parson and his Successors, and to the Layman
and his heirs: So also of a Bishop, etc.

C. ibid. a. 4.
19 If Land be given to John Bishop of Norwich, A man Te^^^ in Condi^^^ with
himself
and his Successors, and to John Over-all Doctor of Divinity and his heirs,
being one and the same Person: In this Case, he is Tenant in Common with
himself.

Co. ibidem.
20 If Land be given to the King and to a subject to have and to hold to them
and to their heirs, The King (...) a subject T^nant in Common.
yet they are Tenants in Common and not joint-tenants; for the King is not
seized in his natural capacity, but in his Royal and politic capacity, in
jure Coronae, which cannot stand in jointure with the seisin of the subject in
his natural capacity: So likewise, if there be two joynt-tenants, and the
Crown descend to one of them, the jointure is thereby severed, and they are
become Tenants in Common, etc.

Co. ibid. 215. b. 4.
21 If there had been Lord and Tenant, Guardian Entry. Re-entry.
and the Tenant had let the Land for life rendering Rent with clause of
re-entry, etc. In this Case (at the Common Law) neither the assignee in deed
(as the alienee) or the assignee in Law (as the Lord by escheat) could take
advantage of the re-entry; Howbeit (at the Common Law) Guardian in Chivalry or
in soccage might in the right of the heir take benefit of a Condition by entry
or re-entry, etc. Grant (...) ^^shop or (...) with Co^^ on not to (...) goods.


Co. ibid. 224. a. 3.
22 If a man make a feofment in fee with Condition, that the feoffee shall not
alien, this Condition is repugnant and void: but it is said, that a man by
license may give Land to a Bishop and his Successors, or to an Abbot and his
Successors, and and a Condition to it, that they shall not without the consent
of their Chapter or Covent, alien: because it was intended a Mortmaine, viz.
that it should for ever continue in that sea or house: for that they had it in
auter droit, for religious and good uses, as was pretended, etc.

Feme Execu^^ix. Baron ^elease.
23 If a Feme creditor take the debtor to Husband, Co. ibid. 264. b. 4. M. 30
and 31 El. and Co. l. 8. 136. a
that is a release in Law of the debt: but if a Feme executrix take the debtor
to husband, that is no release in Law: because she has the debt in another
right, and that would be a wrong to the dead, and in Law work a devastavit,
which an Act in Law shall never work, etc. In Sir John Nedhams Case.

Plene admini^^^ravit.
24 Upon Plene administravit pleaded by an Executor, Co. ibid. 283. a. 2
Et issint riens inter manis, if it be proved, that he has goods in his hands,
which were the Testators, he may give in evidence that he has paid to that
vain of his own money, and ne^^ not plead it specially: because what he did
in that case, was in another right.

A term drow^ed.
25 A master of an Hospital, ^sing a sole corporation, Co. ibid. 338. b. 3
by consent of his Brethren, makes a leasse for years of part of the
possessions of the Hospital, and afterward the Lessee for years is made
Master: In this case, the term is drowned for a man cannot have a term for
years in his own right, and a freehold in auter droit to consist together
(as if a man Lessee for years take a Feme Lessor to Wife, etc.) But a man may
have a freehold in his own right, A term not drowned.
and a term in auter droit: And therefore if a man Lessor take a Feme Lessee to
Wife, the term is not drowned, but he is possessed of the term in her right
during the coverture: So if the Lessor made the Lessee his Executor the term is
not drowned: Causa qua supra: Howbeit in the case first put, if it had been a
corporation aggregate of many, the making of the Lessee master had not
extinguished the term, no more then if the Lessee had been made one of the
Brethren of the Hospital: because he then had the freehold in auter droit
together with others, etc.

^arson. ^^ar.
26 A Parson of Vicar of a Church because he is seized in right of his Church,
Co. ibid. 341 a. 3
for the benefit of the Church and of his Successor is in some cases esteemed
in law to have a fee-simple qualified, but to do any thing to the prejudice of
his Successor, in many Cases, the Law adjudgeth him to have in effect but an
Estate for life; their aliena^^ ^o dis^^tinuance.
Causae Ecclesiae publicis causis acquiparantur, and summa ratio est, quae and
Religione facit, Litt.. 643.
and Ecclesia fungiter vice minoris. Meliorem facere potest Conditionem suam,
deteri^^ rem nequaquam; etc. His alienation of the Glebe makes no
discontinuance, etc.

^eme Execut^^ix. ^hattels. ^eals.
27 If the Wife be possessed of Chattels real in auter droit, Co. ibid. 351. a.
4.
as Executrix or Administratrix, or as Guardian in Soocage, etc. and the
inter-marrieth, the Law makes no gift of them to the Husband, although he
surviveth her: In the same manner if a Woman grant a term to her own use, and
then takes Husband and dies, the Husband surviving shall not have his trust:
but the Executors or Administrators of the Wife, for it consists in privity:
And so it was resolved by the Justices, P. 32 Eliz. in Cancel. in Withams
Case: H. 38. Eliz. in Cancel. in Waterhouses Case, etc.

^ersonal ^ods. ^ron, ^^e.
28 If a Feme sole be possessed of Chattels personal in her own right, Co. ibid.
35^ b. 1
and she takes Baron: In that Case, that marriage is an absolute gift (in Law)
of all such Chattels, whether the Husband survive the Wife or no; But of
personal goods in auter droit, as Executrix, or Administratrix, etc. the
marriage is no gift of them to the Husband, although he survive his Wife. And
as to personal goods (in Case of Baron and Feme) there is a diversity worthy of
observation, between a property in personal goods (as is aforesaid,) and a
bare possession: for if personal goods be bailed to a Feme, or if she find
goods, o^ if goods come to her hands as Executrix to a Bailife, and she takes
an Husband, this bare possession is not given to the Husband, but the action of
detinue must be brought against the Husband and Wife: because the Possession
which she has, is in auter droit, etc.

Co. ibid. 370. a. 4.
29 It is to be observed, Parson. Warranty. No bar (...) Juris utrus, or
Assise.
that in all Cases which Littleton puts in the chapter of Warranty,
concerning lineal and collateral Warranty, the heir is still mentioned to be
bound by them, be never making once mention of the Successor: from whence it
may be inferred, that the Successor clayming in another right, shall not be
bound by the Warranty of any natural Ancestor: And therefore in a Juris utrum
brought by a Parson of a Church, the collateral Warranty of his Ancestor is no
bar, because he demands he Land in the right of his Church in his politic
capacity, and the warranty descends on him in his natural capacity; And
albeit some have holden, that if a Parson bring an Assise, that a collateral
Warranty of his Ancestor shall bind him: because the Assise is brought of his
own possession and seisin, and he shall recover the mean profits to his own
use: yet seeing he is seized of the Freehold, whereof the Assise is brought,
in Jure Ecclesiae, which is in another right then the Warranty, it seems to
be no bar in the Assise: And of this opinion my Lord Cook seems to be:
because he produces it last, according to his own Rule, etc. The like Law is
of a Bishop, Archdeacon, Deane, master of an Hospital, and the like, of their
sole poss^ssions; and of a Prehend, Vicar, etc.

Co. l. 4. 11. b. 3. in Bevils Case.
30 If there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and two shillings Rent, Land and
Tenant, Suit of Co^ Abbot.
and the Lord by incroachment, ( viz. by the voluntary payment of the Tenant)
happens seisin of more Rent: then he ought to have, the Law does so greatly
favor seisins and possessions, that neither the Tenant nor his heir shall
avoid the seisin, so had by incroachment, in Avowry: Nevertheless, if an Abbot
hold by fealty and Rent, and the Lord incroach suite by seisin of the Abbot,
etc. This seisin shall not prejudice his Successor, but he shall discharge it:
for there is not the same reason of the Predecessor to the Successor that there
is to Ancestor to the heir, etc. As it is agreed in 4 E. 2. Avowry 204.

Co. l. 8. 133. a. 1 in Turners Case.
31 For as much as an Executor or Administrator has not the goods of the dead to
his own use, but in auter droit, to the use of the dead, Executor.
Administrat^ ought to e^^cute his O^ lawfully, etc
he ought to execute his Office, and to administer the goods of the dead
lawfully, truly, and diligently: lawfully in paying all duties, debts, and
legacies, in such precedence and order, as they ought to be paid by the Law:
truly, viz. to convert none of them to his own use, neither yet by any
practice or devise to bar or hinder any creditor of his due debt, but truly
to execute his Office according to the trust reposed in him; diligently, Quia
negligentia semper habet infortunium comitem, etc.

Co. lib. 8. 135. b. 3. in Sir John Nedhams Case.
32 The Bishop who is an Executor appointed by the Law, Ordinary (...) not
dispo^e^ the Goods (...) for the good (...) the dead. Executor ^rante ^lia^tate.
is not permitted by the Law to make a release of debt or gift of goods: For he
has a special property in the goods of the dead for the benefit of the dead,
and nothing to his own use; and it appears in 9 El. Dier 253. that the
Ordinary has not power to give authority to another to sell the goods of the
dead; because he has not any such authority himself; And the Statute of West.
2. is, Bona deveniunt ad manus Ordinarii disponenda, viz. for the good of the
dead: And he is not much unlike (as to that purpose) an Administrator durante
minore aetate, who has special power committed unto him to dispose of the
goods of the dead, and nothing in prejudice of the Executor, as it is holden in
Princes in the 5 Rep. fol. 29. So likewise the Lord of a Copi-hold Manor, who
takes a surrender to the use of another, has only power to grant if according
to the use of the surrender, and not to the use of any stranger, as it is
holden in the 4. Rep. fol. 28. in Westwickes Case.

^dministrati^ to the Ob^go^.
33 If the Obligee make the Obligor his Executor, Co. ib. 132 a. 1. in Sir John
Nedhams Case
this is a release (in Law) of the debt; because that is the Act of the Obligee
himself, but if a Commission of Administration be granted by the Archbishop to
the Obligor, that shall not extinguish the debt: because then he has the debt
in another right, and for the good of the dead, etc.

^arrien, ^esentment.
34 If a man present to an Advowson, F. N. B. 31. l.
and after lets it for term of years, and after the Church is void, and the
Tenant for years presents, etc. And after the incumbent dies, and Lessor
presents, and is disturbed: In this Case, it seems he shall not have an Assise
de darrien presentment: because the Tenant for years presents in his own
right: but if a Guardian present in right of the heir, and after the
incumbent die; In that Case, the heir shall present, and if he be disturbed,
he shall have an Assise de darrein presentment: because the Guardian did it in
auter droit, ^uare Impedit
viz. in the right of the heir, etc. This seems to be the opinion of Fitz.
Howbeit it is resolved in the 5. Co. l. 5. 97. b. in the Count. of North. Case.
Report fol. 97. in the Countess of Northumberlands Case, that the
presentation of the Grantee of the prochiene avoydance is sufficient title in a
Quare Impedit for the Grantor and his heirs: because he does it in the right
and title of the Grantor; So it is also of Lessee for years, life, Tenant in
Dower, Courtesy, Guardian, Tenant by Statute, etc. And with this agrees diverse
opinions in our Books, viz. 7 L. 4. 20. 22 E. 4. 9. b. 16 H. 7. 18. a. 9. H. 7.
23. Br. Quare Impedit, 122. 13 El. Dier 300.

35 In debt brought by two Executors the one is summoned and severed, and
afterward he, that was severed, dies, Co. l. 10. 134. a. 3. in Read and
Redmans Case
and the Defendant pleads this in abatement; In this Case, the writ shall not
abate; because either of them Act in an others right.

89 The Law dis-favoureth other persons, as Villeins, Bondmen, Out-lawes,
Ex-leges, men in Exile, Aliens, and especially Aliens, that are enemies.
^hallenge to ^ Poll.
1 It is principal Challenge to the Pol, Co. Inst. p. 1. 156. b. 4.
that he is a Villein or Bondsman: Also upon the trial in a writ of right by
battle, the Champion must be a Freeman and no Villein or Bondman; And this
is propter defectum.

^sure by the ^rd.
2 A Villein can hold nothing (either Land or Goods) in his own right; for,
Quicquid acquiritur servo acquiritur Domino, etc. Co. ib. 117. a. 3.


^^gatus ba^ caput L^pi^.
3 In the Reign of King Elfred, Co. ib. 128. b. 3.
and until a good while after the Conquest, Out-lawry was esteemed in Law a
grievous punishment; so that none was in those times outlawed, save only for
felony, the punishment whereof was death; And therefore in ancient time (as
appears by diverse old Books, and Records) An outlawed man was said to have
Caput Lupinum; because he may be put to death by any man, as a Wolf that
hateful beast might: Fleta l. 1. c. 27. Bract. lib. 5. fol. 421. Britt. 20. b.
Mirroir cap. 2. sect. default punishm.
Utlagatus and Waviata capita habent Lupina, quae ab omnibus impure poterant
amputari; merito enim sine lege debent perire, qui secundum legem vivere
recusant: And another says, Utlage pur felony seigne lien pour Loup, and est
criable Walfeshead, pur ceo que Loup est beasts hay to touts gents, and de ceo
en avaunt list a ascun de le occire ou foer del Loup, dout custom soloit este
de porter les testes al Chief lien del County, or de la Franchise, and sol oit
tou avoir d'un Mark del County pur chescun test de utlage and de Loup. And
this agrees with the Law before the Conquest, Utlagatus Lupinum gerit caput,
quod Anglice, Wolfeshead, dicitur: Et haec est lex communis and generalis de
omnibus utlegatis: 2. Ass. Pl. 3. 2 E. 3. tit. Corone 148.
But in the beginning of the Reign of E. 3. it was resolved by the Judges, for
avoiding of inhumanity and of effusion of Christian blood, That it should not
be lawful for any man, save the Sheriff only (having lawful warrant
therefore) to put to death any man outlawed, although it were for felony, upon
pain to suffer the like punishment, as if he had killed any other man: Note,
that about Bractons time process of out-lawry was given in actions, that were
Quare vi and armis, and since that by sundry Statutes in diverse other Actions,
viz. in Account, debt, detinue, annuity, Covenant, Action upon the Statute of 5
R. 2. Action upon the Case, etc.

Co. ibid. 201. b. 2
4 Villenage is such an exception in any plea brought by the Villein against the
Lord, that it shall make the writ abate, Dis-ability persons.
so that he shall not have a resummons or Re-attachment, as in Case of the
Excommunication etc.

Co. ibid. 158. a. 1.
5 If a man be outlawed in Trespass, debt, No Juror.
or any other Action he is thereby disabled to serve of a Jury; for that is a
principal Challenge to the Poll, viz. propter delictum; because he is Exlex;
and therefore is not legalis homo.

Co. ibid. 132. b. 4.
6 A man exiled or banished beyond Sea ( viz. by authority of Parliament,
Exiled. Abjured. Dead. The Feme may sue.
or in Case of abjuration upon an Ordinary proceeding of Law) is in the nature
of a dead man in Law: And therefore in such Case his Wife may sue or be sued
without him, as in Case when a man enters in Religion and is professed a Monk,
etc. Thus it was in the Case of the Wife of Sir Robert Belknap, 2 H. 4. 7. a.
one of the Justices of the Court of Common Pleas; for, during his banishment:
being yet alive, she brought a writ in her own name, whereupon one said, Ecce
modo mirum, quod foemina fert breve Regis,
Non nominando virum conjunctim robore Legis.
So likewise E. 3. 10 E. 3. 53. 1 H. 4. 1. b. Pl. in Parl. 19 E. 1.
brought a Quare Impedit against the Lady Maltravers, and after that H. 4.
brought a writ of Ward against Sibill B. during the exile of her Husband: The
like was also adjudged at the Parliament holden in Crastinum Epiphanum Ann. 19
E. 1. in the Case of Margery de Mose Wife of Th. of Weyland, being the year
before abjured the Realm for felony, etc. Howbeit if the Husband by Act of
Parliament have judgment to be exiled but for a time (which some call a
Relegation) that is no civil death:) but abjuration (in 8 E. 2. Coron. 425.) is
called a divorce between the Husband and the Wife: And therefore in that Case
the Wife may sue and be sued, etc.

Co. ib. 2. a. 4. and Co. l. 7. 17. a. 2. in Calvin's Case. and 25. a. 4. Calv.
Case.
7 If an Alien, Christian, or Infidel purchases houses, lands, Aliens purchase
is the Kings.
tenements, or hereditaments to him and his heirs, albeit he can have no
heirs, yet he is of capacity to take a fee-simple, but not to hold; for upon
an Office found, the King shall have them by his prerogative, of whomsoever the
land is holden and in that Case the Lord shall lose his Seigniory: So it is
also if he purchase land and die: for in that likewise the Law casts the
freehold and inheritance upon the King. If an Alien purchase any Estate of
freehold in lands, etc. upon Office found the King shall have them. If an
Alien be made denizen and purchase lands, and die without issue, the Lord of
the fee shall have the escheate, and not the King. If an Alien purchase a lease
for years, upon Office found the King shall have it, unless it be of an house
for habitation, to the end he may use Merchandise and Commerce; Howbeit such an
house also if he return home and leave or die, the King shall have it, and not
his Executors, etc.

^ne born out (...) the Kings ^geance.
8 A man seized of land in fee has issue an Alien, Co. ib. 8. a. 1.
that is borne out of the Kings Ligeance, he cannot be heir propter defectum
subjectionis, albeit he is borne within lawful marriage: And if he be made
Denizen by the Kings letters patents, yet cannot he inherit to his father or
any other: But it is otherwise if he be naturalized by Act of Parliament: for
he is not then accounted in law Alienigena, but Indigena.

^ue not in^^ritable.
9 When an Alien is made Denizen, the issue, Co. ib. and Co. l. 7. 7. a. 4. in
Calvin's Cas^. and 36 H. 8. d^nizen Br. 9
that he has afterward shall be heir to him, but no issue that he had
before: So likewise if an Alien comes into England, and has issue two
Sons, these two Sons are Indigenae, subjects borne, because they are borne
within the Realm: and yet if one of them purchase lands in Fee, and dies
without issue, his Brother shall not be his heir for there was never any
Inheritable blood between the Father and them: and where the Sons by no
possibility can be heirs to the Father, the one of them shall not be heir to
another: Co. ibid. 129. a. 3.
It is otherwise of naturalization by Act of Parliament: for if the Father he
naturalized by Parliament, the Issue had before etc. shall Inherit: So if an
Issue of an Englishman be borne beyond Sea, and the Issue be naturalized by
Parliament, he shall Inherit his Fathers Land: but so he shall not, although
made Denizen; because no Alien naturalized by Act of Parliament is to all
intents and purposes, as a natural borne subject; but so is not a Denizen.

Dower. ^enant by Courtesy.
10 If a man be seized af an Estate of freehold and inheritance in lands, etc.
and take an Alien to Wife, and dies, Co. ib. 31. b. 4. and Co. l. 7. 25. a. 4.
Calv. Case.
she shall not be endowed neither shall the Baron be Tenant by the courtesy:
Howbeit it is otherwise in the Kings Case, etc. And Edmond the Brother of E. 1.
married the Queen of Navarre and died: And it was resolved by all the Judges,
that she should be endowed of the third part of all the lands, whereof her
husband was seized fee.

^is-ability of ^ing.
11 It is a good plea in dis-ability of the person, Litt.. 189. Co. ib. 129. b.
1. and Co. l. 7. 16. a. 4. in Calv. Case. and Co. ib. 17. a. 3. Calv. Case.
that the Demandant or Plaintiff is an Alien vee, and this exception holds
good in all Actions both real and personal against an Alien enemy, but not
absolutely against other Aliens: for the Law does distinguish between an Alien,
that is a subject to one, who is an enemy to the King, and one that is subject
to one, who is in league with the King: And true it is, that an Alien Enemy
shall maintain neither Real nor Personal Action, Donec terrae fuerint
communes, viz. till both Nations be in peace: But an Alien, that is in league,
shall maintain personal Actions; For, such an Alien may trade and traficke, buy
and sell: And then of necessity he must be of ability to have personal Actions:
but he cannot maintain either real or mixed actions: So also an Alien, that is
condemned in an information, shall have a writ of Error to relieve himself, Et
sic de similibus.

^^eading.
12 If an Alien that is no Alien Enemy, Co. ibid. b. 2. and in Calv. Case, ubi
supra.
commence a suit the Tenant or Defendant may plead in dis-ability, and ought at
last to demand Judgment, Si il sera respondue: But if an Alien Enemy bring a
suit, he shall conclude to the Action by saying, Judgment si action.

Co. ib. 156. b. 4 and 129. a. 1.
13 It is a principal Challenge to the Poll, Juror.
that the Iuror is an Alien born, and that is propter defectum Patriae, or
rather ligeanciae, as Littleton has it, or Subjectionis, as Bracton.

Co. l. 7. 6. a. 4 in Calvin's Case.
14 It is to be observed, that it is, nec Coelum, nec Solum, Ligeance makes a
Subject born.
neither the Climate nor the Soil; but ligeantia and obedientia, that make a
man to be a Subject born; for if enemies should come into this Kingdom, and
possess a Town or Fort, and have issue there, that issue is no Subject to the
King of England, though he be born upon his Soil, and under his, both Climate
and Meridian; because he was not born under the ligeance of a Subject, nor
under the protection of the King.

Co. ib.
15 If an Alien of a Country in league with the King come into this Kingdom,
and here commit Treason, An Alien in league shall be indicted: It is otherwise
of an alien Enemy, who shall be punished by Martial Law.
etc. he shall be indicted for it, and proceeded against, according to the
municipal Law of the land, and the indictment shall begin and end as other
indictments do; viz. the beginning shall be, contra Dominum Regem, etc. and it
shall also end thus, Contra ligeantiae suae debitum, etc. Only in the middle
these words shall be omitted, naturalem Dominum suum, etc. as it was resolved
in Hill. 36. Eliz. in the Case of Stephano Ferrara de Gama, and Emanuel
Ludovico Tinoco, two Portugals born, who coming into England under the safe
Conduct of Queen Elizabeth, and living here under her protection, joined with
Doctor Lopez, in treason against her Majesty: But if an alien enemy come to
invade this Land, and be taken in war, he cannot be indicted of treason for it;
because the indictment cannot conclude, Contra ligeantiae suae debitum; for he
never was in the Kings protection, nor ever ought any manner of ligeance unto
him, but malice and enmity; and therefore in that Case such an Alien shall be
put to death by Martial law: And so it was in 15 H. 7. in the Case of Perkin
VVarbeck, who being an Alien born in Flanders, feigned himself one of the sons
of E. 4. and invaded this Kingdom, with intent to take upon him the Royal
Dignity: but being taken in war, it was resolved by the Justices, that he could
not be punished by the Common Law; but before the Constable and Marshal,
according to Martial Law, and so he was, according to that Law, adjudged to be
hanged, drawn, and quartered; and was in that manner executed accordingly.

Co. ibid. 17. a.
16 Every Alien is either a friend that is in league, An alien friend and enemy.
etc. or an enemy that is in open war, etc. Every alien enemy is either so pro
tempore, a temporary enemy for a time, or perpetuus, perpetual: or specialiter
permissus, permitted in a special manner: An alien friend (so long as he so
continues to be) may acquire by gift or purchase Lands, etc. but cannot hold
them, he may also have Leases and Goods for Trade and Commerce sake, maintain
personal actions, etc. as is abovesaid: But if such an Alien become an Enemy,
(as all Aliens friends may) then is he utterly dis-abled to maintain any
action, or get any thing within this Realm: but a perpetual enemy (though there
be no Wars by fire and sword between them) cannot maintain any Action, or get
any thing within this Realm; such as are all Infidels, which are (in law)
esteemed perpetui inimici; because the Law presuming that they will not be
converted (that being remota potentia) between them (as with Devils, whose
Subjects they are) and the Christian, there is perpetual hostility, and can be
no peace: For, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 6.15. Quae autem concordia Christo
cum Beliali, aut quae portio fideli cum infideli? And the Law says, Judaeo
Christianum nullum serviat mancipium: Nefas enim est, quem Christus redemit
Blasphemum Christi in servitutis vinculis detinere, Register 282. Infideles
sunt Christi, and Christianorum inimici; And herewith agrees the Book in 12 H.
8. fol. 4. where it is holden, that a Pagan cannot have or maintain any action
at all: And upon this ground there is a diversity between the Conquest of a
Kingdom of a Christian King, and the Conquest of the Kingdom of an Infidel:
For if a King come to a Christian Kingdom by Conquest, seeing that he has
vitae and necis potestatem; he may at his pleasure alter and change the Laws
of that Kingdom; but until he does make an alteration of them, the ancient
Laws thereof shall remain; Howbeit, if a Christian King should conquer a
Kingdom of an Infidel, and bring them under his subjection; there ipso facto,
the Laws of the Infidel are abrogated: for that they be not only against
Christianity, but against the Law of God and Nature, contained in the
Decalogue: And in that Case, until certain Laws be established amongst them,
the King by himself, or such Judges as he shall appoint, shall judge them and
their Causes, according to natural equity, in such sort as Kings in ancient
time did within their Kingdoms, before any certain municipal Laws were given:
But if a King has a Kingdom by title of Descent; there, seeing by the Laws
of that Kingdom he does inherit the Kingdom, he cannot change these Laws
himself, without consent of Parliament, etc. As for an Alien Enemy, that is,
inimicus permissus, he is an Enemy that comes into the Realm by the Kings
Conduct, etc. Vide 7. 4.

The Defendant pleaded an Alien.
17 In an Action brought by a Subject against an Alien, Co. ibid. 25. a. 4. in
Calvin's Case.
the Subject shall plead, that the Defendant is an Alien born for the benefit
of the King: to the end, that the King upon Office found may seize that,
whereof the Alien is seized or possessed, and also that the tenant may yield the
same to the King, and not to the Alien, because the King has best right
thereunto.

Flea against an Alien.
18 In an Action real against an Alien born, Dier. 2. 8. 6 H. 8.
it is a good plea in dis-ability of the person to say that he is an Alien
born, otherwise in Actions personal: but against an Alien Enemy it is a good
plea in both.

Abjured persons.
19 A person abjured is dis-abled to sue any Action; Co. Inst. 1. 128 a. 4.
for that he is extra Legem; and yet he cannot be properly said to be Outlawed.

90 As concerning the ages of Infants, the Law orders them in this manner;
Seven, for the Lord to have aid for the marriage of his eldest daughter of that
age.

Nine, Litt.. 36.
for a woman to deserve her Dower.

Twelve for a man to take the Oath of Allegiance in a Turn or Leet; and also to
bind a woman in matter of Marriage.

Fourteen, the age of discretion; and therefore that a competent age to bind
the man in matter of Marriage, for a Ward in Soccage to choose his Guardian, and
for a woman to be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight Service.

Fifteen, for the Lord to have Aid to make his eldest Son (of that a^e) a
Knight.

Seventeen, for an Infant Executor to be out of the tuition of Administrators.

Eighteen, for an Infant to have power to make a Will.

One and twenty, their full age to make good any Act they do, and for a man to
be out of Ward to the Lord by Knight Service.


Co. Inst. p. 1. 33. a. 3.
1 A wife (whether she be so de facto, Nine years old to have dower.
or de jure) if she be of the age of nine years at the time of the death of her
husband, shall be endowed of what age soever her husband be, viz. although he
be but four years old, etc. And she must be so old (at least) to have Dower;
Quia junior non potest dotem promereri, neque virum sustinere; hec obstabit
mulieri petenti minor aetas viri, wherein it is to be observed, that albeit
Consensus non concubitus facit Matrimonium, and that a woman cannot consent
before twelve, nor a man before fourteen, yet this inchoate and unperfect
marriage (from which either of the parties at the age of consent may dis-agree)
after the death of the husband shall give Dower to the wife; and therefore it
is to be accounted in Law after the death of the husband, legitimum
matrimonium, a lawful marriage quoad dotem: And (in that Case) the Bishop upon
an Issue joined in a writ of Dower, Co. ib. a. 4.
Quod nunquam fuerunt copulati legitimo matrimonio, ought to certify, that
they were coupled in lawful marriage, albeit the man were under fourteen, and
the wife above nine, and under twelve.

Co. ibid.
2 If a man takes a wife of the age of seven years, The wife of (...) yea.
endowed after alienation.
and after alien his Land, and after the alienation the wife attaineth to the
age of nine years; and after the husband dies: In this Case, the wife shall be
endowed; for albeit she was not absolutely Dow^ble at the time of the marriage,
yet she was conditionally Dowable, viz. if she attained to the age of nine
years, before the death of the husband; for so Littleton says. 36. So that she
pass the age of 9 years at the death of her husband; because by his death the
possibility of Dower is consummate: So likewise if the Son endow his wife at
her age of seven years ex assensu patris, if she before the death of her
husband attain to the age of nine years, the Dower is good, etc.

Co. ib. 78. b. 3. Britt. 168. b
3 The reason wherefore the Law gave the Marriage of the heir-female to the
Lord, if she were within the age of fourteen, Marriage o^ heir female under 14.
and that she should not marry her self, appears in Antiquity, viz. Pur ceo que
les heirs females de nostre terre ne se mariassent a nos enemies, and donc il
nous convica droit lour homage prendre, si else se pussent marier a lour
volunte, etc. This is a special age for an heir female to be out of Ward, if
she attain to it in the lifetime of her Ancestor; for at that age she may have
a husband able to do Knight Service, etc.

Ages assigned to the male.
4 A man (by the law) for several purposes has diverse ages assigned unto him,
Co. ib. 78. b. 3 Fitz. 82 b.
viz. twelve years to take the Oath of Allegiance in the Turn or Leet;
fourteen, to consent to Marriage; fourteen, for the heir in Soccage to choose
his Guardian; Co. ib. 78. b 2.
and fourteen is also accounted his age of discretion; fifteen, for the Lord to
have aid pur fair fife Chivaler; under 21 to be in Ward to the Lord by
Knight Service; Co. l. 6. 70. b. 4 in the Lord Darcies Case, and Co. l. 9. 72.
b. 3. in Doctor Husseys case.
under fourteen, to be in Ward to Guardian in Soccage; fourteen, to be out of
Ward of Guardian in Soccage; and 21 to be out of Ward to Guardian in Chivalry,
and likewise to alien his lands, goods, and chattels: Also a woman has seven
Ages for several purposes appointed to her by law; To the female
as seven years for the Lord to have aid, pur file marier; nine to deserve
Dower; twelve to consent to Marriage; until fourteen to be in Ward; fourteen to
be out of Ward, if she attained thereunto in the life of her Ancestor; sixteen
for to tender her Marriage, if she were under fourteen at the death of her
Ancestor, which was granted by the Statute of West. 1. cap. 2^.) and 21 years
to alienate her Lands, Goods, and Chattels, Fitz. 82 b. and 149 l.

An Infants Will.
5 An Infant, when he shall have attained the age of eighteen years, Co. ib. 89.
b. 2.
may make his Testament, and constitute Executors for his Goods and Chattels.

Unequal partition.
6 If Perceners of full age of lands in Fee-simple make an equal partition, she
that has the least part is bound for ever, Co. ib. 170. a. 3 Litt.. 255
as well as in case of an unequal exchange; And if the unequal partition be of
lands in tail, she that has the worst part is bound for her life, but her
issue shall avoid it, etc.

No power to grant before (...). Bailiff. Receiver, I^quest, Wager of law
7 The Law has provided for the safety of a man and woman's Estate, Co. ib. 171.
b. 3 and Litt.. 239.
that before their age of twenty one yeors they cannot bind themselves by any
Deed, or alien any lands, goods, or chattels, before which age a man or woman
is called an Infant; Likewise if before that age he be made a Bailiff or
receiver to another, he is not chargeable in account; neither yet can he (under
that age) be put upon an Inquest, etc. nor make his law of non-summons, nor in
an action of Debt, according to the Maxim, Minor jurare non potest; yet the
husband and wife of full age for the debt of the wife before the Coverture,
shall make their law; And also an Infant, when he is of the age of twelve years
shall take the Oath of Allegiance to the King in the Turn or Leet; and this was
(as Bracton says) secundum leges sancti Edvardi, But (indeed) such was the Law
in the time of King Arthur, etc.

Baron and Feme Infants.
8 If husband and wife be both within age, Co. ib. 337. a. 3
and they by deed indented join in a Feoffment, reserving a rent, the husband
dies, the wife may enter, or have a Dum fuit infra aetatem: But if she were of
full age, she shall not have a Dum fuit infra aetatem for the nonage of her
husband; albeit they be but one person in law.

Infant execut.
9 An Administration durante minore aetate at the age of seventeen years of the
Infant, Co. l. 5. 29. b. Princes case.
executor cease, before which age he cannot assent to a Legacy, etc. Howbeit
if Feme be such an Executrix, and she before seventeen take Baron of full age,
the Administration also in that Case cease; because then the Baron is able to
administer, as executor, etc.

^ge of the ^^eir female.
10 At the Common Law the full age of the heir female was fourteen, as appears
in 35 H. 6. 52. and Litt. 22. Co. l. 6. 70. b. 4. in the Lord Darcies case.
and if she were of the age of fourteen at the death of the Ancestor, she could
not be in ward; and if within that age, she was to have livery at that age,
etc. but now by the Statute of West. 1. cap. 22. if she were under 14 at the
death of her Ancestor, she shall be in ward till sixteen, for the Lord to
tender marriage; and upon refusal to have the benefit of those two years, but
not to have any forfeiture of Marriage, etc.

Co. ib. and l. 9. 72 b. 3. in Doctor Husseys case.
11 The Statute of Merton cap. 6. Anno 20. H. 3. Merton.
cannot extend to the heir female; because it says, 14 and ultra, and ultra
terminum aetatis suae de 21, etc. which words must be understood of the heir
male, and not of the heir female; because twelve is the age limited for the
heir female to give consent to marriage: but fourteen for the heir male; and
therefore that Statute gives a forfeiture in case of refusal of Marriage upon
tender to the heir male, etc.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 78. b. 3.
12 By the Civil Law the full age of a man or woman to alien, Age by the Civil
Law.
demise, let, contract, etc. is five and twenty years, for then the Romans
accounted men to have plenam maturitatem, and the Lombards at eighteen years.

91 In things, the Law respects every thing, according to Worthiness.
1 Littleton says,. 2. If a man be seized of Lands in Fee-simple, The most
worthiest of blood shall inherit.
and die without issue, Co. Inst. p. 1. 10. b 2.
Son prochein Cosein collateral del entire sanke, etc. his next Collateral
Cosen of the whole Blood, etc. shall have it, as heir unto him; whereupon my
Lord Cook puts this Case; One has issue two Sons, A. and B. and dies: B. has
two Sons, C. and D. and dies, A. purchases Lands in Fee-simple, and dies
without issue; In this Case, D. is his next Cosen, and yet shall not inherit,
but the issue of C. because albeit D. be his next Cosen, jure propinquitatis,
yet the issue of C. shall inherit, being the more worthy, viz. his next Cosen,
Jure repraesentationis: And Littleton there means of the right of
representation: for legally, in course of Descents, he is the next of Blood
inheritable, because the most worthy: In such sort, that all that Line of C. be
they never so remote, shall inherit before D. or his Line: And therefore
Littleton says well, de quel pluis long degree que il soit, etc. And yet in
the Case abovesaid, if a Lease for life were made to A, the remainder to his
next of Blood in fee: In that Case, D. shall take the remainder, because he is
next of Blood, and capable to take by purchase, though he be not legally next
to take as heir by Descent: And D. takes the purchase by the special limitation
of the party, but the Law casts the Descent upon the issue of C. as the more
worthy, Finch, p. 116. Litt.. 4. and 5. and Co. ib. 14. a. 1
etc. ( Vide Finch, page 116.) So likewise, the Blood of the Fathers side is
more worthy then that of the Mothers; the male then the female; the eldest Son
then the younger, etc. And therefore those shall inherit before these, and the
female on the Fathers side, before the male or female on the Mothers, etc. Quod
prius est, dignius est, and qui prior est, tempore potior est jure: Si quis
plures filios habuerit, jus proprietatis primo descendit ad primogenitum, eo
quod inventus est primo in rerum natura.

Co. ib. 53. a. 3.
2 If the Tenant cut down or destroy any Fruit Trees growing in the Garden or
Orchard, it is Waste; Trees in Orchard waste.
but if such Trees grow upon any of the ground, which the Tenant holds out of
the Garden or Orchard, it is no Waste.

Co. ib. 240 a. 2
3 A dying-seised and a descent, A Descent. Escheat.
and not a dying-seised and an Escheat, does take away the entry of the
Disseisee, because the descent is the worthier title, etc.

4 It is holden, that if there be Bastard eygne and mulier puisat, Co. ibid.
244. a. 3.
and the Mulier be within age at the time of the dying seized of the Bastard,
Bastard. Mulier. Descent.
that neverthhlesse the Mulier shall be barred: because the Issue of the
Bastard is in judgment of Law become lawful heirs, and the Law does prefer
legitimation, before the privilege of Infancy.

Laches in an Infant.
5 It is regularly true, that Laches shall not prejudice an Infant, Co. ibid.
246. a. 1.
nevertheless Laches shall be adjudged in him, if he present not to a Church
within six months; For, the Law respects more the privilege of the Church
(that the cure be served) then the privilege of Infancy.

Homage and Fealty the worthiest services.
6 Amongst the services due to be performed by the Tenant to his Lord, homage
and fealty are of greatest esteem in the Law, Co. l. 4. 8. b. 2. in Bevils
case.
viz. Homage as the most honorable and the most humble service of reverence (as
Littleton says.) And Fealty, the most sacred, being performed by an oath; And
therefore the Law makes more account of them, then of other inferior services:
for the seisin of them is seisin of all other services whatsoever, and no
distress for them of any goods or chattels (of what value soever) shall in
judgment of Law be deemed excessive: And albeit the Lord distraine for them
oftentimes, so that the Tenant cannot manure his land, yet the Tenant shall not
therefore have an Assise de sovent distress, as he shall have for Rent and
other profits: Vide 28 Ass. Pl. 50. 11 H. 4. 2. 42 E. 3. 26. Br. distress 80.

Title of King and Subject.
7 When the Kings title, Co. l. 4. 55 a. 4. The Sadlers Case.
and the title of a subject concur in commencement, the Kings title shall be
preferred, as Weston holds Pl. Co. 263. b.

The Kings title by Judicial Record and conveyance of Record.
8 In all Cases at the Common Law, Co. l. 4. 59. b. 3. in the Sadlers Case.
when the Kings Title accrued unto him by a Judicial Record; (as Gascoigne
says, 9 H. 4. 4.) by judgment of Record, there albeit, the King had granted
all his Estate over, yet the party grieved who is put unto his petition, and
was to have a scire facias against the Patentee, as in Case of Attainder,
Recovery, etc. (44 E. 3. 22. 10 H. 6. 15. 21 H. 7. 2. 3 M. 139. 7 H. 4. 21.)
But where the King was only entitled by conveyance of Record, as if the
disseisor had conveyed the land to the King by fine, deed enrolled, or other
matter of Record, there albeit the party was put to his petition against the
King, yet if the King had granted the land over, the disseisee or he, that
right had, might enter, or have his Action against the Patentee: for, a
Judicial Record is always preferred before a conveyance of Record by assent,
etc.

The Common law preferred before the Sta^^^e Law.
9 A. By deed indented barganies and sels a reversion of land to B. and his
hieres, and before attornement of the Tenant, Co. l. 4. 71. a. 1 in Hyndes case
or enrollment of the deed (according to the Statute of 27 H. 8. cap. 16.)
levies a fine thereof to B. and his heirs, and after the deed is enrolled
within 6 months; In this Case, the Conusee shall be in by the fine, and not by
the Indenture enrolled; For, when the Fee-simple passes by the fine to the
Conusee and his heirs, the enrolment of the deed indented afterward cannot
divest and turn the Estate out of the Conusee, which was absolutely
established in him by the fine: because then, whereas he was in before in le
per, he shall be now in le post: Also, when the Common Law and Statute Law
concur, the Common Law shall be preferred, etc.

10 When land is given to any express superstitious use, Co. l. 4. 111. b. a
Adams and Lamberts case.
prohibited by the Statute of 1 E. 6. (...) good use ^referred be^re an
im^^^ed. ^uperstitious ^^e uncertain.
cap. 14. without limitation of any certainty for the finding of it, there all
is given to the King by the said Act: but when a good use is limited, and
besides a solarie in certain for a Priest and toward the finding of him other
things, as Books, Bread, Wine, Vestiments, etc, are tacit employed and
requisite, which are uncertain, there the King shall not have all by reason of
the employed incertainty; because a good use expressed shall be preferred before
any thing implied and incident to a superstitious use, etc.

Co l. 5. 28. b. in Harrisons Case.
11 In debt against an Administrator, who pleads, Judgment paiable before other
debt, and obligation before a Statute to perform covenants.
that the Intestate was bound in a Statute staple, Oustre que il mad biens,
etc. the Plaintiff replies, that there were Indentures of defeasance for the
performance of covenants, which are performed huc usque, the Defendant
demurres; And in this Case judgment was given for the Plaintiff; for, an
Obligation shall be paid before a Statute to perform covenants, which
per-adventure will never be broken, but are things in contingency and futuro,
and shall never bar any present debt upon an Obligation or other specially:
And it was adjudged in B. R. Per totam Curiam H. 42. Co. l. 6. 45. b. 2. in
Higgons Case.
El. that a debt recovered in the Kings Court by judgment shall be paid before
a bond in nature of a Statute staple or Merchant: because the judgment is a
matter of a higher and more worthy nature then private Records portable in
pockets: also it shall be preferred before a recognisance acknowledged in any
Court by assent, which may also be privately done; And a judgment so given in
the Kings Court upon ordinary and judicial proceeding, which remain in the
custody of a sworn officer, are Records, which are preferred in Law before
such Statutes; Et non refert, whether the judgment or recognisance or Statute
be first, for be the judgment first or last it shall be first satisfied, etc.
And so it was holden per totam Curiam in Co. Ba. in Pemberton and Bartams Case,
Pl. 32 El. Rot. 235 Which see in the end of the Sadlers Case in the 4. Rep.
Dier 80. 53.

Co. l. 5. 86. b. 3. Blumfeilds Case.
12 There are good diversities betwixt an execution not valuable (as of the body
of the Defendant) and an execution, valuable, as of lands, etc. An Execution
valuable or without satisfaction.
As if two men are bound jointly and severally in an obligation, and the one is
sued, condemned and taken in execution, and after the other is also sued,
condemned, and taken in execution, and then the first escapes, and the other
brings his Audita querela; In that case, he shall be barred to bring that writ,
until the Plaintiff be satisfied; So likewise if the Defendant in debt die in
execution, yet the Plaintiff may have a new execution by elegit or fieri
facias: but if the Plaintiff have once execution of the lands of the
defendant, and after the lands are evicted, there before the Statute of 32 H.
8. cap. 5. he shall not have any new execution; for, the execution of the lands
was valuable, and accounted in Law for a satisfaction, and to (avoid
infiniteness) he shall have but one valuable satisfaction, or one execution
with satisfaction at the Common Law; etc. So likewise, if a Villein be
delivered to one in execution, upon recovery in value, and after the Villein
dies without Issue, yet the Defendant shall never have any new execution,
because his first execution was valuable, and by the Law a man shall have but
one execution valuable, etc.

F. N. B. 33. m. and 34. v.
13 If two Sisters have an Advowson, which happens to be void, Copercen^^ shall
pres^^ by turns.
the eldest Sister shall have the first presentment, and so the Baron of the
eldest Sister (if he be Tenant by the courtesy of the Advowson) shall have the
first presentment, and the Tenant in Dower shall have but the third, etc. And
if there be more Sisters then two, they shall present by turn according to
their several ages, viz. the eldest first, the second next, the third next, etc.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 185. b. 3.
14 Two Femes jointenant of a lease for years, In jointure a tenure t^^ Baron
sha^ not have (...)
one of them takes a husband and dies, In this Case, the moity of the term
shall go to the survivor, and not to the husband: for, allthough all chattels
real are given to the Husband, if he survive: yet the survivor between the
jointenants is the elder (and therefore the more worthy) title, and after the
marriage the Feme continued sole possessed: for; if the husband had died, and
the Feme survived, the Feme should have had it, and not the Executors of the
husband: but otherwise it is of personal goods.

^^ardian in ^^cage.
15 If there be three Brethren, and the youngest holds land in soccage, Co. ib.
88. a. 3.
and has Issue and dies, his Issue within the age of 14 years: In this Case,
both the Uncles are in equal degree, and yet the eldest shall be Guardian:
because in equal degree the Law prefers him as the more worthy.

16 At the Common Law if Cestuy que use and his Feoffees join in a feofment
grant or demise generally, Co. l. 2. 35. b. 4 in Sir Rowland Heywards Case.
this shall be by construction of Law the feoffement grant or demise of the
feoffees, who were owners of the land, and passed the Estate by the Common Law,
not by Cestuy que use, who had nothing but a trust and confidence, and derived
only his authority by the Statute of 1 R. 3. as it is agreed in 21 H. 7. and
the Common Law in such Cases shall be by its own construction preferred before
the power of Cestuy que use, given only by Statute.

17 Vide M. 44. ex 12.

^emove all (...) a Record.
18 If a Record of the C. B. be removed into the K. B. for error, Dier 32. 6.
28. and 29 H. 8.
or the like, the C. B. cannot write to the K. B. to send it, because the K. B.
is an higher Court then the C. B. but the Record ought to be first certified
into the Chancery by Certiorare, and then to be sent from the Chancery into the
C. B. by a mittimus: Howbeit, if it were an inferior Court, the C.B. may writ
to it for any Record, etc.

19 If a man be entitled to have a writ of escheate, F. N. B. Br. 144. o
and he afterward accept the Homage or fealty of the Tenant, he shall not
after such acceptance have a writ of escheate; Howbeit (in such Case) after the
acceptance of Rent he may have a writ of escheate: because Homage and Fealty
are solemn and more worthy services then rent; and therefore the Lord does
respect them more, then it does that. Vide infra Max. 117. Pl. 50.

^ourts.
20 If a Statute makes a thing an offense, Dier 23. 6. 27. 7 Eliz.
which was not so at the Common Law, and inflict a penalty for it to be
recovered in any of the Courts of Record, such offense or penalty is not
determinable in any other Court, save only in the four usual Courts at Westminster.
Howbeit, where no Court is limited, the King shall have his prerogative in any
Court.

92 The Law respects life and liberty most, and the Person above his
possessions.
^e Lords (...) station.
1 If a Villein (as Executor in mothers right, etc. Litt.. 192. Co. Inst. p. 1.
124. b. 2. and 126 a. 4.
) brings an action against his Lord, if the Lord in his plea make not
protestation, that he is his Villein, etc. the Villein, shall be thereby
enfranchised, albeit the Issue be found for the Lord; And this is in favorem
libertatis.

^al of Vil^age.
2 If a Villein sue an action of Trespass or other action against his Lord in
one County, and the Lord says, Litt.. 193. Co. ibidem b. 4
that he ought not to be answered, because he is his Villein regardant to his
manor in another County, and the Plaintiff says, that he is free and no
Villein, this shall be tried in the County where the Plaintiff had conceived
his Action, and not in the other County, where the Lord says he is Villein;
And this is in favorem libertatis, for, impius and crudelis indicundus est, qui
libertatis non favet: Angliae jura in omni casu libertati dant favorem, says,
Fortescue cap. 42.

Co. ib. 137. b. 2
3 If a Villein be once manuntised, Once ma^^mitted for t^^ manumitted.
albeit he afterward becomes ungrateful to the Lord in the highest degree yet
the manumission remains good; for the Common Law gives this in favorem
libertatis, wherein it differs from the Civil Law; for, libertinum ingratum
leges Civiles in pristinam redigunt servitutem, sed leges Angliae semel
manumissum semper liberum indicant, Finch, 29.
gratum and ingratum.

Litt.. 205. Co. ib. 137. b. 4
4 If the Lord make to the Villein an Obligation, Power of bringing to ^ctions,
etc, an enfranchisment.
or grant unto him an annuity, or a lease for years, etc. the Villein is
thereby enfranchised: for when the Lord enabled the Villein to have an Action
against him as for debt annuity, etc. or gives the Villein a certain and fixed
Estate in lands, etc. as a Lease for years, etc. this amounts to an
Enfranchisement, not only during the years, but for ever: And albeit the lease
be made to the Villein without deed, yet it is an Enfranchisement for ever, etc.

Co. ib. 139. a. 3 and Fitz. N. B. 78. f. i.
5 In a writ de nativo habendo, Nonsuit p^emptory, (...) not. hab. (...) so in
a lib. p^
non-suite after appearance is peremptory; for thereby the Villein is
enfranchised: And so it is if two be Plaintiffes in nativo habendo, if one be
non-suite, that is the nonsuit of both and no summons and severance does lie
in that Case, although it is a Real Action: And this is in favorem libertatis;
for, in a liberate probanda nonsuit after appearance is not peremptory,
neither is the nonsuit of one, the nonsuit of both.

Co. ib. a. 3.
6 Nonsuit in an appeal of murder, rape, robbery, In an appe^ nonsuit
peremptory.
etc. after appearance is peremptory, and this is in favorem vitae; for, if the
Defendant be acquitted; and take out process upon the Statute of Westminster. 2.
cap. 12. against the Appellant and Abettors, or if he purchase his original
writ, for that cause he may be nonsuit, etc.

Co. ib. 137. b. 3.
7 The Law and the Wisdom of our Ancients have always had so much respect to
liberty, Solemnity in manumission.
that in ancient time manumissions used to be made with a great deal of
Ceremony and solemnity, as appears in Libro Rubro cap. 78. where it is said:
Qui servum suum liberat, in Ecclesia vel Mercato vel Comitatu vel Hundredo
coram testibus and palam faciat, and liberas ei vias, and portas conscribit
apertas, and lanceam and gladium, vel quae liberorum arma in manibus ei ponat,
etc.

Co. ibid. 139. a. 4. Littleton. 209
8 The Law does tender much the liberty and freedom of the subject in general;
But especially of a Commialty, A Custom (...) have a fine s^ marrying, t^
Daughter, void.
as if a Lord of a Manor will prescribe, that there is a Custom within his
Manor that every Tenant, that marieth his Daughter to any man without the
Lords license, shall pay a fine to the Lord: this is a void Custom to bind a
Freeman: for every Freeman may marry his Daughter to whom he and the
pleases: And therefore to claim such a fine by a general Custom within a
Manor, is against the freedom of a Freeman: that is not bound thereunto by
particular term, tenure etc. Howbeit such a Custom will hold amongst Villeins,
or amongst Freemen, that hold in Villeinage or base tenure, etc.

Co. ib. 156. b. 1
9 At the Common Law, upon an indictment or appeal of Treason, Peremptory.
Challenge.
or Felony the Prisoner might (in favorem vitae) challenge peremptorily, viz.
35. which was under the number of three Iuries; But by the Statute of 22 H. 8.
cap. 14. the number was reduced to 20. in petty Treason, Murder, and Felony,
and in Case of high Treason, and Mis-prision of high Treason, it was taken away
by the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 23. and afterward by the Statute of 1 and 2
Ph. and M. cap. 10. the Common Law was revived; So that now for any Treason the
Prisoner shall have his challenge to the number of thirty five, as before. And
so it was resolved by the Justices, upon conference between them in the Case of
Sir Walter Raleigh, and George Brooks. Co. ibid. 157 b. 4
And albeit the Offender be not arraigned upon the Crime it self, but the issue
is joined upon a collateral point, yet shall the party have such challenges, as
aforesaid: As if a man be outlawed for Treason or Felony at the Kings suit,
and the party for avoiding thereof alleges Imprisonment or the like, at the
time of the Out-lawry: In this Case, although the Issue be joined upon a
collateral point, yet shall the party (in favorem vitae) have such challenges,
as if he had been arraigned upon the offense it self; because this also (by a
mean) concerns his life. And it is to be observed, that this kind of
challenge is called peremptory, because the party may challenge peremptorily
upon his own dislike, without showing any cause at all: Howbeit, if the
Defendant challenges for cause, he must show the cause presently, and then
also albeit the Iuror be tried indifferent, yet may the party afterward
challenge him peremptorily: And all these privileges concerning Challenges are
granted to the Defendant in favorem vitae, etc.

^n criminal Cases, no pri^y verdict.
10 By the Law of England, Co. ibid. 158 a. 2.
a Jury after their evidence given upon the issue, ought to be kept together in
some convenient place without meat or drink, fire or candle (which some Books
call imprisonment) and they are to have no speech with any, unless it be the
Bailiff, and with him only after they are agreed: When they are so agreed,
they may in Causes between party and party (if the Court be risen) give a privy
Verdict before any of the Judges of the Court, and then they may eat and drink,
and the next morning in open Court they may either affirm, or alter their privy
Verdict, and that which is given in Court shall stand. But in criminal Causes,
which concern life and member, the Jury can give no privy Verdict, but must
always give it in open Court, and can^^t be discharged by the Court, or any
other, until they have given up their Verdict accordingly, etc.

Life and liberty ^espected more ^^n Infancy.
11 Regularly no Laches shall be adjudged in an Infant, Co. ibid. 227. b. 2.
yet if an Infant has a Villein, that is fled into ancient Demesne, and he
claim him not within a year and a day, that Non-claim of the Villein shall take
away the seizure of the Infant, and this is in favorem libertatis: So if an
Infant bring not an appeal of the death of his Ancestor within a year and a
day, he is barred of his appeal for ever; and this is in favorem vitae, for the
Law respects more liberty and life then the privilege of infancy.

^eare of ma^ng continu^al claim.
12 Doubt or fear that concerns the safety of the person of a man, Co. ib. 246.
a. 2
as Battery, Maheim, Imprisonment, Death, etc. is sufficient cause to excuse
him from going upon the land to make his Claim, so that he approach as near the
land as he dare for such doubt or fear; but fear of having his houses burnt, or
of the taking away or spoiling of his goods, is no sufficient cause to excuse
him; because he may recover the same, or damages to the value thereof, without
any corporal hurt: And therefore in such Case he shall go upon the Land to make
his claim, etc. Talis enim debet esse metus, qui cadere potest in virum
constantem, and qui in se continet mortis periculum, and corporis cruciatum: Et
nemo tenetur se infortuniis and periculis exponere.

(...) Felony, Out-lawry may be rever^ed by plea.
13 If a man be outlawed, Litt. 419. Co. ib. 259. b. 2
there is two manner of ways to reverse it, viz. by Plea, or by writ of Error,
by plea, for when the Defendant comes in upon the Capias utlagatum, etc. he
may by Plea reverse the same for matters apparent, as in respect of a
Supersedeas, omission of process, variance, and other matter apparent in the
Record, so he do it the same term, as some hold: But for any matters in fact,
as Death, Imprisonment, Service of the King, etc. he is driven to his writ of
Error; Nevertheless, in Case of felony, he may plead these matters of fact
also, and that is in favorem vitae, etc.

Co. ibid. 274 b. 2 Finch 29.
14 An express manumission of a Villein cannot be upon a Condition subsequent;
For, once free in that Case and ever free: A Villein free ever.
And this in favorem libertatis: It is other wise of a Condition precedent in
the same Case, etc.

Co. ibid. 283 2. 3.
15 The life of a man is so precious in the eye of the Law, Life prec^^^ in the
eye of the Law.
that it will not suffer (by way of plea) to justify in the killing or death
of a man; And therefore in that Case he shall be received (as it were by way of
excuse) to give the special matter in evidence, as to say, that it was se
defendendo, or in defense of his house in the night against Thieves, and
Robbers, or the like.

Co. l. 3. 11. b. 4. in Sir Will. Herberts case.
16 The liberty of a man is of such high esteem in the consideration of Law,
that he could not (at the Common Law) he imprisoned, At the Common Law to
capias for (...) etc.
unless he were guilty of committing some force; for the Law, being the
preserver of the Common peace of the Land, abhorres all force, as one of her
capital Enemies; and therefore as concerning such as commit force, the Common
Law subjects their bodies to imprisonment, as to one of the highest Executions
of Law, whereby they lose their liberty, until they have made agreement with
the party, and fine to the King; for which cause it is a Rule in Law, that in
all Actions Quare vi and armis, a Capias lies, and where a Capias lies in
process, there after judgment a Capias ad satisfaciendum lies, and there also
the King shall have a Capias pro fine: And with this agrees 8 H. 6. 9. 35 H. 6.
6. 22 E. 4. 22. 40 E. 3. 25. 49 E. 3. 2. and diverse other Books: But (at the
Common Law) if a common Person had sued a recognisance, or judgment for debt
or damages, he could not have the body of the Defendant nor his lands (unless
in some special case) in execution; but was only (in such case) to have
execution, either of his goods and chattels by fieri facias, or of his grain
or other present profits (which increased upon the land) by levati facias; both
which writs were to be sued within the year after the judgment, or
recognisance acknowledged, and if he had neither the one of the other within
the year the Plaintiff or Conusee was then put to his writ of debt, etc. And
then by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 45. a scire facias was given, and by cap.
18. cum debitum fuerit recuperatum, etc. an Elegit of the moity of the land,
which was the first Act, that subjected land to the execution of a judgment;
or recognisance, and with this agrees F. N. B. 265. q. And then by the Statute
of 13 E. 1. de Mercatoribus, 27 E. 3. cap. 9. and 23 H. 8. cap. 6. In case of a
Statute Merchant or staple all the lands, which the Conusor had the day of the
conusance, shall be extended, in whose hands soever they come, etc. Also by the
Statute of Malbridge cap. 23. and of West. 2. cap. 11. A capias was given in
account (for at the Common Law process in account was distress infinite) and
after by the Statute of 25 E. 3. 17. the like process was given in the debt,
as in account before which two last recited Statutes the body of the Defendant
was not liable to the execution in account or debt etc. neither yet was the
land liable in debt as aforesaid, save in the Kings case, and in the case of
an heir in by descent, and chargeable by the Obligation of his Ancestor, etc.

Co. l. 4. 40. 2. 3. Darleys Case.
17 In P. 25 E. Wotherel brings an appeal against Dorley of murder the Defendant
pleads not guilty, and he was found guilty of homicide, Life shall (...) be
twice (...) in jeopardy for the same offense.
and had his Clergy: and after he was indicted of murder, and thereupon
arraigned at the Queens suit and he pleaded the former condition in the appeal
at the suit of the party: And it adjudged a good bar: because the life of a
man is so precious in judgemedt of Law that it shall not be twice put in
jeopardy for one and the same offense; The like is agreed in Brooks Case, H. 28
El. and P. 33 El. in Vaux his Case, which see Co. l. 4. 45. a.

N^^ compos ^^tis shall not lose his ^ife for felony (...) murder.
18 Every Act, that a man de non sanae memoriae does, Co. ibid. 124. in
Beverleys Case.
either concerns his life, his lands, or his goods; also every Act, that he
does, is either done in pais or in a Court of Record; All Acts, which he does
in a Court of Record concerning his lands and goods, shall bind himself and
all other persons for ever; Also all Acts, which he does concerning his lands
and goods in pais, in some cases shall bind himself only during his life, and
in some case shall bind for ever, etc. But as for his life the Law of England
is, that he shall not lose that albeit he kill a man, and thereby make himself
subject to be indicted for felony or murder, etc.

The death of a ^an grievously punished by the Law.
19 The Law surpriseth the life of a man, Co. ibid. 2. 4. in Beverleys Case.
that it inflicteth grievous punishment upon them that are guilty of taking
away and destroying it; for the malefactor in that case shall 1. Lose his life;
2. Lose it after an ignominious and odious manner, viz. by hanging, for he
shall be hanged betwixt heaven and earth; as unworthy of both; 3. He shall lose
his blood, both in respect of his ancestry (for he is esteemed as a
Terrae-silius without any Ancestor) and also in respect of his posterity, for
his blood is corrupt, and he leaves behind him neither heir nor posterity; 4.
He loses his lands, 5. His goods, And in such case also the King shall have
Annum, diem, and vastuna, to the intent that his Wife and his Children should
be cast out, his houses demolished, his trees eradicated and stockt up, his
meadows broken up and ploughed, and all that he has for his comfort, delight,
and sustenance, wasted and destroyed; because he has in such a felonious
manner offended against the Law, and all this is, ut poena ad paucos, metus ad
omnes perveniat, etc.

Upon an Ar^^st, the cause (...) be shew^d.
20 The Law so provideth for the preservation of a man's liberty, Co. l. 6. 54.
2. 4. in the Countess of Rutlands Case.
that no general arrest is deemed legal without showing the particular cause
wherefore he is arrested; And therefore the Sheriff or any other by his
authority which makes an arrest of the person of another, ought upon the arrest
to show at whose suit out of what Court, for what cause he does it, and when
the process is returnable to the intent that, if it be upon an execution, he
may pay the money, and so free his body from imprisonment: and if it be upon a
mesne process, may either agree with the party, or put in bail according to
the Law, and so make his appearance accordingly, etc.

^he Coll. of ^ys. cannot ^^mmit.
21 An Act of Parliament, Co. lib. 8. 120. a. 3. Doctor Bonhams Case.
that gives power of imprisonment ought to be strictly interpreted, to preserve
(as much as may be) the liberty of the subject: So the Act of 14 H. 8. cap. 5.
which gave power to the President and Censors of the College of Physicians in
London to imprison, was so strictly and liberally to be understood, that the
Jailer was not thereby bound to receive such as they should commit unto him;
because there was no clause in that Statute to give him power so to do;
^^^tures that ^^^tabridge ^^eny to be ^^rictly inter^^cted.
And therefore was the Statute of 1 Mar. cap. 9. made, which commands the
Jailer to receive them upon a penalty, etc. And yet the receipt of the Jailer
(in that case) seems to be a necessary incident to the power given them to
imprison; but in regard it concerned the liberty of the subject, and they had
not the authority of any Court to commit any; the Jailer could not receive such
as they should commit without an express provision by Act of Parliament for
that purpose, etc. Co. lib. 5. 64. Clerks Case. Et Co. l. 8. 127. b. 1. in the
city of Londons Case.


^o constitu^n, upon pe^^lty of im^isonment.
22 A Mayor and Cominalty, etc. may make by Laws and Constitutions for the good
ordering of their Corporation, etc. and may inflict a reasonable pecuniary
penalty for the due observing thereof to be levied by distress, or recovered
by Action of debt, etc. But they cannot inflict penalty of imprisonement: for
such a Constitution or Ordinance, which trencheth upon the liberty of the
subject, is not favored in Law, and besides it is expressly against the
letter of Magna Carta c. 29. Nullus liber homo imprisonetur, etc.

Co. l. 8. 60. 2. 3. in Beechers Case.
23 In an Appeal of Death, Robbery, Imprisonne^ for malicious fact, that
concerns life.
or any other Appeal of Felony or of Maihem, If the Plaintiff be barred, or
nonsuit, or if the Writ abate by his own default, he shall be fined and
imprisoned, 8 H. 4. 17. 20. for the malice is more venomous; which concerns
life and member.

F. N. B. 68. c.
24 In a Homine replegiando if the Sheriff return, A Capias in Withernam (...)
relieve a prisoner.
that the Defendant has eloigned the body of the Plaintiff, so that he cannot
make deliverance, etc. Then the Plaintiff shall have a Capias in Withernam to
take the body of the Defendant, and shall detain him, etc. until, etc. be he
Peer of the Realm or other common Person: And if the Sheriff return non est
inventus, upon that Capias in Withernam of the Body, then shall the Plaintiff
have a Capias in Withernam of the goods of the Defendant, etc. And this is in
favorem libertatis.

F.N.B. 78 c. d.
25 If a man sue special Writ de Nativo habendo against two, But two Villeins
sued, etc. more may s^^, etc.
the two may join in a Writ De liberate probanda notwithstanding those
several Writs: And a man shall not join above two Villeins in a Writ De
nativo habendo: But more may join in a liberate probanda; And that is in
favorem libertatis.

F.N.B. ibid. f.
26 In a Writ De nativo habendo if the Plaintiff after apperance departs in
disp^te of the Court, Enfranchisment upon contempt or Retraxit.
or says he will fetch his Counsel, and after being demanded makes default; In
these Cases the Villein shall be Enfranchised for ever: So also shall he be
upon a Retraxit, when the Plaintiff says he will pursue his Writ no farther,
causa qua supra etc.

F.N.B. ibid. g.
27 If a Freeman marry a Neife, she shall be free for ever, A Nicle free by
marriage^ a Freeman.
albeit the Baron die and she survive, And this (as Fitz notes out of Britton)
is in favorem libertatis, for a Free Woman shall not be a Villein by taking a
Villein to Husband.

F. N. B. 99. d.
28 If a man sue a Writ of Monstravit against a Bailiff upon the Statute of
Malbridge cap. 23. No monst^^^ if the accountant has lands.
with purpose that the Sheriff should attache his Body to bring him to
account, when as he has sufficient Lands in another County, by which he may be
made to answer by Writ of Account: In that Case, the Defendant shall have a
Writ of disceit against the Plaintiff that sues the Monstravit; for so long as
he has lands, his body in that case ought not to be attached.

Finch 29.
29 If a Man for Fear, Confession ^ a Felon not taken.
or in Simplicity will Confess himself guilty of a Felony, yet the Judge must
not Record that Confession, but suffer him to plead not guilty, And that is in
favorem vitae.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 33. b. 1.
30 A Feme, if she be married, is either a Wife De facto, A Feme De ^^re shall
one^ bring an appeal.
or De Jure; De facto, until both of them have attained the years of Consent (
viz. 24 for the Man, and 12 for the Woman) De Jure, when at those ages, they
have not dis-assented: Now, albeit a Wife De facto only, who is nine years
old at her husbands death (though he be but four years old, when he dies)
shall be endowed: yet (as some hold) such a Wife De facto shall not have an
appeal of the death of her Husband, but only she that is a Wife De Jure, and
that is in favorem vitae.

Wardship. Marriage.
31 Wardship has been always (especially of late times) accounted a kind of
slavery, Co. ibid. 79. b Litt 105. Brit. 169. Glanvil, lib. 7. cap. 12.
and therefore it was always in the old Books a Maxim in Law, quod dominus
non maritabit minorem in custodia sua nisi semel, and Glamil says, Si semel
legitime nupti fuerint, etc. postmodum non tenebuntur sub custodia Dominorum
esse. And therefore if the Guardian marry his ward under the age of 14 years,
and at that age he dis-assent as he may, he shall marry him no more, being
thereby freed as to the wardship of his body: So it is also, where the Lord
marries him to a woman, and the marriage is after dissolved by reason of a
pre-contract; It is otherwise where the ravisher marries him within age, and he
disassent at 14, for in such Case, the Lord shall have the marriage of him.
Vide Pl. ibid.

Clergy.
32 Clergy was allowed to the accessory to the stealing of Horses and Mares,
because the Statutes of 1 E. 6. 12. and 2, 3 E. 6. 33. Dier. 99. a. ^9. 1 Mar.
shall be taken strictly in favorem vitae, and are therefore to be only
understood of Principals, which they expressly mention, and not of Accessaries,
per Cur.

Clergy.
33 Albeit it be entered upon Record at one Sessions, quod non legit, Dier. 205.
b. 3, 4 ^l.
and the prisoner is for some cause reprieved, yet he may read at the next
Sessions, and shall have his Clergy, in favorem vitae, Vide 36 H. 6. that a
Prisoner shall have his Clergy under the Gallows.

Life and goods.
44 If two men tilt before the King, Hob. 134. Weaver and Ward.
or two Masters of Defense be playing their Prizes, and one of them happen to
kill the other, this is not Felony, because not done animo felonico, and
besides, if it should be questioned as an Offense, the life of the Offender
(which the Law much tenders) would be brought into jeopardy; there is the same
Law also of a Lunatique, that kills a man: Howbeit in Trespass, which intends
only to give damages, according to hurt and loss, it is not so: And
therefore if a Lunatique hurt a man, he shall be answerable in Trespass: So
likewise, if in training for exercise in re militari, one Soldier happen to
hurt another, he shall be answerable in Trespass, because it extends no
farther then to his goods to sati^^e damages; yet if the accident were
inevitable, he shall be excused, etc.

93 Things in the Realty more then those in the Personalty.
In waste, the place wasted ^ more respect then the damages.
1 It has been a question, Co. Inst. p. 1. 355. a. 4, etc. Note, that it is
holden per Curiam 9 H. 5. 15. that the personalty is the principal, Ideo quare.
Vide Co. l. 2. 68. b. 1. in Tookers case.
whether upon a Recovery had by default in an Action of Waste against tenant in
Dower, or by the Courtesy, a Quod ei deforceat lies upon the Statute of West.
2. cap. 4. And some hold, that it does not, in regard the damages (as they
say) are the principal, and not the place wasted, because the damages were
recoverable upon that action against such Tenants at the Common Law, and the
place wasted was afterward given by the Statute of Gloucester, as a penalty: so
as the nature of the Action (say they) remains still to be personal, for that
the damages are the principal, etc. But in that Case, others are of opinion,
and say, that albeit in that Action the damages may be the more ancient
recompense, yet the place wasted (being in the realty) must needs be the more
principal: And therefore upon a Recovery by default in such an action, a Quod
ei deforceat lies as well as in any other, etc. And this last seems to be my
Lord Cooks opinion, because put last, according to his own Rule, in his Comment
upon Littleton.

^ Lien real and personal.
2 There is a diversity between a Lien real and a Lien personal; Co. ib. 386. b.
3 and 11. E. 3. det. 7.
for a Lien real, as a warranty, does ever descend to the heir at the Common
Law; but the Lien personal does bind the special heirs, as all the heirs in
Gavelkind, the heir on the part of the mother, etc. when such an heir being
charged by the Obligation or other act of the Ancestor is in by descent, etc.
So if two men make a Feoffment in Fee with warranty, and the one die, the
Feoffee cannot vouch the survivor only, but the heir of him that is dead also:
Howbeit it is otherwise, where two do jointly bind themselves in an Obligation;
for if one die, the survivor only shall be charged, etc.

Release of one Joynt-tenant no Bar.
3 In personal actions, the one Ioynt-tenant may release all; Co. l. 2. 68. 24
in Tookers ca. per Popham.
but if the personalty be mixed with the realty, it is otherwise; as in an
Assise by two, the release of all actions personal by the one, is no bar
against the other; for albeit an Assise is an action mixed in the realty and
personalty, yet omne majus trahit ad se minus, as it is adjudged 30 H. 6. Bar
59. Also a Ioynt-tenant shall not prejudice his Companion, as to any matter of
Inheritance of Frank-tenant, but as to the profit of the Frank-tenant, the one
may prejudice the other: for there is a privity and trust betwixt them; and
therefore if one of them take all the profits of the Land, or all the Rent, the
other has no remedy, etc.

Things in the Realty may be intailed, not those in the Personalty.
4 By force of the Statute of West. 2. cap. 1. Co. Inst. p. 1. 19. b. 4.
(which creates estates tail) under this word, tenementa, not only all
corporate Inheritances (which are or may be holden) may be intailed, but also
all Inheritances issuing out of any of those inheritances, or concerning, or
annexed to, or exercisable within the same, though they lie not in Tenure; as
Rents, Estovers, Commons, or other profits whatsoever granted out of land; or
Uses, Offices, Dignities, etc. which concern lands or certain places; All these
(I say) may be intailed within that Statute; because they savor of the Realty:
But if the Grant be of an Inheritance mere personal, or to be exercised about
Chattels, and is not issuing out of land, nor concerning any land, or some
certain place; such Inheritances cannot be entailed, because they savor
nothing of the Realty: For example, in 7 Ass. Pl. 12. and 7 E. 6. 1. the Office
of the fourth part of the Sergeant of the Common Pleas is liberum tenementum,
and therefore may be entailed: In 18 E. 3. 27. the Office of the keeping of the
Church of our Lady of Lincoln was intailed, and a Formedon brought thereupon by
the issue intail. In 5 E. 4 3. and 10 E. 4. 14. The Office of Marshal of
England was intailed. In 11 E. 4. 1. the Office of one of the Chamberlains of
the Exchequer intailed. In 1 H. 7. 28. the Office of a Fostership intailed: In
4 H. 7. 10. and 9 E. 4. 56 b. Charters intailed. In 19 H. 8. 3, An Use
intailed. In 1 H. 5. 1. The nomination to a Benefice intailed, etc. Co. l. 7.
33. 34 Nevil^ Ca^^. and 28 H. c. the Lord Vesce^^ Case.
Also the name of Dignity may be intailed within that Statute, as Dukes,
Marquesses, Earls, Vicounts and Barons, because they are named of some County,
Manor, Town, or place: In 14 Ass. Pl. 2. if the issue in tail in a Formedon in
a Descender be barred by false Verdict, his release is no bar to his issue,
albeit the action is at the Common Law: The like Law is of a writ of Error, 3
Eliz. Dier. 188. If a gift in tail be made with warrantie, the Donee releases
the warranty, this shall not bind the issue in tail; for to all these Cases
and the like the said Statute does extend: But if I grant to a man, and to the
heirs of his body to be Keeper of my Hounds, or Master of my Horse, or to be my
Faulconer or the like, with a fee therefore; yet these cannot be intailed
within the said Statute: for that they be not issuing out of Tenements, nor
annexed to, nor exercisable within, or concerning Lands or Tenements of
Freehold or Inheritance, but concerning Chattels, and savor nothing of the
realty: So it is likewise, if I, by my Deed, for me and my Heirs, grant an
Annuity to a man and the Heirs of his body, because this only charge my
Person, and concerns no Land, nor labors of the Realty.

Baron, Feme, Chattels real and personal.
5 If a Feme sole be possessed of an Estate for years, Co. Inst. p. 1. 351. 185.
b. 3. 299. b. 4. and 46. b. 2.
or by Statute Merchant, Statute Staple, or Elegit, or of a wardship, or other
chattels real, and takes Baron, the Baron is thereof possessed in her right
only. And albeit during the Coverture he may dispose of such an Estate by
Grant, Demise, etc. or upon Out-lawry, Attainder, etc. may forfeit it, or may
subject it to be sold by the Sheriff upon an execution for his Debt, and in
Case he survive the Feme, shall then have a clear interest in it; yet he cannot
dispose of such an Estate by Will, and if she survive him, (no disposition or
forfeiture being thereof made, as aforesaid) she shall have it, and not his
executors or administrators; because these Estates and Interests savor of the
realty: and therefore the Feme being thereof once possessed, her interest cannot
be by the Inter-marriage so easily removed, as if they were Chattels personal:
There is the same Law also of Chattels real, which being of a mixed nature (
viz. partly in possession, and partly in action) happen during the Coverture;
As if the husband be seized of a rent-service, charge, or seck, in the right of
his wife, the rent becomes due, during the Coverture, the wife dies, the
husband shall have the arrerages; but if the wife survive the husband, she
shall have them, and not the executors of the husband: So it is also of an
Advowson, if the Church become void, during the Coverture, he may have a Quare
Impedit in his own name, as some hold; but his wife shall have it, if she
survive him, and the husband, if he survive her, Et sic de similibus. But as
concerning Chattels personal, the inter-marriage is an absolute gift of such
goods, which she has in possession, and in her own right, whether the husband
survive the wife or no, so that he may at his pleasure dispose of them, either
by act execute in his life, or by will; and albeit he make no such disposition
of them, and die living the wife, yet his Executors or Administrators shall
have them and not the wife, etc. Howbeit if they be in action, as Debts by
Obligation, etc. the husband shall not have them, unless recovered during the
Coverture; neither yet shall he have such goods, as the wife has in auter
droit, as Executrix or Administratrix, etc, Vide R. 55. ex. 129.

^enants in ^^mmon. ^hattels.
6 If one Tenant in Common of Chattels take any Chattels real, Co. ib. 200. a. z
(which are not of an entire nature) from his companion, the other may have his
remedy to recover them by Action; but if one of them take all the personal
goods from the other, he has no remedy by Action or otherwise, save only to
take them again by Catch-pole Law: And so it is also of entire Chattels real,
as a Ship, Horse, Hawk, or the like: but that is in respect of the Entireness
and inseverablenesse of their nature, etc. for which see R. 70. ex 25.

^reehold or ^^heritance (...) reassumed ^e collateral ^^sfaction.
7 It is said in our Books, that Accord with satisfaction is a good plea in
personal actions, where damages only are to be recovered, Co. l. 4. 1. a. 4 in
Vernons case.
but not in real Actions; For a right or title to any Estate of Inheritance or
Freehold cannot be barred by acceptance of any collateral satisfaction or
recompense; As if A. disseise B. (tenant for life, or in Fee) of the Manor of
Dale, and after A. gives the Manor of Sale to B. and his Heirs, in full
satisfaction of all his rights and actions, which he has in or for the Manor
of Dale, and B. accepts thereof: Nevertheless B. may enter into the Manor of
Dale, or recover it in any real action; it is otherwise of things in the
personalty.

Dier. 2. 8. 6 H. 8.
8 In real Actions to plead, Alien. Actions.
that the Plaintiff is an Alien is a good bar, because an Alien can have no
land within the Realm, but such a Plea in personal Actions is no bar; because
an Alien may bring personal Actions, unless he be an Alien Enemy.

Co. l. 6. 7. a. in Ferrers Case.
9 Betwixt real and personal Actions there is a diversity: Bar in personal
actions bind not so in real.
for in personal Actions, as in Debt, Account, etc. the bar is perpetual;
because (in such Cases) a man shall not have an Action of a higher nature: But
in a real Action, if the Demandant be barred by judgment upon Verdict,
Demurrer, Confession, etc. yet he may have an Action of a higher nature, and
shall try the same right again, because it concerns his Frank-tenement and
Inheritance: So if a man be barred in Assise of Novel disseisin, yet upon
showing a descent, or other special matter, he may have an Assise of
Mortdancestor, Aiel, Besaiel, etc. Vide infra 1. 78, 14.

Litt.. 146. Co. Inst. p. 1. 103. a. 2.
10 An Abbot, Prior, Bishop, Successor of an Abbot, etc. bound.
or other sole Corporation cannot dis-claim or divest any thing of Fee, which
is vested in their houses, or other spiritual Corporations, to the prejudice of
the Successor: Howbeit, if an Abbot or Bishop, etc. acknowledge the Action in a
writ of Annuity, or in an action of Debt upon an Obligation, Statute or
Recognisance; this shall bind the Successor, so as he shall not prevent
execution thereupon, albeit they were granted and made without the consent of
the Covent, Chapter, etc. because these things being in the personalty, the
recovery thereof cannot be falsified in an higher action, Et res judicata pro
veritate accipitur, Vide supra, M. 1. cap. 4.

Co. ib. 125. b. 3
11 In a Plea real against diverse tenants, Pleas real and personal.
if one tenant plead in bar to parcel, or which extends only to him that
pleads it, and the other pleads a Plea, which goes to the whole ( viz. to
both the tenants) and which (indeed) would make an end of the business, if it
were tried, yet those several Pleas shall have several trials; as if a praecipe
be brought by one as heir to his father against two, and one of them pleads a
Plea, which extends but to himself, and the other pleads a Plea, which
extends to both, (as Bastardie in the Demandant) and it is found for him, yet
the other issue shall be tried, and he shall not take advantage of the others
Plea: But in a Plea personal against diverse Defendants, it is otherwise, for in
such an action if one Defendant pleads that, which extends only to himself,
and the other pleads a Plea which goes to the whole, viz. to both Defendants;
this last Plea shall be first tried; and if that be found for the Defendant
that pleaded it, it shall discharge both, for in a personal Action a Discharge
of one is a Discharge of both: For example. If one of the Defendants in
Trespass plead a Release to himself (which in Law extends to both) and the
other pleads not guilty (which extends but to himself) the Plea which goes to
the whole, and discharges both, shall be first tried, for if that be found, it
makes an end of all, and the other shall take advantage of it.

94 Freehold and Inheritance more then it does Chattels.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 3. a. 2.
1 The Parishioners or Inhabitants, or probi homines de Dale, Parisho^^^
purchase.
or the Churchwardens, etc. are not capable to purchase Lands, unless it were
in ancient time when such Grants were allowed; But Goods and Chattels they may
purchase, etc.

Seigniories suspended.
2 If an Estate of Freehold in Seigniories, Rents, Commons, Co. ib. 29. b. 2.
or the like, be suspended, a man shall not be tenant by the Courtesy; but if
the suspension be but for years, he shall be tenant by the Courtesy: As if
there be Feme, Seignioresse, and Tenant, and the Tenant makes a Lease for life
of the Tenancy to the Seignioresse, who takes an husband, and has issue, the
wife dies, he shall not be tenant by the Courtesy; Howbeit if the Lease had
been made only for years, then should he have been tenant by the Courtesy, etc.

An Estate for life and years.
3 In the eye of the Law any estate for life, Co. ibid. 46. a. 1 and Co. l. 8.
70. b. 4. in Whitlocks Case.
being (as Littleton says) an Estate of Freehold against the tenant, whereof a
Praecipe quod reddat does lie, is an higher and greater estate then a Lease for
years, though it be for a thousand years or more (which is a Chattel; and if so
long, never without suspicion of fraud.) And they have been always the less
valuable, for that (at the Common Law) they were subject unto, and under the
power of the Tenant of the Freehold, etc.

Claim by the Lord of the Villeins goods
4 Claim by the Lord (inter vicines, etc.) of the Villeins goods, Co. ib. 118.
b. 4 and Lit.. 177
shall not only vest the goods, which the Villein then has, but also which he
after that shall acquire and get: Howbeit it is otherwise, if an Estate of
Freehold, or Inheritance in lands, for there such a general Entry or Claim
extends only to such lands as the Villein has at that time, and not to any
other, which he shall purchase afterward.

Rent
5 If a man grant a Rent out of Black-Acre to one and to his heirs, Co. ib.
147. b. 1 and Co. l. 7. 24 a. b. 3. in Buts ca.
and also grant to him that he may distrain for it in the same Acre for the
term of his life, this is a Rentcharge for his life, and a Rent-seck
afterward; diversis temporibus; but if the Distress be only limited for
certain years in the same land: In that Case it remains a Rent-seck entirely;
for that the Fee and the Freehold is seck in such Case, etc.

Joynt-tenants Partition.
6 At the Common Law (before the Statutes of 31 H. 8. cap. 1. Litt. 290. Co.
ibid. 187. a. 1.
and 32 H. 8. cap. 32.) Ioynt-tenants by consent might have made partition, and
if they had been possessed of a Lease for years, they might have done it by
Parol, but if they had been seized in an Estate of Inheritance, or for life,
they could not have made partition without Deed.

Words conditional to make a Lease void.
7 If a man makes a Feoffment in fee, or Lease for life, Co. ib. 204. ^. 4
ad faciendum, or faciendo, or ea intention, or ad effectum, or ad propositum,
etc. that the Feoffee or Lessee shall do, or shall not do such an Act, none of
these words make the state in the land conditional; for (in the Case of a
common person, and not of a will) they are in judgment of Law no words of
Condition, and so it was resolved, H. 18 Eliz. in Com. Banco: Howbeit for the
avoiding of a Lease for years, no such precise words of condition are required,
as in Lease of Freehold or Inheritance; for, if a man by Deed make a Lease of a
Manor for years in which there is a clause. (And the said Lessee shall
continually dwell upon the Capital Message of the said Manor, upon pain of
forfeiture of the said Term) these words amount to a Condition: So it is also
if such a Clause be in such a Lease, Quod non licebit to the Lessee, dare,
vendere, vel concedere Statum, and sub poena foris-facturae, this amounts to
make the Lease for years defeasible: And so it was also adjudged, H. 40. Eliz.
Rot. 1610. inter Brown and Ayel. And the reason of the Court was, because a
Lease for years was but a Contract, which may begin by word, and by word may be
dissolved.

Litt.. 365. Co. ib. 225.
8 A man in any Action real, personal, or mixed, cannot plead, Pleading of a
Condition.
that an Estate of Freehold or Inheritance was made upon condition, without
vouching a Record thereof, or showing a writing under seal, that proves the
same; but a man may plead a condition, that concerns Chattels either real or
personal, without showing forth any writing purporting the same, etc.

Littlet. 388. Co. ib. 239. ib. 2
9 If a Disseisor make a Lease for years, Descent a toll entry
and die seized of the Reversion, this descent shall take away the entry of the
Disseisee; because he died seized of the Fee and Frank-tenement: like Law it
is, if the Land be extended upon a Statute, Judgment, or Recognizance: and so
it is likewise in case of a Remainder: Howbeit, if he had made a Lease for
life, either for his own, or for another life, and then had died seized of the
Reversion, this descent shall not take away the Entry of the Disseisee; for
albeit he had the Fee, yet he had not the Frank-tenement; and the Law does ever
give great respect to the Estate of Freehold, though it be but for term of
life: And therefore there is the same Law also, where the Disseisor makes an
Estate in tail, mutatis mutandis.

Lit. 525, 526 Co. ib. 299. b. 4
10 If I let Land to a Feme sole for life, who takes Baron, Joint confirmation
to Baron and Feme
and after I confirm the Estate of the Baron and Feme to have and to hold for
their two lives: In this Case, the Baron holds not jointly with the Feme, but
only in her right, during her life, and shall have it for life, if he survive
her: But if I let to a Feme sole Land for term of years, who takes Baron, and I
confirm the Estate of the Baron and Feme to have and to hold for their lives:
In this Case, they have a joint Estate in the Frank-tenement of the land;
because the Feme had not Frank-tenement before, but only a Chattel, whereof
the Baron has such a possession in her right, as was capable of a
confirmation, or a release; and the confirmation in this Case to the husband
and wife for their lives, makes them Ioynt-tenants for life; because this
Chattel of the Feme covert may be drowned; So note a diversity between a Lease
for life, and a lease for years, made to a Feme covert; for her Estate of
Freehold cannot be altered by the confirmation made to her husband and her, as
the term for years may, whereof her husband may make disposition at his
pleasure.

Co. ib. 275. b. 4.
11 If Lessee for years be ousted, and he in the Reversion disseised, Release to
the Disseisor.
and the Lessee release to the Disseisor, the Disseisee may enter; for the term
for years is extinct and determined: But otherwise it is in case of a Lessee
for life; for (in that Case) the Disseisor has a Freehold, whereupon the
release of tenant for life may inure; but the Disseisor has no term for years,
whereupon the release of the Lessee for years may inure.

Co. ib. 378. ^. 4
12 A man lets lands for life, upon Condition to have Fee, A Lease for years
not capable of a warranty.
and warranteth the land in forma praedicta, afterward the Lessee performs
the Condition, whereby the Lessee has Fee: In this Case, the warranty shall
extend and increase, according to the State; for a warranty being a Covenant
real executory may extend to an Estate in futuro, having an Estate whereupon it
may work in the beginning: but if a man grant a Seigniory for years, upon
condition to have fee, with a warranty in forma praedicta, and after the
Condition is performed, this shall not extend to the fee, because the first
Estate was but for years, which was not capable of a warranty: And so it is, if
a man make a lease for years, the remainder in Fee, and warrant the land in
forma praedicta, he in the remainder cannot take benefit of the warrantie;
because he is not party to the Deed, and immediately he cannot take, if he were
party to the Deed; because he is named after the habendum, and the Estate for
years is not capable of a warranty, etc.

Waste.
13 A Lease for life, the remainder for years, Finch 29.
the remainder over in Fee, an action of waste lies for him in the remainder
in Fee against the Lessee for life: sor the mean Estate for years is not
regarded: Otherwise it were, if the mean Estate for years were an Estate for
life, etc.

Joynt-tenants may prejudice one another.
14 One Ioynt-tenant cannot prejudice his Companion, Co. l. 2. 68. a. 3. in
Tookers ca.
as to any matter, that concerns the Inheritance or Frank-tenement; But as to
the profits of the Frank-tenement they may prejudice one another, etc. per
Popham.

Right of Action.
15 There is a diversity between Inheritance and Chattels; Co. l 3. 3. a. 1 in
the Marquess of Winchesters Case.
for the right of action concerning Inheritances is not forfeited by Attainder,
etc. but Obligations; Statutes, Recognisances, etc. and such other things in
action are forfeited by Attainder or Outlawry.

Real and personal actions.
16 The Law has provided greater safety and remedy for matters of
Frank-tenement and Inheritance, then for Debts and Chattels; Co. l. 6. 7. a. 1
in Ferrers Case.
for there once barred, and ever barred; for in personal actions, as in Debt,
Account, etc. the bar is perpetual; because the Plaintiff (in that Case) cannot
have an Action of an higher nature, but his only remedy (in such Case) is by
Error or Attaint: Howbeit if the Demandant be barred in a real Action by
judgment upon Verdict, Demurrer, Confession, etc. yet he may have an Action of
higher nature, and try the same right again, because it concerns the
Frank-tenement and Inheritance; as if one be barred in an Assise de novel
disseisin, yet he may have, upon showing a descent, or other special matter, an
Assise of Mortdancestor, Aiel, Besaiel, Entry sur disseisin, to his Ancestor,
etc. So if a man be barred in a Formedon in descender, he may have a Formedon
in reverter or remainder, for that is an Action of an higher nature; because in
it the Fee-simple is to be recovered according to the opinion in Robinsons Case
in the 5. Report, fol. 33.

^ands not ^hargeable in ^^cution.
17 At the Common Law before the Statute of West. 2. cap. 18. Co. l. 3. 11. b.
4 in Sir Will. Herberts case.
(which gave an Elegit against the moity of the Debtors Lands) upon a
Recognisance or Judgment sued, lands were not chargeable in execution, but
only Goods and Chattels, or else grain or other present profit increasing upon
the land, viz. Goods and Chattels by Fieri facias and such present profit by
Levari facias, etc. (Vide supra, Ru. 92. ex. 16.) Howbeit in the Kings Case, by
reason of his Prerogative, and in Case of an Heir, in by Descent, and
chargeable by the act of his Ancestor, etc. (because otherwise (in such Case)
the Creditor was without remedy, etc.) lands were chargeable in execution, etc.

(...) by a ter^^r not good.
18 A man devises a rent for life out of a Manor, Co, l. 6. 58 b. 4 in
Bredimans Case.
and devises the Manor for years, the termor enters, and pays the rent,
after the term, the Devisee brings an Assise for the rent against the
Terre-tenant: And in this Case seisin by the hands of the Termor was adjudged
no sufficient seisin whereupon to ground the Assise, but the seisin ought to
have been given by the hands of the Terre-tenant, viz. of one the tenant of the
Frank-tenement, etc. ( Vide supra, Ru. 86. ex. 21.) It had been otherwise, if
the termor for years had been Lessee for life; for then the seisin had been
given by the hands of the Terre-tenant, viz. of one that had Frank-tenement, as
may be collected out of Bredimans Case, ubi in margin, viz. fol. 58. b.

^^rantee of a ^^version: ^^dition.
19 If a man make a Lease for years, upon condition, Co. l. 8. 95. b. 3 in Matt.
Mannings Case. and Co. l. 10. 48. b. 3 in Lampets ca.
that if the Lessee does not such an act, that the Lease shall be void, and
after the Lessor grants the Reversion over, the condition is broken, the
Grantee shall take advantage of that Condition by the Common Law; for the lease
is thereby absolutely void: But if a lease for life had been made upon such
Condition, the grantee shall not take benefit of the breach of the Condition:
because a frank-tenant (whereof a praecipe lies) cannot so easily cease, but it
is voidable by entry after the Condition broken, which cannot by the Common Law
be transferred to a stranger, etc. and with this agrees 11 H. 7. 17. and Br.
Condit. 245. 2. Mar. per Bromley Rule 27.

Co. l. 9. 135. a 1 in Ascoughs Case.
20 If the Lord grant his Seigniory for years, Seigniory. Attornment. Lessee
for (...) for years.
the remainder to the Tenant peravaile for life, in this Case the Seigniory is
suspended: because the Tenant for life has the frank-tenement of the
Seigniory, and he is Tenant to every praecipe of the Seigniory: as in the Case
of Littleton l. 2. cap. Attornment, fol. 128. If land be let to a man for term
of years, the remainder to another for term of life, and after the Lessor
grants over the reversion, and he in the remainder for life attornes, this is a
good attornment, and shall bind the Lessee for years without any attornment
made by him: For, he was Tenant of the frank-tenement: and at the Common Law
the termor for years was subject and under the power of the Tenant of the
frank-tenement: for he shall not falsify a recovery at the Common Law against
the Tenant of of the frank-tenement, because he has but a Chattel, etc.

Co. lib. 10. 48. b. 3. in Lampets Case.
21 If Lessee for 1000 years be ousted by the Lessor, Frank-te^^^ cannot dr^^^
in a Chattel.
and he makes a lease for 2 years to another: In this Case, the Lessee for
1000 years may release to the Lessee for 2 years: but if the Lessor disseise
his Lessee for life, and make a lease for 1000 years, yet the Lessee for life
cannot release to that Lessee for years: because a frank-tenement is too high
to be drowned in a Chattel.

Co. lib. 10. 87. a. 4. in Leonard Loveis Case.
22 If a term be devised to one and to the heirs males of his body, A term
shall go to the E^ecutors.
his heir shall not have it, but his Executors; for the term, which is but a
Chattel, cannot be entailed, and such a devisee may alien the term to whom he
pleases: and so it was adjudged, Tr. 28 Eliz. in B. R. in Peacocks Case, and
21 Eliz. resolved by Anderson and Walmesly, being referred unto them out of the
Chancery between Higgins, and Milles. See also Dier 7. 28 H. 8. Pl. 8.

F. N. B. 34. f.
23 If a Man make a devise of lands or Tenements, Court* Christian.
the devisee shall not sue for them in the Ecclesiastical Court, and if he do,
the other party shall have a prohibition: Otherwise it is of personal goods,
and also of Chattels real, as a term of years, a ward, etc. for, for such, the
devisee may sue in that Court, etc.

Co. l. 3. 26. a. 3. etc. in Butler and Bakers Case.
24 An Estate of Inheritance or freehold cannot be put out of a man by any
verbal wayver, disclaimer or dis-agreement in pais, Disclaim in pais of inter^
in goods, (...) so of frech^
or otherwise then in Court of Record: but a man may disclaim or disagree to
Interest in Chattels in pais and no such dis-agreement in a Court of Record is
(in that Case) necessary: For example, If Lands be given to Baron and Feme in
tail or in see, the Baron dies, the Feme (in this Case) cannot divest the
frank-tenement out of her, by saying, she dis-agrees to the grant, or that she
will have nothing to do with the land, So if the Baron aliens his land, and
takes again an Estate to him and his wife in tail, the Baron dies, the Lord of
whom the land is holden by Knight Service, supposing that the Baron died solely
seized, by parol assigns dower to the Feme, which she accepts: yet this
refusal of the Inheritance, and acceptance of the Dower in pais shall not
divest the frank-tenement out of her: Likewise, if a Charter of feofment be
made to four, and seisin delivered to three in the name of all, and after the
seisin delivered the fourth coming and seeing the deed, dis-agrees to it and
says he will have nothing to do with the land; yet it was adjudged in 13 R. 2.
Title Jointenance, that this dis-agreement by parol in pais could not divest
the frank-tenement out of him, And Thorpe in 53 E. 3. Tit. Disclaimer, says,
that in such Case the tenancy remains in all, until dis-agreement in Court of
Record: But if A. make an Obligation to B. and deliver it to C. to the use of
B. this is the deed of A. presently; Howbeit if C. offer it to B. there B. may
refuse it in pais, and by such refusal the Obligation shall be his force: There
is the same Law of a gift of goods and Chattels, if the deed be delivered to
the use of the Donee, the goods and Chattels are immediately in the Donee
before notice or agreement: but the Donee may make refusal of such gift in
pais, and thereby the property and Interest shall be divested, and such
dis-agreement is not necessary to be made in a Court of Record, as in Case of a
freehold, etc.

Condition to be void.
25 There is a diversity between a Condition annexed to a freehold and a
Condition annexed to a lease for years; Co. Inst. p. 1. 214. b. 3.
for if a man make a gift in tail or a lease for life upon Condition, that if
the Donee or lessee goes not to Rome before such a day, the gift or lease
shall cease or be void, the grantee of the Reversion shall never take advantage
of this Condition: because the Estate cannot cease before an entry: but if the
lease had been but for years, there the grantee should have taken advantage of
the like Condition: because the lease for years ipso facto by the breach of
the Condition without entry was void: for a lease for years may begin without
Ceremony, and also may end without Ceremony: And of a void thing a stranger may
take benefit, but not of a voidable Estate without entry.

Rent issuing (...) of fee and lease hold.
26 A man seized of Black-acre in fee, Co. 7. 23. a. Buts Case.
and possessed of White-acre for years, grants a Rent charge for life with
clause of distress in both: In this Case, the Rent issues only out of
Black-acre: for out of White-acre in regard of the meanness of the Interest
thereof, a frank-tenement cannot issue: neither shall it be put in view, and
acceptance of the Lease of White-acre by grantee of the Rent shall not suspend
the Rent, etc.

Diversity be^wixt lease and ^^^e-hold.
27 If a man make a Lease for years upon Condition, Co. l. 8. 95. b. 3. Matthew
Mannings Case.
that if he do not such an Act the Lease shall be void, and afterward he
grants the reversion over, the condition is broken, the grantee shall take
benefit of this Condition by the Common Law, for the lease is thereby
absolutely void: but if the lease had been for life with such Condition, the
grantee shall not take benefit of the breach of the Condition: for a
Frank-tenement (up on with a praecipe lies) cannot so easily determine, but is
voidable by entry after the Condition broken, which cannot be by the Common Law
transferred to a stranger.

(...)-tenants. ^^nants in Common.
28 If Lands be given to John Bishop of Norwich and his Successors, and to John
Overall Doctor of Divinity and his heirs, Co. I^st. p. 1. 190. 4.
being one and the same person, he is Tenant in Common with himself; but it is
otherwise of Chattels real or personal; for if a Lease for years be made or a
ward granted to an Abbot and a secular man, or to a Bishop and a secular man,
or if goods be given to them, they are joynt-tenants thereof, and not tenants
in common; for they take them in their natural, and not in their politic
capacity.

(...) of a r^^^^sion, for (...) good ^^houe At^^^ment.
29 Grant of a Reversion of freehold is not good without attornment but if a
man make a lease for years rendering Rent, Dier 26. 167. 28 H. 8.
and afterward makes a Lease of the same land to another to commence during
the first term, this is a good grant of the reversion, and he shall have the
Rent (it being but a Chattel: which is granted in reversion) without attornment.

95 Matter of Record more then other transactions.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 161. a. 3.
1 There is a diversity between a warrant of Record, A warrant and a bare
authority.
and a warrant; or an authority in Law, for if a capias be awarded to the
Sheriff to arr^st a man for felony, albeit the party be innocent yet cannot
he make rescous; but if the Sheriff will by the authority, which the Law
gives him arrest a man for felony, which is not guilty, he may rescue himself.

Littl.. 406. C. ibid. 247. b. 4. Dier 232. 9.
2 If a man de non sane memoriae or an Infant make a feofment or other
conveyance of his land in pais, the heir of the non sane memoriae, Conveyance
by fine, etc.
and the Infant himself or his heir may enter and but the feoffee, etc.
Otherwise it is, if the conveyance be by fine, or by other assurance of record,
etc. unless the Infant reverse it before full age because of inspection.

Co. ibid. 251. b. 2. and 4.
3 A particular Estate of any thing, that is in grant, Conveyance by fine, men
then that by grant.
cannot be forfeited by any grant in fee by deed, as if Tenant for life or
years of an Advowson: Rent, Common, or of a Reversion or remainder of Land, by
deed grant the same in fee, this is no forfeiture of his Estate; because it
passes by deed, and nothing is divested, neither yet does any thing thereby
pass, albeit the deed of such things be enrolled, and so made a matter of
record; yet neither then works if any forfeiture, because the deed is the
original, etc. But a grane of such things by fine, (albeit no reversion or
remainder is thereby divested) works a forfeiture, because that is matter of
Record, ab origin, etc.

Co. ibid. 252. a. 1.
4 An attornment of Record to a stranger by Tenant for life or years works a
forfeiture: So does not an attornment in pais. Attornment forfeiture.


Co. ibid. 258. a. 2. and lib. 9. 106. a. in the Lord Anal^ys Case.
5 If an Infant or any man of full age have any right of entry into any lands,
Entry by a stranger suff^cient for the diseisee, etc.
any stranger in the name and to the use of the Infant or man of full age may
enter into the Lands, and this (regularly) shall vest the Lands in them without
any commandment precedent or agreement subsequent: But if a disseisor levy a
fine with proclamation according to the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap. 24. a stranger
without a commandment precedent, or an agreement subsequent within the five
years cannot enter in the name of the Disseisee to avoid the fine: Howbeit an
Assent subsequent within the five years is sufficient; Omnis enim ratio
habitio retrotrahitur and mandato aequiparatur: And this resolution is grounded
upon the construction of the said Statute, and the force of a fine, being a
matter of Record, etc.

Co. ibid. 309. a. 4. and 314. a. 3. and Litt.. 579. and Co. l. 2. 67. b. 4. in
Tookers Case.
6 Before the Stature of uses (27 H. 8. cap. 10.) upon a grant in pais of a
Seigniory, Rent, reversion, or remainder, Grant in p^^^ not good without
attornment, otherwise of a fine.
if either the grantor or the grantee had died before attornment, such grant
had been remediless and void, etc. but if the grant had been by fine, then
albeit the Conusor or Conusee had died, yet the grant had been good; or for, by
fine levied the state did pass to the Conusee and his heirs, and the
attornment to the Conusee or his heirs at any time, to make privity to
distraine, had been sufficient: But now by force of that Statute the grant of
such things (by fine, or bargain and sale by deed indented and enrolled) is
good (yea even to distraine also) without attornment. Vide R. 55. e. 69.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 320. a. 3.
7 If Tenant for life has a privilege, Claim of ^^^vilege by ^^^nant for
(...) etc.
not to be impeacheable of wast, or any other privilege, and upon grant of the
reversion by deed he attornes without saving his privilege, yet loses he
thereby no privilege, for there can be no conclusion or bar by such
attornment in pais; And so it is also of an attornment in Law; as if the Lessor
disseise the Lessee for life and make a feoffment in fee, and the Lessee
re-enter, this is an attornment in Law which shall not prejudice him of any
privilege; Likewise if the Lessor levy a fine of the reversion, and the
Conusee die without heir, whereby the reversion escheateth to the Lord: In
this Case the Law does supply an attornment, and therefore the Lessee shall
lose no privilege, etc. But in a Quid Juris clamat brought by the Conusee of a
fine, if the Tenant for life claims not his privilege, but attornes
generally, his priveiledge is lost; because that is upon record, and the writ
supposes him to be but a bare tenant for life; and therefore by his general
attornment according to the writ he is barred for ever to claim any
privilege, but a bare Estate for life, etc.

Attornment.
8 If a reversion be granted for life, the remainder in fee, by deed, Co. l. 2.
67. b. 4. in Tookers Ca.
and the grantee for life dies, attornment to him in remainder is void, for it
is not according to the grant; otherwise it is, if the grant were by fine, etc.
Vide supra 6. and R. 55. e. 69.

Waiver in Court of Re^^^d.
9 At the Common Law, Co. l. 3. 26. a. 3. in Butler and Bakers Case.
if lands be given to Baron and Feme in tail, or in fee, and the Baron die; in
this Case, albeit the Feme before her entry, reciting her Estate, says by
parol in pais, that she assents and agrees to the said Estate, or words to that
effect, yet afterward she may waive that Estate in a Court of Record: So in M.
34 E. 1. Tittle Advowry 232. it was adjudged, that if a man take a distress
for one thing, yet when he comes into a Court of Record, he may make Avowry for
what thing he pleases: Also in 13 R. 2. Joint-tenancy, A Charter of feofment
was made to four, and seisin was delivered to three in name of all, and the
fourth coming and viewing the deed, disagrees, and says by parol, he will
have nothing to do with the Land; and it was adjudged, that this disagreement
by parol in pais shall not divest the frank-tenement out of him: And Thorpe in
35 E. 3. Tittle Disclaimer, says, that in such Case the tenancy remains
still, until his dis-agreement thereunto in a Court of Record, and therefore in
such a Court he may dis-agree and not otherwise, etc.

(...) compos ^^^is.
10 The Law so much tendreth the debility and weakness of a non compos mentis,
that in many Cases the Acts, which he does in pais, Co. l. 4. 124. a. 2. in
Beverleys Case.
shall be avoided, etc. but matters of Record done by him shall not be avoided:
as if he levy a fine, suffer a recovery, acknowledge a Statute or
recognisance, etc. such things as these shall not be avoided by any averment of
non sanae memoriae, either by his heirs or executors, etc.

^oods of one (...) lawed sa^ed by a par^^ upon Re^^d.
11 If a man be outlawed for felony, Co. l. 5 111. a. 2. Foxleyes Case.
albeit he was in prison or beyond Sea, etc. renders himself upon the exigent,
and upon his trial is found not guilty: yet he shall forfeit all his goods and
chattels, and shall not have restitution, etc. for Knivet in 43 E. 3. 17.
says, that the party shall not have restitution of his goods, although the
writ of exigent erronice emanavit, so long as the award of exigent (which is
there called a judgment) stands in force: because the foresaid averments of
imprisonment, or being beyond Sea, etc. are but matters in fuit. But (as it is
said in the same Book) if such an outlawed person have a charter of pardon of
an older date then that of the Exigent, the goods are saved, for that the cause
of saving them appears upon Record, etc.

^ Court of ^^cord only ^^wer to im^^^son.
12 In some Action the Defendant shall be fined in one Court, Co. l. 8. 60. b.
z. in Beechers Case. and Co. lib. 8. 41. a. 3. in Griesleys Case. and lib. 8.
120. a. 1. in Doctor Bonhams Case.
and only amercied in another Court, and yet the offense shall be one and the
same: As in a writ of Reception, if it be brought in the Common Pleas, and
judgment there given, the Defendant shall be fined and imprisoned; but if the
writ be Vicontiel, and before the Sheriff in the County the Defendant is
convict, the judgment shall not be, quod capiatur, etc. but in such Case he
shall be only amercied: And albeit the writ, viz. the Reception is of Record,
yet in as much as the Judges in the Court, viz. the Suitors, are not Judges of
Record, nor the Court a Court of Record, they cannot impose a fine or commit
any to prison, Quia nulla Curia, qui Recordum non habet, potest imponere finem,
neque aliquem mandare carceri, quia ista spectant tantummodo ad Curias de
Recordo, etc.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 233. b. 4.
13 If a Lease for life be made to a Feme covert or an Infant, Infant. Feme
covert. Forfeiture. Mortmain. Recovery. Wast.
and they by Charter of Feoffment Alien in Fee, the breach of this Condition in
Law is no absolute forfeiture of her Estate: So it is also of a Condition in
Law given by Statute, which gives an entry only, As if an Infant, or Feme
covert with their husband, Alien by Charter of feofment in Mortmaine, this is
no bar to the Infant or Feme covert: But if a recovery be had against an
Infant or Feme covert in an Action of wast, there they are bound and barred for
ever: because that is matter of record unto which the Law gives high respect:
and therefore it is to be observed, that a condition in law by force of a
Statute, which gives a recovery, is in some Case more strong, then a Condition
in Law without a recovery: For if Lessee for life make a lease for years, and
after enter into the land, and make wast, and the Lessor recover in an Action
of wast, he shall avoid the lease made before the wast done: But if the Lessee
for life make a lease for years, and after enter upon him, and make a feofment
in fee, this forfeiture shall not avoid the lease for years, etc.

Co. ib. 356. 24
14 If a man sue a false and feigned Action against Tenant for life, Recovery.
Discontinuance.
and recover the land against him by default, so that he may have against the
recoveror a Quod ei deforceat, according to the Statute of West. 2. cap. 4. In
this case, albeit the Action be false and feigned, yet is a Recovery (being a
matter of Record) so much respected in Law, that it works a discontinuance:
so that the Lessor cannot have an Action of wast neither against the one nor
the other: for by the recovery the privity between the Lessor and Lessee is
destroyed, and between the Lessor and the recoverer there never was, nor can be
any privity: and by the recovery all the reversion is divested out of the
Lessor and vested in the recoveror: But if Tenant for life make a feofment in
fee upon Condition, and wast is done, and after the Lessee reenters for the
Condition broken: in this Case the Lessor shall have an Action of wast, And so
if a Bishop make a lease for life or years, and the Bishop die, and the
Lessee, the Sea being void, does wast, the Successor shall have an Action of
wast: So if the Lessee be disseised, and wast is done, and the Lessee
reenters, an Action of wast shall be maintained against the Lessee, and so in
like Cases: And yet in none of these Cases, the Plaintiff in the Action of
wast had any thing in the reversion at the time of the wast made: Howbeit in
these Cases the privity utterly still remains: but in the other by force of
the recovery it is for the present utterly destroyed, etc. Vide Statute 14
Eliz. cap. 8. concerning this matter.

Litt.. 695. Co. ib. 364. a. 4.
15 The Disseisor lets the Land to the Disseisee for years, D^sclaime. Remitter.
who enters and disclaimes (by parol in pais) to have any thing, but the lease
for years in the Land; yet is the Disseisee in his Remitter notwithstanding
such disclaimer in pais: But if he disclaim in Court of Record, that he has
not any Estate, save only such Estate for years, such disclaimer in Court of
Record shall conclude him: And so observe a diversity between a claim or
disclaim in pais of an Estate, and a claim or disclaim of Record: for a
claim or disclaim in pais shall not hinder a remitter: But a claim or
disclaim of Record shall; because this works a Conclusion, so does not that,
etc.

Infants, Acts upon record not avoidable.
16 There is a diversity to be observed between matters of Record done or
suffered by an Infant, and matters in fait; Co. ib. 380. b. 2.
for matters in fait he shall avoid either within age, or at full age; but
matters of Record, as Statutes Merchant and of the Staple, Recognisaances
acknowledged by him, and a Fine levied by him, or a Recovery against him by
default in a real action, (saving in Dower) must be avoided by him, viz.
Statutes, etc. by Audita querela, and the Fine and Recovery by writ of Error,
during his minority, and the like: And the reason thereof is, because they are
judicial acts, and taken by a Court or a Judge, etc.

Partition in Chancery of an Advowson.
17 If Coperceners make partition in Chancery, F N B 36 c:
or in the Common Pleas to present by turn, and after a stranger usurpes in
their several turns; yet after, when their turns happen, each of them may
have a Scire facias upon that partition against the stranger, when her turn
falls, to show wherefore he presents, notwithstanding such usurpation made; but
it is otherwise (as it seems) where the partition is not of Record; for then
they are put to their writ of right, by reason of such usurpation.

Bar to a writ of Eschear.
18 Some do hold, that if there be Lord and Tenant, Co. Inst. p. 1. 268. a. 4.
and the Tenant be disseised, and the Disseisee die without heir, the Lord
accepts rent by the hands of the Disseisor, this is no bar to him; but if he
avow for the rent in a Court of Record, this shall bar the Lord of his writ of
Escheat.

Not named, yet good.
19 If a Grant be made to, Co. ib. 3. 2. 3.
or a Lease be made by a Dean and Chapter, Mayor and Communalty, or the like;
it is good without naming the Dean or Mayor, etc. by their names; but in
pleading the proper name of the Dean, Mayor, etc. must be showed, because it is
matter of Record, and ought to be certain.

Partition.
20 If there be two Coperceners, Dier. 52. 20. 33 H. 8
and one of them make a Lease for years of her part; and afterward the other
brings a writ de partitione facienda against the Lessor, and partition is
thereupon made: In this Case, albeit the part allotted to the Lessor be less
then the part of the other, yet the Termor is without remedy: But if the
partition were without writ, it seems to be otherwise.

Ancient De^esne.
21 Ancient Demesne shall be extended by Elegit, Co. l. 5. 105. a. 4. in Aldens
ca.
because in such Case no Judgment is given to recover the possession of the
land in a Court of Record, but only execution made by the Sheriff in pais;
Howbeit in an Assise brought by tenant by Elegit, ancient Demesne is a good
Plea, (as it is held in 22 Ass. Pl. 45.) because there the Plaintiff shall
recover the possession of the land by Judgment upon Record.

Certificate recorded.
22 The Certificate of the Messenger (sent by Queen Mary to the Palatinate in
Germany to call Mr. Bartue and his wife, Dier. 177. 31. 2 El.
the Duchess of Suffolk home) and the abuses there offered him by their
servants being recorded in Chancery, and afterwars sent by Mittimus into the
Exchequer, could not be traversed, for that it was a Record, and could not be
tried by any Visne of the Realm, it is otherwise of matter of fact done in the
Country, etc.

96 Conveyances by Livery, or which pass Estates of the Land, more then those
that pass by Grant, or only pass things belonging to, or issuing out of the
Land.
Things in ^^^nt.
1 Livery of seisin is of greater consideration in Law, Co. Inst. p. 1. 251. b.
2.
then a bare Condeyance by Grant; For, a particular Estate of any thing that
lies in Grant cannot be forfeited by any Grant thereof made in Fee; Lit.. 609,
610 611. Co. ib. 330. b. 2.
Life. No forfeit^^^
As if tenant for life or years of an Advowson, Rent, Common, or of a Reversion
or Remainder of land, by Deed grant the same in Fee, this is no forfeiture of
their Estates, because it passes only by Deed, Conveyant by livery a
forfeiture.
and nothing is divested, neither yet does any thing thereby pass, but what
may lawful pass: But if tenant for life of land enfeoff another of the land
in Fee by livery without Deed, that is a forfeiture of his Estate, in regard of
the solemnity of the livery, whereby the Reversion or Remainder is divested: So
likewise if the Tenant for life or years of land, the Reversion or Remainder
being in the King, make a Feoffment in Fee by livery, etc. Albeit (in that
Case) no Reversion or Remainder is divested out of the King, nevertheless that
also is a forfeiture of his Estate, in respect of the solemnity by livery
tending to the Kings dis-herisin, etc.

Litt. 598, 599 600. and Co. ibid. 328 a. 3 Co. l. 3. 84. a, etc. in the case
of F^nes, and 85. b. 4, etc.
2 If tenant in tail be disseised, A Release no Discontinuance.
and he then releafeth by his Deed to the Disseisor and his heirs all his right
that makes no discontinuance, because nothing can pass by such a release, but
that which may lawfully pass without prejudice to any other: But otherwise it
is; if he make a Feoffment in Fee of the land, in respect of the livery of
Seisin; because it is the most solemn and common Assurance in the Country, and
to be mai^tained for the common good and quiet of the Realm: And upon the
Feoffment the Freehold, (which is so much esteemed in Law) does pass by open
livery to the Feoffee; but by the release a bare right only.

3 Vide supra M. 94.. Pl. 25. M. ^o. Pl. 8.

Dier. 51. b. 17 33 H. 8.
4 Tenant in tail before the Statute of 27 H. 8. Lease good against Issue i^
tail.
of Uses makes a Feoffment in Fee to the use of himself and his heir^, and
after he and his Feoffees make a lease for years rendering rent, and after the
Statute is made, the tenant in tail dies seized and his issue aliens the land
by fine before any entry made upon the Termor, or any receipt of the rent, and
the alienee accepts he rent: In this Case the Alienee shall never avoid the
lease, whether he accepted the rent or no; for the lease was not merely void by
the death of the tenant in tail, without actual entry made by the issue; but it
had been otherwise of a rent granted out of the land by the Tenant in tail and
his Feoffees: So likewise in Littletons Case of a Feoffment by tenant in tail
to his eldest son within age, and when he comes to full age, he make a Leasts
for years, and after the father dies, so as the son is remitted, yet h^ shall
not avoid his lease, as he might have done a rent issuing out of the land.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 332. a. 4.
5 If there be tenant for life, the remainder in tail, Discontinuance.
and he in the remainder grants it to another in fee by Deed, and the tenant
for life attorns, this is no discondinuance of the remainder in tail; so it is
likewise of a Rentcharge, Advowson in gross, Common in gross, or the like;
for the Rule is, that a Grant by Deed of such things as do lie in Grant, and
not in livery of Seisin, do work no discontinuance.

Co. ib. 332. b. 1
6 If tenant in tail of a rent, service, etc. Discontinuance.
or of a Reversion or Remainder in tail, etc. grant the same in Fee with
warranty, and he owes Assets in Fee simple, and dies: This is neither bar nor
discontinuance to the issue intail, but he may distrain for the rent, or
service, or enter into the land after the decease of the tenant for life: But
if the issue brings a Formedon in descender, and admit himself out of
possession, then he shall be barred by the warranty and Assets: It is
otherwise, (...) tenant in tail in possession makes a Feoffment with livery of
Seisin, for that works a discontinuance: And yet if tenant in tail of a rent
disseise the tenant of the land, and make a Feoffment in Fee with warranty, and
dies, This is no discontinuance of the rent, but the issue may distrain for
the same: And albeit the warranty ex^^^^ to the rent, yet (by the Rule of
Littleton. 618.) it lies not in discontinuance: And where the thing does lie
in livery, as lands and tenements, yet if to the Conveyance of the Freehold and
Inheritance no livery of Seisin is requisite, it works no discontinuance; as
if tenant in tail exchange lands, etc. or if the King being tenant in tail
grant by his Letters Patents the lands in Fee, there is no discontinuance
wrought: Also it is regularly true of a thing that lies in grant, that
although it be granted by fine, yet it works no discontinuance: Howbeit it
tenant in tail make a lease for years of lands, and after levy a Fine, this is
a discontinuance: for a Fine is a Feoffment of Record, and in such Case the
Freehold passes: But if tenant in tail makes a lease for his own life, and
after levy a Fine, this is no discontinuance, because the Reversion, expectant
upon a State of Freehold, which lies only in grant, passes thereby.

97 A matter in the right, more then a matter in possession.
Fore-judger ^f Mesne.
1 If the tenant be disseised, and the Disseisor in a writ of Mesne, Co. Inst.
p. 1. 100. b. 1.
fore-judge the Mesne, this shall not bind the Disseisee: And so if the Mesne
be disseised, and a fore-judgment is had against the Disseisor, this does not
bind the Disseisee, for the words of the Statute of West. 2. cap. 9. are,
Quando tenens sine praejudicio alterius quam medii attornare se potest capitali
Domino, etc.

^^scription. ^^stome.
2 A title once gained by prescripcion or custom, Co. ib. 114. b. 2
cannot be lost by interruption of the possession for ten or twenty years; but
by interruption in the right it may be lost, as if a man have had a rent or
Common by prescription, unity of possession of as high and perdurable estate is
an interruption in the right.

^ Writ of ^^sne.
3 In a writ of Mesne the Plaintiff made his title by prescription, Co. ibid.
that the Defendant and his Ancestors had acquitted the Plaintiff and his
Ancestors, and the Terre-tenant time out of mind, etc. the Defendant took
Issue that the Defendant and his Ancestors had not acquitted the Plaintiff and
his Ancestors, and the Terre-tenant; and the Jury gave a special Verdict, that
the Grandfather of the Plaintiff was enfeoffed by one Agnes, and that Agnes and
her Ancestors was acquitted by the Ancestors of the Defendant time out of mind
before that time, since which time no acquital had been; and it was adjudged
and afterward affirmed in a writ of Error, that the Plaintiff should recover
his acquital; for that there was once a title by prescription vested, which
cannot be taken away by a wrongful cesser to acquit of late time: And albeit
the Verdict had found against the letter of the Issue, yet for that the
substance of the Issue was found, viz. a sufficient title by prescription, it
was adjudged both in Banco, M. 4^ and 44. El. in a Prohibition betwixt Nowel
and ^icks in B. R.
and afterward in a writ of Error in B. R. ^^las deci^^di.
for the Plaintiff. So a modus decimandi was alleged by prescription time out
of mind for tithes of lambs, and thereupon issue joined, and the Jury found,
that before 20 years then last past, there was such a prescription, and that
for these 20 years he had paid tithe-lamb in specie, and it was objected first,
that the Issue was found against the Plaintiff, for that the prescription was
general for all the time of prescription, and 20 years did fail thereof.
Secondly, that the party by payment of tithes in specie had waved the
prescription or custom: But it was adjudged for the Plaintiff in the
prohibition: for albeit the modus decimandi had not been paid by the space of
20 years, yet the prescription being found, the substance of the Issue is found
for the Plaintiff: Common.
And if a man has a Common by prescription, and takes a Lease of the land for
20 years, whereby the Common is suspended, after the years ended he may claim
the Common generally by prescription; for that the suspension was but to the
possession, and not to the right, and the Inheritance of the Common did always
remain: And when a Prescription or Custom does make a title of Inheritance,
the party cannot alter or wave the same in pais.

Litt.. 430. Co. ib. 257. a 2
4 The Disseisee after claim (lawfully made) shall have an Action of Trespass
against the Disseisor, Claim Trespass Disseisee Disseisor.
notwithstanding his continuance of possession and occupation, and shall
recover damages and costs for the first entry before any regresse, and after
regresse of the Disseisor he shall have an Action of Trespass with a
Continuando, and recover as well for all the mean occupation, as for the first
entry.

Lit. 486, 487. Co. ib 283. b. 2.
5 If the Disseisee enter upon the heir of the Disseisor (which entry is a
disseisin, The mere r^g^ preferred before the possession.
etc.) and the heir bring an Assise or writ of Entry in the nature of an
Assise, he shall recover; but if the heir bring a writ of right against the
Disseisee, he shall be barred, because in the writ of right the charge of the
grand Assise upon their oath is upon the mere right, and not upon the
possession, etc. And albeit (in that Case) the heir in an Assise or writ of
Entry, etc. may regain the possession from the Disseisee, yet shall the
Disseisee still retain his ancient right, and thereupon may again recover the
possession of the land from the heir in a writ of Entry in the per. for the
disseisin made unto him by the ancestor of the heir, Co. ib. 266. a. 2, etc.
or otherwise may recover it in a writ of right, etc. And therefore there is a
diversity worthy observation, when the possession shall draw the right of the
land to it, and when not: for, when the possession is first, and then a right
comes thereunto, the entry of him that has right to the possession, shall
gain also the right, which follows the possession, and the right of
possession (in that Case) draws the right unto it; but when the right is
first, and then the possession comes to the right, albeit the possession be
defeated (as in the Case aforesaid it is by the heir of the Disseisor) yet the
right still remains: So if a woman that has right of Dower disseise the
heir, and he recover the land against her, yet shall he leave the right of
Dower in her: Likewise if the heir of the Disseisor be disseised, and the
Disseisor enfeoff the heir apparent of the Disseisee being of full age, and
then the Disseisee dies, and the naked right descends to him, and the heir of
the Disseisor recovers the land against him, yet does he leave the naked right
in the heir of the Disseisee, that being originally in him, in respect of the
privity of Descent: Also if the heir of the Disseisor be disseised, and the
Disseisee release to the Disseisor upon condition, if the condition be broken,
it shall revest the naked right, etc. And so the Disseisee had entered upon the
heir of the Dissesor, and made a Feoffment in Fee upon ^ondition, if he entered
for the condition broken, and the heir of the ^isseisor entered upon him, the
naked right should be left in the Disseisee: But (in these two last Cases) if
the heir of the Disseisor had entered before the Condition broken, then the
right of the Disseisee had been g^ne for ever; because in the first Case the
possession of the disseisor was first, and then came the right unto it by the
release of the disseisee, an^ in the other Case, the possession and right
happened both in one and the same instant; and (in that Case) the possession
shall relate first: And i^ both Cases until the breach of the Condition, the
disseisee had oust^d himself of his whole Estate. In like manner, A. disseiseth
the he^r of the disseisor, and the disseisee releaseth to A. Now has A. the
mere right to the land; and therefore if the heir of the disseisor enter into
the land, and re-gaine the possession, that shall draw with it the mere right
to the land, and shall not re-gaine the possession only, and leave the mere
right in A. but by the recontinuance of the possession, the mere right is
therewith vested in the heir of the disseisor; because the possession was in
A: before the acquisition of the mere right, etc.

^respass. ^illein.
6 In an Action of Trespass against Tenant for life, 14 H. 7. 5. Keble. Finch 30.
who pleads villeinage in the Plaintiff and the Plaintiff is found frank and no
villein; yet he in the reversion is not estopped by this verdict: for ye thing
it self whereupon the reversion depends, is not in demand, and the
Plaintiff shall recover only damages: Neither can he in the Reversion have a
writ of Error or attaint upon it: Otherwise it is in a nativo habendo, for
there the right of Villeinage comes in question, and he in the Reversion may
have an error or attaint.

98 Yet it favors Possession, where the right is equal.
Hap the ^ardship.
1 If a man purchases at one time several lands, Finch 30.
holden of several Lords by Knight Service, and dies; the Lord that first can
hap the wardship of his heir, shall have it.

Guardian in soccage.
2 Husband and Wife purchase soccage land to them and the heirs of their body,
and have issue within fourteen years of age die: 8 El. 296. Finch 30.
In this Case, if the Grandmother of the part of the Mother of the Issue do
first seize the body, she shall have the wardship, and not the Grandfather of
the part of the Father of the Issue.

Guardian in soccage.
3 If lands holden in soccage be given to a man and the heirs of his body, and
he dies his heir within the age of 14 years, Co. Inst. p. 1. 88. a. 4. Pl.
Co. Carels Case.
the next Cosen of the part of the Father (albeit he be the worthyer) shall not
be preferred before the next Cosen of the part of the Mother, but such of them
as first seiseth the heir shall have his custody.

Guardian in ^occage.
4 If a man be seized of lands holden in soccage of the part of his Father, and
of other lands holden in soccage of the part of his mother, Co. ibidem.
and dies, his Issue being within the age of 14 years: In this Case, such of
the next of kin of either side, as first happeth the body of the heir, shall
have him; Howbeit the next of the blood of the part of the Father shall enter
into the lands of the part of the mother, and the next of kin of the part of
the Mother, shall enter into the lands of the part of the Father, etc.

Tenants in Common. Chattels Personal.
5 Tenants in Common of Personal goods have an equal right in them; Howbeit the
one may take them all from the other, Co. ibid. 200 a. 2.
and shall have them to his own use, if he can hold them: but the other, if he
can re-gaine them by Catch-pole Law, he shall have them: And so it is also of
real Chattels, that are entire: but not of other Chattels real that are
severable, etc.

Rent by incoachment.
6 If there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and 2 s. Rent, Co. l. 4. 11. b. 2 in
Bevils Case
and the Lord by incroachment ( viz. by the voluntary payment of the Tenant)
happens seisin of more Rent, then he ought to have; In this Case, the Law is
so great a favourer of seisins and possessions; that the Tenant shall not avoid
this seisin had by incroachment in avowry unless it be in some special Cases,
which see ubi supra.

99 The Law respects matters of profit, and Interest, largely; Of pleasure,
skill, ease, trust authority, and limitation, strictly.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 46, b. 2.
1 Albeit to diverse purposes a Lessee for years is not Tenant before entry, as
a releas made to him is not good to increase his Estate, Interest terminate.
before entry, neither yet can the Lessor, before entry, grant away the
reversion by the name of the reversion; nevertheless, he before entry has an
Interest, inter esse termini,, grantable to another: So that although the
Lessor die before the Lessee enters, yet the Lessee may enter into the lands:
So also if the Lessee die before he entered, yet his Executors or Administrators
may enter; because he presently by the lease has an Interest in him; And
therefore if the lease be made to two, and one die before entry, his Interest
shall survive, etc.

Co. ibid. 49. b. 2. 181. b. 2. and Co. l. 5. 94. b. 4. in Barwiks Case.
2 If there be two joint attorneys to receive livery for another, Two joint
^^torneys. Two joint Lessees.
and livery of seisin is made to one of them, in the name of both this is
clearly void: because they had but a mere and bare authority, and they both
do in Law make but one attorney, unless the warrant be jointly and severally:
But if a lease for years without deed be made to A. and B. the remainder to C.
in fee, and livery is made to A. in the absence of B. in the name of both, it
seems (in this Case) the livery is good to vest the remainder; because the
Lessee for years, that took the livery has an Interest, etc.

Co. ibid. 52. a. 4. etc.
3 There is a diversity between an authority coupled with an Interest, and a
bare authority: For example, Difference between a bare authority, and an
authority coupled with an interest.
There was a custom in a Manor for the Lord to grant copi-hold lands always
in fee-simple, and never for any lesser Estate, and the Lord did grant to one
by copy for life, the remainder to another and the heirs of his body: And it
was adjudged ( H. 36. Eliz. Rot. 492. inter Sharton and Barns in an ejectione
firm in B. R.) that the grant and remainder ever was good; because the Lord
having authority by Custom, and an Interest withal might grant any lesser
Estate: for in this Case, the Custom that enableth him to the greater,
enableth him to the lesser, Omne majus continet in se minus, etc. So also if
one as Procurator or attorney to another present to his own Benefice, he
thereby puts himself out of possession; because of his Interest coupled with
his authority, and for that the presentee comes in by the Institution and
Induction of the Ordinary; If the Lord or a Grantee of a Rentcharge had been
also Cestuy que use of the land, and after the Stat. of R. 3. and before the
Stat. of 27 H. 8. Cestuy que use had made a feofment in fee of the land, albeit
(in this Case) the land passes from the feoffees, and his feofment is
warranted by the power given to him by the Statute, yet the Seigniory or
Rentcharge is extinct by his feofment, for that he had not a bare authority as
an Attorney has, but also an interest coupled therewith: But he that has but a
bare authority to do a thing is so far from doing more then which he is
expressly authorized to do, that if he strictly pursue not his authority, the
Law adjudged that which he does to be absolutely void: As if a man be disseised
of Black-acre and White-acre, and a warrant of attorney is made to enter into
both, and to make livery; there, if the attorney enter into Black-acre only
and makes livery secundum formam cartae, In this Case the livery of seisin is
void: because he does less then his warrant; for, the Estate in White-acre
cannot be divested without an entry: So likewise, albeit the warrant be
general, viz. to deliver seisin; yet the attorney cannot deliver seisin within
the view: for his warrant is intendable in Law of an Actual and express
livery, and not of a livery in Law; and so it was resolved in Yarhams Case, P.
3. El. in Co. Banco. In like manner, albeit the warrant of Attorney be
indefinite, without limitation of any time, yet the Law prescribes a time,
which the attorney is bound to observe, viz. in the life time of the Feoffor
and Feoffee; for, if either of them die before Livery made, that is a
countermand of the Letter of attorney, and also the Deed it self is become of
none effect, because in that case nothing does pass before Livery of seisin;
for, if the Feoffor dies, the land descends to the heir, and if the Feoffee
dies Livery cannot be made to his heir, because then he should take by
purchase, whereas heirs were named by way of limitation: And herewith agrees
Bracton, Item, Oportet, quod donationem sequatur rei traditio, etiam in vita
donatoris and donatorii, etc.

^ailment of Ca^el.
4 If I bail unto a man my sheep to compass his land, or my oxen, Co. ib. 57.
a. 4.
to air his land, and he kill any of them, I may have an action of trespass,
or an action of trespass upon the case against him, notwithstanding such
bailment; because when the Bailee having but a bare use of them, takes upon
him, as an owner, to kill them, he loses the benefit of the use of them, which
was limited with this caution, viz. that he should not misuse them, etc.

Gage of goods
5 If goods be delivered to one, as a gage or pledge, Co. ib. 89. a. 4.
and they be stolen, he shall be discharged; because he has a property in
them, and therefore ought to keep them no otherwise than his own: but if he
that gaged them, tendered the money before the stealing, and the other refused
to deliver them, then for this default in him he shall be charged; for, after
such tender he kept them upon trust as Bailee, and therefore was to look safely
to them at his peril.

^and devised (...) be sold.
6 If a man seized of Lands devises, that his executors shall sell it, Co. ib
112. b. 3. 113. a. 2. 181. b. 2
and he makes two executors and dies; In this case, if one of the executors
before sale thereof die, or refuse, at the Common Law before the Statute of 21
H. 8. cap. 4. the land could not have been sold by the surviving executor;
because the power given them by the will, being but a bare authority, it ought
strictly to be observed, Dier 177, 32. 2 El.
and they ought both to join in the sale: but if a man devises lands to his
executors to be sold, and he makes two executors, and the one dies, yet the
survivor may sell the land; because they had not a bare trust only, but also a
trust coupled with an interest, and therefore as the state, so also the trust
shall survive, etc.

^der upon ^ortgage.
7 Upon a Mortgage, if a stranger, that has no interest in the land, Co. ib.
206. b. 4. Littl. 334.
will of his own head take authority to tender the moneys, etc. the Feoffee is
not bound to receive them: but if the Mortgager die, his heir within the age of
14 years, and the land being holden in soccage, the next of the kin, to whom
the Land cannot descend, being his Guardian in soccage, may tender in the name
of the heir; because he has an interest as Guardian in soccage: Also if the
heir be within the age of 21 years, and the land is holden by Knight; service,
the Lord, of whom the land is holden, may make the tender for his interest,
which he shall have, when the Condition is performed; for these in respect of
their interest, are not accounted strangers, etc.

^ditions in (...) upon trust,
8 If an Office of Parkership be granted or descend, Co. ib. 233. b: 4
to an infant or Feme covert, and the conditions in Law annexed to that Office
(which require skill and confidence,) be not observed and fulfilled, the Office
is lost for ever; because (as Littleton says. 379.) that implicit condition
of skill, etc. is as strange as an express condition, but if a lease for life
be made to a feme covert, or an infant, and they by Charter, of feofment alien
in fee, the breach of this condition in law, that is without skill, etc. is no
absolute forfeiture of that estate: So it is likewise of a condition in law
given by Statute, which gives an entry only; As if an Infant, or feme covert
with her husband aliens by Charter of feofment in Mortmain, this is no bar to
the Infant or feme covert; because these conditions endeavor to defeat an
Interest only, but the other an Interest mixed with a trust and confidence.

Co. ib. 258. a. 4.
9 If a man makes a letter of attorney to deliver seisin to I. S. upon
condition, and the Attorney delivers it absolute, this is void; Livery of
s^^sin.
And so (some hold) if the warrant be absolute, and he delivers seisin upon
condition, the livery is void; because he ought to pursue his Warrant, etc.

Co. ib. 265. b. 1.
10 If a man by his last Will devise, Power of R^vocation.
that his executors shall sell his land, and dies; If the Executors release
all their right and title in the land to the heir, this is void; for that they
have neither right nor title to the land, but only a bare authority, which is
not within the case a release of a right; And so it is, if Cesty que use had
devised, that his feoffees should have sold his land, Albeit they had made a
feoffment over, yet might they sell the use; for their authority in that case
is not given away by the livery; because in these cases the power or authority
extends only to the use of a stranger, and nothing for the benefit of him
that makes such release or feoffment: It is otherwise where the power or
authority does also respect the benefit of the releasor, as in the case of the
usual powers of revocation, when the feoffor, has power to alter, change,
determine, or revoke the uses, being intended for his benefit; for in that case
he may release, and where the estates before were defeasible, he may by his
release make them absolute, and seclude himself from any alteration, or
revocation, as it was resolved in Albanies case in the 1 Rep. 112, 113.

Co. l. 1. 112, 113. in Albanies Case. Co. ib. 310. 2. 3. Littl.. 552.
11 Attornment is a kind of power, which the tenant, etc, Attornme^t
has to make perfect the grant of a reversion, remainder, rent, etc. And
therefore it ought to be always strictly and exactly directed according to the
grant: As if the Lord first grant his services in fee to one, and afterward to
another for life, and the tenant first attorns to the last grantee; In that
case, he cannot after attorn to the first grantee to make the fee-simple pass,
for that would not be according to the grant; but in that case the Attornment
to the first is countermanded: And so it is if a reversion expectant upon an
estate for life be granted to another in fee, and after the Grantor before
Attornment confirms the estate of the Lessee, in tail, the Attornment to the
Grantee for the Fee-simple is void: In the same manner, if a Reversion upon an
Estate for years be granted in fee, and the Lessor confirm the estate of the
Lessee, for life, he cannot afterward attorn, etc.

Co. ib. 365. b. 3.
12 Warranties are favored in Law, Warranty, Estopples.
because they are matter of interest, whereby a man's estate is the better
assured; It is otherwise of Estopels; because they are matter of limitation,
whereby an Estate is barred.

Co. l. 9. 75. b. 3. in Combs Case.
13 If man has a naked authority coupled with a confidence, Executors, Cestuy
qu^
as Executors have to sell land, they cannot do it by Attorney; but if a man
has authority, as absolute Owner of the Land, there he may do it by Attorney,
as Cesty que use might after the Statute of 1 R. 3. and before the Statute of
27 H. 8. For Cesty que use had absolute authority to dispose of the Land at his
pleasure, without any confidence reposed in him, as appears in 11 Eliz. Dyer
283. and there also a Judgment in 25 H. 8. is cited, which agrees with it,
against the opinion of some Justices in 9 H. 7. fol. 24. So likewise a
Copiholder, Copyhol^ Power to make Le^
who has not a bare authority only to surrender, but likewise a customary
estate of Inheritance coupled with such an authority, may surrender by
Attorney. Also there is a diversity between a general absolute power and
authority, as Owner of the Land, as aforesaid, and a particular power or
authority (by him that has but a particular interest) to make Leases for lives
or years; And thereforr if A be tenant for life, the remainder in tail, etc.
And A. has power to make Leases for 21 years, rendering the ancient rent, etc.
he cannot make a lease by a letter of Attorney by force of his power; because
he has but a particular power, which is personal to himself alone, as it was
resolved in the Lady Greshams Case, 24 Eliz. per Wray and Anderson, then
Justices of Assise in Suffolk.

^wer to make ^ases not in ^eir own ^me.
14 When any has authority as Attorney to do an Act, Co. ib. 79. b 4.
he ought to do it in the name of him, that gives him such authority; for he
appoints the Attorney to be in his place, and to represent his person; and
therefore the Attorney cannot do it in his own name, nor as his proper act, but
in the name, and as the act of him, but gives him the Authority; And what he
does otherwise is void: So if Attorneys have power by writing to make leases by
Indenture for years, etc. they cannot make the Indentures in their own name,
but in the name of him, that gave them warrant, etc.

(...) Office of ^arshalsie.
15 The office of Marshal of the Marshalsie cannot be granted for years; because
it is an Office of great trust annexed to the person, Co. l. 9. 96. b 4. in Sir
George Reynols Case.
and concerns the administration of Justice, and the life of the Law, which is
to keep such as are in Execution in salva and arcta custodia, to the end they
might the sooner pay their debts, etc. And this trust is individual and
personal, so that it shall not be extended to Executors or Administrators; for
the Law will not repose confidence in matters concerning the administration of
Justice in persons unknown.

(...) an Office ^ survivor.
16 If an Office of trust be granted to two pro termino vitae suarum (without
more) by the death of one of them he grant shall be void; Co. l. 11. 3. b. 4.
in Auditors Curles Case.
for it being an Office of trust no survivor can be thereof: In like manner,
there can be no survivor in the Office of the two Auditors of the Court of
Wards; for the Statute of 32 H. which erects that Court, provides, that there
shall be two persons, etc. who shall have a Judicial voice; and therefore (in
that case) the King cannot appoint only one; because it is a matter of trust
committed to two, and the subject by that Act has an Interest in it, and
securius expediuntur negotia commissa pluribus: Howbeit the King may constitute
one at one time and another at another time by several Patents; And albeit he
may so do, yet he, that is first constituted, has no judicial voice, before
the other be also constituted; for it is provided by the Statute, that two
persons, etc. shall be one Officer: And therefore (in the same case) although
they be constituted by one and the same Patent with these words, conjunctim and
divisim, and alterius eorum diutius viventis; yet that shall serve for no other
purpose, then that the survivor shall be one of the persons, to whom another
may be added to make up that one Office, etc.

^tate.
17 A license to hunt in my Park or Walk in my Orchard extends but to himself,
not to his servants, or other in his company; for, 13 H. 7. 13. Finch 31.
it is but a thing of pleasure; otherwise it is of a license to hunt, kill, and
carry away the Deer; for that is a matter of profit.

^y.
18 Way granted to Church over any land, 12 H. 7. 25. b. Finch ibid.
extends not to any other but himself; for it is but an Easement.

^rnment.
19 A Reversion granted to two Ioynt-tenants, 11 H. 7. 12. b. Finch ibid.
and the tenant attorns to one, it is a void Attornment.

20 If the Sheriff behead one, that should be hanged, it is felony. 5 H. 6. 58.
b. 4.
Finch ibid.

4 E. 6. 68. b. Finch ibid.
21 The King licenceth one to alien the third part of his Land, License.
and he alieneth all, it is a void alienation for all.

Finch ibid.
22 A Lease is made to A. and B. for their lives, A. dies, Joyntenants
limitation.
B. shall have all during his life, for it is an Interest: But if a Lease be
made to I.S. during the life of A. and B. there (if one of them die) the Estate
is utterly determined; for that is a limitation.

Co. l 1. 173. b. 4. Digges Case.
23 A. covenants to stand seized to the use of himself for life, Revocation and
Limitations strictly taken.
the Remainder to B. in tail, etc. which power to revoke and limit new Uses, by
Deed indented to be enrolled in Chancery; A. afterward revokes and limits by
Deed indented, and then levies a Fine, and after that the Indenture of
Revocation, etc. is enrolled in Chancery: Here, by levying the Fine before
inrolment he has extinguished his power of Revocation, etc. So also it had
been, if he had made Feoffment of the Land; for, power of Revocation, and
limitation of Uses are to be punctually observed, because strictly taken in
Law; And therefore also (in the same case) these words, Indented to be
enrolled, are to be understood, Indented and Enrolled.

Co. ib. 174. b. 2.
24 A. covenants with B. that in consideration B. will marry his Daughter,
Limitations exitnct.
he and his heirs will stand seized to the use of B. and his heirs, B. enters,
and disseiseth A, and makes Feoffment in Fee, A. reenters, and after B.
marries his Daughter; yet here, the Use does not vest in B, because he has
extinguished the limitation of the Use to him by his Feoffment.

Dier 56. 18. 35 H. 8.
25 If a man be bound in an Obligation with condition to pay 10 l. to the
Obligor at a day to come, Obligation^, Limitation payment,
and the Obligee delivers him an Horse, or any other thing in satisfaction of
the 10 l. and the Obligee accepts it, the condition is performed, for the
Obligee may dispense with his own duty by that means, but if the condition be,
that a stranger to the condition shall pay it, or that the Obligor shall pay it
to a stranger to the Obligation, in such cases, the Conditions ought to be
strictly performed, according to their several limitations, otherwise the
Obligations are forfeit, for in such case, an horse, or other thing in
satisfaction of the sum will not suffice, because such limitations must be
strictly observed.

Dier 56, 20, etc. 35 H. 8.
26 In Debt upon an Obligation to perform Covenants of an Indenture, Obligation.
Covenants.
etc. the Defendant pleads a Release of all Covenants in the same Indenture,
made five years after the date of the said Indenture, and this was held no
good plea in bar of the Obligation, because the limitation of the condition
being for the performance of Covenants, if any Covenant was broken before the
sealing and delivery of the Release, the Obligation was thereby forfeit, and
could not be avoided by the Release.

Dier 210, 24. 4 Eliz.
27 A man devises, Devise.
that his Executors shall take the profits of his Land, until his heir shall
be at full age to pay Debts, etc. the one dies, after the Survivor makes his
Executors and dies also, the Executor of the Executor last dying, shall take
the profits; because it is an interest, that survives; It is otherwise, if it
had been but a bare authority.

Dier 219, 8. 5 Eliz.
28 A man devises, that after the death of his wife, Devise.
his land shall be sold by his Executors, una cum assensu A. and makes his wife
and a stranger his Executors, and dies, the feme dies, and A. also dies; In
this case, the authority is determined.

Dier 242, 51. 8 Eliz.
29 Two submitted themselves to an Arbitrament by Recognisance concerning the
right and interest of 200 acres of land, Arbitrame^
called Kelstorling, and for all other actions and suits concerning the same,
Ita quod Arbitrium, etc. before a certain day; The Arbitrators award, that the
Defendant shall have brakes during his life in the Waste of the Town of
Kelstorn, rendering to the other 2 s. per annum. And upon a Demurrer it was
adjudged a void award for three causes. 1 Because they made their award but of
one thing, whereas the submission was of two; Howbeit, if the submission had
been by Parol, it had been a good award of part. 2 They have not awarded the
property of the land. whereof the submission was, but a profit only out of the
land. 3 They have not in their award named Kelstorling, and although they might
intend it, yet an averrement of the parties cannot declaim the intent of the
Arbitrators; And all this, because their power being but a bare authority, must
be strictly observed.

100 And therefore these may be countermanded, so cannot those.
An office without profit discharged, with profit otherwise.
1 Where the Grantee of an Office has no profits thereby, Co. Inst. p. 1. 233.
a. 4, etc.
but only a Collateral certain Fee, there the Grantor may discharge him of
his service; as to be a Bailiff, Receiver, Surveyor, Auditor, or the like, the
exercise whereof is only Labor and Charge to him; Howbeit, though he do
discharge, yet he must have his Fee, etc. But where the Grantee, besides his
certain Fee, has also profits, and availes by reason of his Office, there the
Grantor cannot discharge him of his service, or attendance; for that would be
to the prejudice of the Grantee: As if a man does grant to another the
Stewardship of his Courts of his Manors, with a certain Fee, the Grantor cannot
discharge him of his Service, and attendance; because he has other profits,
and fees belonging to his Office, which he should lose, if he were discharged
of his Office: So it is also in the case, which Littleton puts ( 379.) of
the Office of the Keeper of a Park; because (in that case also) he has not
only his Fee certain, but profits and availes also, in respect of his Office,
as Deer-skins, Shoulders, etc-

Attornment.
2 If a feme sole makes a Lease for life or years, reserving a Rent, Co. ib.
310. b. 1.
and grants the Reversion in Fee, and takes husband, this is a Countermand
of the Attornment.

Power of Ar^^tration cannot be made inevocable.
3 If a man be bound by Obligation to stand to, abide, observe, Co. l. 8. 82. a.
3. in Vinyors Case.
etc. the Rule, Arbitrament, etc. of another; yet he may countermand the
authority so given to the Arbitrator, for a man cannot by his act make such an
authority, power, or warrant to be uncountermandable, which by the Law, and of
its own nature is countermandable: As if I make a Letter of attorney to make
Livery, or to sue an action in my name, or if I assign auditors to take an
account, or I make one my Factor, or if I submit my self to an arbitrament;
albeit these are made by express words irrevocable, or although I grant or
bind my self, that all these shall stand irrevocably, nevertheless, they may
be revoked: So likewise, if I make my last Will and Testament irrevocable, yet
I may afterward at my pleasure revoke it: for, my act and my words cannot
alter the judgment of Law, and make that irrevokable, which of its own nature
is revocable: And therefore, notwithstanding it is said in 5 E. 4. 3, 6. That
if I be bound to stand to the award, that I S. shall make, I cannot discharge
that Arbitrament, because I have bound my self to stand to his award, and that
if it were without Obligation, it would be otherwise; Nevertheless, in the one
case and in the other, the authority of the arbitrator may be countermanded;
but then in the one case, he shall forfeit his Obligation, and in the other
case he shall lose nothing; for, ex unda submissione non oritur actio; And with
this agrees Brook, in abridging the said Book of 5 E. 4. Vide 21 H. 6. 30. 28
H. 6. 6. 49 E. 3. 9. 18 E. 4. 9. 8 E. 4. 10.

9 E. 4. 4. b. 1 a E. 5. 28 H. 8. Di 22. Perkins. 14 E. 4. 8. Perkins 19 6.
4 A license to come to my house to speak with me: License. Authority
Countermandable. Presentment Oblige not.
Goods bailed over to be delivered to J. S. or to bestow in Alms, a letter of
Attorney to deliver seisin; all these may be countermanded before they be done:
But if I present J. S. to a Church, I cannot after vary and present a new; for
a kind of Interest passes out of me: So if I deliver an Obligation as a
sorowle into a strangers hand, to be delivered to the Obligee upon a Condition
to be performed, this cannot be countermanded: for upon the delivery there
passes an Interest to the Obligee, he being (as it were) party and privy to
the delivery. Finch 32.

Dier 49. 7. etc. 33 H. 8.
5 A man delivers a sum of money to another to the use and behoof of a Woman,
Bailment.
and to deliver it unto her upon the day of her marriage; In this Case, when a
man makes such a conditional gift of his free will and pleasure, and delivers
the thing in Ovell hand to keep to the use of a stranger, before that condition
be performed, the bailment (which is but a mere authority) is revocable; So if
a man deliver to his servant at Christmas a gold ring to give it for a new
years gift to a stranger, he may countermand it notwithstanding the gift: But
if I say that J. S. has enfeoffed me of certain land, and in recompense
thereof I give him this money, and withal deliver it to a stranger to be
delivered over: In that Case I cannot countermand it, because this gift does
not take effect as a free gift, but as a satisfaction and interest, etc.

Dier 177. 31. 2 El.
6 The license granted to Master Bartue (to go beyond Sea to recover the debts
of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk deceased, provided, License not revocable.
if he should entertain any fugitives of England, that then it should cease)
was not countermandable until he did entertain fugitives, because till then he
had the license in nature of an Interest, being (indeed) granted unto him for a
certain time, viz. until the proviso were broken.

7 Hob. 1^. Sir Dan. Norton against Simmes, the under-shrivewick revocable.

101 Matter of substance more then matter of circumstance.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 114. b. 2.
1 In a writ of Mesne the Plaintiff says, Writ of Mesne Prescription.
that the Defendant and his Ancestors had acquitted him and his Ancestors, etc.
and upon a special Verdict the Jury found, that the Plaintiffs Grandfather
bought the land of one Agnes, and that before that purchase acquital was used
but not since: And (in this Case) it was adjudged both in Banco, and afterward
by writ of Error in B. R. that albeit the Verdict was found against the letter
of the Issue, yet for that the substance of the Issue was found, viz. a
sufficient title by prescription, the Plaintisse should recover his acquital:
M^dus decimandi.
So if a modus decimandi be alleged by prescription, and the Jury finds a
continuance of the prescription till 20 years and after 20 years a payment in
specie: In this Case, albeit the Jury finds not the prescription, as it is
alleged, viz. for the whole time; yet for as much as the substance of the
Issue is found, viz. the prescription, that shall not be prejudiced by such
cesser for 20 years, which is but a circumstance, etc. For if the matter and
substance of the Issue be found, it is sufficient.

Co. ib. 227. a. 4. Co. ib. 154. b. 3 Marton c. 2.
2 If the Mesne recovereth a Rent, when it is a Rent-service, Mesne Redisseisie.
and after the Rent becomes a Rent secke by sur-plussage, and after the Tenant
does re-disseise him of the Rent; In this Case, the Mesne shall have a
re-disseisin upon the Statute of Morton 20 H. 3. for, the substance of the Rent
remains still, though the quality be altered. Tenant after issue, etc.
So if Tenant in special tail recover in Assise, Co. ibidem.
and after becomes Tenant in tail after possibility, etc. and then is
re-disseised, he shall have a re-disseisin upon the same Statute; for albeit
the state of inheritance be altered yet the same free hold remains.

Challenge.
3 If there be a Challenge for Cosinage, Co. ib. 157. a. 4
he that takes the Challenge must show how the Iuror is Cousin: But yet if the
Cosinage, which is the effect and substance, be found, it suffers; for the
Law prefers that, which is material, before that, which is formal.

^ortgage.
4 Upon a Mortgage, Co. ib. 212. a. 4 Litt.. 343.
where there is a time and place limited for the payment of the money; Although
it be paid at a day before it grow due, or at another place, then which is
limited in the deed of mortgage; yet if the mortgagee receive it, that is
sufficient payment; for the time and place of payment are but circumstances,
which shall not prejudice, so that the substance, viz. the payment, etc. be
performed; There is the same Law of an Obligation, etc.

Condition to ^^lean estate ^o the Wife, without impeachment of ^ast.
5 If a feofment be made upon Condition, Co. ib. 219. b. 4 Litt.. 352.
that the Feoffee shall give the land to the Feoffor and his Wife in tail, the
remainder to the heirs of the Feoffor: and the Feoffor dies before the
feofment: In this Case, ( Littleton says. 352.) that the Feoffee ought to make
an Estate for life to the Wife without impeachment of wast, etc. And yet if the
Wife shall accept of any Estate for life without this clause, without
impeachment of wast, it is good: because the Estate for life is the substance
of the grant, and the privilege to be without impeachement of wast is a
collateral circumstance, and only for the benefit of the Wife, and the
omission of it only for the benefit of the heir: So likewise, if the Wife (in
that Case) take Husband before request made, and then they make request, and
the state is made to the Husband and Wife, during the life of the Wife, this is
a good performance of the Condition, albeit the Estate be made to the Husband
and Wife, where Littleton says it is to be made to the Wife, but it is alone
in substance, seeing that the limitation is, during the life of the Wife, etc.

Obligation made beyond Sea.
6 An Obligation made beyond the Seas may be sued here in England, in what place
the Plaintiff will: Co. ib. 261. b. 4
As if it bear date at Bordeaux in France, it may be alleged to be made in
quodam loco vocat Bordeaux in France in Islington in the County of Middelsex,
and there it shall be tried: for whether there be such a place in Islington or
no, is not traversable in that Case, because the place, where it was made, is
only circumstance, and not of the substance of the bond, etc.

^^do and for^^ words of ^orme, not of ^^^stance.
7 These words, modo and forma, prout, etc. are in many Cases but words of form
in pleading, and not words of substance; Litt.. 483. Co. ib. 281. b. 3
for if a man bring a writ of entry in casu proviso, of an alienation made by
the Tenant in Dower to his dis-inheritance, and counts of the alienation made
in fee; and the Tenant says, that he aliened not modo and forma prout, the
Demandant has declared, and thereupon they are at Issue, and it is found by
Verdict that the Tenant aliened in tail, or pur d'auter vie: In this Case, the
Demandant shall recover, yet the alienation was not in manner as the Demandant
had declared: And this Rule holds always true, when the Issue taken goes to
the point of the writ or Action: for then modo and forma are but words of
form: But otherwise it is, when a collateral point in pleading is traversed,
as if a feofment be alleged by two, and this is traversed modo and forma, and
it is found the feofment of one, there modo and forma, is material: So if a
feofment be pleaded by deed, and it is traversed, absque hoc quod feoffavit
modo and forma, upon this collateral Issue modo and forma are so essential,
that the Jury cannot find a feofment without deed.

8 Lord and Tenant by fealty only, and the Lord distraines the Tenant for
Rent, Litt.. 484.
Modo and forma. Lord and T^nant.
the Tenant brings an Action of Trespass against the Lord for his cattle so
taken, and the Lord pleads, that the Tenant holds of him by fealty and certain
Rent, and for the Rent he distrained, etc. And the Tenant says, that he holds
not of him modo and forma, as he supposes, and thereupon they are at Issue,
and it is found by Verdict, that he holds of him per fidelitatem tantum; In
this Case, the writ shall abate, and yet he held not of the Lord, in manner, as
the Lord had alleged; But the matter of the Issue being found, viz, that the
Tenant holds of him, that suffices to abate the writ, albeit the Lord
distraine the Tenant for other services, then are due.

Co. ib. 282. a. 1.
9 If A. be appealed, or indicted of Murder, Modo and forma. Murder. Manslaughter
viz. that he of malice prepensed killed B. A. pleads, that he is not guilty
modo and forma, yet the Jury may find the Defendant guilty of manslaughter
without malice prepensed; because the killing of B. is the matter and malice
prepensed is but a Circumstance.

Co. ib. a. 2.
10 In Assise of darrien presentment, Darrien presentment.
if the Plaintiff allege the avoydance of the Church by privation, and the
Jury find the voydance by death, the Plaintiff shall have judgment: for the
manner of the voydance is not the title of the Plaintiff, but the voydance is
the matter, etc.

Co. ibid. a. 3.
11 If a Guardian of an Hospital bring an Assise against the Ordinary, he
pleads, Deprivation ab Ordinary, as Patron.
that in his visitation he deprived him as Ordinary, whereupon Issue is taken,
and it is found, that he deprived him as Patron; yet the Ordinary shall have
judgment, for, the deprivation is the substance of the matter.

Co. ib. 282. a. 3
12 The Lessee covenants with the Lessor not to cut down any trees etc. And
binds himself in a bond of 40 pounds for performance of covenants, the Lessee
cuts down ten trees, Breach of covenant.
the Lessor brings an Action of debt upon the bond, and assigns a breach
that the Lessee has cut down 20 trees, whereupon Issue is joined, and the
Jury finds, that the Lessee cut down ten; yet judgment shall be given for the
Plaintiff; For sufficient matter of the Issue is found for the Plaintiff.

Litt.. 485. Co. ibid. 282. a. 4. etc.
13 In a writ of Trespass for battery or for goods carried away, In actions
transitory the place must not be traversed.
if the Defendant plead not guilty in the manner, as the Plaintiff supposes,
and it is found, that the Defendant is guilty in another town, or at another
day, then the Plaintiff supposes, yet he shall recover: For in Actions
brought for things transitory, the wrong being done in one town, the
Plaintiff may not only allege it in another town, but also in another
County, and the Jurors upon not guilty pleaded are bound to find for the
Plaintiff: Neither can the assault, battery, taking of goods, etc. alleged
in another County, be traversed without special cause of justification, which
extends to some certain place, as if a Constable of a Town in another County
arrest the body of a man, that breakeeh the peace, there he may traverse the
County: Howbeit he must not stay there, but must say farther, and all other
places, saving in the town, whereof he is Constable: So it is also in an
Action for taking of goods: for, in that Case also, if the Defendant justify
for damage feasant in another County, he may traverse, as before: But where the
cause of the justification is not restrained to a certain place, which is so
local, that it cannot be alleged in any other town (as in the Cases before
alleged, and the like) then albeit the Action be brought in a foreign
County, yet he must allege his justification in the County, where the Action
is brought: As if a man be beaten in the County of Middelsex, and he brings
his Action in the County Buck. the Defendant cannot plead, that the Plaintiff
assaulted him in the County of Middelsex, etc. and traverse the County, but he
must plead his justification in the County of Buck. for that the cause of his
justification is good in any place: So it is likewise in Case of Bailement of
goods, and other Cases for transitory things, as for example: In an Action upon
the Case the Plaintiff declared for speaking of slanderous words, which is
transitory, and laid the words to be spoken in London, the Defendant pleaded a
concord for speaking of words in all the Counties of England, saving in London,
and traversed the speaking of the words in London; the Plaintiff in his
replication denied the concord, whereupon the Defendant demurred, and judgment
was given for the Plaintiff; for, the Court said, that if the concord in that
Case should not be traversed, it would follow, that by a new and subtle
invention of pleading, an ancient principle in Law (that for transitory causes
of Action the Plaintiff might allege the same in what place or County he
would) should be subverted, which ought not to be suffered: And therefore the
Judges of both Courts allowed a traverse upon a traverse in that Case, etc. Now
the ground that rules all these Cases is this, because the Law respects more
the cause of the Action, which is the substance of the suit, then the place
where the Act was done, which is but circumstance, etc.

^ubstance cer^ainely al^eadged, con^yance not.
14 That which is alleged by way of conveyance or inducement to the substance
of the matter, need not to be so certainly alleged, Co. ib. 303. a. 4.
as that which is the substance it self: And where a matter of Record is the
foundation or ground of the suit of the Plaintiff, or of the substance of the
plea, there it ought to be certainly and truly alleged otherwise it is, where
it is but conveyance; because that is but circumstance, etc.

^ea insuffici^^.
15 When a Count, bar, replication, Co. l. 8. 133. b. 1. Turners Case.
etc. is defective in respect of omission of some circumstance, as time, place,
etc. there it may be made good by the plea of the adverse party; but if it be
insufficient in matter and substance, it cannot be salved. Co. l. 8. 120. b. D.
Bouch. Case.

^^cient plea^^ngs.
16 In the Reigns of E. 2. E. 1. and upwards, Co. ib. 303. b. a and Co-l. 7 25.
a in Buts Case. Co. ib. 304. a. 4.
the pleadings were nothing curious, but plain and sensible, ever having Chief
respect to matter and substance and not to forms of words, and were often
helped by a quaesitum est, and then the questions moved by the Court, and the
answers by the parties were also entered into the roll, etc.

^^^ding.
17 Albeit a plea as to the form be gross and ignorant, Co. l. 1. 42. a. 4. b.
3. and 52. b.
yet if good in substance, it shall be adjudged sufficient. In Alton woods Case.

^ate of a ^eed.
18 If a deed bear date after the delivery, Co. l. 2. 4. b. Goddares ca.
and after the decease of the party to whom it is delivered, yet is it
sufficient: as if an obligation bear date the 4 of April 24 El. and the
Obligor delivers it as his deed 30 July 23 El. and the Obligee dies before the
date, yet this obligation is good; for albeit the Obligee in pleading cannot
allege the delivery before the date (as it is adjudged in 12 H. 6. 1.)
because he is stopped to take averment against any thing expressed in the deed, yet
the Jurors, who are sworn ad veritatem diendam shall not be stopped in that
Case: And the reason hereof is, because the date of a deed is not of the
substance of the deed; for if it want date, or have an impossible date (as the
30 day of February) yet the deed is good; there being only three things of the
essence and substance of a deed, viz. the writing in paper or parchment,
sealing, and delivery: And if it have these three, although it wants, in cujus
rei testimonium sigillum suum apposuit, yet the deed is sufficient; for ye
delivery is as necessary to the essence of the deed, as the putting of the
seal unto it, and yet it is not necessary to express in the Deed, that it was
delivered, etc. And from hence it may be observed, that if a man bring an
Action of debt, and count, that the Defendant 4. Apr. 24. etc. made an
Obligation bearing date the same day and years, and the defendant pleads non
est factum, and it is found that the deed was delivered at another day, before
or after the day that the Plaintiff has counted, that yet the judgment shall
be given for the Plaintiff, in as much as the date is not material, and the
Defendant cannot be twice charged, etc.

Co. l. 2. 76. a. 4 in the Lord Cromwels Ca. Co. l. 5. p. 2. 26 b. 2. the E. of
Rutlands case accords.
19 If it be agreed by Indenture, Variance in circumstance betwixt fine
indenture t^ prejudice.
that a fine shall be levied of certain Lands by the name of a certain number
of Acres to diverse persons, and that they shall grant and render the Land again
in Fee-simple, which shall be to certain uses: The fine is levied of the Land,
but there is some variance in the number of Acres comprised in the fine, or the
fine is levied to one of the parties only, who grants and renders the Land: So
that there is variance between the Covenant and fine in number and person;
Nevertheless (in this Case) the fine shall be averred to be to the use of the
Indentures: For the original bargain and agreement of the parties was declared
by writing, and albeit there be some little variance found in quantity, person,
time, or such other circumstances, between the fine and the Indenture; yet the
Law (which in common conveyance has great respect and regard to the Intent of
the parties, and to the substance and effect of their original bargain and
agreement) will permit averment to agree the fine and the indenture,
notwithstanding those little circumstances of number, person, time, and the
like, when the party averres, that there was not any new consideration, or new
agreement betwixt ye party but that the fine was levied according to the
indenture, and to the uses and intents contained in the same: and (indeed it is
consonant to justice and equity, and principally in common assurances of lands
betwixt party and party, that every little variance in circumstance should not
subvert all the substance of ye agreement of ye parties in their indenturs to
ye dis-herison of one of them: and therefore it was adjudged in Taverners case
about the 42 of El. that if A. has 10 acres in Dale, and B. has as many in
the same town, and A. levy a fine to B. of 20 acres, and B. grants and renders
20 acres to A. in fee, yet A. shall not have the 10 acres of B. unless there
was a special agreement between them to that effect; or otherwise the Conusee
should be said to render more then he receives, and the difference in the
number of acres is but a circumstance, etc.

Co. l. 4. 41. b. 3 in Heydons ca.
20 Exception was taken to an Indictment upon the death of a man because these
words (in pace Dei and Domini Regis) were omitted; Indictment.
and albeit in Indictment those words are usually inserted, yet the exception
was not allowed: because such words are not words of substance, but only
inserted by way of Amplification to aggravate the heinousnes of the crime, etc.

Co. l. 4. 87. a. 1. in Luttrels ca.
21 Where a man prescribes for a course of water to a Fulling-mill, Prescription
a water co^^ Estovers, Rooms, Window, and^
whereas indeed anciently it was a fulling-mill, and of late time was pulled
down, and a Grist-mill exected in stead thereof: yet if that water course be
turned by a stranger; In an Action upon the Case, etc. he may well prescribe
for the course of water to his fulling-mill so altered as before, said: For, the
mill is the substance, and the thing to be demanded, and the addition of Grist
or Fulling, are but to show the quality or nature of the mill: And therefore in
the Register, and also in F.N.B. it appears that if a man will demand a
Grift-mill, Fulling-mill, or any other mill, the writ shall be general, de uno
molendino, without any addition of Grist or Fulling, and herewith agrees 21
Ass. Pl. 23. of a Plaint in Assise; So likewise if a man have estovers either
by grant or by prescription to his house, albeit he alter the rooms, or
chambers of the house (as to make that the Hall which was the Parler, or that
the Parler, which was the Hall, or make the like alteration of the qualities
and not of the house it self, and without making new Chimneys, whereby no
prejudice may acrue to the owner of the wood) this is no destruction of the
prescription; for then many prescriptions would be destroyed: And although he
build new Chimneys, or make a new addition to the old house, he shall not
thereby lose his prescription; Howbeit he must not employ or spend any of the
estovers in the new Chimneys, or in the part newly added; There is the same Law
of Conduits and Water-pipes, or the like: So if a man have an ancient Window in
his Hall, and after covert the Hall to a Parler or any other use, yet shall it
not be Lawful for the Neighbor at his pleasure to stop it; For he may
prescribe to h^ve a light in such a part of his House, etc.

^por^tions ^^red yet the ^dy remains
22 If a Corporation has Franchises and Privileges, Co. ibid. b. 1.
by grant or prescription, and after they are incorporate by another name, as
whereas they were Bailiffs and Burgesses before, now they are Mayor and
Community; Or Prior and Covent before, and after translated to Deane and
Chapter; In these Cases, albeit the qualities and name of their corporation is
altered and charged, and principally in the Case of Prior and Covent (for of
Regul^^, who are dead persons in Law, they are made Secular) yet the new body
shall enjoy all the Franchises, Privileges, and Hereditaments, which the old
Corporation or body Politic had, either by grant or by prescription; because
albeit the name, etc. is changed, yet the body, which is the substance does
still remain, etc.

(...) of form ^dable by ^ Cl^r^e.
23 If a Count be insufficient in point of form only, Co. l. 35. b. 1. in
Playters Case.
which the Clerk is able to amend without the information of the Plaintiff,
that error may be rectified by the Clerk by force of the Statute of 28 Eliz.
cap. 14. It is otherwise if it be deficient in matter of substance; As in
Trespass, if the Plaintiff declare, Quare clausum suum fregit, and pisces suos
cepit, etc. without showing the number or nature of the fish: In this Case,
that omission is matter of substance, and not of form to be remedied by that
Statute, etc.

^^ke of the (...) in some (...) matter of ^nce.
24 In a Writ of Error, upon a recovery in wait, Co. l. 5. 45. a Freemans Ca
for that in reciting the Statute of Gloucester, the writ had destrictionem for
destructionem, it was adjudged, that that mistake of the Clerk was matter of
substance: because destrictio was a Latin word, which quite altered the sense
of the Statute, and therefore could not be helped by any Statute, it had been
otherwise, if it had been matter of form only, For at this day if the
original writ want form only, or contains false Latin, or varies from the
Register in matter of form: In such Case, after verdict, no judgment shall be
stayed or reversed: but if it want substance (as in the Case above said)
although it be only the mistake of the Clerk, yet it shall not be remedied by
any Statute: And therefore in a writ of partition the Justices of the Common
Pleas inserted this word oftensurus, which was omitted, and in a writ of Ayell
they amended this word, Ave, and made it, Avie.

(...) arreare (...) Kings (...).
25 Where the King has right of entry for default of payment of a quarters
Rent, and by the office more rent is found arreare, Co. l. 5. 56. b. 1 Knights
Case.
then what the quarters rent amounts unto, yet that is sufficient for the King,
when the Office has matter and substance; for the sole and substantial point,
which proves the breach of the Condition is the non-payment of the Rent, or any
part thereof, and it is not material, when the Rent was arreare: for if any
part thereof be arreare, it suffiseth, etc.

Co. l. 6. 47. b. 2 in Dowdales Case.
26 In debt against an Executor the Jury finds assets in Regno Hyberniae, and
the verdict was adjudged good, Assets found in any pla^
albeit the Assets were found not only in a Foreign Country, but in a
foreign Kingdom: for, the finding of assets is the substance, and the place
where, is but sur-plussage and circumstance: And therefore if an Executor have
goods of the Testator in any part of the world (as if the Testator were a
Merchant or the like, that had goods beyond Sea) he shall be charged with them
as Assets: For the place is but circumstance, etc.

Co. l. 8. 49. a in John Webbes Case. Vid. Stat. W. 2. c 24 in 13 E. 1.
27 In ancient time, Writs origi^ used though the Case ^a^ in circumstance.
when the Masters and Clarks of the Chancery, were grave wise men, well versed
in the Laws of the Land (the first sort of them, making writs in difficult
Cases only which were called Brevia Magistralia, and they (by reason of their
profound learning) called Masters of the Chancery, the other making Brevia de
causa, and therefore called Cursitori^) writs were by them exactly formed
without fault or error: But now when such learned Clerks fail, the Judges in
many Cases give allowance to ancient forms of writ, and puts the party to
make a special Count: and in such Case, when the writ warrants the Count in
substance, they adjudge it sufficient, although there be variance in
circumstance: Co. ibid 48. a. 4
For example, the Original writ of Assisa ultimae praesen^ationis is formed in
these words, quis advocatus tempore pacis praesentavit ultimam personam, quae
mortua est: This form shall h^d, and not be changed, albeit the incumbent
resigned, as appears in 18 E. 2. Tit. Assise de darreine praesentm. 20. etc.
F. N. B. 53. h. Also the writ of War. Cartae is formed in these words, Quod
just, etc. warrantized B. unum mesuagium in D. etc. unde cartam habet, etc.
yet if he be bound to warranty by force of an exchange, or by homage ancestrel,
the form of the writ shall not be altered, Vide 9. E. 4. 49. 21 H. 6. 8. etc.
F. N. B. 134.

Co. l. 8. 76. b. 2. in the Lord Staffords Case
28 The Law never requires circumstance, Circumsta^ not require^ when it (...)
subvert the substance.
when thereby the substance may be subverted: As if the King grant Land to I.
S. for life, with Condition that if I. S. pay at the Exchequer such a day xx s.
to the Kings use, that then he shall have fee, and I. S. pays the xx s.
accordingly: Although it be regularly true, that the King by reason of the
Majesty of his person) cannot take or depart with any thing, but by matter of
Record, (yet in this Case) I. S. shall have fee in the Land, and the fee-simple
shall be out of the King immediately upon the payment of the xx s. without
petition, monstrance de droit, or any other such circumstances, for if the
Estate shall not vest before such circumstance, then it cannot vest presently,
and if it vests not presently, it shall never vest: because if the Estate be
not enlarged: and therefore (in such Case) the fee-simple (for necessities
sake) shall pass out of the King without any such circumstance; for (as is
said before) the Law never requires circumstance, when it may subvert the
substance: And with this agrees the reason in the Lo. Love^^ Case in Pl. Co.
and in Isabel Good-cheapes Case in 49 E. 3. 16.

Co. l. 8. 161. a. 4. in Blackamores Case.
29 Pleas in bar, replications, Pleas, etc. ^ amended.
etc. and regularly matter of substance in them, and especially matters of
fact, shall not be amended in an other term, as omission of averment, and hoc
paratus est verificare, etc. (for in some Cases as in avowry that is not
necessary) but color, which is of course, and wherein the mistake of the Clerk
is found, may be amended, etc.

Co. l. 9. 67. a. 4. in Mackalley's Case for killing the Sergeant of London.
30 In Mackalley's Case, the Indictment was, An indict^ good, although no^
pursued in ^^^cumstance.
that the Sheriff directed his Warrant to the Sergeant to arrest the
Defendant, whereas it appears by the Verdict, that no Warrant at all was made
but that by ye Custom of London, after plaint entered, the Serjant might arrest
him without warrant or precept, and yet the indictment was adjudged good: for
it suffices, if the substance of the matter be found without any such precise
regard to the circumstance: And therefore, if a man be indicted, that he with a
Dagger gave to another a mortal wound, whereof he died, and upon the evidence
it is proved, that he gave the wound with a Dagger Rapier, Staff, or Bill; in
this case, the Offender ought to be found guilty; For the substance of the
matter is, that the party indicted gave him a mortal wound, whereof he died,
and the circumstance of the manner of the weapon is not material in case of an
indictment; yet such circumstance ought not to be omitted, but some weapon
ought to be mentioned in the indictment; So if A. B. and C, be indicted for
killing of I. S. and that A. struck him, and that the other were present,
procuring, abetting, etc. and upon the evidence it appeared that B. struck him,
and that A. and B. were present etc. In this case the indictment is not pursued
in the circumstance, and yet this is sufficient to maintain the indictment; for
the evidence agrees with the effect of the indictment, and so the variance of
the circumstances of the indictment is not material: because it shall be
adjudged in Law the stroke of each of them, and it is as strongly the act of
the other two, as if all three had struck with the Staff, etc. together, and
all had killed him, that was slain; And with this agrees Pl. Com. 98. a. So if
one be indicted for murdering another upon malice prepense, and he is found
guilty of Manslaughter, he shall have judgment upon that verdict; for the
killing is the substance, and the malice prepense is the manner of it; and when
the matter is found, judgment shall be given thereupon, although the manner be
not precisely pursued; and with this also agrees Pl. Com. 101. where it is
farther said, that, when the substance of the fact, and the manner of the fact
are put in issue together, if the Jurors find the substance, and not the
manner; judgment shall be given upon the substance. And this is the reason,
that in case of killing a Minister of Justice in the execution of his Office,
the indictment may be general, viz. that the prisoner felonice, voluntary, and
ex malicia sua praecogitata etc. percussit, etc. without alleging any special
matter; for (in that case) the evidence will well maintain the indictment;
because the Law implies malice prepense, etc. Co. l. 9. 119. a. 2 in the Lord
Southams Case.
So likewise if one be indicted as accessory to two, and he is found accessory
to one, yet the verdict is good, etc.

^respasse for ^ppression of Common.
31 In trespass upon the case for oppression of Common, Co. l. 9. 112. a. 3 in
Robert Maryes Case.
the plaintiff says, that the Defendant put his Cattle upon the Common, and
that they depastured there, from the 1 of May till Michaelmas, the Defendant
pleads not guilty, and it was found by special verdict, that the Cattle
depastured there, etc. but that the Defendant put them not upon the Common: And
(in this case) albeit it was argued by the Defendants Council, that the Jury
had not found the wrong, whereof the plaintiff complained; because he
complained of a Misfeasance, and they had found a Non-feasance; for the
plaintiff counted that the Defendant posuit averia sua, etc. and the Jurors
found quod non posuit, etc. but that the Cattle did depasture, etc. which might
be by escap^, which is a Non-feasance, etc. Howbeit (notwithstanding that
allegation) the action was adjudged maintainable enough: For Judges in finding
of verdicts rather respect substance than circumstance, etc.

(...) unformal ^^nclusion ^all not pre^^e.
32 In an Attachment upon a Prohibition the plaintiff alleges unity of
possession of the Rectory and land in a Prior and his Predecessors before, and
at the dissolution, etc. and then concludes, Co. l. 11. 10. a 4 in Priddle and
Nappers Case.
ratione cujus, idem nuper Prior, and omnes alii priores, etc. per totum tempus
praedictum, etc. habuerunt and tenuerunt, etc. praedict terrae exonerat, etc.
was not de omnimodis deciminis, etc. whereas (in truth) by the unity of
possession the land was not discharged of tithes, but of the payment of tithes,
etc. and therefore the conclusion in that p^int was not formal: Nevertheless
(in this case) in as much as the prescription it self was well alleged in
substance, so that the foundation thereof was good, the mistake of the
conclusion and consequent thereupon (which is but a circumstance) shall be no
cause of granting a Consultation, etc.

Co. l. 11. 78. a. 4 in Magdalen Colledge's Case.
33 When the Grantor is a person able to grant, 18 Eliz. 2. supplies
circumstance.
and has power over the land, and the Deed is good and legal, but wants
circumstance, as inrollment or the like, such a Deed is made good, and such
omission is supplied by the Statute of 18 El. cap. 2. (for confirmation of
Patents or Grants made by or to the Queen) because that act makes the
conveyance good, according to the true intent and purport thereof, which is the
substance, and therefore in such case want of circumstance shall not prejudice,
etc.

Pl. Co. 65. b. 2. in Dive and Maninghams Case.
34 When a Record is to be pleaded in bar, Conveyance to an action need not be
certainly pleaded.
it ought to be entirely and certainly recited; because (in that case) the
Record alone is the matter of substance, and the effect of the bar, which
ought to be full and perfect; but when the recital of a Record is nothing but
conveyance to another matter, and not the effect of the bar, but only an
induction to the bar, or conveyance thereunto; it is not necessary that such
conveyance or induction should be so certainly pleaded, as the effect it self
ought to be. So in Dive and Maninghams Case in the Commentaries, it is
sufficient to begin at the Liberate, and not to recite the whole Record of that
suit; because that is sufficient to lead to the matter of the Sheriffs bond,
which the Statute makes void; and is upon the matter but merely circumstance;
So likewise, if tenant by Elegit make an avowry in a Replegiare, having let the
land to a stranger rendering Rent, etc. he shall not plead the whole Record, 34
H. 6. 48. avowry 26. ^. Monst. de faits 10. 19 H. 6. 29. De^ceit, 11. B. Bell 9.
whereby he became tenant by Elegit, as it was adjudged in 34 H. 6. 48. because
that is but a circumstantial conveyance to the matter of the suit, etc. Also in
19 H. 6. 29. A bill of Desceit was sued against two attorneys of the Co. Pleas
for imbezelling, etc. a Writ of Habeas corpora in placito terrae, upon a
Formedon betwixt the Plaintiff and another, and judgment was demanded of the
bill, because the whole Record was not received in certain; but the bill was
awarded good, notwithstanding it did not recite it certainly; because the
Record was but circumstance, and a conveyance to the suit of Desceit, etc.

Pl. Co. 81. b. 2 Patridges Case.
35 In Debt upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 9. for granting a lease for years
in Lands, whereof the Lessor had a defective title, Stat. 32 H. 8. against
defective titles.
the Plaintiff counts, that the Defendant had demised ye lands for term of
years, (indefinitely) without naming in certain for how many years; and
exception was taken thereunto, because the number of years was not expressed
in certain, etc. But (in that case) it was not conceived necessary to specify
the express number of years; because the term was but conveyance to the sum
in demand; and then that, which is nothing else but conveyance, ought not to be
so certainly showed, as that, which is substance: And therefore in a Decies
tantum all the Record shall not be showed in certain, but only such part
thereof, which conveys the party to his action: but if a Writ judicial issue
out of a Record, in that case the Record ought to be certainly recited; because
the Record is the effect and substance, and not conveyance only, as in the
other case, etc. For there, the showing of the beginning and end of the term
is to no other purpose, Pl. ib. 85. b. 2.
then for the showing of the length and shortness of the time, and that is not
there material; because in such case if the Lease were made only for an hour,
or for an hundred years, it is all one, as if Lessee for life is charged, that
he shall not alien in fee, etc. If he alien only in tail, that is a
forfeiture; So (in that case) alien he for a short time, or for a long time, it
is all one: Howbeit, if he were to recover according to the value of the Lease,
then the beginning and end thereof ought to be showed in certain; And therefore
in such case even in a Decies tantum the certainty of the money ought to be
showed; for he shall recover ten times the value or quantity thereof, and then
to express the value thereof in certain, is of substance, etc.

^dictment for ^^rder found ^anslaughter, ^oo^.
36 If a man be indicted for Murder, Pl. Co. 101 b. 1. Salisburies Case.
and the Jury finds him guilty of Manslaughter only, yet the Judge may give
judgment upon him, viz. that he shall be hanged for the Manslaughter; for the
jury may give their verdict at large, and find the whole matter; as if one be
arraigned for the death of a man, and pleads not guilty, the Jury may find,
that he did kill him in his own defense: So in the other case, when the
prisoner is arraigned for killing a man upon malice praepense, the substance of
the matter is, whether he killed him or no, and the malice praepense is but of
the form or circumstance of killing him: And albeit the malice praepense makes
the act more odious (and for that cause the offender shall lose diverse
advantages, which otherwise he should have, as Sanctuary, Clergy, and the like)
yet that is (indeed) nothing else but the manner of the fact, and not the
substance thereof; for the substance of the fact is the killing of the man, and
then when the substance of the fact and the manner of the fact are put in issue
together, if the Jurors find the substance, and not the manner, yet judgment
shall be given for the substance: As if a man arraigne an Assise for Disseisin
with force, and the Defendant pleads to the general issue, and the Jurors find
the Disseisin, but not with force, yet the Plaintiff shall have his judgment;
for the wrongful expulsion was the substance, and the force was the manner, and
then when the substance is found, he shall have judgment thereupon, and shall
be acquit of the force, etc.

^he King is ^solutely ^g before ^oronation, (...).
37 The King of England immediately after the Predecessors demise of the Crown
is absolutely King without the Ceremony of Coronation, or any other act to be
done ex post facto; for, Co. l. 7. 10. b. 4. in Calvin's Case.
the Law does respect his title to the Crown, by birth, right, and descent, and
not the circumstance of Coronation, which is (indeed) a Royal ornament, and
solemnization of the Royal descent; but no part of the title: Howbeit in 1 Jac.
before his Coronation Watson and Clerk (seminary Priests) and others were of
opinion, that the King was no complete and absolute King before his Coronation,
but that Coronation did add a confirmation and perfection to the descent; And
therefore (observe their damnable and damned consequent) that they by strength
and power might before his Coronation take him and his Royal issue into their
possession, keep him prisoner, remove his Counselors, and constitute others in
their places; and that these acts and others of like nature could be no treason
before he were crowned: but it was resolved by all the Judges of England, that
presently by the descent his Majesty was completely and absolutely King,
without any essential Ceremony, or act to be done ex post facto, and that
Coronation was but a Royal ornament, and outward solemnization of the descent,
as is aforesaid, and as it appears evidently by infinite precedents and Book
cases, which see in the Book at large, etc.

Co. l. 8. 133 a. 4 in Tawners Case.
38 In an action of Debt brought against an Executor, Pleading.
he pleads two recoveries against him in a Court of a Corporation, (being a
Court of Record) which amount to the whole in hand, but shows not in his
Court, that the Corporation has jurisdiction to hold Court, either by
prescription, or by patent; And it also appears by the Court in that Court,
that the Action of Debt was brought for 100 l. without mentioning any
obligation, and therefore it was to be intended, that there was no obligation;
and then the Executor was not chargeable in an action upon a single contract;
And in this case, albeit the Defendant in his bar acknowledged, that the Debt
was by obligation, yet that shall not make the Count good; for when the Count
wants circumstance of time or place, etc. that may be made good by the bar,
but when the Count, Bar, Replication, or, etc. want substance, this cannot be
made good by the plea of either party.

Co. l. 5 72. a. 1. in St. John's Case.
39 A Dagge is as well prohibited to be carried about one, Dagge the same with
Handgun.
as an Handgun by the Statute of 33 H. 8. 6. albeit a Dagge is not named in
that Statute, nor was then invented; because a Dagge differs not from a Handgun
in substance, but has only some small alteration in form and quality.

Co. l. 8. 120. b 3 in Doctor Bonhams Case.
40 When the Count or Declaration wants time, place, Pleading.
or other circumstance, it may be good by the bar, and the bar by the
replication, etc. as appears by 18 E. 4. 16. b. but when the Count wants
substance, the bar cannot make it good, and so it is also of the bar,
replication, etc. and with this accords 6 E. 4. 2. Bon. Case.

Dier 19. 113. 28 H. 8.
41 An obligation was thus drawn, A bond without dare gre^^
Ad quam quidem solutionem been and fideliter solvend. obligo me per
praesentes, datum, etc. and says not Sigillo meo sigillat. nor In cujus rei
testimonium; yet by Shelley and Fitzherbert it is ruled good, if it were
sealed; for that is of substance, the other being but circumstances.

Co. l. 10: 124. b. 2. Wingates Case.
42 The Dean and Canons of Windsor were incorporate by act of Parliament in 22
E. 4. by this name, Name of a Corporation.
The Dean and Canons of the Kings free Chapel of St. George the Martyr within
his Castle of Windsor; and in the Reign of P. and M. they made a Lease of
certain lands by this name, The Dean and Canons of the King and Queens Free
Chapel of S. George within the Castle of Windsor: And in this case three
variances were observed, 1 Because it was named the King and Queens Free
Chapel, whereas it should have been only named the Kings. 2 It ought to have
been S. George the Martyr, whereas Martyr was omitted; 3 It was said within the
Castle, whereas it should have been within the Kings Castle. In this case, the
first only was adjudged a material exception, and of substance, but the other
two only matter of circumstance, and not material, and so the Lease adjudged
void for the first.

Dyer 98. a. 50. 1 Mar.
43 Albeit in the summos of Parliament of 1 Mar. these words supremum caput
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, Supremum caput Eccles^
etc. were omitted contrary to the Statutes of 26 and 35 H. 8. yet by the
better opinion the summons is good, because it was but an Addition or
circumstance, and not parcel or of the substance of the name of the Queen: This
doubt was also moved in the Parliament of 1 El. 2. and upon great deliberation
so likewise resolved.

Dyer 150. 85. 3, 4, P. M.
44 The Corporation of Eaton College was erected by H. 6. per nomen praepositi
and Collegii Regalis Collegii beatae Mariae de Eaton, etc. A void Leas^
And in the time of E 6. a Lease was made per nomen Praepositi and sociorum
Collegii Regalis de Eaton, omitting Collegium and Beatae Mariae, and adjudged
naught, etc.

^ppeal. ^le^.
45 The Lessee of a Parson brings an ejectione firmae, the Defendant pleads,
that the Parson was deprived, the Plaintiff says, Dier. 240. 46. 7 El.
that the Parson has appealed to the Archbishop of Canterbury in Curia
praerogativa sua de Arcubus: and because the Words of the Statute of 24 H. 8.
12. are, that the appeal shall be to the Archbishop of the Province, or, etc.
without limiting any Court in certain, the Defendant demurred in Law: And it
was held by the Justices, that the Words to the Archbishop of Canterbury being
Words of substance were sufficient to maintain the Plea, and that the other
Words being but circumstantial and surplussage should not prejudice the
Plaintiff.

^^nomer.
46 The Deane and and Chapter of Carleil being incorporate by the name of the
Deane and Chapter Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sanctae and individuae Trinitatis
Carleil, Dier 278. 1. 11 El.
made a lease by the name of Decanus Ecclesiae Cathedralis Sanctae Trinitatis
in Carliel, and totum Capitulum de Ecclesia praedicta: And by the opinion of
six Justices against three, it was held good, notwithstanding that variance,
because it is not of substance of the name: Vide 35 H. 6. 4, and 5. A Prior
sues by the name of Ecclesia Sancti Petri, whereas the foundation was Petri and
Pauli and adjudged not good because of substance.

Replevin.
47 Pope brings a Replevin against Skinner, Hob 72. Pope and Skinner.
who avowes the taking as a Commoner in April 11 Jac. the Plaintiff in bar
says, that one Williams was seized of an house and land, etc. whereunto he had
Common, etc. and demised the same unto him the 30 day of March in the same 11
year; to hold from the Feast of the Annunciation next before for a year. The
Avowant traverseth the lease modo and forma, whereupon issue is taken, and the
Jury said, that Williams made a lease to the Plaintiff, on the 25 day of March
for one year from thence next ensuing: And albeit this was not the same lease,
that the Plaintiff pleaded (for this begins on the day, and the other not so
soon) nor was to take his limitation, but from the day exlcuded, yet the Court
gave judgment for the Plaintiff: for the substance of the issue was, whether
or not the Plaintiff had such a lease from Williams as by force thereof he
might Common at the time, which appears for him in this Case, and the modo
and forma in the rest is not material, etc.

Vide Hob. 76. Parker and Parker 117. Napper and Jasper 133. Moon and Andrews.

102 Yet for memory and solemnity substances are to be-exprest under
Ceremonies.
(...) actions de^ce must be (...).
1 In all Actions real, personal, or mixed, Co. Inst. p. 1. 127. b: 3.
albeit the Tenant or Defendant appears, and pleads a sufficient bar, yet
if he makes not in his plea a lawful defense, (as in personal actions to say,
and praedictus C. D. defendit vim and injuriam quando, etc. and damna and
quicquid quod ipse defendere deber, etc.) judgment shall be given against him.

^j^ration.
2 Albeit in 8 E. 2. Abjuration (indefinitely) is called a divorce between the
Husband and Wife; yet every abjuration is not so; Co. ib. 133. 23
for such abjuration as amounts to a divorce ought to be either by authority of
Parliament, or upon ordinary proceeding in Law, as in the Case of Tho. of
Weyland in 19 E. 1. Nevertheless (in that Case) proceeding in Parliament or at
Law are but in the nature of circumstance. etc.

Co. ib. 137. b. 3
3 By the wisdom of our Ancients a great deal of solemnity was used in the
manumission of Villains, Manumission of Villein,
to the end the memory thereof might take the deeper impression in the minds
of the Assistants, for which this was the old Rule, Qui servum suum liberat, in
Ecclesia, vel Mercato, vel Comitatu, vel Hundredo coram testibus and palam
faciat, and liberas ei vias, and portas conscribat apertes, and Lanceam and
Gladium, vel quae liberorum arma, in manibus ei ponat, etc.

Co. ib. 143. b. 1 and 229. a. 3. and Co. l. 5. 20. b. Styles Case.
4 A deed cannot be a deed indented, A deed Indented.
unless it be actually indented: For, albeit the words of the deed be, Haec
indentura, etc. yet if it be not indented indeed, it is no indenture: but if
the deed be indented, albeit the words of the deed be not, Haec indentura, etc.
yet it is an indenture, etc.

Co. ib. 152. a. 4 and Co. l. 5. 112. b. 1. in Mallories Case.
5 If a Lease for life be made, Attornment necessary.
reserving a Rent upon Condition, etc. And the Lessor levies a fine of the
reversion to a stranger; In this Case, albeit the Conusee is Grantee or
Assignee of the Reversion, and so seems to have power given him of taking
advantage of the Condition by force of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 34.
Nevertheless without Attornment he shall not take advantage of the Condition:
For, the makers of that Statute intended to have all necessary Ceremonies and
incidents observed, otherwise it might be mischievous to the Lessee, etc.

Co. ibid. 216. Litt. 349.
6 If Land be Granted to a man for two years upon Condition, Livery.
that if he pay to the Grantor within the said two years 40 marks, that thou
he shall have Fee: But the Grantor gives him no Livery: In this Case, albeit he
pay the 40 Marks within the two years, yet he shall not have Fee: Because
there wanted the Ceremony of Livery: It had been otherwise if Livery had been
made unto him, etc.

Co. ib. 218. a. 3
7 Regularly when any man will take advantage of a Condition, if he may enter
the must enter, and when he cannot enter, Freehold ^ inheritance ^ cannot be ^
vested with entry or thi^
he must make a claim: And the reason is for that a freehold and inheritance,
shall not cease without entry or claim; As if a man Grant an Advowson to a man
and his heirs upon Condition, that if the Grantor, etc. pay 20 li. on such a
day, etc. the State of the Grantee shall cease, and be utterly void: The
Grantor pays the money, yet the State is not revested in the Grantor before a
claim, and that claim must be made at the Church: And so it is likewise of a
Reversion or remainder, of a Rent, Common, or the like: For there also must be
a claim before the State be revested in the Grantor by force of the Condition,
and that claim must be made upon the Land: A fortiori in Case of a feofment,
which passes by Livery of seisin, there must be a re-entry by force of the
Condition before the State be void.

Co. ibid.
8 A man bargaineth and sells Land by deed indented and enrolled with proviso,
that if the bargain pay, Idem.
etc. that then the state shall cease and be void, he payth the money, the
State is not revested in the Bargainer before re-entry: And so it is if a
bargain and sale be made of a Reversion, Remainder, Advowson, Rent, Common,
etc, So it is likewise if Lands be devised to a man and to his heirs upon
Condition, that if the devisee pay not 20 pounds at such a day, that his Estate
shall cease and be void, the money is not paid, the State shall not be dested in
the heir before an entry: And so it is also of a Reversion, Remainder,
Advowson, Rent, Common, or the like.

9 All Deeds and Writings ought to be made in Parchment, Co. ib. 229. a. 3.
or Paper; Writings must ^e in parchment or paper.
For if a writing be made upon a piece of wood, or upon a piece of a linen, or
in the bark of a tree, or on a stone, or the like, etc. and the same be sealed
and delivered, yet it is no deed; for a deed must be written in Parchment or
Paper; Because a writing upon such materials is least subject to alteration and
corruption.

(...), S^^t. 32 (...).
10 It is agreed in 28 H. 8. fol. 28. that where the Statute of the 27 H. 8. c.
10. of Uses provides, Co. lib. 5. 112. b. 3. in Mallories Case.
that the actual possession shall be adjudged according to the use, etc. yet
all circumstances, (required by the Common Law) are to observed, viz. actual
entry de facto.

^o freehold without live^y, or etc.
11 Tenant in tail of an House entering into it, says thus; Brother, Co. lib.
6. 26: Sharpes Case.
I here demise unto you my house as long as I live, paying 20 li. per annum to
me, and you finding me board, horse, etc. this amounts not to a demise for life:
Because there wants livery, or some Act, which the Law adjudged livery, or at
least apt words, which amount thereunto; For delivery of a Charter is an Act:
but the Law does not adjudge that livery, because it has another effect, viz.
to make the Charter his deed, as it has been adjudged, but delivery of a
turfe, twig, or any thing else, which comes from the land, or of the ring of
the door is good livery: So if he says enter and enjoy it, etc. that is good,
although out of the land, if within view; for, that is a delivery of the land
it self: 27 Ass. 61. after delivery of the deed upon the land, to say, have
and enjoy the land according to the deed, this is good livery: so 41 E. 3. 17.
after delivery, etc. upon the land he says, enter, God give you joy, this is
good. 37 H. 8. Feofments Br.

^o new lease ^exe entry.
12 Upon a lease for years by Indenture the Lessee covenants and grants, Dier 6.
28 H. 8. 1. etc.
that if he his Executors or assigns alien that it shall be lawful for the
Lessor to re-enter; and after makes his Wife his Executrix and dies, the Feme
takes a new Baron; who aliens, and the lessor makes a new lease before entry:
In this Case the new lease is not good, being made before entry, for albeit
entry be but in the nature of a ceremony or circumstance, yet in such Case and
others of like kind it is necessary for the Lessor to make his entry before he
can be capable of making a new Lease.

^ornment.
13 If a Villein purchase a reversion, Co. Inst. p. 1. 119. b. 2 Lit.. 179.
his Lord may not claim it before attornment be made by the Tenant of the land
to the Villein, for if he make his claim after the grant and before
attornment, such claim is void, yet attornment is (upon the matter) but a bare
ceremony.

^i^e poenae
14 A nomine poenae is not recoverable without an actual demand of the Rent, for
the non-payment whereof it became forfeited. Hob. 133. Howel and Samback.


103 Things executed and done more, then executorie, and to do. Vide 40. 51.
^ery in (...) without ^y void.
1 A livery in view (otherwise called a livery in Law) is good to convey the
Estate to the feoffee, etc. if he make entry, Co. Inst. p. 1. 48, b. 3
and so the Estate be executed during his life and the life of the feoffor, but
if either of them die before entry, the livery is void.

^ange not ^^ed void.
2 In exchange of Land the parties have no fre-hold in them in deed or Law,
before they execute the same by entry: Co. ib. 15. b. 2.
and therefore if one of them die before the exchange be executed by entry, the
exchange is void: for the heir cannot enter and take it as a purchasor; because
he was named only to take by way of limitation of estate in course of descent.

Co. ib. 51. b. 4
3 If a man let lands to another for term of years, Interest in a Lease for
yea^^^ good without entry, etc.
albeit the Lessor die before the Lessee enter, yet he may well enter into the
same lands after the Lessors death, because (in case of a Lease for years) the
estate is executed, (and the interest of the term does pass, and vest in the
Lessee) before entry; And therefore the death of the Lessor cannot divest that,
which was vested before.

Co. ib. 52. b. 4.
4 If the Lessor by his Deed license, License to alien good after the Lessors
death.
the Lessee for life or years (who is restrained by Condition not to alien
without license) to alien, and the Lessor dies before the Lessee does alien,
yet is his death no countermand of his license, but that he may alien; for, the
license exempteth the Lessee out of the penalty of the Condition, and it was
executed on the part of the Lessor, as much as might be: And so it was resolved
M. 3. Jac. in Com. Ba. So likewise if the King license to alien in Mortmaine
and dies, the license remains good, notwithstanding the Kings death, etc.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 76. b. 3.
5 If one levy a Fine executory (as sur grant and render) to a man and his
heirs, and he, to whom the land is granted and rendered, Upon a fine executory
no Wardship.
dies before execution, and his heir being within age enters; In this case,
he shall not be in Ward, For, his auncestor at the time of his death was not
tenant to the Lord: because the Fine wos not executed, etc.

Co. ib. 128. b. 1.
6 Upon plea in disability of the person by reason of Out-lawry, Out-lawry (...)
perfect, bef^^^ the return of the Exigent.
before the Defendant can disable the Plaintiff, the Out-lawry must be
perfectly executed, and appear upon Record; for, the judgment after the Quinto
exactus given by the Coroners in the County Court, is not sufficient; but the
Writ of Exigent must be returned; because before the Return of that Writ it is
not perfectly executed, nor does appear upon Record, etc.

Co. ib. 130. a. 4
7 A man in execution in salva custodia shall not be delivered by a protection;
for then the suit is executed, and the Law has her end, etc. After exec^^^an
no protection. Writs of execution admit no protection


Co. ib. 131. a. 3
8 In judicial Writs, which are in nature of actions, where the party has day
to appear and plead, (and therefore yet somewhat to do) a protection does lie,
as in Writs of Scire facias upon Recoveries, Fines, Judgments, etc. Albeit, by
the Statute of W. 2. cap. 45. essoignes and other delays are ousted in Writs
of Scire facias, yet a protection does lie in the same;) so it is in a Quid
juris clamat, and the like: But in Writs of execution, as Habere facias
seisinam, Elegit, execution upon a Statute, Capias ad satisfaciendum, fieri
facias, and the like, no protection can be cast for the Defendant, for then the
suit is ended; Neither has the Defendant then any farther day in Court, and
the protection extends only ad placita and quaerelas, and must be allowed by
the Court, which cannot be but upon a day of appearance,

Co. ib. 139. a. 2.
9 In a Quare Impedit, if the Plaintiff be nonsuit after appearance, In a Qua^e
I^pedit non-s^^^ or discontin. a good barr^
the Defendant shall make a title, and have a Writ to the Bishop: And this is
peremptory to the Plaintiff, and a good bar in another Quare Impedit; And
the reason is, for that the Defendant had by judgment of the Court a Writ to
the Bishop, which is a judicial Writ, and in the nature of an execution: And
therefore the Incumbent that comes in by that Writ shall never be removed,
which is a flat bar as to that presentation; And of this opinion is Littleton
in our Books: And the same Law and for the same reason it is, in case of a
discontinuance.

Co. ib. 139: a. 3
10 In an Attaint, if the Plaintiff after appearance be nonsuit, In Attain^
nonsuit peremptory.
it is peremptory; but if the process in the attaint be only discontinued,
the Plaintiff may have another Writ of Attaint; because upon the nonsuit
there is a judgment given, but not upon the discontinuance, etc.

Account. N^n-suit.
11 After an award to account, the Plaintiff may be nonsuit, Co. ib. 139 b. 2
because that is only an interlocutory award of the Court, and no final
judgment.

Recognisance, etc. executory, not binding, executed, con^^^.
12 If there be two joyntenants of an estate in Fee-simple, Co. ib. 184 b. 2.
and one of them acknowledges a Recognisance, or a Statute, or suffers a
judgment in an action of Debt, etc. and dies before execution had, it shall
not be executed afterward; but if execution be sued in the life of the
Conusor, it shall bind the Survivor: So, if a Villein purchase lands, and bind
himself in a Recognisance, etc. if the Lord enter before execution, the Lord
shall avoid it; But where execution thereof is had before seizure, the Lord
shall be bound thereby, etc.

Diversity of the grant of an Annuity, and of a feoffment.
13 If a man grant an Annuity pro una acra terrae, or pro decimis, etc. Co. ib.
204: a. 2
or pro concilio, or quod pasturet concilium, and the Lord is evicted, the
tithes disturbed, or the Council refused; In these cases the Annnuity cease,
because this word pro shows the cause of the Grant, and therefore amounts
to a Condition, and then (according to the Rule) cessante causa cessat
effectus: But if A. pro consilio impenso, etc. make a feoffment or a Lease for
life of an acre, or pro una acra terrae, albeit he denies Council, or that the
acre be evicted, yet A. shall not re-enter, because in this case there ought to
be legal words of condition or qualification; for, the cause or consideration
shall not avoid the State of the Feoffee; And the reason of this diversity is,
for that the state of the land is executed, and the annuity is only executory.

Condition annexed to an e^tate in lands, and of a Recognisance, or Obligation,
diversity.
14 There is a diversity between a Condition annexed to a state in Lands or
Tenements upon a Feoffment, Gift in tail, Co. ib. 206. a. 3.
etc. and a Condition of an Obligation, Recognisance, or such like; for if a
Condition annexed to Lands be possible at the making of the Condition, and
become impossible by the Act of God, yet the estate of the Feoffee, etc. shall
not be avoided: As if a man makes a Feoffment in Fee upon Condition, that the
Feoffor shall within one year go to Paris, etc. and presently after the Feoffor
dies, so as it is made impossible by the Act of God, that the Condition should
be performed; yet (in that case) the estate of the Feoffee is become absolute;
for though the Condition be consequent to the state, yet there is a precedence
before the re-entry, viz. the performance of the Condition, and the state of
the Land is executed and settled in the Feoffee, and cannot be redeemed back
again, but by matter subsequent, viz. the performance of the Condition: So it
is also, where the Condition is, that the Feoffor shall appear in such a Court
the next Term, and before the day the Feoffor dies, for (in that case also)
the estate of the Feoffee is absolute, etc. But if a man be bound by
Recognisance or Bond with Condition, that he shall appear the next Term in such
a Court, and before the day the Conusor or Obligor dies, the Recognisance or
Obligation is saved, because the Bond or Recognisance is a thing in Action, and
executory, whereof no advantage can be taken, Co. ib. 206. b. 3.
until there be a default in the Obligator, etc. In like manner, if a man make
a Feoffment upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall kill I. S. In that case,
albeit the performance of the Condition be malum in se, and therefore the
Condition it self merely void, yet the estate is absolute, because executed,
and settled, etc. But if a man make a Bond upon Condition, that he shall kill
I.S. the Condition being unlawful, as before, and the Bond a thing only in
action and executory, they are both void, etc.

(...) estate once ^id, remedi^e.
15 Where an Estate or Lease is ipso facto void by a Condition or Limitation, no
acceptance of the Rent after, Co. Inst. p. 1. 215. a. 1.
can make it to have a continuance: Otherwise it is of an Estate or Lease only
voidable by entry.

Co. ib. 226. a. 1.
16 R. brought an Ejectione firmae against E. for ejecting him out of land, An
estate executed need not plead a Deed.
which he held for years of ye demise of C, E. pleads that B. gave ye land to
P. and K. his wife in tail, who had issue E. the Defendant, and after the
Donees enfeoffed C. upon condition to demise the land to R. for years, the
remainder to P. and K, etc. C. did demise the land to R. but kept the
reversion; wherefore K. the wife after her husbands decease entered upon R, etc.
for the Condition broken, and died, after whose decease the Land descended to
E. now Defendant; Judgment si Action: Here, exception was taken to this plea,
because E. maintained his entry by force of a Condition broken, and showed
forth no Deed; But the plea was ruled to be good, because the thing was
executed, and therefore he had no Deed to show forth any Deed: for (indeed) he
being issue in tail was remitted.

Co. ib. 236. b. 4.
17 There is a diversity between inheritances executed, Estates executed and
executory diversity.
and inheritances executory, as lands executed by Livery, etc. cannot by
indenture of defeasance be defeated afterward, and so if a Disseisee release
to a Disseisor, it cannot be defeated by Indentures of defeasance made
afterward, etc.

Littl. 620, 621, 622. Co. ib. 333, 334
18 If Tenant in tail grant the Land to A. for life, The like.
and afterward grants the Reversion to B. in Fee, and afterward A. dies, and
B. enters, and then the tenant in tail dies; In this case, the entry of the
issue in tail is taken away; because the Reversion of B. is executed; So it is
also where the Tenant in tail grants the Land for years, and afterward grants
away the Reversion to another, for in that case also both the Fee and
Frank-tenement are discontinued, and the Reversion is executed in the Grantee:
It is otherwise, where the tenant for life survives the tenant in tail; for
then is not the Reversion executed in the life of the tenant in tail, and then
is not the issue in tail put to his Formedon, but may lawfully enter, etc.

Co. l. 1. 155. b. 2 The Rector of Cheddingtons Case.
19 There is a diversity between a Covenant or Agreement, An estate certain,
uncertain, dive^s^^y.
which is perfect and certain, albeit it shall take effect in possession upon
some future matter precedent; And a Co^enant or Agreement imperfect and
uncertain, which is to be reduced to certainty, by matter ex post facto; For,
in the one case the estate is bound presently, in the other case not; As 3 Mar.
Brook Feoffments, al uses 59. It is covenanted betwixt A. and B, that the Son
of A. shall marry the Daughter of B, for which B. gives to A. 100 l. and A.
covenants with B, that if the marriage take not effect, that A. and his heirs
will stand seized of 150 acres in D. to the use of B. and his heirs, until A.
his heirs, etc. pay to B. 100 l. after B. has issue under age and dies, the
marriage takes not effect; In this case, the estate is executed in the heir of
B. and shall have relation to the making of the Indenture, etc. But if the
Grantee of a Reversion die, no attornment can be done to his heir; So it is
also where the Devisee dies before the Devisor, etc. Pl. Co. Brets and Rigdens
case, 345. Vide Shelleys case, where the Indenture bound the land, albeit
execution was not taken out till after his death; for the estate was executed
by the Indenture and Recovery before execution, which shall have a retro-spect
to the Indenture; And 11 H. 7. 12. Where the heir shall have execution upon a
fine: But if the Feoffor or Feoffee die before entry, feoffment by livery
within view shall not take effect: So also, in the Rector of Cheddingtons Case,
Co. l. 1. 155, 156, by the death of Tho. the term is not certain, nor can vest
in his executors.

Co. l. 3. 86. a. 1. The Case of Fines.
20 If the Bishop or Baron make a Lease for life, Bishop. Baron.
and after grant the Reversion in Fee, and the Lessee for life die in the life
of the Bishop, or of the Baron, this is a Discontinuance: It is otherwise, if
the Lessee for life survive the Bishop or Baron.

A thing execu^ed unalterable.
21 H. recovers 75 l. in B. R. and assigns it by Deed enrolled to Queen El. in
satisfaction of a due Debt, as Collector of the Fifteens, Co. l. 5. p. 2. 9^.
Hoes Case.
provided, if the Lord Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer, or any two of
them dis-allow the assignment, etc. and revoke it by writing under their hands,
that then the assignment shall he void; after the Defendant brings Error, and
the judgment is affirmed, and 5 l. Costs given: after by Writ of Prerogative
the Land of the Defendant was extended, and Goods seized to the value of the
Debt; And afterward three Barons revoke the assignment after the death of the
Plaintiff, because the Plaintiff had satisfied the Debt, and his executor
sues a Scire facias for the 75 l. and 5 l. Costs. But it was adjudged, that
after execution had by the Queen, which was the effect of the assignment, the
Revo^ation came too late; for he that has power of Revocation cannot revoke a
thing lawfully executed; So a Letter of Attorney cannot be revoked after it is
executed, Vide 7 H. 6. 42. and 7 H. 4. 2. The Debtee is outlawed, the Debtor
pays to the King, the Out-lawry is reversed; In this case, the Debtor shall
recover against the Debtee: So if the Goods of an outlawed person be sold,
etc. he shall have restitution of the Goods; Co. l. 8. 96. b 4. in Mannings
Case.
but upon a Fieri facias, etc. only the value, Vide 3. E. 3. 51. Recompense in
value once lawfully executed, shall not be divested; albeit the title of the
Demandant be afterward dis-affirmed, and evicted.

Remainder executed.
22 If a remainder be once executed, Co: l. 8. 88 a. 1. in Buckmeres Case.
in a Writ of Formedon in the Descender he shall never speak of that remainder,
but the general Writ of Formedon in the Descender shall serve in that case, and
he shall count of an immediate Gift; for a Formedon in remainder he cannot
have, after the remainder is once executed: But if a Lease for life be made,
the remainder in tail to A. the remainder in tail to B. if A. die without issue
in the life of the Tenant for life, and B. put to his Formedon in the
remainder, in his Formedon he ought to make mention of the remainder to A.
albeit it was determined and spent; for, the Demandant in the Formedon in
remainder ought to make mention of all the precedent remainders in tail,
because in that case the remainder was never executed by way of descent.

(...) London suit ^opt before ^^dgment.
23 The Mayor of London may alter the course of Justice in a cause hanging
before the Sheriffs, viz. to send for the parties, Co. l. 8. 1^6. a 3 in the
Case of the City of London.
and to stop the suit also, if he find the Plaintiff already satisfied; but so
he cannot do after judgment, and this he may do by a custom there.

Judgment ex^cuted irrevocable.
24 There is a diversity betwixt a thing Collateral executory, Co. l. 8 142. a.
1 Doctor Druries Case.
and executed, for when an erroneous judgment is given, and after the judgment
is reversed by Writ of Error, Collateral acts executory are barred thereby, as
if a man has judgment in a Quare impedit, and has a Writ to the Bishop, and
the Bishop refuse, here the Plaintiff upon this Collateral matter of refusal,
may have a Quare non admisit; but if the Defendant reverse the judgment in a
Writ of Error, and after the Plaintiff in the Quare impedit brings a Quare non
admisit, the Defendant may plead no such Record: Vide 26 E. 3. 75. per Willy
and Hill. So if A. in execution at the suit of B. upon erroneous judgment, and
after escapes, and after the judgment is reversed by Error, the action upon the
escape is gone; for he may plead no such Record, because without a Record the
action is not maintainable but in that case if the Plaintiff bring an action
of Debt against the Sheriff or Jailer upon the escape, and has judgment and
execution, and after the first judgment is reversed; yet this judgment upon
that Collateral matter being executed shall remain in force; 7 H. 6. 42. a.
Notwithstanding such reversal of the first judgment. The Conusee of a Statute
Staple in Detinue thereof upon Garnishment, recovers by erroneous judgment
against the Garnishee, and has the Statute delivered unto him, 4 H. 7. 11.
the Garnishee brings a Writ of Error, and the Conusee sues execution upon the
Statute and has it; Here, albeit the Garnishee reverse the judgment, yet this
execution shall not be avoided thereby, because the Statute is already
executed: Likewise, if a man recover by erroneous judgment, and present to a
Benefice, or enter into the perquisite of a Villain, and after the judgment is
reversed by Error, yet, because these Collateral acts are executed, they shall
not be afterward divested.

Co. l. 11. 40. a. 3 in Metcalfes Cases.
25 Upon an interloqutory award of a Court, Error lies not till after judgment.
which is not definitive, a Writ of Error lies not, such as are these, quod
computer, that the shall take an Assise, in Waste to inquire of the Wastes, in
trespass to inquire of damages; In partitione facienda, quod partitio fiat; In
admeasurement: quod admensuratio fiet, that a man shall be ousted of aid, and
the like: upon which the Defendant shall not bring a Writ of Error; but after
judgment in these cases he may.

Co. l 10. 47. b. 3 in Lampets Case.
26 A. Lessee for 500 years devises to B. for life, and after his decease the
remainder to C. and the heirs of his body, this executory devise the remainder
to C. and the heirs of this body, this executory devise may be released to B.
but cannot be granted to a stranger, it is otherwise of an interest executed.

Fit 2. N. B. 83. b
27 If the Lord levy aid to marry his Daughter, Aid for marring, etc.
and do afterward marry her, she shall not have an action against the executors
of the father for that money: it is otherwise, if she were not married in his
life time; So it is also of the son not made Knight, etc.

F. N. B. 120. f: and 121. c:
28 If a man take a feme, who is indebted to an alien, Baron not chargeable
without reco-
and the feme dies before that Debt is recovered by action, in that case the
Baron is not chargeable; It is otherwise, if it were recovered, living the
feme, etc.

Pl. Co. 52. a. 1. Wimb. and Talb. Case.
29 An heir in tail, that has a Reversion, An estate executed, and executory,
div.
or remainder really executed in him, shall not need to plead specially how he
is heir; it is otherwise where it is to be executed: So if Administrators bring
an action of Trespass for Goods taken out of their own possession, they shall
not show the Letters of Administration: Otherwise it is for Goods taken in the
life of the Intestate, for there the possession of the Goods were never
executed in them, but to be executed: Also, if a Lease be made for life, the
remainder in tail, and he in the remainder is seized, after the death of the
Tenant for life, his issue shall have a Formedon, and shall declare upon the
immediate Gift, neither yet shall show the Deed; otherwise it is if that estate
were to be executed.

Pl. Co. 51. a. 3. Wimb. and Talb. Case. 9 H. 6. 23. Pl. Co. 56. b. 5. contra.
30 A man devises land to one for life, An estate vested shall remain.
the remainder to the right heirs male of the Devisor, and to the heirs of his
body begotten, the Tenant for life dies, and the next heir of the Devisor being
a feme enters, and after had a son; And there it was holden by the best
opinion, that the some shall not out the feme, because the son born after
shall not take away the land before vested in the feme, as heir, for default of
such person then in rerum natura, to take the devise.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 117. a. 3.
31 If lands be given to Villain and to the heirs of his body, Villain and
alien tenant^ in tail.
and the Lord enters, and after enfranchiseth the Donee, and then the Donee
has issue, yet that issue shall never have remedy either by Formedon or
entry, to recover the Land, for that it was executed in the Lord before the
enfranchisment of the Donee, and the Statute de Donis gives remedy to the
Issues of the Donee that have capacity and power to take and retain such a
gift, etc. So it is also, if lands be given to an Alien, and to the heirs of
his body, upon office found the land is seized for the King, afterward the
King makes the Alien a Denizen, who has issue and dies, in this Case also the
King shall detain the land against the Issue, etc.

^ f^eri facias, ^c^ted shall ^d.
32 Sale by the Sheriff upon a fieri facias shall stand, Co. l. 8. 76. b. 4.
Matthew Manuings Case.
albeit the judgment afterward reversed, and the Plaintiff in it restored to
the value. Dier 363. 24.

(...) original (...) judicial ^ll abate, or (...) abate.
33 There is a diversity betwixt writs real original, Co. l. 10. 134 in Read and
Redmans Ca.
which are as things executory, and writs real Judicial, which Issue from the
judgment, being in the nature of a thing executed: And therefore if 2
coperceners bring a real Action, and the one is summoned and severed, and after
dies having issue or no Issue, in this Case the writ shall abate: so likewise,
if 2 jointenants bring an Assise or other original real Action, and the one is
summoned and severed and dies, the writ shall abate, albeit the thing in demand
servive: But if two coperceners bring a scire facias, which is a judicial writ
upon a five levied, etc. and the one copercener is summoned and severed and
then dies without Issue, such judicial writ shall not abate: And so it is also
of two joyntenants. Howbeit if the copercener that dies, has issue, it shall
abate, because the right descends.

^^^ter ^c^^ed.
34 If lands be given to a man and the heirs females of his body, Co. Inst. p.
1. 357. a. 2
and he makes a feofment in fee, and take back an Estate to him and his
heirs, and dies, having Issue a Daughter, leaving his wife grossement ensuit
with a Son and dies, the Daughter is remitted, and albeit the Son be
afterward borne, he shall not divest the remitter; because it was executed.

^e feme re^ed after ^ontinu^e.
35 If the Baron discontinue the land of the Feme and go beyond Sea, Litt.: 677.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 356. b. 4.
and the discontinuee leases the land to the Feme for life, and gives her
seisin, and after the Baron returns and dis-agrees to the lease and livery of
siesin made to the Feme: yet in this Case she is remitted to her ancient
Estate, because by the lease for life and livery the remitter was executed in
the Feme, and the Estate for life to the Feme, which wrought, the remitter, is
vanished and whole defeated: And therefore dis-agreement of the husband can
divest the Estate gained by the lease, which by the remitter was actually
divested before.

(...) plen^^ty, ^^re indu^^n.
36 A Clerk is not enabled by the Stat. of 25 E. 3. 7. Dier 1. 8. 4 H. 8.
(by the word possessor) to plead in bar before induction: for by that his
possession is executed, and then he is possessor, and not before.

^e^ants in ^^mon of (...) Advowson.
37 Three Tenants in common (...) an advowson make composition, Dier 19. a. 194
28 H. 8.
that each of them shall present by term, if each of them has once presented
by his turn by virtue of the composition, in a Qu. Imp. brought after amongst
them, it is not necessary to show the composition, because it was executed: it
is otherwise in Case it were not executed: And such composition cannot be
without writing, it is otherwise of coperceners, for such composition may be by
parol amongst them, because they are privies and as one heir, and are
compellable to make partition.

^s^uy que use ^render in (...).
38 Cestuy que use after the Statute of 1 R. 3. 1. the 1 of May, Dier 57. b. 2.
35 H. 8
makes a lease to one for 20 years to begin at Mid-sommer next, the feoffees
the second of May at the Request of Cestuy que use make a lease of the same
Land to the same Lessee for 34 years to begin also at Mid-sommer; In this
Case, the acceptance of the last lease is not a surrender of the first, but
rather a confirmation of the 20 years and a new Lease for the 14 years; for
albeit the Lessee had such an Interest, which he might grant or forfeit, yet in
regard the Lessee having not possession, his Estate was only to begin and
executorie, and not already begun and executed, such acceptance could not be a
surrender in Law, and the rather, for that the feoffees had a lawful and
ordinary authority in the Land to make a lease in such Case.

Dier 67. b. 20. 3 E. 6.
39 For the debt of a Common person upon a Statute after the Inquisition and
before the Liberate, Statute. Staple.
the same Land may be extended for the Kings debt; but it seems to be
otherwise after the Liberate to the Common person, for then it is rested in him
in nature of a freehold; Tamen quaere.

Dier 82. b. 72 7 E. 6.
40 In London upon the attachment of a Debt in a third persons hand, albeit the
Plaintiff have judgment against the third person, Attachment (...) a debt in
L^^don.
yet before execution served, the Plaintiff may resort to have judgment and
Execution against the Defendant, being his principal Debtor: It is otherwise,
if the judgment against the third person had been executed.

Dier 98. b. 57. 1 Mar.
41 A Fieri facias (returnable Quind. Pasc.) was directed to the Shetiffe of
Middlesex who returns, Execution.
quod cepit bona and catalla to the value of part of the debt, and quod
remanent in custodia sua pro defectu emptorum, Error.
and quod ante return. hujus brevis, breve de non molestando fuit direct. quod
de ulteriore executione supersedeat, which writ he also returned annexed to the
fieri facias; Now this writ de non molestando was awarded in Banco by reason of
a writ of Error there brought by the Defendant, but the Record was not yet
removed, because the return of the writ of Error was Crast. Ascent. and not
before: In this Case, the Question was whether or no the writ de venditioni
exponend. should be awarded, because the writ of execution was not served, nor
the property of the goods altered, notwithstanding the seizure, yet at last
the writ de venditioni exponend. was awarded by Sanders and Brown,
notwithstanding the supersedeas, because (as it seems) the writ of Error, upon
which the supersedeas was founded, was but executorie, being not then
returnable.

Dier 205. 7. 3, 4 El.
42 The Conusor of a Statute has a Rentcharge, Extent.
and before extent purchases parcel of the Land; In this Case, the Rent is
gone, and shall not be in Execution: But it seems to be otherwise if the
purchase has been after the extent of the Rent executed.

Dier 220. 50. 5 El.
43 A fine was acknowledged by Baron and Feme of the Land of the Feme in the
Vacation after Hillary Term by ded. potest. the Feme being then but 19 years
of age; Fine.
the writ of Covenant bare test in Jan. returnable Crast. Pur. and the ded.
potest. bare test three days after the original, and the Queens silver was
entered upon Hillary Term four days before the death of the Feme, viz. die
Venetis in Septinaria Pasch. But yet the fine was not engrossed until Wednesday
after; whereupon the heir of the Feme in Easter Term prays, that the fine
should not be delivered to the party, nor recorded, yet it was, notwithstanding
the undue practices of the Baron, because after the entry of the Queens silver
before the death of the Feme, and the engrossing of the fine before Easter
Term, the fine was perfectly executed.

104 Possibility of things.
^sibility if ^^riage.
1 If Lands be given to a man and a woman un-married, Co. Inst. p. 1. 20. b. 4.
and to the heirs of their two bodies, for the apparent possibility of
inter-marying they have an Estate tail in them presently; So it it also where
lands are given to the Husband of A. and the Wife of B. and to the heirs of
their bodies: for they have also a present Estate tail in them, in respect of
the possibility: Also if a Feme sole do enfeoffe a married man causa mairimonii
prolocuti, it is good for the possibility, etc.

^s^bility of ^er.
2 If there be Baron and Feme, Co. ib. 33 a. 3.
and the Feme is above the age of 9 years, and under the age of 12 (that being
the age of consenting to marriage) and the Baron (of what age so ever) die
before the Feme attain the age of 12; yet shall she be endowed, in respect of
the possibility of consenting at that age, which (indeed) is the consummation
of the marriage: So if a man take a Wife of the age of 7 years, and after alien
the Land, and after the alienation the wife attaineth to the age of 9 years,
and after the husband dies: yet here also the wife shall be endowed, for the
possibility of being dowable, if she attained the age of 9 years before the
death of the husband: for by his death the possibility of Dower is consummate,
etc.

^enants in ^tiall tail ^ years old.
3 If a man gives land to a man and his Wife and to the heirs of their two
bodies, Co. ib. 28. a. 2.
and they live till each of them is an hundred years old and have no Issue,
yet do they continue still Tenants in tail: for that the Law in that Case will
not see in them an impossibility of having Children, although they be never so
old: It is otherwise, where Land is given to a man and a woman in special
tail, and woman dies without Issue, for there the Law sees an apparent
impossibility that the man should have inheritable Issue by another womon, etc.

(...) ex as^s^ by any (...) a constant ^it appa^^ not good.
4 The youngest son and heir apparent cannot endow his wife ex assensu patris,,
Co. ib. 35. b. 2.
of lands whereof the Father is seized in fee of the nature of Borough English,
in respect of the possibility that the Father may have another Son; for then
the husband is not heir apparent: For the same reason it is that Dower ex
assensu fratris or consanguinei is not good: because albeit he is heir
apparent at that time, yet for the common possibility that the Brother or
Cousin may have Issue, and every Issue that he shall so have will exclude the
husband from being heir apparent, he is no such heir apparent as the Law
intends, for the Law intends a constant and perpetual appearance, etc.

^ant by the ^resie ^gh the (...) be at^ted.
5 If a man takes a wife seized of lands or tenements in fee and has Issue, and
afterward the wife is attainted of felony, Co. ib. 40. a. 1.
so as the Issue cannot inherit to her, yet he shall be Tenant by the
courtesy, in respect of the Issue which he had before the felony, and which by
possibility might then have inherited: But if the wife had been attainted of
felony before Issue had, albeit he has Issue afterward, he shall not be
Tenant by the courtesy: Because then there was no possibility at all, that
such Issue should inherit after her.

^ant in ^er, though ^e be a ^ing im^bility of ^ng Issue.
6 Dower is given to the Feme for the possibility, that the Issue, Co. ib. 40.
a. 3.
which she may have by the Baron, may inherit his land, albeit she be barren
and have no Issue by the Baron; And although the Feme be 100 years old, and
the husband at his death only 4 or 7 years old, yet shall the Feme be endowed:
For, the Law can not judge that impossible, which may fall within the bounds of
nature to be possible, it being certain that women in ancient time have had
Children at such an age, as no women does now attain unto; and my Lord Coke
says, that he knew a woman above 60 years old to have a Child, ideo non
definitur in Jure, etc.

Co. ib. 47. a. 1
7 A Rent cannot be reserved by a Common person upon an Estate for life of any
incorporal inheritance, as Advowsons, Commons, Rent reserv^^ upon a reve^sion
or rendering good.
Offices, Corody, Multure of a mill, Tithes, Faires, Markets, Liberties,
Privileges, Franchises, and the like; because the Lessor cannot have resort or
recourse to distraine for the Rent arreare, and if it be upon a lease for
years, yet he shall not distraine for it, but have only an Action of debt for
it upon the contract: Howbeit a reversion or a remainder of Lands or Tenements
may be granted reserving a Rent, for the apparent possibility that it may come
in possession, etc.

Co. ib. 58. b. 3.
8 Albeit a Copi-hold Tenement, that escheates, Copi-hold the Lords ^^maines
still demisible.
is kept for many years together in the Lords hands, yet it still retains the
quality of being demisible, in respect of the possibility that the Lord may
again admit some man unto it, etc.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 80. a. 1.
9 If the Ancestor marieth his heir apparent within the age of consent, and
dies, the Infant being still within the age of consent, An infant m^^ried
before years of consent.
the Lord may take the Infant (if he will) into his possession, and if the
Infant be detained from him, he shall recover him in a writ of ravishment of
ward, and thereupon have the Infant delivered unto him; And this is in respect
of the possibility that the Infant may dis-agree to the marriage; Howbeit if at
the years of consent he agree to the marriage: neither the King nor the Lord
shall have the marriage, for then it is a marriage ab initio, and there need no
other marriage.

Co. ib. 244. a. 2
10 If the Husband has an apparent possibility of procreation, Issue, the
h^^band inte^ Maria.
as under eight years, or under the age of procreation, the Issue, which his
Wife has, is a Bastard, albeit he was then within the four seas, that is,
within the jurisdiction of the King of England; but when the parties are both
of full lawful age: if the Husband be within the four seas, as aforesaid, when
the wife has Issue, albeit he never came near her, yet is the Child
Legitimate, for the possibility that they might meet together: For, (in that
Case) Filiatio non potest probari, etc. So it is also if the Issue be borne
within a month or a day after marriage, for (in such Case) the Law will not
judge of any impossibility, etc.

Co. ib. 316. a. 4 and Co. l. 10. 44. a. 2. Jennings Case.
11 A. seized of Land in Fee grants it in tail to B. and afterward grants the
Reversion to C. in Fee by Fine, in this Case, Tenant in t^^^ not compelable to
atto^^^
the Tenant in tail is not compellable to attorne, in respect of the
possibility that this Estate (being an Estate of Inheritance) may continue for
ever, etc.

Litt.. 707. Co. ib. 371. 6.
12 If a man has Issue two Sons and is disseised, Lineal and colateral
warranty.
and the eldest Son release to the Disseisor by deed with Warranty and die
without Issue, and afterward the Father dies, this is a lineal Warranty to the
younger Son, for the possibility that the younger Son, might have convyed his
tittle to the Land through the eldest Son, in Case the eldest Son had survived
the Father: Otherwise it is, where the younger Son deceaseth and dies without
Issue: for the eldest Son can by no possibility convey his title to the Land
from the Father through the younger Son, etc.

Litt.. 708 Co. ib. 372. a.
13 If Tenant in tail has issue three Sons, Lineal and c^lateral wa^ranty of
Tenant in tail
and discontinue the tail in Fee, and the second Son releaseth by his deed
with Warranty to the Discontinuee, and after the Tenant in tail dies, and the
second Son dies without Issue; here the eldest Son is barred to have any
recovery by writ of Formedon; because the Warranty of the second Brother is
collateral to him for the impossibility that he may convey any Estate to him
through the second Brother: but if the eldest Son die without Issue, then may
the youngest Son have a Formedon, in respect of the possibility that the
youngest Son might have conveyed the descent of the land to him thorough the
second Brother, etc.

The heir shall have writthings.
14 If a man make a Feoffment with warranty and die, Co. l 11. b 4 in the Lo.
Buckhursts Case.
the heir of the Feoffor shall have all the writings, which the Feoffor
himself might detain, albeit the heir has nothing by descent, for the
possibility of the descent afterward.

Grant of a remainder to the heirs of I. S. good.
15 If a Lease be made for life the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. (the
same I.S. being then in rerum natura) it is good, Co. l. 2. 51. b. 1. Sir Hugh
Cholmeleys Case.
for the common possibility, that I. S. may die during the life of the Tenant
for life. Co. Inst. p. 1. 378. a. 3.

The Law considers a child in ventre s^ ^^re.
16 Albeit Filius in utero matris is part viscerum matris (vide 3. Ass. Pl. 2.
22 Ass. Pl. 94. 22 E. 3. Tit. Corone 180. Stanford fol. 21. Co. l. 7. 8. b. 4.
the Earl of Bedfords Ca.
) yet the Law in many Cases has consideration of him in respect of the
apparent expectation and possibility of his birth for which see the opinion of
Sanders and Brown in Stowells Case, for the avoiding of a fine; Pl. Co. fol.
vide temps E. 1. Tit. Guard 153. and 31 E. 1. Tit. brief 873. for the Guard
of such an infant; vide 38 E. 3. 7. and 41 E. 3. and 11 E. 3. Tit. voucher,
that he shall be vouched in ventresa mere 3 El. Dier 186. An adulterer counsels
the Feme to murder the Infant, when it should be borne, who does it
accordingly, in this Case the adulterer is accessory, yet at the time of the
counsel given the Infant was in ventre sa mere, etc.

Feofment of Cestuy que use good.
17 If Cestuy que use after the Stat. of 1 R. 3. and before the Statute of 27 H.
8. had disseised the Disseisor of his feoffees; Co. l. 10. 49. in Lampets Case.
here the use is suspended, and depends in possibility to be revived by the
entry of the feoffees. and yet if he make feoffment in Fee, that is good and
shall bind, in respect that the Law has consideration of that possibility of
the use.

A possibility ^ay have a ^eing and be ^^^feitted.
18 H. possessed of an house for 31 years devises the profits thereof to I.
durante viduitate, and after devises the term to R. and dies, Co. l. 10. 52.
a. 3. in Lampets Case. viz. Tr. 28 El. Rot. 1674. Harrington and Rudyards Case.
I. by the assent of the Executor enters and purchases the house in Fee of L.
who covenants with I. that the house shall be free from all former bargains,
etc. And in an Action of Debt upon an Obligation for the breach of covenants,
the defendant pleads covenants performed, the Plaintiff assigns for breach
the devise to I. and afterward to R. and that after I. entering into that
covenant I. had married O. upon whom R. entered, and thereupon the Plaintiff
demurres: And the great Question in the Case was, whether ( R. at the time of
the making of the covenant having only a possibility) the covenant did extend
unto it, or no: And it was resolved, that the covenant did extend to that
possibility, and that the possibility had being for that purpose, and might be
forfeited.

19 Vide infra M. 105. in all.

^ands may be ^tailed ^^gh given ^ persons un^aried.
20 If tenements be given to a man and to a woman, Co. Inst. p. 1. 25. b: 4.
which is not his wife; and to the heirs male of their two bodies, they have
an Estate tail, albeit they be not married at that time, and so it is if lands
be given to a man which has a Wife, and to a woman which has a husband, and
to the heirs of their two bodies, they have presently an Estate tail, for the
possibility that they may marry, etc.

^eare-say.
21 Such thing as one has by credible hearsay (by the example of Litt. ^.
720) are not be neglected, but are worthy of observation, Co. ib. 377. b. 4
for the apparent possibility, that they may be true.

105 And therefore nothing to be void, which by possibility may be good.
1 Vide supra R. 104. e. 1.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 25. b. 4. Co. l 50. b. in Lampets Case.
2 If Lands be given to two husbands and their wives, Lands intailed to more
than two good.
and to the heirs of their bodies begotten, this is not a void Grant for the
uncertainty, but they shall take a joint estate for life, and several
inheritances, viz. the one husband and his wife the one moity, and the other
husband and wife the other moity; So if lands be given to a man and two women,
and the heirs of their bodies begotten, they have a joint estate for life, and
every of them several inheritance; because they cannot have one issue of their
bodies, neither shall there be by any construction a possibility upon a
possibility, viz. that he shall marry the one first and then the other; So it
is also when land is given to two men and one woman, and to the heirs of their
bodies begotten, etc.

Co. ib. 45. b. 3.
3 Regularly in every Lease for years the term must have a certain beginning,
and a certain end; for so Bracton says, A Lease for years good, though
uncertain when it shall begin.
Terminus Annorum certus esse debet and determinatus; And Littleton also has
these words, Pur term de certain ans; Nevertheless, although before the time
it should take effect in possession or interest it do depend upon an
incertainty, viz. upon a possibile contingent before it begin in possession or
interest, or upon a limitation or condition subsequent; yet is it not void for
that uncerrainty; as if A. seized of lands in fee grant to B. that when B.
pays to A. xx shillings, that from thenceforth he shall have and occupy the
land for 21 years, and after B. pays the twenty shillings, this is a good
Lease for 21 years, from thence-forth, notwithstanding that uncertainty;
because it was at first possible the twenty shillings should be paid, and that
being paid, the Lease had from thence-forth a certain beginning, and therefore
was not void but good ab initio, etc. So if A. leaseth his land to B. for so
many years as B. has in the Manor of Dale, and B. has then a term in the
Manor of Dale for 10 years, this is a good Lease by A. to B. of the land of
A. for 10 years; for albeit there appear no certainty of years in the Lease,
yet because by reference to a certainty it may be made certain it suffices.
If the Parson of D. make a Lease of his Glebe for so many years as he shall be
Parson there, this cannot be made certain by any-meanes, for nothing is more
uncertain than the time of death, Terminus vitae est incertus, and licet nihil
certius sit morte, nihil tamen incertus est hora mortis: but if he make a Lease
for three years, and so from three years to three years, so long as he shall
be Parson, this is a good lease for 6 years; for it is possible he may so long
continue Parson there, and then it is good for so long, viz. first, for three
years, and then for three years more; but for the residue it is uncertain;
If a man makes a Lease to I. S. for so many years as I. N. shall name, this
is not void for the uncertainty; for when I. N. has named the years, then is
it a good Lease for so many years,; A man makes a Lease for 21 years, if I.
S. shall so long live; Here, albeit the end of his Lease depends upon an
uncertainty, viz. upon the time of the death of I. S. which is uncertain, yet
because it is possible at last to know the certain time of his death, and (by
consequent) the determination of the Lease thereupon, the Lease is good ab
initio; Notwithstanding that uncertainty, etc. Videl. 6. fol. 34, 35. in the
Bishop of Bath and Wels Case.

Gant to one i^ time of va^ation good.
4 In the time of vacation a Grant made to a Covent is void, Littl. 443. Co.
Inst. p. 1. 264 a. 1.
because the body Politic, which is capable, is not complete, but wants an
head; yet if during the vacatlou, a Lease for life, or a Gift in tail be made,
the remainder to the Abbot and his Successors, this remainder is good, because
it is possible there may be an Abbot before the particular estate be
determined: There is the like Law of a Mayor and Comminalty, etc.

A^tornment good though ^ncertaine.
5 If A. grant the Reversion of black acre, or white acre, Co. ib. 310. b. 2
and the Lessee attorn to the Grant; Here, nothing passes at the time of the
Attornment, and that also is only good in execution, and by the subsequent
election of the Grantee; yet is not this a void Grant, nor the Attornment
fruitless, because upon the Grantees election they may both be made good, etc.

A remainder ^ay r^st in a person uncertain.
6 It is regularly true, that every remainder, Littl.. 721. Co. ib. 378. a. 2.
3, 4.
which commenceth by a Deed, ought to vest in him, to whom it is limited, when
livery of seisin is made to him, that has the particular estate; And yet if
the person that is to take the Remainder be not in rerum natura, as if a Lease
for life be made, the remainder to the right heirs of I. S. (I. S. being then
alive) it suffices, that the inheritance passes presently out of the Lessor,
but cannot vest in the heir of I. S. For that (living his father) he is not in
rerum natura, for non est haeres viventis, nevertheless, the remainder is good
for the possibility that I. S. may die during the life of the Lessee: So if a
man make a Lease for life to A. B. and C. and if B. survive C. then the
remainder to B. and his heirs: here, albeit the remainder is not at the time
of the Livery certainly in B. nevertheless the remainder is good for the
possibility that C. may die before B. it being but a common possibility, that
one may die before another.

^idem.
7. If Lands be devised to I. S. for life, Co. l. 1. 24. b. 4. in Porters Case.
upon condition that I. S. shall by the advice of Learned Counsel, settle the
same Lands within convenient time for certain Uses, which (indeed) are
prohibited by the Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 10. Albeit such Uses are by that Act
prohibited, yet if that Condition be not performed, I. S. forfeits his estate
because they might have been settled by the advice of Learned Counsel, and by
purchasing an Incorporation and a license to settle Lands thereupon, etc.

He may rest in person ^^certain.
8 If I covenant with I. S. that in consideration of fatherly affection, and for
the advancement of my blood, Co. ibid. l. 1. 176. b. 4. Mildmayes Case.
I will stand seized to the use of such of my sons, or such of my kindred as
I. S. shall nominate; In this Case upon the nomination the use shall be raised:
For the consideration is certain, and the person by matter ex post facto may
be made certain.

A possibility (...) void, ^ough not as^^rable.
9 A man possessed of a term for diverse years, Co. ibid. L. 4. 66. b 1. in
Fulwoods Case.
devises the profits thereof to one for life, and after his decease to another
for the residue of the years, and dies, the first Devisee enters by assent of
the executor, and after he in the remainder during the life of the first
Devisee assigns it to another, and after the first Devisee dies: Here, albeit
during the life of the first Devisee, the second Devisee had no estate, that he
could assign over (for the Devise to the first Devisee was (upon the matter)
of all the term if he should so long live;) nevertheless the second Devise is
not void for the possibility, that the second Devisee might over-live the
first; Howbeit, that possibility he could not assign over, etc.

^educement of a Lease to certainty.
10 Every lease for years ought to have a certain commencement, Co. ibid. L. 6.
35. b. 4. The Bishops of Bathes Case.
but that is to be understood, when it is to take effect in interest or
possession: For, if I grant to you, that if you pay unto me 20 l. at Michaelmas
next, that then you shall have my Manor of D. for 21 years; here, it is
uncertain, whether, that Lease shall ever have commencement or no; for
(indeed) until the payment of the money it is no Lease; yet is it a good Lease
in respect of the possibility that the money may be paid, for then it will have
a certain commencement: So also the continuance of a Lease for years ought to
be certain, yet if a man lease the Manor of D. to I. S. for so many years as
I. N. has in the Manor of S. and I. N. has 10 years in S. I. S. shall have
so many in D: So if a Lease be made to another during the minority of I. D. and
he is ten years old, that is a good Lease for 11 years, if I. D. so long
live; for these two last Leases are by reference reduceable to a certainty: In
like manner, if a man make a Lease from St. Michaelmas for so many years as I.
S. shall name, and I. S. names a certain term (in the life of the lessor,)
this is a good lease for the possibility of rendering to a certainty, by matter
ex post facto, viz. by the nomination, etc.

Co. l 10. 50. b. 2 in Lampets ca. 15 H. 7. 10. Pl. Co. 55. a. Colv. and Biv.
Case.
11 If land be given to a married man and a married woman, Possibility of
Marriage.
and the heirs of their two bodies begotten, this is a good estate tail; for
of necessity death will come, and it is a common possibility, that one may die
before another, that then the Marriage may ensue, etc.

106 Id certum est, quod certum reddi potest.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 96. a. 2.
1 If a man hold of his Lord by sheering all his Sheep in his Manor of D, when
the Lord keeps sometimes a greater number, Service uncertain in one respect,
certain in another.
sometimes a less: Here, the service being referred to the number, is
uncertain, and if so, then the tenant not distrainable for it (for it is a
Maxim, that no distress can be taken for a service that is not certain) but
the service being referred to the Manor, is certain, and so is the tenant
distrainable for that uncertainty, because by that relation it becomes certain.

Co. l. 8. 95. b. 4. in Math. Mannings Case, and Lampets Case. Co. l 10. 47. a.
4
2 If lessee for years devises his lease to A. for life, Term uncertain, made
certain.
albeit it is uncertain how many years A. shall hold it, yet is not the
Devise void for such uncertainty: because when A. dies it becomes certain how
many years A. was to hold it, and then also it may be certainly known how
many, how many years the party, that is to have the subsequent interest
therein, ought also to hold it.

Co. l. 9. 30. b. 4 The Abbot of Stata M^rcellaes Case.
3 When a Charter has only a general reference to other Charters, which are
upon Record, it is as much in law, Record implies certainty.
as if they had been all particularly recited, because they may be certainly
known by the Record.

Co. l. 47. a. 1. The ^arl of Shrewsbu^ies Case.
4 Qu. Eliz. grants to the Earl of Shrewsbury, Grants uncertain, made certain.
Senesch Dominiorum sive Maneriorum suorum de Mansfield Bolsover, and Harfley,
and no County is mentioned, where they lie; yet is not the grant for this
uncertainty void; because albeit the Queen might have diverse Manors in the
same or other Counties of the same Name, yet because by some of the Clauses of
the Patent, or by other circumstances, it might be understood what Stewardships
she meant to grant, the letters patents were adjudged good, notwithstanding
such uncertainty: If the King by his letters patents grant to another all the
Manors and Advowsons, which were Priors of A. being a Prior Alien, or which
were I. S. who was attaint, etc. such Grants are good, albeit the County is not
named, because upon inquiry they may be certainly known, as it is adjudged 32
H. 6. 20, 21. So if the King grant to the Abbot and his Sucessors, that the
Monks during the vacations shall have all the Temporalties of the Abbey, this
is a good Grant, notwithstanding the uncertainty of not naming the County or
Counties where they lie, as it was adjudged 39 E. 3. 21. and F. N. B. 33. T. So
likewise in 23 E. 3. 21. b. The King grants unto the Queen all the possessions
of a Baronie (escheated) until Jo. of Gaunt might be able to govern himself,
and it was adjudged good, etc. For in all such cases, if it may be discovered
by any Clause of the Patent, by any circumstance, (as the Tenants Name, in
whose possession it was, or the like,) by the Particular, or otherwise, what it
is, that the King intended to grant, it suffiseth; And if such Patentee be
impleaded, and the Plaintiff by reason of such uncertainty plead non concessit,
and demanding Oyer of the Letters Patents demurres thereupon, it shall be
adjudged against the Plaintiff; For it is matter in fact, what Manors, etc.
pass, and for p^oof thereof such Clauses and circumstances, as aforesaid,
shall be given in evidence, etc.

(...) Hospital ^^rtaine, ^^ugh not ^^lt.
5 A piece of Ground or Soil, whereupon an Hospital, Co. l. 1e 32. a. 1 The Case
of Suttons Hospital.
etc. is intended to be built, may in the Letters Patents of Incorporation be
called an Hospital; albeit there be no building at that time founded thereupon,
and that uncertainty shall not prejudice such a grant; because of ye
possibility, that it may be built thereupon, and by that means may be made
certain.

^^erties pass ^^ogh uncer^^ine.
6 If the King grant lands, Co. l. 10. 65. a. 3 Whistelers Cas^.
which have come to his hands before, and grant over to the Grantee, tales
libertates, privilegia, jurisdictiones, etc. as he that was last seized of the
Lands had; here, albeit the King knew not the certainty of the Liberties and
Privileges, yet the grant is good, and the grantee may require the Liberties
and Privileges, that the other had before; because that uncertainty may be
reduced to certainty by inquiry, or other circumstance. Vide the Case de Strata
Mercella, Co. l. 9. 24. and 18 El. Dier. 351.

^idie un^^^taine, made ^^rtaine by ^^^stance.
7 In Fogasses Case, Pl. 6. 2. 4. and 12 3. and 17. a. 3.
albeit the quantity of the Woad was not known, when the Agreement was made
with the Collector, and so (by consequent neither the subsidy, what money
should be paid for it; yet because the Subsidy might afterward be known by
circumstance ( viz. by weighing, whereupon the King might be entitled to an
action for it) the agreement was adjudged good, and the Statute performed. If
one demise all his Acres in D. to I. S. for years, rendering for every acre 12
d. the Lease is good, because the certainty of the Rent may be known by a
Survey of the Acres, whereby the Lessor may be entitled to an action of Debt
for the Rent, if it be arrear. If one give two acres to another, Habendum the
one for life, and the other in Fee; it is uncertain which of them he has for
life, and which in Fee; but if afterward the Grantee make feoffment of one of
them, he shall be said to have Fee in that ab initio. So if one let black-acre,
and white-acre to another for life, the remainder of one of them in Fee; here,
it is uncertain, in which of them he has fee: but if afterward he license
the Tenant for life to fell Trees in white-acre, it shall be adjudged, that he
had the remainder of that Acre ab initio. In Wheelers Case, 14 H. 8. H. 14. H.
8. 17. Br. Condition 67.
The Grant of a term upon condition, that the Grantee shall obtain the favor
of the Lessor, and shall pay so much as I. S. shall arbitrate, was good, when
the condition was fulfilled: and the second Grant was adjudged void: And there
it is holden fol. 21. that if one make a Lease for so many years as I. S.
shall name, here this is uncertain at the beginning; but if afterward I. S.
name 20 years, it shall be good for 20 years from the beginning. P. 17 E. 4. 1.
So also in 17 E. 4. in trespass for grain taken away, there the plaintff and
defendant had bargained, that ye defendant should go to the place where it
grew, and see it, and if he liked it upon view, he should take it, paying the
plaintiff 40 d. for every acre: this was there holden a good contract
notwithstanding the uncertainty of the quantity of the Grain, and of the sum
he should pay for it, because upon the Circumstance of measuring it, the
certainty might appear: And so there, albeit this were a Conditional agreement
and uncertain, yet it was held good Justification, if he had presently paid
for it, T. 9 H. 6. 27. Fitzh. Grants 7. Br. Patents 4.
when he carried it away. In 9 H. 6. the King grants to the Duchess of York,
quondam Insulam, etc. cum omnibus exitibus amerciamentis and proficuis omnium
gentium residen, etc. de and infra Insulam praedict. in quibuscunque curiis
nostris emergentibus, and there this grant is holden good, for albeit the King
knew not at first what issues or amerciaments would be forfeited; yet because
when they were forfeited, H 5. E. 4. fo. ultimo, and Br. Patent. 60.
they might be certainly known, the Grant was adjudged good. So l^kewise in 5
E. 4. The King grants to Garter the Office of King of Heralds, cum feodis, and
proficuis de antiquo, etc. here, in this Grant there was no certainty of the
Fees and profits belonging to that Office, yet was the Grant adjudged good,
because by inquiry they might be reduced to a certainty. Also in 30 H. 6. The
King grants all such Lands, M. 30. H. 6. per Choke.
as came to him by Attainder, etc. This Grant contained no certainty, yet it
was held good, because it might be reduced to a certainty: So if the King will
pardon all Riots; here, nothing is named in certain, yet is the pardon good.
It is holden in 21 H. 6. that, P. 21 H. 6. 43. Fitz. Grants. 40. Br. Grants
123. and Contract 13. Perck. 17. c.
if a Parson will grant all his tithe Wool of the next year, it is a good
Grant, yet the quantity of the Wool is uncertain at the time of the Grant: So
it is also, where one grants to another all the perquisites of his Court. If a
man grant two acres (as before) the Habendum, the one for life, the other in
fee, in this case, if the Tenant lose both these acres by default, he may have
a Quod ei deforceat for the one, and a Writ of Right for the other, and by that
means the certainty of the Grant is determined. If one grant a Rentcharge,
Lit. cap. Rents fo. 40. and Fitz. N. B. 152. a.
the Grantee may avow, or have a Writ of Annuity, and whether of these he will
have is maintainable; and this Grant which was in that respect uncertain at
first, is by that means reduced to a certainty, and good. So if one grant to
another 20 s. or a Robe; M. 9. E. 4. 36. in Debt, and Abr. by Fitz. Der. ^9.
Br. 12. Perck. 17.
here, it is uncertain which he shall have, yet it being reducible to a
certainty, by the Will of the Grantor, the Grant is good. If I have two Horses
in my Stable, viz. a black and a white, and I give unto I. S. one of these
Horses, this is uncertain; yet it is a good Grant; because by the Election of
I. S. it may be made certain.

Dier 91. a. 11. 1 Mar.
8 If I give unto you so many of my Horses, Uncerta^^ certain b^ gains.
as may well be spared, this is void for the uncertainty; But if I give you one
of my Horses, albeit this is also uncertain; yet because you may make it
certain by your Election, the Gift is good: So if I promise to give for your
Land so much as it is reasonably worth, this is void for the uncertainty; But
if the judgment thereof be referred to a third person, who does adjudge it; by
that means it is made good, etc.

107 Res non per se invicem, sed per pecuniam estimantur, and non pecunia per
Res.
Diversity of a Condition.
1 There is a diversity, Co. Inst. p. 1. 221. b. 2.
when the Condition is for the payment of money, and when for the delivery of a
Horse, Robe, Ring, or the like: for where it is for payment of money, there if
the Feoffee or Obligee accept an Horse, etc. in satisfaction, this is good: but
if the Condition be for the delivery of a Horse, Robe, etc. or, etc. There,
albeit the Obligee or Feoffee accept money, or any other thing for the Horse,
etc. it is no performance of the Condition.

A diversity of Conditions, when to do a Collateral act, and when to pay money.
2 In Peytoes Case, in the 9 Report, there is a difference taken, Co. l. 9. 79.
a. 2.
betwixt a Condition in a Deed to a Collateral act, as to be bound in a Statute
to make a Feoffment to render a true Account, and the like; For there accord
with Execution for money, or other thing, is not satisfaction to save the
Forfeiture of the Condition; Dier 1. 4 H. 8. and 56. 18. 35. 7 H. 8.
for the Contract being made by writing to do such a Collateral act, cannot (in
such case) be altered without writing, according to Rule 27. And thus it is
holden in 12 H. 4. 23. 9 H. 7. 4. 4 H. 8. Dyer 2, etc. But when the Condition
in the Deed (by the original Contract of the parties) is to pay money, there,
by agreement of the parties any other thing may be given in satisfaction of the
money: For, as the Philosopher says, Nummus est mensura rerum commutandarum,
which agrees with the Rule above; And in this sense it is true, quod pecuniae
obediunt omnia. But so it is not of other things: And it matters not, whether
the money mentioned in the Condition be a Collateral sum, or parcel of the
Obligation, or not: for if a man be bound by Obligation in 200 Quarters of
Wheat, upon Condition to pay 20 l. the Obligor may by agreement betwixt them
give unto him a Horse, Gold-ring, etc. in satisfaction of the money, albeit (in
that case) the money be Collateral to the Obligation: And therefore if a man
enfeoff another by Deed upon Condition, that the Feoffor shall pay a certain
sum of money, etc. the Feoffor may (by agreement betwixt them,) give the
Feoffee a Horse, Gold-ring, or the like, in satisfaction, and yet the money (in
this case) is Collateral, having regard to the land: for if tender be made, and
refusal, he shall never be compellable to pay the money; and therefore it is
mere Collateral, Quia reprobata pecunia (in hoc casu) liberat solventem; And
with this agrees Littl. fol. 79, in the Chapter of Conditions. So also if a man
be bound by Obligation in 100 Quarters of Wheat upon Condition to pay 50
Quarters, he cannot give money or any other thing in satisfaction thereof,
because the original Contract was not for money: So as when money is to be
paid, any other thing may be paid in satisfaction; but so it is not of any
other things; for then neither money, nor any other thing can be given in liew
thereof.

108 It favors mutual Recompense.
Fee-simple without the lord Heirs.
1 Upon partition between Coparceners of Lands in Fee-simple, Co. Inst. p. 1. 9.
b. 4. and 169. b. 4. Litt.. 252.
if the one (for owelty of partition) grant a Rent to the other generally, the
Grantee shall have a Fee-simple in the Rent, without the word Heirs, because
the Grantor has a Fee-simple, in consideraon whereof he granted the Rent,
Ipsae etenim leges cupiunt, ut jure regantur.

Ibid. 13. a. 1.
2 If the heir of the part of the Mother of land, The heir of the Voucher shall
sue execution.
whereunto a Warranty is annexed, is impleaded and vouch, and judgment is given
against him, and for him to recover in value; and dies before Execution, the
heir of the part of the Mother shall sue Execution to have in value against the
Vouchee; for the effect ought to pursue the Cause, and the recompense shall
ensue the loss.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 21. b. 1.
3 If lands be given by these words, The word Frank-marriage create inheritance.
(in Frank-marriage) according to the Rules of Law, then do these words create
an estate of inheritance in special tail; For the consideration of Marriage is
(in that case) more favored in Law then any other consideration, in respect of
the mutual recompense.

Ibid. 47. b. 3.
4 The Lessor for years must be seized of the Lands demised at the time of the
Lease made, The Lessor must be seized.
for in every Contract there must be quid pro quo, because contractus est quasi
actus contra actum; And therefore if the Lessor has nothing in the Land, the
Lessee has not quid pro quo, nor any thing, for which he should pay the rent:
And in that case he may also plead that the Lessor non demisit, and give in
evidence the other matter.

Ibid. 78. a. 2.
5 If the Father enfeoffe his eldest Son, Purchase b^^^ fide a voideth
Wardship.
or any of his younger Sons, or others for the making of his Wife a Ioynture,
advancement of his Daughters, payment of his Debt of the like, and die, his
heir within age, the heir shall be in Ward for his body, and a third part of
the land, by construction of the Statutes of 32 and 34 of H. 8. but if his
eldest Son or any of his younger Sons purchase Lands of the Father, which
are holden by Knight Service, bona fide for a reasonable value, the heir shall
neither be in Ward, nor pay Primer seisin, Leonard Loveys Case, Co. l. 10. 83.

Ibid. 89. a. 4.
6 If a Guardian or a B^yliff receive the conts and profits of the Lands, and be
robbed without their default or negligence, A Carrier shall answer Good robbed.
they shall be allowed them upon their Account; but it is otherwise of a
Carried; H. Woodliefe and Curties.
for he has his Hi^e, and thereby implicitly undertaketh the safe Delivery of
the Goods delivered unto him, and therefore shall answer the Value thereof, if
he be robbed of them.

Ibid. 99. b. 4. Pl. 306. b. Sheringtons Case. 33 H. 6. 6. 39 H. 6. 29,
7 The Mesne ought to acquit men of Religion, Tenant in Frankalme^ ought to be
acquit.
which hold of him in Frankalindigne, of all Services to the Lord paramount;
for it is their duty to make prayers for their Founder, and his heirs, and in
consideration of those prayers the Founder, etc. is bound to pay to the Chief
Lord, all Rents and Services issuing out of that Land. 14 E. 3. Mesne 7.

Ibid. 101. a. 2. 18 H. 6. 2. b. per Newton. 9 H. 3. Voucher 277.
8 If the Lord grant the Services of his Tenant by Homage Ancestrel, Homage
Ancestrel, mixtures a Warranty in lan^
the Tenant shall not be compelled in a per quae servitia to attorn, unless
the Conusee will grant in Court to warrant the Land unto him; and if the Tenant
vouch by force of this Warranty in Law, it is a good Counter Plea, that the
Tenant or any one of his Ancestors, recessit de servitio suo, and fecit
servitium suum A. B. sine aliqua coactione de sua propria voluntate.

Ibid 102. a. 1.
9 If at a Sequatur sub suo particulo, No Warra^ Cartae, or vo^cher after a
recovery in value.
both Tenant and Vouchee make default, and the Demandant has judgment against
the Tenant, and after brings a Scire facias to have Execution, the Tenant may
have a Warrantia Cartae, or if he were impleaded by a stranger, he may vouch
again; but if he had judgment to recover in value, he shall never have a
Warrantia Cartae, or vouch again; for by this judgment to recover, in value, he
has benefit of the Warranty.

Ibid. 102. a. 3.
10 The Lord that has received Homage of his Tenant, being vouched, is thereby
barred to disclaim.

^^ed eye for an (...), etc.
11 By the Ancient Law of England, Ibid. 127. a. 3.
if the Defendant in an appeal of Mayhem had been found guilty: the judgment
against the Defendant had been, that he should lose the like member, that the
Plaintiff had lost by his means as an hand for hand, an eye for an eye, etc.
40 Ass. 9. Mirror cap. 4. v. 5. Sect. 18. Britton cap. 25. fol. 144; 145. Fleta
lib. 1. cap. 38.

The issue in^aile not bar^ed without ^ecompence.
12 In Littletons Case, Ibid. 173. a. 1.
. 260. where the eldest Sister has the intailed Lands, and the youngest the
fee-simple Lands, if the youngest daughter alien part of the Land in fee-simple
and dies, so as a full recompense for the Land entailed descends not to her
Issue, her Issue may wave the taking of any profits of the fee simple lands,
and enter into the Land entailed: for the Issue in tail shall never be barred
without a full recompense.

Part of the ^^me no sati^faction.
13 Where the Condition is for the payment of 20 l. the Obligor or Feoffor
cannot at the time appointed pay a lesser sum in satisfaction of the whole;
because it is apparent, Ibid. 212. b. 4 Co. l. 5. 17. Pinnels Case.
that a lesser sum of money cannot be a satisfaction for a greater.

In Estate in^ile charged without fine or ^^covery.
14 It is commonly held, Ibid. 143. b. 1
that Tenant in tail cannot alien or charge the Land in tailed without fine or
recovery: yet if a Disseisor make a gift in tail, and the Donee in
consideration of a release by the Disseisee of all his right to the Donee,
grants a Rentcharge to the Disseisee and his heirs, proportionable to the
value of his right, this shall bind the Issue in tail; albeit the Estate tail
continue: And this is in respect of the natural recompense.

^ Benefice ^harged with^^^ the Pa^^
15 If there be Parson, Patron, and Ordinary, Ibid. 343. b. 4.
and the Parson by the Ordinance and assent of the Ordinary grant an Annuity to
another, having quid pro quo in consideration thereof, this shall bind the
Successor of the Parson; without consent of the Patron.

^nnanty my be an^exed to in^^rporal ^^^ngs.
16 Regularly a Warranty is only annexable to free-holds or inheritances
corporeal, yet to preserve mutual recompense, Ibid. 366. a. 4
it may also be annexed to free-h^lds and inheritances incorporeal, which lie
in grant as advowsons, and to Rents, Commons, Estovers, and the like, which
Issue out of Lands or Tenements: And not only to such inheritances in esse,
but also to Rents, Commons, Estovers, etc. newly created: As a man (some say)
may grant a Rent, etc. out of the land for life, in tail, or in fee, with
Warranty: for albeit there can be no title precedent to the Rent, yet there may
be a title precedent to the Land, out of which it issues, before the grant of
the Rent, which Rent may be avoided by the recovery of the Land, in which Case
the grantee may help himself by a warrantia cartae, upon the special matter,
and so a Warranty in Law may extend to a Rent, etc. newly created, as in Case
of a Rent granted upon exchange, or for owelty of Partition.

^arranty and ^es bind the ^eg.
17 King H. 3. gave a manor to Edmond Earl of Corne-wal, Ibid. ^70. b. 1 Pl.
134. and 553, 554.
and to the heirs of his body; saving the possibility of Reverter, and died,
The earl before the Statute of W. 2. de donis, etc. by deed gave the said
Manor to another in fee with Warranty in exchange for another Manor, and
after the said Statute (in the 28 of E. 1.) dies without Issue, leaving assets
in fee-simple, which warranty and assets descended upon E. 1. as Cousin and
heir of the said Earl, viz. Son and heir of H. 3. brother of Rich. E. of
Cornewal, father of the E. Edmund: And it was adjudged, that the King as heir
to the Earl Edmund was by the Warranty and assets barred of the possibility of
Reverter, which he had expectant upon the said gift, albeit the Warranty and
assets descended upon the natural body of E. 1. as heir to a subject, and E.
1. claimed the said Manor as in his Reverter, in Jure Coronae, in the capacity
of his body Politic, in which right he was seized before the Gift.

Ibid. 372. b. 4 Co. lib. 2. 16. Wisemans Ca.
18 If Prince Henry Son of H. 7. had made a Gift in tail, An intaile ^^mainder
in the King cannot be barred^
the Remainder to H. 7. in Fee, which Remainder by the death of H. 7. had
descended to H. 8. so as he had the Remainder by descent, yet might Tenant in
tail bar the Estate tail by a common Recovery, notwithstanding the Statute of
34 H. 8. 20. But if H. 7. in consideration of money, or of assurance of Land,
or for other consideration by way of Provision, had procured Prince H. by deed
indented and enrolled, to have made a Gift in tail to one of his Servants and
subjects for recompense of service or other consideration, the Remainder to H.
7. in Fee, and all this appear upon Record; This is a good provision within the
said Statute, and the Tenant in tail cannot by a common recovery bar the
Estate tail.

Ibid. 384. b. 2
19 In a formedon in descender, it is a good plea to say, Warranty (...) assets
a good plea against the Issue in tail.
that the Ancestor of the demandant exchanged the land with the Tenant for
other lands taken in exchange, which descended to the demandant, whereunto he
has entered and agreed; or if the demandant has not so entered and agreed then
may the Tenant plead the Warranty in law, and other assets descended; for in
such Cases, there ought to be quid pro quo.

Ibid. 390. a. 4.
20 Tenant in tail makes a feofment in Fee with warranty, Remitter suspended by
warranty an^ assets.
and disseiseth the discontinuee, and dies seized, leaving assets to his
Issue; some hold, that in respect of this suspended warranty and assets, the
issue in tail shall not be remitted: but that the discontinuee shall recover
against the Issue in tail, and he take advantage of his Warranty, if any he
has: And after in a Formedon brought by the Issue, the discontinuee shall
bar him, in respect of the Warranty and Assets, and so (by such mutual
recompense) every man's right is saved.

Ibid. 23. 2.
21 If one make a feofment in Fee without valuable consideration to diverse
particular uses, Use remai^^ in the Feoffor.
so much of the use as he disposes not is in him, as his ancient use in point
of Reverter: It is otherwise if he make such a feofment for money or other
valuable consideration.

Co. l. 1. 24. 2. 3 Porters Case.
22 If a feofment be made to superstitious and unlawful uses, A consideration
makes the feoffees seise^ to their own use.
the Statute of 23 H. 8. 10. makes the uses void, but the feofment remains
good, and the feoffees shall stand seized to the use of the feoffor and his
heirs; but if in that Case the Feoffor shall reserve 1 d. Rent, or receive
from the Feoffees 1 d. consideration upon the feofment, the Feoffees shall be
seized to the use of themselves and their heirs.

Co. ib. 106. a 4.
23 In Shelleys Case, albeit the Recoveree died before execution, Recovery i^
value.
yet the judgment being to recover in value, the Issue is thereby barred,
because he is thereby to have recompense.

Cited in the Rector of Chedingtons Case. Co. l. 1. 154. a. 2
24 The Lord Paget, An use must have good consideration
being seized of the Manor of A. B. etc. covenants with I. S. and others that
in consideration of the discharge of his funerals, and payment of his debts and
legacies out of the profits of his land, and for the advancement of his Son
and others of his blood, he and his heirs would stand seized of the said
Manors to the use of the said I. S. etc. for the life of the said Lord Paget,
and after his death to the use of Chapter P. and others for the term of 24 years,
and after the expiration or end of that term, then to the use of Sir William
Paget his Son in tail with diverse remainders over, and after the Lord Paget
was attainted of treason; In this Case it was adjudged, that the term to Chapter P.
etc. was void, because there wanted good consideration, in as much as Chapter P.
etc. were strangers to the consideration aforesaid: But if he had made them
executors, so that they might have been chargable toward the payment of his
debts, and so made privy to the consideration, then had such consideration been
good, and the Estate made to them had also been good.

^ general ^^sideration (...) good.
25 An use cannot be raised by any covenant or Proviso, C. l. 1. 176. a. 1.
Mildmays Case.
or by bargain and sale upon a general consideration, and therefore if a man
by deed intended and enrolled according to the Statute, for diverse good
considerations bargain and sell his land to another and his heirs, nihil inde
operatur, for no use shall be raised upon such general consideration, because
it appears not to the Court that the Bargainer had quid per quo; but if a good
consideration can be averred, that shall suffice to raise an use, albeit no
particular consideration be mentioned in the deed. Vide plus ibid.

^ valuable ^^sideration ^ust raise an (...).
26 Tenant in tail, Remainder in fee, Co. l. 2. 15. a. 3 Wisemans Ca.
he in Remainder by deed indented and enrolled, in consideration that his Lands
shall continue in his name and blood, and for diverse other good considerations,
covenants to stand feised to the use of himself and the heirs males of his
body, and for default of such Issue to the use of Queen El. and her Successors,
and after Tenant in tail in possession suffers a Common Recovery with voucher:
In this Case, no use was raised to the Queen by the Indenture, for the words,
for other good considerations, are too general to raise an use, without special
averment that some good consideration was given; And that the land shall
continue in his name and blood is no consideration to raise an use to the
Queen: for there wants quid per quo, etc. And contractus dicitur quasi Actus
contra Actum.

The estate tail ^^ved until 1 ^^ersal of the erroneous ro^^very.
27 L. and M. Ioint-tenants for life, the Remainder to L. in tail, Co. l. 3. 3.
2. 3. The Marq. of Winchesters ca.
Remainder to M. L. suffers a recovery erroneously and dies without Issue, and
N. also dies; Here, albeit the recovery is erroneous (and by consequent not
void but voidable by writ of error) yet so long as it continues in force, N.
has no right in the moity of the Remainder in respect of the intended
recompense: So also if Tenant in tail suffer a common recovery erroneously, and
after disseise the recover or and die, his Issue shall not be remitted; for so
long as the recovery remains in force the Estate tail is barred, by reason of
the recompense by recovery in value.

Recovery in ^he a bar (...) the Issue.
28 Baron and Feme are Ioint-tenants for life, Co. l. 6. a. 2. Cuppledikes Case.
Co. l. 6. 32. a. 2 Sir Will. Fite-Williams Case
the Remainder to the husband in tail, the husband suffers a recovery as
vouchee, this harres the Remainder, albeit the Feme joins not; for here was a
lawful Tenant to the praecipe, and the husband coming in as vouchee comes in
in privity of the Estate, and the recompense goes to the Issue in tail, but if
the Femes inheritance had been joint with the Baron, it might be doubled
whether the Issue bad been barred, yet then (it seems) he had been barred for
the moity, in respect of the recovery in value of the moity. Vide 55. 90.

Contribution.
29 If a man he seized of two Acres, Co. l. 3. 12. b. 4. Sir William Herberts
Case.
the one of the nature of Borough-English, and binds himself in a Statute or
recognisance, or if judgment in debt be given against him, and he die having
Issue two daughters, who make partition: In this Case if the one be only
charged, she shall have contribution and recompense against the other; for as
one purchasor shall have contribution against the rest, Co. l. 3. 18. a. 4.
Twines Case. and ib. 83 a. 4.
and also against the heir, so one of these two heirs shall have it against
the other, because they are in aequali Jure.

Nature no good consideration within the Statute of ^ 3 El. 5.
30 The words in the proviso of 13 El. 5. (concerning fraudulent conveyances)
upon good consideration, and bona fide, shall not be understood, of Nature or
Blood, but of some consideration of money, or other thing of value: for if one
being indebted to 5 several persons, to each party in 20 l. in consideration of
natural affection gives all his goods to his Son or Cousin, in this Case, in as
much as the Creditors shall lose their Debts, etc. which are things of value,
the intention of the Act was, that the consideration in such Case should be
valuable; for equity requires, that such a Gift, which defeats others, shall be
of as high and good consideration as the things, that are so defeated by it.

Co. l. 4. 1. b. 2. Vernons Case.
31 If a man before the Statute of 27 H. 8. 10. Jointure made before marriage no
bar of dower.
in consideration of a Marriage after to be had with A. had made an Estate of
certain lands to her for life, in full satisfaction of all the dower, which
after marriage might accrue to her in any of his lands, and after they had
intermarried, this had not been any bar of her dower at the Common Law,
because she had not any title of Dower at the time of the acceptance of the
satisfaction, but that accrued afterward.

Co. lib. 4. 121. a. 4. Bastards Case.
32 In every Exchange rightly made this word Excambium imports in it self
(tacit) a condition and also a warranty, Exchange implies a warranty.
the one to give a re-entry, and the other a voucher and recompense, and all in
respect of the reciprocal consideration, the one land being given in exchange
for the other: but this is a special warranty; for upon the voucher (by force
thereof) he shall not recover other land in value, but that only, which was so
given by him in exchange, because in as much as the mutual Consideration is the
Clause of the Warranty, therefore it shall only extend to the land
reciprocally given, and not to any other land.

Co. l. 5. 87. a. 2. Blumfields ca.
33 Two are bound in an Obligation jointly and severally, The Obliger dying in
pr^son satisfies not the debt.
one is sued and in execution, so is the other; the first escaps, the other
brings an Audita querela; here the Audita querela lies not; for the Action
against the Sheriff upon the escape is not satisfaction of the Debt, because
he may he worth nothing, and if both had been sued by one writ, and several
praecipies, the entry shall be, that there be one execution, viz. with
satisfaction; for they shall both be in execution: If the Conusor of a Statute
Staple or Merchant escape, his lands and goods may be extended, so it is also
if he dies in prison; for execution of the body is not satisfaction: for there
is a difference betwixt execution, which is valuable, and which is not;
valuable execution (by the Common Law) cannot be had twice, as in eviction of
lands executed, it is otherwise of invaluable satisfaction: Also no new can be,
where execution was final before, but there may be where execution was quousque
as in the Case above.

Co. l. 5. 94. a. 1. Barwicks Ca.
34 E. 6. demises for 21 years, Void consideration make the lease void.
Queen El. leases the reversion for 21 years to B. who makes several leases in
futuro, and 23 El. upon consideration of surrender the Queen grants to the said
B. for 21 years, and 26 El. upon consideration of the surrender of the letters
Patents of 23 El. she grants to him for three lives from the day of the making:
Here, the demise for three lives is void, being made upon consideration of the
surrender of the letters Patents of 23 El. which were void, they being upon
consideration of the whole Estate, which was not performed, part being leased
out to diverse before.

Co. l. 7. 17. a. 1 The Case of Swannes. 2 R. 3. 15, 16.
35 The Custom in Com. Bucks is, A signet for the nest*
that if Swans breed upon any man's ground there the owner of the ground may
take the third Signet in them of the ground where they did so breed; and it was
adjudged a good Custom and reasonable, because there is quid per quo. The Lord
Stranges Case in 2 R. 3. 15, and 16. cited in the Case of Swannes.

Co. 10. 37. b. 2 in Mary Porting^ons Case.
36 Judgment given against Tenant in tail with voucher and recompense in value
shall bind the Estate tail, Tail docke by recovery i^ value.
nothwithstanding the Statute de donis, 13 E. 1. and by such recovery in value
the Tenant in tail shall have a formedon of the land so recovered in value, as
it was holden 15 E. 3. Brief 324 vide plus in the Book at large: And there is
observed, that albeit the docking of an Estate tail was never thought of by
the Sages of the Law until 12 E. 4. yet long before that time the opinion of
the Judges was that it might be so barred in respect of the recompense of
recovery in value.

Infant ^pellable ^^^urn.
37 In a per quae servicia against an Infant, Co. l. 9. 85. a. ^
who has the Tenancy by descent he shall not have his age but is compellable
to attourn; because at first the Lord departs with the Land in consideration
that the Tenant shall hold of him, and shall do him services, and pay unto him
a yearly Rent: For the Tenant is called in Law Tenant peravaile, because the
Law presumes, that he has benefit and avail above the services that he does
and the Rent that that he pays to the Lord; And therefore it is against
Reason, that when the heir has the Tenancy peravaile by descent, that he
shall not pay the yearly Rent, etc. which was reserved upon the creation of the
tenancy: And therefore Attornment by an Infant is good, which was the principal
Case there resolved, he being compellable to attourn in a per quae servicia (as
before is said) upon the reason aforesaid.

(...) by far^ not guar^^.
38 A Guardian shall not be punished for Wast done by a Stranger, but the former
shall, F. N. B. 60. g.
because (as is supposed) he receives profit out of the farm, and may
therefore have an action of Trespass against the stranger.

(...) of Mes^^h ^^gh ser^ done.
39 Albeit the Mesne have paid the services to the Lord Paramont, Ibidem 138. b.
yet if the Tenant be afterward distrained for the services, he shall have a
writ of Mesne against the Mesne for it, but whether he shall recover damages,
quaere; yet it seems he shall have damages, because the Mesne shall have
damages against the Lord Paramount, if he will put his cattle into the pound
for the Tenant, and sue Replevin: And yet nient distraine in his default, is a
good plea in a writ of Mesne.

^^y A^^l Parson ^^sors.
40 A writ of Annuity is maintainable against the Parson upon his Predecessors
grant by assent of Patron and Ordinary, Ib. 152. g. and 1.
and likewise upon an Ordinance made by the Ordinary without the Patron, if he
have quid pro quo; So it is also by the Parson against the Vicar upon the
Ordinaries Ordinance; if he have quid pro quo.

Trespass ^^cord no ^ervise of ^^rament.
41 When a trespass is done an Action conceived for it, Pl. 6. a. 1 F^gassaes
Case.
a concord Executorie pleaded is no bar thereof; For there being a wrong done
and not denied, it must be answered with recompense, and then the Concord
Executory is not any recompense de facto, nether is there any Action given
thereupon to compel the party to make recompense, and so he is without
recompense, and destitute of means to recover any: But upon an Arbitrament
where the sum is awarded in recompense to be paid at a day to come, that is a
good bar, because he may have an Act of debt is for at the day limited, and
so the Trespass is converted into another thing by the Arbitrators, who are
judges thereof, and so it is answered with Action, which countervails
satisfaction in deed.

^compence ^^lue.
42 In a Praecipe the Tenant voucheth, Co. Inst. p. 1. 393. a. 2.
and at the sequatur sub suo periculo, the Tenant and the vouchee make default,
whereupon the Demandant has judgment against the Tenant; And afterward the
Demandant brings a scire facias against the Tenant to have execution, in this
Case the Tenant may have a Warrantia Cartae; And if in that Case a Stranger had
brought a praecipe against the Tenant he might have vouched again, for by the
judgment given against the Tenant the Warranty lost not his force: But in such
Case if the Tenant had judgment to recover in value against the vouchee, he
shall never vouche again by reason of that Warranty, because he has had
recompense by taking advantage of the Warranty.

43 If an Executor redeem goods pawned by the Testator to the value of the
goods, Dier 2. 3. 6 H. 8.
he may retain those goods, Executor redeemes a pawn.
and they shall not be assets in his hands; for a man ought to be recompensed
for that which he has lawfully disbursed, As a Disseisor who pays Rent
chargable upon the Land shall have it recouped in damages: Likewise if the
Executor pay with his own money the debt of the Testator, he may retain so
many of the goods, as amount to the sum or sums so disbursed by him, and
they shall not be assets in his hands.

Dier 35. 28. 29 H. 8.
44 A man recovers in a Writ of entry in the Post against Tenant in tail upon a
voucher and recovery in value against the Common vouchee, and before execution
sued the Tenant in tail dies, Recovery in value.
and his Issue enters; In this Case, the recoveror may well enter upon the
Issue, for the Issue cannot falsify this recovery, because of the recovery
over in value. P. Fitzherbert and Baldwin, sed Shelley e contra.

Dier 90. b. 8. 1 Mar.
45 If I Bargain and fell all my Trees in such a Close: Quid pro q^
an no mention is made of a sum of money for the consideration, or if it be
not said, for a competent of money; in this Case, nothing passes, because
there is not Quid pro quo, which ought to be in every contract.

46 The servant of A. was arrested in London upon Trespass, Assumpsit.
and two, Dier 272. 31. 10 El.
who knew his Master bailed him, afterward A. promised them for their
friendship to save them harmless from the damages and costs, etc. In this
Case, if they be afterward charged, an Action upon the Case lies not, because
there was no consideration, for the bailing was on their own heads, and was
executed before the Assumpsit; But if the Master had requested it before, and
assumed after ut supra, it seems to be otherwise: As in considerarion that you
have married my Daughter at my request, I will give you, etc. This is a good
consideration, because the marriage ensued my request.

Hob. 6. 4. 18. and 88.
47 Vide Hob. 4. Lane and Malorie in Assumpsit, Assumps^^
the consideration was the delivery of two Statutes Staple to the Defendant:
Also Hob. 18. Woolastons Case, in Assumpsit, the consideration was a longer
day: And 88 Nichols and Raynored, the consideration was a promise for
promise, which must be at the same time, otherwise they are nuda pacta:
Likewise 88 Brinsley and Partridge, the consideration a former debt promised
upon account.

Hob. 118. Shelton.
48 Every Rate or modus decimand. Tithe.
by prescription is a discharge of the natural title.

109 De minimis non curat Lex.
Co. l. 5. 56. b. 3. Knights Case.
1 In Office by commission under the Exchequer seal is enough to entitle the
King to a Chattle. Chequer seal.


Co. l. 6. 42. a. 2 S. Anth. Mildmays Case.
2 The Law favors Estates tail in possession but gives no regard to Remainders
or Reversions expectant upon an Estate in tail, Rev. or R^ upon an the tail
not ^luable.
for it is adjudged in Caples Case in the 1 Report, that if Tenant in tail
suffer a Common Recovery, that shall not only bar the Estate tail, and the
Remainder or Reversion, but also a Rent, which he in Remainder or Reversion
has granted; So likewise was it adjudged in 12 El. betwixt Terling and
Trafford in the Kings Bench, that a Reversion or Remainder expectant upon an
Estate tail shall not be assets to the heir in debt upon an obligation made
by his Father: Also Hill. 14 El. it was resolved by all the Justices of C. Pl.
in Copwoods Case, that if there be tenant in tail, the remainder to ye right
heirs of I.S. and Tenant in tail suffer a common recovery, I.S. being then in
life, this shall bar the remainder, albeit it were in abeyance and
consideration of Law, which the Law usually favors: but de minimis non curat
lex.

^^se for years ^^eeble ^^te.
3 If Lessee for years pay a Rent seck, Co. l. 6. 57. a. 4 Bredimans Ca.
it is not seisin required in an Assise, against the Tenant of the
Frank-tenement in respect of the meanness and imbecilitie of his Estate; For at
the Common Law he could prejudice nor draw into question the Estate of the
Frank-tenement, nor before the Statute of Gloucester could be received, albeit a
recovery were had against the Tenant of the Frank-tenement by agreement;
neither could he falsify a recovery before the Statute of 21 H. 8. and all
this by reason of the Feebleness of his Estate.

(...) attaint.
4 In Trespass the Defendant pleads Villenage in the Plaintiff and he was found
free and had 2 s. damages given him, F. N. B. 107. l
In this Case the Defendant shall not have an attaint for the finding of the
Plaintiff Free, because the damages are so small.

^dition in (...) broken (...).
5 There is a condition in Law annexed to the keep-ship of a Park, Litt.. 378.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 233. a. 4.
viz. that if he do not well and lawfully keep the Park, it shall be lawful
for the Grantor and his heirs to enter: But this must be understood with a
distinction; For if the keeper does not attend on the Park one, two, or, etc.
days this is no forfeiture of his Office, but if in his default any Dear be
killed, whereby a damage comes to the Lord, that is a forfeiture; For non-user
of it self without some special damages is no forfeiture of private Offices,
but non-user of public offices, which concern the administration of Justice or
the Common Wealth, is of it self a cause of forfeiture.

^^covery not ^lable by (...) out^^y other^^.
6 If a Recovery be had against a man in a praecipe by default, when he is out
of the Realm, Co. ib. 260. b. 3
he shall not (as it seems) avoid it by writ of Error, for so a man might be
infinitely delayed of his Freehold and Inheritance, whereof the Law has so
great regard: But out-lawry in a personal Action shall be avoided in that Case,
quia de minimis non curat Lex, and otherwise he should be without remedy:
whereas in the other Case the Tenant may resort to his writ of higher nature,
or a quod ei deforceat for his remedy.

^^^sion upon Estate (...) of no va^^^ Law.
7 If Lands be given to a man in tail, Co. ib. 172. b. 3
who has as much Land in Fee-simple, and he die leading Issue two Daughters,
who make partition, so as the Land in Fee-simple happens to the youngest
Daughter: Here, if the youngest Daughter Alien the Fee-simple Land and die, her
heir shall enter for a pur part upon the entailed Lands: And so it is also if
the youngest Daughter had granted her part to another in tail: For the
Reversion expectant upon an Estate tail is of no account in Law, because it
may be cut off by tenant in tail.

^^covery (...) or de^ging of ^^^a^y.
8 If a man be seized of Lands in Fee and has Issue two Daughters and make a
Gift in tail to one of them and die seized of the Reversion in Fee, which
descends to both Sisters, Co. Inst. p. 1. 174. b. 1.
and the Donee or her Issue is impleaded, she shall not pray in aid of the
other Copercener either to recover per rata, or to deraigne the Warranty
paramount, for that the Reversion is not of any esteem in Law, and the other
Sister is a Stranger to the Estate Tail, whereof partition neither was nor
could be made.

Hob. 214.
9 The Earl of Somerset had obtained a grant of the license of wines for
years, and took it in the name of Sir John Daccombe, Wine. License.
in trust for him; Now the Question was, whether or no, by the Earls attainder
of felony the lease was forfeited; And by the opinion of all the Judges it was
forfeited, and afterward it was so resolved also in the Exchequer; viz. in
Cases of Chattels real and personal, and things in Action of that sort.

110 In Actions the Law yields favor, when for the doing of them there is, 1
Necessity.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 48. b. 3.
1 If a man makes a Charter of feofment, Livery in view.
and delivers seisin within the view, the feoffee dares not enter for fear of
death, but claims the same, this shall vest the freehold and inheritance in
him: Albeit by the livery no Estate passed to him neither in deed nor in Law,
and this is by reason of the necessity; So as such a claim shall sorve, as well
to vest a new Estate and right in the feoffee, as in the Common Case to revest
an ancient Estate, and right in the disseisee, etc. And so note, that (for
necessities sake) a livery in Law shall be perfected and executed by an entry
in Law.

Lit. 179 Co. ib. 119. a. 3
2 If a man let land to another for life, saving the Reversion, A reversion
vested by claim only As also an ^vowson.
and a Villein purchase the Reversion of the Lessor; In this Case the Lord of
the Villain may presently come to the land and claim it at the Lord of the
Villein, and by this claim the Reversion is forthwith in him, for he cannot
enter upon the Tenant for life, and if he stay till after his death, then he
may perhaps come too late, for the Villain may have granted ^t to another; So
it is also where a Villain purchases an Advowson: for if the Lord claim it at
the Church, it shall be thereby vested in him; Litt.. 180. Co. ib. b.
because if he should stay until the incumbent die, and then present his Clerk,
the Villain might grant it away before, and so the Lord should be outed of his
presentment.

Co. ib. 13. a. 1.
3 In a writ of right of Dower brought in the Court of the heir, Protections
not alowabl^
a protection is allowable, because the proceedings there may be speedy, the
Court being kept every three weeks; but in a writ of Dower unde nihil habet, no
protection is allowable, because the Demandant has nothing to live on: So also
in a Quare Impedit, or assise of darreine presentment a protection lies not
for the eminent danger of the laps, nor yet in a Quare non admisit, because it
is grounded upon the Quare Impedit.

Co. ib. 42 a. 3 and Co. l. 7. 7. a. in 1 Milbornes Case, also 12 E. 3 did.
170. and 11 H. 7. 5.
4 For a Rent or service the Lord cannot distraine in the night, Distress in
the night.
but in the day time only, and so it is also of a Rentcharge; but for damage
fesant one may distraine in the night, otherwise it may be the beasts will be
gone before he can take them: And with this accords 10 E. 3. 21. See Mackallies
Case Co. l. 9. 66. a. 2. Vide infra R. 128. E. 2.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 172. a. 2
5 The full age of an Infant to make all his Acts good is 21 years, An infant
bound in (...) Cases.
yet an Infant may bind himself to pay for his necessary meat, drink, app^^^,
necessary physic, and such other necessaries, and likewise for his good
teaching and instruction, whereby he may profit himself afterward, but if he
bind himself in an Obligation or other writing with a penalty of the payment
of any of these, that Obligation shall not bind him: Also other things of
necessity shall bind him, as a presentation to a benefice, for otherwise the
last would incur against him.

^^ne upon ^^ndition re^^sted but not as it was at the time of the gran^.
6 Regularly it is true, that he who enters for a Condition broken shall be
seized in his first Estate, or of that Estate, Co. ib. 202. a. 4
which he had at the time of the Estate made upon Condition; yet if Cestuy que
use after the Statute of R. 3. and before the Statute of 27 H. 8. had made a
feofment in fee upon condition, and after had entered for the condition broken;
In this Case, he had but an use, when the feofment was made, but now he shall
be seized of the whole Estate of the land, And this is for necessity, because
by the feofment in fee of Cestuy que use, the whole Estate and right was
devestes out of the feoffees, and therefore of necessity the feoffor must gain
the whole Estate by his entry for the condition broken.

Claim may be made where entry is not lawful.
7 In some Cases (for necessities sake) a continual claim may be made by him
that has right, and yet cannot enter; Co. ib. 150. b. 2
As if Tenant for years, Tenant by Statute Staple, Merchant, or Elegit be
outed, and he in the Reversion disseised, the Lessor or he in the Reversion may
enter to the intent to make his claim, and yet his entry, as to take any
profits, is not lawful during the term: And in the same manner the Lessor or he
in the Reversion in that Case may enter to avoid a collateral warranty, or the
Lessor in that Case may recover in an Assise; and so (as some have holden) may
the Lessor enter, to avoid a descent or a warranty.

Claim may be where entry not lawful or peril^^s
8 If the Disseisee make continual claim, Co. ib. b. 3.
and the Disseisor die seized within the year, his heir within age, and by
office the King is entitled to the wardship, albeit that entry of the Disseisee
be not lawful, yet (for necessities sake) he may make continual claim to avoid
a descent: So also where entry is lawful, Litt.. 419.
but for fear the Disseisee dare not enter, in this Case claim as near to
the house and lands as he dare go amounts to an entry and shall vest the
possession and seisin of the tenements in him, as well as if he had entered
indeed; Litt.. 434.
So it does also if (in such Case) it be done only by his servant or Bailiff,
in Case the disseisee himself le languisant or a Release, so that he cannot
claim the tenements himself.

Where wager of Law.
9 In an Action of debt by a Jailer against the prisoner for his victuals, the
defendant shall not wage his Law; Co. ib. 295. a. 4
for he cannot refuse the prisoner, and ought not to suffer him to die for
default of sustenance, otherwise it is for taking a man at large.

Where wager of Law.
10 In an Action of debt brought by an Attorney for his fees, Co. ibidem.
the Defendant shall not wage his Law, because he is compellable to be his
Attorney: And so if a servant be retained according to the Statute of
Laborers, in an Action of debt for his salarie, his Master shall not wage his
Law, because he was compellable to serve, otherwise it is, if he be not
retained according to the Statute.

A rent in two Counties in^^e.
11 If a man be seized of two Acres of land in two several Counties, Co. ib.
153. b. 4
and makes a lease of life of both of them reserving two shillings Rent, in
this Case, albeit several liveries must be made at several times, yet it is but
one entire Rent in respect of the necessity of the Case, and he shall distraine
in one County for the whole, and make one avowry for the whole.

A condition good by necessity.
12 B. seized of a Manor with an Advowson appendant, Co. l. 2. 77. b. 1 The
Lord Cromwels Ca.
by indenture bargains and sels it to A. and covenants to suffer a Common
Recovery to the use of A. in fee, rendering to B. 42 l. per annum, and also to
levy a fine to A. and that A. shall render by the said fine the said Rent;
provided that A. shall grant the Advowson to B. for life, The recovery is had,
B. and A. levy the fine to P. who render the Manor with the Advowson to A.
and the Rent to B. proclamations pass, A. dies before the grant of the
Advowson, the Church becomes void in the life of B., E. enters as heir of A,
and B. enters for the Condition broken; In this Case it was objected, that the
conusance of B. had extinguished the Condition, but one reason amongst the rest
against that was this, that the render of the Rent could not have been made to
him; And albeit a Fine be of so high a nature, that it will not permit a naked
Averrement against the purport and conusance thereof, yet when the Law requires
one for necessity or conformity to join with another in a Fine, it permits him
also to show the truth of the matter to avoid prejudice and conclusion. Vide
ibid. plus upon the same ground.

Co. l. 3. 73. b. 1 Westbies Case.
13 If the Sheriff has in his custody diverse persons in Execution, The Sheriff
is to take notice at his peril, who are in execution.
and die, and afterward a new Sheriff is made, it behooves the new Sheriff to
take notice at his peril of all the Executions, which are against any person,
that he finds in the Gaol, and this is for necessity; for there is none to make
delivery of them, or to give him notice, who are in Execution, and who not: And
it is no mischief to the Sheriff, if he keep them safe, until he has perfect
knowledge of all the Executions; But if he may with impurity suffer suffer such
as are in Execution to escape, great inconvenience would ensue thereupon.

Co. l. 5. 40. a. 4. and b. 3. Dormers Case.
14 Albeit (regularly) a Writ of Entry in the Post, A Writ of Entry upon an
Advowson, etc
cannot be of an Advowson, as appears by the Statute of W. 2. cap. 5. 4 E. 3.
162. and 14 H. 4. 33. Nor of a Common of Pasture, as also appears 4 E. 3. 146.
and 27 H. 8. 12. yet for a Common Recovery (being a common assurance, and by
consent of parties) to cut off an entaile, the Law (for necessities sake)
permits it; for otherwise there could be no assurance of an Advowson, Common in
Gross, etc. to bar remainders or reversions expectant upon an estate tail.

Co. l. 5. 109. b. 4. Foxleys case.
15 If a Felon be arrested for felony and as be is in conveying to the Gaol, he
flies from them that convey him, No felony to kill one in pursuit.
and in the pursuit they cannot re-take him without killing him, and so they do
kill him: If the whole matter and also the flight be presented before the
Cor^ner, or any other having authority to enquire of Felonies, albeit the party
was so killed, yet he shall forfeit all his Goods and Chattels, because they
were urged to do it by necessity: And with this agrees 3 E. 3. Coron. 287, 312,
and 328. And there it appears that it is not Felony in those that pursue him.
So 3 E. 3. Forf. 25, if an true man kill a thief, that would rob him (if the
thief go not back) the true man shall forfeit nothing for the same reason.

Co. l. 6. 21. b. Butler and Goodals Case.
16 Albeit by the Statute of the 21 H. 8. Exceptions out of the Stat. of
Non-residence.
of non-residence the Parson ought to dwell upon his Rectory, viz. in the
Parsonage House, and not in any other House, though it be within the Parish;
(for the Statute intends not only serving of the Cure, or for Hospitality, but
also for the maintenance of the Houses and habitation of the Parson, not only
for himself, but likewise for his Successors, that they may also maintain
Hospitality there,) yet lawful imprisonment without Covin, or if there be no
Parsonage House to live in, are good excuses, of non-residence; and it was held
in the Exchequer, Tr. 39 El. that sickness without fraud is also a good
excuse, viz. where the patient removes for advice in Physic bona fide, for
better air, and for the recovery of his health; for these cases are exceptions
out of the Statute by construction of Law.

Co. l. ^. 47. a. 1. Dowdales case.
17 In Debt against Executors, A Place certain being pleaded for necessity,
restraines not Jurors verdict.
the Defendant pleads fully administered, the Plaintiff replies, that he had
Assets in Exeter, and the Jury finds Assets in Ireland, and it was adjudged for
the Plaintiff; For when the place is material, as when it is parcel of the
issue, there the Jurors cannot find the point in issue in any other place; for
by special pleading the point in issue is restrained to a certain place; But
when the place is only named for necessity and conformity, and is also parcel
of the issue, there the Jurors may find Assets in any other County or place,
than where they were alleged in the Replication: So also in 10 El. 271. Dyer,
in Debt against the heir, he pleads riens per descent generally, in this case
the Plaintiff cannot reply in so general a manner, for then no trial could be
made thereof, but in such case for conformity and necessity of a trial, he
ought to name a certain place, as he did (in that case) viz. in a Parish and
Ward in London, and upon evidence given by the Plaintiff the Jury found Assets
in Cornewal, and it was adjudged good; for the Law is, that the Plaintiff shall
have in Execution all the Lands that the heir has; And therefore (in such
case) a certain place is named for necessity, yet the Jurors may find all
that, which by the Law shall be chargeable in such case, in what Town or County
soever it be.

(...) of rent ^y the Feoffor ^^od.
18 In Bredimans Case in the 6 Rep. it was said, Co. l. 6. 58. a. 1. Bredimans
case
that if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant make Feoffment in Fee, here
before notice and tender of the Arrerages the Feoffor may give Seisin of a
Rent, because he is Tenant as to the Avowry, 8 H. 6. 18. for in such case if
the Lord avow upon the Feoffee, before tender of the arrerages, he shall lose
them, as it is agreed in 7 E. 3. and 7. H. 4, etc. And therefore in as much as
in such Case the Common Law forces the Lord to avow upon the Feoffor, for that
reason at the Common Law such Seisin by the Feoffor (necessitas causa) was good.

(...) Quare Im^^^ against ^e King or (...).
19 Regularly, Co. l. 7 26. b. 3. Halls Case.
a Quare Impedit brought against the Bishop and Incumbent, without naming the
Patron, abates; yet if the King presents to a Benefice, and his Clerk is
admitted, instituted, etc. In this case a Quare Impedit may be brought for
necessity against the Bishop or Incumbent, for it lies not against the King: So
it was* also of the Pope, if he had usurped, 12 H. 8. 12. 4 H. 7. 15, etc.

^n Vicar ge^^^al shall not ^^^fie, but in (...) of neces^^
20 Albeit, Co. l. 8. 69. a. 1 Trollops Case.
(regularly) the Vicar general cannot certify excommunication, yet he shall
certify it, when the Bishop is in remotis aagendis, viz. beyond Sea in the
Kings Service, but the Court must be acquainted therewith by matter of Record,
viz. by Writ out of the Chancery to direct them, and not by the surmise of the
party, and then for necessity (which is always the Law of time, for necessitas
est lex temporis) the Certificate of the Vicar General shall be allowed because
no other can then do it; for he only ought to certificate, to whom the Court
may write to absolve the party, as the Bishop, or the Chancellor of the
Universities.

Fee-simple ^^th out of (...) ^ing by ^^^essary with^^ Office, etc.
21 Reversion in the Queen upon an estate tail, she grants it to T. in tail,
upon Condition, that if be pay 20 s. Co. l. 8. 1. 6. b. 2. The Lord Staffords
case.
at the receipt of the Exchequer, he shall have the said Reversion in Fee, the
Condition is performed, the tenant in tail levies a Fine, and his issue is
barred; And in this case the principal point was, whether by the Condition
performed, the Reversion passed to T. And it was held, that presently upon
payment of the 20 s. by operation of Law the Fee was davested out of the Queen,
and vested in T. And this by necessity, for if it should not vest at the time
of the Condition performed, it would never vest; And therefore, if in this Case
either Office, Petition, Monstrance de droit, or other thing should be
requisite, that would make the Queens Grant void, and would dis-able the Queen
to make such a Grant; And with this agrees the Lord Lovels Case in the
Commentaries; for there it is said, when the Condition is performed, the
Fee-simple shall be immediately out of the King, without Petition, Monstrance
de droit, or other circumstance, for if he must tarry such circumstances, then
can it not vest presently, and (by consequent) shall never vest; because if the
estate be not enlarged at the time of the enlargement appointed, then shall it
never be enlarged; And therefore in such Cases for necessity the Fee-simple
passes out of the Queen without any such circumstances: with this also agrees
Isabel Goodcheaps Case, (49 E. 3.) who being seized in Fee of an House in
London, holden of the King; devises it to Richard Goodcheap, and the heirs of
his body, and for want of such issue to be sold by her Executors, and she makes
W. D. W. W. and I. de T. her Executors, and dies without heir, Rich. Goodch.
dies without issue, whereby the House escheates to the King, and after one of
the Executors dies, W. W. refuses, and W. D. sels the House, and here the
question was whether or no the Sale by one Executor was good, but it was agreed
by all, that if the Sale were good, it shall divest the House out of the King,
and the cause thereof is by necessity of Law; for if the Sale did not divest
the House at the time of such sale, then could there be no Sale at all, and the
Executors, who had but a power, could not have any petition, Monstrance de
droit, or other remedy.

Co. l. 8. 143. a. 2. Doctor Druries Case.
22 There is a diversity betwixt mean acts done in Execution of Justice, which
are compulsive, and acts, which are voluntary; A diversity betwixt acts
compulsive, and volun^^^ acts.
And therefore if erroneous judgment be given in Debt, and the Sheriff by force
of a Fieri facias, sell the Defendants term, and after the judgment is reversed
by a Writ of Error, yet the term shall not be restored, but only the sum,
etc. But if a Capias utlagatum be awarded, whereby the Sheriff is commanded to
take the body, ut bona and catalla, quae per inquisitionem invenerit in manus
nostras capias, and de vero valor, etc. And by force of this Writ the Sheriff
by inquisition takes the Goods and Chattels of the outlawed person, and sels
them, and after the Out-lawry is reversed, in this case the party shall be
restored to his Goods and Chattels, because the Sheriff was not commanded, nor
compelled by the Kings Writ to sell them.

Co. l. 9. 49. a. 4. The Earl of Shrewsburies Case.
23 King James grants to the Earl of Shrewsbury the Stewardship of the Manors
of M. and B. An Earl may make a Dep^ty.
but in the Patent power of making a Deputy was omitted; nevertheless it was
adjudged, that he might make one; for if such an Office descend to an Infant,
Idiot, or man of non sane memoriae; they by necessity ought to exercise it by
Deputy; So an Earl for the necessity, that the Law intends of his attendance
upon the King and the Commonwealth, this Stewardship of a base Court shall be
exercised by Deputy.

Co. l. 9. 66. a. 1. Mackallies ca.
24 An arrest in the night is lawful, An arrest in the night la^ful.
as well at the suit of a Subject, as of the King, for the Officer ought to
arrest him, when he can find him, otherwise he may perhaps never arrest him,
for Qui male agit odit lucem, and if the Officer do not then do it, the
Plaintiff may have an Action upon the Case against him and recover his loss in
damages; Therefore by necessity an arrest in the night is lawful.

Co. ib. 66. b. 2.
25 The Lords day is not Dies juridicus, An arrest the (...) Sabbath
and therefore judicial acts ought not to be done upon that day; but
Ministerial acts may in some Cases be lawfully executed upon that day (as an
arrest) for otherwise perhaps they might never be executed, and Christ permits
Works of Necessity to be done upon that day, bonum est benefacere in Sabbato.

Executors may sell lands in their own names.
26 If Attorneys have power by writing to make Leases by Indenture for years,
etc. Co. l. 9. 77. a. 2 in Combs Ca.
They cannot make Indentures in their own Names, but in the Name of him that
gives them warrant: But if a man by his will in writing devise, that his
Executors shall sell his Land and die, in that Case the Executors in their own
Names may sell the Land for necessity, because he that gave them authority by
his will (which took no effect until after his death) is dead; And yet in such
Case the Devisee is by the Divisor.

Grain bonum ^eriturum.
27 If a man enter into bond conditioned to pay the lesser sum at a day to
come, if he tender it at the day, Co. l. 9. 79. a. 4 Peystets Case.
he may after plead that tender, and shall say, uncore prist: But if a man be
bound by Obligation in 100 quarters of Grain to pay 50 quarters: here, if the
Obligor tender them at the day, and the other refuse, he shall plead it,
without saying uncore prist, because the Grain is bonum periturum, which
cannot be kept any time, and would be chargeable for the Obligee to keep.

Grant ^f an ^^^ce by a ^^hop good, ^^d not with the stat. of (...)
28 The Bishops grant of an Ancient and necessary Office is (by construction)
exempted out of the general restraint of the Statute of 1 El. for as Bracton
says fol. 247. Illud quod alias licitum non est, Co. l. 19. 61. a. 3 The
Bishop of Sarmas Case.
necessitas facit licitum, and necessitas inducit privilegium, quod Jure
privatur? And if Bishops should not have power to grant such Offices of service
and necessity for the life of the Grantees, but that their Estates should
depend upon uncertainties, as upon Death, Translation, etc. of the Bishop, then
persons of best abilities would never serve them in such Offices, or (at least)
would not discharge them with alacrity.

^^eed not ^^^ed pro^^d by wit^^es.
29 Regularly deeds pleaded in Court shall be produced in Court, Co. l. 10. 92.
b. 3 Doctor Leyfeilds Case
for it were dangerous to suffer them to be proved by Witnesses or by a Copy,
because the razings, enterlivings, and other imperfections cannot thereby
appear to the Court, nor upon what Condition, limitation, or power of
revocation they were made, whereby Truth, Justice, and the true reason of the
Law might be subverted; Nevertheless in great and notorious extremities, as by
casualty of fire, where all the evidences in his house have been burnt, if that
appear to the Judges, they may in favor of him, that has received such great
loss by the sire, suffer him upon the general Issue to prove the deed in
evidence to the Jury by witnesses, least affliction should be added to
affliction, and if the Jury find it, although it were not showed in evidence,
this is good enough, as appears in 28 Ass. P. 3.

(...) repair Banks re^^ed against ^^al floods.
30 If a man by proscription is bound to repair a Bank or Wall against
water-flouds (either salt or fresh) and by his default the water breaks in, he
shall repair it at his own charge, Co. l. 10: 139. a. 3. Knightleys Case.
and the rest of the parties interessed therein may recover their damages
against him in an Action upon the Case: But if (in such Case) he maintain the
Wall or Bank at the usual height in good repair, and by a sudden an
un-usual increase of waters the Walls or Banks are thrown down or the waters
over-flowes the Banks; In such Case the Commissioners of Sewers (by the
Statute of 23 H. 8. 5.) are to tax all persons, that have there any Lands,
Common of Pasture or profit of fishing, or may other, that may suffer any loss
or dis-advantage thereby, according to the several quantities of their Lands,
etc.

^int fine ^ good, ex^^ in some ^ses.
31 A joint fine imposed upon two Capital privileges in a Leet, Co. l. 11. 43.
b. 3 Godfreys Ca.
because they refused to present with certainty they had paid the Leet, was
adjudged void, because it was jointly and not severally set; yet in some Cases
a Fine or Amerciament shall be imposed upon diverse persons Jointly, sometimes
upon a Town, as for the escape of a Murderer, other-wayes upon an Hundred, as
for a Robbery, and sometimes upon a whole County, etc. and this for necessity,
by reason of the uncertain knowledge of the persons offending, and the
infinity of the number.

Pl. 9. b. Fogassaes Case. and ib. 13. b. 2.
32 Effusion of Blood and the killing of men are prohibited by the Common Law,
yet every man in his own defense, A tempest excuses on uncertain agreement
with the Custom.
and as a Champion in trial in a Writ of weigh, and the like, may kill others,
and here the one is for the salvation of his life in his defense, and the other
for the necessity of trial: So likewise by the Common Custom of the Realm
Inholders are chargeable with the goods of their Guestes being lost or
imbeziled out of their houses, yet if their houses be broken by the Kings
Enemies, and so the goods taken from them, they shall not be chargeable
therewith: For in reason such violence cannot be resisted, and therefore it
shall infringe the violence of the Custom: Pl. ibid. 19. b.
So in Fogassaes Case in the Commentaries, when by reason of the tempest part
of the Woad was cast into the Sea, and thereby the quantity remaining could by
no means be discovered before it was landed and weighed, the un-certaine
agreement made with the Customer before the landing thereof was adjudged good,
1 E. 6. cap. 13.
and so the rigor of the tempest did excuse the rigor of the Statute.

Pl. 13. b. 3. in Fogassaes Ca.
33 If a Felon break Prison, Breaking of Prison and ^^^verance of J^rors
lawful by necessity.
it is Felony by the Statute of De frangentibus prisonam, yet if the Prison be
fired, and they that are within break the Prison to save their lives, this
shall be excused by the necessity of the change: So in 14 H. 7. fol. 29. Bract.
Verdict, 19. Stamford cap. 7. fol. 15. The Jurors, who were sworn upon an
Issue for fear of a great tempest forsake the house where they were, and
dispersed themselves, and it was there held, that they should not be amercied
for it; but their Verdict afterward was held good for the necessity of the
occasion, whereas otherwise they should have been ^rievou^^y amercied.

Pl. 18. b. 2. in Fogassaes Ca.
34 In 22 Book of Ass. Pl. 56. Lawful to beat a mad man.
where a man was enraged and of non ^^n^e memoriae, and did great hurt,
whereupon a man together with his parents took him, bound him, and beat him
with scourges, and it was there holden, that they might justify for the
avoidance of the great h^rt that he might do being of non sanae memoriae: and
yet does the Law of Nature and Law of the Realm prohibits generally the
beating of any, but this special Case for the prevention of a greater mischief
has an exemption, and a special privilege.

Pl. ibid. b. 4.
35 In a praecipe quod reddat the Tenant shall excuse his default by the
increase of Waters, and yet every default is abhorced in Law, Necessity ^^cused
a default.
because it is a contempt of the Court, but for that he could not without peril
of death appear, the necessity of the accident in such Case shall excuse him.

1 Kings 21. Math. 12. Pl. ib. 19: a. 1.
36 The Law of God prohibited the eating of Proposition Bread, Proposition
Bread, an^ Eats of (...) may be (...)
yet it was adjudged (by CHRIST himself) to be lawful for David to eat it in a
time of necessity to prevent famine; So also upon the like occasion was it
lawful for Christ's Apostles to pull the Ears of other men's Corn, and to eat
them: And in our Law an Obligation per d^^^s or minas shall be avoided, because
it is done by compulsion.

Pl. 37. b. 4. Plats Case.
37 If the Sheriff of Middlesex suffer an in-voluntary escape of a prisoner,
and making fresh suit after him, takes him in Surrey, Pursuit upon an escape, ^
of a di^^^
where he is not Sheriff, yet he may justify the taking of him there; So ^^so
if one come to distr^ine for Rent-service, and the Tenant seeing him coming
drives away his Cattle from off the land, yet there the Lord may pursue them
within view and retake them in whatsoever land they are, albeit they are out of
his Authority: For the pursuit and the possession after shall be adjudged as a
possession with continuance, when it is for Rent-service: But it is otherwise
for damage fesant, and so the diversity is held 16 E. 4. fol. 10. yet H. 6. R.
2. abr. per Fitz. Rescous 11. it is held also justifiable for damage fesant;
and all this is allowed for the necessity of the occasion, and in favor of
right and justice.

^^it patent ^ed in the (...) Court.
38 If a man hold as of a Seigniory in gross, F. N. B. 3. c
which has not a Manor, where the Lord may keep any Court, in such Case the
Tenant may sue Brief de droit patent in the Kings Court, and the Lord shall
not have any Action against him for it, nor by any means annul his Action,
because he has not any Court to hold plea thereof; And therefore he is
compelled by necessity to sue immediately in the Kings Court.

(...) of right (...) Dower su^^ in the ^B.
39 If the Baron give part of his Manor in tail to hold of him and die, F.N.B.
8. a. b
the Feme shall sue her writ of right of Dower in the Court of the Heir of the
Baron against the Donee in tail, and the writ shall be directed to the Heir:
But if the Baron make a Gift in tail, of all the Land he has and die, here
the Heir of the Baron cannot keep any Court, because he has but a Seigniory
in gross; and therefore in such Case it seems reasonable, that she shall have
her writ of right of Dower against the Donee in tail, directed to the Sheriff
and returnable in the Common Place, and there shall be this Clause in the Writ,
Quia B. Capitalis Dominus feodi illius nobis inde remisit Curiam suam. So it is
also if the Baron lease all his Land for life, there also the Feme shall sue
such a Writ against the Tenant for life, returnable in the Common Place,
because the Heir of the Baron in that Case also can keeps no Court, having but
a Seigniory in gross: And in these Cases and the like the Lord shall not sue a
prohibition to the Justices of that Court, that they should not proceed in such
pleas; for that the Feme in such Cases is forced by necessity to do it.

^
40 If an Infant or Feme covert present not within 6 months, Fitz. ib. 34. c*
the Bishop shall present by laps, for there is a necessity the Church should
be served.

^
41 Where wast is made by the Kings enemies, or by tempest, Fitz. ib. 59. l.
the Tenant shall not be punished for it.

42 Ubi aliud suader necessitas, cessat humanae constitutionis, cessat and
voluntas Nomothetae. Erasm. in Coll. Conv. Proph.

^
43 A Dedimus Potestatem was granted to receive an Attorney for the Defendant in
a Quid Juris clamat, Dier 135. pl: 15 3, 4. P. M.
albeit no former President could be found for it, and this was allowed per
Curiam, by reason of the weakness of the Defendant, who could not appear in
person without manifest danger of life.

^^^ing a (...) it Sea.
44 Hob. 13. Bridgmans Case, Hob. 13.
per Hobart concerning the Masters impawning of another man's Ship at Sea for
necessity of fact, or other provision.

^^^er by a ^^tick.
45 An Action of Trover and Conversion may be brought in a Lunatiques own name,
Ho. 215. Cocks and Darson.
for grain sown upon his Copi-hold land and carried away by a stranger, and
that for necessity, because it can be brought in no man's name else.

111. 2 Conveniencie.
Co. l. 9. 49. a. b. The Earl of Shrewsburies Case. Vide Max. 184 cap. 5.
1 If a Parkship be granted to an Earl, Dignity respected for conveniencie.
without words to make a Deputy, yet he may keep it by his servants; for the
Law does allow diverse acts for convenience in respect of the Dignity of the
person, as if License be given to a Duke to hunt in a Park, the Law for
conveniencie given him such attendante, as are requisite to the Digntiy of his
Estate, Vide, 12 H. 7. 25. and 13 H. 7. 10. So when a Bishop is riding forth,
or upon the way, it is not convenient for his Estate and Degree to be then
enforced to examine the Ability of a Clerk, but he ought to attend his
convenient leisure. 14 H. 7. 21. 15 H. 7. 7. and 8.

Co. ibid. and Mirror of Justices, cap. 1.. 2.
2 At the first institution of this Monarchy an Earl was Praefectus, The li^e.
or Propositus Comitatus; for so the Saxon word Shire-reeve imports; The Romans
called him Satropas, from the Persians, viz. Praefectus Provinciae,; And the
Sheriff at this day (called Vice-comes, quasi vicem generis seu vicariis
Comitis,) has the whole authority for the Administration and Execution of
Justice, that the Earl had, and if the King do now by his Letters Patents
commit unto the Sheriff custodium Comitatus, without express words to make a
Deputy, yet he (who comes in the place of the Earl,) may make a Sub-vice-comes,
viz. a Deputy, who was in times past Seneschallus Vice-comitis, and by West. 2.
cap. 39. Sub-vice-comes, and by 11 H. 7. cap. 15. Shire-Clerk.

Co. ib. in the E. of Shrewsburies Case.
3 If before the Statute of Quia Emptores terrarum, 18 E. 1. The like.
the King or any other had given Lands to hold of him in Knights-service, viz.
so attend the King 40 days in his Host sufficiently armed, etc. in this Case
the Law had such regard to the Honor of Knighthood, (which is the lowest
Degree of Dignity,) that he might find an able person to go with the King in
his Wars, Vide. 7 E. 3. 29. and this was for conveniencie, etc.

Co. ib. the principal ^ase.
4 Qu. Eliz. by Patent granted to the Earl of Shrewsbury, Seneschal Dominiorum
sive Maneriorum de Mansfield, Bolsover, and Hotsley, A Pear Steward, may ma^^ a
Deputy.
without giving him power therein to make a Deputy, yet he might make a Deputy;
because it was not convenient that the Earl should keep such base Courts
himself.

Pl. 9. b. 18. b.
5 The Statute of Marlebridge, A Distress may be brought into another County.
prohibits that none shall bring a Distress out of one County into another,
yet it is held per totam. Curiam, M. 1. H. 6. Pl. 9. fo. 3. (abridged by Fitz.
Tit. Distress, 1.) that where a Manor extends into two Counties, the Lord may
distrain in one County, and bring the Distress into the other County where the
Manor is, and this is to avoid the mischief and inconvenience, that would
ensue, if the Lord should be restrained from bringing the Distress to his
Manor. But see the contrary adjudged in 30. E. 3. 5.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 210. b. 1.
6 If the Condition of a Bond or Feoffment be to pay, or to deliver Money, no
place being appointed, where it should be paid, in such Case, the Obligor or
Feoffor is bound (at the day of payment) to find out the Obligee or Feoffee to
make payment or tender thereof, if he be in England, but if the Bond or
Feoffment be to deliver 20 Quarters of Wheat, or 20 Loads of Timber, or the
like; In such Case, the Obligor or Feoffor is not bound to carry the same
about, or to seek the Obligee or Feoffee; but in such Case the Obligor or
Feoffor must go to the Obligee or Feoffee before the day of payment, and know
where he will appoint to receive it, and there it must be delivered; and this
the Law directs for the convenience: So if rent be issuing out of Land, it
ought to be tendered upon the Land; But Homage or any other special corporal
Service, must be done to the person of the Lord, and the Tenant ought (by the
Law of convenience) to seek him, to whom the Service is to be done, in any
place within England: In like manner if a man be bound to pay 20 l. at any time
during his life, at a certain place; the Obligor cannot tender the Money at
the place, when he will, for then the Obligee should be bound to perpetual
attendance, and therefore the Obligor (in respect of the uncertainty of the
time, and for convenience sake,) must give the Obligee notice, that on such a
day at the place limited, he will pay the Money, and then the Obligee must
attend there to receive it: for if the Obligor then and there tender the Money,
he shall thereby save the penalty of the Bond for ever: There is the same Law;
if a man makes a feoffment in fee upon Condition, that if the feoffor at any
time during his life pay the feoffee 20 l. at such a place certain, that then.
etc. In this Case also the feoffor must give notice to the feoffee, when he
will pay it: but in both these last Cases, if the Obligor or feoffor at any
time meet the Obligee or feoffee at the place he may tender the Money: Likewise
if A. be bound to B. with Condition, that C. shall enfeoff D. on such a day,
here C. is bound to seek D. to give him notice, when he will do it.

Homage.
7 No man of Religion (Regular or Secular, Co. Inst. p. 1. 65. b. 3.
) when he does Homage shall say, I become your man, for that were inconvenient,
because he has professed himself the man of God; yet shall he do Homage, and
say, I do unto you Homage, and will be unto you Faithful and Loyal, etc. And
this Homage of Ecclesiastical persons in the old Books and Records of the Law
is called Fealty, for that it wants these Words, I become your man, yet in
judgment of Law it is Homage, because he says, I do to you Homage, etc. There
is the same Law also of a feme sole, for it is not fit that the should say to
her Lord, I become your woman, but shall say, I do you Homage, etc. Argumentum
ab inconvenienti plurimum valet in lege: Non solum quod licet, sed quid est
conveniens, est considerandum; Nihil, quod est inconveniens, est licitum.

^^^ment.
8 Attornment is appointed by Law to avoid inconveniences. See Co. Inst. part 1.
309. a. 3. and Max. 121. cap. 3.

112. 3 Conformity.
^^dowment ^^^ium.
1 In ancient time when a man did endow his Wife ad ostium Ecclesiae, Co. Inst.
p. 1. 34. b. 1.
he did there openly declare the quantity and certainty of the Land, whereof
she was so to be endowed; for the Law (for Conformity sake) does delight to
have that and like acts to be openly and solemnly done.

^ower of rent ^^all be deli^^ed by the (...). ff.
2 If a woman bring a Writ of Dower of six pounds Rentcharge, Co. ib. 34. b. 3.
and she has judgment to recover the third part, Albeit it be certain that she
shall have 40 s. yet she cannot distrain for the 40 s. before the Sheriff do
deliver the same to her; For here, because she demands nothing in certain, but
only a third part of the Rent, she shall not distrain for it before Execution
sued, and thereupon a third part thereof delivered unto her in certain by the
Sheriff; It is otherwise of Land Rent, or other things demanded in certain,
for in such cases the Demandant after judgment may enter and distraine before
Seisin delivered by the Sheriff upon a Writ of Habere facias seisinam: Also
when the Wife of a Tenant in Common demands a third part of a moity, yet after
judgment she cannot enter, until the Sheriff deliver her the third part,
albeit such delivery of the Sheriff shall reduce it to no more certainty, then
it had before, and all this is for conformities sake, that the proceeding may
be orderly.

Co. ib. 53. b. 3.
3 None shall have an Action of Waste, Joynder in Waste.
unless he have the immediate Estate of Inheritance, yet sometimes another
shall join with him for conformity, as if a Reversion be granted to two, and
the Heirs of one, they two shall join in an Action of Waste; So likewise shall
the surviving Co-parcener, and the Tenant by the Courtesy join: Also if there
be two Ioynt-tenants, and to the Heirs of one of them, and they make a Lease
for life, they shall join in an Action of Waste for the same reason.

Co. l. 2. 77. b. 1. The Lord Cromwels case.
4 B. seized of a Manor with an Advowson Appendant by Indenture bargains and
sells the Manor to A. and covenants to suffer a Recovery, and levy a Fine to
A. in Fee, Joynder in a Fine.
and that the said A. shall render by the Fine to B. 42 l. per annum Rent;
provided that A. shall grant the Advowson to B. for life, and if he die before
any avoidance, then one turn to his Executors, and it was farther Covenanted
that all Assurances to be made should be to the said Uses: The Recovery is had,
B. and A. lovie a Fine to P. who renders the Manor, with the Advowson to A. in
Fee, and the Rent to B. Proclamations pass; A. dies before the Grant of the
Advowson, the Church becomes void in the life of B. E. enters as Heir to A. B.
enters, and without any request for the Advowson, bargains and sells to the
Lord Cromwell, for whom it is adjudged: And in this Case it was resolved, that
albeit the Fine was not acknowledged by B. to A. to a stranger was adjudged a
good performance of the Covenant, because B. and A. joined in the Fine for
conformity, to the end (by that means) A. might take the Manor, and B. the
Rent, but B. had the Manor again, because the Condition was not performed.

Ibid.
5 Albeit a Fine is of so high a nature, Joynder is Fine.
that the Law does not suffer any bare Averrement against the purport, and
Conusance of a Fine, yet when the Law requires one for conformity to join with
another in a Fine, it suffers him to show the truth of the matter, for the
avoiding of prejudice and conclusion: So in 30 and 31 El. in a Writ of Error to
reverse a Fine levied by Baron and Feme, for the Nonage of the feme, the Baron
and feme had Restitution presently and the Conusee could not detain the Land
during the Coverture, because all the Estate passed from the feme, and the
Baron only joined for conformity Vide Pl. ibid.

Co. l. 6. 47. a. 1. Dowdales ca.
6 In Debt against Executors, Assets found b^ any County.
the Defendant pleads plene administravit, the Plaintiff replies that he has
Assets in E. and the Jury finds Assets in Ireland, and the Plaintiff recovers;
For when the place is material, as when it is parcel of the issue, there the
Jurors cannot find the point in issue in any other place, because in such case,
by special pleading the point in issue is restrained to a certain place: For
there is a diversity, when the place is named only for conformity and
necessity, and when it is parcel of the issue, as in the Case of 10 El. Dyer
271. In Debt against the Heir, he pleads riens per descent generally, in this
Case the Plaintiff cannot reply in such a general manner, for then there could
be no trial of it, but in such Case for conformity and necessity of a Trial, he
ought to name a certain place, as he did there in a Parish and Ward in London,
nevertheless there the Jurors might find Assets in any other County of
England, etc.

113. 4 Color.
^o descent to (...) away en^y.
1 If a man seized of Land has issue two Sons, and die seized, Littl.. 396.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 242. 2.
and the youngest enter by abatement, and has issue and dies thereof seized,
and the Tenements descend to his issue, and the issue enter: This is no descent
to take away entry, because they both claiming by one Title, and from the same
Ancestor, the youngest had color to enter as heir: So it is also if there be
two Sisters, Litl.. 398. Co. ibid. 243. a. 4.
and the eldest enter, etc. and albeit in either of the said Cases there be
never so many discents cast, yet may the Heirs, the elder Brother or younger
Sister enter, causa qua supra. Howbeit, if there be Bastard eigne, Littl.. 399.
Co. ibid. 243. b. 4. and Co. 244. a. 3.
and mulier puisne, if the Bastard enter, and is peaceably seized all his life,
and die, and his issue enter, the Mulier shall not enter; for he has more
color to keep it as eldest Son, then in the aforesaid Cases; And therefore
the Mulier in such Case, is left without remedy; and has lost the Land for
ever, whereas the other are left in their Action: And it is holden, that albeit
the heir be under age at the time of the descent cast, yet that shall not help
it, for the Law preferres Legitimation before Infancy; because there being no
Claim all his lifetime, the Law implies Legitimation; And when the Descent is
cast, Justum non est aliquem post mortem facere bastardum, qui toto tempore
vitae suae, pro Legitimo habebatur. See more in the first Part of the
Institutes, fol. 242, 243, 244. and Littl.. 400.

^o trespass against the (...).
2 If there be Lord and Tenant by fealty only, Littl. 484. Co. ib. 28. l. b. 4.
and the Lord distraines the Tenant for Rent, whereupon the Tenant brings an
Action of Trespass against the Lord, who justifies for fealty and Rent, and
the Jury finds, that he holds by fealty only; yet the Writ shall a^ate,
because he held of him by fealty, and the matter in issue is, whether he holds
of him or no, and it being found he did, the Lord had sufficient color to
distraine him, and therefore in that case the Action shall abate.

^im slaugh^^ found for ^^der.
3 If A. be appealed or indicted of Murder, Co. ib. 282. a. 1
viz. that he of Malice praepense killed I, A. pleads not guilty modo and
forma, yet the Jury may find him guilty of Manslaughter without Malice
praepense, for if in truth it was but Manslaughter, they had color enough to
find it so.

Inclaiming (...) House.
4 If two be in all House together, the one claiming by one Title, Littl.. 701.
Co. ib. 368. a. 2.
and the other by another, the Law adjudged him in possession, who has right
to the House for Duo non possunt in solido unam rem possidere; yet if a man
has issue two Daughreas, Bastard eigne, and Mulier puisne, and die seized, and
they both enter generally, the Sole Possession shall not be adjudged only in
the Mulier, because they both claim by one and the same Title, and the Bastard
has as well color to claim it as the Mulier.

^^ard shall ^^^ch.
5 If the Bastard eigne enter, and take the profits, Co. ib. 376. b. 3.
he only shall be vouched, and not both the Bastard and Mulier, for there is
color enough to vouch him alone, he being heir in appearance, and he is not
bound to dis-able himself.

^^ministrati^^ ^oid, and ^^able.
6 If an Ordinary of a Diocese commits Administration of Goods, Co. l. 5. 29.
b. 4. in Princes. Case. Were and Jefferies Case.
when they are bona notabilia, such Administration is merely void: but
Administration committed by the Metropolitan, when the defunct had not bona
notabilia, is only voidable; because he has Jurisdiction in all the Diocesses
within the Province, and therefore has sufficient color to do it.

Co. l. 6. 65. a. 3. in Sir Moile Finches Case.
7 In 41 E. 3. 19. Rich. Tompson had Issue by Joan (before marriage) one Agnes,
and after he marries Joan, and makes feofment in fee, A Bastard takes by y^
chase.
and retakes the Estate to himself for life, remanere inde Agnetae filiae
praedict. Rich. and Johanne: and it was agreed that this was a good remainder,
without any averment, that she was known to be their Daughter: for albeit by
the Common Law she was not their Daughter, yet in as much as she had color by
the Ecclesiastical law (which says, subsequens matrimonium tollit peccatum
procedens) this color is sufficient in Case of a conveyance to make the
remainder good, and so note the diversity betwixt descent and purchase, etc.

Co. l. 8. 101. per tout in Sir R. Lechfords Case. The better opinion per Coke.
8 If there be Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne, Mulier beyon^ sea, etc.
and the Father die seized, the Mulier being beyond Sea, within age, in Prison
or of non sanae memoriae, and the Bastard enter and continue in peacable
possession of the Lands, and has Issue and dies, and the lands descend to his
Issue, here the right of the Mulier is for ever bound: because he has color
of legitimation by the Law of Holy Church, and the Common Law respects
legitimation, before the abovesaid Imperfections. Vide plus ibid.

Co. l. 10. 76. b. in the Case of the Marshalsea.
9 If a Sheriff holding his Torn after Michaelmas month takes there an
Indictment of Robbery, it is utterly void, Things done by warrant and contra.
being coram non judice: But if the Court of the Common Bench in a plea of Debt
award a Capias against a Duke, Earl, or, etc. which by the Law lies not
against them, and that appears in the writ it self, here if the Sheriff
arrest them upon the Capias, albeit the writ be against Law, yet because that
Court has jurisdiction of the cause, the Sheriff has color to do it, and
shall be excused; and herewith accords Dier 60. b. 38 H. 8. So also if a
Justice of Peace make a warrant to arrest one for Felony, who is not indicted,
albeit the Justice err in granting the warrant, yet he that makes the arrest
by force of that warrant shall not be panished by writ of false imprisonment,
because the Justice is Judge of the Cause.

Plow. 83. b. 1. in Strange and Crokers Case.
10 In 9 H. 6. it is said, that if I grant to B. Maintenance.
that if my Tenant for life die during my life, that then B. shall have the
Land for 10 years: Here, if my Tenant be impleaded, B. may lawfully maintain,
in respect of the Color of title he has to the Land.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 148. b. 4.
11 Entry into Religion and profession of a Disseisor shall not cause a descent
to toll the entry of the Disseisee, Bastard. Mulier.
because it is the Disseisors own Act, and not the Act of God, as death is:
yet if there be Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne, and the Bastard before claim
enter into Religion, it is said such a descent shall toll the entry of the
Mulier, by reason of the color of title that the Bastard had to the land, and
such an heir shall also have his age.

114 It prizeth the Acts of God and of the Law more then those, that are done
by the party.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 18. a. 4.
1 Fee-simple being (as Littleton says) the largest Estate of inheritance that
is, Two Fee-simples.
one Fee-simple cannot depend upon another by the grant of the party, as if
Lands be given to A. so long as B. has heirs of his body, the Remainder over
in Fee, here the Remainder is void; yet in several persons by Act in Law a
reversion may be in Fee-simple in one, and a Fee-simple determinable in another
by matter ex post facto, as if a Gift in tail be made to a Villein, and the
Lord enter the Lord has a Fee-simple qualified and the Donor a reversion in
Fee, but if the Lord enfeoffe the Donor, now both Fee-simples are united, and
he has but one Fee-simple in him.

^^ires female ^ill not take.
2 When a man gives lands to another man and the heirs female of his body and
dies having issue a son and a daughte^ (...) daughter shall inherit for the
will of the donor (the Stat. working (...) it, Co. ib. 24. b. 3 and 25. b. 3.
and 26. b. 4.
which is upon the matter an act in law) shall be observed, but in case of a
purchase it is otherwise; for if A. have issue a son and a daughter, and a
lease for life is made, the remainder to the heirs females of the body of A. A.
dies, the heir female can take nothing, because she is not heir, for she
must be both heir and heir female, which she is not, because the brother is
heir, and therefore the will of the giver cannot be observed, because here is
no gift, and therefore the Statute cannot work thereupon, so it is, if a man
has a son and a daughter and dies, and lands are given to the daughter and
the heirs female of the body of her father, the daughter shall take nothing but
an Estate for life, because there is no such person, she being not heir, but
where a gift is made to a man, and to the heirs female of his body, there the
Donee, being the first taker, is capable by purchase, and the heir female by
descent, secundam formam doni.

^^tes may (...) altered.
3 Regularly Estates cannot be altered from one to another, Litt.. 33. Co. ib.
28. a.
unless all that have interest join in the alteration thereof; but by the Act
of God estates may be changed without any act done by the parties, that are
interessed: as if lands be given to a man and the heirs that he shall engender
of the body of his wife: here the wife has nothing, and the man is Tenant in
special tail: and therefore in this Case if the Feme die without issue on her
body begotten by the Baron, the estate in special tail, is (by the act of God)
charged into tenancy in tail after possibility of issue extinct.

^^ging of ^^tes.
4 If a feofment in fee be made to the use of a man and his wife for the term of
their lives, and after to the use of their next issue male in tail, Co. ib.
28. a. 3.
and after to the use of the Baron and Feme and the heirs of their two bodies,
having no issue at that time: in this Case the Baron and Feme are Tenants in
special tail executed, and after they have a son they are become Tenants for
life, the remainder to the son in tail, the remainder to them in special tail:
and here, albeit (living the son) they are but bare Tenants for life, yet if
the Baron die having no other issue, and then the son die without issue, the
Feme shall be restored to the privileges belonging to tenant in tail after
possibility of issue extinct, as appears in Jews Bowls Case, Co. l. 11. fol.
80. for (as there is said) the Estate of the Feme (in such Case) is created by
the act of God, and not by the limitation of the party, ex dispositione legis,
and not ex provisione hominis: but if land be given to Baron and Feme, and the
heirs of their two bodies, and after they are divorced causa praecontractus,
consanguinitatis or affinitatis; their Estate of inheritance is turned to a
joint Estate for life, and albeit they had once an inheritance in them, yet for
that the Estate is altered by their own Act, and not by the Act of God, after
the death of either of them without issue, the other shall not be Tenant in
tail after possibility of issue extinct.

(...) not en^ed.
5 If a man take an alien to wife, and after the husband alien ye land, Co. ib.
33. a. 4.
and then she is made denizen, the husband dies, she shall not be endowed, it
is otherwise, if she be naturalized by act of Parliament.

^il death.
6 The Feme shall not not be endowed after the Civil death of the Baron,
(entering into Religion, etc.) being the act of the party, Co. ib. 33. b. 2.
but after the natural death, which is the Act of God.

^t-tenant ^gnes do^^
7 If two or more he joint-tenants of lands, Co. ib. 34. b. 4.
one of them may assign dower to the wife of a third part in certainty, and
this shall bind his companions; because they were compellable to do the same by
law: but if one of them assign a rent out of the land to the wife, this shall
not bind his companions, because he was not compellable by the law thereunto.

8 There is a diversity between particular Estates made by the Terre-tenant,
Co. ib. 57. b. 3.
and pa^^^cular Estates created by Act in Law: Trespass before entry, contra.
For if Tenant pour autre (...) continues in possession after the decease of
Cesty que vie, or Tenant for years holds over his term, the Lessor cannot
have an Action of Trespass before entry: but if a Guardian after the full age of
the heir continues in possession, he is no Tenant at sufferance, but an
Abator, and against him an Assise of Mortancestor, does lie before entry.

Co. ib. 59. b 4. Armestrongs Case certified into the Chancery by Popham, and
others. 39 Eliz.
9 Of fines due to the Lord, by the Copi-holder, Copi-hold. Fines.
some by the change or alteration of the Lord, and some by the change or
alteration of the Tenant, the change of the Lord ought to be by Act of God,
otherwise no fine can be due, but by the change of the Tenant, either by the
Act of God, or of the party, a fine may be due: For if the Lord do allege a
Custom within his Manor to have a fine of every of his Copi-holders of the
said Manor at the alteration or change of the Lord of the Manor, be it by
alienation, demise, death, or otherwise, this is a Custom against the Law, as
to the alteration or change of the Lord by the act of the party; for by that
means the Copi-holders may be oppressed by multitude of fines, by the Act of
the Lord, but when the change grows by the Act of God, there the Custom is
good, as by the death of the Lord: but upon the Change or alteration of the
Tenant, a fine is due to the Lord. Escuage.


Co. ib. 72. b. 1.
10 If the Tenant goes with the King in performance of his Knight Service and
dies in Exercitu, in the Host or Army, he is excused by Law, and no escuage
shall in that Case be demanded. Homage. Ancestral.


Co. ib. 102. a. 4
11 In Case of Homage Ancestral (which is a special warranty in Law) by the
authority of Littl. the lands generally, that the Lord has at the time of the
voucher, shall be liable to the execution in value, whether he has them by
descent, or purchase: but in Case of an express warranty, the heir shall be
only charged for such lands as he has by descent from the same Ancestor, who
created the warranty; and so note, what privilege this express warranty
(created by operation of Law) has more then the express warranty: for,
firmior and potentior est operatio Legis, quam dispositio hominis.

Co. ib. 127. a. 1 in Beechers Case. Co. l. 8. 60. b.
12 If a writ do a abate by the Act of the Demandant or Plaintiff, Amer^ia^^
or for matter of form, the Demandant or Plaintiff shall be amercied; but if
abate by the Act of God, as by the death of one, where there is two, or the
like, there shall be no amerciament.

Co. ib. 148. a. 3 Wards Case cited in Co. l. 2. fol. 32. in Heywards Ca.
13 When a rentcharge is extinguished by the grantees purchase of part of the
land, the grantee shall never have a writ of annuity, Rent-cha^ extinguishe^ no
Annuity
because it was by the grant a rentcharge, and he has discharged the land of
it by his own Act, viz. by purchase of part; but if the rentcharge be
determined by the Act of God, or of the law, yet the grantee may have a writ of
annuity; as if Tenant for another man's life by his deed grant a rentcharge to
one for 21 years, Cesty que vie dies, the rentcharge is determined, and yet
the grantee may have during the years a writ of annuity for the Arrerages
incurred after the death of cesty que vie, because the rentcharge did
determine by the Act of God and by course of law, Actus legis nulli facit
injuriam: The like law is, if the land, out of which the rentcharge is granted
be recovered by an Eigne title, and thereby the rentcharge is voided, yet the
grantee shall have a writ of annuity, for that the rentcharge is avoided by
the course of law.

Co. ib: 148. b. 1 Litt. 222. in Aschoughs ca. vide infra 48.
14 Littleton says, that a Rent-service may be extinct for part, Rent-ser^
suspended contra.
and apportioned for the rest, but it cannot be suspended in part by the Act of
the party, and in esse for the other part; for if there be Lord and Tenant of
40 acres of Land by fealty and 20 s. Rent, if the Tenant make a Gift in tail,
or a lease for life or years; of partel thereof to the Lord, in this Case the
Rent shall not be appo^tioned for any part, but the Rent shall be suspended for
the whole: So it is also if the Lessor enter upon the Lessee for life or years
into part, and thereof disseise or put out the Lessee, here the Rent is
suspended in the whole, and shall not be apportioned for any part, and where
outs Books speak of an apportionment in Case where the Lessor enters upon the
Lessee in part, they are to be understood, where the Lessor enters lawfully, as
upon a surrender, forfeiture, or the like, where the Rent is lawfully extinct
in part: yet by act in Law a Rent-service may be suspended in part, and in esse
for part, as when the Guardian in Chivalry enters into the land of his ward
within age, now is the Seigniory suspended, but in this Case if the wife of the
Tenant be endowed of a third part of the tenancy, she shall pay to the Lord a
third part of the tent: so it is also where the Tenant gives a part of the
tenancy to the father of the Lord in tail, the father dies, and this descends
to the Lord, in this Case also by Act in Law the Seigniory is suspended in
part, and in esse for part; And the same Law is of a Rentcharge, which also
cannot be apportioned but by Act in Law, for if a man has a rentcharge to him
and his heirs issuing out of lands, and he purchase part thereof, Litt. 222,
and 224.
in this Case the whole rent is extinct; but if a man has a Rentcharge and
his father purchase part of the land, out of which it issues, in fee, and die,
and that parcel descends to the son, that has the rentcharge, in that Case
the rentcharge shall be apportioned according to the value of the land, (...)
charge (...).
because the part of land purchased by the father comes not to the son by his
own Act, but by descent and course of Law: Co. ib. 149. b. 4
So also if the Tenant give the father of the grantee part of the land in tail,
and this descends to the grantee, the rent shall be apportioned: and so by act
in Law a rentcharge may be suspended for one part, and in esse for another: or
vice versa, if the father us grantee of a rent, and the son purchase part of
the land charged, and the father dies, after whose death the rent descends to
the son, here also the rent shall be apportioned, causa qua supra.

^^nt-charge ^pationed.
15 If the father within age purchase part of the Land charged, Co. ib. 150. a. 2
and alieneth within age and dies, the son recovereth in a writ of dum flrit
infra aetatem, or enters, in this Case the Act of Law is mixed with the Act of
the party, and yet the rent shall be apportioned, for after the recovery or
entry the son has the land by descent: so it is also where the son recovereth
part of the land upon an alienation by his father, dum non fuit compos mentis,
for the cause aforesaid.

(...)
16 A man seized of lands in fee takes wife, Co. ibid.
and makes a feofment in fee, the feoffee grants a rentcharge of 10 l. out of
the Land to the Feoffor and his wife, and to the heltes of the husband, the
husband dies, the wife recovereth the moity for her dower by the custom, the
Rentcharge shall be apportioned, and she shall distraine for five pound, which
is the moity of the rent: and here albeit her own act does concur with the
Art in Law, yet shall the Rent be apportioned.

^d, (...) Tenant.
17 If there be Lord Mesne and Tenant, Litt.. 231. Co. ib. 152.
and the Tenant holds of the Mesne by 5 s. rent, and Mesne holds over of the
Lord by 12 d. rent, here the Mesne has 4 s. rent in surplussage; Now in this
Case if the Lord purchase the tenancy, The Mesne shall have the 4 s. yearly as
rent secke, and yet he shall distraine for it: Litt.. 232. Co. ib. 153. a. 1
vide infra, 40.
for seeing the fealty is extinct, the Law reserves the distress to the Rent,
and the distress in such Case shall by act in Law us preserved, Quia quando
let aliquid a licui concedit concedere videtur and id, sicut quo res ipsa esse
non potest. And therefore if a man make a lease for life, reserving a rent, and
bind himself in a Statute, whereupon the Rent is extended and delivered to the
Conusee; here, the Conusee shall distraine for the Rent, because he comes to
it by course of law: but if a rent-service be made, a rent-seck by ye grant of
the lord, the grantee shall not distrain for it; for that the distress in that
case remains with the fealty: So likewise if there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant,
and the mesnalty is a Manor having diverse freeholders, and the Lord purchase
one of the Tenancies, and there is a Rent by surplussage, this rent, although
it be changed into another nature, is parcel of the Manor: yet by purchase of
part of the land, the whole Rent is extinct, albeit the Law did preserve it.

Co. ib. 163. b. 4
18 There is a diversity between a descent, Descent and purchase.
which is an Act of the Law, and a purchase which is an Act of the party; for
if a man be seized of lands in Fee having Issue two Daughters, and one of the
Daughters is attainted of felony, the Father dies, both Daughters being alive,
the one moity shall descend to the one daughter, and the other moity shall
escheate: But if a man make a Lease for life, the remainder to the right heirs
of A. being dead, who left issue two Daughters, whereof the one is attainted of
felony: In this Case some have said, that the remainder is not good for the
moity, but void for the whole: because both the Daughters should have been (as
Littleton says) but one heir.

Co. ib. 164. b. 3
19 A Rentcharge is entire and against Common right; Rent-charg^ dividable.
and yet it may be divided between coperceners, and by Act in law the Tenant of
the land is subject to several distresses, and in that Case also partition may
be made before seisin of the Rent.

Co. ib. 165. a. 4
20 If there be two Coperceners of lands with warranty, Coperceners
and they make partition, in this case the warranty shall remain, because they
are compellable by law to make partition: it is otherwise of join-tenants for
they were not by the Common law compellable to make partition.

Co. Ib. 166. b. 3
21 When partition is made betwixt Coperceners, Partition by Copercener^
the eldest sister has the choice, and this is called Enitia part of Eigne, or
Eldest, but this privilege is personal to her alone, and shall not descend to
her heir (for then the next sister has it) because this partition is made
personally by the Act of the parties, but where the law does give the eldest
any privilege without her Act there that privilege shall descend: As if there
be diverse coperceners of an advowson and they cannot agree to present, the law
does give the first presentation to the eldest, and this privilege shall
descend to her issue, nay, her assign shall have it, and so shall her husband
that is Tenant by the courtesy have it also.

22 A partition between jointenants is not good without deed, Partition b^
parol and (...)
although it be of lands, or other things, which may pass without deed, and
albeit they be now compellable to make partition by the Stat. of 31 H. 8. ^0.
and 31 H. 8. 32. because they must pursue one of those Acts (as their case is)
by writ de partitione facienda, Co. ib. 169. a. 1
and a partition between jointenants without writ remains at the common law as
it was before those Statutes, which could not be done by parol, and therefore
such partition is merely by Act of the parties: So it is also and for the same
reason of tenants in common: Dier 29. a. 194. 28 H. 8.
But between Coperceners partition may be made by parol without deed, and that
not only of lands and other things, that may pass by livery without deed, but
likewise of things that do lie in grant, as rents, Commons, Advowsons, and the
like, that cannot pass by grant without deed, and that whether they be in one
and the same County, or in several Counties: because in such partitions the act
of the parties co-operateth with the act of law: so likewise if two teannts in
common make partition by parol and execute the same in severalty by livery,
this is good and sufficient in Law, because here also the act of the party
works together with the Livery, which is an Act of Law: And therefore where
Books say, that Ioyntenants made partition without Deed, it must be intended of
Tenants in Common, and executed by Livery: But the chiefest Reason why
Perceners have this Privilege above Ioyntenants or Tenants in Common is,
because they come to their Estates by Descent, which is an Act in Law, but
these by Purchase, which is an Act of the parties: And the Reason why
Ioyntenants cannot make Partition by Parol, with Livery, as Tenants in Common
may, is because betwixt Tenants in Common, there is only privity in
possession, but betwixt Ioyntenants, there is as well privity in Estate, as
privity in possession, and therefore they cannot convey their Estates one to
another, without Deed, as Tenants in Common may, who have several Estates, and
claim under several Titles.

Rent, etc. may pass without Deed.
23 An Exchange of Lands in the same County may be without Deed, Co. ib. 169. a.
3 Littl.. 251.
but a Rent granted for Egalty of the same Exchange cannot be without Deed; yet
if two Messuages descend to two Co-perceners the one worth 20 s. per annum, and
the other worth 10 s. the assignment of 5 s. per annum, to be paid to the
Co-percener, that has the Message of 10 s. per annum, and her Heirs, is good
by Parol without Deed: And the Reason of this is, because Co-perceners are in
by Descent, which is an Act of Law, but the Exchange is the Act of the parties:
So it is also of Common of Estovers, a Corodie, Common of Pasture, etc. or of a
Way granted by one Co-percener to the other; All which (and the like,) albeit
they lie in Grant, yet may they upon the Partition be granted without Deed,
causa qua supra.

One Co-par^ner married.
24 If there be three Co-perceners, Co. ib. 169. b. 3.
and one of them be married, and for Egalty of partition the Husband and Wife
grant a Rent to the other two, out of the part of the Feme Covert, this
partition (albeit it be not by Fine) being equal, shall charge the part of the
Feme Covert for ever, causa qua, etc.

^^tition by ^^ons, and (...), and In^^^s.
25 If two Co-perceners of Lands take Barons, Co. ib. 171. a. 2 Litt.. 256, 257.
and they and their Barons make Partition, if the Partition was un-equal, at
the time it was made, after the Barons death it may be reformed, and it shall
not bind the Co-percener that was wronged, but if then the Partition was equal,
(albeit it was not by Fine, it shall bind them for ever; because the Partition
is made as well by Act of Law, as by that of the parties, the Barons and Femes
being compellable by Law to make Partition: And therefore if after such
Partition made, the Land become un-equal, by any matter subsequent, as by
surrounding, ill Husbandry, or the like, yet the Partition remains good: So
likewise in Case of an Infant, Co. ib. 171. a. 4 Littl. 258.
if the Partition be equal at the time of the Allotment, it shall bind him for
ever, because he is compellable by Law to make Partition, and he shall not have
his age in a partitione facienda; And though the Partion be un-equal, and the
Infant has the Lesser part, yet is not the Partition void, but voidable by his
entry; for if he take the whole profits of the un-equal part for his full age,
the Partition is made good for ever; And therefore Littleton (Sect. 258.)
gives him a Caveat, that in that Case he take not the whole profits of his
un-equal part, neither shall a unequal part in the Chancery bind an Infant: but
a Partition made by the Writ of Partitione facienda, by the Sheriff upon the
Oath of 12 men, and judgment thereupon given, shall bind the Infant, though his
part be unequal, Co. ib. 172. a. 2.
for this is by Act of Law: And generally whatsoever an Infant is bound to do
by Law, the same shall bind him, albeit he does it without suit of Law: as if
an Infant be Executor, here, upon payment of any Debt due to the Testator, he
may make an acquittance, but in that Case a Release without payment (before his
age of 21 years,) is void.

Littl. 5. 260. Co. ib. 173. a. 3.
26 Partition amongst Coperceners makes no Discontinuance; Partition makes no
discontinuance.
for if Lands be given to a man in tail, who has as much Land in Fee-simple,
and he has issue two Daughteas and dies, and the Daughters make partition, so
as all the Fee-simple Lands are allotted to the youngest Sister, and the
entailed Lands to the Eldest, in this Case, after the Death of the youngest
Sister, her issue (after the alienation of Fee-simple Lands by her Mother) may
enter into the entailed Lands, and hold them in property with her Aunt, because
the issue had (...) recompense for the moity of the entailed Land, and such
Partition made no Discontinuance; because (in that Case) it passed not by
Livery of Seisin, which is an act in Law, but the Partition is in truth less
then a Grant, for that it makes no degree, but each Copercener is in by
descent from the Common Auncestor.

Littl.. 263. Co. ib. 174. b. 3
27 If there be three or four Perceners, who make Partition, The Parceners part
evicted.
and the part of one of them is evicted by lawful entry, in this Case she
shall hold the other Lands with her other Sisters, and so it is also between
the surviving Perceners; and the Heirs of the other, or with the Heirs of
Perceners, all being dead: It is otherwise of Ioyntenants, that make Partition
by Deed, for that is by act of the parties, Littl.. 290. Co. ib. 187 a. 3.
and then the Warranty is destroyed: but if Ioyntenants make Partition by Writ
upon the Statutes of 31 or 32 of H. 8. the Warranty continues, because that is
by Act, and in Course of Law: but Perceners and their Heirs coming in by Act
of Law, viz. by Descent have the same Privilege above Ioyntenants after
Partition, as aforesaw.

Co. ib. 81. b. 2.
28 There is a Diversity between Authorities created by the parties for private
Caus^^, and Authority created by Law, Authorities (...) do a thing.
for Execution of Justice; As if a man make a Letter of Attorney to two, to do
an Act, if one of them die, the Survivour shall not do it, but if a Venire
Facias, be awarded to four Coroners to impanel and return a Jury and one of
them die, yet the other shall execute and return the same: So if a Charter of
Feoffment be made, and a Letter of Attorney to four or three jointly and
severally to deliver Seisin, two of them cannot make Livery, because it is
neither by them four or three jointly, nor by any of them severally; but if the
Sheriff upon a Capias directed to him, make a Warrant to four or three jointly
or severally to arrest the Defendant, two of them may arrest him, because it is
for the Execution of Justice.

Co. ib. 192. a. 2 Littl.. ^02.
29 If there be two Co-perceners in Fee, Partition of Parceners, an^ Joyntenants.
and the one makes a Lease for life, this is no severance of the Co-percenery,
for no withstanding that Lease, the Lord shall make one Avowry upon them both:
but if there be two Ioyntenants, and one of them makes a Lease for life, this
is a severance of the Ioynture, and several Avowries shall be made upon them;
And here the Reason is, because Co-perceners come in by Descent, but
Ioyntenants by purchase the first ^^ing the Act of Law, and the other the Act
of the Party.

Co. ib. 215. a. 1.
30 At the Common Law before the Statute of 32 H. 8. 34. Conditions i^ Deed, and
(...) Law.
the Grantee of a Reversion after an Estate for life or years could not take
advantage of a Condition in Deed, as if Land were let for life or years
rendering Rent upon Condition that if the Rent were not paid at the day, the
Lessor and his Heirs might re-enter, here if the Grantee of the Reversion
could not (before that Statute) take advantage of Entry upon the breach of that
Condition for the non-payment of the Rent at the day limited by the Lease:
Littl. 384. Co. ib. 236. b. 3.
But before that Statute and since, the Grantee of a Reversion may take
advantage of a Condition in Law; As if a man make a Lease for life; there is a
Condition in Law annexed unto it, that if the Lessee does make a greater
Estate, etc. that then the Lessor may enter; and if this and the like
Conditions in Law, which do give an Entry to the Lessor, the Lessor himself and
his Heirs shall not only take benefit of it, but also his Assignee, and the
Lord by Escheat, every one for the Condition in law broken in their own time.

Condition apportioned.
31 Since the making of the said Statute of 32 H. Co. ib. 215. a. 3
the Grantee of part of the Reversion shall not take advantage of the
Condition, as if a Lease be made of three acres, reserving a Rent upon
Condition, etc. and the Reversion is granted of two acres, the Rent shall be
apportioned by the act of the Parties, but the Condition is destroyed, for that
it is entire, and against Common Right: Dumpors case. Co. l. 4. 120. a. 4.
But by act in law a Condition may be apportioned, as if a lease for years be
made of two acres, one in the Nature of Borough English, and the other at the
Common Law, and the lessor having issue two Sons, dies, each of them shall
enter for the Condition broken; for the Reversion, Rent, and Common, are
divided by act in Law: In the King Case also the Condition in such Case shall
not be destroyed, but shall still remain in the King.

^ Condition ^^possible by (...) act of God.
32 If Feoffment be made upon Condition, Co ib. 219. a. 1. Littl. 352.
that the Feoffee shall give the land to the Feoffor and his Wife, to have and
hold to them and the heirs of their two Bodies, the Remainder to the right
heirs. In this Case if the Feoffee die before any Feoffment made, then is the
Condition broken, because he made not the Estates, etc. within the time
prescribes by the law; for when no time is limited for the doing of it, then
the Feoffee at his peril may perform the Condition during his life (although
there be no request made) or else the Feoffor or his heirs may enter; but if
the feoffment be made upon Condition, that the Feoffee before the Feast of S.
Michael, next coming shall give the Land to the Feoffor and his Wife in tail,
ut supra, and before the day the Feoffee dies, the State of the Heir of the
Feoffee shall be absolute, because a certain time is limited by the mutual
agreement of the parties, within which time the Condition becomes impossible
by the Act of God: And therefore it is necessary in such Case when a day is
limited, to add to the Condition, that the Feoffee or his Heirs shall perform
the Condition.

The Mortga^^^ dies be^^t the day.
33 If a man morgage his Land to another, Co. ib. 219. b. 3
upon Condition that if the Mortgageor, and I. S. pay 20 s. at such day to the
Mortgagee, that then he shall re-enter; Here, if the Mortgageor being in full
life, will not pay the Money, but refuse to pay it, and I. S. alone tenders it,
the Mortgage may refuse it: But if the Mortgageor die before the day, and I. S.
pays the Money to the Mortgagee, this is a good performance of the Condition,
and yet the Letter of the Condition is not performed; but because the
Mortgageor dies by the Act of God, that shall not dis-able I. S. to pay the
Money; So also it I. S. had died before the day, the Mortgageor might have paid
it.

^^ewing of a ^eed to prove ^ Condition.
34 Regularly, a man by Plea shall not defeat an Estate of Frank-tenement, by
force of a Condition, Littl. 365. Co. ib. 225. b. 4.
unless he produce the proof of the Condition in writing, etc. yet if a
Guardian in Chivalry in the Right of the heir enter for a Condition broken, he
shall plead the State upon Condition without showing of any Deed, because his
Interest is created by the Law: So it is also of a Tenant by Statute Merchant
or Staple, or Tenant by Elegit: Likewise Tenant in Dower shall plead a
Condition, etc. without showing of the Deed, and the Reason of these Cases and
the like is, for that the Lord does create these Estates, and they come not in
by him, that was to enter for the Condition broken, so as they might provide
for the showing of the Deed, but they come into the Land by Authority of Law,
and therefore the Law will allow them to plead the Condition witheut showing of
it, yet the Lord by Escheat (albeit his Estate be also created by Law) shall
not plead a Condition to defeat a Freehold without showing of it, but this is
because it is conceived the Deed belongs to him; neither yet shall a Tenant by
the Courtesy plead a Condition made by his Wife, In Doctor Leyfields Case, in
fine. Co. l. 10. 94. b.
and a re-entry for a Condition broken, without showing the Deed; for albeit
his Estate is also created by Law, yet because the Law presumes that he had the
Possession of the Deeds and Evidences belonging to his Wife, it will not allow
him that Privilege. Vide infra Ru. 56.

Co. ib. 264. b. 4.
35 There is a diversity between a Realease in Deed, A Release in Deed, and in
Law.
and a Release in law; for if the Heir of the Disseisor make a lease for life,
and the Disseisee release his Right to the lessee for his life, his Right is
gone for ever: but if the Dissesee does disseise the Heir of the Disseisor, and
make him a lease for life, by this Release in law the Right is released, but
during the life of the lessee: for a Release in law shall be expounded more
favorably, (according to the intent and meaning of the parties) then a Release
in Deed, which is the act of the party, and shall be taken most strongly
against himself.

Co. ib. 266. a. 2, etc.
36 Rights are distinguished by three kinds, Jus proprietatis, Rights
distinguished.
Jus possessionis, and Jus proprietatis and possessionis, alias, Jus
duplicatum, or droit, droit: For example, if a man be disseised of an acre of
land, the Dissisee has Jus proprietatis, the Disseisor Jus possessionis, and
if the Dissiesee release to the Disseisor then has he Jus proprietatis and
possessionis: Now regularly it holds true, Right extinct, and contra.
that when a naked right to land is released to one that has Jus possessionis,
and another by a mean Title recover the land from him, the Right of Possession
shall draw the naked Right with it, and shall not leave a Right in him, to whom
the Release is made; So the Heir of the Disseisor being in by Descent, A. does
disseise him, and the Disseisee releaseth to A. now has the mere Right of the
land; but if the Heir of the Disseisor enter into the land, and regaine the
Possession, that shall draw with it A the mere Right to the land, and shall not
regaine the Possession only, and leave the mere Right in A. but by the
continuance of the Possession, the mere Right is therewith vested in the Heir
of the Disseisor; And the Reason of this is, because the Right is conveyed by
Release, which is the act of Party: but when the mere Right is subsequent, and
transferred by act in law; there albeit the Possession be re-continued, yet
that shall not draw the naked Right with it; but shall leave it in him: As if
the, Heir of the Disseisor be disseised, and the Dissesor enfeoff the Heir
apparent of the Disseisee being of full age, and then the Disseisee dies, and
the naked right discends to his Heir, and the Heir of the Disseisor recovers
the land against him, yet does he leave the naked right in the heir of the
Disseisee; So if the Discontinuee of Tenant in Tail enfeoff the issue in Tail
of full age, and Tenant in Tail die, and then the Discontinuee recovers the
Land against him, yet he leaves the naked right in the issue.

^^e of (...)
37 If the heir of the Disseisor be disseised, Co. ib. 266. a
and the disseisee release to the Disseisor upon Condition, if the Condition be
broken, it shall revest the naked right: So likewise if the Disseisee had
entered upon the heir of the Disseisor, and made a feofment in fee upon
Condition, if he entered for the Condition broken, and the heir of the
Disseisor entered upon him, the naked right should be left in the Disseisee: but
in these Cases, if the heir of the Disseisor had entered before the Condition
broken, then the right of the Disseisee had been gone of ever, because the
right (in these cases) was conveyed by release and feofment, which are Acts of
the party, it had been otherwise, if they had been transferred by Acts of Law,
as in the Cases put before in the example last afore-going.

^^^se of ^dition.
38 There is a diversity between a Right, which is favored in law; Co. ib. 274.
b. 1. Litt. 467.
and a Condition created by the party, which is odious in Law, for that it
defeateth Estates, and therefore a right may be released upon Condition, and if
the Condition be broken, the Right shall revest: but if a Condition be released
upon Condition, the release is good, but the Condition void.

^eleas of a^^^s,
39 In a mixed Action a release of all Actions real is a good bar, Co. ib. 285.
a. 2. Litt.. 492.
and so is a release of all Actions personal; for a man by his own act cannot
alter the nature of his action; and therefore if the Lessee for life or Lessee
for years do waste, now is an Action of wast given to the Lessor, wherein he
shall recover two things, viz. the place wasted, and treble damages: and in
this Case, if the Lessor release all Actions Real, he shall not have an action
of waste in the personalty only; Also if he release all Actions Personal, he
shall not have an action of waste in the realty only: and so it is also, where
the Lessee does waste, and after surrendreth to the Lessor his Estate, and the
Lessor accept thereof, here also the Lessor shall not have an action of wast:
howbeit, by act in Law the nature of the action may be changed, as if a man
make lease pur term d'auter vie, and the Lessee does waste, and then Cestuy
que vie dies, In this Case an action of waste shall lie for damages only,
because the other is determined by act in Law: So likewise if an action of wast
be brought against Tenant pur auter vie, and hanging the writ Cestuy que vie
dies, the writ shall not abate but the Plaintiff shall recover damages only,
because if Cestuy que vie had died before any action brought, the Lessor might
have had an action of waste for the damages, as aforesaid.

^t-secke.
40 Grant of a Rent-secke without attornment, is not good: Co. ib. 209. b. 3
for the grantee cannot distraine for it without attornment, or seisin
otherwise, because it is conveyed by the single act of the parties: But if
there be Lord, Mesne and Tenant, and the Mesne grant over his mesnaltie by
deed, the Lord releaseth to the Tenant, whereby the mesnalty is extinct by act
in Law, in this Case, if there be a Rent by surplussage, it is now changed into
a Rent-secke, and albeit there be no express attornment for it, as a
Rent-secke, and that the quality of that part of the Rent is altered from a
rent-service to a rent-secke: yet because it is altered by act in Law, the
attornment to the grant of the mesnalty is a good attornment for that
Rent-secke by surplussage. Vid. sup. 17.

^^e.
41 If an house fall by tempest, or other act of God, Co. l. 4. 63. 2. 4
Herlakendons Case.
the lessee for life or years has special Interest to take the great Timber,
to build the house again, if he will, for his habitation: but if the lessee
pull down the house, the lessor may take the great Timber, as a thing, which
was parcel of his Inheritance, and in which the interest of the lessee is
determined (as in Case of trees and for the same reason) and yet he may have an
action of waste, and recover treble damages.

Co. lib. 5. 5. in the Lord Mortwyes Ca.
42 If Tenant in tail be restrained by Statute to demise his Estate otherwise
then by reserving thereupon verum and antiquum redditum, Demise by Tenant in
tail.
and the Estate being a Manor consisting of Free-rents, Copi-rents, and
Lease-rents, he demiseth the whole Manor reserving a rent amounting to the
sum of all those rents, whereas the demesnes only were formerly demised
rendering rent: or if his Estate were two Farms anciently let, viz. one at 20
l. per an. and the other of 10 l. per an. and he demiseth them both together by
one Indenture, reserving 30 l. per an. In these and the like Cases, such
demises will only hold farm during the life of the Tenant in tail, and after
his death his issue shall avoid them: for here the true and ancient rent is not
reserved, and being thus altered by the act of the party, they shall not bind
the issue in tail: But if there be two Coperceners seized of land in tail,
which was formerly let at 10 l. per an. one of them may demise her part or
moity at 5 l. per an. and it shall bind her issue; so likewise if a Manor has
been always demised at 10 l. per an. and after a tenancy, escheats, yet it may
be still demised at 10 l. per an. and yet it may be said, that now the 10 l.
per an. is not verus and antiquus redditus, for no rent was ever yet reserved
out of the land escheated: But these two last Cases differ from the former, in
as much as Coperceners, and the Lord by escheate are in by act of Law and of
God, which shall not prejudice any: But if the Lord had purchased the tenancy,
it had been otherwise, for then he had been in by his own Act, and not by Act
of Law.

Co. lib. 5. 22. Laughters ca.
43 When the Condition of an Obligation consists of two parts in the
disjunctive, and both are possible at the time of the Obligation made,
Condition disjunctive.
and after one of them becomes impossible by the Act of God, the obligor is not
bound to perform either part: So if A. be bound to B. upon Condition, that if
A. marry I. and together which I. do sell the land of I. if then A. do purchase
to I. and her heirs so much land, as the money received for the other land
sold amounts unto, or else shall leave her worth so much at his death, that
then, etc. In this Case, albeit A. marry I. and they join in the sale of her
land, yet if A. survive I. it is made impossible by the Act of God to perform
the first part of the disjunctive condition, viz. to convey land unto her, and
therefore he is also discharged of the last part also.

Co. l. 5. 85. Sir Henry Knivets Case.
44 Tenant for life lets for years, the Tenant sowes the land, Land sove^
and before the grain is ripe Tenant for life dies, here the interest of the
grain is in the Lessee for years, who may lawfully enter and take it, when it
is ripe: for the Tenant for life's dies is by act of God, which shall prejudice
none: So if there be Tenant for life remainder in Fee, the Tenant for life
demiseth for years, the Tenant for years is outed, and the Tenant for life
disseised, the Disseisor lets for years, the dissors Tenant sowes the land,
Tenant for life dies before the grain is ripe, he in the remainder enters, the
Lessee of the disseisor enters upon him, he in remainder brings an Action of
Trespass: In this Case, he in remainder may justify his entry, but has no
right in the grain: also the disseisors lessee may justify the taking of the
grain, because of his possession, but the mere right of the grain is in the
lessee of the Tenant for life, and he shall recover in Trespass against the
disseisors lessee damages for the grain.

C. l. 6. 1, and 2. in Briuertons Ca. See more of this learning in Talbots Case
Co. l. 8. 105. and in Leyfields Case, Co. l. 16. 107, and 108.
45 If one holds land of his Lord by the yearly service of a Spur, Horse, or
the like, and the Lord purchase parcel of the tenancy, Entire serv^
such entire services are gone, because such service cannot be servered or
apportioned, and he has discharged p^rt thereof by his own Act: So it is also
when the original Act is the Act of the Party, mixed with an Act of Law, as by
recovery in a Cessavit of parcel of the tenancy all the entire services are
gone; But if parcel descend to the Lord, where the tenure is by a spur,
horse, or the like, there it is otherwise; because that comes to him singly by
Act in Law: Howbeit, when such service is to be performed by Coperceners, where
(by the Statute of Malbridge c. 9.) one is to do the service, and the rest are
to contribute (the same Law being also of their vendees by equity) there if any
part come to the Lord either by Act of the party or of Law, yet the whole
service is gone, for there contribution fails, and the Law will rather suffer
things against the principles of the Lord, then a man shall be without remedy,
according to Rule 144.

^verance of Manor.
46 If there be grant and render by fine of the demesnes of a Manor, here
albeit this be done in an instant, Co. l. 6. 64. a. in Sir Moyle Finches Case.
so as there was no transmutation of any possession, yet the demesnes being
once by Act of the party absolutely severed in the fee-simple from the services
of the Manor, the Manor is destroyed for ever: So likewise if a man has a
Manor and he grants part of the demesnes and part of the services to another
he shall not have a Manor, for a man by his own Act cannot create a Manor at
this day: But if there be two Coperceners of a Manor, and upon partition the
demesnes are allotted to one, and the services to another, here albeit in this
Case there is an absolute severance, yet if one of them die without issue, and
the demesnes descend to her, that has the services, the Manor is again
revived; because upon the partition they were in by Act in Law, and the
demesnes and services were again revicted by the Act in Law: So also if upon
the partition an advowson appendant be allotted to one, and the Manor, unto
which it is appendant, be allotted to the other, and after one of them dies
without issue, whereby the Law unites them again, in this Case, the advowson
which was once severed, shall be again appendant to the Manor: Also if two
Coperceners have a Manor, and upon the partition each has parcel of the
demesnes, and parcel of the services: here, because each of them is in by Act
of Law, each of them has a Manor.

In Office not ^^^isable for ^ years.
47 The Office of Marshal of the Kings Bench cannot be granted for term of
years, Co. l. 9. 97. a. in Sir Geo. Requols Case.
because being then a Chattel and an Office of trust, by the death of the
Lessee it may happen to fall into the hands of such persons as are not fit to
be trusted with that place: but yet, by Act of Law, a term (which is but a
Chattel) may be in such an Office, as appears in 5 E. 4. 3. for the Duke of
Norfolk had an Estate-taile in an Office holden of the King in Capite, and
dies, his heir within age and it was found by Office: In this Case the King
had a Chattel in that Office, viz. during the minority, and in that Case if the
King die, it shall descend to the next King, and shall not go to his Executors
or Administrators, for an Act in Law shall not introduce any inconvenience: And
the King having such an Office during the minority, it seems he cannot grant
it for life, or years, or during the minority, because that may prove
inconvenient for the reasons above alleged, but at will he may grant it, for
that is no certain Estate.

A Seigniory, etc. suspended.
48 By the Act of the party (whether right or wrong) all a Seigniory, etc. may
be suspended: Co. lib. 9. 135. a. 3. in Ascoughs Case*
And therefore if the Lord or Lessor disseise or out the Tenant or Lessee of
any part, all is suspended: also if a Commoner take a Lease of any part of the
land, in which, etc. all the Common is suspended: But by Act of Law a Seigniory
may be suspended in part and in esse for the other part: So if a Lord seize the
Wardship of the Land of his Tenant by Knight Service, now is the Seigniory
suspended, but if the guardian endow the Feme of the Tenant of a third part of
the Tenancy, now is the third part of the Seigniory revived, and the Tenant in
dower shall be attendant upon the guardian for the third part of the services,
because Tenant in dower is in by Act of Law: and for the same reason, if a man
seized of lands in fee takes Feme, and enfeoffes another, the feoffee grants a
rentcharge to the Baron and Feme and to the heirs of the Baron, the Baron
dies, the Feme is endowed of a third part of the land out of which the rent
issuing, in this Case the third part of the rent, which the Feme has for life,
is extinct, and two parts of the rent remains to her, issuing out of the other
two parts of the land: for although it be a rentcharge, which regularly cannot
be apportioned, yet by Act in Law it shall be apportioned: so likewise if the
Guardian in Knight Service seize the land of one co-heire within age, the other
being of full age, there the Seigniory is suspended for a moity, and in esse
for the other moity: And if there be two Coperceners of a Seigniory, and the
one disseise the land Tenant, or comes to the land by defeasable title, the
other may distraine her for her moity of the Seigniory: because these also come
in by Act of Law.

Co. l. 10. 94. b. 3. Doctor Leyfeilds Case.
49 When the Interest of a thing is gained by Act of the party, Showing forth of
a deed.
in defense of the title thereof the party interessed must produce to the Court
the Deed, by which he claims: So in Trespass, the Defendant pleads the Queens
grant of the Rectory of O. to A. but shows not the Letters Patents, this is
error, because this Estate being gained by the Act of the party, ^e might in
time have provided for his defense: but when a particular Estate or interest is
created by Law, the party interessed shall not be forced to show forth the
Deed: So guardian in Chivalry, or Tenant in dower may plead a release without
showing it: There is the same Law also of Tenant by Statute, Merchant, Staple,
Elegit, etc. because they also come to the possession by execution of Law, and
against the will of the terre-tenant, who has the deed, for Judici^m redditur
in invitum.

Co. l. 10. 104. b. 3. in Alfridus Deubawdes Case.
50 A Tales ought not to be granted after a full Jury appears and is sworn,
and yet if a Jury be charged, A Tales granted.
and after and before Verdict given in Court one of them is taken away by death
which is the Act of God, in that Case a Tales shall be awarded, and no new
venire facias, and with this accords 12 H. 4. 10. so likewise if any of the
Jurors impannelled die before they appear, and that appears by the Sheriffs
return, the Panel shall not abate, (but if need be) a Tales shall be awarded,
Vide 20 E. 4. 11.

F. N. B. 31. m.
51 If a man usurp upon an Infant and present, Usurpation upon an Infant.
which Infant has an Advowson by descent, and after the Incumbent die, the
Infant shall present, and if he be disturbed, he shall have an Assise de
darreine presentment: But if the Infant purchase the Advowson, and present, and
after the Church is void, and a stranger presents and usurpes upon the Infant,
and after the Incumbent dies, in this Case the Infant shall not have an Ass^^
of darreine presentment, but shall be put to his writ of right: because in the
first Case he is in by Act in Law, viz. descent, but in the last Case by act of
the party.

F. N. B. 34. s.
52 If a Feme purchase an Advowson, and takes Baron, A Feme has an Advowson.
and the Church is void, and a stranger presents, and the Baron suffers this
usurpation; here by this usurpation the Feme shall be out of possession after
the six months past, and shall be put to her writ of right of Advowson, if she
had presented before; but if she had not presented before, she is without
recovery: howbeit, the Law is otherwise, where the Feme has the Advowson by
descent or by course of inheritance, which is an Act in Law.

G^ant good without ac^^eament.
53 The Grantee of a Reversion by Fine shall not have a Writ of Waste against
the Tenant, before the Tenant has attorned; Fitz. N. B. 60. I
but if a Reversion escheat to the Lord, he shall have a Writ of Waste against
the Tenant without any Attornment: Or if the Lord of a Villain claim a
Reversion, that the Villain has, here also the Lord shall have a Writ of Waste
against the Tenant, if he make Waste, without Attornment: So also if the King
grant a Reversion by his Letters Patents, the Grantee shall have a Writ of
Waste without Attornment, because the Grantee being in by matter of Record, he
is conceived in by act of Law: in like manner, if (before or since the Statute
of Wills,) a man devises a Reversion to one in Fee, the Devisee shall have a
Writ of Waste against the Tenant without Attornment: for before the said
Statute he was in by Custom, and since the Statute by force of the same
Statute, which are acts in Law.

A writ of ^esne.
54 If Tenant for life be distrained by the Lord Paramount for Services, Fitz.
N. B. 136. g.
a Writ of Mesne does not lie for him against him in remainder or reversion,
but against the Mesne, yet in this Case Tenant in Dower shall have a Writ of
Mesne against the Reversioner, because she comes to her Estate by Act of Law.

55 In real Writs original, if one be summoned and severed, Co. l. 10. 134. b
2. in Read and Redmans Case.
and afterward dies (which is the Act of God) this shall abate the Writ: but
the taking of Baron or Entry into the Land, by the party, that is so summoned
and severed, shall not abate the Writ, because these are acts of the party, and
the Writ by such acts (where there is no summons or severance) becomes only
abatable.

Guardian may ^ead without ^ewing a Deed.
56 A man cannot plead in any action, Littl.. 365. Co. Inst. p. 1. 225. b. 4.
that the Estate was made in Fee, Fee-taile, or for life upon Condition,
without vouching a record thereof, or showing a Writing under Seal, proving the
same Condition: but if a Guardian in Chivalry in the right of the Heir enters
for a Condition broken, he shall plead the Estate upon Condition, without
showing of any Deed; because his Interest is created by the Law; And so it is
also of a Tenant by Statute Merchant, or Staple, or by Elegit. Howbeit the Lord
by Escheat, Co. ib. 226. a. 1
although his Estate be created by Law, shall not plead a Condition to deseat a
Freehold, without showing a Deed, because the Deed does belong unto him. Vide
supra Ru. 34.

(...). ^iry.
57 Vide Max. 148. 21.

58 An Action of Debt for a rent reserved upon a Lease for years is always
grounded upon a privity, and if the privity fail, Dyer 4. b. 3. 24 H. 8.
the action also fails, and so it is adjudged in 18 H. 6. that if a man make a
Lease for years, rendering rent, albeit the Lessee never enters, or occupies
the land, yet the Action of Debt lies for the privity: But in 9 H. 6. a man
makes a lease for years rendering rent, and the Lessor grants the reversion to
a stranger the grantee shall never have an action of debt for ye rent, because
he was not privy, but a stranger to the first Lease: Howbeit, when the Law
makes a privity it is otherwise, as if a Lease be made to one for years
rendering rent, and the Lessee makes his Executor, and dies, an action of Debt
lies against the Executor for the rent, because he is made privy by the Law.

^portion. ^ct of rent.
59 At the Common Law there could be no apportionment of rent, Dyer ib ^^.
by the act of the party, but only by act of Law, for if the Tenant before the
Statute of Quia Emptores terrarum, Anno 18. E. 2. had made a Feoffment in Fee
of part of the Tenancy, the Lord might distrain in that part, for all the rent,
but at the Common Law if a man had made a Lease for years of two acres of Land
(the one in Borough English, and the other in Gavelkind,) and had issue two
Sons and died; In this Case, this rent should be apportioned, because this
rent descended to them by Course of Law. So if Lessee for years make a
Feoffment of parcel of the Land leased, and the Lessee enter for the Forfeiture
into that parcel; In this Case also the rent shall be apportioned, because this
Title of Entry is given to the Lessor by the Law.

Dyer 246. 68. 8 Eliz.
60 After the Test of a Writ of Covenant, Fine of Feme Sole.
and the Dedimus potestatem, and the Conusance of a Fine taken of a Feme Sole,
and before the day in Bank, to record and engrosse the Concord, the Feme takes
Baron, yet it shall be recorded and engrossed at the Fine of the feme sole; for
she had done all that in her lay to do; And such a fine shall bind the feme and
her Heirs, and also the Baron, as it seems, for the marriage of the feme was
her own Act: It had been otherwise if in that mean time she had died, being the
Act of God, for then the Writ of Covenant had abated.

115 Utique fortior, est dispositio Legis, quam hominis.
Co. Inst. p. 1 310. a. 1. and ^87 b. 2.
1 If a reversion be granted to a man and a woman, Attornment (...) Baron and
Feme.
they are to have moities in law, but if they inter-marrie, and then attornment
is had, they shall have no moities (and yet by the purport of the Grant they
are to have moities,) because it is by Act in Law. Vide Pl. Co. 483. a. 1.

Co. ib. 310. a. 2.
2 If a reversion be granted for life, the remainder in tail, Attornment (...)
the particula^ tenant and remainders.
the remainder in fee, attornment to the Grantee for life shall enure to them
in the remainders to vest the remainders in them; And in this Case, albeit the
Tenant upon the Attornment should say, I do attorn to the Grantee for life, but
that it shall not benefit any of them in remainder, after his death, yet he
Attornment is good to them all; for having attorned to the Tenant for life, the
law (which he cannot control) does rest also all the remainders, according to
the purport of the Grant.

Co. ib. 321. a. 4 Littl. 5. 585.
3 Regularly, Grant of a Seign^ory good without Attornment.
the Grant of a Seigniory is not good without Attornment, yet if there be Lord,
Mesne, and Tenant, and the Mesne grant by fine the Services of his Tenant to
another in fee, and after the Grantee die without Heir, so as the Mesnaltie
comes to the Lord paramount, by way of Escheat, and after the Services of the
M^snalty are in arrear; In this Case, the Lord paramount may distraine the
Tenant, albeit he never attorned; For the Seigniory being by Act in law, (by
the Escheat) drowned in the Mesnalty; the Lord shall have as much benefit of
the Mesnalty escheated, as he had of the Seigniory drowned, and the rather for
that the law casts it upon him, and he has no remedy to compel the Tenant to
attorn.

Littl.. 584. Co. ib. 321. b. also in Marlories Case. Co. l. 5113. a. 4.
4 If the reversion of a Tenant for life be granted by fine to another in fee,
and the Grantee (before attornment) die without Heir, Grant of a Reversion
without Attornment.
so as thereby the reversion escheates to the Lord; if afterward the Tenant
make waste, the Lord shall have a Writ of waste against him, albeit he never
attorned; And yet where men claims by force of a Grant made by Fine, viz. as
Heir, or as Assignee, etc. there he shall not distraine or avow, ^or have an
action of waste, without Attornment; And the reason of the former Case is,
because the Lord is in by Escheat, which is a mere Act in Law: Howbeit, so it
is also, when it is partly by Act in Law, and partly by the Act of the party,
as if the Conusee of a Statute Merchant extends a Seigniory or rent, he shall
distraine without any Attornment, because he is in by force of the Statute: So
also if a man make a Lease for life or years, and after levy a fine to A. to
the use of B. and his Heirs, B, shall distraine and have an action of waste,
albeit the Conusee never had any Attornment, because the reversion is vested in
him by force of the Statute, and he has no remedy to compel the Lessee to
attorn. There is the same Law also of a Bargain and Sale by Deed indented and
enrolled, for in that Case also the Bargainee is in by force of the Statute.

A Surrender in Law.
5 A Surrender in Law is in some Cases of greater force, Co. ib. 338. a. 2. in
Sir Moile Finches Case. Co. l. 6. 96. b. 3. And in the Churchwardens Case of
S. Savior. Co. l. 10. 67. b. Co. ib. 354. b. 3. Litt.. 673.
than a Surrender in Deed; As if a man make a Lease for years to begin at
Michaelmas next, this future interest cannot be surrendered, because there is no
reversion, wherein it may be drowned; but by a Surrender in Law it may be
drowned; As if the Lessee before Michaelmas take a new Lease for years, either
to begin presently, or at Michaelmas, this is a Surrender in Law of the former
Lease: Fortior and aequior est dispositio legis, quam hominis.

Devesting an Estate out of the King.
6 A Gift in Tail is made to B. the remainder to C. in Fee, B. discontinueth and
takes back an Estate in Tail, the remainder in Fee to the King by Deed
enrolled, Tenant in Tail dies; In this Case, his issue is remitted, and
(consequently) the remainder: And the difference is betwixt an act in Law (for
that may divest an Estate out of the King,) and a tortious Act or Entry, or a
false or feigned Recovery against Tenant for life or in tail, which shall never
divest any Estate, Remainder, or Reversion out of the King: But a Recovery by
good Title against Tenant for life, or in Tail, where the Remainder is to the
King by defeasible title, shall divest the Remainder out of the King, and
restore and remit the right owners.

Grant of a presentation.
7 If a man seized of an Advowson in fee by his Deed grants the next
presentation to A. and before the Church becomes void, Co. ib. 378. b. 4.
by another Deed grants the next presentation of the same Church to B. In this
Case, the second Grant is void; for A. had the same granted to him before, and
the Grantee shall not have the second avoidance by Construction, viz. to have
the next avoidance after it, which the Grantor might lawfully grant; For the
Grant of the next avoidance cannot import the second presentation: But if a man
seized of an Advowson in fee take wife; now by act in Law is the wife entitled
to the third presentation, if the husband die before; In this Case if the
husband grant the third presentation to another, and then the husband die, the
heir shall present twice, and the wife shall have the third presentation, and
then the Grantee the fourth; for the fourth presentation shall in this Case be
taken to be the third, which he might lawfully grant: And so note a diversity
between a Title by Act in Law, and by act of the party, for the act in law
shall work no prejudice to the grantee.

Warranty express, and in law.
8 An express Warranty shall never bind the heirs of him, Co. ib. 384. b. 3.
that makes the Warranty, unless they be named: For example ( Littleton
says) Ego and haeredes mei, but in Case of warranties in law in many Cases the
heirs shall be bound to Warranty, albeit they be not named, as Tenant in Dower
(who has a Warranty in Law) being impleaded, shall vouch and recover in value
a third part of the two parts, whereof she is dowable, etc.

Idem by will.
9 It is a Maxim in Law, Co. ib. 386. a 1. Littl.. 734.
that the heir shall never be bound to any express warranty, but where the
Ancestor was bound by the same warranty: And therefore if Tenant in tail alien
his Land to his brother in fee, and has issue, and die, and after his brother
devise the same land to another in fee, and bind him and his heirs to
warranty, etc. and die without issue, this warranty shall not bar the issue
intail, because this warranty did not descend to the issue in tail, in regard
the uncle of the issue himself was not bound to the warranty in his life time,
nor chargeable with it, for that the Devise takes not effect until after his
death: Also if a man make a Feoffment in fee, and bind his heirs to Warranty,
this is void by the Warrant of this Maxim, as to the heir, because the
Ancestor himself was not bound: In like manner, if a man bind his heirs to pay
a sum of money, this is void; And vice versa, if a man bind himself to
warranty, and bind not his heirs, they are not bound; Ego and haeredes mei
warrantizantibinius: And Fleta says, Nota, quod haeres non tenetur in Anglia
ad debita antecessoris reddenda, nisi per antecessorem ad hoc fuerit obligatus,
praeterquam debita Regis tantum; A Fortiori, in Case of warranty, which is in
the realty: Howbeit, the warranty in Law may bind the heir, although it never
bound the ancestor, and this also may be created by a last will and testament;
As if a man devise lands to another for life, or in tail reserving a rent, the
Devisee for life or in tail shall take advantage of this warranty in Law,
albeit the antestor was not bound, and such a Devise shall also bind his heirs
to warranty, albeit they are not named.

Co. l. 1. 83. b. Corbets Case.
10 If a man covenant to stand seized to the use of himself for life, An Estate
to cease to one, and to be in another, repugnant.
the remainder to A. in tail, the remainder to B. in tail, etc. Provided, that
if any of the remainders in tail shall resolve to alien, that then the Estate
of him so resolving should cease, as if he were naturally dead, and that it
should then go to him in the next remainder; here this Proviso is void and
against Law for the repugnancie; for by the words or act of the party an
Estate cannot be limited to cease, as to one, Ibid. 86. b. 4. and 87 a. 4. per
Walmesley.
and from thence-forth to be in another: For if a man make a Lease for life,
upon condition, that if he do not pay 20 l. such a day, that another shall have
the Land, this future limitation is void, also if a man make a feoffment in Fee
of Land to the use of A. and his heirs every Monday, and to the use of B. and
his heirs every Tuesday, and to the use of C. and his heirs every Wednesday,
these limitations are void, and we find no such fractions of Estates in the
Law; And if Co-perceners agree to present by Turn, this is a partition as to
the Possession, yet nevertheless they shall in a writ of Right; So also
partition, that one of them shall have the land from Easter to Lammas, and the
other from Lammas to Easter, in severalty, this is good, as to the possession
and taking of the profits, but it is no severance of the Estate of Inheritance:
Howbeit, an act of Parliament or the Common Law may make an Estate void as to
one, and good as to another, but a man by his words, and the breath of his
mouth cannot do it: As if Land be given to Baron and feme, and the heirs of
their two bodies, and the Baron levy a fine with Proclamations, and has issue
and dies, now this fine by force of the Statute of 32 H. 8. 36. shall bar the
issue in tail; but shall not bind the feme, and so in respect of one it is a
good bar, and in respect of another no b^rre: Also in a Praecipe, if one be
vouched, here as to the Demandant the Vouchee is Tenant, and a Release to him
by the Demandant is good, but as to a stranger he is not Tenant; and therefore
a Release to him by a stranger is void; in like manner if one has a Term for
years as Executor, and surrender it, here, in one respect the Term is extinct,
but in another it is Assets: So that an act of Parliament or the Law may do
that in such Cases, which a man by his words cannot do.

Co. l. 4. 1. b. 3. in Vernons Case.
11 No collateral satisfaction or recompense made to the Feme, Dower assig^ed.
(either before or after marriage) in liew of her Dower was any bar of her
dower at the common law before the Stat. of 27 H. 8. 10. albeit after the death
of her husband she entered thereinto and accepted thereof in recompense of her
dower, because by the marriage she being entitled to a freehold for life, that
title shall not afterward be barred by any collateral satisfaction: Howbeit,
dower ad ostium Ecclesiae, or ex assensu patris shall conclude her of her
dower, if she enter into the land so assigned after the death of her husband:
for the law does allow these, being made in such form, as the law requires
those kinds of dower to be made: It is otherwise, where the dower is made by
the Act of party, as aforesaid: The principal Case there.
And therefore if B. enfeoffes to the use of himself for life, remainder of
his wife for life, upon condition to perform his last will and for her
jointure, albeit after the death of her husband she accepts thereof, yet she is
not bound by it.

^^^nt-tenants ^etition.
12 If two joint-tenants (since the Stat. of 31 H. 8. 1. Co. l. 6. 12. b.
Morrices Case.
which gives them a writ of partitione facienda) do make a partition by deed
with consent, albeit they are now compellable by that Statute to make
partition, yet because they do not pursue the Stat. to make partition by the
writ, such partition remains at the common law, and so (by consequent) the
warranty originally annexed to their Estate is gone, but if they make partition
by writ provided by the Stat. (to which every one being party none can have any
wrong by the operation thereof) the warranty shall remain notwithstanding such
partition in severalty: because the first is by the act of the parties, but the
other is operation of the Statute which is an act in law, so also if there be
two joint-tenants with warranty, and the one disseise the other, and the
disseisee brings an Assise: here albeit the Plaintiff pray recovery in
severalty, yet he shall recover generally, and in this Case also the warranty
shall be preserved, because he recovers by course of Law, and with this agrees
28 lib. Ass. Pl. 35. and Sir Edw. Coke also ubi supra: albeit there be some
Books, that he shall have judgment to hold in severalty, as 10 E. 3. 40. and
10. Ass. Pl. 17.

The Showing (...) a Deed, and ^^^a.
13 When a deed is requisite to be had ex institutione juris, C. l. 6. 38. b. 2.
Bellamies Ca.
it ought to be showed in Court, although it concern a thing collateral, and
transfers or convey nothing, as if the Major and Cominalty of London have an
Estate for the life of I. S. if (in this Case) the Major and Cominalty attorne
to the grantee of the reversion, the law requires, that it shall be by deed:
for, notwithstanding that the grantee comes not in by them that attorne, and
that the attornment is but a bare consent, yet in pleading, the deed of
Attornment ought to he showed, for in such Case the deed is requisite ex
constitutione Legis: but when a deed is only requisite ex provisione hominis,
in such Case the provision of a man shall not charge the judgment of the law;
as if a man make a lease for years of land to A. upon condition, that he shall
not assign it over but by deed, and not by parol: in this Case ex provisione
hominis the assignement ought to be by deed, yet because, ex constitutione
legis, the deed is not necessary for the assignee, he may plead the assignement
without showing the deed.

^^render. ^arranty. ^^^^ment.
14 Fortior and aequior est dispositio legis quam hominis, Co. l. 6. 69. b. 3 in
Sir M^ile Finches Case.
and therefore he that has a future interest cannot surrender it by any
express surrender but by taking of a new lease (which is an Act and amount to
a surrender in law) it may be surrend^ed and determined, as it is held in 35 H.
6. etc. vide supra cap. 5. So if the father be enfeoffed in Fee, and the
Feoffor warrant the land to him and his heirs, here the assignee shall not
vouch, but if the father enfeoffe his son and heir apparent with warranty
and die, in this Case the heir (being in truth assignee) shall vouch: for the
law, which has determined the warranty of the father to the son, will give the
son benefit of the first warranty, as it was adjudged in 43 E. 3. 5. by which
it appears, that the act in law is both more strong and more equal, The
principal Case therein effect.
then the Act of the party can be: So also if A. Lessee for 50 years demiseth
to B. for 10 years and then the reversioner levies a fine to B. and his
heirs, who enfeoffes D. who outs B. and B. reenters upon D. here, the entry
of B. is a good attornment in Law and stronger then an express attornment.

Co. l. 8. 82. a. 3 in Vivyors ca.
15 Albeit a man be bound in an Obligation to stand to, abide, etc. Authorities
revocable.
an Atbitrament, yet he may contermand it; For a man cannot by his own Act
make such an authority, power, or warrant, as shall not be countermandable,
which by the Law, and in its one nature is countermandable, as if I make a
Letter of Attorney to make livery or to sue an Action in my name, or if I
assign Auditors to take an account, or if I make one my Factor or submit to an
Arbitrament, albeit these are made by express words irrevocable, or if I bind
my self, that they shall stand irrevocably, yet they may be revoked; So if I
make my last Will Irrevocable, yet I may afterward revoke it; For my Act or my
Words can not alter the judgment of Law, and make that irrevocable, which of
its own nature is revocable.

Co. l. 10. 67. b. 2 in the Church wardens of St. Savior in Southwarke their
Case.
16 The Churchwardens of St. Savior in South-warke having a Lease of the
Rectory almost expired, contracted, Surrenders (...) Law.
that the Churchwardens then having and possessing the said Rectory would pay
20 l. fine and surrender the old Letters Patents to the King and in
consideration thereof a new lease should be granted them; They paid the 20 l.
fine, delivered into the Chancery the Letters Patents, and discharged the fees
there, but did not take care that the Letters Patents were ^acated; and yet the
King was not deceived in his grant, but the lease adjudged good; For it was a
good surrender in Law, because albeit the lessees were a corporation aggregate
of many, and could not make an express surrender without deed in writing under
their seal, yet they may by Act in Law surrender their term without any
writing: So if the Prior without the consent of the Covent make a lease for
years rendering Rent, if the Prior by deed expressly release the rent, and
die, the Successor shall recover the arrerages, but if the Prior out the lessee
and die, this discharge in law shall discharge the rent, that incurred during
the Outer, against the Successor, as appears in 34 H. 6. 21.

Co. l. 1^. 80. b. 4 in Jews Bowls Case.
17 The Estate of a Tenant in Tail after possibility, Tenant is tail after
possibility, ^
etc. ought to be a R^maine and residue of an Estate Tail, and this by the Act
of God, and not by the limitation of the party, ex dispositione Legis, and not
ex provisione hominis, and therefore if a man make a Gift in Tail upon
Condition, that if he do such an Act, that he shall then have it but for life,
he is not Tenant in Tail after possibility, etc. for this is ex provisione,
hominis, and not ex dispositione Legis, but it ought to be the remain and
residue of an Estate Tail, and that by the Act of God and the Law, viz. by the
death of one of the Donees without issue: And therefore if Tenants in special
tail recover in an Assise, and after one of them die without issue, and
afterward he that survives (who is Tenant in tail after poss^bility) is
redisseised, he shall have re-disseisin for the francktenement, which he had
before: for it is parcel of the Estate tail. Vid. sup. Case 4.

Co. l. 8. 152 a. 2 Edw. Althams Case.
18 If the Disseisee release all Actions to the heir of the disseisor, thereby
his right is gone in judgment of Law, Release of right.
for when a man has not any other mean to come by his Land, but only by way
of Action, if he release all Actions, by such release his right is Inclusive in
Judgment of Law gone, because by his own Act he has barred himself of all
means and remedies to recover or attain thereunto: but if the heir of the
Disseisor^ make a Lease for life, the remainder in fee, and the disseisee
release to the Tenant for life all actions, which he has against him, and
after Tenant for life die, the disseisee shall have an action, notwithstanding
such release, against him in remainder, for he did but release the action, and
the act in law, will never extend the act of the party more largely, then his
express words; as if the Lord disseise his Tenant, and make a lease for life,
this release in law shall not entend farther then for the life of the lessee:
for true it is, Fortior and potentior est dispositio Legis, quam hominis, and
it is as true, Fortior and aequior est dispositio Legis, quam hominis.

^nt-tenants ^enants in Common. Coperceners, ^resentation ^dvowson.
19 A joint-tenant or Tenant in common shall not have a Quare Impedit for the
advowson which they have in jointure or in common, F.N. B. 34. v.
in Case one of them present alone against his companion, that so presents: but
if two Coperceners cannot agree in presenting, the eldest sister shall have the
first presentation, and so shall also he have, that has her Estate and if
either of them be disturbed by the other Copercener, either of them shall have
a Quare Impedit against the other sister, And Coperceners, and those, who have
their Estates shall present as Coperceners ought to do, viz. the eldest first,
and then the second, and after her the third, and so the rest in order
according to their ages: and the diversity between joint-tenants or tenants in
common, and Coperceners arises from this ground, because they are in by grant,
which is the act of the party, but these are originally in by act in law.

^.
20 If an Abbot make waste in the Lands, which he has in ward, F.N.B. 60. m.
and dies, the Successor shall not be charged therewith, because his death is
the Act of God: it is otherwise, if he be deposed, for then the Successor shall
be chargable with it, because that is the Act of the party.

^^d, Mesne, (...) Tenant. ^rnment.
21 If there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, Co. Inst. p. 1. 221. b. 4. Litt.. 583.
and the Lord grant by fine the services of his Tenant to another in fee, here
if the services of the Mesne be arreare, the grantee shall not distraine the
Tenant before attornment: Howbeit if the grantee die without heir, whereby the
mesnalty escheats to the Lord Paramount: in that Case, if the services of the
Mesnalty be arreare, the Lord Paramount may distraine the Tenant without
attornment: because the grantee came to the mesnalty by the act of the party,
but the Lord Paramount comes to it by Act in Law.

(...) entry in (...) more ad^tageous, (...) an entry (...) Deed.
22 An actual entry into land is merely the Act of the party, Co. ib. 253. b. 4
and therefore is called an entry in deed, and albeit a claim be also an Act
of the party, yet it is also mixed with force of Law, and therefore it is called
an Entry in Law, and is not only as forcible, as an Entry in Deed, but because
it is as well an Act of Law as of the party, it gives the party a greater
privilege, then an Entry in Deed does; for a continual claim of the Disseisee
being an Entry in Law shall vest the possession and seisin in him for his
advantage, but never for his disadvantage: and therefore if the Disseisee bring
an Assise, and hanging the Assise he make continual claim, this shall not
abate the Assise, but he shall recover damages from the beginning, but it is
otherwise of an Entry in Deed.

^^nce in (...)
23 Upon a Lease for years by indenture, Dier 6. 28 H. 8. 1. etc.
the Lessee covenants and grants, that if he his Executors or Assigns alien,
it shall be lawful for the Lessor to re-enter, and after he makes his Wife
Executrix and dies, the Feme takes a new husband, who aliens: In this Case some
hold there is no breach of the Condition, because the Baron is in by the Law
and not Assignee of the Lessee, as it is of Tenant by the Courtesy, or Lord of
a Villein: but others hold the contrary, ideo quaere.

Dier 45. 3. 31 H. 8.
24 A lease is made for term of years, Devise of a Lease.
upon Condition that if the Lessee during his life assign the term to any
other without the Assent of the Lessor, that then the Lessor may re-enter, and
the Lessee devised his term by his will to another without Assent, etc. And (by
Brook and Hales) this is a forfeiture, because the Devisee shall be said to be
in by the assignement, that the Divisor made during his life, but if the
Executors had enjoyed the term, that had been no forfeiture, because in that
Case the Law makes the assignement. Tamen quaere.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 310. b. 3.
25 If a reversion of land be granted to an Alien by deed, Attornment
and before attornment the Alien is made denizen, and then the attornment is
made: In this Case the King upon office found shall have the land; for as to
the Estate between the parties it passes by deed ab initio, it is otherwise,
where land is granted to a m^n and a woman, and they intermarie, and then
attornment is had, for which Vide supra Pl. 1.

Dier 60. 22, 23 36 H. 8.
26 There is a diversity, Seizure of a villein.
where the body of a man in execution is set at liberty by authority of Law,
and when without authority, as by the voluntary escape in a Sheriff, or the
like; For the Law saves all rights: as in Case of a Villein, to whom the Kings
presence is a Sanctuary, where the Lord cannot seize him, howbeit afterward
out of his presence he may, because the Law gives the Villain that privilege
pro tempore, but if the Lord himself enfranchise him by manumission (in deed
or in Law) for one hour, he is free for ever in favorem libertatis, because
that is the Act of the Lord himself: So if a man be taken in execution and be
suffered to escape by the Sheriff, this is an absolute discharge of the debt,
and the Plaintiff is to have his remedy against the Sheriff by action of
debt: Arrest of a Member of Parliament
But if a Member of Parliament be arrested by a Sheriff upon an execution, and
be afterward freed by the privilege, which the law gives him, that is no
discharge of the debt, but that when he cease to be a Member, he may be
arrested again upon the same judgment, etc.

Dier 68. 24. in Kidwelleys Case. 4, 5 E. 6.
27 Where demand of Rent is to be made by the law (as when no place is assigned
for the payment thereof, Demand of Rent.
the law it self is the place) there it is not sufficient for the party to
come to the land ad petendum redditum, but he ought to bring witnesses with
him, and in their presence ought to make an express demand of the Rent upon
the land (as to say, here I am and do demand such a Rent, or the like) albeit
none be there present to pay the Rent: But when the Rent is by the agreement of
the parties payable out of the land, the Lessor is not bound to demand it, but
the lessee is to tender it at his peril.

Dier 140. Pl. 39. 3, 4 P. M.
28 A thing or action personal being once suspended (though it be but for an
hour) is extinct and gone for ever, A personal thing exi^ by husband
when it is by the act and consent of the party himself, who has interest in
it: But when it is by the Act of Law, it is otherwise, as the Case is in 6 E.
4. where a man condemned in redisseisin was imprisoned for out-lawry of felony,
and after pardoned, here, the execution of the body was, for the time that he
was the Kings prisoner, suspended, but after pardon it was revived.

116. It reputeth that a man will deal for their own best advantage.
^^^nesse.
1 Upon this ground it is, Co. Inst. p. 1. 6. b. 4.
that a party cannot be Witness in his own Cause, for the Law presumes he
will speak for his own most advantage; And therefore neither shall the party to
an usurious Contract be admitted to be a Witness against the Usurer, for in
effect he should be Testis in propria causa, In Smiths Case 8 Jac.
and should avoid his own Bonds and Assurances, and discharge himself of the
Money borrowed, and albeit he commonly raise up an informer to exhibit the
Information, yet in rei veritate he is the party: And herewith in effect
agrees Britton, Brit. 134.
that he that challenges a right in the thing in demand, cannot be a Witness,
for that he is a party in interest, and will advantage himself as much as he
can.

^^fant ex^^ange.
2 If an Infant exchange Lands, Co. ib. 51. b. 3.
and after his full age occupy the Lands taken in exchange, the exchange is
become perfect, for the exchange at first was not void, because it amounted to
a Livery, and also in respect of the recompense,) but voidable.

Tenant at sufferance*
3 A Writ of Entry ad terminum qui praeteriit, Co. ib. 57. b. 3.
lies against the Tenant at sufferance, that holds over his term; but this
is rather by admission of the Demandant than for any estate of Freehold, that
is in him; for in judgment of Law he has but a bare Possession; So if Tenant
pur term de auter vie continue in Possession after the decease of Cesty que
vie, or Tenant for years holds over his term, in this Case the Lessor cannot
have an action of Trespass before Entry; but he may have a Writ of Entry, if
he will thereby admit himself to have a Freehold; And the Law suffers him so
to do, because the Law presumes that he will not so admit himself without some
hope of advantage, that may redound to himself thereby.

^^^cage. (...). ^eliefe.
4 A Tenant holds of his Lord certain Lands in Soccage to pay yearly a pair
of gilt Spurs or five shillings in Money at the Feast of Easter, in this
Case, the Rent is uncertain, Co. ib. 90. b. 4.
and the Tenant may pay which of them he will at that Feast, and may also pay
which of them he will for Relief, but if he pay it not when he ought, Co. ib.
91. a. 4.
then may the Lord also distreine for which he will: And therefore in such Case
if the heir be not presently (that is, as presently and as conveniently as he
may, all due circumstances considered,) after the death of his Ancestor, ready
upon the Land to pay Relief, the Lord may distraine for which of them he will,
and if the Tenant tendered either of them according to the Law, and none for the
Lord was there ready to receive it, yet the Lord may distraine for that which
was tendered, at his pleasure. For in all such Cases the law supposes, that a
man will deal for his own best advantage.

(...)-charge. ^^^ity.
5 Upon a Reservation of a Rent upon a Feoffment in fee by Deed intented, the
Feoffor shall not have a Writ of Annuity, Co. ib. 144. ^. 2
because the the words of Reservation, as reddeudo solvendo, faciendo, tenendo,
reservando, etc. are the words of the Feoffor, and not of the Feoffee; yet if
afterward the Feoffee accept of the Estate, he is thereby bound, and is
subject to a Writ of Annuity.

Challenges.
6 Upon this ground also it is, that all just Challenges, Co. ib. 156. a. and
157, etc.
both to the Array, and to the Pols, are allowed in Law; for which see the
quotation in the margent.

Frank-marri^^e. ^^^chpot.
7 Where Lands are are given in Frank-marriage, Co. ib. 776. a. 4 etc. Littl..
269
and other lands descend to the other Sister in Fee-simple, if the Donees will
not do the first act, viz. put their Land in Hotchpot, the Law presumes they
are satisfied, and therefore (in such Case) allows them no part of the
Fee-simple Land descended by Writ of partition or otherwise, because non tenent
insimula and per indiviso.

Co. ib. 202. b. 2.
8 If Tenant in tail makes a Feoffment in fee upon Condition, Descent. Entry.
Remitter.
and dies, and the issue in tail within age does enter for the Condition
broken; in this Case, he shall be first in, as Tenant in Fee-simple, as heir to
his father, and (consequently) shall be instantly remitted: but if the heir be
of full age, he shall not be remitted, because he might have had his Formedon
against the feoffee, and the Entry for the Condition is his own Act.

Co. ib. 208. b. 4.
9 When an Obligation or Feoffment in Fee is made upon Condition, that the
feoffor, feoffee, obligor, Feoffment. Obligation. Condition. Act.
or a stranger shall do a Sole Act or Labor, as to go to Rome, Jerusalem, etc.
In such or the like Cases, the feoffor, feoffee, obligor, or stranger have time
during their lives to do it, and cannot be hastened by request; for in such
Cases the Law gives them credit, that they will take the most convenient time
for the doing thereof.

Co. ib: 288. b. 3.
10 If in a personal action the Defendant be Quinto exactus, Utlawry.
Forfeiture, and^
upon the Exigent, and makes default, the judgment is Ideo utlagetur, per
Judicium Coronatorum, or (in London) per Judicium Recordatoris; And then upon
the Return of the Exigent he is outlawed: Howbeit, in this Case the Plaintiff
recovers nothing, but the King takes the whole benefit thereof, which is the
forfeiture of all his Goods; for the Law intends, that the Defendant will
rather appear and answer the Plaintiff, etc, than to forfeit all his Goods and
Chattels, Debts, and Duties to the King, by his default and contumacy.

Co. ib. 303. b. 1.
11 The Plea of every man shall be construed strongly against him that pleads
it, Plea.
for every man is presumed to make the best of his own Case.

Co. l. 2. 35. b. 3. in Sir Rowland Heywards Case.
12 Upon this ground also it is, Election.
that when two things are offered to be taken, it is in the Election of him
that has interest or power in them, to take which of them he pleases; So if
A. seized of a Manor, part in Demesne, part in Service, demiseth, bargains,
and sells the Manor to W. here it is in the Election of W. to take it either
by Demise at the Common Law, or by Bargain and Sale according to the Statute.

Co. l. 3. 24. b. 2. in Walkers Case.
13 It was said, that if the Lessee assign over his term, Lessee. Assignment.
Rent. Avowry.
the Lessor may charge the Lessee or his Assignee at his Election, but if the
Lessor accept the Rent of the Assignee, he has determined his Election, and
shall not have an action against the Lessee afterward for Rent due after the
Assignment, no more then if the Lord once accept the Rent of the feoffee, he
shall avow upon the feoffor.

Co. l. 3. 26. b. in Butler and Barkers Case.
14 Upon this Rule likewise it is, that the Law does allow Agreement, or
Disagreement to an interest offered to the party, Lord. Tenant. Agreement.
Disagreement.
that is to have it; So if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant by Deed
enfeoff the Lord and a stranger, and make livery to the stranger in name of
both, in this case, if the Lord only by Parol disagree to the Estate, it is
nothing worth; for a Frank-tenement shall not be so lightly divested by naked
Parol in pais: but on the other side, if the Lord enter into the Land
generally, and take the profits, this act shall amount to an Agreement to the
Feoffment; Howbeit if he enter into the Land, and distraine for his Seigniory,
this act shall amount to a Disagreement of the Feoffment, and shall divest the
Frank-tenement out of him, and with this accords 10 E. 4. 12. by all the
Justices.

(...) and (...). ^^^ement. ^^greemen^.
15 If Lands be given to Baron and Feme in tail, Ibid. b. 3.
and after the Statute of 32 H. 8. 36. the Baron alien the Land to the use of
himself and his heirs, and after devise it to his Wife for life and dies, here
the Feme inter-claiming by parol the Estate for life, this is a good
Disagreement to the Estate of inheritance, and a good Agreement to the Estate
for life, and with this accords 18 El. 351. b. Dyer, for the Law gives her
power to take which of them she will.

^^rlon re^^d.
16 If A. make an Obligation to B. and deliver it to C. to the use of B. this is
the Deed of A. presently; but when C. offers it to B, Ibid. b. 4.
here B. may refuse it in pais, and thereby the Obligation shall lose his
force; and with this accords, H. 1. El. Rot. 442. in Tawes Case, reported by
Sergeant Benlowes, and by Dyer 167. But in this Case it seems upon an action
brought for it he cannot plead non est factum, because it was once his Deed:
Gift of ^ods refuse^.
There is the same Law also of a Gift of Goods and Chattels; if the Deed be
delivered to the use of the Donee, ye Goods and Chattlels are in the Donee
presently before notice or agreement, but the Donee may make refusal in pais,
and thereby the property and interest shall be divested, and such Disagreement
need not be in any Court of Record.

^^covery. ^^mpence.
17 A Common Recovery is not restrained by the Statute de donis but it shall
bar the issue in tail because of the intended recompense, Co. l. 3. 60. a. 4.
in Lincoln College Case.
wherewith the Tenant in tail seems to be content, the Law thereupon
presuming, that so to suffer the Recovery tends rather to his benefit then
prejudice.

^^^^ture. ^^^s.
18 B. enfeoffes another to the use of himself for life, Co. l. 4. 3. a. 1. in
Vernous Case.
the remainder to his Wife for life for her jointure, upon Condition to perform
his Will, and then dies, the Wife enters and agrees to it, and after brings her
Writ of Dower, but her acceptance bars her Writ of Dower; for albeit her
Dower was an absolute Estate for life, and this a Conditional Estate, yet it
being an Estate for life, and she accepting thereof, the Law presumes she
esteemed it a greater advantage, than to take her Dower, it being in her power
after the death of her Husband to take or waive it; So if a man make a
Feoffment in fee to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of his
Wife, durante viduitate sua for her jointure, if after the death of her husband
she accept thereof, it shall bar her of her Dow^r.

(...). ^^^ance.
19 Before the Statute of 21 H. 8. 13. if one had a Benefice with Cure, and
accepted another Benefice with Cure, Co. l. 4. 75. b. 2. in Hollands Case.
the first Benefice was void: Howbeit, this was not an avoidance by the Common
Law, but by the constitution of the Pope, of which avoidance the Patron might
take notice, if he would, and might present if he would without any
Deprivation, etc.

(...) at will.
20 Feme Tenant for life makes a Lease at will rendering Rent, Co. l. 5. 10. a.
Hensteads case.
and after takes Baron, and she and her Baron brings an action of Debt for the
arrerages after the marriage; In this Case, the Will is not determined by the
inter-marriage; for albeit the feme by taking Baron, has submitted her self
to his Will, as her Head, yet because it may be prejudicial to the Baron to
have the Lea^e determine, (for then he might lose the Rent due at the very next
Rent-day after the marriage) and it cannot prejudice the feme at all to have it
continue, and it being in the power of the Baron to make it continue or
determine, the Law adjudgeth it to continue.

(...) ^^^chant. ^^ple. (...) showed.
21 Tenant by Statute Merchant or Staple, etc. shall not be forced to show a
Deed in Court for the maintenance of their Estate, Co. l. 5. 75. a. 2. in
Wymarks Case.
for they come to the Possession of the Land by Process of Law against the
will of him, that has the Deed; but it is otherwise of a Lease for life, or
years, etc. because he comes in by the Lessor, and might have taken a Covenant
or other security, for his peaceable enjoying of the Land to him demised.

Co. l. 7. 8. a. The Earl of Bedfords Case.
22 Tenant in tail leaseth for years and dies; here, Infant.
the King or other Guardian may avoid it: but if after his full age he accepts
of the rent, the Lease is confirmed to re-continue during the term.

Co. l. 8. 98. a. 4. in Baspoles Case.
23 In Arbitrament, when all matters in Controversy are referred to an
Arbitrator to end; Arbitrament Award.
here albeit there are diverse matters of in difference betwixt the parties, yet
if one only be made known to the Arbitrator, he may make an award of that
alone; for the Arbitrator is in the place of the Judge, and his Office is to
determine secundum allegata and probata, and the duty is to acquaint him with
their grievances, and with all the Causes of their differences, which if they
or either of them omit to do, the Law presumes it is for their own advantage to
conceal them; And therefore such Concealment shall not annul the award, that is
made, albeit it be made only of part.

Co. l. 8. 120: b. 3. in Doctor Bonhams Case.
24 It is presumed, that every one will make the best of his own Case; And
therefore in any suit or action, Pleading.
when the Plaintiff makes Replication, Surrender, etc. whereby it appears that
upon the whole Record the Plaintiff has no cause of Action, he shall never
have Judgment, albeit the Bar, Rejoinder, etc. be insufficient in Matter, for
the Court ought to judge upon the whole Record, and will suppose, that the
Plaintiff has managed his own Cause, as well as he can: Co. l. 8 133. a. 4. in
Turners Case.
So in an Action of Debt brought against an Executor, he pleads two Recoveries
against him in a Court of Record, which amount to the whole in his hand, but
shows not, that the Corporation had jurisdiction to hold Court, either by
Prescription, or by Patent; And it did also appear by the Count in that Court,
that the Action of Debt was brought for 100 l. without mentioning any
Obligation, and therefore it was to be intended, that there was no Obligation,
and then the Executor was not chargeable in an action of Debt upon a single
Contract; And in this Case, albeit the Defendant in his Bar acknowledged,
that the Debt was by Obligation, yet that shall not make the Count good, which
the Law presumes the Plaintiff has made as full as he could.

Co. ibid. b. 2.
25 In Debt upon an Obligation with Condition to perform Covenants in an
Indenture, Pleading.
the Defendant pleads performance of all the Covenants generally, and it
appears to the Court that diverse of them are in the Negative or Disjunctive,
and so the Plea being in the general Affirmative is insufficient, yet if the
Plaintiff reply and show a breach of one of the Covenants, which by his own
showing is not any breach, upon which the Defendant demurres; In this Case,
judgment shall be given against the Plaintiff, because (upon the whole Record)
it appears, that the Plaintiff had no Cause of Action, and it will be always
intended, that every one will make the best of his own Cause.

Co. l. 8. 135. a. in Sir John Nedhams Case
6 In Debt to Administrators upon Administration committed by the Bishop of R.
the Defendant pleads Administration committed to himself by the Archbishop of
Canterbury, Administra^^on.
because the Intestate had bona notabilia, the Plaintiff replies, that that
Administration was repealed; In this Case, because the Defendant did not show
in his bar, that the Intestate had bona notabilia in certain; It shall be
intended; that he had not bona notabilia in diverse Diocesses, yet the
Administration committed by the B. of C. is not (in this case) void, but only
voidable.

^^ving a (...).
27 It is not expected that Tenant by Statute or Elegit, etc. should a deed of
the land, because they come to the possession thereof by execution of Law, and
against the will of the terre-tenant; Co. lib. ^^4 b. 4. in Doctor Leyfeilds
Case.
but Tenant by the courtesy ought to show a release made to his wife, for the
law presumes he has both that and her in his power.

(...) Pa^^^^^. ^^gestion.
28 The suggestion of the party being inserted in Letters Patents raises
always suspicion, Co. l. 10. 110. a. 2. etc. in Legates Case.
because the Law presumes it is inserted to work him some advantage: So if the
King by his Letters Patents grant White-acre, and Black-acre to I. S. with this
clause, quae quidem praemissa, etc. a nobis concelata and detenta fuerunt, etc.
This in judgment of Law is the suggestion of the Patentee, and shall make the
grant void: So in 19 E. 3. tit. Grant 58. the King by his Letters Patents
grants license to appropriate the Advowson of D. to the Prior of C. quae quidem
advocatio non tenetur de nobis, and in truth the Advowson was held mediately of
the King; here, the license was held void, for (the Book says) the suggestion
was falfe: vide plus ibid.

^^son. (...) Christian.
29 If a Parson or Vicar has a pension out of another Church, F. N B. 51. B.
and the pension is with-drawne, or another parson takes or claims it; in this
case the Parson or Vicar, that ought to have, may sue for it in the Court
Christian, and he shall not be stopped by a prohibition, but shall have
consultation: Also upon the prescription he may have a writ of Annuity for it,
at his Election; but if he once bring a writ of Annuity for it, he shall never
after sue for it in the Court Christian.

(...). ^^change.
30 If the Baron exchange land, and after die, F. N. B. 149. n.
if the Feme has dower of the land taken in exchange, she shall not have dower
also of the land given in exchange.

^^^t-charge. ^^^y.
31 Upon grant of an Annuity out of land for years, for life, F.N.B. 152. a.
or in fee, which clause of distress, the grantee has his Election (if it be
behind) whether he will distraine, or bring his writ of Annuity for it; Howbeit
if once he do either, he is for ever after concluded for doing the other: for
the Law supposes he will make choice of that, which tends to his best
advantage.

The time is ^im, that (...) benefit.
32 Where a man is to have benefit upon an act, Pl. 16. a. 4. in Fogassaes ca.
which is first to be done by himself, and no time is limited, when it shall
be done, the Law says that he may do it at his pleasure, as if a man make a
feofment upon Condition, that if he pay the Mortgagee 20 l. that then he shall
re-enter, here in as much as no day of payment is limited, the Mortgager may
pay it when he pleases, for he is to have the benefit, viz. the land again: So
if one grant to another that when he shall take his daughter to wife he will
give him 20 l. in this Case, because no time is limited for the taking of his
daughter to wife, he may take her when he will: So in Fogassaes Case in the
Comentaries, in as much as the payment of the subsidy was to be made unto the
Collector upon the weying of the woad, and a time is limited for the weying,
the Law referres the time thereof to the will of the Collector.

^^^antages ^^lected ^^^covin.
33 In Wimbish and Tabbois Case in the Comentaries one argument to prove covin
in the Feme there, was, Pl. 55. b. 2. in Vimbish and Talbois Case.
because he did not in answering that suit take such advantages, as the Law
allows in such Cases as vieu, essoine, and the like, but immediately appears,
and suffers the Demandant to recover by nihil dicit: For the Law presumes
(unless there be covin, or other neglect or restraint which cannot be avoided)
that the party interessed will take all advantages, that the Law allows, to
make good his own cause, which advantages are the birthright of the subject,
as Lands or other Inheritance, and when they are waved or neglected, the Law
implies covin, or some other miscarriage.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 46. a. 4.
34 The King grants lands to A. in tail, Tenant in ^a^ Lease. Primer seis^
to hold by Knight Service A. makes a lease to B. for 31 years, reserving
rent, A. dies, his son and heir of full age, and all this if found by Office;
now here, as to the King this lease is not of force, for he shall have his
primer seisin, as of land in possession: but after livery the Lessee may enter,
and then if the issue in tail accept the Rent, the leaf shall bind him, for
the Kings primer seisin shall not take away the Election of the issue in tail:
because it may be the Rent was better then the land, and so the Law will
presume, that his acceptance tended to his advantage, and therefore he shall be
bound thereby: Co. ib. 46. b. 1. and Pl. 437. a
In like manner Tenant in tail makes lease a for 40 years, reserving a Rent,
to begin 10 years after, Feofment.
Tenant in tail dies, the issue enters and enfeoffes A. the ten years expire,
the lessee enters: now in this Case also, if A. accept the Rent, the lease is
good, for he shall have the same Election, that the issue in tail had, either
to make it good or to avoid it; But because the lessee accepts the Rent, the
Law presumes it was for his advantage so to do, and therefore thereupon
adjudged the lease still good, notwithstanding such entry of the heir before
it commenced.

Litt.. 559.
35 If there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant take Feme, Acceptance good
attornment.
and after the Lord grants the services to the Feme and her heirs, and the
Baron accept the Deed: In this Case, after the death of the Baron, the Feme and
her heirs shall have the services, for the acceptance of the deed by the Baron
is good attornment; albeit the services are in suspense during the coverture:
Litt.. 573.
So likewise if a man let land to another for term of life, and after confirms
by his deed the Estate of the Tenant for life, the remainder to another in fee,
and the Tenant for life, accepts the deed, this is a good attornment in law to
make the Estate in remainder good.

Co. l. 3. 86. b. 2. in the Case of Fines.
36 Every fine levied shall be intended to be levied with proclamations
according to the Statutes in that behalf provided, Fines.
because that is most beneficial for the Conusee.

Dier 244. 59. 8 Eliz.
37 There were four Defendants in an Assise or plaint of three Messuages, Assise.
three of them severally undertake the Tenancy of the several Messuages, and
plead several bars, and to the residue Null tort, the fourth takes upon the
entire tenancy of all, without that, etc. and pleads also bar at large: In
this Case, the Plaintiff at his peril is to choose his Tenant, because the law
presumes, that he will do it for his best advantage.

117 And therefore the Law believes against the party whatsoever is to his
prejudice.
Co. Inst. p: 1. 52. a. 4.
1 If one as Procurator or Attorney to another present to his own benefice, he
puts himself out of possession, Present. Benefice.
because it is his own act, and the presentee comes in by the institution an
induction of the Ordinary.

Co. ib. 55. b. 3.
2 If Lessee at will or for life sow the land, Tenant for life or will, and
Grant. Sowet.
and the lessor determines his Will, or dies, before the grain is ripe, yet
the lessee shall have it; because in either of the said Cases; the end of the
term is uncertain, either upon the Will or death of the lessor, which cannot
come within the lessees power to prevent: but if lessee for years, who may
know the end of the term, sow the land she shall not have the grain; Litt..
68. Co. ib. 56. a. 4.
because his term is certain: And therefore the Law will attribute the sowing
of the land to his own folly: So if lessee at will sow the ground with Corn,
etc. and after he himself determines his will and refuses to occupy the
ground: In that Case, the lessor shall have the grain: for otherwise the lessor
should lose his Rent, and the lessee has determined it by his own act: In like
manner, if a woman, that holds land durante viduitate, low the ground, and
takes husband, the lessor shall have the emblements, because the determination
of her Estate grew by her own act: So likewise, where the Estate of the lessee
being uncertain is defeasible by a right paramount, or if the lease determine
by the act of the lessee, as by forfeiture, condition, etc. there he that has
the right paramount, or that enters for any forfeiture, etc. shall have the
Corn, causa qua supra.

^ and Te^ ^^dship ^ease.
3 If there be Lord and Tenant by Knight Service, Co. ib. 83. b. ^
and the Tenant dies his heir being within age, the Lord waiveth his wardship
(as he may) and takes himself to his Seigniory: In this Case the Lord shall
not have relief at his full age, because he might have had the wardship of the
body and land, if he had not neglected his time.

(...) emptor.
4 By the Civil law every man is bound to warrant the King, Co. ib. 102. a. ^
that he sells or conveyeth, albeit there be no express warranty: but the
Common Law binds him not unless there be a warranty in deed or in Law, for
the Common Law believes against the party things done to his prejudice, and
therefore in such Case, Caveat Emptor.

^^nage by ^^ssion.
5 If a man being brought into a Court of Record by course of Law will there
acknowledge himself to be a Villein (albeit he was not a Villein before) he
shall be for ever after a Villein in gross: Littl.. 185. Co. Inst. p. 1. 122.
b. 2.
and therefore if a praecipe be brought against one he may confess himself
Villein to a stranger, and that he holds the land in Villeinage of him, and
this is good and shall bind him; and if (in that Case) the Demandant reply,
that the Tenant the day of his writ purchased was a Freeman, and thereupon
issue is taken, and he is tried to be free, yet he shall remain Villein to the
stranger in respect of his confession: So likewise in a writ of ^ativo habendo,
if the Plaintiff (as he ought) offers in his Count to prove the Villeinage
by the Cousins and kindred of the Defendant, and thereupon produces the Uncles
of the Defendant, who upon examination confesses themselves to be Villeins to
the Demandant, this confession being entered of record does so bind, that albeit
they were free before, yet they and the heirs of their bodies are by this
confession bound and Villeins for ever, etc.

^^^chis^^.
6 If the Lord deliver seisin of Lands to his Villein, Litt.. 206 and 108. Co.
ib. 138. a. 4 and b. 3.
to hold in fee, fee tail, for life, or for years, or make him any other
certain Estate, or if the Lord sue against his Villein a praecipe quod reddat
and recover or be nonsuit, or sue against his Villein any other personal
action, as debt, account, covenants, trespass, or the like: These are
ma^^missions, because (in the first Case) the Lord may enter into the land of
his Villein, and (in the other) may imprison his Villein, or take his goods (at
his pleasure) without suit: but by such suits the Lord makes the Villein to be
a person able to render the Lord (in the first Case) the land, and (in the
other) damages by course of Law: In like manner, if before indictmest the Lord
bring an appeal of felony against his Villein, whereupon the Villein is acquit,
this is an enfranchisement, because upon the aquittal the shall recover damages
against the Lord by the Statute of West. 2. cap. 12. quia multi per malitiam,
etc. In sum, wheresoever the Lord gives to the Villein a just cause of
Action, he is enfranchised; and therefore if the Lord kill his Villein, his son
and heir shall have an appeal, and thereby the heir shall be enfranchised,
because the offense of the Lord gave to the heir a just cause of Action
against the Lord.

(...) in (...).
7 If there be two Coperceners, Co. ib. 14^. b. 2
and the one bring a Rationabili pa^^e, or a Nuper obijt against the other, and
the def^ndant claims by purchase, and disclaimes in the blood; here, the
Plaintiff shall have a Mortdancester against her as a stranger for the whole.

Co. ib. 170. b. 4
8 When partition is made by the two Barons in the life time of their Femes
Coperceners, although such partition be unequal, Unequal partition. Feme
covert. Infant.
yet it is not void, but voidable; For if after the decease of the husband, the
wife enters into the unequal part, and agrees thereunto, this shall bind her
and her heirs for ever: There is the same Law of an Infant, when his part is
unequal, Co. ib. 171. a. 4
for by his entry at full age the partition is made good for ever.

Co. ib. 172. b. 3 and 173, a. 3. and Litt.. 260, and 261.
9 If a man having Issue two Daughters die seized of Fee-simple lands and also
of as much in tail, Copercene^ of fee-simpl^ and ent^^^ Lands.
and the eldest sister takes the entailed land for her proper part, an the
youngest sister enters into the Fee-simple lands and having issue aliens them
to a stranger, and dies: In this Case, the issue in tail may enter into the
intailed lands, and occupy them in Copercenery with her Aunt: for it was the
folly of the eldest sister to take the entailed lands for her part.

Litt.. 286. Co. ib. 185. a. 3
10 If there be joint-tenants in fee, Joint-tenan^ Rentcharge Release.
and the one grants a Rent charge out of his part, and dies; in this Case,
the survivor shall hold the land discharged of the Rent: because he claims
the land by a title paramont, viz. from the first feoffor, and not by his
companion: but here, if after the land is charged with the rent, the other
joint-tenant accept of a release from his ompanion, that so charged the land,
in such case, he shall hold the land charged with the rent, for now by
acceptance of such release he is not in by survivorship, but from his companion.

Co. ib. 202. a. 2
11 The demand of a Rent or other sum to take advantage of a re-entry or
condition broken ought (by the law) to be made (where no other place or time is
limited for the payment thereof) upon the Land at the most notorious place
there (as at the fore-dore gate, Demand of Rent, etc. upon a re-entry*
Condition and
or the like) and at the last part of the day, so as the money may be
conveniently numbered before Sun set: yet if upon the day of payment thereof the
lessee or feoffee happen to meet the lessor or feoffor upon any part of the
Land, (although it be not the most notorious place) or at any time of the last
day (although it be not the last part, as aforesaid) in such case if the
Lessor or feossor refuse it, In Wades Ca. Co. l. 5. 14. b. 2
he shall not take advantage of a re-entry or Condition broken, as aforesaid;
for by such refusal (being his own Act) he has barred himself of that
advantage.

Co. ib. 202. b. 3
12 A. is bound to B. to pay 10 l. to C. A. tenders to C. Payment (...) stranger.
and he refuses, in this Case, the bond is forfeit; for it shall be imputed
the folly of A. to undertake to pay it to C. of whom he had no power, to compel
him to receive it.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 209. a. 2 Co. l. 6. 31. a. 2 in Bothies Ca
13 If a man be bound to A. in an obligation with condition to enfeoffe B. (who
is a mere stranger) before a day, Obligation with Condition to ense^
the obligor does offer to enfeoffe B. and he refuses, the obligation is for
the obligor has taken upon him to enfeoffe him, and his refusal cannot
satisfy the condition, because no feofment is made, but if the feofment had
been (by the condition) to be made to the obligee, or to any other for his
benefit or behoof; in such Case, a tender and refusal shall save the bond;
because he himself upon the matter is the cause, wherefore the Condition could
not be performed, and therefore shall not give himself cause of action so also
if A. be bound to B. with Condition, that C. shall enfeoffe D. In this Case, if
C. tender, and D. refuse, the obligation is saved for the obligor himself
undertaketh to do no act, but that a stranger shall enfeoffe a stranger, and in
such case it shall be intended, that the feofment should be made for the
benefit of the obligee.

Litt.. 340 Co. ib. 210. a. 4
14 If A. make feofment or be bound to B, with condition to pay 20 l. No place ^
payment.
at such a day, no place being limited for the payment thereof, here A. is
bound to seek B. (if he be in England) to make payment or tender thereof for
the law presumes that it was so intended when the feoffor or obligor does not
limit any place in certain for the payment thereof.

^^e thing in (...) of ano^^^r. ^atisfaction.
15 If feofment be made upon condition to pay money, Litt.. 344. Co. ib. 212. b.
4
and the feoffor pay to the feoffee an horse, a cup of silver, a gold-ring, or
the like, in full satisfaction of the money, and the other receive if, this
good enough, and as strong, as if he had received the sum of money, albeit such
horse, ringe, or other thing was not of the 20th part of the value of the
money: so also not only a thing in possession, but also a thing in action may
be taken in satisfaction of the money; for if the obligee or feoffee accept a
Statute or a bond in satisfaction of the money, it is a good satisfaction.

(...) good sa^isfaction.
16 Where the Condition is for 20 l. Co. Ibidem.
the obligor or feoffor cannot at the time appointed pay a lesser sum in
satisfaction of the whole, because it is apparent, that a lesser sum of money
cannot be a satisfaction of a greater, but if the feoffee or obligee do at the
day receive part, and thereof make an acquittance under his seal in full
satisfaction of the whole, it is sufficient, because the deed amounts to an
acquittance of the whole: So if the obligor or lessor pay a lesser sum, either
before the day, or at another place, then is limited by the Condition, and the
obligee or feoffee receives it, this is a good sstisfaction.

A Feme ac^^^^s ^n estate (...) life,
17 Where feofment is made upon Condition to give the land to the feoffor and
his wife and the heirs of their two bodies, Litt.. 352 Co. ib. 219. b. 4
the remainder to the right heirs of the feoffor in fee; In this Case (
Littleton says) if the feoffor die before such Estate made, the feoffee ought
to grant the land to the Feme for life without impeachment of waste, the
remainder to the heirs of the feoffor in fee, and yet here, if the Feme accept
of any Estate for life, without this clause, without impeachment of wast, it is
good.

Officers.
18 Officers that have no other profit, but a bare collateral fee, Co. ib. 233.
a. 4
may be discharged of their Offices and service, but yet they shall have their
fee; and where the fee issues out of the profits of the land the grantor cannot
discharge them of their service or attendance: but in all Cases, where the
Officer relinquisheth his Office, and refuses to attend, he loses his Office,
fee, profit, and all.

Acceptance of ^ent. services.
19 If there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant is disseised, Co. ib. 268. a. 4
and the cattle of the disseisee are taken: in this Case (by reason of the
privity betwixt the Lord and the disseisee) the disseisee may compel the Lord
to avow-upon him; yet here, if the Lord have before accepted the services of
the disseisor, the disseisee cannot enforce the Lord to avow upon him: So
likewise, where a man have title to have a writ of escheate, if afterward he
accept homage or fealty of the Tenant, ^^^heate:
he is barred of his writ of escheate: It is otherwise of acceptance of Rent,
(for that may be received by a Bailiffe) unless he avow for it in a Court of
Record: So likewise if the Lord accept the Rent by the hands of the heir of the
disseisor or of his feoffee, because they are in by title, this shall bar him
of his escheate: Howbeit concerning Avowries the ancient law is now altered by
the Statute of 21 H. 8. 19. which see, etc.

^^^ages lost.
20 If there be Lord and Tenant, Co. ib. 269. b. 3. and Co. l. 3. 65. b. 4.
Penuants Case.
and the Rent is behind by diverse years, and the Tenant make a feofment in
fee, if the Lord accept the service of Rent of the feoffee due in his time, he
shall lose the arrerages due in the time of the feoffor: for after such
acceptance he shall not avow upon the feoffor, nor upon the feoffee, for the
arrerages incurred in the time of the feoffor.

Disseisin of a ^ent.
21 A man cannot be disseised of a rent-service in gross, a rentcharge,
Littl.. 589. Co. ib. 323. b. 3
or a rent-secke by attornment or payment of such a rent to a stranger, but at
the Election of him, to whom such Rent is due: for, Nemo redditum alterius
invito domino praecipere aut possidere potest: yet if the disseisee bring an
Assise against such a pernor, or taker of such Rent, he does thereby admit
himself out of possession thereof; Nevertheless, a descent of a Rent in
gross binds not the right owner, but that he may distraine, albeit he
admitted himself out of possession, and determined his Election, as by
bringing an Assise, or the like.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 323. b. 4.
22 In Case of such Rents, Release to a stranger of such a rent.
if the Tenant give a Stranger any thing in name of Attornment, and then the
right owner release to the Stranger, such release is void, because an
attornment only can be no disseisin of such a Rent: but if the Tenant of the
Land pay the Rent to a Stranger, and then the right owner releaseth to him,
this release is good, because he thereby admitted himself to be out of
possession.

Co. ib. 332. b. 1
22 If Tenant in tail of a Rent-service, etc. or of a reversion, Tenant in
(...) barred by a Formedon.
or remainder in tail, etc. grant the same in fee with warranty, and leaves
assets in Fee-simple, and dies, this is neither bar nor discontinuance to
the issue in tail, but he may distraine for the Rent or service, or enter into
the land after the decease of the Tenant for life: but if the issue bring a
Formedon in descender, and thereby admit himself out of possession, he shall
be then barred by the warranty and assets. Co l. 3. 85. a In the Cases of Fines.

Co. ib. 344. a. 1 Hill. 1. Jac. Coram Rege, Rot. 601. inter Faire-childe
Plaintiff and Gayer Defendant in trespass.
24 A Church Parochial may be donative and exempt from all ordinary
jurisdiction, and the Incumbent may resign to the Patron, A Church, and^
donative made presentable.
and not to the Ordinary, neither can the ordinary visit but the Patron, by
Commissioners to be appointed by him, and (by Littletons Rules. 648.) the
Patron and Incumbent may charge the glebe, and although it be donative by a
Layman, yet mere Laicus is not capable of it, but an able Clerk infra sacros
ordines; for albeit he come in by lay donation, and not by admission or
institution, yet his function is spiritual, and if such a Clerk donative be
disturbed, the Patron shall have a Quare Impedit of this Church donative, and
the writ shall say, Quod permittat ipsum praesentare ad Ecclesiam* etc. and
declare the special matter in his declaration: And so it is also of a Prebend,
Chantery, Chapel, Donative, and the like, and no laps shall incur to the
Ordinary, except it be so specially provided in the foundation: Nevertheless*
if the Patron of such a Church, Chantery, Chapel, etc. Donative, does once
present to the Ordinary, and his Clerk is admitted and instituted, it is now
become presentable, and never shall be donative after, and then also laps shall
incur to the Ordinary, as it shall of other benefices presentable: but a
presentation of such a Donative by a Stranger, and admission and institution
thereupon, is merely void.

Co. ib. 367. a. 3
25 If the Tenant make a lease of the land to the Lord for years, Segniory
extinct.
or the Lord be Guardian of the Land, or have it by Statute or Elegit, and then
make feofment in fee thereof to a Stranger: Here, albeit as to the Lessor this
is a disseisin, yet hereby the Lord has extinguished his Seigniory.

Co. ib. 170 b. 1.
26 Husband and wife Tenants in special tail, Parcener^.
of certain land in fee have issue a Daughter, the wife dies, the husband by
a second wife has issue another Daughter, and dies, both the Daughters enter
(where the eldest is only inheritable) and make partition: in this case the
eldest daughter is concluded during her life to impeach the partition, or to
say that the youngest is not heir. So likewise I. S. seized of lands in fee
has issue two daughters, Rose bastard eigne, and Anne, mulier puisne, who
enter and make partition, in this Case, Anne and her heirs are concluded for
ever.

^^^dition to ^^le farther ^^ance, by a (...) not let^^d.
27 A. is bound with Condition that he and his son shall at any time after make
better assurance of land sold to B. B. tenders a writing unto them, the son
being not lettered destres time to be advised of it, Co. lib. 2. 3. b. Marsers
Case.
which being denied, he does not deliver it; In this Case, albeit a man
unlettered is favored in the Law, so as it is not his Act, if the writing be
not read unto him, or rightly expounded, although he deliver it; yet here,
because A. undertook that his son should do it, and no certain fine was
limited for the doing thereof, the bond in this case is forfeit, for the time
for doing of it was peremptory.

^^n not let^ed seals a ^ed.
28 A layman not lettered is not bound to deliver a deed, Co. lib. 2. 9.
Thorough-goods Case.
if there be not a person present, that can read or expound the deed to him in
such language as he understands, neither is he bound thereby, if it be read or
expounded to him in another manner, then the words and matter thereof import,
and it concerns the party, that should take it, to see that done, if the party
that should deliver it require the same; but if the party, that shall deliver
the writing require it not to be done, he shall be bound by the deed, although
it be indicted contrary to his meaning.

Copi-hold ^^rict.
29 The King grants a lease of lands held of him by Copy to A. who assigns to
the Copi-holder, Co. l. 2. 17. a. 4 Lanes Case.
the King grants the reversion in fee to B. the term for years expires: here,
the entry of B. is lawful; for by the acceptance of the assignment of the
term, the copi-hold is determined.

(...)-tenants ^y prejudice (...) another.
30 As to the profits of the frank-tenement one joint-tenant may prejudice
another; for there is a privity and trust betwixt them; Co. l. 2. 68. a. 3 per
Popham in Tookers Case.
and therefore if one of them take all the profits of the land, or all the
Rent, the other has no remedy; for the Law imputes it to his folly to join
himself in Estate with such a person, as will break his trust: So likewise if
there be two Lords and a Tenant of land holden by Knight Service, and the
Tenant die his heir within age: here, the Lords have Election either to seize
the Ward, or to distraine for the services, and so to waive the Ward, as it is
agreed in 1 E. 3. But in this Case if one of them seize the Ward, and the other
distraine for the services, he that first seiseth or distraines shall bind the
other.

^e^^ent upon Condition ^^en.
31 If A. enfeoffe B. of a Manor with an Advowson appendant upon Condition,
that A. shall grant B. the Advowson during his life A. dies before he grants
it: In this Case, the Condition is broken: For when the feoffee or grantee upon
Condition is to make an Estate to the feoffor or grantor and no time is limited
for the doing thereof, regularly it is true, that the feoffee has time to do
it during his life, if the feoffor or grantor do not hasten it by request, for
upon request and a day or time limited, when he will have it done, the feoffee
or grantee ought to do it accordingly; but if no Request be made, and the
feoffee or grantee, who ought to perform the Condition, die, in this Case the
Condition is broken: for he has not performed the Condition within the time
prescribed to him by the Law, which was during his life. But this general Rule
admits some exceptions, which nevertheless are agreeable to this Maxim, for
in this Case of an Advowson A. has not time during his life, albeit no request
be made, but also upon this contingent, viz. if no avoydance fall in the mean
time; for if the grantee stay until an avoydance fall, then ipso facto the
Condition is broken; for then B. cannot have the whole effect, that by the
re-grant he ought to have, because that is, to have all the presentations
during his life, and the Advowson is become in another plight, then it was in
before: So if A. enfeoffe B. the 1 of May upon condition that he shall grant to
B. an Annuity or Rent during his life payable yearly at Mich. and La. da. in
this Case the feoffee has not time during his life to make this grant, but
ought to do it before Mich. for otherwise he shall not have the Annuity or Rent
during his life, and it may be collected upon the Book of 14 E. 3. tit. Debt
138. that in Case of the grant of a rent he shall not have time during his
life: Likewise if two not married be enfeoffed upon Condition to re-enfeoffe
the Donor or feoffor, etc. and one of them die: yet the other may perform the
Condition; but if he that survives has a wife, then is the Condition broken:
for if he made the re-enfeofment, yet shall his wife be endowed: And in all
these Cases and the like the Law imputes it to the Laches and folly of the
grantee, that he will not perform the Condition, while he may, and believes
against him these and the like things done to his own prejudice.

Co. l. 3. 65. b. 2. in Penuants Case.
32 If he, that has a Rent-service or Rent-secke, ^cquittance the last Rent.
accept the Rent due at the last day, and thereof make an acquittance, all the
arrearages due before are thereby discharged, and so it was adjudged betwixt
Hopkins and Merton in that Common Place, H. Rot. 950. Vide 10 El. Dier 271. But
there the Case is left at large; with this also agrees 11 H. 4. 24. and 1 H. 5,
7, 6. But note, that the bar to the avowrie ought to be with conclusion of
judgment, Si encounter cest fait d'acquittance il doit fair Avowry, as
appears by the Record of 10 El. and he ought not to demand judgment si action.

Co. ib. 66. a. 4.
33 If there be Lord and Tenant by Knight Service, A extance shall lose the ward.
and the Tenant enfeoffe his son and heir within age by Collusion: In this
Case, if the Lord accept the services by the hands of the feoffee, he shall
lose the ward; for the Statute of Malbridge cap. 6. making such feofment by
Collusion void and of no effect as to the Lord, if the Lord will affirm the
feofment and waive the benefit of that act by acceptance of the feoffee for his
Tenant, he shall thereby purge the collusion, and therefore deserves to lose
the ward.

Co. l 4. 1. a. and 2 b. 4. Vernous Case.
34 B. enfeoffes to the use of himself for life, jointure in hew of dower.
remainder to his wife for life, with Condition to perform his last will and
for her jointure, and dies, the wife enters, agrees to it, and after brings her
writ of dower; In this Case, if after the death of the husband the wife accept
of that conditional Estate, such acceptance shall bar her from having dower:
for albeit dower at the Common Law (in liew whereof a jointure is granted) be
an absolute Estate for life, yet in as much as an Estate for life upon
Condition is an Estate for life, it is within the words and intent of the
Statute of 27 H. 8. 10. to bar the wife of her dower, if after the death of
her husband she accept thereof: So if the husband enfeoffe to the use of
himself for life, the remainder to the use of his wife durante viduitate for
her jointure, this is an Estate to her for life, and cannot determine without
her own Act, and therefore a jointure also within the Statute, if after the
husbands death she accept thereof.

Co. l. 4: 9. b. 2. in Bevils Ca.
35 If there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and Rent, Rent-service made Rent-secke.
and the Lord grant over the fealty saving the Rent, or if a man make a gift in
tail or lease for life rendering Rent, and grant over the reversion, except the
Rent, in these Cases, the nature of the Rent, is altered by the parties own
Act: and therefore the ancient seisin, when it was Rent-service, will not in
such case suffice because by his own act the nature of the Rent is changed,
neither can he have for it an Assise as of a Rent-secke, because he was never
seized of any such Rent.

Co. l. 4. 11. b 2. in Bevils Ca.
36 If there be Lord and Tenant by fealty and two shillings Rent, Rent by
incroachment.
and the Lord by encroachment ( viz. by the voluntary payment) of the Tenant)
happens seisin of more Rent, then he ought to have, the Tenant shall not (in
avowry) avoid such seisin had by accroachment, unless it be in some special
Cases, which see ubi supra.

^^^ges ir^^^able.
37 If A. has Rent-service or Rentcharge in fee or for life; Co. l. 4. 50. b.
4. in Andrew Ogwels Case.
and the Rent is arreare, and after A. grants over the Rent to another, and the
Tenant attornes, and after A. dies, his Executors are not within the branch of
the Statute of 32 H. 8. 37. which gives power to Executors, etc. to recover
Debt due to the Testator at the time of his death, for by the grant over the
arrecages were lost, and were not due to the Testator at the time of his death:
And therefore when the Testator by his own Act in his life time had dispensed
with the arrerages, the said Act gives no remedy to recover them.

^il revol^ by ma^e.
38 If a Feme sole make a Will, and after take Baron, Co. l. 4. 61. a. 4. in
Forse and Hemblings ca.
this is a revocation thereof; for the making of a Will is but the Inception
thereof, and it takes not any effect, until the death of the Devisor: because
omne Testamentum morte consummatum est, and voluntas est ambulatoria, usque ad
extremum vitae exitum. And therefore it being no perfect Will when she takes
Husband, and after marriage her Will being her Husbands and subject to it, by
taking Husband she has wholly revoked the Will formerly made.

^^vise, ^y. ^^^nder.
39 A. devises Land to B. till 800 l. be raised for the preferment of his
daughters A. dies, C. being heir conceales the Will, Co. l 4. 82. b. 3. Sir
Andrew Corbets Case.
and enters: In this Case, B. shall have allowance for the time, that the Will
was concealed, and that time shall not be accounted parcel of the time for the
levying of the money: But if B. had surrendered to C. upon Condition, and had
entered for the Condition broken, Co. l. 5. 13. b. 3. in the Countess of
Shrewesberies ca.
that should have been accounted parcel of the time, for that was his own Act.

(...)
40 At the Common Law (before the Statute of Gloucester cap. 5. 6 E. 1.) no
remedy lay for waste (either voluntary or permissive) against Lessee for life
or years, because the Lessee has Interest in the Land by the Act of the
Lessor, and it was his folly to make such a lease, and not to restrain him (by
covenant, condition, or otherwise) from making waste: And for the same reason
it is, that at this day Tenant at will shall not be punished for permissive
waste: but for voluntary waste, he may according to Littleton fol. 15.

(...). ^^^der.
41 A. demiseth the Manor of D. to B. for 30 years, Co. lib. 5^ 11. Ives Case.
except the under wood growing upon it, and after demiseth the underwood to him
for 62 years without impeachment of waste, afterward B. accepts a lease of 30
years of the Manor after the exspiration of the first 30 years; In this
Case, because the demise of the underwood did not sever it from the Manor (the
entire franktenement notwithstanding such demise remaining still in the Lessor)
by his acceptance of the last lease for 30 years the former two leases were
surrendered, and so (by consequent) if afterward the Lessee commit waste, he is
subject to an Action for it.

^^gation.
42 If a man be bound to make another before such a time such a release, as the
Judge of the Prerogative Court shall devise and appoint: Co. l. 52. b. 3. Lambs
Case.
In this Case, if the Obligor do not only the first Act, but likewise procure
the Judge to devise and direct the release before the time limited, the bond is
forfeit; for in as much as the Judge is a stranger to the Condition, and the
Condition is for the benefit of the Obligor, and the performance thereof shall
have his obligation, he has undertaken to perform it at his peril.

^^tion.
43 If a man be bound to make to another a sufficient and lawful Estate in
certain Land by the advice of I. D. Co. ibidem.
If he make an Estate to him according to the advice of I. D. be it sufficient
or not, or lawful or not lawful, yet he saves the Obligation: for if it be in
sufficient or unlawful, the Obligee may thank himself, to make choice of such
a man, as could give no better direction. Fuit dit.

Co. l. 5. 33. b. 4. in Reads ca.
44 If after the death of a man, Execution (...) his own wrong.
none takes upon him to be his Executor, or if he died intestate, none takes
out letters of administration; In such Case, if a stranger use the goods of the
dead, or takes them into his possession, which is the office of an Executor or
Administrator, such stranger may be charged as Executor of his own wrong; For
the Creditors of the dead person have not in such Case any other, Co. ibid. 34.
a.
against whom they may bring their actions for the recovery of their debts, or
albeit there be an Executor that Administers, yet if the stranger take the
goods, and claiming to be Executor pays debts, and receives debts, or pays
Legacies, and inter-medle as Executor, in such Case also by such express
Administration as Executor, he may be charged as Executor of his own wrong.
Vide Dier 166. 10. 1. El.

Co. l. 5. ii5. a. 3 in Wades Ca.
45 If the Lessor demands Rent of his Lessee according to the Condition of
re-entry, and the Lessee pay the Rent to the Lessor, Acceptance counterfeit
money.
and he receives it and put in his purse or pocket, and after upon reviewing
thereof at the same time, he finds amongst the money, that he had received some
counterfeit pieces, and thereupon refuses to carry away the money, but
reenters for the Condition broken: In such Case, it is said it was adjudged
betwixt one Vane and Studley, that the entry was not lawful, for when the
Lessor had once received the money, it was at his peril, and after such
allowance, he shall not take exception to it.

Co. lib. 5. 116. ^. 3. Olands Case.
46 A Feme Copi-holder of certain land, durante viduitate sua, Grain sow^
Durante viduitate.
according to the Custom of the Manor sowes the Land, and before the
severance of the grain takes Baron: In this Case the Lord shall have the
grain: For albeit at the time of sowing the grain, the Estate of his wife was
uncertain, and although her Estate determined by limitation, and not by
condition, either in deed (as in Case of re-entry) or in Law (as by forfeiture)
yet because it determined by the Act of the Lessee her self, the Lord shall
have the grain and not the Baron: So if a Feme seized of land (durante
viduitate sua) make a lease for years, and the Lessee sow the land, and after
the Feme, that made the lease, takes Baron; here, the Lessee shall not have the
grain: for albeit his Estate is determined by the Act of a stranger, yet he
shall not be (as to the Lessor) in a better Case, then his lessor was, and the
law imputes it to his folly to depend upon so fickle a thing as the will of a
woman, especially, in point of marriage.

Co. ib. a. 4.
47 If Tenant at will sow the land, Tenant at will sowes grain.
and after the will is determinned, the Lessee shall have the grain, but if
the lessee himself determine the will before the severance of the grain, he
shall not have them; because he has determined his Interest by his own Act: So
if Lessor at will be outlawed, whereby the will is determined; In this Case,
the King shall have the profits, and the Lessee shall enjoy the grain: but if
Lessee at will be outlawed, whereby the will is determined, in such Case the
King shall have the grain. Vide 9 H. 6. 20, and 21. and Dier 173. 15.

Co. ib. b. 1.
48 If a lease be made to Baron and Feme during the coverture, Grain sow^
divorce.
and the Baron sow the land, and after they are divorced, causa praecontractus,
the Baron shall have the grain and not the Lessor: for albeit the suite is the
Act of the party, yet the sentence, which dissolves the marriage, is the
judgment of law, Et judicium redditur in invitum, but if a lease be made to
one until he make waste, and he sow the grain, Waste.
and after make waste, he shall not have the grain. Vide Max. 30. 34.

^^faction of ^^bt by deed
49 In Debt upon an Obligation of 10 l. the Plaintiff pleades, Co. l. 5 117. b.
2 Pinnels Case.
that one F. was bound by the same Deed with him, and each of them in the
whole, and that the Plaintiff made an acquittance to F. bearing date before
the obligation, but delivered after, by which acquittance he acknowledged
himself to be paid 20 s. in full satisfaction of the 10 l. and this was
adjudged a good bar; for if a man will acknowledge himself to be satisfied
by Deed, this is a good bar without receiving any thing. Vide 36 H. 6. Bar
17. 12 R. 2. Bar 243. and 10 H. 7. Yet payment of a less sum in satisfaction
of a greater is not good satisfaction, because a lesser sum can by no
possibility be satisfaction for a greater.

^^re service, ^^tiplied, ^^^ct.
50 If one hold his land of his Lord by an entire annual service, Co. l. 6. 1.
b. 3. in Bruertons Case.
as a Spur, Horse, or the like, and after sels parcel thereof to another, in
this Case the alienee shall hold by the same entire service, because such
entire service cannot be apportioned, and the land is severed by his own Act:
So also if in such Case the Lord purchase parcel of the tenancy, such entire
services are gone, in like manner as if the Lord had released his Seigniory in
part of the tenancy; because he has discharged part of the land by his own Act.

^^rneys ac^^nts.
51 When a writ abates by default of the Clerk, Co. l. 6. 10. a. 2 in Spencers
Case.
as for false Latin, variance, or want of form, or else by the Sheriffs
fault, for want of good summons, in such Cases the Demandant shall have the
benefit of a new writ by Journeys accounts; but if the first writ abate by the
default of the Demandant himself, as by his mis-infirmation of the name of the
Tenant, or of the Town, etc. there the Demandant shall never have a writ by
Journeys accounts. Vide Dier 55. 7. 34, and 35 H. 8.

(...) tenants. ^^land re^^ns charg^
52 If there be two joint-tenants in Fee, Co. l. 9. 79. a. 2 in the Lord of
Abergavenies Case.
and one of them grants a Rentcharge in Fee, and after releaseth to the other:
In this Case, albeit to some intent he, to whom the release is made, is in by
the first Feoffor, and no degree is made betwixt them, yet as to the grantee of
the Rentcharge, he is in under the joint-tenant, that releaseth, and he, that
survives, shall not avoid it after the death of him, that releaseth, for he
that survives by acceptance of the release has deprived himself of the way
and mean to avoid the charge; because Jus accrescendi (the right survivorship)
was the sole mean to avoid it, and that right is taken away by the release.

(...) impedit (...).
53 If a Quare Impedit within the six months abate for false Latin,
insufficiency of form, Co. l. 7. 27. b. in Sir Hugh Portmans Ca.
or mis-naming of the Plaintiff or Defendant (if the Plaintiff confess it)
the Defendant shall not have a writ to the Bishop but the Plaintiff may have a
new writ of Quare Impedit, for that may be the Clerks fault; Howbeit, in such
Case, if the Plaintiff be nonsuit after appearance, discontinue his suit, or
be made Knight, hanging the writ, these are peremptory, and thereupon the writ
shall abate, and the Plaintiff shall not have a new writ, because they are
done by his own Act: and in such Cases the Defendant shall have a writ to the
Bishop, etc.

(...) obligation ^erform an ^^rament (...).
54 If a man be by bound obligation with Condition to stand to an Arbitrament to
be made before Michaelmas, and before Mich. Co. l. 8. 82. b. 4 Vinyors Case
he discharges the Arbitrator to meddle with it: in this Case, albeit the
obligor may by such discharge retract the power so given to the Arbitrator, so
as no Arbitrament may be made, yet the obligation is forfeit and is single
without a condition, because the obligor by his own act has made the Condition
of the obligation (which was indorsed for his own benefit, viz. to save him
from the penalty of the obligation) impossible to be performed, and (by
consequence) the obligation is become single, and without the benefit or aid
of any Condition, for that he has disabled himself to perform it: In like
manner, if one be bound in an Obligation with Condition, that the Obligor shall
give license to the Obligee by the space of 7 years to carry wood, etc. In
this Case also, albeit he give him license, yet if he afterward within the 7
years countermand it, or discharge the Obligee, the Obligation is forfeit.

Co. l. 8. 92. b. 3 in Frances ca.
55 If a man be bound in an Obligation to observe the arbitrament of I. S. and
I. S. makes the arbitrament. In this Case, The like.
if the Obligor neglects to inquire after it to know whether I. S. has made an
arbitrament or no, and for want of such inquiry omits to perform it, the
Obligation is forfeit; for the Obligor ought to take notice thereof at his
peril, because he has bound himself to it, and in such Case no notice is
requisite to be given unto him, as it is held in 1 H. 7. 5.

Ibidem b. 4.
56 If a man be bound upon Condition to account before an Auditor to be assigned
by the Obligee, when he shall be required thereunto, Obligation (...) perform
a^ account.
and to pay the arrerages found upon such account: In Debt brought upon such an
Obligation the Obligor shall at his peril take notice of the arrerages found
before the Auditor: for he having bound himself to satisfy them, shall also
(without notice) inquire after them to know what they are, because he has
bound himself to it, and if he do not his Obligation for such neglect is
forfeit: And so it was adjudged per Curiam in 18 E. 4. 18, and 24. And there
Brian, Vavasor, and Catesby, Justices agreed it for Law; and said it had been
formerly so adjudged in the B. R.

Co. l. 8. 136. a 1 in Sir John Nedhams Ca.
57 A Commission of Administration granted by the Bishop to the Obligor shall
not extinguish the Debt, but the Debt shall remain: Obligation released by
making the Obligor Exe^cutor, etc.
Howbeit if the Obligee make the Obligor his Executor, this is a release in Law
of the Debt, because it is the Act of the Obligee himself, and with this
accords 8 E. 4. 3. and 21 E 4. 2. b. So likewise, if a Feme obligee take the
obligor or one of the obligors to husband, this is a release in Law of the
debt, because it is by the Act of the obligee her self, and with this accords
11 H. Co l. 9, 10. a. 3. Dowmans Ca.
7. 4. and 21 H. 7. 29.

58 If a recovery be suffered without consideration or limiting to what uses,
it shall enure to the use of the recovery and his heirs; A subsequent Indenture
may limit use of a precede^ recovery.
nevertheless the recoveree may afterward by a subsequent indenture direct
other uses thereof, and that shall enure by way of estopel against the
recoveree and his heirs: for, albeit by such a recovery the use is vested in
the recoveree, yet such a declaration by a subseqvent indenture, shall divest
it, because the covenant thereof is the recoverees own Act.

Co. l. 9. 18. a. 3. Anne Bedingf^ilds Case.
59 In a writ of Dower the heir of the Baron may plead detainer of the
evidences, Dower, deta^ ^ner of Cha^ters.
howbeit if the heir have delivered the charters to the Feme he shall not
plead detainment thereof: because the Feme has them by his own Act.

Co. l. 9. 39. b. 1 Hensloes Ca.
60 The Ordinary or his Deputies or Commissaries may seize the goods of the
person deceased without being questioned for the same: An Ordina^ sued.
yet if they meddled with the goods and paid not Debts, an action lay against
them at the Common Law before the Statute of Westminster. 2. 19. which (indeed) is
nothing else but an affirmance of the Common Law.

Co. l. 11. 5. b. 3. in Sir John Heydons Case.
61 In Trespass against two, In Trespass (...) the Plai^^^ confession the writ
abates*
if the Jurors find one guilty at one time, and the other at another time,
there several damages may be taxed: but if the Plaintiff himself confess,
that they committed the Trespass severally, there the writ shall abate: and so
observe the diverstty betwixt the finding of a Jury, and the confession of the
party, because this is his own Act, but that the Act of the Jurors.

F. N. B. 11. c.
62 If there be Lord and Tenant, Distress for more Rent, then is due
justifiable.
and the Tenant pays the Lord a greater Rent, then is due to him, and that
voluntarily without cohersion of distress: here, the Lord having gained seisin
of so much Rent, may distraine the Tenant for such surplussage of Rent, and the
Tenant cannot avoid the Lord in his avowry, because of the seisin, which the
Lord had of so much Rent: Howbeit he may have remedy by the writ of Ne injuste
vepes, grounded upon the Statute of Magna Carta cap. 10. but before that
Statute he had no remedy, as it seems.

(...) none by ^^ance.
63 In a writ of Entry sur disseisin, F.N.B. 21. c
if the original writ wants these words, Quam clamat esse Jus and haereditatem
suam, it is error, yet if the Tenant admit the writ, and pleads to the action
and loses, he shall not assign this default in the writ for error, because he
has admitted the writ by his plea: So likewise in a writ of detinue of
Charters, if the Plaintiff in his Count declare not the certainty of the land,
it is a just cause of error; yet if the defendant admit the Count good and
pleads to the Action and loses by judgment in a writ of error sued by him, he
shall not Assign this default in the Count for error, because he has admitted
it for good by his Plea: Tamen quaere.

^esentment ^ an Advow^.
64 A man may have an Assise of darrein presentment, F. N. B. 13. q. l.
albeit neither he nor his Ancestors presented to the last avoidance; As if
Tenant for life or years, or in Dower or by the courtesy suffer an usurpation
to the Church, etc. and die, he in reversion, that is heir to the Ancestor,
that last presented shall have an Assise of darrein presentment, if he be
disturbed; But if a man presents and after grants the Advowson for life to
another, who suffers an usurpation (or two, or three usurpations) and dies; In
this Case, at the next avoidance he in the reversion shall not have an Assise
of darrein presentment, if he be disturbed to present, because the Lessee was
in by his own Act: Howbeit his heir may have it, but that is by the provision
of West. 2. cap. 5. So likewise if a man present to an Advowson, and after let
if for term of years, and then the Church becomes void, and the Tenant for
years presents, and after the Incumbent dies; and the Lessor presents and is
disturbed; in this Case it seems the Lessor shall not have an Assise of
darrein presentment, causa qua supra: And the termer for years presented in his
own right.

^^^ative.
65 If a man has a Chapel or Chantery Donative, F.N.B. 35. e.
and he presents once to the Ordinary his Clerk to that Chapel or Chantery;
In this Case, he shall never make Collation afterward, but he ought to present
to the Bishop, and if he present not within six months, the Ordinary shall
have advantage of the lapss.

(...) utrum.
66 If a Parson receive Rent or fealty of the Tenant for the land aliened by his
Predecessor, he shall not have a juris utrum during his life, F.N.B. 50. e.
but his Successor may have it.

Recognisance ^^charged.
67 If the Recognisor enfeoffe a stranger of one parcel of the land charged, and
likewise enfeoffe the Recognisee of another parcel thereof, F.N.B. 104. n. and
105. e.
and afterward the Recognisee sues execution against the Recognisor and the
other feoffee; In this Case, the feoffee shall have an Audita quaerela against
the Recognisee, and thereby discharge his land, because the Recognisee has
discharged his parcel of the land by his own Act.

^ warrantia ^^; and ^^cher.
68 If a man be impleaded in any Action, F.N.B. 134. i.
in which he may vouch the party, against whom he has a warranty, in such
Case, he shall not have a warrantia cartae against him, but he ought to vouch
him to warranty, and if he vouch him not in such Action, he shall never after
have any action of warrantia cartae against him to maintain his title.

F. N B. 142. k.
69 If there Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant make feofment by collusion, and the
Lord accept the services of the feoffee: In this Case, Wardship. Collusion.
the Lord shall not afterward have the wardship of the Tenants heir, nor
aver the Collusion.

F. N. B. 144. 0.
70 If a man be entitled to have a writ of Escheate, Acceptance bars. Escheate.
and he accepts the homage of the Tenant; in this Case, he shall not have a
writ of Escheate against him afterward, because he has accepted him for his
Tenant; So also it seems reasonable, if he accept fealty of him, that in such
Case also he shall not have a writ of Escheate: Howbeit, it is not so of Rent;
because the former are solemn services, which the law respects more then Rent.
Vide supra Max. 91. Pl. 19.

Pl. Co. 66. a. 2. in Dive and Maninghams Case.
71 When a man demurres, he is to do it generally, Pleading an^ special demu^
and not upon any special matter; for otherwise he is tied up to that special
matter, and cannot take advantage of any other error or default in the
declaration or other pleading: And therefore in Dive and Maninghams Case in the
Commentaries, where the Defendant concludes, unde ex quo scriptum praedictum
non fuit factum sub tale condition, quali per Statutum fieri deberet, and
petit judicium. Here, this special conclusion has so straightned the
Defendant, that if the obligation were void for any other cause, then what is
mentioned in the conclusion, the Defendant could not have benefit thereof by
Order of Law: So also in 34 H. 6. (which is there also quoted) where one
devises a reversion of a Tenant for life to another in fee, per nomen omnium
terrarum and tenementorum, quae in manibus le Devisor ad tunc fuerunt, and the
heir of the Devisee brings an Action of waste, reciting in his count the
special grant, ut supra. And the Defendant says, ex quo pro narrationem
praedictam apparet, that the Devisor did not devise the reversion, but by the
words, ut supra, and the Tenant for life then held the tenements, and that
nothing of the reversion by the general words passes to the Devisee, and so he
demands judgment, etc. And thereupon the Plaintiff also demurred: And there
it was held, that in as much as the Defendant had demurred in a point in
special, and has rehearsed the cause of his demurrer, that if there were any
other matter in the declaration, whereof the Defendant might have advantage, he
could not take any benefit or advantage thereof.

Pl. Co. 84 b. 3. in Partridge, and Strange, and Crokers Case.
72 In a count or declaration, if the Plaintiff recite a Statute, Count aba^^
by mis-rec^^
which he needs not do (being a general Statute, whereof the Justices are bound
to take conusance) in such Case, if he mis-recite it (as in the date or
otherwise) his count shall abate; for though it was not requisite to recite it,
yet he making use thereof by way of recital, he ought to recite it as in truth
it is; because then he has grounded his action upon the Statute by him
recited, where it appears to the Court Iudicially, that there was no such
Statute at that time, and so he has abated his count by his own showing; etc.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 207. a. 2.
73 If feofment be made upon Condition, Tender and refusal.
that the feoffor shall pay a certain sum of money at such a day, etc. if
tender of the money be made accordingly, and the feoffee refuse to receive it,
by this the feoffor and his heirs may enter, etc. And then the feoffee is
without remedy to recover the money at the Common Law; because it was his
folly, that he would not receive it, when he might: So if an obligation of 100
l. be made with Condition for the payment of 50 l. at a day, etc. and at the
day, the obligor tender the money, and the obligee refuse it: In this Case,
albeit in an Action of Debt upon the obligation the 50 l. may be received,
because it is still a duty and parcel of the obligation, and the obligee has
remedy by Law for the same, according to the Rule; Liberata pecunia non liberat
ofterendum; yet if the Defendant plead the tender and refusal (wherein he must
also say, uncore prist, and tender the money in Court (if the Plaintiff will
not then receive it, but take issue upon the tender, and the same be found
against him, he has lost the money for ever, because he has made two
refusals, when he might have had it.

^cceptance of ^ent.
74 C. purchases a Copi-hold of A. to him his wife and their child for their
lives, Dier 30. 207. 28 H. 8.
A. lets the franck-tenement of the soil by Deed indented to B. for his life
reserving Rent, and livery and seisin is made accordingly: Afterward A. levies
a fine sur conusance de droit come ceo, etc. to C. of the same land, and C.
accepts the Rent of B. In this Case it seems, that by the acceptance of the
Rent of B. the Copihold of C. is gone; So if a Disseisor make a lease for life
reserving Rent, and after grant the reversion to the Disseisee, and he accept
the Rent of the Lessee, he shall never after oust him; Quod fuit concessum per
quosdam.

^^^viledge.
75 One of the Clerks of the Chancery was sued in the C. B. and process
continued till the exigent, Dier 3 3. 18. 28, and 29 H. 8.
and the Defendant (who was the Clerk) sues a supersedeas to the Sheriff,
quia improvide, and after he sues a writ of privilege out of the Chancery
directed to the Justices of the B. reciting the privilege of Chancery and
requires the Justices to surcease: In this Case, the privilege was dis-allowed
and the Clerk put to answer, because the Court was lawfully seized of the plea
by the Act of the Defendant himself: for in as much as he sued out the
supersedeas quia improvide, he thereby affirmed the jurisdiction of the Court
for that every, supersedeas quia improvide recites the Defendants appearance in
Court by an Attorney, and names him, and therefore it was his own default: But
if he had sued such a writ (notwithstanding the exigent) the privilege had
been allowed him, and then after the writ of privilege come to the Justices,
they ought to have sent a special supersedeas to the Sheriff of the Out-lawry,
reciting the privilege: And this resolution agreed with Presidents showed in
Court.

Do^er imper^^ plea.
76 In Dower, the issue was Ne unque seisie que Dower luy puit, Dier 41. 1. 30
H. 8.
and a Deed of feofment made unto the Baron was by the Demandant given in
evidence to the inquest, and produced in Court; whereunto it was answered, that
before the feofment the Baron was seized of land to him and his former wife in
special tail, and that after he made discontinuance, and re-took the Estate in
fee by the feofment aforesaid, and of such Estate died seized, whereby the
heir, who is Tenant in tail, is remitted, and therefore the second Feme could
not be endowed; in this Case, albeit the matter alleged might have a voided
the Dower, if it had been specially pleaded, yet here the issue being only ne
unque seisie, etc. the Justices were of opinion, that the Jury ought to find
for the Demandant, etc.

se^is.
77 If A. plant Conies in his own ground, which increase to such a number, that
they destroy the land of B. next adjoining; Co. l. 5. 104. b. Boulstones Ca.
in this case, B. cannot have an action upon the case for the damage he
sustains by them; for the property of them remains no longer in A. then they
remain within his Warren, and when they come upon the land of B. he may
lawfully kill them, because then they are his if he can catch them, and it is
his own fault, if he do not take them.

(...) to be of ^ounsel in a ^s own ^^^se.
78 This Maxim teaches us, Co. Inst. p. 1. 377. b. 4.
that it is not safe for any man (be he never so learned) to be of Counsel with
himself in his own Case, but to take advice of other learned men, and the
rather because the phisautia and self-opinion, which is in man by nature, so
obscures his understanding, that he can hardly give a right judgment of
things, that concern himself Non prosunt dominis, quae prosunt omnibus arts;
and in suo quisque negotio habitior est, quam in aliena: And therefore in the
new inventions of Justice Richel (an Irishman) in R. 2. time, and of Thirming
in H. 4. time, Litt.. 720.
time, there were found many imperfections, and Richel was overthrown in an
Action upon the Case by his own showing in 2 H. 4. fol. 11. vide Co. l. 1. 88.
a. 2. in Corbets Case.

Dier 69. b. 36 5 E. 6.
79 A man enfeoffs two upon Condition, A Condition severable.
that the feoffees before a certain day shall make an Estate again to the
Feoffor for term of his life, the remainder over in fee to a stranger, one of
the feoffees makes an Estate accordingly; in this Case, albeit the Condition
was entire, yet it was conceived by many, that it is good for the moity,
because the party to the Condition has dispensed with the Condition by his
acceptance of the Estate.

Dier 140. Pl. 43. 3, 4 P. M.
80 If Lessee for years by indenture accept of another lease (though it be but
by parol) to begin immediately, A surrender Law.
this is a surrender in Law of his first lease, because by his acceptance of
the last lease, he admits himself out of possession, and that the Lessor has
lawful power to demise him a new one. Vide Dier 279. 11.

Dier 144. 57. etc. 3, 4 P. M.
81 The Statutes of 27 E. 3. 8. and 28 E. 3. 13. of the Staple were made for the
benefit and in favorem alienigenarum for trials per medietatem linguae, yet if
an Alien be Plaintiff, Trial per (...) dietatem li^gua.
and omit the advantage of requesting it, whereupon a general venire facias
issues out and is returned, some say, that thereby he has slipped his time, and
that the Judges are not bound ex officio to award any such special writ by
reason of the said Statute, for it appears not unto them by the Record, quod
una pars sit alienigena, and by the Common Law the trial was by all English:
Howbeit Treason shall not be tried per medietatem linguae.

Dier 158. Pl. 32. 4, 5 P. M.
82 If a Guest come to a Common Inn to lodge there, A Guest robbed.
and the Host says, that his house is already full of Guests, and is not
willing to admit him, and the Guest says, that he will make shift amongst the
other Guests, and is there robbed of his goods; in such Case the host shall not
be charged therewith, because he refused him, but the Guest shall bear the
loss himself. Vide Dier 266, 9.

Dier 164. 57. 4, 5 P. M.
83 If a man has goods to value of 100 l. and is in Debt 20 l. and by his will
gives his wife the moity of all his goods, Goods bequeathed.
to be equally divided betwixt her and his Executors, and then he makes
Executors and dies; in this Case, if the Executors discharge the Debt to the
Creditor by sale or other satisfaction out of the goods themselves, the Feme
shall have only the moity of the residue, viz. 40 l. but if they pay the Debt
by their own money, the Feme shall have the moity of all the goods viz. to the
value of 50 l. so as the Executors have assets.

Dier 200. 62. 3 Eliz.
84 The King demiseth a Message rendering Rent, Surrender.
and afterward the lessee takes a patent of the office of the keeping of the
said house, this seems to be a surrender in law of the lease.

Dier 226. 40. 6 Eliz.
85 In an Ejectione firmae against two, Ejectione ^^mae.
one appears and pleads the general issue, and process is continued against
the other: who also appears, and pleads entry of the Plaintiff into the land
since the last continuance, in abatement of the writ, whereupon the Plaintiff
demurres; afterward the issue above was found for the Plaintiff, yet he shall
not have judgment; for by the demurrer he has confessed the entry, which
abates his own writ.

Dier 261. 28. 9 Eliz.
86 The rasing of a lease in any place (though not material) by the lessee
himself makes the lease void. Rasing.


Hob. 119. Wood and Budden
87 In Trespass in 8 acres of Pasture in Tollard Royal, Trespass.
the Defendant pleads, that W. E. of Salisbury was seized of Cranborne Chase,
And so prescribed in liberty of Chase, and that the said Chase did extend it
self as well in and thorough the said 8 acres, as the said Town of Tollard
Royal, and ^ustifies the Trespass for use of the chase: The Plaintiff
maintains his declaration, and traverseth, that the Chase extends not it self
as well to the 8 Acres, as to the whole Town; And this issue being found for
the Plaintiff, it was moved in arrest of judgment, that this issue and Verdict
were faulty, because if the Chase did extend to the 8 Acres only, it was
enough for the Defendant, and therefore the finding of the Jury, that it did
not extend as well to the whole Town, as to the 8 Acres, did not conclude
against the Defendants right in the 8 Acres, which was only in question: But
it was answered by the Court, that there was no fault in the issue, much less
in the Verdict, which was according to the issue; but the fault was in the
Defendants plea, who takes the exception, for he put in his plea more thou he
needed, viz. the whole Town, which being to his own dis-advantage, and to the
advantage of the Plaintiff, there was no reason for the Plaintiff to demurre
upon it, but rather to admit as he did, and so to put it in issue: And so
judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

118 When several remedies are given, the party, to whom the Law gives them,
has thereby also election given him to take which he will.
^ writ of an^^y or ^l^^se.
1 If a man grant by his deed a Rentcharge to another, Litt.. 219. Co. Inst. p.
1. 145. a. 1.
and the Rent is arrere, the grantee may choose, whether he will sue a writ of
Annuity, or distraine for the Rent arrere: but in this Case he shall but choose
once; for if he recover in a writ of Annuity, he shall never after distraine,
or if the distrain^ and avow in Court of Record, he shall never after bring a
writ of Annuity; because an avowry in a Court of Record, being in nature of an
Action, Co. ib. 145. b. 4.
is a determination of his election before any judgment given. Electio semel
facta and placitum testatum non patitur regressum.
Quod semel placuit in electionibus amplius displicere non potest.


^ction of ^^at or (...).
So if a Rentcharge be granted to A. and B. and their heirs, Co. ib. 146. a. 1
A. distraineth the Beasts of the grantor: who sueth a replevin, A. avoweth for
himself and makes conusance for B. A. dies and B. surviveth: Here, B. shall
not have a writ of Annuity; for in that Case, the Election and avowry for the
Rent of A. bar^eth B. of his election to make it an Annuity, albeit he assented
not to the avowry. And here, is a diversity to be observed between the Case
abovesaid where the grantee makes it either real or personal at his Election,
real, when he distraines, or personal, when he brings his writ of Annuity, and
where a man may have Election to have several remedies for a thing that is
merely personal or merely real from the beginning: As if a man may have an
Action of account or an Action of Debt at his pleasure, and he brings an
Action of account, and appear to it, and after is nonsuit, yet may he have an
Action of debt afterward, because both actions charge the person: The like Law
is of an Assise, and of a writ of entry in nature of an Assise, and the like.

^^der of (...).
2 If a feofment be made of a wood upon Condition to pay a certain Rent, the
Demand ought to be made at the Wood-gate, Co. ib. 202. a. 1
or at some high way tending through the Wood, or other most notorious place
there: And if one place be as notorious as another, the feoffor has election
to demand it at which he will, and albeit the feoffee be in some other part of
the wood ready to pay the Rent, yet that shall not avail him, and sic de
similibus.

Co. ib. 210. a. 1 Litt.. 339.
3 If upon a Mortgage the money be limited to be paid to the feoffee, Payment of
Mortgage money.
and before the day of payment he make his Executors, and die, in this Case the
Mortgageor shall pay it to the Executors, albeit they be not named, or if it be
limited to be paid to the Mortgagee or his heirs, then, if he die, it ought to
be paid to his heir, because named; but if to his heirs or executors, the
Mortgageor has election to pay it to either; So likewise if the Condition be
to pay it to the feoffee his heirs or assigns, and the feoffee make feofment
over, it is in the election of the feoffor to pay the money to the first or
second feoffee, at his pleasure, and so if the first feoffee die, the feoffor
may pay the money either to the heir of the first feoffee, or to the second
feoffee at his election; for the Law will not enforce the feoffor to take
knowledge of the second feofment, nor of the validity thereof, whether the same
be effectual or not, but at his pleasure.

Litt.. 341. Co. ib. 211. b. 2
4 If feofment in fee be made reserving Rent, An Ass^se, o^ entry.
and for default of payment a re-entry; this is a Rent-secke, and in this Case,
if the feoffor be once seized of the Rent, which after is denied him, it is at
his election whether he will have an Assise of Novel disseisin for the rent
arrere, or enter for the Condition broken: but after a recovery in Assise he
cannot have recourse to his re-entry, because by bringing the Assise he
affirms the continuance of the Estate.

Litt.. 454. Co. ib. 268. b. 1. and 312. a. 1.
5 Before the Statute of 21 H. 8. 19. Avowry at la^ or by Seat.
the disseisee might compel the Lord to avow upon him, but since that Statute
if the Lord distraine upon any of the Lands and Tenements holden, etc. he may
avow, etc. upon the same Lands, etc. as in Lands, etc. within his fee or
Seigniory, etc. without naming of any person certain, and without making
avowry upon a person certain, and therefore at this day the Lord has his
Election, either to avow according to the Common Law: or by force of the said
Statute, as by the word may in the same Statute is imported.

Littl. 478. Co. ib. 278. b. 3
6 If a man be disseised by an Infant, who aliens in fee, Several re^dies by ac^
or entry.
and the alienee dies seized, and his heir enters, the disseisor being still
within age: In this Case, it is in the Election of the Dissefsor to have a writ
of dum fuit infra aetatem, or a writ of right against the alienee: or otherwise
he may make his entry into the land without any suit or recovery: And so it is
to be observed, that many times the Law does give a man several remedies and of
several kinds, as in this Case by action and by entry, by action, either by
writ of right, or dum fuit infra aetatem.

Littl.. 496, 497, and 478. Co. Inst. p. 1. 286. b. 1.
7 When a man has several remedies for one of the same thing, A remedy (...)
remain a^ a release.
be it real personal or mixed, albeit he releaseth one of his remedies, yet he
may use the other; So where a man may enter into lands, and also have an Action
real given him by the Law to recover them; In this Case, if the Demandant
release to the Tenant all manner of actions real, yet the Demandants entry is
not thereby taken away, because nothing is released but the Action: And so it
is also of thnigs personal, as if a man wrongfully takes my goods, albeit I
release to him all actions personals, yet I may by Law take my goods out of his
possession: In like manner if I have any cause to have a writ of detinue of my
goods against another; here, albeit I release unto him all Actions personals,
yet I may by Law take my goods out of his custody, because no right of the
goods is released, but only the Action.

^lent di^ or a^ (...).
8 If one bold of me by Rent-service, which is a service in gross, Litt. 588,
and 589.
and not by reason of my Manor, and another, that has no right, claims the
Rent and receives it of my Tenant by cohersion of distress or otherwise, and
disseiseth me by taking the Rent; albeit such a disseisor die so seized in
taking the Rent, yet after his death it is at my election, either to distraine
for the Rent, or taking him to be a disseisor to have an Assise against the
pernor of the profits.

^ine or a^
9 If an Abbot, Bishop, or Husband in the right of his Wife, Co. ib. 3 27. b. 2
seized of a Rent, or any other Inheritance, that lies in grant had aliened, it
was in the Election of the Successor or Wife (after the death of her Husband)
to claim the Rent, etc. or to bring an Action; for such alienation did not
work a discontinuance, and so it is also (by construction) of the Statute of
West. 2. cap. 1.) in Case of Tenant in Tail.

^tes waiv^ by Feme ^ert.
10 If Lands be given to the Husband and Wife and their heirs, Co. ib. 357. a. ^
the Husband makes a feofment in fee, the feoffee gives the land to the
Husband and Wife, and the heirs of their two bodies, the Husband dies; In this
Case, the wife may elect which of the Estate she will, for both Estates are
waivable, and her time of Election and power of waiver accrewed unto her first
after the decease of her Husband.

^echer of (...) heirs.
11 Inderaigning a warranty against heirs in Gavelkind, Co. ib. 376. a. 4
the eldest may be vouched as heir to the warranty, and the other sons also
in respect of the Inheritance descended unto them: So likewise the heir at the
Common Law, and the heir of the part of the mother may be both vouched: yet in
both these Cases the heir at the Common Law may be vouched alone at the
election of the Tenant.

^nveyance ^y several (...).
12 When a man conveys a thing to another by several words which will admit
several acceptions, Co. l. 2. 35. b. 3. and 36. b. 4. Sit Rowland Heywards Case.
the interest of the thing granted passes presently, and the grantee, his
heirs, or executors may make their election when and in what manner they will
take it: And therefore if a man seized of a Manor part in demesne and part in
lease demiseth, bargains, and sels it to another for years, the Lessee may
make his election, whether he will take it by demise at the Common Law, or by
bargain and sale: So also in Sir Rowlands Heywards Case in the second Report
it was said, if a man give two Acres of land, habendum the one acre in fee and
the other in tail, and he alien both, and has Issue and dies, in this Case,
the Issue may bring a Formedon in descender, for which Acre he pleases; for
the election was not determined by the grantees death because the Estate past
presently by the livery, and the issue takes by descent.

^e heirs E^tion.
13 If a feofment be made to two, and the heirs of one of them, Co. l. 2. 61.
a. 3 Wiscots Case.
and he that has the fee dies, and after he Tenant for life dies, in this
Case, the heir has election to have a Mortdancester, or a scire facias, or a
Formedon in remainder at his pleasure.

The Lords E^ction.
14 If there be Lord and Tenant by Knight Service, Co. l. 2. 68. a. 4. in
Tookers ca.
and the Tenant die his heir within age, here the Lord has election either to
seize the Ward, or to distraine for the services and waive the Ward, Per Popham.

Election of things in ^gant.
15 If Tenant in tail of a Rent, Advowson, Tithes, Common, Co. l. 3. 84. a. 4.
in the Case of Fines.
or other such things, which lie in grant, grants them by deed in fee and dies,
the grant is not absolutely determined by his death; but it is at the Election
of the Issue to make the grant voidable or void at his pleasure; for if he
bring a Formedon for the Rent, etc. he makes the grant voidable, but if he
distraine for the rent, or claim it upon the land, he thereby determines his
election and makes it void.

Co. l. 4. 81. a. 1 in Nokes Case
16 If a man seized of land in fee lets the same for life rendering Rent and
besides binds himself and his heirs to Warranty, Election of Warranty.
here the express warranty takes not away the Warranty in Law; for if he in
reversion grant over his reversion, and the Lessee attorn, and after is
impleaded, it is at his Election whether he he will vouch the grantee by the
warranty in Law, or the Lessor by the express warranty. Vide 20 E. 3. Tit.
Counterplea de Garrantie 7.

Co. l. 4. 82. a. 4. in Sir Andrew Corbets Case.
17 If a man devises demiseth or limiteth by way of use land to another until
800 l. be raised for the perferment of his daughters, and dies, Election of
entry or actions.
and the heir, or he in Reversion or Remainder enter upon him, to whom the
Land is devised, demised, or limited, as aforesaid, and expulse him; In this
Case, it is in the Election of the person so expulsed, either to bring his
Action and recover the mean profits, which shall be accounted parcel of the
sum, or he may re-enter and hold the Land, until he may levy the whole
sum, and the time, in which he was so expulsed, shall not be accounted
parcel: There is the same Law in other Cases, viz. of Tenant by Elegit, Statute
Merchant, Statute Staple, Guardian, who holds over for the double value; If he
in the Reversion, who is to have the Lands, outs them, they have such Election,
as aforesaid, either to hold over, or to bring their action.

Co. l. 4. 93. a. 4 in Slades Case
18 For money due upon the sale of corn, or the like, Election of actions.
it is in the election of the Plaintiff to bring an Action upon the Case, or
an Action of Debt, 1 For the greater number of Presidents and Judgment in the
point. 2 Every contract executory justly implies an Assumpsit. 3 Recovery in an
Action upon the Case bars in Debt. 4 It is the more speedy Action, for if the
payment be at several days, no debt lies till the last, this lies upon the
first breach. 5 It is a formed action in the Register, and may lie, where Debt
lies, as appears there, Fol. 97, 98, 100, and 103. See Dier 20. 118. 28 H. 8.
Gore and Woddeys Case.

Co. ib 94. b. 4. in Slades Case
19 When the Register has two writs for one of the same Case, Election of
action.
it is at the election of the party to take and use either the one or the
other, and it appears by diverse Cases in the Register, that an action upon the
Case will lie, albeit the Plaintiff may have for the same thing another formed
Action in the Register: F. N. B. 94. g. and Register 103. b. So if a man has a
Manor within an Honor, and has a Leet within his Manor for his own Tenants,
if he or his Tenants are distrained by the Lord of the Honor to come to the
Leet of the Honor, he that is so distrained may have a general writ of Trespass,
or a special writ upon his Case; So if an Officer take toll of him, who ought
to be quit of toll, he shall have a general writ of Trespass, or an action upon
his Case, as appears by Fizt. ibid. If a Prior or other Prelate be riding upon
his journey, and one distraines the horse, upon which he rides, when he might
distraine other of his goods, in this Case, he may have a general action of
Trespass, or an action upon his Case, as appears by the Register fol. 100. and
F. N. B. 93. b. So if a Sheriff suffer one in execution upon a Statute
Merchant to escape, the Conusee may have an Action of debt, or an action upon
the Case, as appears by the Register 98. b. and F. N. B. 93 B. C. So if a man
^ust the Executors of his Lessee for years from their term, they may have a
special writ upon their Case, as appears F. N. B. 92. g. Register 97. and yet
they may also have an Ejectione firmae, or Trespass: for in all Cases, when the
Register has two writs for one and the same Case, it is at the election of the
party to take either the one or the other.

(...) of (...) for (...).
20 Where a Prior is the Kings debtor, Co. l. 5. p. 1. 16. a. 2. in the K.
Ecclesiastical Law.
and ought to have tithes of another spiritual person, he may choose either to
sue for subtraction of his tithes in the Ecclesiastical Court, or in the
Exchequer, and yet the persons and matter also was Ecclesiastical.

^tion for a ^n a Leet.
21 For offenses committed in the Leet it self, Co. l. 8. 41. b. 2 in Grieslies
ca.
as refusing to take the oath of Constable, or the like, the Lord may bring his
action of Debt, distraine goods and sell them, or distraine and impound them at
his Election.

^count to ^ng.
22 If the Treasurer and Undertreasurer of the Exchequer give power to one by
an un-lawful warrant to receive money of one and more of the Tollers of that
Court, Co. l. 11. 90. b 4. and 92. b. 4. Sir Walter Mildmayes ca. cited in the
E. of Devons Ca.
it is in the Kings Election to charge the party that receives them, or (in
Case he die) his Executors, or otherwise to charge the Treasurer and
Undertreasurer, that issued out such unlawful warrant.

^n Office ^ward^
23 If a man be ousted of his Steward-ship of a Manor, Co. l. 9. 51. a. 1 the
Earl of Shrewsburies Case:
so as another executes the place taking the profits thereof, for his
restoration thereunto he may either bring an Action of the Case, or otherwise
an Assise at his Election.

^ers or o^s in Ga^ed, a Ra^ part, ^ a Nuper (...).
24 If the Ancestor die seized, F.N.B. 9. g.
and one of the Sisters enter into all the Lands and deforce the rest: In this
Case, the other Sisters may sue a writ de rationabili part, or a writ of nuper
obiit at their Election; So likewise for lands in Gavelkind, if one Brother
enter into all the lands, and oust his Brothers, here also (if the Ancestor
died seized) the other Brothers may sue a writ de rationabili part, or a nuper
obiit, at their Election.

^ded in A^y, or by ^ ^juste (...),
25 If there be Lord and Tenant, F.N.B. 10. h.
and the Lord incroacheth other services then such as are due to him, as
Homage, Escuage, or the like; In this Case, the Tenant may avoid such
incroachment in Avowry made by the Lord for such services, because the Tenant
may traverse the manner of the Tenure, as to say that he holds of the Lord by
fealty and xx s. Rent only, without that, that he holds by Homage, Fealty, and
Rent in manner and form as the Avowry is made: Or otherwise he may bring a
writ of Ne injuste vexes, if he please, at his Election.

^t of right ^urowson, ^n scire fa^,
26 If a man recover in a writ of Right of Advowson, F.N.B. 36. a.
at the next avoidance he may present, and shall have a Quare impedit without
assigning any presentment in himself, or his Ancestors, but shall declare upon
the Record: or otherwise he may have a scire facias upon such recovery.

^it utrum, ^^aint.
27 If a man recover by an Action tried against a Parson, F.N.B. 48. r.
lands and Tenements by verdict, and the Parson pray not in Aid of the Patron,
and Ordinary; In this Case, if it was a false Verdict, the Successor may have a
Juris utrum; or an attaint at his Election.

^r, or at^
28 If a Parson lose by action tried, or by default, F.N.B. 49. g.
his Successor may have a writ of Error, or an attaint at his Election.

(...) in Court ^ristian or a (...) of annui^
29 If a Parson, Vicar, Master of an Hospital, or the like, F.N.B. 51. b.
have a pension out of another Church, which they and their Predecessors have
had time out of mind, it is at the Election of such Parson, Vicar, etc. to sue
for such pension in the Court Christian, or by writ of annuity at the Common
Law, for in that case, if they sue for it in Court Christian, and the other
party purchase a prohibition, etc. upon the matter showed they shall have
consultation. F.N.B. 82. d.


^sse or ^de auxilio.
30 For Aid ad filium suum militem faciendum vel ad filiam maritandam; the Lord
may distraine his Tenant and make avowry, or bring a writ auxilio, at his
Election.

F. N B. 98. c.
31 If Baron and Feme lose by default the land of the Feme; here, Deceit or in
vita.
if the Baron die, the Feme may have a writ of defeit, or a Cui in vita, at her
Election.

F.N.B. 99. g.
32 A writ of deceit may issue out of the Common Pleas or Chancery at the
Election of the Plaintiff, A writ of ceit our o^ Com. Pl^ Cha^cery
as if a man lose by default land in a praecipit quod reddat in the Common
Pleas, the Tenant shall have a writ of deceit, (alleging that he was not
summoned, or the like) out of the Common Pleas, or out of the Chancery at his
Election.

F.N.B. 104. f.
33 Where the Recognisor purchases a Manor, Audita (...) or seis^t.
unto which the Recognisee is Villain regardant: In this Case, the Recognisor
may have an audita quaerela, or otherwise may enter and seize the Recognisor
without any such suit, at his Election.

F.N.B. 122. d.
34 A man may sue a writ of debt upon a Statute Merchant, Debt or e^cution.
Statute Staple, or Recognisance; or otherwise, he may sue execution upon those
Statutes, at his Election.

F.N.B. 155. d.
35 If Tenant in Tail, Dower, by the Courtesy, Deceit or Quod ei d^ceat.
or for life lose by default (where they were not summoned, or the like) they
may have a writ of deceit, or a Quod ea deforceat, (upon the Statute of W. 2.
c. 4.) at their pleasure.

Dier 162. 51. 4, 5. P. M:
36 If a man condemned in debt or damages have lands in diverse Counties, Elegit.
Fieri fa^^
the Plaintiff may pray an Elegit in each County for the whole debt or
damages, or he may make divisions of his debt, viz. Quoad december libras, etc.
and quoad alias december libras, etc. and sic deinceps; at his election. Vide M.
17 E. 3. in debt against Executors two writs of fieri facias, were awarded into
several Counties for the whole debt: And in waste in 29 H. 6. Rot. 103. the
Plaintiff for the treble damages had three writs of Elegit in three several
Counties for the whole.

Dier 344. 2. 18 Eliz.
37 A man grants a Rentcharge without these words per se and haeredibus, and
dies, Annuity.
the grantee brings a writ of Annuity against the Heir, and after discontinues
his suit and distraines, and i^ it was adjudged well done, because the Election
to make it an Annuity was determined by the death of the Father.

119 Cujus est divisio, alterius est Electio.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 166. b. 2. and Litt.. 245.
1 Upon partition amongst Coperceners, Election by Copercene^
the eldest shall have the Election: for she shall have Civitiam partem, but if
she herself make the partition, she loses her privilege of Election, and
shall take last.

Hob. 107. the Bishop of Carliles Case.
2 A prescription, that if an inhabitant has five fleeces of wool, Tithe^.
or above, that then the inhabitant after the shearing and binding up of the
said five fleeces without fraud or deceit shall truly pay unto the Rector after
monition, etc. at the door of the Mansion house of the said inhabitant, etc.
the tenth part thereof, without any sight or touch of the nine parts by the
Rector, is a void prescription: for it is against common reason, that any man
should judge or divide for himself, and then take choice of his own division,
against the Rule of Litt.. 245. for the truth of the tenth depends upon the
proportion it holds with the nine parts, and therefore for the parishioner, who
is in the nature of an adversary to the Parson in this Case, to set out a part
of the tenth, which he only affirms to be just, is to give him merely power
to tithe as he lists, and the prescription were as reasonable as to say
plainly, that the parishioners might set out what tithe they please.

120 Nemo prohibetur pluribus desensionibus uti.
^ral Pleas (...).
1 Where the Tenant or Demandant may plead a general issue, Co. Inst. p. 1. 304
a. 3.
thereupon the general issue pleaded, he may give in evidence as many distinct
matters to bar the action or right of the Demandant or Plaintiff, as he can.

^able mat^ pleaded.
2 Where a special Verdict contains double or treble matter, Co. ibidem.
the Tenant or Defendant may either make choice of one matter, and to plead it
to bar the Demandant or Plaintiff, or to plead the general issue, and to
take advantage of all, or he may plead to part one of the pleas in bar, and
to another part another plea, and the conclusion of his plea shall avoid
doublenes.

(...), as admi^ator, or ^^or.
3 An Executor brings debt as Administrator, Co. l. 5. 33. a. Robinsons Ca.
and is barred by plea, that he is Executor: In this Case, he may afterward
bring debt as Executor: For he was barred, as to the action of the writ, to
have Debt as Administrator, but not to the Action.

^^tion (...) satisfa^^.
4 Two men were bound jointly and severally in an Obligation, Co. l. 5. 96. b.
Blumfeilds ca.
the one was sued, condemned, and taken in Execution, and so (not long after)
was the other: And afterward the first escaping, the other brought an Audita
quaerela: but it was not admitted; for albeit the Plaintiff might have had his
action against the Sheriff upon the escape, yet until he be satisfied indeed,
the other shall not be enlarged, nor have his Audita querela: because the
execution upon the first, that escaped, was not valuable, being without
satisfaction.

(...) of acti^ ^ll not (...) recovery ^ise.
5 If one be barred by plea to the writ, Co. lib. 6. 7. a. in Ferre^^ Ca.
he may have the same writ again: if by plea to the Action of the writ, he may
have his right Action: If the plea be to the Action, and he be barred by
judgment, confession or verdict, in personal Actions it is a bar for ever*
but in real actions he may have a writ of an higher nature, and shall it is the
same right again, because it concerns his Franktene^^ent and Inheritance: So
if one be barred in an Assise of Novel disseisin, yet upon showing a descent or
other special matter, he may have an Assise of Mortdancester, Aiel, Besaiel, a
writ of Entry sur disseisin of his Ancestor, etc. or the like: F.N.B. 5. n.
And if he happen to fail in any such real action yet may he have (last of all)
his writ of right, in which the whole matter shall be tried and determined
again; Howbeit, Recovery or bar in Assise is a bar in every other Assise
and in a writ of entry in the nature of an Assise; because they are both of his
own possession and of the same nature: So bar in a writ of Aiel, is a hair
in a writ of Besaiel, Cosinage, because they are ancestral and of the same
nature: yet in a Formedon in descender, albeit the D^mandant be barred by
verdict or demurrer, yet the issue in tail may have a now formedon in
descender; But this is by the construction of W. 2. c. 2. So likewise, if the
Ancestor be barred in a writ of Error upon a release, by him made to the
Tenant, yet the issue shall have a new writ of Error; For he claims in not
only as heir, but per formam doni; And by the Statute he shall not be barred
upon a feined or false plea of his Ancestor, so long as the Right of the
intaile remains, and with this accords 10 H. 6. 5. and 3 Eliz. 188. Dier Sir
Ralfe Rowlets Case.

^erse.
6 In Trespass the Defendant makes title, for that A. W. Co. lib. 6. 24. a Reads
Case.
being seized in fee, leased to him, the Plaintiff makes title by descent, and
traverseth the lease, and good; for it may be true, that A. W. was seized, and
yet that a descent was cast to the Plaintiff, therefore the lease is most
material to be traversed: Howbeit it seems, that either the one, or the other
may be traversed. So in Trespass the Defendant pleads, that A. was seized, who
enfeoffed B. who enfeoffed C. who enfeoffed D. whose Estate the Defendant has;
here, the Defendant may traverse which of them he please.

Co. l. 8. 15. b. 4 in Edw. Althams Case.
7 Where a man releaseth totum Jus generally, By release of actions Entry
remains:
all his rights are thereby released, but if the disseisee release to the
disseisor omnes actiones, viz. recuperandi sive prosequendi in judicio, thereby
his right of entry is not released: for, when a man has diverse means to come
to his right, he may release one of them in special, and yet take benefit of
the other, and with this accords Litt. fol. 115. b. and 19 Ass. Pl. 3. 19 H. 6.
4. 21 H. 6. 23. 21 H. 7. 23.

Co. l. 9. 23. b. 1 in the Case of Avowry.
8 Notwithstanding the Statute of 21 H. 8. 19. The Lord (...) avow, as before
the Stat.
the Lord may at this day avow upon a person certain, as upon the utry Tenant
according to the Common Law; For the Statute takes not away the Common Law in
that Case, but gives liberty to the Lord to pursue the one or the other.

Co. l. 9. a. 4. in the Case of Avowry.
9 If the Lessee (or if Tenant peravaile in Case of Mesnalty) be present, when
the Lord and his Bailiff comes to distraine, Upon distres^ rescous, or trespass.
if nothing be in arreare, he may well make rescous, and so release himself,
as it was resolved in Bevils Case in Co. lib. 4. fol. 8. and diverse other
Books (which see in the Case of Avowry, Co. lib. 9. 23. a. 4.) Or otherwise,
he may have an Action of Trespass against the Lord, or Bailiff.

F.N.B. 9. g.
10 Vide sup. Max. 118. R. 24. Parceners.
where parceners or heirs in Gavel-kind may have a writ de rationabili part,
or a Nuper obiit, being ousted by one of their Coparceners. See also, supra,
Maxim 118. Rot. 25.

F.N.B. 21. c.
11 If a man be vouched, and enter into Warranty and loses, Vouchee and Tenant
by receipt may have a writ of Error.
he may have a writ of Error, and assign the Errors, which have happened betwixt
the Demandant and the Tenant, or betwixt the Demandant and the Vouchee: So
likewise he in reversion, who prays to be received for default of the Tenant
for life, or for his faint pleading; here, albeit he be received and plead and
lose, yet may he have a writ of Error and assign the Errors, that have happened
between the Demandant and Tenant, and the Demandant and him, that so prayed to
be received.

F.N.B. 99. b.
12 In a praecipe quod reddat against Baron and Feme, Baron and Feme may have
error.
at the Grand Cape the Baron appears in proper person, and the Feme by an
Attorney, who has not sufficient warrant, and thereupon judgment was given
upon the default of the Feme against Baron and Feme, etc. yet if they were not
duly summoned, they may bring their writ of Error to reverse that judgment.

F.N.B. 135. d.
13 A man may have a Warrantia Cartae, Recovery in value.
albeit he may vouch in the Action, that is brought against him; and if he
recover in the Warrantia Cartae, and afterward lose in the Action brought
against him, in which he has vouched him, against whom he has recovered the
warranty, then shall he have a writ of habere facias ad valentiam, etc.
maintainable within a year after the recovery to recover in value according to
his loss.

Plow. 96. a. 1.
14 For Heriot-service the Lord may either distraine or seize, Heriot-service.
and so he has two several means to come by it.

121 Consensus tollit Errorem.
When by consent no challenge.
1 When in a writ of right the Jury, that are to try the mere right, Litt..
514. Co. Inst. p. 1. 294 a. 2.
are once impanelled by the four Knights with the consent of both parties, none
of the 12 so chosen can be challenged, because it is by consent of parties.

^^ebe may be ^^rged.
2 If the Parson of a Church charge the Glebe of his Church by his Deed, Litt..
528. Co. ib. 300. a. Litt. 648, Co. 34 3. a. Co. 301. a. 4.
and the Patron (having fee-simple in the Advowson) and the Ordinary confirm
that grant, such grant shall stand in force according to the purport thereof;
Because done by the joint consent of all the parties, that can claim any
interest in the Advowson: So likewise may the Patron and Incumbent of a
Chantery donative charge the land, upon the same reason: because the whole
interest resides in them, and the Ordinary is not to meddle therewith.

Attornment.
3 To avoid many inconveniences, Co. ib. 309. a. 3
Attornment was appointed by the Law, which is nothing else but the consent of
the particular Tenant to the reversioners grant: And therefore it is said in
the old Books, Si Dominus attornare possit servitiam tenentis contra voluntatem
tenentis, tale sequeretur inconveniens, quod possit eum subjugare Capitali
inimico suo, and per quod teneretur sacramentum fidelitatis facere ei, qui eum
damnificare intenderet. For such consent of the Tenant is conclusive, and binds
the Tenant to pay the purchaser the Rent, and to perform all other services
due for or in respect of the land.

(...) facias, (...) ^^nsent.
4 In a Ejectione firmae upon the issue joined the Plaintiff makes suggestion
to the Court, that he, the Sheriff, Co. l. 5. 36. b 4. in Baynehams Case. Vide
Dier 367 Pl. 40. 21, and 22 Eliz.
and one of the Coroners were of the liveries of the Earl of Worcester, and
therefore that he had caused the Venire facias to be directed to the other
Coroner, and the Defendant also confessing the suggestion the venire facias was
allowed accordingly: and upon the trial the Verdict passed for the Plaintiff:
Howbeit afterward, the Court was moved to arrest judgment, because the
suggestion did not contain principal challenge: sed non allocatur, because the
venire facias was awarded ex assensu partium.

^y things ^nsent (...).
5 A Common Recovery differs from the judgment and proceeding in other real
actions, Co. l. 5. 40. b 2 in Dormers Case.
for this reason (amongst others) because it is had by the mutual consent of
the parties, 39 E. 3. 1. The Demandant and Tenant consent, that two of the four
in a writ of right shall be Esquires, albeit by the Law they ought to be all
Knights, and well; because by consent, 44 E. 3. 3. Trial of Villanage altered
from natural trial by consent, 7 H. 6. 7. Pleader of feofment in fee upon
Condition without Deed and re-entry, is good, if the other part confess the
Condition. 34 E. 3. Title Office de Court, 12. If 12 be sworn and one departs,
another of the Panel (by consent) may be sworn, and with the 11 give the
Verdict, 11 H. 6. 13. The Court in a Quare Impedit may (by consent) give longer
day, then is limited by the Statute of Marlebridge H. 4. The Statutes of 2 E.
3. and 20 E. 3. provide, that neither for the great Seal, nor little Seal,
Justice shall be delayed, yet when the matter concerns the King only, if he
command it, it may be stayed. F. N. Br. 21. b. 27 H. 8. A Tenure may be created
at this day by consent of all, notwithstanding the Statute of quia emptores
terrarum, 6 E. 6. Dier 78. By special consent of the Parties re-entry may be
for default of payment of Rent, without demand thereof.

(...) by con^ none.
6 In a writ of Error to reverse a fine, Co. l. 5. 45. b. Gages Case.
the Error assigned was for that the writ of Covenant bare Test the 24 of
April, returnable 15 Paschal, which in truth was 15 of April, and so return
before the Test: And it was resolved that per totam Curiam, that it should be
amended: because fines and common recoveries are but common assurances had by
the mutual consent of the parties, and therefore such mis-prisions may be
amended; Howbeit in other actions no amendment shall be in such Case: So in 18
El. inter Norreys and Braybrooke. A writ of Error was brought to reverse a
recovery in 19 H. 8. and the Test was a day after the return; nevertheless,
because it appeared to be but a mistake of the Clerk, and was in the Case of a
Common recovery (which passes by consent) it was amended.

Co. l. 6. 66. b. 4 in Sir Moyle Finches Case.
7 There is a diversity betwixt brevia adversaria, Diversity betwixt brevia
adversaria, (...) brevia ami^^ bilia.
vix. brought as adversary to recover the land, etc. And brevia amicabilia,
viz. brought by consent and agreement amongst friends; for true it is in
brevibus adversariis the process of the Common Pleas shall not pursue the
custom or reputation of the Country, as in 6 E. 3. 11. the Demandant in a writ
of Entry demands the Manor of C. the Tenant says, that the tenements put in
view are a Message and a Carve of land called, etc. and not a Manor, etc.
whereby it appears, that if it were not a Manor in truth, albeit it was so in
Common Appellation, the writ should abate; but it was adjudged in Sir Jo.
Bruyns case in the beginning of Queen El. Reign, that in Common Recovery
(which is had by the consent and agreement of the parties) of acres of land,
they shall be accounted according to the accustomable and usual measure of the
Country, and not according to the Statute de terris mensurandis made in 33 E.
1. So likewise it is agreed in 47 E. 3. 18. if a man bargain and sell so many
acres of wood, that shall be measured according to the use of the County, viz.
according to 20 foot to the Pole, and not according to the said Act; for in
such Case consuetudo loci est observanda; also if a fine be acknowledged of a
Manor, which (in deed) is a Manor in reputation only and not in truth, yet
is the five good, because done by consent of parties.

F. N. B. 38. t.
8 In a Quare Impedit if the Defendant plead to issue and after make default,
Precepartum
a writ shall be awarded for the Plaintiff to the Bishop ad admittendum
Clericum; but if to the distress returned against the Defendant, he comes, and
takes day per praece partium, and then makes default the Plaintiff shall not
have a writ to the Bishop, but a new distringas.

Dier 33. 13. etc. 28, and 29 H. 8.
9 A lease for years is made rendering Rent, Termors c^sent,
and the lessor makes feofment of the land, the termor being also upon the
land, and without his consent; in this Case the Rent is extinct: but if the
feofment be made by the agreement of the termor, that works no extinguishment
of the Rent, or surrender of the term, etc.

122 Volenti non fit injuria.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 368. a. 2. Litt.. 701. Pl. Com. 91. the Parson of Honey Lanes
ca.
1 If the Tenant in an Assise of an house desire the Plaintiff to dine with him
in the house, which the Plaintiff does accordingly, Dyning in a house no entry.
but does not clame the house at that time; this is no entry or possession to
cause the Assise to abate; because if he had been a stranger, he had been no
trespasser for volenti non fit injuria.

Dier 275. 46. 10 El.
2 The Marshall suffers one in execution to go at large by license of the Chief
Justice, the Plaintiff also agreeing thereunto; in this case, Prisoner in
ecution.
after he returns, he is in execution again, so as if he afterward escape,
the Gaolor is subject to an action of Debt.

Dier 359. 1. 20 El.
3 The Tenant peravaile, who held of a Mesne, Tenure.
as of his Manor of D. in soccage, which Manor of D. was held over of the
King by Knight Service in capite, purchases a release of the Mesualty; in this
Case, the Tenant peravaile shall now hold of the King in capite; for volenti
non fit injuria.

123 Quilibet potest renunciare juri per se introducto.
^^main.
1 Land may be amortified by Licenses granted by the King and all the Lords
immediate, and mediate of whom the land is holden; Co. Inst. p. 1. 98. b. 4.
and 99. a. 3. and 99. b. 2
For it is a Rule in Law; Alienatio licet prohibeatur, consensu tamen omnium,
in quorum favorem prohibitum est, potest fieri, and quilibet potest renuntiare,
etc. And the License of Lords immediate and mediate in this Case shall Enure to
two intents, viz. to a dispensation both of the Statute of Quia emptores
terrarum, and also of the Statute of Mortmaine.

Condition (...) restrain ^^ful li^^.
2 If a man make a gift in tail upon Condition, Co. ib. 223. b. 3
that he shall not make a Lease for his own life, or if a man make a lease for
life or years upon Condition, that they shall not grant over their Estate or
let the land to others: In these Cases and the like, albeit Tenant in tail
has power by the Law to make a lease for his own life, and the Lessee for
life or years to grant and let, yet by the Condition, and their own agreement
they have restraindd themselves of the liberty which the Law gives them: So
likewise if a man make a gift in tail upon Condition that he shall not make a
lease for three lives or 21 years according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. In this
Case also the Condition is good to restrain the Tenant in tail from making
such leases; For, albeit the Statute does give him power to make such leases,
yet that power may be restrained by Condition and his own agreement, because
this power is not incident to the Estate, but given to him collaterally by the
Act, according to that Rule of Law, Quilibet potest renunciare, etc.

^eires ^^ged.
3 If there be Lord and Tenant, Litt.. 538. Co. ib. 305. a. 4
which Tenant holds of his Lord by fealty and 20 s. Rent, here, if the Lord by
his Deed confirm the Estate of his Tenant, to hold by 12 d. or by a penny, or
a half penny; In this Case, the Tenant is discharged of all the other
services, and shall render nothing to the Lord, but what is comprised in the
same confirmation: For, the Lord by his confirmation to hold by less services
has abridged himself of the power and interest, which was before legally due
to him.

^^e all (...) all pas^^.
4 By the Common Law if Patron, Ordinary, Litt.. 648. Co. ib. 343. Note that
this law is altered by stat. 13 El. cap. 10.
and Incumbent had joined in a grant of the Rectory or Vicarage, they might
have charged it, or conveyed it to whom they pleased; because they all together
had the whole right in them, viz. the Patron, to present, the Ordinary to
admit, institute and induct and the Incumbent, to enjoy the glebe, tithes, and
other profits; And all these had liberty to depart with their several rights
and interests at their pleasure.

^ good right ^^de preten^^*
5 If A. be lawful owner of land and in possession, Co. ib. 369. a. 3
and be afterward disseised; in this Case, A. has a good lawful right, and
yet if A. being out of possession granted away the land, or contracteth for it
with another, he has now made his good right of entry pretenced within the
Statute of 32 H. 8. 9. and both the grantor and grantee within the danger
thereof: A forciori of a right of Action. Quod nota.

^ joint grant ^f a Rent-^^nge.
6 A. enfeoffes B. upon Condition, A. and B. join in the grant of a Rentcharge
out of the land to C. the Condition is broken, A. enters; Co. l. i. 146 a. 2
Anne Mayo^es Case.
In this Case, it was objected that this grant enured, as the grant of B. and
the confirmation of A. which confirmation could not alter the quality of the
Estate: Howbeit, it was resolved and adjudged, that the land was chargable with
the Rent, and one of the reasons alleged for it was, that every fee may be
charged one way or other, and when both join in the grant, that have the whole
interest in the land, it must needs be charged with the Rent, for if it cannot
be done by their joint grant, there is no other way to do it.

Co. l. 3. 60. b. 1. in Lincoln College Ca.
7 A. and B. f^ynt-tenants for life, An entail docked by (...) lease.
and to the heirs of the body of A. intermarry, and have issue C. who after the
death of A. disseises B. and suffers a Common recovery, and B. releaseth with
warranty and dies; In this Case, the Estate tail had been barred, albeit B.
had not released with warranty: for it is reasonable, that the entaile should
be cut off this way, as well as by joining in a fine, or surrender of B. and
recovery after against the heir: because they both had power to bar the
Estate tail one way or other, having the whole Estate in them subject to be
docked.

Co. l. 10. 48 b. 4 in Lampets ca. F. N. B. 152. g k.
8 Littleton says, Joinder of d^visees in a grant, etc. of a lease.
cap. Discout. fol. 144. that it is a Maxim in the Law, that land in
fee-simple may be charged one way or other: So also it is a Maxim in the Law,
that every right, title, or interest in praesenti or futuro by the joining of
all, that may claim any such Right, Title, or Interest, may be barred or
extinct; And therefore at the Common Law if the Donor and Donee had joined in
the grant of a rentcharge, and after the Donee had died without issue, and the
fee had reverted to the Donor, that he should have held it charged, and yet he
had but a possibility at the time of the charge made; Because all those who had
any Estate or interest therein in praesenti or in futuro did join in the
charge: So likewise (a fortiori) if they had joined in a lease for years, and
the Donee had died without issue, the lease had been good against the Donor. In
like manner, Lessee for 400 years devises for life to his executor, The
principal Case there.
the remainder to M. and dies, M. mary's, her husband and she releases to the
Executor; In this Case, albeit M. had but a possibility, yet a release by her
Husband and her to the Tenant in possession vests the whole interest of the
term of 400 years in the Executor; because none other had interest in praesenti
or in futuro but those that joined in the release, and both consented to it,
the one in releasing and the other in accepting thereof: For if they had joined
in an assignment of the term, it had also been good, causa qua supra; And in
Case both join in a grant; it is the grant of him, that has the term, and the
release or confirmation of the other.

Co. ib. 49. a. 3. Pasc. 4 E. 6. in Co. Ba.
9 If a man make a lease to another for 21 years, Lessor and Lessee join.
if the Lessee shall so long live; here, if the Lessor and Lessee join in the
grant of a term, by Deed to another and after the Lessee die within the term so
granted, the grantee shall enjoy the land during the residue of the term
absolutely. Fuit tenus per Montague, Hales, Molineux, and Brown.

Co. l. 10. 101. a. 3. in Bewfages Case.
10 In the Statute of 23 H. 6. 10. which enjoynes Sheriffs to take bail of
prisoners within their guard for appearance upon reasonable suerty of
sufficient persons, etc. Here these words, Security to the Sheriff.
Reasonable suerty of sufficient persons, do not so restrain the Sheriff, but
that he may (if he please) take suerty of one single person; for the Statute
leaves it to his discretion to take such security as he thinks fit; because he
is to be amercied, if the party appear not at the day in the writ, and
therefore it is at his peril, if he take not good security of the party
arrested, and he has liberty to waive that power by taking less security,
then the Statute mentions: for those words import rather an advice then a
command, and Quilibet potest renunciare, etc.

Dier 23. b. 148 28 H. 8. Stat. 27 H. 8. 10.
11 A man seized of land in right of his wife makes a feoffment in fee to his
own use, and declares his will to be, Upon grant by the Baron o^ the Femes
lan^ (though to her) no remitter.
that the feoffees shall stand seized to the use of his wife for life; And then
comes the Statute of Uses 27 H. 8. 10. which says, that Cestuy que use shall
be deemed in possession of such an Estate as he had in the use; Here, the
Question was whether or no the Feme should be remitted: And (by Shelley) it
seems she is remitted, because she comes in not by her own Act, but by an Act
in Law, viz. by the Statute, and there is none against whom she may bring her
Cui in vita; But Baldwin and Knightly e contra, because she comes in by Act of
Parliament, to which every one is party, and the Statute says, Cestuy que use
shall be adjudged in such Estate as he had in the use; for if Tenant in tail
make a feofment in fee to his own use in fee or fee tail, the issue is not
remitted, because he had a fee-simple in the use, and the Statute conveyes unto
him such an Estate as he had in the use. Ideo quaere.

^^sor. ^^see.
12 A Lease is made for years, upon Condition, Dier 334. 3^. 16 Eliz.
that the Lessee shall not alien to any person without the Lessors License the
land nor any part thereof, the Lessor gives him License to alien part, the
Lessee aliens the residue without License; And it was adjudged that the Lessor
might enter, notwithstanding the dispensation with the condition in part, and
that the condition was entire.

^^re of an ^^raile.
13 Baron and Feme are Tenants in special tail, Dier 351. 24. 18 Eliz.
the Baron alone levies a fine to his own use, and devises the Land to the
Feme for life (the remainder over) rendering Rent, the Baron dies, the Feme,
enters, and pays the Rent, and dies; In this Case, the Issue is barred for two
causes, 1 By the fine, which has barred his conveyance to the entaile, 2 By
the Remitter waived by the mother.

124 Omnis Ratihabitio retro-trahitur, and mandato seu licentiae aequiparatur.
^^gageor and ^rtgagee.
1 If there be Mortageor and Mortgageute;e of Land, Co. Inst. p. 1. 206. b. 4.
and at the day of payment of the Money for the redemption of the Land a
stranger (of his own head) in the name of the Mortgageor or his heir (but
without his consent for privity) tender the money, and the mortgagee accepts
thereof; In this Case, the Mortgageor or his heir agreeing thereunto, it is a
good tender and satisfaction, and the Mortgageor or his heir may re-enter into
the Land mortgaged immediately after such tender and consent thereunto: for
Omnis Ratihabitio, etc. howbeit the mortgager or his heir may dis-agree
thereunto, if he will.

^^tard and ^^lier. Claim with a five years ^ter fine.
2 In Case of Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne; Co. ib. 245. a. 3 Litt. 401.
regularly none shall enter upon the Bastard to vest the Estate in the Mulier,
but the Mulier himself, or some other by his special command; no more then in
Case of a fine to avoid it by claim within five years; For there also, a
Stranger cannot (of his own head) in the name of him, that right has, enter
within the five years to avoid the fine: Howbeit in both these Cases, 1 If the
Mulier agree thereunto before the descent of the Bastard: Or 2 If he that right
has before the five years be past, do assent thereunto, the claim is good,
and shall avoid the Estate both of the Bastard and of the Conusee, as it was
holden in the Lord Audleys Case, Mich. 38, and 39 Eliz. in B. R. per Curiam:
Quia omnis Ratihabitio, etc. Co. l. 9. 106. a. 1 in Marg. Podgers Case.
and the last Case stands well with the words of the Statute, So that they
pursue their title, etc. by way of Action or entry, etc. and so also is the
Book in 31 H. 8. Br. Entry Congreg. 123.

^^ry by a ^^anger.
3 If an Infant make a feofment in Fee a stranger (of his own head) cannot
enter to the use of the Infant, for the Estate is voidable; Co. ib. a. 4.
as it was held P. 39 Eliz. in Co. B. per Cur. But where an Infant or a man of
full age is disseised, an entry by a stranger (of his own head) is good and
vesteth presently the Estate in the Infant or other disseisee: So it is also if
Tenant for life make a feofment in fee, and a stranger enter for a forfeiture
in the name of the Reversioner (but without his privity) for in that Case also
the Estate shall be thereby vested in the Reversioner.

Co. ib. 258. a. 2
4 If an Infant or a man of full age have any right of Entry into any lands,
Idem.
any stranger in the name and to the use of the Infant or man of full age may
enter into the lands, and (regularly) this shall vest the lands in them without
any commandment precedent or agreement subsequent: But if a disseisor levy a
fine with proclamation according to the Statute, a stranger without a
commandment precedent or agreement subsequent within the five years cannot
enter in the name of the disseisee to avoid the fine, Co. l. 9. fol. 106. a. in
the Lord Awdleys Case: And that resolution was grounded upon the construction
of the Statute of 4 H. 7. 24. Howbeit a assent subsequent within the 5 years is
sufficient, as is aforesaid.

Co. l. 4. 30. a. 3.
5 The Lord of a Manor may by parol retain one to be Steward of his Manor,
and so may he do a Bailiff by parol only; Steward. Bailiffe.
and such retainer shall serve, until they be discharged; for his permitting
of him to be Steward or Bailiff without countermand is a ratification of his
Office. Tr. 41. Eliz. inter Harris and Jay in B. R.

Pl. Co 8. 6. 4. in Fogassaes Case.
6 If another man make a disseisin to my use, Assent to disseisin or a Ravishor.
and afterward I agree to it, In this Case, I am a Disseisor ab initio, albeit
the agreement thereunto was after the fact done: So if one ravish a woman, and
she afterward assents to the Ravishor, in this Case, this agreement shall have
a retrospect to the first Act, and shall be then said to be executed.

125 Nemo tenetur accusare seipsum.
Co. Inst. p. 1 158. b. 1.
1 In trial of Challenges, Challenge of a Juror.
if the cause of the Challenge touch the dishonor or discredit of the Iuror, he
shall not be examined upon his bath concerning the same: but in all other Cases
he shall be examined upon oath, the better thereby to inform the triors.

Co. l. 7. 10. a. in Ughtreds Case.
2 Regularly, none shall be compelled to allege that, Conditions precedent
(...) subsequent.
which makes against him, for every one ought to allege that, which makes for
him, and is for his advantage: And therefore in all Cases, when an interest or
Estate commenceth upon Condition precedent, be the Condition or Act to be
performed by the Plaintiff, or Defendant, or any other, and be the Condition
in the affirmative or negative, there the Plaintiff ought to show that in his
Count, and aver the performance thereof; For in such Case the interest or
Estate commenceth in him, by the performance of the Condition, and is not in
him, until the Condition be performed: but it is otherwise, when the interest
or Estate passes presently and vests in the grantee, and is to be defeated by
matter ex post facto, or Condition subsequent, be the Condition or Act to be
performed by the Plaintiff, Defendant, or any other, and be the Condition in
the affirmative or negative; For in such Case, the Plaintiff may count
generally without showing the performance thereof, and this shall be pleaded by
him, that will take advantage of the Condition or matter ex post facto, and not
by the Plaintiff; for no man is bound to betray his own cause. Vide plus ibid.

Pl. Co. 16. b. 3. in Fogassaes Case.
3 In Fogassaes Case in the Commentaries, Agreement precedent good.
there was an agreement with the Customer before the landing of the woad, and
if there had been any default in the Defendant afterward to have made the
agreement void ab initio, it ought to have been alleged by the Informer and
not by the Defendant, because it made against him: So Hill. 3 H. 7. 11. if a
Sheriff take one by force of a capias, he does well, but if he thereupon
return a non est inventus, Sheriffs (...) return.
he shall be adjudged a trespassor ab initio: And in such Case, in false
imprisonment brought against him, it is sufficient for him to allege, that he
was Sheriff, and that the capias came to him, and that by force thereof he
took and imprisoned the party, and then to demand, judgment si action, and
ought not to say, that he returned, non est inventus, because that makes
against him, that is, makes him a trespassor ab initio: but the false return
ought to be alleged by the Plaintiff, who is to take advantage thereof.

^^ed and ^^in.
4 If the Ecclesiastical Court will enjoyne a man to be examined upon oath for
the discovery of any covin or fraud concerning himself, Hob. 84. Spendlow.
a Prohibition lies, for albeit the original cause belongs to their Conizance,
yet the covin and fraud are criminal, and the avowing of the Act to be done
bona fide is punishable both in the Star Chamber, and by the penal Law of
fraudulent gifts, and therefore not to be extorted out of himself by his oath.

126 Nec se infortuniis and periculis exponere.
1 In making continual claim, if the adverse party lie in wait in the way
with Weapons, or by words menace to beat, mayhem, or kill the party, that would
enter; in such Case, the Law allows a claim, made as near the land as he
dare approach for fear of death, or other bodily hurt: Howbeit (says Bracton)
Talis debet esse metus, qui cadere potest in virum constantem; and qui in se
continet mortis periculum, and corporis cruciatum; Et nemo tenetur se
infortuniis and periculis exponere. And therefore every doubt or fear is not
sufficient; for it must concern the safety of the person of the man, and not
his houses or goods, for the fear of burning his houses, or taking away or
spoiling his goods, is not sufficient, because he may recover the same, or
damages to the value thereof without any corporal hurt; But if the Jury upon a
special Verdict do find, that the disseisee did not enter for fear of corporal
hurt, this is sufficient, and it shall be intended, that they had evidence to
prove the same: Also it seems that fear of imprisonment is sufficient;
because such a fear suffices to avoid a bond, or a Deed; for the Law has a
special regard to the salfety and liberty of a man, and imprisonment is a
corporal damage, a restraint of liberty, and a kind of captivity.

For the time of doing things it countenanceth more. 127 Things done in time of
Peace, than in time of War.
^^^sin in (...) of war.
1 If a man be seized of tenements in fee by occupation in time of War and
thereof die seized in time of War, Litt.. 412. Co. Inst. p. 1. 249 a. etc.
and the tenements descend to his heir, such descent shall not out any man of
his entry, Vide 7. E. 2. Now a time of Peace is, when the Courts of Justice be
open, and the Judges and Ministers of the same may by Law protect men from
wrong and violence, and distribute Justice to all: on the other side, when by
invasion, insurrections, rebellions, or the like, the peacable course of
Justice is disturbed and stopped, so as the Courts of Justice he (as it were)
shut up (nam inter arma silent Leges) then it is said to be a time of War:
And the trial thereof is by the records and Judges of the Courts of Justice:
for by them it will appear, whether Justice had her equal course of proceeding
at that time, or no: And this shall not be tried by Jury, but by them, as
aforesaid: And therefore albeit during these late troubles the Courts of
Justice sat duly at Westminster, as in other times of Peace, yet quaere,
whether an occupation and descent at that time within the Kings Quarters would
bar the disseisee, for although they sat, yet had they no power there to
execute their judgment.

Co. ib. 249. b. 2 and 4.
2 If a man be disseised in time of Peace; The like.
and the descent is cast in time of War, this shall not take away the entry
of the disseisee: So likewise in real Actions, the Explees, or taking of the
profits, are laid tempore pacis; 6 E. 3. 41. Co. l. 2. 93. a. 3 in Binghams
Case. F. N. B. 31. i.
for if they were taken tempore belli, they are not accounted off in Law: And
as it is in Case of descent, so it is also in Case of presentation; for no
usurpation in time of War puts the right Patron out of possession, albeit
the Incumbent come in by institution and induction: And time of war does not
only give privilege to them, that be actually in War, but to all others
within the Kingdom; And albeit the admission and induction be in time of Peace
yet if the presentment were in time of war, it puts not the right Patron
out of possession.

3 The Law countenanceth more the proceeding against a Felon in time of peace,
then in time of War: And therefore if a man commit Felony in time of Peace,
he shall by judgment forfeit his lands, three manner of ways, 1 quia suspensus
per collum, 2 quia abjura vit regnum, 3 quia utlagatus est; but they, who are
hanged by Martial Law, (in favorem belli) forfeit no lands.

128 Things done in the day more then those done in the night.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 135. a. 4. Mirr. l. 5.. 1.
1 It is not lawful to hold pleas in the night time or before Sunrise; And
therefore the Mirroir says, No pleas the night.
Abusion est que lon tient pleas par Dimenches (v. Sondayes) ou par outres
jours defenders, or devant le Soleil levy, ou nectanter, etc.

Co. ib. 142. a. 3
2 For damage fesant a man may distraine in the night, No distress^ the night.
because otherwise, it may be the beasts will be gone, before he can take them,
but for a Rent or service the Lord cannot distraine in the night, but it ought
to be done in the day time, and so it is also of a Rentcharge. Vide supra 110.
R. 4.

Co. l. 7. 6. b. 2. in Milbornes Case.
3 For Robbery committed in the morning ante lucem, No pursuit the night.
the Hundred shall not be charged: And albeit no time be specified in the
Statute of Winchester 13 E. 1. yet it shall not extend to Robbery done in the
night; because no laches or negligence can be adjudged in the Hundred for
default of a good guard in the night: Neither can they in the night make
pursuit or inquire after them; for as the Scripture says, The day is made for
man to labor in, and the night to rest. Note that the Statute of 27 El. 13.
has altered this Law.

Co. ib. 4.
4 At the Common Law, if one be slain in a Town by day, For an es^^ no
amerci^ment.
viz. so long as there is full day light, and he that has slain him escape,
the Town, where the Felony was committed, shall be amercied for the escape;
And so it is held in 21 E. 3. Tit. Corone 238. Dum quis Felonice occisus fuit
per diem; nisi felo captus fuit, tota Villata illa oneretur; and with this
agrees 3 E. 3. But if such a Murder or Homicide be committed in the night, the
Town shall not be a amercied by the Common Law, because no laches or neglect
can be attributed to them. Vide plus ibid.

When things are fit to be straightned to a certain time, it esteems,
according to the nature of the things. 129 Sometimes a whole day sufficient.
^ods last in (...).
1 Where goods are lost in war, Fich. 38.
and recovered from the enemy by another of the Kings subjects, the owner shall
have them again, if he make fresh suit before the Sunset, otherwise not.

130 Sometimes a whole year.
^^ protection ^^re a year.
1 No protection either profecturae or moraturae shall endure longer, Co. Inst.
p. 1. 130. b. 3. and 254. b. 4.
then a year and a day next after the Test or date of it; and so it is also
of an Essoine de service le Roy: If a protection bear date 7 die Januarii, and
have allowance pro uno anno, the re-summons, re-attachment, or re-garnishment
may be sued 8 Januarii the next year: howbeit Britton (fol. 280, 282, and 283.)
treating of an Estoine beyond the Grecian-sea in a Pilgrimage, etc. says thus,
Ascun gent ne quident se purchasent nous letters de protection patents durable
a 1 an. ou 2, ou 3 ans, and Jalumeyus font attorneys generals ausi par nous
letters patents: Et ceux font bien and sagement; car null grand Seignior ne
Chevaler de nostre Realm ne droit prender chimin sans nostre conge, car issuit
poet le Realm remainer disgarnae de fort gente.

^^re and a ^y in many ^^es.
2 The Law in many Cases has limited a year and a day to be a legal and
convenient time for many purposes; Co. ib. 254. b. 3 Co. l. 5. 107. b. 4. Sir
Henry Constables Case. and Co. l. 8. 100. a. F.N.B. 79. a.
As at the Common Law upon a fine or final judgment, and execution in a writ of
right, the party grieved had a year and a day to make his claim; So the Wife
or heir has a year and a day to bring an appeal of death: If a Villain
remained a year and a day in ancient demesne, he was privileged: If a man be
wounded, poisoned, or, etc. and dies thereof within the year and the day, it
is felony: By the ancient Law if the Feoffee of a disseisor had continued a
year and a day, the entry of the disseisee for his negligence had been taken
away: After judgment given in a real Action, the Plaintiff within the year
and the day may have a Habere facias seisinam, and in an Action of Debt, etc. a
Capias, fieri facias, or a levari facias. And in many other Cases: But this
time of a year and a day in Case of continual claim is since altered by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. 33.

^ecke.
3 By the Statute of West. 1. cap. 4. it is provided, that if a man, Co. l. 5.
107. b. 3 in Sir Henry Constable. Case.
Dog, or Cat escape alive out of the ship, nothing, which was therein, shall be
adjudged wrecke; but that the things shall be kept safe by the view of the
Sheriff, Coroner, or other Bailiffe of the King, etc. So as if any come in and
prove, that they are his Lords, or perished in his custody, they shall be
rendered unto him without delay; and this is but a declaration of the Common
Law; for Bracton (who wrote before this Statute, viz. Tempore H. 3.) delivers
the same in substance; and if the right owner die, his Executors or
Administrators may make the like proof wihtin the same time: So it is also of
Flotfan, Jetsan, and Lagan: And if any living creature come a shore, or the
goods may be known by the mark or cocket, if seaseth.

Co. ib. b. 4.
4 In many Cases concerning time, Estray des.
the Law esteems a year and a day a convenient time, as in Case of an Estray,
if the owner (proclamations being made) do not claim it within a year and a
day, it is forfeit; the like time is also given in Case of descent after entry
or claim: but in Case of wrecke, the year and day shall be accounted from the
taking or seizure of the goods as wrecke; for albeit the property is in Law
vested in the Owner before seizure, yet until he seize and take them into his
actual possession, it is not known, who claims the wrecke; nor to whom the
Owner shall resort to make his claim, and to manifest his proofs: And if the
Owner bring his Action for them within the year and day, it suffices, albeit
the Verdict be not given for the recovery of them, until afterward.

F. N. B. 121. p.
5 If a man be imprisoned upon a Capias pro fine at the Kings suit within a
year after the judgment past against him at the suit of the party, Copias pro
(...)
and the Jailer suffer him to escape the party shall have an Action of Debt
against the G^oler for his damages recovered by the judgment, although he was
not imprisoned at his suit, but if he be taken after the year, the party is
put to his scire facias, etc. Vide infra 189. 41.

131 Sometimes the last part of the last day.
Co Inst. p. 1. 202. a. 2. Co l. 5. 114 b. 2 in Wades case. Co. Inst. p. 1.
206. b. 3.
1 The time of demand of a Rent is such a convenient time before the Sun setting
of the last day of payment, The time of demand and payment of Rent.
as that the money may be numbered and received: Howbeit if the tender be made
to him that is to receive it, upon any part of the Land, at any time of the
last day of payment, and he refuses, the Condition is saved for that time; for
by the express reservation the money is to be paid on the day indefinitely,
and convenient time before the last instant, is the uttermost time appointed by
Law, to the intent that then both parties should meet together; the one to
demand and receive, and the other to pay it, so as the one should not prevent
the other. Vide Dier 130. b. 70. and 222. 22.

Co. Inst. 202. and Pl. a. 3. Comm. 70. b. 1. in Kedwellies Case, against Brand.
2 If the reservation of the Rent be (as Littl. puts the Case. 325.) at
certain Feasts, The like.
with Condition that if it happen the Rent to be behind by the space of a week
after any day of payment, etc. In this Case, the Feoffor needs not demand it
on the Feast day, but the uttermost time for demand is a convenient time (as
aforesaid) before the last day of the week, unless before that the Feoffee
meet the Feoffor upon the land and tender the Rent, as is aforesaid.

Co. ibid.
3 If Rent be granted payable at a certain day, The like.
and if it be behind and demanded, that the grantee shall distraine for it: In
this Case, the grantee need not demand it at the day, but if he demand it at
any time after, he shall distraine for it; For the grantee has election in
this Case to demand it when he will, to enable him to distraine. The like.


4 If Rent be granted payable upon Michaelmas day or within 20 days after; it
seems the grantee must demand it a convenient time before Sunsetting both upon
Michaelmas day, and the last of the 20 days; for in this Case, it seems to be
in the election of the grantor to tender and pay it upon Michaelmas day, or the
twentieth day at his pleasure. Tamen quaere.

Pl. Co. 70. b. in Kedwellies Case against Brand.
5 If Rent be reserved to be paid upon Michaelmas day, The like.
and if it happen to be behind forty days after, that then the Lessor may
re-enter; In this Case, the Lessor must demand it a convenient time before
Sunset upon the fortieth day, to give advantage of re-entry: Howbeit if the
Rent be limited to be paid at another place assigned and not upon the land (as
Rent reserved out of Dale to be payable at Sale) in such Case the Lessor may
take advantage of re-entry without demand, and the Lessee is then bound to
tender it at his peril: but when no place is limited, the land is the place,
because it is principal Debtor. Vide 52. 10.

^^e like.
6 If Rent be reserved to be paid at the Feasts of Michaelmas and the
Annunciation, Dier 142. 50. 3, 4 P. M.
or within a month after the said Feasts by equal portions, and if it happen
the Rent to be behind after any of the said Feasts and days by the space of 8
weeks, that then, etc. In this Case, it seemed to Sanders Chief Justice,
Whiddon, and others, that the 8 weeks should be accounted from the 28 day
after the Feast, because that makes for the benefit of the Lessee and against
the Lessor, who grants, and the 28 day is a day of payment at the Election of
the Lessee, as well as the first Feast and day: Tamen quaere, because no Feast
and day certain is mentioned before, but the Feast day; and the month is not
any day, nor comprehends any day in certain, etc.

Copi-hold.
7 In Case of forfeiture of a Copi-hold upon non-payment either of Rent or Fine,
there must be a demand thereof, Ho. 135. Denny and Lemman.
at the time it grew due, or some time after, of the person of the Tenant.

132 When no time is limited, the Law appoints the most convenient, and in
some Cases, the immediate time.
^^e con^^^ent, and ^^ng life.
1 If a Feofment be made upon Condition, Litt.. 337. Co. Inst. p. 1 208. a. 3.
etc.
that if the Feoffor pay a certain sum of money to the Feoffee, that then it
shall be lawful for the Feoffor and his heirs to enter; in this Case, if the
Feoffor die before the payment made, tender by the heir is void; because it
was limited to be paid by the Feoffor himself, viz. during his life, for
seeing no time is limited, the Law does appoint the time, and that is, during
the life of the Feoffor; wherein diverse diversities are worthy the observation;
As first, between the said Case of the Condition of a feofment in Fee, for the
payment of money, where no time is limited: And the Condition of a bond for the
payment of a sum of money where no time is limited; For in such a Condition of
a bond the money is to be paid presently, viz. in convenient time: And yet in
Case of a Condition of a bond there is a diversity between a Condition of an
obligation, Co. l. 6. 30. b. 4. in Bothies Ca. Co. l. 2. 79, 80, 81. in the Lo.
Cromwels ca.
which concerns the doing of a transitory Act without limitation of any time,
as payment of money, delivery Charters, or the like; for there the Condition is
to be performed presently, that is, in convenient time, and whereby the
Condition of the Obligation the Act that is to be done to the Obligee is of his
own nature local; For there the Obligor (no time being limited) has time
during his life to perform it as to make a feoffment, etc. in Case where the
Obligee does not hasten the same by request. Again, where the Condition of the
Obligation is local, there is also a diversity, when the concurrence of the
Obligor and Obligee is requisite, (as in the Case of a feofment, etc.) and when
the Obligor may perform it in the absence of the Obligee, as to acknowledge
satisfaction in the Court of the Vpper-Bench; for here albeit the knowledge of
satisfaction is local, yet because he may do it in the absence of the Obligee,
he must do it in convenient time and has no time during his life.

Co. ib. 208. b. 3 Co. l. 6 30. b. 4 in Bothies ca. The Lo. Cromwels Case. Co.
ib. 218. b 4
2 There is a diversity between a Condition of an Obligation, The like.
and a Condition upon a feofment, where the Act, that is Local, is to be done
to a stranger, and where to the Obligee or Feoffor himself; as if one make a
feofment in Fee upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall enfeoffe a stranger, and
no time limited; In this Case, the Feoffee shall not have time during his life
to make the feofment; for then he should take the profits in the mean time to
his own use, which the stranger ought to have; and therefore in such Case, he
ought to make the feofment as soon as conveniently he may: And so it is also
of the Condition of an Obligation: But if the Condition be, that the Feoffee
shall re-enfeoffe the Feoffor, there the Feoffee has time during his life for
the privity of the Condition between them, unless he be hastened by request;
and so it is likewise of an Obligation.

Co. ib. 208. b. 4 also in Bothies Ca. in the Lo. Cromwels Ca.
3 There is also a diversity, The like.
when the Obligor or Feoffor is to enfeoffe a Stranger, and when a Stranger is
to enfeoffe the Feoffee or Obligee: As if A. enfeoffe B. of Black-acre, with
Condition, that if C. enfeoffe B. of White-acre, A. shall re-enter; in this
Case C. has time during his life to enfeoffe B. if B. does not hasten it by
request; and so it is also of an Obligation.

Co. ib. 208. b 4 also in Bothies Case.
4 In some Cases, albeit the Condition be collateral, The like.
and is to be performed to the Obligee, and no time limited for the doing
thereof, yet in respect of the nature of the thing, the Obligee shall not have
time during his life to perform it: As if the Condition of an Obligation be, to
grant an Annuity or yearly Rent, to the Obligor during his life, payable
yearly at the Feast of Easter, this Annuity or yearly Rent must be granted
before Easter, or else the obligee shall not have it yearly at that Feast
during his life, and sic de similibus, and so it was resolved by the Judges of
the Common Pleas in Andrews his Case, which see in Dier 14 Eliz. 311.

Co. ibidem. Co. l. 6. in Bothies Case, sol. 30. b. 4.
5 When the Obligor, Feoffor, or Feoffee is to do a sole Act or labor, The like.
as to go to Rome. Jerusalem, etc. In such and the like Cases, the Obligor,
Feoffor, or Feoffee has time during his life to perform it, and cannot be
hastened by request: And so it is also if a stranger to the obligation or
feofment were to do such an Act, he also has time to do it at any time during
his life.

Co. ib. 218. b. 4 Litt.. 352.
6 If a feofment be made upon Condition, The like.
that the Feoffee shall convey the land to the Feoffor and his Wife, to have
and hold to them and the heirs of their two bodies, and for want of such issue
to the right heirs of the Feoffor: here, no time being limited, the Feoffee by
the Law has time during his life, unless he be hastened by the Request of the
Feoffor or the heirs of his body; And if the Feoffor die before such
re-conveyance, the Feoffee (as Littleton says) ought to make a conveyance
thereof as near to the intent of the Condition, as may be, viz. to the Feme
for life without impeachment of Waste, the Remainder to the heirs of his body
on the Feme engendered, and for default of such issue to the right heirs of the
Feoffor: And yet in this Case also (albeit the Feme be a stranger) the Feoffee
has time during his life to make the re-conveyance, Co. ib. 219. a. 4 and l.
2. 79. etc. in the Lord Cromwels Ca.
and is not bound to make it in convenient time, as in some other Cases he
shall, when a stranger is to take the Estate: because the Feoffor, who was
privy to the Condition was to take jointly with the Feme: So it is likewise,
where the Condition is to enfeoffe the Feoffor and a stranger, for then also
the Feoffee has time during his life, unless he be hastened by request:
Otherwise it is (as has been said) where the Condition is to enfeoffe a
stranger or strangers only.

(...) like.
7 If a Feofment in Fee be upon Condition, Co. ib. 219. b 2 and l. 2. ubi sup.
that the Feoffee shall make a gift in tail to the Feoffor: the Remainder to a
stranger in Fee; there the Feoffee has time during his life, as is aforesaid;
because the Feoffor who is party and privy to the Condition, is to take the
first Estate: But if the Condition were to make a gift in tail to a stranger.
the Remainder to the Feoffor in Fee; In this Case, the Feoffee ought to do it
in convenient time; For that the stranger is not privy to the Condition, and he
ought to have the profits presently,

^light.
8 The Statute of Winchester 13 E. 1. ordaines, Co. l. 7. 6. a. 4. in Ashpoles
Case.
that upon a Robbery committed in the day time, the Hundred shall satisfy the
damage to the party Robbed, and the time here intended is not betwixt Sun and
Sun, but betwixt twilight and twilight.

^^ present ^
9 In the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 12. De servientibus, Balivis, Co. l. 8. 119.
b. 4. in Doctor Bonhams Ca.
etc. qui ad computum reddendum tenentur, etc. cum Dominus hujusmodi
servientium dederit eis auditores compoti, and contingat ipsos esse in
arreragiis super compotum suum, etc. arrestentur corpora eorum, and per
testimonium auditorum ejusdem compoti mittantur and liberentur proximae Gaolae
Domini Regis in partibus illis, etc. In this Case, albeit no time be limited,
when the accomptant shall be imprisoned, yet it ought to be done presently, as
it is held in 27 H. 6. 8. And the reason thereof is rendered in Fogassaes Case
in Pl. Com. 17. viz. that the generalty of the time shall be restrained to the
present for the benefit of him, upom whom the pain shall be inflicted, and
with this also agrees Pl. Com. in Stradlings Case 206. b.

^^ demand
10 A man granted a Rent out of certain land pro consilio impenso and
impendendo, Co. Inst. p. 1. 144. a. 1.
to have and hold to him and to his Assigns for term of his life payable at
four Feasts in the year, and for default of payment upon demand, it should be
lawful for him to distraine; the grantee granted the Rent over: The Assignee
after one of the days demanded the Rent, and distrained, and the distress was
adjudged lawful; Co. ib. 153. a. 4
For (in this Case) he needed not to make a demand at any of the days, as in
the Case of re-entry, but he might demand it when he pleased; because it was
only to entitle him to his remedy for his mere duty: For it is not necessary,
that the grantee of a Rentcharge, or secke should demand it at the very time,
when it becomes due, but at any time after it is sufficient: because this is
not like a demand of a Rent upon a Condition, in as much as that is penal and
overthrows the whole Estate, and therefore (in such Case) the time of demand
must be certain, to the end the Lessee, Donee, or Feoffee, may be there to pay
the Rent; But the demand of a Rent-secke or Rentcharge is only a formal mean
to recover that, which is due, and therefore (in that Case) it may be demanded
after it is behind at any time, whether the Tenant be present or no, because
remedies for right are ever favorably extended. Vide Ho. 207, 208.

(...) of pay^^.
11 As to the payment of Rent issuing out of land, Co. l. 10. 127. b. 3. in
Cluns Case.
there are 4 times of payment, The 1 voluntary and not satisfactory, and yet
good to some special purpose; The 2 voluntary, and in Case satisfactory and in
Case not; The 3 legal and satisfactory absolutely, and not coercive, And the 4
legal, satisfactory, and coercive: As to the 1 Lessee, etc. pay his Rent before
the day, this is voluntary, and not satisfactory, but if it be paid in name of
seisin or Rent, although it shall not enure by way of satisfaction, yet it
shall give sufficient seisin to an Assise or other remedy for the Rent. For the
2 if the Rent be payable at Easter, in that Case, if the Tenant pay the rent in
the morning, and the lessor die two hours before noone of the same day, this
payment was voluntary, and yet is good satisfaction against the heir, but not
against the King, 44 E. 3. 3. As to the third the legal time is a convenient
time before the last instant of the day, and is the most extreme time, and is
satisfactory and not coercive, for until the end of the day no remedy by Law is
given, 21 H. 6. 40. As to the fourth, that is when the Rent being due and
arreare is recovered by order of Law, and this is satisfactory, but coercive
withal, concerning all which several times the Poet says, Judicis officium
est, ut res, ita tempora rerum Quaerere, quaesito tempore, tutus eris.

12 Vide 183. 1.

Dier 354. 32. 19 El.
13 A. levies a Fine to B. to the uses in a certain indenture mentioned, wherein
there is a proviso, Notice of p^ment.
that if A. pay or tender 20 l. during his life to B. at the Font-stone of the
Church of Sarum, that it shall be to the use of A. in Fee; In this Case,
because no day is limited, the tender will not be to purpose, unless A. give
notice to B. when he will pay it, to the end B. or his Assignee may be there to
receive it.

133 The third offense is esteemed most heinous.
2 E. 4. 1.
1 The third writ not returned by the Sheriff is a contempt, Sheriffs return.
where an attachment lies. Finch. fol. 10. b.

134 The place also ought to be convenient.
Litt.. 180. Co. Inst. p. 1. 120. a. 1.
1 If a Villain purchase an Advowson full of an Incumbent, At the Chu^
the Lord may immediately come to the Church and claim the Advowson; and by
this claim, it vests presently in him; because if he should stay till an
avoydance, the Villein might alien the Advowson, and so out the Lord of his
presentment: And in this Case, albeit the Advowson is a thing incorporeal and
not visible, yet because the principal duty of the presentee of the Patron is
to be done in the Church, the claim of the Villains Lord must be made there,
and by that claim the Inheritance of the Advowson shall be vested in the Lord;
For every claim or demand to divest any Estate or Interest must be made in the
place, which is most apt for that purpose.

Co. ib. 153. a. 4 and b. 3. and 201. b. 4. Litt.. 341.
2 When Rent is issuing out of Land, and no place limited, Upon the land.
at which it shall be paid, the land is the debtor, and the Rent must be
demanded upon the land: howbeit, if there be house and land, a demand upon the
land is sufficient, unless it be for a Condition broken, for then it ought to
be at the house.

Co. ib. 201. b. 1
3 If the King makes a lease for years rendering a Rent payable at his receipt
at Westminster: The like.
and after the King grants the reversion to another and his heirs: In this
Case, the grantee shall demand the Rent upon the land, and not at the Kings
receipt at Westminster. For as the Law without exp^esse words does appoint the
Lessee in the Kings Case to pay it at the Kings receipt, so in Case of a
subject, the Law appoints the demand to be on the land.

Co ibidem. 15 El. Dier 329
4 If there be a house upon the land, Fore-door.
the Rent must be demanded at the house, and that, not at the back-doore, but
at the fore-doore thereof, because the demand must be ever made at the most
notorious place, and it is not material, whether any person be there or no: and
albeit the Feoffee or Lessee be in the hall or other part of the house, yet the
Feoffor or Lessor need come no farther, then to the fore-doore: for that is the
place appointed by Law, although it be open.

^ Wood.
5 If a Feoffment be made of a Wood only, Co. ib. 202. a. 1. and Dyer ibid.
the demand must be made at the gate of the Wood, or at some high way leading
through ye Wood, or other most notorious place; And if one place be as
notorious as another, the Feoffor has election to demand it, at which he will;
And albeit the Feoffee be in some other part of the Wood ready to pay the rent,
yet that shall not avail him; Et sic de similibus.

^void de^and.
6 If the Feoffor demand the rent on the ground at a place which is not most
notorious, as at the back Door of a House, etc. Co. Inst. p. 1. 202. a. 1.
And in pleading the Feoffor allege a demand of the rent generally at the
House, the Feoffee may traverse the demand, and upon the Evidence it shall be
found for him,; for that such a demand is void, and (indeed) no demand at all.

(...) another ^lace.
7 If rent be reserved to be paid at any place from the land, Co. Ibid.
yet it being in Law a rent, the Feoffor or Lessor must demand it at the place
appointed and agreed upon by the parties, observing the former Rule, concerning
the most notorious place.

^t any place.
8 When the Feoffee or Lessee are absent, Co. ibid. a. 28
then the most notorious place is to be observed, as has been said before: But
if the Feoffee comes to the Feoffor at any place upon any part of the ground
at the day of payment, and offer his rent; Albeit they be not at the most
notorious place, nor at the last instant of the day, yet the Feoffor is bound
to receive it; or else he shall not take any advantage of any Demand of the
Rent for that Day.

^aim of a Remainder.
9 Claim of a Remainder by force of a Condition ought to be upon the Land, Co.
l. 2. 54. a. 2
and a Claim thereof made out of the Land is not sufficient: So if a Villain
purchase a Reversion, the Claim of the Lord ought to be upon the Land. See
Littl. fol. 40. and the Book in 15 Ass. Pl. 12. is good Law, that a Distress
upon the Land after the Condition broken, amounts to a Claim of the Seigniory,
unto which it was annexed.

^xre actions ^ to be ^aght.
10 A. recovers 20 l. against B. Co. l. 7. 1. Bulwers Case. Vide Ho. 195. Hall
and Winkfield.
in the Common Pleas by Action laid in Norfolk, and dies; C. in the Name of A.
(upon the judgment before Execution) out-lawes B. in London, and afterward
takes him upon a Capias Utlagatum in Norfolk, and imprisons him there two
Months: Hereupon B. brings his Action of the Case against C. in Norfolk, and
counts, that to outlaw him Maliciose and de captive machinatus est: And the
doubt in this Case was, whether or no, the Action of the Case were rightly laid
in Norfolk, or should have rather been laid in London, where the Out-lawry was
had, which caused the imprisonment, and a forfeiture of all the Goods of B. But
it was resolved, that it was well laid in Norfolk; because the first Action
was brought there, and there also was the visible tort, viz. the Imprisonment:
For, it is a Maxim in Law, Quod ibi semper debet fieri triatrem, ubi Juratores
meliorem possunt habere facti notitiam. When matter in one County depends
upon matter in another County, the Plaintiff has Election to bring his Action,
in which of the two he pleases, (except the Plaintiff upon the general issue
pleaded, may be prejudiced in his trial) as if two conspire in one County to
indict another in another County; and do it, an Action may be brought in
either; Howbeit, if any other but the Conspirators indict him, it shall be
brought, where the Conspiracy was. If Manasse be mad in Essex, whereby my
Tenants recide in London. I shall have my Action in Essex, and not in London,
for I have nothing in London. If an action be founded upon two things material
and traversable in two several Counties, an Action may be brought in either of
them. An Annuity granted in one County to be paid in another, the action shall
be brought, where the Grant was. He that is robbed may have an Appeal of Felony
for it in every County, where the Goods; but an Appeal of Robbery will lie
only, where the fact was done, a Lease for years made in one County, of Land
in another, Debt shall be brought, where the Lease was made, and waste also
where the Land lies. Every Action which concerns the life of a man, shall be
brought, where the offense was committed. Every issue which arises upon an
action, in which Land shall be recovered, shall be brought where the Land
lies, as in right of Ward of Land or Body, intrusion of Ward, forfeiture of
Marriage, valor maritagii, and Quare Impedit: But Ravishment of Ward, where
the Ravishment was, and a Quare non admisit, where the refusal was. Before the
Statute of 7 R. 2. cap. 10. An Action for Land in diverse Counties, or for
Common in one County appendant to Land in another, was brought by several Writs
n both Counties; but since that Statute by on Writ in Confinio Comitatum; A per
que servitia shall be brought, where the note of the fine was levied.

Dier 46. 8. 31 H. 8.
11 At the Common Law if a man had been wounded in one County, and had died in
another, The Venire where.
the Venire to try the Issue should have been out of both Counties, (except in
London and Middlesex, because such a Jury there could not join,) and in such
case the Issue was only tryable in the K. B. but this Law is altered by 2 and
3 E. 6. 24.

Dyer 38, 50. 29 H. 8.
12 An appeal was brought against two accessaries for abetting in London to a
Robbery committed in the County of Wilts, Appeal, when brought.
and the appeal was brought in the County of Wilts, but by the better opinion
it seems it ought to have been brought in London, where the Abetment was,
because the Jury there might have best notice thereof: but this is now also
settled by 2 and 3 E. 6. 24.

Dyer 51. b. 18. 33 H. 8.
13 If a man maks a Lease for years, rendering rent, Demand of rent.
and if the rent be behind by the space of a Month after the day of payment,
that then the term shall cease; In this case if the rent is reserved to be paid
at some place out of the Land, upon failer of payment or due tender of the rent
at that place, the Lessor may enter without making any Demand upon the Land;
but if the rent were payable upon the Land, or no place named, where it should
be paid, upon such failer, the Lessor cannot enter without demanding the rent
upon the Land, because the rent is payable there of right.

Co. l. 5. 83. b. in the Case of Market overt.
14 If Plate be stolen and sold openly in a Scriveners Shop upon the Market day,
(for every day in London is Market day, Market over^
except Sunday,) such Sale shall not alter the property, but the party shall
have restitution; for a Scriveners Shop is not a Market overt for Plate,
because none will look there for any such thing, Et sic de similibus, etc. but
if the Sale had been openly in a Goldsmiths Shop in London, so as every one
that should stand or pass by the Shop, might have seen it, such sale shall
alter the property; Howbeit, if such Sale be in a Goldsmiths Shop, behind a
curtain, hanging, cubbord, in a Warehouse, or some other part of the House; So
as passengers cannot observe it, such Sale shall not alter the property; for
such places are no Market overt; And observe, that the reason of this case
extends to all the Markets overts in England. Vide Max. 186, 32. and 191, 3.

Dyer 270. 25. 10 Eliz.
15 In Debt upon an Obligation to perform Covenants brought in London, the Issue
was, Place of tria^
whether or no the Defendant was verus possessor of certain Lands in the
County of Bedford, at the time of the Indenture; and it was the opinion of the
Court that the most apt place for that trial was in Com. Bedford, and not in
London. Vide Dyer 305, 58.

Trial in Ire^^nd.
16 If a Peer of Ireland commit Treason in Ireland, Dyer 360. b. 20 Eliz.
he cannot be tried in England, by the Statutes of 26 H. 8. 13. 35 H. 8. 2. 5,
6 E. 6. 11. for he is not a Subject of England, but of Ireland, and the trial
in Ireland, is by Parliament, and not per Pares.

^ender of ^ent.
17 If a Rent be reserved upon a Lease, Hob. 8. Bakers Case.
and the Lessee bound by Obligation to pay it; In this Case, the Lessee is
bound to pay it without demand; Howbeit, he is not bound to seek the Lessor,
but to tender it only upon the Land; for he has bound himself to pay it, but
still as a Rent, and at the place which the Law assigns.

^^bt for Ar^arages.
18 In Debt brought by an Executor for Arrearages of a Rentcharge, due in the
life of the Testator, Hob. 37. Pines Case.
the action ought to be brought in the County where the Land lies, out of
which it issues.

19 Vide Hob. 78. Don Diego, etc. concerning Causes triable in the Admiralty,
etc. 79. Palmer against Pope.

Maxims of Reason taken out of Morality.
135 The Law favors Charity.
^^nder by any (...) an Idiot.
1 Upon a Mortgage, if the Mortgageor die, Co. Inst. p. 1. 206. b. 4.
his heirs within age of 14 years, (where the Land is holden in Soccage,) the
Guardian in Soccage: or within age of 21 years, (the Land being holden by
Knight Service,) the Lord ought to tender the Money for the redemption of the
Land: but if the heir be an Idiot, of what age soever, any man may make the
tender for him, in respect of his absolute Disability; for the Law in this, and
like Cases, is grounded upon Charity.

^^pitals.
2 Albeit upon the foundation of any lay Hospital, or after, Co. ib. 342. a. 2
it was ordained, that one or more Priests should be there maintained to
celebrate Service to the Poor, and to pray for the Soul of the Founder, and
all Christian Souls, or the like, and that the Poor there should make like
Orisons; yet such Hospital is not within any of the Statutes of 27, 31, 32, and
37 H. 8. or of 1 E. 6. for the makers of those Statutes never intended to
overthrow works of Charity, but to take away the abuse, and such Hospitals
being Lay, and not Religious, and for the most part founded or ordained in that
manner.

^ensuit in ^aint per^ptory.
3 In an Attaint, if the Plaintfff after appearance be nonsuit, Co. ib. 139. a.
3.
it is peremptory, and the reason is for the faith and credit; that the Law
(in Charity) gives to the verdict, and for the terrible and fearful judgment,
that should be given against the first Jury, if they should be convicted; And
therefore upon such nonsuit the Plaintiff shall be imprisoned, and his
sureties amercied.

C^ritable (...).
4 Good and Charitable Uses are not taken away by the Statute of 23 H. 8. 10.
albeit the words of the Statute are general, viz. Co. l. 1. 24 a. 2. in Porters
ca.
all like uses: but the intention of the Makers of that Statute was only to
take away Superstitious Uses, and not Good and Charitable Uses.

(...) Services
5 Regularly where entire Services are reserved, Co. l. 6. 1. b 4. in Bruertons
Case.
if the Lord purchase part of the Land, the whole Service is extinct; Howbeit,
when such entire Service; are reserved for works o^ Devotion, Piety, or
Charity, as to marry a poor Virgin yearly, (which Tenure you shall find in 24
H. 8. Br. Tenures 53.) or to find a Preacher, or Ornaments for such a Church
(as you have it in 35 H. 6. 6.) in such cases, albeit the Lord purchase part,
yet the entire service shall remain.

Co. l. 10. 28. a. 4. in the Case of Suttons Hospital.
6 The Kings License by Charter to found an Hospital, Chantery, Future Corp^
etc. are sufficient to make them Corporations capable of endowments, though
they be not yet built, or prepared for such purposes or employments: because
the Kings Charters for Erection of Pious and Charitable Works are to be taken
in the most benign and beneficial sense.

Co. l. 10. 92. b. 4. in Leyfields Case.
7 Regularly, A Deed not showed, good
a copy or proof of a Deed shall not be given in evidence to a Jury, but the
Deed it self ought to be produced; yet if a man has by casualty had all his
Writings burnt, so as he cannot possibly produce it, if that be proved to the
Judges, they may in favor of him, that has sustained so great Loss, suffer
him upon the general issue to prove the Deed by witnesses in evidence to the
Jury; least they should add affliction to affliction: And if the Jury find it,
albeit it were not showed in evidence, yet is it good enough, as appears 28.
Ass. p. 3. And this in charity to him, that has suffered such loss. Vide 28
H. 8. Dyer 29. b. Pl. 199.

Ho. 136. Floods Case.
8 A Devise of Lands to a College is good, Devise.
notwithstanding the Statutes of Mortmain, because within the Statute of 43
Eliz. of Charitable Uses, under these words limited and appointed: See there
also the next Case, a Devise for the repair of an High way; where albeit the
Devise be void, yet the Statute of 43, by reason of the said words (limited and
appointed) does reach it. Collisons Case.

136 De mortuis nil nisi bonum.
Littl.. 399. Co. Inst. p. 1. 244. a 3. Co. l. 8. 101: a. 3. in Sir Rich.
Lechfords case.
1 If there Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne, Bastard eigne and Mulier puisne.
and the Bastard have issue, and die seized of the Land without claim of the
Mulier, in this case the Mulier is barred for ever, albeit the Mulier were
under age at the time of the descent cast, whereas the descent (in their cases)
only puts him that right has to his action, and does not bar him for ever:
And one of the reasons hereof seems to be, because after the Bastards death,
he shall not be branded by the name of Bastard, to the prejudice of him and his
issue after him: For, Justum non est aliquem post mortem facere bastardum, qui
toto tempore vitae suae pro legitimo habebatur: And therefore if there be
Bastard eigne, and a Daughter Mulier puisne, and she be covert at the time of
the Descent, yet is she barred; Also if the Bastard die not, but enter into
Religion, by which a Descent is cast, that shall also bar the Mulier for
ever: Likewise descent of Services, Rents, Reversions upon an Estate tail, or
for life, etc. which bar not the entry of those, that right have, shall bar
the Mulier for ever: So if the Bastard die, and his issue endow the Bastards
wife, the Mulier cannot enter upon the widow, but is barred causa qua supra.

Co. l. 7. 43. in Kennes Case.
2 A Sentence of Divorce may be repealed after the death of the parties, Divorce.
but after their death there can be no Sentence of Divorce given to declare the
marriage void; for that were to traduce the Dead, and to bastardise the issue to
the shame of the deceased.

Co l. 8. 101. b. 4. in Sir Rich. Lechfords case.
3 If a Bastard eigne enter, and die seized, Bastardie.
his wife being with child of a Son, and after the Son is borne, he shall
inherit the Land; for in as much as the Father died in possession, without
interruption, the Mulier shall not allege against the issue Bastardy in his
Father after his death.

137 And therefore, it hates malice and oppression.
^^rious ap^^l.
1 The Common Law abhor malice in seeking the blood of another without cause:
And therefore if A. has the Goods of B. Co. l. 5. 110. a. in Foxleys ca.
by bailement or trover, and B. brings an appeal of Robbery against A. for
taking them feloniously, and it is found, that they were the Goods of the
Plaintiff and that the Defendant came by them lawfully; In this Case, the
Plaintiff shall forfeit those goods to the King for his false and malicious
appeal, as it is adjudged in 3 E. 3. Title Corone, 367.

^prisonment.
2 It seems reasonable, that one, Fitz. 116. 0.
who is in Prison upon a recognisance, shall have a writ of conspiracy upon the
Statute called Articuli super cartas, 28 E. 1. 10. against the Recognisee, if
he find him not Bread and water in Prison.

3 Albeit a man in Prison by process of Law ought to be kept in salva and
arcta custodia, and by the Law ought not to go out; Co. Inst. p. 1. 260. a. 3.
though it be with a Keeper, and with the leave or sufferance of the Jailer;
But yet imprisonment must be, custodia and not poena: for, Carcer ad homines
custodiendos, non ad puniendos dari debet.

^^^se of (...).
4 To prevent and avoid oppression, injure, and injustice, Co. ib. 266. a. 1
the Law prohibits, that a Right, or Chose in Action should be granted or
transferred to a stranger: And therefore says the Mirror (cap. 2.. 17.) Null
charter, null vende, ne null done vault pro penaltment, si le Donor nest seisie
al temps de contracts de deux droits, viz. Del droit de possession, Et del
droit de property: Howbeit such a right or thing in Action may be released,
because that quiets and confirms the present possession and property, and
causes no disturbance, or injustice, but rather prevents them.

138 It favors Virtue.
139 Hates Vice.
^^^ition ^^nful void.
1 A Remainder may enure upon Condition to marry my Daughter, or any other
lawful Condition precedent; Pl. Co. 34. b. 4.
But if the Condition be to kill a man, or to do any other unlawful Act, the
Remainder shall not be good, for the Condition being unlawful, it shall not be
of force to gain any thing in our Law.

^^rd.
2 A man makes a Lease for life to B, Co. Inst. p. 1. 3. 1.
Remainder to the eldest Issue male of B. and to the heirs males of his body,
B. has Issue a Bastard-sonne, he shall not take the Remainder; for, qui ex
damnato coitu nascuntur inter liberos non reputentur: So it is also if a man
make a Lease for life to B. the Remainder to the eldest Issue male of B. to be
begotten of the body of Jane S. whether the same Issue be legitimate or
illegitimate, B. has Issue a Bastard on the body of Jane S. this Son or
Issue shall not take the Remainder, causa qua supra; And it seems also, if
after the birth of the Issue B. had married Jane. S. so as thereby the Issue
becomes Bastard eigne, and had a possibility to inherit, yet shall he not take
the Remainder by the word Issue.

^pement.
3 If the Wife Elope from her Husband, that is, Co. ib. 32. a. 4.
if the Wife leave her Husband, and goes away and tarrieth with an Adulterer,
she shall lose her dower, until her husband willingly without coertion
Ecclesiastical be reconciled to her, and permit her to co-habit with him, all
which is comprehended shortly in these two verses: Sponte virum mulior fugiens;
and adultera facta,
Dote sua careat, nisi sponsi sponte retracta.
And if she goes willingly with or to the Avowterer, this a departure and a
tarrying, albeit she remains not continually with the Avowterer, or tarrieth
with him against her will, or he turn her away; also if she co-habit with her
Husband by the Censures of the Church: In all these Cases she loses her Dower;
See more of this matter in the exposition upon the Statute of West. 2. 34. 13.
E. 1. Vide Co. Inst. part. 2.

Co. ib. 123. a. 4.
4 Some hold, that the Bastard of a Niefe shall be a Villain, Bastard.
and others hold, that if a Villein has a Bastard by a Woman, and after
marries the Woman, that this Bastard is a Villain, but the Law is contrary in
both Cases; For, Vice is so odious in Law, that albeit a Bastard be a reputed
Son, yet is he not such a Son, in consideration whereof an use may be
raised, because in judgment of Law he is nullius filius: And for the same
reason, where the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Wills speaks of Children,
Bastard-children are not within that Statute, neither is the Bastard of a Woman
a Child within that Statute, where the mother conveyes lands unto him. It was
found by Verdict, that Henry the Son of Beatrix, which was the Wife of Robert
Radwel deceased was borne per undecim dies post ultimum tempus legitimum
mulieribus constitutum, and thereupon it was and judged, quod dictus Henricus
dici non debet filius praedicti Roberti secundum Legem and Consuetudinem
Angliae constitutam, that being nine months, according to that of Esdras, Vide
and interroga pregnantem, si quando impleverit novem menses suos, adhuc poterit
matrix ejus retinere partum in semetipsa? and dixi non potest, Domine; Howbeit
the Prince of Conde (father of the Prince now living, and in Rebellion against
the King of France this present year 1652) was borne 14 months after the
death of his father, and it was adjudged possible by the unanimous opinion of
the Physicians of Montpeller, by reason of the excessive grief, which the Lady
was conceived to take at the death of her husband.

Co. ib. 123. b. Litt.. 189, 290.
5 Regularly a Villain cannot sue an Action against his Lord, Appeal of the
Lord for death or Rap^ by the Ville^^
yet sin and vice are so odious in the eye of the Law, that he may have
against his Lord an Action of appeal of the death of his father or other
Ancestor, whose heir he is: And if in such an appeal of death it be found for
the Plaintiff, the Villein is enfranchised for ever: Hinc enim est, Fleta l.
1. ^. 5.
quod eo ipso sunt hujusmodi Domini servos suos amissuri, cum de injuriis
fuerint convicti. And there is no diversity herein, whether he be a Villain
regardant or in gross, although some have held otherwise. Likewise, if a Nife
be ravished by her Lord, she may have an appeal of Rape against him: For by
the general purview of the Statutes of Westminster. 1. 13. West. 2. 35. 6 R. 2. 6. 11
H. 4. 13, and 1 E. 4. 1. that give the appeal of Rape, the Niefe shall have an
appeal of Rape against her Lord: And it seems by the ancient Authors of the
Law, that this so heinous an offense was severely punished by loss of eyes and
privy members: However of old time it was felony, which you may see at large in
the second part of the Institutes upon West. 1. 13. see also more of Rape in
the third part of the Institutes, cap. Rape.

Co. ib. 2^6. b 2
6 Obligations or other transactions, Unlawful ac^
with enjoyne men to do any Act, which is malum in se, are invalid and not in
Law: As if a man be bound, upon Condition, that he shall kill J. S. the bond is
void: So if a man make a feofment, upon Condition, that the Feoffee shall kill
I. S. the Estate is absolute and the Condition void: so as he, who intends any
unlawful Act, is still by the Law crossed in the design, or purpose, he aims at.

Dier 28. a 16. 31 H. 8.
7 Vice is so odious in the eye of the Law, Blood corrupt.
that it will not suffer any to inherit, who derives his title through blood
tainted with any Capital offense: As if a man has issue two Sons, and the
eldest in the life of the Father is attainted for felony, and dies living the
Father, and after the Father dies seized of the land in Fee, this land shall
descend to the younger Son, as heir to his Father, if the eldest Son has
no issue living, but if he has issue in life, who by the Law should inherit
the Land, if it were not for the Attainder, and albeit he has committed no
offense, yet the land shall not descend to him nor yet to the younger Brother,
but shall escheate to the Lord of the Fee.

140 Interest Reipublicae, ne maleficia remaneant impunita.
^^feit in^^ no good (...).
1 Where an Indictment is found insufficient, Co. l. 4. 45. a. 1 in Vaux his
Case.
the offender may be indicted again; for in such Case Autre fois acquit, or
convict is no good plea; because that plea is allowed upon that Maxim of the
Common Law, viz. that the life of a man shall not be put in jeopardy twice for
one and the same offense; Howbeit this is intended upon a lawful acquital or
Condition, for otherwise his life was never put in jeopardy: but when the
Indictment or other proceeding against him are insufficient, he may be
re-indicted: For the Law does abhor, that great offenses should pass
un-punished, according to these ancient Maxims of the Law and State, Maleficia
non debent remanere impunita, and impunitus continuum affectum tribuit
delinquendo, and minatur innocents, qui parcit nocentibus. Howbeit if upon an
insufficient Indictment of felony a man has had judgment, quod suspendatur and
collum, and so is attainted, which is the judgment and end, that the Law has
appointed for felony, in this Case, he shall not be again indicted and
arraigned, until that judgment be reversed by Error.

(...) it goods (...).
2 The Reason why bona waviata, (viz. Co l. 5. 109. a. 4 in Fauxleys Case.
such shelme goods as a felon in flying waives, or leaves behind him) are
forfeit to the King, and that the owner shall in such Case lose his property in
them, is, because of the negligence and default in the owner; for that he made
not fresh suit to apprehend the felon; for, Interest Reipublicae, ne maleficia
remaneant impunita, and impunitas semper ad deteriora invitat: And therefore
the Law has imposed this penalty upon the owner, that if the felon by his
industry, and fresh suit be not taken, by such default he shall lose all his
goods which the felon so leaves behind him.

^^^es taken intend^^.
3 In many Cases Penal Statutes shall be taken by intendment, Co. l. 11. 44. b.
in Alexander Pollers Case.
and not according to the express words thereof, especially, when it is to
remedy a mischief, in advancement of Justice, and for the suppressim of Crimes
and heinous offenses, of which see many examples in the book at large quoted in
the margent.

^ption.
4 In a writ of Reception, F. N. B. 72. h.
where after Replevin the party distraines again for that same thing, the
Sheriff is commanded to apprehend the party so offending, and so to chastise
him by amerciament, quod castigatio illa in casu consimili timorem aliis
praebeat delinquendi.

(...) brea^^.
5 A man was put into the Stocks upon suspicion of Felony, Dier 99. a. 60. 1
Max.
and another comes, who lets him go at large, this is felony at the Common Law
de frangend. prison. albeit the party, that escaped, be not indicted for felony.

^^lt. ^^^der.
6 In Banco Reg. in the Case of one Tripcony the Jury to the Nisi prius gave the
Plaintiff but 40 l. damages for the cutting of his right hand, Dier 105. a 4.
1, 2 P.M.
and they were increased by the Justices to 100 l. because this was matter
apparent to the Court, and the offense and trespass therein was carried about
with the person; howbeit, in the Case of Sir John Bonham against the Lo.
Sturton for slander, where the damages were 500 Marks the Justices said they
could not lessen them.

Dyer 211. 33. 4 Eliz.
7 By the better opinion, albeit the Statutes of 27 H. 8. 4. and 28. H. 8. 15.
Admiral.
be penal, and ordain, that Commissions to hear and determine piracies shall
be awarded to the Admiral and others to be named by the Chancellor, yet the
Lord Keeper (being no Chancellor) may grant such Commissions, and that for the
necessity to punish such offenses.

141 It favors Justice and right.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 33. a. 1.
1 In a writ of Dower brought against the heir tout temps prist is a good plea
(before demand) to bar the woman of the mean values and damages, because the
heir holds by title, Plea in dow^
and does no wrong till a demand be made; It is otherwise in a writ of Aid,
Cosinage, etc. where the land and damages are to be recovered; for there such a
plea is not good: because in that Case the Tenant of the land has no title,
but holds the land by wrong.

Co. ib. 103. a. 4 and b. 1.
2 If there be Lord and Tenant by Homage Ancestrel, Homage ancestrel conti^nued.
and the Tenant alien the land in Fee, although it be but upon a Condition,
which is performed at the day, yet is the tenure gone for ever, because the
privity and Estate being once discontinued, it is for ever after extinct: But
if the land be recovered against the Tenant upon a faint title, and the Tenant
recover the same again in an Action of an higher nature, there the Homage
Ancestrel remains, for the right (which is favors in Law) was a sufficient
mean for the continuance thereof: so it is also, if he had reversed it in a
writ of Error.

Co. Inst. p. 1. 143. a. 4.
3 Before the Statute of quia emptores terrarum if a man had made a feofment in
Fee rendering Rent, he might have distrained for the Rent arreare of Common
Right, and in Case he had made no reservation of Rent or service, yet the
Feoffee should then have held of the Feoffor by such services as the feoffor
held over of the Lord paramount; So as albeit the Feoffor were negligent and
made no provision or reservation of Rent or service, yet the Law it self so
much regarded Equity and Justice, that it created a tenure, where the party was
careless and reserved none.

Co. ib. 253. a. 4
4 Remedies for rights are always favorably extended: Rights favo^rably
extended.
and therefore the grantee of a Rentcharge and Rent-secke may demand them
after they are behind at any time, whether the Tenant be present or no, and it
is not necessary, that the grantee should demand them at the very time when
they become due: It is otherwise of a Rent upon a Condition, because that is
penal and overthrows the whole Estate, and therefore the time of demand (in
that Case) must be certain, to the end the Lessee, Donee, or Feoffee may be
there to pay the Rent for the redemption of the Estate.

Litt.. 307. Co. ib. 194. b. 3 Litt.. 308.
5 If a man be disseised, Release to one joint-tenant.
and the Disseisor make feofment to two men in Fee, and the Disseisee releaseth
by his deed to one of the feoffees; in this Case, it shall enure to both the
Feoffees, because they have a Rightful Estate by Law, and come not in by wrong
done to any: So likewise if the Disseisor make a lease to one for life, the
remainder to another in Fee, and the Disseisee release to the Tenant for life,
this shall enure to him in remainder, and the Estate of the Disseisee is
thereby quite extinct, causa qua supra.

Co. ib. 125. b. 3
6 The Statutes of 3, and 4 E. 6. cap. 4. and 13 El. cap. 6. Constat and
i^speximus.
which ordain Constats and Inspeximus of letters Patents are to be favorably
construed for advancement of the ^emedy and right of the subject.

^^gment ac^^ding to (...).
7 Estopels, Co. ib. 227. a. 4
which bind the Interest of the Land (as the taking of a lease of a man's own
land by deed indented, and the like) being specially found by the Jury, the
Court ought to judge according to the special matter; for albeit Estoples
regularly must be pleaded and relied upon by an apt conclusion, and the Jury is
sworn ad veritatem dicendam, yet when they find veritatem facti, they pursue
well their oath, and the Court ought to judge according to Law and right: So
also may the Jury find a warranty being given in evidence, though it be not
pleaded, because it binds the right, except it be in a writ of Right, when
the Mise is joined upon the mere right.

^. 33 H. 8. (...).
8 Albeit the Statute of 32 H. 8. 33. Co. ib. 238. a. 3
(which gives entry to the Disseisee, or his heirs, if the Disseisor were not
in peaceable possession five years before the descent cast) be a penal
Statute, yet it is taken favorably for the advancement of the ancient right;
For whether the disseisin be with force or without force, it is within the
Statute: and albeit the Statute speaks of him, that at the time of the
descent had title of Entry, etc. or his heirs; yet the Successors of bodies
Politic or Corporal (so you hold your self to a disseisin) are within the
remedy of this Statute: but an Abator, Intrudor, or the Feoffee or Disseisor
are not within the Statute, nor he in reversion, or remainder, that had not
right of Entry at the time of the descent cast.

^ery descent ^^i not toll ^^y.
9 Albeit the Law gives much favor to descents, Litt.. 394. Co. ib. 241. b. 2
yet when the title of a descent commenceth by wrong, for the advancement of
the ancient right, the Law tieth a descent to strict terms: and therefore when
a descent is cast, if immediately after, there be not a person capable of it
which may take it, such descent cannot toll the entry of him, that right has,
but his Entry is congeable. As if a Feme be seized of land in Fee, wherein I
have title of Entry, and the Feme takes Baron, and they have issue, and after
the Feme dies seized, and after the Baron dies, and the issue enters, etc. In
this Case, I may enter upon the possession of the issue, because the issue
comes not to the tenement immediately by descent after the death of his mother,
but by the death of his father; For here was but a descent of a reversion at
the time of the dying seized, so as the Fee and franktenement together did not
immediately after the decease of the Feme descend to the heir; and if a dying
seized takes not away the Entry of him, that right has, at the time of the
descent, it shall not do it by any matter ex post facto: So if a Disseisor die
without heir, his Wife priviment enseint with an issue, and after the issue is
borne, who enters into the land; In this Case, he has the land by descent,
and yet thereby the Entry of the Disseisee shall not be taken away, because (as
Littleton says) the issue comes not to the lands immediately by descent after
the decease of his father: Likewise, if a Disseisor make a gift in tail, the
remainder in Fee, and the Donee dies without issue, leaving his Wife priviment
enseint with a son, and he in the remainder enter, and after the son is
borne, who enters into land, this descent shall not take away the entry of the
Disseisee, causa qua supra.

^cent tols (...) t^try.
10 B. Tenant in tail enfeoffeth A. in Fee, Co. Inst. p. 1. 246. a. 2.
A. has issue within age and dies, B. abateth and dies seized, the issue of
A. being still within age, this descent shall bind the infant for the issue in
tail is remitted: And the Law does more respect an ancient right in this Case,
then the privilege of an Infant, that had but a defeasible Estate.

^cent upon ^ession, no (...).
11 No glorious pretext of an Act (who though it be of Religion) shall work a
wrong to a stranger, that has right, Co. ib. 248. b. 3
to bar him of his entry; but it must be done by the Act of God, viz. by
death: and therefore if the Disseisor have issue and enter into Religion, such
a descent shall not bar by the disseisee of his entry, but he may well enter,
notwithstanding any such profession, or pretext of Religion.

Litt.. 417. Co. ib. 252. a. 4
12 If a man has cause of entry into diverse lands in several Towns in the same
County, if he enter in any parcel thereof in the name of all, Entry how be done.
by such entry he shall obtain a good possession and seisin of all; The like
also may be said of Livery of seisin: and this is in favor of right and
Justice.

Litt.. 472. Co. ib. 275. b. 4
13 If a man diseised by two, and he releaseth to one of them, he, Release to
Disseisors.
to whom the release is made, shall hold out his Companion, and by such release
shall gain the sole possession and Estate in the land: but if a Disseisor
enfeoffe two in Fee, and the Disseisee release to one of them, this shall enure
to them both; because these come in by feofment, but those by wrong.

Co. ib. 278. a. 3.
14 If two Disseisors be, and they enfeoffe another, Release to Disseisors.
and take back an Estate for life or in Fee; here, albeit they remain
Disseisors to the Disseisee, as to have an Assise against them, yet if the
Disseisee release to one of them, the releasee shall hold out his Companion,
because their Estate in the land is by feofment: Again, if there be two
Disseisors, and they be disseised, and release to their Disseisor, and then the
Disseisee release one or both of them, yet the second Disseisor shall re-enter,
for they shall not hold the land against their own release: If their be two
Femes joint Disseisors, and the one takes husband, and the Disseisee release
to the other, she is solely seized, and shall hold out the husband and wife,
because she claims by a just title, viz. by the release, but they came in by
wrong.

Co. ib. 279. b. 1 Litt.. 478.
15 Dormit aliquando vis moritur nunquam; Right can^ die.
for of such an high estimation is right in the eye of the Law, that the Law
preserves it from death and destruction; trodden down it may be, but never
trodden out; for where it is said, that a release of right does in some Cases
enure by way of extinguishment; It is to be understood (as Littleton does.
478.) in respect of him, that makes the release, or in respect that by
construction of Law it enureth not alone to him, to whom it is made, but to
others also, who be strangers to the release, which is a quality of an
inheritance extinguished: As if there be Lord and Tenant, and the Tenant make a
lease for life the remainder in fee, if the Lord release to the Tenant for
life, the Rent is wholly extinguished, and he in remainder shall take benefit
thereof; So when the heir of a Disseisor is disseised, and the Disseisor make
a lease for life, the remainder in fee, if the first disseisee release to the
Tenant for life, this is said to enure by way of extinguishment, for that it
shall enure to him in remainder, who is a stranger to the lelease, and yet in
truth the right is not extinct, but does follow the possession, viz. the Tenant
for life has it during his time, and he in remainder to him and his heirs,
and the right of the inheritance is in him in the remainder; for a right to
land cannot die, or be extinct in deed; and therefore if after the death of
Tenant for life, the heir of the Disseisor bring a writ of Right against him
in the remainder, and he join the Mise upon the mere right, it shall be found
for him, because in judgment of Law he has by the said release the right of
the first Disseisee.

Co. ib. 315. a. 1
16 Remedies to come to rights or duties are always taken favorably: Remitters
^^voured in (...)
and therefore there is a diversity between money given by way of Attornment,
and where it is given as parcel of a Rent by way of seisin of the Rent: for
albeit the Rent be not due before the day, yet a payment of parcel of the Rent
before hand is an Actual seisin of the Rent to have an Assise; and so it is
also, if he give an Ox, an Horse, a Sheep, a Knife, or any other valuable
thing in name of seisin of the Rent before hand, this is good, whereas money or
any other thing given in name of attornment is only a seisin in Law, which the
grantee has before actual seisin: So as a payment of part of the Rent in name
of seisin is more beneficial for the Grantee, being both an actual seisin and
an attornment in Law also; and yet being given before the day on which the Rent
is due, it shall not be abated out of the Rent, in such sort that, as to give
seisin of the Rent; it is taken as part of the Rent, but as to the payment of
the Rent, it is accounted as no part of the Rent; and such prevarications the
Law permits, when a right is concerned.

^^emiters fa^^ured in law.
17 If Tenant in tail discontinue, and has issue a Daughter, Litt.. 671. Co.
Inst. p. 1. 353. b. 4.
and die, and the Daughter being of full age takes Baron, and the discontinuee
releaseth to the Baron and Feme for their lives, this is a Remitter to the
Feme, and the Feme shall be in by force of the entaile; because Remitters to
ancient Rights are much favored in Law: It is otherwise of a descent, for if a
woman be disseised, and being of full age takes husband, and then the
Disseisor dies seized, this descent shall bind the wife, albeit she was
covert, when the descent was cast; because she being of full age, when she
took Baron, did not claim her Interest in the land.

(...). West. 2. (...). 4.
18 There has been a Question in our Books upon these words of the Statute of
West. 2. cap. 4. (by default.) as for example, whether a recovery being had by
default in an Action of waste against Tenant in Dower or by the Courtesy, a
Quod ei deforceat lies by the said Statute; but (doubtless) it does: for
albeit the Defendant may give in evidence, if he knows it, yet when he makes
default the Law presumes he knows not of it, and it may be, that he in truth
knew not of it; and therefore it is reason, that seeing the Statute, which is a
beneficial Statute, has given it him that he be admitted to his Quod ei
deforceat, in which writ the truth and right shall be tried: Ind so it is also
of a Recovery by default in an Assise, albeit the Recognitors of the Assise
give a Verdict, a Quod ei deforceat lies; and all this, as to this point was
resolved in P. 33 El. Rot. 1125. And so the doubt in 41 E. 3. 8. is well
resolved: if Tenant for life make default after default, and he in reversion is
received and pleads to issue, and it is found by Verdict for the Demandant, the
default and Verdict are causes of the judgment, and yet the Tenant shall have a
Quod ei deforceat, in favor of Right and Justice, especially when the Statute
intends him as much.

(...) like.
19 If the Baron discontinue the land of the Feme, Littl.. 677. Co. ib. 356. b. 4
and the discontinuee demise the same land to the Feme for term of her life,
and deliver seisin accordingly; In this Case, it seems whether the Baron agree
or disagree to the livery, it is a Remitter to the Feme, it is otherwise if she
had been sole: but one of the reasons why in that Case she is remitted is, for
that the Law having once restored her ancient and better right will not suffer
the disagreement of the husband to divest it out of her, and so to revive the
discontinuance, and revest the wrongful Estate in the discontinuee; because
Remitters tending to the advancement of ancient rights are very much favored
in Law: so likewise, if lands be given to a man and the heirs females of his
body, and he makes a feofment in Fee, and takes back an Estate to him and his
heirs, and dies having issue a Daughter, and leaving his wife Grossement
enseint with a Son, in this Case also, the Daughter is remitted, and albeit
the Son be afterward borne; he shall not revest the Remitter.

Litt.. 678. Co. ib. 357. a. 3
20 If the Baron discontinue the land of the Feme, The like.
and the discontinuee is disseised, and after the disseisor demiseth the land
to the Baron and Feme for term of their lives, this is a Remitter to the Feme;
for Remitters that restore ancient right are so much favored in Law, that the
Estate made by the disseisor (who comes to the land by wrong and upon whom the
entry of the discontinuee is lawful) does remit the wife, and devesteth all out
of the discontinue, albeit he has a warranty of the land.

Litt.. 693. Co. ib. 363. b. 1
21 When the entry of a man of full age is congeable, Right of entry
if he take an Estate of the land for life, in tail, or in fee, he is thereby
remitted, unless it be by Indenture, matter of record, or otherwise, whereby
he may be concluded or estopt: It is otherwise where he has but right of
action, for in that Case by taking such an Estate she shall not be remitted,
and so observe a diversity betwixt right of action and right of entry, when his
entry is lawful.

Co. l. 3. 86. a. 4. in the cases of Fines. Justice. Windams Ca.
22 Where alienation was made in mortmaine, 17 E. 3. 7. El. 20. Tenant not
compellable to attorne.
A fine is levied of land holden in ancient demesne, 31 E. 3. Tit. Ancient
demesne, 16. an infant levied a fine, 36 H. 6. 24. Pl. 19. A fine levied of the
reversion of land holden in Capite without license, 45 E. 3. 6. or where Tenant
in tail of a reversion or remainder (before the Statutes of fines, 4 H. 7. and
32 H. 8.) had levied a fine thereof; in all these cases and the like, the
Tenant was not compellable to attorn, because the Estate that passed by the
fine was not lawful, but either prohibited by the Common Law, or by some
Statute, and for the most part were voidable.

Co. l. 4. 26. a. 4. in the Copihold cases, in Melwiches Case.
23 The Lessee of a Copi-holder, An Ejectione firmae g^anted to a Copiholder.
for a year may maintain an Ejectione firmae, for in as much as his term is
warranted by the Law by force of the general Custom of the Realm, it is
reason, that, if he be ejected, he should have an Ejectione firmae, for that it
is a speedy course for a Copi-holder to gain the possession of the land
against a stranger; being no more, then what right requires to be yielded unto
him for the recovery of his Estate.

Co. l. 5. 28. a. in the cases of Executors, in Middletons Case.
24 An Executor before probat may release an Action, Release by Executor before
probat good.
albeit before probat he cannot bring an Action, because of the right of Action
that is in him at the Common Law, it is otherwise of an Administrator, for if
A. release, and after take administration, this shall not bar him, for the
right of Action was not in him at the time of the release made, Vide 18 H. 6.
43. b. Greysbrockes Case, Plowd. 277, 278. 21 E. 4. 24. To Executors prove the
will, and the third refuses, yet he may afterward release, for the ancient
right, that remains in him, Litt. fol. 117. If one be bound to pay a sum at
the day to come, before the day he cannot bring an Action of debt, yet a
release of all actions before the day bars him, because of the present right
and duty that he then had in him.

Co. l. 6. 1. b. in Bruertons ca.
25 If a man hold land by the service of ayding the Sheriff, Tenure for Justice
not extinct.
or to be High-Constable of England, which are for the advancement of Justice
(for the determination of diverse cases belong to the Court of the Constable and
Marshal, and the Sheriff is a Minister of Justice) or if the tenure be, ad
custodiendum Recorda Domini Regis, as the Abbot of St. Barthelm. in Smithfield
held (as appears in the Records of the Tower in 7 R. 2. membr. 15. in Dorss.)
in these and the like cases, if the Lord purchase parcel of the tenancy, yet
the whole service remains, quia ista concernunt administrationem Justitiae.

Co. l. 6. 62. a. 3. in Catesbies Case.
26 In Catesbies Case in the 5 Rep. the single point in question was, A year
for laps.
whether the six months of laps to give the Bishop power to collate should be
accounted by 28 days for each month, or by the half year, and one of the
reasons there alleged for the account by the half year was this: when a
computation in such case is ambiguous; it is always requisite to determine it
for the relief and remedy of him, that right has, viz. of the Patron, and for
the preservation of his right to allow him the longest time of the two, to the
end he may not lose his right.

(...) ^5. H. 8. 6
27 Upon the Stat. of 35 H. 8. 6. to return a Tales, Co. l. 10. 103. b. 2 in
Alfrid Denbawds ca.
albeit the title thereof is usually december Tales, yet the Sheriff (although
there be but one) Iuror appear or all be challenged but one) may at first
return 11 to that one, because it is for the speeding of trials, and that
Statute being ordained for the furtherance and advancement of expedition in
Justice shall have a benign and favorable interpretation.

^^ssisee (...).
28 If a man be disseised of a Manor, F.N.B. 33. q.
to which an Advowson is appendant, and the Advowson happen to be void, the
disseisee may present, and have a Quare Impedit, albeit he has not entered into
the Manor, by reason of the ancient right that is in him.

^^ers. ^^owson.
29 If a man traverse an Office found of a Manor, F.N.B. 34. p.
to which an Advowson is appendant, and upon the traverse the King demiseth the
Manor to him without making any mention of the Advowson, and after the Church
is void, here, he that tenders the traverse shall have the presentment, if the
traverse be found for him.

^^^ntment de Bishop.
30 If a man recover an Advowson, and the six months are past, F.N.B. 38. f
yet if the Church be void, the Patron may pray a writ to the Bishop, and shall
have it, and if the Church be void, when the writ comes to the Bishop, the
Bishop is bound to admit his Clerk; and it seems also reason, if the Patron
after the six months present to the Bishop, the Church being then void, that
the Bishop ought to present his Clerk, in respect of the right, that is in the
Patron.

31 If the King write to the Justices to prorogue the Assise, F.N.B. 153. h.
because the defendant is in his service, etc. yet ye Justices ought to
proceed, and not to cease for that writ, because it is for the advancement of
Justice and to do right.

^^e Judges (...) to give ^^^eous ^^ment.
32 In Dive and Manninghams Case in the Commentaries, Pl. Co. 66. b. 3. Dive and
Manninghams Case, and 84. b. 4 in Partridges Case.
albeit the Defendant had pleaded Judgment si action, whereas he ought to have
pleaded non est factum (Dive the Sheriff having taken a bond of a man in
execution to secure himself, which was void by the express words of the
Statute of 23 H. 6. 10.) notwithstanding such default in right pleading, the
Judges finding the Sheriff to have no just cause of action (because that
Statute made the bond clearly void) gave judgment against Dive the Plaintiff.
So H. 7. E. 4. 31. Fitz. Title judgment, 50. where an action of trespass was
brought against T^lly and Woddy for five boxes with writings taken, etc. Tilly
pleads not guilty, and Woddy makes title to him by a gift, and the Plaintiff
traverseth the gift, and upon these matters they were at issue, and Tilly was
found guilty, and the issue was found for Woddy and against the Plaintiff: And
here albeit the Issue was found against Tilly, yet by the clear opinion of the
Court the Plaintiff shall not have judgment against him, for it was found
betwixt the Plaintiff and Woddy; that the Plaintiff had no title, and
therefore the Judges (ex officio) ought to give judgment against him, vide plus
ibid.

^^^ter to (...) and (...).
33 If land be given to Baron and Feme in special tail, Co. Inst. p. 1. 354. a.
3.
and after the husband alien the land in fee, and take back an Estate to him
and his wife for their lives; in this Case, ye husband against his own
alienation (if he had taken the estate to himself alone) could not have been
remitted; but when the estate is made to the husband and wife, albeit they be
but one person in law and no moities between them, yet for that the wife cannot
be remitted in this case, unless the husband be remitted also, and for that
remitters are much favored in law, because thereby the more ancient and better
rights are restored again, therefore in this case in judgment of law both
husband and wife are remitted.

Co. ib. 194. a. 3
34 A release by the disseisee to one of the disseisors shall enable him to hold
out his companion, because they are in merely by wrong; A release to
usurpation.
howbeit if two men do usurp by a wrongful presentation to a Church; and
their Clerk is admitted, instituted and inducted, and the rightful Patron
release to one of them, this shall enure to them both; for that the usurpers
came not in merely by wrong, but their Clerk is in by admission and
institution, which are Judicial Acts: and usurpation shall work a Remitter to
one that has a former right.

Co. ib. 297. a. 2
35 There is a diversity betwixt a bare assent without any right or interest,
and an assent coupled with a right or interest: Attornment. Confirmation
and therefore an Attornment cannot be made for a time or upon Condition,
because that is a bare assent; but if a Parson make a lease for 100 years, the
Patron and Ordinary may confirm 50 of those years, for they have an interest,
and may charge in time of vacation: so if a disseisor make a lease for 100
years, the disseisor may confirm parcel of those years, but then it must be by
apt words; for he must not confirm the lease or demise, or the Estate of the
Lessee, because then the addition for parcel of the term would be repugnant,
when the whole was confirmed before: but the confirmation must be of the land
for part of the term, etc.

Co. ib. 277. b. 4
36 If A. disseiseth B. to the use of C. and B. releaseth to A. this shall take
away the agreement of C. to the disseisin, because otherwise it should make him
a wrong-doer: so if the disseisor be disseised, and the disseisee releaseth to
the second disseisor; this takes away the right of the first disseisor had
against the second; for a relation of an Estate gained by wrong shall never
defeat an Estate subsequent gained by right; against a single opinion in 14 H.
8. 18. never seconded by any other since.

Hob. 13. Sir Daniel Nortons Case.
37 If the Vnder-Sheriffe Covenant with the High Sheriff, Skeriffes.
that he will not serve executions of above 20 l. without his special warrant,
this Covenant is void, because it is against Law and Justice.

142 That, which is not tortious in it self, cannot be tortious to any.
Co. lib. 11. 98. b. 1. in Edw. Seymers Case.
1 If there be Tenant in tail, Remainder in tail, Remainder not divested
the Reversion in in Fee to the Tenant in tail, the Tenant in tail bargains
and sels the land and levies a Fine to the bargainee, who enfeoffes I. S. in
this Case, by the feofment of the bargainee to I. S. the Remainder in tail is
not displaced or put to a right; for the bargainee had an Estate in Fee-simple
determinable upon the death of the Tenant in tail without issue, and when he
made the feofment his determinable Fee-simple in possession and his absolute
Fee-simple expectant upon the Estate tail in remainder did pass and did not
divest the remainder: for the feofment, which is not tortious in it self,
cannot be tortious to another.

143. Interest Reipublicae, ne Curia Domini Regis deficeret in Justicia
exhibenda.
A Letter of Attorney, a P^nnell.
1. If a man make a Letter of Attorney to two, to do any act, Co. Inst. pars 1.
181. b. 3.
if one of them dye, the survivor shall not do it; but if a Venire facias be
awarded to four Coroners to impannel and return a Jury, and one of them dye,
yet the other shall execute and return the same, because this last is for the
execution of justice.

Tenants is common shall join in Assize.
2. If there be two Tenants in Common of 20 s. Rent, Co. ibid. 197. a. b.
a pound of Pepper, or such like thing as will admit severance, if they be
arreare, they shall bring several Assizes for them, because of their several
titles; but if the Rent be an entire thing, which cannot be severed or divided,
as an Hawke, Horse, or the like, in such case they shall join in the Assise,
for otherwise they should be without remedy; and thus they must do, Ne Curia
Dom. regis, etc. And Lex non debet deficere conquerentibus in justicia
exhibenda; besides, if they should not join, they should have damnum and
injuriam, and yet should have no remedy by Law, which would be inconvenient,
for the Law will that in every case where a man is wronged and endamaged, that
he shall have remedy: Aliquid conceditur ne injuria remanent impunita, quod
alias non concederetur: Vide plus ibidem.

A Villain.
3. A man cannot be properly said to be dispossessed of a Villain, Co. ibid. 307.
a. 1.
either in gross, or regardant (unless he be dispossessed of the M. too) for
otherwise the Law would have given a remedy against the wrong doer, as the Law
does in case of a Ward, because the Lord may seize his Villain whersoever he
finds him.

The Lessee of a Copyholder ^^y have an Ejectment.
4. The Lessee of a Copiholder for a year may maintain an Ejectione firm, for
in as much as hi^ term is warranted by the Law, Co. l. 4. 26. a. 4. in
Melwitches case.
by force of the general custom of the Realm, it is reason, that if he be
ejected he should have an Ejectione firm, for otherwise he should be without
remedy: And Interest reipublicae, ne Curia, etc.

(...). West. 2. ^ 28.
5. The Statute of Westminster 2. ca. 28 provides, Quod quotiescunque de cetero
exercerit in Cancelleria, Co. l. 7. 4. a. 2. in Bulwers case.
quod in uno casu reperitur breve, and in consimili casu, cadente sub eodem
jure, and simili indigente remedio, non reperitur: concordent Clerici in
Cancelleria in brevi faciendo, etc. vel ad proprium Parliamentum de consensu
Jurisperitorum fiat breve. And then concludes with this Maxim in Law, Quod
Curia Domini Regis non debet deficere conquerentibus in justicia perquirenda.
Upon which Statute and ground diverse things are admitted, in consimili casu.
Vide plus ibidem.

No error be^^re full Judgment.
6. The Defendant in account, after judgment to account, Co. l. 11. 36. a. 4.
Medcalfes case.
and before judgment final brings Error, but it was not allowed; so in an
action brought against two, one pleads to the issue, and the other confesses
it, and thereupon judgment passes against him, yet he shall not have Error
till the plea be determined against the other: Vide plus ibidem. And the reason
of these and the like cases is, because if the Record should be removed before
the whole matter be determined, there would be a Failer of Right; for the
Judges of the Kings Bench cannot proceed upon a matter which is not yet
determined.

^eturne of the ^^eriff.
7. If a Sheriff return upon a Replevin (alias or pluries) that he has sent
to the Bailiff of the Franchise, who has made him no return, F. N. B. 68. f. g.
or that he will not make deliverance of the Cattle, in such case a Non omittas
shall issue forth (alias and pluries) to cause the Sheriff to enter the
Liberty, and to make return; or if the Bailiff make no return, or will not
make deliverance, it seems that by the Statute of West. 1. ca. 27. upon such
returns the Sheriff may (without Writ) enter the Liberty and make deliverance
of the Cattle, in like manner as the Sheriff may do by the Statute of
Marlebridge ca. 21. where a plea De vetit. Nav. is in the County by plaint
before the Sheriff, and the Sheriff sends to the Bailiff of the Liberty to make
deliverance, and he does nothing, in this case also the Sheriff may (without
Writ) enter the Liberty and do it. Likewise if the Sheriff upon a Pluries
return, that the Defendant has conveyed the Cattle into another County, or
that he has commanded the Bailiff of the Franchise, who returns that the
Cattle are eloined into diverse Liberties, so that he cannot have the view of
the cattle to make deliverance, or that the Defendant has eloyned the Cattle
into diverse places unknown, or that the Defendant has imparked them in the
Rectory of the Church of O. that he cannot make deliverance, etc. Upon these
returns of the Sheriff the Plaintiff shall have a Writ of Withernam, to take
so many of the Defendants Cattle, and detain them in Pound, until the
Defendant produce the Plaintiffes: And all this is, Ne Curia Domini Regis, etc.

Pl. Co. 36. a. 3. in Plats case.
8. The Statute of 1 R 2. 12. The Extent o^ 1. R. 2. c. 12*
which gives an action of debt against the Warden of the Fleet for suffering a
Prisoner (being in upon Judgment) to go at large without Writ, is extended by
equity to all other Keepers of Prisons, although it be a penal St^tute; and
that is for the better execution of justice, and that the Creditors debts may
be the sooner discharged.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 294. 4.
9. If there be not four Knights in the County for the electing of the twelve
chosen for the trial of the mere right in a Writ of Right, when the Mise is
joined upon the mere Right, Writ of right.
the next to them in the County shall be taken, Ne Curia Regis, etc.

Co. l 7. 4. a. 4 in Bulwers case.
10. If there be Lord and Tenant, Two Writs, one Count.
and the Tenancy extends into two Counties; in this case, if the rents and
services are arreare, the Lord shall have several Writs of the Customs and
Services, for each County a Writ, and shall have them returneable at one day in
the Bench; but he shall have but one Count upon them as his case is, Quia
aliter Curia Domini Regis deficeret conquirentibus in justitia proquirenda.

F. N. B. 26. h.
11. Upon a Rescous returned by the Sheriff, Rescous.
and thereupon an Attachment awarded, against the party, in this case he shall
not appear by Attorney but in person, and shall immediately upon his appearance
be committed to the Fleet, Nam expedit reipublice, etc.

Litt. S. 438. Co. Inst. pars 1. 260. a. 3.
12. Alb it the Law in diverse respects favors a Prisoner, P^oc^edings against
a Prisoner.
so as a Recovery then had against him by default, shall be reversed by Error,
a descent then cast against him shall not annoy him; yet it will not privilege
him from suits, or Outlawries: for if the Tenant or Defendant be in Prison, he
shall upon motion, by order of the Court, be brought to the Bar, and either
answer according to Law, or else, the same being recorded, the Law shall
proceed against him, and he shall take no advantage of his imprisonment.

Dyer 1. 5. etc. p. 4 H. 8.
13. A Writ of error was brought by the feoffee of the Conusor of a Statute,
Error brought by a stranger.
because the Conusee had sued execution two years before the day of payment;
albeit the Feoffee was a stranger to the Record, 18 E. 3. So also in 32 E. 3. A
Scire facias was brought by the Gr^^^e of the reversion against him that had
execution of the Land by reason of a Statute Merchant, and to obtain the Scire
facias alleged, that the Conusee had received his duty, etc. And yet the
grantee was neither party and privy: likewise if a Parson has an annuity and
recover, and after the Church is appropriate to a religious House, the
Sover^igne of the House, though he be not party, shall have a Scire facias: so
it is also (as is said) of two Benefices united. Vide Rule 145.

(...).
14. If a Jury in a Leet refuse to make presentment, Dyer. 211 31. 4. Eliz.
the Steward may assesse a Fine upon each of them for contempt and
concealment, and if the Homage in a Court Baron refuse to do it, if they be
Copyholders, it is a forfeiture.

15. If the Sheriff return Rescous, the party shall have Trovers, by the word
Convincatur, in West. 2. ca. 40.

(...).
16. One Cobham being indicted of Piracy, stood mute, Dyer 241. 49. 7. Eliz.
for he answered not directly, and therefore had Judgment of Pain fort and
dure, by the Statutes of 27 H. 8. 4. and 28 H. 8. 15. Howbeit, he might have
had his Clergy, if he had demanded it, by the Statute of 1 E. 6. 12. where
Piracy is not mentioned.

144. It favors Common Right.
^ment of ^^wer.
1. Dower being a thing due of Common right, Co. Inst. pars 1. 35. a. 3.
it may be assigned without Livery of seisin or writing, and before the
Guardian in Chivalry enter, the Heir within age may assign Dower, causa qua
supra.

^^^mon right ^^mmon ^^w.
2. Where the Tenant holds his land of his Lord by fealty and certain rent, or
by homage, fealty, and certain rent, Litt. S. 213.
or by other services and certain rent, and the rent is arreare at a day when
it ought to be paid, in this case the Lord may distrain for the rent of common
right, so if a man demise land to another by Deed or without Deed, Co. ibid.
142. a. 4.
for life or years, rendering rent, if it be arreare, etc. the Lessor may
distraine for it of common right, albeit there be no clause of distress
comprised in the Deed, or otherwise: And when it is said, That a man may do a
thing of common right, it is as much as to say, that he may do it by the common
Law: And the common Law is called Common right, because it is the best and most
common birthright that the Subject has for the safeguard and defense, not
only of goods, lands, and revenues, but of his Wife and Children, his body,
fame, and life also: And when it is said, that a man may distraine, or do, or
have any thing of common right, it is as much as if it were said, he may do or
have it by the common Law, without any reservation or provision of the party.
It is worth observation, that the common Law of England is sometimes called
Right, sometimes common Right, sometimes Communis justicia: The French also
call their municipall Law, Droit, which in their vulgar tongue signifies Right.
In the great Charter the common law is called Right, Rectum: Nulli vendemus,
nulli negalibus, aut differemus Justiciam vel rectum. In West. 2. ca. 1. it is
called Common Droit: In primes voet le Roy and command, que le pais de saint
Eglise, and de la terre soit bien guard and maintain en touts points, and que
Common droit soit fait a touts, anxibien aux povres, come aux riches sans
regard de nullus: which agrees with the ancient law of King Edgar, Porro autem
has populo, quas servet, proponimus leges, primum publici Juris beneficio
quisquam fruitur idque ex aequo and bono, sive is dives sive inops fuerit, jus
Redditur. And Fleta says, Item quod pax Eccles^ae and terrae inviolabiliter
observetur, and quod communis Justicia singulis pariter exhibeatur. Also all
the Comissions and Charters for execution of Justice, are, Facturi quod ad
justiciam pertinet secundum Legem and consuetudinem Angliae: So as in truth
Justice is the Daughter of the law or common right, for the law brings her
forth; and in this sense being largely taken, as well the Statutes and Customs
of the Realm, as that which is properly the common law, is included within
Common Right.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 147. b. 4. Litt. S. 212.
3. If a man has a Rent charge to him and his heirs issuing out of certain
land, if he purchase parcel thereof to him and his heirs, Rent-cha^ extinct
by purchase of parcel.
all the Rentcharge is extinct, and the annuity also, and one of the reasons
thereof is, because the grant of a Rentcharge out of Land is against Common
right.

Co. ibid. 215. a. 3.
4. By the Common Law no Grantee or Assignee of a Reversion could take advantage
of a re-entry by force of a Condition, A Grantee part of a R^version shall nor
take advantage of (...) Condition.
because it was against Common right: but this is now altered by the Statute of
32 H. 8. ca. 34. Yet at this day since the Statute, a Grantee of part of the
Reversion shall not take advantage of a Condition no more then he could before
that Statute: As if the Lease be of three acres, reserving a rent upon
Condition, and the reversion is granted of two acres; in this case, albeit the
rent shall be apportioned by the act of the parties, yet is the Condition
destroyed, for that it is entire, and also against common right, and therefore
shall not be taken by Equity or implication upon the words of the Statute,
being without the express words thereof.

Co. ibid. 225. b. 2.
5. There is a difference between a rent and a re-entry, A Re-entry cannot be
without Dee^
for upon a gift in tail or a Lease for life, a rent may be reserved without
Deed, because it is natural and agreeable to Law, that rent should be reserved
out of Land: but a Condition with a re-entry cannot be reserved in these cases
without Deed, because that is collateral, unnatural, and against Common right.

Co. 4. 37. b. 3. Vide Co. l. 8. 79. in Wiat Weilds case.
6. There is difference between Common appendant and Common appurtenant, for
Common appendant may be apportioned, Common appendant man be apportio^ed, not
common appu^nant.
because it is of Common right, and therefore (in that case) if the Commoner
purchase parcel of the land, in which, etc. yet the Common shall be
apportioned, as if the Lord purchase parcel of the tenancy, the rent (being
not entire) shall be apportioned; so if A. has Common appendant in twenty
acres of land, and enfeoff B. of parcel thereof, this Common shall be
apportioned, and B. shall have Common pro rata, and if he be invested shall make
a special prescription for his Common. It is otherwise of Common appurtenant,
which is against common right; for by purchase of part of the land, in which,
etc. the whole common is extinct.

Co. l. 6. 58. a 4, Bredimans case. Co. ibid. 58. b. 3.
7. Lessee for years pays a rent seck, Seisin of Re^seck by the Lessee for years
not good.
this is not such a seisin as is required in an Assise against the tenant of
the frank tenement, and one of the reasons alleged for this resolution is,
because a rent seck is against common right, and therefore shall not be
favored in Law, but the seisin ought to be given by the tenant of the frank
tenement or seisin ought to be made or given by all the ter-tenants that have
interest in the land, out of which, etc. because they are against common right,
and therefore not favored in Law.

Co. l. 8. 105. b. 3. in John Talbots case.
8. In most cases where the Lord purchases part of the tenancy (especially if
the tenant hold by an Entire service) the whole service is extinct, Homage and
fealty remai^
howbeit although the Lord purchase parcel of the tenancy, Homage and Fealty
shall remain for the residue, because they are due of common right.

Co. l. 8. 118. a. 2. in Doctor. Bonhams case.
9. When an Act of Parliament is against common right and reason, Acts against
common rig^ void.
or repugnant, or impossible to be performed, the common Law does control it,
and adjudgeth such an Act void: And therefore in 8 E. 3. 30. Thomas Tregors
case, upon the Statute of Westminster. 2. c. 38. and Artic. super Car. cap. 9. Herle
says, Some Statutes are made against Law and right, which those that made
them, perceiving, would not put them in execution. The Statute of Westminster. 2.
cap. 21. gives a Writ of Cessavit heredi petenti super heredem tenentem, and
super eos, quibus alienatum fuerit hujusmodi tenementum. And yet where in 33 E.
3. tit. Cessavit 42. there were two Coparceners Lords and Tenant by fealty and
certain rent, the one Coparcener had issue and dies, the other and the Niece
could not join in a Cessavit, because the heir could not have a Cessavit for
the Lessee in the time of her Ancestor ( F. N. B. 209. f. and with this accords
Plowd. Com. 110.) and the reason hereof is, because in Cessavit the tenant
before judgment may render the arrerages and damages, etc. and retain his
Land, and this he cannot do when the heir brings Cessavit for the Lessee in
the time of his Ancestor, for the arrerages occurred in the life of his
Ancestor belong not to him; and thereupon, because the said Act was against
common right and reason, the common Law (as to that point) adjudged it void.
Vide plus ibidem.

T^^hes due of common right.
10. Quota pars, viz. decima pars (which we call dismes or tithes) is an
Ecclesiastical Inheritance, collateral to the estate of the Land, Co. l. 11.
13. a. 3. in Bridle and Nappers case.
which cannot be either extinct or suspended by unity of possession, because
they are due of common right: And therefore if a Prior, having a Parsonage
impropriate, had infeoffed a Layman of part of the Glebe, yet he should have
had tithes against his own feoffment, as it is held in 42 E. 3. 13. a. Vide
Hob. 107. The Bishop of Carliles case.

Certainty in a Leet.
11. The Lord of a Leet cannot justify to distraine for the certainty of the
Leet, because it is collateral and against common right, Co. l. 11. 44. 2. and
45. 2. in Rich. Godfreys case.
and for the private profit of the Lord of the Leet, which the Lord cannot have
without prescription, and therefore as he ought to prescribe in the principal,
so ought he to prescribe in the distress: Howbeit although for an amerciament
in a Court Baron the Lord cannot distraine without prescription ( Vide 44 E. 3.
13.) yet for a Fine and all amerciaments in a Court Leet, distress is incident
of common right: And therefore if the certainty be not duly paid, the Deciver
or Capital pledge, that collects it, may first be amerced, and then distrained
for his negligence.

Tenant at will.
12. If Lessor upon a lease at will reserve an annual rent, Litt. S. 72. Co.
Inst. pars 1. 57. b.
he may distraine for the rent arreare, or have an action of debt for it at his
election; because power of distress is (in that case) given him of common
right, and so is also the action.

^galty de partition.
13. Where Coparceners make partition by Parol, Litt. S. 252. Co. ibid. 169. b.
and for egalty of partition one of them is to have a rent out of the land; in
this case she may distraine for the rent arreare of common right.

Assize.
14. In an Assise of Novel disseisin for Land, Dyer, 84. a. 81 7. E. 6.
or (since the Statute of 32 H. 8. 7.) for Tithes, the ter-tenant need not be
named in the Count, but only the disseisor: It is otherwise in an Assise of
Rentcharge or seck, because they are things against common right.

145. And therefore it suffers things against principles of Law, rather then
the party should be without remedy.
A special case of an entail.
1. John de Mandevile by his Wife Roberge had issue Robert and Mawde, Michael de
Morvile gave certain Lands to Roberge, Co. Inst. pars 1. 26. b. 2.
and to the heirs of John Mandevile her late Husband on her body begotten, and
it was adjudged that Roberge had an estate but for life, and the feetaile
vested in Robert (heirs of the body of his Father being a good name of
purchase) and that when he dyed without issue, Mawde the Daughter was tenant in
tail as heir of the body of her Father, per formam doni, and the Formedon,
which she brought supposed, Quod post mortem prefatae Robergiae, and Roberti
filii and heredis ipsius Johannis Mandevile, and heredis ipsius Johannis de
prefata Robergia per prefatum Johannem procreat, prefatae matildae filiae
predict Johannis de prefato de Robergia per prefatum Johannem procreatae sorori
and heredi predicti Roberti descendere debet performam donationis predictae.
And yet in truth the land did not descend unto her from Robert, but because
she could have no other Writ, it was adjudged to be good: In which case it is
to be observed, that albeit Robert being heir, took an estate by purchase,
and the Daughter was no heir of his body at the time of the gift, yet she
recovered the land per formam doni, by the name of Heir of the body of her
Father, which (indeed) her brother was, and was also capable at the time of the
gift, whereas when the gift was made, she took nothing but in expectancy,
when she should become heir per forman doni: And yet the law permits her to
have a Writ in form aforesaid, least otherwise she should have been without
remedy.

Co. ibid. 47. b. 3.
2. The Lord shall not have an action of debt for relief or for escuage due
unto him, because he has other remedy to recover the same, viz. Remedy for
releife, etc.
by distress: Howbeit his Executors or Administrators shall have an action of
debt for them, because they are now become as showers fallen from the stock, and
they have no other remedy.

Litt. S. 67. Co. ibid. 52. b. 4.
3. If tenements are let to a man for the term of half a year or a quarter
of a year, etc. in this case, if the lessee make waste, For waste.
the lessor shall have against him a Writ of waste, and the Writ shall say,
Quod tenet ad terminum annorum, but he shall have a special Declaration upon
the truth of the matter, and the Count shall not abate the Writ; and the reason
is, because he can have no other Writ, whereby the wrong done him may be
remedied: And therefore albeit the Statute of Gloucester ca. Co. ibid. 54. b 4.
5. which gives the action of waste against the lessee for life or years
(which lay not against them at the common Law) speaks of one that holds for
term of years, in the Plural number, nevertheless (although it be a penal
Law, whereby treble damages and the place wasted shall be recovered) yet a
tenant for half a year being within the same mischief, shall be within the
same remedy, though it be without the letter of the Law, causa qua supra.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 56. a. 1.
4. If Lessee for years be disturbed of his way, An action for a public
nuisance.
for remedy thereof he shall have his special action upon the case, but if it
be a common way (to avoid multiplicity of suits) it ought to be presented and
reformed in the Leet or Turn, and no particular person shall bring any action
for it, unless he suffer particular damage by the nuisance (as if he and his
Horse fall into a ditch so made in the common way, or the like) which happens
not to others: Howbeit in the Kings Bench in a case betwixt Westbury and Powell
it was adjudged, that where the Inhabitants of Southwarke had by custom a
watering place for their Cattle, which was stopped up by Powell, in that case
any Inhabitant there might have an action, because otherwise they should be
without remedy, for that such a nuisance is not presentable in the Leet or Turn.

Co. ibid. 111. a. 4.
5. In Cities and Burrows, where Tenements were devisable, Ex gravi querela
granted to Devisees of Lands.
if the heir of the devisor had entered, and had held out the devisee, albeit
the devisee might have entered (as Lit. says, S. 167.) Yet, besides, the Law
ordained a Writ for him called Ex gravi querela, and this Writ without any
particular usage was incident to the custom to devise; because otherwise, if a
descent had been cast before the devisee had entered, the devisee had been
without remedy, there being no other way provided for him to recover his land.

Litt. S. 179. Co. ibid. 119. a. 3.
6. If a Villain purchase a Signiory, rent, or other profit out of land, Claim
of a Reversion, etc. by the Lord of a Villain.
or a reversion after an estate for years, life, in tail, by Statute
Merchant, Statute Staple, or Elegit, and attornement is made unto him according
to the grant; in such cases, the Lord may come upon the land and claim the
reversion, and in so doing shall not be adjudged a trespasser, for he has no
other means to come by the reversion, because if he should stay until the
reversion should fall, the Villain might alien it to another before his entry,
and so prevent him of his just title thereunto: Also upon grant of an Advowson
to a Villain, claim must be made immediately at the Church, though it be then
full of an Incumbent, Lit: S. 180.
for if he stay till an avoydance, he may be prevented, as aforesaid, Vide
infr. 35.

Outlawry no plea in Error to reverse it.
7. Regularly an outlawed person cannot sue, and if he do, Co: ib. 128. a. 4.
it is a good plea in disability of his person, to say, that he is outlawed:
yet in a Writ of Error to reverse an Outlawry, Outlawry in that suit, or at any
strangers suit shall not disable the Plaintiff, because if he in that action
should be disabled, and were outlawed at several men's suits, he should never
reverse any of them.

Aliens may have actions personal.
8. Albeit Aliens (though in annuity) are excluded from many privileges that
Subjects borne enjoy, Co. ib. 129. b. 1.
yet such a Alien may maintain personal actions, for an Alien may trade and
traffic, buy and sell, and therefore of necessity he must be of ability to
have personal actions, and an Alien that is condemned in an Information shall
have a Writ of Error to relieve himself, Et sic de similibus, for otherwise
they should be without remedy.

A Monk can^ sue, etc.
9. If a Monk or other spiritual person professed, were beaten, wounded, Co: ib.
132. b. 3.
or imprisoned, he is prohibited to sue (as Lit. says, S. 200.) because he is
a dead person in Law: but here the Law gives a remedy, for in that case the
Abbot and Monk shall join in an Action against the wrong doer, and if the
Writ be Ad damnum ipsius Priores, the Writ is good, or if it be Ad damnum
ipsorum, it is good also: yet in this case the Abbot or Pryor (in his person)
was not wronged. Also if a Monk were by Conspiracy falsely and maliciously
indicted of Felony and Robbery, and afterward was lawfully acquitted, his
Sovereign and he should have joined in a Writ of Conspiracy, and the like:
There is the same Law also of a Nun, Sanctimonialis, mutatis mutandis: And if
the Law did not provide such a course, they might have been injured and left
without remedy.

^ Feme Co^^^ may sue ^ be sued.
10. A Feme Covert is disabled to sue without her Husband, Co: ib. 132. b 4. 2
H: 4. s. 7. a.
and yet we read that (in some cases) a Wife has had ability to sue and to be
sued without her Husband: for the Wife of Sir Rob. Belknap (one of the Justices
of the Court of Common Pleas) who was banished beyond Sea, did sue a Writ in
her own name, without her Husband, he being alive, whereof one said: Ecce modo
mirum, quod foemine fert breve Regis
Non nominando virum conjunctim robore Legis.
Also E. 3. brought a Quare Impedit against the Lady Maltravers, Co: ib. 10 E.
3. 53.
and she pleaded, that she was Covert of Baron, whereunto it was replied for
the King, that her husband, the Lord Maltravers was put in exile for a certain
cause, and she was ruled to answer. Vide more examples hereof in Coke, ubi
supra, where this difference is put, that if the Husband be condemned to
perpetual banishment, his wife in his absence, and in her own name, shall sue
and be sued; but if it be but Relegation for a time, it seems to be otherwise:
And all this, least the parties that have cause of Action, should remain
without remedy; for when he is condemned to perpetual banishment, he is as a
Monk professed, dead in Law: There is the same Law also of perpetual abjuration.

(...) person ^ll be charg^^ with an an^ity, though ^harged by ^^^oes.
11. If a man grant a Rentcharge out of his Land, Co: ib. 146. b. 1. Co. L. 7
39 b. 2. in Lillingstons case.
with Proviso that the Grantee shall not charge his person: in such case
(regularly) the Land shall be only charged, and his person free: And yet in
some case where there is such a Proviso in the Grant, that the person of the
Grantor shall not be charged, nevertheless the person of the Grantor shall be
charged: As if a man grant a rent charge out of certain Lands to another for
life, with such a Proviso, the rent is behind, the grantee dies, in this case
the Executors of the Grantee shall have an action of debt against the Grantor,
and charge his person for the arrearages due in the life of the Grantee,
because the Executors have no other remedy against the Grantor for the
arrearages. Vide infr. 32.

Litt. 252. Co. 169. b. 4.
12. Where in Dower or upon Partition betwixt parcenors, Egalty of partition.
a rent is granted to supply the thirds, or for egalty of partition; in such
case, the Law does give a Distress, lest the Grantee should be without remedy,
having in liew thereof departed with a valuable recompense in Land.

Co. ibid. 197. a. 4.
13. For twenty shillings rent, Tenants in common shall join in Assize.
or a pound of Pepper payable yearly, two tenants in common ought to have
several Assizes, because they have them by severable titles; as one tenant in
common may have an Assise of the moity of twenty shillings, or of the moity of
a pound of Pepper ( de medietate unius librae piperis, but not of ten
shillings, or de dimidio librae piperis.) And for that these things are in
themselves severable: Howbeit, for an Hawk, Horse, or the like, which are
entire, albeit they be tenants in common, yet shall they join in an Assise,
because, otherwise, they should be without remedy; for, one of them cannot make
his plaint in Assise of the moity of a; Hawk, Horse, etc. that were against the
order of nature, which the Law will not suffer: and if they should not join,
they should have Damnum and injuriam, and yet should have no remedy by Law,
which would be inconvenient: for the Law will, that in every case, where a man
is wronged and endamaged, that he shall have remedy, Aliquid conceditur, ne
injuria remaneret impunita, quod alias non concederetur: so also shall they
join in a Quare impedit, in a Writ of right ward, or ravishment of ward for
the body, for the same reason.

Co. ibid. 198. a. 3. Co. l. 10. 134. b. 3. in Read and Redmans case.
14. If there be two Tenants in common of an Advowson, The survivor shall
recover.
and a stranger usurps, so as the right is turned to an action, and they bring
a Writ of Quare impedit, which concerns the realty, the six months pass, and
the one dies: In this case the Writ shall not abate, but the survivor shall
recover, for otherwise there would be no remedy to redress this wrong, and so
it is also of Coparceners.

Litt. S. 365. Co. ibid. 226. a. 3.
15. It is regularly true, A Condition need not be showed forth.
that a man shall not plead or take advantage of a Condition, without showing
forth the proof thereof in writing: And yet, if land be mortgaged upon
condition, and the Mortgagee lets the Lands for years, reserving a rent, the
condition is performed, the mortgagor reenters: In an action of debt brought
for the rent, the Lessee shall plead the condition and the re-entry, without
showing forth any Deed: so in an Assise the tenant pleads a Feoffment of the
Ancestor unto him, etc. the Plaintiff says, The Feoffment was upon condition,
and that the condition was broken, and pleads a re-entry, and that the tenant
entered and took away the Chest, in which the Deed was, and yet detaineth the
same, the Plaintiff shall not in this case be enforced to show the Deed: Also
if a woman give Lands to a man and his heirs by Deed or without generally,
she may in pleading aver the same to be Causa matrimonij prelocati, albeit
she has nothing in writing to prove the same: And the reason of these cases
and the like is, lest the parties that should prove the conditions should (upon
failer thereof) be utterly left without remedy.

Litt. S. 391. Co. ibid. 240. a. 3.
16. If the Feoffee of Land in fee upon condition dye seized, Right and title a
diversity.
this descent (if the condition be broken) shall not take away the entry of the
Feoffor or his heirs: but if the Feoffee upon condition be disseised, and the
disseisor dye, whereby a descent is cast, this shall take away the entry of the
Feoffee, because he has a right to the land, and therefore his entry may be
taken away, for that he may recover his right by action: But the Feoffor, that
has but a Condition, his title of entry cannot be taken away by any descent,
because he has no remedy by action to recover the land, and therefore if a
descent should take away his entry, it should bar him for ever: And the Law
(in this case) is all one, whether the descent were before the condition broken
or after: Also he that has a title to enter upon a Mortmaine shall not be
barred by a descent, because then he should be without all remedy: So it is
also where a Woman has a title to enter, Causa matrimonii prelocuti, no
descent shall take away her entry, because she has but a title, and no remedy
by action. If a man be seized of lands in Fee, and in writing devises the same
to another in Fee, and dies, and the Heir before any entry made by the
Divisee, enters and dies seized, this descent shall not take away the entry
of the Devisee; for if the descent (which is an act in Law) should take away
his entry, the Law should bar him of his right, and leave him utterly without
remedy: So it is also of him that enters for consent to a ravishment, and was
so resolved in the case of Martin Trotte, 32 Eliz. in Communi Banco, and
accordingly was the Opinion of the Court of Common Pleas, Pasch. 1. Jac. To
this may be added as a like Case, The Kings Patentee before he enter, etc. by
all which you may observe a diversity betwixt a right, for which the Law gives
a remedy by action, and a Title, for the which the Law gives no remedy, but by
entry only.

^^^tinuall ^^me.
17. Regularly, Continual claim cannot be lawfully made, Co. ibid. 250. b. 1.
Litt. S. 414.
but where he that makes the claim has present right or title to enter, and
yet in some cases (where a man is left without other remedy) a Continual
claim may be made by him, that has right and cannot enter: As if Tenant for
years, Statute Merchants, Staple, or Elegit, be outed, and he in the reversion
disseised, the Lessor or he in reversion may enter to the intent to make his
claim, and yet his entry, as to take any profits, is not lawful during the
term: So likewise the Lessor or Reversioner may in such case enter to avoyde a
collateral Warranty, or the Lessor in that case may recover in an Assise: And
so (as some have holden) may a Lessor enter in case of a Lease for life, to the
intent to avoyde a Descent or Warranty. If the Disseisee make Continual
claim, and the Disseisor dye seized within the year, his Heir within age,
and by Office the King is entitled to Wardship; in this case, albeit the entry
of the Disseisee be not lawful, yet may he make Continual claim to avoyde a
Descent.

^^^nuall ^^^e.
18. When a man for fear of death, Co. Inst. pars 1. 2 53. b. 4. Litt. S. 419.
or some corporal hurt dare not make an actual entry into land, he may
approach as near thereunto, as he dare for such fear, and claim the Land, and
this claim, which is an entry in Law, does vest the possession and seisin in
him (for his advantage, but not for any thing which may tend to his
disadvantage) as if he had made an actual entry into the Land; because
otherwise he should be left without remedy.

^^lawry (...) beyond (...) reversable.
19. If a Recovery be had against a man in a Precipe by default, Co. ibid. 260.
b. 3.
when he was extra quatuor maria, it shall not be reversed by a Writ of Error
for that cause, for that he is not left without remedy, but may have his action
of an higher nature, or a Quod ei deforceat: Howbeit, if a man be outlawed in a
personal action, being then extra quatuor maria, he may reverse it by a Writ
of Error, for otherwise he should be without remedy, and (besides) de Minimis
non curat Lex.

20. Where a man cannot have advantage of the special matter by way of
pleading, Co. ibid. 283. a. 3.
What not pleaded given in evidence.
he shall be permitted to take advantage thereof in the Evidence: for otherwise
he should be left without remedy: For example, the Rule of Law is, that a man
cannot justify in the killing or death of a man, and therefore in that case he
shall be received to give the special matter in Evidence, as that it was Se
defendendo, or in defense of his House in the night against Thieves or Robbers,
or the like.

Co. ibid. 312. b. 1.
21. If a Seigniory be granted to one for life, the remainder to another in
fee, Attornment, Acquittall.
the attornement of the Tenant to the Tenant for life is an attornement to the
remainder also: Howbeit, if acquittall ought to be made or other privilege
had: in such case, albeit attornement be made to the Tenant for life, and he
acknowledge the acquittall, etc. Yet after his decease he in remainder shall
not distraine, until he acknowledge the Acquittall also, notwithstanding the
Attornement of the Tenant for life, for otherwise the Tenant should be without
remedy.

Co. ibid. 347. a. 1.
22. By the policy of the Law, Abbot capable to sue and be sued.
The Abbot (termed the sovereign) albeit (indeed) he be but a Monk or secular
person dead in Law, yet has he capacity and ability to sue and be sued, to
enfeoffe, give, demise, and Lease to others, and to purchase and take from
others; for otherwise they who right have, should not have their lawful
remedy, nor the House remedy against any other, that did them wrong.

Co. ibid. 354. a. 3.
23. Regularly, Baron remitted against his own alienation.
a man cannot be remitted against his own alienation, yet if there be Baron
and Feme in special tail, and the Baron alien the Land to another in fee, and
take an estate back to him and his Wife for their lives: in this case, the
Baron is remitted against his own alienation, as well as the Feme: for the
Feme cannot be remitted without the Baron be remitted also, and rather then the
Feme should not by Remitter have remedy and her ancient right restored to her,
the Baron shall be also remitted against his own Grant: Litt. S. 673.
And therefore (in that case) if there were any remainders in tail upon the
special tail, and last of all a reversion or remainder in fee above them,
upon taking back of the estate for lives by the Baron, all those in remainder
or reversion are also remitted.

Co. ibid. 376. a. 3. etc.
24. By the Rule of Law, One that is not heir at Law, may be vouched to
warranty.
a Warranty made by the Father descends upon his heir at the common Law, and
he only is to be vouched to maintain the same; yet in some cases lest the
Voucher should be without remedy, they that are not Heir at Law may be
vouched: As if a man enfeoffeth another of an acre of land with warranty, and
has issue two Sons, and dies seized of another acre of land of the nature of
Burrow English, the Feoffee is impleaded; here, albeit the Warranty descends
only upon the eldest Son, yet may he vouch them both, the one as heir to the
Warranty, and the other as heir to the land: For if he should vouch the eldest
Son only, then should he not have the fruit of his Warranty, Viz. a recovery
in value, and the youngest Son only he cannot vouch, because he is not heir
at the common Law, upon whom the Warranty descends: So it is also of heirs
in Gavelkind, the eldest may be vouched as heir to the Warranty, and the other
Sons in respect of the Inheritance descended unto them: In like sort the heir
at the common law, and the heir of the part of the Mother shall be vouched:
Howbeit the heir at Law may be vouched alone in both these cases, at the
election of the Tenant, and sic de similibus: In the same manner if a man dye
seized of certain lands in fee, having issue a Son and a Daughter by one
venture, and a Son by another, the eldest Son enters and dies, and the land
descends to the Sister; in this case, the Warranty descends on the Son, and
he may be vouched as heir, and the Sister, as heir of the land: In which and
the other case of Burrow English, the Son and heir at Law, having nothing by
descent, the whole loss of the Recovery lies upon the heirs of the Land,
albeit they be no heirs to the Warranty.

Warrants.
25. If a man do warrant Land to another without this word (Heirs) his heirs
shall not vouch; and, regularly, Co. Inst. pars 1. 384. b. 4.
if he warrant Land to a man and his heirs, without naming Assigns, his
assignee shall not vouch: Howbeit, if the Father be enfeoffed with Warranty to
him and his heirs, and the Father enfeoffeth his eldest Son with warranty
and dies: In this case, albeit the Warranty between the Father and the Son is
by act in Law extinct, yet the Law gives to the Son advantage of the Warranty
made to the Father, because (otherwise) he should be without remedy, occasioned
by an act of Law, which can do no wrong.

26. It is against a Rule in Law, Co. ibid. 390. a. 1.
that a man should vouch himself ( Vide R. 54. Ex. 14.) And yet if a man be
enfeoffed with warranty to him and his heirs of green acre, ^a^ranty.
and is also seized in fee of black acre in Burrow English, and having two
Sons, enfeoffeth his eldest Son of green acre; in this case, if the eldest
Son be impleaded, he shall vouch himself, and his younger Brother (being
heir in Burrow English) for otherwise the eldest Son should be without
remedy; because the act in Law ( Viz. The descent) has determined the Warranty
between the Father and the eldest Son.

^arranty by ^^fe and husb^^d, etc.
27. Baron and Feme being one person in Law, Co. ibid. 290. a. 3. 1. and 103.
b. 9. Dyer 2. p and Mar. and 315. b. 1. 15. Eliz.
it is against the Rule of Law, that they should vouch one another, neither
shall a Warranty be made use of, while it is in suspense: And yet if a man
enfeoffeth a woman with Warranty, and they intermarry, and are impleaded, and
upon default of the Husband the Feme is received; in this case, the Feme shall
vouch her Husband, etc. notwithstanding the Warranty was put in suspense by the
intermarriage: So likewise on the other side, if a woman enfeoff a man with
Warranty, and they intermarry, and are impleaded; in this case, the Husband
shall vouch himself and his Wife by force of the said Warranty: Albeit it be
against another Rule of Law ( Viz. 54. before cited) that a man should do an
act to himself: And all this least the Husband or Wife, in their several
cases, should be without remedy.

Warranty. C^parcener.
28. Regularly, Co. ibid. 174. a. 4.
the Feoffee of one Coparcener shall not have aid of the other Coparcener to
deraigne a Warranty paramount: And yet if there be two Coparceners, and they
make partition, and the one of them enfeoffs her Son and heir apparent and
dies, and the Son is impleaded: In this case, albeit he be in by the Feoffment
of his Mother, yet shall he pray in aid of the other Coparcener to have the
Warranty: And the reason of the granting of this aid is-for that the warranty
between the Mother and the Son is by Law annulled, and therefore least the
Son should be prejudiced by Law (which can do no wrong) and so be left
without remedy, the Law gives him (albeit he is in by Feoffment) to pray in
aid of the other coparcener to deraigne the warranty paramount.

Co. l. 3. 12. a. 3. in Sir Will. Harberts case.
29. Debt against the Heir.
In Debt against the heir upon an obligation made by the Ancestor, the
creditor could not (at the common Law) have had execution against any part of
the Land, whereof the debtor was seized, in the life of the debtor himself;
but after his decease he might have had all the land descended upon the heir
in execution, until he should be satisfied the debt, because the common law
giving action of debt against the heir, if the debtor should not have had
execution of the Land against the heir, he should not have had any fruit of
his action, and so should have been left without remedy: for the goods and
chattells of the debtor did belong to his Executors or Administrators, so as if
land should not have been liable to a debt of a common person at the common
Law, the creditor had been without remedy: and yet the common phrase is, Lands
pay no debts.

Co. l. 4. 30. b. 3. in Shaw and Thompsons case.
30. Dower. Copyhold.
In a Court Baron the damages to be recovered ought not to exceed forty
shillings, yet in a Copyhold Manor where the custom is that a Feme shall be
endowed, if she recover Dower with damages in the Lords Court, albeit those
damages exceed forty shillings, yet are they recoverable in the same Court, for
otherwise she should be without remedy, because they are not recoverable by
the common Law, but only in the Court of the Lord by Levari facias.

Co. l. 5. 88. a. 3. in Garnors case.
31. At the common Law, No capias in debt at the C. Law.
if a man had judgment in an action of debt, and after judgment outlawed the
Defendant: in this case the Plaintiff was not at the end of his suit, as to any
process to be further sued by himself, for he could not have a Scire facias,
nor any other process upon the Judgment, but was put to his new Original, as
it is agreed in 13 H. 4. 1. a. 21 E. 3. 55. and 20 E. 3. Nonability 8. And
albeit before the Statute of 25 E. 3. ca. Capias did not lie in debt, nor the
body of the Defendant before that Statute was subject to execution for debt;
yet in these cases if the Defendant be taken by Capias ut lagatum at the Kings
suit (no Laches being in the Plaintiff in continuance of his process) he shall
be in execution for the Plaintiff, if he will: for albeit the property of all
the Defendants goods and profits of his Lands are by the Outlawry vested in the
King, yet rather then the Plaintiff should be without remedy, he shall hold him
in execution for his debt, and for that reason he shall (in such case)
participate of the benefit as well as the King.

Co. l. 6. 41. b. 1. in Sir Anthony Mildmays case. and Co. l. 7. 39. b. in
Lillingstons case.
32. If a man by Deed grant a rent to another for his life, Rent sued for by
Executors.
provided that he shall not charge his person; in this case, if the rent be
arreare, and the grantee dye, his Executors shall charge the person of the
grantor in an action of debt, for otherwise they should be without remedy. Vide
supra 11.

Co. l. 8. 57. b. 2. in Bredimans case.
33. Regularly, a Precipe lies not against a Termor, Writ of Dower against
Guardian.
because he cannot tender seisin: Howbeit, against a Guardian in Chivalry, who
is upon the matter but a Termor, being but possessed of a Chattell ( viz. the
Wardship) a Writ of Dower lies, because otherwise the tenant in Dower should
be without remedy, for (in such case) no Writ of Dower lies against the Heir,
as it is adjudged in 9 H. 6. 6. Trevils Case.

Co. l 6. 65. b. 1. in S r M^^le Finches case.
34. Misnosmer.
If William Abbot of Worcester purchase a Writ by the name of Thomas Abbot of
Worcester, the Writ shall abate, because he may purchase a new one: Howbeit, if
he with the consent of the Covent, grant to the Burgesses of Worcester common
of pasture out of certain lands by the name of Thomas Abbot of Worcester, when
his name is William, the grant is good, because there is certainty enough to
make certain the name of the Grantor, viz. Abbot of W. (Nihil facit error
nominis cum constat de persona.) And, otherwise, the Grantees should be without
remedy, for they cannot have a new Grant.

Avowry and wast without attornment, etc.
35. If a man be seized of a Manor, part whereof in Lease for life, Co. l. 6
68. a. 1. in Sir Moyle Finches case.
and part in Lease for years, and he levies a Fine to A. to the use of B. in
tail, with diverse remainders over: In this case B. shall avow for the rent,
and have an action of Waste without any attornement: for, when a reversion is
settled in any in judgment of Law, and he has not any possible means to
compel the Tenant to attorne, and no Laches or default is in him, in such case
he shall avow and have an action of Waste without attornement, for the Rule is,
Quod remedio destituitur, ipsa re valet si culpa absit. So in 20 E. 3. Contra
formam Collat. because the founder cannot have the Writ of Contra formam
Collationis of an Advowson, he shall present without any suit, because
otherwise he should be without remedy Likewise in 7 E. 3. and 3 H. 7. A man
shall be Tenant by the Courtesy, of a rent or Advowson, albeit the woman dye
before the day incurr, or the avoydance fall: Also the Lord in Mortmain or of a
Villain claims a reversion, by such claim the Law vests the reversion in
him, and he shall avow and bring an action of Waste without attornement,
because he has no means to compel the Tenant to attorne: There is the same
law of Letters Patents, and of a demise of a reversion, as appears in 34 H. 6.
for in all these cases, abest culpa, and the party should be (otherwise) left
without remedy, Vide supra 6.

A Quare Imped^ shall not abate for the death of the Patron.
36. If a Quare impedit be brought against the Patron and Incumbent, and the
Patron dye, hanging the Writ, Co. l. 7. 26. b. 2. in the cases of Quare
Impedits. Vide Co. l. 10. 134. b. 4. in Read and Redmans case.
the death of the Patron shall not abate the Writ, as it is adjudged in 9 H. 6.
31. For here are two mischeifs, the one if the Writ shall abate the disturbance
shall be left unpunished, and albeit the Writ be well commenced, yet the
Plaintiff shall be without remedy, for there will want a disturber: and the
other mischief is, if the Writ do not abate, but the Piaintiffe proceeds to
Judgment and Execution, the true Patron shall be out of possession: And
therefore in as much as in the one case, if the right Patron be put out of
possession, he has remedy by a Writ of right to recontinue the Advowson and in
the other case, if the Writ shall abate, the Plaintiff shall be without remedy,
which (of the two) is the greater mischief, for this cause the Writ shall
stand and shall not be abated: with which accords 7 H. 4. 20 b. 13 H. 8. 13. 9
H. 6. 57. For the same reason it is, that a Quare impedit brought by
Coparceners or Ioyntenants shall not abate by the death of one of them, or
brought by Baron and Feme shall not abate by the death of the Feme: because,
otherwise, the Plaintiff (if the six months are past) shall be without remedy,
as the Books are in F. N. B. 35. b. 38 E. 3. 43. 37 H. 6. 11. 7 H. 4. 19. 14 H.
4. 12. 9 H. 6. 30. 57. 1 H. 5. 13. 17 E. 3. 11. 7 E. 3. 304. Co. l. 7. 30. a.
4. in cases of the discontinuance of Process.


Discontinuance of suits by demise of the ^ing.
37 At the common Law (regularly) by demise of the King all suits were
discontinued, for remedy whereof the Statute of 1 E. 6 7. was ordained, yet
since that Statute if an Original were not returned before the death of the
King, it was lost, for the words of that Statute are, Depending in any Court:
Howbeit (at the Common Law before that Statute) in an Appeal of death, if the
Writ were delivered to the Sheriff within the year, and before the return
thereof, or that the Sheriff does any thing in it, the King dies, and the year
is expired before the day of the return: In this case the common Law gave
remedy to the Plaintiff, viz. a Certiorari out of the Chancery returnable in
the Kings Bench, and thereupon the Plaintiff had re-attachment, although it
came not in by the return of the Sheriff, but by the Certiorari: And the
reason is, for the necessity of the matter, for (otherwise) the Plaintiff, who
lawfully purchased his Writ within the year without any default in him, shall
lose his appeal, the year being past: And therefore in as much as by act in
Law the Writ is discontinued, the Law gives a mean to revive it, to the end
the party should not be without remedy: So if a man purchase a Formedon against
the Parnor of the profits within a year after the title accrued, if before the
return of the Writ, etc. the King demiseth his Crown, the Writ shall be
removed into the Common Bench by Certiorari, and thereupon he shall have a
Resummons for the mischief, etc. for otherwise he should be left without
remedy, as is holden in 10 E. 4. 13. b. and 14. a.

Co. l. 7. 39. b. 2. in Lillingstons case.
38. If a man grant a rentcharge for life out of his land, Arreare of rent
sued by Executors.
with Proviso not to charge his person, and the rent is arreare, and the
Grantor infeoff A. and the rent is arreare in his time, and after A. enfeoffs
B. and the rent is also arreare in his time, and after the Grantee dies, his
Executors shall have an action of debt against any of them for the rent arreare
in his time, because, otherwise, the Executors should be without remedy, and
Qui sentit commodum sentire debet and onus. Vide supra 11. and 32.

Co. l. 8. 50. a. 3. in John Webs case.
39. It seems incongruous and against reason, The Ter-tenant may have an
Assize for his own Land.
that the ter-tenant who is already seized of the land, should have a Writ of
Novel disseisin concerning the same Land: And yet in some cases (rather then
he should be left without remedy) he shall have it: As if the Lord, etc.
distraine his tenant so often, that he cannot manure his Land, in this case the
ter-tenant may have an Assise, and the Writ shall be general, but he shall
make a special Plaint, that the Lord, etc. Sovent fois distraines, etc. And
the Judgment shall not be, Quod querens recuperabit seisinam tenementorum
praedictorum, for the Plaintiff himself is seized of the Land, but the
judgment shall be, that he shall have and hold the Land, absque multiplici
districtione, etc. So likewise, in casu quo quis poscit alterius separale, The
ter-tenant shall have an Assise by the common Law: And the Statute of West. 2.
ca. 25. that gives an Assise of Novel disseisin de libero tenemento in such
cases, is but an affirmance of the common Law: for in like manner he shall have
an Assise for fishing in his several Piscary, or for Turbary, Common, etc. and
the Writ shall be general, as appears by that Statute, but the Plaintiff in
his plaint ought to show that the Defendant claiming common of pasture in his
several, with his Cattle disturbs him, etc. And the Judgment shall not be,
that he shall recover the seisin of the tenements, etc. but that he shall have
and hold them in severalty, for the Plaintiff himself is already in seisin of
the frank tenement: In which cases, and the like, it may be observed, that the
Judgment does not pursue the Writ, which (regularly) it should, for then it
should adjudge him the Land it self, which is needless, because he has it
already: Howbeit least he should be without remedy, it gives him the Writ, by
which Land is usually recovered.

Co. l. 10. 127. b. 3. in Clu^s case.
40. If the Lessee pay his rent voluntarily before the day, Part of the rent
seisin.
albeit this payment be voluntary, yet is it not satisfactory, as to satisfy
the rent not then due: Howbeit if the rent, or any part thereof be given before
the day of payment in name of seisin of the rent, this payment shall give
sufficient Seisin to have an Assise or other remedy for the rent, because the
Law delights in giving remedies. Tenant may bring an action without license.


F. N. B. 3. c.
41. If there be Lord and Tenant of a Seigniory in gross, for which the Lord
(for want of suitors) can keep no Court; in this case, the Tenant may sue in
the Kings Court without license of the Lord, because, otherwise, he should be
without remedy, and the Lord shall not have ^n action against the Tenant for so
doing, nor any means to annull the Tenants action; and in the end of the Writ
th^se words shall be inserted, Quia Dominus remisit curiam suam. Tenant in
Dower may sue in Co. B. without license.


F.N.B. 8. a. b.
42. If the Baron give parcel of his Manor in tail, to hold of him, and dye,
the Feme shall sue her Writ of right of Dower in the Court of the Heir of the
Baron against the Donee in tail, and the Writ shall be directed to the heir;
but if the Baron make a gift in tail of all the Land which he has, and dies,
and the Feme is to sue a Writ of Right of Dower of that Land, here the heir of
the Baron cannot have any Court, because he has but a Seignorie in gross; and
therefore (in such case) she shall have a Writ of Right of Dower against the
tenant in tail, directed to the Sheriff, and returnable in the Common Bench,
and this clause shall be in the Writ, Quia B. Capitalis Dominus feodi illius
nobis inde remisit curiam suam. So likewise if the Baron makes a Lease of all
his Land for term of life to a stranger, and dye, and the Feme is to bring a
Writ of right of Dower; in such case also, the Feme shall have a Writ of right
of Dower against the Lessee for term of life in the Common Bench, because the
Reversioner has not any Court: And albeit this clause, viz. Quia B. Capitalis
Dominus, etc. be put in the Writ; yet because the Lord has one by a seignorie
in gross, and has not any demesne land to hold a Court, and albeit the Lord
never remitted his Court, nor that there is any matter apparent, or demurrer in
Chancery to prove the assent and will of the Lord to remit his Court, yet the
Writ returnable in the common Bench before the Justices there, is good, and
they shall proceed thereupon, if the Lord has not any Court to hold plea upon
that matter: And it seems, that the Lord shall not have an Action against the
Demandant for the suit of that writ in the Co. Ba. if he has not a court to
hold plea thereupon, and to do right to the party, for if the party might not
have liberty to sue in the Co. Ba. in that case, she should be left without
remedy: Howbeit (indeed) if the Lord had a court to hold plea, then he might
sue a Writ of Prohibition to the Justices of the Co. Ba. that they should not
proceed upon that Plea: but otherwise not.

A Quare Impe^it granted in improper cases.
43. If one man has the nomination to an Advowson, F. N. B. 33. b. c. d. e. f.
and another the presentation, if he name his Clerk, and the other that should
present, present another clerk, he that has the nomination shall have a Quare
Impedit, and the Writ shall be Quod permittat ipsum praesentare; albeit, he had
but the nomination, for (otherwise) he should be without remedy: upon the same
reason it is, that upon disturbance to one to present to a priory or chantery
donative to the King or a Bishop, or the like, a Quare Impedit lies, and the
Writ shall be, Quod permittat ipsum praesentare: and yet those words are not
proper in such cases, but because there is no other Writ, hereby the party may
have right done him, rather than he should be without remedy, the Law permits
that Writ to be used.

The like.
44. Regularly, a man shall not have a Quare Impedit, F. N. B. 33. h. i.
if he cannot allege a presentment in himself, or in his Ancestor, or in
some other person, by whom he claims the Advowson: yet if a man by the Kings
license make a Parish Church, or other Chantery, which shall be presentable,
etc. if he be disturbed to present thereunto, he shall have a Quare Impedit,
without alleging any presentment in any person, and shall count upon the
special matter: so likewise if one recover an Advowson by Writ of right
against another, when the Church is void, he shall present, and if he be
disturbed, he shall have a Quare Impedit, and allege presentment in him,
against whom he recovered it, without alleging any other presentment: And a
man shall have a Quare Impedit, and alleadg a presentment by his procurator,
and it shall be good without alleging any presentment by himself, etc. for
(otherwise) in these cases and the like he should be without remedy: So if an
Abbot had been Parson imparsonee time out of mind, etc. And after the Abbey
were dissolved, etc. In this case he of whom the Advowson was holden, shall
present, and if he were disturbed, he might have had a Quare Impedit without
alleging any presentment in the Count, but therein shall show the special
matter

F. N. B. 69. h.
45. One would think it a vain act for a man to procure a Replivin, A Replivin
for cattle not detained.
when his cattle are already come home of their own accord, or when he has
them again safe in his own possession: yet if the Lord take the cattle of his
Tenant tortiously, and after the cattle come home again to the Tenant: in
this case, albeit the Tenant is already possessed of them, yet shall he have a
Replivin against the Lord for his cattle taken, and shall recover his damages
for the tortious taking of them: because (otherwise) he should be without
remedy, for he cannot have an action of Trespass against his Lord for such
unjust taking of his cattle

F. N. B. 74. f.
46. In a Replivin it were somewhat preposterous, Withernam granted to the
Defendant.
that the Defendant should have Withernam against the Plaintiff, yet if the
Defendant has return awarded him, and he sues the Writ de Returno habendo,
and the Sheriff return upon the Pluries, Quod averria elongata sunt, etc. In
this case, the Defendant shall have a Scire facias against the pledges, etc.
according to the Statute of West. 2. And if they have nothing, etc. then shall
he have Withernam against the Plaintiff for the beasts of the Plaintiff:
because (otherwise) he should be without remedy.

F. N. B. 97. c.
47. A man cannot be properly said to recover Land from another, A Writ of
Deceit.
who never entered into the Land, nor ever had the actual possession thereof:
And yet in a Precipe quod reddat, if the Sheriff return the Tenant summoned,
where he was not summoned, whereby the Tenant upon the grand Cape returned
loses the Land by default, in this case the Tenant shall have a Writ of Deceit
both against him that recovered, and also against the Sheriff for his false
return, and by such Writ of Deceit the Tenant shall be restored to his Land
again: And this Writ may be so brought by the Tenant after Judgment, and
before any Entry in possession made by the Demandant: For if the Tenant should
not have this Writ before the Demandant enter, it may be the Demandant will not
enter until the Summoners in the Precipe quod reddat, and the Summoners,
Veyors, and Pernors in the grand Cape are all dead: And so should the Tenant be
left without remedy to recover the Land: for, after the decease of all the
Summoners, Veyors, and Pernors, he cannot have such a Writ, because, whether he
were summoned or no, is to be tried by their examination, etc.

F. N. B. 114. b. Vide Sup. 31.
48. Next to life, Merchant stranger.
the person and estate of a man are much favored in Law (Vide Max. 92.) so as
at the common Law a Capias lay not but in case of Trespass, vi and armis,
Felony, etc. yet if an English Merchant has his goods taken away from him
beyond Sea by a Merchant stranger, and there he prosecutes the Law to have
Justice done him and restitution, and cannot have it, and this matter is
testified to the King in his Chancery by credible witnesses: upon such bare
testimony (part in audita altera) if such Merchant stranger come afterward
into England with goods, both body and goods shall be arrested and detained,
until the party greived be satisfied all his damages, by Writ out of the
Chancery, to be directed to the Officers or Merchants strangers of the place
where he is, or has goods: for (otherwise) the English Merchant should be
without remedy: And such Writs may issue to the several Ports, where the
Merchant stranger has any goods, to each of them one, etc,

F.N.B. 120 d.
49. Action of debt by the Ordinary.
At this day the Ordinary shall not have an Action of Debt against the Creditor
of the intestate, because that Action is now given to the Administrator by the
Statute of 31 E. 3. 11. and the Ordinary may commit the Administration of the
goods and credits, when he pleases: but before that Statute Fitzharbert seems
to be of opinion, that he might, because it is requisite, some person should
have that power: for (otherwise) the intestates debts could never have been
recovered.

50. If the Lessor let the term by Deed pol, and afterward out the Lessee,
Writ of covenant against the Lessor.
F. N. B. 145. b.
the Lessee shall have a Writ of Covenant against the Lessor upon the Deed Pol,
albeit he have no Indenture of it: But if a stranger which has no right, out
the Lessee, he shall not have a Writ of Covenant against the Lessor, because he
has remedy by action against the stranger: Howbeit if the stranger enter by
eigne title upon the Lessee he shall have a Writ of Covenant against the
Lessor, because (in such case) he has no other remedy.

Action against the Gaole^ upon an escape.
51. If one be in Prison upon execution for debt, and makes an escape, Pl. Co.
36. a. 3. in Plats case.
in this case the Debtor is discharged of the debt, so as the Creditor can
never renew his execution to take him again: And therefore in as much as after
the escape the Plaintiff is without remedy against the Defendant in the first
suit, the Common law, which is common Reason, provides that the Plaintiff
should have an action of debt against the Jailer, in whose default the
execution of the Plaintiff was discharged; for (otherwise) the Common Law
should be defective in that point, which must not be: And therefore will rather
permit the Plaintiff to recover against the Jailer, then that he should be left
without remedy, albeit there never was any contract betwixt them.

Land revested without entry a claim.
52. Regularly, when any man will take advantage of a Condition, Co. Inst. pars
1. 218. a. 3. Litt. S. 350.
if he may enter, he must enter, and when he cannot enter he must make a
claim: for that a Freehold and Inheritance shall not cease without entry or
claim: And yet if Land be granted to a man for term of five years, upon
condition, that if he pay the Grantor within the first two years forty
pounds, that then he shall have fee, or otherwise but for the term of five
years, and livery of seisin is made unto him by force of the Grant: In this
case, if the Grantee pay not unto the Grantor forty pounds within the first
two years, then immediately after the first two years the Fee and
Frank-tenement shall be adjudged in the Grantor without entry, because the
Grantor cannot presently after the two years enter upon the Grantee, Co. ibid.
21 a. 4.
for that the Grantee has yet a term of three years in the Land, and in as
much as he cannot enter, he shall not be driven to make any claim to the
Reversion: For seeing by construction of Law, the Freehold and Inheritance (if
the Condition had been performed) was to pass Maintenant out of the Lessor,
by the like construction the Freehold and Inheritance by the default of the
Lessee shall be revested in the Lessor without entry or claim: There is the
same Law of a Grant by Devise, Lease and Release, Bargain and Sale by Deed
indented and enrolled, etc. or whether it be of an Advowson, Reversion,
Remainder, Rent, Condition, or any other thing that lies in Grant.

Feme recovered without Baron.
53. The Husband is the Wives head, Co. ibid. 352. b. 4. Litt. S. 668.
and regularly she can do nothing without him; and yet in an action of Waste
if the Baron make default to the great Distress, the Feme (upon prayer) shall
be received and shall show the whole matter, and how she is in her Remitter,
and shall bar the Lessor of his Action: And albeit this privilege be given
the Feme by Westminster. 2. cap. 3. yet ancient Authors, who wrote before that
Statute, do speak of such a kind of receipt at the Common Law; for otherwise
the Feme would be without remedy.

Judgment upon a dead ^an.
54. It seems irregular, Co. ibid. 390. b. 4.
that Judgment should be given upon a man already dead: And yet in 8 Ed. 3.
Judgment 225. the Defendant in an appeal of death did wage Battle and was
slain in the Field, yet Judgment was afterward given that he should be
hanged, and the Justices said, such Judgment was necessary; because otherwise
the Lord could not have a Writ of Escheate, and so would be without remedy.

Co ibid. 393. a. 4.
55. Regularly, Two Recoveries upon one warranty.
there cannot be two recoveries in value upon one warranty, and yet in some
special cases rather then a man shall be without remedy, there shall be two
such recoveries; for if a disseisor give lands to the Husband and Wife and to
the heirs of the Husband, the Husband alieneth in fee with warranty and dies,
the Wife brings a Cui in vita, the Tenant voucheth and recovereth in value,
if after the death of the Wife, the Disseisee bring a Precipe against the
Alienee, he shall vouch and recover in value again.

Co. l. 8. 61. a. 3. in Beechers case.
56. In all actions real and personal, No amerciament against the Plaintiff.
if part be found for the Demandant or Plaintiff, and part against him, or all
or part against the one Tenant or Defendant, and nothing or but part against
the other, the demandant or Plaintiff shall be amerced: Howbeit, in Trespass
of Battery against Baron and Feme, supposing the battery to be done by them
both, and the Feme is only found guilty, etc. and the Baron acquit, yet (in
this case) the Plaintiff shall not be amerced, because the Plaintiff (in such
case) can have no other Writ, and therefore he shall be excused, Vide Max. 149.
41.

57. Vide 143. 15.

Dyer, 8. a. 28. H. 8. Pl. 11. and 16.
58. In a Writ of Ward, the Writ supposes that B. held the land, etc. Variance
inter writ and count, no error.
and the Count declares that B. was but Cestuy que use, so as the Feoffees
held the land, and not B. Here, this variance is no Error, because the Statute
of 4 H. 7. which gives the wardship of Cestuy que use appoints no special Writ
for it, and therefore the general Writ and special Count suffiseth; for
otherwise the Lord should be without remedy, which the Law will not permit: So
in a Warrantia Cartae, the words of the Writ are Unde cartam habet, and yet the
Count may be upon warranty for Homage Ancestrel.

Dyer 56. 17. 35 H. 8.
59. A Writ of Right (Quia Dominus remisit Curia, Feme Covert.
etc.) was brought by Baron and Feme, the Feme being under age, the Feme
appears by Procheine amie, who was admitted by the Court, and upon the Tenants
voucher and default of the Vouchee she had judgment final, etc. without her
Husbands appearing in the action. Vide supra 10.

Dyer 206. 11. 3, 4. Eliz.
60. A man makes a Lease for years to begin at a day to come, Waste.
and before the day the reversion is granted over diverse times, afterward the
Termor enters and makes waste, and the fourth Assignee bring waste, and counts
of the assignment and tenure of each of them, to whom the Land came after the
Lease, albeit there was no tenure before the commencement of the Lease, and it
was held good, and so it is also in the Regester.

Hob. 3. Pincombes case.
61. Albeit (regularly) a warranty ought only to be annexed to a freehold, and
not to any lower estate, Warranty is a covenant.
yet when the breach or impeaching is not of a Freehold, but of a chattell,
Viz. of a Lease for years, for which there can neither be Voucher, Rebutter,
nor Warrantia Cartae, an action of Covenant may be grounded upon such a
Warranty: As if A. demiseth the Monnor of D. to B. for one and thirty years,
and afterward grants it to C. in possession for life, with warranty against
him and his Ancestors, C. may bring an action of Covenant upon that Warranty,
and shall recover damages thereupon. See the Book at large.

Hob. 48. Coxes case.
62. Lands in Ancient demesne, where the possession is stirred, Ancient demesne.
cannot be recovered but within their own Franchise or Jurisdiction, and this
is regularly true; yet actions at the Common Law, upon which no remedy can be
had in ancient demesne, do lie in the Kings Court, though they stir the
possession, as in a Quare impedit, 7 H. 6. 35. because they cannot write to the
Bishop: And the reason is, because the Common Law being as ancient as their
privilege is, will not endure that by pretense of Privileges there should be
a Failer of Original Right, as that case is: Howbeit, of new rights or
remedies brought in by Statutes (which are not presumed to intend their
prejudice) it is otherwise.

146. It hates Wrong.
Disparagement of the heir punished.
1. Co. Inst. pars 1. 80. b. 2.
The Law does hate and abhor the odious and corrupt dealing of any man, and
never lets it go unpunished: And therefore in case of a Ward, where he is
disparaged by his Guardian, the Law does so abhor the odious dealing of the
Guardian, to whom the custody of the Heir is committed, and his horrible
profanation of honorable Marriage, the only ligament of men's Inheritances,
that albeit ^he Heir at the age of fourteen may descent to it, and so dissolve
it by such his disagreement, yet the Law inflicted upon the Guardian for his
attempt, the loss of the wardship from such disagreement, according to the
Statute of Merton, cap. 6. being but an affirmance of the Common Law.

No breaking of Enclosures for rent.
2. If a Lord of a Manor, or, etc. Co. ibid. 161. a. 3.
come to his Tenants land to distraine for rent arreare, and he finds the
doors or gates shut, so that he cannot take the Tenants goods or cattle
without breaking open the doors, gates, or other enclosures: In this case,
albeit the Law gives him power to distraine, it does not license him to break
open any doors, gates, or other enclosures to distraine, for by so doing he
becomes a wrong doer: Howbeit, if he were before actually seized of the rent,
if they be shut on purpose to prevent him to distraine, it amounts to a
disseisin of the rent.

A Disseisor ^ay be no Tenant of the Land.
3. If diverse persons disseise another to the use of one of them, Co. ibid.
280. b. 3.
or of another that assents; in this case, albeit he only, to whose use the
disseisin is made is the sole Tenant of the land, yet the Law does so abhor
wrong, that the Coadjutors, Counselors, Commanders, etc. thereunto, are all
Disseisors; and therefore albeit the Tenant (whether he be a Disseisor or no)
dye, yet an Assise lies against the Coadjutor, Councellor, Commander, etc. 50
E. 3, 2. The Demandant and others in a Precipe did disseise the Tenant to the
use of the others, and the Writ did not abate, for the Demandant was a
Disseisor, though not Tenant of the land, but only a Coadjutor, and therefore
an Assise lies against him, in respect of the wrong done by him, as aforesaid.
A man disseiseth Tenant for life to the use of him in the reversion, and after
the Reversioner agrees to the disseisin: In this case it is said, That the
Reversioner is a Disseisor in fee, because by the disseisin made by the
stranger, the reversion was divested, which (say they) cannot be reversed by
the agreement of the Reversioner, for that makes him a wrong doer, and
therefore no relation of an estate by wrong can help him.

Release to one Disseisor.
4. A man seized of Lands is disseised by two, Litt. S. 306. Co. ibid. 194. a.
3. Litt. S. 472. and S. 522.
and releaseth all his right to one of the Disseisors: in this case, the
Releasee shall hold out his companion, because the two Disseisors being in by
wrong and against the Law, when one of them has a lawful interest by the
release of the Disseisee, the wrong vanishes and is utterly extinct, for the
Releasee being seized per my and per tout, is thereby capable of the whole
estate: It is so also of two joint Abators or Intruders, which come in merely
by wrong; for by operation of Law, presently upon the delivery of the Release,
the whole Freehold and Inheritance is vested in the Releasee, and all the
estate that the other Disseisor, Abator, or Intruder has who has divested;
because right and wrong cannot consist together, but the wrongful estate
gives place to the rightful. Vide 141. 13.

Co. ibid. 239. a. 1.
5. No estate gained by wrong makes a degree, An estate by wrong in degree.
whereupon to ground a Writ of Entry in the per and cui, but it ought to be
upon a lawful descent or alienation; And therefore an Abatement, intrusion, or
disseisin upon disseisin make no degree.

Co. ibid. 245. a. 4.
6. If an Infant make a Feoffment in fee, By entry of a stranger an estate
gained by wrong divested.
a stranger (of his own head) cannot enter to the use of the Infant, for the
estate is upon lawful conveyance, though voydable, but where an Infant or a
man of full age is disseised, an Entry by a stranger of his own head is good,
and vesteth presently the estate in the Infant or other disseisee: So if Tenant
for life make Feoffment in fee, albeit that be a lawful Conveyance, yet
because such a Feoffment is a wrong to the Reversioner, by the Entry of a
stranger (of his own head) for a Forfeiture in the name of the Reversioner, the
estate shall be immediately vested in the Reversioner.

Co. ibid. 257. b. 1.
7. In a Writ of forcible Entry upon the Statute 8 H. 6. 9. Treble costs by the
Stat. of 8 H. 6. cap. 9.
Albeit the Statute gives only treble damages to the party greived; yet he
shall also have treble costs allowed him, if he recover: for although the
Statute be penal, and (in that respect) should be favorably expounded, yet in
as much as it is a wrong of a high nature, treble costs are also interpreted to
be given by it.

Co. ibid. 278. b. 2.
8. If an Alien be a Disseisor, and obtain Letters of denization, Aliens
feoffment not good.
and then the Disseisee releaseth to him: in this case, the King shall not have
the Land: for the release has altered the estate, and it is as it were a new
lawful purchase: It is otherwise if the Alien had been the Feoffee of a
Disseisor, for in such case, he claims under one, that gained the estate by
wrong.

Litt. S. 697. Co. ibid. 365. a. Co. ibid. 366. b. 2. Litt. S. 698. Co. ibid.
366. b. and 367. a.
9. Before the Statute of Gloucester cap. 3. 6 E. 1. Warranty commencing by
disseisin, abatement, or intrusion, no bar.
All legal warranties both lineall and collateral were a bar to the heir:
but at the common Law (before that Statute) warranties, that did commence by
disseisin, were never any bar to the heir, because they did commence by tort.
viz. by disseisin: For (regularly) the Conveyance, whereunto such warranty is
annexed, does work a disseisin: As if the Father or other Ancestor be Tenant
of the Sons or Heirs Land for years, at will, by Elegit, Statute-merchant, or
Statute-staple, and the Father or other Ancestor makes a Feoffment in fee of
the Land to a stranger with warranty, this warranty shall not bar the Heir,
unless he have other Lands, that may be assets, by descent from the same
Father or other Ancestor respectively, in all which cases the disseisin is
immediately to the heir: Howbeit in some cases, albeit the disseisin be not
done immediately to the heir, yet the warranty shall not bar him: As if the
Father be Tenant for life, the Remainder to the Son in fee, the Father by covin
and consent makes a Lease for years, to the end that the Lessee shall make a
Feoffment in fee, to whom the Father shall release with warranty, and all is
executed accordingly, the Father dies, this warranty shall not bind, albeit
the dis^eisin was not done immediately to the Son, for the Feoffment of the
Lessee is a disseisin to the Father, who is particaps criminis: So it is, if
one brother make a gift in tail to another, and the Uncle disseise the Donee,
and enfeoffeth another with warranty, the Uncle dies, and the warranty
descends upon the Donor, and the Donee dies without issue: here, albeit the
disseisin was done to the Donee, and not to the Donor, yet the warranty shall
not bind him. The Father, the Son, and a third person, are Ioynt-tenants in
fee, the Father makes a Feoffment in fee of the whole with warranty and dies,
the Son dies, the 3. person shall not only avoid the Feoffment for his own
part, but also for the part of the son, and he shall take advantage that the
warranty commenced by disseisin, though the disseisin be done to another. If a
man commit a disseisin to the intent to make a Feoffment in fee with warranty,
albeit he make the Feoffment many years after the disseisin, yet because the
warranty was done to that intent and purpose, the Law shall adjudge upon the
whole matter, and by the intent couple the disseisin and warranty together: And
all this, because such disseisins commence by wrong: So it is also of a
warranty that commenceth by abatement or intrusion (that is when the abatement
or intrusion is made of intent to make a Feoffment in fee with warranty) for
neither shall that bind the right heir no more then a warranty that commenceth
by disseisin, because they do also commence by wrong: Likewise, if the Tenant
dies without heir, and the Ancestor of the Lord enter before the entry of the
Lord, and make a Feoffment in fee with warranty, and dies, this Warranty shall
not bind the Lord, because it commenceth also by wrong, being in the nature of
an Abatement, Et sic de similibus.

An unlawful Fine not suffered to pass.
10. This exception in the Statute of Gloucester cap. 3. 6 E. 1. Litt. S. 729.
730, 731. Co ibid. Co. ibid. 383. a. 3.
(whereof no Fine is levied in the Kings Court) are to be understood lawfully
levied; And therefore if the Baron will levy a Fine of the Femes Land without
the Feme, the Judges (being conusant thereof) ought not to take it; because it
works a wrong to the Feme, and if it be with warranty to the heir also:
Neither (indeed) ought the Judges to take a Fine, which works a wrong to a
third person.

D^^^ni pro te^pore, difference.
11. Domini pro tempore of a Copyhold Manor, Co. ibid. 58. b. 1. Co. l. 4.
24. p. 29. Eliz. inter Rouse and Arteis.
who are in by lawful title, though it be only for years, by Statute
Merchant, Staple, or Elegit, at will, for wardship in Chivalry, etc. may hold
Courts, make admittances, and grant voluntary Copies of ancient Copyhold lands,
which come into their hands, and such voluntary grants by Copy made by such
particular Tenants, as aforesaid, shall bind him that has the Freehold and
Inheritance, because all these be lawful Lords pro tempore: Also Disseisors,
Abators, Intrudors, Tenants at sufferance, etc. of such Manors, who come in by
tort, and hold by defeasible titles, may hold Courts, and make admittances of
ancient Copyhold-lands which shall stand good against them that right have:
because these are lawful acts, and they are compellable to do them: But
voluntary Grants by Copy made by Disseisors, Abators, Intrudors, Tenants at
sufferance, or others, that have defeasible titles, shall not bind the
Disseisee, or others, that right have, because they come in by tort, as
aforesaid.

Livery of part not good.
12. If Feoffment be made of a Message, cum pertinentijs, Co. l. 2. 32. a. 1.
in Beltisworths case.
the Lessor de parts with nothing thereby but only that which is parcel of
the house, viz. the buildings, curtilage, and garden: Howbeit the keeping of
the possession of a house, or any parcel of the thing demised against tortious
entry and expulsion by the Lessor, is not only possession of all, that may
pass by the name of Message, or of such parcel, but of all the lands, etc.
which are demised therewith by one entire demise in the same County: And
therefore, if a Lease for years be made of an house, a close, and diverse other
Lands, and the Lessor makes Livery of the Close, in the name of the whole in
Lease, the Lessee being then in the house, and no body for him in the close: In
this case, the Livery is void, for the possession of the house by the Lessee at
the time of the Livery made is possession also of all the Lands, etc. contained
in the demise: because it is to preserve the first right and interest of the
Lessee against force, and the tortious entry of the Lessor: It is so also,
albeit the Lessee had then demised that close by will: but otherwise, if he had
demised it for years; for that had made a severance of it from the rest of the
Message and Lands demised,

Election lost by wrong doing.
13. If one enfeoff another of two acres, Co. l. 2. 37. a. 4. in Sir Rowland
Heywa^ds case.
to have and hold the one for life, and the other in tail: In this case, the
Feoffee has election to chose, which he shall have for life, and which in
tail: Howbeit, if before his election he makes Feoffment in fee of both the
acres: In such case, the Feoffor shall enter into which of the acres he
pleases for the Forfeiture, for the Feoffee by his own act and the wrong done
to the Feoffor has lost his election.

Co. l. 2. 55. b. 4. in Bucklers case.
14. Tenant for life, leases for years, and then grants to A. Estopell to plead
parts finis nihil habuerunt.
for life from a day to come, the Lessee for years atturnes after the day, the
term expires, and A. enters and leases at will, the Lessee for life levies a
Fine Come ceo, etc. to the Tenant at will, and then the Remainder enters for
the Forfeiture: In this case, the Fine levied to the Tenant at will is a
Forfeiture, and the Remainder may thereupon well enter upon the Tenant at will,
and thereby charge the disseisin; And here, albeit neither the Tenant for life,
nor the Tenant at will have any thing in the Land (for the interest of the
Tenant for life is past away to A. and the title of the Tenant at will, is of
little or no consideration in Law, and also vanishes, because derived from A.
who had no interest, because granted in futuro, and therefore void) yet both of
them are estopt to say, Quod parts finis nihil habuerunt; And of such
estoppels, which are by matter of Record, and trench to the wrong and
disherision of those in Remainder or Reversion, they shall take advantage,
albeit they are not parties thereunto; as of an Aid prier of a stranger, or by
acceptance of a Fine Sur conusans de droit come ceo, etc. albeit the
Reversioner or Remainder be not party to the Record, yet he is privy in estate
to take advantage of a Forfeiture by any matter of Record done to his
disherison.

Co. l. 5. 13. b. in the Countess of Shrewsburies case. Dyer, 122. b.
15. Tenant at will is not chargeable with permissive waste, Tenant at will
chargeable with voluntary waste.
as negligently suffering the house to be burnt, or the like: but if Tenant at
will commit voluntary waste, viz. in distroying the houses, felling the wood,
or the like, in such case a general Action of Trespass lies against him
(Vide Litt. fol. 15.) for when Tenant at will takes upon him to do unlawful
Acts, and such as none may do but the owner of the Land, they amount to a
determination of the will, and of his possession, and the Lessor (in such case)
shall have a general Action of Trespass without any Entry: 15. E. 4. 26.
So if the Bailee of goods, as a horse, etc. kill them, the Bailor shall have a
general Action of Trespass, for by the killing the privity is determined: And
(in some cases) when confidence is put in the party, if any wrong be done, an
Action upon the Case may also lie for negligence, albeit the Defendant come to
the Possession by the Act of the Plaintiff, as where a man delivers a Horse to
another to be safely kept, 12 E. 4. 13.
and the Defendant equum illum tam negligenter custodirit, quid ob defectum
bonae custodiae Interijt, here an Action upon the case will lie: So it is also
against a Shepherd, that keeps any Sheep so negligently, that some of them
are thereby drowned, or otherwise destroyed.

Co. l. 5. 14. b. 2. in the cases of Ecclesiastical persons.
16. Regularly, the King shall not be bound by an Act of Parliament, Statutes
to present fraud, bind the King.
unless he be therein particularly named, and yet all Statutes, which are made
to suppress wrong, and to take away fraud shall bind the King, albeit he be not
named in them by express words, for Religion, Justice, and Truth are the sure
supporters of the Diadems of Kings: And therefore it is agreed in 35 H. 6. 60.
that the King shall be bound by the Statute of West. 2. cap. 5. which makes
provision against tortious usurpations, although the King be not named in the
Act: So in the Lord Barkleys case (reported by Master Plowden) if a gift in
tail be made to the King, he shall not alien to defraud him in the Reversion or
his Issues, but is bound by the Statute of West. 2. de donis conditionalibus.

Co. l. 5. 27. b. 2. in Russels case.
17. An Infant Executor brings an Action of Trover and Conversion for a Chest
with diverse sums of money and Iuels in it, A release of an Infant Executor.
the Defendant pleads a release of the Plaintiff: In this case, albeit a
release by him upon payment of money, or delivery of a Legacy, and all Acts in
pursuance of his office of Executor are strong and good, yet a release (in this
case) is adjudged not valid to bind him; because first, it would amount to a
devastavit, and then the infant should be chargeable to answer it of his own
goods: and secondly, it would be a wrong, which an infant by his release can
never do.

Restraint by condition, if there be a tort.
18. If a man make a gift in tail, Co. l. 6. 41. b. 1. in Sir Anthony Mildmays
cases. Co. Inst. pars 1. 223. b. 4.
upon condition that he shall not alien, this condition to some intent is good,
and to other some void; for if he make a Feoffment in fee, or any other estate,
whereby the Reversion is discontinued tortiously, the Donor shall enter for the
condition broken; for every act, that is prohibited by Law, or makes a tort, a
man may prohibit by condition (Vide 10 H. 7. 11.) Howbeit if in such case the
Donee suffer a common Recovery, the condition cannot by the Law extend to it,
because that is lawful, whereas the other is tortious and against Law: So if
Feoffment be made to Baron and Feme in fee, upon condition, that they shall not
alien: in this case, they are not thereby restrained to alien by levying a Fine
both of them together, because that is lawful and incident to their estate;
but they cannot alien by Deed, because that is tortious and against Law:
likewise, if a man enfeoff an Infant in fee, upon condition, that he shall not
alien, this shall not restrain him to alien at his full age, for that were
repugnant to the liberty, that the Law gives in case of Fee-simple (according
to Litt. fo. 84. a.) Howbeit such a condition shall restrain him from aliening
during his nonage, for that is tortious and against Law, and thereupon the
Feoffor shall enter, etc. Co. l 6. 70. a. 1. in Sir Moyle Finches case.


Right cannot incorporate with wrong.
19. There is such an extreme enmity betwixt an estate gained by wrong, and
the ancient right, that the right cannot possibly incorporate it self with an
estate gained by wrong, but it will rather suffer extinguishment, then pass
with it: And therefore if the Donee be disseised, and the Donor disseise the
Disseisor, and make Feoffment in fee, and the Donee make regresse, the Donor
shall not have the Reversion but the Disseisor; for there is a diversity
betwixt an estate and a right, as where the Reversioner disseiseth the Donee or
Lessee for life, and then makes Feoffment in fee, upon regresse of the Donee or
Lessee, the Reversion is left in the Feoffee, and this is by force of the
Feoffment, but where the Donee or Lessee is disseised, here the Reversioner
has but a right, which he cannot transfer to another; and therefore when he
disseiseth the Disseisor and makes Feoffment, this passes the estate, which he
gained by Disseisin, and extinguisheth his ancient right, which he could not
transfer to another, and then the first Disseisor has the first possession,
and a better right then the Feoffee of the Reversioner, because he comes in
under him, who disseised the first Disseisor, and hereby the ancient right is
extinct: for the Reversioner cannot have it, because that would be repugnant to
his own grant, neither can the Feoffee have it, because a right cannot be
transferred, and the Law will not (in this case) suffer the Disseisor to have
it, because right and wrong cannot cohabit together, and therefore it shall
rather extinguish: So likewise if the Disseisee disseise the heir of the
Disseisor, here he gains the estate by wrong, viz. by Disseisin, having the
ancient right; in this case, if he make Feoffment in fee to another, he thereby
passes away the estate which he gained by Disseisin, and extinguisheth his
ancient right, so that the heir, when he reenters, shall retain the Land as
well against the Feoffor as against the Feoffee.

A Disseisor ^^e only ^^ong-doer.
20. If a Disseisor make Feoffment in fee, Co. l. 11. 51. a. 4. in Rich.
Lifords case.
and the Feoffee cuts down Trees, Grass, grain, growing upon the ground, etc.
if the Disseisee re-enter, he shall not have an Action of trespass vi and armis
against the Feoffee, that came in by title; so it is also if he had made a gift
in tail or a lease for life or years of the Land, because they come in by
title, but in such case the Disseisee shall recover all the mean profits
against the Disseisor, as the Disseisee (in such cases) should have recovered
damages against the Disseisor in an Assise at the common Law before the Statute
of Gloucester cap. 1. There is the same Law also, if the Disseisor be disseised,
an Action of Trespass does not lie against the second Disseisor, for he may
come in by title, and if he should be charged, he might then be doubly charged,
viz. both by the Disseisee and also by the first Disseisor; and this fiction of
Law, that the Frank-tenement has always continued in the Disseisee (which
ought to be the ground of the Action of Trespass) shall not have relation to
make him, that comes in by title, or upon a second Disseisin to be a
wrong-doer, against whom an Action of Trespass may be brought: Howbeit, if one
disseise me, and during the Disseisin he cuts down the Trees, Grass, grain,
etc. and after I re-enter; in this case, I shall have an Action of Trespass vi
and armis against him for the Trees, Grass, Grain, etc. for after my regress
the Law (by fiction) as to the Disseisor and his Servants supposes that the
Frank-tenement has always continued in me, and he only (by construction of
Law) shall be adjudged the wrong-doer, which fiction cannot extend to him that
comes in by title, or upon a second Disseisin, etc.

Co. l. 11. 72. b. 4. in Magdalen College case.
21. The Statute of West. 2. cap. 5. The King bound. The law preserves right.
Quod quotiescunque aliquis jus non habens tempore hujusmodi custodiarum, etc.
presentaverit, etc. which was made to suppress wrong, shall bind the King: And
therefore it is well said in 24 E. 3. 41. That the Law is reason and equity to
do right to all, and to preserve men from wrong and mischief, for the Law will
never make construction against Law, Equity and Right.

Pl. Co. 64. b. 3. ^in Dive and Maninghams case.
22. Albeit the Statute of 23 H. 6. 10. Obligation made to defend one for a
wrong void.
(which prohibits Sheriffs to take security of persons taken in execution, to
the end to let them go at large) had not been made, yet a Bond had been void
at the Common Law: For such a Prisoner by the Common Law is not main parnable,
and then the letting of him go at large by Mainprise is a wrong, and a thing
done against the Law, and (by consequent) the Obligation is made to aid the
Sheriff for a wrong done by him, in which case (even by the order and course of
the Common Law) the Obligation is void: So if an Obligation be made to save one
harmless for killing such a man, or to commit such a Trespass, etc. in such
cases, the Obligation is void by the Common Law: And therefore if the Plaintiff
in a Replegiare has a Withernam out of the Common Pleas, by force whereof one
of the Sheriffs Bailiffs takes four beasts in the name of Withernam, and after
delivers them again to the Defendant, and the Defendant is bound to save the
Bailiff harmless for the fource beasts, who afterward being damnified, brings
his Action of debt upon the Obligation: In this case (as it held by the better
opinion in M. 2. H. 4. fol. 9. Fitz. Obligation 13. and Br. 20.) the Obligation
is void, for the Writ of Withernam is, Capias in Withernam, etc. et ea detineas
quousque, etc. so as the Sheriff ought to have kept the Cattle, and not to
have delivered them to the party, for that was a wrong, and therefore the
Obligation made to defend him for that wrong is void.

147. So as none shall take benefit or advantage of their own wrong.
Litt. S. 19. Co. Inst. pars 1. 23. a. 3.
1. Upon a gift in tail the Rule of Law is, Tenure by Knight Service.
that the Donees and their issues shall do to the Donor and his heirs such
services, as the Donor does to his Lord Paramont: And yet if a man seized in
right of his wife of Land holden by Knight Service in tail, that Land
generally, the Donee shall not hold of him by Knight service; because his wife
held the land, and he had nothing but in her right, and (in that case) the
Baron having gained a new Reversion by wrong shall not take advantage of his
own wrong, but such a Donee shall only hold by Fealty, which is incident to
all tenures.

Rentcharge apportioned.
2. Regularly, a whole Rentcharge is extinct by the purchase, Co. ibid. 148.
b. 4.
or otherwise gaining of the Possession of part of the Land, out of which it is
issuing: And yet in some cases a Rentcharge shall not be wholely extinct,
where the Grantee claims from and under the Grantor: As if B. makes a Lease
for life of one Acre to A. and A. is seized of another Acre in fee, A. grants
a Rentcharge to B. out of both the Acres, and does waste in the Acre which he
holds for life, B. recovereth in waste: In this case, the whole Rent is not
extinct, but shall be apportioned, and yet B. claims the one Acre under A.
and the reason hereof is, for that no man shall take advantage of his own
wrong, Nullus commodum capere potest de injuria sua propria: for seeing the
waste was committed by the act, and wrong of the Lessee, he shall not take
advantage thereof to extinguish the whole Rent: And the whole Rent cannot issue
only out of the other Acre, because the Lessor has the one Acre under the
estate of the Lessee, and therefore in such case it shall be apportioned: So it
is also if A. had made a Feoffment in fee, and B. had entered for the
Forfeiture, in that case also the Rent shall be apportioned, and not wholely
extinct: causa qua supra.

Re-disseisin against the feoffee.
3. A re-disseisin does lie against the Re-disseisor, Co. ibid. 154. b. 2.
but likewise against his Feoffee: for, otherwise the Re-disseisor might
prevent the Plaintiff of his Re-disseisin, and so take advantage of his own
wrong.

Challenge to the Array.
4. If the Plaintiff or Defendant have an Action of debt against the Sheriff,
this is a good cause of challenge to the Array, Co. ibid. 159. a. 2.
but albeit the Sheriff has an Action of Debt against either party, this is no
good cause of challenge: for, the failer of paying a debt to the Sheriff is a
wrong, and against Law, and if either party might challenge for such cause, he
should take advantage of his own wrong.

Cattle dis^ained out of (...) fee,
5. If the Lord come to distraine Cattle, Co. ibid. 161. a. 2. Co. L. 9. 22.
a. 3 in the cases of Avowry. 44 E. 3. 20. per Thorpe.
which he sees then within his fee, and the Tenant or any other (in his
behalf) to prevent the Lord to distrain, drive the Cattle out of the Lords
fee into some other place, yet may the Lord freshly follow, and distraine the
Cattle, and the Tenant cannot make rescous, albeit the place, in which the
Distress is taken, is out of his fee: for if by such a shift the Tenant might
prevent the Lord of his Distress, he should take advantage of his own wrong And
therefore in such case in Judgment of Law the Distress is taken within his
fee, and so shall the Writ of Rescous suppose, in case the Cattle be rescued:
but it is otherwise of cattle to be distrained for Damage-feasant, for they
must be Damage-feasant at the time of the Distress.

Condition ab^^^re, Bond not valid.
6. If a man make a Feoffment in fee upon Condition, Co. ibid. 206. b. 2.
that the Feoffee shall re-enfeoff him before such a day, and before that day
the Feoffor disseise the Feoffee, and hold him out by force until the day be
past: In this case, the estate of the Feoffee is absolute, for the Feoffor is
the cause wherefore the condition cannot be performed, and therefore shall
never take advantage for the nonperformance thereof: So it is also if A. be
bound to B. that J. S. shall marry J. G. before such a day, and before the day
B. marry with J. he shall never take advantage of the Bond, for that he himself
is the mean, that the Condition could not be performed.

Obligation (...).
7. If a man be bound to A. in an Obligation to enfeoff B. (who is a mere
stranger) before a day, Co. ibid. 209. a. 2.
the Obligor does offer to enfeoff B. and he refuses: In this case, the
Obligation is forfeite, for the Obligor has taken upon him to enfeoff him, and
his refusal cannot satisfy the Condition: but if the Feoffment had been by
the condition to be made to the Obligee, or to any other for his benefit or
behoof, a tender and refusal shall save the Bond, because he himself (upon
the matter) is the cause, wherefore the Condition could not be performed, and
therefore shall not take advantage thereof to give himself cause of Action
thereby.

Co. Inst pars 1. 210. b. 3. Litt. S. 340.
8. If Feoffment be made upon Condition to pay the Feoffee twenty pounds upon a
certain day: In this case, Tender excused.
the Feoffor is bound to find out the Feoffee, and to make tender thereof unto
him if he be in England: but if he be out of the Land, he is not bound to seek
him, nor to go out of the Realm unto him: Neither shall the Feoffee take
advantage of his own absence, but the Feoffor shall enter into the Land, as if
he had duly tendered it according to the Condition, because the Feoffee himself
was the cause, that the Feoffor could not make due tender at the day limited
for the payment thereof.

Litt. S. 355, 356. Co. ibid. 220. b. 4. ^
9. If Feoffment be made upon condition to enfeoff another, Disability.
or to make a gift in tail to another, etc. And the Feoffee before the
performance of the Condition enfeoffs a stranger, or makes a Lease for term of
life: In this case, his Feoffee or Lessee shall not have the Land, for then he
should take advantage of his own wrong, but the Feoffor and his Heirs may
enter, because the Feoffee has disabled himself to perform the Condition: So
it is also if he had made but a Lease for years, for the estate ought to be in
the same plight at the time of the re-enfeoffment, that it was in at the time,
when he took the estate.

Litt. S. 383. Co. ibid. 236. a. 4.
10. If Lands be devised to be sold by his Executor; in this case, Laches.
the Executor is bound by the Law to sell them as soon as he can; for
(otherwise) he shall take advantage of his own Laches.

Co. ibid. 238. b. 2.
11. If there be Grandfather, Father, and Son, and the Son disseiseth one, and
enfeoffeth the Grandfather, who dies seized, Grandfather, Father, and Son.
and the Land descends to the Father; Now is the Entry of the Disseissee
taken away; but if the Father dye seized and the Land descend to the Son; In
this case, is the Entry of the Disseisee revived, and he may enter upon the
Son, who shall take no advantage of the descent, because he did the wrong unto
the Disseisee: And the Law were the same, if the Land had not descended to the
Son, but the Son had been in by purchase, as by Feoffment in fee, in tail,
or for life, from his Father, yet may the Disseissee enter upon him, for he
shall in no kind take advantage of his own wrong.

Litt. S. 395. Co. ibid 242. a. 1.
12. If a Disseisor enfeoff his Father in fee, The like.
and the Father dye seized, whereby the Land descends to the Disseisor, as his
Son and Heir, etc. In this case, the Disseisee may well enter upon the
Disseisor, notwithstanding the descent, because he being particeps criminis,
shall take no advantage of his own wrong; for albeit a descent be cast, and the
Entry of the Disseisee taken away, yet if the Disseisor comes to the Land
again, either by descent or purchase of any estate of Freehold, the Disseisee
may enter upon him or have his Assise against him, as if no descent or mean
conveyance had been, causa qua supra.

Co. ibid. 247. a. 3. in Beverleys case. Co. l. 4. 125. a. 3.
13. The heir of one, that is non compos mentis, (as an Idiot, A Drunkard.
Lunatique, etc.) shall after his Ancestors death avoid a descent: but neither
a drunkard himself nor his heir shall avoid it: for, albeit some are of such a
beastly humor to be (in a manner) always in that condition, yet neither he nor
his heir shall thereby avoid a descent cast: because then his drunkenness
would be an advantage to him or his heir, which ought not to be, but does
aggravate his offense, he being indeed to be reputed rather Voluntarius Demon,
then non compos mentis.

Profession makes no descent.
14. Profession in Religion shall not make a descent to take away Entry;
because it is the Disseisors own act, Litt. S. 410. Co. ibid. 248. b. 4.
whereof neither he nor his heir shall take advantage: So if a man be Tenant
or Defendant in a real or personal Action, and hanging the Suit, the Tenant
or Defendant enters into Religion, by this the Writ shall not abate; Causa qua
supra, there is the same Law of a Resignation, etc. but not of a Deposition or
Deprivation, because he is expelled by Judgment, and yet his offense, etc. was
the cause thereof: Sed in presumptione legis, Judicium semper redditur
indivisum.

Baron and Feme waste.
15. If Land be given to a Feme sole for life, Litt S. 525. Co. ibid. 299. b. 3.
and after she take Baron, and the Reversioner confirms the estate of the
Baron and Feme to hold for their two lives; here the Baron has an estate for
life in the Land by way of Remainder (as Littleton terms it, S. 525.) or (as
others call it) by way of Reversion; but however it enures to him by way of
increase or enlargement of estate, or otherwise, he is seized of an estate for
life in the Land: And yet in this case, if the Husband commit waste, an Action
of waste shall lie against Husband and Wife, notwithstanding the mean
Remainder, because the Husband himself commits the waste and does the
wrong, and therefore shall not excuse himself for his committing of waste, in
respect he himself has the Remainder, no more then if a man leaseth to A.
during the life of B. the Remainder to him during the life of C. if he commit
waste, an Action of waste shall lie against him.

Forfeiture.
16. A. Tenant for life, the Remainder to B. for life, Co. ibid. 302. b. 3.
the Remainder in tail, the Remainder to the right heirs of B. A. and B. join
in a Feoffment by Deed; here, albeit it may be said, that this is the Feoffment
of A. and the confirmation of B. and consequently he in the Remainder in tail
cannot enter for the forfeiture during the life of B. yet because B. joined in
the Feoffment, which was tortious to him in the Remainder in tail, and is
particeps criminis, they have both forfeited their estates, and he in the
Remainder in tail shall enter for the forfeiture.

Covin with a Diseisor, on ^^mitter.
17. If the Baron discontinue the Land of the Feme, Litt. S. 678. Co. ibid.
357. b. 2.
and the Discontinuee is disseised, and after the Disseisor lets the Land to
the Baron and Feme for life: in this case the Feme is remitted, albeit the
Baron were (in this case) of covin with the Disseisor, but if the Baron and
Feme were of Covin, that the Disseisin should be done, in that case the Feme is
not remitted, for she shall not any way take advantage of her own wrong: So if
Tenant in tail and his issue disseise the Discontinuee to the use of the
Father, and the Father dies, and the Land discendeth to the issue: In this
case, the issue is not remitted against the Discontinuee, in respect he was
privy and party to the wrong whereof therefore he shall not take any advantage,
but in respect of all other he is remitted and shall deraigne the first
warranty.

Covin.
18. A. and B. Ioynt-tenants are entitled to a real Action against the Heir
of the Disseisor, A. causes the heir to be disseised, Co. Inst. pars 1. 357.
b. 3.
against whom A. and B. recover and sue execution: In this case, B. is
remitted, for that he was not party to the Covin, and shall hold in common with
A. but A. is not remitted, because he was of Covin, and shall not take
advantage of his own wrong.

Condition broken by demise.
19. A. devises Land to his Wife, Co. l. 1. 25. b. 3. Porters case.
upon Condition that she convey them in convenient time to certain persons in
trust for the maintenance of a Free-schoole: the Testator dies, and his Wife
demised the Land to a stranger for years: in this case the Condition is
broken, and the next Heir shall enter, because by the demise she has
disabled her self to convey them according to the Condition, viz. in the same
plight she had them, and therefore shall not take advantage of her own wrong.

Co. l. 3. 29. b. 4. in Butler and Bakers case. 14 H. 4. 38. 1 H 5. Tit.
Grants, 43.
20. If Donee in tail make a Feoffment in fee, in this case, Donee still Tenant
after discontinuance.
the Donee has neither Jus in rei veritate, nor Jus ad rem: for by his own act
he has departed with all the estate that was in him; and yet after this the
Donee may extinguish or diminish his rent by release or confirmation made to
him by the Donor, because (as to the Donor) the Donee shall still remain
Tenant, and of necessity for the rent the Donor shall avow upon the Donee, for
he cannot avow upon the Discontinuee: because then by his own showing the
Reversion, to which the rent is incident, should be de^ested out of him by the
Feoffment, and by consequent he could not then maintain his Avowry for the
rent: and therefore of necessity he shall avow upon the Donee, notwithstanding
he has divested himself of all his estate, for it is no reason, that the
Feoffment, which is the Donees own act, and by which wrong is done, should
avail the Donee to bar the Donor of his rent; for then the Donee, that made
the discontinuance, should take advantage of his own wrong.

Co. l. 3. 44. b. 2. in Baytons case. Co. l. 3. 52. a. 4. in Rigewayes case.
21. If one in execution escape of his own wrong and be re-taken, Escape of
Prisoners.
he shall not have an Audita Querela to discharge himself of his Imprisonment:
because he shall not take advantage of his own wrong, and in such case, it is
lawful for the Jailer to re-take him, in what place soever he finds him: And
albeit the Prisoner in the pursuit be out of view (at the turn of a corner or
the like) yet the Sheriff or Gaoloer may re-take him, and although it be in
places without their jurisdiction: but the Plaintiff may bring an Action
against the Sheriff before he can re take him, and he shall be answerable for
an escape, albeit the Sheriff re-take him afterward: Howbeit, the Sheriff may
then justify to retain the Prisoner, until he save him harmless from the
Plaintiffs Action, or may bring an Action of Trespass upon the case against
him for the damages he shall suffer by the Plaintiffs Action: Also after the
escape, if the Capias ad satisfaciendum be not returned and filed, it may be
renewed against the Prisoner.

Co. l. 3. 64. a. 4. Pennants case.
22. A man leases his Land, Acceptance of rent, no confirmation.
upon condition that the Lessee shall not assign any part thereof, the
condition is broken, and the Lessor before notice of the assignment accepts the
rent due after such assignment: In this case, the condition being collateral,
the breaking thereof may be so secretly contrived, that it is not possible for
the Lessor to come to the knowledge thereof, and therefore notice in this case
is material and issuable: for (otherwise) the Lessee should take advantage of
his own fraud: It is otherwise, if a Lease be made with condition of re-entry
upon non-payment of the rent, for in such case both parties may take notice
thereof by the Indenture, and therefore by acceptance of the rent afterward,
the Lessor dispenses with the Condition, and confirms the Lease.

Co. l 3. 76. b. 2. Fermors case.
23. A. possessed of diverse parcells of Land within the Manor of S. for years,
at will, and by copy, and also of others there in fee, Fine, no bar^ to the
Lord.
demiseth the whole to B. for life, and thereupon levies a Fine to B. etc. of
so many acres as amount to the whole Land, continues possession, and pays the
rents to the Lord: In this case, albeit five years pass, yet the Lord is not
barred: for it is unreasonable to give the Lessee benefit (in this case) of the
Lessors non-claime, when the tort and covin of the Lessee is the cause of his
non-claime, for a man shall not take advantage of his own covin or wrong.

Co. l. 4. 82. a. 4. Sir Anthony Corbe^s case.
24. A. devises his Land to B. till eight hundred pounds be raised for the
preferment of his Daughters, and dies, Devise to raise money.
C. his heir conceales the Will, enters, and dies: In this case B. shall have
allowance for the time, that the Will was concealed, and shall hold the Land so
much the longer, according to the time that the Will was so concealed, until
the eight hundred pounds may be raised, for it is against reason, that the
heir should enter upon the Land so much the sooner, because his concealment of
the will was a wrong, and then he should take advantage of his own wrong.

Waste in a Colemine.
25. A. demiseth a Close to B. wherein there is a Colemine un-opened, Co. l. 5.
12. b. 3. in Sanders case.
B. opens the Mine and assigns his term to C. except all Mines, C. digs Coals
out of the Mine, and A. brings an Action of waste against C. in this A. shall
recover locum vastarum, and the exception shall not excuse it, for the opening
of the Mine by B. was a tort, and (that being committed) if B. should excuse or
avoid it by the exception, he should thereby take advantage of his own wrong.

26. If A. grants to B. one hundred cords of wood to be cut down and taken by
the assignment of A. If A. in convenient time after request by B. do not
assign them, B. may take them himself without any assignment, Co. l. 24. b.
4. in Sir Thomas Palmers case.
for the Grantor (in such case) by his own act or default shall not derogate
from his grant, nor take advantage by such his neglect of non-assignment; there
is the same Law of Estovers, etc. to be assigned by the Bailiff of a Manor,
etc.

Executor, de son tort.
27. An Executor of his own wrong shall not retain goods in his own hands to
satisfy his proper debt, Co. l. 5. 30. b. 3. in Coulters case.
for then he should take advantage of his own wrong, which the Law will not
permit.

Age not allowed.
28. Regularly, in all real actions at the Common Law, Co. l. 6. 4. b. 3. in
Markals case.
if the Tenant be within age, and in by descent, he shall have his age:
Howbeit, if the Action be founded upon his own wrong, as in Cessavit, upon his
cesser: in such case, he shall not have his age: For then he should take
advantage of his own wrong.

After Judgment the bond not valid.
29. A. has Judgment in an Action of debt upon an Obligation, Co. l. 6 45. b.
2. in Higgens case.
the Defendant brings a Writ of Error, and hanging the Writ of Error, the
Plaintiff brings a new Action of debt upon the same Obligation: but it was
adjudged he could not; for, until the Judgment be reversed by Error, the
Obligation remains quasht, and if there be Error in the proceeding, that is
the Plaintiffs fault, and he shall not take advantage of his own tort or
default.

Release to a Joynt-tenant.
30. A. and B. are Ioynt-tenants for life, Co. l. 6. 78. b. The Lord of
Abergavenies case.
and Judgment is had against A. in debt, who releaseth to B. and B. dies: In
this case, albeit the term is expired, so as the Reversioner may enter, yet
the Land shall stand charged with the Judgment during the life of A. for
(otherwise) A. should take advantage of his own Act, and thereby avoid the debt
and Judgment of the Creditor, who is a stranger to the release.

Action upon the case.
31. A. recovers against B. in the Common Pleas, and dies, Co. l. 7. 4. b. 2.
in Bulwers case.
C. upon the Judgment in the name of H. outlawes B. in the Hustings of London,
die lunae proximum post festum Simonis and Judae, and thereupon P. is taken by
a Capias Utlagatum in Norfolk, and there imprisoned, whereupon B. brings an
Action upon the case against C. Quia maliciose and deceptive machinatus est,
etc. And in this case it was objected, that the Capias Utlagatum was erroneous,
because the Outlawry was therein recited to be proximum ante festum, etc. but
that exception was not allowed, because the error in the Writ, which the
Defendant C. had tortiously pursued, shall give no advantage to himself: but
in as much as B. the Plaintiff was imprisoned and molested thereby, he had
thereupon good cause of Action.

The heir not estopt.
32. Where Lands were conveyed to Baron and Feme, Co. l. 8. 53. b. 3. in Sims
his case. 18. E. 3. fo. 9.
and to the heirs of the Baron, and the Baron gives them in tail, the Baron
dies, the Feme recovers the Land against the Donee by a writ of Cui in vita,
supposing that she had the Land to her and her heirs in fee, the Feme after
the Recovery enfeoffs another and dies, the Donee in tail dies without issue,
the issue of Baron and Feme brings a Formedon in Reverter against the Feoffee
of the Feme; And (in this case) albeit the issue was heir to the Feme, and
thereby estopt by the Recovery in the Cui in vita to say, that the Feme had a
less estate then Fee-simple, yet the issue, who claimed the Reversion of the
Land as heir to the Baron, shall not be bound by that Estoppel made by the
Feme, although he was heir to her also; for then the Feme who had but an
estate for life, might by her own act have barred the heir, that right had,
and claimed as heir to his Father.

C. l. 8. 76. a. 2. in the Lord Staffords case.
33. If a man make a Lease for years, upon Condition, Outer by Lessor.
that if the Lessor out him within the Term, that he shall have fee, and the
Lessor does out him accordingly; in this case, albeit the interest of the term
is by such ouster turned to a right, yet the Lessee in such case shall have
fee: for that such ouster is the act and tort of the Lessor himself, whereof
he shall take no advantage.

Co. l. 8. 133. a. 4. Turners case.
34. In debt against an Executor, Executor de lays, etc.
he pleads a Recovery against him in such a Court, which amounts to the whole
in his hands: the Plaintiff replies, that the recoverer has accepted
composition, and that the Defendant delays to accept a release, with purpose
to defraud the Plaintiff: In this case, the deferring to accept the release is
a tort, and against the duty of an Executor, and therefore cannot help him,
for if any prejudice happen to him thereby, it is by his own tort and default,
and therefore he shall not take any benefit thereby.

Co. l. 9. 68. b. 4. in Mackallies case.
35. Upon an arrest, Resistance by Prisoner.
if the party arrested submit himself peaceably thereunto, and gives the
Sergeants or Bailiffs convenient leisure to acquaint him with their business,
they oughtupon demand to show him their warrant, and to let him know the
occasion thereof, as it was adjudged in the Countess of Rutlands case, in the
6. Rep. fo. 55. But if he make resistance, and obey not their warrant, they are
not bound to show it, nor, etc. and if then any of them be killed, it is
murder: for the Prisoner shall not in such case take advantage of his own wrong.

Co. l. 10. 134. b. 2. in Read and Redmans case.
36. In real Writs original, Summons and severance.
if he that is summoned and severed dies (which is the act of God) the Writ
shall abate, but taking of Baron or entering into the Land by him that is
summoned and severed (or where there is no summons and severance) shall not
abate the Writ, but only make it abateable, because these are the parties own
acts, whereof they shall not take advantage.

Co. l. 11. 81. b. 1 in Jews Bowls case.
37. If a Tenant for life or years fell Timber Trees, Waste.
or pull down the Houses, the Lessor shall have the Timber, for the Lessee
cannot have them by his demise, but as things annexed to the soil: And
therefore it is absurd in reason, that when by his own act and wrong he has
severed them from the Land, he should gain a greater property in them, then he
had by the demise.

F. N. B. 59. k.
37. The Tenant may fell Trees to repair the Houses: Waste.
but if the Houses be fallen into decay by his default, if then he fell Trees
to repair them, it is waste, for he shall not usurp the power of felling Trees
to amend the Houses, when the cause why they wanted repairing was by his own
neglect.

Pl. Co. 16. b. 4. in Fogassaes case.
38. In Fogassaes case in the Commentaries, Not weying Woad.
the not weying of the Woad is referred to the Collector: And therefore the
Collector shall not by his neglect take advantage in the Kings behalf of the
not weying thereof, and by that means cause Fogassa to forfeit the same.

Dyer 30. 205. 28 H. 8. and Dyer 42. 9. etc. 30 H. 8.
39. The Condition of an Obligation was this, Obligation to enjoy peaceably.
That the Obligor should surrender certain Copyhold-land, and also that he
should suffer the Obligee and his heirs peaceably to enjoy the Land without
the interruption of any: The Defendant pleads performance, and also that the
Plaintiff did peaceably continue the Possession thereof according to the
condition for a certain time, and that afterward the Lord for rent arreare in
the Plaintiffs time entered according to the custom for the forfeiture,
Judgment f^action, and this was held a good Plea, because the reason why the
Plaintiff did not enjoy the Land was caused by his own act, which in this case
shall not work to his advantage: So if the Obligee had been Tenant at the
Common Law, and had ceased, the Obligation had been saved, for that it was the
act of the Plaintiff himself.

148. And therefore the Law of it self prejudiceth none.
Distress.
1. Any goods may be distrained for damage-feasant, Co. Inst. part 1. 47. a. 4
by reason of the necessity (See Max. 110. Ex. 4.) and such Distress may also
be made in the night time, for the same reason ( Vide M. 128. E. 2.) Howbeit
for rent, nothing can be distrained in the night time, or which cannot be
rendered in as good plight, as it was in at the time of the Distress taken, as
sheaves or shocks of Corn, or the like, cannot be distrained for rent, because
when a Distress is made for rent it is in the custody of the Law, and
repliviable, and during the time it so remains, the Law will not suffer the
owner thereof to suffer prejudice by the detainer, and (in such case) there is
no such necessity, but that the Distress may be made in a seasonable time, and
of convenient goods: Howbeit Wagons or Carts laden with grain (Horses and
all) may be distrained for rent, because they may be restored in the same
condition they were in, when they were taken: And yet Beasts belonging to the
Plough (averria carucae) shall not be distrained, nor any Vtensils or
Instruments of a man's Trade or Profession, as the Axe of the Carpenter, the
Books of a Scholar, etc. while other Beasts or Goods (which Bracton calls
animalia, or catalla otiosa) may be distrained, for that were un-charitable and
an injury to the public, whereof the Law (if possibly it may be otherwise)
will not be guilty. Vide plus ubi supra.

Waste against Guardian.
2. If the Guardian does waste, Co. ibid. 54. a. 2.
and the heir within age brings an Action of waste, the Guardian shall lose
the Wardship, but if the heir bring an Action of waste at his full age, he
shall then recover treble damages, for when the Law at his age of one and
twenty years takes away from him his advantage of having the Forfeiture of the
Wardship, in liew thereof it gives him treble damages, because (otherwise) the
Guardian might do him an injury, and make him no recompense for it, for then
the Guardian cannot lose the Wardship.

An Infant pays releif.
3. Littleton says, Litt. S. 112. Co. ibid. 83. b. 4.
That the heir of a Tenant by Knight Service ought not to pay releife until
his age of twenty one years, yet in some case the Heir shall pay releif, when
he was within that age at the time of the death of his Ancestor: As if a man
holds Lands of the King by Knight Service in Capite, and of a common person
other Lands by Knight Service, and dies, his heir being within age; here, the
King has the Wardship both of body and Lands by his Prerogative, until the
full age of the heir, and therefore (in this case) the Heir (though he be
within age) shall immediately pay releif to the other Lord: for as the Law
gives away the Wardship to the King by reason of his Prerogative, so does it
in respect thereof reserve to the other Lord all that conveniently may be
reserved, viz. his releif.

The Lord shall not have the body.
4. A man seized of Land holden by Knight Service has issue a Daughter, who
takes Baron, and has issue a Son, Litt. S. 114. Co. ibid. 84. a. 3.
the Tenant dies and also the Mother; in this case, the Son shall not be in
ward for his body living his Father, but yet the Lord shall have the Wardship
of the Land until the full age of the Son; for albeit (in this case) the Law
does give the custody of the body to the Father and barreth the Lord thereof,
yet the Lord shall have the Wardship of the Land by force of the tenure of the
first creation thereof: So it is also if the Father marry his heir within age
and dies, in this case also the Lord shall have the Wardship of the Land.

Co. ibid. 88. b. 3.
5. Where the Father is Guardian of his Son for Land holden in Knight Service,
this is in respect of his paternall natural custody, Father Guardian in socage
accountable.
and therefore in such case he shall not be answerable for his marryage or
custody of his Lands; but where the Father is Guardian by reason of a tenure in
Socage, he must by Law be accountable to the Son both for his marriage and also
for the profits of his Lands, which he should not be, if he had the custody of
his eldest son (in this case) as his Father in respect of nature; And because
the Law does appoint him to be Guardian in Socage, it compels him also to be
accountable: for the act of Law does never any man wrong.

Co. ibid. 134. b. 2. Anic. super carta, cap. 15. 28. E. 1.
6. Before the Statute of Articuli super cartas, In real actions fifteen days
return.
in all Summons and Attachments in Plea of Land were contained the term of
fifteen days, and it appears not only by that Statute, but likewise by the
ancient Authors of the Law, who wrote before that Statute, that this was the
ancient common Law: And the reason of giving so many days in real Actions,
was (the Recovery being so dangerous) that the Tenant might the better provide
himself both of answers and proofs.

Co. ibid. 132. b. 2.
7. If I be disseised, and my Brother release with Warranty, Descent upon
Profession.
and is afterward professed in Religion, and thereby the Warranty descend upon
me: In this case, albeit the Law binds me by the Warranty, yet (I being his
heir) the Law gives me by descent such Inheritance as my Brother had at the
time of his Profession.

Co. ibid. 137. a. 3. Litt. S. 203.
8. Albeit by an act in Law a man may have damnum, Profession discharges
wardship.
yet (in such case) it is always absque injuria, as if a Ward enter into
Religion and be professed, hereby the Lord loses the Wardship of the Land, which
may be said damnum: for by such Profession the Ward is civiliter mortuus, a
dead man in the Law, and cannot hold any Inheritance, neither can the Guardian
continue the Wardship of the land, because by the civil death of the Ward, the
Inheritance is descended to another, but this damnum is absque injuria, for by
such Profession the land descends to another, who is either to be in Ward, or
to pay releif: And therefore (in such case) the law gives the Guardian no
remedy, neither by any formed Writ, nor by Action upon the case.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 138. a. 3.
9. If Tenant for another man's life by his Deed grant a Rent charge to one for
twenty one years, Cesty que vie dies, A annuity good, the land evicted.
hereby the Rentcharge is determined, and yet the Grantee may have during the
years a Writ of Annuity for the arrearages incurred after the death of Cesty
que vie, because the Rent charge did determine by the act of God and the course
of law, Actus Legis nemini facit injuriam: So it is also, if land, out of which
a Rentcharge is granted, be recovered by an eyent title, and thereby the
Rentcharge is avoyed, yet the Grantee shall have a Writ of Annuity, because
the Rentcharge is avoided by the course of law, and so it was holden in Wards
case, cited in Co. l. 2. fo. 36. in Heywards case, against an opinion obiter in
6 H. 6. 42. a. Vide Max. 114. Ex. 13.

Co. ibid. 149. a. 1.
10. A. has common of Pasture sans number in twenty Acres of land, Common sans
number not apportioned.
and ten of these Acres descend to A. the common sans number is entire and
uncertain, and cannot be apportioned, but shall remain, but if it had been a
Common certain (as for ten Beasts) in that case the Common ^^^dition shall be
apportioned; And so it is also of common of Estovers, Turbary, Piscary, etc.
And it is to be observed, that in none of these cases, or the like, the
descent, which is an act in Law, shall work any wrong to the Ter-tenant; for
(nevertheless) he shall have thereby that which belongs to him, for the Act
in Law shall never work any wrong.

The like.
11. Of Common or Corody certain (as for ten beasts, Co. ibid. 164. b. 4.
so many Dishes in certain, etc.) partition amongst Coparceners or
Apportionment may be made; for this can work no wrong to the Ter-tenant: But
if a man have reasonable Estovers (as House-boot, Hay-boot, etc) Appendant to
his Freehold, they are so entire that they shall not be divided amongst
Coparceners; So likewise if a Corody uncertain be granted to a man and his
heirs, and he has issue diverse Daughters, this Corody shall not be divided
between them; there is the same Law also of Common sans number: for (in these
cases and the like) if Estovers, Common, Piscary, or Corody uncertain should
be partable amongst Sisters, such partition would work a wrong to the
Ter-tenant, Co. ibid. 165. a. 1.
who should be oppressed and overcharged thereby, which the Law will not suffer:
But in such cases one of the Coparceners has it, and the rest are satisfied
otherwise, or if there be nothing but such entire Inheritances, that will not
admit severance, then they are to have the profit thereof by turns, etc. vide
pl. ibid.

Warranty continues after partition.
12. If two hold jointly certain Lands with warranty, Co. ibid. 165. a. 4.
and make partition, in this case the Warranty is gone; because they are not
compellable by the Common Law to make partition: but if Coparceners hold Land
with Warranty, and make partition, yet shall the Warranty still remain, for
they are compellable by the Common Law to make partition, and therefore the Law
preserves their Warranty.

The estate preserved by construction of Law.
13. If Tenant for life make a Lease generally, Co. ibid. 183. a. 4.
this shall be taken (by construction of Law) to be an estate for his own life,
that made the Lease; for if it should be a Lease for the life of the Lessee, it
would work a wrong to him in the Reversion: So it is likewise, if Tenant in
tail make a Lease generally, the Law shall contrive this to be such a Lease as
he may lawfully make, and that is for term of his own life, for if it should
be for the life of the Lessee, it would be a Discontinuance, and (consequenty)
the estate which should pass by construction of Law should work a wrong,
which the Law will not permit; because, Legis Constructio nunquam facit
injuriam.

Descent tells Entry.
14. In case of a Descent cast, Co. ibid. 237. b. 4.
there is a Diversity betwixt corporal Inheritances, as Houses, Land, etc.
which do lie in Livery, and Inheritances incorporall, as Advowsons, Rents,
Commons, etc. which lie in Grant, for a Descent cast of these shall not put the
Disseisee to his Action, but he may claim them notwithstanding such Descent:
Howbeit a Descent cast of the other puts the Disseisee to his Action: because
Houses serve for the habitation of men, and Land to be manured for their
sustenance, and therefore an heir shall not after a Descent of them be
molested or disturbed in them by Entry.

Continual claim.
15. If a man for fear of Battery, mayhem, or death, Co. ibid. 254. a 4. Litt.
S. 421.
dare not go to the Land to make his Entry, the Law (to prevent danger) givee
him leave (in such case) to go as near the Land as he dare, although he be not
within the view thereof.

Feme Obligee and Execution.
16. If a Feme Obligee take the Obligor to Husband, Co. ibid. 264. b. 4.
this is a release in Law, the like Law is if there be two Femes obliques, and
the one take the Obligor to Husband, this is also a release in Law of the whole
debt: But if a Feme Executrix take the Debtor to Husband, this is no release in
Law; for that should be a wrong to the dead, and in Law work a Devastavit,
which an act in Law shall never work; And so it was adjudged in the Kings
Bench, M. 30, and 31 Eliz.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 269. b. 3.
17. If there be Lord and Tenant, Lord and Tenant. Lord, Mesne and Tenant.
and the rent is behind by diverse years, and the Tenant make a Feoffment in
fee, if the Lord accept the service or rent of the Feoffee due in his time, he
shall lose the arrearages due in the time of the Feoffor; for after such
acceptance he shall not avow upon the Feoffor, nor upon the Feoffee for the
arrearages incurred in the time of the Feoffor: But in that case if the Feoffor
dye, albeit the Lord accept the rent or service by the hand of the Feoffee due
in his time, he shall not lose the arrearages; for now the Law compels him
to avow upon the Feoffee, and that which the Law compels him unto shall no
way prejudice him: So if there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the rent due by
the Mesne is behind, and after the Tenant fore-judge the Mesne, and the Lord
receive the services of the Mesne, which issue out of the Tenancy, he shall not
be barred of the arrearages, which issued out of the Mesnalty; so likewise if
the rent be behind and the Tenant dye, the acceptance of the services by the
hand of the heir shall not bar him of the arrearages, causa qua supra; for in
all these cases, albeit the persons be altered, yet the Lord does accept the
services of him, who only ought to do them, which being caused by act in Law,
it will not suffer him to be prejudiced thereby.

Co. ibid. 285. a 3.
18. If Tenant, pur anter vie, bring an Assize, and Cestuy que vie dies,
Assise. Waste, Ejectione fi^me.
hanging the Writ, here albeit the Writ were well commenced, yet the Writ shall
abate because no Assize can be maintainable for damages only: but where an
Action is begun, and part of the Action determines by Act in Law, and yet the
like Action for the residue is given, there the Writ shall not abate but
proceed; As if an Action of Waste be brought against Tenant per anter vie, and
hanging the Writ Cestuy que vie dies, the Writ shall not abate, but the
Plaintiff shall recover damages, because if Cestuy que vie had dyed before any
Action brought, the Lessor might hade had an Action of Waste for the damages,
and the Act in Law shall not prejudice him: So in an Ejectione firm, if the
term incur, hanging the Action, yet shall the Action proceed for damages,
because an Ejectione lies after the term for damages, which he shall recover,
notwithstanding the term be by Law determined. If a Conspiracy be brought
against two, Co. ibid. a. 4.
and one of them dye, hanging the Writ, nevertheless it shall proceed.

Co. ibid. 309. a. 3.
19. Albeit a man may by the Law grant away a Seigniory, Rent, Atturnment.
Reversion, Remainder, etc. yet such Grant shall not be good without
Attornement; that is, the consent of the present Tenant of the land, for which
the old Books render this reason, Si dominus attonnare possit servitium
tenentis contra voluntatem tenentis, tale sequaretur inconveniens, quod possit
eum subjugare capitali immico suo, and per quod teneretur sacramentum
fidelitatis facere ei, qui ei damnificare intenderet.

Co. ibid. 327. a. 2.
20. When Tenant in tail makes Feoffment, or, Entry taken away.
etc. the Entry of the Donor, who has the Reversion, and also of him in
Remainder is taken away, and they are put to their Action, viz. A Formedon in
Reverter for the one, and in Remainder for the other; And the reason, why these
alienations in these several cases do make a discontinuance, and put him in
Reversion or Remainder that right had to his Action, and take away his Entry
is, to the end that every man's right may be preserved, viz. to the Demandant
his ancient right, and to the Feoffee or Purchasor the benefit of his Warranty,
which course is founded upon great reason and equity, for the benefit of
Warranty would be prevented and avoyed if the Entry of him that right had were
lawful, hereby also the danger that many times happens by taking of
Possessions is warily prevented by Law.

^rant of the next avoy^^nce.
21. If a man seized of an Advowson in fee by his Deed grants the next
presentation to A. and before the Church becomes void, Co ibid. 378. b. 4.
by another Deed grants the next presentation of the same Church to B. the
second Grant is void; for A. had the same granted to him before, and the
Grantee shall not have the second avoydance by construction, to have the next
avoydance, which the Grantor might lawfully grant; because the Grant of the
next avoydance does not import the second presentation: but if a man seized of
an Advowson in fee, take wife, now by act in Law is the wife entitled to the
third Presentation, if the Husband dye before her; And in this case, if the
Husband grant the third Presentation to another and dye, the heir shall
present twice, the Wife shall have the third Presentation, and the Grantee the
fourth; for in this case it shall be taken the third Presentation, which he
might lawfully grant: And so note a diversity between a title by act in Law,
and by act of the party, for the act in Law shall work no prejudice to the
Grantee.

Warranty.
22. If a man does warrant Land to another without this word (Heirs) his heirs
shall not vouch; Co. ibid. 384. b. 4.
And (regularly) if he warrant Land to a man and his heirs without naming
assigns, his Assignee shall not vouch: but if the Father be enfeoffed with
warranty to him and his heirs, the Father enfeoffeth his eldest son with
warranty and dies, the Law gives to the son advantage of the warranty made to
his Father; because by act in Law the warranty betwixt the Father and the son
is extinct, which act in Law shall not prejudice him.

A^signment of Dower.
23. An Assignment of Dower by a Disseisor, Abator, Intrudor, Co. ibid. 35. a. 3.
etc. if there be no covin, is good, unless where it is prejudicial to the
Disseisee, etc. As if the Husband enfeoff the younger son with warranty and
dies, the eldest disseiseth the younger son, and endowes the widow; In this
case, the younger son shall avoid this Assignment, for otherwise he shall lose
his warranty: But a Disseisor, Abator, Intrudor, etc. cannot assign a rent out
of the Land to her for her Dower, to bind the Disseisee, etc,

24. Vide 33. 5.

Disagreement ^^st be in presence.
25. The Law gives favor to an agreement, Co. l. 2. 69. a. 1. in Tookers case.
which tends to the advantage of the party, for that may be done in his
absence, as well as in his presence; but so it is not of a dis-agreement, for
that ought to be done in his presence, because the Law conceives the party
interessed may use persuasions to the other party; and so induce him to agree;
so Attornement is good, though the Grantee be absent.

Wardship.
26. If there be Tenant for life, Co. l 2. 93. b. 2. in Binghams case.
the Remainder in fee of Land holden by Knight Service, and the Lord grants his
Seigniory for life, and after he in the Remainder in fee dies, his heir within
age, and after the Grantee for life of the Seigniory dies, and then the Tenant
for life dies, he in Reversion of the Seigniory shall have the Ward: So
likewise, if he in the Remainder dye, his heir within age, ut supra, and after
the Lord dye, and then the Tenant for life dies, the heir of the Lord in this
case shall have the Ward; for the act in Law shall not prejudice any, and his
Execut^r cannot have it, because it was not a Chattell vested in the Testator.
Co. l. 3. 65. b. 3. in Penants case.


Acceptance of ^ent. Bar, and ^^tra.
27. If a man having Rent-service or Rentcharge, accept the Rent due at the
last day, and thereof make an acquittance, thereby all the arrearages due
before are discharged, as it was adjudged in Hopkins and Mortons case, Hill.
Rot. 950. in C. B. Vide 10. Eliz. 271. Dyer, but if a man make a Lease for life
rendering Rent, or if there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Rent, and the Rent
is arreare by 2. years, and after the Lessor or Lord disseise the Ter-tenant,
and then the Tenant recovers in an Assize, and the rent which incurred, is
recouped in damages, yet the Lord or Lessor shall recover in Assize the
arrearages incurred before the Disseisin, and the bar of the last years rent
shall not be a bar of the former arrearages.

Ibid. b. 4.
28. If there be Lord and Tenant, and the Rent is arreare, Idem.
and the Tenant makes Feoffment in fee; In this case, if the Lord accept the
Rent or service of the Feoffee, he shall lose the arrearages in the time of the
Feffor, albeit he made him no acquittance; for after such acceptance he shall
not avow upon the Feoffor at all, nor yet upon the Feoffee, save only for the
services, which incurred in his time, as appears in 4 E. 3. 22. 7 E. 3. 8. 7 E.
4. 27. 28 H. 8. Br. Avowry 111. Howbeit, In such case, if the Feoffor dye,
although the Lord accept the Rent or Service by the hand of the Feoffee, yet
shall he not lose the arrearages; for now the Lord can avow upon none but the
Feoffee, and that whereunto the Law compells a man shall never prejudice him:
So if there be Lord, Mesne, and Tenant, and the Rent due by the Mesne is
arreare, and after the Tenant fore-judges the Mesne, and the Lord receives the
Services of the Mesne, which now issue immediately out of the Tenancy, yet
shall he not be barred of the arrearages, which issue out of the Mesnalty:
likewise, if the Rent be arreare, and the Tenant dye, the acceptance of the
Services by the hand of the Heir shall not bar him of the arrearages, causa
qua supra: For in all these cases, albeit the person be altered, yet the Lord
accepts the Rent and Services of him, who only ought by the Law to do them:
Vide 4 E. 3. 22. 7 E. 3. 4. 7 E. 4. 27. 9 H. 8. Br. Avowry 111. before cited.
Neither shall acceptance of Rent bar a releife, because that is as a blossom
fallen from the Tree, and a fruit or improvement of the Services.

Co. l. 3. 72. b. 2. in West^ie^ case.
29. If a Sheriff dye, and before another is made, Escape.
one in execution breaks the Goal and goes at large, this is no escape, for
when a Sheriff dies, all the Prisoners are in the custody of the Law, until a
new Sheriff be made, and albeit they in the interim fled out of the walls of
the Goal, yet the Law has the custody of them, and preserves them in
execution without any fresh Suit, in what place soever they be; and therefore
they may (in such case) be again taken in execution at any time after: for no
escape can happen in prejudice of the party, but when some body may be charged
therewith, and the Law deceives none.

30. If since the Statute of 31. H. 8. 1. Ioynt-tenants make partition with
consent by Deed, the Warranty annexed to their estate is gone: Co. l. 6. 12. a.
Morrices case.
Writ of partition.
but if they sue a Writ of Partition according to that Act, they may vouch as
before, and such partition will not prejudice them, being founded upon a
Statute Law, whereunto all persons give consent: So if there be two
Ioynt-tenants with Warranty, and the one disseiseth the other, and the
Disseisee brings an Assize; In this case, it seems to be the better opinion,
that the Disseisee shall not recover in severalty, but generally, neither is
the Warranty gone by such Recovery, as it was adjudged in 28 lib. Ass. Pl. 35.
because the Recovery is an Act in Law, which prejudiceth none; albeit some
Books are against it, as 10 E. 3. 40. and 10. lib. Ass. 17.

Co. l. 6. 27. b. 4. Viscount Montagues case.
31. No Fine for alienation. Stat. 27 H. 8.
Vicount Montague with license of the Queen suffers a Recovery to B. and D. to
uses, with power of revocation and limitation of other uses, he revoks and
limits new uses, in this case, no Fine shall be paid to the Queen for
alienation: For when license is granted to alien to A. and the alienation is to
the use of B. here, no Fine is to be paid for the alienation to the use of B.
because the use is executed by the Statute of 27 H. 8. which can wrong no man.

Co. l. 9. 106. b. 2 Margaret Podgers case.
32. P. Copyholder for life, Remainder for life, An act of Parliament do^ no
wrong.
the Lord bargains and sels, and levies a Fine with Proclamations to P. five
years pass without any claim by those in Remainder, yet are they not barred:
because P. the Bargainee was in by force of the Statute of 27 H. 8. upon a
bargain and sale by Deed indented and enrolled, and an act of Parliament can
never do wrong. See there also the Lady Greshams case, where an Act of
Parliament excused a Fine for alienation of Land in Capite without license,
upon the same reason.

The like.
33. Plow. 59 a. 2. in Wimbish and Talboies case.
Where a Feoffment was made to Feoffees to the use of another before the
Statute of 27 H. 8. of uses, and then that Statute was made, which transfers
the Possession to Cestuy que use: In this case, the gift passes from the
Feoffees to Cestuy que use by the Parliament, because the consent of the
Feoffees is involved in that Act of Parliament, and it cannot be said, that the
Parliament gave it to Cestuy que use: for if it should be said the gift of
another then of the Feoffees, then should the Parliament do the Feoffees wrong
in taking a thing from them, and making another the Donor thereof, which an Act
of Parliament cannot do. See there also the Rector of Edingtons case, 19 H. 6.
62. Fitz. Grant 10. and Br. 40. and Parl. 88. to the like purpose.

Stat. W. 2. c. 39. Ravishment of Guard.
34. A woman covert is not within the Statute of West. 2. cap. 39. Co. l. 9 73.
a. 1. in Doctor Husseys case.
Concerning ravishment of Ward, for part of the words are, Si haeredem post
annos nubiles maritaverit, and de maritagio satisfacere non potuerit, abjuret
regnum, vel habeat prisonam imperpetuum, etc. for a Feme covert being by Law
disabled to satisfy, she shall not be by Law punished with banishment or
perpetual imprisonment, and the Husband being innocent ought not to be
punished, because the punishment is personal, Vide pl. ibid. and infra Max.
156.

Fealty.
35. Co. Inst. pars 1. 98. a. 3.
Where an Abbot (holding in Frankalmoigne) together with his Covent, aliens the
Land to a secular man, he cannot hold as they held, viz. in Frankalmoigne, and
(of necessity) he must hold of some body, and by some service, for that the Law
will enjoyne him to do, to avoid the inconvenience of holding of none: And
therefore in regard the Law is (in this case) to create him a new tenure, it
shall be the lowest ( viz. in Socage) and with the least service that can be
done, and nearest to the freedom of the former service. Vide 184. 4.

Parol, demur. nonage.
36. Co. l. 9. 85. a. 4. in Connies case.
In a Writ of Mesne the Parol shall not demur for the nonage of the Plaintiff,
because it is not reason, that the Infant should be distrained for the services
of the Mesne during his nonage, and yet he to have no remedy until his full
age, but in regard his nonage shall not privilege him from the payment of the
Rent during his nonage, the Law will also give him remedy during that time.

149. Vide M. 150. Ex. 9.
Especially for things that cannot be imputed to their own folly, or neglect.
Tenant by the courtesy. Things that lie in Grant.
1. Tenant by the Courtesy shall have after his Wives death a Rent, Co. Inst.
pars 1. 15. b. 2. and Co. ibid. 29. a.
or Advowson, albeit the Rent day was not then come, nor the Church then void,
and (by consequent) he not actually seized thereof before his Wives death,
because there was no Laches or default in him nor possibility to get Seisin,
and therefore the Law in respect of the issue begotten by him, will give him an
estate by the courtesy of England therein, albeit he was not thereof actually
seized as aforesaid: It is otherwise, where he has (in right of his Wife)
title of Entry into Lands, and in her life neglects it, for that is imputed to
his own laches and folly: Neither shall a man be Tenant by the courtesy of a
bare right, title, use, or of a Reversion or Remainder expectant upon an estate
of Freehold, unless the particular estate be determined or ended during the
Coverture.

Courtesy. Dower.
2. Co. ibid. 31. a. 3.
A man shall not be Tenant by the Courtesy of a Seisin in Law without Entry,
but he ought to be actually seized in the life of his Wife: Howbeit, a woman
shall be endowed of a Seisin in Law, as where Lands or Tenements descend to the
Husband, here before Entry he has but a Seisin in Law, and yet the Wife shall
be endowed thereof, albeit it be not reduced to an actual Possession, for it
lies not in the power of the Wife to bring it into an actual Seisin, as the
Husband may do of the Wives Land, when he is to be Tenant by Courtesy.

Co. ibid. 47. b. 1.
3. When Cattle are distrained they are to be put in a pound overt, Distress.
or open, within three miles, in the same County, as into a pinfold made for
such purposes, or in his own close, or the close of another by his consent; to
the end the owner may give his Cattle meat and drink without Trespass to any
other, and then if the Cattle miscarry, he that distrains them is excused, for
it cannot be imputed to any neglect of his, the Owner (in such case) being
bound to sustain them at his peril: but if the Cattle be put into a pound
covert or close, as in a house, where the Owner cannot come at them; in such
case, they are to be sustained with meat and drink at the peril of him that
distraines, and he shall have no recompense for the charge of keeping them, and
if any of them miscarry he shall make them good; for in this case it cannot be
imputed to the folly or neglect of the Owner, if they be worse or miscarry,
because he could not come at them to sustain them.

Co. ibid. 53. a. 2. and 3.
4. Waste.
It is permissive waste in the Tenant to suffer the house to be uncovered,
whereby the Sparrs or Rafters, Planches, or other Timber of the House become
rotten: Howbeit, if the House be un-covered, when the Tenant comes in, it is
no waste in the Tenant, to suffer the same to f^ll down; for in such case it
cannot be imputed to his neglect but the Owners: So likewise, if a wall be
un-covered, when the Tenant comes in, it is no waste, though he suffer it to
decay: Also if the house fall down by tempest, or be burnt by lightning, or
prostrated by enemies, or the like, without any default in the Tenant, or be
ruinous at his coming in and fall down; this is not waste in the Tenant; but
he may build the same again with such materials as remain, and with other
Timber, which he may take growing upon the ground, for his habitation; but he
must not make the house longer then it was.

Co. ibid. 53. b. 1.
5. It is waste to suffer a Wall of the Sea to be in decay, Waste.
so as by flowing and re-flowing of the Sea, the Meadow or Marsh is surrounded,
whereby the same becomes unprofitable; howbeit, if it be surrounded suddenly by
the rage and violence of the Sea, occasioned by wind, tempest or the like,
without any default of the Tenant, this is no waste punishable, because it
cannot be imputed to the Tenants neglect or default in that case: Fl. l. 1. c.
111.
According to Fletaes rule, Fortuna, ignis, and hujusmodi eventus inopinati
omnes tenentes excusant.

Co. ibid. 55. a. 4. etc.
6. Tenant at will: particular estates. Grain, etc. sown.
Tenant at will shall reap the crop which he sowed in peace before his Lessor
determined his will, whether it be grain, hemp, flax, or any other annual
profit; for it cannot be imputed to his folly, that he knew not his Lessors
intention, that he would determine his will before they might be ripe; there is
the same Law and reason of Tenant by the courtesy, in Dower, for life, pur
anter vie, or any other un-certaine estate, viz. when the term will determine;
and if such Tenant happen to dye, his Executors, etc. shall enjoy the crop: If
Tenant by Statute Merchant sow the ground, and then a sudden and casual profit
falls, by which he is satisfied, Co. ibid. b. 3. Co. ibid. b. 4.
yet shall he have the embleaments, causa qua supra. And in all these cases, it
is not material whether the grain, etc. be not ripe, or dead ripe, ready to
be cut; for by the same reason they may be taken, though they be not ripe, they
may also be taken when ripe: Albeit Littleton says, Apres lembleer and devant
que les blees sant matures.

Co. ibid. 55. b. 4.
7. Where there is Lessor and Lessee at will, Tenant at will, etc. notice
requisite.
the Lessor may by actual Entry into the ground determine his will in the
absence of the Lessee, but by words spoken from the ground the will is not
determined, until the Lessee have notice: no more then the discharge of a
Factor, Attorney, or such like in their absence is sufficient in Law, until
they have notice thereof.

^^aine sown. Term uncertain.
8. If Lessee for years, that knows the end of his term, Co. ibid. 56. b. 4.
sows the Land, if the term determine before he can cut them, the Lessor
shall have them; because the end of his term was certain, and it was his
folly to sow them, when he might know beforehand, that he could not Inn them in
due season: Howbeit, where a Lease for years depends upon an un-certainty, as
upon death of Tenant for life being made by him, or of a Husband seized in
right of his wife, or the like, there it is otherwise.

Dying seized, ^ardship.
9. If there be Lord and Tenant, Co. ibid. 76. b. 1.
and the Tenant makes a Feoffment in fee upon Condition, and the Feoffor
dies, after his death the Condition is broken, the Heir within age enters
for the Condition broken, in this case the heir shall be in Ward, and yet the
Tenant dyed not seized of the Land, neither had he any estate or right in the
Land at the time of his death, but only a Condition, and which was broken
after his death: Nevertheless, because here is no default in the Lord to bar
him of his Wardship, and the Condition restores the Tenants the Land in nature
of a descent (for, he shall be in by descent) therefore shall the heir, in
this case, be in Ward. Vide pl. ibid.

Guardian in Socage, robbed. Discharged.
10. Co. ibid. 89. a. 3. 4.
If a Guardian in Socage having received the rents and profits of the Lands of
the Minor, happen to be robbed of the same without his default or negligence,
he shall be discharged thereof upon his account; so also shall a Bailiff of a
Manor, a Receiver, a Factor of a Merchant, or the like: It is otherwise of a
Carrier; for he by taking his hire does thereby implicity undertake the
delivery of the goods delivered unto him: So it is likewise, if goods be
delivered to a man to be kept or to be safely kept (which is all one in Law)
and after those goods are stolen from him, this shall not excuse him; for by
the acceptance, he undertook to keep them safely, and therefore he must keep
them at his peril: But if the goods be delivered unto him to be kept as he
would keep his own, there if they be stolen from him without his default or
negligence, he shall be discharged: so if goods be delivered to one as a gage
or pledge, and they be stolen, he shall be discharged; because he has a
property in them, and therefore he ought to keep them no otherwise then his
own; but if he that gaged them tendered the money before the stealing, and the
other refused to deliver them, then for this default in him he shall be charged.

The like.
11. If A. leave a Chest locked with B. to be kept, Co. ibid. a. 4. Pasch. 43.
El. inter Southcote and Bennet in detinue.
and takes away the key with him, and acquainteth not B. what is in the Chest,
and the Chest, together with the goods of B. are stolen away, B. shall not be
charged therewith; because A. did not trust B. with them, as this case is,
neither were they lost by the default or negligence of A. And in all such
cases, what is said of stealing is also to be understood of Shipwreck by Sea,
fire by lightning, and other like enevitable accidents. And therefore when a
man receives another goods to keep, it is good to receive them with this
caution, To keep them as his own, or at the peril of the Owner.

Vouchee.
12. If upon a sequatur sub suo periculo, the Sheriff return, Co. ibid. 101. b.
4.
that the Vouchee has nothing, albeit the Demandant shall have Judgment
against the Tenant, yet he shall not have Judgment to recover in value,
because the Vouchee was not warned.

Condition, Tender.
13. Co. ibid. 211. a. 2.
If a man be bound to pay twenty pounds at any time during his life at a place
certain, and the Obligor tenders the money at the place without giving notice
to the Obligee, this is no good tender: So it is also where a man makes a
Feoffment in fee upon Condition, that if the Feoffor pay twenty pounds to the
Feoffee at a place certain at any time during his life, that then, etc. in
this case also the tender is not good without notice: for the time (in these
cases) being uncertain, it cannot be imputed to the default or negligence of
the Obligee or Feoffee, if he be not present at the payment thereof ready to
receive it, Vide pl.

Co. ibid. 246. a. 4. Litt. S 403. Dyer 143. 57. 3, 4. P. M.
14. If a Feme sole be seized of Lands in fee, and is disseised, Baron and Feme.
Descent, a last Entry.
and then takes Husband, in this case, the Husband and Wife (as in the right
of the Wife) have right to enter, and yet the dying seized of the Disseisor in
that case shall take away the Entry of the Wife after the death of her Husband:
because it shall be accounted her folly, that when she was sole she did not
enter, and also for that she would take such an Husband as would not enter
before the Descent cast: But if Baron and Feme have title of Entry into Lands
in right of the Wife, and the Tenant dye seized, the Entry of the Baron is
taken away, but if the Baron dye, then may the Feme enter upon the Heir, that
is in by Descent: for it shall be accounted Laches in the Baron, and not in the
Feme, nor any way turn to the prejudice of her or her Heirs: So if the woman
were within age at the time of her taking of Husband, then also the dying
seized shall not after the decease of her Husband take away her Entry: because
no folly can be accounted in her, for that she was within age, when she took
Husband, and after coverture she could not enter without her Husband. It is
otherwise where a Condition is to be performed, which see ubi supra.

Litt. S. 416. Co. ibid. 251. Co. ibid. 252. a. 3.
15. If there be Tenant for life, Remainder for life, Continual claim, right
of Entry.
Remainder in fee, and the Tenant for life aliens the Land to another in fee,
and he in the Remainder for life makes continual claim before the dying
seized of the Alienee, and after the Alience dies seized, and he in Remainder
for life also dies before any Entry made by him: In this case, he in the
Remainder in fee may enter upon the Heir of the Alienee, by reason of the
continual claim made by him in the Remainder for life, because such right as
he had to enter shall remain to him in the Remainder after him, in as much as he
in the Remainder in fee could not enter upon the Alienee in fee during the life
of the Remainder for life, and because he could not make continual claim, for
none can make continual claim, but he that has title of Entry.

Litt. S. 438. Co. ibid. 259. b. 3.
16. Excuse of (...) appearance.
There are diverse ways of excusing a man's not appearing in Court, and all
allowed by Law, as by Imprisonment, whereof Littleton speaks, S. 438. also,
per inundationem aquarum, tempestatem, pontem fractum, Navigium subtractum per
fraudem petentis, minorem aetatem, defensionem summonitionis per legem, mortem
Attornati, breve de warrantia diei: Also, si petens essoniatas sit, vel si
placitum mittatur sine die: But sickness (as one says) is no cause of saving
a default: because it may be so artificially counterfeited, that it cannot be
known.

Litt. S. 442. Co. ibid 262. b.
17. If a man be disseised, An Assize amounts to a claim.
and he arraigne an Assize against the Disseisor, and the Recognitors of the
Assize chaunt for the Plaintiff, and the Justices of Assize will be advised of
their Judgment, until the next Assize, etc. and in the interim the Disseisor
dies seized: In this case, this dying seized shall not toll the Entry of the
Disseisee: because the bringing of the Assize amounted to a continual claim,
and there was no default or neglect in the Disseisee. Note, that this is a
Quere in Litt. but since resolved to be Law.

Co. ibid. 283. a. 1.
18. In an Action of Waste, upon the Plea, null wast fait, Waste.
he cannot give in evidence Justifiable waste, as to repair the House, or the
like: but he ought to plead it specially: Howbeit, if the waste be such as came
not by any default or neglect in him, he may upon the Plea, null wast fait,
bring in evidence that the wast was done by tempest, lightning, enemies, or the
like, and he shall be thereupon excused, etc.

Rent-service. Descent tolls not Entry.
19. If my Tenant which pays me a Rent-service in gross, Litt. S. 589. Co.
ibid. 323. b. 3.
atturnes and pays it to a stranger, this shall not put me out of Possession
of the Rent; no, albeit I bring an Assize against the stranger for the Rent,
and thereby admit my self out of Possession, or although the stranger die, and
a Descent is cast; for still I may distraine my Tenant for all the rent
arreare; because it cannot be imputed to my neglect or folly that the Rent was
paid to a stranger.

Remitter.
20 If Tenant in tail enfeoff his Son and another of Land in tail by his Deed in
fee, Litt. S. 684. Co. ibid 359. a. 4.
and Livery of Seisin is made to the other according to the Deed, and the Son
knowing nothing thereof, agrees not to the Feoffment, and after he that takes
the Livery of Seisin dies, and the Son does not occupy the Land nor take the
profits thereof, during the life of the Father, and then the Father dies; Here,
this is a Remitter to the Son, because the Frank-tenement is cast upon him by
the Survivor, and no default was in him, for that he never agreed to the
Feoffment.

No damages against the Tenant.
21. If a man be disseised, Litt. S. 685. Co. ibid. 359. b. 2.
and the Disseisor makes Feoffment to A. B. and C. and Livery is made to A. and
B. but C. was not at the Livery, nor agrees to the Feoffment, nor takes any
profit of the Land, and after A. and B. dies, and C. survives them, and the
Disseisee brings his Writ Sur disseisin in the per against C. who shows all
the matter, how he never agreed to the Feoffment, and so he shall be discharged
of the damages, albeit he was Tenant of the Frank tenement of the Land, and
that the Statute of Gloucester will, that the Disseisee shall recover damages in
a Writ of Entry grounded Sur disseisin against him that is found Tenant; yet
here, because C. was in no default, the Disseisee shall not recover damages
against him.

Release of ^arranty.
22. If two make a Feoffment in fee, Co. ibid. 393. a. 1.
and warrant the Land to the Feoffee and his heirs, and the Feoffee release to
one of the Feoffors the warranty, yet he shall vouch the other for the moiety:
So likewise if one enfeoff two with warranty, and the one release the warranty,
yet the other shall vouch for his moiety, causa patet.

Condition, Acceptance. Confirmation.
23. If a Lease be made rendering rent at a certain day, Co. l. 4. 64. a. 4.
Pennants case.
with clause of Re-entry upon non-payment thereof, and the rent is behind two
years; in this case, if the Lessor accept the last half years rent, all the
arrearages are discharged, and by such acceptance the Lease is confirmed; but
if the Condition be, that if he alien any part of the Land without the Lessors
license, then it shall be lawful for him to re-enter; In this case, if the
Condition be broken, and the Lessor do afterward accept the rent, this is no
confirmation of the Lease; because such assignment may be done so secretly that
the Lessor cannot possibly discover it; for in the first case the Lessor may
know the time when the Condition ought to be performed, but not in the other:
See the like case adjudged in Com. Banco, Mich. 39, and 40 El. which Plea
begins Term. Hill. 38 El. Rot. 1302. in Trespass inter March and Curteis.

Escape.
24. The Sheriffs of London at the end of their office, Co. l. 3. 71. b. 4.
Westbies case.
delivered by Indenture, B. in execution to the new Sheriffs, and whereas he
was in execution at the Suit of C. and D D. was only named in the Indenture,
B. after such Delivery makes an escape, C. brings an Action of debt against the
old Sheriffs upon this escape, and recovers; because here, the default was in
the old Sheriffs, for that they did omit the execucution of C. in their
Indenture; and therefore albeit B. was within the Walls of the Prison after
such Delivery over by Indenture, yet was he not Prisoner to the new Sheriffs,
but it was an escape from such Delivery: Nevertheless there was no reason that
C. should be without remedy in this case; for that no default or negligence
could be imputed to him in that mis-carryage.

Co l. 3. 78. b. 4. in Fermers case.
25. Fine levied by Covin.
A. possessed of diverse parcels of Land within the Manor of S. for years, at
will, and by copy, and of others in fee there, demiseth the whole to B. for
life, and then levies a Fine to him and his heirs of so many Acres as amount to
the whole Land, continues Possession, and pays the rents to the Lord, as if no
such thing had been done; In this case, albeit five years passed, yet the Lord
was not barred, and yet in the Statute of 4 H. 7. the saving is of such right,
as first shall grow, remain, etc. And there, the right first accrued to the
Lessor after the Fine in the Forfeiture: Nevertheless, the Lord (in this case)
shall not be barred, because A. having Lands within the same Manor, and still
continuing the Possession and paying the Rents, the Lord could not possibly
take notice of the Covin: So if Lessee for life (having Lands in the same
Town) levy a Fine, the Statute shall be construed against the words, and the
Lessor shall be allowed five years after the death of the Lessee for life, and
in that case Non-claime shall not prejudice him; because he was forced to it by
the Lessee, whose Conveyance was so close, that he could have no notice, that
any Fine was levied of his Land.

Co. l. 4. 10. b. 4. in Bevils case.
26. Rents and Services, Statute 32 H 8. 2. Limitation.
The Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 2. for limitation of Rent or Service (to have
actual Seisin thereof within forty years, etc.) extends not to such a Rent or
Service, as by common possibility cannot happen or become due within sixty
years, as if a Seigniory consists of Homage and Fealty only, for the Tenant
may live above sixty years after they are made: So if the Service be to cover
the Lords Hall, or to go with him, when there shall be a War betwixt the King
and any of his Enemies; such casual Services as by common possibility cannot
happen within sixty years, are not within that Statute; neither is the Lord
bound by it, because it is not his default or neglect, that he cannot prove
himself seized of the Services within forty years, according to the limitation
of that Statute: There is the same Law of a Formedon in descender, for the
Tenant in tail may live sixty years after the Discontinuance: So likewise, if
the Lord release to the Tenant so long as I. S. has heir of his body, and
sixty years pass, and I. S. dye without heir of his body; in this case also,
albeit the sixty years pass, yet the Lord may distraine for them when he
pleases, because they are not within the purview of the Statute, causa qua
supra.

Co. l. 4 27. a. 2. in Chifton and Molineux case.
27. Where a Feme, Tenant for life of a Copyhold, takes Baron, Waste by Baron.
Copyhold.
and the Baron commits Waste against the custom of the Manor and dies, the
estate of the Feme is (in this case) forfeited by the act of the Baron, because
it was her folly to take such a Husband as would commit Waste: But if a
stranger commit the Waste without the consent of the Baron, that is no
Forfeiture, because it cannot be then imputed to her folly.

Co. l. 4. 50. a. 4. in Andrew Ognels case.
28. When a thing is due in right and truth, Exposition of that.
and becomes remediless by no default in the party, to whom it is so due, but
by the Act of God, as by the death of the party, or the like: In such cases,
Acts of Parliament, which are made to give remedy in such cases ought to have a
favorable construction, which may extend to advance the remedy proportionably
to the mischief and defect in Law, Arrearages recoverable by Executors.
according to the meaning of the makers thereof. And therefore if a man grants
a Rentcharge out of his Land, and after aliens the Land to a stranger, who
lets it at will to another, the rent is arreare, and the Grantee dies: In this
case, the Executors of the Grantee may distrain for the arrearages by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 37. And that the words of that Statute are, That it
shall be lawful for the Executor, etc. to distrain for the arrearages, etc.
upon the Lands so long (only) as they remain in the Seisin or Possession of
the Tenant in Demesne, who ought immediately to have paid the Rent, or of any
other claiming by and from him, etc. Here, by the words of this Statute the
Executors may only distrain the Grantor or his immediate Grantee ( by and from
being in the Conjunctive;) Yet in the case above they may distraine the Tenant
at will, and the word and shall be taken for or: to the end the Lessee at will
may be understood to derive his estate from him, and so to be comprehended
within the purview of that Statute, for the reason above alleged.

Clergy. Appeal.
29. By the Statute of 3 H. 7. c. 1. Holcrofts case, alleged in Wrote and
Wigges case. Co. l. 4. 46. b.
An Appeal cannot be brought against the Felon after Clergy had; but (by
consequence) before Clergy it may: And yet if a Felon be indicted, and upon his
trial confesses the fact, and prays Clergy, and the Judges take time, and
will be further advised, and then an Appeal is brought; In this case, the act
of the Court (to be advised as to the allowance of the Clergy) shall not
prejudice the party, especially in case of life: there being no default in him,
why he had not his Clergy, when he prayed it.

Benefice. Laps.
30. If a Clerk be presented, admitted, and instituted, Co. l. 4 79. b. 3. in
Digbies case.
to a benefice with cure, above the value of 8 l. and after and before
induction to the first he accepts another benefice with cure, and is thereunto
inducted; In this case, the first is void by the Statute of 21 H. 8. for the
words of the Statute are, If any parson having one benefice with cure, etc.
accept and take one other, etc. and he that is instituted to a benefice is said
in Law to accept and have a benefice: Howbeit, although by such institution to
the second benefice, the first is void by the ecclesiastical Law without any
deprivation or sentence declaratory, yet no laps shall (in this case) incur
against the Patron without giving notice to him, F. N. B. 35. h.
no more then if the Church had become void by resignation or deprivation, and
yet the Patron may take notice thereof, if he please, and may present according
to the said constitution, but he is not bound to take notice thereof at his
peril: It is otherwise, if he had been inducted, for then he is to take notice
at his peril, because the avoydance after induction is declared by act of
Parliament, whereunto every one is party, per Popham and totam Curiam. Co. l.
5. 13. b. The Countess of Salops case.


Waste. Tenant at will.
31. Tenant at will shall not be charged for permissive waste, for it is not in
his default, but in the Lessors, he having an uncertain term.

Emblements sown.
32. Tenant for life, Remainder in fee, Co. l. 5. 85. a. In Henry Knivets case.
the Tenant for life lets for years, the Lessee for years is ousted, and the
Tenant for life disseised, the Disseisor lets for years, and his Lessee sowes
the Land, the Tenant for life dies, the Remainder in fee enters, the Lessee of
the Disseisor carries away the grain, and the Remainder in fee brings an
action of Trespass: And in this case it was adjudged, that because the Lessee
of Tenant for life could not know the end of his term, he had right to the
Land, and (by consequence) to the grain, as things annexed to the Land, and
albeit by the death of the Tenant for life his Interest to the Land determined,
yet the Land being sown before the death of the Tenant for life, his right to
the emblements remains.

Execution of the body not valuable.
33. Upon a Judgment in debt, Co. l. 5. 86. b. 4. etc. in ^lunfeilds case.
after the Plaintiff has pursued an Elegit, he cannot have a Capias ad
satisfaciendum against the body, because he has made his election, which he
cannot waive so long as the Defendant lives, neither yet can he have an Elegit
after the party is taken upon a Capias ad satisfaciendum returned served, or
after the Defendant is in Prison thereupon: Howbeit, if (in such case) the
party dye in Prison (which is the Act of God and can do no wrong) the Plaintiff
may have recourse to his Elegit, or take some other course, until he be
satisfied, for his death is not the Plaintiffs fault: So if there be two bound
in an Obligation jointly and severally, and the Plaintiff has Judgment
against them both, and casts them both into Prison, out of which one of them
escapes, and so the debt as to him is discharged, and the Plaintiff is to have
his remedy against the Sheriff: Here, albeit the debt seems to be discharged
against the other also (because they were jointly bound, and it was but one
entire debt) yet the other remaining in Prison shall not have his Audita
querela, but shall there continue until the whole debt and damages be fully
satisfied: because corporal Imprisonment is not valuable satisfaction of the
debt, and it was not in the Plaintiffs default, that he did escape.

Co. l. 5. 10. a in Spencers case.
34. Upon a Writ brought by Journeys accounts, A Writ by Journeys accounts.
Diversity.
if the first Writ abated by the default of the Demandant himself, as by his
misinformation of the name of the Tenant, or of the Town, etc. in such case,
the Demandant shall not have a Writ by Journeys accounts, as the Books are in
48 E. 3. 21. 14 H. 4. 23. 22 H. 6. 62. 13 H. 4. Executors 118. But if the Writ
abate by the default of the Clerk, as where it abates for false Latin, or
variance, or for default of form, etc. there, the Demandant shall have the
benefit of a new Writ by Journeys accounts, because it was the default of the
Clerk of the Chancery, and not the default of the Demandant himself, as the
Books are agreed in 26 E. 3. Quare Impedit 163. 25 E. 3. 54. 48 E. 3. 5. 14 H.
4. 23. etc. So likewise, when the Writ abates for want of due Summons, for that
is the default of the Sheriff, and no default in the Demandant: and therefore
in such case also the Demandant shall have a new Writ by Journeys accounts.

Co l. 7. 6. b. 3. in Milbornes case. Vide Max. 57. Ex. 51.
35. For a Robbery done in the morning ante lucem, Hue and cry.
the Hundred shall not be charged, because the Robbery was done in the night:
And albeit no time be expressed in the Statute of Winchester. 13 E. 1. yet by
good exposition it shall not extend to Robbery done in the night: for no Laches
or negligence can be attributed to the Hundred for default of well guarding the
Country in the night, also in the night they cannot make pursuit after the
offenders, or inquiry for them, and then to charge them, when they are deprived
of their convenient means, would be hard. Vide 57. 50.

Co. ibid.
36. At the Common Law, The Town amercied for homicide done there.
if one were slain in a Town in the day time, viz. so long as there was full
day light, and he that slew him escaped, the Town where the Felony was
committed was to be amercied for it, and so it is held in 3 E. 3. Corone 238.
Dum quis felonice occisus fuit per diem, nisi felo captus fuit, Tota villata
illa oneretur: But if such a murder or homicide were done in the night, the
Town shall not be amercied by the Common Law: because, in such case, no Laches
or negligence can be imputed to the Inhabitants of the Town: For God has
ordained the day for men to work in, and the night for them to rest in: And
therefore the Prophet says, Posuisti tenebras, and facta est nox, in qua
pertranseant bestiae silvae, etc. sub oritur and congregati sunt, exit homo ad
opus and operationem and redit vespere: And the Poet says: Ut jugulent homines
surgunt de nocte latrones.

Co. l. 5. 27. b. 6. in Sir Hugh Portmans case.
37. Bar in Quare Impedit, and contra.
If the Plaintiff in a Quare Impedit be nonsuited after appearance, that is
peremptory, and a good bar in another Quare Impedit, albeit that it be brought
within the six months; because in such case the Defendant upon title made
shall have a Writ to the Bishop to admit his Clerk, which is a good bar in
another Quare Impedit, and with this accords 19 E. 4. 9. 22 H. 6. 44, 45. 33 H.
6. 1. 55. 20 E. 4. 14. 21 E. 4. 2. b. etc. F. N. B. 38. b. So if the Plaintiff
in a Quare Impedit discontinue his suit, the Defendant upon title made shall
have a Writ to the Bishop, and therefore this is also peremptory, and with this
accords 31 H. 6. 15. Likewise, if the Plaintiff be made a Knight, hanging the
Writ, the Writ shall abate, and the Defendant shall in that case also have a
Writ to the Bishop: and (by consequence) that is also peremptory: for, all
these are the Acts of the Plaintiff, and he does them in his own wrong: But if
the Writ of Quare Impedit within the six months abate for false Latin, or
insufficiency of the form, that is the default of the Clerk, and shall not be
peremptory to the Plaintiff, neither shall the Defendant thereupon have a Writ
to the Bishop, but the Plaintiff may in such case have a new Writ, because (in
these cases) no default can be imputed to the Plaintiff, and with this agrees 3
H. 6. 3. 31. H. b. 15. F. N. B. 38. b. and h. Vide 34. Ass. Pl. 9. So likewise
it is, if the Writ abate for the mis-naming of the Plaintiff or Defendant, if
the Plaintiff confess it, the Defendant shall not have a Writ to the Bishop:
for this may be also the default of the Clerk in writing it, and with this
accords F. N. B. 38. See also 31 H. 6. 15.

Goods stolen in an Inn.
38. If a man come to a common Inn, Co. l. 8. 32. a. Caleys case.
and deliver his Horse to the Hostler and say nothing to him, whether the
Hostler keep him in the Stable, or put him into a Pasture abroad without any
order from the Owner to put him out to Pasture: In this case, if the Horse be
stolen, the Inn-holder shall make him good: But if the Owner give order to the
Hostler to put him abroad into a Pasture, which being done, the Horse is
stolen or otherwise lost, in such case the Inn-holder is excused, and shall
not answer for him: because by the Writ in the Register, the Inn-holder is not
to answer for more then is within his Inn, and all that he is to answer for,
albeit the guest has a key delivered to him, and locks his goods, etc. within
his Chamber, Vide the case at large.

Amerciament, ^here.
39. In all Writs of Precipe quod reddat, as Writs of right, Co. l. 8. 60. b. 4.
in Beechers case.
Formedon, Aiel, Entry, etc. Precipe quod permittat, as to have Estovers,
Common, etc. or Precipe quod faciat, as Writs of Customs, Services, etc. if
the Demandant be barred, or nonsuited, or his Writ abate for being vicious in
matter or form, he shall be amercied: but if there be two Demandants, and the
Writ abates by the death of one of them, the other shall not be amercied, 48 E.
3. 23. 46 E 3. Account 40. 5 E. 3. 3. 22 H. 6. 7. 38. E. 3. 31. 7 H. 6. 36. 41
Ass. 14.

The like.
40. In all personal Actions, as Debt, Detinue, and the like, Co. l. 8. 61. a.
1. in Beechers case.
without force or desceit to the Court, and also in Actions, which comprehend
force or desceit to a Court of Record, if the Plaintiff be barred, nonsuited,
or the Writ abate for being vicious in matter or form, he shall be only
amercied, not fined, but if the Writ abate by the death of one of the
Plaintiffs, or if one of the Plaintiffs appear and the other is nonsuited
(which in Law in personal Actions is a nonsuit of both) he that survives or
appears shall not be amercied, for there was no default in him: but only in
him that appeared not: 47 E. 3. 6 43 Ass. 3. 7. H. 6. 36. 38 E. 3. 31. 41 Ass.
14.

The like.
41. In all Actions real and personal, Co. l. 8. 61. 3. in Beechers case.
if part be found for the Demandant or Plaintiff, and part against him, or all
or part against one of the Tenants or Defendants, and nothing or but part
against the other, the Demandant or Plaintiff shall be amercied, except no
default be found in the Demandant or Plaintiff: And therefore in Trespass of
Battery against Baron and Feme, supposing the Battery to be done by both, and
the Feme is only found guilty, etc. and the Baron acquit: yet the Plaintiff
shall not be amercied, for the Plaintiff cannot have any other Writ in such
case, and therefore because no default was found in him, he shall not be
amercied in this case.

The Kings ward dies before homage.
42. The Kings Tenant in Capite under age is to remain in Ward, Co. l. 8. 172.
a. Hales case. Prerogativa Reg. cap. 3.
and the King is to receive the profits of his land until he do his homage,
and that cannot be until he have sued out his Livery: And if at his full age
he tender his Livery, he is to have three months to perfect it: Howbeit, if
after such tender, by the Act of God ( viz. death) he is prevented to perfect
it, the King shall not receive the profits after such tender: but the next
heir shall have them, and after such tender he might in that case sell the
Land or any part thereof, and the sale shall be good, notwithstanding the Kings
hands upon it.

Co. l. 9. 87. a. 4. in Pinchons case.
43. It is a Rule in Law, Where wager of Law in the Testator, Executors not
chargeable.
that where the Testator might have waged his Law, his Executors shall not be
charged with that duty, and contra: because that advantage is lost by the act
of God ( viz. by death) and therefore shall not be imputed to any default of
his: So debt lies not against Executors for the diet of their Testator,
because he might (in that case) have waged his Law, and so have freed himself
thereof, which advantage being lost by his death (and no fault of his) his
Executors, who represent his person, shall not be prejudiced thereby: Howbeit,
if a Prisoner in the Tower for treason receive his diet of the Lieutenant, and
dye, the Lieutenant shall have an Action of debt against his Executors for such
diet of the Testator; and the reason is, because (in that case) the Testator
could not in his life time have waged his Law, as it is adjudged in 27 H. 6. 4.
b. in Thomas Bodulgats case: And the reason why no wager of Law lies in such
case is, because every Jailer ought to keep his Prisoner, in salva and arcta
custodiae, and so must of necessity find him victuals, etc. Vide pl. ibid.

Co. ibid. 87. b. 4.
44. In 14 H. 6. 19. b. R. G. brings a Writ of debt of ten marks against T.T.
and others, Executors of W. W. and counted, The like.
that the Testator had retained the Plaintiff to be with him for a year in the
art of limming of Books, paying him ten marks per annum; and there Martin held,
that the Action of the Executors was not maintainable: And he took a difference
betwixt this case of a Limmer, and that of a common Labourer; for a Labourer
shall be compelled to labor, and his salary is put in certain by the Statute;
and therefore there is no reason that the Servant should lose by the death of
his Master (being bound by the Law to serve) which shall not be said to be his
default, but the Act of God and the Law; Howbeit, in the case of a Limmer, he
was not compelled by the Law to serve; And so when he made the Covenant, it was
his own act and folly, and no act in Law; and he might have taken a Specialty:
And this is good Law: but the true reason of that difference is, because in the
Case of a common Labourer the Testator could not wage his Law, but in that of a
Limmer he might, etc. Vide pl. ibid.

Co l. 10. 76 b. 2. in the case of the Marshalsey.
45. If the Court of Common Bench in Plea of debt award a Writ of Capias against
a Duke, Earl, Erroneous arrests.
etc. which by the Law lies not against them, and this appears in the Writ it
self: yet if the Sheriff arrest them by force of the Capias, albeit the Writ
is against Law, nevertheless the Court having Jurisdiction of the cause, the
Sheriff shall be excused, because there is no default in him but in the Court,
and with this accords 38 H. 8. Dyer 60. b. So it is likewise, if a Justice of
Peace makes a warrant to arrest one for Felony, who is not indicted, albeit the
Justice ers in the Warrant, yet he that makes the arrest by force of that
Warrant, shall not be punished by a Writ of False Imprisonment, because is is
not his fault, but the Justices, who is Judge of the cause: and with this
agrees 14 H. 4 16.

Co. l. 11. 27. a 3 in Henry Pigots case.
46. If the Obligee himself alter the Obligation in any point material or not
material by interlining, addition, racing, or the like, An Obligation void or
not void by rasure, etc.
that shall make the Obligation void: but if a stranger do it without the
Obligees privity in a point not material, that shall not avoid the Deed: as if
an Obligation be to be made to the Sheriff for appearance, etc. and in the
Obligation after the sealing and delivery thereof, these words, Vicecom. Commit.
Oxon, are interlined by a stranger without the privity of the Sheriff, yet the
Obligation remains good, notwithstanding such interlining by a stranger
without the Obligees privity, in regard it was not conceived to be a point
material, Benedicto Winchcombe, his name and surname being there inserted
before, and being done by a stranger it shall not in that case prejudice the
Obligee.

Refusal of Clerk.
47. Where the Bishop refuses the Clerk of the Patron for non-ability or
crime, he shall not present by Laps, F. N. B. 35. i.
unless he have first given notice to the Patron of the insufficiency of his
Clerk, and the Patron neglect to present within the six months; for (in such
case) after the six months past, the Patron shall have a Writ to the Bishop, if
the Church be void, and the Bishop have not in the mean time collated.

48. If one sell another a piece of Cloth and warrant it to be of a certain
length; in this case, if the piece be not of that length, F. N. B. 98. k.
a Writ of Disceit lies against the Vendor, albeit the Warranty be but by
Parol.

Custom of Woad, uncertain by tempest.
49. In Fogassaes case in the Coment. Pl. Com. ^. b. 1. in Fogassaes case.
the storm at Sea being a thing, that could by no possible means be
prevented, and that causing the uncertainty of the quantity of the Woad, and
there being no means of knowing the certainty thereof before it should be
landed and weighed, and that uncertainty being caused by no folly in the
Defendant Fogassa, there was great reason he should be excused, and not made
liable to forfeit the Woad, albeit he had not observed the strict words of the
Statute in that case.

Rentcharge, pro consilio impendendo.
50. If a man has a Rentcharge granted him, Pro consilio impendendo, Dyer. 2.
2. 6 H. 8.
and afterward he is attainted of Treason and cast into Prison, so as the
Grantor cannot have access to him for his counsel, yet he shall have the Rent
during his Imprisonment; for he may give counsel as well in Prison as at
large, and there is no fault in him, that the Grantor came not at him.

A Sheep-biter.
51. If a man has a Dog that kills Sheep, Dyer 25. b. 163. 28 H. 8.
the Master of the Dog being ignorant of the Dogs condition, he shall not be
punished for it: It is otherwise if he had notice of the Dogs condition and
quality, for then it may be imputed to his own folly and neglect: See also Dyer
29. 195. 28 H. 8.

Repair of River-bankes.
52. A Lease was made of a Meadow bordering upon the River of Exe in Devon by
Deed indented, Dyer 33 10. 22, and 29 H. 8.
and the Lessee covenanted to sustain and repair the Banks of the River, in
pain of ten pounds, and afterward by reason of a sudden flood upon subversion
of certain Wears in Devon, the Banks were decayed and perished, etc. and by
the opinion of Fitz. and Shelley, the Lessee shall be excused from the Penalty,
as if it had been of an House, that had been burnt by lightning or thrown down
by tempest, which are the act of God and cannot be resisted: Howbeit, in this
case he ought to repair the Banks in convenient time.

Act of God.
53. A man makes a Lease for years of Land, and a stock of Sheep, Dyer 56. 15.
35 H. 8.
rendering rent, and all the Sheep dye: In this case, the rent shall be
apportioned, because it was the act of God and no default or neglect of the
Lessee.

Bond eaten with Mice.
54. In debt upon an Obligation, Dyer 59. a. 12. 36. H 8.
if after non est factum pleaded and entered, the Labels by the negligence of
the Clerk are eaten off with Mice, it seems this shall not prejudice the
Obligee, because it did not happen by his default.

Descent, a total Entry.
55. A man being beyond Sea out of the Realm is disseised, Dyer 143. 57. 3, 4.
P. M.
and after he returns into the Realm, and then departs out again, during
which time there is a Descent cast: In this case, if it cannot be proved, that
he had notice of the Disseisin when he was in the Realm, it seems this Entry
is not taken away, for by intendment of Law he could not have notice of the
Disseisin, at the time when it was done: So if an Infant be disseised, and at
his full age he goes beyond Sea, or takes Baron, or is imprisoned, during which
time there is a Descent, his Entry shall be taken away for this Laches after
his full age; but if he were within age, when he did such an act, it shall be
otherwise.

Dyer 241 50 8 El.
56. Undue practice.
A Capias ad satisfaciendum returnable Tres Trin. being not served, the
Solicitor of the Plaintiff takes it again of the Sheriff, and one of the
Prothonotaries Clerks makes the Tres Trin. Tres Mich. and then the Solicitor
re-delivers it to the Sheriff unsealed, viz. to the Sheriff of London, who
makes Warrant thereupon to a Sergeant, who arrests the Defendant, and
afterward the Writ is sealed; And in this case, albeit the offenders for this
undue practice were committed to the Fleet, yet afterward it appearing upon
examination, that the Plaintiff was ignorant of the practice, the Writ was
received, and the Defendant committ^d also to the Fleet in execution.

Dyer 260. 24. 9 Eliz.
57. Partition against two, the one confesses the Partition, Partition.
and the other pleads to Issue, and in the Record of Nisi prius, the name of
the Defendant was omitted by the negligence of the Clerk, being written and
praedictus similiter, without more; Also the Jury was betwixt the Plaintiff and
both the Defendants, whereas one of them was not party to the Issue, which
errors being apparent were amended by the dir^ction of the Justices of Nisi
prius (quod nota) and so the Jury taken.

Dyer 318. 10. 15. El.
58. The Earl of Kent being reputed but an Esquire, The Earl of Kent.
brings a Writ of Entry by the name of Esquire, and the Pannell was returned;
now by the Heralds he was then newly declared Earl, and thereupon he
challenged the Array, because there was no Knight in the Pannell, but it was
not allowed, for that there was no default in the Sheriff, he being commonly
reputed an Esquire.

150. Nemo debet rem suam sine facto vel def^ctu suo amittere.
Litt. S. 442. Co. Inst. pars 1. 262. b.
1. If a man be disseised and he arraigne an Assize against the Disseisor, and
the Recognitors of the Assize chaunt for the Plaintiff, An Assize.
and the Justices of Assize will be advised of their Judgment, until the next
Assize, etc. and in the Interim the Disseisor dies seized: In this case, this
dying seized shall not toll the Entry of the Disseisee, because the bringing of
the Assize amounted to a continual claim, and Nemo debet rem suam sine facto
vel defectu suo amittere. Note, that this is a Quaere in Littleton, but is
since adjudged for good Law. Vide supra M. 149. Ex. 17.

Litt. S. 443. Co. ibid 263. b. 1. etc.
2. If an Abbot dye, and during the vacation, Descent tolls not Entry.
a man tortiously enters into part of the Land belonging to the Monastery, and
dies thereof seized, and afterward a new Abbot is elected; this Descent shall
not toll the Entry of the new elected Abbot: because, this Entry and Descent
was not occasioned by any act or default of or in the new Abbot, the Land being
during the vacation in abayance and custody of the Law, and for that by the
death of the former Abbot (which is the act of God) there was no person able to
make continual claim. This is also a Quaere in Litt. It is so likewise of
Dean and Chapter, Mayor and Comonalty, Master and Fellows of a College, or
any other Corporation aggregate of many, where such a Descent happens when they
want their head, viz. Dean, Mayor, Mastor, etc. for then they are not in a
capacity to make claim: Also if an Usurpation to a Church be had in time of
Vacation, this shall not prejudice the Successor to put him out of Possession,
but that at the next avoydance he shall present.

Litt. S. 588, 589. Co. ibid. 323. b. 3.
3. If my Tenant, who pays me a Rent-service in gross, Rent paid to a stranger.
atturnes and pays it to a stranger, this shall not put me out of possession
of the Rent; albeit the stranger die and a Descent is cast: for still I may
distraine my Tenant for all in arreare, and, Nemo redditum alterius invito
Domino precipere aut possidere potest.

Release of warranty.
4. If one enfeoff two with warranty, Co. ibid 393. a. 1.
and the one release the warranty, yet the other shall vouch for his moiety.

A Donative.
5. If the Patron of a Church, Prebend, Chantery, Chapel, etc. Co. ibid. 344.
a. 2.
Donative, does once present to the Ordinary, and his Clerk is admitted and
instituted, it is now become presentable, and shall never be Donative after,
and then also Laps shall incur to the Ordinary, as it shall of other Benefices
presentable: but a Presentation to such a Donative by a stranger, and admission
and institution thereupon, is merely void.

Debt. Execution.
6. If the Defendant in debt dye in execution, Co. l. 5. 86. b. 4. in Blumfeilds
case.
the Plaintiff may have a new execution by Elegit or Fieri facias; because the
Plaintiff shall not be prejudiced, nor the Defendant take benefit by the act or
tort of the Defendant, in not paying his debt, when no default was in the
Plaintiff, he having pursued the due and ordinary course of Law.

Lord, Mesne, and Tenant.
7. The King is Lord, A. Mesne, Co. l. 6. 6. a. 1. in Sir Jo. Molyns case.
and B. Tenant of the Manor of D. B. commits treason, and after Attainder an
Office is found, and the Manor seized into the Kings hand, afterward the King
grants the Manor to C. and his heirs, Tenendum de nobis, heredibus and
successoribus nostris, and aliis capitalibus dominis feodi illius per servicia
vide debita and de jure consueta: These are sufficient words to create a tenure
in the Mesne as it was before the Attainder and Forfeiture, and the tenure of
the Mesne is thereby preserved; for, it is against reason and equity, that the
Mesne, who did no wrong, should lose his services.

Seisin of rent.
8. Where payment of a rent by a Bailiff, or Tenant for life, Co. l. 6. 59. a.
4. in Bredimans case.
for years, or at will, works a special prejudice to the Master or Lessor, it
shall not be accounted suffcient Seisin thereof; as if the Lord has not had
Seisin of his rent within sixty years, and the Tenant makes one his Bailiff
generally of his Manor; In this case, the Bailiff cannot without express
command of his Master, pay this remediless rent to the Lord, or if he do it
otherwise, it works no Re-seisin thereof, so it is also, if the Tenant for
life, for years, or at will pay such a rent without order of the Tenant of the
Frank-tenement.

A grant without Attornement.
9. If a man be seized of a Manor, part in Lease for life, Co. l. 6. 68. a. 1.
in Sir Moyle Finches case.
and other part in Lease for years, and he levy a Fine to A. to the use of B.
in tail, with diverse Remainders over: In this case, B. shall avow for rent, or
have an Action of Waste without Attornement: for when a Reversion is settled in
any in Judgment of Law, and he has no possible means to compel the Tenant
to atturne, and no Laches or default in him, in such case, he shall avow or
have Action of Waste without Attornment: for the Rule is, Quod remedio
destituitur, ipsa re valet, si culpa absit.

Quare Impedit abate.
10. A Quare Impedit against the Bishop and Incumbent, Co. l. 7. 25. b. 4. in
Halls case.
without naming the Patron, shall abate: for otherwise, the Patronage shall be
in that case recovered against him who has nothing in the Patronage: and it is
against reason, that he, who is Patron, should be dispossessed and ousted of his
Patronage, when he is a stranger and no party to the Writ.

No damage without notice.
11. A. by a writing purporting his Will, Co. l. 8. 92 a. 3. in Frances, case.
devises Land to B. and his Heirs, but afterward (without the knowledge of
B.) enfeoffs C. to the use of B. for life, with diverse Remainders over,
provided that B. disturb not the Executors of A. from carrying away the goods:
A. dies, B disturbs the Executors, the next in Remainder enters upon B. into
the Land: In this case, albeit B. had made disturbance against the words of the
Proviso, yet he shall not thereby forfeit his term without notice of the
Condition; for none shall lose any Estate or Interest, which he lawfully has,
without some act or default in himself; and therefore (in this case) in as
much as B. was a stranger to the Feoffment, he shall not lose his estate
without notice given him of the Proviso: Quod nostrum est sine facto sive
defectu nostro amitti seu in alium transferri non potest; which accords with
the opinion of Pophani in Mallories case in the 5. Report 113. b. that the
Feoffee of Land or bargain of a Reversion by Deed indented and inrelled shall
not take advantage of a Condition for non-payment of rent reserved upon a Lease
upon Demand thereof, Co. l. 5. 113. in Mallories case.
without giving notice thereof to the Lessee.

The like.
12. Co. l. 8. 92. a. 4. in Fra^ces case.
If the estate of the Lord of a Manor cease by Limitation of an use, whereby
the use and estate thereof is transferred to another, the demand of the rent of
a Copyholder, who denies to pay it to him, causes no Forfeiture without
giving notice to the Copyholder of the alteration of the use and estate: And
so it was adjudged Hill. 1. Jac. in Trespass, inter Beconshaw Plaintiff, and
Southcote, and others Defendants. So likewise the Bargainee of a Manor by Deed
indented and enrolled shall not take advantage of a Forfeiture of a Copyholder
for denial of payment of rent without notice to him given of the bargain and
sale; for the Law will never compel a man to take notice of acts done amongst
strangers, Co. ibid. 93. a. 1.
or of any uncertainty upon pain of forfeiting a man's Estate or Interest, but
in such cases notice ought to be given to those that are to suffer the loss:
It is otherwise when a man binds himself to do a thing, as to perform an
Arbitrament, to pay the ovus, which such an Auditor assigned shall charge him
withal, or the like; for in such case he takes upon him to do it.

Error in a Fine.
13. A Fine was levied of a Manor and other Lands, Co. l. 5. 43. Bohuns case.
to the value of twenty Marks per annum, so as the Kings-silver was forty
shillings, which was paid, but in entering of it upon the Writ of Covenant, the
Manor was omitted, and thereupon Error was brought; but after that, albeit the
transcript of the Fine was removed into the Kings B. the Judges of the Common
Place amended the Record, because it appeared to them, that the Kings-Silver
was paid for the Manor: and whereas the Writ of Covenant was, Deed meipso, for
Test meipso, they amended that also, and certified it into the K. B. upon
Diminution, and it was allowed; for it was against reason, that the Misprision
of the Officer or Clerk should prejudice the Conusee, when it happened not by any
default or neglect in him. Vide Dyer 225. 34.

Ni^i Prius.
14. At a Nifi prius the Jury after departure come again, and said, Dyer. 218.
4. 5 Eliz.
that they were all agreed save one, who had eaten and drunk, thereupon they
were re-manded at the request of the Plaintiff, and after gave Verdict for him,
and this was held good: Howbeit day was given in Bank to assesse a Fine upon
the said Iuror, and the Fine was assessed at twenty pounds, but the Plaintiff
had Judgment.

Execution.
15. Dyer 244. 61. 8 Eliz.
The Solicitor of the Plaintiff and the Sheriff conspire to arrest one
condemned in debt, and after procure a Capias ad satisfaciendum, and the
Prisoner being brought into the Court upon the return of the Writ, had the
matter examined, and it was found, ut supra; yet because the Plaintiff was not
particeps criminis, he remained still in execution, and the Sheriff and
Solicitor were amercied, viz. the Sheriff at ten pounds, and the Solicitor at
five pounds.

151. It drives not a man to show, take notice of, or do that which by
intendment he knows not, or should or cannot do.
Men in one County take no notice of things done in another.
1. Because the Inhabitants of one County do not accampany together with men of
another County at County Courts, Turns, Leetes, Co. Inst. pars 50. a. 1.
and othor Courts, therefore in Judgment of Law they shall take no notice of a
Livery in another County to pass Lands in their own County.

Waste.
2. If waste be done Sparsim (here and there) in Woods, the whole Wood shall be
recovered: Co. ibid. 54. a. 4.
So likewise in Houses so many whole Rooms shall be recovered, wherein the
Waste is done: for it would be impossible, or (at least) inconvenient for the
Plaintiff to recover only part of the Wood, or part of the Rooms of the
Houses; because (in such case) he could not be able conveniently to make any
use of them.

Protection cast.
3. Co. ibid. 131. a. 4.
A protection may be cast either by a stranger or by the party himself; for,
an Infant, Feme covert, Monk, or any other may cast a protection for the
Tenant or Defendant; and this difference there is, when a stranger casts it,
and when the Tenant or Defendant casts it himself; for, the Defendant or
Tenant casting it, he must show cause wherefore he ought to take advantage of
the protection, but a stranger need not know the cause, save only that the
Tenant or Defendant is thereby protected, because it is presumed the stranger
may not know the cause. Co. ibid. 157. a. 2. Die. 231.


Challenge.
4. He that challenges for the Hundred, must show in what Hundred it is, and
not drive the other party to show it.

Not to show writings.
5. If Land be morgaged upon Condition, Co. ibid. 226. a. 3.
and the Morgagee lets the Lands for years, reserving a rent, the Condition
is performed, the Morgagor reenters, in an Action of Debt brought for the
rent, the Lessee shall plead the Condition and Re-entry without showing forth
any Deed: So in an Assize the Tenant pleads a Feoffment of the Ancestor of the
Plaintiff unto him, etc. the Plaintiff says, That the Feoffment was upon
Condition, etc. and that the Condition was broken, and pleads a Re-entry, and
that the Tenant entered and took away the Chest, in which the Deed was, and yet
detaineth the same: In this case, the Plaintiff shall not be enforced to show
the Deed.

Wager.
6. Wheresoever a man is charged as Executor or Administrator, Co. ibid. 295. a.
4.
he shall not wage his Law, for no man shall wage his Law of another man's Deed,
because the Law presumes he is not acquainted therewith: It is otherwise of a
Successor to an Abbot, for that the House never dies.

Acceptance of rent, no confirmation.
7. P. Leases on Condition the Lessee shall not alien any part, Co l. 3. 64. a.
4. in Pennants case.
the Condition is broken, the Lessor before notice accepts the Rent due after:
This acceptance is no confirmation of the Lease; because the Assignment may be
so secret, that the Lessor cannot know it: It is otherwise, where a Lease is
made rendering rent at a certain day with clause of Re-entry upon non-payment
of the Rent; in this case, if the Lessor has advantage of Re-entry upon
non-payment of the Rent at the day, acceptance of the Rent after confirms the
Lease; because the Lessor in such case might know the day and time of payment
of the rent.

Certain quantities of water not required.
8. Co. l. 4. 88. b. 4. in Luttrells case.
In an Action upon the case for diverting a stream of water from a Mill, the
Plaintiff may allege the diverting of a great quantity of water without
showing how much in certain; for it is impossible to show how much water in
certain runs by the Mill, and the quantity of water is not material.

Co. l. 4. 27. b. 4. in Hubbard and Hamonds case.
9. Where a Copyholder pays a certain Fine, Copyhold Fines.
he ought to pay it at the Court upon his admittance; but where the Fine is
uncertain, the Copyholder is not bound to pay it presently, because he
knows not what Fine the Lord will assesse, and nemo tenetur divinare; And,
because he cannot then provide any certain sum, he shall have a convenient
time to pay it, in case where the Lord limits no certain time for the payment
thereof.

Co. l 5. 101. a. 2. in Penrud docks case.
10. Nuisance. Quod permi^tat.
A. raises an house to the nuisance of the curtilage of B. in this case, if A.
alien his house, and B. his curtilage, the Feoffee of B. shall not have a Quod
permittat against the Feoffee of A. before notice given to the Feoffee of A. to
abate the nuisance; because he was a stranger to it, and (by consequence) might
be ignorant thereof: Howbeit, B. might have brought it against A. without
notice, for that A. was the Actor of the nuisance.

Co. l. 5. 113. b. 1. in Mallories case.
11. Notice requisite to take advantage of a Condition.
If the Lessor in the absence of the Lessee enter and make Feoffment, and the
Lessee re-enter, albeit this amounts to an Attornement in Law, yet without
notice given of this Feoffment to the Lessee, the Feoffee shall not make demand
of the Rent reserved upon the Lease by Entry for the Condition broken: for,
although he may (in that case) distraine or have an Action of Debt for the
Rent, or an Action of Waste (because in his Avowry or Count, he may allege the
Feoffment whereof the Lessee might then have notice) yet he cannot demand the
rent upon the Condition without notice; for then it would not be possible for
the Lessee to know to whom he should pay the rent, to save his term, nor to
have notice of the Feoffment in such case, before he should have forfeited his
term: So if the Lessor bargain and sell the Reversion by Deed indented and
enrolled, the Bargainee (albeit here needs no Atturnement) shall never take
benefit of a Condition, upon demand of a rent, without giving notice to the
Lessee of the bargain and sale: for although the bargain and sale by Deed
indented and enrolled be upon Record, yet for as much as it may be enrolled in
so many Courts in secret manner, the Law will not force all the Farmers of
England, who have Conditional Leases, to make every six months such infinite
search, to save their terms, but the Law (in such cases) for the preservation
of the Interest and Term of the Lessee compells the Bargainee (who is to take
benefit of the Condition) to give notice thereof to the Lessee, who is a mere
stranger thereunto. Per Popham, and not denied by the rest of the Justices.

Co. l. 7. 4. b. 3. in Bulw^rs ca^e.
12. Deceit.
Contrivance of the passages in deceit need not to be alleged specially; for
it suffices (in such cases) to say, maliciose and deceptive machinatus fuit,
etc. without alleging particulars; because such passages are so secret and
uncertain, that they cannot be known or tried.

Co. l 7. 6. a. 3. in Send^s case.
13. Robbery.
Robbery of an house by day or by night is neither within the letter nor
meaning of the Statute of Winchester, 13 E. 1. because when a Robbery is done
in an house, it is so secretly done, that the Hundred cannot take notice
thereof: It is otherwise of Robbery upon the Highway, for that is openly done,
and therefore the Hundred may of themselves take notice thereof.

Co. l. 8. 602. 1. in Beechers case.
14. If the Defendant or Tenant plead a false Deed made to him, Denial of a
Deed, sine amerciament.
or deny his own Deed, and it be found against him, or if relicta
verificatione cognovit actionem, he shall be fined for his falsehood, Quia certi
debemus esse de proprio facto: but if one deny the Deed of his Ancestor, or
plead a Deed made to his Ancestor, and it is found against him, yet he shall
not be fined but only amercied, Quia de alieno facto: So if one deny a
Recovery or other Record, whereunto he is party, he shall not be fined; for it
is not his act but the Act of the Court, and he does not deny the Record
absolutely, but, non habetur tale recordum.

The pedigree of the Donee not named.
15. If a man brings a Formedon in Reverter or Remainder, as heir, Co. l. 8.
88. a. 3. in Buckmeres case. Pl. Co. 56 a. 1.
omission of an eldest Son, which survived his Father, or the like, in the
pedigree on the part of the Donor, or of him in Remainder shall abate the Writ;
but on the part of the Donee, albeit the Donee had many issues in the lineall
descent inheritable to the estate tail, and which held the Land, the Demandant
need not name any of the Issues in the Clause, Et quae post mortem, but he
shall say, Et quae post mortem le Donee ad ipsum reverti debet, eo quod le
Donee obiit without Issue; because the Demandant is a stranger to the pedigree
of the Donee, and therefore (by intendment) knows it not.

An uncertain Plea good.
16. In debt against an Administratrix, Co. l. 9. 110. a. 3. in Meriel Treshams
case.
the Defendant pleads one Recognizance of eight hundred pounds, and another of
one thousand pounds, the Plaintiff replies, that the eight hundred pounds
Recognizance was for the payment of 400 l. which is paid, and that the 1000 l.
Recognizance was for the performance of Covenants, which are not broken, yet
both kept on foot uncancelled by Covin of the Defendant: In this case, the
replication of the Plaintiff is good notwithstanding the uncertainty; for
albeit he neither pleads a Defeasance for the payment of the four hundred
pounds, nor what Covenants in particular they were, for which the one thousand
pounds Recognizance was entered into, yet the replication is good; because the
Creditor is a stranger to them, and has no means by Law to know the
particular certainties.

A Deed not showed.
17. He that claims a thing or any Right or Interest out of it, Co. l. 10. 93.
b. 4. in Doctor Leyfeilds case.
or justifies in right of the Grantee, in such cases the first Grant ought to
be produced; As the second Grantee of a Rentcharge shall show the first Grant,
and so shall his Bailiffs, etc. but where a man is a stranger to a Deed, and
claims nothing contained in the Grant, nor any thing out of it, nor does any
thing in the right of the Grantee, as Bailiff or Servant, there he may plead
the Patent or Deed without showing it.

Damages, where counted for, and where not.
18. There is a Diversity betwixt personal Actions and real Actions, Co. l.
10. 117. a. 2. in Robert Pilfords case.
wherein damages are to be recovered, for in personal Actions the Plaintiff
shall count for damages: because he may know in certain what damage he has
suffered before the Writ purchased, and those he shall only recover, but in
real Actions the Demandant shall never count for damages, because he is to
recover damages, hanging the Writ, which being uncertain, he shall not count
for them, but shall have them assessed after by Writ of Inquire, as in a Writ
of Entry sur Disseisin, or in the nature of Assize, as it was held in 33 H. 6.
47. a.

Parson, impers^^ee.
19. When a thing is beyond time of memory, Co. l. 11 10. a. 2. Priddle and
Nappers case.
a man is not compellable to prove the Commencement thereof, as where a Prior
and his Predecessors have been Parsons Imparsonees of a Church time out of
mind, proof of the Commencement thereof, and whether it were by appropriation
or union is dispensed withal: because (by intendment) no such proof can be
made.

Action of Account.
20. Fitz. N. B. 117. c. c.
If a man having cause to bring an Action of Account against one as his Bailiff
or Receivor, makes his Executors and dye: In this case, his Executors shall
have that Action, for that the Executors may by rentalls and otherwise know how
to charge them: but an Action of Account lies not against the Executors of a
Bailiff or Receivor for the receipt or occupation of their Testator: because (by
intendment) they being ignorant of the accounts of their Testator, are not able
to defend themselves: So likewise, the Executor of a Merchant shall have an
Action of Account against another Merchant, but not against the Executor of a
Merchant.

Covin.
21. Covin need not be certainly pleaded, Pl. Co. 46. a. 3. in Wimbish and
Talbois case.
but may be alleged generally: for Covin is a secret thing contained in the
heart of a man, whereof (by intendment) another man can have no knowledge, and
then the law will never force a man to show that, which by intendment of Law
lies not within his cognizance: And therefore a woman shall have dower of a
rentcharge without showing the deed of the grant; because it belongs not to
her. vide plus ibidem, and 54. b. 1. in Wimb. and Talb. case.

Pl. Co. 64. b. 4. in Dive and Maninghams case. vide Pl. Co. 83. b. 4. in
Stranges case.
22. A general act need not be specially pleaded; Pleader of a Statute.
for the Judges ought to take notice thereof without special pleading; but a
particular Act, or a particular Act in a generaltie (as when it concerns a
certain sort of men, as Sheriffs, Justices, or the like) ought to be
specially pleaded, at least the branch thereof, which concerns the present
matter: for (by intendment) the Judges cannot take such notice thereof as of an
Act which generally concerns all the people of England, within which number
they themselves are included.

P. C. 81. b. 3. in Partridges case, and 84. a. 3. and 85. a. 4.
23. In an action brought upon the Statute of 32. H. 8. 9. against such as buy
pretenced titles, if it be for the demise of a lease, Monstrance des faits.
Pretenced ^itles.
the plaintiff shall not be compelled to show the term, rent, or any other
circumstances thereof; because he is a stranger thereunto, and (by intendment)
can by no means come to the knowledge thereof; And this may well be resembled
to the cases of showing of deeds: And therefore in 35. H. 6. 8. where an action
is brought for goods carried away, the defendant justifyes, for that at the
time of the trespass supposed to be done he was Mayor of the town of C. and
that the King had granted unto the defendant (being then Mayor) and to the
Comonaltie, and their successors, all goods of outlawed persons within the said
Town, and shows that the plaintiff was outlawed, and so justifies: And by the
better opinion the plea is good without showing the letters patents; because
they now belong to his successor and not to him, and he is now become a
stranger to them, albeit he was once privy to them, being Major, etc. vide plus
ibidem. and 84. a. 3. and 85. a. 4.

Pl. C. 123. a. 4. in Sir Richard Binkleys case.
24. In an action brought against the Sheriff upon the Statute of 23 H. 6. 15.
for making an untrue return of the Knights of Parliament, Election of Knights
of Parliament.
the Plaintiff shall not be compelled to plead a certain number of the
Electors; because he can by no means come to the knowledge of them, and
therefore shall express them generally by the greater number, without giving
the number of them in certain: So in debt against an executor, the Defendant
pleades, ne unques executor, ne administer come executor, to this the Plaintiff
may say, that at such a place he administered, without showing what things he
there administered, because he cannot come to the knowledge or number of them,
being not privy thereunto: And so it is also of things of an infinite number,
as if a man be bound to save the Sheriff harmless of all things concerning
his office, he shall allege, that he has discharged him generally, without
showing the things in certain, because the things are of so great a number,
that the certainty thereof cannot (by intendment) be remembered or known: Also,
if a man be bound to sheere yearly the sheep of the Obligee going in such a
pasture, he shall say that he has shorn them without showing the number, for
peradventure some years there were more, some years fewer, so as he cannot (by
intendment) remember the certain number.

25. A. brings an action of debt against B. upon an Obligation by the father,
wherein he bound himself and his heirs, Co. l. 5. 60. Gooches case.
B. pleads riens per descent, A. maintains that assets at D. in com. S.
descended unto him: And upon a Nisi prius before Sir Christopher Wray the
descent was proved, and agreed; whereupon B. the defendant gives in evidence,
that long before the action commenced, he enfeoffed one C. of the Land, which
was also confessed; but A. the plaintiff proves likewise, that that feofment
was made by fraud to deceive him of his action, and therefore void by the
Statute of 13. Eliz. 5. Now it was strongly urged, that this ought to have been
pleaded, and could not upon the issue (Riens per descent Jour del breife
purchase) be brought in evidence: But it was resolved that it might be brought
in evidence without pleading; because fraud and covin (for that they are
odious) are so privily hatched in an hollow tree (in arbore cava and opaca) and
so artificially covered and concealed, that the party grieved has no means
to find or know them, and then to force the Plaintiff to plead the feoffment
(whereof he has no notice) and also that it was done by fraud, is both against
Law and reason, being indeed very mischievous to creditors, and tending much to
the maintenance and increase of fraud and covin.

Feoffment upon condition.
26. A. enfeoffes B. upon condition, Co. l. 5 96. b. 1. in Goodals case.
that if A. after the death of B. pay unto the heirs, executors, or
administrators of B. 100 l. that then the feofment shall be void, afterward
B. enfeoffes C. and C. enfeoffes D. etc. B. dies, A. pays the 100 l. to the
heir of B. In this case, the condition is performed, albeit the heir was then
a stranger to the Land, because the heir is the person expressly named in the
condition, to whom the payment shall be made, and the feoffor is a stranger to
the conveyances, which the feoffee and his assigns have made, and therefore
the feoffor shall not take notice at his peril of the validity thereof, nor
of the conditions or limitations annexed thereunto.

Quo minus Charter pleaded without showing it.
27. In the Exchequer the Kings Farmer brings a Quo minus, Dyer 174. 18. 1, 2.
Eliz.
and in his Count entitles Qu. Eliz. to the reversion of his term by the grant
of his lessor (who was Sir Richard Sackvile) of the reversion to the Duke of
Northumberland with his attornement to the said Duke, and after the Duke grants
it over to E. 6. in fee, by deed enrolled, and does not allege expressly,
that Sir Richard Sackvile granted the reversion by deed, but generally, quod
concessit reversionem hadendam in feodo, ad quam quidem concessionem idem
querens se inde Atturnavit: And in this case the Count (per Dyer) was good
without saying per cartam, and without producing it into Court; because the
Farmer was a stranger to the deed or grant, and had not the power of it, for
that it belonged not to him, neither did he convey any title to him under it;
T. 17. H. 6. Rot. 121.
So in an Assise, the Plaint was made of Land and rent, and the tenant conveyed
them unto him by the grant of A. in tail, the remainder to the King in fee,
and prayed Aid of the King without showing the deed, and without saying,
concessit tenementum per cartam, and habuit Auxilium, etc.

Feomedon.
28. In a Formedon in Reverter the doner need not show the pedigrees of the
issues of the donee, nor who was last seized, Dyer 216. 56 4. Eliz.
because he is a stranger to the pedigree, and by intendment cannot come to the
knowledge of it: It is otherwise in a Formedon in discender; Quaete in
Remainder.

Appeal.
29. The Lessee of a Parson brings an Ejectione firmae, Dyer 240. 46. 7. Eliz.
the defendant pleads that the parson was deprived, the Plaintiff says, that
the parson has appealed to the Archbishop of Canterbury in Curia sua
prerogativa de Arcubus, and because the words of the Statute of 24. H. 8. 12.
are, the appeal that shall be to the Archbishop of the Province, or, etc.
without limiting any Court in certain, the Defendant demurred; And these words
to the Archbishop of Canterbury were held sufficient, because of substance,
etc. And in this argument although it appeared by the Civilians that the Arches
were not the Praerogative Court, yet because the Defendant did not show it, but
demurred generally, the Temporal Judges were not bound to take notice of their
Jurisdictions.

Formedon in Rem.
30. In a Formedon in Remainder brought upon a Remainder in use after the
Statute of 27. H. 8. It was held by the Justices, Dyer 277. 58. 10. Eliz.
that the demandant need not show the deed of the remainder, 1. because (in
this case) the remainder might be created without deed, 2. for that the deed
did appertain to the feoffees, and not to Cestuy que use, and therefore might
not be in his power to produce.

Hob. 51. Holmes and Twist.
30. A. being possessed of 10 tun of woad, sels to B. one tun thereof,
Assumpsit.
for which B. promises to pay him according to such rate as he should sell the
rest for; A. sels the rest after the rate of 23 l. the tun: In this case, A.
shall not recover the 23 l. of B. before he has acquainted B. at what rate he
sold the rest; because the price is a secret thing betwixt A. and his other
chapmen, whereof B. is not bound to take notice; as it was adjudged upon a Writ
of Error in the Exchequer Chamber T. 12. Jac. Rot 1758.

152. Nor to do that, which were in vain for him to do.
Litt. S. 103. Co. Inst pars 1. 79. a. 2.
1. If an heir female be married within the age of 14. in the life of her
ancester, and the ancester die, she being still within the age of 14, Tender of
marriage.
the Lord shall have but the ward of the land until her age of 14, and shall
not within the two years after tender her marriage, according to the Statute of
Westminster. 1. cap. 22. for that is without the case of the Statute, it being
in vain for the Lord to tender her marriage, when she is already married:
Natura non facit vacuum, nec Lex supervacuum.

Litt. S. 179. Co. ibid. 119. a. 3.
2. If a villain purchase a reversion, Claim by Lord.
the Lord (after attornment) ought to claim it upon the land to entitle
himself thereunto; so it is also of a rent, common, or other inheritance
issuing out of land: but if a villain purchase the seigniory, or a rent,
common, or, etc. issuing out of the land of the Lord himself, it is said, that
the seigniory, rent, common, etc. are extinguished in the Lords possession
without any claim; for it is needless to claim them upon the Land, when he
himself is possessed of the land, out of which they are issuing.

Co. ibid. 123. b. 3.
3. A villain shall not have an appeal of Robbery against his Lord, Appeal.
Lord and Villain.
for that the Lord may lawfully take the goods of the villain as his own: and
then it would be in vain to bring an appeal against the Lord for taking his
own goods.

Litt. S. 194. Co. ibid. 126. b. 3.
4. If the Lord mayhem his villain, Appeal of mayhem.
he may be indicted for it at the suite of the King, and thereupon make Fine
for his offense; but the villain shall not have an appeal of mayhem against
his Lord; because in such appeal he shall recover only damages, which the
Lord after execution may take again, and so the Judgment would become inutile
and illusorie, and sapiens incipit a fine, And the law never gives an action,
where the end of it can bring no profit or benefit to the Plaintiff.

Litt. S. 273 Co. ibid. 178. b. 4.
5. A man seized of 30 acres of land of equal value, Hochpot.
and having two Daughters, gives 15 acres with one of them in frankmarriage and
dies, and the other 15 acres descends to the other Daughter: In this case,
there shall be no casting into hochpot; because the lands were of equal value
at the time of the partition; for it were in vain to put them into hochpot,
being equal, no alteration since (by the act of God or otherwise) whereby the
lands are bettered or impared, being to be had in consideration.

Co. ibid. 19^. b. 1.
6. If there be two tenants in common of a rent, as money, grain, Tenants in
common.
or any severable thing, and they be disseised thereof, they shall bring
several assizes for the recoverie thereof, because they have it by several
titles: Howbeit, if the rent be a Hawke, horse, or any other entire thing,
which cannot be severed, they shall join in an assise for it: because the Law
will never enforce a man to demand that, which he cannot recover, and a man
cannot recover the moitie of an Hawke, horse, or the like, Lex neminem cogit ad
vane seu inutilia.

Co. ibid. 218. a. 4.
7. If I grant a rent charge in fee out of my land upon condition, Claim not
needful.
there if the condition be broken, the rent shall be extinct in my hand;
because I (that am in Possession of the Land) need make no claim upon the
Land, and therefore the Law shall adjudge the rent void without any claim.

Claim the like.
8. If a man make a Feoffment unto me in fee, Ibid.
upon condition that I shall pay unto him twenty pounds at a day, etc. and
before the day I let unto him the Land for years reserving a rent, and after
fail of paying the twenty pounds; In this case, the Feoffor shall retain the
Land to him and his Heirs, and the rent is determined and extinct; for that
the Feoffor could not enter, neither has he need to claim upon the Land,
because he himself was in Possession, and the Condition being collateral is
not suspended by the Lease.

The like.
9. If a man by his Deed in consideration of Fatherly love, Ibid. b. 1. and 237.
a. 2.
etc. covenant to stand seized to the use of himself for life, and after his
decease to the use of his eldest Son in tail, the Remainder to his second Son
in tail, the Remainder to his third Son in fee, with a Proviso of revocation,
etc. The Father makes a Revocation according to the Proviso; In this case, the
whole estate is immediately (upon the Revocation) revested in him without Entry
or Claim, causa qua supra.

Release good.
10. A Release to a Tenant at sufferance (as to one that holds over his term)
is void, Co. ibid. 270. b. a. Litt. S. 460, 461.
but a Release to a Tenant at will by the Owner of the Land is good to convey
the Inheritance unto him, because there is between them a Possession with a
privity; for it would be in vain to make an estate by Livery to him who has
already Possession of the Tenements by the Owners consent.

Averment.
11. That which is apparent to the Court by necessary collection out of the
Record need not be averred, for it were vain to aver that, Co. ibid. 303. b. 3.
which is apparent to the Court already.

Attornment of T. in tail.
12. Albeit Tenant in tail may attorne where the Reversion of his estate is
granted over, yet he is not compellable to attorne, Co. ibid. 316. a. 4.
although such Grant of the Reversion be by Fine; because he has an estate of
Inheritance, which may continue for ever: and therefore it were a vain thing
to require any Attornment from him.

Attornment.
13. If a Lease be made for life, the Remainder to another in tail, Litt. S.
578. Co. ibid. 319. b. 1.
the Remainder to the right heirs of the Tenant for life; In this case, if the
Tenant for life grant his Remainder in fee, that Remainder passes without
Attornment; for here, if any should attorne it should be the Tenant for life,
and it were in vain for the Tenant for life to attorne upon his own Grant.

Attornment.
14. In these eases following, Co. ibid. 318. a. 4.
the Tenant is not compellable to attorne; because if he should it were in
vain for him so to do: As 1. if an Infant levy a Fine, the Tenant shall not be
compelled to attorne; because the Fine is defeasible by Writ of Error during
his minority: So if Land be holden in ancient demesne, and he in the Reversion
levieth a Fine of the Reversion at the common Law, in this case, the Tenant
shall not be compellable to attorne, because the estate that passed is
reversible by a Writ of Disceit: Also if Tenant in tail (before the Statutes of
4 H. 7. and 32 H. 8.) had levied a Fine, the Tenant should not have been
compelled to attorne, because it was defeasible by the issue in tail: but since
those Statutes (which give strength to Fines to bar the Issue in tail) the
reason of the common Law being taken away, the Tenant in this case shall now be
compelled to attorne, as it was adjudged in Justice Windhams case, Co. l. 3.
fol. 86. Lastly, if an alienation be in Mortmaine, the Tenant shall not be
compelled to attorne; because the Lord Paramont may defeat it.

Co. l. 5. 21. a. 1. Sir Anthony Maines case.
15. A. Leases for one and twenty years to B. and is bound to make a new Lease
to B. upon surrender of the old, A. Disability to make surrender.
Leases to another for eighty years by Fine; in this case, the Bond is forfeit;
Albeit the first act is to be done by B. viz. to surrender, and albeit he never
surrender: for by the Fine levied for eighty years, A. has disabled himself
both to take the Surrender and to make a new Lease; And the Law will not
enforce a man to do a thing which will be vain and fruitless, To make
Feoffment.
Lex neminem cogit at vana and inutilia per agenda: but it would be a vain
thing to compel B. to surrender to A. when A. is not in a capacity to take it:
So if a man seized of Lands in fee Covenants to enfeoff I. S. of them upon
request, and after he makes Feoffment in fee of the said Lands; in this case,
I. S. shall have an Action of Covenant without request, because it would be in
vain for I. S. to make request, when the other has disabled himself to do it.

Co. l. 5 121. b 4. in Long^ case.
16. In some cases upon an Indictment of Manslaughter it may be requisite to
express the length and depth of the wound, A wound upon an Indictment.
because it may appear thereby whether or no the wound was mortal; but when
the wound penetrates through the body it is not necessary to show them; because
it were vain to show them, when the wound appears to be mortal of it self
without producing those dimensions.

Co. l. 9. 54. a. 4. in Batens case.
17. In a Quod permittat brought by A. against B. for building an House so near
the House of A. that it jutties over the House of A. it is sufficient to say,
Nuisance.
Ad nocumentum liberi tenementi ipsius A. without assigning any special
Nuisance; for it were in vain to assign any such special Nuisance, when it
appears to the Court, that it must needs be to the Nuisance of the Plaintiff;
because the rain, which falls from the House of the Defendant must of
necessity fall upon the House of the Plaintiff: And Cujus est solum, ejus est
usque ad Caelum: Also by over-hanging of the Defendants House, the Plaintiff is
hindered of Air, and building his House higher, etc.

Co. l. 9. 106. a. 4. in Margaret Podgers case.
18. A. being Copyholder for life, Remainder for life, Fine of a Copyhold in
bar.
the Lord bargains and sels and levies a Fine to A. with Proclamations, and
five years pass without any claim by those in Remainder, nevertheless they
in Remainder shall not be barred; for no Fine or Warranty shall bar any estate
in Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, which is not divested and put to a
right: because he that has the estate in him cannot be put to his Action,
Entry, or Claim: for that he has already that which Action, Entry, or Claim
can vest in him or give him: And therefore in vain was the bargain and sale
and Fine, when they could not alter the estates of them in Remainder.

Co. l. 10. 90. a. 4. in Doctor Leyfields case.
19. Color shall not be given in any Action, Color to the Plaintiff.
where the Plea goes in bar of the right: for it were in vain to give color
of right, and to bar it after: As in Assize or Writ of Entry in nature of an
Assize, if collateral Warranty be pleaded, and the Defendant rely upon it, or
if an Estoppell be pleaded, or Fine levied with Proclamations, etc. there is no
need of any color to be given, because the Plaintiff is barred, albeit he had
right: So it is also where the Plaintiff conveys the title unto him by Letters
Patents of the King, or by Act of Parliament: for that bars the right, etc. it
is otherwise, where the Possession is only barred, etc. vide pl. ibid.

P. C. 8. b. 3. in Fogassaes case.
20. When a man is not bound to do a thing, Not tied to answer.
in a Plea concerning it, he need not make answer thereunto: as in Fogassaes
case exception was taken, for that the suerty was not named, that was bound for
answering the custom, and it was said, that because the Statute speaks of no
surety, and the agreement might be good without surety, it had been in vain to
speak of it, or to make answer thereunto, and thereupon that exception quasht.

Death not traversable.
21. In a Formedon in Reverter or Remainder, P. C. 32. b. 1. Colthrist versus
Bevishin.
a man shall not show the death of the particular Tenant, because it is but a
Conveyance, and not traversable nor issuable: So in Colthrist and Bevishins
case, the Defendant shall not show the deaths of Henry and Elenor Bevishin,
because the Plaintiff Colthrist should have traversed it, and said, that they
were alive, he should confess, that he had not title to the Land before their
lives, and would have destroyed his own Action; And therefore in regard their
deaths were not traversable, it was in vain for the Defendant to show it, (by
consequent) he shall not be compelled to do it.

Covin.
22. A man need not show any special cause of Covin when it is apparent; P. C.
49. b. 2. in Wimbish and Talboies case. Ibid. 55. b. 3.
as when Feme Tenant in tail for her Ioynture by Covin appears in a Formedon
in Remainder brought against her by one that pretends title in Remainder, and
she appears the first day without Essoine, View, etc. and Judgment is had
against her by nihil dicit; here the Covin is apparent and need not be
specially showed, for it is in vain to show that, which is apparent of it
self: So it is a vain thing to aver, that an Horse bought, which wants eyes,
is blind, when it is apparent that he must be blind when he wants eyes: If the
Tenant enfeoff his Son within age by collusion, the Lord shall seize him for
his Ward, and shall not be forced to show this Collusion in special, causa qua
supra.

Pretenced titles.
23. In an Action upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. 9. against buying pretenced
titles, P. C. 81. a. 4. in Partridges case against Strange and Croker.
the Plaintiff need not aver the title or right to be pretenced; because the
Statute declares and intends the title to be pretenced, when neither his
Ancestors, nor those, from whom he claims, have enjoyed the Land in
Possession, Reversion, or Remainder, nor received the rents or profits thereof
for a year before the purchase thereof: and therefore because it were in vain
for him to aver the pretenced title, because the Statute makes it so, he shall
not do it.

153. Non licet, quod dispendio licet.
Surrenders.
1. M. Leases for twenty one years to S. and is bound to make a new Lease to S.
upon surrender of the old, Co. l. 5. 21. a. 4. in Sir Antohny Maines* case.
M. Leases to another for eighty years by Fine, and S. brings an Action of debt
upon the Bond: In this case, albeit S. may surrender and ought to do the first
act, viz. to surrender, yet M. has forfeited his Bond, although S. never
surrender, for S. shall not now be forced to surrender; because if he should
surrender, M. cannot now make him a new Lease, which w s the effect and end of
the Surrender: for by such Surrender S. will lose his old term, without
possibility of having a new one: And, Non licet quod dispendio licet.

Parson not to ^esigne.
2. I. Parson of the Church of G. was bound in an Obligation to the Prior of E.
to resign his Church to the Prior for a certain Pension, Co. l. 5. 21. b. 1.
ibid. and 14 H. 4. 19. a.
as it should be agreed, the Parson and Prior agree for a Pension of C. s. yet
the Parson refused to resign; And 14 H. 4. 19. a. it was the opinion of all
the Court, that albeit they were agreed of the Pension, yet the Parson was not
bound to resign, until he might be sure of his Pension, and that could not be
without Deed; And therefore (in such case) the Parson was not bound to resign,
until the Prior should ^ender a Deed of the Pension, whereby he might be sure
(...) it.

154. It favoreth Truth, Faith, and Certainty. Vide Max. 41. ^9.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 139. a. 3.
1. Regularly, upon a nonsuit the Demandant or Plaintiff may again commence an
action of like nature, etc. Howbeit, in an Attaint, Nonsuit in Attaint
peremptoria.
if the Plaintiff after appearance be nonsuit, it is peremtorie, and he is
thereby barred from ever bringing an attaint against the first jury again; and
the reason is, for the faith that the Law gives to the verdict, and for the
terrible and fearful judgment, that should be given against the first jury,
if they should be convicted, and therefore upon the nonsuit the Plaintiff shall
be imprisoned, and the pledges amercied. Vide infra 11.

Co. ibid, 227. b. 3. Co. ibid, b. 4. L. S. 366.
2. A special verdict, or at large, may be given in any action, A special
verdict.
and upon any issue, be the issue general or special; because the truth of
the cases may be the better discovered and discussed, and justice and right
done: so if a man seized of lands in fee, lets them for life without Deed
rendering rent, upon condition of re-entry upon non-payment of the rent,
whereupon if the lessor enter and the lessee bring an assise of Novel
Disseisin, the jurors may find the matter at large, and the Judges ought to
adjudge it for the tenant, albeit regularly a condition is not available
without Deed showed, and although the lessor show no Deed.

Co Inst. pars 1. 294. b. 4.
3. In an action of Debt (the better to discover the truth) Wager of Law is
allowed, Wager of Law.
that is to take an oath (for example) that he ^weth not the Debt demanded of
him nor any penny thereof. It is called W^ger of Law, because of ancient time
the Defendant put in suertie to make his Law at such a day: It is also called,
Making of his Law, because the Law (for the discovery of the truth) does give
such a special benefit to the Defendant to bar the plaintiff for ever in
that case: Howbeit for the further manifestation of the truth, the Defendant
ought to bring wi^h him eleven persons of his neighbors, that will avow upon
their oaths, that in their consciences he says truth, so as he himself must
be sworn De fidelitate, and the eleven De credulitate.

Co ibid, 303. 4. 3.
4. A Count or Declaration, Truth and certainty in Pleadings.
which anciently (and yet) is called Narratio ought to contain two things,
viz. certainty and verity, for that it is the foundation of the suite,
whereunto the adverse pertie must answer, and whereupon the Court is to give
judgment, Certa debet esse intentio and narratio, and certum fundamentum and
certa res, quae deducitur in Judicium. Bract. lib. 2. 140. Howbeit, it must be
understood, that there are three kinds of certainties; First, to a common
intent, and that is sufficient in a Bar, which is to defend the party and to
excuse him; Secondly a certain intent in general, as in Counts, Replications,
and other pleadings of the Plaintiff, Co. ibid, 352. b. 1.
that is to convince the defendant, and so in Indictments, etc. Thirdly, a
certain intent in every particular, a^ in Estoppels; because, in respect they
conclude a man ta allege the truth, they ought to be certain to every
intent, and not to be taken by argument or inference.

Co. ibid* 352. b. 2.
5. Where the verity is apparent upon Record, Estoppel.
there the adverse party shall not be estopped to take advantage of the truth,
for he cannot be estopped to allege the truth, when the truth appears of
Record: So if a Fine be levied without any original, it is voydable, but not
void; howbeit if an original be brought, and a Retraxit entered, and after
that a concord is made, or a Fine levied, this is void, in respect the verity
appears of record; Likewise, an Impropriation is made after he death of an
Incumbent to a Bishop and his successors, the Bishop by Indenture demiseth the
Parsonage for 40 years, to begin after the death of the Incumbent, the Deane
and Chapter confirm it, the Incumbent dies, this demise shall not conclude,
for that it appears, that he had nothing in the Impropriation till after the
death of the Incumbent.

Certainty and verity in Counts
6. If a man declare upon a Statute, he must recite it truly; P. C. 84. a. 4. in
Partridges case against Strange and Croker.
for mentioning the Statute and mis-reciting it, causes error, albeit as to
the substance of his declaration he might have omitted it; because a
Declaration ought to have 1. Certainty, so as the defendant may know to what
to make answer; And therefore when of necessity a thing must be showed in
certain in the Declaration, it must by no means be omitted. 2. Verity, which
ought to be joined with certainty; for if it appear to the Court, that
falsehood is produced in stead of truth, the party, that shows it, has
confounded and annoyed himself.

Wast. Plea:
7. If the tenant do or suffer wast to be done in houses, Inst. 1. 53. a. 3.
yet if he repair them before any action brought, there lies no action of
wast against him: Howbeit in such case he cannot plead Null wast fait, for that
is not true; but he ought to plead the special matter, as the truth of his
case does import. Vide M. 166. Variance. F. N. B. 104.


Audita querel^.
8. If a man comprehend two several matters in an Audita querela to extinguish
the execution, yet the Writ is good; Howbeit (to reduce that double matter to
some certainty) the Plaintiff shall hold himself to one matter only, and the
Defendant shall be put to answer only to that. Co. l. 10. 92. a. 4. in Docter
Leyfeilds case. Co. Inst. part. 1. 226. a. 1.


Showing Let^ers and other Deed^*.
9. The lessee or assignee of a Patentee shall not justify his estate by
producing only his lease or assignement, but he ought to show the original
letters Patents, or a true copy thereof proved upon oath, to the end the
Judges and Jury severally (as it belongs to them) may give certain Judgment of
the sufficiency, or insufficiency thereof ( vide Dyer 28 H. 29. b. pl. 199.)
And so it is also of other original Deeds, which are not Letters patents. Vide
Dyer 171. 9. Dyer 35. 26. 29. H. 8.


Feoffment to diverse.
10. It was agreed by the Justices of the C. B. If a man enfeoffe diverse, and
make livery to one in the name of all, this is not good without Deed of
feoffment; because as (it seems) their names being expressed in a Deed of
feoffment, it may be certainly known who are the feoffees, unto whom the
feoffor intended to convey the estate.

Artaint.
11. In an Attaint the Plaintiff shall not give more in evidence nor produce
more witnesses, then he gave or produced to the Petty Jury; Dyer 54. b. 14.
34. H. 8.
but contrariwise the Defendant is allowed to give and produce more in
affirmance of the first verdict. vide supra 1.

Showing Let. pat.
12. In nono of H. 8. A Merchant obtaines a license to him and his assigns to
import Wines in any vessel besides English, Dyer 54. a. 17. 34. H. 8.
notwithstanding the Statute of 4 H. 7. 10. the assignee of the Patentee upon
an Information brought against him, pleads the Letters Patents of license and
his assignement, but produces not the Letters Patents into Court, for want
whereof his Plea was adjudged insufficient. Dyer 87. a. 100.


Averment.
13. If the King grant all his lands, which he had by the Attainder of I. S. and
a man will convey the lands unto himself by such a grant, he ought to aver,
that I. S. had such lands: So in case of a Common person, who makes a release
of all such Lands as descended unto him on the part of his mother in D. there
ought to be an averment, what lands descended unto him there on his mothers
part; for otherwise the release is void by reason of the generaltie and
uncertainty thereof, etc.

Dyer 229. 51. 6. Eliz.
14. In Debt upon an Obligation to ratify, confirm, Pleading a Deed.
and allow at all times the estate of the Obligee, it is no good plea to say,
that he has ratified, confirmed, etc. for the confirmation ought to be pleaded
by Deed, that it may appear to the Court to be certain.

Dyer 243. 56. 8. Eliz.
15. There was a submission to an Award by Obligation, Arbitrament.
so as it should be made and yielded in Writing at or before Michaelmas, etc.
the Plaintiff says, that the Arbitrators by arbitrament in writing factum and
partibus before the day deliberat. make an award, etc. and assigns the breach,
the Defendant demurres, and the Court gave it against the Plaintiff; Because 1.
it is no direct but only an argumentative affirmance, that the Arbitrators
delivered the award. 2. He should have pleaded the deliverie according to the
condition, viz. that it was delivered at or before, etc. and not before only:
3. Redditum had been a more apt word to answer to yielded, then deliberatum.

Hab. 38. Capes case.
16. Upon an Assumpsit brought by an Administrator for a promise to the
Intestate, it is not enough for him to plead the Letters of administration,
Administrator.
but he ought to produce them in Court, that it may appear to them, that it is
as he has pleaded; So upon plea of a Deed, the Deed must be showed in Court.

Hob. 91.
17. The Auditor of the Court of Wards could set no charge, or award process to
answer any charge, but upon a Record, an office, or the like, Sir Thomas
Puckerings case.

255. It Disfavoureth Impossibilities.
Co. Inst. pars, 1. 25. b. 4.
1. If Lands be given to a man and two women, Lands intailed to a man and two
women.
and the heirs of their bodies begotten; in this case, they have a joint estate
for life, and every of them several Inheritance; because they cannot have one
issue of their bodies, neither shall there be by any construction a
possibility upon a possibility, viz. that he shall Marry the one first, and
then the other; And the same Law it is, when Land is given to two men and one
woman, and to the Heirs of their bodies begotten.

Co. ibid, 28. b. 1:
2. Lands are given to the husband and wife, General Tail frustrates Special.
and to the heirs of the body of the husband, the remainder to the husband
and wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies begotten, the husband dies
without issue; In this case, the wife shall not be tenant in tail after
possibility, etc. for the rent in special tail was utterly void, for that it
could never take effect; because so long as the husband should have issue, it
should inherit by force of the general tail, and if the husband die without
issue, then the special tail cannot take effect, in as much as the issue,
which should Inherit the special, must be begotten by the husband, and so the
general which is larger and greater, has frustrated the special, which is
lesser; and the wife in that case shall be punished for wast.

Co. ibid, 30. b. 2.
3. A man shall be tenant by the courtesy of a Common sans number, Common sans
number.
but a woman shall not be endowed thereof, because it is Impossible to divide
it.

Co. ibid, 48. b 4. Betrisworths case, Co. l. ^. 31. b. 4.
4. If a man be seized of an house and of diverse several closes in the same
County in fee, and makes a lease thereof for years, Livery Void.
and afterward makes a feoffment in fee of the same, and makes livery of
seisin in the closes (the lessee or his wife or servants being then in the
house) the Livery is void for the whole; because it is impossible for the
lessee to be upon every parcel of the land to him demised, for the
preservation and continuance of his possession therein; and therefore his being
in the house or any part of the Land to him demised, is sufficient to preserve
and continue his possession in the whole from being ousted or dispossessed.

A Corporation cannot do homage.
5. A single person may do homage either in his own right or in the right of
another, as the husband and wife in right of the wife, Co. ibid, 66. b. 3.
the Bishop in right of his Bishopric, the Abbot or Prior in right of his
Monastery, etc. for the Covent are dead persons in Law: But a Corporation
aggregate of many (though capable persons, be the same Ecclesiastical or
Temporal) cannot do homage, as Deane and Chapter, Mayor and Commonaltie, and
the like, albeit they be seized of Lands holden by homage; because homage must
be done in person, and it is not possible for a Corporation aggregate of many
to appear in person; for albeit the bodies natural, whereupon the Body
Politic consists, may be seen, yet the body corporate or politic it self
cannot be seen, nor do any act but by Attorney, and homage must ever be done
in person.

Relief.
6. A tenant holds of his Lord certain Lands in soccage to pay yearly a pair
of Guilt Spurs or 5 s. in money at the feast of Easter; Co. ibid. 90. b. 4.
In this case, the rent is uncertain, and the tenant may pay which of them he
will at the said feast, and likewise the tenant may pay which of them he will
for relief; but if the tenant be to attend upon his Lord at the feast of
Christmas, or to pay 10 s. in that case, the releife must be 10 s. because it
is impossible to double the attendance upon his Lord at Christmas, for that (as
the common saying is) Christmas comes but once a year.

Homage Ancestrell, Acquitall, warrantie.
7. In case of an express Warrantie the heir shall be charged but only for
such lands as he has by descent from the same ancestor, Co. ibid, 102. a. 3.
who created the Warranty; but in case of Homage Ancestrell (which is a
special Warranty in Law) the lands generally, that the Lord has at the time
of the voucher, shall be liable to execution in value, whether he has them by
descent or purchase; for it were unreasonable, that the tenant should be driven
to recover in value only those lands, which the Lord had from that Ancestor,
who created the seigniory; because that is (in a manner) impossible, for that
the seigniory must be created before time of memory, and the first creation of
the seigniorie did not create the warrantie, but the continuance of both sides
time out of mind created it.

No heir female whiles an heir male.
8. If a man give lands to another, Co ibid, 164, a. 2.
and to the heirs males of his body, upon condition, that if he die without
heir female of his body, that then the donor shall re-enter; this condition
is utterly void; for it is impossible, that he should have an heir female, so
long as he has an heir male.

Condition.
9. Regularly, it is true, that he, Co. ibid, 202. a. 3.
who enters for a Condition broken shall be seized in his first estate, or of
that estate, which he had at the time of the estate made upon Condition;
Howbeit, this fails where there is an Impossibility it should be so: As if a
man seized of lands in right of his wife, makes a feoffment in fee by Deed
indented, upon condition, that the feoffee should Demise the land to the
feoffor for his life, etc. the husband dies, the condition is broken; In this
case, the heir of the husband shall enter for the condition broken, but it is
impossible for him to have the estate, that the feoffor had at the time of the
condition made: for therein he had but an estate in the right of his wife,
which by the coverture was dissolved: And therefore, when the heir has entered
for the condition broken, and defeated the feoffment, his estate does vanish,
and presently the estate is vested in the wife.

Impossible conditions void.
10. In all cases, where the condition of a bond, recognisance, etc. Co. Inst.
part, 1. 206. a. 4.
is possible at the time of the making of the condition, and before the same
can be performed, the condition becomes Impossible by the act of God, of the
Law, or of the Obligee, etc. there the Obligation, etc. is saved: but if the
condition of a bond, etc. be Impossible at the time of the making of the
condition, the Obligation, etc. is single: And so it is also in case of a
feoffment in fee with a condition subsequent, that is Impossible; In that case,
also the estate of the feoffee is absolute; but if the condition precedent be
Impossible, no State or interest shall grow thereupon: As if a man be bound in
an Obligation, etc. with condition that if the Obligor do go from the Church of
Saint Peter's in Westminster, to the Church of Saint Peter's in Rome within 3
hours, that then the Obligation shall be void; In this case, the condition is
void and impossible, and the Obligation stands good. So likewise, if a
feoffment be made, upon condition, that the feoffee shall go, as is aforesaid,
the state of the feoffee is absolute, and the condition impossible and void:
In like manner, if a man make a lease for life upon condition, that if the
lessee go to Rome, as aforesaid, that then he shall have fee; Here, the
condition precedent is Impossible and void, and therefore no Fee-simple shall
(in this case) accrue to the lessee.

Co. ibid. 218. a. 2. and Pl. Com. 32. a. 4. in Colthrists case. And. ibid. 34.
b. 4.
11. If a Lease be made with Condition to have fee upon payment of money to the
Lessor or his Heirs at a certain day, Condition impossible, no accruet.
before the day the Lessor is attainted of Treason or Felony, and also before
the day is executed: Now is the Condition become impossible by the act and
offense of the Lessor, and yet the Lessee shall not have fee, because a
precedent Condition to increase an estate must be performed, and if it become
impossible, no estate shall accrue.

Co. l. 1. 87. a. 4. in Corbets case. and Co. l. 6. 40. b. 3. in Sir Anthony
Mildmayes case.
12. If Coparceners agree to present by turn, Perpetuity.
this may be done being partition, as to the Possession: so if they agree, that
one of them shall have it from Easter to Lammas, and the other from Lammas to
Easter, this is good, and may be done as to the possession and the taking of
the profits, but they cannot make severance of the estate of Inheritance in the
Land, as the one to have it for one time and the other for another, for such
agreement were impossible and void: And therefore if a man intaile his Land to
his eldest Son, provided, that if he go about to alien, etc. that then his
second Son shall have it, etc. this is void; for it is impossible and against
reason, that an estate should cease as to one, and yet continue, as to another,
or that (in such case) the eldest Son should be dead, when one beholds him, and
in full life, when another looks upon him, and so to make him (as it were)
half alive and half dead. Vide pl. ibid.

Co. l. 2. 51. a. 1. Sir Hugh Chomleys case.
13. If there be Tenant in tail, Render void.
the Remainder in tail grants all his estate for the life of Tenant in tail,
the Remainder to Queen Eliz. In this case, the Remainder to the Queen is void;
because the particular estate, which should support it, is void; for that it is
impossible, that the Remainder granted during the life of the Tenant in tail
should ever take effect in Possession, or the Grantee enter to have any benefit
of such a Grant, Co. ibid. b. 4.
and therefore void: besides, when the Remainder in tail had granted all his
estate for the life of Tenant in tail, it is not possible the Queen should take
any thing, when all his estate was granted away before to the first Grantee;
but in such case, the Inheritance in obeyante, etc.

Co. l. 4. 19. b. 2. in Briltridges case.
14. If one say, that I. S. is a perjured old knave, Slander.
and that is to be proved by a stake parting the Land of A. and B. These words
by reason of the insensibility, and impossibility of them are not actionable;
for it is impossible, Co. l. 5 8. a. 2. in Justice Windhams case.
that a stake should prove any thing.

15. Regularly, if Land be granted to two and their heirs, Joint Grant enures
severally.
they shall take jointly: Howbeit, if a Lease be made to an Abbot and a secular
man, or a gift to two men or two women, and the heirs of their two bodies
begotten; in one case the Possession, and in the other the Inheritance, is
several; because it is impossible, that an Abbot (being a Corporation) should
take jointly with a secular person, or that two men or two women should have
Issue of their two bodies, unless one of them be an Hermotradite.

Payment of money.
16. The payment of a less sum at the day in satisfaction of a greater, Co.
l. 5. 117. a. 3. in Pinnels case.
cannot be satisfaction for all; for that by no possibility a lesser sum can be
satisfaction for a greater; but before the day a lesser sum may be taken in
satisfaction of a greater; and so may any thing else, as an Horse, Hawke, or
the like, upon the day or before the day; because the money paid before the
day, or a Horse, Hawke, etc. may be as beneficial for the party, as if the
money had been paid at the day.

The Duchy of Cornwall.
17. One chief reason, Co. l. 8. 16. a. 3. in the Princes case.
to prove the first point in the Princes case (whether or no, the Duchy of
Cornwall was to be always in the eldest Son of the King, by the Charter of
the 11 of E. 3. or by Act of Parliament confirming that Charter) was; because
there were diverse privileges granted him, which could not possibly be granted
by Charter, but must of necessity be by Act of Parliament. Vide. pl. ibid.

Melius inqui^^d.
18. A Melius Inquirendum to find, what Land I. S. held of King James at the
time of his death, Co. l. 8. 168. a. 4. in Paris Sloughters case.
being in the 40 year of Queen Eliz. shall be quasht for the impossibility
thereof; for it is impossible, that I. S. should hold any Land of King James in
the 40 year of Queen Eliz. he being then King of Scotland.

156. Non cogit ad Impossibilia, and Impotentia excusat Legem.
Showing a Deed.
1. If a Deed remain in one Court it may be pleaded in another Court without
showing it forth: Co. Inst. pars 1. 231. b. 4.
because he cannot have it out of the other Court, and Lex non cogit ad
impossibilia, vide Co. l. 5. 74. b. 4. in Wymarks case.

Claim.
2. Regularly, Litt. S. 434. Co. ibid. 258. a. 3.
where a man does less then the commandment or authority committed to him,
there (the commandment or authority being not pursued) the Act is void, and
where a man does that, which he is authorized to do, and more, there it is
good for that which is warranted, and void for the rest, yet both these rules
have diverse exceptions, and amongst the rest this for one, that if a man be
sick, that he cannot go to the Land nor any part thereof to make his claim,
and he commands his Servant to do it, and the Servant dare not go to the Land
for fear of some bodily hurt; in this case, if the Servant go as near the
Land as he dare, and there make claim for his Master, that shall suffice,
albeit his Master bade him go to the Land; because Impotentia excusat legem;
for seeing the Master cannot, and the Servant dare not enter into the Land, it
suffices that he come as near the Land as he dare.

Descent.
3. Descent shall not take away Entry of a man in Prison at the time of the
Descent cast, because he could not make continual claim, Litt. S. 436. Co.
ibid. 259. a. 2.
when he was in Prison, being there kept (as it is presumed in Law) in salva
and arcta custodia, without intelligence of things abroad.

Descent.
4. A Descent cast during the vacation of an Abbey, Litt. S. 443. Co. ibid. 263.
b. 2
shall not take away the Entry of the next Successor; because, seeing by the
death of the Abbot (which is the Act of God) no person is able to make
continual claim, therefore a Descent during that time shall not prejudice the
Successor; for, Impotentia excusat legem.

Co. l. 5. 22. a. 3. in Laughters case.
5. Where the Condition of an obligation is in the disjunctive, Condition
disjunctive.
viz. for the Obligor either to do one thing or another, and both the things
possible at the time of the delivery, and afterward one of them becomes
impossible by the Act of God; in this case the Obligor is not bound to perform
the other; for Impotentia excusat legem.

Co. l. 5. 115. a. 3. in Wades case.
6. If a man be bound to pay 40000 l. at such a day, Tender of money.
if he tender it in baggs, it is sufficient; for it is not possible it should
be numbered within the compass of one day.

Co. l. 6. 21. b. in Butler and Goodalls case.
7. Lawful Imprisonment without Covin, Non-residence
the want of a Parsonage House, and sickness without fraud (when the Incumbent
by the advice of his Physician removes for better air, or the like) are good
excuses for non-residence, against the statute of 21 H. 8. cap.

Co. l. 8. 172. Hales case.
8. If the Heir holding of the King by Knights Service tender his Livery, that
includes tender of Homage, Tender of Livery.
and therefore after such tender he may sell any part of his Land; and if he
dye after tender, and before Livery sued out, the King shall not have the
profits of his Lands longer then to the time of the Tender; because by his
death (which is the Act of God) the showing out of his Livery is become
impossible, and Impotentia excusat legem.

Co. l. 3. 73. a. 1. in Doctor Husseyes case.
9. A Feme Covert is not within the Statute of Westminst. 2. cap. 39. Ravishment
of Guard, VV. 2. c. 39.
concerning Ravishment of Ward, for the Law, that disables her to have any
thing, wherewithal to satisfy the value of the Marriage, does also free her
from the punishment of Banishment and Imprisonment; because it is impossible
she should satisfy it when she has nothing to do it withal; for, Lex non
cogit ad impossibilia, etc. vide Max. 34.

Co. l. 10. 139. b. 3. in Knightlies case.
10. If a man be bound to repair a Wall against the flowing of the Sea, if it
fall into decay by his default and negligence, Wast, a wall of the sea.
he shall be solely charged with the repair thereof; but if it be overthrown
or endamaged by the violence of the water without his fault, by the Stat. of 23
H. 8. they are to be equally charged, who have loss by it; for, Impotentia
excusat Legem, vide Pl. ibid.

157. It disfavoureth Falsehood, Fraud, and Covin, Vide Dyer 294. 8.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 17. b. 3.
1. A man has as absolute ownership and property in an Advowson, Advowson how
pleaded.
as he has in Lands or Rents, yet he shall not plead, that he is seized
thereof, In Dominico ut feodo; because that Inheritance, savouring not De domo,
cannot either serve for the sustentation of him or his Household, neither can
any thing be received for the same for defraying of charges; and therefore he
cannot say, that he is seized thereof, In Dominico suo de feodo: Whereby it
appears how the Common Law does detest Symmony and all corrupt Bargains for
Presentation to any Benefice, but that Idonea persona for the discharge of the
cure should be presented freely without Expectation of any thing; nay the
Common Law is so cautelous in this point, that the Plaintiff in a Quare
Impedit, should recover no Damages for the loss of his Presentation, until
the Statute of Westminster 2. cap. 5. And that is the reason, that Guardian in
Soccage shall not present to an Advowson, because he can take nothing for it,
whereof to make Account, for by the Law he can meddle with nothing, that he
cannot account for: So in a Writ of Right of Advowson, the Patron shall not
allege the Explees in himself, but in the Incumbent: For which Reasons, of an
Advowson a man shall plead, that he is seized, De advocatione ut de feodo and
jure.

False plea in Dower.
2. In a Writ of Dower, Co. ibid. 33. a. 1.
if the Tenant (being in by descent) plead a false Plea, he shall answer all
the damages from the time of the Husbands death, albeit for some part of that
time he enjoyed not the Land, nor received any profit thereof: As it appears
in a notable Record between Belfeild and Roll, Mich. 8, and 9. Eliz. Rot. 904.
in Com. Ba. In which Suite, the Tenant as to parcel pleads non tenure, and for
the residue detainer of Charters, upon which Pleas they were at Issue, and both
Issues found by the Jury against the Tenant, and found further, that the
Husband dyed seized such a day and year, and had Issue a Son, and that the
Demandant and the Son for six years, after the decease of the Husband,
together took the profits of the Land, and after the Son such a day and year
dyed without Issue, after whose decease the Land descended to the Tenant, as
Uncle and Heir to him, by force whereof he entered and took the profits, until
the purchasing of the Original Writ, and found the value of the Land by the
year, and assessed damages for the detaining of the Dower, and costs of Suit;
upon which Verdict (after much debating) the Demandant had Judgment to recover
her damages for all the time from the death of her Husband, without any
defalcation: And this was cheifely caused by his false Plea, whereas he might
have avoided the answering of the damages for the six years, if he had truly
pleaded according to the truth of his case.

Assignment of Dower by a wrong-doer voidable.
3. If assignment of Dower be made by any Disseisor, Abator, Co. ibid. 35. ^. 2.
and in Bredi man's case. Co. l. 6. 58. a. 1.
Intrudor, or any wrong doer, in Lands and Tenements, if they came to that
estate by collusion and covin between the Widow and them; albeit the Widow has
just cause of Action, and the Assignment be indifferently made after Judgment
by the Sheriff of an equal third part, yet shall the Disseisee, etc. avoid it;
for, covin (in this case) shall suffocate the right, that ^^pertained to her,
and so the wrongful manner shall avoid the matter, that is lawful. See Pl.
Co. 51. a.

Rentcharge extinct by covin.
4. If a man grant a Rentcharge out of two acres, Co. ibid. 148. b. 3.
and after the Grantee recovereth one of the Acres against the Grantor by a
title Paramont, the whole rent shall issue out of the other Acre: but if the
Recovery be by a faint title by Covin, then the rent is extinct for the whole,
because he claims under the Grantor.

Forfeiture.
5. If Tenant for life plead covinously, Co. Inst. pars 1. 252. a. 1.
to the disherison of him in the Reversion, this is a Forfeiture upon Record.

Avowry, Stat. 11 H. 8. 19.
6. The Stat. of 21 H. 8. 19. (which gives to the Lord Avowry upon the lands
without naming any person certain) being made to suppress fraud, Co. ibid. 268.
b. 2. and in the case of Avowry, Co. l. 9. 22. a.
shall be taken with equity; And therefore where the words of the Statute be,
If the Lord distraine upon the Lands and Tenements holden, yet if the Lord come
to distrain, and the Tenant chase away his Beasts, which were within view, out
of the Land holden, and there the Lord distraine; Albeit the Distress be (in
that case) taken out of his fee and Seigniory, yet it is within the said
Statute; for in Judgment of Law the Distress is lawful, and as taken within
his fee and Seigniory; because that Statute being made to prevent fraud and
covin admits an equitable interpretation, as aforesaid: So it is also, if his
Bailiff do it, tamen quaere de hoc, but for Damage-feasant the Distress must
be taken upon the Land, etc.

Attaint.
7. Perjury (which is a falsehood or fraud in a high degree) is greivously
punished by the common Law; Co. ibid. 294. b. 2.
And therefore in an Attaint (which is a Writ that lies where a false Verdict
in Court of Record upon an Issue joined by the parties is given) if the petty
Jury be attainted of a false oath, they are stained with perjury, and infamous
for ever: for, the Judgment at the common Law imports 8 grievous
punishments, 1. Quod amittat liberam legem imperpetuum, viz. that they shall be
infamous for ever, and never be received to be a witness, or of a Jury, 2.
Ferisfaciant omnia bona and catalla sua, 3. Terrae and tenementa in manus
domini Regis capiantur, 4. Uxores and liberi extra domos suas ejicerentur, 5.
Domus suae prostrentur, 6. Arbores suae extirpentur, 7. Prata sua urentur, 8.
Corpora sua carceri mancipentur. And the Law esteemed perjury in this kind the
more odious, and afflicts the greater punishment thereupon, because the
trials of all Actions, real, personal, and mixed, depend upon the oath of
twelve men, and prudent Antiquity inflicted a strange and severe punishment
upon them, if they were attainted of falsehood and perjury, ut poena ad paucos,
metus ad omnes perveniat; for, there is miserecordia puniens, and there is also
crudelitas paucens. But this punishment is altered by the Statute of 23 H. 8.
cap. 3.

Co. ibid. b. 3.
8. The Statute of 23 H. 8. cap. 3. (made to prevent perjury and false Verdicts)
shall be taken with equity; for, 1. where the Statute says, Attaint, Stat. 23
H. 8. 3.
that the party greived shall have an Attaint against the party, who shall have
Judgment upon the Verdict, yet the Attaint shall be maintained upon that
Statute against the Executors of that party: Howbeit, it must be between party
and party, 2. In the Kings Bench or Common Pleas, 3. Consider what Pleas may be
pleaded in an Attaint by force of that Statute, and what not.

Litt. S. 675.
9. If a man let Land to a Feme for life, A false Recovery.
and afterward one sues a feined and false Action against the Feme, and
recovers the Land against her by default, so as the Feme may have a Quod ei
deforceat, according to the Statute of West. 2. cap. 4. The Law gives so much
respect to a Recovery, Co. ibid. 356. a. 4. and 362. a. 1. and Co. l. 1. 15. b.
3.
that it works a Discontinuance, so as the Reversioner shall not have an
Action of Waste, etc. Howbeit, if Tenant for life suffer a common Recovery, or
any other Recovery by covin and consent between the Tenant for life, and the
Recoveror, this is a Forfeiture of his estate, and he in the Reversion may
presently enter for the Forfeiture: See the Statute of 14 Eliz. cap. 8.
concerning this matter, and Co. l. 1. 15. Sir William Pethams case, and l. 3.
60. etc.

Litt. S. 678.
10. If the Baron discontinue the Land of the Feme, Covin hinders a Remitt^r.
and the Discontinuee is disseissed, and after the Disseisor lets the Land to
the Baron and Feme for life, this is a Remitter to the Feme; but if the Baron
and Feme were of covin and consent, that the Disseisin should be made, then is
it no Remitter to the Feme, because she is then a Disseiseresse, and particeps
criminis: Howbeit, if the Baron were only of covin and consent to the
Disseisin, and not the Feme; in that case, the Feme shall be remitted: So as
here, covin and consent of Baron and Feme does hinder the Remitter of the Feme;
Co. ibid. 357. a. 4.
and so covin does (in many cases) choke a mere Right, and the ill manner does
many times make a good matter unlawful.

Co. ibid. b. 1. Co. l. 3. 78. a. in Farmers case.
11. If a Disseisor, Intrudor, or Abator do endow a woman, that has lawful
title of Dower, this is good, and shall bind him that right has: but if a
woman be lawfully entitled to have Dower, and she is of covin and consent, that
one shall disseise the Tenant of the Land, against whom she may recover her
lawful Dower, all which is done accordingly: In this case, the Tenant may
lawfully enter upon her, and avoid the Recovery in respect of the covin.

Co. ibid. b. 2.
12. In all cases, The like.
where a man has a rightful and just cause of Action, yet if he of covin and
consent do raise up a Tenant by wrong, against whom he may recover, the Covin
does suffocate the right, that the Recovery (though upon good title) shall not
bind, or restore the Demandant to his right: So if Tenent in tail and his Issue
disseise the Discontinuee to the use of the Father, and the Father dies, and
the Land descends to the Issue; in this case, the Issue is not remitted
against the Discontinuee, in respect he was privy and party to the wrong, but
in respect of all others he is remitted, and shall deraigne the first Warranty:
And so note, a man may be remitted against one, and not against another.

The like.
13. A. and B. Ioint-tenants are entitled to a real Action against the Heir of
the Disseisor, A. causes the Heir to be disseised, Co. ibid.
against whom A. and B. recover and sue execution; In this case, B. is
remitted, for that he was not party to the Covin, and shall hold in common with
A. but A. is not remitted, causa qua supra.

False Plea.
14. He that will have the benefit of the Statute of Gloucester, Co. ibid. 366.
a. 3. and Co. l. 8. 53. a. 3. in Sims case.
cap. 3. 6 E. 1. must plead the truth of his case, viz. the Warranty,
acknowledge the title of the Demandant, and pray, that the advantage of the
Statute may be saved to him; and then if afterward assets descend, the Tenant
upon this Record shall have a Scire facias, etc. But if the Tenant plead the
Warranty, and plead further, that assets descended, etc. and the Demandant
takes Issue, that assets descended not, etc. which Issue is found for the
Demandant, whereupon he recovereth; In this case, the Tenant, albeit assets do
afterward descend, shall never have a Scire facias upon the said Judgment; for
that by his false Plea he has lost the benefit of the Statute.

Outlawry by (...).
15. Imprisonment is a good cause to reverse an Outlawry, Co. Inst. pars 1. 259.
b. 2.
if it be by Process of Law in invitum; but if it be by consent and covin,
such Imprisonment shall not avoid an Outlawry, because upon the matter it is
his own act.

Attornment.
16. Where the Tenant has notice, Co. l. 2. 68. a. 2. in Tookers case.
that the Seigniory was granted but to one, or that the Reversion was granted
but of one Acre, or that the Reversion was granted for fewer years, or that the
Reversion was granted for life only with no Remainder over, whereas it was in
any of the cases otherwise; in such case, general Attornement without true
notice of the Grant is void; for the usual pleading (which intent is the
oracle of the Law) is, to which Grant he attorned, and therefore if he has not
notice of the Grant, or (which is all one) true notice thereof, the assent,
which he gives to it (which in truth is but part of the Grant) the Law (which
abhors falsehood) will not construe to be Attornment to the true Grant.

Fine by covin, to bar.
17. A man possessed of diverse parcells of Land within the Manor of D. whereof
some he held for years, others at will, others by copy, Co. l. 3. 77. b. 2. in
Farmers case, and in Margaret Podgers case. Co. l. 9. 105. b. 1.
and some also in fee, demiseth the whole to another for life, and then levies
a Fine to the Tenant for life and his Heirs of so many Acres as amount to the
whole Land, continues Possession, and pays the rents to the Lord, five years
pass; yet (in this case) the Lord is not barred by the Statute of 4 H. 7. cap.
24. For the makers of that Statute did never intend that such a Fine levied by
fraud and practice of Tenant for years, at will, or by copy, which pretend no
title to the Inheritance, but intend the disherison of their Lessors or Lords,
should bar them of their Inheritance, and this appears by the preamble of the
said Act, where it is said, that Fines ought to be of greatest strength to
avoid strifes and debates: but when Tenant for years, at will, or by copy, make
Feoffment by assent and covin, that a Fine should be levied, this is not to
avoid strife and debate, but by assent and covin, to begin and stir them up;
And therefore that Statute did not intend to establish any such estate made and
created by such fraud and practice, which (being fraudulent) is (upon the
matter) no estate at all, etc. vide pl. ibid.

A fraudulent ^^e of goods.
18. The grant of goods, albeit it be made upon good consideration, Co. l. 3.
80. b. 4. in Twines case.
yet if it be not bona fide, but has trust in it, or other badges of fraud, as
if the Grantor keep them still in his own Possession, uses them as his own in
disposing of them, or otherwise, or if they be Sheep, and the Grantor brand
them with his own mark, or when he grants all his Goods and does not except so
much as his wearing apparel, or the like; such a Grant is within the Statute
of 13 Eliz. 5. and upon a Fieri facias at another Suit, the Sheriff may seize
them, as if no Grant at all had been made thereof. Vide pl. in that case to the
like purpose. Queritur ut crescunt tot magna volumina Legis;
In promtu causa est, crescit in orb dolus.


Co. l. 4. 26. a. 1. in Kite and Quientons case.
19. Pretenced titles of Copyhold-lands are within the Statute of 32 H. 8. 9.
for the Statute says, If any bargain, buy, or sell, etc. Pretenced titles of
Copiholds.
any right or title in or to any Lands, or Tenements, etc. and Copyholds are
Lands, in and to which right or title may be had and made, and they are
included in that act to avoid Suites, Maintenance, and Champerty, and (by
consequent) fraud and deceit, per Wray. And note, that in Partridge and Crokers
case in Pl. Co. 76. A Lease for years is adjudged within that Act.

Co. l. 5. 14. b. 2.
20. By all Statutes made to prevent and suppress fraud, Fraud. The king bound.
the King is bound, albeit he be not especially named, because Truth, Justice,
and Religion are the Supporters of his Crown and Diadem. In the case of
Ecclesiastical persons.

Co. l. 5. 60: a Gooches case.
21. In Debt upon an Obligation against the heir, Fraudulent conveyance void.
the Defendant pleads riens per descent, the plaintiff maintains assets in
Com. S. the Defendant says, that before the action commenced he had enfeoffed
A. of those lands; against which the Plaintiff alleged and proved, that the
feoffment was by fraud, unto which it was urged, that the fraud ought to have
been specially pleaded, and could not be brought in evidence: but it was
adjudged per totam Curiam, that it might be given in evidence, and needed not
to be specially pleaded; 1. because the Statute of 13. Eliz. 5. provides
generally, that the estate, as to the creditor shall be void, and Acts of
Parliament made for prevention and Suppression of fraud ought to have a benign
interpretation: 2. If that matter ought to be pleaded, it would prove
mischievous to Creditors, and would tend much to the mainteinance and increase
of fraud and covin; for fraud and covin (because they are odious) are so
privily hatched in an hollow tree (in arbore cava and opaca) and so
artificially contrived and concealed, that the party grieved has no means to
find or know them, and then to force the Plaintiff (who is a stranger to it) to
plead the feoffment (whereof he has no notice) and that it was done by fraud,
etc. would be mischievous, and against Law and reason; and thereupon Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff.

Co. ibid b.
22. A. seized of land in fee makes a fraudulent conveyance (to the intent to
deceive and defraud purchasers contrary to the stat. of 27. The like.
Eliz. 4.) continues in possession, and is reputed as owner; B. enters into
communication with A. for the purchase thereof, and by accident B. has notice
and intelligence of the fraudulent conveyance, and notwithstanding that
concludes with A. and takes his assuranre from him; In this case, B. shall
avoyde the said fraudulent conveyance by the said Act, notwithstanding such
notice; for the Act has by express words made the fraudulent conveyance void
as to the purchasor, and in as much as it is within the express purview of
that Statute, it ought to be so taken and expounded in suppression of fraud,
per Wray; but see the like case agreed and resolved per totam Curiam P. 3. Jac.
in the case of one Standen.

Co. l. 5. 69 b. 4. in Burtons case.
23. If A. lend 100 l. to B. upon the first of July 1653, and B. Usury.
grants to A. 20 l. per annum out of the Manor of D. to begin to be paid at
Christmas twelve Months after, upon Condition if B. pay 100. pounds to A. the
first of July, 1654. that then the Annuity shall ce^se; This is not within the
Statute of usury; but if it had been agreed betwixt them that notwithstanding
such power of redemption the 100 l. should not be paid the first of July, 1654.
and the clause of redemption was inserted on purpose to evade the Statute, that
had been an usuri^us bargain and contract within the Statute.

Usury.
24. A. lends B. 100 l. to pay 20 l. for the Loan of it for one year, Co. ibid.
per Popham.
if the Son of A. shall be then living, this is Usury within the Statute, for
if this shall be out of the Statute, by reason of the uncertainty of the life,
the Statute will be of little effect; because, by the same reason that he may
add one life, he may add more, and so he may evade the statute at pleasure,
that Liberty being like a Mathematical line, viz. Divisibilias in
indivisibilia.

False deed.
25. If a Deed be pleaded and showed in Court, and denied, Co. ib. 74. b. 4. in
Wymarkes case.
then it shall always remain in Court, to the end that if it be found not his
Deed, it should be damned for the falsity thereof.

Fraudulent conveyances.
26. The statute of 11 H. 8. 5. Co. ibid. 77. a. 4. in Boothes case.
being made to suppress Fraud and Deceit, shall be taken and interpreted
beneficially; And therefore whereas the words of that Act are, that where
Tenant for life or years have demised or granted, to the intent, that those in
Reversion, (viz. their Lessors, their Heirs or Assigns) should not know their
names, and afterward the first Tenants continually occupy the Lands, etc. and
make Wast, etc. It is ordained, etc. that he in Reversion (in such case) shall
maintain a Writ of Wast against the said Tenants for life or years; yet every
Assignee of the first Lessee mediate or immediate is within the said Act,
albeit not therein mentioned: Also he in Remainder is within the Act, as well
as he in Reversion, albeit both in the Preamble and Body of the Act, there is
only mention made of him in Reversion.

Profits,
27. In Formedon the Tenant pleads non-tenure, Co. ibid. b. 2.
the Demandant says, that he has made a Feoffment to persons unknown with
purpose to defraud him of his Tenancy, and still takes the profits; In this
case, the pernancy of the profits, and not the Feoffment is traversable, 4 H.
7. 9.

Warranty.
28. The Father Tenant for life, Remainder to the Son, Co. l. 5. 80. b. 2
leases for years to A. with a design to bar the Son, A. enfeoffs B. to whom
the Father releaseth with Warranty, and dies; In this case the Son is not
barred by this Warranty, being a Warranty, that begins by disseisin, for albeit
it is said in our books (and true it is) that Warranty is much favored in
Law, because it extends to establish him, that is the Ter-tenant in possession,
yet when Warranties are mixed with Covin, (which is so odious and so much
abhorred in Law) they loose not only their favor but force also, for Covin is
like poison, that infects every good thing, with which it is mixed, etc.

Feigned arrest.
29. The entering of feigned Actions in the Counter, Co. l. 6. 54. b. 2. in the
Countess of Rutlands case.
upon pretense afterward when the Sergeants have the Prisoner in their Custody
to charge him with a Capias ad satisfaciendum, (to prevent an escape upon the
Capias) was condemned by all the Court of Star Chamber in the Countess of
Rutlands case; because by the color of Law and Justice, they by such feigned
means do contrary to Law and Justice, and so cause Law and Justice to be the
Author of wrong and Injustice.

Seisin of rent.
30. If A. having a Rent-seck issuing out of the Manor of D. Co. l. 6. 58. a.
1. in Bredimans case.
granted unto him, but no seisin thereof, plots with B. to disseise the
Ter-tenant, to the end, that after such disseisin B. may give him seisin of the
Rent, this seisin shall not bind the disseisee, or he that right has; for the
Covin makes it unlawful.

Fraudulent Leases.
31. The Father leases by Fraud, and dies, Co. l. 5. 72. b. in Burrells case.
the Son knowing of it (or not) sels the Land; in this case the Vendee shall
avoid those Leases, by the statute of 27 Eliz 4. so it is also where the Father
leases to the Son, who assigns fraudulently, and then sells the Land. etc.

False Deed.
32. If a man deny the Deed of his Ancestor, Co. l. 8 60. a. 1. in Beechers case.
or plead a Deed made to his Ancestor, and it is found against him, yet he
shall not be fined but only amercied, quia de alieno delicto, etc. But if the
Tenant or Defendant plead a false Deed made to him, or deny his own Deed, and
it is found against him, or if he relicta verificatione cognoscit actionem, he
shall be fined for his falsity, quia certi debemus esse de proprio facto.

Co. l. 8. 127. a. 1. in the City of Londons case.
33. Where the custom is, Inward shop.
that no Forraigner shall sell in any open Shop, in pain to be fined, he is a
greater offender that trades there in an inward Shop or Chamber; for such
places are more dangerous and offensive then outward Shops, because they may
there use deceit, and are not subject to search: Qui male agit odit lucem, and
omnia delicta in aperto leviora sunt. See there likewise the case of the Prior
of Dunstable to the like purpose.

Co. l. 8. 134. Mary Shipleys case.
34. If an Executor plead pleni administravit, Executor, assets.
and assets be found by the Jury in his hands, they shall pay the debt, as far
as they will answer, but if they come short, he shall answer the damages of his
own goods, for his false Plea.

Co. l. 9. 17. b. 1. in Ann Bedingfeilds case. Co. ibid. 19. a. 3.
35. If a Feme having title of Dower do deceitfully detain the Charters which
concern the Lands, Rebutter in Dower.
out of which she is to have Dower assigned, that is a good rebutter of the
Action in a Writ of Dower brought by her against the Heir: So if she
deceitfully conceal and detain the heir, the Guardian in Chivalry may plead
it against her in bar of her Dower: but he cannot plead detainer of Charters,
which concern the heir: because they shall not be delivered to him.

Co. l. 9. 20. b. 4. in the case of Avowry.
34. The Law will never suffer falsehood to suppress truth: Avowry.
and therefore, if there be Lord and Tenant by Fealty and Rent, and the Tenant
make a Lease for years, and the Lord distraines (when there is no Rent or
Services behind) the Cattle of the Tenant, and avowes upon a mere stranger,
as his true Tenant, with purpose to charge the Plaintiff unjustly: In this
case, the Lessee upon showing the whole matter in special, may pray in aid of
the Lessor, and shall thereby compel the Lord to avow upon the Lessor, as his
true Tenant, and the false Avowry of the Lord upon the stranger, who is not
Tenant, shall not annoy the Lessee against the truth of his case, quia veritas
nihil veretur nisi abscondi.

Co. l. 10. 110. a. 2. in Arthor Legates case.
35. A false suggestion in the Kings Grant (being the words of the Patentee)
makes the Patent void: Void Patents upon false suggestion.
As where the King grants fifteen Acres of Land, as concealed, whereas they
being parcel of a Manor, the profits thereof are duly answered to the King,
though occupied by an Intrudor, yet because they are only detained and not
concealed, but suggested only to be concealed, the Patent is void: So in 19 E.
3. tit. grant 58. The King by his Letters Patents gives license to appropriate
the Advowson of D. to the Prior of C. Quae quidem advocatio non tenetur de
nobis, etc. and in truth the Advowson was held of the King, and the license was
held void, for the Book says, that the suggestion was false: And in 21 E. 4.
48. if the King grant the Manor of D. etc. Quod quidem manerium ad manus
nostras devenit ratione eschaet. etc. and in truth the Manor did not come to
the King by escheat, in this case also the Grant was void, and the reason that
Hussy chief Justice there gives is, for that, the falsehood comes of the
surmise of the party.

Co. l. 11. 73. b. 4. and 74. a. 4. in Magdalen College case.
36. A Grant to the Queen by the Master and Fellows of Magdelen College in
Cambridge, The like.
of an House in London rendering 15 l. per annum Rent, upon Condition, that she
should re-grant it to Benedict Spinola Merchant D^nizen, and his heirs, was
adjudged void, because they made use of the Queens Prerogative to alien the
Lands of the College, which they were prohibited to do by the Statute of 13
Eliz. within which Statute the Queen is included: So if one intending to sell
his Land, had by Fraud conveyed it by Deed enrolled to the Queen, with purpose
to deceive the Purchasor, and after he sels the Land for a valuable
consideration, and makes conveyance accordingly, in this case, the Purchasor
shall enjoy the Land against the Queen by the Statute of 27 Eliz. 4. for albeit
the Queen is not excepted, yet the act being general, and made for suppressing
of fraud, shall bind the Queen, etc. vide pl. ibid.

Covin in Feoffment. Recovery. Remitter.
37. In Trin. 19 H. 8. fo. 12. Br. Remitter 1. Pl. Co. 51. a. in Wimbish and
Talboies case. and ibid. 54. b. 4.
If one disseise the Discontinuee in tail by covin, to the intent to enfeoff
the Issue in tail within age, who had no knowledge of the covin, he enfeoffs
him accordingly: in this case (by the better opinion) the Issue in tail shall
not be remitted, notwithstanding his good title, and the only cause hereof is
the covinous intent, for covin may alter the matter, where the title is good:
so if my Ancestor disseise me, to the intent to make Feoffment with warranty to
bar me: here, albeit the Warranty be made twenty months after, yet this
Warranty begins by Disseisin, so the intent makes the act to enure otherwise
then it would do: for when covin is mixed with the truth, it makes all unsavory:
So in Wimbish and Talboies case in the Com. Eliz. Talbois joining by covin with
W. Talbois in being taken by nihil dicit, he was to lose her estate by force of
the Stat. of 11 H. 7. and the Issue in tail might before that Statute falsify
a feined Recovery by covin.

38. The 11 H. 7. 20. Pl. Co. 59. b. 1. ibid.
and all other Statutes made for the suppressing of fraud shall be extended by
equity: the words of the Statute of Marlebridge cap. 6 are, de his, qui
primogenitos and haeredes suos infra aetatem existentes feoffare solent, and
yet if the first be dead, and he enfeoff his second Son, which is his heir,
that is within the equity of the Statute, or if he levy a Fine to him, which is
matter of Record, that is also within the equity of the Statute, albeit the
Statute speaks of Feoffment: And the reason is, because covin is always
abhorred in our Law, and Statutes made for the suppression thereof, are made
for the public good, and therefore shall be extended by equity: In like
manner, 1 H. 7. cap. 1. which gives a Writ of Formedon in Remainder against the
perner of the profits, was made for the suppression of covin, for a Feoffment
made to persons unknown to defraud those that right had, Pl. Co. 81. b. 4. in
Partridge and Stranges case.
was great covin and deceit in the Law, and therefore a Scire facias to execute
a Remainder shall be maintainable against the pernor of the profits, as it is
adjudged in 14 H. 7. fo. 31. And to these Statutes and the like made for the
suppression of fraud and covin are always to be extended by equity, and to
have a favorable interpretation and construction: And therefore the Statute of
32 H. 8. cap. 9. shall be also extended by equity, Co. l. 5. 80. a. in
Fitzharberts case.
being ordained for the suppression of fraud and covin in buying of pretenced
titles, so that Leases for years as well as higher estates shall be intended by
it.

Warranty.
39. The Father Tenant for life, the Remainder to the Son and Heir apparent in
tail, Leases to A. for years with intent, that A. should enfeoff B. unto whom
the Father should release with Warranty, all which is done accordingly: This is
a Warranty, that commenceth by Disseisin; for, albeit the Warranty be not made
at the time of the Disseisin (which was upon the Feoffment to B.) yet (by
construction of Law) it shall be adjudged to be Warranty, that begins by
Disseisin by reason of the practice and covin betwixt the confederates: for if
the Father had made the Feoffment to B. with Warranty and had dyed, this
Warranty had barred the Heir, etc. vide pl. ibid.

^ttaint.
40. A false Verdict is a contradiction in it self, Co Inst. part 1. 128. 4.
and so odious in the Law, that in an Attaint, Outlawry in the Plaintiff cannot
be pleaded in disability of the person.

41. The Statute of 31 Eliz. 6. Hob. 75.
to prevent Simonie is to be largely expounded, though penal. The King against
the Bishop of Norwich.

158. Jus and Fraus numquam Cohabitant.
Co. l. 10. 45. a. 4. in Jennings his case.
1. The Statute of 14 Eliz. cap. 8. Recovery by Tenant in tail.
does not extend to preserve any Reversion or Remainder expectant upon an
estate tail, or where the Tenant for life is impleaded, and Tenant in tail is
vouched; for, the title of the Act is, For avoiding of Recoveries suffered by
collusion by Tenant for life, etc. but a Recovery cannot be said to be by
collusion, where Tenant in tail is in the Recovery, either Tenant in Fait or
Tenant in Law, as Vouchee; for the Law (as an incident to his estate) has made
the Land and all Remainders and Reversions subject to his pleasure, and he has
right and power to bar them all, and Jus and Fraus numquam Cohabitant; And
therefore the title of the Act being, For avoiding of Recoveries by collusion,
etc. it cannot extend to a Recovery, where Tenant in tail is party or privy.

Pl. Co. 51. a. 2. in Wimbish and Talboies case.
2. When truth is mixed with covin (that wicked herb) or covin with truth,
Truth. Covin.
that conjunction and mixture makes all bitter and unsavory, and goodness is
perverted into wickedness, for they cannot continue together, no more then
fire and water.

Dyer. 55. 9. 35 H. 8.
3. A Verdict is said to be very dictum, Verdict. Error.
which ought to have truth in it, and no semblance of fraud or partiality to
either party; And therefore if a Jury before their agreement, eat or drink at
the charge of either of the parties, it is good cause of Error to reverse the
Judgment upon such a Verdict, for there cannot be truth in such a Verdict,
which has such a badge of fraud and falsehood, because such practice implies
partiality and suspicion.

159. Quando aliquid prohibetur fieri, ex directo prohibetur and per obliquum.
Litt. S. 361. Co. Inst. pars 1. 223. a. 4.
1. If a Feoffment in fee be made upon Condition, A Feoffment upon Condition,
that the Feoffee shall not alien:
that the Feoffee shall not enfeoff I. S. or any of his Heirs or Issues, etc.
this is good; for he does not restrain the Feoffee of all his power; howbeit
if he enfeoff I. N. with intent and purpose, that he should enfeoff I. S. some
held, that it is a breach of the Condition: So if a Feoffment be made upon
Condition, that the Feoffee shall not alien in Mortmaine, this is good, because
such alienation is prohibited by Law, and (regularly) whatsoever is prohibited
by Law, may be prohibited by Condition; but (in this case) if the Feoffee
enfeoff I. S. with intent, that he shall alien the Land in Mortmaine, it seems
to be a breach of the Condition: In ancient Deeds of Feoffment in fee there was
usually this clause, Quod licitum sit donatorio rem datam dare vel vendere cui
voluerit, exceptis viris religiosis and Judaeis.

Co. ibid. 282. a. 3.
2. In an Action upon the case, Innovation prohibited.
the Plaintiff declared for speaking of slanderous words (which is transitory)
and laid the words to be spoken in London, the Defendant pleaded a Concord for
speaking of words in all the Counties of England, save in London, and traversed
the speaking of the words in London; the Plaintiff in his replication denied
the Concord, whereupon the Defendant demurred, and Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff; for the Court said, if the Concord (in that case) should not be
traversed, it would follow, that by a new and subtle invention of pleading, an
ancient Principle in Law (that for transitory causes of Action the Plaintiff
might allege the same in what place or County he would) should be subverted,
which ought not to be suffered, and therefore the Judges of both Courts allowed
a Traverse upon a Traverse in that case: And the wisdom of the Judges and
Sages of the Law have always suppressed new and oblique inventions in
derogation of the common Law: whereupon it is said by the Judges in one Book
(38 E. 3. 1.) we will not change the Law, which has been always used; and
another says (2 H. 4. 18.) it is better that it be turned to a default, then
the Law should be changed, or any innovation made.

Warranty that begins by Disseisin by an oblique grant.
3. The Father Tenant for life, Co. l. 5. 80. a. 1. Fitzherberts case.
the Remainder to the Son and Heir apparent in tail, Leases to A. for years
with purpose, that A. should enfeoff B. unto whom the Father should release
with Warranty, all which is done accordingly; this is a Warranty that begins by
Disseisin; for albeit the Warranty be not made at the time of the Disseisin
(which was upon the Feoffment to B.) yet by construction of Law it shall be
adjudged to be Warranty, that begins by Disseisin, this Warranty binds not,
because of the covin.

An oblique Grant of College Lands, void.
4. The Master and Fellows of Magdalen College in Cambridge, Co. l. 11. 73. b.
1. in Magdalen College case.
grant an House in London to Queen Eliz. upon Condition that she within three
months should convey it to Benedict Spinola and his Heirs, who does so
accordingly; this Grant of the College is void by the Statute of the 13 Eliz.
10. and was not helped by the Statute of Confirmation of the 18 Eliz. 2. for it
appeared, that the intent of the Master and Fellows was, that they should
convey the said House to Benedict. Spinola and his heirs; and therefore that
which they could not do de directo, they attempt to do ex obliquo, to grant it
to the Queen and her Successors, but upon Condition contained in the same
Grant, that the Queen within three months should grant the House to B. Sp. and
his Heirs, so as it was by this device endeavored, that the Queen, who was
the Fountain of Justice, should be made an Instrument of injury and wrong, and
of the violation of a pious and excellent Law, which she her self had made for
the maintenance of Religion, advancement of learning, and sustenance of poor
people.

The like.
In 17 E. 3. fo. 59. Co. ibid. b. 4.
The Friars Carmelites (who had not then any place of habitation) obtain of
one John Merit, who was seized of ten Acres of Meadow holden of the Bishop of
Winchester, to have the said ten Acres of Meadow, for a place of habitation for
them, and because John Merit could not grant unto them the ten Acres by reason
of the Statute of Mortmaine, by covin contrived betwixt Merit and the Friars
to oust the Bishop of his Seigniory, Merit (to evade the Statute of Mortmaine)
grants the ten Acres to the King, his Heirs and Successors, whereby the Bishops
Seigniory might be extinct, to the end that the King should grant them over to
the Friars, which he did accordingly: Howbeit, because here there was a
practice betwixt Merit and the Friars to take away the Bishops Seigniory, it
was adjudged, that the Charter should be repealed, and that the Carmelites
should be distrained to deliver it to be cancelled.

Lands purchased with the Kings money.
6. In Term. Trin: 24. E. 3. Rot. 4. in the Exchequer, Co. l. 11. 92. b. 4. in
the Earl of Devonshires case.
one Walter Chirton, the Kings Customer, had purchased certain Lands with the
Kings money, and by covin had caused the Vendor to enfeoff his friends in fee
to defraud the King, and yet nevertheless took the Issues and profits of the
Land to his own use, and those Lands were by inquisition returned with the
values into the Exchequer, and there by Judgment were seized into the Kings
hands, until, etc. for albeit the estate of the Land was never in Chirton, yet
the taking of the estate in the name of others, and he in the mean time
receiving the profits thereof, was all one, as if he had taken the estate in
his own name, especially in the Kings case, and the lands being bought with the
Kings money.

Fraudulent Indictment.
7. One Verney in the 34 H. 6. Dyer 245. 65. 8. Eliz.
being in execution in the Fleet for diverse debts, as also for Fines to the
King returned into the Exchequer, caused himself to be indicted of Felony,
with an intent to confess it and to have his Clergy, and so to be out of the
temporal Law, and then to have his purgation, and all this with purpose to
defraud his Creditors, etc. And upon a Corpus cum causa, all was removed into
the Kings Bench; Howbeit the King having notice of the Fraud, by a privy Seal
commands the Justices to stay the Araignment, etc.

160. Rectum est index sui and Obliqui.
Co. l. 10. 24. b. 2.
1. In the Case of Suttons Hospital Sir Edward Coke excuses himself from
answering the Objections in that case at large, (being, Excuse to answer
objections.
as he says, for the most part of no great moment) by producing manifest and
fallible proofs of the validity of that Incorporation, alleging this Maxim
for the ground thereof, Rectum and index sui and obliqui.

Dyer 234. 16. 7. El.
2. In a Formedon in Descender, Formedon.
a Fine with Proclamations levied in 30 H. 8. was pleaded in Bar, and the issue
being upon Null tiel Record, at the day the Tenant had the Record, but in the
Proclamations, viz. 5, 6, 7, 8. made in Trin. Term, the year of the King was
omitted; Howbeit because in Easter Term before, and Michaelmas Term after, 30
H. 8. was expressed, of necessity it did follow, that the said four
Proclamations were also made in the same year, for they being right, by
consequence the others were right also; And thereupon it was held, that he had
not failed of the Record.

161. It disfavoureth Improbabilities.
Co. Inst. p. 1. 25. b. 4. Co. l. 10. 50. b. 1. in Lampets case.
1. If Lands be given to a man and a woman being not his wife, Lands intailed.
and to the Heirs males of their two bodies, they have an Estate Tail, albeit
they be not married at that time, so it is also, where Lands are given to a
man, which has a wife, and to a woman, which has a husband, and the Heirs of
their two Bodies, they also have presently an Estate Tail for the possibility
that they may marry: But if Lands be given to two Husbands and their Wives, and
to the Heirs of their Bodies begotten, they shall have a joint Estate for
life, and several Inheritances, viz The one Husband and Wife the one Moiety,
and the other Husband and Wife the other Moiety, and no cross Remainder or
other possibility (for the improbability thereof) shall be allowed in Law,
where it is once settled and takes effect; so likewise if Lands be given to a
man and two women, and the Heirs of their bodies begotten, in this case, they
have a joint Estate for life, and each of them a several Inheritance, because
they cannot have one Issue of their bodies, neither shall there be by any
construction a possibility upon a possibility, (for the Improbability thereof)
viz. that he shall marry the one first and then the other: The same Law it is
also, when Land is given to two men and one woman, and to the heirs of their
Bodies begotten.

Co. l. 2. 51. a 4. in Sir Hugh Cholmelies case. in Magdalen College case. Co.
l. 11. 70. b. 3.
2. A remote possibility is never intended by Law; Remainders improbable to take
effect.
And therefore where A. was Tenant in Tail, Remainder in Tail to B. B. grants
all his Estate to C. for the life of A. this Grant is void, because it is
impossible it should ever take effect; and whereas (in that case) it was
objected that A. might enter into Religion and be professed, whereupon the
Grantee might enter and enjoy the Land, during the natural life of A. it was
answered and resolved, That that was a Foreign possibility, and not probable
nor imaginable in Law; for a possibility which makes a Remainder good, must be
Potentia propinqua a common possibility; and not Potentia remota: And therefore
a Remainder will not vest in a thing or person that is not in Esse, at the time
of the Grant made, unless at the same time there be Potentia propinqua, or a
pregnant probability that it may take effect; as a Remainder granted to a
Corporation, not in being at the time of the Grant made, is void, albeit the
Corporation be erected afterward during the particular Estate, because that is
Potentia remota, and improbable; But if a Lease be made for life, the Remainder
to the right Heirs of I. S. this is good; for by common possibility that I.S.
may dye, during the life of Tenant for life, and until he dye, his Heirs are
in him; Howbeit if at the time of the limitation of the Remainder, there be no
such person as I.S. but during the life of Tenant for life I.S. is borne and
dies, his Heir shall never take it, 2 H. 7. 13. 10 E. 3. 46.
as it is agreed in 2 H. 7. 13. So likewise in 10 E. 3. 46. upon a Fine levied
to R. he grants and renders to I. and Florence his Wife for life, the Remainder
to G. the Son of I. in tail, the Remainder to the right Heirs of I. and in
truth at the time of the Fine levied I. had not any Son named G. but after had
issue named G. and dyed; In this case, G. could not take the Remainder in
Tail, because he was not borne at the time of the Fine levied, for when I. had
not then any Son named G. the Law does not expect that he shall have a Son
named G. after, for that is improbable, and Potentia remota, etc.

Obligation payable before statutes.
3. Debt due by Obligation shall be paid by an Executor before a Statute
acknowledged for the performance of Covenants, Co. l. 5. 28. b. Harrisons case.
when none of them are, or perhaps will ever be broken, but are things in
contingency and Futuro, and therefore such a possibility, which peradventure
will never happen, shall not bar present and due debts by Obligation, or
other specialties.

Contingency.
4. When a man by Indenture limits Lands to himself for life, Co. l. 10. 85 a.
2. in Leonard Lovies his case.
Remainder to another in tail, Remainder to his right Heirs with power to make
Leases for Life, Lives, or Years, without any restraint of Lives or Years,
and further to the uses to be expressed in his last Will, or to the use of such
person or persons, unto whom he shall by his last Will devise any Estate or
Estates thereof: In this case, the Estate in Tail is incontingency, for by
those or the like words he may devise the Land to any person in Tail or in
Fee: And therefore, because it is very improbable, that the Estate tail may
ever take effect, it shall not (in this case) presently vest by the statute of
27 H. 8. but shall be said to be in contingency, so as, if he by such power
alter not the Estates so limited, it may happen to take effect, but if
otherwise, it will vanish and come to nothing, Vide pl. ibidem.

Bar to an avowry.
5. In Bar to an Avowry for Trespass in 300 acres of common field Land, or
Down, Dyer 171. 9. 1 2. Eliz.
the Plaintiff to frame himself a Title alleges in his Bar, that A. (from
whom he derived his Estate) was seized of the site of the Manor of Dale,
whereof the said 300 acres were parcel, and this Bar was adjudged
insufficient for the Improbability, that so much Land should be parcel of the
site.

162. Uncertainties, by which the truth may be inveigled.
Villain.
1. If a man do enfranchise a Villain Cum tota sequela sua, Co. Inst. pars 1.
3. a. 4.
that is not sufficient to enfranchise his children borne before, for the
uncertainty of the word Sequela.

Heirs.
2. If a man gives Lands to one, to have and hold to him or his heirs, Co Ib.
8. b. 3. 22 H. 6. 15.
he has but an Estate for life for the uncertainty; so if a man give Land to
two, to have and to hold to them two Et heredibus, omitting Suis, they have but
an Estate for life for the uncertainty.

Co. ibid. 9. a. 2. and Co. ibid. 20. b. 1.
3. To avoid uncertainty, Vocabula artis.
which is commonly the Mother of contention and confusion, the Law does
appropriate to it self certain words (which may be termed Vocabula artis) to
express diverse things, which cannot significantly be expressed by any other
words, or by any Periphrasis or circumlocution without them, as the word Heirs
for the descent of Inheritance, which does not only extend to his immediate
heirs, but to his heirs remote, and most remote, born and to be borne, Sub
quibus vocabulis, heredibus suis, omnes haeredes propinqui, and remoti, nati
and nascitari, And Haeredum appellatione veniunt haeredes haeredum in
infinitum, says Fleta, lib. 3. cap. 8. So likewise, the Law uses peculiar
words for Tenures, Persons, Offenses, Forms of Original Writs, Warranty,
Exchange, etc. and all this to procure certain expressions, and to prevent
uncertainty for the reason aforesaid.

Co. ibid. 20. b. 1.
4. If a man give Lands to A. Et haeredibus de corpore suo, A grant void.
the Remainder to B. In forma predicta, this is a good Estate Tail to B. for
that the words, In forma predicta, do include the other; but if a man let Lands
to A. for life, the Remainder to B. in Tail, the Remainder to C. In forma
predicta, this Remainder is void for the uncertainty.

Co. ib. 34. b. 1.
5. In Dowment Ad ostium ecclesiae, to the end it may have certainty, Dowment
ad ^ostium ecclesiae.
which is the Mother of quiet and repose, and to avoid after contention, the
Law requires, that it be done openly, and may be assigned in certainty, to be
enjoyed distinctly by it self, and not in Common.

Co. ibid. 37. a. 3. and Co. ibid.
6. In all cases where the demand of Dower is certain, Assigment of dower.
as in case of Dower Ad ostum ecclesiae, or Ex assensu patris, There the wife
after the death of her Husband may enter; but where the demand is uncertain,
as in Writs of Dower at the Common Law, there albeit the thing it self be
certain, yet shall she not take it without Assignment, as if a woman bring a
Writ of Dower of three shillings rent, albeit she ought to be endowed of one
shilling, yet cannot she after judgment distraine for 12 d. before Assignment,
because the demand was uncertain: So it is if two Tenants in Common be, and the
wife of one of them bring a Writ of Dower to be endowed of a third part of a
moiety, and have Judgment to recover, yet cannot she enter without assignment,
Co. ibid. 34. b. 3.
albeit the Assignment cannot give her any certainty, because her Husbands
Estate was uncertain: So if a woman bring a Writ of Dower of six pounds
Rentcharge, and she has judgment to recover the third part, albeit it be
certain, that she shall have forty shillings, yet she cannot distrain for
forty shillings, before the Sheriff do deliver the same unto her: It is
otherwise, where a Writ demands Land, Rent, or other things in certain; for
there the Demandant after Judgment may enter and distraine before any Seisin
delivered to him by the Sheriff upon a Writ of Habere facias seisinam, etc.

Co. ibid. 45. b. 2.
7. If a man make a Lease for so many years as he shall live, Lease void.
this is void for the uncertainty.

Co. ibid. 45. b. 4.
8. If the Parson of D. make a Lease of his Gleab for so many years as he
shall be Parson there, this cannot be made certain by any means; The like.
for nothing is more uncertain then the time of death, Terminus vitae est
incertus, and licet nihil certius sit morte, nihil tamen incertius quam hora
mortilo: But if he make a Lease for three years, and so from three years to
three years, so long as he shall be Parson, this is a good Lease for six
years, if he continue Parson so long, viz. First, for three years, and after
that for three years, and for the residue uncertain.

Co. ibid. 49. b. 2. and Co. ib. 359. ^. 3.
9. If A. be to make a Feoffment to B. and C. and their heirs without Deed,
Livery.
and A. makes Livery to B in the absence of C. in the name of both, and to
their heirs, this Livery is void to C. because a man being absent, cannot take
a Freehold by a Livery, but by his Attorney lawfully authorized by Deed to
receive Livery, unless the Feoffment be made by Deed, and then the Livery to
one in the name of both, is good, and the reason hereof seems to be, because
the Feoffment being made without Letter of Attorney or Deed, it is uncertain
whether or no he consented thereunto, which is apparent by his sealing of the
Letter of Attorney or Deed of Feoffment. Note, That a Deed sealed may be
delivered without words, because there is sufficient certainty expressed in the
Deed, what is meant by the Delivery; but Livery of Seisin requires words to
express it, and also Ceremony, to the end it may be certainly known what is
intended by it; And a man absent can neither take nor make Livery without Deed.

A Plow-land uncertain.
10. A Fine of so many Acres of Land, Meadow, and Pasture, Co. ibid. 69. a. 4.
in certain is good, because the quantity of an Acre is certainly known by the
Statute, De terris mensurandis; but a Fine De una virgata terrae shall not be
received for the uncertainty; because it contains in some places more, in
others less, and therefore Prisot says well in 35 H. 6. 29. That a Plow may
till more Land in one year in one Country, then in another.

Rent and Distress uncertain.
11. There may be a certainty in uncertainty, Co. ibid. 96. a. 1. and 142. a. 3.
as if a man hold of his Lord to sheere all the sheep depasturing within the
Lords Manor, this is certain enough, albeit the Lord has sometimes a greater
and sometimes a less number there; for this uncertainty being referred to the
Manor, which is certain, the Lord may distrain for this uncertainty: Howbeit
no distress can be taken for any Services, that are not put into certainty,
nor can be reduced to any certainty, (for Id certum est quod certum reddi
potest) because Oportet quod res certa deducatur in judicium, and upon the
Avowry Damages cannot be recovered for that, which neither has certainty, nor
can be reduced to any certainty.

A Protection uncertain.
12. A Protection, Co. ibid. 130. b. 4.
as well moraturae as profecturae must be regularly to some place out of the
Realm of England, and must be also to some place in certain, as super salva
custodia Caliciae, etc. and not to Carlisle or Wales, which are within the
Realm, or the like, but it may be to Ireland or Scotland, because they are
distinct Kingdoms, or to Calice, Aquitaine, or the like, but a Protection
granted to one, etc. until he return from Scotland was in 1 E. 3. 25.
disallowed for the uncertainty of the time; So likewise a Protection, Quia
moratur super altum mare, will not serve, not only because (as some think)
that Mare non moratur, or for that a great part of the Sea is within the Realm
of England, but likewise for the uncertainty of the place.

A Bishops certificate.
13. If a Bishop certify, that another Bishop has certified him, Co. ibid.
134. a. 3.
that the party, which is his Diosesan, is excommunicated, this certificate
upon another report is not sufficient for the uncertainty, there is the same
reason also of an Hearsay in evidence.

A Villain.
14. If the Lord make a Lease to his Villain for life or years by Deed or
without Deed, this is an infranchisment of the Villain; Litt. S. 207. Co. ibid.
138.
but if he make him a Lease at will by Deed or without Deed, it is no
infranchisement, because he has no certainty of his estate, but the Lord may
put him out when he will.

An Earldom to Daughters.
15. If an Earl has his dignity to him and his Heirs and dies, Co. ibid.
165. a. 3.
having issue one only Daughter, the Dignity shall descend to the Daughter and
to her posterity, as well as any other Inheritance, as it fell out in Sampson
Leonards case, who married Margaret the only Sister and Heir of Gregory Fines
Lord Dacre of the South, and in the case of William Lord Rosse; for in such
case there can be no uncertainty, when there is but one Daughter, or Sister:
Howbeit, where there are more Daughters then one, the eldest shall not have the
Dignity and power of the Earl, viz. to be a Countess; but (in such case) the
King, who is the Sovereign of honor and dignity, may for the uncertainty
confer the dignity upon which of the Daughters he please; Howbeit the Lands
shall be divided betwixt them, as amongst Parceners, for they are divisible and
certain.

Co. ibid. 211. a. 2. and 220. a. 4.
16. If a man be bound to pay twenty pounds at any time during his life at a
place certain, Uncertain day of payment.
the Obligor cannot tender the money at the place when he will, for then the
Obligee should be bound to perpetual attendance, and therefore the Obligor in
respect of the uncertainty of the time must give the Obligee notice, that on
such a day at the place limited, he will pay the money, and then the Obligee
must attend there to receive it; for if the Obligor then and there tender the
money, he shall thereby save the penalty of the Bond for ever: So likewise, if
a man make a Feoffment in fee upon Condition, that if the Feoffor at any time
during his life pay to the Feoffee twenty pounds at such a place certain, that
then, etc. In this case also the Feoffor must give notice to the Feoffee, when
he will pay it; for without such notice, as aforesaid, the tender will not be
sufficient: Also if A. be bound to B. with Condition that C. shall enfeoff D.
on such a day, C. must give no^^ce thereof to D. and request him to be on the
Land at the day to receive ^he Feoffment, and (in such case) he is bound to
seek D. and to give him notice: In all which cases it is to be observed, that
what the contract of the parties leaves uncertain, the Law (to prevent
contention) reduces to a certainty: And therefore (in such cases) Littletons
advise is wholesome council, viz. Not only to limit a certain place and day,
Litt. S. 342. Co. ibid. 212. a. 3.
but likewise to set down in the Condition a certain time of the day, as
betwixt the hours of two and four, or the like: And (indeed) it is good in
Conveyances to set down every thing in certainty and particularity; for
certainty is the mother of quietness and repose and uncertainty the cause of
variance and contention: And therefore for the obtaining of the one, and
avoiding of the other, the best mean is in all assurances, to take council of
learned and well experienced men, and not to trust only (without advice) to a
Presiden: for as the Rule is concerning the state of a man's body, Nullum
medicamentum is idem omnibus, so in the state and assurance of a man's Lands,
Nullum exemplum est idem omnibus.

Co. ibid. 218. a 2.
17. A Lease is made to a man and a woman for their lives upon Condition, that
which of them two shall marry first, Lease on Condition to marry.
that one shall have the fee, they intermarry; In this case, neither of them
shall have fee, for the uncertainty.

Co. ibid. 227. a. 1.
18. If the Jury give a Verdict of the whole Issue, and of more, Insufficient
Verdict.
etc. that is surplusage, and shall not stay Judgment; for, utile per inutile
non vitiatur, and necessary incidents required by Law, the Jury may find:
Howbeit, a Verdict finding matter uncertainly or ambiguously is insufficient,
and no Judgment shall be given thereupon; as if an Erecutor plead plene
administravit, and Issue is joined thereupon, and the Jury find, that the
Defendant has goods in his hands to be administered, but find not to what
value, this is uncertain and therefore insufficient: so a Verdict, that finds
part of the Issue, and nothing for the residue, is insufficient for the whole;
because they have not tried the whole Issue, whereby they are charged: As if an
Information of Intrusion be brought against one for intruding into a Message,
and one hundred Acres of land, upon the general Issue, the Jury find against
the Defendant for the Land, but say nothing for the House, this is insufficient
for the whole, and so it was twice adjudged, viz. H. 25 Eliz. in a Writ of
Error in the Exchequer Chamber inter Brace and the Queen, and M. 28, and 29
Eliz. inter Gomersall and Gomersall in account in Banco Regis.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 271. b. 4.
19 A Feoffee to the use of A. and his Heirs before the Statute of 27 H. 8. for
money bargaineth and sells the Land to C. and his Heirs, Uncertainty or an
use.
who has no notice of the former use, yet no use passes by this bargain and
sale; for there cannot be two uses in esse of one and the same Land, and seeing
there is no transmutation of Possession by the Ter-tenant, the former use can
neither be extinct nor altered: And if there could be two uses of one and the
same Land, then could not the Statute of Uses execute either of them for the
uncertainty.

Detinue.
20. A Writ of Detinue lies for goods delivered or found, Co. ibid. 286. b. 2.
when the Plaintiff can declare in certain what they are; but it lies not for
money out of a Bag or Chest, or for Corn out of a Sack, or the like; because
these cannot be distinguished from other money or Corn: So likewise an Action
of Detinue lies for Charters, which concern the Inheritance of Land, if he
know them in certain, and what Land they concern, or if they be in a Bag
sealed, or Chest locked, albeit he know not the certainty of them; but the
Writings, or (at least) the Bag or Chest he must know in certain, otherwise
that Action lies not; And in case of a Bag or Chest it is good to declare (if
he can) of one Writing in certain, for then the Defendant cannot wage his Law,
which otherwise he may.

Plaas double and multiplied.
21. In dilatory Pleas there may be duplicity and multiplicity of distinct
matter, for in their time and place a man may use diverse of them, Co. ibid.
304. a. 3.
but in Pleas perpetual and peremptory, there ought not to be duplicity or
multiplicity of distinct matter to one and the same thing, whereunto several
answers (admitting each of them to be good) are required, for that is not
allowable in Law for the uncertainty; Bract. fo. 5. fo. 400. Fleta l. 6. cap.
35.
whereof Bracton and Fleta speak notably, Sicut Actor una action debet
expediri (saltem illa durante) sic oportet tenentem una exceptione, dum tamen
peremptoria (quod in dilatorijs non est tenendum) quia si liceret pluribus uti
exceptionibus peremptorijs simul and semel, sicut fieri poterit in dilatorijs,
sic sequetur, quod si in probatione unius defecerit, ad aliam probandam possit
habere recursum, quod non est permissibile non magis quam aliquem se defendere
duobus bacalis in duello, cum unus tantum sufficiat. Vide pl. ibid. per totam
paginam, for departure, double Pleas, etc.

Attornement.
22. If the Lord first grant the Services of his Tenant to one, Co. ibid. 310.
b. 1.
and afterward by another Deed of a later date grants the same services to
another; In this case, if the Tenant attorne to the last Grantee, it makes his
Grant good, and albeit he afterward attorne to the other Grantee, yet cannot
that make the first Grant good; because the Attornement took effect in
perfecting the last Grant: Howbeit (in the same case) if the Tenant attorn to
them both, the Attornment is void to both for the uncertainty, so if a
Reversion be granted for life, and after it is granted to the same Grantee for
years, and the Tenant attorneth to both the Grants, this is also void for the
uncertainty: A Fortiori, if the Lord by one Deed grant his Seigniory to I.
Bishop of London and to his heirs, and by another Deed to I Bishop of London,
and to his Successors, and the Tenant attorne to both Grants, this Attornment
is void for both Grants; for albeit the Grantee be but one person, yet he
having several capacities, and the Grants being several, the Attornment is
not according to either of the Grants, and (by consequent) void for the
uncertainty.

An uncertain Deed.
23. If Land be given by Deed to two, to have and to hold to them, Co. l. 1.
85. a. 1. in Corbets case.
and heredibus, it is void for the insensibility and incertainty; And although
it has a clause of Warranty to them and their heirs, this shall not make the
first words which are incertaine and insensible, to be of force and effect in
Law, albeit his intent appear; but his intent ought to be declared by words
certain and consonant to Law.

24. In an Indenture of bargain and sale for twenty pounds, Dyer 6. 26 H. 8. 3.
there are diverse Covenants, An uncertain Plea
and in the end there are these words, Ad quas conventiones perimplendas obligo
me in 40 l. etc. Here, in debt brought for the 40 l. payment of the 20 l. is no
Plea without an Acquittance; albeit, proof may be made of the payment of the
20 l. yet without an Acquittance it remains uncertain whether the Covenants
were performed, and what other agreements there were betwixt the parties by
Spilman, Fitzherbert, and Shelley, and 28 H. 8. 25. accords, Tamen Quaere, for
Dyer seems to be of another opinion.

Dyer 14. 71. 28 H. 8.
25. If a Feoffment be made to four by Deed, Livery without Deed.
Livery to one is good for all; It is otherwise, if it be without Deed for the
uncertainty.

Dyer 17. 95. 28 H. 8.
26. A negative pregnant is disfavoured in Law, for the uncertainty; A negative
pregnant.
as in a Writ of Entry in consimili casu, supposing the alienation to be in
fee, the Tenant says, that the Tenant for life did not alien in fee, which
implies that he did alien, though not in fee; for notwithstanding that Plea,
the Tenant for life might alien for another life or in tail, and therefore no
good Plea for the uncertainty.

Dyer 22. b. 138. 28 H. 8.
27. If a man buy twenty quarters of Grain, No Detinue for grain of money.
and is to have them delivered at such a place upon such a day, and the
contract is not performed by the Vendor; In this case, the Vendee cannot have
an Action of Detinue for the Grain for the uncertainty; because one quarter of
Grain cannot be known from another quarter of the same Grain; there is the
like Law of Coin.

Dyer 25. 156. 28 H. 8.
28. An Inquest remained pro defectu hundredorum, Defect of Jurors.
and the Plaintiffs Council made suggestion to the Court, that there were no
Freeholders in the Hundred, but all Copyholders, and Tenants in ancient
Demesne, and thereupon prayed Process, de proxim. hundred. adjacente, and non
potuit habere; for the Court are not to believe the Councels suggestion for the
uncertainty thereof, but ought to have it ascertained by the return of the
Sheriff, who is a sworn Officer.

Co. l. 1. 84. b. 4. in Corbets case.
29. If Land be given to A. in tail, the Remainder to B. in tail, A perpetuity
not good.
with other Remainders over, upon Condition, that if any of these shall offer
to bar the said estate, his estate shall cease as if he were naturally dead,
and then it shall be to the next in Remainder: This is a void Proviso for the
uncertainty; for Judges ought to know the intention of the parties by certain
and sensible words, which are agreeable and consonant to the rules of Law.

Co. l. 1. 155. a. 3. in the Rector of Chedingtons case.
30. A man possessed of certain Land for sixty years in consideration of a
marryage to be had betwixt his Son and the Daughter of another, Leases void for
the uncertainty.
demiseth the Land to his Son for seventy years, to begin after his death, and
after the Lessor dies, in the case the Lease is good; because, when the Land is
demised, Habendum after the death of the Lessor for seventy years, there was
sufficient certainty, and no apparent uncertainty in the Deed, as it was agreed
in Locrofts case, M. 34. and 35 Eliz. But if a man possessed of a Lease for forty
years grants to B. so many of the years as shall be behind, tempore mortis
suae, this is void for the uncertainty, as it is agreed in 7 E. 6. Br. Grants
154. and in Pl. Com. 520. b. So if a man have a Lease for life by Deed indented
with Proviso, that if the Lessee dye within sixty years, that the Executors of
the Lessee shall have it for so many years as shall be behind at the time of
his death, this is but a Covenant, and not a Lease for the uncertainty: Vide 3,
and 4, P. and M. Gravenors case, Dyer 150. a. and 22. Ass. Pl. 37.

Co. I. 2. 3. Mansers case.
31. In debt by P. against M. the Defendant pleads the Bond was upon Condition,
that P. should enjoy the Land, An uncertain Plea.
which he held by Feoffment from M. discharged and indemnified, and that M. and
his Son should perform such Acts for further assurance, as by P. should be
devised; and then he pleads further, that he had kept P. discharged and
indemnified, and sealed a release devised by P. And this Plea was held
insufficient, for the uncertainty. 1. because it should have showed how the
Defendant had kept the Plaintiff indemnified, being in the affirmative, but if
he had pleaded in the Negative, not damnified, it had been well enough. 2.
because the Defendant did not show, that the Release concerned the Land.

An uncertain covenant to stand seized.
32. If I covenant with you, Co. l. 1. 176 a. 1. in Milmayes case.
that in consideration of Fatherly affection, and for the advancement of my
blood, I will stand seized to the use of such of my Sons, or such of my
Cousins, as you will name, upon nomination made the use shall be raised, for
here the consideration is particular and certain, and the person by matter, ex
post facto, may be made certain; but if I for diverse considerations covenant
with you, that I will stand seized to the use of such an one as you shall name,
here albeit you name my Son or Cousin, yet no use shall hereby be raised,
because for the generalty and uncertainty this was void ab initio, and no
Averment shall make it good or reduce it to any certainty, for the intent of
the Covenantor was as general and uncertain as his words were: Neither can
the Covenantor (in such case) reserve power to make Leases for the same reason.

Uncertain Grant.
33. The King or a common person grants omnia illa messuagia in tenura Johannis
Brown situate in Wells, Co. l. 2. 33. a. 3. Doddingtons case.
whereas in truth they lie in D. in this case, the Grant is void for the
uncertainty.

Error.
34. In Error, Co. l. 3. 2. a. The Marquess of Winchesters case.
the Record of a Recovery was of the Manor of Merleston cum pertin. and the
Writ of Error was to remove a Recovery of the Manor of Merleston in Merleston
cum pertin. this is no good removal of the Record for the uncertainty, because
the true Record was not removed, Tamen quaere.

Remainder in contingency.
35. If A. make a Feoffment to the use of B. until C. shall return from Rome
into England, Co. l. 3. 2. a. 4. in Bonastons case.
and after such return from Rome into England, to remain over in fee, this
Remainder is void for the contingency and uncertainty, it being altogether
uncertain, whether or no C. will ever return from Rome into England, for when
a Remainder is limited to take effect upon the doing of an Act, which Act shall
be the determination of the particular estate; here if the Act depend upon a
casualty or a mere uncertainty whether it will ever happen or no, in such case
the Remainder depends upon an uncertainty and in contingency, and therefore
shall not vest presently.

Casualties not devisable.
36. If the King grant to one and his heirs, Co. l. 3. 32. b. 3. Butler and
Bakers case.
bona and Catalla felonum and fugitivorum, or utlagorum fines amerciamenta,
etc. within such a Town or Manor; In this case he cannot devise them to
another, nor leave them to descend for a third part according to the Statutes
of 32. and 34 H. 8. of Wills, because the yearly value of such Hereditaments is
altogether uncertain, and therefore they are usually called casualties.

Dower.
37. If Lands be conveyed to a Feme before marriage for part of her jointure,
Co. l. 4. 3. a. 3. in Vernous case.
and after marriage more Land is conveyed unto her for her full jointure, and
in satisfaction of all her Dower, and after the Baron dies; in this case, if
the Son waive the Land conveyed unto her after marriage, she shall have the
Land conveyed unto her before the coverture, and her Dower also in the residue;
for Land conveyed to a Feme for part of her jointure, or in satisfaction of
part of her Dower, is no bar of any part of her Dower for the uncertainty: So
if a Debtor give to the Creditor an Horse or any other thing in satisfaction of
part of his debt, this shall be a bar for no part thereof for the uncertainty.

Sander.
38. In slander, Co. l. 4. 17. b. 1. James and Ru^lech case.
both the person and scandalous words ought to be certain and apparent, and
not to want an innuendo to make them out, as when two are talking together of
I. S. and one of them says, he is a notorious theife; in this case, I. S in
his count may show, that there was speech of him betwixt them, and that the one
said of him, He (innuendo pred. I.S. is a notorious Theif; for the Office of an
Innuendo is to design the same person which was named in certain before, and
in effect stands in the place of a Predict. But an Innuendo cannot make that
person certain which was uncertain before, as if one say without any precedent
Communication, that one of the Servants of I.S. (he having diverse) is a
notorious Felon or Traitor, etc. here, for the uncertainty of the Person, no
Action lies, and an Innuendo cannot make it certain; so if one say generally,
I know one near about I.S. who is a notorious Theife, and the like: And as an
Innuendo cannot make the person certain which was uncertain before, so an
Innuendo cannot alter the matter or sense of the words themselves, as if one
speaking of I.S. says, He is full of the Pocks, here the Plaintiff cannot say
Innuendo, the French Pocks, for thereby he strives to extend the general
words, The Pocks to the French pocks by imagination of an Intent, which was not
apparent by any precedent words, which the Law will not suffer for the
uncertainty, for it would be inconvenient, that Actions should be maintained
upon a mere imagination of an intent, which appears not by the words, upon
which the Action is grounded, but is altogether uncertain, and subject to a
loose conjecture.

Co. l. 4. 35. a 4. in Bozomes case.
39. The Queen grants Totam illam portionem decimorum, Grant of tithes.
etc. in D. nunc vel nuper in tenura Io. Corbet, and Corbet never had Tithes
there, this Grant is void for the uncertainty in the case of a common person, A
fortiori, in the Queens.

Co. l. 4. 40. b. 3. in Yonges case.
40. In an Indictment there was this expression, Indictment insufficient.
Unam plagam mortalem circiter pectus, and it was adjudged insufficient for the
uncertainty; for it might be in the neck, in the arm, or in the belly, and an
Indictment ought to express in certain as well in what part the mortal wound
is, as the depth and breadth of it, to the end it may appear to the Court to
be mortal; and because it was said that he dyed De vulueribus and plagis
praedict. and one of them was uncertainly alleged, that made the Indictment
insufficient as to all.

Co. l. 4. 74. a. 4. in Palmers case.
41. An Inquisition was thus returned, Inquisition insufficient.
that the Queens Debtor was possessed of a certain Term, Pro termino quorundam
annorum adhuc venturo, and it was adjudged insuffient, for a Term cannot be
extended without showing the commencement and certainty of the Term, to the
end that (the Debt being satisfied) the party may have the term again, if any
part thereof shall remain, which ought to appear, and thereupon the party may
have remedy to remove the hands of the Queen or of any other person, and so it
was adjudged M. 32. and 33. Eliz. In scaccario.

Co. l. 4. 110. b. 4. Adams and Lamberts case. and ib. 110. b. 2 in the same
case* see there also 113. a. Sir Barth. Reads case.
42. If Land of the yearly value of 20 l. per ann, A charitable and a
superstitious use.
be given upon condition to fine a Priest to pray for Souls, and that the
Priest shall have yearly 10 l. thereof for his Salary, and shall distribute
other ten pounds to certain poor people; in this case by the Statute of 1 E. 6.
14. the King shall have but the 10 l. limited to the Priest, and not the Land;
howbeit if the same Land were given to find the Priest, and for the
maintenance of 20 poor men, in this case the King shall have all the Land,
albeit the Priest has 10 l. thereof, and the poor men the other 10 l. And the
reason of this diversity is, because in the first case there was a good use
separate and distinct in certain from the superstitious use, but in the other
case it was left altogether uncertain how much the Priest, and how much the
poor men should have, and therefore in such case the King shall have all.

Co. l. 4. 115. b. 3. Turners case in Ad. and Lamb. case.
43. A man seized of certain Houses of the yearly value of 4 l. 6 s. 8 d.
devised them upon Condition to find an Obit, The like.
spending thereat so much as the devisees should in their discretions think
fit, the Devisees expend only upon the Obit, 6 s. 8 d. per annum, and it was
adjudged that the Queen Elizabeth, should have all the houses, because the
appointment was uncertain, albeit the employment was certain.

Co. l. 5. 1. a. 4. in Claitons case.
44. Indentures of demise were engrossed bearing Date the 26 day of May, Anno
25. Eliz. to have and to hold for three years from henceforth, Commencement of
an Indenture.
and they were delivered at four a clock in the afternoon upon the 20 day of
June anno praed. In this case the Lease shall end upon the 19 day of June in
the third year; for the Law in this computation rejects all Fractions and
Divisions of a day for the uncertainty, which is always the Mother of
contention.

Several Interests, several Covenants.
45. An Authority may be granted to two, vel cuilibet eorum, Co. l. 5. 19. a.
Slingsbies case.
as to make Livery or the like; but an Interest cannot be so granted, as if A.
covenants with two, Et cum quolibet eorum, they cannot sue severally, unless
their interests were several; as if a man by Indenture devises Black Acre to
A. White Acre to B. and Green Acre to C. and covenants with them, Et quolibet
eorum, that he is lawful owner of the said Acres; in this case in respect of
their several Interests, by the words, quolibet eorum, the Covenant is made
several; but if he demise the acres to them jointly, then the words, Cum
quolibet eorum are void for the uncertainty; for albeit diverse persons may
bind themselves, and quolibet eorum, and so the Obligation shall be joint or
several, at the election of the Obligee, yet a man cannot bind himself to
three, and to each of them to make it joint or several at the election of
several persons for one and the same cause, for the Court will be in doubt for
which of them to give judgment, which the Law will not suffer: As it was held
in 3 H. 6. 44. where one brought a Replevin for one beast against two, who made
several avowries, each of them by himself in his own right, and there (by the advice of all the Justices) both the Avowries abated for the inconvenience and
uncertainty; because, if both the Issues should have been found for the
Avowants, the Court could not have given Judgment to them severally of the same
thing.

Uncertain count.
46. It is the duty of a Declaration, Co. l. 5. 35. a. 3. in Plaiters case.
to reduce the generalty of the Writ into certainty, otherwise the issue will
be general and uncertain, and (by consequent) the verdict the like, and then
the Jury cannot be attainted, if they happen to give a false verdict.

Schismatic.
47. Where a Bishop refuses to admit a Clarke, Co. l. 5. 37. b. Specots case.
it is not a sufficient cause to allege in general, that he is Schismaticus
inveteratus, for that is causa vaga and incerta, but he ought to charge him in
particular with some particular Schism, and to show how and wherefore he is a
Shismatick.

Releas^.
48. M. is Bail for C. in an Action where H. is Plaintiff, Co. l. 5. 70. b.
Hoes case.
H. has Judgment, and Scire facias against C. and in his default against the
Bail, who pleads the Plaintiffs release before Judgment, this is held an
insufficient plea, because a certain duty with a Condition subsequent may be
released, as an Obligation; not an uncertain duty with a condition precedent
before the time, because the debt and damages are uncertain. See also Co. l.
10. 51. a. 1. in Lampets case.

An award.
49. The Plaintiff and Defendant submit themselves to the Arbitrament of A. who
awards that the Defendant shall enter into Bond, Co. l. 5. 77. b. Sammons case.
that the Plaintiff and his wife shall enjoy such Land quietly; This is a void
award, because of the uncertainty of the sum in the Bond, which ought to be
(at least) to the value of the Land, also the award is void as to the Feme,
because she is a stranger to the submission.

No Lapse.
50. A Patron is not bound any way to take notice of a Laps for the Incumbents
not reading the Articles according to the Statute of 13 Eliz. 12. but from the
Ordinary himself, Co. l. 6. 29. b. 1. in Greens case.
and no laps will incurr if that be not done, and such notice ought to be
certain and particular, and therefore it is not sufficient for the Ordinary in
such case to give notice, that the Presentee has not read the Articles and
subscribed, generally; but he ought particularly to inform the Patron, that he
has not read the Articles, etc. for which default he is deprived, and that
thereupon it belongs to the Patron to present, for Notitia dicitur a noscendo,
and Ex vi termin. it ought to be special and certain, for Notitia non debet
claudicare.

Co. l. 35. b. 1. The Bishop of Bathes case.
51. If one let the Manor of D. to I. S. for so many years, An uncertain
Lease.
as I. N. has in the Manor of S. and he has ten years in it, such Term shall
I. S have in the Manor of D. so if a Lease be made to another during the
minority of I. S. and he is of the age of ten years, this is a good Lease for
11 years, if I.S. so long live, because such Leases have a certain
commencement and a certain end; but if the wife of I.S. be great with child,
and a Lease be made until the issue in ventre sa mere, shall come to full age,
this is no good Lease for the uncertainty; for at the time when the Lease is to
take effect, it is uncertain when the child will be borne, and (by consequent)
the commencement, continuance, and end, of that Lease is uncertain, and
therefore void: So if a man let Land of the value of 20 s. per annum, until 21
l. be levied of the Issues and profits, without Livery, this is but a Lease at
Will for the uncertainty, for it is not certain that the Land will hold to be
every year of one and the same yearly value, vid. plus ibidem.

52. Vide Max. 36. 1.

Co. l. 6. 60. a. 3. Gatewards case.
53. Common by reason of Commonancy is against reason, Common for commonancy
for such a Common is transitory and utterly uncertain, because it follows
the person and that for no certain time or estate, but only during his
inhabitancy, which kind of Interest the law will not suffer, for custom ought
to extend to that which has certainty and continuance.

Co. l. 8. 68. b. Trolops case.
54. A Bishop certifies in general, that I.S. is excommunicate,
Excommunication.
this is not good for the uncertainty, for he ought to certify the particular
cause in certain, wherefore he was excommunicate.

Co. l. 8. 91. a. 4. Frances case.
55. If Land be devised to I.S. upon condition that he suffers his Executors to
carry away his goods, Devise.
disturbance by Parol is no breach of the Condition, but the heir that claims
interest must allege some special disturbance in certain by some act done,
as by shutting the doors upon them, laying hands upon them, or the like,
whereunto the other party may make a certain answer, and whereupon a certain
issue may be taken, whereof the Jury may enquire, and the Court may judge
whether it be a sufficient breach of the Proviso or no.

Co. l. 8. 121. a. 1. in Doctor Benhams case.
56. Regularly, Uncertain plea.
those that have power to impose Fine and Imprisonment (except a Court of
Judicature) shall plead the particular cause in certain wherefore the party was
so fined or imprisoned, and not in a general or uncertain manner, because in
such Cases upon an Action brought by the party fined or imprisoned, the cause
is traversable, as the Fine and Imprisonment in Doctor Bonhams case, and the
Acts and Orders of Commissioners of Banckrupts; for they are traversable, and
therefore ought not to be uncertainly pleaded.

Co. l. 8. 135. a. 4. in John Nedhams case.
57. An Administrator cannot plead uncertainly and in general, The like.
that the Intestate had Bona notabilia; but he ought to plead them in certain,
for otherwise it will be intended that the Intestate had not Bona notabilia, in
several Diocesses.

Co. l. 8. 155. a. 3. in Edw. Althams case.
58. If a man by Deed gives goods to one of the sons of I. S who has diverse
Sons; here, he shall not take averment which son he meant, for by judgment of
Law upon this Deed, this gift is void for the uncertainty, which cannot be
supplied by averment, Vide 11 E. 4. 2.

Co. l. 9 18. a. 2. Ann Bedingfeilds case.
59. In Dower, upon plea of detainer of Charters, in bar thereof, Detainer of
Charters.
the heir must show the certainty of the Charters, or that they are in a chest
or box, locked or sealed, to the end that a certain Issue may be joined
thereupon, and it is not enough to plead detainer of Charters in general, for
that is an insufficient plea for the uncertainty, See also Co. l. 9. 110. a. 2.

Co. l. 9. 25. a. 2. in the case of Strata Mercella.
60. In the case of the Abbot De Strata Mercella, Uncertain plea.
the Defendant pleaded, Quod pred. Abbas licite habuit bona felonum, etc. And
yet showed not his case in so certain and special manner that the Court might
adjudge whether the Abbot by the Law had Felons goods or no; And thereupon his
plea was adjudged insufficient for the Uncertainty: So also it is agreed in 22
E. 4. 40. The Lord Lisles case, where one was bound in an Obligation upon
Condition that he should come to B. such a day and show the Obligee or his
Council a sufficient discharge of an Annuity of 40 s. which he claimed out of
two houses, etc. And in Debt upon this Obligation, the Defendant pleaded, that
he came to B. at the day aforesaid, and there offered to show to the Plaintiff
and his Council a sufficient discharge, and that they refused to see it, upon
which the Plaintiff demurred in Law; And it was adjudged that the plea was
insufficient, for the plea ought to have alleged what manner of discharge in
certain he offered to show, viz. a Release, unity of possession, or other
matter of discharge, whereupon the Court might have adjudged whether it had
been sufficient, or no.

Ravishment of Guard an uncertain ver^^ct.
61. In Ravishment de Guard, Co. 9. 74. a. 3. in Doctor Hu^sers case.
(according to the Statute of Westminster. 2. 35.) The Jurors found generally, that
the Ward was married, and that at the time of his marriage, he was eighteen
years old and upwards, etc. and this was adjudged an insufficient Verdict;
because it is not only thereby left uncertain who procured him to be married,
viz. Whether the Ravishor, a stranger, or the Plaintiff himself, or that the
Ward of his own accord married himself; but also it is uncertain in the time
when he was married, whether before or after the Ravishment; And therefore it
is well said in 30 E. 3. 23. That the Verdict ought to be such that the Judges
may clearly proceed to Judgment, and (by consequent) ambiguous and uncertain
Verdicts are insufficient and void, as in 40 E. 3. 15. in Debt against
Executors, they plead fully administered, etc. the Jurors find that they have
goods in their hands, but do not say to what value, and for this uncertainty
their Verdict was held insufficient and void, See more authorities, ut supra

Uncertain re^^cation.
62. A. seized of the Manor of D. levies a Fine to uses with power of
Revocation, upon payment of 40 s. to the Conusee, Co. l. 9. 106. b. 2. Lady
Greshams case in Marg. Podgers case.
and being likewise seized of the Manor of S. levies another Fine thereof to
the same Conusee, but to other uses, with like power of Revocation upon payment
of 40 s. to the said Conusee; Afterward A. pays 40 s. to the Conusee for
revocation of all the uses raised upon both the Fines, and this payment was
testified in writing under the Seals of the parties; In this case none of the
uses are revoked, but the Revocation is utterly void for the uncertainty;
because two several sums of 40 s. should have been tendered, and not one sum
only, for they were several Indentures, and several Mannore, and could not
be satisfied by one sum, because it was thereby left uncertain, which uses,
and of which Manor the Revocation was meant.

U^certaine plea.
63. In debt against an Executor, he ought not to plead, Co. l. 9. 109 b. 3.
Menel Treshams case.
Quod ipse non habet, etc. aliqua bona, etc. praeter bona, etc. quae non
sufficient ad satisfacienda debita predicta; but he ought to plead, Quod non
habet, etc. bona, etc. praeterquam bona and cattalla ad valentiam of a certain
sum, Et non ultra, quae eiisdem debitis obligata, and onerabilia existunt,
etc. for the first plea is insufficient for the uncertainty, because the
Plaintiff cannot reply thereupon, so as a certain Issue may be taken.

^ncertainty of ^^e the per^^n.
64. When there is uncertainty in the person, Co. l. 10. 51. a. 3. in Lampets
case.
to whom a Release or other Grant is made, such Release or grant cannot be
good; And therefore if a Lease for life be made, the Remainder to the right
heirs of I. S. and the Lessee is disseised, and the eldest Son of I.S.
releaseth to the disseisor, and after I. S. dies; In this case the Release is
void for the uncertainty, whether or no he shall be right heir at the death of
his Father: So likewise in 17 Eliz a man lets to Baron and Feme for 21 years,
the Remainder to the survivor of them for 21 years, and the Baron grants over
this term, here also the grant is void for the uncertainty of the person, for
albeit of all Chattels real, which are the Femes, the Baron may dispose, yet
in this case neither the Baron nor Feme had any thing until the Survivor, etc.

Co. l. 10. 90. a. 3. in Doctor Leyfeilds case.
65. The reason why color is given in a Writ of Enter sur disseisin, Color in
pleading.
Writ of Enter in the nature of an Assize, and Assize, Trespass, etc. is, for
that the Law (which prefers and favors certainty as the mother of quiet and
repose) to the intent that either the Court may adjudge upon it, if the
Plaintiff demur, or that a certain Issue may be taken upon a certain point,
requires that the Defendant, when he pleads such a special Plea
(notwithstanding which the Plaintiff may have right) shall give color to the
Plaintiff, to the end that his Plea should not amount to a general Issue, and
so leave all the matter at large to the Jurors, which would be uncertain and
full of multiplicity and perplexity of matter.

Co. l. 10. 117. b. 2. in Rob. Pi^folds case.
66. In Trespass the Plaintiff counts for damages twenty marks, Uncertain
Verdict,
the Defendant pleads not guilty, the Jurors tar damages and costs jointly at
twenty two marks; In this case the Verdict cannot stand, for it appears not
how much is for damages, and how much for costs; and therefore the Plaintiff
can have Judgment but for twenty marks for the uncertainty.

Co. l. 11. 25. b. 1. in Hen. Harpers case.
67. An Ejectione firmae brought de omnibus and omnimodis decimis in W. without
saying garborum, faeni, lavae, etc. Uncertain allegation.
this is not rightly laid for the uncertainty, because there is no certainty
alleged of the nature or quality of the tithes, whereupon a certain
Judgment may be given, or execution by habere facias possessione had; And this
also appears in an Assize brought, de quadam portione decimarum, etc. in 7 E.
6. Dyer 84.

F. N. B. 41. a.
68. The Bishop shall not cite or distraine any to appear before him to make
oath at the pleasure of the Bishop against the will of him, Citations.
that is so summoned or cited; for such general citations, which the Bishops
make to cite men to appear before them, prosalute animae, without expressing
any cause in special, are against Law, for which the party greived may sue a
prohibition against the Bishop, and thereupon an Attachment, if the prohibition
be not obeyed; And such cause ought to be only Matrimonial or Testamentary.

Plow. 56. a. 1. Wimbish and Talb^ies case.
69. A Bar, which is certain to a common intent, is good; Replication^ must be
certain:
but Replications, Titles, Pleas in Abatement of Writs, and Estoppels ought to
contain Certainty; for the Law (which is grounded upon reason) ordaines, that
Replications which make the Issue, should be certain, to the end that neither
the Court nor Jurors (who try the Issue) should be misled or enveigled by
uncertainty; and therefore albeit a man may plead in Bar Que estate, without
showing how he comes by the estate, yet in a Replication if he plead Que estate
generally, it is not good, as it is held in 2 E. 4. but he ought to show how he
comes by the estate for the cause aforesaid.

Pl. 65. a. 3. Dive and Manninghams case.
70. Where a Recovery is had of two hundred Acres, An uncertain Plea.
upon occasion of pleading that Recovery, to plead a Recovery of one hundred
Acres, inter alia, is not good for the uncertainty, as in 22 E. 4. in a Scire
facias to have execution of two hundred acres of Land, the Tenant pleads that
since the Scire facias sued, I.S. brought a Formedon of one hundred Acres inter
alia, and recovered and had execution, Judgment of the Writ for that parcel,
and this Plea was not held good, for it is not the right form of pleading such
a Recovery, because a Recovery ought to be certainly pleaded to every intent,
and these words inter alia are certain to no intent; but there it is held,
that he ought to have pleaded, that I. S. brought a Formedon of two hundred
Acres, whereof those one hundred Acres now in demand are parcel, and has
recovered, and has had execution.

Certainty in Law proceedings.
71. The proceedings of a Suit, Pl. 84. a. 4. Partridges case.
the allegations ought to be certain in one part or other, according to the
nature of the Suit, viz. sometimes in the count, and for want of certainty it
shall abate, as in 3 E. 4. A man retained in Husbandry brings an Action of debt
against a Prioresse for his salary, and declares, that he was retained with his
Predecessor, and shows not the person that retained him, this count abated for
the uncertainty; for it might be, that one, who had not Warranty, retained him
for the Predecessor: Sometimes the Count and Writ also may be general without
certainty, as in Assizes, but there the certainty ought to be showed by the
Replication: sometimes the Writ, Count, and Replication may be uncertain, but
then the certainty ought to appear by the Verdict, as in a Quare Impedit, the
value appears not in the Count, nor in the Replication, but it will appear by
the Verdict, for they shall assesse double damages, or damages by half a year
according to the value of the Church; so in a Writ of Ward the Jury shall find
whether the heir be married or not, and shall assesse damages for it, and yet
in the Count or Replication no such matter appears; So likewise in a Detinue
the value of the goods shall appear by the Verdict, etc. so as certainty ought
always to appear to the Court.

Jeofaile.
72. In debt upon an Obligation for performance of Covenants, Dyer 31. 217. 28
H. 8.
whereby the Defendant was bound to do and suffer to be done upon request, all
such things for the Plaintiffs assurance in certain Lands, as should be
devised by council; the Defendant says, that he was not requested; the
Plaintiff replies, that his council advised, that the Defendant should seal a
Release, which was required to be done, and that the Defendnat refused; to this
the Defendant rejoynes and says, that he did not refuse, and that he was ready
to do it: And the Court said, that this re-joynder was a full Jeofaile, and
therefore insufficient for the uncertainty, for that he waved his bar, viz. the
request, which he ought to have maintained, as to have said, Quod non fuit
requisitus.

Abayance.
73. When the right of Fee-simple is perpetually by Judgment of Law in abeyance
without any expectation to come in esse, Co. Inst. part 1. 343. a. 3.
there he that has the qualified fee, and to many purposes is no more then a
bare Tenant for life (concurrentibus hijs, quae in jure requiruntur) may charge
or alien it, as in case of a Parson, Vicar, etc. when the Patron and Ordinary
join with him in the Charge or Grant: for in this case (at the common Law)
when all that had an Interest in the thing did join, the Charge or Grant might
have been thereby made certain and infallible: but where the Fee-simple is in
Abeyance, and albeit by possibility it may every hour come in esse, yet it is
altogether uncertain, when or whether ever or never that may happen: In such
case, the Fee-simple cannot be charged until it come in esse, so as it may be
certainly charged or aliened: As if a Lease for life be made, the Remainder to
the right Heirs of I.S. Here the Fee-simple cannot be charged or aliened,
before I.S. be dead, in case I.S. dye, living the Tenant for life, Co. ibid
378. a. 3.
but if the Tenant for life happen to dye before I.S. then is the Remainder
vanished and gone, because it cannot immediately vest after the death of the
Tenant for life.

Second deliverance.
74. Upon a second deliverance the Defendant being a Widow justifies by an
estate for life, if she so long continue a Widow, Dyer 142 51, etc. 3, 4. P. M.
and averreth not, that she is the same woman, to whom the estate was made, nor
that she is still a Widow, for which uncertainty, and others concerning the
place, where the Cattle were taken, the Plaintiff had Iudgentent etc.

Inquisition.
75. Inquisitio capta apud D. of Land in S. Dyer 208 19. 3, 4. Eliz.
without showing in what County either D. or S. is, was adjudged insufficient
for the uncertainty, because upon a Traverse it could not be tried for want of
the knowledge, where the Venue should be taken.

Dyer 254. b. 1. 9 El.
76. In debt for rent arreare, the Plaintiff counts, Debt for rent arreare.
that his termor devised to the Defendant the term and dyed, and that the
Defendant entered and was possessed, and that for arreare of rent the Action
accrued, to this the Defendant demurs, 1. because he has not alleged, that
the Devisor made Executors, and that the Defendant entered with their agreement:
2. For that he says not, vertute cujus legationis, the Defendant was possessed:
for which uncertainties the Count was adjudged insufficient: for if the
Defendant were in of any other estate or title then as Assignee of the Lessee,
an Action of debt lies not against him for want of privity.

Dyer 264. 39 9. Eliz.
77. A new Assignment was in one Acre, New Assignment.
terrae sive prati in campo vocat. N. the Defendant pleads not guilty, but for
the uncertainty, whether Land or Meadow, and also because there was no
abuttalls, the Jury were discharged.

Hob. 2. Axworths case.
78. In an Action upon the case by Thomas against Axworth, Slander.
the words were, This is John Thomas his writing, innuendo the Plaintiff, and
he innuendo, etc. has forged this Warrant, the Sheriffs Warrant at the Suit of
M. Hog against the Defendant, Innuendo: And in this case it was held, that the
Innuendo would not support the Action, the word Warrant alone being of an
uncertain sense, and the matter of the Action shall not be enlarged or
ascertained by the Innuendo; as Pox, innuendo, the French Pox. Vide Hob. 6.
Miles case, and 45. Harvies case.

Hob. 38. Dawtries case.
79. Office.
An office was found by Commissioners after the death of William Dawtry,
whereupon a Melius Inquirendum went forth and recited, but thus, Cum per
quandam Inquisitionem captam apud Chichester, etc. and does not say, that it
was either by Commission or Writ, or before whom: and it was held void for the
uncertainty, and the office also, that was taken upon the Melius, for by the
Melius it ought to appear, that the first office was by warrant, etc.

Hob. 89. Rich and Shere.
80. In an Ejectione firmae the Plaintiff counts of a Message, etc. Ejectio^e
firma
with Appurtenances called Dizard in Cornwall, to hold for five years, the
Defendant pleads not guilty, whereupon the Plaintiff had Judgment; And the
Defendant assigns for Error, that the Plaintiff had not showed in what Town,
Parish, Hamlet, or place the Message lay, but in the general County, and
thereupon the Judgment was reversed in the Exchequer Chamber, 13. Jac. for
here was a trial without a Visne.

Hob. 90.
81. Vide Hob. 90. Keere and Owen upon an Elegit, Elegit.
Error for omitting the Entry of a clause in the Roll, which were expressed in
the Writ and Return.

Hob. 128. Pie and Coke.
82. Two Informations exhibited the same day against the same party for one and
the same offense, Judgment shall be given for neither, for the uncertainty.
Vide Hob. ibid. for an Inrolment of a Deed, and 129. Wilton, for an Amerciament
in a Leet.

163. Impersonalitas non concludit nec ligat.
Co. Inst. 1. 352. b. 1. Pl. Co. 398. a. 1.
1. An Estoppell shall not be spoken impersonally, as to say, ut dicitur, An
Estoppell.
or the like; but it ought to be a precise affirmation of that which makes the
Estoppell; neither yet does a recital conclude any thing, because it is no
direct affirmation. The Earl of Leycesters case in Plowd.

164. Generale nihil certi implicat.
General words.
1. Co. Inst. 1. 33. a. 3. Dodingtons case.
If the King or a common person grant omnia illa messuagia in tenura l. B.
situate in W. whereas in truth they lie in D. In this case, because the grant
is general, and is restrained to a certain Town, the Patentee or Grantee
shall not have any Lands out of that Town, unto which the generalty of the
Grant refers.

Slander:
2. If one says to another, that he is perjured, Co. l. 4. 15. a 4. Stanhop and
Bilths case.
or that he has forsworn himself in such a Court, such words of slander are
actionable, for by these words it appears, that he has forsworn himself in
a judicial proceeding, but if one say to another, that he has a Manor, and
has gotten it by swearing and forswearing, these words will bear no Action;
because they are too general, and words which shall charge any with an Action,
in which damages shall be recovered, ought to have convenient certainty: So if
one call another Villain, Rogue, Varlet, or the like, or tells him that he is
forsworn, such words are not actionable, because they are accounted words of
heat and passion, and benignior sententia in verbis generalibus seu dubijs est
praeferenda; for Actions of slander shall not be maintained by any strained
construction or argument, because they are more frequent now-a-dayes, then in
times past.

Schism.
3. Co. l. 5. 58. a. 4. Sp^cots case.
It is not a sufficient allegation for the Bishop (who refuses to present to a
benefice) to say that the Presentee is a Schismatic in general, but he ought
to accuse him of some Schism or heresy in certain, to the end the Court may
consult with Divines to know whether if be Schism or no, and thereupon make
Judgment whether the original cause of refusal be just or no.

Arrests.
4. When the Sheriff, Bailiffs, or Sergeants arrest one, C. l. 6. 54. a. 4. The
Countess of Rutlands case.
it is not sufficient for them to say in general words I arrest you, but they
ought upon the arrest to show at whose Suit, out of what Court, for what cause
they do it, and when the Process is returnable; to the end that if it be upon
an Execution, he may pay it and free his person from Imprisonment, and if upon
a mean Process, either to agree with the party, or to put in bail according
to Law.

Errors.
5. In Assignment of Errors a general Assignment is not good, F. N. B. 20. h.
as to say, in omnibus erratum est, for that expresses no certainty; but the
Assignment ought to be special and certain, as to say, in hoc erratum est,
etc. and to show the certainty of the things, and again to say, and in hoc
erratum est, and to show another thing, and sic de singulis, in which he will
assign Errors.

Arbitrament.
6. The submission to an award betwixt A. and B. was general, Co. l. 8 98. a.
2. Baspoles case.
viz. of all Actions, Demands, etc. And the Award was that A. should pay B.
twenty pounds: And in this case it was objected, that it did not appear that
the matter of the Arbitrament was the matter only that was betwixt them,
because the submission was general of all Actions, Demands, etc. And therefore
if the Arbitrament were not made of all the matters in controversy, the award
was void: Howbeit, the award was adjudged good, because when the submission is
general of all Actions, Demands, etc. Generale nihil certi Implicat, and
therefore it stands well with the generalty of the words, that there was but
one cause depending in controversy betwixt them.

165. Dolosus versatur in generalibus.
Co. l. 3. 80. b. 4. Twines case.
1. P. being indebted to T. in four hundred pounds, A fraudulent Deed.
and to C. in two hundred pounds, C. brings an Action of debt, P. possessed of
goods to the value of three hundred pounds makes a gift to T. in part of
payment, by the name of all his Goods and Chattells, but continues the
Pessession and imployes them to his own use, to prevent the execution of a
Fieri facias at the Suit of C. Here one of the badges of Fraud alleged in
that Grant, was, for that it was general, viz. of all his Goods, etc.

Co. l. 5. 57. b. 4. Specots case.
2. Schismatiqu^
It is not a sufficient allegation for a Bishop upon refusal of a Clerk to say
in general, that he is a Schismatique, Heritique, or the like; but he ought to
accuse him of some crime, or Error in particular; because if such general
allegation shall be admitted, Bishops (at this day) might at their pleasure
deprive all Patrons of their Presentations. Vide 164. 3. for Dolosus versatur,
etc.

166. Variance.
Co. Inst. 1. 131. a. 4.
1. A material Variance between a Protection, Protection.
and the Record does avoid it.

Co. ibid. 53. a. 3. 183. a. 1.
2. If the Tenant do or suffer waste to be done in Houses, Waste.
yet if he repair them before any Action brought, there lies no Action of
Waste against him: Howbeit he cannot in such case plead Non wast fait, for by
reason of the Variance between the Evidence and such a Plea, the Issue will be
found against him; but he must plead the special matter according to the truth
of his case.

Co. ibid. 282. b. 4.
3. In Battery Not guilty is a good Issue, Battery.
where the Defendant committed no Battery at all; but regularly (at the common
Law) if the Defendant has cause of Justification or excuse, then can he not
plead not guilty; for then upon the Evidence it shall be found against him;
because by such a Plea he confesses the Battery, and upon the Issue cannot
justify it; but he must plead the special matter, and confess and justify
the Battery; for otherwise the Variance of the Evidence from his Plea will
cause the Jury to find him guilty. The like Law is in many other cases; and
therefore it is a learning necessary to be known, because the loss of many
causes depends thereupon: As in Battery if the Defendant can justify the
same to be done of the Plaintiffs own assault, he must plead it specially, and
must not plead the general Issue.

Co. ibid.
4. In Trespass of breaking his Close, Trespass.
upon not guilty he cannot give in Evidence, that the Beasts came thorough the
Plaintiffs Fence, which he ought to keep, nor upon the general Issue justify
by reason of a Rentcharge, Common, or the like.

Co. ibid. 283. a. 1.
5. In Detinue the Defendant pleads non detinet, Detinue.
in this case he cannot give in Evidence that the goods were pawned to him for
money, and that it is not paid, but he ought to plead it: Howbeit he may give
in Evidence a gift from the Plaintiff; for that proves he detaineth not the
Plaintiffs goods.

Co. ibid.
6. In Waste upon the Plea non fecit vastum, Waste
he may give in Evidence any thing, that proves it no Waste, as by tempest,
lightning, enemies, or the like: but he cannot give in Evidence justifiable
Waste, as to repair the House, or the like; for that will cause a Variance
between the Evidence and the Issue.

Co. ibid. and l. 5. 119. Whelpdales case.
7. If two men be bound in a Bond jointly, and the one is sued alone, Joint
Obligees.
he may plead this matter in Abatement of the Writ, but he cannot plead non est
factum, for it is his Deed, though it be not his sole Deed, See Whelpdales
case, where a man may safely plead non est factum, and where not, and former
books that treat of that matter, well reconciled: Co. Inst. 1. 303. b. 4.
See also more of this matter Co. Inst. ubi supra, etc. And here note, that in
matter of pleading (to prevent variance) each party must be very circumspect in
the ordering thereof, least his Replication depart from his Count, or his
Rejoinder from his Bar, Et sic de cetaeris. Likewise what is departure in
pleading and what not, See Co. Inst. 1. 304. per totam paginam, and pl. Co.
105. b.

Variance inter Writ and Count.
8. Co. l. 5. 37. a. 4. Bishops case. Co. l. 8. 163. a Blackamores case.
In an Action upon the case Variance was found betwixt the Writ and the Count
in the Defendants name, for in the Count he was named George, and in the Writ
Christopher, and after Judgment for the Plaintiff in the Common Place upon a
Writ of Error in the K. B. the Judgment was reversed by reason of that
variance; for the Statute of 18 Eliz. 14. gives remedy where there is no
Original Writ, but not where there is a Writ and a material variance betwixt
the Writ and Count, etc.

Variance inter Original and Judgment.
9. There ought not to be any variance betwixt the Original Writ, Co. l. 9. 74.
a. 1. Doctor Husseyes case
and the Judgment given thereupon, but the Judgment ought to be conformable
to the Original, because it is grounded thereupon: And therefore in Ravishment
of Ward, if the Action be grounded upon the Statute of Westminster. 2. 35. according
to the form of the Writ there prescribed, the Plaintiff cannot have Judgment
at the Common Law, but the Judgment ought to be conformable and pursuant to
the Original Writ, which is the Foundation and ground of the Judgment, Vide
plus ubi supra.

Variance of names.
10. The Dean and Cannons of Windsor, Co. l. 10. 124. b. 2. Linne Regis case.
Win^ates case. 29. and 30. Eliz. Hob. 124.
were incorporate by the Statute of 22 E. 4. by this name, The Dean and Cannons
of the Kings free Chapel, etc. And in the Reign of P. and M. they made a
Lease of certain Lands by this name, The Dean and Cannons of the King and
Queens free Chapel, etc. And in an Ejectione firmae, brought by Wingate
against Hall, M. 29. and 30. Eliz. the Lease for that variance was adjudged
void.

The like.
11. Merton College in Oxford, Co. ibid. 125, a. 2.
was incorporate by Act of Parliament anno 1. M. Per nomen Guardiani and
Scholarium Domus sive Collegii Scholarium de Merton, etc. And they made a
Lease, per nomen domus sive Collegii de Merton, omitting Scholarium; Merton
College case in B. R.
And in an Ejectione firmae, H. 30. Eliz. This omission was agreed to be a
variance in substance to quash the Lease; for the said Act has Baptized the
College by the name of the College of the Scholars of Merton, and they made
the lease by the name of the College of Merton himself, who, (in truth) was
the Founder.

And, quer.
12. In an Audita querela, F. N. B. 104. 5.
variance betwixt the Writ and the Record shall cause the Writ to abate.

Variance inter brief and ^^^nt.
13. In Debt upon the Statute of 32 H. 8. 9. Pl. Co. 79 b. 4. Partridges case.
made against buying pretenced Titles, etc. That Statute was recited in the
Count to commence the 28 of April anno 32 H. 8. whereas it did begin the 28 of
April anno 31 H. 8. and was continued by prorogations until 32 H. 8. and for
that variance the Count was adjudged defective.

The like.
14. In 20 H. 6. A man brings a Writ of Forger of false Weights, Pl. ibid. 84.
b. 3.
and the Writ was Diversa facta and munimenta, etc. and he counts but of Deed
only, and Per totam curiam, for that variance the Writ shall abate.

Writ and Count.
15. In a Writ De consuetudinibus and servitiis, if the Demandant say, F. N B.
15 1. 7*
De reddibus and arreragiis, etc. These words prove that the Demandant himself
was seized of the Services, and then if he count in such a Writ of the Seisin
of his Ancestor, and not of his own Seisin, for that variance the Writ shall
abate.

Dyer 150. 85. 3, 4. P.M.
16. The Corporation of Eaton College was erected by H. 6. A void lease.
Per nomen praepositi and Collegii Regalis Collegij beatae Mariae de Eaton,
etc. And in the time of E. 6. a Lease was made by Sir Thomas Smith, and the
Fellows, Per nomen Praepositi and sociorum Collegii Regalis de Eaton, and
adjudged void for the variance.

Dyer 191. 22. 2, 3 Eliz.
17. The relict of a Copyholder pleaded a Custom, Custom.
to have the Copyhold during her life after her husbands death, and upon the
evidence the custom appeared to be only Durante viduitate, and thereupon the
Defendant demurring to the Evidence, Judgment was given against her.

Dyer 219. 11. 5. Eliz.
18. A man declares for the debt of 20 l. upon the sale of Wood, Debt.
and gives in evidence but for twenty Marks, it shall be found for the
Defendant, as if there had been variance in the things sold, Tamen Quaere if
there be no difference, for the Issue is Quod nullum Denarium inde debet, So in
Detinue of a chain of three ounces, where it weighed but two ounces, the Law
lay 22 E. 4:

Dyer 299. 34. 13. Eliz.
19. Issue was joined, that T. West, Issue,
Miles dominus de la War non demisit, and in truth he was then Dominus, but
at the time of the demise he was but Knight, yet it seemed to three Justices
that the dignity was parcel of the Issue, so it could not be found with him,
that pleaded his Lease.

Dyer 338. 14. 18. Eliz.
20. In an appeal of the death of a Brother against I. S. of M. etc. Appeal.
as principal, and one F. as accessory, whereas the name of the principal was
T.S. The accessory appears and pleads, Null tiel in rerum natura, as I.S. the
day of the Writ purchased, nor at any time since; In this case the two Chief
Justices held, That albeit there were another I.S. in another County, if it
were not in the same County, where the Town of M. is, or if he were dead before
the Writ purchased, the Plea suffices; and there also it was held, that in
Favorem vitae, a man might traverse the Sheriffs Return.

Hob. 38.
21. In Wast, Wast.
if more Towns be mentioned in the Declaration then in the Writ, where the
Wast is supposed to be done, the Writ shall abate. The Earl of Cumberlands case.

Hob. 118. the Bishop of Yorks case.
22. In a Quare Impedit for the Vicaridge of Leeds, Amendment,
the word Vaccariam was inserted instead of Vicariam, and exception being taken
thereunto, it was amended by the Cursitor in open Court.

Vide 40. 53.
167. Contrariety and Repugnancy. And therefore, Libera Eleemosina.

Co. Inst. 1. 97. a.
1. If Lands were given to hold In libera Eleemosina, reddendo, a Rent, the
Reservation of the Rent seems to be void, because it is repugnant and
contrary to the former grant, In libera Eleemosina.

Co. ibid. 142. a. 3.
2. A man upon his Feoffment or Conveyance cannot reserve to himself parcel
of the annual profits themselves, Profits cannot be reserved.
as to reserve the Vesture or Herbage of the Land, or the like, for that would
be repugnant to the Grant, Non debet enim esse reservatio, de profieiris ipsis,
quia ea conceduntur, sed de redditu novo extra proficia.

Lit. S. 220. Co. ib. 146. a. 2.
3. When in a general grant the Law does give two remedies, Proviso repugnant.
the Grantor may provide that the Grantee shall not use one of them, and may
leave him to take the other, as upon the Grant of an annuity, the Grantor may
provide, that the Grantee shall not charge his person; but where the Grantee
has but one Remedy, there that Remedy cannot be barred by any Proviso, for
such a Proviso would be repugnant to the Grant.

Co. ib. ^: 3:
4. The like.
If a man by his Deed grants a Rent charge out of the Manor of D. (wherein
the Grantor has nothing) with a Proviso that it shall not charge his person;
Here, albeit the Repugnancy does not appear in the Deed, yet the Proviso takes
away the whole effect of the Grant, and therefore is (in Judgment of Law)
repugnant, for upon the matter it is but a Grant of an Annuity, provided that
it shall not charge his person.

The like.
5. If a man by his Deed grant a Rentcharge out of Land, Co. ib. a. 4.
provided that it shall not charge the Land; Here, albeit the Grantee has a
double Remedy, as above is said exam. 3. yet the Proviso is repugnant, because
the Land is expressly charged with the Rent, but the Writ of unity is but
employed in the Grant, and therefore that may be restrained without any
repugnancy, and sufficient Remedy besides left for the Grantee,

Condition repugnant.
6. If a man give Lands to another, Co. ib. 164 a. 2.
and to the Heirs males of his body, upon Condition that if he dye without
heir female of his body, that then the Donor shall re-enter, this Condition is
utterly void; for he cannot have an heir Female, so long as he has an heir
male.

The like.
7. If a man make a Feoffment in Fee upon Condition that he shall not alien,
this Condition is repugnant and against Law, Co. ib. 206. b. 3. 222. b. 4.
Litt. S. 360.
and the Estate of the Feoffee is absolute: But if the Feoffee be bound in a
Bond, that the Feoffee and his Heirs shall not alien, this is good; for he may
notwithstanding alien, if he will forfeit his bond that he himself has made:
So it is also if a man make a Feoffment in Fee upon Condition that the Feoffee
shall not take the profits of the Land, this Condition is repugnant, and
against Law, and the Estate conveyed is absolute: But, a Bond with a condition
that the Feoffee shall not take the profits of the Land, is good. If a man be
bound with Condition to enfeoff his wife, the Condition is void and against
Law; because it is against a Maxim of Law, yet such a Bond is good: so if he
be bound to pay his wife money, that is good also, Et sic de similibus, whereof
there be plentiful Authorityes in our Books.

Devise, Release, etc.
8. If a man devise Land upon Condition, Co. ibid. 223. a. 1.
that the Devisee shall not alien, the Condition is void; And so it is of a
Grant, Release, Confirmation, or any other Conveyance, whereby a Fee-simple
does pass, for it is absurd and repugnant to reason, that he, who has no
possibility to have the Land revert to him, should restrain the Feoffee,
Devisee, or Grantee, in Fee-simple, of all his power to alien.

Chattells.
9. If a man be possessed of a Lease for years, or of an House, Co. ibidem.
or of any other Chattell, real or personal, and give or sell his whole
Interest or Property therein, upon Condition that the Donee or Vendee shall not
alien the same, this is a void Condition; because his whole Interest and
Property is out of him, so as he has no possibility of a Reverter, and it is
also against Trade and Traffic, and bargaining and contracting betwixt man and
man. Iniquum est ingenius hominibus non esse liberam rerum suarum alienationem:
Again, Rerum suarum quilibet est moderator and arbiter: Take also this Rule,
Regulariter non valet pactum de re mea non alienanda.

Seigniory in Rent, etc.
10. If a man be seized of a Seigniory, Rent, Advowson, Common, Co. ib. a. 3.
or any other Inheritance that lies in Grant, and by his Deed grants the
same to a man and to his Heirs, upon Condition that he shall not alien, this
Condition is also void for the repugnancy: Howbeit some have said, that a man
may grant a Rent charge newly created out of Lands to a man and his Heirs upon
such a Condition, and that in such case it shall be good, because the Rent is
of his own Creation, but this is against the reason and opinion of Littleton
(Sect. 360.) and also against the height and purity of a Fee simple: Howbeit,
the examples aforesaid are to be understood of Conditions annexed to the Grant
or Sale it self, Condition not repugnant
in respect of the Repugnancy, and not to any collateral thing; As if A. be
seized of Black acre in fee, and B. enfeoffeth him of white Acre, upon
Condition that A. shall not alien black acre, the Condition is good, because
the Condition is annexed to other Land, and ousteth not the Feoffee of his
power to alien the Land, whereof the Feoffment is made, and so no Repugnancy to
the State passed by the Feoffment; And so it is of gifts or Sales, of Chattells
real or personal: Again, A man before the Statute of Quia Emptores terraum,
might have made a Feoffment in Fee, and added further, that if he or his
Heirs did alien without License, that then he should pay a Fine, this had been
good: And it is said, that then the Lord might have restrained the Alienation
of his Tenant by Condition, because the Lord had a possibility of Reverter, and
so it is in the Kings case at this day, because he may reserve a Tenure to
himself.

Co. ib. 223. b 4. Co. l. 10. 38. b. 4. Mary Portingtons case. Co. l. 5. 40.
Sir Anthony Mildmayes case.
11. If a gift in Tail be made upon Condition, that the Donee, etc. Condition
repugnant upon grant of an estate in tail.
shall not alien, this Condition is good to some intents, and void to other
some; for as to all those alienations, which amount to any discontinuance of
the Estate Tail, (as Littleton speaks, Sect. 362.) or are against the
Statute of Westminster 2. the Condition is good without question; but as to a
common Recovery, the Condition is void, because this is no discontinuance but a
Bar, and this common Recovery is not restrained by the said Statute of
Westminster 2. and therefore such a Condition is repugnant to the Estate Tail;
for it is to be observed, That to this Estate Tail there be diverse incidents;
First, To be dispunishable of Wast. Secondly, The Wife of the Donee in Tail
shall be endowed. Thirdly, That the Husband of the Feme Donee after Issue shall
be Tenant by the Courtesy. Fourthly, That Tenant in Tail may suffer a common
Recovery: And therefore if a man make a gift in Tail upon condition to
restrain him of any of these incidents, the condition is repugnant and void in
Law: And it is further to be observed, That a collateral Warranty or lineall
without assets in respect of the recompense is not restrained by the Statute De
donis, no more is a common Recovery in respect ot the intended recompense: And
Littleton ubi supra, to the intent to exclude the Common Recovery, says, Tiel
alienation and discontinuance, joining them together.

Inst. pars 1. Co. 224. a. 2.
12. If a man before the Statute Do donis, had made a gift to a man, The like.
and to the Heirs of his Body, upon Condition, that after Issue he should not
have power to sell, this Condition had been repugnant and void; Pari ratione,
after the Statute a man makes a gift in Tail, the Law, Tacit, gives him power
to suffer a common Recovery, therefore to add a Condition, that he shall have
no power to suffer a common Recovery, is repugnant and void.

Co. ibidem.
13. If a man make a Feoffment to Baron and Feme in Fee, Feoffment to Baron and
Feme.
upon Condition that they shall not alien, to some intent this is good, and to
some other intent it is void, for to restrain an alienation by Feoffment, or
alienation by Deed, it is good; because such an alienation is tortious and
voidable: But to restrain their alienation by Fine is repugnant and void,
because it is lawful and unavoidable.

14. It is said, that if a man enfeoff an Infant in Fee, upon condition, Infant.
that he shall not alien, Co. ibid.
this is good to restrain alienations during his minority, but not after his
full age.

Co. ibid.
15. It is likewise said, Spirit. Corpor.
that a man by License may give Land to a Bishop, and his Successors; or to an
Abbot and his Successors, and add a Condition to it, that they shall not
without the consent of their Chapter or Covent alien, because it was intended a
Mortmain, that is, that it should for ever continue in that Sea or House, for
that they had it En author droit, for religious and good dses: And note, That
whatsoever is prohibited by the intent of any Act of Parliament, may be
prohibited by Condition, and shall cause no repugnancy.

Confirmation.
16. A Disseisor makes a Lease for one hundred years, Co. ibid. 297* a. 2.
and the Disseisee confirms the estate of the Lessee for fifty of those years,
this is a confirmation of the whole term, for when he had once confirmed the
Lessees estate, the whole estate was thereby confirmed, and therefore
afterward to limit the term to fifty years only, when the whole term was
confirmed before, is repugnant and void; but the Confirmation ought to have
been of the Land for part of the term; so likewise might the Disseisee
confirm part of the Land for part of the term, etc. Vide infra 32.

Habendum.
17. In a Deed or other Conveyance of Land, Co. ibid. 299. a. 2.
when the Habendum does either agree in substance with the Premises, or
enlarge them, the Habendum is good, but when it abridgeth the Premises, it is
repugnant and void. Vide Dyer 272. 30.

Repugnant covenant.
18. John de Mar made a Charter to John de Burford of Fee-simple and the same
day it was covenanted between them, Co. ibid. 217. b. 3. 12 E. 2. Voucher 265.
that John de Burford should hold the same Tenements for eight years, and if
Jo. de Mar did not pay to Jo. de Burford one hundred marks at the end of the
term, that then the Land should remain to Jo. de Burford and his heirs: In
this case, the subsequent Covenant was repugnant and void; for first, the
Charter of the Fee-simple was absolute, and the Covenant being made after the
Charter, could neither alter the absolute Charter, nor upon a Condition
precedent give him a Fee-simple, that had a Fee-simple before.

A saving Repugnant.
19. I.S. being seized of certain Land in Fee, Co. l. 1. 47. a. in Alton Woods
case.
the same Land is given by Act of Parliament to the King in Fee, saving the
Estates, Rights, etc. of all persons; In this case, the Estate of I. S (the
owner of the Land) is not saved; for that would be repugnant, and make the
express gift void, and vain.

Act of Parliament repugnant.
20. It appears in our Books, that a saving in an Act of Parliament, which is
repugnant to the body of the Act is void, Co. l. 1. 47. in Alton Woods case.
as in Plowdens Commentaries fol. 563. b. where the supposed Attainder of the
Duke of Norfolk was by Act of Parliament in primo Mariae declared to be void
and null, ab initio, saving the Estates and Leases made by E. 6. This saving
was void, for when the Attainder was declared to be void, the said saving was
against the body of the Act, and therefore repugnant and void.

The like.
21. It is enacted by the Statute of 31 H. 8. cap. 13. that all Houses of
Religion, Co. ibid. a. 3.
and their Possessions then or afterward to be dissolved shall be the Kings in
the same estate and condition, as they were at the time of the making of the
said Act, saving to all strangers their Interests, etc. After the said Act the
Abbot of Ramsey grants the next avoydance of a Church of his Patronage, and
after the Abbey is dissolved, and it was adjudged (Mich. 6. and 7. Eliz. Dyer
231.) that the Grant was void, and the saving repugnant to the body of the Act,
for if the Advowson were in the King in the same estate and condition, as it
was at the time of the making of the Act, then a Grant made after cannot be
saved.

22. If Land escheat to the King by Forfeiture of Treason, Co. ibid. Co. l. 8.
118. b. 3. Doctor Bonhams case.
and after this Land is given to another by Act of Parliament, The like.
saving to all others their Rents, Services, etc. This saving is repugnant and
void, for they were extinct by the Forfeiture, 14 Eliz. Dyer 313.

The like.
23. By the Statute of 1 E. 6. of Chanteries, all Services, Rents, Co. Inst.
ibid. a. 4.
etc. are saved, yet this saving as to Services is repugnant and void, for the
King cannot hold of any, as it is held 14 Eliz. Dyer 313. a.

24. In the case of Alton Woods, Co ibid. and 52. b. 1.
the Manor of Abbottesley being expressly given to the King, by the Statute
of 28 H. 8. the general saving cannot extend to save the estate, The like.
etc. of him, that was seized of the Land, for that would be repugnant to the
body of the Act, and would make the Act vain and idle.

Co. l. 1. 84. a. 3. Corbets case. Co. l. 6. 40 b. Sir Anthony Mildmayes case.
25. C. covenants to stand seized to his own use for life, Perpetuities.
the Remainder to R. in tail, the Remainder to A. in tail, etc. upon this
Condition or Proviso, that if any of these shall resolve to bar the said estate,
that then his estate shall cease, as if he were naturally dead, and be to the
next Remainder; Here, this Proviso is repugnant and against Law, for an estate
tail cannot cease by the only death of the Tenant in tail, but by his death
without Issue, and death natural or civil is requisite to every Descent,
Reversion, or Remainder upon the determination of an estate tail. Vide pl.
ibid.

Co. ibid. b. 3.
26. In 8 Assis. Pl. 33. A man gives Land to Mary and Johan his Sisters, Joint
estate repugnant.
Et haeredibus de corporibus earum legitime procreatis (whereby they had a
joint estate for life, and several Inheritances) and the Donor (intending that
neither of them should break the Ioynture, but that the Survivor should have
all, per jus accrescendi) added this clause, Sub hac forma quod illa quae
illarum diutius vixerit tenebit terram illam integram; Howbeit, in as much as
his intent is contrary to Law, if the Ioynture were severed by Fine levied, the
Survivor shall not have the part so severed by the said clause, which he had so
inserted of his own cenceit and imagination repugnant to Law and reason.

Co. ibid. b. 4.
27. In Plesintons case in 6 R. 2. (which see tit. Quid juris clamat, Condition
repugnant.
20.) A man makes a Lease upon Condition, that if the Lessor grants the
Reversion, that then the Lessee shall have fee; In this case, if the Lessor
grant the Reversion by Fine, the Lessee shall not have fee, for the Condition
is repugnant and void. Vide Pl. Com. 32. a. 4. Colthirst and Bevish.

Co. l. 1. 176. b. 1. Mildmayes case.
28. When an use is raised in consideration of Fatherly love, Proviso repugnant.
etc. with a Proviso to make Leases, the Proviso is repugnant and void; because
when the Indenture is once sealed and delivered, his power of making Leases is
taken away: it is otherwise where uses are raised upon a Fine, Recovery, or
Feoffment, for there needs no consideration.

Co. l. 2. 23. b. 4. in Baldwins case.
29. In Baldwins case in the 2 Report, Premises and Habendum repugnant.
these Resolutions were agreed for Law; 1. As to things which take their
essence and effect by the Delivery of the Deed without other ceremony, and
which lie in Grant, when there is variance between the Premises and the
Habendum; In such case, the estate which so passes by the Delivery of the
Deed, and is most advantageous to the Grantee shall stand, and the other shall
be void for the repugnancy; So if a man grants rent on Condition, etc. out of
his Land by the Premises of the Deed to a man and his Heirs, Habendum to the
Grantee for years or life; in this case, the Habendum is repugnant, for fee
passed in the Premises by the delivery of the Deed, and therefore the Habendum
for years or life is repugnant and void. 2. If a man by Deed grant a Rent in
esse, or a Seigniory in the Premises to one and his Heirs, Habendum to the
Grantee for years or for life, albeit it another thing or ceremony is requisite
( viz. Attornement) besides the delivery of the Deed, yet in as much as the
thing lies in Grant, and both the estates, viz. as well the estate in fee, as
the estate for years or for life, ought to have one and the same ceremony (
viz. Attornement) to pass it; for that cause (in such case) the Habendum is
also repugnant and void. 3. When a man gives in fee by the Premises, Habendum
to the Lessee for life; in this case the Hebendum is repugnant and void, for
one and the same ceremony ( viz. Livery) is requisite to both the estates, and
therefore when Livery is made according to the form and effect of the Deed, it
shall be taken most forcibly against the Feoffor, and most for the advantage of
the Feoffee, and the Habendum (in such case) is repugnant and void, and until
Livery the Feoffee has but an estate at will. 4. When to an estate limited by
the Premises a ceremony is requisite to the perfection of the Estate, and to
the Estate limited by the Habendum nothing is requisite to the perfection and
essence thereof, but only the delivery of the Deed, there albeit the Habendum
be of a less Estate, then is mentioned in the premises, yet the Habendum
shall stand, and the premises are repugnant and void, as it fell out in the
principal case in Baldwins case; for A. covenants, grants, and lets to farm to
B. and C. and to the heirs of C. to have for ninety nine years, etc. here the
Estate for years limited by the Habendum took effect by the delivery of the
Deed, whereas the Estate mentioned in the premises could not take effect
without Livery, and for that cause was adjudged repugnant and void.

Indictment repugnant.
30. Where a Wound was given the fourth of August, Co. l. 4. 42. b. 2. Heydons
case.
and the party dyed the nineteenth of December after, An Indictment against A.
and B. as Abbettors to the Felony, was drawn in these words, Et praed. A. and
B. tempore feloniae and murdri praed. fact. viz. 4: Aug. etc. Felonice fuerunt
presents, etc. ad feloniam and murdrum praed. in forma praed: faciend: And
this Indictment as to A. and B. the Abbettors, was adjudged insufficient for
the Repugnancy, because no Felony was committed until the death of the party,
and none shall be adjudged a Felon by relation, which is but a Fiction in Law.

The like.
31. In an Appeal of Murder, Co. l. 4. 42. b 4. Humes case.
the Wound was laid in the Count to be given at Weetwood, and the death to be
at Westliborne, and then he concludes, Et sic praed. L.O. apud Weetwood praed.
modo and forma praed. the said A. H. Felonice, etc. Murdravit. And it was
resolved, that the Count was repugnant and insufficient, for it cannot be said
that he murdered him at the place where the wound was given, but where the party
dyed. The like is adjudged in Wrotes case, Co. l: 4: a: 4.

Confirmation.
32. A Prebend leases for seventy years, Co. l. 5. 81. a. 4. Foords case.
the Deane and Chapter (being the Patron) confirm, dimisionem praed. in the
Form aforesaid, for one and fifty years, and no farther, this confirms the
entire Term; for after the Term is confirmed, one and fifty years are
repugnant and void: It had been otherwise if they had recited the Lease for
seventy years, and then confirmed the Land for one and fifty years. vide
supra, 16.

Conditions repugnant.
33. It has been said, Co. l. 6. 42. b. 4. Sir Anthony Mildmayes case.
If a man make a gift in Tail upon Condition that he shall not make Feoffment,
this is a good Condition, but if the Condition be, that he shall not make a
Charter of Feoffment, this is not good, for this without Livery (as Littleton
says, fo. 15.) amounts but to a Tenancy at Will, which Tenant in Tail cannot
be restrained to do: So if a man make a gift in Tail, upon Condition that he
shall not make a Lease for his own life, this is void and repugnant; for when
a man makes a gift in Tail (which is an Estate of Inheritance, and by
possibility may continue for ever) and thereby makes the Donee the Principal
owner of the land, he cannot restrain him from doing any lawful Act, or
making any Estate, which is no Wrong to any, and which by the Law he may
lawfully do or make: Howbeit, if a man make a Lease for Life or Years, with
Condition that he shall not alien or demise, this is good, because the Lessor
has the Reversion, whereby he has power to restrain the Lessee; so if a man
demise a Copyhold Manor for Life or Years, with Condition, that he shall
make no voluntary Grant of any Copyhold Lands, according to the Custom of the
Manor, this is good: but if a man grant in tail a Copyhold Manor with such a
Condition, the Condition is void for the repugnancy.

Co. l. 6. 61. a. 3. Gatewards case.
34. It was alleged, that the custom of the Town of S. was, Common.
that every Inhabitant within it had used, etc. to have Common (by reason of
Commonancy) within a place in the Town of H. which was another Town, and it
was adjudged insufficient for the repugnancy.

Co. l. 7. 25. a. 2. Buts case.
35. A. seized of black Acre in fee, Rent. Avowry.
and possessed of white Acre for years, grants a Rentcharge to B. for life out
of both of them, A. distrains and avows in white Acre, concluding thus in his
Plea, Virtute cujus, he was seized in dominico suo ut de libero tenemento pro
termino vitae suae, and the Avowry was adjudged insufficient and repugnant,
because he could not have a Frank-tenement out of a term for years: Derivata
potestus non potest esse major primitiva, Max. 26.

Co. l. 8. 118. a. 2. in Doct. Bonhams case.
36. When an Act of Parliament is against common right and reason, Cessavit.
Act of Parliament repugnant.
or repugnant or impossible to be performed, the common Law shall control and
adjudge such an Act to be void, as the Statute of West. 2. cap. 21. gives a
Writ of Cessavit heredi petenti super heredem tenementum, and super eos, quibus
alienatum fuerit hujusmodi tenementum, and yet it is adjudged in 33 E. 3. Tit.
Cessavit 42. that the Heir should not have a Cessavit: The case was this,
there were two Coparceners Lords, and Tenant by Fealty and certain Rent, the
one Coparcener has Issue and dies, in this case the Aunt and the Neice shall
not join in a Cessavit, because the heir cannot have it for the Cesser in the
time of her Ancestors, in regard the arrearages do not belong to her, etc. (See
F. N. B. 209. F. and. Pl. Com. 110.) besides in a Cessavit the Tenant before
Judgment may render the arrearages and damages, etc. and retain the Land, and
that cannot be done, when such an heir brings a Cessavit for the Cesser in the
time of his Ancestor, because the arrearages then incurred belong not to him,
as aforesaid.

Co. l. 8. 127. a. 1. The City of London case.
37. Where there is a Market overt, and correction in any, Prescription
repugnant.
a Prescription to sell commodities in private houses or other places out of
the open Market is repugnant and void, because so the Seller may use deceit and
is not subject to search, Qui male agit odit lucem, and omnia delicta in aperto
leviora sunt, See 11 H. 6. 19. The Prior of Dunstables case.

Co. l. 9. 58. b. 3. William Aldreds case.
38. When a man has lawful easement or profit by prescription time out of
mind, another Custom which is also time out of mind, Prescription for a way.
cannot take it away, because that were repugnant, the one being as ancient as
the other; as if a man has a way over the Land of A. to his Franck-Tenement by
Prescription time out of mind, etc. A. cannot allege Prescription or Custom
to stop the said way.

Co. l. 9. 109. b. 3. Meriel Treshams case.
39. In Debt against an Administratrix, she pleads in Bar, Bar repugnant.
Quod ipsa plene administravit omina bona, etc. quae fuerunt, etc. and quod
illa nulla habet bona, etc. quae fuerunt, etc. nec habuit die impetrationis
brevis, etc. praeter bona and catalla ad valentiam, of the Kings debt, and of
several Recognizances, by which plea she confesses, that she had sufficient
in her hands to satisfy the said Debt and Recognizances; And then she pleads
further, Quod ipsa nulla alia sive plura habet bona, etc. quae fuerunt, etc.
Praeterquam bona and catalla, quae non sufficient ad satisfaciendum Praed.
seperalia debita: Which is clearly and Ex diametro repugnant to what she had
confessed before; and thereupon the said Bar was adjudged insufficient.

Co. l. 11. 80. b. 2. Jews Bowls case.
40. A Feme brings a Cui in vita, quod clamat tenere ad vitam, Cui in vita,
Contrariety.
and maintains it in her Count by a gift in special Tail to her and her
Husband, and that her Husband is dead without Issue, and the Writ abated for
the contrariety of the Title; for in the Writ she named her self but a bare
Tenant for life, whereas in her Count it appeared, that she had such an Estate
for life, which had greater Privileges incident unto it, then a bare Estate
for life has, Vide 18 E. 3. 37. Assignment of Errors. Contrariety.


F. N. B. 21. b.
41. In a Writ of Error upon a Judgment given in the Common Bench, the
Plaintiff cannot assign for Error, that the Justices of the Common Bench did
not give the Judgment, but that the Clerks of their own heads did it; Neither
can he assign for Error, that the Jurors gave Verdict for the Defendant, and
that the Justices entered it for the Plaintiff, and gave Judgment for him;
because such assignment is contrary to that which the Court does as Judges.

Remainder limited upon a contrariety.
42. A Remainder limited upon a contrariety cannot be good, Pl. Com. 29. b. 3.
Colthrist and Bevisham.
as in the case of Rickill in Littleton, S. 720. for when he had once made a
Feoffment and vested the estate in one, he could not make that estate cease as
to him, and cause it to remain to another: So if Land be given to a man and
his heirs, so long as I. S. shall have heirs of his body, and if I. S. die
without heir of his body, that then it shall remain to another in fee, this
Remainder is void for the contrariety; because the first estate was Fee-simple
determinable, upon which a Remainder cannot depend.

The like.
43. If a Lease for life be made upon Condition, Pl. Com. ibid. and 32. a. 4.
34. b. 4.
that if a stranger pay to the Lessor twenty pounds, that then after the death
of the Tenant for life, it shall remain to the stranger, this is a good
Remainder, so if a Lease for life be made to Baron and Feme, and it is
appointed by the said Lease, that if A. their eldest Son dye, living the Baron
and Feme, that then it shall remain to B. their second Son for life, this is
also a good Remainder; for in these cases there is no contrariety, because in
the first the stranger shall have it expressly after the death of Tenant for
life, and in the other it is intendable that B. shall have the Remainder after
the death of Baron and Feme: But if a Lease for life be made upon Condition,
that if a stranger pay to the Lessor twenty pounds, that then immediately the
Land shall remain to the same stranger, this Remainder is void for the
contrariety, because the Tenant for life ought to have it during his life,
during which time the stranger cannot have it.

Proviso repug^^nt.
44. C. makes B. and a Feme his Executors, 19 H. 8. Dyer 4. Pl. 10.
provided that B. shall not administer his Goods, this Proviso is void for the
repugnancy, for when C. had made them once his Executors, the several powers
limited to them afterward are void, because when the intent of a man, who
makes a Testament, agrees not with the Law, his intent shall be taken as void,
as if a man devise to H. in fee, and if he dye without heir, that M. shall
have the Land, this devise is void for the repugnancy as to M. for one
Fee-simple cannot depend upon another Fee-simple, by the Law.

Condition ^^id.
45. The Custom of London is, Dyer 33. 12. 28, and 29 H. 8.
that a man may devise his Purchase-Land in Mortmaine, and a Purchasor devised
by his Will, that the Prior and Covent of Saint Bartholm. and their Successors
should have the Land, Ita quod reddant annuatim Decano and Capitulo Sancti
Pauli 16. Marc. And if they failed of payment, that their estate should cease,
and that then the said Deane and Chapter should have it, and for the Condition
broken those of Paul's entered; and it seemed clear to Baldwin and Fitzh. that
the Condition was void, for no estate could remain after the Fee-simple given
away, because the Feoffor had determined his Interest and Right, and then a
stranger could not enter for the Condition broken, but the heir ought to do it.

^^ape.
46. In debt against the Sheriffs of London, Dyer 66. a. 11. 3 E. 6.
for an escape of a Prisoner out of Ludgate, they plead, that three years
before Jerveis and Curteis their Predecessors suffered the same Prisoner to
escape to Lambeth in Surrey, he being then in their Guard in Ludgate Goal
London, which is impossible; for the former Sheriffs could not let them go at
large, when he was imprisoned and in their custody at the time of the escape,
and then the escape ought to have been supposed in London, where the Prison
was; for which repugnancy and other errors the Plea was adjudged void.

Dyer 68. b. 28. 5 E. 6.
47. An Indictment of Murder was adjudged insufficient; Indictment.
for that the place of the assault was set down, and not the place of the
Murder, nor these words, adhuc and Ibidem, inserted in the Indictment, in case
the Assault and Murder were acted at one and the same place; And this was for
the uncertainty, because the Assault and the Murder are of differing natures,
and might be done at several places.

Dyer 209. 21. 3, 4 Eliz.
48. A Lease is made for years upon Condition, Condition repugnant.
that if the Lessor grant the Reversion, the Lessee shall have fee, the Lessor
levies a Fine, the Conusee brings a Quid juris clamat, the Termor claims fee,
this is a Forfeiture, because the Condition was repugnant: And note the
Judgment there, that the term shall be forfeit, the Conuses might enter, and
the Fine shall be engrossed. Vide Plowd. Sanders against Freeman, and
Plesintons case, 6 R. 2.

Dyer 264. 40. 9 El.
49. Repugnant Lease.
Baron and Feme being Termors of the three Conyes in Fleet Street, the Baron
leaseth part of the term by these words, the Message called the three Conyes
with all the Chambers, Sellars, and Shops, except to the Baron the Shops, ad
proprium opus and usum, the Feme enters into the Shops, and then brings
Ejectione firmae, and per Curiam the exception is but temporary to the Baron
himself, there being no mention of Executors or Assigns, and also the
exception is void for the Shops, because repugnant to the demise of the Shops.

Dyer 288. 54. 12 El.
50. Exception repugnant.
If a common person grant the Manor of D. except the Courts and perquisites,
the exception is void for the repugnancy, and the Grantee shall keep Courts and
have the perquisites, notwithstanding such exception: Howbeit, it is otherwise
in the Kings case. Vide Max. 81. 103.

Hob. 13. Sir Daniel Nortons case.
51. If an Undersheriff covenant with his High Sheriff, Sheriff and
Undersheriff.
that he will not execute any Writ of execution for any debt above twenty
pounds, without special Warrant from the High Sheriff; This Covenant is void
for the repugnancy: for albeit he may chose not to make an Undersheriff at
all, or may make him at his will, and remove him also if he please, yet he
cannot leave him an Undersheriff, and yet abridge his power, no more then the
King may, in case of the Sheriff himself. Vi. 65. 25.

Hob. 39. John Ion's case.
52. An Office was found, Office.
that A. being seized of the Manor of D. in fee, enfeoffed B. in fee, to the
use of himself for life, the Remainder to C. in fee, and that A. being so
seized of the Premises, dyed thereof so seized; And this Office was adjudged
void for the repugnancy.

168. It will not drive a man to justify or show that, which he goes about to
defeat, or which makes against him.
Co. l. 7. 10. a. Vghtreds case.
1. The Marquess of Winchester grants the Captainship of a Fort, Condition
subsequent not to be averred.
and for the exercising of that Office, and for finding a Gunner, and six
Soldiers, he grants him an Annuity of two and thirty pounds yearly; upon Suit
for this Annuity exception was taken to the count, for that the Plaintiff had
not therein averred his exercising of the Office: but the exception was
overruled by the Court; because in all cases when an Interest or Estate
commenceth upon a Condition precedent, be the Condition or Act to be performed
by the Plaintiff or Defendant, or any other, and be the Condition in the
affirmative or negative, there the Plaintiff ought to show it in his Count, and
to aver the performance thereof, for then the Interest or estate commenceth in
him by the performance of the Condition, and is not in him until the Condition
be performed; but it is otherwise when the Interest or Estate passes presently
and vests in the Grantee, and is to be defeated by matter, ex post facto, or
Condition subsequent, be the Condition or Act to be performed by the Plaintiff
or Defendant, or any other, and be the Condition in the affirmative or
negative; In such case the Plaintiff may count generally without showing the
performance thereof, and it shall be pleaded by him that will take advantage of
the Condition or matter, ex post facto, for every one ought to allege that,
which makes for him, and which is for his advantage, and no man shall be forced
to allege that, which makes against him, Vide plus ibidem.

The like.
2. If I grant to one, that when he shall be promoted to a benefice, Pl. Com
25* b 4. Colthrist and Bevish.
that then he shall have an Annuity; In this case, if he demand the Annuity, he
ought first to show that he is promoted to a Benefice, in such a case he shall
have a Writ of Annuity, and shall not show that he is yet promoted, because the
annuity precedes, and the promotion is subsequent, and goes in defeasance of
the annuity, and therefore ought to be showed on the contrary part, and not by
the Plaintiff, because it makes against him, Vide 15 H. 7. fol. 1. Br. Annuity
22. and Count 43. and Co. l. 7. 10. b. Vghtreds case.

The like.
3. In Colth. and Bevishams case, Pl. Com. ibid. 26. b. 4. 30. a. 3. 32. b. 2.
34. a. 2.
Pl. Com. The Grange was to remain to Peter Bevisham for life, Si vellet
inhabitare, etc. durante termino, which was the whole Term, and immediately
after the death of Henry and Elianor, and therefore it was alleged, that he
should have showed in his bar the time of his entry, and his abode thereupon;
but it was resolved, that the bar was good notwithstanding that exception,
because by common intendment it shall be taken, that his entry was immediately
after the Remainder fell, and if it were not so, the Plaintiff ought to have
showed it, and not the Defendant in his Bar, because it made against him, being
in Defeasance of his Estate, etc.

Condition subsequent.
4. If I grant to one, that when he shall do such an Act, Pl. Com. 30. a. 2.
Colthirst and Bevish.
that then he shall have a Rent charge out of my Land, in this case, he shall
not avow for the Rent, unless he first show the performance of the Condition,
for that enables him to the Rent; but if I grant to one out of my Land a
Rentcharge, upon Condition, that he shall do such a thing, here he shall avow
for the rent without showing the thing to be done, for the Condition is
subsequent and goes in defeasance of the estate, which he that would have the
estate to continue ought not to show, because it makes against him.

Copyhold.
5. A Copyhold Lord in suing for a Fine upon admittance, Ho. 135. Denny and
Lemman.
need not aver, that the Fine set upon the Copyholder was reasonable, because
that might perhaps make against him, if it should be adjudged by the Court
unreasonable: but the unreasonablenesse of the Fine ought to be pleaded on the
Copyholders part.

169. Non potest adduci exceptio ejusdem rei, cujus petitur dissolutio.
Tail discontinued.
1. If Tenant in tail of Lands make a gift in tail, or a Lease for life, Co.
Inst. pars 1. b. 2.
rendering a rent, and dies, and the Issue brings a Formedon in the
Descender, in this case, the Reversion and Rent shall not bar the Demandant,
because by his Formedon he is to defeat the Reversion and Rent. Et non potest
adduci, etc.

Disclaimer. Error.
2. If the Tenant disclaim, Co. l. 8 61. b. 4. in Beechers case.
he shall not have a Writ of Error against his Disclaimer, because by his
Disclaimer he has barred himself of his right in the Land; for the words of
the Disclaimer of the Tenant are, Nihil habet nec habere clamat in illa terra,
nec die impetrationis brevis originalis, etc. habuit sive clamavit, sed aliquid
in illa terra habere dead^ocat and disclamat; And against this he cannot have a
Writ of Error to have restitution of the Land against such Disclaimer. Vide 6
E. 3. 7. and F. N. B. 22. c.

170. None shall take exception to an Error or Act, which operateth to his own
advantage.
Co. l. 3. 69. b. 4. Lincoln College case.
1. C. and F. Ioynt-tenants for life, Collateral Warranty.
and to the heirs of the body of C. intermarry, and have Issue E. who after
the death of C. disseiseth F. and suffers a common Recovery, F. releaseth to
the recoverors with Warranty and dies, also E. dies without Issue, and R. as
heir male of the body of C. brings his Formedon in Descender; and here the
question was, whether or no the collateral Warranty of F. did bar the
Demandant, or that the heir in tail might have the Land by force of the
Statute of 11 H. 7. 20 which gives Entry to the next Heir upon Discontinuance,
etc. of the Inheritance of the Husband by the Feme: But it was resolved, that
this case was out of the intention of the said Act, because the intention of
that Act was to restrain such women to make Discontinuance, Warranty, or
Recovery in bar, or prejudice of the heir in tail, or of them in Remainder,
etc. but when the heir in tail himself conveys and assures the Land to others,
the release or confirmation of the Feme with Warranty is but to make perfect
and corroborate the estate, which the heir in tail has made, and therefore
such Warranty is not restrained by the said Act; for it shall be intended for
the benefit of the heirs in tail, and not to their prejudice: And this is also
the reason, why a common Recovery in respect of the intended recompense was not
restrained by the Statute of West. 2.

Co. l. 8. 59. a 3 in Beechers case.
2. For the reversall of a Judgment a man shall not assign for Error, that
which makes for his advantage, Assignment of Error.
as to allege that he was essoined, where he ought not to have been essoined,
or that he had a longer day then the common day, or that he had aid granted to
him, where it was not grantable, or the like. Vide 7 E. 3. 25. per Herle, 8 H.
5. 2. 11 H. 4. 8. F. N. B. 21. f.

Co. l. 11. 56. a. Benhams case.
3. M. brings a Writ of Annuity against B. and they being at Issue, Insufficient
Verdict.
the Jury found for the Plaintiff, and also the arrearages, but did not assesse
any damages or costs; whereupon the Verdict was imperfect, neither could it be
supplied by a Writ to inquire the damages; Howbeit, afterward the Plaintiff
released his damages and costs, and thereupon had Judgment: whereupon the
Defendant brings a Writ of Error, and assigns for Error, the insufficiency of
the Verdict, but the Judgment was affirmed, because the Plaintiffs release of
the damages and costs was for the Defendants benefit and advantage, and
therefore ought not by him to be excepted against. Vide 22 Eliz. Dyer 369, 370.
Where in a Writ of Ejectione Custodiae terrae and haeredis, the Jurors assessed
damages entirely, which was insufficient, for it lies not for the heir, yet
the Plaintiff released his damages and had Judgment for the Land: Note, that
insufficient Assessment of damages and no Assessment is all one.

F. N. B. 22. d. and 25. c.
4. It is not Error to suffer one to make an Attorney in an Action, Attorney.
in which he ought not to make an Attorney, because that is for his advantage.

171 Nemo tenetur armare adversarium suum contrase.
Challenge.
1 He that challenges a Iuror for the hundred, or for Cosinage, Co. Inst. pars
1. 157. a. 2. and 4.
must show in what hundred he has no land, and how he is of kin, and shall not
drive the other party to show it.

2 The Plaintiff in a Replevin pleads in bar of an Avowrie for damage fesant,
Co. l. 5. 78. b. 3. Grayes case.
that he has common of Pasture by custom in the place where, etc. belonging to
his Copyhold, which custom was traversed, and it was found that he had such
Common there, but withal that every Copyholder had used to pay time out of
mind, etc. pro eadem communia unam Gallinam, and quinque ova annuatim; and it
was adjudged, that upon this verdict the Plaintiff should have Judgment, albeit
he omitted in his bar the yearly payment of the Hen and five eggs; And the
reason was, because the Plaintiff was not bound to show more than what made for
him, and tended to his advantage.

172 It favors Diligence; And therefore hates Folly and Negligence.
Waste,
1 Waste may be done in houses by suffering them (by negligence) to be
uncovered, whereby the spars, fasters, planchers, Co. Inst. pars 1. 51. a. 2.
and b. 2.
or other timber of the house become rotten; So likewise if he suffer a wall of
the sea to be in decay, so as by the flowing and reflowing of the sea the
Meadow or Marsh adjacent is surrounded, whereby the same becomes unprofitable;
Also the burning of an house by negligence or mischance is waste.

Waste.
2 A prohibition of waste did lie at the Common law against tenant by the
Courtesy, tenant in Dower, and a Guardian in Chivalry, Co. ibid. 53. b. 4.
because they were in by the Law; but not against tenant for life or years,
because they come in by the Act of the lessor himself, and therefore it is
imputed to his own folly and negligence, if upon granting the term, he made not
sufficient provision against committing of waste, for in that case the Law did
not aid him. Vide Co. l. 4. 62. b. 3. in Herlakendens case, and Co. l. 5. 13.
b. 3. in the Countess of Salops case.

Guardian in soccage.
3 If Guardian in soccage marry the heir under 14 years of age without a
convenient fortune, Co. ibid. 88. a. 3. Littl.. 123.
he is compellable to make it good upon his account; for it will be imputed to
his own folly, that he married him without provision of a convenient portion
answerable to his estate.

Goods gaged.
4 If goods be delivered to one as a gage or pledge, Co. ibid. 89. a. 4.
and be afterward stolen from him, yet he shall be discharged of them,
because he has a property in them, and therefore he ought to keep them no
otherwise than as his own; Tender.
but if he that gaged them tendered the money before the stealing, and the other
refused to deliver them, then for this negligence and default in him he shall
be charged with them.

Default in re^^^ictions.
5 In real actions where Voucher lies, Co. ibid. 101. b. 4.
if the Sheriff return that the Vouchee is summoned, and he make default, then
a Magnum Cape ad valentiam is awarded, when if he make default again, then
Judgment is to be given against the tenant; Also if the vouchee do appear, and
after make default, then a Parvum Cape ad valentiam is awarded, and if he
thereupon make default again, then judgment is to be given, as before.

Villein. (...) Lords (...).
6 If a Villein purchase land, Co. ibid. 118. a. 4. and b. 1, 2. Littl.. 177.
and alien the land to another before the Lord enter; In that case, the Lord
cannot enter, for it shall be adjudged his folly, that he entered not, when the
land was in the Villeins hand: So it is likewise, if a freeman has issue, and
afterward by confession becomes bond, and purchase lands in fee, and before
the Lord enter he dies seized, and the land descends to his issue, which is
free, in this case also the Lord shall not enter: The like Law it is, if the
land so purchased by the Villein escheat to the Lord of the fee before any
entry made by the Lord of the Villein; as if the Villein dye without heir, or
be convict or outlawed for felony; or if a recovery be had against the Villein
in a Cessavit, or the like, in all such cases, it will be imputed to the folly
of the Lord of the Villein, that he entered not in time, when he might: Also if
a Villein be disseised before the Lord does enter, the Lord may enter into the
land in the name of the Villein, and thereby goin the Inheritance of the land;
but if there be a descent cast, so as the entry of the Villein is taken away,
then the Villein must recontinue the estate of the land by judgment and
execution, before the Lord of the Villein can enter: So if the Villein purchase
lands in tail and alien before the Lord enter, the Lords entry is taken away
causa qua supra; but if the Villein dye, and his issue recover the land
entayled in a Formedon, then the Lord may enter: The like law is also of
Seigniories, Co. ibid. 2.
Advowsons, Reversions, Remainders, Rents, Commons certain, and such like
certain Inheritances: And all the reason of these ^^^es is, (besides the Lords
folly and negligence) because the Lord before his entry has no interest, but
only a bare possibility: Howbeit it is otherwise in the Kings case after office
found, because nullum tempus occurrit Regi.

Co. ibid. 118. a. 4. and b. 3. Littl.. 177.
7 If a Villein purchase goods or chattels, Villein. The Lords seizure of Goods.
and sell or give them away before the Lord seize them, his title to the goods
is gone, for the Law imputes it to his folly and negligence, as before of
lands, etc. for a bare claim of the goods of the Villein is not sufficient in
Law, but he must seize some part in the name of all the residue, or that the
goods be within the view of the Lord, for the claim and view amount to a
seizure, as the claim of a Ward (being present) by word is a sufficient
seizure, albeit the Guardian lays no hands of him: And here under the name of
goods and chattels are comprehended not only personal goods, as an Horse, a
Cow, Housholdstuff, and the like; but also chattels real, as Wardships, Leases
for years, Interests by Statute staple, Statute merchant, Elegit, or the like:
and the gifts aforesaid do not only extend to gifts in deed, but likewise to
gifts in Law; And therefore if a Wife has goods and takes Baron, upon this
gift in Law by force of the marriage, the land is barred; So likewise if a
Villein having goods make his executors and dye, by this gift in Law the Lord
is barred for his folly and neglect.

Co. ibid. 131. a. 4.
8 In an action where a Protection lies, ^^^tecti^n.
if after it is allowed the party tarrieth in the Country without going to the
service (for which he was relieved) above a convenient time after the
Protection had, or otherwise withdraw himself from the service, upon
Information thereof to the Lord Chancellor, he shall repeal the Protection in
that case, by an Innotescimus. See the Statute of 13 R. 2. 16.

Littl.. 261. Co. ibid. 173. a. 4.
9 If lands be given to a man in tail, Partition.
who has as much Feesimple lands, and has issue two daughters, and dye, and
the daughters make partition, and the feesimple lands are assigned to the
youngest daughter for her purparty, and the entailed lands to the elder, and
the youngest daughter aliens the feesimple lands, and having issue dies; In
this case the issue of the youngest daughter may enter into the moiety of the
entailed lands notwithstanding such partition, for it will be imputed to the
folly of the eldest daughter, that she agreed to such a Partition, whereas she
might have had upon the Partition the moiety of the one and also of the other;
because in a writ of Partition she was not compellable to take the whole estate
in tail, but might have challenged moities in each, as aforesaid, and that ex
provisione legis: But when she will not submit her self to the policy and
provision of Law, but betake her self to her own policy and provision, there
the Law will not aid her: So likewise if a man be seized of three Manors in fee
of equal value, Dower.
and takes wife, and charge one of the Manors with a rentcharge, and dies,
the wife may by the provision of the Law take a third part of all the Manors,
and hold them discharged, but if she will (in folly) accept the entire Manor
charged, she shall hold it charged with the rent.

Mortgage.
10 If the Mortgageor tender the money at the day to the Mortgagee, and the
Mortgagee refuse it, and the Mortgageor thereupon enter, Littl.. 335. Co. ibid.
207.
the Mortgagee is without remedy at the Common Law, for it will be imputed to
his folly, that he refused it, when lawful tender thereof was made unto him.
Vide Max. 80. case 24.

Bastard Mul^er.
11 If there be a Bastard eygne and Mulier puisne, Littl.. 399. and 401. Co.
ibid. 244.
and after the fathers death the Bastard enter, and peaceably enjoys the land
without entry of the Mulier all his life, and having issue dies seized; In
this case the Mulier is barred for ever; for it is imputed to the folly and
negligence of the Mulier, that he entered not during the life of the Bastard;
and albeit the Mulier were under age, or covert baron at the time of the
descent cast, or that after the death of the Bastard the Mulier entered before
the heir of the Bastard, yet none of these cases shall aid or help the Mulier.
Vide infra 25.

Entry of feme covert.
12 If a Feme covert have title of entry into lands, Co. ibid. 246. a. 3.
and her husband neglects to do it, and during his life a descent is cast, yet
after her husbands death the feme may enter notwithstanding the descent; But if
a feme sole be seized of lands in fee and is disseised, and then takes
husband; In this case, the dying seized of the disseisor shall take away the
entry of the wife after the death of her husband; because it will be accounted
folly in the feme, as well for that she did not enter when she was sole, as
that afterward she took an husband, who would not enter before the descent
cast: It is otherwise, if the woman were under age at her marriage, for then it
will not be imputed to her folly, but her husbands) or it the Land were
entailed, and only disconnued.

Continual claim.
13 If a man be disseised, Co. ibid. 353. b. 4. Litt.. 426. Co. ibid. 256. a. 2.
Littl.. 440. Co. ibid. 261. b. 4.
and the disseisor die seized within a year and a day after the disseisin made,
whereby the tenements descend to his heir; in this case the entry of the
disseisee is taken away; for the year and day shall not be taken from the time
of his title of entry accrued, but only from the time of the claim by him made;
and therefore it it will be accounted his folly, that he made not his entry
immediately after the disseisin committed, which he ought to have done: Howbeit,
this is now helped by the State of 32 H. 8. cap. 33. for now by that Statute,
if the disseisor dye seized within five years after the disseisin, though there
be no continual claim made, it shall not take away the entry of the disseisin;
but after the five years there must be such continual claim as was at the
Common: Also that Statute extends not to any Feoffee or Donee of the
disseisor, immediate or mediate, but they remain still at the Common Law, as
they were before the making of the said Statute.

Remitter.
14 If tenant in tail enfeoff his heir apparent, Littl.. 664. Co. ibid. 350. b.
1.
the heir being of full age at the time of the feofment, and after the tenant
in tail dies, this is no remitter to the heir, because it was his folly, that
he being of full age would take such a feofment; for albeit the heir apparent
might have some benefit there by in the life of his ancestor, yet was he by
taking such a feofment (besides his own) subject during his life to all charges
and encumbrances made or suffered by his ancestor: Howbeit, it is otherwise, if
he were under age, in respect of his tender years and want of experience.

Li^tl.. 682. Co. ibid. 358. b. 4.
15 If tenant in tail has issue two sons of full age, Remitter.
and he demiseth the land to the eldest son for life, the remainder to the
younger son also for life, and dies: In this case the eldest son is not
remitted, because it was his folly to take such an estate of his father, which
created a tortious feesimple; but if the eldest son die without issue, the
younger son shall be remitted, because no folly can be imputed to him, for that
the franktenement was cast upon him by force of the remainder.

Littl.. 725, 726. Co. ibid. 380 a
16 At the Common Law before the Statute of the 11 H. 7. 20. Warranty to bar
entry.
if tenant in Dower or for life had aliened the land with warranty, and the
warranty had descended upon the heir, reversioner, or remainder-man, being yet
under age; In such case they might have entered upon the alienee, because no
lachess or folly could be adjudged in them (being under age) that they did not
enter in the life time of the terretenant: But if the heir, reversioner, or
remainder-man were within age at the time of the alienation, and becoming of
full age in the life of such terretenant, did not enter, they were barred by
such warranty, because it was imputed to their folly, that they being of full
age entered not in the life time of the tenant in Dower or for life.

Co. l. 1. 177. b. 1. in Mildm^yes case.
17 Where a lease is void in Law, Slander.
yet if one ignorant of the Law taking upon him to know the Law, and meddling in
a matter, that he has nothing to do withal, will report and affirm openly,
that such a lease is good, to the prejudice of another title, that other may
have an action upon the case against the reporter, and recover damages
according to his prejudice, for in such case Ignorantia Juris non excusat.

Co. l. 2 26. b. 3. in the case of Bankrupts.
18 By the Statute of 13 El. 7. Bankrupts.
distribution is to be made to all the creditors rate and rate-like, viz. to
such of them as are willing to come in as Creditors; but a Creditor, that
either obstinately refuses, or carelessly neglects to come before the
Commissioners, and pray the benefit of the Statute, shall not be admitted to
have any share with the rest, for vigilantibus and non dormientibus Leges
subveniunt.

Co. l. 3 9. a. 2. in B^v^lls case.
19 Seisin of one yearly service is not seisin of another yearly service, Lord
and tenant.
as if there be Lord and tenant by fealty, rent of 10 s. and three work-days
yearly, seisin of the rent is not seisin of the work-dayes, neither is seisin
of the rent, seisin of suit of Court, which is annual, Vide 16 El. Dyer 330. d.
And the reason is, because it shall be imputed to the folly of the Lord, that
he did not obtain seisin of that, which was yearly due unto him; and besides,
it would be mischievous to the tenant, for peradventure in ancient time the
work-days were discharged, which now cannot be showed, whereupon might ensue
suits and trouble.

Co. l. 7. 6 a. 3. in S^nd ls case.
20 If a man be robbed in his house in the day time or in the night, Robbery.
the Hundred, in which that house is situate, shall not be charged therewith;
for albeit the words of the Statute of Winchester are general, without
mentioning any place in special, yet such Robbery is not within the said Act,
for diverse reasons, amongst which this is one, viz. because the house of every
one is his castle, which he ought to keep and defend at his peril; and
therefore if any be robbed in his house, it shall be imputed to his own
negligence and default.

Co. l. 8. 72. b. ^. in Greneleys case.
21 By the Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 28. Entry by Feme.
Discontinuance by fine by the husband of the wives lands, shall not bar her
entry after his death, yet if she make not her entry within five years after
her husbands death, she shall be barred by the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 36.
notwithstanding the said Statute of 32 H. 8. 28. for it will be imputed to her
folly, that she did not enter within the time limited by 32 H. 8. 36.

^^^d, Mesne, ^enant.
22 If there be Lord, Mesne, and tenant, Co. 9. 23. a. 1. in the case of Avowrie.
and the Lord distrains the tenant for rent arrear, etc. in this case, the
tenant ought to request the Mesne to put his cattle into the pound, and thereby
release the tenants and if the Mesne refuse so to do, or otherwise acquit not
the tenant, by payment of the rent, etc. the tenant may have a writ of Mesne,
etc. but if the tenant will replevy the Cattle and have deliverance of them
himself, and then the Lord avow upon a stranger, In this case the tenant is
without remedy by his own default, for it will be accounted folly in the
tenant, that he did not request the Mesne to acquit him as aforesaid.

^^isoner.
23 A Prisoner cannot wage his law for meat and drink had of the Jailer, Co. 9.
87. b. 4. in Pinchons case.
because the Jailer being enjoined by Law to keep the prisoner in salva and
arcta custodia, Innkeeper.
is compellable to find him victuals; But if a Victualler or an Innkeeper bring
an action of debt for the victuals delivered to his Guest, Guest.
the Guest may wage his Law, for the Victualler or Innkeeper is not compellable
to deliver his victuals to his Guest, until he be paid for them; and therefore
it is his folly to part with them, until he has money in hand for them.

Feme advow^on.
24 If a feme purchase an Advowson, and takes baron, and the Church is void, and
the baron suffers an Usurpation; In this case, F.N.B. 34. 5.
the feme, if she had presented before, is put to her writ of right of
Advowson, but if she had not presented before, she is without recovery; for it
will be attributed to her folly, that she took such an husband, as would not
present upon the avoydance, but suffer an usurpation. It is otherwise if the
Advowson came to her by descent. Vide Max. 114. case 52.

Bastard. M^^^er.
25 If a man has issue a Bastard, and dies, Co. Inst. pars 1. 244. a. 4.
and the Bastard enters and dies seized, and the land descends to his
issue; in this case the Collateral heir of the father is bound, as well as
where the father has two sons, Bastard eigne, and Mulier puisne: So likewise
if a man has issue two daughters, the eldest being a Bastard, and they enter
and hold the land peaceably as heirs, now the Law in favor of legitimation,
does not adjudge the whole possession in the Mulier (who then had the only
right) but in both, so as if the Bastard has issue and dies, her issue shall
inherit; and in the same case if both daughters enter and make partition, this
partition shall bind the Mulier for ever. Vide supra 11.

Proviso upon ^ale of land.
26 A bargainee of land for 600 l. by another Indenture covenants to make back
to the bargainor and his heirs such assurance of the land, Dyer 361. 9. 2^ Eliz.
as the Council of the bargainor should devise within the year next ensuing,
provided, that if the vendee made default in the assurance, if he then should
not pay 500 l. to the vendor, that he would stand seized to the use of the
vendor, the vendor tenders no assurance, and the 500 l. is not paid; In this
case, the vendee has the right of the land; for it was the folly of the
vendor, that he required not the Assurance. Winsors case.

173 Negligentia semper habet infortunium Comitem.
Laches.
1. Regularly, Co. Inst. pars 1. 246. b. 2.
no laches or negligence shall be accounted in Infants or femes covert for non
entry or claim to avoid descents, yet laches shall be accounted in them for
nonperformance of a condition annexed to the estate of the land; for if a feme
be enfeoffed either before or after marriage, reserving a rent, and for default
of payment a re-entry: In that case, the laches of the baron shall disherit the
wife for ever: And so it is of an Infant, his laches for nonperformance of a
condition annexed to an estate, either made to his auncestor, or to himself,
shall bar him of the right of the land for ever: And therefore if a man make a
feoffment in fee to another reserving a rent, and if he pay not the rent within
a month, that he shall double the rent, and the feoffee dies, his heir within
age, the Infant pays not the rent, albeit the Infant at this day shall not by
this laches forfeit any thing; yet in such case a feme covert shall; and the
reason and cause of this diversity is, for that the Infant is provided for by
the Statute of Merton cap. 5. Non current usurae contra aliquem infra aetatem
existen. etc. but before that Statute he could not have avoided such a penalty;
neither yet does that Statute extend to a feme covert, or to a condition of a
re-entry, which an Infant ought to perform, because the breach thereof cannot
be properly called usura.

Co. ibid. 250. b. 4.
2 If the father be disseised, and make claim, and the disseisor dies,
Continual claim.
and then the father also dies; In this case, his heir may enter, because the
descent was cast in his fathers time, and the right of entry, which the father
gained by his claim, shall descend to his heir: But if the father make
continual claim and dies, and the son make no continual claim, and within the
year and day after the claim made by the father the disseisor dies, this shall
take away the entry of the son, for that the descent was cast in his time, and
the claim made by the father shall not avail him, that might have claimed
himself; because no continual claim can avoid a descent, unless it be made by
him, that has title to enter, and in whose life the dying seized was: The same
likewise holds in all respects of the predecessor and successor: Co. ibid.
252. a. 3.
Also if tenant for life make continual claim, this shall not give away benefit
to him in the remainder, unless the disseisor died in the life of the tenant
for life, causa qua supra.

Co. l. 5. 13. b. 4. in the Countess of Salops case.
3 Upon Bailment of goods to keep, Bailment of goods.
when there is a confidence put in the Bailee, an action upon the case will lie
for negligence, notwithstanding the delivery of them by the Bailor; As in 12 E.
4. 13. A man delivers an horse to another to keep safely, the defendant equum
illum tam negligenter custodivit, quod ob delictum bonae custodiae interiit;
here an action upon the case lies for the breach of the trust reposed in the
Bailee: so likewise in 2 H 7. 11. If my shepherd, whom I trust with my sheep,
by negligence suffers them to be drowned, or otherwise to perish, here also an
action lies.

Co. l. 5. 109 a. 4. in Foxl^ys case.
4 By the default and negligence of the owner of goods waived in not making
fresh pursuit after the felon and prosecuting him in an appeal of the same
felony, he shall lose his property in them, Goods waived.
and the King shall have them as goods waived, and this course is ordained by
the Law to prevent felonies; for Interest reipublicae ut maleficia remaneant
impunita, and impunitas semper ad deteriora invitat: Also if the owner be
negligent, Co. ibid. 109 b. 4.
and omit any of the goods stolen from him out of his appeal, the King shall
likewise have the goods so omitted, because perhaps by leaving them out the
felon might have escaped.

Co. l. 5. 1^0 b. 4.
5 If a man upon an appeal or indictment of felony be so negligent, Ex^gent.
that he comes not in, but tarries the Exigent; In this case, albeit he be
afterward (when he comes in) acquit of the felony, yet he shall forfeit his
goods to the King for such his default and neglect.

Co. l. 6. 45. b. 4 in H^ge s case.
6 In 17 E. 3. 24. In debt upon an obligation of 20 l. judgment was obtained
before the Mayor of Newcastle, Two Judgments.
and execution had thereupon, and because the obligation was not quasht (as it
ought to have been) the use was then, being the Plaintiff had judgment in
another action upon the same obligation; And the defendant upon pleading the
first judgment could not be relieved, because it was imputed to his
negligence, that he did not procure the obligation to be cancelled upon the
first Judgment. Vide 17 E. 3. 24.

Copyhold.
7 Tenant by Copy in fee (where the custom is, Co. l. 8. 100. b. 3. in Sir Rich.
Lechfords case.
that the heir within three Courts and proclamations made, shall be barred, if
he claims not) dies, his heir being then beyond sea, and until the three Courts
and proclamations be past, but then returns and claims his right; In this case,
he shall not be barred, no more than by non-claim upon a fine: but if he went
beyond sea after the death of his ancestor, he shall be barred, because of his
neglect to take admittance of his Copyhold before he went his Journey.

Repair of sea banks.
8 If one be bound by prescription to keep a sea-bank in good repair, Co. l. 10.
139 b. in Kightleys case.
and by a sudden and unusual increase of waters it is beaten down; in such case
the Commissioners of Sewers, by the Statute of 23 H. 8. 5. may charge all other
persons and their lands, that may receive any loss or damage thereby: but if any
default or negligence be found in him that should so repair it, as that he has
not kept the banks so high nor so well in repair as they have used formerly to
be kept; or that the danger was not so inevitable but that he might well have
prevented it, the Commissioners may charge him only with the repair thereof,
and if by his negligence the danger becomes inevitable, or he be not able to
repair it, so as the charge is laid upon others, each person so charged may
have an action upon the case against him, that should so repair it, and recover
damages according to their loss.

Quare Impe^^.
9 In a Quare impedit, F. N. B. 35. c.
if the defendants clerk was admitted and instituted at the time of the writ
purchased, and the Plaintiff purchase the writ only against the Patron, not
naming the Incumbent, albeit the Plaintiff recover, yet he shall not avoid the
defendants clerk, because he neglected to insert his name in the Quare impedit.

Quare Imp.
10 In a Quare impedit, F.N.B. 38. h.
if the Patron being defendant makes default to the distress, and the Incumbent
abate the writ by plea, yet there shall be no writ awarded to the Bishop for
the Patron by reason of his default and negligence.

Lord. Villein.
11 Upon a nativo habendo brought by the Lord, F.N.B. 77. h. and 78. f.
the Villein sues a liberate probanda, and obtulit se at the fourth day
against the Lord, who did not appear but make default, upon which default the
Villein was enfranchised, and had a writ to the Sheriff, that the Sheriff
should not suffer the Lord to vex him afterward: so if the Lord be non-sute
after appearance, the Villein or Nief shall be infranchised.

Audita Qu.
12 Upon an Audita querela sued, F. N. B. 104. o.
the plaintiff shall have a supersedeas in the same writ to cease execution; but
if he be nonsute, he may have a new Audita querela, but then he shall not have
a supersedeas to stay execution.

Attaint.
13 Nonsute in attaint after appearance is peremptory, F.N.B. 108. d.
and so likewise is a Retraxit entered of Record, So as the plaintiff in attaint
shall not bring a new attaint afterward.

Non-sute.
14 At the day of the return of the Habeas corpus, or Distringas, Dyer 286. 44:
12 El:
if the Jury and defendant appear; albeit the writ be not returned, yet if the
Plaintiff make default he shall be nonsute, because the parties have day by the
Roll. Quaere, nam dubitatur in Banco Regis.

Ward.
15 The Queen grants the ward of the body of A. who dies at full age, no tender
of Marriage being made by the grantee; Dyer 306. 65 14 El:
In this case the land shall not be retained in Curia Wardorum, for it was his
folly and negligence not to tender a Marriage.

^^b^ against ^e heir.
16 In debt upon an obligation against the daughters and heirs of Henningham
entered into by their father, Dyer 344. 1: 18 Eliz.
the Plaintiff recovered upon Nihil dicit, and has general judgment:
Afterward upon the Scire facias to have execution, the defendants pleaded
riens per descent in see the day of the first writ purchased or since: Howbeit
the opinion was, that after recovery by Nihil dicit, non sum informatus, or
confession, the heir comes too late to plead riens, etc. but he ought at first
to plead or show the certainty, when, etc. And per Dyer, if the profits
received after the death of the ancestor until the writ purchased, were
sufficient to satisfy the debt, that then the plaintiff should have general
judgment against the heir.

Dyer 357. 45. 19 El.
17 If an Alien born pray not medietatem linguae before the Venire facias is
awarded, he comes too late after, for non constat Curiae, Alien.
that he is an Alien. Spinolaes case.

174 Vigilantibus non Dormientibus Leges subveniunt.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 139. b. 1.
1 At the Common Law upon every continuance or day given over before judgment,
the plaintiff might have been nonsuted, Non-sute.
and therefore before the Statute of 2 H. 4. cap. 7. after verdict given, if
the Court gave a day to be advised, at that day the plaintiff was demandable,
and might have been Nonsuted, for vigilantibus non dormientibus, etc.

Co. l. 4. 82. b. 3. in Sir Andrew Corbets case.
2 A. devises land to B. till 800 l. be raised for the preferment of his
daughters, and dies, C. the heir of A conceals the will, enters, and dies;
Devise. Notice.
In this case B. shall have allo^ance for the time that the will was concealed;
but albeit B. had not notice of the will, yet if a stranger had occupied the
land, the devisee ought to take notice of the devise at his peril; for
vigilantibus non dormientibus, etc. And in such case none is bound to give him
notice.

Co. l. 5. 76. a. The Earl of Pembrooks case.
3 Where the defendant shows a deed to the Court, Deed entered.
the plaintiff may pray the same Term, that it may be entered in haec verba, And
so he may demurr, or take issue at his pleasure; But if he neglect to pray it
that term, he shall never have it so entered afterward.

Co. l. 7. 27. b. Sir Hugh Portmans case.
4 In a Quare impedit if the plaintiff be nonsute after appearance, Quare Impedit.
or discontinue the suit, that is peremptory, and the defendant becomes Actor
and shall immediately have a writ to the Bishop, etc.

Co. l 6. 8. b. 1 in Ferrers case.
5 At the Common Law before the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 4. Recovery by default.
If any had suffered a Recovery in any real action by default (if he were
lawfully summoned, and there were no error in the proceeding) he could not have
(the case of an Infant only excepted) any remedy, but by writ of right; And
therefore the writ of Quod ei deforceat was by that Statute given to tenant in
tail, by the Courtesy, in Dower, and for life, after recovery had against them
by default.

F.N.B. 20 g.
6 In a writ of Error, when the record is come into the Court, Error.
if the plaintiff all that Term do not assign his errors, and albeit he then
assign the errors, yet if he do not then also sue out a Scire facias ad
audiendum errores against the defendant returnable the same term or the next
term following, all the matter is discontinued.

Dyer 232. 9. 7 Eliz.
7 An Infant at full age brings an Audita querela in Chancery to avoid a
recognisance in the nature of a Statute staple by him made within age, Infant.
but because his age was to be tried by the inspection of the Court, it was
adjudged, that it did not lie; so also it had been, if he had died within age:
for in such case he should have brought the Audita querela before his full age.

Dyer 241. 48 7 Eliz.
8 A Quare Impedit issued against the Archbishop of Canterbury, Quare Imp.
the Bishop of Lincoln, and the Incumbent, who made default to the great
distress, whereupon the plaintiff made title, that he might have a writ to the
Bishop, and a writ was awarded to enquire de damnis, de plenitudine, ad cujus
praesentationem, quantum temporis elabitur a vacatione, et quantum Ecclesia
valet per annum, all which points were returned by inquisition, and accordingly
Judgment was given, that the plaintiff should recover the presentment, and
should have a writ to the Bishop of Lincoln, and damages to the value of the
Church by half a year, and the defendants in misericordia.

Error.
9 If a writ of Error be delivered to the Chief Justice of the C. B. or the
Clerk of the Treasorie there, this is a Supersedeas in Law, Dyer 244. 63. 8
Eliz.
and a stop to award execution; Howbeit, if the plaintiff do not crave the
removal of the record before the return of the writ of Error, the Justices may
then award execution. Vide 6 H. 7. 16.

175 It favors speeding of men's Causes; And therefore
Protections,
1 In ancient time, Co. Inst. pars 1. 130. b. 4.
when Noblemen and others purchased by Letters Patents from the King
protections, either Profecturae, or Moraturae, to go or remain beyond the
Grecian sea, or elsewhere, they were also by other Letters Patents to purchase
license to make their general Attorneys in all Courts, so as no actions or
suits should be thereby delayed, which Britton commends to be bien et sagement
fait, fol. 282.

Protection.
2 In an Assise of Novel disseisin a Protection is not allowable, Co. ibid. 131.
a. 1. Co. l. 8. 50. a. 2 in Jehu Webbs case.
nor yet in a Certificate upon an Assise, because an Assise is festinum
remedium to restore the disseisee to his freehold, whereof he is wrongfully and
without Judgment disseised: And therefore in this action the defendant shall
not be essoined, nor pray in aid but only of the King, nor vouch a stranger,
nor any party to the writ, unless he will immediately enter into the warranty;
there is the same Law also of receipt; neither shall the Paroll stay for the
nonage either of the plaintiff or defendant, and in many other respects an
Assise is remedium maxim festinum.

Dower. Appeal. Assise.
3 In Dower, Co. l. 9. 30. b. 3. in the case of the Abbot of Strata Mercella.
or in appeal brought by the feme of the death of her husband, or in an Assise
brought by a feme, which was the wife of B. if the tenant or defendant plead,
that the baron is in full life, the trial thereof shall not be by the Jury, but
by the Justices upon examination made before them, and that course is taken for
the greater expedition.

Nonage inspected.
4 If the tenant in a real action vouch A. as heir within age, Co. l. 9. 30. b.
4. The same case
or if the tenant for life be impleaded and pray in aid of A in reversion
within age, and pray also, that the Paroll may demurr, etc. In both these
cases, if the demandant reply, that he is in full age, this shall not be tried
by the Country for the great delay of the demandant, but a writ of Venire
facias shall issue to the Sherif to bring A. before the Justices to be
inspected by them, whether he be of age or no.

Assise.
5 Of all actions an Assise is most favored in Law, Pl. Co. 75. b. 4. Wimbish,
and the Lord Willoughby.
because it gives the most speedy remedy. And therefore the Statute of Westminster.
2. cap. 25. says of it, and quia non est aliquod breve in Cancellaria per quod
querentes habent tam festinum remedium sicut per breve novae disseisinae, etc.
And as the Law favors an Assise, so likewise it favors all such things, as may
speed and expedite it, and abhors any thing, Pl. ibid. 89. b. assise of Fresh
force in London.
that may hinder or retard it; And therefore upon a bare surmise, that the
Sherif is allied fo either party, the writ shall be at first directed to the
Coroners, and this shall be no exception to abate the writ, and many other
exceptions, which abate other writs, shall not abate an Assise, because it is
much favored in Law by reason of the expedition and dispatch, which
accompanies it, and wherein the Law takes much delight and satisfaction. Vide
Dyer 84. b. 83.

Co Inst. pars 1. 155. a. 2.
6 Albeit the writ of Assise command the Sherif, Assise.
Quod faceret duodecim liberos et lega les homines de vicineto, etc. videre
tenementum, etc. yet by ancient Course the Sherif must return 24, and this is
for expedition of Justice; for if twelve should only be returned, no man should
ever have a full Jury appear or be sworn (in respect of Challenges) without a
Tales, which would be a great delay of trials.

176 Hates Delays.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 32. b. 4
1 Some say, that the demandant in a writ of Dower, Dower.
who procures or suffers delays in that suit, shall not recover damages.

Co. ibid. 126. b. 4.
2 The cause of an Amerciament in a plea real, Amerciament.
personal or mixed (where the King is to have a fine) is for that the tenant or
defendant ought to render the demand (as he is commanded by the Kings writ) the
first day, which if do, he shall not be amerced; so as for the delay which the
tenant or defendant does use, he shall be amerced.

Co. ibid. 128. a. 4.
3 If the defendant plead in disability of the person an Outlawry of the same
Court, he shall not need to show it forth presently, Outlawry.
or if he plead an outlawry in bar, and it be denied, then he shall have a day
to bring it in; But if he plead an Outlawry, and offer withal to show it to
the Court, he must show forth the record of the Outlawry maintenant sub pede
sigilli; because the plea is but dilatory.

Co. ibid. 158. a. 2.
4 After challenge to the Array, and trial duly returned, Challenge.
if the same party take a challenge to the Polls, he must show cause presently;
so if a Iuror be formerly sworn, if he be then ch^llenged, the party
challenging must show cause presently, and that cause must rise since he was
sworn; likewise when the King is party, or in an appeal of felony, the
defendant, that challenges for cause, must show his cause presently.

Co. ibid. 161. a. 3.
5 To Counterplead the plaintiff in an Assise, Counterplea.
by which he is delayed, makes him, that pleads it, a disseisor: Otherwise
it is, if he had pleaded Null tort, etc.

Co. ibid. 260. b. 3.
6 If a man be out of the Realm, Recovery.
and a recovery be had against him in a Praecipe by default; In this case, he
shall not avoid such recovery; because by such means a man might be infinitely
delayed of his freehold and Inheritance, whereof the Law has so great regard;
and few or none go over, but of their own freewill, neither is he in such case
without his ordinary remedy, either by his writ of an higher nature, or by a
Quod ei deforceat: Howbeit it is otherwise of outlawry in a personal action,
for de minimis non curat lex, Outlawry, Imprisonment
and he should otherwise be without remedy: Also as to a recovery, there is a
difference betwixt being beyond sea, and imprisonment, etc.

Co. ibid. 390. b. 3.
7 If a man be convicted of felony by verdict, Voucher.
and delivered to the Ordinary to make purgation, he cannot be vouched; for
that the time of his purgation (if any should be) is uncertain, and the
demandant cannot be delayed upon such an incertainty; besides the tenant is not
without remedy, for he may have his warrantia cartae.

Co. l. 4 35. b. 1. in Bozouns case.
8 If the King grant a protection in a Quare Impedit, Protection.
or an Assise with a non obstante of any Law to the contrary, that grant is
void; for by the Common Law a Protection lies not in either of these cases,
for the damage that may happen to the plaintiff by such great delay, and a non
obstante cannot avail, when by the Common Law the King cannot grant the thing
it self.

Stat. 36 E. 3. ^.
9 The Statute of 36 E. 3. Stat. 1. cap. 13. Co. l. 4. 58. a. 2. in the Sadlers
case.
which gives traverses to offices of lands seized into the Kings hands shall be
taken generally according to the letter and intention of the said Act, because
it is for the advancement and execution of Justice against grievous and tedious
delays.

Ad admittend. (...).
10 In a Quare Impedit if the defendant do not come in at the distress returned
against him, F.N.B. 38. n.
the plaintiff shall have a writ ad admittendum clericum directed to the Bishop,
without making any farther title.

^^cedendo.
11 If the Judges of any Court (as well of record as other) do delay the party
plaintiff or defendant, F.N.B. 153. b, c, d.
and will not give judgment for him, when they ought to do it; In this case,
the party grieved may have a writ de procedendo ad judicium directed to such
Judges or Justices, and thereupon an alias and pluries, if they will not
proceed to give Judgment, and after that an attachment (if they please)
directed to the Coroners, and returnable into the Kings Bench or Common Pleas.

Assise.
12 The Law favors all things, Pl. Co. 75. b. 4. Wimbish and the Lo. Will.
which have speed and expedition in them, and abhorrs all delays, which retard
or delay Justice; and therefore an Assise (which by the Statute of Westminster. 2.
cap. 25.) is said to be festinum remedium, is much favored in Law; so as a
writ of Assise upon a bare surmise shall be at first directed to the Coroners,
without first directing it to the Sherif, and then upon a challenge to the
Array to have it afterward directed to the Coroners, which is the ordinary
course for other writs.

177 Unnecessary Circumstances; And therefore, Frustrafit per plura, quod fieri
potest per Pauciora.
The entry of the issue con^eable after discontinua^ce.
1 In a praecipe, where the demandant is to recover damages, Co. Inst. part 1.
362. b. a.
if the tenant plead non-tenancy or disclaim, there the demandant may aver him
to be tenant of the land, as the writ supposes, for the benefit of his
damages, which otherwise he should lose, or otherwise he may pray judgment and
enter, at his election: but where no damages are to be recovered, as in a
Formedon in descender, and the like, there he cannot averr him tenant, but pray
his judgment and enter; for thereby he has the effect of his fute, and
Frustra fit per plura, etc. And therefore if tenant in tail discontinue,
Littl.. 691.
and his issue bring a Formedon against the discontinuee, and the discontinuee
pleads that he is not tenant, but utterly disclaims in the tenancy of the land;
In this case, the judgment shall be, that the tenant shall go without day, and
after such judgment the issue may enter into the land, notwithstanding the
discontinuance.

One patent better than two.
2 When the King was to grant a reversion, Co. l. 8. 167. a. 1. in the Earl of
Cumberlands case.
the ancient form was to recite the first grant, and then to grant the
reversion, and besides by another patent to grant the lands in possession, by
which way a good estate passed to the patentee; Howbeit, to pass these several
grants in one and the same patent, is as good and effectual in Law, as to pass
them in several patents; and frustra fit per plura, etc.

Seizure. Office.
3 If the Office of the Marshalsie be forfeit, Co. l. 9. 95. b. 3. in Sir. Geo.
Reynolds case.
the King shall be in possession thereof by seizure without office; so it is
also of the Temporalties of a Bishop, or of a Prior Alien; because the
certainty of these appear in the Exchequer, and frustra fit, etc. In some cases
also the King shall be in possession by office without seizure, as of lands,
tenements, offices, etc. which are local, and whereof continual profit may be
taken, as where it is found by office, that a condition is broken, or that one
attainted of felony is seized of land, etc. or in case of the ward of land,
etc. In all these cases the King is in possession by office without any seizure.

2 H. 6. 1. b. Finch, fol. 54.
4 One that is in Court ready to join with the defendant may do it without
process, Vouchee.
as the vouchee (the lessor of the plaintiff being prayed in aid of) when the
defendant in a replevin avows upon him; Or the Mesne, when the Lord paramount
avows upon him: but joynder in aid cannot be by Attorney without process.

Co. l. 5. 21. Sir Anthony Maines case.
5 M. leases for 21 years unto S. and covenants to make a new lease to S. upon
the surrender of the old, Covenant to surrender.
M. leases to another by fine for 8. years, and hereupon S. without surrender
of the old lease brings an action of Covenant against M. In this case, the
covenant is broken, albeit S. do not surrender (which ought to be the first
act) because it were in vain for him to do it, in regard M. has disabled
himself to take the surrender, or to make a new lease.

4 E. 3. 170.
6 The demandant may waive issue upon Counterplea of voucher, Waiver of issue.
and grant the voucher; for if the Enquest pass, the tenant cannot have more.

1 H. 6. 4. b.
7 One that is a debtor to the King of Record in the Exchequer, Kings debtor.
if he be seen in Court, may be brought in to answer without process.

Dyer 59. ^. 14. 36 H. 8.
8 In Replevin the defendant has return awarded upon Nonsute of the plaintiff,
Replevin.
and upon Returno habendo the Sherif returns averia elongata per Querentem, and
thereupon Withernam is awarded, and the defendant has delivered unto him as
many of the plaintifs goods, whereupon the Plaintiff is to sue a second
deliverance; In this case, he shall sue the second deliverance for the first
distress, and not for the Cattle delivered upon the Withernam, for the Cattle
of the first distress (being the cause of the Withernam) being delivered, the
other upon the Withernam will be also discharged.

Dyer 19^. 24. 2, 3. El.
9 The Sherif of Midd. had an attachment of privilege against one Kemp, Cap.
satisfac. and an attachment.
and likewise a Capias ad satisfaciendum against him at the same plaintifs
suit, both returnable the same term into the C. B. but the attachment was
returnable first; upon which he brings his body into Court, and said he would
return the Ca. sa. at the day of return thereof: Howbeit, upon motion of one of
the Protonotaries, the Justices sent the defendant to the Fleet, and discharged
the Sherif of him, and would not stay until the return of the Ca. Sa. there
being a former judgment against him upon Record. Vide Dyer 214. 47.

Dyer 204. 1. 2. Eliz.
Upon nihil dicit in waste, a writ issues, Waste.
that the Sherif in propria persona accedat ad locum vastatum, to enquire of
the damages, and it was held good, and not to enquire of the waste, for that
was confessed by the Nihil dicit; neither is it in such case necessary, that he
should then go in person, according to West. 2. cap. 25. for that is only in
vasto inquirendo, where the Defendant makes default to the distress.

178 Expedit Reipublicae, ut sit finis Litium.
1 Regularly, an Abbot, Prior, Bishop, Abbot. Annuity.
or other sole Corporation cannot disclaim, Co Inst. p rs 1. 103. a. 1.
or do any act to the prejudice of their house or benefice, but what may be
avoided by the successor; yet if an Abbot, Bishop, etc. acknowledge the action
in a writ of Annuity, this shall bind the successor, because he cannot falsify
it in an higher action, and Expedit reipublicae, ut sit finis Litium. Vide
supra Max. 1. case 4. and 93, 10. So it is likewise in an action of debt upon
an Obligation, Statute, or Recognisance; for there must be an end of suits, and
Res judicata pro veritate accipitur.

Challenge.
2 If the plaintiff allege a cause of challenge against the Sherif, Co. ibid. 158
a. 3. 18 E. 4. 8.
the process shall be directed to the Coroners, and if any cause against any of
the Coroners, process shall be awarded to the rest, if against all of them,
then the Court shall appoint certain Elisors or Esliors (so nanamed of the
French word eslire, to choose, because they are named by the Court) against
whose return no challenge shall be taken to the array: Howbeit, challenge may
be yet made to the Polles, but that shall be also presently examined and settled
in Court: For Expedit reipublicae, etc.

Partition.
3 A partition of intailed lands between parceners, Co. ibid. 173. b. 1.
being equal at the time of the partition, shall bind the issues in tail for
ever, albeit the one do alien her part. See Dyer P. 1 Mar. 98. b. pl. 52.

Rolls. Records.
4 The Rolls of a Court of Record being the Records and memorials of the Judges
of the same Courts, Co. ibid. 260. a. 2.
import in them such incontrollable credit and verity, as they admit no
averment, plea, or proof to the contrary; And if such a Record be alleged, and
it be pleaded that there is do such record, it shall be tried only by it self;
And the reason hereof is apparent, for otherwise (as our old Authors say, and
that truly) there should never be any end of Controversies, which would be
inconvenient: Howbeit, during the Term, wherein any Judicial act is done, the
Record remains in the breast of the Judges of the Court, and in their
remembrance, and therefore (in such case) the Roll is alterable during that
term, as the Judges shall direct; but when that term is past, then the Record
is in the Roll, and admits no alteration, averment, or proof to the contrary.

Fines.
5 At the Common Law before the Statute of Non-claim 34 E. 3. cap. 16. after a
fine levied of land, Co. ibid. 262. a. 1. Littl.. 441.
if a stranger having title thereunto had not made claim within a year and a
day after such fine, he had been barred for ever, and the reason thereof was
alleged to be, Quia finis finem litibus imponebat: but this is now helped by
the Statute of 4 H. 7. 24. which gives 5. years after the fine and
proclamations.

Extent.
6 Before the Statute of 32 H. 8. 5. Co. ibid. 290. a. 4. Co. l. 5. 87. a. 3. in
Blumfields case.
if an extent had been insufficient in Law, there might have issued out a new
extent; But it appears by the Preamble of the said Statute, and also by diverse
Books and resolutions of the Judges, that (before that Statute) after a full
and perfect execution had by extent returned and of Record, there could never
be any re-extent upon any ejection: And there are many inconveniences yet,
which are not remedied by that Statute; for which see Co. ibid. fol. 289. and
290. Vide supra, 32, 21.

judgment final.
7 Where the judgment is to be final, Co. Inst. par. 1. 294. a. 4.
there the Oath of the Grand Assise or Jury ought to be absolute, and not to
their knowledge; as in a writ of right, when the Mise is joined upon the mere
right, or in an Attaint, or in wager of Law; for the judgment in every of
these three is final.

Judgment in a Grand Assise.
8 In a writ of right when the Mise is joined upon the mere right, Co. ibid.
295. b. 2.
and the tenant tenders a Demi mark, that the grand Assise may also inquire,
whether the demandants ancestor were seized in the time of the King, as he had
Counted In this case, albeit the verdict of the Grand Assise be given only upon
this last point, yet judgment final shall be had thereupon: so it is likewise
if the tenant after the Mise joined make default, or confess the action, or if
the demandant be non suit, and yet in none of these cases they of the Grand
Assise give their verdict upon the mere right; but the reason is, because the
Law aims at peace and quiet, and that there might be an end of suits and
controversies. Vide F. N B. 5. n.

Hea.
9 Every plea that a man pleads ought to be triable, for that without trial
the cause can receive no end. Et expedit reipublice, etc. Co. ibid. 303. b. 1.


Co. ibid. 369. b. 1.
10 If there be tenant for life the remainder in fee by lawful and just title,
Pretenced titles.
he in the remainder may obtain and get a pretenced title of any stranger
(notwithstanding the Statute of 32 H. 8, 9.) not only because the particular
estate and the remainder are all one, but for that it is a means to extinguish
the seeds of troubles and suits, and cannot be to the prejudice of any.

Co. l. 4. 15. b. 1. in Stanhop and Blithes case.
11 If one tell another that he is perjured, Slanderous words.
or that he has forsworn himself in such Court, these words are actionable,
because by these words it appears, that he has forsworn himself in a Judicial
proceeding: but words of heat and passion, as to say to one, that he has
forsworn himself, or that he is a Villein, Rogue, Varlet, or the like, by these
or such like words an action ought not to be maintained, for Boni Judicis
interest lites dirimere; And the rather, because such frivolous actions are now
more frequent than they have been in former ages, Et malitiis hominum est
obviandum. Vide 188. 1.

Co. l. 5. 77. b. Samons case.
12 The plaintiff and defendant submit themselves to the arbitrament of A. who
awards, that the defendant shall enter into bond, Arbitrament.
that the plaintiff and his wife shall enjoy certain lands quietly; this award
is void, because the uncertainty of the sum, wherein the defendant shall be
bound, may be an occasion of a new suit and controversy, for that the
Arbitrator not naming the sum, he cannot assign his power to the plaintiff,
defendant, or any one else to do it.

Co. l. 5. 91. b. 3. in Semayns case.
13 When any house is recovered by any real action, Seisin, or possession by the
Sherif.
or by Ejectione firmae, the Sherif may break open the house, and deliver the
seisin or possession thereof to the demandant or plaintiff, (for the words of
the writ are Habere facias seisinam, or possessionem, etc.) because otherwise
there would be no end of such suits: and after judgment it is not (in right
and judgment of Law) the house of the tenant or defendant.

Co. l. 6, 7. a. in Ferrers case.
14 When one is barred in any action real or personal by judgment upon
demurrer, confession, verdict, Bar in act^ons.
etc. he is barred as to that or the like action of the same nature for the
same thing for ever; for Expedit Reipublicae, etc. Vide supra, 93, 9.

Co. l. 6. 9. b. 1. in Ferrers case.
15 At the Common Law before the Statute of Marlebridge, Writ of Entry in the
Post.
cap. 29. if land had been conveyed out of the degrees, so as the demandant
could not have a writ of Entry in the per, or in the per and cui, the demandant
was put to his writ of right; for there was no writ of Entry in the Post before
it was given by the said Statute; And the reason why the law was so before that
Statute, was, quod sit finis litium, and that he that right had should not be
negligent, but take his remedy by writ of Entry before there should be more
than two alienations.

Co. l. 6. 45. a. 3. Higgens case.
16 In debt upon an obligation the defendant pleads, Judgment bar to the bond.
That the plaintiff has recovered upon the same bond, and that the judgment
thereupon is removed by Error into the Kings Bench, and was not yet reversed;
And this was adjudged a good plea, because the judgment takes away the
strength of the bond, and if after judgment he might sue the same party upon
the same bond, he might do it infinitely, and (consequently) the defendant
might be infinitely amerced; for upon every Judgment the defendant shall be
amerced, and if he be a Peer of the Realm, the amerciament is 100 s. and so the
defendant might be infinitely amerced upon one and the same obligation, which
would be mischievous, Et interest Reipublicae ut sit finis litium.

Co. l. 7. 43. Kenns case.
17 A bill of reviver upon a bill of reviver shall not be suffered for the
infiniteness, Bill of reviver.
no more than a writ by Iourneys accounts upon a former writ of the same
nature, for so they might be had infinitely.

Barrettry.
18 A Barrettor is in judgment of Law accounted one of the most dangerous and
pernicious vermin in the Commonwealth, Co. l. 8. 37. in the case of Barretry.
because whereas the Law endeavors to settle peace and amity, and to
suppress discord and contention, he is seminator litium, and oppressor
vicinorum suorum, either by force and open Maintenance of possessions, or the
like, or by fraud and malice under color of Law, as by multiplicity of unjust
and feigned suits, Informations, or the like, to the end he may by that means
enforce poor people (ad redimendum vexationem) to give him money, or otherwise
to compound with him, etc.

A bitrement.
19 Upon an award albeit the parties do not discover all their differences to
the Arbitrators, so as they determine some, C. l. 8. 98. a. 4. in Baspoles case.
and leave the rest undetermined, yet the award is good; because otherwise many
Arbitrements might be avoided, for the one or the other of the parties may
conceal a trespass done to him, or some other secret cause of action, and so
avoid the Arbitrament, which were inconvenient, for Expedit reipublicae, etc.

Accord.
20 Accords are much favored in Law, Co. l. 9. 79. b. 4. in Peytoes case.
because they prevent and compose suits and controversies amongst neighbors
(Et concordia parvae res crescunt, discordia maximae dilabuntur) And therefore
it was adjudged P. 3 sac. rot. 1033. that an Accord with satisfaction was a
good plea in bar, in Eden and Blakes case.

Fines.
21 The general Statute of 32 H. 8. 36. Co. l. 11. 75. a. 1.
of Fines shall bind the King, though he be not named, because it was ordained
for the settling and quieting of estates, and the prevention of debates and
controversies in the Commonwealth, in Magdalen College case.

Assets descended a bar.
21 The Statute of Gloucester in 6 E. 1. cap. 3. ordains, Co. l. 52. b. 4. in
Syms case. Pl. Co. 110. Fulmerstons case.
that where tenant by the courtesy aliens his wives inheritance with warranty,
if assets descend from the heir, he shall be barred for the value of the
inheritance so descended, and if lands after descend, that then the tenant
shall recover against the heir of the seisin of his mother, viz. out of the
residu of his mothers lands so much as the assets afterwads descended shall
amount unto: Here, albeit at the making of this Act (being in 6 E. 1.) there
were no intailed lands (for all Inheritance was then, ( viz. before Westminster. ^.
being 13 E. 1.) feesimple absolute or conditional) yet intailed lands are since
taken to be within the equity of the said Act of Gloc. but not to retain or
recover the lands intailed, but only the lands which should so descend; because
otherwise there would be occasion of new suits and contention, which the Law
hates and abhorrs; for if the tenant after assets descended might retain or
recover the lands intailed, then if the assets were aliened, the issues
inheritable to the estate tail might by writ of Formedon in descender recover
the intailed lands again, which would beget a new suit, and no way answer the
Intention of the said Act, being (indeed) a good provision for feesimple lands,
but not for lands entailed, without such a construction by equity, as
aforesaid; And therefore in case of entailed lands so aliened with warranty,
the tenant shall have a Scire facias out of the Rolls of the Justices, before
whom the suit depends, to recover the lands descended according to the
provision of the said Act of Gloucester; which in just and proportionable equity
agrees with the case of the feesimple lands, and the Intention of the same Act.
Vide supra 15. 9. and infra 186. 8.

179 Circuit of Action.
Co. Inst. part 1. 265. a. 3.
1 Littleton says,. 446. If the father be disseised, Rebutter.
and the son (having only a possibility) release to the disseisor without
warranty, such release is void; Howbeit, if there be a warranty annexed to the
release, then the son shall be barred; for albeit the release cannot bar the
right, because the son had no right in the land in the life of the father, yet
the warranty may rebut, and bar him and his heirs of a future right, which was
not in him at that time: And the reason (which in all cases is to be sought
out) wherefore a warranty being a covenant real, shall bar a future right, is
for avoiding of circuit of action, which is not favored in Law, viz. That he
who made the warranty should recover the the land against Terre-tenant, and
then the Terre-tenant by force of the warranty should have as much land in
value against the warrantor, which course would occasion Circuit of action, and
more trouble than needs.

Mauxels case, 7. b. Finch.
2 Where the father enfeoffeth his son and heir apparent with warranty, and
dies, Voucher.
the son in a praecipe brought against him may immediately vouch his fathers
feoffor, for the Law will not suffer him to vouch himself, according to Max.
54. and so, when he comes in as vouchee, he may darraign the first warranty, to
avoid Circuit of Action. Finch. fol. 14. Fr. Edit.

F. N. B. 18. f.
3 In false Judgment against an Abbot, the plaintiff was non-sute, False
Judgment.
and the Abot had a Scire facias against the plaintiff to show cause, why he
should not have execution returnable quindena Paschae, at which day the
plaintiff appears and assigns his errors, and tenders security to sue cum
effectu, and prays a Scire facias against the Abbot ad audiendum errores, and
the opinion of the Court was, that he might assign his errors against the
Abbot, without suing out any Scire facias against him.

Finch, page 55.
4 In an action of waste upon a lease for years by deed, Waste.
wherein the lessor grants to the lessee, that he shall not be impeached of
waste, the lessee may plead this in bar of the action of waste, without
bringing his action of Covenant.

Finch, ibid.
5 Upon the grant of a ward with warranty, the defendant in a writ of right of
ward, may rebut the plaintiff by that warranty, and shall not be driven to bring
an action of Covenant upon the grant, to avoid circuit of action.

Finch. fo. 14. Fr. Edi.
6 One that has rent issuing out of land disseiseth the terre-tenant, Recouper.
in an Assise by the disseisee the disseisor shall recoup the rent in the
damages: and the reason is for avoiding circuit of action; for otherwise when
the disseisee reenters, the action for the arrerages of rent shall be
received; but Circuitus est evitandus, and boni Iudicis est lites dirimere, ne
lis ex lite oriatur. Vide Co. l. 5. 31. a. 2. in Coulters case.

180 Matter of Vexation; And therefore
Co. Inst. part 1. 127. a. 1.
1 If the demandant or plaintiff be non suit, Plaintiff amerced.
or judgment given against him, he shall be amerced pro falso clamore, for
vexing and troubling the tenant or defendant without just cause.

Co. l. 5. 73. b. The case of Orphans.
2 If any Orphan of London, O^phans.
which by the custom of that City is under the government of the Mayor and
Aldermen there, sue in the Ecclesiastical Court, or in the Court of Requests,
etc. for any goods, money or chattels due unto them, either by the custom of
London, or by any devise or legacy in the will of their Ancestor, or to have
account, etc. In such case, a prohibition lies; because the government of the
Orphans of London belongs to the Mayor and Aldermen of that City, and they have
Jurisdiction of them: And (per Popham) if the Lord of a Manor has probate of
testaments within his Manor, if any will prove such a will in the
Ecclesiastical Court, a prohibition lies, because the jurisdiction thereof
belongs to another: And the reason of this is, for that otherwise the party
might have double vexation and trouble.

Judgment drowns a ^o^d.
3 Where a man has judgment upon an Obligation, Co. l. 6: 45. a. 3. Higgens
case.
he shall not afterward bring an action of debt upon the same obligation
against the same party; not only because the judgment has drowned the bond by
changing it into a matter of record, but likewise for that if he that so
recovers might have another new action and another new judgment, he might also
(by consequent) have infinite actions and infinite judgments, to the perpetual
vexation and charge of the defendant, and infinitum in lege reprobatur: Co.
ibid. 46. a. 2.
And therefore if a man brings an action of debt upon an Obligation, and is
barred by the judgment, as he (so long as that judgment stands in force)
cannot have a new action; Pari ratione, when he has judgment in an action
upon the same Obligation, so long as that judgment stands in force, he shall
not have a new action.

Sure in two Cour^s.
4 If any use the Countenance of Law (which was instituted to prevent, Co. l. 8.
60. a. 3. in Beechers case.
and make an end of controversies and vexation) for double vexation, he shall
be fined: As if a man sue in the Common pleas, and afterward for the same
cause sue the defendant in London, or any other Court, the plaintiff shall be
fined for this unjust vexation, 9 H. 6. 55. 14 H. 7. 7. And in a Recaption the
plaintiff shall recover damages, and the defendant shall be fined, and
imprisoned for his double vexation. Vide F. N. B. 71. and f. m. and infra, 181.
7.

5 In good discretion no melius inquirendum shall be awarded after office found
against the King, without view of some Record, Co. l. 8. 169. a. 4. in Paris
Stroughters case.
or some other pregnant matter for the King, to avoid further vexation of the
subject: And therefore where upon a Diem clausit extremum it was found, that
the land was held of the Queen, Dyer 292. pl. 71. 12 Eliz.
sed per quae servitia Iuratores ignorant, and thereupon a melius inquirendum
awarded, whereby the tenure was found of a subject, and all other points
certainly found; In this case the first office was adjudged void by the sense
of 2 and 3 E. 6. and the rather, because it should give no further occasion of
vexing the subject, for that the usual course was upon a double Ignoramus to
adjudge a tenure for the King in Capite.

181 Pendente Lite nihil innovetur.
Quar^ Imped^t.
1 At the Common Law, Co. Inst. part 1. 344. b. 3.
if hanging a Quare Impedit against the Ordinary for refusing the Patrons
Clerk, and before the Church were full, the Patron had brought a Quare Impedit
against the Bishop, and hanging the suit, the Bishop had admitted and
instituted a Clerk at the presentation of another; In this case if judgment
were given for the Patron against the Bishop, the Patron might have had a writ
to the Bishop, and removed the Incumbent, that came in pendente lite by
usurpation, for pendente lite nihil innovetur; And therefore at the Common Law
it was good policy to bring the Quare Impedit against the Bishop as speedily as
might be.

Co. l. 115. b. Foliambs case. F.N.B. 60 a.
2 In Real actions depending, as Formedon, dum fuit infra aetatem, Estrepment.
writ of right, or the like, the demandant shall have a writ of Estrepment, to
inhibit the tenant from committing waste or estrepment, hanging the suit; the
like writ also may be had after judgment, and before execution. Vide the
Statute of Gloucester, 6 E. 1. cap. 13. It lies also in an action of waste; and
the words of the writ are, Tibi praecipimus, quod ad messuagium praed.
personaliter accedens totaliter ordinari facias, quod vastum seu estrepamentum
de eodem messuagio, contra formam Statuti praedict. non fait, pendente placito
praed. indiscusso.

Co. l. 6. 29. b. 3.
3 In Dyer 339. 17 Eliz. A presentation obtained of the Queen, Presentation.
hanging a Quare Impedit, in deceit of the Queen, was adjudged void. In Greens
case.

F. N. B. 20. c.
4 In a writ of Error after errors assigned and scire facias awarded against the
defendant upon such assignment, Error.
the plaintiff shall not assign any error in fact, as to allege that the
plaintiff in the other action was dead at the time of the judgment, or before
the judgment, or the like; And when the plaintiff may assign errors in fact, he
shall assign but one error of that kind, but he may assign as many errors as
appear in the record, because this shall be tried by the Justices in Court, but
that by a Jury, which innovation will much delay and prejudice the defendant in
the writ of error.

F.N.B. 37. f. g.
5 In a Quare impedit, or darrein presentment, if the plaintiff suspect, Ne
admittas.
that the Bishop (hanging the plea) will admit the defendants Clerk, the Law
gives the plaintiff a writ of Ne admittas within the six months, to inhibit the
Bishop so to innovate, to his prejudice, hanging the plea: The words of the
writ are these; Prohibemus vobis ne admittatis personam ad ecclesiam de B. quae
vacat, ut dicitur, and de cujus advocatione contentio mota est in Curia nostra
inter A. and B. donec discussum fuerit in eadem Curia, ad quem eorum pertineat
ejusdem ecclesiae Advocatio.

F. N. B. 43. 1.
6 If a man sue a Quare Impedit, and deliver it upon record, Prohibition.
as he may, and after the defendant or his clerk sues a Citation against the
presentee of the plaintiff; In this case, the plaintiff in the Quare Impedit
shall have a prohibition in the Common Place, before the return of the Quare
Impedit, because it appears upon record, that such a Quare Impedit is depending.

F.N.B. 48. o.
7 If a man has a Quare impedit, Quare incumbravit.
and he sue a Ne admittas to the Bishop, and after the Bishop encumbers the
Church within the six months with his own Chaplein, or with the Chaplein of
the defendant; here, the plaintiff shall have a writ of Quare incumbravit, to
prevent such disturbance hanging the suit in the Quare Impedit.

F. N. B. 71. e. f. m.
8 If a man distrain for rent or service, Recaption.
and after (hanging the plea) distrains again for the same rent or service; In
such case he that is so distrained shall have a writ of Recaption, and shall
recover his damages for the second distress so taken, and he that distrained
shall make fine for the wrong he has done, albeit the first distress was
lawfully made, and the rent is still in arrear.

182 Infiniteness and multiplicity of suits.
Co. Inst. part 1. 56. a. 2. Co. l. 5. 73. a. 3. in Williams case.
1 There is a diversity between a private way, Public nuisance.
which serves for a private man's use or occasion, and a public way, which is
a Common passage; for if a man be interrupted in a private way, he shall have
an action upon his case, and recover damages according to his prejudice: But if
the way be a Common way, and any man be disturbed to go that way, or if a ditch
be made overthwart the way, so as a man cannot pass, yet he shall not have an
action upon his case; and this the Law has provided for avoiding multiplicity
of suits, for if any one man might have an action, all men might have the like:
But the Law for this common nuisance has provided an apt remedy, and that is by
presentment in the Leet or in the Turn, unless any man have a particular
damage, as if he and his horse fall into the ditch, whereby he receives hurt
and loss, there for this special damage, which is not common to others, he
shall have an action upon the case: And all this was resolved in the Kings
Bench 27 H. 8. 27. And in that case it was said, that it had been adjudged in
that Court between Westbury and Powell, that where the Inhabitants of Southwark
had by custom a watering place for their cattle, which was stopped by Powell,
that in that case any Inhabitant of Southwark might have an action; for
otherwise they should be without remedy, because such a nuisance is not
presentable in the Leet or Turn.

Plea.
2 In an action against two, if one of them plead to the writ, Co. Inst. pars 1.
125. b. 3.
and the other to the action, the plea to the writ shall be first tried; for if
that be found, all the whole writ shall abate, and make an end of the business:
So likewise in a Personal action against two defendants, if one defendant
pleads that which extends only to himself, and the other plead a plea which
goes to the whole, this last plea shall be first tried, and if that be found
for the defendant that pleaded it, that shall discharge both, and the
particular plea of the other defendant shall not be tried; for example, if one
of the defendants in trespass plead a release to himself (which in Law extends
to both) and the other pleads not guilty (which extends but to him that pleads)
the plea which goes to the whole and discharges both, shall be first tried;
for if that be found, it makes an end of the suit, and the plea of the other
defendant shall not be tried; Howbeit, the Law is otherwise in Real action, for
which vide ubi supra.

Descent a full entry.
3 If a recovery be had by A. against B. and before execution B. die seized,
this descent shall not take away the entry of the Recoveror, Co. ibid. 237. b.
4.
and so it is also in case of a fine; for if that were admitted, there would be
no end of suit, but a new one would be occasioned: So likewise if a recovery be
had against tenant for life, where the remainder is over in fee, tenant for
life dies, he in the remainder enters before execution, and dies seized;
here also the entry of the Recoveror is lawful, not only because he in the
remainder is privy in estate, but likewise for that otherwise it would occasion
a new suit: Howbeit, the Law is otherwise of an Advowson, because at the Common
Law every presentation to a Church did put the rightful Patron out of
possession, and did put him to his writ of right, whether the presentation were
by title or without.

Things in action.
4 The Common Law, for avoiding of Maintenance, Co. ibid. 214. a. 3.
suppression of right, and stirring of suits at Law, has provided, that
nothing in action, entry or re-entry, shall be granted over, because under
color thereof pretended titles might be granted to great men, whereby right
might be trodden down, and the weak oppressed, which the Common Law abhorrs; as
also that men should grant any thing before they be in possession thereof,
which might occasion suits and troubles.

Divine service.
5 A man that by prescription has had Divine service celebrated, Co. l. 5. 73.
Williams case.
and the Sacraments administered upon every Sunday and Holiday at his Chapel
within the Manor of D. for his own family, upon failer thereof may have an
action upon the case against the Chaplein that neglects to perform it, because
such a prescription will be intended to commence by some grant: But when the
Chapel is not a private Chapel for him and his family only, but public and
common to all his tenants of the said Manor, which may be many; In such case no
action of the case lies for the Lord; for then every tenant may also have an
action upon his case, as well as the Lord, and so there might be infinite
actions for one default; neither yet are they in such case without remedy, for
they may and ought to sue in the Court Christian, and there shall have it
redressed.

Co. l. 5. 104. b. in Boulstones case.
6 A man cannot have an action upon the case for damage by the Pigeons of a
Dove-house, Dove-house.
because then every man might have the like; And therefore it has been held,
that if any man (except the Lord of a Manor) erect a Dove-house, Prat and
Sternes case.
it is presentable in the Leet; Sed quaere de hac, for it has been since
otherwise adjudged; See the E. of Northumberlands case, Poph. Rep. 141. Trin.
16. Jac.

Co. l. 6. 8. b. 4. in Ferrers case.
7 If the plaintiff be barred by judgment, upon demurrer, Vexatious suits.
confession, or verdict, in personal actions he is barred for ever, and in real
actions he must have recourse to his action of an higher nature, and at last
shall be finally barred in his writ of right, if the Grand Assise find against
him: So likewise (before the Statute of Marlbridge) when the degrees were past,
and (before the Statute of Westminster. 2.) upon loss by default, there was no remedy
but by writ of right: And the reason of the Common Law in these and the like
cases, was to avoid Multiplicity and Infiniteness of suits, trials, recoveries,
and judgments in one and the same case; And therefore in the judgment of the
Law it was thought more profitable for the Commonwealth, and more for the
honor of the Law, (in some cases) rather to leave some without remedy, and to
put others to their writ of right, without any respect of Coverture, Infancy,
or the like, than that there should not be a convenient time for the ending of
actions and suits: See the judgment in redisseisin and post diss. F. N. B.
188, 190. and the punishment inflicted by the Law in such case; See also the
Register 206. and 208. And (indeed) without such a strict course there may be
much oppression committed under color and pretense of Law: for so a rich and
malicious man may by actions and suits infinitely vex him that has right, and
in the end (for the avoiding of charge and vexation) Compel him to forsake his
right, all which was remedied by the Rule and Reason of the ancient Common Law,
the neglect whereof (by introducing trials of rights and titles of Inheritance
and franktenement in personal actions, in which there is no end or limit of
suits) has brought with it four main Inconveniences; 1. Infiniteness of
verdicts, recoveries, and judgments in one and the same cause: 2. Sometimes
contrarieties of verdicts and judgments one against another: 3. Continuance of
suits by 20, 30, and 40 years to the utter impoverishing of the parties: 4. All
this tends to the dishonor of the Common Law, which utterly abhorrs
Infiniteness and protraction of suits: And herein the excellency of the Common
Law is to observed, viz. That the receding from the true institution thereof,
introduces many Inconveniences, and the observation of it is always
accompanied with peace and quiet, the end and center of all human laws. See the
Epistle to the 4. Report, fol. 1. b.

8 Vide Max. 180. ca. 3. and 186, 25.

183 The Law construeth things with Equity and Moderation.
Convenient time.
1 In 18 E. 4. 22. Co. l. 3. 27. a 1.
A man is bound to make an obligation immediately, yet he shall have convenient
time to do it. In Butler and Bakers case.

Escape.
2 For as much as Escapes are very penal to Sherifs, Co. l. 3. 44. a. 4. in
Baytons case.
Bailifs of Liberties, and Keepers of Prisons, the Judges have always made
such favorable construction, as the Law will permit, in favor of them, being
Officers, and Ministers of Justice, and will never adjudge one to make an
escape upon any strict construction; for albeit the Sherif or other officer,
that keeps prisoners, ought not to suffer one in execution to go at large by
Bail or Baston, but ought to keep them in salva and arcta custodia, and
according to the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 11. which ordains, quod carceri
mancipentur in ferris, to the end they may the sooner pay their Creditors; yet
if one be arrested upon a Capias ad satisfac. and the Bailifs upon a habeas
Corpus bring him to Westminster. and at his request carry him to Lambeth in Surrey,
and at the day of return deliver him to the Kings Bench, This shall be adjudged
no escape, neither shall the prisoner thereupon have an Audita querela against
the Creditors; So it is likewise if the prisoner had of his own accord gone to
Lambeth, so as he had returned in time to be delivered into Court at the return
of the writ, as it was adjudged in Charnicks case, Sheriff of the County of
Bed. in 31 Eliz. So if one be Sherif of two Counties, and has several
prisoners in execution in each County, upon two habeas Corpora against two of
them, he may bring the one prisoner out of the one County into the other, and
then carry both the prisoners up according to the several writs to him
directed, and this shall not be adjudged any escape in the Sherif: Also, If a
prisoner in execution escape and fly into another County, and the Jailer make
fresh suit after him, and taking him puts him into the Gaol again, this shall
be adjudged no escape; for that upon fresh suit the Jailer took him again, and
put him in prison before any action brought against him: And in the cases above
produced upon habeas Corpus the Sherif is not strictly bound to keep the direct
way to West. in recta linea, so as he have him at the return of the writ, and
then deliver him into Court, for if the effect of the writ be pursued, it
suffices.

Copihold Fines.
3 Where fines in a Copyhold Manor are uncertain, Co. l. 4. 27. b. 3. in Hubbert
and Hamonds case.
the Lord ought not to demand or exact excessive or unreasonable fines, and if
he do, the Copyholder may deny to pay it without danger of forfeiture, and it
shall be determined by the opinion of the Justices, before whom the matter
depends, upon a demurrer, or at the trial, whether the fine demanded were
reasonable or no; for if Lords might assess fines excessively at their
pleasure, all the estates of Copiholders, which are a great part of the Realm,
and have continued time out of mind, would be at the will of the Lords to
defeat and destroy, which would be inconvenient; And thus it was adjudged in
the Common place in Hoddesdons case.

Sewers.
4 Notwithstanding that the words of the Commission of Sewers give authority to
the Commissioners to do according to their discretions, Co. l. 5. 100. a. 3. in
Rooks case.
yet their proccedings ought to be limited and bounded by the Rule of Law and
reason; for discretion is a science of discerning truth from falsehood, right
from wrong, shadows from substance, and betwixt equity and colorable glosses
and pretenses, and not to do according to their own wills and private
affections.

Co. l. 6. 50. b. 4. in Boswels case.
5 If tenant in tail suffer an usurpation and die, Tail. Usurpation.
the issue in tail is remedied by the equity of the first branch of Westminster. 2.
cap. 5. because after the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 1. (which created the
estate tail, and was made the same Parliament) the issue in tail could not have
a writ of right of advowson, and therefore shall be aided by the said first
branch, as it is held 43 E. 1. 24, and 25. Vide 26 Ass. pl. 4. 8 E. 2. Quare
Impedit 167. 24 H. 6. 28.

Co. l. 8. 40. a. 4. Grieslyes case.
6 Amerciaments, Amerciaments.
whether they are to be affeared in Inferior Courts by the suitors, or in
Superior Courts by the Judges, they are all termed Misericordia, because
whosoever has the affearance of them, ought to use great moderation.

Co l. 11. 44. a. 2. in Rich. Godfreyes case
7 The Reasonableness of fines in Courts, distresses, Fines. Distress, etc.
amerciaments, and fines at the will of the Lord, shall be adjudged by the
Justices, and if they be outrageous, and excessive, and (by consequent) injust
and against the Law, they have power to moderate them.

F. N. B. 75. a. etc.
8 When an amerciament is excessive or outrageous in a Court Baron, or other
Court, which is not a Court of Record, for trespass, Amerciament.
or any other offense, the Law has ordained the writ of Moderata Misericordia
to be directed to the Lord of the same Court or his Bailifs, commanding them to
take a moderate amerciament according to the quantity of the trespass, etc. and
thereupon the party grieved may have an Alias, Pluries, and Attachment if he
please. See the Statutes of Magna Cart. cap. 14. and Westminster. 2. cap. 6.

F. N. B. 103. b.
9 If a man be bound in a statute merchant, Statute Merchant.
and after make feofment of parcel of his lands to one man, and of another
parcel thereof to another, and the recognisee sues execution upon the Statute,
and has execution against the one feoffee; here, this feoffee shall have an
Audita querela against the other feoffee, to show cause why the recognisee has
not execution against his lands, as well as against the lands which he has,
etc.

Pl. Co. 17 a. 4. etc. in Fogassaes case.
10 Both the matter and words of penal Laws shall be taken strictly, Penal Laws.
and not extended by Equity in prejudice of them against whom the penalty is to
be inflicted: As the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 11. ordains, that if Accomptants
shall be found in arrear before Auditors, Arrestentur Corpora eorum, et per
testimonium Auditorum ejusdem Compoti mittantur et liberentur proximae Gaolae
Domini Regis in partibus illis, quousque, etc. Here, the Statute is general,
that they should be imprisoned by the Auditors, and says not at what time, so
as by the Letter of the Statute, the Auditors may imprison the Accomptants when
they please after their account; yet in 27 H. 6. 8. Tit. Bar, 44. and Br.
Account 6. In debt upon arrerages of account it is adjudged, that if the
Auditors do not commit the Accomptant to prison presently after the account,
they can never commit him afterward, because the Statute is penal to him, that
is to be imprisoned, etc.

Pl. Co. 67. a. 1. Dyve and Man^ngh.
11 At the Common Law before the Statute of 23 H. 8. 10. the Sherif had
commandment and authority to let to bail such as were mainpernable; Bail.
for the Common Law (which is Common reason) would always have persons taken
by writ, bill, or warrant upon personal actions, or Indictments of trespass, to
be enlarged by sureties, for that in a manner it stands indifferent, whether
they are guilty or no, and then if they should not be guilty, and yet
restrained of their liberty, it would be a great inconvenience, which the Law
would never suffer.

12 Hob. 14. Sir Dan. Norton against Simmes.

184 Restrains a general Act or Rule, and (sometimes also) a Particular
contract, if there be found any mischief or Inconvenience in them.
Wife no witness ^or her ^u^band.
1 Regularly, any person of competent age and discretion, Co. Inst. part 1. 6.
b. 4.
and against whom there is no just exception by reason of perjury, conviction
of felony, or the like, may be admitted a witness in any cause, yet in 10 Jac.
in Com. Banc. in a case upon the Statute of Bankrupts, it was adjudged, that a
wife cannot be produced as a witness either against or for her husband, for
that it might be a cause of implacable discord and dissension between the
husband and wife, and a mean of great inconvenience. Tender of marriage.
Co. ibid. 79 a. 3.


2 By the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 22. Tender of Marriage to an heir female
before the age of fourteen is void, which is to be understood, where the Lord
may hold the land the two years after the 14, for within that time the Statute
appoints the tender; but where the Lord cannot have the two years, he may
tender a marriage to the heir female at any time after the age of 12. and
before 14. for so he might have done at the Common Law. Frankmarriage.
Frankalmo^gn
Co. ibid. 97. a. 4. Littl.. 138.


3 An Argument drawn from inconvenience is forcible in Law, and the Law, that
is the perfection of Reason, cannot suffer any thing which is inconvenient; And
therefore the Law says, It is better to suffer a mischief ( viz. peculiar to
one) than an inconvenience, that may prejudice many: Frankmarriage is so
called, because it ought to be freed of all service to the donor, until the
fourth degree be past, yet the tenant in Frankmarriage shall make fealty to the
donor, for it were inconvenient that he should hold land, and do no service at
all for it; So likewise tenant in Frankalmoign, albeit he be freed from all
temporal service, yet he shall say divine service for his Lord, for it were
inconvenient that he should do no service at all for the land he holds of his
Lord. All land holden.
Co. ibid. 98. a. 1.


4 If an Abbot holds in Frankalmoign, and he and the Covent under their Common
Seal alien the land to a Layman; In this case the secular man shall make
fealty, albeit the Alienors held not by fealty nor any terrene service, but
only by Spiritual services, and those uncertain; for in such case the Law
creates a new Temporal service out of the land to be done by the Alienee
(wherewith the Abbot was not formerly charged) for the avoiding of an
Inconvenience, viz. that the feoffee should do no manner of service, and
(consequently) that the land should be holden of no man, which would be
inconvenient, for that all land is holden of one or other; and mediately or
immediately of the King, because they did originally come from the Crown. Vide
148. 35.

Grand Serjancy.
5 Regulary, Co. Inst. part 1. 107. a. b.
tenant by Grand Serjancy must perform that service in proper person, and shall
not make a deputy without the Kings license: yet at the Coronation of King R.
2. John Wilshire a Citizen of London, who held certain lands in Heydon in the
County of Essex of the King by Grand Serjancy, viz. by holding a Towell when
the King should wash his hands before dinner, the day of his Coronation, etc.
upon his petition exhibited to the High Steward of England in his Court was
admitted to make a deputy to perform it, because it was inconvenient for him
(being a Citizen) to execute so high an office himself; And therefore he
deputed Edmond Earl of Cambridge to perform the service by holding the towell
that day to the King. So at the same Coronation William Furnival, who held the
Manor of Farnham in Com. Buck. by Grand Serjancy, viz. to find the King a glove
for his right hand, and to support the Kings right hand the day of his
Coronation, while he held in his hand the Verge Royal, could not have executed
that place in person, but by some honorable deputy, had not the King that day
made him a Knight, and by that means made him also capable of performing that
office himself. Also Anne the wife of Sir John Hastings Earl of Pembroke, who
held the Manor of Ashley in Norfolk of the King by Grand Serjancy, viz. to
perform the office of the Naperie at his Coronation, was adjudged to make a
deputy, because a woman could not do it in person, and thereupon she deputed
Sir Thomas Blunt Knight, who performed the service in her right, etc.

Co. ibid. 117. a. 1.
6 It is a Rule in Law, Lord and Villein.
that what the Villein has is the Lords upon seizure or claim, yet if the
Villein purchase a Common sans number, the Lord shall not have it, for the Lord
may surcharge it, which would be a prejudice to the terre-tenant; there is the
same law also of a Corodie uncertain granted to a Villein, or such like
inheritances, etc.

Co. ibid. 128. a. 4.
7 In any suit Outlawry is a good exception in disability of the person, yet in
a writ of Error to reverse an Outlawry, Outlawry.
Outlawry in that suit, or at any strangers suit, shall not disable the
plaintiff, because if he in that action should be disabled, if he were Outlawed
at several men's suits, he should never reverse any of them, which would be
inconvenient; So likewise in an attaint Outlawry in the plaintiff cannot be
pleaded in disability of the person.

Co. ibid. 130. b. 1.
8 A protection cannot be cast for the demandant or plaintiff, Protection.
because the tenant or defendant cannot sue a re-summons or a re-attachment,
but the demandant or plaintiff that sued out the summons or attachtachment, etc.
must also sue forth the re-summons or re-attachment.

Co. ibid. 131. a. 1.
9 In a writ of Dower unde nihil habet no protection is allowable, Protection.
because the demandant has nothing to live upon; otherwise it is in a writ or
right of dower: Likewise in a Quare Impedit, and assise of Darrein presentment
a Protection lies not, for the eminent danger of the laps: neither lies a
protection in an Assise of Novel disseisin, because it is festinum remedium, to
restore the disseisee to his freehold, whereof he is wrongfully and without
judgment disseised: It lies not in a Quare non admisit, because it is
grounded upon the Quare impedit; nor in a Certificat upon an Assise, for the
like reason, et sic de fimilibus: yet regularly and in most suits Protections
are allowable. An Infant was vouched, and at the Pluries venire facias a
protection was cast for the Infant, but disallowed, because his age must be
adjudged by the Inspection of the Court.

Co. ibid. 134. a. 1.
10 If an Executor or Administrator sue an action, Excommunication.
Outlawry in the plaintiff shall not disable him, because the suit is in auter
droit, viz. in the right of the testator, and not in his own right: but if an
executor or administrator be excommunicate, he may be disabled, albeit he sue
in auter droit, because they, who converse with a person excommunicate, are
excommunicate also.

Littl.. 202. Co. ibid. 136. b. 3.
11 The Law gives power to the Lord to seize his Villein where he finds him,
yet if a Villein enter into Religion and be professed, Villein.
the Lord cannot take him out of his Cloister, because then he could not live
as a dead person, nor according to his Religion, which were inconvenient.

Littl.. 219 Co. ibid. 145. a. 1.
12 Upon the grant of a rentcharge the grantee may make his election, either to
recover it by writ of Annuity or by distress, Annuity.
for the law grants both to him; yet when he has once made his election and
fixed upon one way, he shall not make use of the other, for then he should
recover one thing twice, which would be a double charge to the grantor.

Replevin.
13 The words of the Statute of Marlbridge, Co. ibid. 145 b. 3.
cap. 21. for Replevins are, Quod vicecomes post querimoniam inde sibi factam
ea sine impedimento vel contradictione ejus, qui dicta averia ceperit,
deliberare possit, etc. By which word querimonia it may seem, that by the
Statute the plaint ought first to be entered in the County Court, before the
Sherif can grant a Replevin; Howbeit, the Sherif may take a plaint upon the
said Act out of the County Court, and make Replevin presently; for it would be
very inconvenient for the Owner to forbear his Cattle till the County day.

Replevin.
14 If a man by his deed grant a rent with clause of distress, Co. ibid. 145. b.
3.
and grant further, that he shall keep the goods distrained against gages and
pledges, until the rent be paid, yet shall the Sherif replevy the goods
distrained, for it is against the nature of such a distress to be
irreplevisable, and by such an Invention the current of Replevins would be
overthrown, to the hinderance of the Commonwealth; And therefore in 31 E. 3.
Gage deliv. 5. it was disallowed by the whole Court, and awarded, that the
defendant should gage deliverance, or go to prison.

Grant of a rent.
15 If there be Lord and tenant by fealty and certain rent, Co. ibid. 150. b. 1.
and the Lord by deed grant the rent in fee, saving the fealty, and grant
further by the same deed, that the grantee may distrain for the same rent in
the tenancy; Here, albeit a distress were incident to the rent in the hands of
the Grantor, and although the tenant attorn to the grant, yet cannot the
grantee distrain, for the distress remaining as an incident inseparable to the
Seigniorie, the tenant should then be subject to two several distresses of two
several men, which would be oppressive and inconvenient: So it is likewise if
the Lord in that case grant the rent in tail, or for life, saving the fealty,
and further grant, that the grantee shall distrain for it; Here also, albeit
the reversion of the rent be a rent service, yet the donee or grantee shall
have it but as a rent seek, and shall not distrain for it.

Coperceners.
16 Estovers appendant to freehold, Corodie uncertain, Homage, Co. ibid. 164. b.
4.
Fealty, Piscary uncertain, Common sans number, or the like, shall not be
divided between Coperceners for that would be a charge to the tenant of the
soil.

The Lord Mountjoyes case.
17 The Lord Mountjoye seized of the Manor of Canford in see, Co. ibid.
did hy deed indented and enrolled bargain and sell the same to Brown in fee,
who in the deed covenants, that the Lord Mountjoye and his heirs shall digg ore
and turf in the wastes of the said Manor; And in this case three points were
resolved, 1. That this did amount to a grant of an Inheritance to the Lord
Mountjoye, 2. That notwithstanding this grant, Brown and his heirs might dig
also, and like to the case of Common sans number, 3. That the Lord Mountjoye
might assign his interest to one, two, or more, but then if it were to two or
more, they could make no division of it, but work together with one stock,
neither could the Lord Mountjoye, etc. assign his interest in any part of the
waste to one or more, for that might work a prejudice and a surcharge to the
tenant of the land; And therefore if such an uncertain Inheritance descends
to two Coperceners, it cannot be divided between them, Causa qua supra.

Tender of ^ebt in court.
18 If an Obligation of 100 l. be made with condition for payment of 50 l. at a
day, and at the day the obligor tender the money, Co. ibid. 207. a. 3.
and the obligee refuses the same, yet in an action of debt upon the
obligation, if the defendant plead the tender and refusal, he must also plead,
that he is yet ready to pay the money, and tender the same in Court, because
the 50 l. are parcel of the obligation, and not perishable; but if a man be
bound in 200 quarters of wheat for the delivery of 100 quarters, if the Obligor
tender at the day the 100 quarters, etc. he shall not plead uncore prist,
because albeit they are parcel of the obligation, yet they are bona peritura,
and it is inconvenient and a charge for the Obligor to keep them.

Littl.. 419. Co. ibid. 253. b.
19 Before a man can bring his action for the recovery of lands, Entry and Claim.
whereunto he has title or right, the Law requires, that he first make his
entry, and claim his right or title upon the land, which entry gives him
possession and seisin of the same; and where he may enter, a bare claim from
off the land will not serve to give him seisin thereof; yet if by reason of
menacing words, lying in wait in the way with weapons, or the like, he dare not
enter upon the land; in such case, the Law gives him this liberty, that if he
claim his right, as near the Land as he dare go for fear of such bodily hurt,
as may cadere in virum constantem, that claim shall give him seisin, as well as
if he had entered upon the land; Littl.. 434.
And if the party be sick, decrepit, or recluse, he may do it by his servant,
etc.

Littl.. 440. Co. ibid. 261.
20 The Rule of Law is, that where a disseisor dies seized, Descent a fuller
En^^y.
it takes away the entry of him that right has; yet if the disseisee at the
time of the disseisin and descent were not in England or the dominions
thereunto belonging, such descent shall not take away his entry, because being
beyond sea (by intendment) he could not have notice of the disseisin, and yet
without any folly or laches in him he should lose his right, which were
inconvenient, and unjust.

Co. ibid. 282. b. 3.
21 In an action upon the case the plaintiff declared for the speaking of
slanderous words, which is transitory, Action of Slander.
and laid the words to be spoken in London, the defendant pleaded a Concord for
speaking of words in all the Counties of England, saving in London, and
traversed the speaking of the words in London: The plaintiff in his replication
denied the Concord, whereupon the defendant demurred, and judgment was given
for the plaintiff: for the Court said, that if the Concord in that case should
not be traversed, it would follow, that by a new and subtle invention of
pleading, an ancient principle in Law ( viz. that for transitory causes of
action the plaintiff may allege the same in what place or County he will) should
be subverted, which ought not to be suffered; and therefore the Judges of both
Courts allowed a traverse upon a traverse in that case: And the wisdom of the
Judges and Sages of the Law has always suppressed new and subtle inventions,
in derogation of the Common Law. Vide infra 193. 1.

Co. Inst. part 1. 315. a. 4.
22 Regularly in all actions an Infant shall have his age, Attornment.
and yet if an Infant have lands by purchase or descent, he shall be compelled
to attorn in a per quae servitia, and no mischief to the Infant at all; for
when he comes to full age (notwithstanding such attornment) he may disclaim to
hold of him, or may say, that he holds by lesser services; but a great mischief
would fall upon the Lord, if the Infant should not attorn, or his attornment
should not be good, for then the Lord should lose his services in the mean
time: So likewise an Infant is compellable to attorn in a Quid juris clamat, in
case where he is lessee. Vide Connys case, Co. l. 9. 85. b. 1.

Co. ibid. 54. a. 1.
23 A Guardian shall not be punished for waste done by a stranger, it is so
penal to him, Waste.
because for waste he shall lose the wardship both of the body and of the Land,
albeit the waste be but to the value of 20 s. and if that suffiseth not to
satisfy for the waste, then shall he answer damages of the waste, over and
above the loss of the ward: It is otherwise in case of Tenant by the Courtesy,
tenant in Dower, tenant for life, years, etc. for they shall answer for waste
done by a stranger, and then shall take their remedy over.

Detinue for writings.
24 Regularly, Co. l. 1, 2, 3, in the Lord Buckhursts case.
the writings that concern land belong to the owner of the land, and are to be
kept by him, yet if I am infeoffed to me and my heirs, and I enfeoff another to
him and his heirs with warranty, my heir shall have a Detinue for the deed, by
which I was infeoffed, and shall Count specially, viz. upon the special matter,
in respect of the special loss and prejudice, which he may have for want of the
deed, in case he should be vouched upon the warranty, which I made to my
feoffee. Vide 10 E. 4. 9. b.

Rent extinct.
25 Tenant in tail, remainder in tail, Co. l. 1. 62. b. Caples case.
he in remainder grants a rent charge out of the land, and then Tenant in tail
in possession suffers a recovery; In this case, the rent is extinct and gone;
for it were inconvenient that the land should be subject to the charges both of
the tenant in possession, and of him in remainder also, as to be charged with
the statutes or recognisances of tenant in tail, and also of him in remainder
simul et semel, whereas tenant in tail in possession having power to dock both
his own estate, and the estate of him in remainder, by possibility it might
never come in possession to him in remainder.

Fraudulent Conveyances.
26 Where a man conveyes his land to the use of himself for life, Co. l. 3. 82.
b. 2. Standen and Bullocks case, in Twines case, per Warmsley Just. from Sir
Chapter Wray Chapter Just. per tot. cur.
and after to the use of diverse others of his blood, with future power of
revocation, as after such a feast, or after the death of such a man, and
afterward, and before the power of revocation commenced, he for a valuable
consideration bargains and sells the land to another and his heirs, this
bargain and sale is within the remedy of the Statute of 27 Eliz. cap. 4. for
albeit the Statute says, The said first conveyance not by him revoked,
according to the power by him reserved, which seems by the literal sense to be
meant of a present power of revocation, for no revocation can be made of a
future power, until it come in esse, yet it was held, that the intent of the
Act was, that such voluntary conveyance, which was originally subject to the
power of revocation, be it in praesenti, or in futuro, shall not stand against
the purchasor bona fide for valuable consideration, and if any other
construction should be made, the said Act would serve for little or no purpose;
for then it would be no hard matter to evade it: So likewise if A. reserve a
power of revocation by the assent of B. and after A. bargains and sells the
land to another, this bargain and sale is good, and within the remedy of the
said Act; for otherwise the good provision of the Act by a small addition and
knavish invention might be defeated.

The like.
27 In 38 Eliz. in C. B. betwixt Lee and his wife executrix of one Smith
plaintiff, and Mary Colshil executrix of Th. Colshil defendant, Co. l. 3. 82. b.
4. Colshils case, reported in Twines case.
in debt upon an obligation of 1000 marks, Rot. 1707. The case was this,
Colshil the testator had the office of a Customer by Letters patents to him and
his deputies, and by indenture betwixt him and Smith the testator of the
plaintiff, and for 600 l. paid, and 100 l. per annum to be paid during the life
of Colshil, makes deputation of the said office to Smith, and Colshil covenants
with Smith, that if Colshil dye before him, that then his executors should
repay unto him 300 l. and diverse covenants were in the said Indenture
concerning the said office and enjoyment thereof, and Colshil was bound to
Smith in the said obligation to perform covenants, and the breach was alleged
for the non-payment of the said 300 l. for that Smith survived Colshil. And
albeit the said covenant to repay the 300 l. was lawful, yet in as much as the
residue of the covenants were against the Statute of 5 Ed. 6. cap. 16. the
obligation was adjudged void, because if the addition of a lawful covenant
should make the bond of force as to that, the Statute would serve for little or
no purpose. Vide plus ibid.

Co. l. 4. 122. b. 4. in Bustards case.
28 The Rule of Law is, Exchange.
that exchanges ought to be of equal estates, and yet if A. has a reversion in
fee of an acre of land expectant upon an estate for life, and makes an exchange
with B. by deed indented, and gives this acre by name of an acre of land, (and
not by the name of the reversion) in exchange for another acre; In this case
albeit B. expect to have the acre, so given to him, in possession, yet (in as
much as nothing passes by the grant of the acre of land but the reversion) the
warranty or condition in Law annexed to the exchange, cannot by the Law extend
to more than passed by force of the exchange, for they are incident and annexed
to the estate which is given, and cannot extend to the franktenement which was
in the lessee; because if the Law should be otherwise, great mischief would
ensue: for if an exchange be made of diverse Manors, and peradventure diverse
parcels of them are in lease for life; In this case if the exchange should be
void, because it was not made as of a Manor in possession, that would avoid all
such exchanges, which would be mischievous, and there can be no mischief on the
other part; for when the tenants for life are in possession of the Land, it
will be imputed the laches and folly of the purchasor, that he did not discover
it by Survey or some other enquiry.

Co. l. 5. 90. a. 2. in Hoes case.
29 Regularly, all writs directed to the Sherif ought to be returned, Executions.
for so the Sherif is by them commanded to do, and if a Capias in process be
not returned, the arrest is tortious; so likewise an Elegit, because the extent
is to be done by an Inquest, and not by the Sherif alone, if it be not
returned, it is not valid: nevertheless, in all writs of execution, when the
Sherif alone does it, as Capias ad satisfaciendum, habere facias possessionem,
or seisinam, fieri facias Liberate, etc. if the execution be duly made, it is
valid, albeit the writ be not returned; for if the non-return of the writ by
the Sherif should cause new execution to be had against the defendant, and
should leave him to his action against the Sherif, that would tend much to the
prejudice of the defendant, whose goods are already sold by the writ and
process of Law for the satisfaction of his debt: Again, if the sale of the
goods by force of the writ should by the non-return of the writ be tortious,
then the Sherif will never find buyers, to whom he may sell any defendants
goods by force of any writ of execution, which would be inconvenient, and great
delay of executions, which are the fruit and life of every suit.

30 If a rent be granted out of the Manor of Dale, Rent charge.
and the grantor grant over, Co. l. 7. 24. a. 3. Buts case.
that if the rent be behind, the grantee shall distrain for the same in the
Manor of Sale, this is no grant of the rent, but only a penalty in the Manor of
Sale; for if the grantee should bring a writ of Annuity, that would only extend
to the Manor of D. for upon the grant of the distress in the Manor of Sale, no
writ of Annuity lies, because the Manor of S. is only charged, and not the
person of the grantor, as to that; And therefore the bringing of the writ of
Annuity cannot discharge the Manor of S. of any rent; And so the Law, by
construction against the words and intention of the parties, shall do an
injury to the grantor to charge him twice, which were inconvenient.

Co. l. 9. 85. a. 4. in Connys case.
31 In a writ of Mesne the Paroll shall not demurr for the nonage of the
plaintiff, because it is not reason, Parol demur. nonage.
that the Infant should be distrained for the services of the Mesne during his
nonage, and yet he to have no remedy until his full age; but in regard his
nonage shall not privilege him from the payment of the rent during his nonage,
the Law will also give him remedy during that time.

Writ of Error
32 These two Rules in Law are regularly true, Co. l. 11. 41. a. 1. in Metcalfs
case.
1. That a writ of Error lies not upon an award, until the principal judgment
be given; 2. That it lies not until the whole matter in the original be
determined; yet each of these have exceptions: For as to the first, in Trin. 18
H. 7. in B. R. Rot. 3. E. was indicted for the death of M. before Justices of
Peace in the County of Lincoln, whereupon a Capias was awarded; and thereupon
also an Exigent, after which E. dies before any Attainder, upon which award of
the Exigent his executors bring a writ of Error, and it was adjudged, that the
writ of Error did well lie, because by the award of the Exigent his goods and
chattels were forfeit, and of such awards, which tend ad grave damnum of the
party, a writ of Error lies, and sic de similibus. As to the second, you shall
find in 36 H. 6. Fieri fac. 3. That in debt against diverse by several
praecipes, if there be error in the Judgments against one of them, he shall
have a writ of Error; for in Originals, wherein there are several Counts, and
Error is against one, he shall have a writ of Error, and the record of his
Count, and the pleading* etc. shall be severed from the original and removed
into the Kings Bench, and yet the Original shall still remain in the Common
Place; for it would be inconvenient and prejudicial (in that case) to stay
until judgment be given upon the whole original: Howbeit, where there is one
original and one Count, he cannot have a writ of Error until all be
determined, for the record cannot be in the Kings Bench and the Com. Pl. all at
one time.

Collusion.
33 It is provided by the Statute of Marlebridge cap. 6. that the Lord by Knight
service shall not lose his custody by feoffment made by Collusion, Co. l. 11.
77. b. 3. in Magdalen Colleges case.
veruntamen non licet eis hujusmodi feoffatos sine Iudicio disseisire, fed
brevia habeant de hujusmodi custodia sibi reddenda, yet if the tenant enfeoff
the Villein of the Lord upon collusion, the Lord may enter and expel him, and
shall not be put to his action, as it is held in 33 H. 6. 16. for the general
words of the Act shall not enable the Villein, who is disabled against his Lord
by the Common Law, and if the Lord should bring an action against him according
to the letter of the Act, he shall be thereby enfranchised, which would be a
prejudice to the Lord, and was never intended by the Makers of that Act.

Intent of the Law performed, no breach.
34 In every Law there are some things, which when they happen, Pl. Co. 18. a.
4. in Fogassaes case, and 19 b. 1.
a man may break the words of the Law, and yet not break the Law it self, and
such things are exempt out of the penalty of the Law, albeit they are done
against the letter of the Law; for the breaking of the words of the Law is not
the breaking of the Law, so as the intent of the Law is not broken, and when
the words of the Law are broken for the avoiding of greater inconveniences: For
example, it is against the Law for any man to assault, bind, or beat another,
yet in the 22. Book of Assizes, pl. 56. If a man be mad and out of his wits,
whereby he does or is likely to do great hurt, other men may assault, bind, and
beat him too, and justify it by Law, to prevent the hurt and mischief which he
may do in that condition: So the Statute of Marlebridge cap. 4. prohibits
generally, that none shall convey a distress out of one County into another,
yet it is adjudged in 1 H. 6. Tit. Distress 1. that if one hold land of a Manor
in another County, the Lord may distrain and bring the distress from the land
holden of the Manor, into the County where the Manor is, and this is for the
avoiding of a mischief and inconvenience; for it would be great damage to the
Lord if he might not bring the distress to his Manor, for the avoidance whereof
the Law is not offended, albeit the letter of the Law is not observed: In like
manner, there was a Law amongst the Romans, that whosoever scaled the walls in
the night should be condemned to die, yet in the time of war one scaled the
walls in the night to discover the approach of the Enemy, and he was by the
Senate not only discharged of death, but besides was well rewarded for that his
service to the Commonwealth; for although he thereby infringed the words of the
Law, yet the grave Senators expounded it to be no breach of the intent of the
Law; because that Law was made to prevent hurt and danger, and not to inhibit
benefit and safety to the City: So likewise in Fogassaes case, the incertainty
of the word being caused for the avoiding of a great inconvenience, ( viz. the
loss of many men's lives) shall excuse the incertainty of the agreement with the
Collector.

Pl. Co. 100 b. in matters of the Crown.
35 In an appeal of murder against five, Trial.
if one Venire facias issue out to summon the Jury, they ought to be tried all
together, but if they in subtilty make several Challenges, so as there cannot
be left a full Jury, the Clerk may sever the panel; for otherwise upon slight
and subtilty they might evade the trial.

Co. l. 4. 22. b. in the cases of Copyholds.
36 Albeit the estate and interest of a Copyholder (upon descent) vesteth in him
by force of the Custom of the Manor, Copyhold.
yet in pleading the Law does allow him to allege (before admittance) his
ancestors admittance, and (after admittance) his own, as a grant, and this is
so permitted him by the Law to avoid an inconvenience, which otherwise would
necessarily follow; for if the Copyholder in pleading should be compelled to
show the first grant, he would be at a loss in doing that, because if the grant
were before time of memory, then is it not pleadable, or if it were within time
of memory, then would the custom fail; for which cause the Law has allowed the
Copyholder in pleading to allege any admittance, as a grant, either upon a
descent, or a surrender rather than to force him to plead that which may tend
to his prejudice, although in rei veritate he is in by the Custom, and not by
any grant.

Dyer 218 3. 5 Eliz. Fortescue against Strode.
37 The condition of an obligation was, Unreasonable condition.
that the obligor upon request should do all acts, which to the Council of the
obligee should seem reasonable for the releasing of an obligation, in which the
obligee stood bound to the obligor; hereupon request was made to seal a release
of all demands to the obligee and one M. and averment, that there was no other
matter betwixt them, but makes no mention of M. And this request was adjudged
unreasonable, albeit there were no matter betwixt the obligee and M.

Dyer 262. 31. 9 Eliz.
38 Regularly, Felo de se.
all the personal estate of a Felo de se is forfeited to the King, yet if such
a felon had due unto him a debt upon a simple contract without specialty, it
shall not be forfeited to the King, because then the party should be rebutted
from waging his Law, which he might do against a common person.

39 Vide Hob. 3 Pincombe against Rudge: A warranty may be sued by way of
Covenant 133. Allen, and Walter, for summons in Dower.

Hob. 91. Sir Tho. Packerings case.
40 If an office be found only in one County of all the lands lying as well in
other Counties as there, which in Law is no office, Offices.
but only for the proper County, yet this by the Court of Wards was allowed, as
an office to all, to ground a charge and process upon; for that it was
beneficial to the Subject, who else by diverse offices would have been put to an
intolerable charge, etc.

185 Nemo bis punitur pro eodem delicto.
App^al. Indictment.
1 Wetherol brings an appeal of murder against Darley, Co. l. 4 40. a. 3.
Darleys case.
the defendant pleads not guilty, and he was found guilty of Homicide, and had
his Clergy; And afterward he was indicted of murder, and thereupon arraigned
at the Queens suit, and he pleads the former conviction in the appeal at the
suit of the party; And it was adjudged a good bar, and thereupon he was
discharged; for it was a good bar at the Common Law, and not restrained by any
Statute; And the reason thereof is, because the life of a man shall not be
twice put in jeopardy for one and the same offense.

Bar in mayhem.
2 Hudson brings an appeal of Mayhem against Lee, Co l. 4. 43. a. Lees case.
the defendant pleads, that the plaintiff had before brought an action of
trespass in the Common Bench against him of assault, battery, and wounding, and
thereupon had recovered against him 200 Marks damages, and 10 s. costs, which
were satisfied before the appeal brought; and farther averred, that the battery
and wounding in the trespass, and the mayhem in the appeal were all one, and
not diverse; whereupon the plaintiff demurrs: And it was resolved per totam
Curiam, that the bar was good; for albeit it was alleged, that an appeal of
mayhem, being an action of an higher nature than an action of trespass, could
not be barred by it, yet because in the appeal the plaintiff was but to recover
damages, as he had done before in the action of trespass, he shall not be twice
satisfied, nor the defendant twice punished for one and the same thing. Vide 41
Ass. pl. 16. and 2 R. 3. 14.

Action sur case Bar in debt.
3 Recovery or Bar in an action upon the case sur assumpsit is a good bar in
an action of debt brought upon the same contract, Co. l. 4. 94. b. Slades case.
And vice versa Recovery or bar in an action of debt is a good bar in an
action upon the case sur assumpsit; because in such an action upon the case he
shall not only recover damages for the special loss which he has, if any be,
but likewise for the whole debt, and reason will not permit, that the defendant
should satisfy one debt or duty twice. Vide 12 E. 2. 13. a. 2 R 3. 14. 38 H.
8. Br. Action sur le case 105. Bis idem exigi bona fides non patitur, and in
satisfactionibus non permittitur amplius fieri, quod semel factum est.

Covenant.
4 A. covenants with two, and cum quolibet eorum; Co. l. 5. 19. a 3. Slingsbies
case
in this case they cannot sue severally, unless their Interests be several, for
their Interests and the Covenant must accord: otherwise the covenantor may be
twice charged for one and the same thing; and therefore these words cum
quolibet eorum are (in such case) but words of amplification and abundance, and
cannot sever the joint cause of action: In like manner one cannot be bound to
many jointly and severally, for albeit authority may be so given (as to two,
vel cuilibet eorum, to give livery, etc.) yet interest cannot, causa qua supra.

Trover.
5 In an action of Trover and Conversion brought in the Exchequer by bill, the
defendant pleads, that the plaintiff had an action of Trover, Co. l. 5. 61. a.
3. Sparries case.
etc. for the same goods then depending in the K. B. and demands Judgment of
the Bill, whereunto the plaintiff demurrs; and it was resolved by the Barons,
that the Bill should abate; and one of the reasons thereof was this, that the
defendant should not be twice vexed for one and the same thing; Nemo debet bis
vexari, si constat Curiae, quod sit pro una et eadem causa.

Nuisance.
6 A man shall not have an action upon the case for a nuisance levied in the high
way, for it is a common nuisance, Co. l. 5. 73. a. 4. in Williams case.
and therefore it is not reason, that one particular person should bring the
action; for by the same reason, that one person may have an action for it, by
the like reason every one may likewise have an action for it, and so by that
means the party may be punished 100. times for one and the same cause, which
were both unjust and unreasonable.

Co. l. 8. 61. a. 4 in Beeche^s case.
7 In all causes real or personal, Amercia^ent
when there is but one demandant or plaintiff, and diverse tenants or defendants,
the demandant or plaintiff may be diverse times amerced, but where there is but
one tenant or defendant, he shall not be twice amerced.

Co. l. 11. 43. b. 4. in R^. Godfreyes case
8 If a man be convicted in the County Court before the Sherif in a Writ of
Recaption, he shall be only amerced, Amerciament
because it is not a Court of Record; but if he be convicted in a Writ of
Recaption before the Justices, viz. in a Court of Record, he shall be fined and
imprisoned, but then he shall not be amerced, for that were to punish him twice
for one and the same offense.

Co. l. 11. 51. b. 1. in Lifords case.
9 If my disseisor be disseised, and after I re-enter, Disseisin.
I cannot have an action of trespass against the second disseisor; because then
he would be doubly charged for one and the same offense, viz. by me, and the
first disseisor, And therefore by a fiction in Law) I shall recover all the
mesne profits against the first disseisor, his servants, and others, who have
committed trespass by his Command, and in his right.

F. N. B. 39. d.
10 If a man has a Quare Impedit against one, Damages.
and the defendant has also an Assise of Darrein presentment, against the
plaintiff, and recovers in the Darrein presentment, and the plaintiff is non-sute
in the Quare Impedit; In this case, the defendant shall have two judgments
against the plaintiff, viz. to have a writ to the Bishop in both Actions, and
two writs shall be awarded to enquire of damages, Howbeit he shall not pay
damages twice for one and the same disturbance.

F.N.B. 43. g.
11 Where one is sued in the Common Bench and in the Court Christian for the
same thing, a prohibition lies. Prohibition.


12 Vide Hob. 2. Incerti temporis and nominis. Debt.
A debt shall not be twice satisfied.

Hob. 128. Pa and Coke.
13 Two Informations exhibited the same day against the same man for the same
offense, shall be both quashed. Information.


186 It flies and preventeth all occasions of Evil.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 88. b. 1. Littl.. 123.
1 The heir of lands in Soccage under the age of 14. shall not be committed to
the custody of any person, Heir in soccage.
unto whom the Inheritance by any possibility may or can descend, lest by
undirect practice he may gain the Inheritance to himself; And therefore if a
man has issue two sons by several venters, and having lands holden in soccage
of the nature of Borough English, dies, the younger brother within the age of
14 years, the elder brother of the half blood shall not have the custody of the
land, because by possibility the elder brother may inherit the land; for if the
youngest die without issue, and the land desc^nd to the uncle, the elder
brother of the half blood may be heir unto him; And therefore the Rule in Lib.
Rubr. cap. 70. is, Nullus haeredipetae suo propinquo vel extraneo periculosa
sare custodia committatur; And herewith also agree our ancient Authors, as
Bracton l. 2. fol. 87. Brit. fol. 163. Fleta l. 1. cap. 10. Fortesc. cap. 40.
Howbeit it is otherwise in the Civil Law, Vide Fort. ibidem.

Co. ibid. 100. a. 3.
2 To prevent suits and troubles, Writs of Prevention.
there are six writs in Law that may ^e maintained, Quia timet, before any
molestation, distress, or impleading: As 1. A writ of Mesne, before he be
distrained; 2. A Warrantia cartae, before he be impleaded; 3. A Monstraverunt,
before any distress or vexation; 4. An Audita querela, before any execution
sued; 5. A Curia Claudenda, before any default of enclosure; 6. A Ne injuste
vexes, before any distress or molestation: And these are called brevia
anticipantia, writs of Prevention.

To prevent false verdicts.
3 To prevent false verdicts, Co. ibid. 228 a. 1.
if the Jury after their evidence given unto them at Bar do at their own
charges eat or drink either before or after they be agreed on their verdict, it
is finable, but it shall not avoid the verdict; Howbeit, if before they be
agreed on their verdict they eat or drink at the charge of the plaintiff, if the
verdict be given for him, it shall avoid the verdict; but if it be given for
the defendant, it shall not avoid it, Et sic e converso: Howbeit, if after they
are agreed on the verdict, they eat and drink at the charge of him, for whom
they do pass, it shall not avoid the verdict.

The like.
4 If the plaintiff after evidence given, Co. ibid. a. 2
and the Jury departed from the bar, or any for him, do deliver any letter
from the plaintiff to any of the Jury concerning the matter in issue, or any
evidence, or any escrowl touching the matter in issue, which was not given in
evidence, it shall avoid the verdict, if it be found for the plaintiff, but not
if it be found for the defendant, and sic e converso: But if the Jury carry
away any writing unsealed, which was given in evidence in open Court, this
shall not avoid the verdict, albeit they should not have carried it with them.

The like.
5 By the Law of England a Jury after their evidence given upon the issue, ought
to be kept together in some convenient place, Co. ibid.
without meat or drink, fire or candle, (which some Books call an Imprisonment)
and without Speech with any unless it be the Bailiff, and with him only if they
be agreed: After they be agreed, they may in causes between party and party
give a verdict, and if the Court be risen give a privy verdict before any of
the Judges of the Court, and then they may eat and drink, and the next morning
in open Court, they may either affirm or alter their privy verdict, and that
which is given in Court shall stand: But in criminal causes of life and member,
the Jury can give no privy verdict, but they must give it openly in Court.

Law-wager.
6 In no case where a contempt, trespass, Co. ibid. 295. a. 2.
deceit or injury is supposed in the defendant, he shall wage his Law, because
the Law will not trust him with an Oath to discharge himself in those cases:
Only in some other cases, as debt, detinue, and account, the defendant is
allowed by Law to wage his Law, because they are not criminal.

The reason of discontinuance.
7 The reason why alienations in fee, in tail, or for life, Co. ibid. 327 a. 2.
by tenant in tail, Abbot, Bishop, husband of his wives land, and the like, do
make a discontinuance, and put the issue in tail, him in the reversion or
remainder, successor, or wife, that right had, to their action, and took away
their entry, was for that he was privy in estate, and for the benefit of the
purchasor, and for the safeguard of his warranty, so as every man's right might
be preserved, viz. to the demandant for his ancient right, and to the feoffee
for the benefit of his warranty, which was founded upon great reason and
equity, because the benefit of the warranty would be prevented and avoided, if
the entry of him, that right had, were lawful, and thereby also the danger,
that many times happens by taking of possessions, was warily prevented by Law.

Stat. of Gloc. Warranty. Assets.
8 By the express purview of the Statute of Gloucester, Co. ibid. 366. a. 2.
cap. 3. (where the baron aliens his wives Inheritance with warranty) if assets
do after descend from the father, then the tenant shall have recovery and
restitution of the lands of the mother; But in a Formedon (for lands intailed)
if at the time of the warranty pleaded no assets be descended, so as the
demandant recovereth the land, if afterward assets descend, there the tenant
shall have a Seire facias for the assets, and not for the land intailed; And
the reason hereof is, for that if (in this case) the tenant should be restored
to the land intailed, then if the issue in tail should alien the assets, his
issue in a Formedon would again recover from the tenant the land intailed: And
therefore the Sages of the Law to prevent future occasions of suits, have
heretofore resolved the said diversity in the cases abovesaid, upon
consideration and construction of the Statute of Gloucester, and of the Statute
de donis, West. 2. cap. 1. Vide supra 15, 9. 157, 14. and 178. 22.

Co. Inst. part 1. 392. a. 4.
9 The punishment which the Law inflicts upon a felon is very severe, for he is
not only punished in his own person, Punishment of Treason and Felony.
but likewise in his relations; The judgment against his person is, that he
shall be hanged by the neck until he be dead: he is punished also implicative
in his relations; as 1. In his wife, for she shall lose her Dower; 2. In his
children, for they shall become base and ignoble; 3 In his Posterity, for his
blood is stained and corrupted, so that they shall not inherit either to him or
any other Ancestor; 4. In his real estate, for he shall forfeit all the lands
that he has in feesimple, feetail, or for life; 5. In his personal estate, for
he shall forfeit all his goods and chattels both real and personal: Thus heavy
was his punishment at the Common Law, And the reason thereof was, to the end
men should fear to commit felony ut poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perveniat:
And it is truly said, Etsi meliores sunt quos ducit amor, tamen plures sunt
quos corrigit timor: And so it is a fortiori in case of High Treason. Howbeit,
after the Statute de donis 13 E. 1. cap. 1. Intailed lands could not be
forfeited for felony or treason, but only during the life of tenant in tail;
but since by the Statute of 26 H. 8. cap. 13. Intailed lands shall be also
forfeited for Treason: Also by the Statute of 1 E. 6. c. 12. the wife was to be
endowed, albeit her husband were attainted, convicted, or outlawed for treason
or felony; but afterward by the Statue of 5, and 6 E. 6. cap. 11. The wife
shall lose her dower, where the husband is attainted of Treason, so long as the
attainder continues in force: There are also diverse offenses made felony by
special Statutes, wherein dower, corruption of blood, and disherison of the
heir are by special provision saved.

Co. ibid. 171. b. 3.
10 The Law has provided for the safety of a man's, Infants age.
or a woman's estate, that before their age of twenty one years they cannot
bind themselves by any deed, or alien any lands, goods, or chattels. Co. l. 2.
44. a. 4. in the Bishop of Winchesters case.


11 A mere Layman, Prescription for tithes.
which was not capable of tithes in perancie, was yet capable of discharge of
tithes at the Common Law in his own land, as well as an Ecclesiastical person,
for by the Common Law the Parson, Patron and Ordinary might have discharged a
parishioner of tithes in his own land, or the parishioner might have given part
of his land to the Parson for the discharge of tithes in the residue, as
appears in 8 E. 4. 14. and in the Reg. fol. 38. Howbeit, this was always by
grant or composition, but he could never be discharged of tithes by
prescription; for albeit such prescription might have lawful commencement, yet
the Law in favor of holy Church would never suffer such prescription to be put
to the trial of laymen, lest they should rather strain their consciences for
their private benefit, than render the Church the Duties due unto it. Vide
supra 2, 5.

Feofment per fait not divested by parol.
12 The Law to prevent suits and troubles, will not permit, Co. l. 3. 26 b. 2.
in Butler and Bakers case.
that a franktenement shall be lightly divested by bare words in pais, to the
end the tenant to the praecipe may be the more certainly known; and therefore if
there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant by deed enfeoffs the Lord and a
Stranger, and make livery to the stranger in the name of both; In this case, if
the Lord by parol disagree to the estate, this is not valid to divest it, or if
he enter into the land, and distrain for the services of his Seigniory, this
shall amount to a disagreement of the feoffment, and shall not divest the
franktenement out of him, but if he enter into the land generally and take the
profits, this act shall amount to an agreement to the feoffment, as it is
adjudged per tot. Cur. in 10 E. 4. 12. For then it is not left uncertain, who
are tenants to the praecipe, etc.

Attornment,
13 If a reversion of two tenants for life, Co. l. 2. 67. a. 4. in Tookers case.
or the rent or seigniorie of two Iointenants be granted by fine; here, in a
Quid juris clamat, Quem redditum reddit, or Per quae servitia against such
Iointenants, the Law will not permit the one to attorn without his Companion,
because the one making attornment without the other may prejudice his
companion, as in not claiming to be dispunishable of waste, a Condition to have
fee, a future term, or the like; for upon a general attornment in Court of
Record, the lessee shall lose all advantages, which are not so claimed of
Record.

Prisoners Sherif.
14 The Law has so great a regard and care of executions, Co. l. 3. 72. a. 2.
in Westhies case.
which are the fruit and life of every suit, that notwithstanding they be
matters of Record, and the Letters Patents granted to the new Sheriff, and the
writ of discharge, and writ of delivery to the old Sherif, yet until the
prisoners are delivered unto the new Sheriff, they still remain in the custody
of the former Sheriff; and all this to prevent a new suit and trouble for the
recovery of that, which is already determined by Law.

S^ander.
15 It one exhibit articles to Justices of Peace against another, Co. l. 4, 14.
b. 1. in Cutler and Dixons case.
containing great abuses and misdemeanors, not only touching the petitioner,
but many others also, and all this to procure him to be bound to the good
behavior; In this case, the party accused for any matter contained in such
articles shall not have an action upon the case, because therein the party
complainant pursues the ordinary course of Justice, and the Law will not permit
actions in such cases, lest such as have good cause of complaint should be
deterred from doing it, for fear of suits and infinite vexation.

Common.
16 In case of Common by reason of vicinage, Co. l. 4. 38. b. 1. in Tirringhams
case.
the one may enclose against the other; for he that has such a Common cannot
put his cattle into the land of the other; but the Cattle ought to be put into
the land where they have Common, and then if the Cattle stray into the other
land, they are excused of trespass, by reason of the ancient usage, which the
Law permits, to prevent suits, which might arise, if actions should be brought
for every such trespass, when there is no separation or enclosure betwixt their
Commons. Vide Co. l. 7. 5. b. Sir Miles Corbets case.

Execution of process.
17 In all cases, when the process concerns the King, Co. l. 5. 92. b. 3. in
Semayns case.
the Sheriff or other officer, (upon refusal after demand, to open the door)
may break open the door of the house, or use other means to get in to do
execution; But in case of a common person the Law does not permit the Sheriff,
etc. (upon request made, and denial, as aforesaid) to break into the house of
the defendant to execute any process at the suit of any Subject, for the great
inconvenience that might ensue thereupon; because if men as well in the night
as in the day should have their houses (which indeed are their Castles) broken
open, upon pretense thereof great mischief and damage might fall out, for by
color thereof upon any feigned suit the house of any man at any time might b^
broken open, when the defendant might be arrested elsewhere, and so men should
not be in safety and repose in their own houses: And albeit the Sheriff be an
officer of great authority and confidence, yet it appears by experience, that
the Kings writs are many times executed and served by Bailifs, w^o are
generally persons of little or no value, and therefore not to be trusted with
the breaking open and ransacking of houses upon every slight occasion. See Co.
l. 11. 82. a. 4. Jews Bowls case.

Co. l. 5. 101. b. 3. in Penruddocks case.
18 If a nuisance be levied to the prejudice of another franktenement, Nuisance.
the Law does permit the party grieved to abate the nuisance before he suffer
any prejudice thereby, and by that means prevent the damage, before he be
prejudiced by it. Per Popham cum tota Curia.

Co. l. 5. 115. b. 3. in Fol^ambs case.
19 To prevent any further waste, Waste. Estrepement.
a writ of Estrepement lies in an action of waste at any time, as well before
Judgment, as after Judgment and before execution.

Co. l. 6. 51. a. 3. in Boswels case.
20 To prevent Simonie, or any thing that might savor thereof, Simonie.
the Plaintiff in a Quare Impedit before the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 5. did at
the Common Law recover no damages; for the Law does so abhor Simonie, that it
gives to the Patron no recompense either for his presentment or for his
disturbance thereof.

Co. l. 6. 74. b. 2. in Sir Drue Druries case.
21 In Sir Drue Druries case in the 6. Report the Justices said, Wardship.
Knighthood.
that it did behoove them to have good consideration in all cases depending
before them, nor only of the present case in question, but likewise of the
consequences thereof, viz. what general prejudice might happen thereupon either
to the King or the Subject: So if a ward should be knighted after the grant of
the wardship under the Great Seal, if his knighthood might excuse him from the
value of his marriage, when he might be knighted not only by the King, but
likewise by his Lieutenants in Ireland or elsewhere, this would tend very much
to the damage both of the King and Subject, for none would then purchase any
wardship upon such uncertainties; and therefore in that case his knighthood
shall not excuse him from the value of his marriage, which was vested in the
Lord upon his ancestors death.

Co. l. 7. part 1. 18. b. 2. in Calvin's case.
22 The Common Law by inhibiting an Alien born to be capable of Inheritance in
England, prevents three great inconveniences; Alien.
for otherwise, 1. The secrets of the Nation might thereby be discovered, 2.
The revenues thereof (being indeed the sinews of war, and the ornament of
peace) might be taken and enjoyed by Strangers born, 3. It might at last bring
the Nation to ruin and destruction, 1. Tempore belli, for then Strangers might
fortify themselves in the heart of the Realm, not much unlike the Trojan horse
in Virgil, 2. Tempore Pacis, for they having gotten into their hands a great
part of the Inheritance of the Commonwealth, and not being capable to serve of
Iuries, there would be a failer of Justice, etc.

Co. l. 9. 56. b. 2. in the Poulters case.
23 To prevent mischief and oppression in the Commonwealth, Conspiracy.
Conspirators are Inditable by the Common Law* albeit they put nothing in
execution by any overt act, as if they shall be found guilty of conspiring to
indict and acquit any, though they put nothing thereof in ure.

Co. l. 9. 69. ^. 4. in Mackallyes case.
24 To prevent escapes upon arrests, Arrests.
the Law does not enjoin a Sergeant or Bailif sworn and commonly known (though
not by the party arrested) to show his mace or warrant, nor a special Bailif to
show his warrant without demand, lest in the mean time the party arrested may
escape; but it shall be warning and warrant enough to say, I Arrest you.

Things in action.
25 To prevent multiplication of controversies and suits, Co. l. 10. 48. a. 3.
in Lampets case.
great oppression of the people, (principally of terre-tenants) and the
subversion of the due and equal execution of Justice, the wisdom and policy of
the Sages and Founders of our Law have provided, that no possibility, right,
title, or thing in action shall be granted or assigned to strangers; and as
they cannot be granted by the act of the party, so right of action cannot be
transferred by act in Law; as unto the Lord by escheat, neither shall the Lord
of a Villein have things in action, as appears in 22 Ass. pl. 37. etc. Co. l.
3. fol. 1.
And in the Marquess of Winchesters case Right of action to land was not given
to the King by an Act of Attainder: And all this was for the quiet and repose
of terre-tenants: Howbeit, all rights, titles, and actions may by the like
prudence and policy of the Law be released to the terre-tenant, for the same
reason of his repose and quiet, and for the avoidance of contentions and suits,
and that every one may live in his vocation in peace and plenty.

Ecclesiastical livings.
26 To preserve Ecclesiastical possessions from alienation in prejudice of the
Successor, Co. l. 10. 60. a. 3. in the Bish. of Sarums case.
the prudence of the Sages of the Law did provide, that no sole Corporation
should be trusted with the disposition of his possessions, as to bind his
Successors, but in such case they were to have the consent of others, as the
Bishop was to have the consent of his Dean and Chapter, the Abbot of his
Covent, the Parson of his Patron and Ordinary, and sic de caeteris.

Auditor of the Court of Wards.
27 The Law to prevent any miscarriage in matters of Judicature, has provided,
Co. l. 11 4. a. 2. in Auditor Curles case.
that no judicial office shall be granted in reversion, and the rule of Law in
this point is, Officia Judicialia non concedantur antequam vacent; And the
reason is, to prevent a great inconvenience which may ensue thereupon; for that
he, who at the time of the grant in reversion may be able and sufficient to
supply the office of Judicature, and to administer equal justice to the Kings
Liege people, may, before the office fall, become unable and insufficient to
perform it; And therefore the Kings grant of the office of Auditor of the Court
of Wards unto John Churchil and John Took in reversion after the death of
Walter Took, and William Curle, was adjudged void, because it was an office of
Judicature in that Court, and therefore could not be granted in reversion.

Error in London.
28 If a man has judgment given for him in London in the Sheriffs Court,
F.N.B. 24. a.
or before the Mayor and Sheriffs in the Hustings of London, and the defendant
to delay the execution of the judgment, sues a writ of Error to remove the
Record before the Mayor, etc. in the Hustings, or before certain Commissioners,
if the judgment be given in the Hustings, etc. and afterward the defendant
eloyns his goods goods out of the City, or wastes them, to the intent that the
plaintiff should not have execution of those goods; In this case, the plaintiff
may have a special writ directed to the Mayor and Sherifs to take order, that
so many of the goods of the defendant as amount to the value of that which is
recovered, may be safely kept to satisfy the plaintiff, if he shall have the
judgment affirmed for him, so as execution of the former judgment may be
made, etc. of the same goods, etc.

Security of the Peace.
29 Before a man can have security of the Peace against another, F.N.B. 79. h.
(lest the cause of his complaint may arise rather from malice than any just
ground of fear) the party complainant ought first to make oath, that he
requires the Peace against the other for the safeguard of his body, and not out
of malice; And this course is still used in the K. B. and before Justices of
Peace; And it was also the usual course in the Chancery to make such oath
before a Master of that Court, before he could have it granted; but of later
times that course has been left in Chancery, which Fitzharbert says is not
well done, because such prosecution for the most part proceeds rather from
malice, than any just cause of fear.

F.N.B. 113 a.
30 The King of right ought to save and defend his Realm as well against the Sea
as against Enemies, Oyer and Terminer for Nusances.
that it be not surrounded and laid waste, and to provide remedy for the same,
and also to take order that his subjects may have their passage throughout the
Realm by bridges and safe ways, etc. And therefore if the banks of the Sea be
broken, or the Sewers and drains be not scowred, that the fresh waters may have
their direct course, the King for the prevention of such damage as may happen
by reason of such defaults, might by the Common Law before any Commissions of
Sewers, etc. grant commissions to inquire, hear, and determine such defaults.

Pl. Co. 67. a. 2. in Dyve and Maninghams case.
31 The persons mentioned in the second branch of the Statute of 23 H. 6. 10. (
viz. such as were in ward by Condemnation, Bailment.
exemption, Capias utlagatum or excommunicatum, surety of the peace, or
committed by command of the Justices, or Vagabonds refusing to serve) were not
bailable by the Common Law (before that Statute) for the Inconveniences which
might ensue thereupon.

Co. l. 5. 83. b. in the case of Market overt.
32 No sale of stolen goods, but in a Market overt, Market overt.
alters the property; And therefore if stolen plate be openly sold (in London or
elsewhere in any other market overt) in a Scriveners shop, that sale alters not
the property, because it is no market overt for plate; it is otherwise, if it
be openly sold in a Goldsmiths shop; but if the sale be there behind a hanging
or Cupboard, or in a warehouse, or other part of the house, and not openly,
that passengers may observe it, such sale alters not the property; And this the
Law has ordained to prevent felony, etc. Vide Max. 191. 3. and 134. 14.

Co. I^st. pars 1. 6. b. 4.
31 It was resolved in the C. B. Pasc. 10. Feme covert no witness for the Baron.
Iac. that a wife cannot be produced as a witness, either against or for her
husband, and one of the reasons of that resolution was, in respect it might be
a cause of implacable discord and dissension betwixt the husband and wife, and
a mean of great inconvenience.

H b. 36. Druries case.
32 Drury brought a Quare Impedit against Kent the Incumbent and others; and
upon surmise made to the Court, Prohibition.
that Kent did fell timber upon the Glebe, and upon the lands of Copyholders,
holding of a Manor parcel of the Rectory, the Court granted a Prohibition to
prevent further waste.

H^b. 62. Pa^row and L^w^llyn.
33 The private delivery of defamatory Letters was criminal and censurable in the
Starr-chamber (and now, as it seems, Star Chamber.
inditable in the Upper Bench) because such quarrellous Letters tend to the
breach of the peace, and to the stirring of Challenges and quarrels, and
therefore the means of such evils, as well as the end, are to be prevented.

187 It moderateth the strictness of the Law it self.
Co. I st. part 1 13. ^. 1.
1 A Protection Moraturae or Profecturae have these clauses in them, Protection.
Praesentibus minime valituris, si contingat ipsum, etc. a custodia Castri
praedicti recedere: Or si contingat iter illud non accipere, vel infra illum
terminum a partibus transmarinis redire, according to the provision of the
Statute of 13 R. 2. 16. nevertheless, if he return into England, and came over
to provide Munition, Habiliments of war, victuals, or other necessaries, it is
no breach of the said conditional clauses, nor against the said Act; for that
in judgment of Law coming for such things as are of necessity for the
maintenance of the war, Moratur (he does stay) according to the intention of
the Protection and Statute aforesaid.

Annuity.
2 If A. be seized of lands, Co. ibid. 144. b. 2.
and he and B. grant a rent charge to one in fee, this prima facie seems to be
the grant of A. and the confirmation of B. but yet the grantee may have a writ
of annuity against both: Howbeit if two men grant an annuity of 20 l. per annum
to another, although the persons be several, yet he shall have but one annuity;
but if the grant be Obligamus nos et utrumque vestrum, the grantee may have a
writ of annuity against either of them, but he shall have but one satisfaction.

Judgment.
3 An action of trespass was brought against Tilly and Woody for five boxes with
charters taken, etc. Tilly pleads not guilty, H. 7. E. 4. fol. 31. and Title
Judgment 50 Pl. Co. 66. b. 3. Dyve and Maningham
and Woody makes title to him by a gift, and the plaintiff traverseth the gift,
and thereupon they were at issue, and Tilly was found guilty, and the issue was
found for Woody against the plaintiff; In this case, albeit the issue was found
against Tilly, yet the plaintiff had not judgment against him; for it was found
betwixt the plaintiff and Woody that the plaintiff had not title; and then in as
much as it appeared to the Judges by the Record, that the plaintiff had not
title, they ex officio ought to give judgment against the plaintiff.

The like.
4 An action of trespass was brought by lessee for years of Cattle taken, the
defendant says, P. 10 E. 4. fol. 7. Title Office del Court 7. Br. 29. Pl. Co.
ibid.
that the Lessor held of him by diverse services, etc. and for so much arrear he
took the Cattle; the plaintiff says, there is nothing arrear, etc. and hereupon
they were at issue, and it was found for the plaintiff; And yet per totam Curiam
the plaintiff shall not have judgment, for albeit the defendant admitted the
writ good, yet the Court did abate it, because it appeared unto them that the
defendant was Lord, against whom an action of trespass lies not, Marbr. 3.
for the Statute says, Non ideo puniatur dominus, etc.

Appeal.
5 In an appeal by a feme of the death of her father, Pl. Co. ibid.
albeit the defendant affirm the writ, yet the Court ex officio ought to abate
it; for it appears to the Court, that no feme may have an appeal of the death
of any, save of her husband, by the Statute of Magna Carta cap. 34. which was
in affirmance of the Common Law.

Non est f^ctu^.
6 In debt upon an obligation, Pl. Co. 66. b. 4.
if the defendant conclude his plea with Judgment si action, whereas his plea
should have been non est factum, yet if the Justices find that it was not his
deed, so as the plaintiff had no cause of action, they ought ex officio to give
judgment against the Plaintiff. Vide 11. 9.

Attaint.
7 The Statute of 23 H. 8. 3. Dyer 201. 65. 3 El. ^
of Attaints lies as well against executors, as the party himself, albeit the
party that recovers upon the false verdict be only named in that Statute; for
that Statute being made in mitigation of the rigor of the Common Law shall be
taken by equity, and the words against the party that has judgment are
superfluous, for it lies against any that enjoys the thing lost.

188 Verba semper accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu.
Slander.
1 If one say to another, that he is perjured, Co. l. 4. 15. b. 1. in St^nhop
and Blithes case.
or that he has forsworn himself in such a Court, by these words an action may
be maintained, for by these words it appears, that he has forsworn himself in
a judicial proceeding; but to charge another generally, that he has forsworn
himself, is not actionable, because he may be forsworn in usual communication,
And benignior sententia in verbis generalibus seu dubiis est praeferenda. Vide
178, 11.

Co. l. 4. 15. b. 3. in Yeamans case.
2 Yeamans charged Hext (being then a Justice of Peace) in these words, For my
ground in Allerton, Hext seeks my life; Slander.
These words being taken in mitiori sensu were not actionable, 1. because he
may seek his life lawfully upon just cause, and his land may be holden of him;
2. seeking of his life is too General, and for seeking only no punishment can
be inflicted by the Law.

Co. l 4. 17. b. 4. in James and Rutleches case.
3 In an action upon the case for words, Slander.
as an Innuendo cannot make the person certain, which was uncertain before, so
neither can an Innuendo alter the matter or sense of the words themselves, as
to say, that such an one was full of the Pox (innuendo) the French Pox, this
Innuendo does not perform his proper office, for it strives to extend the
general words the Pox to the French pox by Imagination of an Intent, which is
not apparent by any precedent words, unto which the Innuendo may referr, And
the words themselves shall be taken in mitiori sensu.

Co. l. 4. 20. a. 1. in Barhams case.
4 Barham brings an action upon the case against Nethershall, Slander.
the words were these, Mr. Barham did burn my barn (innuendo a barn with corn)
with his own hands, and none but he: And it was adjudged that they were not
actionable, for it is not felony to burn a barn, unles it be parcel of a
Mansion House, or full of Corn; And in this and the like cases agitur
civiliter, and not criminaliter, and verba accipienda sunt in mitiori sensu:
Also the Innuendo will not serve, when the words themselves are not slanderous.

Co. l. 6. 6. a. Sir John Molyns case.
5 E. 3. is Lord, the Abbot of Westminster. Mesne, Tenure.
and C. tenant of the Manor of D. the tenant is attainted of treason, and
office thereof found, E. 3. grants the Manor to Sir John Molyns, and his heirs,
Tenendum de nobis haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, et aliis capitalibus
dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita and de Iure consueta: In this
case, the question was, of whom and how this Manor was holden? And here albeit
it was objected that the Tenendum, being by the services (inde) thence due, at
which time nothing was due to the Mesne, the Mesnalty continued still extinct,
and therefore that it was holden immediately of the King; yet it was adjudged,
that by those words of the Patent the Mesnalty was revived, for when those
words may be interpreted two manner of ways, viz. either immediately of the
King, or mediately by the Mesne, reason requires, that the words should be
understood in the milder sense, especially when that appears to be the Kings
intention, and tends more to his honor, and it is not reasonable, that the
Mesne, who offended not, should lose his tenure.

Co. l 6. 6. b. Wheelers case.
6 H. 8 grants land, Tenure.
Tenendum de nobis et haeredibus nostris per servitium unius Rosae Rubeae
Annuatim ad festum Nativitatis, Sancti Iohannis Baptistae, solummodo pro
omnibus and omnimodis aliis servitiis: And this was adjudged tenure in soccage
in Chief, and not tenure in Capite by Knightservice; for albeit it was
objected, that the patentee could not hold only by the Rose, because homage,
or (at least) fealty was incident to every tenure, and therefore that the King
was deceived in his grant, yet it was resolved, that for as much as fealty is
incident to every rent service, the Law annexeth fealty to the rent, and these
words, viz. Pro omnibus aliis servitiis, are to be understood of other
services, which the Law does not imply or add to it, so as the tenure shall be
by a Rose and fealty; and this is the benign construction of Law, as near the
Kings intention as may be, by which construction the said words pro omnibus
aliis servitiis have some effect, and shall not be rejected as vain, and of no
force.

Co. l. 6. 66. b. Sir Moyle Finches case.
7 When a Manor has once had the reputation of a name, Name in reputation.
by which it has been commonly known, albeit the demesnes be afterward
severed from it, so as it cease to be a Manor, yet in grants, fines, or other
amicable conveyances it may pass still by the name of a Manor, (but not in
Adversary writs, etc.) so if I have a Park by the license and grant of the
King, and by the name of a Park it is commonly known, and after I surrender my
patent to the King, by which (in Law) it remains no longer a Park; yet it
having once obtained the name of a Park in truth, it is a good ground for the
reputation and continuance of the name of a Park afterward, and by that name
may pass in conveyances; And all this by a favorable construction of Law, etc.

Remainder vests.
8 If land be granted to A. for life, the remainder to B. for life, Pl. Co. 32.
a. 2. in Colthrist and Beinsh^ns case,
and if B. die, living A. that then it shall remain to C, for life; In this
case, this word (then) shall not be intended presently during the life of A. as
these words prima facie do seem to import, but they shall have a beneficial
construction, viz. that then it shall remain, as a remainder ought to do, that
is to say, to vest then, and to be executed after the death of A. So if a gift
in tail be made upon condition, that if he do such an act, that then the land
shall remain to his right heirs, this word then is not so to be understood, as
if it should avoid the estate tail, and to be executed presently upon the act
performed, but it is to be intended, that upon the act performed the remainder
shall vest, and after the estate ended shall be executed, and not before.

189. Construeth things according to Common possibility or intendment; And
therefore
Judges.
1 Regularly Judges ought to adjudge according to common intendment of Law. Co.
Inst. part 1. 78. b. 1.


Parson.
2 By intendment of Law every Parson or Rector of a Church is supposed to be
resident on his benefice, unless the contrary be proved. Vide 2, 3.

Manor.
3 By common intendment one part of a Manor shall not be of another nature than
the rest.

A Will.
4 By common intendment a Will shall not be supposed to be made by collusion.

Bonu^. Vicinus. Possibilia.
5 In facto, quod se habet ad bonum and malum, magis de bono, quam de malo lex
intendit. Lex intendit vicinum vicini facta scire. Nulla impossibilia aut
inhonesta sunt praesumenda, vera autem et honesta et possibilia.

Guardian. Ward.
6 Lex semper intendit quod convenit rationi: As in this case, the Guardian
shall have the custody of the land, until the heir come to his full age of one
and twenty years, because by intendment of Law the heir is not able to do
Knight service before that age, which is grounded upon apparent reason.

Jurors.
7 By the Common Law in a plea real, mixed, or personal, Co. ibid. 157. a. 1. and
158. b. 2.
there ought to be 4. of the Hundred (where the cause of action arises)
returned for their better notice of the cause, for vicini vicinorum facta
praesumuntur scire: Howbeit, by the Statute of 27 Eliz. 6. In a plea personal,
if two Hundreders appear, it suffiseth; And in an Attaint albeit the Jury is
double, yet the Hundreders are not double.

Fee-simple.
8 When a man is said to be seized in fee, without more, Co. ibid. 189. a. 2.
Littl.. 293.
it shall be intended in fee simple, and it shall not be intended by this word
(in fee) that a man is seized in fee tail, unless this addition be put to it,
fee tail; for fee shall be taken (secundum excellentiam) for the highest and
best fee, and that is fee simple.

Verdict.
9 If a verdict find, that a man has duas parts Manerii, Co. ibid. 190. b. 3.
etc. in tres parts divisas, this shall not be intended to be in common; but
if the verdict be in tres parts dividendas, then it seems that they are
tenants in Common by the Intendment of the verdict.

Co. ibid. 226. a. 1.
10 The Lord by escheat, albeit his estate is created by Law, Pleading a
condition. Lord. Tenant by courtesy.
shall not plead a condition to defeat a freehold without showing of it,
because the deed does belong unto him, and therefore it is presumed that he
has it in his custody: So likewise a Tenant by the Courtesy shall not plead a
condition made by his wife, and a re-entry for a condition broken, without
showing the deed; for albeit his estate he created by Law, yet the Law does
presume, that he had the possession of the deeds and evidences belonging to his
wife.

Co. ibid. 237. b. 3.
11 One of the reasons why a descent takes away the entry of him that right
has, is, Descent a toll entry.
for that the heir of the disseisor cannot suddenly (by intendment of Law) know
the true state of his title: And in regard many advantages follow the
possession and tenant, the Law takes away the entry of him, that would not
enter (when he might) upon the Ancestor, (who is presumed to know his title)
and drives him to his action against the heir, who (by intendment) may be
ignorant thereof.

Co. ibid. 238. b. 4.
12 At the Common Law, Writ of right.
if Lands were conveyed out of the degrees, the demandant was driven to his
writ of right; for that in regard of such long possession in so many men's hands
(which the Law does ever respect and favor) the Law did presume, that the
present tenant had best right to the Land: But this is now altered by the
Statute of Marlebr. cap. 29. which gives a writ of entry in the Post in that
case.

13 Max. 22, 31.

Littl.. 440. Co. 261.
14 If a descent be cast when the disseisee is out of the Realm, Descent out of
the Realm.
albeit he be not there in the Kings service, that descent shall not take away
the entry of him that right has; because he that is out of the Realm cannot,
by intendment of Law, have conusance of the disseisin, no more than a thing
done out of the Realm can be tried within the Realm by a Jury of 12 men; but it
is otherwise, if such disseisee were within the Realm at the time of the
disseisin, or the descent cast.

Co. ibid. 194. b. 4.
15 In a writ of right or an Appeal, when the tenant or appellee failed of
witnesses, evidences, or other proofs, Battle.
the Law did institute trial by Battle, because the presumption of Law is, that
God will give victory to him that has right.

Co. ibid. 344. b. 1.
16 At the Common Law, if the Church were once full, Plenarty.
the Incumbent could not be removed, and plenartie generally was a good plea in
a Quare Impedit, or Assise of Darrein presentment, and one of the reasons
hereof was, for that the Law intended, that the Bishop who had Cure of souls
within his diocese, would admit and institute an able man for the discharge of
his duty and his own, and that the Bishop would do right to every Patron within
his diocese: besides, Institution is a Judicial act, and in nature of a
Judgment, and therefore intended to be just. Co. ibid. a. 4.


Co. ibid. 294. a. 3.
17 The four Knights Electors of the grand Assise are not to be challenged, for
that in Law they be Judges to that purpose, Challenge.
and Judges and Justices cannot be challenged, because they are intended by Law
to do right: And for the same reason it is, that Noblemen, who in case of High
Treason are to pass upon a Peer of the Realm, cannot be challenged, because
they are Judges of the fact; and therefore (by intendment of Law) will give a
righteous judgment, Res Iudicata pro veritate accipitur.

Co. ibid. 373. a. 4.
18 If rent be behind for 20 years, No averment against presumption in Law.
and the Lord make an acquittance for the last that is due, all the rest are
presumed to be paid, and the Law will admit no proof against this presumption:
So if a man be within the four Seas, and his wife has a Child, the Law
presumes, that it is the child of the husband, and against this presumption
the Law will admit no proof: If a man that is innocent be accused of felony,
and for fear flies for the same, albeit he judicially acquitteth himself of
the felony; yet if it be found that he fled for the felony, he shall,
notwithstanding his innocence, forfeit all his goods and chattels, debts and
duties: for as to the forfeiture of them the Law will admit no proof against
the presumption in Law grounded upon his flight. Vide 79. 1.

War anty.
19 In a feoffment by deed, Co. ibid. 383. b. 2.
albeit in the clause of warranty it be not mentioned to whom, etc. yet it
shall be intended to the feoffee.

Titles.
30 A Layman may prescribe in modo decimandi, Co. l. 2. 44. a. 4. in the Bp. of
Winchesters case, and Co. ibid. 45. a. 1.
but not in non decimando, because a Layman is but in some special cases
capable of Tithes at the Common Law, and therefore without special matter
showed, it will not be intended, that he has any lawful discharge: Vide 2, 5.

Limitation of uses.
21 If baron and feme levy a fine of land, Co l. 2. 57. a. 4. in Beckwiths case.
whereof they are seized in right of the feme, and the baron only declare the
use of the fine, this declaration shall bind the feme, if her dis-assent appear
not; for when she joins with the baron in the fine, it shall be intended (if
the contrary appear not) that she joined also with him in agreement for the
declaration of the uses of the fine: So if baron and feme sell the land of the
feme to another for money by paroll, and after levy a fine to the vendee and
his heirs, this shall bind the feme without any writing proving her assent.
Vide plus ibid. and Dyer 290. pl. 61.

Attornment.
22 If the reversioner oust his lessee for life, Co. l. 2. 68. b. 2. in Tookers
case.
and make feofment in fee, and the lessee re-enter, this is a good attornment,
and yet peradventure he had not notice of the feoffment which was made of the
land, and without notice the attornment is not valid; Howbeit, in regard it is
intended by Law, that the lessee cannot be mis-conusant of such feoffments as
are made of the land, the Law (in such case) does imply notice.

Limitation.
23 By the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 2. of Limitations, Co. l. 4. 10. b 4. in
Bevils case.
in an Avowry or Conusance for rent, suit or services, the seisin shall be
within 40 years before such Avowry or conusance; Howbeit, that Act shall not
extend to such rent or service, as by common possibility may not happen or
become due within 40 years; as if the seigniorie consists of homage and fealty
only, in this case the tenant may live 40 years after they are made: In like
manner if the service be to cover the Hall of the Lord, or to march with him
when there shall be war betwixt the King and any of his enemies, such casual
services, as by common possibility cannot happen within 40 years, are not
within that act: There is the same Law also of a Formedon in descender, for the
tenant in tail may live 50 years after the discontinuance; And therefore in
Fitz williams case in 10 and 11 Eliz. it was adjudged, Dyer 278. pl. 2.
that Formedons in descender were not within the Statute for the common
possibility aforesaid. Vide plus ibid.

Sale by the Sherif
24 The Sherif reciting, Co. l. 4. 74. a. 3. Palmers case.
that A. had a lease of a Parsonage pro termino diversorum annorum extunc
ventur. sold it by force of a Fieri facias to another; and this sale was
adjudged good, because by common intendment the Sherif cannot have precise
knowledge of the commencement and end of the term: The Law is otherwise in case
of an Inquisition, because a term cannot be extended without showing the
beginning and ending thereof, to the end that the debtor may have the residue
of the term, when the debt is satisfied, etc.

Co. l. 4. 77. b. 2. in the case of Corporations.
25 Albeit a Corporation have a commencement by Charter, Corporations.
and (by consequence) within memory, and it be expressed in their Charter that
the choice of their Mayor, Bailifs, and other principal Officers shall be by
the Commonalty, yet if by a long usage they have chosen them by a select number
of the principal of the Commonalty or of the Burgesses, although no such
constitution can be showed to warrant such election, yet (to avoid popular
confusion) such election is adjudged good in Law, because it is presumed and
intended, that such special election (which could not commence without common
assent) was formerly made and agreed upon. Vide infra 192. 2.

Co. l. 5. 12. a. in Sanders case.
26 If a man has land, in part whereof there is a Cole-mine open, Cole-mine.
and he devises the land to one for life, or for years, the lessee may digg in
the mine; for in as much as the mine is open at the time of the lease made, and
he demiseth all the land, it shall be intended, that his intent is here
general, as his demise is, viz. that the lessee shall take profit of all the
land, and (consequently) of the mine within it: Vide 17 E. 3. 7. And so the
doubt in F. N. B. 149 c. well explained.

Co. l. 5. 96. b. 4. in Goodals case.
27 A. seized of lands in fee by deed indented and enrolled covenants with B.
that if B. shall pay to A. his heirs or assigns 100 l. such a day at such a
place, Assignee in Law, and in fact. Diversity.
that then A. and his heirs will stand seized of the land, to the use of B. and
his heirs; before the day of payment A. having issue a son makes his will in
writing, and his wife executrix thereof, and dies, the wife renounceth the
executorship, and then takes administration: In this case, this word Assigns
shall be only intended of the assigns of the estate of A. for he has an estate
in him assignable, and the Law will never seek an assignee in Law, when there
may be an assignee in fact: but if A. had made a feoffment in fee, upon
condition that the feoffee shall pay the money to the feoffor, his heirs or
assigns, etc. there because he has departed with his whole estate in fee, and
has but a naked condition, which cannot be assigned over, the Law, which never
rejects any word, if by any reasonable construction it may take effect, will
make construction what person shall be most apt (as his assignee in Law) to
receive the money, and these the Law adjudgeth to be his executors, because
they represent the person of the testator for all goods and chattels, and in
such case the feoffor cannot have any assignee in fact. Vide 27 H. 8. 2. a.

Co. l. 5. 97. a. 4. in Goodals case.
28 In a special verdict all other matters shall be intended and supplied, but
only that, Verdict special.
which the Jurors have referred to the consideration of the Court, as it was
adjudged in 30 and 31 Eliz. in B. R. inter Scovel and Cabel: and therefore in
Goodales case in the Fifth Report, albeit no title was there found for the
defendant, but was as a mere stranger, yet the Court never doubted thereof, but
by intendment took it for granted, and took only into their consideration that,
whereof the Jurors made doubt, viz. whether the payment there were a good
performance of the Condition.

Co. l. 5. 105. Aldens case.
29 In an Ejectione firmae at the Common Law Ancient Demesne is a good plea to
the Jurisdiction of the Court, Ancient demesne.
because by common intendment the title and right of the Land will thereby come
in debate, and the plaintiff shall recover the possession of the land, and have
execution by habere facias possessionem; so also in Replevin, writ of Mesn,
writ of Ward in account against Guardian in Socage, etc. Ancient demesne is a
good plea for the appearance, and common intendment, that the realty will come
in debate; the like Law is also in account against a Bailif, because it is
brought for the issues of the land, which is ancient demesne; and therefore
ought to be brought and determined in the Court of ancient demesne, and not
elsewhere, etc.

Co. l. 6. 16. a. Collyers case.
30 By intendment of Law a devise shall be for the benefit of the Devise.
devisee, and not to his prejudice, as if land of the value of 3 l per annum be
devised to A. and that A. shall pay out of it 50 s. per annum, in this case A.
has but an estate for life, for he may pay it out of the profits of the land,
and is sure to be at no loss; but if it be devised to B. for life, the
remainder to A. paying 50 s. per annum out of it; In this case, A. has fee
simple, because after the payment thereof A. may die before he can receive
satisfaction for the same out of the profits of the land; and therefore such a
devise shall be fee simple, because the Law intends that the devise was
intended for his benefit, and not for his prejudice.

Error in popular actions.
31 B. brings a plaint in the Court of Ludlow (which is a Court of Record)
against C. tam pro Domina Regina quam pro seipso, Co. l. 6. 19. b. Gregory's
case.
upon the Statute of 4 and 5. Ph. and M. cap. 5. for exercising the trade of a
woollen-weaver without having served seven years as an Apprentice, etc. and had
judgment, etc. hereupon C. brings a writ of Error, etc. and for one of the
Errors assigns, that albeit Ludlow be a Court of Record, yet it is not such a
Court as is intended by the Statute for causes of that nature; for that the
ancient usage in all such popular actions or informations has been, that
albeit the Informer tam pro domina Regina quam pro ipso exhibits the
Information, yet if the defendant pleads a special plea, the Queens Attorney
shall reply alone, and it was intended by the makers of the said Act, that the
suit should be in such a Court, where the Kings Attorney may attend, for the
benefit which the King may have by such a suit, and that is in the four Courts
at Westminster; And thereupon the Judgment was reversed. Vide Dyer 236. 24.

Admission and Institution.
32 He that comes in by Admission and institution, Co. l. 6. 49. b. 1. in
Boswels case.
comes in by a judicial act, and the Law presumes that the Bishop, who has the
cure of the Souls of all within his diocese, for which he shall answer at his
fearful and final account (in respect whereof he ought to defend them from all
Schismatiques, Heretics, and other Instruments of the devil) will not do, or
assent to any wrong to be done to any Parsonage within his diocese, but if the
Church be litigious, will inform himself of the truth de Iure Patronatus, and
so do right.

Peer ag^.
33 The person of a Peer of the Realm, or a Countess, Baroness, Co. l. 6. 52. b.
3. in the Countess of Rutlands case.
etc. by marriage or descent, ought not to be arrested for debt or trespass;
because the Law presumes, that they have sufficient in lands and tenements,
whereby they may be distrained; and therefore in such cases issues only shall
go out against their lands: And albeit a Countess, Baroness, etc. in respect of
her sex, cannot sit in Parliament, yet she is a Peer of the Realm, and shall be
tried by her Peers, as appears by the Statute of 20 H. 6. cap. 9. which is but
a declaration of the Common Law. Vide plus ibidem.

Cestuy que use.
34 If Cestuy que use had granted his use by his will, Co. l. 6. 76. a. 3. in
Sir Geo. Cursons case.
no collusion could have been averred upon such a will to obtain the wardship
of his heir; for Nemo prae^umitur esse immemor suae aeternae salutis, et maxim
in articulo mortis. et omne testamentum morte consummatum est: And therefore
the Statute of 4 H. 7. 10. which gives the wardship of Cestuy que use, makes
exception, when any will is by him declared. Vide 27 H. 8. 14.

Divorce.
35 Chapter and Eliz. were divorced in the Court of Audience ratione aetatis mino^is
et impubertatis Eliz. after they had lived ten years together, and had issue a
daughter; Co. l. 7. 43. b. Kennes case.
and afterward Chapter marrying another woman, by another Sentence in the
Ecclesiastical Court the first marriage was declared void, the second good, and
liberty given them ad exequenda conjugalia obsequia; The second wife dies, and
Chapter marries a third wife, and has issue another daughter; The last daughter is
found heir by office, the first traverseth the office by bill in the Court of
Wards: And in this case it was resolved, that albeit the first was in truth a
lawful marriage, yet the Sentence of divorce being in force, no averment could
be admitted against it, because the Spiritual Judge having jurisdiction
thereof, before the Sentence were repealed, it was intended by Law to be Just,
and our Law gave credence thereunto: for, Res Judicata pro veritate accipitur.
See Dyer 13. pl. 62.

Co. l 9. 52. b. 4 in Hickmols case.
36 If the Obligee confess himself to be discharged of all bonds betwixt him and
the Obligor, Release of bonds.
this (by intendment of Law) is a release or discharge of all bonds betwixt
them; for albeit the word discharge is not properly said of the part of the
Obligee, but of the Obligor, (for the Obligor is to be discharged,) yet (in
judgment of Law) such an acknowledgement amounts to a discharge of the Obligor
of all such duties.

Co. l. 9. 109. Meriel Treshams case.
37 In debt against an executor he cannot plead quod ipse non habet, etc. aliqua
bona, etc. praeter bona, Plea of Executor.
etc. quae non sufficient ad satisfacienda debita praedicta; but he ought to
plead, quod non habet, etc. bona, etc. praeterquam bona and catalla ad
valentiam of a certain sum, and non ultra, quae eisdem debitis obligata and
onerabilia existunt; for the first plea is insufficient for the uncertainty (
vide Max. 162. pl. 61.) and the other he ought to plead, because he being privy
and representing the person of the testator, has (by intendment of Law) notice
of the certainty and certain value of the goods, and therefore in such case
ought to plead certainly, as aforesaid; The like Law is of an administrator for
the goods of the Intestate.

Co. l. 11 13. a. 1. in Priddle and Napp^rs case.
38 Of Impropriations formerly given to Monasteries, Appropriations.
not only those which were truly Impropriate, but likewise such as had been and
were so in reputation, were given to H. 8. by the intendment of the Statutes of
Dissolution; for albeit in those Statutes there is a saving of rights, yet the
Founders, Donors, etc. are excepted out of that Saving, so as they are bound by
the body of the Act.

Co l. 11. 16. a 4. in Doct. G an^s case.
39 A Prescription, Tites.
that every Inhabitant in the parish is to pay 2 s. in the pound according to
the value of their houses yearly, instead of Tithes, is a good prescription;
because (by intendment of Law) the commencement thereof might be lawful, for
it might be so by composition for the land before the houses were built.

40 It is a Principle in Law, that a bar is good, if it be certain, Plea in
bar to a common intent good.
to a common intent; Pl. Co. 28. a. 4. Colchrist and Bernshin. Vide ibid. 31.
a. and 33 a. 4. and ^6. a. 3.
as if a Message be demised to A. for life, the remainder to B. for life, si
ipse B. vellet inhabitare in messuagio praedicto, etc. Here, in an Action
brought by the lessor for the recovery of the Message, etc. upon the condition
broken, it is a good bar for B. to say, that after the death of A. he entered,
without averring the time of his entry, viz. immediately after the death of A.
because (by intendment of Law) it will be presumed he did so enter: So if one
plead in bar, that A. died seized, and that B. entered, as son and heir to A.
this is a good bar, and yet it may be that he was not his heir, for it is not
expressly said, that he is his son and heir, but that he entered as son and heir,
and yet in regard he pleads by way of bar, the best shall be intended for the
defendant. In like manner in 27 Ass. pl. 31. Tit. Bar 303. and Br Assise 272.
In an assise brought by the heir, the tenant says, that the father of the
plaintiff being tenant by the Courtesy, and yet in life, let his estate to the
ancestor of the tenant, w^o died seized of that estate, after whose death the
tenant was in as son and heir, and demands Judgment si Assise, etc. And this
was held a good bar, And yet he says not, that he was the first that entered
after the death of his Father, and if he were not the first, he has no title,
for the land in such case Occupanti conceditur, viz. to him that first enters,
and that might be the plaintiff: but yet the bar was held good, because to a
common intent it shall be taken, that the tenant was the first that entered
after the death of the father, and if it were not so, the plaintiff may and
ought to show it. Vide plus ibid. and infra 195. 27.

Capias pro fine.
41 If a man be condemned in trespass, F.N.B. 121. 1.
or in debt upon an obligation (where he denies his deed) at the suit of the
party, and after he is taken by Capias pro fine within the year at the Kings
suit, and committed to the Gaol, if the Jailer suffer him to escape, the party
shall have an action of debt for this condemnation against the Jailer, and yet
he was not committed to him at his suit, but at the suit of the King; Howbeit
the Kings suit shall serve the party in this case, because the King was
entitled to the fine by the party: but it is otherwise after the year, for
then it will be intended, that the party has accorded with him that was
condemned; And therefore after the year he shall be put to sue a Scire facias
upon that Judgment. Vide Max. 63. pl. 4.

Executor. Heir. Assets.
42 In debt against an Executor the plaintiff need not count, Co. l. 9. 94. a 3.
in Will. Banes case.
that the executor has assets; for it will be intended prima facie, that he
has assets; So likewise in debt against the heir, the plaintiff shall never
averr in his Count, that he has assets; for the Law presumes it prima facie;
because the Law presumes, that the testator or ancestor will not leave a
greater charge upon the executors or heir, than he leaves benefit to discharge
it.

Perpetuities.
43 In the Argument against perpetuities in Corbets case, Co. l. 1. 87. b. 4. in
Corbets case.
it was said by Glanvile Justice, that betwixt the making of the Statute of 13
E. 1. de donis, and the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses, such a proviso annexed to
an estate tail, that it should cease as if the tenant in tail were dead, was
never seen or heard of, and therefore he concluded, that it could not be done
by Law: Little. f. 23.
And so likewise concludes Littleton in the like case, that if any action might
have been brought upon the Statute of Merton, cap. 6. De dominis, qui
maritaverint illos, etc. si parents conquerentur, etc. it shall be intended,
that at some time or other, it would have been put in ure; And therefore he
says, that no action can be brought upon that Statute, in as much as it was
never seen or heard, that any action was ever taken thereupon.

Attaint.
44 By intendment of Law a verdict is true, Dyer 212. 34. 4 El.
and therefore the Law will admit of no new proof to defeat it: for albeit,
where the defendants in an attaint give new matter in evidence to enforce the
first verdict, as they may, the plaintiff shall be admitted to disprove it; yet
the plaintiff shall never be suffered to produce any new matter in evidence, nor
enforce the first by other matter afterward discovered.

Devise. Tenure.
45 A man intitles himself as devisee of the whole land by the Statute of the 32
H. 8. of wills, and albeit he showed not the tenure, Dyer 329. 16. 16 Eliz.
it was ajudged well enough, for that it ought to come on the other part, and
prima facie it shall be intended Socage, because most part of the land is so
holden.

190 Stabit praesumptio donec probetur in Contrarium.
Co. Inst. p^rs 1. 222. b. 3. 34 Ass. pl. 1.
1 If an agreement be made between two, Condition.
that the one shall enfeoff the other upon condition in surety of the payment
of certain money, and after the livery is made to him and his heirs generally,
the estate is bolden by some to be upon condition, for that the intent of the
parties did not appear to be changed, but to continue at the time of the livery.

Co. ibid. 227. b. 1 Dyer 81.
2 An issue found by verdict shall always be intended true, Attaint.
until it be reversed by Attaint, and for that reason upon an Attaint no
supersedeas is grantable by Law. Plow. 49. b.

Co. ibid. 310. b. 4.
3 If a man plead a feoffment of a Manor, Attornment.
he need not plead an Attornment of the tenants, for it will be intended that
the tenants did attorn; But (if it be material) it must be denied or pleaded of
the other side.

Co. ibid. 361. a. 3.
4 The issue of tenant in tail may falsify a recovery had against tenant in
tail by default, nihil dicit, confession, or demurrer; Falsifying of a recovery,
but if the recovery passed upon an issue tried by verdict, he shall never
falsify in the point tried, because an attaint might be had against the
Jurors, and albeit all the Jurors be dead, so as the attaint do fail, yet the
issue in tail shall not falsify in the point tried; because, until it be
lawfully avoided, pro veritate accipitur: As if the tenant in tail be impleaded
in a Formedon, and he traverseth the gift, and it is tried against him, and
thereupon the demandant recovers; In this case, the issue in tail shall not
falsify in the point tried, but he may falsify the recovery by any other
matter; as that the tenant in tail might have pleaded a collateral warranty,
Littl.. 688.
or a release, as Littl. puts the case, or to confess and avoid the point
tried.

Co. l. 4. 71. ^. 4. Hyndes case.
5 A. seized of land in fee, demiseth to B. for years, Fine. Deed enrolled.
and after by deed indented before Easter Term in 29 Eliz. bargains and sells
the land to C. and the same Term levies a fine to C. and his heirs, and
afterward in the same Term also the deed is enrolled, A. commits waste, for
which C. brings his action, whereunto A. pleads that C. was in by the fine, and
not by the deed enrolled, and that he never attorned: upon which plea C.
demurrs: In this case, although it was objected, that it shall be intended by
Law, that the deed was enrolled the first day of that Easter Term, because the
Term as to diverse purposes is but one day in Law, and the rather for that it
does not appear by the record, what day of the Term the deed was enrolled, but
generally Term Pasch. and therefore it shall be intended to be enrolled the
first day of the Term, and then C. being in by the deed and not by the fine,
there needed no attornment: yet (in this case) it was resolved by the Court,
that it was true, that it shall be intended by presumption of Law, that the
deed was enrolled the first day of the Term; but Stabit praesumptio donec
probetur in contrarium, and for as much as the plaintiff by his demurrer has
confessed the enrollment to be after the fine, the presumption thereby
vanishes, and becomes of no force, and the mutual consent and confession of
both parties shall stand.

Co. l. 5. part 1. 5. a. 2. and 7. b. 1. The Kings Ecclesiastical Law.
6 In the cause against Cawdry, being deprived by the High Commission Court for
preaching against the Common Prayer Book, H^gh Commission.
it was objected, that the Commissioners were not nominated and appointed
according to the Act of 1 Eliz. 1. because the Jurisdiction and power given by
that Act to the Crown, was to name such Commissioners as were natural born
Subjects, and not Aliens, and that it did not appear by the special verdict,
that the said Commissioners were natural born Subjects; And therefore the Queen
having only a power given by force of that Act, the nomination not pursuing the
authority given unto her, was utterly void, etc. But to this it was answered
and resolved, that they who were Commissioners, and had places of judicature
over the Kings subjects shall be intended to be subjects born, and not Aliens;
but if (in truth) they were Aliens, yet in respect of the general intendment to
the contrary, it ought to be alleged and proved by the other party; for
Stabitur praesumptioni donec probetur in contrarium.

Wardship.
7 By intendment of Law the heir being under the age of 21 years is not able to
do Knight service, until his full age of 21 years, Co. l. 6. 73. b. 4. in Sir
Drue Druries case.
and herewith agrees Littl. fol. 22. yet this presumption of Law gives place to
a judgment and proof to the contrary, according to the Maxim, Stabitur
praesumptioni donec probetur in contrarium: And therefore when the King, who is
the Sovereign and supreme Judge of Chivalrie, dubbs an Infant Knight, he
thereby adjudgeth him able to do Knight service, and all persons are concluded
to say the contrary; and therefore such an heir so made Knight shall be out of
Ward and custody: Howbeit, he shall pay the value of his marriage, etc. Vide Ma.
ca. cap. 3.

Arbitrament.
8 The submission to an award betwixt A. and B. was general, Co. l. 8. 98. a. 2.
Baspoles case.
viz. of all actions, demands, etc. And the award was, that A. should pay B.
twenty pounds. And in this case it was objected, that it did not appear, that
the matter of the Arbitrament was the matter only that was betwixt them,
because the submission was general of all actions, demands, etc. and therefore
if the arbitrament were not made of all the matters in controversy, the award
was void: To which it was answered and resolved, that it appeared by the award,
that it was made de praemissis praedictis in condition specificatis, which
words import, that the Arbitrator had made it of all that, which was referred
to him, and so it was to be intended, until the contrary were showed and
alleged by the other party.

U^es.
9 Indentures subsequent are sufficient to declare the uses of a Recovery
precedent, Co. l. 9. 11. 3. Dowmans case.
if nothing appear to the contrary to declare the consent of the parties to be
otherwise.

Quo warranto.
10 In a Quo warranto for the claim of chattels of felons, etc. the defendant
pleads, that the Abbot of S. lawfully had and enjoyed them, Co. l. 9. 27. The
case of the Abbot de Strata Mercella.
till the Abbey was granted to the King by the Statute of 27 H. 8. etc. and
pleads also the Statute of 32 H. 8. which revives the privileges of Abbeys, and
that the King granted a Manor parcel of the Abbey, and tot, talia, et tanta
privilegia, etc. unto him; And in this case, it was objected, that it did not
appear by the claim of the defendant, what estate the Abbot had in the said
Franchises, but generally, quod licite habuit and gavisus fuit, and so
peradventure he might have them but by a lease for life or years, etc. To which
it was answered and resolved, that a general having and enjoying of them shall
be intended of a having and enjoying in fee simple, and that in such case a
particular estate or interest shall not be presumed, unless it be specially
showed, etc. so the word Fee shall be intended fee simple, and not fee tail,
unles it be so expressed. Vide supra, Max. 189. pl. 8.

11 If the principal in felony be attainted erroniously, either by error in
process, No accessory where no principal.
or because the Principal being out of the Realm, Co. l. 9. 119. a. 4. in the
L. Sanchars case.
etc. was outlawed, or for that he was in prison at the time of the outlawry,
etc. yet the accessory shall be attainted; for the attainder against the
principal stands in force, until it be reversed, and with this agrees 2 R. 3.
f. 12. And in the 18 E. 4. 9 The principal was erroniously outlawed for
felony, and the Accessory taken, indicted, arraigned, convicted, attainted and
hanged, and afterward the principal reversed the outlawry, and was indicted
and arraigned of the felony, and found not guilty, and thereupon was acquit:
And here it might be demanded, that for as much as there cannot be an accessory
without a principal, and in this case there being no principal, how shall the
heir be restored to the lands which his father had forfeited by the said unjust
attainder? To this it may be answered, That the heir may enter or have his
action; for now upon the matter by act in Law the attainder against the father
is without any writ of Error utterly annulled; because by the reversal of the
attainder against the principal, the attainder against the accessory, which
depended upon the attainder of the principal, is ipso facto utterly defeated
and annulled: And this notably appears in an ancient book in the time of E. 1.
Tit. Mordancester 46. The case was this, A. was indicted of felony, and B. of
the receipt of A. A. essoignes himself and is outlawed, B. was taken, and
putting himself upon the Inquest was found guilty, whereupon B. was attainted
and hanged, and the Lord entered as in his escheat, and after A. came and
reversed the outlawry, and pleading to the felony was found not guilty, and
thereupon was acquit, whereupon the heir brings a Mordancester against the Lord
by escheat, who comes and shows all this matter, and it was demurred in
Judgment thereupon, whereupon it was awarded, that the heir of B. should
recover seisin of the land; for if B. had been then alive, he should have gone
quit by the acquittal of A. because he could not be a Receiver of a felon, when
A. was no felon. Vide plus ubi supra.

F. N. B. 45. d.
10 The writ of Indicavit shall not mention, Tithes.
that the tithes and offerings, which are in suit, amount to the fourth part of
the Church, but decimas provenientes de centum acris, or of such a Manor, and
if those Tithes be not of the value of the fourth part of the Advowson, the
other party may surmise it, and pray Consultation; for the Law presumes, that
the plaintiff would not bring an Indicavit, if the Tithes were not of that
value, until the defendant allege something to the contrary.

Plow. 64. a. 3.
11 The return of a Sherif, whether it be right or wrong, Return.
is presumed by Law to be good, and shall stand in force, until it be reversed
by error.

Plow. 77. a. 2.
12 Upon suggestion of consanguinity in the wife of the Sherif, Assise directed
to the Coroners.
and the wife of the plaintiff, an Assise was directed to the Coroners, and an
exception was taken to the suggestion, for that it was not showed that they
were of the whole blood; but the Court held, that it should be intended they
were of the whole blood, until the contrary were showed on the other part.

Co. Inst. part 1. 295. a. 1.
13 Wager of Law lies not, Wager of Law.
when there is a specialty or deed to charge the defendant, but when it grows
by word, so as he may pay or satisfy the party in secret, whereof the
defendant, having no testimony of witnesses, may wage his Law, and thereby the
plaintiff is perpetually barred, (as Littl. says. 514.) for the Law presumes,
that no man will forswear himself for any worldly thing.

Co. l. 5. 98 a. Buries case.
14 The husband and wife were divorced Causa frigiditatis in the husband, he
marries again and has issue, this issue is legitimate; Divorce.
for the first marriage was dissolved from the Matrimonial bond, and albeit the
second marriage be admitted voydable, yet it stands good, till it be avoided.

Dyer 179. 42. 2. Eliz.
15 A man arraigned of homicide pleads not guilty, Bail.
and is found guilty, but for the difficulty of the Clergy in the case, he was
reprieved before Judgment, and it was moved to the Justices, whether or no he
were bailable in the mean time; And it was held he was not, because he was more
than a vehemently suspected person, being convicted of the offense: It had been
otherwise if he had not been convicted; for by presumption of Law before
conviction he shall not be deemed guilty before he be so found upon his trial,
and the meaning of the Law in Bails is, quod stat indifferenter, whether he be
guilty or not.

Dower.
16 In 2 Eliz. a woman sued for her Dower, Dyer 185. 65. 2. Eliz.
and being put to prove her husbands death, she did it by two witnesses
(whereof one was his brother) viz that being a Minister in 1. Mar. he fled for
religion into Germany, and that by Merchants and other Englishmen, who used to
travel and trade in those parts, they could never learn any tidings of his
life, and theref^^e they did in their consciences rather think him dead than
alive; And this proof was adjudged sufficient for the recovery of her Dower.

Fine reversed.
17 Cheney levies a fine, and after brings error to reverse it, Dyer 201. 63. 3.
Eliz.
and assigns nonage, and has a Scire facias against the Conisee, and upon two
Nihils the Court proceeds, and by witnesses and inspection reverse the fine:
Cheney sells the land to others, upon whom the first Conisee enters, and the
Vendees bring a writ of entry sur disseisin, and against the former Judgment
the tenant gives in evidence an exemplification of the examination of witnesses
in Chancery, proving the full age, and albeit it seemed to the Court not
available against the Judgment, yet the verdict past with that testimony, and
afterward was affirmed in attaint.

Office. Tenure.
18 Upon a Commission in nature of a Diem clausit extremum a tenure in Socage is
found of the Queen, Dyer 248. 81. 8. Eliz.
as of her Barony of S. Afterward a second Commission finds Knight Service
tenure, as of the said Barony; After that a third Commission issues reciting,
Quod compertum est per inquisitionem capt. post mortem A. tempore H. 5. that
the said land was holden of the King in Knight Service in Capite, whereupon
Knight Service in Capite is returned, prout per dictum Inquisitionem tempore H.
5. liquet: And in this case, it was held, that the heir need not traverse the
two last Inquisitions, because they were without warrant, but that the first
office (although against the Queen) shall be allowed, until disproved by Scire
facias, which shall issue out of the Record tempore H. 5. according to the
Statute de Eschaetoribus, 29 E. 1.

Leases g^od.
19 The Dean of Wells was deprived by the Bishop for having two dignities in the
same Church, Dyer 273. 35. 10. El.
but he being afterward restored by a Commission of Delegates, made diverse
demises, which were confirmed by the Bishop and Chapter, and after that he was
again removed by another Commission of Delegates; yet the demises, which he
made while he was Dean, were adjudged good.

Devise.
20 Lessee for years devises his term to his executor for life, Dyer 277. 59.
10. El.
the remainder to A. and dies, the executor enters, and makes executor and
dies, the executor of executor enters, and takes the profits for a year, and he
in remainder brings account for the profits; And it was held, it lay not, 1.
for want of privity, 2. the remainder of the term was void, (Howbeit Weston,
Welsh, and Harper, held it might be good by devise, though void by estate
executed) 3. for that the executor had not declared to have the term as
devisee, or as executor, and it shall be intended as executors, until the
contrary be showed.

Debt against the heir.
21 In debt against the executor of the heir, Dyer 344. 1. 18. Eliz.
there need no averment that assets descended to him, for it is so intended,
unless the contrary be showed.

Hob. 78. Saint-Iohn and Saint-Iohn.
22 In debt by Saint-John against Saint-John, Bailiff of Stockbridge, upon the
Statute of 23 H. 6. 15. for not returning him Burgess of that Town to the then
intended Parliament: And where the Statute says, that the Sherif shall send
his precept to the Mayor, and if there be no Mayor, then to the Bailif, the
plaintiff declared, that the Sherif had made his precept to the Bailif, without
averring that there was no Mayor; And after a verdict for the plaintiff this was
moved in arrest of Judgment: But the Court was of opinion clearly, that it
shall be presumed there was no Mayor, except it be showed, and if there were,
it ought to be showed on the other part.

191 Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, Jura adaptantur.
Co. Inst. part l. 238. a. 2.
1 It is said, Descent a Toll entry.
that Abators and Intruders are out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. cap. 33. which
gives the disseisee five years to prevent a descent, etc. because that Statute
is penal, and extends only to a disseisor, who is only named in it; And the
reason why he only was therein named, and not the Abator or Intrudor, was,
because disseisin was the most common mischief; Et ad ea quae frequentius
accidunt, etc.

Co. ibid. 295. a. 1.
2 In times past wager of Law was accounted a good trial in an action of debt
without specialty, because the Law presumed, Wager of Law
that no man would forswear himself for any worldly thing; But of later times
men's Consciences are grown so large (especially in this case passing with
impunity) that the plaintiff now dare not (many times) adventure the debt upon
the defendants oath by bringing an action of debt, but rather chooses to bring
an action upon the case upon his promise, wherein he cannot wage his Law.

Co. l. 5. 83. b. in the case of Market overt. Popham 84. 11.
3 The proper and most usual place for selling plate in London or any other
Market overt is a Goldsmiths shop, Market overt.
because such commodities use to be sold there, and not in a Scriveners shop,
or the like; And therefore if stolen Plate be sold in a Scriveners shop
(although it be openly, and upon the market day) it shall not alter the
property, but the party shall have restitution; It is otherwise if it be sold
openly in a Goldsmiths Shop. etc. Vide Max. 186. pl. 32. and 134. 4.

Co. l. 5. 127. b. 1. Palmers case.
4 Guardian in Knight Service shall have the single value of the marriage without
tender; Valor maritagii.
And yet the words of the writ de valor maritagii are, Quare cum Maritagium
praed. B. ad ipsum A. pertineat, eo quod praed. B. terram suam de eo tenuit per
servitium militare, and idem A. praed. B. dum fuit infra aetatem, etc.
compotens maritagium absque disparagatione, etc. saepius obtulerit, etc. But
the reason thereof is, for that writs are most commonly framed according to
that which does most usually fall out, always (in this case) supposing, that a
tender is made, because for the most part it so happens to be; And therefore
whereas the Rule is, Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, Iura adaptantur, it may
in like manner be said, Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, rescripta sive brevia
adaptantur; And in other cases a special case shall have an usual writ, and a
special Count.

Co. l. 6 45. l. 3 in Higgins case.
5 In 17 E. 3. 24. In debt upon an obligation of 20 l. Judgment was obtained
before the Mayor of Newcastle, Obligation not to be cancelled after Judgment.
and execution had thereupon, and because the obligation was not cancelled
(which after judgment had was the usual course in those days) the plaintiff had
judgment in another action upon the same obligation, and the defendant upon
pleading the first Judgment could not be relieved, because it was imputed to
his folly, that he did not procure the obligation to be cancelled upon the
first Judgment which was the ordinary usage of the Judges at and about that
time, because men in ancient time after a judgment obtained were apt to be
quiet, and to rest contented therewith, without bringing writs of Error, or
Attaints, which then were very rare, especially writs of Error: But now of
later time men growing more contentious, and not satisfied with any trial or
judgment, but being apt upon every such trial or judgment to bring a writ of
Error or Attaint, the Judges have thought it dangerous to order the deed to be
cancelled, either where the plaintiff recovers, or where he is barred by
judgment; for in both cases the judgment may be reversed by Error or Attaint:
And therefore the reason or cause of the Judgment in 17 E. 3. being now
changed, there is now no question, but at this day judgment and execution upon
an obligation is a good bar in a new action thereupon, albeit the obligation
be not cancelled.

Statute of wills.
6 If there be Grandfather, Father, and diverse Sons, Co. l. 6. 77. a. 2. in Sir
Geo. Cursons case.
and the Grandfather in the life of the Father convey his lands to any of the
Sons, this is out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. 1. of Wills; for the words of the
Statute are, for the advancement of his wife, preferment of his children, etc.
and therefore because the Fathers children are none of the Grandfathers
children, such a conveyance is out of that Statute; But the makers of that Act
framed it according to that which was most vulgar and usual, and that was for
the father to dispose to his children, and Ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, etc.

Presentation.
7 If a man present to an Advowson, and after the Parson resigns, F.N.B. 31. h.
or is deposed, and the Patron presents again, and is disturbed, he shall have
an Assise of Darrein presentment, and the form of the writ shall be, Quis
Advocatus tempore pacis praesentavit ultimam personam, quae mortua est ad
ecclesiam, etc. Albeit he resigned, and is in full life: Also the form of the
writ is to suppose that the defendant did deforce him out of the Advowson, and
yet by his Count he shall declare, that he or his ancestor presented last to
the Advowson, by which he supposes, that he is in possession of the Advowson,
and yet this good; for ad ea quae frequentius accidunt, etc.

Nomination.
8 If a man has the nomination to an Advowson, F.N.B. 33. b. c.
and another has the presentation, if he name his Clerk, and he that ought to
present, present another Clerk, he that had the nomination shall have a Quare
impedit, and the writ shall be, Quod permittat ipsum praesentare, etc. And in
his Count he shall declare the special matter, and the writ, notwithstanding
such variance from the Count, shall be good: so if a man have a Chantery,
Donative.
which is a donative by his Letters patents, and not presentative, and he gives
it to a Clerk, who is disturbed by another, and that other presents to this
Chantery, or gives it by his Letters Patents, he that has right, shall have a
Quare Impedit of this donative, and the writ shall be, Quod permittat ipsum
praesentare, etc. ad Cantariam, etc. And yet it is not presentative but
donative: Howbeit in the Count he shall show the special matter.

Collati^n.
9 If a Bishop be disturbed to present, F N.B. ibid. d. e.
where he ought to make Collation, the writ shall be, Quod permittat ipsum
praesentare, etc. So likewise if the King be disturbed to make Collation by his
Letters Patents to his Free Chapel, he shall have a Quare Impedit, and the writ
shall be, Quod permittat ipsum praesentare, etc. ad praebendam in sua libera
Capella, etc.

Quare Imp dit without ^lleging a p esentment.
10 Regularly, a man shall not have a Quare Impedit, F.N.B. ibid. h. i. k.
unless he may allege a presentment in himself, or in his ancestor, or in some
other person, by whom he claims the Advowson, and that in his Count; And yet at
this day if a man by the Kings license make a Church parochial, which shall be
presentable, etc. if he be disturbed to present unto it, be shall have no other
writ for the recovery thereof, than a Quare Impedit, and that without alleging
any presentment in any person; for that writ being the most usual writ for the
recovery of Advowsons, shall not be altered for any such special case: So if a
man recover an Advowson by writ of right against another, when the Church is
void, he shall present, and, if he be disturbed, shall have a Quare Impedit,
and allege presentment in him, against whom he recovers, without alleging any
other presentment: In like manner if an Abbot has been Parson ^mparsonee time
out of mind, etc. and afterward the Abbey is dissolved, etc. Here, he of whom
the Advowson was held, shall present, and if he be disturbed, shall have a
Quare Impedit without alleging any presentment in the Count, etc.

11 If an Advowson become void by six months, Vacation.
at such time as the King is seized of the Temporalties of the Bishopric, Here
the King shall present to this Advowson, as the Bishop should have done, and if
disturbed, shall have a Quare impedit, etc. The King likewise shall have a
Quare Impedit of the Subdeaconry of York, which voideth when the Temporalties
of the Archbishopric are in the Kings hands, and the writ shall be, Quod
permittat eum praesentare, etc. And yet the King may give the Subdeaconry by
his Letters Patents.

F.N.B. 38. a.
12 Albeit the Bishop himself be party and disturber, Collation.
yet the form of the writ of Ne Admittas alters not for that, but remains the
same, as in other cases, viz. Prohibemus vos ne admittatis, etc. Howbeit the
form of the writ in such case might more properly be, Prohibemus vos, ne
conferatis Clericum ecclesiae, etc. quae vacat, etc. because the Bishop is
properly said to Collate, when he presents in his own right.

F.N.B. 60. d.
13 If a man make a Lease for one year, or for half a year, if the tenant commit
waste, the Lessor shall have a writ of waste, Leases.
and the writ shall say, Quas tenet ad terminum annorum; because the writ was
ordained for leases, which were most vulgar and usual, viz. for leases for
years: Howbeit, he shall in his Count show the special matter: ibidem, n.
So a writ of waste is maintainable upon a lease made to a man, until he shall
promote himself to a benefice, and the writ shall suppose, quod tenet ad
terminum vitae: It is so likewise of a Lease made to endure from such a feast
to such a feast: and in such case the writ shall suppose, quod tenet ad
terminum annorum, etc. but the Count shall declare the special matter, as
aforesaid.

F.N.B. 86. k.
14 If one man imprison another, the form of the writ of trespass is, Imp
isonment.
Ostens. quare vi et armis in ipsum A. apud N. insultum fecit, et ipsum
vulneravit, imprisonavit, male tractavit, and alia, etc. and it is not material
whether he wound him or not, for the form of the writ is so, comprehending all
that in such case may happen, and therefore is the same in all cases of
Imprisonment, without alteration.

F. N. B 118. ^.
15 If a man has a writ of account against a Prior, Receipt of moneys.
upon a receipt made by him by the hands of his Commoigne, yet the writ shall
suppose that he himself received it, and shall not say, by the hands of the
Commoigne; So likewise a receipt made by the baron by the hands of his feme is
his own receipt, and both the writ and the Count shall suppose, that he himself
received it, without saying by the hands of the feme; The writ also shall be
the same, when the money is received by the hands of a stranger; Howbeit, in
this case the Count shall declare the special matter, viz. that he received it
by the hands of a stranger, etc. but in all these cases and the like, the writ
shall be general and remain the same, viz. de tempore quo fuit receptor
denariorum, with out saying by the hands of any, because a Receiver for the
most part receives the money by himself, etc.

^^rantia Chartae.
16 Before the Statute of Quia Emptores terrarum in 18 E. 1. a man might grant
land to hold of himself, which was then the most usual course, yet then also
the feoffor (if he so pleased) might grant it to hold of the Lord paramount,
which did not so often happen; and therefore the writ of warrantia chartae
(used at this day) seems to be the same that was used before that Statute,
which always supposes, that the plaintiff in that writ holds of the defendant,
because that did most often happen, for the form is, Rex, etc. praecipe A. quod
just, F.N.B. e. f.
etc. warrantizat B. unum Messuagium cum pertinentiis in D. quod tenet et de eo
tenere clamat, etc. yet it is not material whether he hold of him or no: So
likewise if the plaintiff hold by homage ancestrel of the defendant any land,
and is impleaded, and has no charter thereof, yet he shall have this writ de
warrantia chartae against the defendant, and the writ shall say, unde cartam
habet, etc. and yet he has not any Charter to show, but only holds by homage
ancestrel, which implies a warranty; nevertheless because for the most part a
warranty is contained in a Charter, the writ retains the same form, and in such
cases the words, unde chartam habet, etc. are not material.

Escheat.
17 If a man be condemned to be hanged for felony, and happen to die after such
judgment, and before execution thereof by the officer, F.N.B. 144. b.
yet the writ of Escheat shall say, pro quo suspensus fuit, etc. and it is not
material whether he be hanged or no; but the writ retains that form, because
for the most part after such judgment the felon is hanged.

192 Frequentia Actus multum operatur.
Fine. Non-claim.
1 A. possessed of diverse lands in D. for years, at will, Co. l. 3. 79. b. 2. in
Fermors case.
and by Copy, and seized of other lands there in fee, demises the whole to B.
for life, and then levies a fine to B. etc. of so many acres as amount to the
whole land, continues possession, and pays the rents to the Lord; five years
pass, yet is not the Lord barred by his non-claim; because in as much as the
lessee had lands in fee simple in the same Town, the fine shall be presumed to
be levied of such lands there, whereof it is lawful to levy a fine; and then
as for the quantity, albeit the fine contain more acres, than his own fee
simple lands, that can prove nothing to pass the Lease or Copy land; because it
is the common use and practice almost in all fines to insert more acres
therein, than the lands intended to be passed by such fines do contain.

Corporation.
2 Albeit a Corporation have a Commencement by Charter, Co. l. 4. 77. b. in the
case of Corporations.
and (by consequence) within memory, and it be expressed in their charter, that
the choice of their Mayor, Bailifs, and other principal officers shall be by
the Commonalty, yet if by a continual usage they have chosen them by a certain
select number of the principal of the Commonalty, or of the Burgesses, albeit
no constitution can be showed to warrant such election, yet such election is
adjudged good in Law, because it it has been so often put in execution. Vide
supra 189. 25.

Du^chy of Cornwall.
3 Ed. 3. gave unto the Black Prince the Dukedom of Cornwall, Co. l. 8. 21. b.
1. in the Princes case.
etc. habendum et tenendum eidem duci, and ipsius and haeredum suorum Regum
Angliae filiis primogenitis, et dicti loci ducibus in regno Angliae
haereditarie successuris, etc. This grant was adjudged fee simple, and not at
will, as some would have had it; And one of the reasons was, because diverse
Acts both of E. 3. and the Black Prince himself did confirm the same to be fee
simple, and not any inferior estate: for E. 3. in the 14. year of his reign,
when he was to make war against Philip de Valois King of France, (which was but
3. years after the said Charter) grants to the Prince, by the name of Edward
Duke of Cornwall, to be Lieutenant of the Realm so long as the King should be
beyond sea: Then in 21 E. 3. the Prince for a fine of 1000 marks demiseth the
Stanneries to Redman, rendering 3000 marks rent per annum. And diverse other
Letters Patents were cited in the Princes case in the 8. Rep. to the like
purpose, all which did confirm the said estate of the Prince to be fee simple:
For frequentia actus multum adjuvat. Vide supra 71, 4. Also another reason to
prove the title of the Prince to the Duchy of Cornwall was, that ever since
the creation thereof (which was in the 11 of Ed. 3.) in the succession of
diverse ages it had been enjoyed according to the said Charter by the eldest son
of the Kings of England, etc. for which see the book at large.

193 It always construeth things to the Best; And therefore
Co. Inst. part 1. 87. b. 3.
1 If a man be seized of a rent charge, rent seck, common of pasture, Guardian.
Infant under 14.
or such like Inheritances, which do not lie in tenure, and dies, his heir
within the age of 14 years; In this case, the heir may choose his Guardian; but
if he be of such tender years, as he can make no choice, then (if the father
has made no disposition of the custody of the child) the Law adjudged it most
fit, that the next of kin, to whom the Inheritance cannot descend, should have
the custody of him; and whosoever takes the rent, etc. the heir shall charge
him in an account.

Co. ibid. 98. a. 3.
2 Where an Abbot (holding in Frankalmoigne) together with his Covent, aliens
the land to a Secular man, he cannot hold as they held, Frankalmoigne. Socage.
viz. in Frankalmoigne; yet because (of necessity) he must hold the land of
some person, and by some service, the Law (in this case) creates and appoints
him the lowest and easiest tenure that is, viz. to hold the land of the Lord in
socage by fealty only, which is incident to every tenure: Co. ibid. 99. b. 3.
so likewise if the Seigniory be transferred to a stranger by act in Law, and
thereby the privity is altered; In such case also the tenure in Frankalmoigne
is changed to a tenure in socage by fealty: And therefore if there be Lord,
Mesn, and Tenant, and the Tenant is an Abbot, who holds of the Mesn in
Frankalmoigne; Here if the Mesn die without heir, so as the Mesnalty escheats
to the Lord Paramount, the Abbot shall hold immediately of the Lord Paramount
by fealty only, because he cannot hold of him in Frankalmoigne: 148, 35.

Co. ibid. 146. b. 3
3 If a Villein descend to two Coparceners, Entire Inheritances.
this is an entire inheritance, and albeit the Villein himself cannot be
divided, the Law has ordained, that the profit of him shall be divided; for
one Coparcener may have the service one day, one week, etc. and the other
another day or week, etc. And for the same reason it is, that a woman shall be
endowed of a Villein, viz. to have him every third day, week, or, etc.
Likewise, if an Advowson descend to Coparceners, the Law has so ordered it,
that they shall present by turns* Et sic de similibus: In all which cases the
Law has contrived and established the best way and order that may be, for the
parting of Entire inheritances, which are otherwise in their nature indivisible.

Co. ibid. 214. ^. 2.
4 If two joyntenants, the one for life, and the other in fee, I^intenants.
Tenant for life. Reversioner.
join in a Lease for life, or a gift in tail, reserving a rent; In this case
the rent shall inure to them both; for if the particular estate determine, they
shall be joyntenants again in possession; But if tenant for life and he in the
reversion join in a Lease for life, or a gift in tail by deed, reserving a
rent, this shall enure to the tenant for life only, during his life, and after
to him in the reversion; for each of them grants that which he may lawfully
grant, and if (at the Common Law) they had made a feoffment in fee generally,
the feoffee should have holden of the tenant for life during his life, and
after of him in reversion: And so it was holden Mich. 36 and 37 Eliz. in B. R.

Release.
5 If a man make a lease to A. for term of the life of B. and after release to
A. all his right in the land; Co. Inst. part 1. 273. b. 1. and ^.
by this A. has an estate for the term of his own life; for a lease for term
of his own life is higher and better in judgment of Law, than an estate for
the term of another man's life: So if a release be made to tenant by Statute
Merchant or Staple, or tenant by Elegit, or to Guardian in Chivalry, who
holds in for the value of the marriage, by him in reversion of all his right
in the land, by this a freehold passes for the life of him, to whom the
release is made; for that is the best and greatest estate, that can pass
without apt words of Inheritance, viz. heirs.

Accruer.
6 Queen Eliz. being seized of a Reversion in fee upon an estate tail in the
Lord Stafford, grants it to Tindal in tail, Co. l. 8 77. a. 2. in the Lo.
Staffords case.
upon condition to have praedictam reversionem in fee; Here, these words
praedictam reversionem shall not be construed to extend to the estate tail
granted before to Tindal, but to the reversion in fee.

Feoffments.
7 The heir of the disseisor being in by descent, Co. Inst. part 1. 302. b. 1.
Littl.. 534.
the disseisee and he jointly enfeoff another in fee by deed, and livery of
seisin is had thereupon: In this case as to the heir, the land passes, and the
deed enures by way of feoffment, and as to the disseisee, by way of
Confirmation; for (by construction of Law) the land shall ever pass from him,
that has the estate of the land in him; as if Cestuy que use and his feoffees
after the statute of 1 R. 3. 1. and before the Stat. of 27 H. 8. 10. had joined
in a feoffment, it had been the feoffment of the feoffees, because the estate
of the land was in them: So it is likewise, if the tenant for life, and he in
the remainder or reversion in fee join in a feoffment by deed, the livery of
the freehold shall move from the lessee, and the inheritance from him in the
reversion or remainder, from each of them according to his estate; for it
cannot be adjudged by Law, that the feofment of tenant for life does draw the
reversion or remainder out of the lessor or him in remainder, or does work a
wrong, because they joined together: So if there be tenant for life, the
remainder in tail, the remainder in tail, etc. and tenant for life and he in
the first remainder in tail levy a fine, this is no discontinuance or devesting
of any estate in remainder, but each of them pass that which they have power
and Authority to pass.

The like.
8 If the disseisor and disseisee join in a charter of feoffment, Co. ibid. 302.
b. 4.
and enter into the land and make livery, it shall be accounted the feoffment
of the disseisee, and the confirmation of the disseisor, because the entry of
the disseisee was then lawful; It is otherwise, when the heir of the disseisor
and the disseisee join (as in Littletons case, supra 7.) for in such case the
disseisees entry is not congeable: But if he in the reversion in fee and tenant
for life ioin in a feoffment by parol, this shall be (as some hold) first a
surrender of the estate of tenant for life, and then the feoffment of him in
the reversion; for otherwise if the whole should pass from the lessee, then he
in the reversion might enter for the forfeiture, and every man's act (ut res
magis valeat, etc.) shall be construed most strongly against himself.

9 Words are always taken best for the Speaker; Hob. 77. Adrian Coote.
so as there is one Rule for deeds or pleading, and another for words.

194 Every Act to be lawful, when it stands indifferent, whether it should
be lawful, or not.
Co. Inst. part 1. 42. a. 4.
1 A. tenant in fee simple makes a lease of lands to B. to have and to hold to
B, for term of life, Estates for life.
without mentioning for whose life it shall be; This shall be deemed for term
of the life of the lessee, because (in this case) it shall be taken most
strongly against the lessor, an estate for a man's own life being (as to him)
better and higher, than for the life of another: But if tenant in tail make
such a lease without expressing for whose life, this shall be taken but for the
life of the lessor, for two reasons; First, when the construction of any act is
left to the Law, the Law, which abhors injury and wrong, will never so
construe it, that it may work a wrong; And in this case, if by construction it
should be for the life of the lessee, then should the estate tail be
discontinued, and a new reversion gained by wrong: but if it construed for the
life of the tenant in tail, then no wrong is wrought: And it is a general Rule,
that whenever the words of a deed, or of the parties without deed may have a
double intendment, and the one stands with Law and right, and the other is
wrongful, and against Law, the intendment that stands with Law, shall be
taken. 2. The Law respects more a lesser estate by right, than a larger
estate by wrong; as if tenant for life in remainder disseise the tenant for
life in possession; in this case the disseisor has a fee-simple; but if tenant
for life in possession die, now is the disseisors wrongful estate in fee (by
Judgment of Law) changed to a rightful estate for life: So if tenant in tail
make a lease to another for term of life generally, and after releaseth to the
lessee and his heirs; Here, albeit between the tenant in tail, and the releasee
a fee-simple passed, yet after the death of the lessee, the entry of the issue
in tail is lawful, which could not be, if it were a lease for the life of the
lessee, for then by the release it had been a discontinuance executed: In like
manner, if I retain a servant generally without expressing any time* the Law
shall construe it to be for one year, because that retainer is according to
Law. Vide Stat. 5 Eliz. cap. 4.

Co. Inst. part 1. 55. b. 3.
2 If lessor at will without the consent of the lessee enter into the land and
cut down a tree (where the trees are not exempted) this is an employed
determination of the will, Lease at will,
for that it would otherwise be a wrong in the lessor to do it: So if a man
lease a Manor at will, whereunto a Common is appendant, and the lessor puts in
his beasts to use the Common, this is also a determination of the will, for
otherwise he should be a trespassor.

Co. ibid. 78. b. 2.
3 By common intendment a will shall not be supposed to be made by collusion;
for In facto, quod se habet ad bonum and malum, A Will.
magis de bono quam de malo lex intendit.

Co. ibid. 119. a. 3. Littl.. 179.
4 If there be tenant for life of land, the reversion in fee, Villein.
and a Villein purchase the reversion, and the tenant for life attorns; In this
case, the Lord may justify to enter upon the Land and claim the reversion, and
yet shall be no trespassor to the tenant for life; for the Law will make
construction that he entered to make his claim, and not to commit trespass: The
like Law is also of a reversion after an estate in tail, Statute Merchant or
Staple, Elegit, and for years, and of the reversion of a Seigniory, rent,
common, and any other freehold or inheritance, issuing out of any lands or
tenements of another.

Co. ibid. 170. b. 4.
If Partition be made by the two Barons in the lifetime of their femes
coperceners, albeit such partition be unequal, yet it is not void, Pa r^tion.
but voidable, for it shall be deemed good and lawful, until it be defeated by
the entry of either of the femes, if she happen to survive her husband: There
is the like Law of an Infant copercener, Co. ibid. 171 a. 4.
for it remains good, if he defeat it not at his full age.

Feoffment upon condition.
6 If a feoffment be made by deed poll upon condition, Littl.. 376. Co. ibid.
232.
and the feoffor haps the deed poll, and afterward the condition is broken,
whereupon the feoffor reenters; In this case, having the deed en poigne, albeit
it does not properly appertain to him, but to the feoffee, yet he may make use
of the deed, and thereby plead the condition in justification of his entry and
title; for it will be rather intended, that he came to the deed by lawful,
Joint trespass.
than by tortious means: Littl.. 3^7.
So if there be two joint trespassors, and the party trespassed releaseth to
one of them; In this case also, if the other trespassor be sued, and have the
release en poigne, he may plead it in discharge of the trespass, causa qua
supra.

Bastard.
7 If the husband be within the 4. seas, viz. within the Jurisdiction of the
King of England, if the wife has issue, Co. ibid. 144. a. 2.
no proof is to be admitted to prove the Child a Bastard; for the question
being, whether he is legitimate or no, the Law will rather deem him legitimate,
than Proles spurius, a bastard: And in this case Filiatio non potest probari.

The like.
8 If a man has issue two daughters, the eldest being a Bastard, Co. ibid. 244.
a. 4.
and they enter and enjoy the land peaceably together; Here, the Law, in favor
of legitimation, will not adjudge the whole possession in the Mulier, (who
indeed has the only right) but in both, so as if the Bastard has issue and
dies, her issue shall inherit: And in the same case, if both daughters enter
and make partition, this partition shall bind the Mulier for ever.

The like.
9 If the Bastard invite the Mulier to see his house, Co. ibid. 245. a. 2.
and to see pictures, etc. or to dine with him, or to hawk, hunt, or sport with
him, or such like, upon the land descended, and the Mulier comes upon the land
accordingly, this is no interruption, because he came in by the consent of the
Bastard, and therefore the Law will not adjudge the coming upon the land in
such case to be any trespass; but if the Mulier comes upon the ground upon his
own head, and cutteth down a tree, or diggeth the soil, or take any profit,
these shall be interruptions; For rather than the Bastard shall punish him in
an action of trespass, the act shall amount in Law to an entry, because he has
a right of Entry: so it is if the Mulier put any of his Cattle into the ground,
or command another to do it, these do amount to an entry; for albeit in these
cases the Mulier does not use any express words of Entry, yet these, and such
like acts do (without any words) amount in Law to an Entry, for acts without
words may make an Entry, but words without an act, ( viz. Entry into the land,
etc.) cannot make an Entry. Vide infra 28.

M scon inuance.
10 If one process be awarded instead of another, or a day is given which is not
legal, this is a miscontinuance of the suit, Co. ibid. 325. a. 4.
and if the tenant or defendant make default, it is good cause of Error, but if
he appear, then is the Miscontinuance salved; for albeit (in truth) his
appearance is not legal, yet when he appears, the Law shall construe it to be
lawful, because there is a suit depending against him in Court.

D^scontinuance of estates
11 If there be tenant for life, the remainder in tail, Co. ibid. 332 a. 4.
and he in the remainder grants it to another in fee by deed, and the tenant
for life attorns, this is no discontinuance of the remainder in tail; So it is
likewise of a rent charge, Advowson in gross, Common in gross, or the like: for
the Rule is, that a grant by deed of such things as do lie in grant, and not in
livery of seisin, do work no discontinuance; and the reason is, because the Law
makes construction, that of such things the grant of tenant in tail works no
wrong, either to the issue in tail, or to him in reversion or remainder; for
(in such case) the Law adjudged nothing to pass from the tenant in tail, but
that which he may lawfully grant, viz. an estate for his own life.

Co. ibid. 335. a. 2.
12 If tenant for life make a lease for his own life to the lessor, the
remainder to the lessor and a stranger in fee: Surrender. Forfeiture.
In this case for as much as the limitation should work a wrong, by
construction of Law it rather inureth to the lessor as a surrender for the one
moiety, and a forfeiture as to the remainder of the stranger; for he cannot
give to the lessor that which he had before, and as to the remainder to the
stranger; it is a forfeiture for his moiety, and when the lessor enters, he
shall take benefit thereof.

Co. Inst. part 1. 381. b. 1.
13 The words of an Act of Parliament must be always taken in a lawful and
rightful sense, Stat. of Gloc.
as in the Statute of Gloucester cap. 3. The words in the end of that Act
(whereof no fine is levied in the Kings Court) are to be understood, whereof no
fine is lawfully or rightfully levied in the Kings Court: And therefore a fine
levied by the husband alone of the wives land, is not within the meaning of
that Statute; for that fine would work a wrong to the wife; but a fine levied
by the husband and wife is intended by the Statute, for such a fine is lawful
and works no wrong: So the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 5. says (Ita quod
Episcopus Ecclesiam conferat) is construed, Ita quod Episcopus Ecclesiam
legitime conferat, and the like in a number of other cases in our books: And
the general rule is, Non praestat impedimentum, quod de lure non sortitur
effectum.

Co. ibid. 42. a. 1.
14 If tenant for life infeoff him in the remainder for life, Surrender.
this the Law construes to be a surrender, which is a lawful act, and not a
forfeiture, which implies a wrong.

Co. ibid.
15 If tenant for life makes a lease by deed or without deed, Lease for life to
him in remainder.
to him in the remainder or reversion, in tail or in fee, for the term of the
life of him in remainder or reversion, and after he in remainder takes wife
and dies; In this case, his wife shall not be endowed; for the Law will
adjudge the estate made to him in remainder or reversion, a good and lawful
estate, and tenant for life shall enjoy the land again: And here, in regard
this can be no surrender, because tenant for life did not part with his whole
estate, the Law (rather than to admit of a forfeiture, which implies a wrong)
preserves the first estate for life from being surrendered, drowned or
forfeited: And (indeed) forfeited it cannot be in another respect, for that he
in remainder was party thereunto.

Co. l. 1. 76 a. Bredons case.
16 If there be tenant for life, remainder in tail, remainder in tail, No
discontinuance or forfeiture.
and tenant for life, and the first remainder levy a fine to one, who grants
and renders a rent charge to the tenant for life, and then the first remainder
dies without issue, and the second remainder enters, and tenant for life
distrains for the rent: In this case, there is neither discontinuance nor
forfeiture: no discontinuance, because each of them grants but his own estate,
which he may lawfully do: no forfeiture, because it shall be first construed to
be the fine of him in remainder, and afterward of the tenant for life.

Co. l 2. 67 a. 1 in Took^es, case.
17 Dower assigned by one Iointenant only, Assignment of Dower. Attornment.
or by an Abator or disseisor, shall not be avoided by the other Iointenant or
the disseisee, as it is agreed in 12 Ass. pl. 20. because these are lawful
acts: so it is said, if the disseisor attorn or give seisin to the grantee of a
seigniory, this shall bind the disseisee for the same reason: albeit the
grantee of a seigniory cannot compel the disseisor to attorn to him, or to
give him seisin, if he had not seisin before within the time of limitation.
Vide 8 H. 6. 17. 8 Ass. pl. 16. 8 E. 3. 52. 11 H. 4. 29. 39 H. 6. 2. It is
likewise said, that if the lessor disseise his two lessees for life, and
enfeoff another, and one of the lessees re-enter, this act of the one is an
attornment in Law for both; much more shall an express attornment bind both,
because these are (by construction of Law) lawful acts, etc. Vide 23.

Fine and 5. years pass.
18 T. possessed of diverse parcels of land within the Manor of S. for years, at
will, and by Copy, and of others in fee there, Co. l. 3. 79. b. 2. Fermers case.
demises the whole to C. for life, then levies a fine to him and his heirs of
so many acres as amount to the whole land, continues possession, and pays the
rents to the Lord: Here, albeit 5. years pass, yet is not the Lord barred: for
in as much as the lessee had lands in fee simple in the same Town, by
construction of Law it will be presumed, that the fine was levied of the land,
whereof a fine might be lawfully levied; And albeit the fine contained more
acres than his own land, yet that alters not the case, for it is usual (almost)
in all fines to put in more acres, than the just content of the land.

Copyhold.
19 If a man seized of Copyhold land in right of his wife surrender it to the
use of another in fee, who is admitted accordingly, Co. l. 4. 23. a. 2. in
Copihold cases, Bullock and Dibley.
the baron dies, this is no discontinuance to the feme or her heirs, but that
the feme may well enter, neither shall she be put to her Cui in vita, or her
heir to his sur Cui in vita: because the Law will construe it to be such an
alienation as he may lawfully make, viz. of his estate in right of his wife
during the Coverture: So if a Copyholder for life surrender to the use of
another in fee, this is no forfeiture for the like reason; and because it
passes by surrender to the Lord, and not by livery.

King tenant pur auter vie.
20 If the King being tenant pur auter vie, Co. l. 5. 12. a 4. in Englefields
case.
make a lease for 40. years; albeit he (having but an estate pur auter vie)
cannot absolutely contract for a lease of 40. years, yet without any recital or
mention of the estate for life, the lease is good; because the lease for years
is (in judgment of Law) less than the estate pur auter vie, and the King does
not thereby any wrong or prejudice to any, neither yet is he deceived in his
grant; for (by construction of Law) it is a lease for 40 years, if Cestuy que
vie so long live.

Afferment of Amerciaments.
21 If a Jury or a Leet tax an amerciament, Co. l. 8 40. b. 4. in Grieslyes case.
this suffices without any afferment, for the afferment may as well be per
totum Homagium, as by special Afferrors, because the amerciament is the act of
the Court, and the Afferment the act of the Jury. Vide 10 Edw. 3. 9. and 10. 8
Hen. 7. 4. 7 Edw. 3. 15. b. Astlies case. 25 Edw. 3. 26, and 27.

Grant of the King.
22 The King grants the herbage and pannage of a Park to Markham for life, and
reciting that estate, Co. l. 8. 56. a. 1. The E. of Rutl. case.
grants to the E. of Rutland for life: In this case, albeit the King grants to
the Earl in possession, yet he is not deceived in his grant; for reciting and
granting, as here, it enures (as it may by Law) to a grant of the reversion,
etc.

Attornment.
23 Albeit an Infant be not compellable to attorn, unless the grant be by fine
in a per quae servitia, Co. l 9. 85 b. 3 Conys case.
yet upon the grant of a seigniory without fine, if he attorn, that shall bind
him, and he shall not have his age: so likewise attornment by him upon the
grant of a reversion is good, albeit he cannot be forced thereunto. Vide supra
17.

Covin.
24 Covin shall never be intended or presumed in Law, except it be expressly
averred, quia odiosa and inhonesta non sunt in lege praesumenda, Co. l. 10. 56.
a. 3. in the Chan. of Oxf. case.
and in facto, quod se habet ad bonum and malum, magis de bono quam de malo
praesumendum est. And so it was adjudged in the case of Meriel Littleton, Trin.
10 ^ac. in B. R. Quod vide ubi supra.

Co. l. 10. 67. b. 3. in the Churchwardens case.
25 When two Constructions may be made of the Kings grant, The Kings Charter.
and by force of the one the grant may according to the Rule of Law be adjudged
good, and by the other it may be also taken by the Law to be void; In such
case, for the honor of the King, and the benefit of the Subject such
construction shall be made, that the Kings Charter may take effect: as it was
resolved in the case of the Churchwardens of Saint Saviors in Southwark, Co.
l. 10. 67. b. 3. and in Sir John Molins case, Co. l 6. 5. See also Priddle and
Nappers case, Co. l. 11. 11. a 4 The E. of Rutlands case supra 22. The L.
Staffords case, Co. l. 8. 77. The Lord Chandos case, Co. l. 6. 55. The E. of
Cumberlands case, Co. l. 8. 166. and. 12 E. 4. 44.

F. N. B. 148. f.
26 If the heir within age endow the feme of more land than she ought to have
assigned in Dower, Dower assigned.
or if the Guardian endow the feme of more than a third part of the land, the
heir at his full age shall have a writ of Admeasurement of Dower against the
feme; Howbeit in such case she shall retain so much of the land so assigned as
amounts to her Dower, because it was a lawful act, Plea in bar.
only the surplusage shall be taken from her, what she had above such third
part assigned unto her.

Pl. Co. 28. b. 1. in Calthr. and Bevish. case.
27 In an Assise, if the tenant plead in bar descent to the plaintiff, and two
others, and that he has the estate of one of them; In this case, the plea is
good, and yet it may be, that he had his estate by disseisin, in which case he
is also a disseisor to the plaintiff, for he cannot be a disseisor to one, and
not to the other, or he may gain his estate lawfully, and so a doubt arises,
whether the tenant is in lawfully, or by wrong: Howbeit in this case it shall
be taken, that he had his estate lawfully, and not tortiously or by wrong, and
therefore such plea in bar is good. Vid 189. 40.

Pl. Co. 93. a. 4. The Assise of Fresh force in London.
28 In the Assise of Fresh force by Panel against Moore and the Corporation of
Mercers in London, Assise of Fresh force.
Moors invitation of the plaintiff to dine with him and to see the Cellar, etc.
was adjudged no entry by the plaintiff after the last continuance, because it
was rather to be esteemed a lawful than a tortious act, being by the consent
of Moore one of the defendants. Vide supra 9.

29 Cestuy que use for term of life the remainder over in tail, Cestuy que use
for life.
after the Statute of 1 R. 3. 1. makes a lease for the term of the life of the
lessee, Dyer 57. b. 1. 35 H. 8.
and dies, and the lessee continues his estate; In this case the lessee is but
tenant by sufferance; for the lease makes no discontinuance of the Remainder,
because he had authority by the said Statute to make a lease, grant, or
feoffment, and that ought to be understood, of such an estate as he may
lawfully make.

Dyer 150. b. 86. 3, 4. P.M.
30 By the Statute of 32 H. 8. 1. that gives power to devise two parts of a
man's land holden in Knight service, Devise of lands.
a devise of the whole had been good for two parts, albeit the Statute of
explanations (34 and 35 H 8. 5.) had not been made.

Dyer 286. 43 11 El^z.
31 In an Ejectione firmae the plaintiff declares of a lease made unto him the 8.
day of May, Ejectione firmae.
to have and hold for 21 years extunc proxime sequent. Virtute cujus postea,
viz. eodem 8 day of May he entered: This seems to be good, and that he entered
not as a disseisor before the lease commenced; for extunc is immediately after
the delivery, and shall not be intended the morrow after the date, and the word
postea declares, that he entered not before the lease was made: Tamen Quaere,
for the practice is otherwise at this day, making the term to commence at some
feast or day before the day of delivery, to prevent the said exception.

Dyer 359 3. 2. E.
34 A. Tenant of Prince Arthur as Earl of Chester, Wardship.
in Knight service in Capite dies, and B. his eldest son is in ward, B. dies
without issue, and upon a Devenerunt C. was found brother and heir to B. and
within age, C. at full age pursues livery by writ to the Escheator per nom^n B.
filius and haeres A. And now the question was whether or no the possession
still continued in Qu. Eliz.? And it was adjudged, that it did not, but that it
was a good livery; for if he had not been named heir to any, it had been good,
because constat de persona.

Tenants in Common.
35 If a tenant in Common enter into the land generally, Hob. 120. Smales and
Dale.
without expressing whether it be for himself alone, or both for himself and
his companion; yet it shall be taken according to right, as under construction
of Law, and therefore construed lawful, and not that he intended to oust his
companion of his part by tort.

195 Non praestat impedimentum, quod de Jure non sortitur effectum. Vide 195,
13.
Bastard eigne and Mulier Puisne.
1 If the Bastard eigne after the decease of the father enter, Co. Inst. part 1.
245. b. 1.
and the King seiseth the land for some contempt supposed to be committed by
the Bastard, for which no freehold or inheritance is lost, but only the profits
of the land by way of seizure, and the Bastard die, and his issue is upon his
petition restored to the possession; In this case, for that the seizure was
without just cause, the Mulier is barred for ever; for the possession of the
King* when he has no just cause of seizure, shall be adjudged the possession
of him, for whose cause he seized: But if after the death of the Father the
Mulier be found heir, and within age, and the King seiseth; In such case the
possession of the King is in right of the Mulier, and vesteth the actual
possession in the Mulier, and consequently the Bastard eigne is foreclosed of
any right for ever: so it is likewise when the King seiseth for a contempt, or
other offense of the father, or of any other ancestor; In that case; if the
issue of the Bastard eigne upon a Petition be restored, for that the seizure
was without just cause, the Mulier is not barred; because the bastard could
never enter, and consequently could gain no estate in the land; but the
possession of the King in that case shall be adjudged in the right of the
Mulier. Vide 2 Ass. pl. 9.

Copyhold.
2 If a Copihold estate fall into the Lords hands by escheat, Co. l. 4. 31. a.
2. in Frenches case.
forfeiture, or the like, and the Lord make a lease thereof for years, life, or
other estate by deed or without deed, or if the Lord make a feoffment thereof
in fee upon condition, and enter for the condition broken, or if the Copyhold
so forfeited or escheated, before any new grant thereof made, be extended upon
a Statute or Recognisance acknowledged by the Lord, or if the feme of the Lord
in a writ of Dower has that land assigned to her; In all these cases, and
albeit these last impediments are by acts in Law, yet for as much as all these
interruptions are lawful, the lands can never after be granted by Copy; because
after such disposition thereof it was not demised or demisable: But if the
interruption be tortious, as if the Lord be disseised, and the disseisor die
seized, or if the land be recovered against the Lord by a false verdict, or
erroneous judgment: In these cases, until the land be recovered, or the
judgment nulled or reversed by the Lord of the Manor, the land was not demised
or demisable, and yet after the land is recontinued, it is again grantable by
Copy, because the interruption was tortious, for Non valet Impedimentum, quod
de jure non sortitur effectum, and quod contra legem fit pro infecto habetur.

Restraint to alien.
3 If a man make a gift in tail, upon condition that the donee shall not alien;
yet in such case if the donee suffer a Common recovery, Co. l. 6. 41. b. 2. in
Sir Anthony Mildmayes case.
that is no breach of the Condition, because it is a Conveyance allowed by Law
in respect of the intended recompense; but if he make a feoffment in fee or any
other estate, whereby the reversion is tortiously discontinued, the donor may
enter for the Condition broken; for every act, which is prohibited by Law, or
is a tort, may be prohibited by condition, vide 10 H. 7. 11. So if a feoffment
be made to Baron and feme, upon condition that they shall not alien, yet that
does not restrain their joint alienation by fine, because it is lawful and
incident to their estate: But their feoffment, or alienation by deed is
restrained by such a condition, for that is tortious, and against Law: Also if
a man enfeoff an Infant in fee, upon condition that he shall not alien, this
cannot restrain him to alien at his full age; but during his minority it does,
because that is tortious, and prohibited by Law.

Co. l 7. 6 a. 3. in Send^ls case.
4 One of the reasons, Robbery.
why the robbing of an house either in the day or in the night is not within
the Statute of Winchester for the Hundred to satisfy the damages, is, for that
it is not lawful for any man to enter into the house of another for the
safeguard thereof.

Co. l. 11. 74. a. 3. Magd. Coll. case.
5 Albeit the Friars Carmelites were of a Profession of Religion, Carmelites.
and had not any habitation, so as it seemed to be a work of piety and charity
to provide an habitation for them, yet non facias malum, ut inde fiat bonum.

F.N.B. 36. f.
6 If a man be disseised of a Manor, to which an Advowson is appendant,
Usurpation.
and the disseisor suffers an usurpation by a stranger to the advowson, and
after the disseisee reenters into the Manor, he shall present to the advowson,
when it happens to be void, notwithstanding such usurpation.

Dyer 168. 19. 1 Eliz.
7 Bronker Sherif of Wiltshire, to prevent perjury in his office, Sheriffs oath.
did neglect to be sworn in incepto officii, which he ought to have done by the
ancient Common Law of the Realm, for which contempt he was fined and imprisoned
by decree in the Star Chamber.

Dyer 219. 10. 5 Eliz.
8 A man is bound to deliver the key of an house, Livery of seisin.
and quiet possession, to the Mayor of London to the use of the obligee; no
person being in the house he locks the door, and delivers the key to the Mayor
out of view; A stranger pretending title, enters into the house; This seems to
be no delivery of possession, yet verdict was given for it, which was
afterward affirmed in Attaint; And the reason seems to be, for that the
impediment was unlawful.

196 Praetextu liciti non debet admitti illicitum.
Co. l. 11 88. b. 1 in the case of Monopolies.
1 The Charter of making and importing Cards (being adjudged in the 11 Rep. a
Monopoly) had a glorious preamble and pretext; Monopolies.
yet was repealed as derogatory to the Kings honor, and very pernicious to the
Commonwealth; And indeed it is true, Quod privilegia, quae revera sunt in
praejudicium Reipublicae, magis speciosa habent frontispicia, et boni publici
praetextum, quam bonae et legales concessiones; but Praetextu liciti non debet
admitti illicitum.

Dyer 35 6. 33. 29 H. 8.
2 If a lessee has liberty to fell trees to repair the house, Waste.
and he fells 4. Oaks for that purpose, and sells them, and buys 4. other Oaks
as good, and imployes them toward the repair of the house, yet that is waste;
for the cutting of them down and selling them was a tort: so if a man sell the
distress, which he has caken and impounded, and afterward (finding his error)
buys them again and impounds, yet their sale is a tort, and the impounding of
the Cattle afterward shall not excuse it.

Dyer 36. b. 38. 29 H. 8.
3 If the lessor be bound to a man in 100 l. and the lessee cuts down 20 Oaks,
sells them, and pays the obligee for the lessor; Waste.
yet an action of waste lies against the lessee for felling the trees, albeit
the money arising upon the sale was converted to the use and profit of the
lessor; for albeit a thing may sometimes sound for the profit of a man and not
for his damage, yet it is not lawful for a man to do a wrong; As if a man see
his neighbors beasts in another man's soil Damage feasant, Damage feasant.
it is not lawful for him to chase them, and if he so do, the owner shall have
an action of trespass against him, yet in so doing he does a good work, and
saves the owner from the damages for depasturing his cattle.

Trespass.
4 In 21 H. 7. A Parson brings an action of trespass for his Grain carried away,
the defendant says, Dyer ibid. pl. 39.
that the Grain was severed from the 9. parts, and in danger to be spoiled with
Cattle, whereupon the defendant carried them to the plaintifs own barn, and
there lodged them; And yet this was adjudged no good plea, because the carrying
of them away was a tort: So if a Commoner make a trench in the soil, where he
has Common, whereby the soil is made better, yet he is a trespassor, and
subject to an action for it.

5 Hob. 12. Holder against Tailor, and 220. Wrenhams case, who was censured in
the Star chamber 1000 l. for publishing a scandalous book against a decree of
the Lo. Chapter Bacons.

197 The Law favors things for the Commonwealth.
Incapable Officers.
1 If an Office either of the grant of the King or Subject, Co. Inst. pars 1. 3.
b. 2.
which concerns the administration, proceeding, or execution of Justice, or the
Kings revenue, or the Commonwealth, or the interest, benefit or safety of the
Subject, or the like; If these or any of them be granted to a man that is
unexpert, and has no skill or science to exercise or execute the same, the
grant is merely void, and the party disabled by Law, and incapable to take the
same, pro commodo Regis and populi, for only men of skill, knowledge, and
ability to exercise the same are capable thereof to serve the King and his
people: So an Infant or Minor is not capable of an office of Stewardship of the
Court of a Manor either in possession or reversion: Neither yet is a man,
though never so skillful and expert, capable of a judicial office in reversion,
but must expect until it fall in possession: Likewise bargaining, or giving of
money, or any manner of reward, etc. for offices, shall make such a purchasor
incapable thereof; because it is to be presumed he will by bribery, extortion,
and other undue means make his stake good again, to the prejudice of the
Commonwealth; which learning is worthy to be known, but more worthy to be put
in due execution.

Dower C^stles.
2 Of a Castle, that is only maintained for the private use and habitation of
the owner, a woman shall be endowed; But of a Castle, Co. ibid. 31. b. 3.
that is maintained for the necessary defense of the Realm, a woman shall not
be endowed: And so it was adjudged in the Court of Common Pleas, where in a
writ of Dower the demand was, De tertia part Castri de Hilderker in Comitatu
Northumb. And the Statute of Magna Charta, cap. 7. whereby it is provided, Nisi
domus illa sit Castrum, is to be understood of a Castle for the necessary and
public defense of the Realm: And this agrees also with ancient Records, the
effect whereof is, Non debent mulieribus assignari in dotem Castra, quae
fuerunt virorum suorum, et quae in Guerra existunt, vel etiam homagia and
servitia aliquorum in Guerra existentia: And so are the old books to be
intended, as it was resolved Trin. 17 Eliz. in the Court of Common Pleas. Vide
infra 35.

Co. ibid. 39. a. 4. Littl.. 48.
5 If a man seized of 40 acres of land, (20 hold by Knight service, Dower de la
plus beale.
and the other 20 in Socage) die thereof seized (his heir being under the age
of 14 years) his feme shall be endowed de la plus beale out of the Socage land,
and not out of the Knight service land; for the Common Law gives this
privilege to the land holden by Knight service, that it shall not be
dismembered, but in such case the whole dower shall be taken out of the Land
holden in Socage; And the reason is, for that Knight service land is for the
defense of the Realm, which is pro bono publico, and therefore to be favored.

Co. ibid. 47. a. 4.
4 Things shall not be distrained for rent, Distress.
which are for the benefit and maintenance of trades, and (by consequent) of
the Commonwealth, and are there by authority of Law, as a horse in a Smiths
shop shall not be distrained for rent issuing out of the shop, nor the horse
etc. in the Hostry, nor the materials in a Weavers shop for making of cloth,
nor cloth or garments in a Tailors shop, nor Sacks of Corn or meal in a Mill or
Market, nor any thing distrained before for damage fesant, for it is in the
custody of the Law, and the like.

Co. ibid. 55. a. 4.
5 If Tenant at will sow the ground with grain, hemp, flax, Tenant at will shall
reap his c^op.
or the like, or set roots, or sow or set any other thing which will yield an
annual profit, and after the same is so planted, the lessor will out him, or if
the lessee dies, yet he or his executors shall have that years crop; And the
reason is, for that the estate of the lessor is uncertain, and therefore lest
the ground should be unmanured, which would be hurtful to the Commonwealth, he
shall reap the Crop which he has sowed in peace, albeit the lessor does
determine his will before it be ripe: There is the same reason also for every
other particular estate, that is uncertain; And therefore if tenant for life
sow the ground, and dies, his executors shall have the Corn, for that his
estate was uncertain, and determined by the act of God; And there is the same
Law of a lessee for years of the tenant for life: So likewise if a man be
seized of land in right of his wife, and sows the ground and dies, his
executors shall have the Corn, and if his wife die before him, he himself shall
have it. If tenant pur term dauter vie sow the land, and Cestuy que use dies,
the lessee shall have the corn. If tenant by Statute merchant sows the
ground, and then a sudden and casual profit falls, by which he is satisfied,
he shall have the embleaments. If a man seized in fee has issue a daughter and
dies, his wife being enseint with a Son, and the daughter sows the land, and
then the son is born, yet the daughter shall have the Corn, because her estate
was lawful, and defeated by the act of God, and it is good for the Commonweaith
that the ground be sown: But if husband and wife he jointenants of the land,
and the husband sows the ground, and the land surviveth to the wife, 8 Ass.
pl. 21. 8 E. 3. 54. Dyer 316.
It is said that she shall have the Corn and not the executors. and the Law
seems to be so, because they were as one person in Law, and held by intietties.

Co. ibid. 75. b. 4.
6 The tenure by Knight service being at first ordained for the defense of the
Commonwealth both against domestique insurrections and foreign invasions (a
Militia being indeed the chief pillar that supports a Commonwealth) the due
observance thereof was strictly enjoined by the Laws of Edward the Confessor,
Knight service.
where you shall find it thus provided, Lamb. 135.
Debent enim universi liberi homines, etc. secundum feodum suum, and secundum
tenementa sua, arma habere, and illa semper prompta conservare ad tuitionem
regni, and servitium dominorum suorum, juxta praeceptum Domini Regis explendum
et peragendum. And William the Conqueror confirmed that Law in these words,
Statuimus et firmiter praecipimus, quod omnes Comites, and Barons, and
Milites, et Servientes, and universi liberi homines totius regni nostri
praedicti habeant and teneant se semper in armis, et in equis, ut decet, et
oportet, et quod sint semper prompti and parati ad servitium suum integrum
nobis explendum and peragendum, cum semper opus adfuerit, secundum quod nobis
debent de feodis et tenementis suis de jure facere, etc.

The like.
7 The tenure by Knight service (because it was instituted for the Guard and
defense of the Commonwealth) was so much favored in Law, Co. ibid. 76. b. 4.
that betwixt the making of the Statutes of 4 H. 7. 17. and 27 H. 8. 10. of
Uses, there might lie two wardships for one and the same land, as if Cestuy que
use before the Statute of 27 H. 8. had died, his heir within age, the Lord
should have had the wardship of his heir by force of the Statute of 4 H. 7. and
if the feoffee had died, his heir within age, the Lord should have had the
wardship of his heir also, viz. by the course of the Common Law: And at the
Common Law before the making of those Statutes there might be two wardships in
respect of the same land, as if tenant by Knight service had made a gift in
tail, the remainder in fee, and tenant in tail had made a feoffment in fee, and
died, his heir within age, the Lord should have had the wardship of him, and if
the feoffee had died, his heir within age, Co. ibid. 77. a. 1.
the Lord should have also had the wardship of his heir, and of the land: so
likewise if tenant by Knight service make a gift in tail, and the donee makes
a feoffment in fee, and the donee dies, his heir within age, the donor shall
have the wardship of him, because he is his tenant in right: but if the feoffee
dies, his heir within age, the Lord paramount shall have the wardship of his
heir, because en fait he is tenant to him, etc. And the Common Law did not
remedy this inconvenience, because that tenure was deemed serviceable for the
Commonwealth.

Tillage.
8 Agriculture or Tillage is much favored, and of great esteem, Co. ibid. 85.
b. 1.
because it is very profitable for the Commonwealth, concerning which the
goodness of the habit is best known by the privation: For by laying of lands,
used in tilth, to pasture, six main inconveniences do daily increase: 1.
Idleness, Co. l. 4. 39. a. in Tirringhams case.
which is the beginning and ground of all mischiefs: 2. Depopulation and decay
of Towns: 3. Husbandry, which is one of the greatest Commodities of the Realm,
is decayed: 4. Churches are destroyed, and the service of God neglected by
diminution of Church Livings, (as by decay of Tithes, etc.) 5. Injury and wrong
is done to Patrons and Gods Ministers: And 6. The defense of the land against
foreign Enemies is enfeebled and impaired, the bodies of Husbandmen being more
strong and able, and patient of cold, heat, and hunger than of any other: from
which Inconveniences necessarily follow these consequences; 1. The displeasure
of Almighty God: 2. The subversion of the Policy and good government of the
Realm; And all this appears in our books: And therefore the Common Law gives
arable land (anciently called Hyde or Gain) the precedence before Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Mines, or any other ground whatsoever; And averia carucae (the
beasts of the Plough) have in some cases more privileges than other cattle,
etc. This employment was also of high estimation amongst the ancient Romans,
Co. Inst. part 1. 161. a. 1.
in so much that the grave Senators themselves would put their hand to the
plough, etc. If the Lord will distrain averia carucae, where there is a
sufficient distress besides, the tenant may make rescous. O Fortunatos nimium,
sua si bona norunt,
Agricolas, quibus ipsa, procul discordibus armis,
Fundit humo facilem victum justissima Tellus.
Virg. in Georg.

Co. ibid. 99. a. 2.
9 An Abbot or Prior, etc. who holds lands by Knight service, Abbot. Prior.
albeit he ought not, in respect of his profession, to serve in war in proper
person, yet must he find a sufficient man, conveniently arrayed for the war,
to supply his place; And if he can find none, then must he pay Escuage, etc.
for his possession does not privilege him, but that the Kings service in his
war must be done, which belongs to his tenure, and concerns both the honor
and safety of the Commonwealth.

Co. ibid. 127. a. 4. Bract. lib. 6. fo. 6.
10 The life and members of every subject are under the safeguard and protection
of the King; Life and Member.
for (as Bracton says) Vita et membra sunt in potestate Regis; And herewith
agrees a notable Record, Pasch. 19 E. 1. coram Rege, Rot. 36. Northt. Vita and
membra sunt in manu Regis, to the end that they may serve the King and the
Commonwealth, when occasion shall be offered: And therefore if the Lord mayhem
his Villein, the King shall punish him for mayheming his subject, Villein.
by fine, ransom, and imprisonment, until the fine and ransom be paid, because
he has thereby disabled him to do the King and Commonwealth service.

Co. ibid. 130. a. 4.
11 The Protections Quia Profecturus (which concerns services of war, as the
Kings soldier, Protections.
etc.) and Quia Moraturus (which concerns wisdom and counsel, as the Kings
Ambassador or Messenger pro negotiis regni) being for the public good of the
Realm, private men's actions and suits must be then suspended for a convenient
time; for Jura publica anteferenda privatis, and again, Jura publica ex
privatis promiscue decidi non debent: And the cause of granting such
protections must be therein expressed, to the end it may appear to the Court,
that they are granted pro negotiis regni, et pro bono publico: And these
protections are not allowable only for men of full age, but for men within age,
and for women, as necessary attendants upon the Camp, and that in three cases,
Quia Lotrix, seu Nutrix, seu Obstetrix.

Co. ibid. 131. b. 2.
12 Treasure is one of the chiefest supports of a Commonwealth; Protection.
And therefore the King (who is the Head of the Commonwealth) is regularly (by
his prerogative) to be preferred in payment of his duty or debt by his debtor
before any subject, albeit the Kings debt or duty be the later; upon which
ground it is, that the King may grant his debtor a protection cum clausula
volumus, to protect him from the suits and actions of other Creditors: And the
reason hereof is, for that Thesaurus Regis est fundamentum belli and
firmamentum pacis: But this Law is somewhat altered by the Statute of 25 E. 3.
cap. 19. quod vide. Co. ibid. 132. b. 3.
If a Monk be a farmer of the King, yielding a rent, Monk.
he shall have an action concerning that farm, because the Kings revenue is
also the revenue of the Commonwealth.

Co. ibid. 133. a. 4.
13 By the Common Law the wife of the King of England is an exempt person from
the King, Queen.
and is capable of lands or tenements of the gift of the King, as no other feme
covert is, and is of ability and capacity (without the King) to grant and to
take, to sue and be sued, as a feme sole at the Common Law; for the wisdom of
the Law would not have the King (whose continual care and study is for the
public, and circa ardua regni) to be troubled and disquieted with such
private and petty causes.

Co. ibid. 149. a. 2. and Co. ibid. 149. b. 2.
14 If the tenant holds by fealty and a bushel of wheat, Service. Tenant.
or a pound of Cumin, or pepper, or the like, and the Lord purchases part of
the land, there shall be an apportionment, as well as if the rent were in
money: yet if the rent were by one grain of wheat, one seed of Cumin, one
pepper Corn, a horse, or any other entire service, by purchase of part, the
whole should be extinct: Howbeit if such an entire service be pro bono publico,
as Knight service, Castle-guard, Cornage, etc. for the defense of the Realm, or
to repair a bridge or way, to keep a Beacon, or to keep the Kings Records; or
for avancement of Justice and peace; as to aid the Sheriff, or to be Constable
of England, albeit the Lord purchases part, yet the entire service remains.
See Bruertons case, Co. l. 6. 1. b. 4. and Jo. Talbots, l. 8. 105. b. 4.

Authority.
15 If a man make a Letter of Attorney to two, to do any act, Co. ibid. 181 b. 3.
if one of them die, the survivor shall not do it: but if a Venire facias be
awarded to four Coroners, to impannel and return a Jury, and one of them die,
yet the other shall execute and return the same; because it is for the
execution of Justice, and (by consequent) pro bono publico: so if a charter of
feoffment be made, and a Letter of Attorney to four or three jointly and
severally to deliver seisin, two of them cannot make livery, because it is
neither by them four or three jointly, nor by any of them severally: But if the
Sheriff upon a Capias directed to him, make a warrant to four or three jointly
or severally to arrest the defendant, two of them may arrest him for the reason
aforesaid, and for the same reason such an act shall be more favorably
expounded, than a private one; for Iura publica ex privato promiscua decidi non
debent.

Tenants in Common and Joyntenants.
16 If there be two tenants in Common of a Manor, Co. ibid. 200. a. 3. etc.
to which waif and stray does belong, a stray happens, they are tenants in
Common thereof; And yet if one of them take the stray, the other has no remedy
by action, but to take it again; unless they have a prescription to take
strayes by turns: Howbeit if there be two tenants in Common of a Dove-house,
and the one wholly destroys the flight; or of a folding, and one disturbs the
other to erect hurdles; In these cases an action of trespass lies against the
other, because they are offenses committed in prejudice of the Commonwealth. If
two several owners of houses have a River in common between them, and the one
corrupts the River, the other shall have an action upon his case against his
companion: So if there be two tenants in Common or Iointenants of an house or
Mill, and it fall into decay, and the one is willing to repair it, and the
other will not, he that is willing shall have a writ de reparatione facienda,
and the writ says, Ad reparationem et sustentationem ejusdem domus teneantur,
whereby it appears, that owners are in such case bound pro bono publico to
maintain houses and mills, which are for the habitation and use of men.

Offices.
17 Non-user of it self without some special damage is no forfeiture of Private
offices, as the Keepership of Park or the like: Co. ibid. 233. a. 4.
But Non-user of Public offices, which concern the administration of Justice,
or the Commonwealth, is of it self a cause of forfeiture.

Repair by the lessee.
18 In many cases a tenant for life or years may fell down timber to make
reparations, albeit he be not compellable thereunto, Co. ibid. 54. b. 2.
and shall not be punished for the same in any action of waste: As if an house
be ruinous at the time of the lease made, if the lessee suffer the house to
fall down, he is not punishable, for he is not bound by Law to repair the house
in that case; and yet if he cut down timber upon the ground so letten, and
repair it, he may well justify it; And the reason is, for that the Law does
favor the supportation and maintenance of houses which were ordained for the
habitation of Mankind, and are (by consequent) beneficial to the Commonwealth:
And therefore if the lessor by his Covenant undertake to repair the house, yet
the lessee (if the lessor does it not) may with the timber growing upon the
ground repair it, though he be not compellable thereunto: In like manner if a
man make a lease of an house and land without impeachment of waste for the
house, yet may the lessee with the timber upon the ground repair the house,
though he may utterly waste it if he will; and so it is in many other cases for
the reason above alleged.

Co. l. 4. 14 b. 1. Cutle^ and Dixons case.
19 If a man exhibit articles to Justices of Peace against another, Slander.
containing diverse great abuses and misdemeanors, to the intent to have him
bound to the good behavior; In this case, the party accused shall not have for
any matter contained in such Articles any action upon the case: because he has
pursued the ordinary course of Justice in such case provided: And if actions
shall be permitted in such cases, they who have just cause to complain would
not dare to make such complaint, Co. ibid. Si^ R chapter Buckleys case.
for fear of infinite vexation. So if a man had exhibited a Bill in the
Star Chamber against another, containing diverse scandalous accusations, albeit
they were false, yet no action upon the case would lie for them, if they were
examinable in that Court; because the proceeding was in a Course of Justice,
whereunto the Law gives favor, because it tends to the good of the
Commonwealth. See Dyer 11 Eliz. 285. pl. 37.

Co. l. 4. 37. a. 2. in Tirringhams case.
20 In ancient time when a Lord enfeoffed another of arable land, Tillage.
to hold of him in Socage, viz. per servitium Socae, the feoffee ad
manutenendum servitium Socae had Common in the wastes of the Lord for his
necessary Cattle, that gained and compossed the land; not only because that
liberty was tacit employed in the feoffment, (for he could not plow and compass
the land without cattle, and they could not live without pasture to sustain
them) but such Common appendant was principally given him for the maintenance
and advancement of tillage, which is much regarded and favored in Law, because
it is one of the chiefest supports of the Commonwealth; so as such Common
appendant is of Common right, and began by operation of Law, and in favor of
tillage, and therefore needs not prescription (as it was held in 4 H. 6. and 22
H. 6.) which it ought to have, if it were against common right: Howbeit it is
only appendant to the ancient arable Hyde and Gain, and only for horses and
oxen to plow the land, and for Cows and Sheep to manure it; And all this for
the melioration and advancement of tillage, as aforesaid: And with this agrees
37 H. 6. 34. per tot. Cur. and 29 H. 8. 4.

Co. l. 4. 124 b. 2 in B^verleys case.
21 No felony or murder can be committed without a felonious intent and purpose,
Nam ideo dicta est felonia, Non compos mentis.
quia fieri debet felleo animo; And therefore a Mad man cannot commit felony,
because he cannot have a felonious intent: so likewise if a feme Non compos
mentis kill her husband, it cannot be Petty treason: Howbeit in some cases Non
compos mentis may commit high treason, as if he kill or offer to kill the King,
that is high Treason; For the King est Caput et salus Reipublicae, and a capite
bona valetudo transit in omnes, and for that cause their persons are so sacred,
that no man ought to offer them violence, and if he do, he is Reus criminis
Laesae Majestatis.

Co. l 5. 63. a 2. in the Chamberl^^n of Londons case.
23 The Inhabitants of a Town (without any custom) may make Ordinances or
Bylaws, for the repair of the Church, By-Lawes.
or of an Highway, or any other such thing, which is generally for the good of
the Commonwealth, and in such case the greater part shall bind all without any
custom. Vide 44 E. 3. 19. Also Corporations may make Ordinances or
Constitutions (without custom or the Kings charter) for things which concern
the Commonwealth, as reparations of the Church, common Highways or the like.
Vide 8. E. 2. Assise 413. 21 E. 4. 54. 11 H. 7. 13. 21 H. 7. 20, and 40.

Co. l. 5. 63. ^. 4.
23 The Act of the Common Council of London for bringing of Cloth to
Blackwell-Hall to be searched, Constitutions
and the imposition of a penny for tallage upon every Cloth, were adjudged
lawful constitutions, because they were beneficial to the Commonwealth, and
not for any private profit.

Constitutions.
24 In 37 Eliz. 1695. The Term being appointed to be kept at St. Albons, Co. l.
5. 64. a. Clerks case.
a Constitution was made there for the assessing of a sum of money for the
preparing of Courts and other necessaries for the Term, and every Inhabitant
was enjoined to pay his respective assesment on pain of imprisonment; Clerk an
Alderman (who also consented to the assessment) refused to pay his proportion,
and thereupon being imprisoned by the Mayor, did bring an Action of false
Imprisonment against the Mayor, and had judgment to recover, because the
Constitution was against Magna Charta, cap. 29. Nullus liber homo imprisonetur,
etc. Howbeit if the Constitution had been upon a pein of a reasonable sum of
money, and distress or action of debt for the recovery thereof, the Mayor might
have justified the distress or action; because it was pro bono publico, that
the Town should make provision for the Term, and the rather, for that E. 6. who
did incorporate them had granted them power to make Ordinances: Albeit
Corporations within time, etc. cannot have that privilege, but by Parliament,
when it is pro commodo privato. See Co. l. 8. 127. b.

Penalties of Statutes not transferrable.
25 When a Statute is made by Parliament for the public good of the Realm, Co.
l. 7. 36. b. 3. in the cases of Penal Statutes.
the King cannot give the penalty or benefit thereof to any subject, or give
him power to dispense with it, or to make a warrant to the Great Seal for
licenses in such case to be made; for when a Statute is made pro bono publico,
and the King (as the head of the Commonwealth, and the Fountain of. Justice and
Mercy) is by all the Realm trusted with it, this confidence and trust is so
inseparably annexed to the Royal person of the King in so high a point of
Sovereignty, that he cannot transferr it to the disposition or power of any
private person, or to any private use; because it is committed to the King by
all his Subjects for the Common good, and if he might grant the penalty of one
Act, he may also grant the penalty of two, and so in infinitum.

Dangerous to have London too populous.
26 The Custom in London, that a Foreiner shall not sell by retail, Co. l. 8.
127. b. 2. in the case of the City of London.
was adjudged good, because it was beneficial not only for the Citizens, but
likewise for the whole Commonwealth; for that it would prevent the confluence
of people from all parts of the realm to London, which confluence might produce
3. great inconveniences: 1. Impoverishment of all the good Towns in England: 2.
Depopulation of Towns in every Country: 3. Destruction in the end of all trades
and tradesmen in every part of the Realm: Besides, it might be a means to
increase the Pestilence by reason of the multitude of people, and pestering the
air, whereby it might prove dangerous not only to the Subject, but likewise to
the King himself and the Great Lords who attend upon his royal person: Again,
if London should be too populous, it would become ungovernable by the
Magistracy of the City, and if that City (which is tanquam Epitome totius
regni) should not be well governed all the parts of the Realm would find the
inconvenience thereof, whereas when that City shall be well governed, all parts
of the Commonwealth will be preserved in better order: Lastly, that City
becoming too populous, it will not be subject to search, etc. not only in
prejudice of the City it self, but likewise of the King and the whole
Commonwealth, because then fraud and deceit will increase in all Merchandise
and things vendible.

Plea. Accord.
27 Accord with satisfaction is a good plea in an Ejectione firmae, Co. l. 9. 78
a. 3. Henry Petoes case.
for that is mixed with trespass; and (indeed) in all actions, which suppose a
tort to be done (where Capias and Exigent do lie) there an Accord is a good
plea, because it redeems the body from imprisonment, so as men (being at
liberty) may go about their business, which is good for the Commonwealth.

Co. l. 10. 108. b. 3. Lofi^lds case.
28 If there be Lord and Tenant by Knight service, Tenure.
and the tenant gives the tenancy to two men, and to the heirs of their bodies,
and they die having issue, their issue shall hold severally by Knight service,
because it is for the defense of the Lord, and of the Realm. Vide supra 14.

Co. l. 11 54. a. The Tailers of Ipswich case.
29 An Ordinance of a Corporation, Corporation Ordinance.
that none shall exercise any trade there, unless he has served 7. years as an
apprentice in the same, and shall also be approved by them to be skillful
therein, is not good, because against the Common Law, which restrained no man
from exercising any trade, and also prejudicial to the Commonwealth, for that
it puts a greater restraint upon Tradesmen, than the Statute of 5 Eliz. does
ordain, in as much as he ought also to be approved by them, which the Statute
does not enjoin; for if he be ignorant of his trade, an action upon the case
lies for his misdoing; as it did also at the Common Law before the Statute;
neither does the Stat. restrain a Tailor or other Artificer retained to
exercise his trade in a private house. And the Statute of the 19 H. 7.
strengthens not any Ordinance against the Law or the Commonwealth, though
allowed, as that Statute ordains; the allowance only discharges the penalty of
40 l. for making Ordinances against the Kings prerogative and the Commonwealth.

Co l. 11. 72. a. b. Magd. Coll. case.
30 The King is bound by the Statute De donis, though not named, Statutes
binding the King.
because it is an Act, which concerns the Commonwealth, and was ordained for
the preservation of the possessions of the Nobility, Gentry, and others; so the
Statute of 13 Eliz. 10. made for the prevention of long leases, and
dilapidations of Colleges, Cathedrals, Hospitals, etc. does bind the King,
albeit not named, because those Corporations were trusted with their
possessions pro bono publico, and for the use of the Commonwealth, and for the
same reason that Act has in all cases had a benefical and favorable
construction to the prevention of all inventions and evasions, Co. ibid. 76. a.
2.
against the true Intention of the same Act.

Co. l. 11. 86 a. 3. and b. in the case of Monopolies.
31 One of the Chiefest reasons, Monopolies.
why the Monopoly of the sole making and importing of Cards, and all other
Monopolies are prohibited by Law, is, for that there are three inseparable
incidents to every Monopoly against the Commonwealth: 1 The price of the
Commodity will be raised, for he who has the sole vendition of any commodity,
may and will make the price as he pleases: And this word Monopolium is
compounded of these Greek words, mno and poleoma, id est, cum unus solus
aliquod genus mercaturae universum emit, pretium ad suum libitum statuens; And
the Poet says, Omnia Castor emit, sic fit ut omnia vendat. Also it appears by
the writ of ad quod damnum (F. N. B. 222) that every gift or grant of the King
has this condition, either expressly or tacitly annexed unto it, Ita quod
Patria per donationem iliam magis solito non oneretur seu gravetur: And
therefore every grant made in grievance or prejudice of the Subject is void, (
Vide 13 H. 4. 14.) The second Incident to a Monopoly is, that after the
Monopoly granted, the Commodity is not made so good and merchantable, as it was
before; for the Patentee having the sole trade, regards his private benefit
only, and not the Commonwealth. 3. This tends to the impoverishment of diverse
artificers and others, who before by the labor of their hands in their art or
trade did sustain themselves and their families in good condition, and having
also by that means increased their substance, were fit and ready to serve the
King, when need should require; but by the grant of such a Monopoly they are
reduced to such necessity, that ever after they are constrained to live in
idleness and beggary, etc.

Munition and Treasure of the King.
32 Munition (though unserviceable) cannot be claimed as fees belonging to the
Master of the Ordnance, Co. l. 11. 91. b. 4. The Earl of Devons case.
because they were provided for the defense and safeguard of the King and
Commonwealth; and therefore albeit the King grant them to him, and then he
dies, yet his executors shall not have them, but shall be accountable to the
King for them: And for the same reason it is, that no officer of the King, or
all of them together, can ex officio, issue or dispose of the Kings treasure,
although it be for the honor and profit of the King himself: for although it be
true, that it is for the honor and benefit of the King, that good service done
unto him should be rewarded, yet it ought to be rewarded by the King himself,
or by his warrant, and no by other; because the treasure of the King (being the
ligament of Peace, the preserver of the Honor and Safety of the Realm, and the
sinews of War, all which do much concern the Commonwealth) is of so high an
estimation in Law, in respect of the necessity thereof, that the imbezilling of
treasure trove, although it were not in the Kings Chests, was Treason; And
treasure and other valuable chattels are so necessary and incident to the Crown
for the reasons aforesaid, that in the Kings case they shall go with the Crown
to the successor, and not to the executors, as in case of a common person, as
appears in 7 H. 4. 43, and 44.

Escape. Statutes extendible by equity.
33 Albeit the Statute of 1 R. 2. 12. be penal, Pl. Co. 56. b. Plats case.
and gives an action of debt only against the Warden of the Fleet, yet is
extended by equity against all other persons, who have the Custody of prisoners
in execution, because it is good for the Commonwealth; for although it is penal
against the Warden, yet being also extended against all others so chargeable
with prisoners, it is beneficial to the Commonwealth; And (indeed) every
Statute is penal against some man; but in as much as the taking of it by equity
is more beneficial than prejudicial to the greater number of men, and so (by
consequent) to the Commonwealth, it is good reason, that it should be by the
Rules of Law extended by equity: So likewise the Statute of Circumspecte agatis
in 13 E. 1. is, Pl. Go. 59. b. in Wimbish and Talbois case. Vide Pl. Co. 82. a.
the Stat. of 32 H. 8. 9. of pretenced titles extended also by equity.
viz. Circumspecte agatis de negotiis tangentibus Episcopum Norwicensem and
ejus Clerum, and yet it is extended to all other Bishops; Likewise the Statute
of 9 E. 3. cap. 5. which ordains, that the executor, who comes in first by
distress, shall answer, is extended by equity to Administrators: Also the
Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 3. 13 E. 1. which gives a Cui in vita upon a recovery
by default, is extended by equity to a Cui ante Divortium; And the Statute of
Marlbridge, cap. 6. which makes mention only de hiis qui primogenitos suos
infra aetatem existentes feoffare solent, and yet if his first son die, and he
enfeoff his second son, who is his heir, this is within the equity of that
Statute, or if he levy a fine to him, which is a matter of Record, that is also
within the equity of the same Statute, and yet the Statute speaks only of a
feoffment: But regularly all Statutes, which are for the advancement of
Justice, or beneficial to the Commonwealth, are extendible by equity.

Torts justifiable.
34 In some cases a man may justify to do a wrong, Dyer 36. Pl. 40, 29 H. 8.
which tends to the good of the Commonwealth, as in time of war a man may
justify to make Bulwarks in another man's soil without license; So may he
justify to pull down an house that is on fire, for the safeguard of the
neighboring houses: also if the Sheriff pursue a felon to an house, he may
justify to break open the house door to take him; for all these and the like
sound to the good of the Commonwealth.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 165. a. 4.
35 If a Castle that is used for the necessary defense of the Realm, Coparceners.
descend to two or more Coparceners, this Castle might be divided by Chambers
and Rooms, as other houses be, but yet for that it is pro bono publico, and pro
defensione Regni, it shall not be divided, Propter jus gladii dividi non potest
(Fleta l. 5. cap. 9.) And another says, ( Britton 186, 187.) Pur le droit del
espee, que ne souffree division, en aventure que la force del Realm ne defaille
pas tant: But Castles of habitation for private use, that are not for the
necessary defense of the Realm, may be parted amongst Coparceners as well as
other houses, and wives may be thereof also endowed, as before has been said,
supra 2.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 14. a.
36 In King Alfreds time Knights fees descended to the eldest son; Knight
service, Socage.
for that by division of them between Males the defense of the Realm might be
weakened; but in those days Socage-fee was divided between the heirs male, and
therewith agrees Glanvile, (lib. 7. cap. 1. and 3. Cum quis haereditatem
habens moriatur, si plures reliquerit filios, tunc distinguitur, utrum ille
fuerit Miles, sive per feodum militare tenens, aut liber Sockmannus, quia si
miles fuerit aut per militiam tenens, tunc secundum jus regni Angliae
primogenitus filius patri succedit in toto, etc. si vero fuerit liber
Sockmannus, tunc quidem dividetur haereditas inter omnes filios, etc.

198 Public Commerce. Vide supra 198, 31.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 2. b. 2.
1 If an Alien take a lease for years of Lands, Meadows, Alien. Trade.
etc. or (being no Merchant) takes a lease for years of an house for
habitation, upon office found, the King shall have them; for albeit he be
capable to take such a lease, or lands, tenements, or hereditaments to him and
his heirs, yet upon office found, the King shall have them by his prerogative:
Howbeit he being a Merchant, may take a Lease for years of an house for
habitation, as incident to Commercery, for without habitation he cannot
merchandise or trade; But if he be no Merchant, or being a Merchant depart the
Realm, the King shall have the Lease; or if he die possessed thereof, neither
his executors or administrators shall have it, but the King; for he had it only
for habitation, as necessary to his trade or traffic, unto which the Common
Law gives much favor.

Co. ibid. 129. b. 1.
2 An alien enemy shall not maintain any action real, personal, Alien. Actions.
or mixed, donec terrae fuerint communes: Howbeit (in favor of trade) an alien
in league may maintain personal actions; because such an Alien may trade and
traffic, buy and sell; And therefore he must of necessity be of ability to
have personal actions, or being condemned in an information, he may have a writ
of Error to relieve himself: but he cannot have either real or mixed actions.

Co. ibid. 172. a. 3.
3 Regularly, Merchants account.
a Receiver (upon his account) shall not be allowed his expenses and charges,
yet in some case in an action of account against one as Receptor denariorum, he
shall have allowance of his expenses and charges, and also shall account for
the profit he received, or might reasonably receive; And this was provided by
Law in favor of Merchants, and for advancement of trade and traffic; As if
two Joint Merchants occupy their stock, goods, and merchandise in common to
their common profit, one of them naming himself a Merchant, shall have an
account against the other, naming him also a Merchant, and shall charge him as
Receptor denariorum ipsius B. ex quacunque causa and contractu ad communem
utilitatem ipsorum A. and B provenientium, sicut per legem Mercatoriam
rationabiliter monstrare poterit.

Merchants.
4 Survivorship holds not betwixt two Ioint-merchants; Co. ibid. 182. a. 2.
for the wares, merchandises, debts, or duties, which they have as
Ioint-merchants, or Parceners, shall not survive, but shall go to the executors
of him that deceaseth; And this is per legem Mercatoriam, which is part of the
Laws of this Realm, for the advancement and continuance of Commerce and trade,
which is pro bono publico; for the Rule is, that Jus accrescendi inter
mercatores pro beneficio commercii locum non habet.

Trade.
5 One of the chiefest reasons, why a Condition not to alien, Co. ibid. 223. a.
2.
annexed to a feoffment, devise, or gift of lands or goods, is void, is, for
that it is flatly against trade and traffic, bargaining and contracting,
between man and man. Vide infra 9.

Monopolies.
6 Trin. 44 Eliz. The grant of the sole making of Playing Cards was adjudged
void, because it restrained trade and traffic, Co. l. 8. 125. a. 3. the case
of London.
which are the very life of every Commonwealth, and principally of an Island.
There is the same reason of all other Monopolies. Vide Co. l. 11. 87.

Guilda.
7 In favor of trade and traffic, Co. ibid.
the Law gives the King power by his prerogative to erect Guildam Mercatoriam,
viz. a Fraternity, Society, or Incorporation of Merchants, to the end that good
order and government may be by them observed, for the increase and advancement
of Merchandising and trade, and not for the hindrance and diminution thereof.

Trade. Idleness.
8 At the Common Law none could be prohibited to work in any lawful trade, Co.
l. 11. 53. b. 4. The Tailors of Ipswich
for the Law abhorrs Idleness the Mother of all mischief, Otium omnium vitiorum
matter, and principally in young people, who ought in their youth (which is
their seed-time) to learn lawful sciences and trades, which are for the
advancement of traffic, and profitable to the Commonwealth, and thereof they
ought to reap the fruit in their old age, For Jeunesse Oisense, Vieillesse
disettense: And therefore the Law detests Monopolies, which prohibit the
exercise of lawful trades; And this appears in 2 H. 5. b. where a Dyer was
bound, that he should not use the Dyers trade by the space of two years, and
there Hall held, that the obligation was against the Common Law; and added
farther, Per dien si le plaintiff fuit icy, il iroit al prison, tanque il
feroit fine al Roy.

Tail.
9 Before the Statute of 32 H. 8. 36. it seems to be the better opinion, that
tenant in tail by a fine might have barred his heir, Dyer 32. 28. and 29 H. 8.
albeit the reversion were in the King; because the Law always disfavours
restraint of alienation in prejudice of trade and traffic. Vide supra. 5.

199 Honor and Order.
Tenant by Courtesy.
1 A man shall be tenant by the Courtesy of an house, Co. Inst. pars 1. 30. b. 2.
that is Caput Baroniae, or Comitatus, because so it may be still preserved
entire; but it appears by 4 H. 3. that a woman shall not be endowed thereof,
because in such case it should be severed, which the Law will not permit, for
that the Law respects Honor and Order. Vide Title Dower 180.

Villein.
2 Amongst the cases where the Villein shall be privileged from the seizure of
the Lord, albeit he be not absolutely enfranchised, Co. ibid. 137. b. 3.
this is one, viz. Ratione dignitatis, as if the Villein be made a Knight, the
Lord cannot seize him. Vide Britton 79.

Challenge.
3 A Peer of the Realm, Co. ibid. 156. b. 3.
or Lord of Parliament (as a Baron, Viscount, Earl, Marquess, or Duke) in
respect of Honor and Nobility are not to be sworn on Iuries, and if neither
party will challenge him, he may challenge himself; for by Magna Carta it is
provided, Quod nec super eum ibimus, nec super eum mittemus, nisi per legale
judicium parium suorum, aut per legem terrae: Now in reference to Honor and
Order the Common Law has divided all the Subjects into Lords of Parliament,
and into the Commons of the Realm: The Peers of the Realm are divided into
Barons, Viscounts, Earls, Marquesses, and Dukes; And the Commons are divided
into Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, Citizens, Yeomen, and Burgesses; and in
judgment of Law, any of the said degrees of Nobility are Peers to another: As
if an Earl, Marquess, or Duke be to be tried for Treason or Felony, a Baron, or
any other degree of Nobility is his Peer: In like manner a Knight, Esquire,
etc. shall be tried per pares, and that is by any of the Commons, as Gentlemen,
Citizens, Yeomen, or Burgesses, so as when any of the Commons is to have a
trial, either at the Kings suit, or between party and party, in such case a
Peer of the Realm shall not be impannelled.

Co. ibid. 165. a. 3.
4 Concerning Inheritances of Honor and Dignity there is an ancient Book-case in
23 H. 3. Tit. Partition 18. in these words; Note, Noble women Coparceners.
if the Earldom of Chester descend to Coparceners, it shall be divided between
them, as well as other lands, and the eldest shall not have this Seigniory and
Earldom entire to her self; Quod Nota, adjudged per totam Curiam. By this it
appears, that the Earldom ( viz. the possessions of the Earldom) shall be
divided, and that where there be more daughters than one, the eldest shall not
have the dignity and power of the Earl, that is, to be a Countess; but in such
case the King, who is the Sovereign of Honor and Dignity, may for the
uncertainty conferr the Dignity upon which of the daughters he please: And this
has been the usage since the Conquest, as is said ( Vide 3 H. 3. tit.
Prescription.) Howbeit if an Earl, that has his dignity to him and his heirs,
dies, having issue one daughter, the dignity shall descend to the daughter and
her posterity; for there is no incertainty: And this appears by many
presidents, and by a late Judgment given in Sampson Leonards case, who married
with Margaret, the only sister and heir of Gregory Fines Lord Dacre of the
South, and in the case of William Lord Ros. Howbeit, there is a difference
between a dignity or name of Nobility, and an office of Honor: for if a man
hold a Manor of the King to be Constable of England, and die, having issue two
daughters, and the eldest daughter takes husband, he shall execute the office
solely, and before Marriage it shall be exercised by some sufficient Deputy, and
all this was resolved by all the Judges of England in the Duke of Buckinghams
case, 11 Eliz. Dyer 285. But the Dignity of the Crown of England was (without
all question) descendible to the Eldest daughter alone, and to her posterity;
and so it has been (25 H. 8. cap. 22.) declared by Act of Parliament: for
Regnum non est divisibile, and so likewise was the descent of Troy, as appears
by Virg. Aeneid. 1. Praeterea Sceptrum Ilione, quod gesserat olim
Maxima natarum Priami --


Co. l. 1. 24. b. 4. in Porters case.
5 Judges in their resolutions ought to have a special care, Go^d uses.
that the honor of the Law be not prejudiced nor any way blemished: And
therefore in Porters case in the 1. Rep. one of the reasons, why good and
charitable uses ought not to be expounded to be within the Statute of 23 H. 8.
cap. 10. was, because it would be dishonorable to the Law of the Land to make
such good uses void, and to restrain well-minded people to give lands to good
and charitable uses; And if that or any other Statute should be made directly
against the Law of God, Doct. and Stud. lib. 1. cap. 6.
as if it should be ordanied, that none should give Alms to any, in what
necessity soever they were, or the like, the Judges (in point of Honor to the
Law) ought to adjudge such a Statute void.

Libel.
6 In a settled state of Government, if an injury be offered, Co. l. 4. 125. b.
1. In the c^ses of Libels
the party grieved ought not to revenge himself by the odious Course of
libelling, or otherwise; but ought to make complaint thereof to the Magistrate
in an ordinary Course of Law.

Kings grant.
7 It has been always the gravity of the ancient Sages of the Law to construe
the Kings grants beneficially for his Honor, Co. l 6 6. a. Sir John Molins
case, and Co. l. 9. 131. a. in Bewleys case.
and the relief of the Subject, and not to make any strict or literal
construction in subversion thereof: And therefore E. 3. being Lord, an Abbot
Mesne, and the Tenant attainted of Treason, the King grants to I. M. to be held
of us, and other chief Lords of the fee, by the services, etc. In this case the
Mesnalty was adjudged to be revived; for that the words were sufficient to
create a tenure in the Mesne, as it was before the Treason; because that seemed
to be the Kings intention, and was also consonant to equity, viz. that the
Mesne who offended not, should not lose his services; And therefore in such
case the grant shall be taken beneficially for the Honor of the King, and for
the relief of the Mesne; neither yet can the words Tenendum, etc. have any
other reasonable construction.

Arrest of Peers.
8 The person of one, who is in Law a Countess by marriage, Co. l. 6. 52. b 3.
The Countess of Rutl. case.
or by descent, is not to be arrested for debt or tre^pass; for albeit (in
respect of her sex) she cannot sit in Parliament, yet is she a Peer of the
realm, and shall be tried by her Peers, as appears by the Statute of 20 H. 6.
9. which was but a declaration of the Common Law: And there are two reasons why
her person shall not be arrested in such cases: the one, in respect of her
dignity; and the other in respect that the Law presumes, that she has
sufficient lands and tenements, in which she may be distrained: There is the
same reason for a Lord, that is a Peer of Parliament.

Oath of Allegiance.
9 To preserve the Kings Honor and Safety, Co. l. 7. 6. b. 3 in Calvin's case.
and good order in the Government of the Commonwealth, the Oath of Allegiance
was invented and enjoined (as it is said in Lamb. 135, 136.) by King Arthur to
be taken in Folkmotes, now called Turns and Leets: Hujus legis authoritate
expulit Arthurus Rex Saracenos et inimicos a Regno, etc. Et hujus legis
authoritate Etheldredus Rex uno et eodem die per universum regnum Danos occidit.

Homage. fealty.
10 Homage and Fealty, Co. l. 10. 108. b. 2. in Humfry Lofields case.
were at first ordained for the preservation of order in the Common wealth, and
being servicces of fidelity do require multiplication; And therefore if a man
seized of two acres, the one, at the Common Law, and the other in Borough
English, and make a gift in tail of both, and the donee having issue two sons
dies, both the sons shall make fealty; There is the same Law also of Homage,
whether it be reserved by the party or created by the Law: so likewise if the
donor die having two sons, both the s os shall have homage and fealty.

King.
11 In a writ de Cautione admittenda these words, F.N.B. 66. a.
De gratia nostra speciali, are not words of necessity, but of form only. for
the Honor of the King; for he ought of right to make restitution of the goods
of the Clerk, before seized by the Sheriff.

Fines in Courts.
12 For the better preserving of order in the Commonwealth, Co. l. 8 38 b. 3. in
Grieslyes case.
if any contempt or disturbance be committed in any Court of record, the Law
gives the Judge or Judges thereof power to impose upon the offenders a
reasonable fine; And this holds not only for the Superior Courts at Westminster. but
likewise for all inferior Courts, which are of Record; And therefore in a Leet
(being a Court of Record, and the Steward Judge there) if any contempt or
disturbance to the Court be committed before the Steward there, he may impose a
reasonable fine upon the offenders; as if the Bailiff there refuse to execute
his office, the Steward may assess upon him a reasonable fine; and with this
agrees 7 H. 6. 12. b. So if a Tithingman refuse to make presentment in a Leet,
the Steward may impose a reasonable fine upon him, as it was held 10 H. 6. fo.
7. Also if one of the Jury in a Leet depart without giving up his verdict, he
shall be fined by the Steward, as appears in the book of Entries, fol. 149. Et
sic de similibus.

Dyer 107. b. 27.
13 When a Peer of the Realm is party to a suit, Challenge.
there ought to be one Knight at least impannelled of the Jury, otherwise it is
a good Challenge for the Peer.

200 Public quiet.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 5. a. 3.
1 No Subject can build a Castle or house of strength imbattelled, Fortresses.
etc. or other fortress defensible, without the Kings license, for the danger
which might ensue in disturbance of the peace and quiet of the Realm, if every
one at his pleasure might do the like.

Co. ibid. 72. a. 4.
2 Albeit Escuage uncertain was due by tenure, Escuage.
yet because the assesment concerned so many and so great a number of the
Subjects of the Realm, lest it might disturb the public quiet thereof, it
could not be assessed by the King, or any other, but by the Parliament only.

Co. ibid. 130. b. 3.
3 Britton treating of an Essoin beyond the Grecian Sea (amongst other things)
says thus, None shall go beyond sea.
Null grand Seignior ne Chivalier de nostre Realm ne doit prender chemin sans
nostre conge, car issint poet le realm remainer disgarny de fort gente, because
if many others should do the like, and by that means the Realm be left
unfurnished of able and powerful men to serve the King, that might tend much
to the disturbance of the public quiet thereof. Vide supra 198, 35. and infra
16. and Max. 78. 27. and Dyer 128. pl. 61.

Co. ibid. 246. a. 1.
4 Regularly, Infant.
no lachess shall be adjudged in an Infant within the age of 21 years; yet the
Public Repose of the Realm, concerning men's freeholds and inheritances, shall
be preferred before the privilege of Infancy, in case of a fine, when the five
years begin in the time of the Ancestor. Vide Pl. Co. 372.

Co. ibid. 328. a. 3.
5 The disseisee, Release. Feofment.
or any other that has a right only by his release or confirmation, cannot
make any discontinuance, because nothing can pass thereby, but that which may
lawfully pass: But otherwise it is of a feoffment, in respect of the livery of
seisin, for that it is the most solemn and common assurance in the Country, and
to be maintained for the Common quiet and repose of the Commonwealth.

Co. ibid. 361. b 3. Co. l. 1. 106. a. 4. in Shelley. case.
6 If a judgment be given against a tenant in tail upon a faint or false
action, and tenant in tail die before execution, Common recovery.
no execution can be sued against the issue in tail: But if in a Common
Recovery judgment be had against tenant in tail, where he voucheth, and has
judgment to recover over in value, albeit the tenant in tail dies before
execution, yet the Recoveror shall execute the judgment against the issue in
tail, not only in respect of the intended recompense, but likewise for that it
being the Common assurance of the Realm, is much favored in Law for the
public quiet and repose of the Commonwealth.

Co. ibid. 161. a. 3.
7 Incloser is adjudged in Law a disseisin of the rent, Incloser.
because the Lord cannot justify to break open the gates, or break down the
Enclosures to take a distress, for that would be in disturbance of the public
peace and quiet of the Commonwealth.

Exchequer Seal.
8 The Judges in general cases have great respect and consideration, Co l. 2.
17. a. 1. Lanes case.
that their judgment may not impeach or prejudice a multitude of people
against ancient and common approbation; and therefore in Lanes case in the 2
Rep. a lease under the Exchequer seal was adjudged good, albeit by the Common
law no grant of any land by the King is available or pleadable, but under the
Great Seal, yet the ancient usage of that Court makes such leases to be good
and available in in Law; For if such leases should not be good, great mischief
would ensue thereupon, because an infinite number of leases and grants under
the Exchequer Seal would be said to be void, and as great a number of grants of
reversions expectant upon such leases would be void also, for if the King grant
a reversion, where he has a possession, his grant is void: And therefore, lest
their judgment in that case might disturb the public repose of the
Commonwealth, leases under the Exchequer Seal were adjudged good and available
in Law, as aforesaid, etc.

Common assurances.
9 In Common Recoveries, Co. l. 2. 75. a. 3. in the Lo. Cromwels case.
and other common assurances it would be a thing too perilous to make any
construction against the general allowance thereof, for thereupon would arise
infinite contentions, quarrels and suits, which would be inconvenient, and
stir up trouble and disquiet in the Commonwealth, whereas the end of the Law
is to settle and establish repose and tranquillity betwixt man and man
concerning their possessions.

Imprisonment
10 The body of the defendant was not liable to the execution for debt at the
Common Law, Vide 13 H. 4. 1. Co. l. 3. 12. a. 3. in Sir William Harberts case.
But the Common Law, which is the preserver of the Common peace of the land,
abhors all force as the Capital enemy thereof; And therefore against such as
commit any force, the Common Law subjects their bodies to Imprisonment, (which
is the highest execution, and whereby he loses his liberty) until he has
agreed with the party, and made fine to the King.

False News.
11 The Statutes of Westminster. 1. cap. 33. and of 2 R. 2. cap. 5. which prohibit
false and scandalous news, Co. l. 4. 13. Actions of Slander.
whereby debate might arise between the Lords and Commons in disturbance of the
peace and quiet of the Commonwealth, seem to be but declarations of the Common
Law; for (doubtless) that offense was punishable at the Common Law before the
making of those Statutes, because it was prejudicial to the peace and repose of
the Commonwealth, and might be a cause to raise Sedition in the Realm; As the
Poets describes it. Ac veluti magno in populo cum saepe coorta est
Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile vulgus,
Jamque faces and saxa volant, furor arma ministrat.
In which tumults another Poet says, Non novit medium rustica progenies.

Murder. Constable.
12 If upon an Affray made, Co. l. 4. 40. b. 4. in Yongs case, and Co. l. 9 66.
a. 4. and 68. a. 4. in Mackallyes case.
the Constable and others in his assistance come to suppress the Affray, and to
keep the peace, and in doing their office the Constable or any of his
assistants are slain, this is murder in Law, albeit the Murderer did not know
the party that was slain, and although the affray was sudden; because the
Constable and his assistants come by authority of Law to keep the peace, and to
prevent the danger that might ensue by the breach thereof; and therefore the
Law adjudgeth it Murder, and that the Murderer had malice prepense, because he
opposed himself against the justice and public repos^ of the Commonwealth: So
if a Sheriff or any of his Bailiffs or other Officers be slain in the execution
of a process of Law, Co. l. 5. 71. b. in Saint-Iohns case.
or in doing their office, it is Murder: Guns.
There is the same Law also of a Watchman, that is slain in doing his office:
Upon the same reason it is, that the generalty of the Statute of the 33 H. 8.
6. prohibits not Sheriffs and their officers to carry about them (in execution
of Justice, and in order to the peace and quiet of the Realm) the weapons
therein forbidden.

Co. l. 5. 91. b. 1 in Swaynes case.
13 In order to the general peace and quiet of the Commonwealth every man's house
is to him as his Castle and Fortress, A man's house his Castle.
as well for defense against injury and violence, as for his repose, And albeit
the life of a man is a precious thing, and much favored in the eye of the Law,
so as albeit one man kill another in his own defense, or per infortuniam,
without any intent, yet the Law adjudgeth that felony, and thereby he shall
forfeit all his goods and chattels, for the great regard that the Law has to
the life of a man: Howbeit, if Thieves assault a man's house to robb or murder
him, and the owner or his servants kill any of the Thieves in defense of
himself and his house, this is not felony, neither shall he lose any thing
thereby; And with this agrees 3 E. 3. Tit. Corone 303. and 305. and 26 Ass. pl.
23. So likewise it is held in 21 H. 7. 39. that a man may justify to assemble
his friends and neighbors to defend his house against violence, but not to go
with him to the Market or elsewhere to guard himself from violence: And all
this to establish quiet and tranquillity in the Commonwealth.

Co. l. 5. 125. a. 2. in the cases of Libels
14 Every Libell (which is called famosus Libellus, Libels.
seu infamatoria scriptura) is made either against a private man, or against a
Magistrate, or public person: if it be made against a private person, it
deserves a severe punishment, for albeit the Libel be only made against one,
yet it invites all of the same family, kindred, or society to revenge, and so
tends (by consequence) to quarrels and disturbance of the peace and quiet of
the Commonwealth, and may be the cause of effusion of blood, and of great
inconvenience: If it be against a Magistrate or other public person, that is
yet a greater offense, for this concerns not only the breach of the peace, but
the scandal of Government; because what greater scandal can there be to
Government, than to have corrupt and wicked Magistrates to be substituted by
the King to govern his Subjects under him? Neither can there be greater
imputation to the State, than to permit such corrupt men to sit in the sacred
seat of Justice, and to have any meddling in or concerning the administration of
Justice, which conceit being fixed in the minds of the people, may be a cause of
tumults and sedition, to the great disturbance of the quiet and repose of the
Commonwealth.

F N.B. 81. d.
15 Albeit Justices of Peace have not express authority given them by their
Commission to take recognizance for the keeping of the peace, yet the Law gives
them thereby that power ex congruo, in order to the public quiet of the
Commonwealth, for that they are thereby Constituted to be Conservatores Pacis,
and empowered to cause men to keep the peace, and to hear and determine offenses
committed against the peace and quiet of the Realm: The Common Law gives also
power to the Sheriff (either upon a writ of Supplicavit, or without such a
writ) to take a Recognizance for the keeping of the peace, because he also is
Conservator Pacis, and to that end and purpose has the guard and custody of
the County committed to him for the time that he continues Sheriff, as appears
by the words of his Commission and Patent; Rex, etc. Commissimus vobis
Custodiam, etc. And what the Justices or he do in that behalf, is matter of
Record, and so ought to be deemed, for that it concerns the Public peace and
tranquillity of the Commonwealth.

A man may go beyond sea
16 By the Common Law any man may go out of the Realm to employ himself as a
Merchant, or to undertake a pilgrimage, F.N.B. 85. a.
or for any other cause at his pleasure, without demanding license of the King,
neither shall he incurr any punishment for so doing: Howbeit, because every man
in right is bound to defend the King and his realm, and to preserve the
public repose and tranquillity of the Commonwealth from foreign invasions from
abroad, and intestine sedition and insurrection at home, the King may at his
pleasure command by his writ De securitate invenienda, quod se non divertat ad
parts exteras sine licentia Regis, under the Great Seal, Privy Seal, or
Signet, that he shall not go beyond sea without the Kings license; And if he
do, he shall be fined for disobeying the Kings command. Vide 3.

Uses.
17 In case of a Feoffment or other conveyance, Co. Inst. pars 1. 237. a. 2.
whereby the feoffee or grantee, etc. is in by the Common Law, a Proviso for a
power of Revocation is merely repugnant and void; but in a voluntary
conveyance, which passes by raising of Uses, being executed by the Statute of
27 H. 8. 10. and now become very frequent, by such a Proviso it is lawful for
the Covenantor at any time during his life to revoke any of the said Uses, etc.
And these revocations are always favorably interpreted, because now to
interrupt that Course would disturb the Public quiet of the Realm, many men's
Inheritances depending thereupon.

Warranty collateral.
18 In 50 E. 3. ( Rot. Parl. 77.) it was attempted in Parliament to have a
Statute made, Co. ibid. 373. b. 1.
that no man should be barred by a warranty collateral, but where Assets
descend from the same Ancestor; but it could never take effect, because it
would weaken common assurances, and (by consequence) disturb the peace and
quiet of the Commonwealth.

Remainders.
19 For as much as in coveyances, Co. Inst. pars 1. 299. a. 2.
limitations of Remainders are usual and common assurances, it is dangerous by
conceits and nice distinctions to bring them in question (as has of late time
been attempted) lest thereby the quiet repose of the Commonwealth may be
interrupted.

Descent to toll Entry.
20 The Statute of the 32 Hen. 8. 33. (concerning descents to toll entries)
shall be understood of a descent upon any disseisin, Dyer 219. 7. 5. Eliz.
albeit the words are of entries with strength: And this large interpretation
of the words is given for the better preservation of the pea^e and quiet of the
Country: By the Opinion of all the Justices.

Descent of the Royal line.
21 In the Star Chamber the Countess of Shrewsbury was fined 1000 l. and
committed to the Tower; Hob. 235.
for that being called to the Council Table, and Interrogated what she knew, or
had heard, or thought of a supposed child, which was rumored that the Lady
Arrabella should have had, she refused obstinately to make any answer: because
it was judged, that this was a question of State, and proper for the Council
Table to take cognizance of; for there is not one thing that does more concern
the peace and quiet of a kingdom, than the certainty of the Royal line, etc.

201 Conventio seu beneficium privatorum non potest publico juri derogare. Vide
supra 198, 29.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 166. a. 4. Littl.. 244
1 No private contract or agreement, Partition.
which varies from the ordinary course of Law, and sounds in prejudice of the
Commonwealth or Common right, shall be deemed good in Law; as if a Castle that
is used for the necessary defense of the Realm descend to two or more
Coparceners, and they by agreement choose certain of their friends to make
partition between them, who make partition of the Rooms and Chambers of the
Castle, assigning some to one, and some to another, etc. this Partition is
void, because a Castle, which is to be kept entire pro bono publico, and for
the safeguard of the Commonwealth, will not admit of any such division; albeit
such a partition of other lands that are partable, had been good in Law, and
binding to the Coparceners after election of their several Parts: Co. ibid. 31.
b. 3.
Dower.
Neither shall such a Castle be assigned for Dower, albeit the parties consent
thereunto, because the public shall be preferred before the private.

Co. l. 7. 23. a. 3. Buts case.
2 A. seized of black acre in fee, Rent out of a lease for years.
and also possessed of white acre for years, grants a rent charge out of both
to B. for his life, with Clause of Distress, etc. In this case, the estate of
the rent, being a Franktenement (according to the purport of the deed) cannot
issue out of the term for years, but out of the land only, which the grantor
had in fee-simple, because the Franktenement of the rent cannot issue out of a
Chattel, and the entire rent cannot be Franktenement out of black acre, and a
chattel out of white acre, and to make two rents, when one only is granted,
would be injurious; Neither yet can the contract and mutual agreement of the
parties charge such a thing with a rent, which is not chargeable by Law, as out
of an Hundred, or Advowson, 30 Ass. Pl. 5. or out of a Fair, 14 E. 3. Scire
facias 122. The Earl of Kents case: Neither can a rent be granted or reserved
of any estate of Franktenement out of any other Franktenement, which is not
mainourable, either in possession, reversion, or by possibility, but is only
haereditamentum incorporeum; for Pacta privata non derogant juri communi; And
in an Assise they cannot be put in view, neither can any distress be taken in
them; And in the case above, albeit white acre be haereditamentum corporeum and
mainourable, yet in respect of the exility and incapacity of the interest which
the grantor has in it, that rent of Franktenement cannot issue out of it, but
out of the land in fee simple: And in that case also, in an Assise brought for
the rent, the land in fee shall be only put in view: And if the Grantee should
accept a lease or grant of white acre, that will not suspend his rent.

Co. l. 9. 128. a. 4. in Sondayes case.
3. Term. Hill. 8. Iac. it was resolved by the two Chief Justices, Recovery.
Title.
the Chief Baron, and the Court of Wards, that no condition or limitation, be
it by act execute, or limitation and use, or by devise in a last will, can bar
tenant in tail to alien by a Common recovery, for the causes and reasons
reported at large in Sir Anthony Mildmayes case in the 6. Report.

Co. l. 9. 141. b 3. in Beaumonts case.
4 If there be Lord and tenant of a Carue of land, Confirmation
and the tenant has issue, and is attainted of felony, and the King pardons
him, and after the Lord confirms the estate of the tenant, and the tenant dies;
In this case the Lord shall have the land against his own confirmation, for the
confirmation cannot add to the estate of the tenant a descendible quality to
him, who was disabled to take the land by descent; For Pacta privata juri
publico derogare non possunt.

The like.
5 Baron and feme being tenants in special tail, Co. ibid. 138. b. and 141. b 4.
the remainder to the heirs of the Baron, the Baron levies a fine to E. 6. who
grants to the Earl of Hunt. in fee, the Baron dies, and the Feme enters, and
the E. of H. confirms her estate, Habendum to her and the heirs of the body of
the Baron, then the Feme dies having issue a son; In this case, the
confirmation is void, for it cannot add a descendible quality to the issue in
tail, who was disabled by the fine to take by descent; Again, if that
confirmation should add to the estate of the feme a descendible quality, it
would in effect (as to that point) repeal no less than two Acts of Parliament,
viz. 4 H. 7. 24. and 32 H. 8. 36. by which the estate in tail is barred as to
the issues, and the issues are disabled to claim the Land by force of the said
estate tail. Sed Pacta privata, etc.

Common Recovery.
6 Tenant in tail cannot be prohibited by any condition or limitation to bar
the issues in tail, as also the reversions or remainders, Co. l. 10. 38. b. 1.
and 4. Mary Portingtons case.
by suffering a Common Recovery; much less can he be prohibited to prevent by
any such condition or limitation a going about, conclusion, or agreement to
suffer such a recovery; for to suffer such a recovery to the purposes
aforesaid, is an incident so inseparably annexed to an estate tail, that it
cannot possibly be prohibited by any such condition, limitation, or other
agreement whatsover between the Parties, Conventio privatorum non potest, etc.
So likewise Dower or tenancy by the Courtesy cannot be restrained by condition,
because they are annexed to the estate tail by Law, no more than a tenant by
the Courtesy or tenant in tail after possibility can be by condition made
punishable for waste: Also things ordained by Statute, cannot be restrained by
condition, etc. as that the tenant in tail shall make no leases, according to
the Statute of 32 H. 8. 28. or levy a fine, according to the Statutes of 4 H.
7. 24. and 32 H. 8. 36. to bar the issues; for none of these, which are
incident to his estate by Act of Parliament, can be restrained by condition or
limitation.

Auditors of the Wards.
7 The King himself cannot do any thing against an Act of Parliament, when the
subject has also an interest in it: Co. l. 11. 3. b. 4 in Auditor Curles case.
And therefore albeit the words of the grant to the two persons ordained by the
Statute of 32 H. 8. 46. to be Auditors of the Court of Wards, be conjunctim and
divisim, et alterius eorum diutius viventis, yet that being an office of trust,
there shall be no survivor thereof; for that it being enacted by that Statute,
that there should be two persons, etc. which should have a judicial voice, the
King cannot constitute one only; for the Subject by the Act has interest
therein: Et securius expediuntur negotia commissa pluribus; Howbeit, the King
may constitute one at one time by one patent, and another at another time by
another patent; And albeit he may so do, yet he who is first constituted, has
not any judicial voice, until the other be constituted also, for it is provided
by the Statute, that two persons, etc. shall be one officer; and therefore
these words, Conjunctim et divisim, et alterius eorum diutius viventis, serve
only to this purpose, that (...) survivor shall be one of the persons, unto
whom the other shall be (...).

A fraudulent grant.
8 The Master and Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford having an intent to
grant a Message in London to Benedict Spinola and his heirs (because they were
prohibited by the Statute of 13 Eliz. 10. Co. l. 11. 73 b. 1. in Magdalen
College case.
to grant it immediately to him) made a grant thereof first to the Queen and
her successors, upon condition (contained in the same grant) that the Queen
within 3. months should grant the said Message to Spinola and his heirs;
whereby it was endeavored, that the Queen, who was the fountain of Justice,
should be an Instrument of Injury and tort, and of the violation of a pious and
excellent Law, which she her self (for the maintenance of Religion, the
advancement of Liberal Arts and Sciences, the sustenance of poor people, and
other public uses) had made: And whereas the said Master and Fellows were
seized of the said Message to them and their successors for ever in jure
Collegii pro bono publico, and to pious and charitable uses, thereby it should
be converted to the private use of Spinola and his heirs for ever: And so (as
the Statute of Carlisle has it in 35 E. 1. Quod olim in usus pios ad divini
cultus augmentum, and caetera opera pietatis charitative fuit erogatum, nunc in
sensum reprobum est conversum; which also the Poet well reprehends, -- fuit
haec sapientia quondam,
Publica privatis secernere, sacra profanis.


Co. l. 11. 87. a. 2. in the case of Monopolie^.
9 The Monopoly of the sole making and importing playing Cards was damned,
Monopolies.
because albeit it was pretended by the preamble of the Patent to be for the
good of the Commonwealth (which was indeed the Queens intent when she granted
it) yet it was apparent to be very prejudicial thereunto, and merely intended
to be employed for the private benefit of the Patentee, the Queen being thereby
deceived in her grant, and the Commonwealth more abused than before.

Dyer 60. a. 21. 36 H. 8.
10 A Member of Parliament is free from arrests of his person, A Member of
Parliament.
because the King and all his Realm having an interest in his person for the
dispatch of the public affairs of the Commonwealth, it is reason that the
private commodity of any particular man should not in such case be regarded, and
the rather, for that such arrest is no discharge of an excution, but that after
the Parliament he may be taken again thereupon.

202 Minime mutanda sunt, quae certam habuerunt interpretationem. Vide Max.
201. per tout.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 364. b. 4. Co. ib^d. 186. a. 1.
1 Littleton at the beginning of the Chapter of Warranty, Communis opinio.
intending to distinguish warranty into the three several kinds thereof,
Lineal, Collateral, and that which begins by disseisin, the better to confirm
that distribution, says, that it is Commonly said there are 3. such kinds of
warranty; whereby it may be observed, that Communis opinio is of Authority, and
stands with the Rule of Law, A Communi observantia non est recedendum. Vide
Max. 204. 1.

Co. ibid. 383. b. Littl.. 733.
2 The word warrantizabimus does only create a warranty, Warrantizabimus.
for so has that word of Art been always interpreted; Neither ought there to
be any other word (though it may signify the same thing in substance) used for
warranty; And therefore neither Acquietabimus, or Defendemus, or any other word
of the like signification will do it: The reason why the Law has rather fixed
upon that word (though barbarous) than any other, seems to be, (...) ^void
uncertainty, and critical cavils and disputes about the significa^^on of words:
And as Ego and haeredes mei warrantizabimus, etc. creates a warranty in Latin,
so I and my heirs shall warrant, in English, creates a warranty also.

Co. l. 6. 43. ^. 4. in Sir Anth. Mildmayes case.
3 It was the intent of the Statute of 27 H. 8. 10. Uses.
(as appears by the preamble, to restore the ancient Common Law, and to
extirpate and extinguish all subtle inventions, imaginations, and practices of
Uses, which had introduced many mischiefs and inconveniences, mentioned in the
same preamble: And this was very good and necessary for the Commonwealth; for
the Common Law has Rules to direct the estates and, inheritances of lands,
which are certain and infallible; And therefore it is (without comparison)
better and much more safe to have estates and inheritances directed by those
certain Rules of the Common Law (which has been an ancient, true, and
faithful servant to this Commonwealth) than by the uncertain imagination and
conjecture of any of these new inventors of Uses, without any approved ground
of Law or Reason.

Primet seisin.
4 Tenant in Chief, having issue a son, Co. l 6. 77. a. 3. in Sir Geo. Carsons
case.
covenants to stand seized to the use of his niece; the son dies; In this case,
the King shall not have primer seisin: And two of the chiefest reasons which
induced that resolution was, because the experience of the Court of Wards had
been always so; and for that a great number of the subjects, which were in
peace, would be vexed and molested, if the Common received opinion should be
changed.

The old Laws best.
5 Interroga Pristinam generationem, Co. l. 7. pars 1. 3. b. 3. in Calvin's case.
and investiga patrum memoriam (Job 8.8.) Hesterni enim sumus, and vita nostra
sicut umbra supra terram. We are but of yesterday, and therefore had need of
the wisdom of those that were before us, and had been ignorant, if we had not
received light and knowledge from our forefathers; Our days also upon earth
are but as a shadow, in respect of the old and ancient days past, wherein the
Laws have been by the wisdom of the most excellent men (in many successions of
ages) by long and continual experience (the trial of right and truth) fined and
refined, which no one man (being of so short a time) albeit he should have in
his head the wisdom of all the men in the world, in any one age, could ever
have effected or attained unto: And therefore it is optima regula, qua nulla
est verior et firmior in Jure, Neminem oportet esse sapientiorem legibus, No
man ought to take upon him to be wiser than the Laws, which have been received
and approved by men of the greatest wisdom in all former ages.

Acts of Parliament.
6 Albeit an Act of Parliament be thus expressed, Co l. 8. 20. b. 3. in the
Princes case.
Dominus Rex statuit, etc. (as there are many so penned, Vide 7 H. 7. 14. and
39 E. 3. 12.) yet if they be entered in the Parliament Roll, and always allowed
for Acts of Parliament, it shall be intended, that they were by authority of
Parliament, although no mention be therein made of Lords or Commons.

Writs not to be changed.
7 Writs formed and of course, viz. Originals, Co. l. 8 48. a. 4. in Iehu Webos
case.
were at first authorized by Parliament, and without Parliament they cannot be
altered or changed, but shall still remain the same; albeit they may in some
cases seem incongruous: as the original writ De Assisa ultimae praesentationis
was formed in these words, Quis Advocatus tempore pacis praesentavit ultimam
personam, quae mortua est: This form shall hold, and cannot be changed, albeit
the Incumbent resigned, as appears in 18 E. 2. Tit. Ass. de dar. pres. 20. and
F. N. B. 31. h. So likewise the writ of Warrantia Cartae is formed thus: Quod
just, etc. warrantizet B. unum Messuagium in D. etc. unde cartam habet, etc.
And yet if he be held to warranty by force of an exchange, or by Homage
ancestrel, the form of the writ shall not be altered. Vide 9 E. 4. 49. 21 H. 6,
^. and F. N. B. 134. and many other cases may be put upon this ground.

Arbitrament.
8 A. being bound to stand to the award of B. countermands the authority of the
arbitrator; In this case, the bond is forfeit; Co. l. 8. 82. b. 4. in Vinyors
case.
because the Condition is, that A. the obligor should stand to and abide, etc.
the rule, order, etc. which form was invented by prudent antiquity, to the end
he should not revoke the submission; And it is good always to pursue (in such
cases) the ancient forms and presidents, which are full of knowledge and wisdom.

Co. l. 9. 11. b. 3. in Dowmans case.
9 The defendant in an Assise makes title by a recovery suffered by A. to
certain uses, the plaintiff confesses the recovery, Declaration subsequent.
but withal says it was to the use of A. and his heirs in fee, and
traverseth, that it was to the uses mentioned by the defendant: The Jury find
that the recovery was suffered, as the defendant had alleged, and that by
Indenture subsequent, the intent of the parties to the recovery was declared to
be, as the defendant had alleged: In this case, such subsequent declaration was
adjudged good; for that no mischief or inconvenience could ensue upon that
construction, and if it should be otherwise construed, great inconvenience
might follow thereupon; because the inheritances of many Subjects in England
depend upon such declarations subsequent, or (at least) upon Indentures, which
(in truth) were delivered after the recoveries suffered, or the Fines levied;
and this resolution concurrs with the common opinion of men learned in the Law,
and Common experience, and alterations of such opinions, as concern assurances
of inheritances, would prove dangerous, and be of ill consequence in the
Commonwealth.

Co. l. 10. 40. a. 3. in Mary P rtingtons case.
10 At this day to question the validity of a Common recovery to bar an estate
tail (albeit the land recovered in value be not had, Common Recovery.
or the tenant in tail after judgment and before execution die) is as great an
absurdity, as to deny Common and known Principles; and if any should be so
impudent, as to dispute against that or any other of the legal Pillars of the
Common assurances of the lands and inheritances of the Subjects, he ought not
to be heard; And therefore in a cause depending before the Lords (at a
Parliament in Qu. Eliz. time) One Hoord an Vtter-barrister (of Council with one
Vernon, who was barred by a Common Recovery) rashly and with great malevolence
inveighing against Common Recoveries (not knowing the reason and foundation of
them) was with great gravity and some acrimony reproved by Sir James Dyer, then
Chief Justice of the Common pleas, who said, that he was not worthy to be of
the profession of the Law, that durst speak against Common Recoveries, which
were the very sinews of the assurances of Inheritances, and founded upon great
reason and authority: Semper in fictione Iuris subsistit aequitas, Et contra
principia negantem non est disputandum.

Co. l. 11. 35 a. 3. Alexander Powlters case.
11 In Alexander Powlters case in the 11 Rep. it being doubted (upon the penning
of the several Statutes of 23 H. 8. 1. 25 H. 8. 3. 1 E. 6. 12. 5, and 6 E. 6.
10. and 4, and 5. P. and M. 4.) whether or no one guilty of House-burning
should be allowed his Clergy; House-burning.
The Judges had conference with diverse Clerks of Assise, and other ancient
Clerks, to the end they might be satisfied of the usual course therein; And for
that (upon view of many Records) it appeared, that the Principals and
Accessories (before) had been always outed of their Clergy in case of
House-burning (except one in Essex before Sir John Puckering and his Companion,
Justices there) the said Powlter had judgment to be hanged for setting an
house in Newmarket on fire, whereby most of the Town was burnt, and therefore
was ordered to be hanged in Chains, etc.

Co. l. 11. 83. a. 2. L^w^s Bowls case.
12 B. covenants to stand seized of the Manor of D. to the use of himself and
his wife for life without impeachment of waste, Waste.
the remainder to his 1. 2. and 3. sons successively in tail, the remainder to
the heirs of the bodies of B. and his wife, with other remainders over; they
have issue a son; then B. dies, the wife enters, the son dies, a piece of a
Barn parcel of the premises is blown down by wind, the wife causes 30 loads
of timber blown down to be carried from off the Manor, for which he in the
remainder brings an action of Trover and Conversion: And upon the argument of
this cause two questions were moved, 1. Whether or no the wife shall be tenant
in tail after possibility, or that she shall have the privilege of tenant in
tail after possibility, viz. to make waste? 2 Admitting she shall not have the
privilege, etc. whether the clause, without impeachment of waste, gives to her
prope^^y in the timber so thrown down by the wind; whereupon it was resolved,
that she had a property in the timber, and might convert it to her own use; for
that (as was said) it was the continual and constant opinion of former times,
that these words, without impeachment of waste, do give power to the lessee to
make waste to his own use, and it would be dangerous now to recede therefrom;
And as it was said by the Judges in 38 E. 3. 1. So the present Judges did say
in this case. We will not change the Law, which has always been used; Also it
is well said in 2 H. 4. 10. It is better that there should be a default or
defect, than that the Law should be changed.

13 Albeit the King has a prerogative above others, F. N. B. 7. b. Finch 84.
that he may sue in what Court he pleases, as to bring a Quare Impedit, or a
writ of Escheat of Lands in London, retornable in the Kings Bench, yet he
cannot change the nature of the writ, otherwise than the Law gives power to him
and others, or has been formerly used.

Assise of Fresh force in London.
14 In an Assise of Fresh force in London before the Mayor and Aldermen, against
Foxley and Agnes his wife, and 11 others, Pl. Co. 90. b. 4.
10 of them appear by Bailiff, and plead, No such woman as Agnes the wife of
Foxley, in rerum natura, and demand judgment of the Plaint, and that it should
be inquired by the Assise, etc. and the others plead the same plea by Attorney:
And it was adjudged, that the Plaint should not abate, but should stand good
against all the rest, save only Agnes: And this resolution was given upon the
advice of Justice Hales to Southcote (then Judge of the Hustings, where the
suit was brought) because (as Hales said) all the books went that way, and not
one the other way: And therefore he advised Southcote to follow the judgments
formerly given.

Trial of accessory.
15 An accessory shall not be arraigned as accessory before all the principals
be attainted, Pl. Co. 99. b.
because it had been always the usual course in such cases so to proceed; and
therefore it seemed the best way to the Court to pursue the same order that the
Sages had formerly used; and the rather, for that he may not be accessory to
one, and yet may be found accessory to another.

Common Rec^very.
16 In the case of a Common Recovery, Co. l. 2. 74. a. 3. in the L. Cromwells
case.
he that enters into the warranty may (if he please) save his rent issuing out
of the land; yet if he enter into the warranty generally, it may be saved by
covenant and agreement in the Indenture made before the recovery, as may be
agreed betwixt them, and this in favor of Common Recoveries, which are the
Common assurance of land, the usual form whereof shall not be altered by any
special matter of Entry, saving his rent or condition, but they ought to be
saved by the Indenture dehors: For Conveiances, which are used for Common
assurances of land shall be expounded and construed according to common
allowance, without prying into them with Eagles eyes; And therefore, Pasch. 35
Eliz. in Dormers case it was adjudged in the Kings bench, that a Common
Recovery may be had of an advowson: So was it also adjudged in the Exchequer in
Sir Will. Pelhams case, that if a Common Recovery be suffered by tenant for
life, it is a forfeiture of his estate, and the reason of both these Judgments
was, because that a Common Rec^very is by usage a Common conveyance, as a fine,
feoffment, etc. And it is said in Trevilians case 514. that in Common
Recoveries the common usage and the intent of the parties are to be respected;
for a Common Recovery had against Baron and Feme shall bar the feme of her
dower, and yet the feme shall not have any recompense in value and therefore in
strictness of reason it is strongly to be maintained, that Common usage and the
intent of the parties make this bar, according to these rules, Non recedendum
est a Communi observantia, and Minime mutanda sunt, quae certam habuerunt
interpret^^onem. And these Rules hold not only in a Common Recovery, but much
strongger in a fine, which is also a Common assurance of land; for in case of a
Recovery the Vouchee may enter into the warranty, saving his action, rent,
condition, etc. and yet (because Common usage has allowed it her^tofore) they
may be better saved by covenant and agreement, as aforesaid; Howbeit, in a fine
no saving can be contained therein, and therefore by necessity (and according
to common usage always allowed) they ought to be saved by the direction and
Rule of a precedent covenant and grant: Upon which ground it was adjudged in 6
E. 2 tit. Estoppel 2. that if a man and his wife enfeoff two by deed, to have
and to hold to them and their heirs, and after the feoffor and his wife levy a
fine sur conusance de droit to them and the heirs of one of them, yet this is
no conclusion, but that both of them may have the fee-simple, as they had it
before.

203 A Communi Observantia non est recedendum.
Littl. 371. Co. Inst. pars 1. 229 b 4. Vide Max. 203. 1.
1 The making of an Indenture in the third person is the most sure way, because
it is most commonly used, whereby it appears, Indentures in the third person.
that the form which is most commonly used in conveyances is the safest,
Magister Rerum usus. It is provided by the Statute of 38 E. 3. 4. that all
Penal bonds in the third person be void and holden for none, wherein some Books
( viz. 40 E. 3. 1. 2 H. 4. 10. 8 E. 4. 5.) seem to differ, but they being
rightly understood, there is no difference at all; for the Statute is to be
intended of Bonds taken in other Courts out of the Realm, and so it appears
by the preamble of that Act; being (indeed) principally intended of the Courts
at Rome, and so it appears by Justice Hankford in 2 H. 4. In which Courts
bonds were taken in the third person: so as such bonds made out of the Realm
are void, but other bonds in the third person are resolved to be good, as well
as Indentures in the third person, by the opinion of the whole Court in 8 E. 4.

Co. ibid. 303. a. 3.
2 The ancient forms of Courts are to be duly observed, Pleading.
as Cum dimisit, or Cum dedit, and not to say that he was seized and demised,
etc. and yet if he say so, it makes not the Count vicious; But in a bar,
replication, or other kind of pleading, the party must allege a seisin in the
Lessor or Donor, and ancient forms of pleading are also to be observed.

Co. l. 1. 24 b. 3. in Porters case.
3 The Statute of 23 H. 8. 10. ordains, that if any grant of land, Charitable
uses.
etc. shall be made in trust, to the use of any Churches, Chapels,
Churchwardens, Guilds, Fraternities, Commonalties, Companies, or Brotherhoods,
etc. all such uses shall be void, they being no corporations, but erected
either of devotion, or else by common consent of the people: yet this Statute
does not make good and charitable uses (not savouring of any superstition) to
be void, as to find a Grammar School, to sustain poor people, or any other such
good use, but only superstitious ^ses; because that Statute has been always
by the Common opinion so taken to be; for almost all the lands belonging to
Towns and Boroughs (not incorporat) to defray the Common Taxes of the Town, or
to repair the Highwayes, or the Church, or for sustenance of the poor of the
parish, or to support other common charges of the parish, are conveyed to
diverse Inhabitants of the parish and their heirs, in trust to employ the
profits thereof to such good uses; and such good uses (albeit prima facie they
seem to be within the letter of that Act) were never made void by that Statute:
and it is a thing dishonorable to the Law of the Land to make good uses void:
And it appears by a case reported by Sergeant Benlowes, that it was held in the
Common pleas in 5 and 6. E. 6. that a feoffment to the use of poor people was
not within that Act of 23 H. 8. 10.

Office.
4 In Alton Woods case in the 1. Rep. Exception was taken to an office virtute
officii returned into the Chancery, for it was said, Co. l. 1. 42. b. in Alton
Woods case.
that it ought to have been returned into the Exchequer, but upon the view of
infinite presidents of offices found before the Escheator virtute officii, and
returned into the Chancery, it was disallowed per totam Curiam.

Perpetuities.
5 In the argument of Corbets case in the 1 Rep. Justice Glanvile said, that
betwixt the making of the Statute of 13 E. 1. de donis, Co l. 1. 87. b. 4.
Corbets case.
etc. and 27 H. 8. such a proviso annexed to the estate tail, viz. that it
shall cease, as if the tenant in tail were dead, was never seen or heard of,
and therefore he concluded, that it could not be done by Law: And so likewise
concludes Littl. fol. 23. in like manner, that if any action might have been
brought upon the Statute of Merton, Disparagement.
cap. 6. De dominis, qui maritaverint, etc. it would be intended, that
sometimes it would have been put in ure; and therefore he concludes, that no
action can be taken upon that Statute, in as much as it was never seen or
heard, that any action was ever brought thereupon.

Elections in Corporations.
6 Where in the Charters of Corporations it is said, Co. l. 4. 77. b. in the
case of Corporations.
that the choice of the Mayor, Bailiffs, Provosts, or the like Magistrates or
Officers, shall be chosen by all the Commonalty or Burgesses, if they have been
chosen (time out of mind) by a certain select number of the principal of the
Commonalty or Burgesses, commonly called the Common Council, or by such like
name, and not in general by all the Commonalty or Burgesses, nor by so many of
them as will come to the election, such ancient and usual elections are good
and well warranted by their Charters, and by the Law also; for in every of
their Charters they have power given them to make Laws, Ordinances, and
Constitutions, for the better government of their Cities, Boroughs, etc. by
force whereof, and to avoid popular confusion, if they (by their common assent)
do constitute and ordain, that the Mayor, Bailifs, or other principal officers
shall be chosen by a certain select number of the principal of the Commonalty
or Burgesses, as aforesaid, and prescribe also how such select number shall be
chosen, such Ordinance and Constitution was resolved (in 40 and 41 Eliz.) to be
good and allowable, and to agree with the Law and their Charters, for avoiding
of Popular discord and confusion: And albeit such an Ordinance or constitution
cannot be now produced, yet it shall be presumed in respect of such a special
manner of ancient and continual election (which cannot begin without common
consent) that at first such an Ordinance or Constitution was made; Such
reverend respect the Law attributes to ancient and continual allowance and
usage, although it begin within time of memory: Mos retinenda est fidelissimae
vetustatis; Quae praeter consuetudinem et morem Maiorum fiunt, neque placent,
neque recta videntur: Et frequentia actus multum operatur. And according to
this Resolution the ancient and continual usages have been in London, Norwich,
and other ancient Cities and Corporations, and God defend, that they should be
innovated or altered; for many and great inconveniences may arise thereupon,
all which the Law has well prevented, as appears by this Resolution.

Co. l. 4. 93. a. 4. Slades case.
7 Albeit an action of debt lies upon a Contract, Action upon the case.
yet the bargainor may have an action upon the case, or an action of debt for
the same at his election, and one of the chiefest reasons of that resolution
was, for that George Kempe (secondary of the Protonotaries of the Kings Bench)
produced an infinite number of presidents, as well in the Common Pleas as in
the Kings Bench, in the reigns of Hen. 6. E. 4. H. 7. and H. 8. by which it
appeared, that the plaintiffs did Count, that the Defendants in Consideration
of a sale to them of certain goods, did promise to pay so much money, etc. to
which presidents and judgments, being of so great number, and in so many
successions of ages, and in the several times of so many reverend Judges, the
Justices in this case gave great regard, and so the Justices in ancient time
and from time to time have done, as well in matters of form, as in deciding of
doubts and questions, as well at the Common Law, as in the Construction of Acts
of Parliament: And therefore in 11 E. 3. Formedon 32. it is held, that the
ancient forms and manner of presidents are to be maintained and observed, and
in 34 Ass. pl. 7. that which is not according to the usage, shall not be
permitted, and in 2 E. 3. 29. The ancient form and order is to be observed.
Vide plus ubi supra.

Co. l. 5. 32. a. Pettifers case.
8 Upon fieri facias of the Goods of the Testator, Devastavit.
the Sheriff returns nulla bona, etc. hereupon a writ issues to the Sheriff to
enquire by Enquest, whether the executors have wasted, etc. He returns they
have, and thereupon Judgment was given of their own goods, but the executors
suing a writ of error de redditione executionis, the execution was reversed;
because this course of proceeding in such case had been taken up of later
times, whereas the ancient course was upon the return of Nulla bona, to sue a
scire fac. to the Sheriff to levy, etc. out of the Testators goods, and if it
should appear to him, that the executors have wasted, then out of their own
goods: for albeit it was said, that the said newer course was usual in the
Common Bench, and more favorable than the ancient course was, because thereby
the Devastavit shall not be returned by the Sheriff only, but shall be inquired
likewise by an Inquest returned, and thereupon a Scire facias ought to be
awarded; yet judgment was given, that the said proceeding was erroneous,
because invented of later times; And the rather, for that by the ancient
course, if the Sheriff make a false return, the party may have his remedy by
action upon the case, which is a good mean to enforce the Sheriff to make true
and just returns in such cases; but by the said new course, if the Sheriff take
an inquest and return it, although it be false, yet the party has no remedy
either against the Sheriff, or any other, which would be inconvenient: by which
resolution it may be observed (by the way) how dangerous a thing it is to alter
or change the ancient forms and courses of Law, for albeit a new way may (prima
facie) seem specious and convenient, yet afterward it will prove incommodious
by introducing sundry mischiefs, which cannot be discovered otherwise than by
future experience, as in the case above recited: which point (it were to be
wished) our late Regulators would well study and consider, before they presume
to innovate any thing in the Law.

Co l. 9. 15. a. A^^^ Bedingfields case.
9 In a writ of Dower an essoin was cast, and challenged, Ess^in.
for that by the Statute of Essoins 12 E. 2. it is provided, Quod non jacet
Essonium in breve de Dote; Howbeit, because the Common essoin has been always
allowed in a writ of Dower, therefore the Justices did construe that Statute to
extend to an essoin of the Kings service, and not to the Common essoin; And the
rather, for that the Statute adds a Reason of that purview, viz. Quia videtur
deceptio and prorogatio Iuris, and that is properly to be intended of an essoin
of the Kings service, which is a delay and prorogation of right for a year.
Vide 4 E. 3. 36. 4. Ass. pl. 2. Long 5 E. 4. 70.

Ward.
10 Albeit 16 E. 3. Damages 80. and some other books are, Co. l. 9. 74. b. 2. in
Dr. Husseys case.
that Damages shall not be recovered in a writ of Ravishment of Ward, yet for
that it is held in 17 E. 3. 57. and many other books (quas vide ubi supra) and
agrees with common experience, that Damages should be recovered in that writ,
it was so resolved accordingly.

Bastardy.
11 It appears by the Statute of Merton, Co. l. 5. pars 1. 12. a. 1. and Merton
20 H. 3.
that all the Bishops instanced the Lords, that they would consent, that all
such as were born before Matrimony (marriage following after) should be
legitimate, as well as they that were born within Matrimony, as to the
succession of Inheritance, for that the Church accepted such to be legitimate:
But all the Earls and Barons with one voice answered, Nolumus Leges Angliae
mutare, quae hucusque usitatae sunt et approbatae.

A writ to the Coroners.
12 If a writ be directed to Coroners, Coronatoribus de Comitatu, Pl. Co. 76 b.
4. Wimbish and Willoughby.
or in Comitatu, have the same construction, de and in (in this case)
signifying the same thing; yet because in (in such case) has been most
frequently used, upon such a direction to the Coroners, de ought to be
rejected, and in retained: for the order of the Register is, that all writs
directed to the Sheriff shall be Vicecomiti de Comitatu, but those directed to
the Coroners, Coronatoribus in Comitatu; as an Attachment against the Sheriff
for not returning a Replevin, is directed Coronatoribus in Comitatu, etc. So is
likewise the writ of Certifying an Outlawry, as appears in the book of Entries,
and so all other writs, as a Diem clausit extremum is, Escheatori in Comitatu,
and the like: And he that finds fault with this direction, argues against the
Register, and also against the common usage of the Law heretofore practiced.

Phrase.
13 If I give you a pint of wine, you shall not have the pint-pot; Pl. Co. 85.
b. 4. Partridges case.
but if I give you an Hogshead of wine, you shall have the Hogshead, for the
phrase of the language commonly used expresses the intent, Et a Communi
observantia, etc.

14 A writ of Inquiry being directed to the Sheriff himself to be executed, he
makes return, Hob. 83. Virely and Gunstone.
Quod mandavit Balivo Hundredi de B. etc. Qui quidem Balivus sic sibi
respondit, And so sets down the Inquisition taken before the Bailiff, and 40 l.
damages; Howbeit, upon a writ of Error it was agreed by all the Judges, that
the return was insufficient; because it was apparently untrue and against Law;
for that the warrant was directed to the Sheriff himself to be executed in any
part of the County, and no Venue contained in that Inquest of office, as there
is in other writs, which entitle the Bailiffs of Liberties: Howbeit, the Court
would not reverse the judgment, because there were diverse of the like kind,
both in the Kings Bench and Common Pleas, especially in Suffolk and Norfolk in
later times. Vide Hob. 84. Skeat and Oxonbridge such an allowance in a writ of
waste.

Star Chamber
15 In a suit in the Starr-chamber witnesses were examined to prove what was
deposed concerning a will in the Ecclesiastical Court; Hob. 114.
but because depositions were not allowed in the Starr-chamber taken in other
Courts, they were rejected, as a crafty device to induce depositions against
the Rule of the same Court.

204 Eventus varios Res nova semper habet; And therefore it hates new
Inventions, and Innovations.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 379. a. 2.
1 Sir Edward Cook speaking of Justice Richel his Perpetuity, Inventions.
observes, that new inventions (though of a learned Judge in his own
profession) are full of Inconvenience: Periculosum est res novas et inusitatas
inducere. And that Author says farther, that Littleton in the debate of that
case (. 721, 722, and 723.) has taught us an excellent point of learning, Co.
ibid. b. 1.
that when any innovation or new invention starts up, the best way is to try it
by the Rules of the Common Law, for they are the true touchstones to sever the
pure gold from the dross, and sophistications of novelties and new inventions:
And by this example (he says) you may perceive, that the Rules of the Common
Law (which are indeed the Maxims of Reason) being soundly applied to such
novelties, it does utterly crush them and bring them to nothing; for commonly a
new invention does offend against many Rules and reasons of the Common Law: Co.
ibid. 282. b. 3.
And therefore the ancient Judges and Sages of the Law have ever suppressed
innovations and novelties, as soon as they have offered to creep up, lest the
Quiet of the Common Law might be disturbed, and so have Acts of Parliament also
many times done the like: And the Judges say in 38 E. 3. We will not change the
Law, which always has been used And another says in 2 H. 4. 18. Co. ibid.
303. b. 4.
It is better that it be turned to a default, than that the Law should be
changed, or any innovation made. And therefore new and subtle inventions ought
not to alter any principle of the Common Law. Vide supra 184. 21. and 159. 2.

Co. ibid. 377. b. 4.
2 The Invention devised by Justice Richel (an Irishman born) in the time of R.
2. and the like by Thirning Chief Justice in the time of H. 4. were both full
of imperfections, The like.
for nihil simul inventum est and perfectum, and saepe viatorem nova non vetus
orbita fallit: And therefore new inventions in assurances are dangerous.

Co. l. 1. 87 a. 4. in Corbets case.
3 If a man make a feoffment in fee of land to the use of A. and his heirs every
Monday, and to the use of B. and his heirs every Tuesday, Perpetuity.
and to the use of C. and his heirs every Wednesday, these limitations are
void, because it is a new invention, there being no such fractions of estates
found in the Law: And therefore not to be permitted for the inconvenience that
may ensue thereupon.

Co. l. 1. 138. a. 3. in Chudl^yes case.
4 By the Statute of 27 H. 8. of Uses, The like.
some uses were executed presently, others by matter ex post facto, and others
again were extirpated and extinguished by that Act: Uses in esse did draw the
possession presently by force of the Act; Uses limited in futuro, and agreeable
to the Rule of the Common Law, are also, if they become in due time in esse,
within the provision of that Statute; but uses invented and limited in a new
manner, and not agreeable to the ancient Common Laws of the land are utterly
extirpated and extinct by that Act; for it appears by the express letter of the
Act, that it was the intent of the Parliament to extinguish and root them out,
and to restore the ancient Common Law of the Land. Vide plus ibidem.

Co. l. 5. 32. a. Pettisers case.
5 Upon a fieri facias of the goods of the testator, Devastavit.
the Sheriff returns nulla bona, etc. And thereupon another writ issues to him
to inquire by Enquest, whether or no the executors have wasted, etc. he returns
they have, and thereupon execution is awarded of their own goods; but this
award of execution was reversed by writ of Error; because that practice had
been taken up of late days, whereas the ancient course was (and since the
judgment in this case is taken up again) to sue a fieri facias to the Sheriff
to levy, etc. of the testators goods, and if it appear to him, that the
executors have wasted, etc. then of their own goods: And in such case an action
upon the case will lie against the Sheriff if he make a false return; whereas
in the other case no such action lies, because the Sheriff makes his return by
Inquest.

Perpetuity.
6 All perpetuities (being new inventions) are against the reason and policy of
the Common Law; Co. l. 6. 40. b. 3. in Sir Anthony Mildmayes case. Co. l. 9.
128. a. 4. in Sondayes case.
for at the Common Law all Inheritances were fee-simple, to the end that
neither Lords should be defeated of their escheats, wards, etc. nor purchasors
or farmers should lose their estates or leases, or be evict by the heirs of
their grantors or lessors, nor such infinite occasions of troubles,
contentions, or suits should arise: And therefore it may be truly averred, that
the policy and Rule of the Common Law in this point was in effect subverted by
the Statute de donis made in 13 E. 1. which ordained a general perpetuity by
Act of Parliament for all such as had then made it, or would afterward put it
in ure; by force whereof all the possessions of England in effect were intailed
accordingly, which was the cause of the said and diverse other mischiefs;
Howbeit diverse attempts were made for remedy thereof in diverse Parliaments, and
many bills exhibited accordingly, but they were always upon one pretense or
other rejected: Indeed the truth was, that the Lords and Commons knowing that
their estates tail were not forfeitable for felony or treason, as their estates
of Inheritance were before the said Act (and principally in the Barons wars in
the time of H. 3.) and finding also, that they were not chargeable with the
debts or encumbrances of their ancestors, and that the sales, alienations, or
leases of their ancestors did not bind them for the lands which were so
entailed to their ancestors, did always reject such bills; And this continued
all the residue of the Reign of E. 1. and the Reigns of E. 2. E. 3. R. 2. H. 4.
H. 5. H. 6. and until about the 12 of E. 4. when the Judges upon consultation
had amongst them did resolve, that an estate tail might be docked and barred by
a Common recovery, and that by reason of the intended recompense the Common
recovery was not within the restraint of the said perpetuity made by the said
Act of 13 E. 1. whereby it appears, that many mischiefs did arise upon the
change of a Maxim and Rule of the Common Law, which they who altered it could
not discern, when they made the said change; for Rerum progressus ostendunt
multa, quae in initio praecaveri seu praevideri non possunt. Vide 8.

Marshalsie.
7 In Sir Geo. Reynels case in the 9 Report, Co. l. 9. 97. a. 2.
one of the reasons why the office of Marshalsie could not be granted for
years, was, because it was an ancient office, and had been always granted for
life, or at will, to the end the person to whom it was granted might be
certainly known; And therefore to grant it for years, when it was never known
to be so granted before, being an Innovation, might prove dangerous and of ill
consequence to the Commonwealth.

An Intail docked.
8 The docking of an Intail by a Common recovery in 12 E. 4. was no new
invention, Co. l. 10. 37. b. 2. in Mary Portingtons case.
but consonant to the opinion of the Sages of the Law, even from the making of
the Statute De donis, as appears by diverse authorities in our books, viz. in 42
E. 3. 53. in 44 E. 3. 21, 22. Octavian Lumbards case, in 48 E. 3. 11. b.
Jefferey Benchers case, in 12 H. 4. 13. b. in 1 E. 4. 5. in 5 E. 4. 2. b. which
resolutions and opinions in Law, together with diverse others of the like kind,
did (as it seems) produce the judgment in 12 E. 4. And therefore such barring
of an estate tail was not then to be esteemed an innovation or new invention,
but the Judges and Sages of the Law then perceiving what contentions and
mischiefs had crept into the quiet of the Law by such fettered Inheritances,
upon consideration of the said Act, and of the former exposition thereof by the
Sages of the Law since the making of the same Act, did in the said 12 year of
E. 4. give judgment, that in such case an estate tail should be barred. And in
Scholasticaes case in 12 Eliz. Pl. Com. 403.
it was not thought fit to stand with the honor and gravity of the Court, that
the question concerning the restraint of a Common recovery (which had been so
often debated and resolved) should be once moved. Vide supra 6.

Co. l. 11. 87. a. 3. in the case of Monopolies.
9 The Queen grants to one of the Privy Chamber the only making, Monopolies.
and importation of Cards; This was adjudged a Monopoly, and therefore void;
and one of the reasons was, because the grant was primae Impressionis, for no
such was ever seen to pass by Letters Patents under the Great seal to that very
day: And therefore because it was a dangerous Innovation without president or
authority of Law or Reason, and the Queen deceived in their grant, it was
adjudged void.

Dyer 135. 15. 3, 4. P. M.
10 A Dedimus Potestatem was granted to Justice Saunders to receive an Attorney
for the defendant in a Quid juris clamat, Quid juris clamat.
but because there could be found no former president for it, it was with much
difficulty and after long debate allowed by the Judges, and that upon great
necessity, and weakness of the party.

205 Communis Error facit Jus.
Co. Inst. 1. 52. b. 2.
1 In a deed of feoffment beginning with Omnibus Christi fidelibus, Livery by
Attorney.
etc. or Sciant omnes per praesentes, etc. or the like, a Letter of Attorney
may be contained, for one continent may contain diverse deeds to several
persons: But if it be by indenture between the feoffor on the one part, and the
feoffee on the other part, there a Letter of Attorney in such a deed is not
good, unless the Attorney be made a party in the deed indented; howbeit,
because it has been commonly used to insert it in the Indenture, without
making the Attorney party thereunto, it has been permitted to pass, but the
other way is safest, and more legal. Communis Error facit Jus.

Co. l. 6. 67. a. 4 in Sir Mo^^ ^inches case.
2 Where it is required by the Statute of 1 H. 5. 5. that in every writ
original, etc. in which Exigent shall be awarded, Additions. Stat. 1 H. 5.
Additions should be given to the defendants of their estate, degree, mystery,
etc. It so fell out, that one, who was by birth but a Yeoman, was commonly
called Gentleman; And in that case, in such a writ brought against him he may
have the Addition of Gentleman, albeit in truth he is no Gentleman, but only by
vulgar reputation: for in as much as the intention of the Act is, that he
should have such a name by which he may be known, it is sufficient to satisfy
the Act of Parliament; for Communis error, etc.

206 So does a Custom, which is reasonable: unreasonable, contra.
Co. Inst. ^pars 1. 59 b. 4
1 Of fines due to the Lord by the Copyholder, Copyhold fines.
some be by the Change or alteration of the Lord, and some by the Change or
alteration of the tenant, the change of the Lord ought to be by the act of God,
otherwise no fine can be due, but by the change of the tenant, either by the
act of God, or the act of the party, a fine may be due: for if the Lord do
challenge a Custom within his Manor to have a fine of every of his Copyholders
of the said Manor at the alteration or change of the Lord of the Manor, be it
by alienation, demise, death, or otherwise; This is a custom both against the
Law and Reason, as to the alteration or change of the Lord by the Act of the
party; for by that means the Copyholders may be oppressed by multitude of
fines, by the Act of the Lord: But when the change grows by the Act of God,
there the custom is good, as by the death of the Lord: And this was resolved
upon a Case in Chancery by all the Judges and Sergeants of Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet (Trin. 39 Eliz.) and so certified into that Court: But upon the
change or alteration of the Tenant, a fine is due unto the Lord, because that
custom is reasonable.

2 Of fines taken of Copyholders some be certain by custom, and some be
uncertain, The like.
but that fine although it be uncertain, Co. ibid.
yet ought it to be rationabilis, and that reasonableness shall be discussed
by the Justices upon the true circumstances of the Case appearing unto them;
And if the Court, where the cause depends, adjudgeth the fine exacted
unreasonable, then is not the Copyholder compellable to pay it: And so it was
adjudged P. 1 Iac. C. B. rot. 1845. for all excessiveness is abhorred in Law.

3 In former times it has been doubted, whether or no, if a Copyholder had
been ousted by his Lord, Copyhold custom.
he might have any other remedy therein, than only to sue to his Lord by
petition; for it seems, Co. ibid. 60. b. 3. Littl.. 77.
that if the Copyholder might have any other remedy, he could not be properly
said to be Tenant at the Will of the Lord according to the Custom of the manor:
But Magistra rerum experientia has made this clear and without question, that
the Lord cannot at his pleasure put out the lawful Copyholder, without some
cause of forfeiture, and if he do, the Copyholder may have an Action of
Trespass against him; For albeit he be tenens ad voluntatem Domini, yet it is
secundum consuetudinem manerii: And Britton says, speaking of these kind of
Tenants, Et ascuns gents sont, qui tout franks de sank et tenent terre de nous
en villeynage, et sont proprement nos sokemans, Britton fo. 163. Co. ibid. 140.
a. 3.
et ceux sout privileges en ties manner, que null ne les doit ouster de tiels
tene ments taut come ils font les services, que a lour tenements appendant, et
null ne poit lour services accressre ne changer, a fair autres services ou
plus, autrement que ils ne solaient, And herewith agrees Sir Robert Danby Cl.
Inst. of the C. Pl. M. 7 E. 4. 19. and Sir Thomas Brian his Successor M. 21 E.
4. 80. That the Copyholder doing his customs and services, if he be put out by
his Lord, shall have an Action of trespass against him.

Consuetudo.
4 Consuetudo contra rationem introducta potius usurpatio quam consuetudo
appellari debet; Again, Co. ibid. 113. a 4.
Consuetudo ex certa causa rationabili usitata private communem Legem: And,
Consuetudo praescripta et legitima vincit legem.

Villeinage, fine to mary.
5 All customs and prescriptions, that are against reason are void; Co. ibid.
139. b. 4. Littl.. 209.
as if a Lord of a manor will prescribe, that every Tenant, who matieth his
daughter to any man without the Lords license, shall make fine; This
prescription is void, being against reason: because none shall make such fines,
but only villeins; for a freeman may freely mary his daughter to whom he
pleases: And albeit that it has been objected by some, that such a custom may
have a lawful beginning, because Littl. in the beginning of the chapter of
villeinage. 174. allows, that a freeman may take lands of the Lord to be
holden of him, viz. to pay a fine for the marriage of his son or daughter, and
therefore some have thought, that such a custom generally with in the manor
might be good; but the answer is, that although it may be soln a particular
Case upon such a special reservation of such a fine upon a gift of land, yet to
claim such a fine by a general custom within the manor, is against the freedom
of a freeman, that is not bound thereunto by particular tenure: howbeit a
custom may be alleged within a manor, that every tenant (albeit his person be
free) that holds by bondage or native tenure (the freehold being in the Lord)
shall pay to the Lord for the marriage of his daughter without license, a fine;
And this is termed Marchet, of two french words, Marriage and achecter to buy.

Co. ibid. 140. a 4. and b. 1. Littl.. 210.
6 The custom of Gavelkind in Kent, where all the sons inherit equally,
Gavelkind.
has been always allowed a good custom, because every son is as well a
gentleman, as the eldest, and having means may attain to as great honor and
preferment as the eldest, which by want and penury may be obstructed,
according to that of Horace, Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi.


Co. ibid. 140. b. 3. Littl.. 211.
The like custom is used and allowed as reasonable in other parts of England
within diverse manors and seigniories, although it be not called Gavelkind in
any Country but Kent: And as it is said of sons, so likewise (by custom) when
one brother dies without issue, all the other brethren may inherit; There is
also another custom allowed within diverse manors, called Borough-English,
Borough-English
where the youngest son, or youngest brother inherits; and in the manor of B.
in Berkshire, where the sisters shall not be Parceners, but the eldest sister
shall have the inheritance; all which do hold good, because consonant to reason.

Co. inst. pars 1. 141. a. 3.
7 Malus usus abolendus est, and every usage is evil, Malus usus.
that is against reason; Quia in Consuetudinibus non diuturnitas temporis, sed
soliditas rationis est consideranda; And by this rule at the Parliament holden
at Kilkenny in Ireland Lionel Duke of Clarence being then Lieutenant of that
Realm, the Irish custom (called there the Brehonlaw) was wholly abolished, for
that (as the Parliament said) it was no law, but a lewd custom, et malus usus
abolendus est, as is said before.

Co. ibid. 155. a. 2.
8 Albeit the writ of Assise be, that the Sheriff, Assise.
Faceret duodecim liberos et legales homines de vicineto, etc. videre
tenementum, etc. Yet by ancient course the Sheriff must return 24. and this is
for expedition of justice; for if 12. should only be returned, no man should
have a full Jury appear or be sworn (in respect of challenges) without a Tales,
which would be a great delay of trials; so as (in this case) usage and ancient
course makes a Law.

Co. l. 2. 17. a. 4. in Lanes case.
9 Severance of the frank-tenement and inheritance of land holden by copy of
Court-Roll, Copyhold.
does not extinguish or determine the Copyhold estate; for albeit his estate is
taken to be but an estate at Will, yet the custom has so established the
estate of the Copyholder, that he is not removeable at the Will of the Lord, so
long as he performs the customs and services: And by the same reason the Lord
cannot determine his interest by any Act that he can do, and so has it been
oftentimes adjudged in the Kings Bench.

Co. l. 4. 21. a. 3. in Browns case.
10 Albeit a Copyholder has (in judgment of law) but an estate at Will, yet
custom has so established and fixed his estate, Copyhold.
that it is (by the custom of the manor) descendable, and his heirs shall
inherit it; And therefore his estate is not merely ad voluntatem domini, but ad
voluntatem domini secundum consuetudinem manerii: so as the custom of the manor
is the very soul and life of Copyhold estates; for without custom, or if they
break their custom, they are subject to the Will of the Lord: And by custom a
Copyholder is as well inheritable to have his land according to the custom, as
he who has a franktenement at the Common Law, for Consuetudo (in this case)
est altera lex, and being an usage time out of mind may create and consolidate
Inheritances.

Alienation presented.
11 A Custom within a Manor, Co. l. 5. 84 a. 3. in Penimans cas^.
that every alienation of lands holden of the same Manor (whether it be by
writing or feoffment thereof made, or by will) shall be presented at the next
Court holden for the said Manor, in pain that (upon failer of such presentment)
such alienation shall be void, is a good and reasonable Custom: But a Custom,
that none shall use his Common in such a place, until the Lord enter with his
beasts, is void for the unreasonableness: for if the Lord will not enter, it is
no reason that the Commoners should lose their Common. Vide 2 H. 4. 24.

Common of Shack.
12 Common called Shack (which at the beginning was but in nature of a feeding
together by reason of Vicinage for avoiding of suits) is in some places (by
Custom) altered to the nature of Common appendant or appurtenant, Co. l: 7. 5.
a. Sir Miles Corbets case.
and in some places it retains the original nature, and the Rule to know it* is
the Custom and usage of every several Town, or place, for Consuetudo loci est
observanda: And therefore if in the Town of Dale one has gotten diverse parcels
of land together (in which the Inhabitants have used to have Shack) and long
since did enclose it, and nevertheless always after harvest the Inhabitants
have had Shack there for their Cattle, This shall be taken for Common appendant
or appurtenant, and the Owner cannot exclude them from Commoning there, albeit
he will not Common with them, but hold his own lands so enclosed in severalty;
And this is well proved by the usage, for notwithstanding the ancient enclosure
the Inhabitants have had Common there: But if in the Town of Sale the Custom
and usage have been, that every Owner in the same Town has enclosed his own
land time out of mind, and so has held in severalty; there that proves, that
it was but in nature of Shack originally because of Vicinage, and so continues;
And therefore (in such case) he may enclose and keep it in severalty, and
seclude himself from having Shack with the rest of the Commoners.

Ancient Demesne.
13 Lands in ancient demesne, Dyer 72. b 4. 6 E. 6.
which were partable between heirs male, were aliened by fine levied at the
Common Law; nevertheless it seemed to be the better opinion, that hereby the
course of the Inheritance was not altered, and made descendable at the Common
Law, but that they shall still remain partable, as before.

Custom unreasonable.
14 A Custom, Dyer 199. 58. 3 Eliz.
that the Lord of a Manor has used to have the best beast of his tenant there
dying, and if such beast be eloigned before seizure, that then the Lord has
used to take the best Beast of any other, levant and couchant within the said
tenure, was adjudged void for the unreasonableness thereof. Vide 3, 4 Eliz.
Rot. 1496.

Lands in London.
15 Lands in London may be bargained and sold in London by paroll without
Indenture or enrollment, Dyer 229. 50. 6 Eliz.
as before the Statute of 27 H. 8. and this by a Proviso in the same Statute.
Chilborns case.

Custom.
16 A Custom was alleged, Dyer 357. 46 19 Eliz.
that the tenant in fee could not make a lease for above six years; and it was
adjudged a void custom, because repugnant to fee* and unreasonable. Salfords
case.

Co ps.
17 A Custom for the Incumbent or Churchwardens of a Parish to be paid for the
burial of a Corpse of one who is no parishioner, Ho. 175. The Lady Fer^ars case.
but only passing that way by accident, lodging in an Inn, or other lodging,
or the like, is an unreasonable custom and void.

207 Licet Consuetudo sit magnae Authoritatis, Nunquam tamen Praejudicat
manifestae veritati.
Co. l. 4. 18. a. 1. Oxford and Crosses case.
1 The plaintifs bring an action in London, Slander.
for that the defendant called the wife of the plaintiff Whore, the defendant
removes it by habeas corpus into the Kings Bench, and it was moved to have a
Procedendo to remand it, because the action was maintainable in London for the
said words, but not at the Common Law: Howbeit the Procedendo was denied per
per totam Curiam; for such a Custom to maintain actions for such brabling words
is against Law: Licet Consuetudo, etc.

Co. l. 6. 6. b. 1. Sir John Molins case.
2 Ed. 3. Lord, an Abbot Mesne, Records.
the tenant is attainted of Treason, the King grants to Sir John Molins, to be
holden of him and other chief Lords of the fee by the services, etc. In this
case the Mesnalty is revived: and albeit diverse Offices, licenses, and other
Records were produced to prove the Kings immediate tenure, yet the Barons
(before whom that cause depended) said, in as much as by construction of Law
upon the Letters Patents it appeared, that there was no immediate tenure in the
King, albeit it had been otherwise found in offices, or admitted in licenses,
or other Records, yet that could not alter the true tenure, which originally
appeared (to them as Judges) upon Record: And it was then also said, Licet
consuetudo, etc.

Co. l. 11. 75. a. 2. in Magdalen College case.
3 In Magdalen College case in the 11 Rep. Grants by Ecclesiastical persons.
Stat. 13 El. 10
(where the Master and Fellows of that College had granted to Queen Eliz her
heirs and successors an house in London, with proviso, that if she did not
regrant it within some short time to Bened. Spinola and his heirs, that then
the grant to her should be void, with intent thereby to defraud the Statute of
13 Eliz. 10.) it was objected, that since that Statute there had been a great
number of such grants made by Masters and Fellows of Colleges, Deans and
Chapters, Masters of Hospitals, etc, Howbeit to this it was answered, that such
grants had been made rather ex consuetudine Clericorum, who imitated presidents
of such grants made before that Statute, than by the sage advice of men learned
in the Law; and Multitudo errantium non parit errori Patrocinium.

F. N. B. 118. c.
4 It appears by the Register, Account. Prison.
that if a man be found in arrearages upon his account, and the plaintiff
arrests him in London for those arrearages, that then the plaintiff may sue
forth a writ in Chancery directed to the Sheriff, rehearsing this matter, and
commanding the Sheriff to detain the Accomptant safe in prison, until he has
paid the arrerages: And it seems also upon the same reason, that if a man sue
forth a writ of debt upon arrearages of account before Auditors, and has the
party attached, etc. that he may have a writ out of the Chancery directed to
the Sheriff to keep him in prison, until he has satisfied the arrearages: but
it seems to Fitzherbert, that such a writ cannot stand with Law, which shall
command a man to be kept in prison before he shall have answered to the suit
commenced against him.

5 Hob. 17. Dr. James his case, concerning holding the Court of Audience in the
Borough of Southwark, which is within the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Winchester.

208 Husband and wife are one Person, And therefore
Rebutter.
1 If a feme heir of a disseisor enfeoff me with warranty, Co. Inst. pars 1.
365. b. 3.
and then marry with the disseisee, if after the disseisee bring a praecipe
against me, I shall rebutt him, in respect of the warranty of his wife, and yet
he demands the land in another right: So likewise if the husband and wife
demand the right of the wife, a warranty of the collateral ancestor of the
husband shall bar them, because the husband and wife are one person in Law:
Protection.
And for the same reason it is, Co. ibid. 130. a. b. 1. F. N. B. 116. 1.
that a protection for the husband shall serve also for the wife.

Conspiracy.
2 A writ of Conspiracy must be brought against two at least, for if there be
such occasion of action only against one, an action upon the case lies for the
falsehood and deceit, because one cannot conspire with himself: and therefore a
writ of Conspiracy for indicting the plaintiff of felony lies not against Baron
and feme only, because they are but one person, but it may lie against Baron
and feme and a third person.

Account.
3 In an action of account, receipt made by the Baron by the hands of the feme is
the Barons own receipt, F. N. B. 118 f.
and both the writ and Count shall suppose that he received it himself, without
saying, by the hands of the feme.

Debt. Feme covert.
4 If a man take a wife who is indebted to other persons, F. N B. 120. f.
the Baron and feme shall be sued for this debt, living the feme, but if the
feme die, the Baron shall not be charged therewith after the death of the feme;
Howbeit if the Creditor of the Baron and feme recover the debt during the
Coverture, which was due by the feme before the Coverture, then albeit the feme
die, yet the Baron shall be charged to pay that debt after the death of the
feme, by reason of that Recovery, etc. And all this because during the
coverture they are but one person in Law.

Remitter.
5 If tenant in tail enfeoff a feme in fee, and die, Littl.. 665. Co. I^st. pars
1. 350. b. 3.
and his issue within age takes the feme to wife, this is a remitter to the
infant within age, and the feme has nothing left in her, because they are one
person in Law: So likewise if the husband discontinue his wives land, and take
back an estate to him and his wife, during the life of the husband, this is a
remitter to the wife presently, albeit the estate is not by the limitation to
have continuance after the decease of the husband, because the husband and wife
are one person, as aforesaid.

Joint purchase
6 If a joint estate of land be made to Baron and feme and a third person, in
this case the Baron and feme shall have but a moity, Littl.. 291. Co. ibid.
187. a
and the third person the other moity; so likewise if land be given to Baron
and feme, and two others, the Baron and feme have but a third part; because
they are but one person in Law.

Cui in vita.
7 If the Baron discontinue the land of the feme, Littl.. 676. Co. ibid. 356. b.
1.
and after take an estate to him and his wife, and a third person, for life or
in fee; This is only a remitter to the feme for the moity, and for the other
moity, after the death of her husband, she shall have a Cui in vita.

Witness.
8 It was resolved in the Common Bench, Co. ibid. 6. b. 4.
in P. 10 Iac. that a wife cannot be produced as a witness either against or
for her husband, quia sunt duae animae in carne una, and it might be a cause of
implacable discord and dissension between the husband and wife, and a mean of
great inconvenience.

Pardon for alienation.
9 Sir Robert Catlyn Chief Justice purchased lands holden of the Crown in
Capite, to him and his wife, Dyer 196. 40. 3. Eliz.
and the heirs of the said Sir Robert, and the Queen pardons him omnes
transgressiones et offensas, pro quacunque alienatione sibi facta, without
speaking of his wife; yet this was a sufficient discharge of the fine for the
alienation to him and his wife; because (as it seems) they were one person in
Law.

Ho 179. Levendens case.
10 An action of debt was brought against the husband and wife for the Recusancy
of the wife, Debt for Recusancy.
and the husband would have appeared alone by Supersedeas; but the Court
resolved, that either both must appear, or both be outlawed; being one person
in Law.

209 The Wife is of the same Condition with her Husband.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 16. b. 3. and Co. l. 4 118 b. 3. in Actons case, and Co. l.
6. 52. b. and 53. b. in the Countess of Rulands case.
1 Nobility may be granted for term of life, by act in Law, Nobility.
without any actual creation; As if a Duke take a wife, by the intermarriage
she is a Duchess in Law, and so of a Marquess, an Earl, and the rest, and in
some other case; for that (in such case) she is of the same condition with her
husband: Howbeit, there is a diversity between a woman that is noble by
descent, and a woman that is Noble by marriage: for if a woman, that is noble by
descent, marry a man that is under the degree of Nobility, yet she remains
Noble still; but if she gain it by marriag^, she loses it, if she marry under
the degree of Nobility, and so is the Rule to be understood, Si mulier Nobilis
nupserit ignobili desinit esse Nobilis; but if a Duchess by marriage marieth a
Baron of the Realm, she remains a Duchess, and loses not her name, because
her husband is Noble, and sic de caeteris.

Co. ibid. 30. b. 1. and Co. l. 4. 55. a. 3. in the Commonalty of Sadlers case.
2 If a man mary the Nief of the King by license, and has issue by her, and
after lands descend to the Nief, and the husband enter, Villeinage.
the Nief dies, he shall be tenant by the Courtesy of this land, and the King
upon any office found shall not evict it from him, because by the marriage the
Nief was enfranchised during the Coverture. But if a free woman marry a Villein
of the King by license, and lands descend to the Villein, the Villein dies,
the wife shall not be endowed, but upon an office found the King shall have the
land, for the Villein remains still a Villein to the King.

Co. ibid. 123. a. 1. Littl.. 187.
3 If a Nief marry a freeman, Villenage.
by the Common Law of England the issue is free, because in such case during
the Coverture she is enfranchised, and (by consequence) free; And therefore
they being both free, the issue ought to have the same privilege: So likewise
if a Villein marry a freewoman, the issues are Villeins, for the like reason,
viz. because during the coverture they are both Villeins.

Co. ibid. 136. b. 1.
4 In case where a freeman marries a Nief, some have holden, Villein Nief.
that by this marriage the wife shall be free for ever, but the better opinion
of our books is, that she shall be privileged during the coverture only, unless
the Lord himself marries his Nief, and then some hold, that she shall be free
for ever. Vide infra 9.

Co. ibid. b. 2.
5 If a Nief be regardant to a Manor, Villein Nief.
and she takes a freeman to husband by license of the Lord, and the Lord
makes a feoffment in fee of the Manor, the husband dies, the feoffee shall
not have the Nief, but the feoffor; for that during the marriage she was severed
from the Manor; And so is the book of 29 Ass. (which is falsely printed) to be
understood.

Co. ibid.
6 If there be two Coperceners of a Villein, Villein^
and one of them takes him to husband, she and her husband shall not have a
Nuper obiit against her Copercener, but after the decease of her husband (...)
may.

Petty treason.
7 By the Statute of 25 E. 3. it is declared, Pl. Co. 86. b. 2. in Partridges
case.
that if a servant kill his Master, it shall be adjudged Treason, viz. Petty
treason, and in 19 H. 6. 47. ( tit. Corone 7. and Br. Treason 8.) upon an
Indictment one was arraigned for killing the wife of his Master, which he
confessed, and thereupon it came into question, whether or no he should be
drawn and hanged, or hanged only, and it was adjudged by the advice of all the
Justices of both the Benches, that he should be drawn and hanged, for that it
was treason; And there it is not taken within the equity of that Statute, which
speaks only of killing the Master, but rather within the words thereof, because
Master and Mistress import the same, being one person in Law.

Amerci^me^t.
8 If a feme cove^t be outragiously amercied, F N. B. 75. d.
and thereupon the husband be distrained for it, he shall have the writ de
Moderata misericordia to relieve himself from such outrageous amerciament.

Villein and Nief.
9 If a freeman marry a Nief, she shall be free for ever, F. N. B. 78. g.
albeit the Baron die, and she survive, and this the Law gives her, as Britton
says, in favorem libertatis; and it seems reasonable that the Law should be
so, because she and her husband are but one person in Law, and she ought to be
of the same nature and condition in Law to all intents with her husband; Now
therefore her husband being free to all intents without any condition in Law,
or otherwise, and she being of the same nature and condition with her husband,
if she be once clearly discharged of Villeinage to all intents, she cannot be
Nief after without some special act done by her self, as divorce, or Conusance
in a Court of Record; and this is in favor of Liberty. Vide Exodus cap. 21. and
supra 4.

A Lady of Honor.
10 A writ of partition was brought against the Duke of Suffolk and his wife,
and others, per Radulphum Haward Armig. Dyer 59. b. 51, 6 and 7 E. 6.
and Dominam Annam Powes uxor. ejus (for so she was named in the writ) and
exception was taken upon the Misnomer, because she ought to have been named
only by the name of her husband, and not otherwise. And by the opinion of
Montague Chapter Justice, and Hales Justice, the exception was good, because by the
Law of God she is sub potestate viri, and therefore her name of dignity ought
to he changed according to the degree of her husband, notwithstanding the
courtesy of the Ladies of Honor and the Court; whereupon the plaintifs brought
a new writ, ad re^pondendum Radulpho H. and Anna uxori suae, nuper uxori Domini
Powes defuncti.

210 They cannot sue one another, nor make any grant one to the other, or the
like.
Baron cannot g^a^ to the ^^m^.
1 A man may at this day by his deed covenant with others to stand seized to the
use of his wife, Co. Inst. para 1. 112. a. 4. Littl.. 168.
or make a feoffment or other conveyance to the use of his wife; for now such
an estate may be executed to such uses by the Statute of 27 H. 8. 10. because
an use is but a trust and confidence, which by such a mean may be limited by
the husband to the wife; so likewise in places where lands were devisable, the
husbands (before that Statute) might by his testament devise his tenements to
his wife in fee, for life, or years, because such devise took not effect, until
after the death of the devisor: Howbeit, at the Common Law a man could not by
any conveyance, either in possession, reversion, or remainder, limit an estate
to his wife; neither yet since the said Statute covenant with his wife to stand
seized to her use, because (he and his wife being one person in Law) he can
grant nothing to her, nor covenant with her.

Co. ibid. 206. b. 3.
2 If a man be bound with a Condition to enfeoff his wife, Bond.
the condition is void and against Law, because it is against a Maxim of Law,
viz. that a man cannot make any grant to his wife; and yet the bond is good,
but if he be bound to pay his wife money, that is good, Et sic de similibus.

Co. l. 4. 29. b. 3. in Buntings case.
3 Albeit he that is admitted to a Copyhold estate is in by him, Copyhold.
that made the surrender, yet a man may surrender to the use of his wife,
because the Baron does it not immediately to the wife, but by two means, viz.
by surrender of the Baron to the Lord to the use of the wife, and by the
admittance of the Lord according to the surrender; but if the estate did
immediately pass from the husband to the wife, it could not be good.

Co. l. 8. 136. a. 2. in Sir John Nedhams case.
4 It was adjudged M. 30 and 31 Eliz. that, Feme Executrix.
where in debt against a feme executrix, she pleaded fully administered, and it
was found, that the defendant had taken the Obligor to husband, and that the
husband was dead, this was no release in Law, neither yet the debt thereby
extinct, but only suspended during the Coverture; for she could not (against a
Maxim of Law) by taking him to husband make a release to him of the debt.

5 Hob. 10. Friar against Gildridge.

211 Upon a joint Purchase during the Coverture, either of them takes the
whole.
Co. Inst. p^rs 1. 55. b. 2.
1 If a man be seized of land in right of his wife, Emblements.
and sows the ground and dies, his executors shall have the Corn, and if his
wife die before him, he himself shall have it: But if husband and wife be
joyntenants of the land, and the husband sow the ground, and then the land
surviveth to the wife; in this case, it is said, that she shall have the Corn.
Vide 8 Ass. 21. 8 E. 3. 54. and Dyer 316.

Co. ibid. 187. a. 4,
2 If a joint estate of land be made to a man and a woman and their heirs before
marriage, and after they intermarry; in this case, Baron and feme hold by
intierties.
the husband and wife have moities between them: but if it be during the
Coverture, they hold by intireties: For example, William Ocle and Joan his wife
purchased lands to them two and their heirs, afterward William Ocle was
attainted of high treason for the murder of E. 2. and was executed, Joan his
wife surviving him; E. 3. granted the lands to Stephen de Bitterly and his
heirs, John Hawkins the heir of Joan in a petition to the King discloseth this
whole matter, and upon a Scire facias against the Patentee has judgment to
recover the lands, for that William and Joan were one person in Law.

Co. ibid. 187. b. 2. Vide Pl. Co. 58. b. 4. Wimbish and Talbois.
3 If a feoffment were made before the Statute of Uses (27 H. 8. 10.) to the use
of a man and a woman and their heirs, The like.
and they intermarry, and then the Statute is made; In this case they hold by
moities, for if the husband alien it is good for a moity, because the Statute
executes the possession according to such quality, manner, form, and condition,
as they had in the use, so as though it vest during the coverture, yet the Act
of Parliament executes several moities in them, Co. ibid. 310. a 1. and Co. l.
2. 68. a. 1. in Tookers c^se, Pl. Co. 483. a. Nich. and Nich.
seeing they had several moities in the use: But it has been said, if a
reversion be granted to a man and a woman, and their heirs, and before
attornment they intermarry, and then attornment is made, That in this case the
husband and wife shall have no moities, no more than if a charter of feoffment
be made to a man and a woman, with a letter of Attorney to make livery, they
interm^ry, and then livery is made secundum formam cartae, in which case it is
also said, that they have no moities.

Cui in vita.
4 Before the Statute of 32 H. 8. 28. if husband and wife were jointly seized to
them and their heirs, Co. ibid. 326. a. 2.
of an estate made during the Coverture, and the ^usband alone (or together
with his wife) had made a feoffment in fee, and died, the wife by the Common
Law might have had a Cui in vita to recover the whole land, and after her
death, her heir might also have had sur Cui in vita; And since that Statute
both she and her heir may enter after such discontinuance of the husband,
without being put to their action.

Discontinuance.
5 If the Baron discontinue the land of the feme, Co. ibid. 356. b. 1.
and after take an estate to him and his wife, and a third person for life or
in fee; this is only a Remitter to the feme for a moity, and after the death of
her husband she is pat to her Cui in vita for the moity: But if such an estate
be taken back to him and his wife only, she shall be remitted to all.

Recovery.
6 Husband and wife are Iointenants for life, the remainder to the husband in
tail, the Remainder to another in fee, Co. l. 3. 5. a. 4. the Marq. of
Winchesters case.
the husband suffers a recovery; this is no bar to the issue for any part,
because there are no moities betwixt Baron and feme, and therefore no lawful
tenant to the praecipe of the whole; And the estate in remainder depends upon
the entire estate made to Baron and feme, etc.

Real lien.
7 If sundry persons acknowledge a recognisance, it survives not, but the lands
of them all shall be put in execution equally; Co. l. 3. 14. a. 4. in Sir
William Herberts case.
so likewise if two be bound to warranty, the survivor and the heir of the
other shall be vouched together: But if husband and wife, and the heirs of the
wife be bound to warranty, and the wife die, the land of the Baron may be only
put in execution; because there are no moities betwixt Baron and feme, etc.

The like.
8 If a feoffment be made to a man and a woman sole with warranty, they
intermary, and then they are vouched, and recover in value; Pl. Co. 483. a. 1.
Nich. and Nich.
In this case, moities shall not be betwixt them, for albeit they were sole,
when the warranty was made, yet when they recover and have execution, they are
Baron and feme, and cannot take by moities.

212 The Husband is the Woman's head; And therefore
Homage by Baron and feme.
1 The husband and wife doing homage for the wives land, Littl.. 88, 89, 90. Co.
Inst. pars 1. 66, a. 3. and 67. a. 2.
the husband shall speak the words for them both, viz. We do you Homage, etc.
And the homage, which the husband and wife do, is the very homage, which the
wife should do alone for her own land; and in that case when he has issue by
his wife, he shall do the homage alone, during his wives life, because by
having of issue he is entitled to an estate for term of his own life, in his
own right, and yet is seized in fee also in the right of his wife; so as in
such case he is not a bare tenant for life: Howbeit if his wife die, then he
has only an estate for life, and (by consequence) cannot do homage: And what
is said of doing homage, is also true of taking homage, in case where the
husband is seized of a Seigniory in right of his wife, for in such case also
(before issue) the husband and wife shall take it together by holding the
tenants hands in the hands of them both: But after issue he shall receive it
alone, and after the wives death he shall not receive it; for (regularly) it is
true, that he who cannot receive homage in respect of the weakness of his
estate in the Seignory, shall not do homage, when he has a like estate in the
tenancy. In like manner, Co. ibid. 130. b. 1. Co. ibid. 54 b. 1.
Protection for the husband shall serve also for the wife. Protection.


Redisseisin.
2 If a recovery he had against a woman in an Assise of Novel disseisin, and the
plaintiff recovereth and has execution, the woman takes husband, and both of
them redisseise the plaintiff, he shall not have Redisseisin, because the
husband is now the woman's head, and alius: But if a feme recover in an Assise,
and after take Baron, and they are redisseised, the husband and wife shall have
a redisseisin, because (as before) he is the woman's head, and therefore joyneth
for conformity, and does it in the right of his wife, who was disseised before,
so as (in effect) it is Idem disseisitus, and idem Conquerent. Vide Merton cap.
3. 20 H. 3.

Co. ibid. 354. a. 3.
3 If land be given to Baron and feme, Remitter.
and the heirs of their two bodies, and after the Baron alien the land in fee,
and then take back an estate to himself for life; In this case the Baron shall
not be remitted against his own alienation: But if he had taken back an estate
to him and his wife for their lives, albeit they be but one person in Law, and
no moities between them, yet for that the wife (the husband being her head)
cannot be remitted in this case, unless the husband be remitted also: Therefore
(in judgment of Law) both husband and wife shall in this case be remitted
against the husbands own alienation.

Co. l 11. 77. b. 2. in Magdalen College case.
4 If an Appeal be brought against a feme covert, and she be acquit, Appeal.
Feme covert.
she shall not have damages by the Statute of Westminster. 2 cap. 12. because she is
disabled by the Law to sue sole without her husband. Vide 22 E. 3. tit. Corone
276.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 112. a. 4.
5 To cover in English is tegere in Latin, and is so called, Contract.
for that the wife is sub potestate viri, and therefore is disabled to contract
with any without the consent of her husband, who is her head.

213 All that she has is her Husbands. Vide Ho. 216.
Co. Inst. pars 1. 112. a. 4.
1 Omnia, quae sunt uxoris sunt ipsius viri, non habet uxor potestatem sui sed
vir, Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 15. And again, Nothing the wives.
Res licet sit propria uxoris, vir tamen ejus Custos, cum sit caput Mulieris.
Bract. lib. 5. cap. 25.

Co. ibid. 326. a. 4.
2 The husband is tenant in tail, the remainder to the wife in tail,
Discontinuance.
the husband makes a feoffment in fee; In this case the husband by the Common
Law did not only discontinue his own estate tail, but his wives remainder also,
because at the time of the feoffment he was seized of his wifes remainder in
her right: Howbeit after the death of the husband without issue the wife may
enter by the Statute of 32 H. 8. 28.

Co. ibid. 351. a. 1.
3 If a man takes to wife a woman seized in fee, Inheritance.
he gains by the intermarriage an estate of freehold in her right, which
estate is sufficient to work a remitter, and yet the estate, which the husband
so gains, depends upon uncertainty, and consists in privity, for if the
wife be attainted of felony, the Lord by escheat shall enter, and put out the
husband; otherwise it is if the felony be committed after issue had: Also if
the husband be attainted of felony, albeit the King thereby gains no freehold
(for that remains still in the wife) yet the King shall have a pernary of the
profits during the Coverture.

Co. ibid. a. 3.
4 If a man marry a woman possessed of a term for years: Chattel real.
In this case the baron is also possessed thereof in her right, and has power
to dispose thereof by grant or demise, he may also forfeit it by Outlawry or
Attainder, because they are gifts in Law.

Co. ibid.
5 Upon an Execution against the husband for his own debt, The like.
the Sheriff may sell the term: Howbeit, the husband cannot dispose thereof by
will: Also if he make no disposition or forfeiture of it in his life, and
survive the wife, he shall have it by gift in Law; but in such case if the wife
survive him, she shall have it again: There is the same Law likewise of estates
by Statute Merchant, Statute Staple, Elegit, wardships, and other chattels real
in possession. Vide Hob. 3. Young and Radford.

The like.
6 Chattels real en auter droit, Co. ibid.
or consisting merely in action or use, the husband shall not have by the
intermarriage; but Chattels real being of a mixed nature, viz. partly in
possession, and partly in action, which happen during the Coverture, the
husband shall have by the intermarriage, if he survive his wife, albeit he
reduces them not into possession in her lifetime; but if the wife survive
him, she shall have them: As if the husband be seized of a rent-service,
charge, or seck, in the right of his wife, and the rent becomes due during the
coverture, the wife dies, the husband shall have the arrerages, but if the
wife survive him she shall have them, and not the executors of the husband: So
it is of an Advowson, if the Church become void during the Coverture, he may
have a Quare Impedit in his own name, as some hold, Vide 50 E. 3. 13. 28 H. 6.
9. 7 H. 7. 2. But the wife shall have it, if she survive him, and the husband,
if he survive her: Et sic de similibus: But if the arrerages had become due, or
the Church had fallen void before the marriage; In such case they were merely
in action before the marriage; Co. ibid. b. 1.
And therefore the husband should not have them by the Common Law, although he
survived her: And so it is likewise of Reliefs, mutatis mutandis: But now by
the Statute of 32 H. 8. 37. if the husband survive the wife, he shall have the
arrerages as well incurred before the marriage, as after.

Chattels personal.
7 Things in Action, as debts by obligation, contract, or otherwise, Co. ibid.
the husband shall not have, unless he and his wife recover them; But the
marriage is an absolute gift of all Chattels personal in possession in her own
right, whether the husband survive the wife or no: so if an Estray happen
within the Manor of the wife, and the husband die before seizure, the wife
shall have it; But after seizure by the husband, the property vesteth
immediately in him, and if he die, his executors shall have it: Howbeit, as to
personal goods there is a diversity, between a property in personal goods (as
is aforesaid) and a bare possession; for if personal goods be bailed to a feme,
or if she find goods, or if goods come to her hand as Executrix to a Bailiff,
and then she take a husband, this bare possession is not given to the husband;
yet in such case the Action of detinue must be brought against husband and
wife, as (regularly) in all other actions against the wife it ought to be.

Co^fi mation.
8 If a man let land to two men, to hold the one moity to the one for life, and
the other moity to the other for his life, Co. Inst. pars 1. 299. b, 1.
and the lessor confirm the estate to them both in the land, to hold to them
and to their heirs, they are tenants in common of the Inheritance; for
regularly the confirmation shall enure according to the quality and nature of
the estate, which it does enlarge and increase: But if such a lease for life be
made to husband and wife by several moities, and the lessor confirm their
estate in the land, to hold to them and their heirs, this confirmation as to
the moity of the husband enureth only to the husband and his heirs, for the
wife had nothing in that moity; but as to the moity of the wife, they are
Iointenants, for the husband has such an estate in his wifes moity, in her
right, as is capable of a Confirmation.

Feme. Executor.
9 A feme covert cannot make an executor without the assent of her husband, Co.
l. 4. 51. b. 2. Andrew Ognell.
and the administration of her goods of right appertains to her husband.

Replevin.
10 If the beasts of a feme sole be taken, and after she takes a Baron, F. N. B.
69. k
the Baron alone may sue a Replevin, Trin. 33 E. 3.

Obligation.
11 If a feme sole be bound in an obligation, and take baron, F. N. B. 121. c.
and after dies, the baron shall not be charged therewith, if recovery thereof
were not had against him and his wife in the life of the wife; but if a man
demise land to a feme for life, rendering rent, Rent.
and she take baron, and after the rent is arrear, and then she dies; In this
case the baron shall be charged by writ of debt for those arrerages, because he
took the profit of the land by reason of his wife.

F. N. B. ibid.
12 If a man be bound by obligation to a feme, and she take baron, The like.
and the day of payment comes during the espousals, and after the feme dies,
the baron shall not have an action of debt for this obligation, because it was
a duty due to the feme, and a thing in action before the espousals; but if a
feme be endowed of a rent, and after she take baron, and the rent is arrear,
and then the feme dies; In this case, the Baron shall have a writ of debt for
this rent, because it was a duty accrued unto him during the espousals.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 46. b. 3.
13 If a lease be made to Baron and feme for term of their lives, Leases.
the remainder to the executors of the survivor of them, the husband grants
away this term and dies, this shall not bar the wife; for that the wife had
but a possibility, and no interest: But if a man be possessed of a term for
forty years in right of his wife, and makes a lease for 20 years, reserving a
rent, and die, albeit the wife shall have the residue of the term, yet the
Executors of the husband shall have the rent, for that it was not incident to
the reversion, because the wife was not party to the lease: So if the husband
had made a grant of the whole term, upon condition that the grantee should pay
a sum of money to his executors, etc. and the husband had died, and then upon
breach of the condition the executors had entered; This had been a disposition
of the whole term, and the wife had been barred thereof, because the whole
Interest was in that case passed away by the husband: Also if husband and wife
be ejected of a term in the right of his wife, and the husband bring an
Ejectione firmae in his own name, and have judgment to recover, this is an
alteration of the term, and vesteth it in the husband: and sic de similibus.

214. Her will ought to become his will, and to be subject unto it.
Co. Inst pars 1. 112. b. 1.
1. The husband may devise lands to his wife, Devise.
because (as Littleton says. 168.) the devise takes not effect till after the
husbands death; Howbeit this reason holds not to make a devise of lands from
the wife to the husband goo^; for if a Feme covert be seized of lands in fee,
she cannot devise the same to her husband, because at the making of her will
she had no power (being sub potestate viri) to devise the same, and the law
intends, that it may be done by coercion of her husband.

Co. ibid. 132. b. 2.
2. A woman cannot be professed a Nun during the life of her husband: Profession.
Howbeit in such case some do hold a diversity, viz. that ante carnalem
copulam, the husband or wife may enter into religion without any consent, but
Post carnalem copulam neither of them can without the consent of the other.

Co. ibid. 310. b. 1.
3. If a Feme sole makes a lease for life or years reserving a rent, Attornment.
and grants the reversion in fee, and then takes husband, this is a
countermand of the Attornment; for that she had no such freedom of will, when
her grant was to take perfection by attornment, as she had at the time of the
grant made, her will now being subject to the will of her husband.

Co. l. 2. 57. a. 4. in Beckwiths case.
4. If Baron and feme levy a fine of land, Declaration of Uses.
whereof they are seized in right of the feme, and the baron only declare the
use of the fine, this declaration of the use shall bind the feme, if her
disassent appear not, albeit her assent to the limitation of the uses cannot
appear; for when she joins with the baron in the fine, it shall be intended (if
the contrary appear not) that she joined also with him in agreement in the
declaration of the uses of the fine.

Declaration of uses.
5. If Baron and feme sell the land of the feme to another for money by parol,
and after levy a fine to the vendee and his heirs; this is good, Co. l. 2. 24.
Beckwiths case.
and shall bind the feme without any writing proving her assent; A fortiori
when the use is declared by the deed of the baron, and no other declared by the
feme, it shall bind, vide 12 Eliz. 290. Dyer. Baron and feme were seized of a
tenement in London to them and the heirs of the Baron, and the Baron covenanted
by Indenture in consideration of 20 l. that he and his wife should suffer a
recovery by writ of right according to the custom of London (which binds as a
fine at the Common Law) and that the recovery should be to the use of the
recoverors, until they should make a lease by Indenture for 40 years, and
after the making of the lease, then to the use of the baron and feme and the
heirs of the baron, and the recovery was had accordingly, and the opinion of
all the Justices was, that the lease was good, and not disseisible by the feme,
who survived the baron; And yet in this case the baron was only party to the
deed that declared the use, nevertheless it bound the feme, because the feme
is sub potestate viri. And therefore albeit the feme be owner of the land, and
the declaration or disposition of the use insues the ownership of the land,
sicut umbra sequitur corpus; Co. l. 4. 51. b. 2. And. Ognels case.
yet in regard she is sub potestate viri, she cannot in respect of her
coverture without the barons consent limit the use, no more than she can make
an executor without such consent.

Devise.
6. A feme sole devises land to a man, and then takes him to husband, Co. l. 4.
61. a. 3. etc. Forse, and Hemblings case.
and dies, this intermariage is a revocation of the devise, and the heirs of
the feme shall have the land, and not the husband; because after marriage the
will of the feme in judgment of law is subject to the will of her husband, and
(as it is commonly said) a feme covert has not any will; for the making of the
will is but the inception thereof, and takes not effect until the death of the
devisor: Omne Testamentum morte consummatum est, and voluntas est ambulatoria
usque ad extremum vitae exitum.

Tenant at will.
7. If a feme sole be lessor or lessee at will, and take husband, Co. l. 5. 50.
a. 4. Hensteads case.
this determines not the will; because after the marriage, the feme herself
cannot countermand or determine the lease at will, no more than where she and
her husband make a lease at will rendering rent during the coverture, or if a
lease be made to them at will; for she has submitted herself and all her will
to her husband; And* so a few covert may have a tenant at will, or be a tenant
at will, and yet she herself cannot countermand it, because she by her
intermariage has put her couutermanding power in this case (which concerns not
franktenement or Inheritance) into the mouth of her husband: so if baron and
feme demise land at will, and the baron dies, this is no countermand of the
will, but the lease continues still.

Security of the peace.
8. The will of the wife ought (by the law of England) to be subject to the will
of her husband; that to make her obedient thereunto, F. B. 81. f
the Common Law does seem to allow him to give her lawful and reasonable
chastisement, For if the husband threaten to beat or kill his wife, she may
have a writ de securitate pacis against him, but such writ shall have this
clause in it, Quod ipse praef. A. been and honest tractabit and gubernabit, ac
damnum and malum aliquod eidem B. de corpore suo aliter quam ad virum suum ex
causa regiminis and castigationis uxoris suae licite and rationabiliter
pertinet, non faciet nec fiei procurabit quovismodo, Compellatis, etc.

Pl. Co. 37. a. 2. in Plats case.
9. If the office of the warden of the Fleet (which is an office in fee) descend
to a feme sole, Escape.
and she mary's one imprisoned there upon an execution, this shall be adjudged
an escape in the feme, who is warden, and the Prisoner (albeit he be within the
walls of the prison) is thereby enlarged; for he cannot be lawfully imprisoned,
but under a warden, and he cannot be under the guard of his wife; and therefore
the law will adjudge him at large.

Co. Inst. pars 1. 3. a. 1.
10. A feme covert cannot take any thing of the gift of her husband, Purchase by
a feme covert.
but is of capacity to purrhase of others without the consent of her husband;
Howbeit her husband may disagree thereunto, and divest the whole estate; but if
he neither agree nor disagree, the purchase is good; Howbeit, after his death,
albeit her husband agreed thereunto, yet she may without any cause to be
alleged waive the same, and so may her heirs also, if after the decease of her
husband she herself agreed not thereunto.

Dyer 271. 27 10 Eliz.
11. The baron is outlawed, and his feme waived, Baron and feme outlawed.
the feme comes in in ward by process, and has a charter of Pardon; In this
case, she shall be discharged of the Imprisonment, but the charter could not be
allowed, because she could not have a Scire facias against the Plaintiff without
her husband, for that her will is subject unto his.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
ABatement of Writ, 683. 695. Where dissability abates it not, 38. Of a Quare
Impedit, 90. 247. 557. Of a Formedon, for an omission in pedigree, 597.
Abatement in Lands, where it is no bar, 564. Abayance, 633. Abbot and Prior.
676. 732. Abjuration, 342. 345. 391. Ab initio, 486. Acceptance, 169. 460, 461.
Of a Rent, where it makes a Lease good, 40. 141. 458 Makes voidable Leases
good; not so of void, 54 103. Where a good bar, 59. 579. Of Rent, no
Confirmation, 572. Of a Deed, makes Attornement good, 458. Of one thing in liew
of another, 461. Bars Escheats, 470. O counterfeit money, after receiving of it
shall not give advantage to alter for the Condition broken. Accruer, 771. Of
estate, 194. Accord, With satisfaction where a good Plea, 64. Accessory, No
Accessory without a Principal, 4^. 713. Actions, To be laid, where the cause
arises, 47. Where the ground of it fails, all is gone, 114. Entire, 252.
Popular, 331. Real and personal, 363. Where to be brought, 495. Acts, The
original Act, where to be considered, 62 Done to a man's self, 169, 170, 171.
Voluntary and Compulsary, 422. against common right, 548. Actions upon the
Case, 573. For woe ds, 159. 678 690. 703, 704. 734. 762. For Nusances 95. 696.
Lies not for erecting a Dove cote, 684. Upon abatement of goods lost, or
spoiled by negligence, 670. Acts of Parliament, 331. B^st expound themselves
^49. Judges, to take notice of them, 29^. Do no wrong, 580. Repugnant, void,
641. 644. Account, 715. Against Guardian in Socoge, and when, 85. Not against
the Executors of the Accountant, 155. 597. Must be grounded upon privity, 175.
Of Merchants, 738. Accusation; None bound to accuse himself, 486. Acquittance,
97. 464. Advantages, Not taking of them, is an Inlet to Covin, 457.
Administrators and Administration, 456. Where they shall not sue Execution, 83.
In Law, 140. Ought to execute their office faithfully, 340. Of bona Notabilia,
218. Composition, shall not prejudice, 330. Admeasurement. Of Acres, how to be
482. Advowson, 251. 290. 610. Appendant, 143. After Partition remains
appendant, 228. Appendant to one Acre, 234. To the Demesnes, 236. Admission,
and Institution, 709. Age. 346. 347. By the civil Law, 348. Agreement and
Disagreement, 454, 455. Aid, 31. To deraigne the Warranty 40 Of the King, 307.
Allegiance, 134. 288. One may be borne in England, and yet not within the Kings
Allegiance, 46. Is due to the natural person, 88* An inseparable incident,
136. Due by nature, 279. Is not local, 287. Alienations, by Tenant in tail
where no bar, 72. By Tenant by the Courtesy no bar, 206. Of a Villain
purchasor, 291. Alien, 291. 345. May trade, 95. Not Inheritable, 160. In
league, may be indicted, but not alien Enemy, 344. May have and maintain
Actions personal, may purchase to the use of the King. Amendment, of a Record,
594. Amercement, upon a Nonsuit, upon what Lands, 42. in Courts Baron, and
Leet, 335. Of the Town, for Manslaughter, 588. Te^med Misericordia, 686
afferred, 725 The C^untry not amerced for not apprehend^ng of Felons for f^lon
s in the night, 488. Annuity, 703. What, 155. Extinct by Eviction of the Land,
31. Not maintainable against the Heir by Prescription 36. Where good hy
Prescription 69. Good, and yet the Land evicted 576. Annual sum not severable
240. Ann and Jour. 489 To bring Appeal to make claim 489. Appeals 391. 768.
Not by the Lord against his Villain 104. 500. By the Villain against the Lord
110. Of Mayhm 680. Malicious abhorred in Law 499. Apportionment and Division.
Castles where dividable 91. Estovers, Advowsons, and things entire not
apportionable 255. 455. Approvement 208. Apt words 606. Appropriation 710.
Disappropriate 125. Appendant and Appurtenant 284. Arrests 355. 424. The Bailey
must show his Warrant 700. Erroneous 590. Arbitrament and Arbitrators 456. 153
221. 379. 713. 749. Their power not irrevokable 379. A Plea to it revoked 138.
Attaint, lies not before Execution 112. By the heir in Villainage 198. No new
Evidence to be given in it 605. 711. Attachment of a Debt in London 400. Assets
149. 386. Found in any County 430. Assets, by Descent. Assumpsit 280. 600.
Defeated 123. Assignments 325. Of Dower 579. Assignees in Fait and in Law 708.
451. May vouch 187. Attainder, the right of the Heir not forfeited by it 188
Attorneys. The Lessor Attorney to make Livery 60. 90. Cannot do more then his
Master 66. So of Bailey ibid. Were not allowed by the common Law 152. To deliver
Seisin 336. Assize, By Joynt-tenants and Tenants in Common 43. Of a Rent after
a Disseisin 143. By the Grantee of a Seigniory upon a Fine before Attornement
15. In Consinio Comitatus 225. Amounts to a claim 584. Attornement 707. 770.
143. 155. 184. 255. 326, 377. Not compellable to a deseisible estate 33. 601.
Where upon Alienations 32. Who shall attorne 33. Paramount a Condition 82. of a
Eeme Sole 110. Where it is needful 13 601. To the particular Tenant, vests all
Remainders 183. Upon the grant of Rent, who ought to attorne 183, 184. By one
Joynt-tenant good for both 185. 188. 256. Of an Enfant 690. One not to attorne
without his Companion 699. Not for a time, or upon Condition 508. Void for
uncertainty 625. Audita Querela 123. 147. 605. By an Enfant to avoid a Statute,
672. To avoid a Statute made by duresse 50. Not after a release 105. Nonsuit in
it 335. Averment, not against a Presumption in Law 707. Negative Pleas not to
be averred 110. Not of that, which appears 112. Where necessary, and e contr.
613. Avowry 92. For a Rent service upon the person 32. Where title is to be
made 165 Made for a Rent, where it shall be a bar in Annuity 176. without
Attornement 557. 593. Determination of Election 473. Auditors. Of the Court of
Wards granted to two, there shall be no Survivor 747. Authority 733. 374.
Created, by the parties, and by the Law differ 438. Revocable 243. 450. Ancient
Demesne 147, 148. 276. 292. 369. 708. Award 247. 679. 456.
B.
Bail 686. 714. Bailement 380. 702. Of Goods 35. 375. Executors of the Bailee
shall not take advantage of a Release 5. Bars 233. In diverse respects 163.
479. Defective, yet the Plaintiff shall recover 243. 248. In personal, and
real Actions 360. In a Writ of Escheat 369. In a Quare Impedit, and e contr.
394. and 588. e contr. In Mayhm 695. Bar in an Action upon the Case is a bar in
Debt 695. Baron and Feme 141. 359. 571. Grant of the Husband without the wife,
where not good 63. Estates to them is Joynt-tenancy 66. Husband, charge the
Wives Lands 81. Wife can pass nothing, without Examination 317. Husband cannot
grant to his Wife 765. Hold by Entierties 766. Bastard and Mulier 52. 200. 349.
723. 499, 500. Shall vouch 431. Takes by purchase 432. Est nullius filius 500.
Battle, in an Appeal 155. Bills, Of Revivor, not upon Revivor 678. Bylaws,
where good 734. Blood Corrupted, not inheritable 246. Body, more worthy then
Land 224. Bonds taken by the Sheriff, where not, with the Statute of 23. of H.
6. 250. without date good 390. Boots, where the Lessee may take them without
Assignment 244.
C.
CApias pro fine 52. 711. Lay not at the Common Law for a Debt 354. Carrier
410. Castle-Gard 222. Casualties not devisable 627. Cause, the cause ceasing
the effect shall. cease 29. 30 Charges upon Lands, where good, and e contr. 117,
118. Upon a Benefice, without the Patron 411. Where the person shall be charged
although discharged by a Proviso 551. Cestuy que use, his Lessees estate
determined 38. Champerty 281. Chattells, real return to the wife 82. Vested
103. 137. What the Husband shall have 769. Challenge 72. 114 167. 292. 677. To
the Array and Polls 277. 569. Peremptory 352. Cannot be of the four Knights of
the Grand Assize 706. 481. Charters, how to be construed 65. Chaplains 64. 76.
Certainty, where required 629, 630, 631, 632, 633. Certificate, of the Bishop
156. 291. Of an Accord, before a Non omittas 272. Not to be traversed Clergy
106. 357. Claim 550. 553. 609. Where not needful 601. How it must be made 43.
in part, good in all 216. Fear of making continual claim 353. 489. When, and
where to be made 495. by the Lord of the Villains goods 361. Of Privilege 366.
the Heir Beyond Sea, not barred by Non claim 671. in Case of fear made as
near the Land as may be, good 487. Circuit of Action 680. Collusion 693.
Collations 717, 718. Common Recovery, common Assurances 742, 743, Where bars an
estate tail, 45. Common, Of Vicinage 34. 211. Appendant, due of common right
63. Apportionable 238. 548. Ratione Comorantie 269. 287. Without number 576,
577. Commoners, by Vicinage, may enclose one against another 699. Compositions
330. Conditions, precedent and subsequent 47. 64. Proviso, is a word of
Condition 53. 68. A Stranger may take advantage of it 53. Of a Mortgage must be
performed 65. Where an estate shall cease upon it 68. Paramount, a Descent 81.
83. 293. Of Encreaser 293. Accessarie, to the estate 232. Runs with the Lands
255. Entire 259, 260. 485. Repugnant 639. and e contr. 640. subsequent, not to
be averred, 646. Not pleadable without showing the Deed 324. Words Conditional
in Leases 361 In Law, upon Trust 375. Annexed to estates in Lands, and of a
Recognizance differ 395. In the Disjunctive 442. Apportioned by Act in Law 439.
Where by Entry for a Condition, the party shall not be in his first estate 607.
Impossible void 608. Unreasonable 694. When to be performed presently, when in
convenient time 491, 492, 493. Restraines Liberty 483. Performance of them must
be averred 485. Concord 415. Conjunction and Copulative, how to be taken 13,
14. Confirmations, void, 74, 116. 160, 161. Of a Rent void, to enlarge his
estate 59. 255. By the Patron and Ordinary 59. Works not, without Privity 183.
Joint, to the Husband and Wife 362. Conformity, Joynder in Actions and Fines
for Conformity 438. Contracts void 75. Import an Assumpsit 137. Conspiracy 171.
Must be brought at least against two 763. Lies not after a Pardon 35.
Indicted, though yet nothing in Execution 700. Contempts 152. Color of Entry
431. Not to be given where the Plea goes in bar of the right 602. Consent takes
away Erro^s 481. Contribution 413. Where not compellable upon Audita Querela
36. Where the heir sued shall not have 199. 282. Considerations 413, 414. Where
blood is no good Consideration, and e contr. 138. What is good, within 13 Eliz.
cap. 5. 168. To raise Uses 281 Continual Claim 584 Construction, Where one
thing shall be taken within another 218 219. Concealments 240. 302
Constitutions 735 Conveyances, out of the Statute of 32 H. 8. of Wills 717. By
Livery, where a Forfeiture 370 Copyholds and Copyholders 727. 760. 217. No Fine
due upon surrender or descent before Admittance 45. May lop Trees 47. Their
estate confirmed by Custom 58. Surrenders by Attorney, and good 68. In by the
Surrender, not by the Lord 83. Severed by Custom, so continue 133. 328.
Grantable, by Executors 142. Dominus pro tempore 142. Grantable in fee, may be
granted for life 216. Their Fines must be reasonable 213. Surrenders, before
admittance, good 327. In pleading may allege an Admittance as a Grant.
Copyhold Customs 759. Extinct 463 Convenience, things respected, by reason of
their convenience 428 Cornage 162 Corodies 228 254 Corporations 390. 708. 719.
Failing, the Lands revert 29. Hold Lands, by Knights service 36. Where granted,
is dissolved upon a Release 52. 53. Translated, enjoy their old Privileges
154. Single and aggregate 150. Altered, yet the body remains 354 Corruption of
Blood 161 Coronors, their Inquest 244 Costs 564 Covenants, joint and several
89. What bind betwixt Lessor and Lessee 133. Incident to the Lands, and came
with it 135. Employed and expressed 157. Have special relation 167 Covin
apparent, need not be showed 603. Hinders a Remitter 612. Not presumed, unless
averred 725 Cui in vita 765 Custom Concealed 14. Of goods lost by Tempest, not
recoverable 591 Customs, binds strangers 145. Of Borough English 148. 244*
313. To have a Fine for marrying the Daughter 352 Cou ts, made good, by the Bar
and Replication 249. Must contain certainty and verity 605. abated by
mis-recitall 470 Courts Baron 135. By Commission cannot sit in Term where the
Kings Bench is 223. Remedy for spiritual things in temporal Courts 234 Of
Record only have power to imprison 367
D.
Days, in Court, and pleadable 7 Damages several, amongst Parcenors 237. When
they shall be laid in the Count 597. And increased, and e contr. 502. Double
Writs of Enquiry of them 696 Darriane Presentment 331. 341. 382. Demand, of a
Rent, when to be made 489, 490, 491, 492, 493. 495. 474. Of the purchase of a
Villain 495 Deeds must be avoided by Deeds 71, 72. In whose custody to remain
127. In Cases of necessity may be proved without showing them 425. Made void by
rasure, etc. 590. Fraudulent void 613, 614, 615. 691. Not to be pleaded,
without showing 706 Death, Not traversable 603 Delivery, Of Goods by the
Banckrupt not good 207 Degrees, Of worthiness of the Lands 269 Demise of the
King, no change by it 145 Demise of goods 151 Debt, for rent after a Surrender
144. Extinct 154. 172. Against Executors 157. 161. 288. Against the Heir 556
Denial 596 Deraignment purges Profession 73 Deprivation 289 Detinue, by the
heir of Deeds 691. For Charters, 136. Of Charters where no Plea 195 Devise 715.
770. One equal part of Capite Land to descend 209. For Executors to sell 221.
Of the third part 327. Of a Reversion sold by Executors 336. Shall make a
Fee-simple by Construction in Law 709 Demand, the form of it in a Writ 17. Of
rent, must be upon the Land, and when 52. 245. 460 490. Not to be by the King
295 Demurrer 296 Devastavit 754 756 Dignity, forfeited for Treason 138.
Restrained to an estate for life 156. Respected for convenience 428 Descent
293. 311, 312. When privity of blood fails 32. Where shall take away Entry,
Et e contra, 32, 134, 609. To Daughters, and not Parcenors, 51. In stirpes, and
in capita 61. By Entry into Region 62. Where not good against the King, 62. One
out of the Realm not barred by a descent, 216. Takes away Entry, 577. 591. 683,
716. Of the Bastard eigne where it shall bar the Mulier 493 Discontinuance, 20,
56, 57, 325, 368, 270, Removed the Issue may enter, 33. Defeated upon a
surrender, 33. Of an Estate tail 44. 55. Once defeated, all that depends upon
it is gone, 117. Where a Bar, Et e contra, 185. Of the Lands by the husband,
218. By enfeoffing the Donor and a stranger, 256. The reason of it, 697
Discontinuance of Suit 557 Dispensations 160. To take two livings, 22, 101
Disseisin 696. Not of a Rent without Attornment 217. Not of a Rentcharge or
Seck but at Election 462. In time of war takes not away Entry 488 Disseisor
and Disseisee 235. May be no Tenant of the Land 563 Disfranchisement 107
Disceit 147 596 Disclaimer 364. 368. Where it shall bind, and e contr. 55. In
the blood 459 Disability 343. 570. To make a Surrender 602 Distress, for
Damage feasant most be upon the Land 31. Of the Lord out of his fee, when 42.
Of the Lord Paramount without attornement 82. No Distress is irreplevisible
168. For owelty of Partition 237. In the night 418 Not for certainty in Leet
549. For more rent then is due, where justifiable 468, 469. In another County
418 Division, of Lands, in Hotch pot 205. Of the Testators goods 205 Divine
service, by Prescription 683 Divorce, 593. Causa frigiditatis 714. Sentence in
case of Divorce repeated after the death of the parties 498 Donative, Charges
donative, may be made Presentative 462 Double Pleas 625 Dower, where it lies
against the Guardian and e contr. 35. Of a woman at nine years of age 37. Ex
assensu Patris, where not good 73. 622. Dos non de dote 79 According to the
improved value 79. of Copyhold 91. 556. Where not of the Rent, but of the Land
125 Of entire things 207. Ad ostium Ecclesiae 220. 622. Of Castles where, and e
contr. 729. Of the pluis beat part 730. Of Rent to be delivered by the
Sheriff 429 Duchy of Cornwall 720 Drunkard 570
E.
Ecclesiastical persons cannot prejudice their Church, 4. Cannot disclaim, 4.
May resign to the King, 220. Ecclesiastical Courts, may take Recognizance of
a debt, 239. Where Temporal Courts are to take notice of their Jurisdiction,
599. Ecclesiastical Laws, What are in force, 7. Founded by the Common Law 71.
Ejectione firmae, 141. 727. Of what it lies not, 18. Not within the Statute of
32 H. 8. of Titles 92. By the Lessee of a Copyholder 545 506 Estates,
Deseiable, 122. Upon accruer, 122, Particular and Remainder one Estate 187.
Voidable evicted by Guardian and Bishop, 192. In tail cannot drown, 201 Two
Estates made together of one Land, 207. Once void remediless, 395. Executed
and Executory, 396. Altered and charged 433 Election, 159, 473, 474, 475, 477.
Of a Writ of Annuity or Distress. 473. Lost by doing wrong, 565. By
Coparcenors, 478. To Corporations, 753. Of the Knights of the Parliament, 550.
Of the Heir and the Lord, 475. Of things in grant, 475. Of Entry and Actions,
476 Enfranchisement, 356, 459. For a time, 161 Enfant, May attorne 48. Shall do
his Services, ibid. Where, shall not have his Age, 48. Cannot be Guardian, 104,
Where his plea shall demurr for Enfancy, 315. Shall not account, 319. Their
Acts upon Record not voidable, 369. Married before years of consent, 402.
Compellable to attorne 415 Entry congeable 40 44 Entry, Taken away by
Corruption of blood, 37 Revived, 38. Is not good where is no Interest 55. Taken
from the Issue in tail, 57 After Entry, the party Trespassor Ab initio, 108.
Given to the King without demand, 275. When may be for non-payment of Rent
without demand, Et e contra, 496. By a stranger, devests not an estate 485
Encroachment of Rent, avoided in Avowry: or by Nuper obijt 477 Emblements 85,
466, 587. 730, 442, 583. Equity, What it is, 202. Upon certain statutes, 204,
295, 210, 211, 212, 213. Error, Not after a Release, 105, In Court, 124. By him
in the Reversion, or Remainder 132. In Law, not reversable in the same Court
170. By the Vouchee 197. Who may have Error 198. 546. Not upon Disclaimer 198.
647. No Writ, before the Judgemennt be completed 247. 274. 545. 693. In fact,
and in Law 682. In London 701. Upon a Plaint in Inferior Courts 709 Escheat
294 Escape 36. 95. 572. 585. 685, 772. 645. By marriage of the Keeper 36.
Against a Jailer 561 Estrepment 700. In what case it lies 682 Estovers 135 194
Estoppell 186. 566. The heir where not estopped 573. No Estoppell, to allege
the truth which appears on Record 604 Executors, where they shall not recover
Arreares but lose them 66, 67. May release before Probate 125. Chargeable,
without naming of them 166. Not chargeable where the Testator might wage his
Law 590. Of his own wrong 466 Execution 400. Where against the Kings Debtor,
and e contr. 40. Of the Land only, which the party had at the time of the
Judgment 42. Where returneable, and e contr. 93. What Execution was at the
common Law upon a Recognizance 214. 215. Cannot be of the profits of an Office
in Trust 236. Discharged by purchase of parcel of the Land 240. Sheriff may
break open doors to do it 290. Where not against an heir Enfant 350.
Valuable, or without satisfaction 350. No protection after it 394. Of the body
not valuable 587. Prisoners are in Execution till delivered over to the new
Sheriff 699. Of Process 699 Excomengment 688. Where a good Plea to abate a
Writ, and e contr. 38. Where it shall disable, and e contr. 170 Exchange.
Imports Warranty and Covenant 137, Not equal void, 242. Entire, being a
condition in Law, 259. Not executed void, 393 Exigent, 122 Extent 480
Exposition of words, 13, 18, 96, 217, 705, Construction of them must referr to
the next Antecedent. 15. In forma predicta, 15. Of Sentences and words 21 23
Exception 165 Extinguishment, Tail extinct in a fee-simple 223. Of a Rent
charge, bars an annuity, 434 Ex gravi querela, to whom granted 550
F.
FAiler, Of Action, 75. Of the Record, 620 Falsifier of Recovery, Not by Tenant
in tail in Remainder 67 False Latin 19. Shall not quash a Count, nor a
judicial Writ 21 Fealty 129, 581. Incident though not named, 134 Fee-simple,
Without words Heirs 409, passes out of the King without Office 421 Fees,
Barons and Knights Fees, 203 Feoffments, To uses, 148. To the use of his Will,
the use is in the Feoffor 53 Conditional 285. Makes not extinguishment of
Rent, 482. Not to an Alien, 618. By Deed, not devefted by words 699 Feme covert
562. After coverture, a Neife again, 31. disabled to bring Actions, 551
Felony, 50, 420 Felo de se, Shall not forfeit to the King a debt upon a simple
Contract 694 Fines levied of Lands, 93, 214, 400. Void, 74, 75, 400 Cannot
operate double, 96 Bar an intaile, 154, 188, 330, For years within the
Statute of 11 H. 7. 209 Levied by Covin shall not bar, 586. 613. Reversed 715
Fines upon copyhold Estates, 434. Excessive or unreasonable, no Forfeiture to
deny them, 685 Fine, In a Leet to be distinct and not joint, 49, 334 557. For
an unjust vexation, 68^. Eor disturbance in a Court of Record 741 Forejudger,
371 Folly, where attributed to the party, and so bind them 666 667 Forfeiture,
of marryage, not paid after Knigthood 34. Of a Dignity entailed 93 Not without
some overt act done 108. Of an office for waste 214 For saying Mass 245. By
Attornement upon Record 366 Fo^cible Entry 91 Foundation, of a College, where
void 76 Formedon 41 599 Frankalmoigne 410 720 Frank-marriage, Hotchpot 31. 62.
Who shall have the Land, after a Divorce 52. Out of use 158 Fractions, in
Conditions, estates 256 257 Franchises, shall not dye 64 65 Fraud 613 614 615
Fraudulent Grants 747
G.
GArnishment 123 Gavelkind 148 Goales 133 Guardian, the body of the Ward
severed from the Land, the Lord shall have the benefit of the two years 30. In
Socage cannot present to a Benefice 104. Accountable 142 576. In Socage 235.
351. 371. Of what discharged upon his Account 583. Must account of the marryage
of the heir 665 Goods, too high apprised to be delivered, the Apprisors 215
Grand Serjeancy 150 687 Grants of the King 206. Grants to the King restrained
by general words of Statutes 26. Of an office, and after of a Rent for the
exercise of it, the office determined 41. Made upon false suggestions of the
parties, are void 302. 616. 457. Construed for his honor, and the releife of
the Subjects 741 Grants, of an estate of Freehold in futuro void 24. Not to be
expounded against the express Letter 25. Of a Villain for years, not good
without Deed 42. Of a Reversion not good without Attornment 67. Of Monopoly,
void 68. Of a Rent, where void 74. Of the office of Auditor 77. Of a
Surveyorship 77. To a College, where void 77. Of Glebe Lands, void, to
Children before birth, void 78. Made upon good grounds, and e contr. 128. of
Services, Quid operatur 129 of the next avoydance 160. 164 245. 579. of a
Seigniory 169. of Pawnage 245. of copyholds 252. In pais, not good, without
Attornment 366. Joint, where they enure severally 608. 609. By Ecclesiastical
persons 762. Where good, without Attornment 455, Made Concurrentibus his, how
they operate 484 Gifts, to Husband and Wife, how to be taken 62. Causa
Matrimonii prolocuti 275
H.
HAbendum, and Premises, their difference 100 Heir, a man's heir remains in
him during his life 241 Heresy 8 Heriot service, and custom 254 Homage, by
Husband and Wife 767. Auncestrell gone after Alienation 30. 410. May be
separated, and twice done 113. Personal 150 Extinct 173. Auncestrell implies
Acquitaile 607. Hotchpot 205 600 Hospitalls 407 Huy and Cry 588 Hundred, not
chargeable to a Felony done in a man's house 668
I.
IDiots, examined in Chancery 123 Imprisonment 320 356 743 Indictments, Not
void by Nicity, or Curiosity 26. 27. Good though not pursued in the
Circumstances 386. Where, the wound must be left out, and e contr. 602.
Fraudulent 620. Auterfoits acquit, where a good Plea 501 Incidents 131.
Incident services not discharged without special words 131. Fish and Doves to
the Freehold 226. To a Deed 321. To Corporations 135. Inseparable 135. A
Judgment distroyes a Bond 222 Entire things 262, 263, 264, 265, 266. 498.
Entire Inheritances 720. Multiplied 467 Indentures, subsequent, declare uses of
a precedent Recovery 468 Inventions, new, are dangerous 756 Enclosures 563.
Disseisin of a Rent 742 Inheritances, shall not depend, upon uncertain words
107 Indicavit, where it lies, and e contr. 178. 179 Infidells, accounted
Enemies in Law 10 Interpretation of the Statute of 11 H. 8. Of the Statute of
32 H. 2. cap. 2. Of Charters, as the Law was when they were first made 158.
Joyntures, void 75 Before marriage no bar of dower by the Common Law 414 Made
in liew of Dower 464 Joynder in Action 600 430 Joint tenants charge 164. May
grant their moyeties 57. 59 of a right, of differing natures 162. May prejudice
one another 363 Issue, where not inheritable 343 Issues, of Jurors levied upon
the Feoffee 42 Journeys Accounts 121 588 Judgments, in the Grand Assize 677.
where defeated 122, 123. Payable, before debts 350. Upon dead men 561. Drown
Obligations 681. Final 6. 77 Jurisdiction of Courts 139. Prohibited. 139
Justices of the Benches 219. Must surcease upon the Kings Certificate 38. Where
they ought to give Judgment, ex officio 703. Where righteous Judgment 507 Juris
Vtrum 161
K.
KIng, his command against the Law not to be obeyed 8. 103. Shall have the
Purchases of Aliens 38. Shall not find Pledges 106. Not deceived in making
Leases 219. No Minor 224. his Debts shall first be paid 228. His Grants
favorably interpreted 295. 299. His Prerogatives 296, 297, 298, 299. 305. Acts
to him done, must be fully completed 301. Where not barred by Acts of
Parliament 303. Cannot be Joynt-tenant with another 305. absolute before his
Coronation 389. Has property of Felons goods waived 670 Knights-service 91 738
L.
LAw, Common Law preferred before the Statute Law, 341. Favors Right, 542.
Where it excuses 609 Appropriats to it self vocabula artis to express it self
by 632. Penal not taken by Equity, 686. hates Vice, 499. Countenanceth things
done in peace, more then in War, 437, 488. Lachesse, shall not prejudice an
Enfant, 6 Of Entry, shall bar the party, 666, 667 Leases, 74, 69, 393. With
condition to take the profits, 11. The Commencement of them 7. Where exception
in them is void, 11, 13. Durante viduitate, 67. By Tenant in tail, good only
for his life, 67. 162. When to begin* 76. Where shall enure by grant or
confirmation, 102. where voidable, 121. To one and his Heirs at will, void
242. Of a house with Implements Quid operatur, 227. Void for incertainty, 626.
Drowned as to one, has continuance as to another, 324. For years not capable
of a Warranty, 362. By Tenant in Tail 442. By Deanes an Chapters, 715. Under
the Exchequer Seal good 743 Legacies not grantable over 95 Leet 549 Livery and
Seisin, 728. Of an Estate in futuro, void, 73. By Attorney, 96. Upon condition
99. void 113. To one, enures to both 166: Of what it must be made 226. Within
the view 393. 418. Where of part not good 5^5. Not to be made, nor taken
without a Deed 623 Livery and ouster le Maine 37 203 Libells 744 Limitation of
Uses 707 Licenses, not revocable 381. To alien where good 394. To sell Wines
157 418 Lord and Villain, manumission of the Villain 50 London, dangerous to
be populous 735
M.
MAintenance, Where justifiable 432 Manumission 392 Marriage, of Priests 73.
Due to the Lord 102 An absolute gift of Chattells to the Husband 199 Manor, by
the word Manor, a Reversion passes 218. What things it draws to it 228 229
Magis Dignum 226 348 349 Market-overt 702. In London 716 Merchants 561
Manslaughter, the diversity in it 211 Marshalsey, none to sue there but those
of the Kings Household 276. Office of it not grantable for years 757 Menalty
327 Misnosmer 391. 556. Shall not make void a Grant, or a Presentment 21 27
Misprision, of Clerks where not amendable and e contr. 250 385 592
Miscontinuance of Suit 723 Monopolies 728 748 756 140 302. Monks 337 Mortgage
251. Where upon it, the money is to be paid to Executors, where to the heir 43
Monstrans of deeds, 196. 595. 598, 457 Modo and formae, not words of substance
381. 382 Mortmaine 309 Murder 747. An Act may be murder, though not intended
48, 50. All are Principle sin it 50. Intentions adjudged Murder 901
N.
NAturalisation 284 Ne Exeat regnum 742 Necessity, in what Cases it excuses
425, 426. Writs in what Courts to be sued in case of necessity 427. A Deed not
showed, where it may be good in Evidence in case of necessity 498 Neife 356
Nobility 764. Gotten by marriage, lost by marriage 71 Non-claime 316
Non-Residency, good excuses of it 610 Nonage 74 Non Compos Mentis 43. 367.
Shall not lose his life for Felony 355 Non Obstant^ 310 Non est factum 158 591
Nonsuit, in a Quare Impedit peremptory, in Attaint peremptory, 394 604 497
Notice, where a man shall not forfeit his estate upon a Condition broken,
without notice 593. 596. Things done in one County, taken notice of by them in
another County, e contr. 595 Nusances 96. 154. 289. 602. For public and
private, how the Actions shall be 683. Abated 700
O.
OAth of Allegiance 741 Obligations, joint and several 88. Several, upon one
Parchment 320, 321. Made Beyond Sea 381. Payable before Statutes 621. With
Conditions to enfeoff 469. To perform an Accord 468. Released by making the
Obligor Executor 468. Where not to be cancelled after Judgment 716 Office
found 694. Not to be quashed but by Petition or matter of Record 70 Offices, of
trust, not traversable 89. 153. Of Clarke of the Sheriff 133. Of Exigenter of
London 137. Of the Marshall personal 152, 153. 377. Of skill 153. Of Filizer
153. Of Auditor of the Court of Wards 264. Of the Kings Tennis plays 273. In
the King without suing a Scire facias 301. Of Clarke of the County 334.
Judicial, not grantable in Reversion 701. Granted to persons unskilful or
incapable, void, 729. Where they cannot be leased for years 553 Ordinary,
where he cannot dispose of the goods 160. 340. The Intestates goods committed
to him, 300 Order in Writs 271. In pleadings 275 Oyer and Terminer, cannot sit
where the Kings Bench is, in Term time 223. For Nusances 702 Outlawry, where
it gives a Forfeiture of Land, and e contr. 50, 51. Upon an Indictment reversed
by Error 71. Outlaw, babet Caput Lupinum 341. Where beyond the sea reversible,
553, must be pleaded, Sub pede sigilli 674
P.
PAnell void 76 Pardon 164. 252. before Judgment, discharges an annuity, 31.
Cannot pardon damages or costs before Judgment for Alienations 765 Payment no
plea without acquittance, 72 place of payment of a Rent, 166 Parcenors, Where
they shall have the Rent jointly, where in common, 37, 42, 43. Shall have aid,
to deraign the warranty, 38. shall join in Assise 43. So of Deodands, 46.
Where the Judgment shall be to hold in severalty* 65. The propriety of one,
not gone by alienation in respect of privity, 175. Cannot make severance of
estate of inheritance in the Lands 608 Patron and patronage, shall not charge
the Glebe 73 Partition 746. 149. 200. 209. 369. Not avoided for inequality 437.
Where made, not to be impeached 174. Avoided by Eviction 175. Makes no
Discontinuance 438. Egality of it 552 460 Particeps Criminis 163 Peace and War
298 Parson and Vicar, his ability 4. Not to be removed, after institution 4.
Ought to be resident 6. Their Alienation, no Discontinuance 339 Peers and
Peereage, not to be sworn on Juries 740. Trial of them 741. In Coparcenory
267 268 Piracy 547 Plaints, in Copyhold Courts 132 Pleadings, and Pleas 456.
Guardian may plead, without showing a Deed 445. Of Non est factum, or Judgment
if Action 101. Truth and Certainty must be in them 604. dictatory 644. In bar
to a common intent good 710. Not to be holden in the night 488 Plenarty 291,
294 Pluralities 21, 787 Perquisites 159 Shall accrue to executors 236
Perpetuities, 711 753 757 void 243 688. Post nati and Antenati 158. Not noble,
without creation 46 Possession fratris 141 P^ssibility 401. 406. may be
forfeited. 405 remote is never intended in Law 620 621 Post fines 268
Prescription, where insufficient 17. Extinct by interruption 32. Felons goods
not forfeitable by prescription 45. Where saved 72. In a water course 144. Of
Estovers, 144 quashed by a record or writing, 222. for Felons goods, not good
225. To repair Sea Bancks 671. for tithes, 698. where void 478. Repugnant void
644 Presentation and nomination 717 771 89 145 147. 469 By Symmony, 73 By laps
294 their difference 559 Precipe in capite 331 Privilege of Bailee of goods
detained 34 of Tenant by the courtesy lost 125. Lost by purchase 126. Of
impeachment of waste gone by altering the Estate 197. Of a person in one Court
not allowed where another Court is seized of the plea 471 of the Clergy 5. of
Tenant by the courtesy 61 Priority and posteriority 160 307 Privity of blood
and title 178 179. of contract 190 of estate and contract, 190 favored in Law,
172 173 destroyed, the action is gone 173. Homage extinct for want of privity
173 In blood and estate 177 193. between the Ancestor and the Heir, the
Testator and Executor 176 177 Procedendo 675 Prohibition 681 682 Of Waste not
against Tenant in dower 125. against waste 213. upon a suit for Orphans goods
in the spiritual Court 681 To the spiritual Court for examining a thing
triable at Common Law 487 Power of Revocation annulled by Feoffment or Release
69 Protection 307 688 702 Quia moratur in Walliam 35 Repealed by Inotesimus 41
72 By whom must be disallowed 68 Cast for the vouchee 174 by whom it may be
cast 595 Uncertain void 623 In what cases not allowable 673 in what actions not
673 674 not for the demandant 688 quia profecturus, quia moraturus 732 not for
above a year 489 Profession 576 makes no descent 571 discharges wardship 576
Proof 597 Proviso where it makes a condition 13 Proximity of Estates respected
272 Purchase of a Feme Covert, not good without the assent of her husband 772
Principal and accessory 231 232 233 234 241
Q.
QVare Impedit, 141, 172, 329, 341, 681, 467, 451. Causes or refusal of a
Clarke, 45. Not without alleging a presentment 717 Quare non admisit, Out of
what Court, 234 Quare incumbravit, 682 Queen, Is a person exempt from the King,
and may grant, or take 732 Quit Rents 157 Quid Juris clamat, 427 Quod ei
deforceat 34. Whereupon a Recovery had upon default in Wast, Et e contra 44.
For Tenant in Dower and the Courtesy, 273 Quo minus 599 Quo warranto 713
R.
RAtionabile part bonorum, 477 Ravishment of Guard, 335. The guardian shall
have it 103 Rebutter, 191. 687. 763. Without privity, 187 Recovery, By default,
19. 316. Where it is no Discontinuance, 19. In value. 51. 413. Feined, 118. Not
avoidable by error 417. Bind, being by consent of parties, 481 Recognizance 151
Records, removal of them 351 Recaption, 681. 501 Recusancie 245 Redisseisin
682 Refusal Of goods in pais, 455. Of the Clarke, 591 Reparation of Sea
bancks, 671. 591. Felling of Timber for Reparation 733 Rleases, 33, 58, 105,
115, 116, 182, 183. Of Actions, 480. By Executors before probate, 507. Excuses
Execution, 32. Of a Remainder of a Term, 49. Before an Interest void, 56. To
disseisors how it enures, 57. To the Bail not good, 58. Of a Conusee of a
Statute of his right in the Land, yet he may sue Execution, 59 By the Donor to
the discontinuee of Tenant in Tail, 60. To Lessee for years, where void, 73.
For a time, good for ever 115. To privies, where good, 180. Before Entry, where
void, 181. To Tenant at Will and sufferance, the difference, 181. without
privity is void, Of a writ of Error 187. of all demands, 217. Of a future
Interest, where void, 242. In Fact and in Law, 440. Of a Right 450. To one
Disseisor, 563 Relation, 165, 167, 326. Protection and Subjection relate from
the birth, 165 Of offices and fees, 165. of damages and wrong 166. Of process,
166 Remainder, 705. Where good, where void, 15 117. 128. 608. Of a Rent, void,
55. 119. of a Term, not grantable, 59. good when the particular Estate fails,
99. Must vest during the particular estate, 119. To a man's right heir, a
limitation to himself, 128 Upon an Estate tail not valuable, 417. against his
own alienation, 554 Remitter, 84, 159, 311, 313, 314, 705, 667 668, 763, 768 Of
the wife is the Remitter of the husband, 508. Of an Infant, where not 67.
avoyds a Rent, 74. Right with action, no Remitter, 79. The reason of, because
no person against whom to bring a Writ, 169. 485. Suspended by warranty and
assets, 412. Favored in Law 506 Releife, Services not doubled for it, 254.
remedy for it, 550. Paid by no Enfant, 575 Reversion separated for years,
good, without attornment 365 Reservation of Rent not exchanged by altering
Names 20 Rents 24, 325. Extinct by feoffment 55. 119, 161, 253, Devisable, and
e contr. 60. 166. Apportioned 130. 253, 289. 569. 435. Incident to the
Reversion 130, 131, 132, A sum reserved to a stranger, no Rent, 242. Charge,
becomes Seck, 253, 254. Extinct by Recovery and purchase of part 254, 322, 548.
Not to go out of things incorporeall, 286. Suspended in all, 322. paid by the
Lessee, no prejudice to the Tenant of the Land, 328. In Esse after a Release,
329. By encroachment, 373. Service made seck, 464. May pass without Deed 437.
When to be demanded 490 Replevin 334. 391. For cattle not distrained 560. A
plaint must be entered before the writ can be good 689 Resistance must be by
some over tact, and not by word, 107 Resignation 603 Rescous, where lawful 73
Retraxit 151 Revocation 151. Shall be strictly taken, 379. The power of it,
192. 298 377 Right cannot be transferred, 69 196. ancient not barred 82. Left
after a Recovery, 143. Of possession, draws right of property, 225. follows
the possession 227. may be forfeited 237. preferred before the possession, 372.
where extinct, Et e contr. 440. cannot incorporate with wrong, 567. favorably
expounded 502. cannot dye, 504. Present, or future, may be barred 485 Robbery
110 Return, The Court cannot proceed upon a-False return 272
S.
SAles, not good upon the Lords day, 8. by the Sheriff 707 Scandal. magnatum 87
Seisin 668. payment of Rent by a Term or is no seisin, 58. 287. 363. 548. 593.
Presentment of the grantee a good seisin for the grantor in a Quare Impedit,
191. not traversable, 287. of a Rent by the Feoffor 421 Scire facias 160, 613,
690. When shall issue out, when not, follows the Record, 229 Seals 743
Seizure of a villain 162 Seigniory 263. suspended 361. 443. Sheriffs 244. must
take notice who are in Execution, 420. Where they may break up a house to
deliver Execution or Seisin, 678 Sewers, 685, 49 Socage lands deviseable 35
Subsidies uncertain made certain by circumstances 407 Surrenders 235 603. By
Attorney 152 after a grant of a rent 164 entire 260 in Law, 472 447 450
Suspense, Seigniory suspended, not grantable 56 personal things once
suspended, ever gone 154 Statutes what bind the King, 13. subsequent expounded
by equity of former 23 220 Interpretation of them. 24 142 Of 32 H. 8. of
pretenced rights 326 388 That abridge liberty, how taken 355 taken by
intendment 501 Stewardship 300 Services Entire 262 263 Divine 285 Summons and
severance 337 574
T.
TAil, what things may be intailed 358 Void for incertainty 405 docked by
recovery, value 414 Tales 507 Term not extinct by purchase of the Fee, 335 not
drowned, 339 Tempus sem. how to be accounted 12 Tender Of marriage 91 687 of
amends 259 of money to a stranger, 200 Upon a mortgage 375 Excused 570. of
Livery by the heir 610. Tender and refusal 470. ^or the Redemption of a
mortgage by the Guardian 497. For an idiot, 497. by a straner where saves a
forfeiture 485. of the demi mark 677* Of the debt in Court, 689 Tenant by the
courtesy 41 581 Tenant in tail 313 550 cannot grant any remainder of his estate
57 barred by a common Recovery, and how not 130 131 Tenant in Frankalmoigne,
149. cannot disclaim 104 is not to be distrained for Arreares 106 Tenant Right
214 Tenants in common 244. shall join in Assise 545 where join, where sever in
actions, 611 Tenant in tail after possibility, etc. 450 Tenant for another
life 578 Tenant at sufferance 453 Tenures, In capite, 61. 142. In socage. 97
136. not extinct by purchase of part of the Land 507 Treason 110 Treasure, none
can dispose of the Kings treasure without license 303 304 Trade, what it is,
139 Traverse, not without an office found 72. the place not to be traversed in
personal actions, 382. Traverse upon a traverse 618 Trespass 268. for
oppression in the Common 387 Trees 231 Trial in a foreign county 224 of
villainage 351. of a Peer in Ireland, 497. Per medietatem lingue 472 Trover
brought by a Lunatic 427 Trusts, where they shall go to executors, 187
V.
VAriance, between the original and judgment 637. in circumstances no
prejudice, 384 Between the writ and the count, 636 637 Valor Maritagii 716
Verdict, entire 261 in criminal causes not privy 353 where at large 604 708.
uncertain is insufficient, 624. 631. 632. 648. where voided by acts done by the
Jurors, 697 Et e contr. Villain 37 292 337 765 764. may sue his Lord 282 by
Confession 419 may give his goods before seizure 666 View of the vouchee 92
Voyage royal 61 Voucher 92 449 of the heir and the younger Son 110 475. Of the
assignee 169 in dower 194 Usurpation, 310 318 upon an Infant 444. Unity of
possession, does not extinguish partition 150 Uses 349. Revoked 72 of a
recovery after it is suffered, declared 109 regarded, as E states 202
superstitious, draw good uses, 231 good and charitable to be preferred, 740 741
752. introduced inconveniences 748 Declaration of them 771 good, and
superstitious, how they shall operate 628.
W.
WAger of Law, 429. 644. 697. 714. 716, 419. Not by a prisoner for meat and
drink, 669. Where not in account, and where in debt upon a Bond 51. Not by an
Infant 94 Wardships 700. 713. the husband after the death of his wife guardian
shall loose it, 37. The second ward shall not sue Livery, 37. Revived 40. No
Wardship because the tenure begins in the Sons, 61. of an use 111. Where,
though not dying seized, 142. Not during the Fathers life 277 278 Way 377
Warrants 366 Waiver of goods, To whom the goods belong, 501. 502 Warranty 238.
314. 326. No bar, and e contra, 20, 256 340. Collateral and Lineall 39. 163.
283 402. 648. Which commenceth by disseisin 45. 63. 144. 187. 250. 564. 617.
619. The Heir not bound to warranty, where the Ancestor was not, 57. Makes a
discontinuance, 99. Extinct 118. May increase upon an Estate granted, 119
Determined 124. What words imply it, 124. void 124. Without the word (Heirs)
187. Employed in Exchange, and partition 191. For life only, 206. Follows the
Land, 250. Entire 256. 262. Deraignment of it, 535. Annexed to incorporeall
things, 411. With Assets binds the King, 411. Express and employed, 447. By
Husband and wife, 555. Continues after Partition, 577 Warrantia Charta. 157.
469. 719. Not after a Recovery in value 410 Waste, 37. 141. 143. 334. 574 465
700. 728. 729. 750 751. 582. By him in the remainder maintainable where, 39. Et
e contra, In Cole mines not opened 67. 573. Against Tenant in Dower, and by the
courtesy 188. Against the Guardian 575. Successor not charged with it 451.
Women, Not sworn in Leets 318. Withernam 560 Wills, Void 74 Of an Infant when
85. Repugnant void 243. Revoked by marriage 465 Witnesses 453 Writings in
parchment or in paper 393 Words, In Grants needless 245. Of inferior Rank
exclude them of higher, 270. Construed in the milde^ sense, 704. General,
Imply no certainty; 635 636 Writs, Of Customs and services, 18 317. not to be
changed without Act of Parliamen, 68. De secunda superoneratione, 273. Of Right
o^ Advowson, 294. Of Mesne, 371. 380. 445. Of Entry upon an Advowson, 421. O^
Disceit 560. To the Bishop 112. Adversa^ia and amicabilia, and their
difference, 482 Where to be brought, 496 Wreck 489.
FINIS.

