THE BODY OF THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND: As it stood in force before it was
altered by Statute, or Acts of PARLIAMENT, or STATE. Together with an exact
Collection of such Statutes, as have altered, or do otherwise concern the same.
Whereunto is also annexed certain Tables containing a Summary of the whole Law,
for the help and delight of such Students as affect Method. By Edm. Wingate of
Grayes-Inne Esquire; The second Edition corrected and amended.

London, Printed for H: Twyford in Vine Court Middle Temple, and Roger Wingate,
at the Golden Hynd in Chancery Lane, 1655.

The Preface.
THe Summary of the Common Law (extracted, for the most part, out of Sir Henry
Finch Knight, his learned Treatise of the Law) being intended only to present
the Original frame of that Law, and not capable of comprehending the Rules or
Maxims of the several titles of law, therein contained: it is conceived
expedient here farther to present the same Authors continued method of the same
law (conformable to that Table) which conteins the Rules of law inserted under
their proper titles respectively; so as the Student by often reading over, and
fixing in his memory the order and matter of this Treatise, may thereby attain
such a certain notion of the Common Law, as may make him apt and ready to
apprehend any case may be put him, or any Law Book he shall read: Howbeit,
although the Rules here propounded are regularly true and conformable to the
ancient Common Law, yet they have been and still are subject to be altered by
two other Laws, viz the Statute Law and the Law of Reason: As for the first,
it has been a law framed in all Ages by the Prudence of Parliaments for
prevention of Inconveniences found in the Common Law, according to the
condition of the people, and state of affairs in the several times, when it was
made, a brief Collection whereof ( viz of so much as alters, or otherwise
concerns the Common Law) is hereunto annexed. The other is as ancient as the
Creation, and coming into the world with man cannot be abrogated this last
many times controuls the common Law, when in respect of some accidents or
circumstances the Judges are constrained to make a construction according to
one or more Rules of reason (if not) against (at least varying from) a positive
Rule of of Law, as might be exemplified by many Instances, if it were now
convenient to insist thereupon: but that being deferred to a fitter
opportunity, the Abstract following invites your serious and indulgent perusal.

THE BODY OF THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.
CHAP. 1 The Definition of the Common Law, also of the Place where, and the
Persons by whom it is used.
I. THe Common Law of England is a Law used time out of mind throughout the
Realm.

II. The Realm of England is divided into Counties, (in all 39) and each County
into several Towns, a Precinct which anciently contained ten families, called
Tithings, and ten of those Tithings made a Precinct called an Hundred.

III. In some Counties, Towns, and other places of the Realm, there be special
Usages time out of mind, differing from the Common Law, which are called
Customs.

IV. A County is a part of the Realm, entirely governed by one Sheriff.

V. Every one ought to be Inhabitant within some, tithing, and there find
sureties for his good behavior.

VI. Diverse Towns have Hamlets in them, and some special places there be, out
of any Town or Hamlet.

VII. The persons within the Realm are to be considered, either as one entire
body, or as particular persons.

VIII. As one entire body it consists of the King, and his subjects.

IX. The King is the Head of the Commonwealth, immediately under God.

X. And therefore the King has a shadow of the excellencies that are in God,
in a similitudinarie manner given him, as

XI. Infiniteness.

XII. Perfection.

XIII. Majesty.

XIV. Sovereignty.

XV. power

XVI. Perpetuity.

XVII. Justice.

XVIII. Truth.

XIX. He has also a prerogative in all things, that are not injurious to the
subject.

XX. In regard of the King, the Queen his wife is participant of diverse
prerogatives above other women.

XXI. his subjects are the members of the Commonwealth, and are Barons and
Commons,

XXII. The Barons are called the Peers of the Realm.

XXIII. All the rest are Commons.

XIV. The particular persons, are natural persons, or Bodies Politic.

XXV. The natural persons are every man.

XXVI. A Body Politic is a body in fixion of Law, that indureth in perpetual
succession; such is the King alone, and by himself considered, and a Parson
(called) the Rector of a Church.

XXVII, The Parson in regard of his continual attendance upon that sacred
function, is freed from all personal charges, that may hinder him in his
calling.

XXVIII. So is every other Clerk within Orders.

XXIX. To the Parson belongs the Tenth of all manner of yearly increase.

XXX. Every Parson must be presented to the Ordinary, who is to admit him.

XXXI. And then the Arch Deacon is to put him in possession, by delivering the
Ring of the Church-door, and ringing the Bells.

XXXII. The Incumbent has not the mere right in him of land in the right of
his Church.

XXXIII. Therefore every act which he does with such land, may be avoided, when
he cease to be Incumbent, except such as are done by consent of Patron and
Ordinary, which bind for ever.

XXXIV If the Church be void six months, the Ordinary may Collate, or appoint
a Clerk of his own; and if it be void six months after his time, then the
Metropolitan and six months after his time, the King may present, if the
Patron present not before them.

XXXV. when one Church is not able to find the Cure, the Ordinary by consent
of the Patrons may unite it to some other.

XXXVI. Besides those Corporations, that were at the Common Law, there be
diverse other, which have grown of latter time, by special foundation
election, whereof some are aggregate of many persons viz. of an ead and body:
Others consist in one single person.

XXXVII. These Corporations are Temporal or Spiritual.

XXXVIII. The Temporal are made by the King, as Major and Commonalty; also
Colleges, as Master and Fellows, etc.

XXXIX. Diverse Towns are so Incorporate before time of memory, and are called
Boroughs.

XL. The Spiritual ones were for the most part made by the Pope, but had their
power to purchase from the King.

XLI. These are also of two sorts, viz. Regular, or Secular.

XLII. Regular, which have entered into Religion, professing to vow three
things, viz* Obedience, voluntary Poverty, and perpetual Chastity.

XLIII. And therefore these are dead persons in law, only their head has power
to purchase, or do such other things to the use of the house. And of this sort
are Abbot and Covent, Prior and Covent, etc.

XLIV. Secular, are such as have not entered into Religion, as Bishop and his
Chapter, Master of an Hospital and his Brethren, Guardian of a Chapel and
his Chaplains, etc. Also Archdeacons, and the like.

XLV. Touching the Bishop and his Chapter (which make but one body) their
possessions are divided, so as the Bishop has part by himself, and the chapter
the residue, which Chapter consists of a Dean as the chief, and Prebendaries
or such like, who are most properly termd the Chapter; and of these also the
possessions are for the most part divided, the Dean having some part solely in
the right of his Deanery, and the particular Prebendaries some other part in the
right of their respective Prebends: the residue the Dean and Chapter have
together; and every of them is to such purpose incorporate by himself.

XLVI. These spiritual Corporations are sometimes Presentative, sometimes
Dative, perpetual or removable sometimes Elective, and have a Common Seal.

XVIIL. To them also Parsonages may be Appropriate by the Patron, Ordinary, and
King, and Vicars endowed to serve the Cure.

CHAP. 2. Of Possessions.
I. OF the Common Law there be two parts, the one concerns Possessions, the
other punishment of offenses.

II. A Possession is whatsoever may be enjoyed.

III. The King shall have to his own use all the Possessions of a Fool
natural, during his Ideocie.

IV. When one has the Possession of any thing to another use, this was
accounted nothing, but as a matter in Conscience and Chancery.

V. Sundry men possessing the same thing by purchase, are Joynt-tenants, or
Tenants in common.

VI. Joynt-Tenants, which possess by the same Title.

VII. And here, the Survivor shall have the whole in the same sort as he had
his part, excepting only present interests of the thing it self granted by him
that dies.

VIII. Tenants in Common are they, which possess by several titles:

IX. To possessions this is general, that they may be granted.

X. Every Grant, made by the King upon surmise or suit of the party, shall be
taken most beneficially for the King, and against the party.

XI. No grant of his is good, When it appears within the body of the Grant,
that the King is deceived.

XII. His grant shall not inure to any other intent then that, which is
precisely expressed within the grant.

XIII. A grant by an Infant under the age of 21. years, one out of his right
mind, or compelled thereunto, either by dures of Imprisonment, or fear of some
bodily hurt threatened, as loss of life and member, or though it be but of
Imprisonment, may be avoided at any time, if they deliver it with their hand.

XIV. But if they deliver it not with their hand, nothing at all passes.

XV. So it is also of a grant made by one, that has no understanding.

XVI. Yet grants of an Infant, in respect of having necessary things can not be
avoided.

XVII. Other grants of his, where himself has likewise benefit, are only
voydable.

XVIII. To this place belongs Exchange, which is a mutual grant of equal
Interests, each in exchange of other.

XIX. Prescription is as available, as any Grant.

XX. A possession is restrictive or absolute.

XXI A restrictive possession is upon a limitation, or condition*

XXII. Upon a limitation, which cease upon the doing, or not doing of
something.

XXIII. Upon condition, which is only defeasible upon the doing, or not doing
of something.

XXIV. Absolute which is neither upon limitation or condition.

CHAP. III. Right, titles, Deeds.
I. POssessions are in possession, or in an action.

II. In Possession, which one does enjoy.

III. In action which one ought to enjoy, either in respect of a right or a
title.

IV. Right, when a wrong was done before.

V: Title. when no wrong was done.

VI. Of things in action no stranger shall take advantage.

VII. Therefore things in action cannot be granted but to him that has
possession, and that by Release Confirmation.

VIII. Release is a passing of the Grantors interest.

IX: Confirmation is a ratifying of the Grantees possession.

X. The grant of every thing in action, and of such things in possession, as
cannot pass by the liverie of the hand, must of necessity be by Deed.

XI. A Deed is a writing sealed and delivered, and belongs always to him,
whose possession is made by it.

XII. But a Writing read in another form to one, that cannot read, is not his
deed at all, though he seal and deliver it*

XIII. A Deed, is a Deed Poll, or Indenture.

XIV. Poll, which is the only Deed of the Grantor.

XV. Indenture, which is the natural deed of both:

XVI. An Indenture barreth every of the parties from saying contrary to any
thing therein contained.

XVII. Sometimes also bare acts work an estopple in like sort.

CHAP. IV: Heriditaments, Estates Terms.
I: A Possession is an Hereditament or Chattel:

III. Hereditament is a possession, which one may have an Estate in:

III. one born of parents out of the Kings allegiance is disabled to enjoy any
Hereditaments:

IV. Therefore such a one purchasing any it is the Kings.

V. An Estate is Particular, or an Inheritance.

VI. A Particular Estate is uncertain, or certain.

VII. Uncertain, which is determinable at another pleasure, as an estate at
sufferance and at will.

VIII. At sufferance, when after lawful occupation, he continues possession
without authority.

IX. At will, when an estate is made during pleasure:

X. And this is according to the custom, as a Copie-holder; or at pleasure
otherwise, as a bare Tenant at will.

XI. Certain, which is not so determinable, and it is called a Term, whereupon
may depend a remainder of Reversion.

XII. Remainder, is the residue of an estate, at the same time appointed over.

XIII. Reversion, is the residue of an estate, not at the same time appointed
over.

XIV. Terms are forfeited, by plucking the Inheritance out of him that has it.

XV. Terms may be surrendered, that is, to him that has the next and higher
estate.

XVI. A Term is for years, or for life.

XVII. A Term for life is for his own life, or for another life.

XVIII. where the Tenant for another life dies before Cesty que vie, he that
can first hap it, shall enjoy out the Term and is called an Occupant.

XIX. The present estate for life is termed a Freehold, and may be so in deed,
or in Law.

XX. In deed, when he is actually seized of it.

XXI. in Law, before his entry, when it is cast upon him by course of Law:

XXII. The release of an Inheritance or of an estate for life, is not good to
one that is but Tenant for years without privity.

XXIII. To these two estates a warrantie does belong which is an assurance
warranting such an Estate:

XXIV. Every Exchange has a warrantie knit by Law.

CHAP. 5. Inheritance, Fee-simple, Dower, Tenancie by the Courtesy.
I. INheritance is an estate descendable to his heirs that has actual
possession.

II. An heir is the next or worthiest of whole blood, being also of blood to
the first purchaser.

III. He that is begotten out of Marriage is called a Bastard, and is of blood
to none, but in Law accounted Nullius Filius.

IV. A Bastard therefore cannot inherit.

V. But Marriage following after, gives him the right of inheritance, if after
the fathers death he enter before his younger brother, born of the same father
and mother within Espousals and continue the possession all his life without
interruption.

VI. If the next be women in equal distance, as daughters, Sisters, Aunts, etc.
they shall inherit alike, and are but as one heir.

VII. Where the general Entry of one is of the rest, if they list.

VIII. The inheritance that descends shall be charged with the deed of the
Ancestor, binding himself and his heirs.

IX. The Dying seized of the inheritance and Freehold together, whereby the
land descends unto his heir takes away the Entry of every one, that may have
an Action.

X. But claim upon the land within a year before the death, or if they dare not
upon the land for fear of some bodily hurt, then as near the land as they dare,
saves their entry.

XI: A Fee-simple is a Fee-simple conditional or absolute.

XII. Conditional is a fee simple to one, and the heirs of his body.

XIII. This estate before issue cannot be alienated, after issue had, becomes
an absolvte fee simple.

XIV. But so, as if the issue fail before the alienation, the donor shall have
it.

XV. Hither belong hereditaments given in Frank-marriage with ones kinswoman.

XVI. Absolute, is a fee-simple to one and his heirs whatsoever.

XVII. This estate descending to Females, if one of them have lands of the same
Ancestor by Frank-marriage, she shall have no more, unless she be content,
that the value thereof be allowed to the other:

XVIII. To this place are to be referred Lands given to a Corporation, which go
in perpetual succession.

XIX. Here, two special estates for life, Dower and Tenancie by the courtesy
of England, do arise after ones death that has an Inheritance joined with the
freehold*

XX. Howbeit, these estates must be of a fee-simple, or such an estate tail,
as may go to the issue had between the Donees.

XXI. Dower is an estate, whereby the woman has the thirds in severalty.

XXII. She must be nine years of age at the time of her husbands death,
otherwise she shall not be endowed,

XXIII. Detaining of deeds concerning Inheritance descended to the heir, is a
bar of her Dower.

XXIV. If the husband at the Church door (ad ostium ecclesiae) or being heir
apparent by his fathers or mothers consent ( ex ass^nsu patris or matris)
presently upon affiance endow her of any certainty, as of the whole, moity, or
less part etc. this will bar her of her thirds if she agree to it.

XXV. Tenancie by the courtesy of England is an estate, whereby of an actual
possession the husband that has issue by her born alive, shall have the whole.

CHAP. VI. Tenement, Advowson.
I: HEreditaments are tenements or bare hereditaments*

II. A Tenement is a possession holden, the Fee-simple whereof, when he that
has it dies without heir, comes to the Lord:

III. Of this sort are Lands and Advowsons:

IV. Land is a Tenement in Mannuall occupation:

V. Under the name of Land are comprehended, not only Gardens, Meadows,
Pastures, Woods, Rivers, etc: but also Messuages, Mils, Yards, Tofts, Castles
and the like.

VI. Churches and Churchyards belong to the Incumbent.

VII. Prescription here has no force:

VIII. All Land is holden of the King immediately, or by means, himself not
having any higher upon earth; of whom to hold.

IX: Escheats of all Cities appertain to the King:

X: All Mines of Gold and Silver, or wherein the gold or silver is of the
greater value, are the Kings.

XI. Amongst Coperceners, the eldest upon partition shall have the chief house:

XII. Seisin delivered of land always passes a freehold.

XIII. Otherwise a Freehold of land cannot pass save by release and
confirmation, where they are by way of enlarging an estate.

XIV. They may also sometimes pass by Exchanges Endowments, or Surrenders.

XV. An estate made within view of land is a good Liverie of seisin, if the
other enter in the Feoffors life time.

XVI. An Advowson is an interest of presenting to a Church.

CHAP. 7. Distres, Seigniories, Fealty, Rent-service, Homage, Suit of Court,
Tenures, Releife, and Rent charge.
I. RAre Hereditaments are those, which are not holden, and concern the Land,
or the person.

II. Those that concern the Land are extinguished, or gone for ever, when he
that has them, has high and continuing an estate, as he has the
hereditaments.

III. Otherwise they are but suspended, or gone for a time.

IV. These are leviable by distress, or such as cannot be distr^ined for.

V. Distress is a taking of Chattels, found upon the same Land, for
satisfaction of Arrearages.

VI. The King may distrain in any other land of the same man's for his Service
or Rent charge.

VII. The distress being put in some place, where the owner may lawfully come
by them, as, if they be things that have life, to give them meat, etc. he that
distraineth shall not be charged, what hurt soever they receive.

VIII. Bare hereditaments, that may be distrained for, are a Seigniorie, or
rent charge.

IX. Seigniories are services, whereby Lands are holden:

X. Services are common to all certain estates, or proper to inheritances.

XI. Common, as Fealty, and Rent service, whereof Fealty is incident to every
such estate.

XII. And therefore the Seigniory or Tenancy being altered, it must be done
anew.

XIII. All other (both common and proper) grow by Reservation.

XIV. Fealty is an Oath to be faithful to the Lord for the Tenements.

XV. Rent service, is a Rent to be paid to the Lord at certain set times:

XVI. And to this place we may refer all services that lie in Fesance.

XVII. Of which kind two amongst the rest are specially to be considered, viz.
Frank-Almoign, and Divine Service.

XVIII. Frank-Almoigne, is when a man of the Church holds freely in Alms, for
which he is bound to say Prayers.

XIX. But because the Prayers are not limited in certain, he neither shall do
Fealty, nor is subject to distres.

XX. The lord must warrant such a Tenant against himself and his heirs, and
save him harmless of all manner of all services against the Lords above.

XXI. Divine service is a spiritual kind of service limited in certain.

XXII. These are the services whereby every certain estate may be holden.

XXIII. There follow those proper to Inheritances, the Grantee whereof shall
hold of the Grantor by such services, as he holds over, if other services be
not reserved.

XXIV. Or the Grantor may appoint him ^o hold of the next Lord.

XXV. A Mesn must acquit the Tenant of all manner of services against the Lords
Paramont.

XXVI. But Donors in Frankmarriage cannot hold but by Fealty, and that of the
Donor, until the Fourth degree be past, who must also acquit them of all
manner of services.

XXVII. One that holds of the King as of his person alienating the Free hold
without license forfeiteth the Land.

XXVIII. Services proper to Estates of Inheritance are Homage and Suit or Court.

XXIX. Homage is an Oath of fidelity acknowledging himself to be the Lords
man, In the doing whereof the Tenant must be ungirt, uncovered, kneel upon both
knees, and hold both his hands together between the Lords hands, sitting before
him.

XXX This is to be done to the Lord himself, and but once during the Tenants
life.

XXXI. The Kings Chamberlain shall take homage for him.

XXIJ. When an Inheritance descends to Coperceners, the eldest only shall do
Homage.

XXXIIJ. But if they hold of the King, all of them must do it.

XXXIV. When one and his Ancestors, whose heir he is, have held by homage of a
Lord and his Ancestors whose heir the Lord is, time out of mind, and the Lord
has received homage, that binds him to warrant and acquit the Tenant.

XXXV. Suit of Court is a service by coming to the Lords Court: And here Land
in the Lords hands (whereof several men hold by Suit of Court) is termed a
Manor, but the Land considered apart from the service is termed Demesnes.

XXXIV. The particular kinds of services (whereby Lands of inheritance are
distinguished) are Soccage and Knight Service.

XXXVII. Both draw unto them certain commodities to the Lord, partly in the
Tenants life, and partly after his death.

XXXVII. That in his life is reasonable Aid, or Portion toward the making of
the Lords eldest Son a Knight; and toward the marrying of his eldest daughter.

XXXIX. The other after his death, are wardship and relief.

XL. Wardship is the custody of the body and land of the heir within age, which
shall be til fourteen of a woman.

XLI. Relief is a Portion to be paid by the heir to the Lord.

XLII. Soccage is tenure to be done out of Ward.

XLIII. Where the next of the kin, to whom the Inheritance cannot descend
shall have the heirs wardship till fourteen to the heirs own use.

XLIV. Here, for releif the Lord shall have presently so much as one years rent
amounts unto

XLV. Tenure by Soccage in Chief gives the King primer seisin, or the value of
that Land by a year if the heir be of the age of fourteen year, at his
ancestors death*

XLVI. Knight service is a service touching War to be done by the body of a
man.

XLVII. To all Knight service Homage is incident.

XLVIII. Here the Wardship is the Lords to his own use, and that till, 2^. of
an heir mal^.

XLIX. The wife shall be barred of her Dower, so long as she detained the heir
from him.

L. Wardship of the body gives the wards marriage to the Lord.

LJ If one hold sundry Lands of diverse Lords, the wardship of body goes to
the Lord of that Land, which the tenant held first; and this is termed, Tenure
by priority.

LIJ. The King shall have the Wardship of the body, though the tenure of him be
by Posteriority.

LIIJ. The eldest child, being heir apparent to his father, shall not be in
ward for his body during his Fathers life.

LIVE. Tenure by Knight service in chief, gives to the King the Wardship of all
other Lands also.

LV. It gives him likewise Primer seisin, or the value of them all by half a
year, if the heir were in Ward by a whole year, if he were not; which P^imer
seisin must be paid and relief also.

LVI. Relief, for Land holden by Knight Service amounts to an C.s. for a
whole Knights fee, to a C. Marks, for a Baronie, and to a C. Pounds, for an
Earldom.

LVII. If The heir be within age at the Tenants death no relief shall be paid
to the Lords that are to have the Wardship.

LVIII Grand Serjancie, viz. Tenure of the Kings person, to do to him a more
special service whatsoever by the person of a man, is a special Knight
service in chief, where the King in stead of relief shall have the value of the
Land by a year*

LIX: Rent charge is a Rent with Liberty to distrain.

CHAP. 8. Rent seck Common.
I. BAre Hereditaments concerning land (for which no distress can be taken)
are a Rent Seck, and Common.

II: A Rent Seck is a Rent without liberty to distrain.

III. When a rent is granted for equaliy of Partition, amongst Coperceners,
this rent may be distrained for though no such liberty be granted.

IV. The grant of a Seigniorie, Rent charge, and Rent Secke, as also of a
Remainder or Reversion of any of these, or of the land it self, is nothing
worth without Attornment, viz. agreement of the tenant, that presently must be
charged.

V. In the grant of a reversion depending upon a Freehold, the Attornment of
the Freeholder is sufficient though he be not the Tenant, that presently must
be charged.

VI. Common is a profit to be taken in another Land.

CHAP. 9. Villenage, Annuity, Corodie Office.
I. BAre hereditaments that concern the person are merely of the person
himself, or by reason of the person.

II. of the first sort are Villeins.

III. A Villein is such a servant, as himself, and whatsoever he possesses is
the Lords if he claim it.

IV. The Lord cannot sease his villein in the the Kings presence.

V. The children of a Villein are also Villeins.

VI. Villenage begins by confessing a man's self to be one in a Court of
Record.

VII. A Villein is manumitted or set free, when the Lord enableth him to
possess any thing against himself.

VIII. Those by reason of the person are Annuities and Corodies, or Offices.

IX. Annuitie is a yearly rent to be had of the person of the Grantor.

X. Corodie is a Portion for ones sustenance.

XI. Office is a duty of attendance upon a charge.

CHAP. 10. Franchises.
I. BEsides the Hereditaments already handled, there be certain other derived
from the Kings Prerogative, which are termed Franchises.

II. A Franchise is a Royal privilege in the hand of a subject.

III. It may be forfeited by misusing of it.

IV. The kinds of Franchises are diverse, and almost infinite.

V. Of such sort are Warrens, Markets, Faires, Toll of every buyer for things
he buyeth there, not being for his own expenses, and whatsoever liberties or
commodities else, that (created at first by the Kings special grant, or of
their own nature belonging to him) are given to common persons to have any
manner of estate in.

CHAP. 11. Chattels, Real, and Personal, Testament, Bailment, Contracts,
Actions, Arbitrament.
I. SUch then is the nature of an hereditament in his sundry sorts and kinds:

II. Chattels are possessions, wherein there cannot be several estates.

III. All ones Chattels, whether in possession, or that any is indebted to him
in, may be given away or devised by his Testament.

IV. Testament is the appointment of some person to administer them for him
after his death who therefore is called an Executor.

V. the Executors must prove the Will (to be a true one) in the spiritual
Court, and be sworn to see it performed.

VI. If many Executors be made, and one refuse, yet he may administer at his
pleasure.

VII. But an Executor once administering, can never refuse after.

VIII. Executors must answer all certain duties of the Testator.

IX. But so as duties, that grow by specialties are to be answered before other
duties, and legacies to be last of all delivered.

X In these devises the Testators intent (standing with the rules of Law) shall
be taken.

XI The Executor of an Executor is Executor to the fi st Testator.

XII If no Will be made, the Ordinary shall administer all the Chattels that
were in his possession.

XIII. But whether any Will be made or no, his wife and such children as are
not advanced by him in his life shall have a part to their own use, viz. one
third of all (after the debts paid) to his wife; and another third part to his
children: This seems to be the ancient Common Law by Mag. Charta, cap. 18. See
F. N Br. 122. l.

XIV. Chattels are real, or personal.

XV. Real, as terms for years, and Wardship.

XVI* Personal, as Plate, Jewels, Gold, Silver, Implements of Household,
Cattle, and all goods and movables whatsoever, corn sown upon the ground, etc.

XVII. The owner-ship of a Chattel personal is termed a property, which of wild
beasts cannot be in any, nor after they are made tame, longer then they remain
in ones possession.

XVIII. Treasure in the earth, and Treasure Trove, or Coin being found, is the
Kings.

XIX. Cattle also, that stray into another land, are the Kings after a year
and a day, if being proclaimed at the Market in two several Towns next
adjoining, the owner do not claim them.

XX. Goods wrecked are also his.

XXI. The King being Tenant in Common of an entire Chattel personal, shall
have the whole.

XXII. Goods, that belong to an Alien enemy, any body may seize to his own use.

XXIII. The taking of goods by an Alien enemy in Battle, devesteth the
property from the owner, if he come not before Sunset to claim them.

XXIV. Churchwardens are enabled to have goods to the behoof of the parish.

XXV. To Chattels personal, Bailment, and Contract do belong.

XXVI. Bailment is a delivery of goods in possession, and is either to keep, or
to employ.

XXVII. To keep, when only the Custody is committed to him, and is a simple
Bailment or pledge.

XXVIII. A simple Bailment, when he receives them to keep for another; whether
it be for the Bailer to re-deliver him again, or for a stranger to bail them
over to him.

XXIX. A Pledge is when he received them in assurance for another thing had of
him at the time.

XXX. The Bailment of goods to employ is, when the Bailee has the things
themselves to use to another profit.

XXXI Contract is a mutual agreement for the very property of personal things.

XXXII. Here, the duty growing upon it cannot be apportioned.

XXXIII. Of this kind of contracts are buying and selling, borrowing and
lending, and such like.

XXXIV. The sale of another man's goods in Market overt alters the property,
if toll be paid for them.

XXXV. Hither belong certain (as it were) Contracts in law, though not arising
from the special agreement of the parties: as Trover and conversion, etc.

XXXVI. These are the things that belong to Chattels personal in general, for
the interest of personal things uncertain, Accord and Arbitrament lie.

XXXVII. Accord is an agreement between the parties themselves upon a
satisfaction executed.

XXXVII. Arbitrament is an award of satifaction by others, whom they choose to
judge between them.

XXXIX. The award of a personal Chattel alters the property thereof.

CHAP. 12. Trespass upon the Case.
I. WE have hitherto spoken of possessions, (being the first and hardest part
of the law;) The other remains, which ministers justice in the punishment of
offenses.

II. An offense is the doing of any wrong, and it is a wrong without force, or
to the which force is coupled*

III. In those of the first kind, the offender is to be amerced, viz. to pay a
petty sum of money to the King, and if he be a Peer of the Realm, then C. S.

IV. The Kings wife shall never be amerced.

V. Offenses without force are Trespasses upon the case, or Real wrongs.

VI. Trespass upon the case is such an offense whereby any thing is endamaged,
and it is a misuser, or deceit and conspiracy

VII. Misuser, when by mere wrong it is endammaged.

VIII. Of this kind there be many, and those of diverse sorts; as if a man
maliciously utter any false slander to the endangering of one in law.

IX. The touching of him with some heinous crime.

X. The impairing his trade of life.

VI. If one having another man's goods, convert them to his own use.

XII. If a Sheriff suffer one in execution for debt to go at large.

XIII. If a Smith prick my horse, or kill him in cure.

XIV. If being committed to the Jail, the Jailer of malice puts upon me so
many Irons, or otherwise uses me so hardly, that I become lame thereby, etc

XV. But two above the rest do here require more especial consideration. viz.
Disturbance and Nuisance.

XVI. Disturbance is the hindering of that, which in right belongs to one to
do.

XVII. Nuisance is annoyance done to ones hereditament.

XVIII. All manner of Nusances are to be removed, and common nusances any man
may pull down.

XIX. Deceit is when the damage grows by an under slight; As if in play one
win another money by false dice or if he that sells any thing, do upon the
sale, warrant it to be thus and thus, whereby the other is deceived.

XX. Conspiracy is, where two or more conspire to do one wrong, or the like.

XXI. There are certain other offenses against the Law, which are in the nature
of trespasses upon the case, and by the Kings prerogative punishable like to
them.

XXII. Of this sort are Nonsuit in an action, fault in the Original writ, or
(by the Sheriff) in the return of a writ, making default when he should
appear, and whatsoever other offenses (not being with force and arms) which
offer no direct injury to a common person.

CHAP. 13. Discontinuance, Disseisin, Usurpation, Intrusion, Abatement.
I. HItherto of Trespasses upon the case: A^ real wrong is that which medleth
with the Freehold otherwise then it ought.

II. A real wrong is a discontinuance or an Ouster

III. Discontinuance is when he that has an estate Tail, or a Fee-simple in an
others right, makes a larger estate of the land then he may.

IV. Warrantie of an estate of Inheritance, or for life descending upon him,
that ought to have such an estate makes a discontinuance.

V. Discontinuance takes away the entry of those that come to have title after
the death of the discontinuer.

VI. If he (whose entry is barred by a descent or discontinuance) have the
Freehold cast upon him by a new title, he shall be in of his ancient title,
which is termed a Remitter.

VII. Ouster is, when the Freeholder is put out.

VIII. This Ouster is of a Freehold in deed, or in land.

IX. Of the first sort are Disseisin and Usurpation.

X. Disseisin is the Ousting of him that has freehold in deed, by putting or
holding him out of the land.

XI. This may be also of a rent or other profit out of land, by disturbing him
in the means of coming to it: as

XII. In every rent Encloser and Forestaller.

XIII. Encloser is, when the tenant incloseth the land, so as he cannot come to
distrain or demand it.

XIV. Forestaller is, when the tenant besetteth the way with force and arms
upon his coming.

XV. Of this nature is the menacing of him, when for doubt of some bodily hurt
he dare not come.

XVI. In a rent service, and rent charge, Rescous and Replevin.

XVII. Rescous, when either the party having distrained, the distress is
rescued, or being upon the land to distrain, cannot be suffered to do it.

XVIII. Replevin is, when an action of Replevin is brought upon a distress
taken.

XIX. In a rent charge, and rent seck, Denier.

XX. Denier is, when the rent (being demanded upon the land (is not paid.

XXV. Usurpation is, when the Church becomes full by the presentment of a
wrong Pa^ron, and the Institution of the pattie presented by the Ordinary.

XXII. But against the King Induction only does it.

XXIII. Of the second sort are Intrusion and Ab^tement, being of a freehold in
Law.

XXIV. Intrusion which is after the death of the tenant for life.

XXV. Abatment, which is after the death of one that has the Inheritance.

CHAP. 14. Trespass, Menaces, Assault, false Imprisonment, Battery, Mayhem,
Rape.
I. SUch is the nature of an Offense without force.

II. An Offense with force is a Trespass or an Offense against the Crown.

III. Trespass is a criminal Offense punishable by a Fine to the King.

IV. For this the party must be imprisoned, until he do compound.

V. Trespasses touch Possessions, or the person.

VI. Possessions, when the wrong is done in them, namely, in Goods, or Lands.

VII. Trespass in Goods is the wrongful taking of them with pretense of Title.

VIII. And therefore such a Trespass alters the property of the Goods.

IX. Trespass in Land is, when the Trespass is done upon the actual
possession thereof.

X. Beasts and other Chattels may be distrained by him that has damage by them.

XI. Hither belongs Ejectment, when a Termer for years of Land is ousted.

XII. Here the King having possession none can put him out

XIII. Trespasses to the person are with pretense of violence, or violence in
deed.

XIV. Pretense of violence, as Menaces and Assaults.

XV. Menaces are threatening words of beating one, or such like; through fear
whereof ones business is foreslowed.

XVI. Assault is an unlawful setting upon ones person.

XVII. Hither belong, lying in wait, besetting his Mansion House, and not
suffering his Servants to go in and out, etc.

XVIII. Violence in deed is false-imprisonment, or bodily hurt.

XIX. False-imprisonment is an unlawful restraint of liberty.

XX. Bodily hurts are either outward violencies only, or Rape.

XXI. Outward violencies only are Battery and Mayhem.

XXII. Battery is the wrongful beating of one.

XXIII. Mayhem is the wrongful spoiling of a member defensive in fight.

XXIV. Rape is the carnal abusing of a woman against her will.

CHAP. 15. Offenses against the Peace.
I. BEsides these Offenses (being for the most part) twixt party and party,
there are other Offenses to the damage of the public in the nature of
^respasses, and are termed Contempts.

II. These Offenses are punished not only by fine, but sometimes by corporal
pain, and sometimes by loss of member.

III. As the Commonwealth is a body politic, which consists of the King, as
the Head, and of his Subjects as the Members thereof; so are these Offenses to
be distributed.

IV Public Offenses against the King are, to disobey the Kings Command, by his
Writ, or Proclamation, to disobey any thing ordained by Statute, etc.

V. And therefore the Sherif that serves not the first Writ, makes a contempt.

VI. Public Offenses to the body of the Commonwealth, are first those which
trench against the domestical safety thereof, as against the heart of the
Commonwealth.

VII. which safty consists, in this, that there be pa^domi, and threfore here,
the offenses are Rebellions, Insurrections Riots, Routs, unlawful assemblies,
breach of the Peace: and good behavior, false news, Barratrie, Eves-dropping,
etc. Also all trespasses with force, which may be prosecuted by Indictment as
well as by the suit of the party grieved.

VIII. An unlawful assembly is, when above the number of two assemble
together, with purpose to do some unlawful act.

IX. Rout, when they set forwards to do it.

X. Riot, when they do it in deed.

XI. In the second place come the offenses, that are against the strength of
the Realm, and the defense thereof against foreign enemies, as against the
hands and arms of the Commonwealth.

XII. Of this sort are these; to send victual or armor beyond sea, in comfort
and aid of the Kings enemies, To go beyond sea, without the Kings license,
whereby the King and the Realm may be enfeebled, etc.

CHAP. 16. Against Justice.
I. THe third sort are offenses against the justice of the Realm, as against
the thighs and legs thereof; as

II. Judges which delay or pervert Justice.

III. Officers Negligent or corrupt, who do not execute their offices as they
ought to do.

IV. Goalers, who by fear of punishment cause their prisoners to become provers
to accuse others, or teach the Lay People in their custody to read for the
salvation of their lives.

V. Enditors, who give warning to Enditees, whereby the Council of the King and
the Justices is discovered.

VI. He that by negligence or voluntarily suffers one under arrest to go at
large.

VII^ And here if the arrest be for felony, such voluntary escape is felony.

VIII. Hither also all manner of extortion in Officers is to be referred.

IX. A Juror, that appears, and is challenged, and afterward, when he is found
indifferent, and is called to be sworn makes default: He shall be fined to the
value of his land by the year.

X. All force against the Justice of the Realm.

XI. The breaking of Prison: and here, if it be by the party himself, it is
felony.

XII. Rescous, when a stranger, or the party himself disturbes the arresting of
a felon or other.

XIII. Affrayes in disturbance of Justice. as

XIV. Such as come forcibly into the Kings Court in affray of the peace, so as
the Jurors dare not give their Verdict.

XV. Such as are evil people to beat the people of the Court, Jurors of
Enquest, or any other.

XVI. To go armed in the Kings palace.

XVII. He that strikes a man in Westminster Hall shall lose his right hand.

XVIII. He that strikes a Juror in the presence of the Justice shall have the
same punishment, and besides shall suffer perpetual imprisonment.

XIX. Conventicles, which comprehend conspirators and confederators.

XX. Such as receive people to their avowment, to maintain them right or wrong.

XXI. Maintenance, when a man maintains a suit in law.

XXII. Champarty, when he maintains it, to have part of the thing sued for.

XXIII. Offenses in savor of malefactors, as

XXIV. Misprisions, viz. the concealment of Treason or felony, whereof the
first is punishable by perpetual imprisonment.

XXV. Theft-boot, when a man takes his goods from a theif with purpose to
favor and maintain him; The punishment whereof is ransom and imprisonment.

XXVI. Not assisting the Sheriff, Constable, or other officer.

XXVIJ Contempt of Justice, as

XXVIII. Such as fly for fear, when Treason, or Felony is done by any.

XXIX. Such as in case of Treason or Felony tarry the Exigent.

XXX. Such as suffer themselves to be outlawed.

XXXI. The King may imprison the body of him that is outlawed, until he
purchase his Charter of pardon.

XXXII. Perjurie and subornation of perjurie.

XXXIII. Forgerie.

XXXIII. All other falsehood in matter of justice.

CHAP. 17. Against, the Wealth of the Nation.
I. THe fourth kind of public offenses are such as are committed against the
flourishing estate of the Realm, as against the Color and sanguine complexion
thereof.

II And this, in diverse manners, as well in matter of Traffic, buying,
selling, and the like, as otherwi c.

III. In matter of Traffic buying and selling, etc. as

IV. Practices, which tend to make the commodities of the Realm more dear, as,

V. To transport the commodities thereof without the Kings license, or paying
his Customs.

VI. Fore-stallers, Regradors, and Ingrossers, under which all Monopolies are
comprehended

VII. Conspiracies of Merchants, Tradesmen, and the like, who by Combination
amongst themselves, put certain prices upon Commodities, which are to be sold.

VIII. False Weights and Measures.

IX. Out of the course of Traffic, as

X. Things which tend to the destruction of the commodities of the Realm, as

XI. Depopulation of Towns, and the like.

XII. Burning of a dwelling house, or of a Barn near adjoining thereunto.

XIII. Burning Corn in a Barn, or the like.

CHAP. 18. Public Nusances.
I. IN the sixth and last place are such Offenses to be ranked, as are
committed against the false passages and ways of the Country, as against the
feet and toes of the Commonwealth, as

II. Bridges, Cawseys, Highways, Streets, etc. broken, or out of Repair.

III. To this place common Nusances, Purprestures, etc. may be referred.

IV. Such Nusances any man may abate.

V. And as to Nusances, there is a writ in the Register.

VI. Where a Lazer or Leper will go in public, the Writ de leproso amovendo
lies to remove him out of the company of men to some solitary place.

CHAP. 19 Felony, Fealty, Manslaughter, Murder, Burglary, Robbery.
I. THus far of Trespass, it remains to speak of Offenses against the Crown,
which are criminal Offenses punishable by death.

II. Hire also all the Offenders both Hereditaments and Chattels, not only in
possession, but such also as he has but a Right to, are forfeited to the King,
viz.

III. Hereditaments* from the time of the offense, and chattels from the time
of the attainder only.

IV. In these and all other forfeitures, the Town is chargable with the goods.

V. The blood also here corrupted.

VI. The wife loses her Dower.

VII. Those that fly for fear of the offense forfeit their chattels to the King

VIII. Accessories after the fact viz witting maintainers, and such as
voluntarily suffer one arrested to escape are guilty of the same offense.

IX Concealing the offense forfeiteth chattels, and hereditaments also during
life.

X. Offenses against the Crown are felony or, High Treason.

XI Felony is an offense of the Crown not immediately bent against the State.

XII. Here, the forfeiture of the offenders inheritance is given to the Lord.

XIII. The King is also utterly to waste the Inheritance.

XIV. Felony is bare felony, or petty treason.

XV. Bare felony is a felony of the lowest nature, and is punishable by
hanging.

XVI, This is single or mixed.

XVII. Single, as stealth and man-slaugher.

XVIII. Stealth is the wrongful taking of goods without pretense of title.

XIX. Inne-keepers must answer for goods of their guests stolen.

XX. Goods confiscated which, the theif attainted for stealing another thing,
disclaimeth to have any property in, and waifes, viz. which a theif waiveth,
are the Kings, if he seize them before the party from whom they were stolen.

XXI. But if the party from whom they are stolen seize them first, or doing his
diligence to apprehend the theif, convict him afterward, upon an appeal, he
shall have his goods again.

XXII. The stealing of goods which exceed not the value of 12 d. (termed petty
Larcenie) does only forfeit chattels.

XXXIII.. Man-slaugher is the killing of any person born into the world.

XXIV. But if one live a year after the act committed, which was the cause of
his death. it is not felony in him that did the Act.

XXV. The killing of one by chance in doing a lawful act, or in his own
defense, flying as far as he may to save his life, forfeiteth only chattels.

XXVI. But the killing of one that attempteth to rob him, (whether upon the
high way, or when men come to his house, and compass it about to burn it,
though they do not burn it, whereupon he issues out and kileth one of them) is
neither felony, nor causes any forfeiture at all.

XVII. Any unreasonable thing killing a man, it and everything moving with it,
is forfeit to the King, and those are termed Deodands.

XXVIII. Manslaughter is Chance-medly, or Murder.

XXIX Chance-medly is manslaughter without former malice.

XXX. Murder is man-slaugher upon former malice.

XXXI. He that murdereth himself (we call him Felo de se) does only forfeit
his chattels.

XXXII. Mixed felony is that kind of bare felony, which rises from the
former, and it is Robbery or burglary.

XXXIII. Robbery is stealth from ones person by assault in the Highway.

XXXIV. Burglary is the night breaking of an house with an intent to steal or
kill, though none be killed, nor any thing stolen.

CHAP. 20. Petty-Treason.
I. THus much of bare Felony: Petty-treason is a Felony of an higher nature
then bare Felony is, the punishment whereof is burning.

II. This is against mortal Creatures, or against God.

III. Against mortal Creatures as Petty-treason (properly so called) and
Sodomy.

IV. Petty-treason (properly so called) is the killing of any to whom private
obedience is due; as on's master, mistres, Husband, etc. for which (in stead of
burning) a man shall be drawn and hanged.

V. Sodomie is a carnal copulation against nature viz. of a man or woman in the
same sex, or of either of them with beasts.

VI. Against God is that, which is immediately bent against his Majesty, as
heresy and Sorcery.

VII. Heresy is a presumptuous oppugning of an Article of faith.

VIII. In case of heresy, the party, before he can be burnt, must be convict
in a Provincial Synod, and after abjuration make a relapse into the same, or
some other Heresy.

IX. Sorcery is a consulting with Devils, and contains under it Conjuring,
Necromancy, and such like.

CHAP. 21. High Treason.
I. High Treason is an offense of the Crown directly bent against the State.

II. Also to kill the Chancellor, Treasurer, a justice of either Bench, a
justice in Air, of Assize, or Oyer and Terminer being in their places, and
doing their Offices, is High Treason.

III. Here, the punishment is, by drawing, hanging, and quartering for a man,
and drawing, and hanging a woman.

CHAP. 22. Courts of Record, Court Baron, County Court.
I. Thus we have gone through both the parts of the Law; there remains yet
one general, and common Affection scattered throughout the whole law (as the
blood is through the body) which we call Action.

II. Action is the handling of a cause in controversy before certain Judges,
who (in respect of the place where they are set to do justice) are commonly
called a Court.

III. Of all apparent faults proceeding from the Action, the Court must take
notice.

IV. Every Court has power to award forth precepts, and if the precept be not
served, another of the like nature shall go forth, until it be served.

V. To every Court do belong Clerks and Officers.

VI. A Clerk is he that serves for things to be done in Court,

VII. Any error that appears to the Court to be the Clerks mistaking, may be
amended at any time.

VIII. Officers are those, who are to serve the Courts precepts, and to
certify the Court thereof.

IX. Courts, are Courts of Record, or Court Barons.

X. Of Record, which are the Kings Courts.

XI. These have such credit, that no averment can be taken against any thing
there entered, or done.

XII. Things also, that cannot be granted but by deed, pass here by matter of
Record.

XIII. The King takes hereditaments by matter of Record only.

XIV. Villennage begins only by confessing a man's self to be one in a Court
of Record.

XV. Duties of the Testator growing by Record must be answered by Executors
before other duties. See Bankrupts 34.

XVI. Courts of Record, are the Parliament, or Courts that have ordinary
jurisdiction.

XVII. The Parliament is a Court of the King, Nobility, and Commons assembled,
having an absolute power in all causes.

XVIII. Statuts of restraint bind not the King unless they concern the
Common-whealth, or he be specially named.

XIX. He may license things forbidden by the Statutes*

XX. But where the Statute says his license shall be void, there it must have
a clause of Non obstante viz. this clause, notwithstanding any statute, etc.

XXI. Courts of Record, which have ordinary Jurisdiction, are either general
whose jurisdiction extends throughout the Realm, or but within some County.

XXII. The former are those that are holden i^ Term time only, the whole year
having four Terms viz. Michaelmas, and Hilary Term, Easter and Trinity term,
and every term several days of Return.

XXIII. Michaelmas term (beginning the 10 of October, and ending the 28 of
November) has eight Returns Octabis Michaelis, Quindena Michaelis, Tres
Michaelis, Mense Michaelis, Crastino animarum, Crastino Martini, Octabis
Martini, and Quindena Martini.

XXIV- Hilarie term (beginning the ^3 day of January, and ending the 12 of
February) has four Returns, Octabis Hilarii, Quindena Hilarii, Crastino
Purificationis, and Octabis Purificationis.

XXV. Easter term (beginning 17 days after Easter and ending the Monday next
after A^cension day) has five Returns, Quindena, Paschae, Tres Paschae, Mense
Paschae, Quinque Paschae, and Crastino Ascentionis.

XXVI- Trinity term (beginning 12 days after Whitsunday, and continuing 19
days) has five Returns, Octabis Trin. Quind Trin. Crastino Johannis
Baptistae. Octa. Johannis Baptistae, Quindena Iohannis Baptistae

XVII. To these Courts belongs the power of sending forth Writs.

XXVIII. A writ is a Latin letter of the Kings in parchment, sealed with his
seal.

XXIX. All writs have a salutation, Rex, to such an one salutem, and a
conclusion expressing the place, as apud Westmonasterium, etc. and the time
(both day and year) of making it; if it be returnable, the day of the return is
also appointed in it.

XXX. The third writ (termed the Pluris) not served, is a contempt.

XXXI. And therefore the third writ has always this clause in it, vel causam
nobis significes; so may the second (termed the Alias) also have if the
Plaintiff will.

XXXII. The Officer of these higher Courts is the Sheriff, to whom is
committed the custody of the County.

XXXIII. For matters spiritual the Ordinary is their Officer.

XXXIV These general Courts are the Chancery and two Benches, the Kings Bench
and Common place.

XXXV. Chancery, which deals in suits concerning the King.

XXXVI. Here the judge is the Chancellor, having the Custody of the great Seal
of England, under which pass all suits out of the Chancery with Test meipso.

XXXVII. The Kings Grants are also entered of Record in this Court.

XXXVIII. Such grants are effectual to pass a freehold, from the King
without any Livery.

XXXIX. and being Matters of Record, they take effect from the time of the
Date.

XL. In default of a Chancellor the Lord Keeper o^ the great Seal has his
Authority.

XLI. The Keeper (or Master) of the Rolls is an assistant to his Court.

XLII. In the Kings Bench and common place, the Judges are one Chief Justice,
and three (and sometime^ more) other Justices.

XLIII. The Test of their writ is Test Johan^ Popham, the Chief Justice for
the time being.

XLIV. The Kings Bench is that, which dealet^ properly with pleas of the Crown.

XLV. The Common place, which deals properl^ with Common Pleas.

XLVI. The King has a proper Court of this kind for all things touching his
Revenues, called the Exch^quer.

XLVII. The Judges whereof are called Barons being one chief Baron and three
other.

XLVIII. And this also has a Court of Chancery before the Chancellor and
Barons of the Exchequer called the Exchequer-chamber

XLIX. The escheator here is a special Officer, an^ has a kind of a Court
for finding out the Kings titl^ to lands, tenements, and other things.

L. Those Courts, which deal but within some County, are the Sheriffs Turn,
and the Coroners Court.

LI. The Sheriffs Turn is a Court of Record for offenses, which are common
greivances.

LII. Whereunto every man of the age of 12 year^ and upwards (being within the
Precinct) owes suit; and must be there sworn to the Kings allegiance.

LIII. But Peers of the Realm are excepted.

LIVE. The offender here shall be amerced, and distrained for that amerciament.

LV. The Coroners Court, is a Court for matters of the Crown, as Battery,
Mayhem, Rape, Murder, etc.

LVI. Upon just exception to the Sheriff, process out of the higher Courts
shall be directed to the Coroners.

LVII. The Steward and Marshall of the Kings house have a Court for all
personal Actions, and pleas of the Crown arising there.

LVIII, By reason of certain Franchises, grow two other Courts of Record, which
deal within some certain Precinct, viz. a Leet, and a Court of Pipowders.

LIX. A Leet is a Court of Record, having the sa^e Jurisdiction within an
hundred, or some less precinct, which the Sheriffs turn has in the County,
the profit thereof being to a Common person.

LX: A Court of Pipowders is a Court of Record, incident to Faires and Markets,
for all Actions arising there, and the suit must at the same time be commenced.

LXI. The King (by commission under his Letters Patents) may erect other Courts
at his pleasure.

LXII. Such were Justices in Air, and such are Courts of Record in
Corporations and other places, by special Charter.

LXIII. These are the Courts of Record: a Court Baron is the Court of a common
person.

LXIV. This Court is for personal accounts under forty shillings.

LXV. These cannot be kept oftener then every three weeks.

LXVI. The process here is by precept to the Bailiffe.

LXVII. The Suitors are the Judges.

LXVIII. A Court Baron is the Lords, or a County Court.

LXIX. The Lords Court is either of a particular Manor, or of an whole Hundred.

XXX. The Hundred Court is that, whereunto all the Inhabitants within the
Hundred owe suit.

LXX. The County Court, which is incident to the Sheriff, and has
Jurisdiction over the whole County

CHAP. 23: Suits, Original Writs, Petitions.
I. OF an Action there be two parts, the suit and the judgment.

II. Suit, is the parties dealing in the Action.

III. Here for their help they are allowed Counce^ learned in the law.

IV. The Suit has two parts, the beginning and the proceeding.

V. The beginning is the proper duty of the Plaintiff.

VI: This also has two parts; the first matter of the suit, and the original
process.

VII. The first matter of the suit must always be brought into that County,
where the cause of Sui^ grows.

VIII. The first matter of the suit is for every man by writ out of the
Chancery; or in Courts, where writs lie not, by Plaint or Bill; for the King
alone, by Inquiry.

IX^ In all of the first kind the Plaintiff must find surety (by some that
will be his pledges) to prosecute the suit.

X. And these may be either to the Officer, or to the Court where the suit is.

XI. A poor man in stead of sureties shall give his faith to prosecute it.

XII. Writs that begin the suit, are original, or commissionall.

XIII. Original, which appoint the first Process ((...) the Plaintiff find
pledges) returnable in the Kings Bench, or Common Place.

XIV. This must be true Latin, and also formal.

XV. And it must express the name of Baptism, and Surname, or (in lieu
thereof) the name of dignity both of the Plaintiff and Defendant.

XVI. Where there be many of one name, diversity of the names must be put by
addition of Elder, younger, and the like.

XVII. The Kings servants in his Court, or others by special grace of the
Chancellor may here be admitted to find pledges in the Chancery.

XVIII. Writs original are concerning Common pleas, or appeals that concern
life.

XIX. Those that concern common pleas lie not for, or against a feme covert
without her husband.

XX. Many having or giving jointly cause of Action may sue or be sued together
in one.

XXI. Several Actions of one nature may be joined in one original with
several Praecipes, or commandments to be executed.

XXII Here in place of action against the King, Petition must be made unto him
in the Chancery.

XXIII And that (in case of hereditaments) though the King have granted the
same away.

XXIV. Whereupon process shall go out against the Grantee to maintain his
title.

XXV. But whilst personal things, seized for the King, remain in the Officers
hands, the party that has right may sue the officer, or disturb him to take
the profits.

XXVI. Petition is a supplication declaring the parties right, where mention
must be made of all the Kings title.

XXVII. The writs, which concern common pleas, are Real or personal. and they
both are again Praecipes or Si fecerit te securum.

XXVIII. A praecipe is that which wills the Sheriff to command the Defendant
to do somewhat in certain, that the Plaintiff sueth for, which if he do not,
then to serve the first Process.

XXIX. The form hereof is, Praecipe A, quod reddat B, etc. Et nisi fecerit, etc
tunc summon, etc.

XXX. A Praecipe is, a Praecipe quod reddat, or a Praecipe quod faciat.

XXXI. A Praecipe quod reddat, which lies for things in render.

XXXII. A Praecipe quod faciat, which lies for things not in render, viz. in
Fesance, as a Writ de consu^tudinibus and servitiis, secta ad molendinam, etc.
or sufferance, as a Quod permittat, etc.

XXXIII. A Si fecerit to securum; is that which wills the first process to be
served without more ado.

XXXIV. The form hereof is, Si A fecerit te securum de clamore suo prosequendo,
tunc summon, etc.

CHAP 24. Actions real.
I. Real Actions, where a Freehold shall be recoveed, are Possessory, or in
the right.

II. Possessory, which are to recover a Possession.

III. In the right, which are to recover a Possession mixed with the right.

IV. And both these may be of a possession or right in himself, or descended
from his Ancestor.

V, Real Actions in the right, are either founded upon the right, or for the
mere right.

VI. Real Actions, where the Freehold shall be recovered, lie only against
the Tenant of the Freehold.

VII. With the Freeholder may be joined in Action any having Title to enter.

CHAP. 25. Ad Terminum, quem praeteriit, Entry ad communem legem, Causa
Matrimonii praelocuti, Dum fuit infra aetate^, Dum fuit non compos mentis.
I. A Real Praecipe quod reddat, is that which is for real things in render,
and it is a plea of land or other like Praecipe.

II. A plea of land, which is for land or other such things in demesne.

III. Where land in certain is demanded, it must always be brought in a Ville,
or place known out of any Ville.

IV. A plea of land is a writ of entry, or a writ showing the demandants title.

V. A writ of entry is that, which is to disprove the tenants possession by the
means of his entry.

VI. Wherein tenant in fee-simple demanding of the possession of his Ancestor,
shall say in the writ, Quod clamat esse Jus, and hereditatem suam.

VII. A writ of entry is either against the first party, or in the degrees.

VIII. Against the first party, when it is against him to whom the first
alination was, or that made the disseisin.

IX. That in the degrees, is in the per, or in the per and cui.

X. In the per, when he, against whom it is brought, comes in immediately under
the first party, as heir unto him, ot by alienation from him.

XI. In the per and cui, when he, against whom it is brought, comes in
immediately under the first parties heir, or aliance.

XII: Writs of entry grow either without wrong at the first, or upon a wrong.

XIII. Those without a wrong at the first are grounded upon a determination of
the first estate, or upon a disability in the person that made it.

XIV. Upon a determination of the estate, either by reason of a particular
estate ended, or a condition broken.

XV. Of a particular estate ended, is an ad terminum qui praeteriit, or Entry
ad communem legem.

XVI. Ad terminum qui praeteriit is upon a deforcement by the lessee, or a
stranger, after the Lease for years or life expired.

XVII. Entry ad communem legem, is when a tenant for life does alien and die.

XVIII. Of a condition broken, as Causa matrimonii praelocuti.

XIX. Causa matrimonii, praelocuti, is for a woman that gives land to a man to
marry her, and he will not.

XX^ Those grounded upon the disability of the person, are a Dum fuit infra
aetatem, and a Dum non suit compos mentis.

XXI. Dum fuit infra aetatem is by the infant, when he comes to his full age,
upon an alienation by himself, or his ancestor being within age.

XXII. But the clause that he is of full age, (viz. qui plenae est aetatis)
shall not be inserted in the Writ, if either it be brought in the degrees, per,
cui, or post, or upon the ancestors alienation.

XXIII. Dum non fuit compos mentis, is upon the alienation of himself, or his
ancestor or being of non san^ memoriae.

CHA Cui in vita sua, Cui in vita, sine assensu Capituli A writ of Intrusion, a
writ of Entry in the quibus.
I. THose upon a wrong at the first, are upon a discontinuance or an Ouster.

II. Upon a discontinuance, as a Cui in vita, or a sine assensu Capituli.

III. A Cui in vita. for the wife after the husbands death upon his alienation
of her fee simple, fee tail, or freehold, or of such a Joint estate in them.

IV. and in this writ, claiming a fee-simple, she shall say, Quod clamat esse
jus and hereditatem suam.

V. If it be an estate of fee-simple, and she bring not (in her life time) a
cui in vita, the heir shall have a sur cui in vita.

VI. And of this nature is a Cui ante divortium, when it is brought by the wife
after divorcement, upon such an alienation, as before.

VII. A sine assensu Capituli, is for the successor of a Bishop, Abbot, Prior,
Dean, Prebendary, Master of an Hospital, etc. after the discontinuance of the
Predecessor.

VIII. Upon an Ouster, is either an Intrusion, or a disseisin.

IX That upon an Intrusion is called a writ of Intrusion, and is for him in the
reversion or remainder in fee-simple or for life, after the death of tenant for
life in Dower, or by the courtesy.

X. Upon a disseisin, is when the disseisin is done to him or his ancestor, as
a Writ of Entry in the Quibus or (which is all one) in the nature of an Assize.

CHAP. 27. A Writ of Ayel, Besaiell, Cosinage, Formedon, Escheat, Dower, a
Precipe in Capite.
I. WRits that show the demandants title are mere possessory or in the right.

II. Mere possessorie are those, which are brought by the next heir upon an
abatement after the death of any ancestor, other then his Father, Mother,
Brother, Sister, Uncle, Aunt, Nephew, Niece, seized in demesne, as of the
fee-simple, the day of his death: Of this sort are.

III^ A writ of Ayell, after the death of his Grandfather or Grandmother.

IV. A writ of Besayell, after the death of his great Grandfather or great
Grandmother.

V. A Writ of Cosinage, after the death of his great great Grandfather, or
Grandmother, or any other Collateral Cousin, save those abovementioned in the
second Rule of this Chapter.

VI. In the right, is that which is to disprove the right of the tenant, and is
a writ of right in his nature, or a praecipe in Capite.

VII. A writ of Right in his nature, which shows how the demandants right is
grown, and is a Formedon, or a writ of Escheat, and Dower unde nihil habet.

VIII. A Formedon is a praecipe quod reddat, entitling the party by the form
of the gift, and is a Formedon in remainder, or a Formedon in reverter.

IX. A Formedon in remaninder, is for him in the remainder for life, or in fee,
upon a lease for life expired.

X. A Formedon in Reverter is for the Donor after the estate in tail determined.

XI. A writ of Escheat, is for the Lord upon an Escheat.

XII. Dower unde nihil habet, is a writ for ones Dower, who has received no
part at all thereof.

XIII. A writ of Dower lies against Gardein by Knights service.

XIV. A praecipe in capite is a praecipe quod reddat for the mere right of
lands holden in chief.

CHAP. 28. A writ of right of ward, and sur disclaimer.
I. OTher real praecipe quod reddats are those, which are in respect of a
Seigniorie, as a writ of right of ward, and a writ of right sur-disclaimer.

II. A writ of right or ward is to recover the wardship.

III. If it be for the recoverie of the wardship of the body, it lies as well
for Gardein in Socage, as for Gardein by Knight Service.

IV. But if it be for the recovery of the wardship of the land, it lies only
for Gardien by Knight Service.

V. A writ of right sur-disclaimer, is for the Lord to prove the lands to be
holden of him, when in Action, where the services should be recovered, the
tenant in Court of Record disclaimeth to hold of him.

VI. If in this writ the Lord can prove the Land to be holden of him, he shall
recover the Land it self.

CHAP. 29 A writ de consuetudinibus et se^ ^ic^js, secta ad molendinum, Quare
impedit, Quod permittat, Curia Clau^enda, Mesne, and Warrantia cartae.
I. A Real Praecipe quod faciat is either to recover hereditaments, or some
real things that concern them.

II. Those that are to recover some hereditament, demanding of ones own seisin,
are in the debet and solet.

III. But demanding of the ancestors seisin, they are in the debet only, and
then are in all respects, as writs for the mere right.

IV. These are either in respect of a Seigniory, or to recover some other
hereditament.

V. In respect of a Seigniorie, as a writ de consuetudinibus and servitiis, and
a secta ad molendinum.

VI. A writ De consuetudinibus and serviciis lies for the Lord that has an
estate for life, or a greater estate in the Seigniory, and is deforced of his
services.

VII. Secta ad molendinum lies for the Lord, when the tenants that hold of him
by grinding their corn at his Mill, withdraw their suit and grind elsewhere.

VIII. Those that are to recover some other hereditament are a Quare impedit,
and a Quod permittat.

IX. A Quare impedit lies upon a disturbance, where he or his ancestors, or
those, from whom he claims, having at any time before presented to a Church,
himself is now disturbed.

X. A Quod permittat lies for one that has common of pasture, for his beasts
being disturbed by a stranger, so as he cannot use his Common.

XI. These are to recover some real thing concerning hereditaments, are a Curia
claudenda, or a covenant real, and other writs sounding in that nature.

XII. Curia claudenda, lies for a freeholder, when one that has a Close next
adjoining to him, which he should keep enclosed, will not do it.

XIII. A writ of Covenant real lies upon a Covenant to do a thing real, as to
levy a fine of Lands, etc.

XIV. Writs in the nature of a Covenant real, are a writ of Mesne, and a
warrantia cartae.

XV. A writ of mesne lies for the tenant against the mesne, when the Lord
Paramont does destrain the tenant whom the mesne ought to acquit.

XVI. A warrantia cartae lies for him that has lands or tenants warranted
unto him.

XVII. Here the warrantors hereditaments are liable to the warrantie from the
time of the action brought.

XVIII. Upon these writs a fine may be leived.

XIX. A fine is the acknowledging of an hereditament in the Kings Court,
according to the covenant, to be his right that does complain.

XX. Here, one of them must needs have such an estate at the time of the fine
levied.

XX. That whereof the fine is levied, or any thing contained in it, may be
granted back again to the Conisor by the same fine,

XXII. Fines executed bind all persons, if claim be not made within a year.

XXIII. A Feme covert joining with her husband is a fine, it bindeh her for
ever.

XXIV. Therefore the Justices must examine her, to see that she do it willingly.

XXV. A grant by fine of a Seigniorie, rent charge, rent seck, remainder, or
reversion, is presently good, saving for bringing actions that run in privity
between the tenant and him.

CHAP. 30. An Assize of Novel, Disseisin, Nuisance, Darrein Presentment Juris,
utrum, Partitione facienda, Nuper objit, Quo Jure.
I. THus much of real Praecipes; Real Si fecerit te securum are an Assize, and
a Juris utrum, or other.

II. An Assze is such a real plea merely in possession.

III. And this is either an Assize of ones own possession, and an Assize of
Mordancester, or an Assize of Darrein presentment.

IV. An Assize of ones own possession, is an Assize of novel disseisin, or an
Assize of nuisance.

V. An Assize of novel disseisin, is for a freeholder against his disseisor
(whether it be of land or rent) for the Bailiff of the disseisor, if himself
cannot be found.

VI This disseisin being of a rent charge or rent seck, all the tenants of the
land must be named, though he were disseised by one tenant only.

VII. If the lord distrain the tenant too often for the rent or services, the
tenant may have an Assize.

VIII. An Assize of nuisance is for him, whose freehold is spoiled by any
nuisance.

IX. An Assize of his ancestors possession only, called an Assize of
Mordancester, is for the next heir upon an abatement after the death of his
Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, uncle, Aunt, Nephew, or Niece, who was seized
in demesne, as of fee-simple the day of his death.

X. An Assize, which may be either of his own or his ancestors possession,
called an assize of Darrein presentment, is upon a disturbance, when himself or
his ancestor did last present.

XI. A Juris utrum is such a real plea, founded upon the right of a Parson or
Vicar upon his predecessors alienation.

XII. This is the nature of an Assize, and Juris utrum: These that follow are a
partitione facienda. and nuper obiit (both which lie between privies in blood)
or a Quo jure.

XIII. A Partitione facienda lies between Coparceners to compel partition to
be made.

XIV. Therefore here for equality of partition, things that otherwise cannot,
may be granted without deed.

XV. A Nuper obiit, lies against one privy in blood, that enters after the
death of the Ancestor, that died seized in demesne.

XVI. A Quo jure lies for the Tenant of the land, when one challenges Common,
there to try whether in right he ought to have any, or no.

CHAP. 31. Debt, Detinue, Account, Covenant.
I. THus far of real Actions: A personal Actio^ is that, wherein damages
shall be recovered.

II. This Action being once suspended, is gone for ever.

III. Executors bringing such an Action must do i^ in all their names, as well
of those that refuse administration, as of the rest, but an Action may be
brough^ only against those that do administer

IV. In personal Actions growing in respect of ^ possession in Common, Tenants
in Common are i^ all respects as Joynt-tenants.

V. In personal Praecipes damages only shall be recovered, where the thing it
self cannot be had.

VI. Personal Praecipes quod Reddat's are debt, an^ detinue.

VII. Debt, when any thing is due upon a contract

VIII. If the debt be money due one from another i^ their own right it is in
the debet and detinet otherwi^^ in the detinet only.

IX. When any of the Kings Goods come into a Subje^^ hands, his land at all
times after is chargeable for the same into whose hands soever afterward it
comes.

X. Of this nature is a writ of Annuity, which lies for him that has an
Annuity, be it money or other things, as clothes, bread, etc.

XI. This writ is in the debet for any other thing, as well as for money, and
not in the detinet, therein differing from an action of debt.

XII. Detinue is, when any thing is with holden.

XIII. Personal Praecipe quod faciats, are an action of account, and an action
of covenant.

XIV. An Action of account, which is for an account to be made.

XV. The King may have it against Executors, and so can no other.

XVI. An Action of Covenant, which is for a Covenant to be holden.

CHAP. 32. Personal Si fecerit Securum's.
I. PErsonal Si te fecerit Securum's are of things done without force, or where
force is coupled with it.

II. Of those without force, some go not so far as breach of the peace, others
do break it.

III. Those that break not the peace, are these that follow.

IV. Rationabili part bonorum, for the wife and children of one deceased, to
have their part of the goods.

V. Valor maritagii for Guardian in Knight Service when the heir at full age
refuses to satisfy him for his marriage.

VI. A writ of forfeiture of marriage, which is to recover the double value
against such an heir, marrying himself within age, without the Lords assent,
and at full age putting out the Lord.

VII. Intrusion of ward, when the heir by Knight Service enters, and puteth
out the Lord.

VIII Ejectione custodiae, for any Guardian by Knight service or soccage,
against a stranger ejecting him of the land, or body of the heir, or both.

IX. Quare ejecit infra terminum for lessee for years, against the feoffe in
fee, or for life of his lessor.

X. Here the term it self shall be recovered, if it be not past.

XI. Trespass upon the case of things not against the peace, as Assumpsits, for
an assumption, or promise to be performed, and the like.

XII. This lies not against Executors.

XIII. Here, and in all other actions of trespass upon the case, the writ must
comprehend all the matter o^ substance.

XIV. The other that break the peace, but not (...) are called trespasses
against the peace.

XV. And of this kind are especially (of the nature of such a trespass) an
action of deceit, and an action o^ conspiracy.

XVI. An action of deceit, is upon any deceit committed.

XVII. Here, if it be upon a non-summons in a pl^^ of land, whereby he loses
the land by default, or suc^ like, it must be brought during the life of the
Summoners.

XVIII. In a writ of deceit the Plaintiff shall rec^ver all that he has lost.

XIX. Conspiracy (in the nature of a trespass) upon conspiring by many to
prejudice a man wron^fully.

XX. Such are trespasses without force, is an Action (...) trespass coupled
with force. is an action of trespass for a trespass done.

XXI. An Action of trespass brought in a Court Baron must not suppose it to be
done by force and arms.

XXII. And therefore no Capias lies there in such case.

XXIII. Special actions of trespass are these that follow.

XXIV. De Parco fracto, for taking distress out of the Pound.

XXV. Rescous, for taking a distress away before it be impounded.

XXVI. Ejectione firmae, when lessee for years of land is ousted, where the
term it self shall be recovered if it be not past.

CHAP. 33. Appeal.
I. THese are Common Pleas: an Appeal that concerns life, is the parties
private action, prosecuting also for the Crown, in respect of a felony.

II. Appeals of the death of a man are given to the heir of the party slain.

CHAP. 34. A Writ of right Patent, and justicies.
I. THus far of original writs: Commissional are these, which are not
returnable but determinable before the parties to whom they are directed.

II These are Commissionary, or mere Commissions.

III. Of the first sort are those that give authority to a Court Baron to hold
plea.

IV. Here the suitors are the Judges, not the Sheriff or Steward.

V. These are a writ of right Patent, or a Justicies

VI. In both these the same course is holden, as is those that went before.

VII. A writ of right patent is a writ for the mee^ right of Tenements holden
of a common person, to be brought in the Lords Court of that Manor.

VIII. If he hold noe Court, or otherwise yield hi^ Court to the King for that
time, then it may be in the Kings Court with this clause, Quia B. capitalis
Domin^ nobis inde remisit curiam.

IX. This writ must show by what service the land i^ holden.

X. The writ remains always with the party himself.

XI. If one privy in blood, not past the third degree enter after the death of
the ancestor, that died not sei^ed, in such case, a writ of right patent is
called a wr^^ of right de rationabili part terrae.

XII. A woman that has received part of h^ Dower, shall have a writ of right
of Dower patent for the remnant, whereof she is to be endowed.

XIII. A Justicies is a writ, that gives the County Court power to hold plea.

XIV. And therefore it ts called a Viconte writ; o^ this sort are.

XV. An Assize of petty nuisance, where a mill, o^ such like is levied to ones
nuisance.

XVI. All of them are comprehended in these Verse rica ca (...) gultum ges
lendinum Fab, fur, porta, domus, vir, gur, mo, murus ovil^ Et pons: traduntur
haec vicecomitibus.

XVII Admeasurement of Dowerby the heir, whe^^ his Guardian, or himself endowed
the wife in his no^^ age of more then she ought to have.

XVIII. Admeasurement of pasture by a Commoner, whom another Commoner wrongeth,
by putting i^ more Beasts into the Common then he should.

XIX. Here, all the Commoners shall be admeasured.

XX. A nativo habendo for the Lord, that has an Inheritance in any Villein,
when his Villein departs away from him.

XXI. Here, if the Villein plead that he is frank, the Sheriff cannot proceed.

XXII. Rationalibus divisis, for that Lord, whose land or waste has by little
and little been incroached upon within time of memory until now, by a Lord,
whose Seigniory adjoyneth in another ville, against the Lord so incroaching.

XXIII. A homine replegiando, for one imprisoned, or in prison detained, where
he should not.

XXIV. A Replevin for goods or chattels distreined,

XXV, This may be both by writ and plaint in any Court Baron, as well as in the
County Court.

XXVI. This being by plaint; it shall not proceed, if any thing touching the
freehold come in question.

XXVII. Upon the pluris not served by the Sheriff, his power is determined, and
the parties shall plead in Bank.

XXVIII. Many of the actions, that went before both for real things to be done,
as Consuetudinibus and servitiis, secta ad molendinum, Quod permittat, Mesne
Dower, unde nihil habet: And also personal actions, as annuity, debt, detinue,
account, covenant, trespass to what sum soever, may as well be brought in
the County by Justicies, as to be returnable in the Common Place.

XXIX. Mere Commissions are these that follow, being all of them to be directed
to choice persons, such as it shall please the King.

XXX. Oyer and Terminer, to hear and determine upon some heinous offense
committed.

XXXI. In these and such like commissions lie properly, a writ of Association,
and Si non omnes.

XXXII. Association is a writ for other to be associate into their company.

XXXIII. Si non omnes, is a writ for the rest to proceed, although the other
come not.

XXXIV. Ad quod damnum, to enquire what hurt it may be to the King, Country, or
any other, for the King to grant such, or such a thing.

XXXV. Perambulatione facienda, to enquire of the bounds of 2. Seigniories or
^ownes, where an incroachment by little and little is supposed to have been
made.

XXXVI. This must be by the mutual assent of both Lords.

CHAP. 35. Plaints, and Bills.
I. SO far of writs; it follows, to speak of Plaints and Bills, both being in
such Courts as hold ple^ without original writ.

II. A plaint is in matters that concern Common pleas.

III. A Plaint of trespass in a Court Baron shall not proceed, if the freehold
come in question.

IV. A Bill is in pleas of the Crown, as an appeal of felony, mayhem, rape,
etc. may be by Bill before one Coroner of the County, finding first sureties to
the Sheriff.

V. One whose attendance is necessary in any Court shall sue, and be sued there
in form of Plaint, which is called a Bill of Privilege.

CHAP 36. A Quo Warranto, Office, Indictment.
I. THe King has a special means of suit for trying of the right of
Franchises, usurped upon him, called a Quo Warranto, and is to be brought
before the Justices in Air.

II An Enquiry for the King is, when matter for the King is found by a Jurie,
called an Enqest of Office.

III. This may be before the Officers, as Sheriffs, Escheators, Coroners, etc.
Virtute officii, Brevis, or Commissionis, to them directed.

IV. Here, the number of twelve is not of necessity requisite.

V. An Enquiry is an office, or presentment.

VI. An Office, which finds matter to entitle the King to some possession.

VII. Upon as high a matter of Record to avoid the Office, as the Office it
self, a man may traverse it.

VIII. If the office be for personal goods, the party may always have a
traverse, or plead any matter unto it, unless the Escheator have accounted for
them; and that although the office find the Kings title to be by matter of
Record.

IX. The King upon office finding for him, if his entry be lawful, and the
possessions to be had at the time, is presently in possession.

X. Also he shall be answered all the mean profits from the time of his title.

XI. Upon an office found virtute Officii, whereby the King is entitled to ones
wardship, the heir shall never have livery, viz. the land delivered out of the
Kings hands.

XII. But upon a perfect office, Virtute Brevis, or Commissionis (if it be a
special writ or Commission, not a general one to inquire of all wards) he may.

XIII. Therefore here the heir is allowed these Commissions following, or writs
in the nature of such Commissions, viz 1. For finding of an office for the
King. 2. For the having of the land out of the Kings hand.

XIV. Those for the finding of an office are Diem clausic extremum, Mandamus,
and Devenerunc, to inquire, what lands holden of the King, and what of others,
the ancestors was seized off, the day of his death, who is his next heir, and
of what age.

XV. The Diem clausit extremum is to be sued within the year after his death.

XVI. The Mandamus is after the year; and here, it must further be inquired,
who took the profits.

XVII. The Devenerunt is, when the ancestor dies in ward to the King.

XVIII. Upon defect in Offices found by virtue of such writs or commissions,
these writs following shall issue out to make them perfect, viz.

XIX A Quae plura, upon leaving of any land out i^ these offices.

XX A Melius inquirendum, upon any other defect i^ the Office.

XXI. A Datum est nobis intelligi, upon an Office finding lands to be holden of
any other person, when there is a Record to prove, that they are holden of the
King.

XXII. The writs for having the lands out of the Kings hands, are an Aetate
probanda, and a writ i^ Livery

XXIII. An Aetate probanda, is to inquire whethe^ he b^ of full age, or not.

XXIV A writ of Livery is after a perfect Office finding a tenure in chief; to
have all the lands delivere^ to him at once by the King.

XXV. Two being found heirs by one and the sa^^ title, The King shall not make
Livery, until by enter-pleader the truth be discussed at his full age, that wa^
found heir first.

XXVI Amongst Co-parceners the King upon Livery shall make partition.

XXVII. He that holds of the King by Knight service, but not in Chief, shall
not sue Livery. Be when he comes to his full age, shall have an Ouster^ main.

XXVIII. A presentment is an enquiry finding some offense against the King,
which is also called an Indictment.

XXIX. Every strong suspicion of such offense appearing of Record has the
force of an Indictment.

XXX. Without an Indictment the King can have no suit upon a wrong done,
principally to another, but done to himsef, he may.

XXXI. For the preventing of diverse offenses, viz. trespasses to the body and
felonies, and committing them that offend to prison, until they may be
indicted, and so duly punished, every Hundred has his High Constable, and
every several tithing within the Hundred has his petty Constables, or
Headboroughs,

XXXII. Any man, suspecting another of a felony committed, or but intended,
may arrest him.

XXXIII. With indictments of trespass, informations upon penal Statutes (such
as inflict a pecuniarie mulct, or other penalty upon offenders) have a near
affinity.

XXIV. Indictments of the death of a man are to be taken before the Coroners.

CHAP. 37. Proper Original Process.
I. HItherto of the first matter of the suit; it follows to speak of original
process.

II. Original process is, that process, which is until the defendant do
appear.

III. Original process is proper or improper.

IV. Proper, which is to bring some matter into Plea or solemn action; and it
is single, or mixed.

V. Single, which is by the possessions only (lands or goods) or only by the
person.

VI. That by the land is of two so^ts, first, summons and Grand Cape in a real
Praecipe quod reddat.

VII. The summons is the warning of the tenant in his land by certain summoners.

VIII. The summons upon an action brought against one as heir, must be in the
land that did descend.

IX. If it be to recover the freehold of land it self, it must be in the same
land.

X. A Grand Cape, is to take the Land into the Kings hands by the view of
lawful men, with a summons of the tenant to answer, as well to his default, as
to the demandants action.

XI. If the tenant be returned, summoned, where i^ deed he was not, the writ
shall abate.

XII. Secondly, it is summons and re-summons, in a Mordancestor, Juris utrum,
and an Assize of Darren presentment, and upon default the enquest awarded.

XIII. Original process by the goods, as in Assize of novel disseisin, and
nuisance, where the original process is Pone per vadios etc. salvos plegios.

XIV. A Pone pervadios and salvos plegios, is a proces^ to attach the defendant
by certain of his proper goods, being mere personal chattels, which he shall
forfeit, i^ he appear not, and upon such default the Inquest (summoned by the
writ) is presently to be awarded to recognize the Assize.

XV. The original process by the person is a Capias (which is a process to
imprison him) then an exigent o^ solemn demand at five several County Courts
immediately following one another, and for not appearing Outlawry.

XVI. This Judgment of Outlawry is given by the Coroner in the fifth County, and
is only in mayhem felony, and treason

XVII. If the Exigent be returned not fully serve without any folly in the
Plaintiff, he bringing an Exigent de novo, before any other County holden,
sha^^ have the benefit of the former Counties.

XVIII., Outlawry disableth him from suing an^ actlon,

XIX, By Outlawry all his chattels are forfeit to the King, even such as he
has but a right unto.

XX. In Mayhem there must be three Capias, viz. Capias, alias, and pluries) t^o
in Felony, viz. Stealth Robbery, and Burglary) and only one in the death of a
man, and high Treason.

XXI. In felony and Treason, they that tarry the Exigent forfeit their
chattels.

XXII. A mixed original process is that which is so by his goods, as for want
of goods, resort may be made sometimes to his land, and sometimes to his person,
and sometimes to both.

XXIII. Those of the first sort are in all other real actions, and in all
personal actions (except trespass and offenses against the Public) and in all
Justicies Summons by the goods, Attachment, (or a Pone per vadios, etc.) and a
distress infinite.

XXIV. Distress infinite is a process to distrein him continually after, till
he do appear by certain of his goods and profit (or issues) of his lands, which
he loses if he appear not,

XXV. Upon his distress must be returned in issues the value of all his lands
from the Test of the writ, until the day of the return.

XXVI. With these issues the land is chargable.

XXVII. In such process as these, if the defendant be a beneficed Clerk, he
must be warned by his person, or land, if he have any Lay-fee; otherwise,
process shall go out to the Ordinary to make him appear by the issues of his
benefice,

XXVIII. Here also, if upon the summons a nihil be returned, viz. that the
party has nothing whereby to be summoned; in such case there shall issue forth
a continual Capias.

XXIX. But a Capias lies not here against a Peer of the Realm, because by
common intendment he must have freehold.

XXX. In a Replevin in the County Court, if the goods be conveyed away, so as
at the tenants suit they connot be restored, process of witherm^^ ^ieth, which
i^ for the Plaintiff to have of the othe^s goods, until restitution of his own.

XXXI. Those of the second sort ar^, in all trespasses upon the case, and in
all offenses in the nature o^ trespasses upon the case, an Attachment,
distress in^nite, and upon nihil returned a continual Capias, as before.

XXXII. Here for contempts a Capias lies against Peers of the Realm*

XXXIII. Those of a third sort are, in trespass (...) and offenses against the
public; Attachment, distres^ infinite, and upon nihil returned, three Capias,
Exige^^, and Outlawry.

CHAP. 38. Improper Original process Commandatorie.
I. THus far of proper original writs, which begin a^ Action, besides which,
there are certain other ^riginals out of the Chancery, which are not deductory
to bring any matter into plea or solemn action but only commandatory or
prohibitory to do, or to lea^^ something undone.

II. Upon these writs no process lies, and therefore they may be termed
Improper Originals.

III. The Commandatory writs of this nature an^ these that follow.

IV. De Dote assignanda, which is for the wife of the Kings tenant, when the
King is entitled, by office, (...) land, where she is dowable.

V. This writ is always directed to the Escheator, an^ may be either to
deliver her such part of her land, as i^ already assigned to her in the
Chancery for her dower^ or for the Escheator himself to assign her part unto her

VI If her husband held in chief; then she must first take an oath in the
Chancery not to marry without the Kings license.

VII. De Homagio capiendo, which is for the tenant by Homage Ancestrel to
compel the Lord to receive his homage.

VIII. De scutagio habendo, for the Lord to have Escuage of his tenants by
Knights-service, when the same is due upon a Voyage Royal, etc.

IX. De auxilio ad filium suum militem faciendum and filiam maritandam, for the
Lord to have such aid of his tenants where it is due.

X. De Corodio habendo, to have a Corodie for his servant.

XI. De annua pensione habenda, to have a pension granted to his Chaplain,
until he be promoted to a benefice.

XII. De libertatibus all ocandis, for one single person, or body corporate in
pleaded before the Kings Justices, to have the liberties formerly grante^ unto
them, to be allowed:

XIII. De executione judicii, to have a judgment executed: and this is a
Justicies.

XIV. De restitutione temporalium, where the temporalties before seized into
the Kings hands are to be restored to a Prior, or Bishop elect and consecrate.

XV. De securitate pacis, for him that is in fear of corporal hurt, or of the
burning of his houses, to be secured of peace in that behalf, against the
party; whom he fears, where a corporal oath must be taken by him, that
stands so in fear.

XVI. De vi laica removenda, to remove all Lay-force in any Church.

XVII. Of cleansing streets, to have the ways, streets, and lanes of a Town
corporate to be made clean when they be apt to cause infection by their
nastinesse and stench,

XVIII De lepros^ amovendo, to remove a Leper or Lazer (that will come abroad)
from the company of men to some solitary place of abode.

XIX De excommunicato capiendo upon a significavit, viz. the Ordinaries
certificate i^to the Chancery, that one excommunicate stands out 40 days, to
imprison him, until he satisfy holy Church: And this writ also is a Justicies.

XX. De excommmunicato deliberando, to deliver him out of prison, when the
Church is satisfied.

XXI De cautione admittend^, when one taken by an excummunicato capiendo
offers sufficient pledge or caution to obey holy Church, which is refused, to
have that caution addmitted, and to be delivered.

XXII. De heretico combu^endo, to cause one convicted for an heretic to be
burnt.

XXIII. De coronatore eligendo, to choose a Coroner in full County by the
freeholders of the County.

XXIV. De coronatore exonerando, to discharge a Coroner of his Office upon just
cause.

XXV. This writ is directed to the Coroner himself*

XXVI. De electione viridariorum Forestae, to choose a Verdor of the Forest.

XXVII. De ^exoneraeado viridario Forestae, to discharge a Verdor of the Forest.

XXVIII. Conge d'eslire, to Dean and Chapter (o^ such like) to choose their
Bishop.

XXIX. A writ for the Royal assent to signify to the Ordinary his assent to
the election of an Abbot, etc and to will him to execute that which belongs
unt^ him.

XXX. This is always directed to the Ordinan^^ himself.

XXXI De securitate invenienda, quod non se ^^vertat in parts exteras sine
licentia Regis, to compel on^ to find sufficient mainpernors in a reasonable
sum o^ money, not to go in foreign parts without the Kings license, nor any
thing there to attempt in contempt or prejudice of the King, or hurt of the
people; nor to send any thither for any such cause.

XXXII. All Dedimus potestatems, the principal of which are these that follow.

XXXIII. Dedimus Potestatem, to give the Kings Royal assent to the election of
an Abbot, or the like, made, or to be made, and to signify so much by his
letters to the Ordinary, that he may do that which belongs to him, and to
receive fealty, etc, Commanding the party to do the premises.

XXXIV. Dedimus Potestatem de fine levando, to certain persons to take the
acknowledgment of a fine out of Court, when one that has agreed in the Kings
Court to levy a fine, is so feeble, that he cannot travel.

XXXV. The Chief Justice of the Common Place may take the acknowledgment of a
fine without any dedimus potestatem.

XXXVI. Dedimus Potestatem de Atturnato faciendo, for the Judges to admit an
Attorney for one in a suit.

CHAP. 39. Improper Original Process Prohibitorie,
I. PRohibitorie improper original writs are these that follow;

II. A Protection cum clausula nolumus, to free ones possessions, that nothing
be taken against his will for the Kings business.

III. Parsons, or other spiritual persons not to be charged to the payment of
fifteens for goods in their possessions, annexed to their Churches.

IV. Quod Clerici non elegantur in Officium Balivi, for a Clerk not to be
chosen an Officer for his lands.

V. A prohibition to forbid tenant in Dower, or by courtesy of England, or
Guardian by Knight service, o^ in soccage to commit waste to the destruction of
the Inheritance.

VI. A Quo minus, for grantee of Estovers, to restrain the grantor from
committing waste, so as he cannot have estovers.

VII. De exoneratione sectae, for tenants by suit o^ Court, or other services,
that they be not distreined t^ do the same for such time, as they ought to hold
the land discharged.

VIII. De exonerando pro rata, to discharge the tena^^ of parcel of the Land,
according to the rate of hi^ land, when he is lawfully distreined for all the
rent and services.

IX. De essendo quieto de Tholonio, to Officers not t^ grieve spiritual
persons, and others, that ought to be quit of paying of Toll, Murage, Pannage,
Pontage etc

X. De non ponendo in Juratis, to discharge Peers o^ the Realm, and other
persons privileged from being of Juries, unless their presence be for any
special cause necessary.

XI. Ne exeas regnum, to the party himself to inhibit him from going into
foreign parts without the Kings license.

CHAP. 40. The Count, and Pleading.
I. THus far the beginning of a suit: the Proceeding follows, which has two
parts: The Count and the Pleading.

II. A condition (annexed to an estate of freehold) cannot be alleged in
Count or pleading, unless it be by Deed.

III. The Count is a larger declaration of the substance of the original writ,
and therefore is usually termed Declaration.

IV. In real actions, which are in the right, the demandant must allege the
taking of the-profits, called Esplees, in the declaration.

V. In stead of the Count a plaint shall be made in Assizes of novel disseisin,
and in writs of Dower a demand.

VI. Pleading is the parties debating of the suit.

VII. Every plea must be offered to be proved true by saying in the plea, Et
hoc paratus esse verificare, and this is termed an averment.

VIII. An advantage of a matter, which cannot be pleaded, shall be saved by
protesting, not acknowledging it to be true, although the matter pleaded pass
against him.

IX. Pleas are either of the defendant, when he is first brought in to answer,
or the mutual pleas of both.

X. In a joint action against two or more, one of them appearing shall not
answer, till the other come in to answer, or the suit be finished against him,
as by death, outlawry etc.

XI. An action by, or against an Infant, as heir, shall not proceed, till his
full age, unless it be apparent, that by proceeding he cannot be prejudiced.

XII. But in a writ of Dower an Infant heir shall not have his age.

XIII. The defendants first pleas are dilatory, or to the Action.

XIV. Dilatory, which are before any plea in Bar.

XV. When an action is brought against many they must join in the plea, if they
inrend to plead these dilatories.

XVI. Dilatory Pleas are exceptions, or foreign advantages.

XVII. Exceptions are dilatories grounded upon the matter it self of the suit;
and are in disability, or abatement

XVIII. Those in disability are to the jurisdiction or person, both which must
be before the Count.

XIX. To the jurisdiction, when it is alleged that the Court ought not to hold
plea of it.

XX. To the person, when it is alleged, that the Plaintiff ought not to be
answered, as if he be outlawed, excommunicated, etc.

XXI. But in case of excommunication the suit shall be put without day, only
till he be absolved.

XXII. Those in abatement are for any fault in the first matter of the suit.

XXIII. For this cause the defendant may have Oy^^ of any thing tendered by the
Plaintiff, and not being parcel of the Record, as of the writ, condition, etc.

XXIV. Pleas in abatement are to the Count first, and then to the writ.

XXV. Amongst Pleas to the writ, exceptions tha^ arise upon the view of the
writ are to be pleaded before those that are foreign, as non-tenure, several
tenancy, etc.

XXVI. Pleas to the Count, are for insufficiency, variance from the writ, etc.

XXVII. Pleas to the writ, are for default of for^ false Latin, etc.

XXVIII. By waging of law, for non-summons in a praecipe quod reddar, the writ
shall abate.

XXIX. In Assize of novel disseisin and nuisance, and in appeals of felony, and
Juris utrum, the defendant may have many pleas in abatement.

xxx. The writ abating for some cause, that can not be imputed to the
Plaintiffes folly, himself bringing another with speed in the same Court
against the same party, shall have all advantages of the former; an^ this is
called a writ purchased by Journeys account

xxxi. Forain advantages are delays without excepion to any thing; as in all
actions, Oyer of the writ, etc. In real actions, view, aid, prayer, and voucher.

XXXII. View, is (in real actions) of the thing demanded, or of the land,
whence it comes, when it is so necessary, as without view the defendant cannot
well answer.

XXXIII. Aid prayer is for the tenant for life, to request him that has the
inheritance, to help him to plead: so must the Incumbent pray in aid of the
patron and Ordinary.

XXXIV. Voucher is the calling in of one that should warrant, to answer the
action.

XXXV, Here the voucher loosing, the tenant shall recover in value against him
any hereditaments, that he had at the time ^f voucher.

XXXVI. Therefore voucher is in liew of another action, where the original
process is Summons ad Warrantizandum, and then a Grand Cape ad valentiam.

XXXVII. If one be vouched within age, it is a summons ad habendum visum first,
and being awarded of full age, a summons ad warrantizandum. and Grand Cape, as
before.

XXXVIII. But if he be awarded within age, the parol shall demurre until his
full age.

XXXIX. If the summons ad warrantizandum or habendum visum be not served, then
a sequatur sub suo periculo is to go forth, and if the tenant cannot get that
served, he loses his warranty; for it is sub periculo of the tenant.

XL. But in exchanges the hereditaments are liable from the very time of the
exchange.

XLI. In partition amongst co-perceners from the death of the ancestor.

XLII The King shall not be vouched but prayed in aid off, which in case has
the force of a Voucher.

XLIII. So is it also of co-perceners.

XLIV. In an Assize of novel disseisin, and nuisance voucher lies not, unless
the vouchee be present in Court, and will by and by enter into warrantie.

XLV. He that is impleaded in any action, wherein he may vouch and does not,
shall never have the benefit of a Warrantia Cartae

XLVI. Advantages in certain personal actions are Garnishment and Enterpleader.

XLV^I. Garnishment is upon a writ of detenue, when it be alleged by the
defendant to have been upon a bailment by the Plaintiff, and another. or for
another upon condition, that other shall be brought in to show whether by
reason of that bailment himself, or the Plaintiff ought to have the goods,
chattels, etc.

XLVIII. Enterpleader is, when diverse bringing several writs of detenue, ward,
or Quare impedit against the same person in the same County, and for the same
thing, the rest shall answer him, that brought the first writ.

XLIX. The King may appoint any place he thinks good to be a safeguard for
all offenders flying tbither, tha^ they shall not be molested, or compelled to
answer, which privileged places have in former times been called Sanctuaries.

L. Thus far of dilatory Pleas, Pleas to the action are such as go to the body
of the matter, and are Pleas in Bar, or Confessions.

LI. Pleas in bar, are those, which are to bar the Plaintiff of his action.

LII. In these the defendant must make defense, as t^ say, Defendit vim and
injuriam quando, etc.

LIII. But no such defense shall be made in Dower, Assize of novel disseisin,
per quae servitia, or Attaint.

LIVE. The tenant may plead a warrantie in bar o^ him that should warrant; if he
b^ing the writ.

LV. And though the tenant of the land be a stranger to the warrantie, yet he
may plead that he has a third persons estate, and so rebut by a warrantie,
made unto that person.

LVI. But in writs of Dower the ancestors warrantie is no bar.

LVII. A warrantie made by the disseisor at the time of the disseisin, barreth
not the heir, and this is called a warrantie that commenceth by disseisin.

LVIII. In an Assize of novel disseisin and trespass the defendant pleading a
title in bar, must give color of titl^ to the Plaintiff.

LIX. In the giving of this color, these three, things must be observed, 1. It
must be to the Plaintiff not to a stranger, or to the defendant, 2. It must be
of such a possession, whereby he may maintain his action. 3. The Color must be
a matter doubtful in law, or otherwise difficult to the Lay people.

LX. In real actions for the mere right, when it is in respect of a disseisin
done, the tenant cannot traverse the seisin, but may tender half a mark to the
King to have it inquired by the Jurie: and being found, that the demandant was
not seized in the time, whereof he counts, that shall bar him for ever.

LXI. The tenant cannot tender half a Mark against the King.

LXII. The heir or executors in an action brought against them (where they are
chargable) pleading a matter in their own knowledge, which goes in perpetual
bar, shall be charged as in their proper duty, if it pass against them.

LXIII. In Assizes of novel disseisin, nuisance, mortdancestor, Juris utrum, and
in indictments and appeals of felony, the defendant may plead in abatement, and
over in bar, or take the general issue also.

LXIV. In Assizes of novel disseisin and nuisance, he may plead a special
matter, that amounts but to a general issue:

LXV. Upon Indictments of felony and treason, the defendant being put to
answer, is not allowed Council, if he deny the fact.

LXVI. A presentment in the Leet or Sheriffs turn, after the day of
presentment binds the party for ever, and is not traversable but in cases
that touch ones freehold.

LXVII. Therefore the course is, to remove such presentiments into the Kings
Bench by a Certiorari, where they may be traversed.

LXVIII. Confession is, when the defendant confesses the Plaintiffes action to
be good.

LXVIX. The defendant confessing an Indictment of felony may accuse others of
the same offense.

LXX. One that flying to a Church or Churchyard and confesses before the
Coroner, when he comes the certainty of any bare felony, where life and
member is to be lost, before he be thereof attainted, may abjure.

LXXI. Abjuration, is his oath before the Coroner himself to depart the Realm
for ever at the time and place set him; going the direct way theither; tarrying
there but one flood and ebb, if he can have passage, and, till he can so
pass, going every day in the sea up to the knees to assay if he may pass
over; and if he cannot pass within 40 days, then to put himself again into
the Church as a felon, etc.

CHAP. 41. Replication, Rejoinder, Sur-rejoynder, etc. the issue and demurrer.
I. THus far the Pleas of the defendant, the mutual pleas of both, are the
debating before issue, or the issue it self.

ij. Debating before issue, is the discussing of the material things to draw it
to some one issue.

iij. Of the first sort, are replication, rejoinder, sur-rejoynder, etc.

iv. In an Assize against many, if each take the whole tenancy severally, and
plead several matters in bar, or one Nul-tort, and the other in bar, the
Plaintiff at his peril must choose his tenant. And then after issue for the
whole, the Tenancy shall be first inquired of, and being found for the
Plaintiff, then the other issue shall be enquired; but being found against him,
and no title made against the tenant indeed, the writ shall abate.

v. In an action of trespass mere transitory, although the defendant justify
by any special matter, yet the plaintiff may take issue, that it was done de
son tort de mesne, viz. wrongfully by the defendant without answering to that
matter.

vi. If it be a trespass upon land, the defendant justifying in some other
land then the Plaintiff means, the Plaintiff may make a new assignment

vii. An issue is, when both the parties join upon somewhat, that they refer to
trial to make an end of the plea.

viii. This issue, is of the fact or of the law.

ix. Of the fact, when the proper contradiction of that, which one alleges,
is set down by the other.

x After which, if any insufficient pleading appear in the Record, whether the
issue be joined thereupon (which is called a Jeosaile) or no, the Parties must
begin a new, where the first defect was.

xi. But no re-pleader shall be in an Assize, if the Plaintiff have disclosed
a sufficient title.

xii. If the tender of this issue come on the plaintiffes part the form is, Et
hoc petit, quod Inquiratur per recordum or Patriam, etc.

xiii. If on the defendants part then it is, Et de hoc ponit se super recordum
illud, or super Patriam.

XIV. Issue in a writ of Right cannot be joined upon the mere right, but by the
party himself, and this is called the joining of the Mise.

XV. Where the Plaintiff in his his replication makes title at large, the
Tenant may join issue upon the title, by saying, Veigne Assize sur le title,
and this is called a Pleading to the action at large.

XVI. But in a personal action, when the title of the Land comes in question,
it lies not till issue joined, and yet in that case it never lies for Tenant
for life, but only for tenant for years. Bailiff, etc.

XVII. Aid in these actions shall be of the King before issue joined only.

XVIII. This being a matter (In fait, viz.) done in the country is tryable by
the oath of twelve free and lawful men of the same County indifferently chosen.

XIX. Four of the Jury must be of the same Hundred.

XX. If the thing in issue lie in the notice of two several counties, and not
of one only, the Jury shall be made equal out of both.

XXI. But upon an Indictment of an offense against the Crown, the trial shall
never be by Joynder of Counties.

XXII. But if the Defendant plead in any Action, that the Plaintiff is a
villeine regardant to a Manor of his, in in another County, yet the same shall
be tried in the County where the writ is brought.

XXIII. Where a Peer of the Realm is party to the Action, a Knight must be
returned upon the Jury.

XXIV. In a Court of Pipowders, the trial is by the Merchants.

XXV. The Jury in a writ of Right is called the grand Assize, being four
Knights (or others in default of Knights) choosing of twelve unto them.

XXVI. This Jury is called the Grand Assize, because it always consists of
more then 12. viz. of 16.

XXVII. Upon trial by Jury* challenges are allowed for the parties (if they
will) both to the Array and to the Pols, and are to be tried by some of the
jurors.

XXVIII. If it be before any Jurors sworn, the Court shall choose Triers, but
when any of the Jurors are sworn they must try it.

XXIX. Challeng to the Array, is when the Jury is not sufficiently impanelled.

XXX. Upon just cause of exception to the Sheriff, and afterward to the
Coroner, the Court shall choose certain persons to return the jury, who are
called Esliors.

XXXI. And then the parties shall never afterward make any challenge to the
array.

XXXII. Challenge to the Poll, is, when any of the jurors are not fit to pass
upon the trial.

XXIII. This Challenge must be taken before the panell be perused, and shall be
tried by two of the jurors chosen by the Court.

XXXIV. But Challenges that sound not in reproach of the juror, shall be
examined upon his Oath which is called examination upon Voire Dire.

XXXV. He that challenges the array, if it pass against him (or that he
release it) shall never challenge the polls, without showing cause presently,
which shall be tried out of hand.

XXXVI, After Challenge to a juror for one cause, which passes against the
Challenger, he shall not challenge him for another.

XXXVII. In Indictments and appeals of felony, the defendant may challenge
thirty five jurors without showing cause, and this is called a peremptory
challenge.

XXXVIII. When there lacks some to fill the jury, others of the same sort
shall be taken till it be full, and they are called a Tales.

XXXIX. The Tales must be an even number, and less then the principal Panel,
as December Tales, Oct^ Tales, etc.

xl. Every Tales must be of less number then the other, as after an Octo
Tales, a sex Tales, etc.

xli. But in Indictments and appeals, that touch life, a Tales may be of a
greater number then the principal panel.

xlii. The Jury being charged, may neither eat no^ drink (but by leave of the
Justices) before their Verdict given.

xliii. Doing so before they be agreed, it maked their verdict void, but after
they are agreed, it is only finable.

XLIV. The Jury upon arraignment, acquitting on^ that was found guilty of the
death of a man upon an enquiry before the Coroners super visum corporis, mus^
find who did the fact.

XLV. The Jury in an Assize of novel disseisin shall inquire of the plea in
abatement.

XLVI. And therefore in such an Assize no plea i^ abatement is answerable.

XLVII. An Infant bringing an Assize, if a matte^ done in the same County be
pleaded against him, the Jury shall inquire of all the circumstances.

XLVIII. The like inquiry of the circumstance^ shall be, if in an Assize
brought against him, he plea^ to the Assize at large.

XLIV. If the tenant in a mordancester travers^ any point of the writ, yet the
jury shall inquire of al^ the points, and any one found against the Demandan^
abateth the writ.

L. For the better direction of the Jury in their verdict, greater liberty is
permitted in pleading a matte^ doubtful in law.

LI. For sometimes a traverse may be omitted.

LII. Sometimes also, the special matter may b^ pleaded together with the
general issue.

LIII. Likewise the Court may be abridged before verdict, so as the original
remain true.

LIVE. After acquittal upon an appeal or indictment of felony or treason, he
shall never be drawn in question for the same offense again.

LV. In writs of right and in appeals, that touch life, trial may be by battle
at the defendants choice.

LVI. The battle in a writ of right may be by Champions, who must be freemen.

LVII. Here, the demandants Champion must have seen him or his ancestors in
possession, and thereof take his oath.

LVIII. The battle in an appeal must be in proper person; and therefore here
the defendant is restrained from the choice of Battle (and must needs try it
by Jury) if there be any notorious presumption of the fact in him, or
imbecility in the Plaintiff: Also against a Peer of the Realm bringing an
appeal, the defendant shall not wage Battle.

LIX. In a writ of Dower, issue taken upon the death of her husband, shall be
tried by witnesses.

LX. In some cases also the trial shall be by the defendants oath, as 1. Where
the tenant in a Praecipe quod reddat alleges, that he was lawfully summoned
according to the law of the land. 2. In mere personal contracts growing without
deed, or privitie of others, the defendant may wage his law.

LXI. Therefore in such kind of actions executors are not chargable.

LXII. No wager of Law shall be against the King.

LXIII. But wager of law may be upon plaints in Court Barons for personal
things under 40 Sh.

LXIV. An issue of Law (returned a Demurrer) is, when admitting the matters
alleged, either of them rests in the judgment of the Court.

LXV. The demurrer being joined upon an exception to the original it self, or
Count for fault appearing in them, does only drive the defendant to make a
better answer (which is called a respondes ouster) if it pass against him.

CHAP. 42. Appearance, Continuance, mesne, process.
I. THus far concerning pleading; the other mean acts are appearance and
continuance, or judicial process.

II. Appearance, is the parties coming into the Court where upon common day
given, the fourth day after the very day is allowed.

III. When the defendant appears not, as he ought he is said to make default.

IV. When the party for not appearing should have some great loss, or
corporal pain, he may appear, though the Officers return force him not to it.

V. If the Plaintiff will not appear, when he is demanded at the day, (which
is termed a Nonsuit) or say in Court; that he will not sue forwards, (which is
a retraxit) this is peremptory, and loses him his Action.

VI. But in real Actions brought by many, if one will not prosecute, the rest
may alone; except in a writ (...) nativo habendo, and that is in favorem
libertatis.

VII. For executors also summons and severance lie^ in personal actions.

VIII. If the defendant will not plead (which is called a Nihil dicit) this in
all actions is peremptory, (...) loses the action.

IX. So in personal Actions, if he appear, and afte^ plea or demurrer joined,
make default; this is al^^ peremptory, and imports a Nihil dicit.

X. Howbeit, either of the parties may for once be excused of appearance, if
they demand it the first day, or any of the four days, unless the other enter
an exceception, that no Essoyn be received.

XI. Also upon every mean appearance a new Essoin lies.

XII. And this is called an Essoin de mal venir, or the common Essoin.

XIII. Besides this Essoyn, there are diverse other for special causes allowed,
as of being beyond sea, of going ad terram sanctam, of the Kings service, and
de malo lecti.

XIV. These last have a year and a days adjournment, where upon an oath must
be taken that the cause is true.

XV. But no such special Essoin lies in an Assize of novel disseisin, Dower,
Assize of Darrein presentment, and Quare impedit.

XVI. Continuance is from day to day till the end of the suit.

XVII. Here, if the Plaintiff do nothing, it is called a discontinuance.

XVIII. and if any error be in the continuing, as by awarding a Capias, where a
distress should be, it is called a miscontinuance.

XIX. The suit of an excommunicate person shall be put without day, (termed
parol sans Jour) till he be absolved.

XX. So it is also in all other cases, which happen without the Plaintiffes
folly.

XXI. After continuance taken, the defendant may for once, leave his former
plea, and plead any thing, growing since this latter continuance.

XXII. Continuance is by process, or upon the Roll.

XXIII. That upon a Roll is the dies datus, or Emparlance.

XXIV. Dies datus, when the Court gives the parties day, and this is always
before the Count.

XXV, Such a continuance by assent of both the parties is called a Prece
partium.

XXVI. But in Assizes the continuance is, by a Justiciarii nondum avisantur,
and not by a Dies datus,

XXVII. Emparlance is, when the defendant demands day, to see if he may end
the matter without further suit, which he may do once, but not often without
the Plaintiffes consent, and this is alwaye^ after the Count.

XXVIII. After Emparlance he cannot plead i^ the Jurisdiction or person,
neither yet in abatement either of the Count or writ, nor demand Oyer of an
Obligation, or the like.

XXIX. But after a special Emparlance, Salvis o^nibus advantagiis, he may plead
to the Count or writ and also have Oyer; but not to the Jurisdiction (...)
person.

XXX. In an appeal that touches life, if the defendant plead a plea, whereby
his life should come (...) jeopardie, the Plaintiff shall not imparle unto it,
b^^ must answer sedente curia.

XXXI. Default after Emparlance is peremptory and loses the action in all
actions real and pers^nall.

XXXII. Judicial process, is a process out of the Court, where the original
is returned, prosecuting (...) Action.

XXXIII. Judicial process are mesne process, (...) in nature of new originals.

XXXIV. Mesne process, which is for any necesary act to be done, not only for
the Plaintiff against the defendant, but for either of them against any other
whose presence in the Court may be necessary for them

XXXV. Upon a fine levied, before it be engrossed, the writs to compel
attornment are.

XXXVI. Per quae servitia, when the fine is levied of a Seigniorie.

XXXVII. Quem redditum reddit, when it is of a rent charge or rent seek.

XXXVIII. Quid juris clamat, when it is of a remainder or Reversion.

XXXIX. In Petitions, or whatsoever the King (being made party) may be at
loss, A writ of search lies, which is to search in the Treasury before the
plea prooeed if by likelihood some matter may be found there to maintain his
title.

XL. In real Praecipes, where a freehold is to be recovered, upon default,
after plea, issue or demurrer, a Petit Cape shall go forth to cause the tenant
to answer to the default only.

XLI. So upon a voucher a Petit cape ad valentiam.

XLII. In such as are for other hereditaments (save in point of Seigniorie) as
annuity, Quare impedit, Quo jure, Quod permittat etc. upon default, as before,
a distress shall go forth in lieu of a Petit cape.

XLIII. The process against jurors is a venire facias to the Sheriff to
return them, at which day if they appear not, then a Habeas corpora, and after
that a distress infinite.

XLIV. In an action of trespass (always) whatsoever the issue be, release,
justification, etc. and in debt, detinue, account, and other personal actions,
which are for things in certain, if the issue be taken upon matter in fait
only, and the defendant make default, the jury shall be taken.

XLV. But if it be upon matter in writing, the plaintiff may there pray
judgment, if he will: howbeit, if he do not pray it, the Jury shall be taken by
default as in action of trespass.

XLVI. But in Assizes of novel disseisin, nusanc^ Mordancestor, Darrein
presentment, and Juris ume^ the original writ commands a jurie, as well as
the defendant to be warned, which summons to the jurie se^veth in stead of a
venire facias, so that the process her^ against the jury, is Summons, Habeas
corpor, and d^stringas.

XLVII. And therefore here, upon default afte^ that original process ended, (
viz. the Atachments an Assize of novel disseisin, and nuisance, and the summons
and re-summons in a mordancestor, Darrein resentment, and Juris utrum) the
enquest shall be taken by default.

CHAP. 43. Commandatorie Judicial process in the nature of new originals.
1. THus far of mesne process; Judicial process in the nature of new originals
(in none of which (...)

II. Freehold shall ever be recovered, but damage^ only) are these that
follow; first, such as cmomande^ do something, as,

III. Re-summons, and Re-attachment, to receive (...) the former plight a suit
put without day:

IV. These may either revive the original alone, (...) the whole proceeding by
special words.

V. All certificatorie writs.

VI. Certiorari, to remove a Record out of a Count (...) Record into the
Chancery.

VI. Writs to remove suit out of the Court Baron

VIII. These may be without showing any cause, the writ, if the remove be at
the Plaintiffes suit; b^ not without showing good cause in the writ, if it be
(...) the defendants suit.

VIII. These are to remove pleas, by writ, or by plaint.

IX. Of the first sort are Tolt and Pone.

X. Tolt or Tollas is for the Plaintiff to remove a writ of right out of the
Lords Court into the County Court.

XI. A Pone is to remove into the Common place in all other cases.

XII. But a Pone, to remove a Replevin by writ out of any other Court Baron,
then the County Court, cannot be without showing cause.

XIII. Of the second sort are a Recordare, and Accedas ad Curiam, in both which
nothing but the plaint shall be removed.

XIV. A Recordare is to remove plaints in the County Court.

XV. An accedas ad Curiam, is to remove plaints in any other Court Baron.

XVI. This also (upon good cause showed in the writ) lies for a tenant to
remove the plea in writ of right out of the Lords Court immediately into the
Common place.

XVII. A Mittimus, to send a Record out of the Chancery into another Court of
Record.

XVIII. But the Chancellor may send such a Record by his own hands (without any
Mittimus) if he please.

XIX. A Procedendo, to proceed in suits.

XX. Of this nature is a writ of consultation, to proceed in the spiritual
Court, when one* suing there for matters belonging to that Court, is restrained
to prosecute the suit.

XXI. A writ of Mainprise, to set at liberty one bailable, finding bail to
answer the action

XXII. Such persons bailable be they which are taken upon a Capias original.

XXIII. But not the defendant in appeal of mayhem, if the mayhem be heinous;
nor the principal in an indictment or appeal of felony; nor the accessory
after the attainder of the principal, nor any in high Treason.

CHAP. 44. Other judicial Process of the like nature.
I. A Writ of Recaption, for him whose goods being distrained before for rent,
or services, are distrained again for the same thing; hanging the plea in the
County Court, or before the Justices.

II. A Writ de magna Assisa eligenda to the Sheriff to summon four Knights to
choose the Grand Assize, when the Mise is joined thereupon in a writ of right.

III. And this is a mere Judicial writ issuing out of the Common place, when
the Plea hangs there.

IV. A Certificate of Assize upon an imperfect Verdect given in an Assize, to
bring in the same Jurors to give a more perfect one.

V. A proprietate probanda unto the Sheriff, to enquire whether the property
be to the plaintiff or defendant, when upon a Replevin sued, the defendant
claimed property.

VI. And this also may be mere Judicial, issuing o^ of the Kings Bench, or
Common place, and returnabl^ there.

CHAP. 45. Prohibitory judicial process in the nature of new Originals.
I SEcondly, hither belong such Writs, as are prohibitory, or restrain from
doing some thing, where the prohibition it self is in lieu of a summons, and
after that the process is an Attachment and Distress: of this sort are.

II. Prohibitions to restrain the party from suing in an inferior Court, that
ought not to hold plea of it.

III. Such a prohibition is an indicavit for the defendants Patron, when the
right of advowson in any part of ones tithes is in demand in a spiritual
court, between two Clerks, claiming from several Patrons

IV. A Supersedeas, to stay any further proceeding in a suit.

V. Of this nature are, a writ of peace, for the tenant upon a writ of Right
brought in the Lords Court, vouching one to warranty out of the power of that
court which is called a Foreign Voucher, or joining the mise upon the grant
Assize, to have the matter respited, until the Justices in Air come thither,
which writ, if he bring not, after such voucher or mise joined, he loses his
tenancy.

VI. De liberate probanda, for the Defendant upon a Nativo habendo in the
County Court, claiming to be frank, to the Sheriff, to adjourn the plea before
the justices in Eyer

VII. Identitate nominis, for one molested by a suit against another of the
same name.

VIII. Protections cum clausula volumus, when the King (in respect of the
defendants being in his service) takes him into his protection for one year to
be free from all suits.

IX. Therefore such a protection shall for that time save all defaults.

X. Howbeit writs of Dower, Quare impedit, Assizes of novel disseisin, and
pleas before the Justices in Air are accepted.

XI. This kind of protection is double, viz. Protectio quia profecturus, when
he is to go beyond sea in the Kings business.

XII. And Protectio quia moratur, when he stays there about it.

XIII. Of this nature also is a protection quia in prisona, when being sent
beyond sea in the Kings wars, he is there taken and detained in prison.

XIV. The King may take his Creditor into his protection, that no other
Creditor shall sue or arrest him, till the King be satisfied.

XV. He may also by a writ called Warrantia Dei, (rehearsing that one which
should appear, in proper person, is in his service) will, that for one day, no
default be recorded, upon him.

XVI. Essoin de malo lecti, which is a writ to warrant an Essoin of lying sick
a bed, cast by the tenant in a writ of right; Commanding four Knights to see
him; and if he be sick, to give him adjournment of a year and a day.

XVII. A ne admittas, for either party in a Quare impedit, or Assize of
Darrein presentment, to the Ordinary, not to admit the others Clerk, till the
matter be discussed.

XVIII. This writ must be sued within six months otherwise the Ordinary may
present by lapse.

XIX. A Quare incumbravit, for him that sueth a Ne admittas and afterward
recovereth in a Quare impedit against the Ordinary for imcumbring the Church,
contrary to the Ne admittas.

CHAP. 46. The Judgment.
I. THus far of suit: Judgment is the Courts final determination of the suit.

II. Upon judgment against the King in a petition, he is presently out of
possession.

III. In a writ of right, the judgment after issue joined is final on either
side.

IV. Against the King, judgment is not final, but is always with a Salvo jure
Regis.

V Recovery in a writ of right binds all strangers, not claiming within a year.

VI. Tenant for life suffering a wrongful recovery, it shall not prejudice his
right, that has the Inheritance, though he be prayed in aid, and make default.

VII. For after the death of tenant for life, he may falsify it by action, of
ad terminum qui preteriit, or writ of right, which is called falsifying of a
recovery.

VIII. In a writ of Dower feme Guardian in soccage against Guardian by Knight
service, she shall at his prayer be adjudged to endow her self wholly of the land
in soccage, and this is called Dower de la plus beale.

IX. A debt acknowledged in a Court of Record either to the King, or a common
person, is in the nature of a judgment, and called a Recognizance.

X. In appeals of mayhem, and in Indictments or appeals of felony, the
accessory shall not be compelled to answer, till attainder of all the
principals.

XI. He that is, or (by possibility) may be within Orders, namely, a Deacon at
the least, may have the benefit of his Clergy, if he be found culpable of any
bare-felonie, where life and member is to be lost.

XII. This possibility (there being no other impediment) shall be tried by the
judges by his ableness to read a verse.

XIII, Clergy is the delivering of him to the Ordinary to be kept in prison.

XIV. If it be before judgment (in which case he is called a Clerk convict) he
shall be tried there by a jury of Clerks, and therefore purging himself shall
go at large.

XV. Not purging himself, but being found culpable by those Clerks, he shall be
only degraded.

XVI. But upon an appeal, no purgation shall be allowed.

XVII. A Clerk convict shall answer to any offense committed before.

XVIII. A Clerk convict forfeiteth his chattells.

XIX. Notice must be given to the King of the time, before the party make
purgation.

XX. If the Clergy be after judgment (in which case he is called a
Clerk-attaint) he shall remain in perpetual prison.

XXI. Outlawry is a judgment in it self.

XXII. So is ab^uration.

XXIII. The offender upon a presentment in a Leet, or Sheriffs turn shall be
amercied.

XXIV. The Defendant in an appeal of felony, being acquitted, shall have
judgment also to recover damages against the Plaintiff.

XXV. The Plaintiff recovering in a suit shall be allowed his costs.

XXVI. These judgments have their judicial Writs belonging to them, both mere
judicial writs for the execution of them, and new originalls in the nature of
judicial writs, to undo some matters concerning judgments.

XXVII. Mere judicial Writs in real, or personal actions* are either such as
lie only within the year and day after the judgment rendered, or a Scire facias.

XXVIII. Those of the first sort are between the party to the recovery, and in
the same Court where the recovery was.

XXIX. Of this kind are upon recovery in real and mixed actions.

XXX. Habere facias seisinam, to put him in possession upon a freehold
recovered, in an Assize, Precipe quod reddat, etc.

XXXI. A writ to the Bishop to admit ones Clerk upon a presentation recovered
in a Quare impedit, or Assize of Darrein presentment.

XXXII. Those upon a recovery in personal actions are of two sorts, viz. to
have execution of his possessions, or against his body.

XXXIII.. Execution of his possessions, is either of his lands, or chattels, or
both.

XXXIV. That of the land, is either of the land it self, or of profits out of
the land.

XXXV. Execution of the land it self is an Habere facias possessionem, upon a
term of years recovered in an Ejectione firmae etc.

XXXVI. Executions of his chattels is a Fieri facias, to levy execution of his
goods and chattels only.

XXXVII. Execution of his lands and chattels, is a Levari facias, to levy
execution of the profits of his lands and chattels.

XXXVIII. Here, execution shall be of any land, which the party had the day of
the judgment rendered, but for chattels (though it be a lease for years) only
those, which he had the day of the execution sued.

XXXIX. But in Court Barons execution is only by distress, and impounding
till the party be satisfied

XL. The King may have a distringas to levy an amerciament, or such like by
distress and sale, whether it be an amerciament in the Leet, or Sheriffs turn,
or otherwise.

XLI. Execution against the body is a Capias ad satisfaciendum, to take the
body in execution for satisfying of the party.

XLII. This is only (in a personal action) where a Capias lay.

XLIII. Here an Exigent shall be awarded upon the first Capias.

XLIV. Of this nature are two special writs by the Kings Prerogatory, Capias
pro fine Regis, and Capias utlagatum.

XLV. Capias pro fine, when the party is adjudged to pay a fine to the King.

XLVI. Capias utlagatum, to take one that is outlawed

XLVII. These are the judicial writs within the year and day.

XLVIII. A Scire facias, is to warn the defendant upon recovery in real
actions, to show cause why the plaintiff should not have execution.

XLIX. Here, upon a Nihil returned, execution shall be presently against the
parties to the Judgment.

L. In case of life, the Judge may command execution to be done without any
writ.

LI. A woman quick with child shall for once (an^ no more) be respited
execution.

LII. Here, the trial shall be by a Jury of women and the writ for it is
called, A writ De Ventre inspi^endo.

CHAP. 47. A writ of Error, False Judgment, Attaint, Audita Querela.
I. THe new originals in the nature of judicial writs to undo some matters
concerning Judgments are either writs grounded upon Error, or an Attaint, and
Audita querela

II. Writs grounded upon Error, are a writ of Error and false Judgment.

III. Both these lie upon any error in the proceeding.

IV. But error in process may the same term be reformed in the same Court.

V. The process here is a Scire facias.

VI. The party bringing a writ to reverse error in the Judgment, may have a
super-sedeas to stay execution, till the error be discussed.

VII. A Writ of Error is upon an error in a Court of Record.

VIII. This may be sued in the Kings Bench, or Parliament.

IX. In the Kings Bench, when the error is in the Common place, or other
inferior Court of Record.

X In the parliament, when the error is in the Kings Bench, and this is
returnable before the King and the Lords only.

XI. A writ of false Judgment is upon error in a base Court.

XII. An Attaint, is to enquire, whether a Jurie of twelve men gave a false
verdict.

XIII. This must be brought in the life of him for whom it passes, and of some
of them that gave it.

XIV. It lies only in personal actions other then trespasses.

XV. The Jury here, (called the Grand Jury) are twenty four, who are to be
warned the first day.

XVI. The process against the party is summons, re-summons, as in
Mortdancestor, etc.

XVII. The process against the petty Jury is Venire facias, and distress.

XVIII. The petty jury must be all present, when the Grand jury is taken, and
may plead in bar of the attaint, but not in abatement of the writ.

XIX. The Plaintiff in the Attaint can give no more Evidence then was given at
the first; but the defendant in affirmance of the first verdict, may.

XX. Audita querela, is for one being, or to be in execution, to relieve him
upon good matter of discharge, which he has no means to plead.

XXI. The process where the Audita querela is sued before execution, is a
venire facias and distress, and upon default after appearance and plea
pleaded, a distringas ad audiendum judicium; for thereby judgment is to be
given against him.

XXII. In case of an Audita querela sued before execution, he may have a
supersedeas upon good matter of discharge surmised in the writ of Audita
querela, to stay for once the execution upon sureties.

XXIII. After execution the process is only a Scire facias; for if the
process should be by distress infinite peradventure the party should loose
issues to keep the others body in perpetual prison.

FINIS.
STATUTES:
CHAP. I.
Rule 1. IN the second Volume of old Statutes is a long Act made Anno 12 E 1.
entitled Statuta Walliae, whereby it appears, that Wales was then
incorporated into England, there are also many good Laws concerning the
division of Wales into Counties, also for trials of Actions, together with
diverse forms of Writs, and the proceeding thereupon, much like the Laws of
England, etc.

Stat. 27. H. 8. 26. Incorporateth Wales into England, and the other Statutes,
that concern it, are 28. E. 3 2. 9. H. 4. 4: 2. H. 5. Stat. 2. 5. 26 H. 8 4. 26
H 8. 6 27 H. 8. 7. 33. H. 8. 13. 34. 35. H. 8 26. 18 El. 8. 27. El 9

Rule 35. Stat. 37. H. 8. 21. By assent of Ordinary, Incumbent and Patron under
their seals, an union may be made of two Churches, being not above six pounds
yearly value in the Kings Books, nor distant one from another above a mile;
saving to the King his tenths and first fruits.

Incorporate Towns, it must be by assent of the Corporation.

If such a poor Parish will within a year assure by writing to the incumbent
and his successors, 8 l. yearly the union shall be void.

Rule 36. etc. Magna Charta, 36. 9 H. 3. If any shall give lands to a religious
house, the grant shall be void, and the land forfeit to the Lord of the fee.

Stat. of Gloucester, or de religiosis, 7 E. 1. If lands be aliened in Mortmain,
the immediate Lord has a year to enter, the next Lord half a year, and so
from Lord to Lord, till it come to the King.

Westminster. 2. 32. 13. E. 1. Ecclesiastical persons being debarred by the former
statutes to obtain lands in Mortmain by alienation, endeavored fraudulently to
obtain them by default in a suit: And therefore in such case it as ordained by
this statute, that it should be enquired by the country, whether or no the
Demandant had just title; and if so, then he should recover seisin; but if
otherwise, the Lord of the fee should enter as before.

West. 2. 41. The King (founder of a religious house) may seize Lands, which he
gave them, if they alien.

Ordinatio de perquirendis libertatibus. 27. E. 1. Before licenses are obtained
to Amortize lands, the writ Ad quod damnum, shall issue out of the Chancery to
inquire concerning the same, etc.

The statute of Amortizing of Lands, 34. E. 1. Lands shall not be aliened in
Mortmain, where there be mean lords without their consents declared under their
seals, neither shall any thing pass, where the donor reserveth nothing to
himself, or where the inquisition is made, and returned without warrant, viz.
without the writ Original returned with the inquisition, etc.

The statute of writs for making inquisitions of Land to be put in Mortmain,
Incerti temporis, Writs of Ad quod damnum, for amortizing lands shall not be
granted, but upon petition in full Parliament.

St^tutum de Clero, 3. 18 E. 3. If Prelates, Clerks beneficed, or other people
of religion, being impeached for purchasing lands in mortmaine, show the Kings
charter of license, and process thereupon made by an Inquest of Ad quod damnum,
or of the Kings grace or by fine, they shall be in peace: And albeit they
cannot sufficiently show that they have entered by due process license to them
granted, yet they shall be well received to make a convenient fine for the same.

Stat. 15. R. 2. 5. Lands converted to a Churchyard, or purchased to the use of
any spiritual person, Guilds, or Fraternities, or by a corporation shall be
within the Statute of Gloucester, 7. E. 1.

CHAP. 2.
Rule 3 PRaecog Reg. 9. 17. E. 3. The King shall have the custody of the lands
of natural fools, taking the profits thereof without waste and finding them
necessaries and after, their death, shall render them to the right heir.

Praec. Reg. 10. The King shall provide* that the lands of lunaticks be safely
kept without waste, and that they and their families (if they have any) shall
be maintained with the profits thereof, and that the residue be kept for their
use: and delivered unto them when they become to be of right mind: so as their
lands shall not be aliened, neither shall the king have any profit thereof to
his own use: But if they dye in such estate, the residue shall be distributed
for their souls by the advice of the Ordinary.

Rule 4. Stat. 1. R. 3. 1. All grants, conveyances recoveryes and other
assurances, made by Cesti que use, (being of full age, Compos mentis, and at
large) shall be good against him and all others claiming as his heir or heirs,
or to his use, saving the right of all others.

Stat. 4. H. 7. 17. The heir of Cesty que use (of Knight Service land) shall be
in ward and pay relief.

Stat. 19. H. 7. 15. execution upon judgment, statute or recognizance shall be
good against Cesty que use.

The heir of Cstey que use shall pay relief, heriot, etc.

Cesty que use being a Bond man, the Land shall be seized by the Lord.

Stat. 27. H 8. 10. Where any be seized to the use of trust of another, Cesty
que use, or trust shall have the possession in such quality, manner, and
condition, as he had the use or trust: so when any be seized to the use or
intent that another shall have a yearly rent of the same lands, Cesty que use
of the rent shall be deemed in the possession thereof, of like estate as he had
that use.

Stat. 27. H. 8. 16. Bargains and sales to raise an use of Inheritance or
freehold must be by deed indented and enrolled within six months, in a court
of record at Wstem. or in the County where the land lies.

Rule 9. Stat. 50. E. 3. 6. Fraudulent Assurances of lands or goods to deceive
Creditors shall be void, and the creditors shall have execution thereof, as if
no such gift had been made.

Stat. 3. H. 7. 4. All deeds of gift of goods and chattels, made of trust to
ones own use, shall be void.

Stat. 13. El 5 Every gift, grant, bargain, and conveiance of lands, or
chattles, or of a lease, rent, common, or other profits out of them, and every
bond, suit, judgment and execution had or made for the defrauding of any
persons just action, suit, debt, account, damage, penalty, forfeiture, heriot,
mortuarie, or releif, shall be void against that person, his heirs executors,
etc.

The parties, or privies (knowing such a fraudulent gift) which shall justify
it to be done bona fide, or shall alien such things so to them conveyed, forfeit
one year value of the lands or profits out of it, and the whole value of the
goods and chattles, and the sum of such covenous bond, and shall have half a
years imprisonment.

This Act extends not to common recoveries, nor vouchers in a Formedon, nor to
any gift, etc. bona fide, and upon good consideration to any person, not
knowing of the fraud.

Stat. 27. El. 4. Every conveyance, grant, charge, lease, estate, encumbrance,
or limitation of use of lands, tenements, or hereditaments made for the
defrauding of purchasers of the land it self, or any part, or profit out of it,
shall be void against the person so purchasing for money, or other good
consideration, and against all claiming under him, with penalty, as in the
former Statute.

This extends not to the avoiding of any grant, etc. upon good consideration
and bona fide

If any such conveyance, etc. be made with a clause of revocation or alteration
at his pleasure, by writing, and after he shall bargain, demise, sell, grant,
convey, or charge the same lands, etc. for money, or other good considerati^n
(the conveyance not revoked nor altered) then such conveyance, etc. shall be
void against the bargainees, etc. and all claiming under them, lawful
mortgages only excepted.

Rule 11. Praecog. Reg. 15. 17. E. 2. The Kings gift or grant of land, or a
Manor cum pertinentiis, ^^nveyeth, not Knights fees, advowsons, or dowers,
without express words.

Stat. 1. H 4. 6. In a petition to the King for lands, annuities, offices, etc.
their value shall be therein expressed; otherwise, the letters Patents thereupon
shall be void.

Stat 18. H. 6. 1. All Letters Patents, which bear not date the day of the
delivery of the Kings-warrant into the Chancery, shall be void.

Stat. 34. 35. H. 8. 21. A confirmation of all estates contained by, or
conveyed from the King within seven years after the fourth of February, in the
27 year of his reign, notwithstanding any mis-recitall, non-recitall, etc. with
diverse provisoes, etc. therein contained.

Stat. 1. E. 6. 8. Such another Statute for the confirmation of all grants,
made, and to be made by E. 6. from the 28 of January in the first year of his
reign, and so during his life, with such provisoes, etc. as in the said Act of
H. 8.

Stat. 4, 5 P.M. 1. Another like Statute for the confirmation of grants made
and to be made, to or by the Queen, or the King and Queen, from the first of
July in the first year of her Reign, and so during her life, with provisoes, as
in the former Acts.

Stat. 18. El. 2. Another like confirmation of al grants made to, for, or by
the Queen, or to be made within seven years next after the end of this Session,
with like provisoes, etc.

Stat. 43. El. 1. Another confirmation of grants made by Qu El. from the eight
of February in the 25 year of her reign, until the end of this Session and a
year after.

Stat. 21. Jac. 25. The King, etc. shall not take advantage of Forfeitures
against his Patentees, before Commission Process, etc.

Stat. 21. Jac. 29. A confirmation of Leases of the Duchy lands in Cornwall.

Stat. 1. Car. 2. Such another for Leases thereof, to be made within three
years.

CHAP. 3.
Rule 6. STat. 32. H. 8. 34. Grants of Reversions may enter upon Farmers for
any Forfeiture (or condition) and have like advantages against them (by action
only, for any other Covenants, condition, or agreement eontained in the
Indenture of their lease) as the Lessors, their heirs, or successors might: And
the like for the Lessees against the grantees of reversions, Recovery in value
only excepted.

CHAP. 4.
Rule 9. STat. 6. H. 8 15. If any make suit to the King for lands, offices, or
other things, formerly granted to any person during the Kings pleasure (the
first Patentee being still in life) the last grantee shall express in his
Petition or pattent the former pattent, and the determination of the Kings
pleasure concerning the same, otherwise the last grant shall be void.

Rule 15. Gloucester 7. 6. E. 1. If a woman alien her dower in fee or for life,
the heir or other person, to whom the Land ought to revert, shall recover
against the Alience in her life time.

CHAP. 5.
Rule 5. MErton, 9: 20. H. 3. A child borne before Marriage is a bastard,
albeit the common order of the Church be otherwise.

Stat. 9. H. 6. 11. No writ shall be awarded to the ordinary to certify
Bastardy, before three Proclamations be made in Chancery in three months, viz
once every month, that all persons, who have any thing to object against the
party for bastardy, shall sue to the Ordinary for that purpose.

Rule 8. Merton, 5. 10. H. 3. Usury shall not run against any within age from
the time of the death of his Ancestor, (whose heir he is) unto his lawful age;
yet the principal with usury due before the Ancestors death shall be paid,
notwithstanding this Act.

Rule 10. Stat. 32. H. 8. 33. The dying seized of a disseisor with force, and
without title, takes not away the entry of him and his heirs, who at the time
of such descent had good title of Entry, unless the disseisor had peaceable
possession by five years next after such disseisin.

Rule 14 Westminster. 2. 1 13 E. 1. The will of the giver (according to the form in
the deed of gift manifestly expressed) shall be from henceforth observed: so
that they to whom the land was given under such condition (viz. that if the
donee or donees should die without issue, that then the land should revert to
the donor) should have no power to alien the land so given, but that it shall
rename to their issue after their death, or shall revert to the giver or his
heirs, if issue fail; neither shall the second husband of any such woman, being
donee in tail) from henceforth have any thing of the land so given upon
condition, after the death of his wife, by the Law of England; neither shall
the issue of such husband and wife succeed in the inheritance; but immediately
after the death of the husband and wife, to whom the land was given, it shall
return to their issue, or to the giver, or his heirs, as aforesaid.

A Fine levied of such lands shall be void in Law and the heir or reversioner
(albeit they be for full age, in England, and out of prison) need not make
their claim: Howbeit, this clause concerning a fine is altered by 32 H 8. 39.
which see infra.

Stat. 34: and 35. H. 8 20. No common recovery (...) lands in tail, of the gift
or other provision of the King or his progenitors (though it be with voucher
against tenant in tail, the remainder or reversion being (...) the King at the
time of the recovery) shall bind the heir in tail, or bar him of his entry:
Tenant in us^ shall take no advantage for any rccompence in valor agianst the
vouchee or his heirs.

Rule 24. Mag. Cart. 7. 9. H. 3. The wife, after the death of her husband,
shall abide in his chief message forty days, within which time her dower
shall be assigned her: If the chief message be a Castle, then she shall have a
competent house provided her, til her dower be assigned.

Westminster. 2. 34. 13. E. 1. A woman that leaves her husband and abides with an
adulterer, shall not have Dower; unless the husband (voluntarily and without
coertion of the Church) reconcile her and suffer her to dwell with him.

Stat. 11. H. 7. 20. If a woman that has an estate in Dower for life, or in
tail jointly with her husband, or only to her self, or to her use in any lands,
etc. of the inheritance or purchase of her husband, or given to the husband and
wife by the husbands ancestors, or any seized to the use of the husband, or his
ancestors, do sole (or which an after taken husband) discontinue or suffer a
recovery by Covin, it shall be void, and he to whom the land ought to belong
after the death of the said woman, may enter (as if the woman were dead)
without discontinuance or recovery: Howbeit, the woman may enter after the
Husbands death, but if the woman were sole, the recovery or discontinuance
barreth her for ever.

This Act extends not to any recovery or discontinuance with the heir next
inheritable to the woman, or by his consent of Record enrolled.

Stat. 27. H. 8. 10. Where an estate is made in possession or use to Husband
and wife and his heirs, or the heirs of their bodies, or of one of their
bodies, or to them for their lives, or for the wives life for her Jointure; In
any of these cases she shall not have Dower: Howbeit upon a lawful eviction of
that Jointure she shall be endowed according to the rate of her husbands land,
whereof she was dowable.

Such a Jointure being made after marriage, the wife (after the husbands death)
may refuse it, and betake her to her Dower, unless such Joyntute be made by
Act of Parliament.

CHAP. 7.
Rule 7. STat. de districtione Scaccarii, 51. H. 3^ The owner of impounded
cattle may give them food without disturbance.

A distress taken for the Kings debt shall not be sold within 15 days, and
upon showing of a Tally, and giving security for his appearance in the
Exchequer upon the next account, the distress shall cease^ The Sherif shall
also attach the party that received the debt, to be there likewise at the same
time.

Neither draught cattle, nor sheep shall be distrained (except for
Damage-feasant) so long as other goods may be found to satisfye the debt:
Distresses shall be reasonable: The Sheriff shall answer all debts received,
and where the Sherif charge himself, the debt shall be quitted.

Marlebr. 15. 52. H. 3. It shall not be lawful for any (except the King and
his officers, having special authority) to take distresses out of his fee, or
in the Kings high way, or in the common street.

Marlebr. 4. None shall drive a distress out of the County, wherein it is
taken, in pain to be fined, and to make recompense to the party grieved: none
shall take an unreasonable distress, in pain of amerciament

Westminster. 1. 16. 3. E. 1. None shall drive a distress out of the County, or
distrain wrongfully upon the penalties provided by the Statute of Marlebr.

Westminster 2. 36. 13. E. 1. None shall procure any to distrain another to make him
appear at the county court or any other inferior court, on purpose to vex him
and put him to charge and trouble, in pain to make fine to the King, and to pay
the party grieved treble damages.

Westminster. 2. 37. 13. E. 1. No distress shall be taken but by Bailiffs known and
sworn, in pain to restore damages to the party grieved, and to be grievously
punished by the King.

Artic. Cler. 9. 9. E. 2. Distresses shall not be taken in the Highway, nor in
the ancient fees of the Church.

Stat. 1, 2. P.M. 12. No distress of Cattle shall be driven out of the
hundred, rape, wapentake, or lath, where it is taken, except to a pound Overt
within the same Shire, not above three miles distant from the place, where it
is so taken: Neither shall a distress be impounded in several places, whereby
the owner may be constrained to sue several Replevins for the delivery thereof
in pain to forfeit to the party grieved for every offense committed against the
Act. 5 l. and treble damages.

None shall take above 4 d. for the poundage of one whole distress (and where
less is usually taken, to take less) in pain to forfeit it to the party
grieved 5 l. and so much money, as is taken above 4 d.

Rule 24 Quia emptores terrarum, 18. E. 1. In all Feoffments to one and his
heirs, the Feoffee shall hold his land, and the chief Lord of the fee by the
same services that the Feoffer held before.

Here, if the Feoffment be made of parcel, he shall hold of the chief Lord pro
particula, according to the quantity of the land, and the Feoffor shall be set
free for that part.

Rule 27. Mag. Cart. 31. 9. H. 3. If a Baronie, etc. Escheat to the King, the
tenants that hold of the same (not having other lands that hold of the King in
chief) shall pay like relief, and do like services to the King after such
Escheat, as they paid or did to their former Lords, and not otherwise.

Stat. 1. E. 6 4. So also it is, when a Seigniorie comes to the King by
attainder, conviction, outlawry, dissolution or surrender.

Stat 1. E. 3. Stat. 2. Cap 12. Lands holden of the King in chief, and aliened
without license shall not be forfeited, but a reasonable fine shall be taken
(of such lands so aliened) by due process in Chancery. A^ cap. 13 lands holden
of the King, as of some Honor she not be taken into the Kings hands, as if they
were holden of the King in chief, as of his Crown.

Rule 31. Stat. 33. H. 8 22. A fee set down for respiting of Homage in the
Exchequer or other Courts

Rule 35. Marlebr. 9. 52. H. 3. None enfeoffed b^ deed shall be distrained to
do suit to his Lords Court unless he be bound to do it by the form of his deed
or he or his ancestors have used to do it, before the Kings first voyage in
Britain, being about 39 years and an half before the making of this Statute.

The eldest Coparcener shall only do suit of Court and the other parceners
shall be contributary: All one Jointenant or tenant in Common shall do the
(...) and the rest shall contribute.

Rule 38. Westminster. 35. Reasonable aid shall be 20 l. for a whole Knights fee, and
as much for 20. l. land i^ soccage; and so more or less, according to that
rate.

It shall be levied at 15 years age of the son, and ^ years of the daughter;
and if the Father levy it, and dye before the marriage of the daughter, the
father executors shall be charged therewith, and if they have not assets, the
heir shall be therewith charged.

Stat. 25 E. 3. Stat. 5. 11. Reasonable aid to make the Kings eldest son a
Knight, and to marry his elde^ daughter shall be levied of all lands holden of
the King (without Mean) according to the rate in the former Statute.

Rule 43. Marlbr. 17. 52. H. 3. Guardian in soccage shall make no waste, sale,
or destruction of the heirs inheritance, but safely keep the same to the use of
the heir, and when he comes to age shall answer the issues thereof by a lawful
account, saving his reasonabl costs: neither shall such Guardian sell the
marriage of such heir, but to his advantage.

Rule 48. Magn. Cart 3 9. H. 3. The Lord shall take homage of the heir before
he have the Wardship; and such heir, after he has been in Ward, shall (at his
full age of 21 years) have his inheritance without relief or fine; and if the
heir within age be made a Knight, yet his land shall remain in ward, until his
full age aforesaid.

Marlebr. 6. 52. H. 3. If one enfeoffe his heir within age to cause the Lord to
lose his Wardship, and die yet the Lord shall have the Wardship.

So when a fraudulent feoffment is made by a tenant upon condition to revert
(after certain years) to him and his heirs, if the feoffees pay not a certain
sum to the value, or more then the value of the lands; In such case the Lord
shall have a writ de Cuctodia reddenda: And if (being able to aver this matter)
he recover, yet the feoffees shall have the land again, when the heir comes to
age; Howbeit, the Lord not being able to aver it, shall render the feoffees
their costs and damages,

Stat. 32. H. 1. Two Jointenants or more holding of the King, and he that has
the fee dies, the King shall presently have the ward-ship and marriag of the
body of his heir, if he be within age. Saving to every woman her dower of two
parts of those lands, divided from the third part (as in that Statute is
directed) and saving to the King during the wards minority, the reversion of
such Jointenants, and tenants in dower.

Rule 50. Merton, 6. 20. H, 3. If any heir (14 years old, or above) marry
himself without license of his Lord to defraud him of the marriage, and the
Lord of him a convenient marraige without disparagement, the Lord shall retain
the land beyond the term of his fu^^ age, until he may receive the double
value of the ma^riage.

If a Lord marry the heir within 14 years of age whereby he is disparaged, he
shall lose the Wardship and the profits of the lands shall (by the Wards friends
be converted to the Wards use.

Merton 7. 20. H. 3. If an heir will not marry at the request of the Lord, he
shall pay to the lord as much as his marraige is worth; for (of right) the
marraige of an heir within age pertains to the Lord.

West. 1. 22. 3. E. 1. The Lord may hold the land o^ heirs female two years
after their age of 14 within which two years if he marry them not, they shall
g^ quit without giving any thing for the wardship or marriage, and If they will
not except a convenient marriage tendered by the Lord, he shall hold the land
til their age of 21 years, and over, until he have taken the value of the
marriage.

Stat 4. 5. P.M. 8. None shall take or convey, or care to be taken or conveyed
away any maid or woman child unmarried, being within the age of 16 years, or
of the custody and against the will of the father or mother of such child, or
of the person, to whom the father of such child (by his last will, or other act
in his life time) has appointed the governance of such chil^ (except such
taking shall be (without fraud) by or for the Master or Mistress of such child,
or her Guardia^ in Soccage or Chivalrie (in pain of two years impriso^ment with
out Bail, or else to pay such fine, as shall be assessed by the Council in the
Star Chamber.

None shall take away or deflower any such child, o^ against the will of her
father, if he be living, or of he^ mother (having the custody of her) if the
Father b^ dead, contract matrimony with any such Child, (except by the title of
Wardship) in pain of five years imprisonment, or to pay a fine to be assessed
by the said Council. The Fines are to be divided betwixt their Majesty's and
the prosecutor.

The said Council and Justices of Assize have power to hear and determine these
offenses.

If any such child (above the age of 12. and under the age of 14) consent to
any such contract of matrimony, the next of the kin to whom her inheritance
should come, shall enjoy it during her life? but after her decease, it shall
revert to the right inheritor, other then to him, that did so contract
matrimony. This act shall not prejudice any custom in London, or any other
City or town concerning Orphans.

CHAP.
Rule 6. MErton 4 20. H. 3. Lords of wastes, or commonable woods or pastures
may approve against their Tenants part thereof, so as they leave sufficient
Common besides together with free ingresse and regresse to enjoy the same.

West. 2 46 13 E. 1. Such a Lord may approve in like sort against his
neighbors which have common appurtenance, and for a Windmil, Sheepcote, Dairy,
enlarging of a Court or Courtilage none shall be grieved by Assize of novel
disseisin.

If a ditch or hedge made for that purpose be thrown down, and the parties
offending be not discovered by the Towns adjacent, they shall make it up
again, and render damages.

Stat. 3. E. 6. 3. Upon Judgment for the Plaintiff in an Assize upon any branch
of the said Statutes of Merton and Westminster. 2. the Court shall award treble
damages

This Statute shall not extend to houses built before the making thereof, not
having above three acres laid to them, nor to a Garden, Orchard, or Pond, not
exceeding two acres.

Stat. 43. El. 11. All contract made betwixt Lords and Commoners of wastes, etc.
subject to surrounding shall be good, save where the Queen, etc. has an
Interest. This Act shall not be prejudicial to Lords and Commoners in any part
of wastes, not assigned to Drainers, etc. nor to any Port or Haven.

CHAP. 9.
Rule 3 STat. 19 H. 7. 15. Upon a feoffment made to the use of a Villein, the
Lord may enter into the land it self.

Rule 7. Stat. 9. R 2 2. In a suit by a Villein against his Lord, the Lord
shall not be barred of their Villeins, because of their answer in Law.

Rule 11. E. 61. 6. 16. No office or deputation thereof, or of any part
thereof, which concerns the administration or execution of Justice, or the
receipt, controlement, or payment of the Kings money, or revenue, or any
account, Aulnage, Auditorship, or Surveying of the Kings Lands, or Customs, or
Administration, or Attendance in any Custom House, or keeping of any of the
Kings Towns, Castles, or Fortress (being places of strength or defense) or any
Clerkship in a Court of Record, shall be bargained or sold, or any reward, or
agreement of Reward taken for it, upon pain that the seller, etc. shall forfeit
all his Interest in such office or deputation, etc. and the buyer be a disabled
person to enjoy the same. And all bonds, etc. to be void, as against him, by
whom they are made. Howbeit, all Acts executed by any such person offending
before he be removed from his Office, etc. shall remain good.

This sttatute extends not to any Office of Inheritance, or to any
parkership, or to any offices to be given by the Chief Justices of the Kings
Bench or Common place, or by any Justices of Assize.

CHAP. 10
Rule 2. STat. 27. H. 8 24. No subject shall have authority to pardon any
felony, or any accessories to felony, or any outlawry for such offenses. Nor to
make any justices of Air, Assize, Peace, or Gaole-delivery: All original
Writs, Indictments of treason, felony, tree pass, and process upon the same
shall be only in the Kings name, and the Test in his name, that has the
Franchise.

Every Writ and Indictment, whereby any thing is supposed to be done against
the peace, shall be supposed to be done against the Kings peace only, and not
against the peace of any subject the King shall have all fines, issues,
amerciaments, and forfeitures lost by any Officers of Franchises for
non-execution, or insufficient returns of process, or for any misdemeanour
concerning their office, with many provisoes in the same Statute.

CHAP. 11.
Rule 4 Westminster. 2. 23. 13. E. 1. Executors shall have a Writ of account, and the
action and process in the same writ, as their testator should, if he had lived.

Stat. 4. E. 3. 7. 1. Executors shall have an action for a trespass done to
their testator, as of his goods and chattels carried away in his life, and
recover their damages in like manner, as he, whose executors they are, might
have done: if he had lived.

Stat. 32. H. 8. 1. He that has lands, tenements, (...) hereditaments in
soccage, and none holden by knight service, or soccage in chief, may devise all
by his wa^ in writing, or give all by act executed in his life; (...) may he
that has land holden by soccage in chief, an^ other land holden of a common
person by soccage, and none holden by Knight Service: saving to the King^
primer seisin, relief, suing of the same out of the King^ hands, fines for
alienation, etc. and all other dutie^ for the soccage in chief, as before has
been accustomed.

He that has lands, etc. holden by Knight service (whether he have any other
lands holden of the King or of any other person by Knight Service, or orherwise
or not) may do the like for two parts in three to be divided in certainty, for
the advancement of his wife or children, and payment of his debts: saving unto
the King the wardship or primer seisin of the third part (without any charge,
dower, etc.) and finds for alienation.

He that has lands, etc. holden by knight service (whether of the king alone
by knight service, not in chief, or of a common person, or some holden of the
king, some of a common person) and other land in soccage, may devise by will,
or give by act executed in his life, two parts of that holden by
knight service, and all the soccage: saving to the Lord of the land holden by
knight service the Wardship of a full third part thereof, without any charge,
dower, etc.

Provided, that every one shall sue his liverie, and pay his relief and heriot,
as if this Act had never been made.

Stat. 34. 35. H. 8 The former Statute shall be extended to enable devises, and
other Acts only by Land in Fee-simple.

And if the party, that makes the will or other Act be seized in
Coparcenerie, or in the common; it shall be good for so much, as in himself of
right is.

The wardship, relief, primer seisin, etc. shall be of lands, that descend
immediately after the death of him that makes the will or other act, as well in
fee-tail as fee-simple; And the devise of two parts residue shall be good,
though it be of all his fee-simples land: Such a will shall be good for two
parts, (in case only where two may be devised) though it be made for the whole
or more then two parts.

Such wills made by a feme-covert, infant under the age of 21 years Idiot, or
one of non-sane memory shall not be good, See also some other things there for
the explanation of the former Act of 32 H. 8. 1.

Rule 10. Stat. 21. H 8. 4. that part of the executors, which take upon them
the charge of a will, may sell the land devised by the Testator to be sold,
albeit the other part which refuse, will not join with them.

Rule 11. Stat. 25. E. 3. Stat. 5 5. Executors of executors shall have actions
of debt, account, and goods carried away of the first Testators, and Execution
of Statute-Merchants recognizances made unto him; And shall also answer for
Assets, as the first executors should have done.

Rule 12. Westminster. 2. 19. 13. E. 1. the Ordinary shall satisfy debts, wherein
the Intestate was bound, as executors should,

Stat. 31. E. 3 11. the Ordinaries shall depute next friends of the Intestate
to administer his goods, who shall sue and be sued, and be accountable to the
Ordinaries, as executors should.

Stat. 21 H. 8. 5. Administration shall be committed to the widow of the
Intestate, or to the next of his blood, or to both, at the discretion of the
Ordinary. The O^dinary not doing his duty herein forfeiteth ten pound

Stat.. 43. El. 8. If any obtain goods of an Intestate fraud (as by procuring
administration to be granted a stranger of mean estate, or not to be found) and
no^ upon valuable consideration, etc. he shall be charge as executor in his own
wrong as far as the goods debts extend.

Rule 20. Westminster. 1. 4. 3. E. 1. Where a man, dog, cat, escape alive out of the
Ship, it shall be no wreck but the things shall be prised by the Sheriff or
Corone^ and delivered to those of the Town, where they (...) found, to answer
for them: So as if any within a ye^^ and a day prove, that the goods are his,
they shall (...) restored to him.

CHAP. 13.
Rule 3. Stat. 32. H. 8 28. Leases made by tenant (...) tail, or by him, who is
seized in the right of his wife or Church (they being of full age at the time
of such a lease made) shall be good against the Lessors, their wives, heirs, and
successors.

This Statute shall not extend to any lease to be made of lands in the hands of
any Farmer by force of a^ old lease, unless such an old lease expired within a
yea^ after the making of the new; nor to any grant to be made of any reversion
of such lands, nor to any lease o^ lands, which have been let to Farm 20 years
before such lease made; nor to any lease made without impeachment for waste;
nor for above 21 years, or three lives from the making thereof; and that upon
every such lease there be reserved so much yearly rent, as has bi^ usually
paid within 20 years before such lease made And the reversioner of such lands,
etc. may (after the death of such lessor, o^ his heirs) have such remedy
against such lessee, his executors and assigns, as such lessor might have had
against such lessee.

Provided, that all leases made by the husband of land, etc. (being the
inheritance of the wife) shall be made by Indenture in the name of the husband
and wife, and she to seal to the same, and the rent shall be reserved to the
husband and wife, and the heirs of the wife. And here, the husband shall not
alien or discharge the rent, or any part thereof longer then during the
coverture, unless it be by fine leived by husband and wife.

No fine, feoffment, or other act, done by the husband only, of the inheritance
or freehold of the wife shall make any discontinuance, or prejudice the wife
or any other, who is to enjoy the estate after her decease, fines leived by the
husband and wife only excepted.

Stat. 1. El. not printed. All estates made by any Archbishop, or Bishop of
any manors, Lands, etc. parcel of their Bishopric, other then to the Queen,
etc. and other then for 21 years and three lives from the time of such estate
made; and whereupon the accustomed yearly rent or more shall be reserved* shall
be void.

Stat. 13. El. 10. All leases, conveyances, and estates made by any master and
Fellows of a College Dean and Chapter, Guardian of an hospital, Parson,
Vicar, or other having any ecclesiastical living etc. other then for 21 years,
or three lives from the making, and whereupon the accustomed yearly rent or more
is reserved, shall be void.

Stat. 14. El. 11. The branch of the Statute of 13. El. 10. made to avoid
certain Leases, shall not extend to houses situate in Corporations, or
Market-townes, or the Suburbs thereof, nor to the grounds of such houses, so as
they be not the dwelling houses of the persons there restrained, nor have 10
acres of ground belonging to them. Provided, that no leases in reversion shall
be made of such houses, nor without reserving the accustomed yearly rent at
least nor without charging the less^^ with reparations, nor for a longer term
then 40 years Neither shall any such houses be aliened without purchasing
presently after other lands in Fee-simple of good value.

Stat. 18. El. 11. All leases made by such persons, are mentioned in 13. El.
10. where another lease is being, not to be expired, surrendered, or ended with
three years next after the making of such new lease shall be void: And all
Bonds and Covenants for renting of any such lease contrary to this Act, or to
the said Stat. of 13 El. 10. shall also be void.

Rule 21. Westminster. 2. 5. 13. E. 1. Usurpation of Churches during wardship,
particular estates, Coverture (...) Vacanci, shall not bar the heir at full
age, the reversener or remainder in possession, the feme-discovert (...) the
spiritual person in succesion, from having their wri^ of Advowson possessory,
viz a quare impedit, or an assize of Darrein presentment, as their ancestor, or
predecestor might have had, usurpation had happened in their time; whereas
before this Act they were ((...) such cases) put to their writ of right of
Advowson.

One and the same form of pleading, shall be used (...) Darrein presentment,
and Quare impedit, viz. if the defendant alleged plenartie of his own
presenati^^ the plea shall not stay by reason of the plenartie, so (...) the
writ be purchased within the six months; albeit (...) cannot recover within
that time.

Where partition is made upon record, or by fine (...) present by turn, the
Coparcener, that is disturbed sha^^ not be put to a Quare impedit, but may have
remed^ upon the Roll or fine by Scire facias: And among^^ Coparceners, if one
present twice together, yet sha^^ not the other barred, but have his other turn
when it falls.

CHAP. 14.
Rule 4. Westminster. 2. 34. 13. E. 1. If a man ravished woman married, maid, or
other, albeit she did consent after, he shall have judgment of life and member,
and here the King shall have the suit.

Stat.. 6. R. 2. 6. Both the ravisher and ravished (where she consents after
the fact) are disabled to have or challenge any inheritance, dower, or
loint-estate after the death of their husband or ancestor.

In an appeal of Rape, the Husband, father, or next of the blood shall have the
suit, and the Defendant shall not be received to wage Battle.

CHAP. 15.
Rule 2. Westminster. 1. 33. 3. E. 1. he that publishes any false news or tales,
whereby discord or occasion of discord and slander may grow between the King and
his people, or the Nobles, shall be kept in prison, until he has brought him
forth into the Court, that did speak the same.

Stat. 12. R. 2. 11. The like for him that tells false lies of nobles and
great offices, whereby discord may arise between the Lords and Commons.

Stat. 12. R. 2. 11. in the case of these former Statutes if the party cannot
bring forth him, that speak the same, he shall be punished by the advice of the
Council.

CHAP. 19
Rule 4. 31. E. 3. Stat. 1. 2. If any man or Town, charged with the goods of
fugitives or felons will (in discharge of himself) allege another, that is
chargeable therewith, he or they shall be heard, and right shall be done him.

Stat. 1. R. 3. 3. None shall seize the goods of any arrested for suspicion of
felony before he be convict or attaint thereof, or the same goods be otherwise
lawfully forfeited, in pain to forfeit to the party grieved double the value of
the goods so taken to be recovered by action of debt, etc.

Rule 6. 1. E. 6. 12. The wife shall be endowed, albeit her husband were
attainted, convicted, or outlawed for treason or felony, saving the right of
others. But note, that this is altered for treason, by 5. E. 6. 12.

Rule 13. Magn. Cart: 22, 9. H. 3. The King shall have the land by a year and a
day, and then render it to the Lord of the fee,

Praerog. Reg. 16. 17. E. 2. The King shall have the profits by a year and a
day, and also the wasting of the tenements by pulling down houses, cutting down
woods, digging up meadows, etc.

Rule 18 Stat. 21. H. 8. 7. (made perpetual by 5, El. 10.) the servant that
has any goods or chattels delivered unto him to keep by his master, and (with
an intent to steal) does either go away therewith, or (being in service)
imbeziles or converts the same to his own use, shall be judged a thief, if the
value of the goods amount to 40 s. Howbeit, this extends not to apprentices
or persons within eight years of age.

Rule 21. Stat. 21. H. 8. 11. where a felon robs or takes the money or
goods of any, and is thereof found guilty, or otherwise attainted upon evidence
given by the party himself, or others by his procurment; in tha^ case, the
justices of G. D. or other justices, before whom he is so found guilty or
attainted, have power to award a writ of restitution for the money or goods so
robbed or taken, in like manner, as if the felon were attainted at the suit of
the party in an appeal.

Rule 23. Stat. de Malefact. in parcis, 21. E. 1. It is no felony for
Foresters, etc. to kill misdoers, etc. If they will not submit themselves.

Rule 25. Gloucester 9. 6. E. 1. He that kills a man by misadventure, or se
defendendo, must put himself upon the Country; and if he be found to have done
it so, the King (if he please) may pardon him.

Marlbr. 25. 52. H. 3. To kill a man by misadventure shall be no murder.

CHAP. 21.
Rule 3. STat. de proditionibus 25. E. 3 Stat. 5. s. It is high treason to kill
the Chancellor, Treasurer, etc. as in the second Rule of this Chapter. Also to
counterfeit current money: To bring false money into this Realm counterfeit
according to the money of England (knowing the same false) to merchandise or
make payment with it. To counterfeit the great Seal or privy seal.

Stat.. 1. Mar. Sess. 1. 6 Seal-manuel, privy signet, or privy seal, strange
coin current in this Realm.

Stat. 1. 2. P.M. 11. To bring wittingly false foreign coin hither, to the
intent to utter it within the Realm

Stat. 5. El. 11. To clip, wash, round, or file any money of this Realm, or
current here: Howbeit, this causes forfeiture of land for life only; but no
loss of Dower or blood corrupted.

Satt. 18, El. 1. To impair, diminish falsify, seal, or lighten any money by
any art, ways, or means whatsoever.

Stat. 1. El. 1. and. 6. Stat. 13. El. 1. Treason, to advance the Popes
authority, etc.

Stat. 33. H. 8, 20. Attainder of high treason by (...) course of the common
Law, or Statutes of this Rea^^ shall be of as great force, as an attainder by
Parlame^^ And the King shall have the real possession of eve^^ thing forfeited
without inquisition or office: saving strangers, etc.

Stat. 29. El. 1. No record of attainder of treason sha^^ be reversed, where
the party attainted is executed (...) the same offense.

Stat. 20. H. 10. and 5. 6. E. 6.. 11. Any offense ((...) treason hertofore)
committed out of the limits of (...) Realm, shall be inquired here by
commission, and (...) process used, as if it he had been don within the Real^
One Resiant out of the limits of the Realm may (...) outlawed for high Treason:
An estate Tail shall be forfeit for high Treason.

CAAP. 22.
Rule 2. 36 E. 3. 15. All pleas which be pleaded in any of the Kings Courts
etc. or in the Courts of other Lords shall be pleaded, showed, and defended,
answered, debated, and judged in the english tongue and entered and enrolled in
Latin.

Rule 7 14. E. 3. 6. No process shall be annulled (...) discontinued by the
Clerks mistaking in writing o^^silable or letter too little or too much, but
shall be speedily amended without any advantage to the other.

Stat. 9 H. 5. 4. The justices before whom such pleas o^ records be made, or
shall be depending, may make such amendment as well after judgment, as before
so long as such record or process shall continue before them* Stat 4. H 6. 3.
The Statute of 9. H. 5. 4. is made perpetual: provided it shall not extend to
records or processes in Wales, or whereby any person is outlawed.

Stat. 8. H. 6. 12. No judgment or record shall be reversed or annulled for
error assigned by reason of the raising or interlining of any record, process,
warrant writ, panel, or return, or any addition, subtraction, or diminution of
words, letters, titles, or parcel of let^^rs found in the same.

The Judges may reform all defects in any reeord, process, word, plea,
warrant, writ, panel, or return (except appeals, indictments of treason, or
felony, and- the outlawries of the same, and the substance of the proper
names, sirnames, and addition, left out in original writs, exigents, and in
other writs of Proclamation, contrary to the statute of 1 H. 5. 5.) so as by
such misprision of the Clerk no Judgment shall be reversed or annulled.
Variance alleged between a Record and the Certificat thereof shall be amended
by the Judges.

Stat. 8 H. 6. 15. The Justices may amend the misprisions and defaults of
Clerks of the Court, or of Sheriffs and their Clerks, and of all other
Officers whatsoever, found before them in any record or process, or the return
of the same, by reason of writing one letter or syllable too much or too little
except in records and processes within Wales, and of felonies and treasons, and
the dependances of the same.

Stat. 27. El 5 After demurrer joined and entered, the same Court amended all
imperfections, defects, and wants of form, other then those only, which the
party demurring shall particularly express in his demurrer. Howbeit, his Act
shall not extend to the proceedings in an appeal of felony or murder, or upon
an Indictment presentment, or penal Statute.

Rule 8. westminster. 2. 39. 13. E. 1. Damages given against the Sheriff, if he
return not at all, or return a tarde, upon writs delivered, or offered to be
delivered him by bill: so upon returning a Mandavi Balivo libertatis falsely:
Upon any resistance of any great man to execute the Kings precepts, the
Sheriff shall take the Posse ^^mitatus, and see it served: See 2 E 3. 5.

The Stat. of York 5. 12, E, 2. Bailiffes of Franchises man deliver their
returns of writs to the Sheriffs by Inde^ture, and if he change the return,
the Lord of the ^^berty, and the party shall recover double damag^^ Sheriffs
and Bailiffs shall set their proper names to (...) returns.

Stat. 27. El. 12 Every Undersheriff, Bailiff of Fr^^chise, Deputy, Clerk of
the Sheriff, etc. must take (...) oath of Supremacy, and another oath for the
true sp^^dy and indifferent returning of writs, and impanelli^^ of Jurors,
without taking above the fees allowed.

Stat. 29. El 4. No Sheriffs, Under-Sheriffe, Baliffe (...) a liberty, or any
of their Deputies shall either directly or indirectly take more for serving an
extent or execution, then after the rate of 12 d. for every pound under 100 l.
and 6 d. for every pound above 100 l. of what they shall so levy, in pain to
forfeit treble damages (...) the party grieved, and besides 40 l. to be divided
betwixt the Queen and the prosecutor.

Rule 11. Stat. 1. E 34. Stat. 1. Averment given in a writ of false judgment
against the record certified*

Rule 26. trinity Term shall begin the monday after Trinity Sunday for keeping
of Essoines, proffers, returns, etc. the full term shall begin the Friday
after Corpus Christi day, and have four returns only, Crassino Trin. Octabis
Trin. Quindena Trin. and Tres Trin. the rest are cut off: also by a late Act
the two first Returns of Michaelmas Term are abridged.

Rule 37. 18. H. 6. 1. The Kings Letters Patents must bear date the day of the
delivery of the warrant to the Chancellor, and not before, otherwise they are
void.

Stat. 3. 4. E. 6. 4 Every one that has any Intrest in any land or office by
or under authority of the Kings Letters Patents (made after the fourth of
February 27. H. 8.) may make his title, plea, avorwie, etc. as well against the
King as any other by an exemplification (or ^^stat) under the great Seal.

Stat 13. El. 6. So likewise of the Patentees of H. 2. ^^ Qu M.P. and. M. and
Qu. Eliz. and all claiming under them.

Rule 49. Stat. 14. E. 3. 8. Escheators shall not continu^ in their office
above a year.

Rule 51. Mag. Cart. 35. The Sheriff shall make his turn throughout the
Hundred but twice a year viz. once after Easter, and once after Michaelmas. And
the view of Frank pledge shall also be made at the turn of Michaelmas.

Stat. 31. E. 3. Stat. 1. 15. Every Sheriff shall hold his turn yearly, one
time within the month after Easter, and another time within the month after
Michaelmas, in pain to lose his turn for the time.

Stat. 1. E. 3, Stat. 1. 17. Indictments in Sheriffs turns must be by rolls
indented, one part thereof to remain, with the Endictors, the other with the
Sheriff.

Stat. 1. E. 4. 2. upon Indictments and presentiments taken before Sheriffs, or
their Ministers at their turns or Law-dayes, they shall not attach, arrest, or
imprison, nor levy any fine or amerciament of any person so indicted (or
presented) but deliver the same Indictments or presentiments to the Justice of
peace of the same County, at their next Sessions who shall proceed hereupon, as
if they were taken before them.

Stat. 1. R. 3. 4. None shall be returned upon a panel of inquiry for the
Sheriffs Turn, but men of good name and fame, having within the same County
Freehold land to the yearly value of 20 s. or Copihold land to the yearly
value of 26 s. 8 d. and every Indictmen^ ortherwise taken shall be void.

Rule 55. Westminster. 1. 10. 3. E. 1. Coroners shall be chosen in all counties of
the most wise and discreet Knigh^ Sheriffs shall have Counterparts with the
Coroners all things, which concern their office: they shall (...) nothing of
any man to do their office, in pain of gre^^ forfeiture to the King.

Stat. 14. E. 3. Stat. 1. 8. A coroner shall have sufficie^^ in the County,
whereof to answer all people.

Stat. 28. E. 3. 6. Coroners shall be chosen in the^^ Counties of the most
convenient and lawful men ^^ving unto the King and other Lords (that may (...)
Coroners) their Franchises.

Stat. 1. H. 8. 7. where one is slain by misadventure, (...) Coroner shall
execute his office without fee, in pain (...) 40 s. Justices of Assize and
Peace have power to require of and punish the defaults and extortions of
Coroners.

Rule 57. Artic. super Cart. 3. 28. E. 1. They shall behold plea of any
contracts or covenants, but such as (...) of the Kings house makes with
another of the (...) house: Nor of any trespass, unless the party were
^^tached, and the plea determined before the Kings ^^parture from the place,
where the trespass was committed, Any thing attempted here against is void*
Pleas of felony (that cannot be determined before the Steward, because the
felons cannot be attached, or (...) other like cause) shall be refered to the
Common Law.

Stat. 5 E. 3. 2. and 10. E. 3. Stat 2. 2. Inquests shall be taken by the men of
the country about, (...) by none of the Kings house, except it be in Covenants,
contrasts and trespasses, when either party is of the Kings house.

Stat. 13. R. 2. Stat. 1. 3. the jurisdiction of the Steward and Marshall of
the Kings house shall extend no further then twelve miles from the Kings
Lodging.

Stat. 15. H. 6. 1. The defendants may aver, that themselves and the
Plaintiff (at the time of the Suit commenced) were not of the Kings house
against the Record.

Stat. 33. H. 8. 12. The Lord Steward of the Kings house alone, or (in his
absence) the Treasurer and controller of the kings house with the Steward of
the marshalsie or two of them (whereof the Steward of the Marshallsie to be
one) may without Commission hear and determine all Treasons, Murders, Man
slaughters and bloodshed, within the kings house, although the king be removed
before: the inquiring and verdict must be by the Kings household servants in the
Check-roll: No Clergy or Sanctuary is given to any, found guilty before them.

Rule 60. 17. E. 4. 2. made perpetual 1 R- 2. 6. No Plea shall be holden in
Court of Pipowders, unless the Plaintiff or his Attorney swear, that the
matter of the declaration was done in the time of the same fair, and within the
Jurisdiction thereof, but that oath shall be-no conclusion to the defendant,
but that he may plead as he might before: Every Steward holding plea otherwise,
forfiteth 5 l.

CHAP. 23.
Rule 2. Gloucester 8. 6. E. 1. Attorneys may be made in all pleas, where
appeals lie not.

Merton 10. 20. H. 3. In suits at the County Court, Hundred, Weapontake, or
Lords court.

Westminster. 2. 10. 13. E. 1. An Attorney may be made in all Counties, where
justices do journey* and Stat. 3. H. 7. 1. An appeal of death may be pursued by
Attorney. Westminster. 1. 25. 3. E. 1. Westminster. 2. 49. 13. E. 1. and Artic. supp. Cart
11. 28. E. 1. there shall be no maintenance in such.

Stat. 32. A. 8. 9. None shall buy, sell, or get or take promise, or grant to
have any pretenced rights or (...) to lands, except the seller, or those, by
whom he claims were in possession, or took the profits, by the span of a
year next before upon pain that the seller, etc. shall forfeit the value of the
land, and likewise the buyer, knowing the same, provided, he that is in lawful
possession by taking the yearly profits, may buy, etc. another pretenced
right, etc.

Rule. 7. Stat. 6. R. 2. 2. Debt, account, and all such actions shall be
brought in the County where the contract, etc. was made.

Rule 16. Stat. 1. E. 6. 7. The Acceptance of a new name of dignity shall not
abate the writ.

CHAP. 24.
Rule 6. MErton 8. 20. H. 3. Seisin of ones Ancestor in a writ of right shall
be from the time of H 2.

In a Mortdancester, writ of Nief, and of entry, from the last return of King
John out of Ireland.

In an Assize of novel disseisin, from Henry 3. his first passage into
Gasciogne.

West. 1. 38. 3. E 1. Seisin of ones ancestor in a writ of right shall be from
the time of Richard the first.

In an Assize of novel disseisin, and Nuper obiit, from H. 3. his first passage
into Gascoigne.

In a Mortdancester Cosinage, Aywel, entry and writ of Niefe, from H. 3. his
Coronation.

Stat. 32. H. 8. 2. Seisin in a writ of right, shall be within 60 years.

In a Mortdancester, or any other possessory action (upon the possession of his
ancestor or predecessor) shall be within 50 years.

A writ of the possession of the Plaintiff himself shall be within 30 years.

An avowry or cognizance, for rent, suit, or services of the seisin of his
Ancestor, or of his own, shall be within 40 years.

Formedons in reverter or remainder, and Scire facias upon fines shall be sued
within 50 years, after the title or cause of action accrued

Stat. 1 M. 1. Parl. 2. sess. 5. The statute of 32 H. 8. 2. shall not extend to
a writ of right of advowson, Quare impedit, Assize of Darrein presentment, Jure
patronasus, writ of right of ward, writ of ravishment of ward nor to the seiser
of the wards body or Estate: but the time of the seisin to be alleged in such
cases shall be as it was in the Common Law, before the making of the said
statute.

Stat. 21. Jac. 2. The time of prescription for lands concealed from the King
is sixty years before the making of that statute

Stat. 1. Jac, 16. In writs of Formedon in descender, remainder and reverter,
and right of entry, the time is 20 years after accruer, and imperfections
removed.

Rule 6. Stat. 25 E. 3 stat 5. 16. Non-tenure shall not abate the writ, but
only for the quantity.

Stat. 37. E. 3. 17. No writ shall be abated by acknowledgment of villeinage,
if the demandant or Plaintiff will averr, that he that alleges the
exception was freed the day of the Writ purchased.

CHAP. 26.
Rule 4. Westminster. 2. 2 13 E. 1. A Gui in vita given to the wife after her
husbands death, upon his loosing of the land by default, and the Tenant that
recovered against the husband must maintain his own right.

CHAP. 27.
Rule 4. Westminster, 2 20. In a Writ of Cosinage Ayel, and Besayel, the point shall
be inquired, whether the demandant be next heir, as well as in a Mortdancestor.

Rule 10. Westminster. 2. 1. 13. E. 1. A formedon in Descender is also given by this
Statute to the heir in tail upon a descent from his Ancestor dying seized of
the estate tail.

Rule 12. Merton 1 20 H. 3. A woman deforced of her dower or Quarentine, shall
(in a writ of Dower) recover damages, viz. the value of her Dower from her
husbands death to the day of the recovery of her Dower, and the deforceor shall
be amercied.

Westminster. 1. 48. 3. E. 1. A writ of Dower unde nihil habet shall not abate, though
she have received part of her Dower before the writ purchased, unless it were
of the same party, against whom the writ was brought, and in the same Town.

Westminster 2. 4. 13. E. 1. In place of a writ of right a Quod ei deforceat is given
to tenant in Dower for life, by the coutresie, in Frank-marriage, and in tail,
upon losing by default.

CHAP. 28.
Rule 2. Marlebr. 7 52. H. 3. In a writ de communi Custodia, if the deforceor
come not at the grand distress, the writ shall be renewed as often as may be
within half a year, and every time read and claimed in the county court; and if
he come not in to answer, nor the Sheriff find him within that half year,
he shall lose the Ward saving his action another time, if he have right.

Westminster. 2. 35. 13. E. 1. In a writ of ward of land or heir, or both, either of
the parties dying before the plea determined, a re-summons shall be; And in the
grand distress day must be given, that three County days may be held before
the return, in every of which Proclamation shall be made, whereupon if the
defendant appear not, judgment shall be given for the plaintiff: saving the
right of the defendant, if afterward he will claim it: So shall it be done
also in a writ of ejectment of ward.

Rule 6. Westminster. 2. 2. 13. E. 1. If the tenant disclaim in the County Court, or
other Court not of Record the Lord may remove the plea before the Justices to
cause it to be of Record; so as he may have a writ of right sur dlsclaimer.

Gloucester 4. 6. E. 1. and Explanat. 4 When land is given in Fee farm,
rendering or doing so much as amounts to the fourth part of the value of the
land, if he (whose land is charged) let it lie fresh by two years, so as no
distress can be found in it, nor render or do that which is contained in the
writing, the other shall recover the land by a Cessavit; but the tenant coming
before, judgment if he render the arrerages and damages and find sufficient to
do from thenceforth that which is contained in the writing, shall retain his
land. Westminster. 2. 21. 13. E. 1. If a man detain from his Lord his service due, by
two years, the Lord shall recover the land by a Cessavit: This lies also for
the Lords heir, against the tenant, his heirs and Alience.

Westminster. 2 41. If religious houses, that have land given; etc. withdraw the
Alms, etc. by two years, the donor shall have the like action.

CHAP. 29.
Rule 7. MArlbr. 9. 52. H. 3. The process in a Sella ad molendinum is
attachment, venire facias, and the grand distress: see also there the order of
proceeding in that action.

Rule 9. Stat. 25. E. 3 Stat. 3. 3 tht Kings Collation to a benefice (being
found before Judgment to be untrue) shall be repealed.

Marlbr. 12. 52. H. the process in a Quare impedit shall be Summons,
Attachment, and Grand distress.

Westminster. 5. 13. E. 1. A Coparcener being disturbed (after Partition) shall have
a Scire facias, and shall not be put to a Quare impedit.

If tenant in Dower, or by the courtesy have presented, the reversioner being
disturbed shall have a Quare impedit, or Darrein presentment at his pleasure.

Rule 15. Westminster. 2. 9. The Mesne not coming in to acquit the tenant loses the
service, and the tenant shall have like remedy against the lord for exaction, as
the Mesne might have had: And there see the process and proceeding to be used
against the Mesne.

Rule 21. Stat. de finibus 18. E. 1. Stat. 4. After the writ original is
delivered in the presence of the parties before the Justices, the Pleader shall
say, Sir Justice Conge d'accorder, then the Justice shall say what says Sir R;
And when the Kings fine is agreed for; and the peace cried, the Pleader shall
declare the substance of the fine: the parties ought to be of full age, of s^^
memory, and out of prison: A feme-covert must be examined before four
Justices, and without her consent the fine cannot be leived.

Stat. de finibus levatis, It shall be no good exception that before and at the
time of the fine leived the demandant or his ancestors were seized of the land
contained in the fine, or of some part thereof: Fines shall be openly read at
two certain days in the week by the discretion of the Justices, and in the
mean time all pleas shall cease.

Sta. 5. H. 4. 13: Every writ of Covenant, All other whereupon Fines are
levied, the dedimus potestatem, and all knowledges of the same, before they be
drawn out of the Common Bench by the Chirographer, shall be enrolled in a Roll
to be of Record for ever, out of which execution shall be had, if the Notes and
Fines be imbeziled.

Stat. 23 El. 3. Every writ of Covenant, or other writ, whereupon any fine is
levied, the Return thereof, the Concord, Note, and Foot of the Fine, the
Proclamations, and the Queens silver, also every writ of Entry in the post, and
other writ, whereupon any common recovery is suffered, writs of Summons ad
Warrantizandum, and the return of all these writs, and every warrant of
Attorney, may at any man's request be enrolled, which Inrollment shall be of as
great force to all purposes in law, as the things themselves, if they were
extant: No Fine, Proclamation, or common Recovery shall be reversed by writ of
Error, by reason of false Latin, Razure; Interlining, mis-entring of the
warrant of Attorney, or of any Proclamation, or by reason of any other defect
of form in words, and not in matter of substance.

Rule 22. Stat. 34. E. 3. 16. The plea of non claim of Fines shall be no bar
hereafter.

Stat. 4. H. 7. 24. Every fine after the engrossing shall be proclaimed in the
Court the same Term, and the three next, four several days in every Term, all
pleas ceasing the whilst: The Proclamations being so made, The fine shall
conclude all privies and strangers, except women Covert, persons within 21
years of age, in prison, out of the Realm, or of non-sane memory (being no
parties to the Fine) so as they or their heirs take their action or lawful
entry within five years after those imperfections removed: saving to all
persons and their heirs (other then parties) the right, claim, and interest,
which they have at the time of the fine so as they pursue it by action or
lawful entry within five years next after the Proclamations; And saving to all
other persons such right, title, claim and interest, as first shall grow,
remain, or come to them after the Proclamations by force of any matter before
the fine, so as they take their right according to the Law within five years,
next after it so grows, etc. And those, that be Covert-baron, etc. at the time
when it grows, that they or their heirs take their action or lawful envy
within five years after those imperfections removed: saving also to all (not
parties or privies) the exception, that none of the parties, or any to their
use, had any thing in the lands at the time of the fine.

Stat. 1. M. Parl. 1. 7. All Fines whereupon Proclamations be not or shall not
be duly made (by reason of the adjournment of any term by writ) shall be as
good as if any term had been holden from the beginning to the end, and
proclamations therein made according to the Statute.

Stat. 32. El. 2. Proclamations of Fines shall be only four times, viz. once in
the term, wherein the Fine is ingrosed, and once in every of the three terms
next after.

CAAP. 30.
Rule 2. MAg. Cart. 12, 9. H. 3. Assizes of Mortdancester and novel-disseisin
shall not be taken but in their proper County by the Justices of Assize, and if
they cannot be determined there, they shall be determined by the same Justice
in their Journey: Also difficult matters shall be referred to the Justices of
the bench to be there determined

westminster. 1. 24 3. E. 1. An Assize given against an Escheator, Sherif, or other
Bailiffe of the King, that seiseth any lands by color of his office, without
special-warrant; and double damages to be recovered by the ^est^e party
greieved.

Westminster. 2. 25. 13. E. 1. An Assize of novel disseisin shall lie for estovers of
wood, profit to be taken in woods, a Corody, delivery of Corn, and other
victuals and necessaries to be received yearly in a certain place, toll
tronage, passage, Pontage, Pawnage, and the like to be taken in places certain,
the keeping of Parks, Woods, Forests, Chases, Warrens, Gates, and other
Bayliwicks, and Offices in fee; And in all these cases the writ shall be, de
libero tenemento: All an Assise is given for common of turbarie, fishing and
such like Commons appendant to a freehold, or without a freehold by special
deed (at least) for term of life.

If any holding for years or in ward alien in fee, remedy shall be had by an
Assize, and both the feoffors and feoffees shall be had for disseisors, so that
during the life of any of them the said writ shall hold place; but if they die
the remedy shall be by writ of entry.

the giving of this writ in new cases shall not diminish the force thereof in
those, wherein it had force before; and remedy also shall be had thereby, in
case where on feeds in the sevrall of another.

In this suit, if the defendant fail to make good the exception, which he
pleads, he shall be adjudged a disseisor without taking the Assize, and shall
give to the Plaintiff double damages both inquired, and to be inquired; and
besides shall suffer a years Imprisonment

If such an exception shall be alleged by a Bailiffe the taking of the Assize
shall not thereby delayed nor yet the judgment upon the restitution of the
land and damages: Howbeit, if the Master of such Bailiffe afterward offer to
prove to the Court by matter of Record, that there was just exception, whereby
the Plaintiff might have been barred, he shall have a venire facias, to produce
such record; And then, if the Justices see cause, the plaintiff shall be warned
to appear at a certain day, and the defendant shall then have again his seisin
and damages, and the plaintiff shall be punished by Imprisonment at the
discretion of the Justices: In like manner also shall the Justices proceed, in
case the defendants proof is by deeds and releases; for if the plaintiff
purchased the Assize contrary to his own deed, he shall be punished, as
aforesaid.

Stat. 7. R. 1. 10. An Assize of novel disseisin for (...) issuing out of Lands
in diverse Counties shall be taken in confinio comitatus, as is used for Common
of Pas^^^ in one County, appendant to tenements in another.

Stat. 1. H 4. 8. A special Assize is maintainable by the disseisee for such
lands, as are granted by the King patent, without title first found by inquest
for the King, without suit to be made to the King in that behalf; And if the
pattentee pray in Aid of the King a procedendo shall also be granted without
suit. Here (...) the Assize pass for the disseises, he shall recover (...)
damages against the patentee.

Stat. H. 4. 8. If any make forcible entry into land by way of maintenance, the
Chancellor of England shall grant a special Assize without suing to the King
and if the disseisor shall be attainted thereof, he sha^ suffer one whole
years imprisonment, and restor^ double damages to the party grieved.

Stat. 21. H. 8. 3. The plaintiff in Assize may abridg^ his plaint of any part,
whereunto a bar is pleaded without prejudice to the residue.

Merton 3. 20. H. 3. A man disseised recovering his seisin by Assize of novel
disseisin, or confession of the party, and having the same delivered him by the
Sherif, if he be again disseised of the same tenements by the same disseisor,
he shall have a writ of redisseisin to command the Sherif (taking with him the
Keeper of the pleas of the Crown, and other Knights) in proper person to go to
the land, etc. and by the first Jurors or other lawful men to make inquiry:
Howbeit, this must not be without special commandment of the King: The
redisseisor shall be imprisoned.

Marlbr. 8 52. H. 3 And not delivered without special command of the King, and
payment of a Fine.

Westminster. 2. 8. 13. E. 1. Writs of redisseisin must be enrolled in the Chancery,
and transcripts thereof shall be sent into the Exchequer.

Westminster. 2. 26. A writ of Redisseisin shall lie for them-that have recovered by
default, reddition, or otherwise, without recognition of assizes or Iuries: The
redisseisor shall answer double damages, and not be reprevisable by common writ.

Rule 8. Westminster. 2. 24. 13. E. 1. Gives an assize of nuisance against him, to
whom the tenement is alienated after the nuisance is made.

Stat. 6. R. 2. 3. The Plaintiff, if he will, may have a writ of nuisance in the
nature of an Assise, determinable before the Justices, or before the Justices
of Assize.

Rule 9. Magn. Cart. 12. Vide suprae, Rule 2.

Marlb. 16. 52. H. 3. If the Lord will not render unto the heir the land (when
he comes to age) without plea, the heir shall recover his land by an Assize of
Mortdancestor, together with all his damages.

West. 2. 4. 13, E. 1. If a woman having no right, recover Dower against a
Guardian, the heir at full age shall have a Mortdancester aginst her.

Gloucester 3. The heir shall have an Assize of Mortdancester, if the tenant by
eouttesie alien, and leas^ no Assets.

Gloucester 6. All the heirs, whereof one is Son o^ Daughter, Brother, or
Sister, Nephew or Niece, and the other in a further degree, shall join in a
Mortdancester.

Rule 10. Mag. Cart. 13. An Assize of Darrein presentment shall be always
taken before the Justice of the Common place.

Rule 1^. Westminster. 2 24 13. E. 1. A writ of Juris utr^^ shall be granted, to try
whether free alms belong to one Church or another, in case where they are
transferred from one Church to another.

Rule 13. Stat. 31. H. 8 1. Iointenants and tenants in Common of an estate of
Inheritance in their own right or in the right of their wives in any Manors,
Land, etc. may be compelled to make partition by writ de partitione facienda,
as Coparceners are compellable to do, and afterward shall have aid to deraigne
the Warranty paramount, and to recover pro rata, as Coparceners (after
partition) should.

Stat 32. H 8. 32. Iointenants and tenants in common, that hold for life or
years amongst themselves, (...) with others, that have Inheritance or freehold
in any Manors, lands, etc, shall also be compelled to make partition by the
said writ to be pursued upon their case Howbeit, such partition shall not be
prejudicial to any but the parties, to such partition their executors and
assigns.

CHAP. 31.
Rule 3. STat. 9. E. 3. Stat. 1. 3. In a writ of debt brought against diverse
executors, they shall have but one Essoine before appearance, and another after
appearance, he or they that do first appear in the Court at the grand
distress, shall answer to the Plaintiff, and the plaintiff (if it pass for
him) shall have judgment and execution of the goods of the Testator against all
named in the writ, as well as if they had all pleaded.

Rule 7. Mag. Cart. 8. 9. H. 3. The pledges shall be free so long as the
principal debtor is sufficient; And they answering the debt, shall have the
lands and rents of the principal, until they be satisfied* but note, that
this is meant of the Kings debtor.

Stat. 1 R. 2. 12. No Warden of the Fleet shall suffer any prisoner in
execution to go out of prison by Mainprize, Bail, or Baston, without making
gree with the party, unless by writ, or other commandment of the King, upon
pain to lose his Office, and the Creditor to have a writ of debt against him.

Stat. 23 H. 6. 10. Every Obligation taken by a Sheriff or his Ministers by
color of their office of any person in their Ward by course of Law, shall be
by the name of their office, and upon condition, that the prisoner appeared at
the day and place mentioned in his Writ, Bill, or Warrant, an Obligation in any
other form taken is void.

Stat. 32. H. 8 37. The Executors and Administrators of him, that has any rent
or fee-farm in fee-simple, fee-tail, or for life, shall have an Action of debt
for the arrerages in the Testators life time, against the tenants, that should
then have paid it, or may distreine and make avowrie upon their matter) in the
lands, so long as they remain in the possession of the said tenant,, or of any
claiming only from him.

A husband seized of any such estate in any rent or fee-farm in his wives
right, shall (after her death) himself (and also his executors, or
administrators) have the same remedy for arrerages due in her life: So likewise
of him, (his executors, or administrators) that has a rent or fee-farme during
another life, and Cesty qui vi^ dye, the same being unpaid.

Rule 9. Stat. 13. El. 4. The lands, profits, and hereditaments of every
Accomptant, or him that receives money for the Queen, or her successors to be
employed to the use of the Queen, etc. shall be extended (in the nature of a
Statute staple) for the payment of the arrerages: Or the Queen, etc. if he do
not satisfy within six months after the arrerages found, may sell his land,
and the party may have the surplussage to be delivered to him by him that
received the money upon the sale, without further warrant: This sale to be of
any land, whereof it is found by Inquisition, that the Accomptant takes the
profits; with Inquisition, if it be true, after traverse of the office, and
that found for him, he shall have his land again without any petition, livery,
or Ouster le main: Here, if any such buy land with the Queens treasure, and pay
not the arrerages, as before; the Queen shall seize and retain the land,
according to the rate that the party had it.

This Act extends not to such officers as have used to disburse money
immediately after their accounts past, as the treasurers of War, Garrisons,
Navies, etc. unless the Queen, etc. command present pay: Neither does it
extend to Accomptants, whose whole Receipt exceeds not 300 l. not to
Sheriffs, Escheators, or Bailiffes of Liberties.

The Queen, etc, being satisfied by sale of land, the sureties shall be
discharged for so much, and if any remain yet unpaid, the sureties shall pay
the residue ratably according to their abilites.

Stat. 2 7. El. 3. the Queen etc. may make sale of the accomptants lands, etc.
as well after his death as in his life time, and as well where the account was
made, and the debt known within eight years after his death, as in his life
time. Provided, that after the Accomptants death and before the lands* be sold;
a fcire facias shall be awarded to garnish the heir, to show cause why the
lands etc. should not be sold, etc. whereupon, if the heir upon such
Garnishment or two nihils returned do not prove unto the Court, that the
executors or administrators of the accomptant have sufficient, then ten months
after such two nihils or garnishment returned, the lands etc. shall be sold,
and disposed according to the Stat. of 13. El. 4 Nevertheless, the heirs sale
bona fide and upon good consideration before the scire facias awarded, shall be
good to him, that is not consenting to defraud the Queen, etc.

This Act shall extend to all Officers of Receipts and Accounts to the Queen,
and to none other? The heirs lands, etc. shall not be sold during his minority
but at any time within eight years after his full age they shall be liable as
aforesaid: If the Accomptant or debtor had a Quietus est in his life time, that
shall discharge the heir of debt.

Stat. 7. Ja. 15 No debt shall be assigned to the King, etc. by any debtor or
accomptant, other then such debts as did before grow due originally to the
Kings debtor or Accomptant bona fide: All Grants and Assignments of debts to
the King, etc. contrary to the true intent of this Act shall be void.

Rule 15. Marlbr. 23. 52. H. 3 Attachment given in an Action of Account against
Bailiffs, that withdraw themselves, and have no lands or tenements to be
distrained by.

Westminster. 2. 11. 13. E. 1. He to whom the account is to be made, may assign
Auditors to take it who may immediately commit to the next Jail the Accomptant
(being found in arrerages) till he fully satisfy: whereupon the Accomptant
finding himself grieved, may bring the matter by a scire facias before the
Barons of the Exchequer.

CHAP. 32.
Rule 22. Westminster 1-20 3. E. 1. Trespassers in parts and Ponds attainted at the
suit of the party (besides making large amends according to the trespass and
fine at the Kings pleasure) shall have three years imprisonment, and find good
surety not to commit the like trespass; And if he cannot find surety, he
shall abjure the Realm. Being a fugitive and having no lands or tenements,
whereby to be justified, he shall be proclaimed from county to county; and (if
he appear not) outlawed.

Stat. 5. R. 2. 7. None shall enter into lands or tenements by force, in pain
of Imprisonment and ransom at the the Kings pleasure.

Stat. 15 R. 2. 2. When forcible entry is made into lands or Church Livings,
one or more Justices of peace, taking sufficient power, and going to the place
so kept by force may commit the offender to the next Jail, there to remain
convict by the Justices record, till he has made fine and ransom to the King;
and herein the Sheriff and all others shall be assistant, in pain of
Imprisonment and great fines making.

Stat. 8. H. 6. 9. The Statute of 15 R. 2. 2. shall be duly put in execution
both against forcible entry and forcible detainer, though the entry was
peaceable.

When complaint of any such entry or detainer shall be made to any such Justice
or Justices of peace, he or they by precept shall command the Sheriff to
summon a sufficient Jury, and having by them made inquiry of the force
committed, shall cause the tenements to be reseised, and that as well in the
absence as presence of the party offending. And here, the alienation of
tenements (so entered into or detained by force) for maintenance, shall be
adjudged void: Howbeit, this Act shall endamage none, where peaceable
possession has been enjoyed three years.

Stat. 31. El. 11. There shall be no restitution upon an Indictment of forcible
entry or detainer, where the defendant has been three years next before in
quiet possession, and his estate therein ended.

Stat. 21. Ja. 15. Upon force or detainer, as aforesaid, a Justice or Justices
of peace have power to give restitution of possession, as well unto tenants for
years, by Elegit, Statute-Merchant, or staple, copiholders, or Guardians by
Knight service, as unto such as claim freehold or Inheritance.

Merton. 6 20. H. 3. A Layman ravishing or marrying a Ward within 14 years of
age, shall be imprisoned, besides loss of the value of the marriage.

Westminster 2. 35. 13. E. 1. A strict Law against one that takes away a Ward.

CHAP. 33.
Rule 2. MAgna Cart. 34. 9. H. 3. A woman shall have no appeal, but only of the
death of her husband.

Gloucester 9. 6. E. 1. An appeal of the death of a man must be brought within
the year.

Stat. 3. H. 7. 1. One acquitted upon an indictment of Murder or manslaughter,
or as accessory, shall not go at large without good bayl, until the year and
day be past, within which time an appeall may be brought (if no Clergy be had
before) and all advantages therein saved, as if the acquittall had not been.

CHAP. 34.
Rule 17. and 18. WEst. 2. 7. A guardian may have writ of admeasurement of
dower, howbeit the heir (at full age) shall not be barred by that suit, if the
guardian did follow it faintly.

In Writs of admeasurement both of Dower and Pasture after the great distress,
proclamation shall be made two County days, whereupon if the party come the
plea shall proceed, if not, admeasurement shall be made in his default.

Westminster. 2. 8. 13. E, 1. when the same party (after admeasurement, another time
surchargeth the Common, a writ to enquire of that second surcharge shall go
(...) either judicial, if the former admeasurement were before the Justices,
or otherwise, Original, out of the Chancery, and the beasts surcharging the
Common, (or their value) shall be answered to the King.

Rule 24 etc. Marlbr. 21. 52. H. 3. The Sheriff may replevin beasts not only
without but within a liberty also if the bailiff of the liberty will not do it.

Westminster 2. 2. 13. E. 1. The sheriff or bailiff shall take pledges of the
plaintiff before they make deliverance of the beasts, not only de prosequendo,
but for return in them, if a return be adjudged, he that takes pledge,
otherwise shall answer the price of the beasts.

Upon a return awarded to the defendant, the writ de returno habendo shall have
this clause (that the Sheriff shall not deliver them without writ, wherein
mention shall be made of the Judgment*) and thereupon he may (if he will) hare
a judicial writ to the Sheriff to deliver him the beasts: but if afterward
the Plaintiff desire to replevie his Beasts again, he shall have a Judicial
writ ( viz a writ of second deliverance) that the Sheriff taking surety for
the suit, and also for the beasts to be returned or their price (if return be
awarded) shall deliver the beasts before returned, and the distrainor shall be
attached to come before the justices at a certain day, and if he that replevied
make default, or for some other cause, return of the dissresse is awarded)
being now twice replevied (the distress shall afterward remain irrepleviable.

Stat. 1. 2. P.M. 12. Every Sheriff of a Shire (being no City) shall at his
first County-day, or within two months after receipt of his, patent proclaim in
the shir-town four deputies (at least) dwelling not past 12 miles one from
another, which in his name shall make Replevins, as the Sheriff might do
himself.

Rule 30 Stat. 2. E. 3. 3. Commissions of Oyer and Terminer shall be only
granted to the Justices of the one Bench or other, or to Justices errants.

CHAP. 36.
Rule 1. STat de quo warranto 18. E. 1. Pleas of quo warranto shall from
hencforth be pleaded and determined in the Circuits of the Justices. See also
Stat de quo warranto novum.

Rule 3, etc. Stat. 36. E. Stat. 1. 13. No Escheator shall take enquests of
office but indented between the Jurours and him, otherwise they are void.

Stat. 33. H. 8. 22. No Escheator shall sit virtute offici^ (only) to find an
office of lands holden of the King, of 5 l. value or above, in pain of five
pounds.

Stat. 8. H. 6. 16. No escheator shall take inquests b^ of people impannelled
by the Sheriff, and those enquests must be returned within a month after the
taking, in pain of 20 l. so also of Commishoners.

Stat. 23. H 6. 17. An Escheator shall take an inquest, virtute brevis, within
a month after the delivery of the writ unto him his fees are there also, set
down.

Stat. 1. H. 8 8. He shall not sit, unless he have land etc. to the clear
yearly value of 40 marks, in pain of 20 l. He shall not delay to take the
Verdict, when the Jury offers it, in pain of 100 l. so also of Commissioners:
He shall not be Escheator again within three years after that year ended.

Stat. 36. E. 3. Stat. 1. 13. A traverse is given to the party, whose lands are
seized by office of alienation without licnece, or the nonage of the heir in
Ward, It shall be sent to the Kings Bench to be tried.

Stat. 69. E. 3. Stat. 1. 13. Upon a traverse of monstr^^ de dron the
Chancellor may let him (that tenders it) the lands holden to farm, finding
surety to do to waste.

Stat. 8. H. 6. 19. They shall not be let to farm till the inquests returned,
nor within a month after, without which time the party grieved may have the
benefit o^ the former statute: All Letters Patents within the month shall be
void.

Stat. 18. H. 6. 6. All Letters patents made of lands o^ tenements before
office found and returned, shall b^ vo d.

Stat 1. H. 8. 8. Diverse good provisions concerning ^^cheators Commissioners,
Jurors, and Offices, and the manner of returning offices into the petty bagg.

Stat. 1. H. 8. 10. Lands soiled into the Kings hand by office, shall be let to
farm to him, that tendered to traverse the same within three months after such
office found, notwithstanding the Statute of 8 H. 6. 16.

Stat. 2 3. E. The estates and interests of others shall be saved, though they
be not found in the office where an heir of full age is found within age, he
shall have a writ de aetate probanda, and may proceed to sue out his livery or
ouster le main, (as his case is) and receives the profits of his lands,
notwithstanding such office found.

Where after the Kings tenants death more hiers then one are found, or if one
be untruly found a Lunatic Idiot, or dead, the party grieved may have his
traverse, as in other cases of untrue Inquisitions: A Traverse of Monstrans de
droit is given without peition, though the King be titled by double matter of
Record.

When the Jury finds de quo vel de quibus Ignorant, or per quae servitia
ignorant, the first shall not make a tenure of the King, nor the last tenure in
Ca^ite; but in such cases a Melius inquirendum shall issue forth traverse given
to an ofice where a wrong tenure is found: the rents of mean Lords shall be
paid (during the nonage of the Ward) by the officer, that receives the revenue
of the Wards lands.

Artic de super cart. 19. 68 E. 1. When the Sheriff or Escheator seize land
into the Kings hand without cause, upon ousting of the Kings hands, the party
shall have the mesne issues.

Stat. de Escheatoribus. 29 E. 4. 3. If the Escheator by writ out of the
chancery seize land into the kings hand, and after upon Inquisition no title is
found for the king to have the Custody, an ouster le main shall be awarded for
the party out of the Chancery: Provided, that if any thing afterward may be
found in the Chancery, Exchequer, or K. Bench for the King, a scire facias
shall go out against the party, and if the King have right, (...) shall be
answered of all the issues from the time of the Escheators first seisiing of
the land.

Stat. 23. H. 6. 17. In a scire facias upon a travers^ against any Patentee, no
protection shall be allowed*

Rule 11. Stat. 28. E. 3. 4 The rents given to the^ that sue livery, when the
rent day comes, how soo^ soever it comes after the livery.

Stat. 3^. H. 8.. 46. The erection of the Court of Ward And Stat. 33 H. 8. 22.
the annexing thereunto the Liveries: See the Statutes at large,

Rule 31. Also for the better preservation of the peac^ diverse wholesome Laws
bean to be framed from the beginning of the Reign of E. 3. for the establishing
(...) justices of Peace in every County, until at last abo^^ the 12, year of
R. 2. they were fully settled, and ha^ power to keep their Quarter Sessions?
which Government Sir Edward Cook has observed to be the best i^ the Christian
world for the preservation of the Peace And therefore see those Statutes, as
you shall find the^ ranked together in diverse Books now extant.

Rule 33. Concerning Informations there are dire^^ good Laws made, which are
now sorted together (under the titles of actions popular or Informations) in
d^vers Treatises, which treat of the office of a justice o^ Peace; and
therefore it is conceived needless here t^ insert them.

Rule 34 See Officium Coronatoris, 4. E. 1. Which sets down the whole order
how he is to proceed upon inquiries: See also Stat de Exonia 14. E. 1. and the
a^ticles thereunto annexed.

Artic super Cart. 3. 28. E 1. The Coroner of the cou^tie shall join with the
Kings Coroner in inquring of the death of a man in a Kings house.

Stat. 33. H. 8. 12. The Coroner of the Kings house shall inquire alone without
the Coroner of the County, by a jury of the Yeoman officers of the Court.

CHAP. 37.
Rule 10. Stat. 31. El. 3. Upon a summons in a real action (fourteen days
before the return) a Proclamation of the Summons shall be made) upon a Sunday
after divine Service) at the door of the Parish Church where the Land lies,
and shall also be returned with the names of the Summoners: And till that done,
no Grand Cape shall go out, but a Alias and Pluries, as the case requires

Rule 15. Stat. 1. H. 55. In every original writ of actions personal, appeals,
and indictments, in which the Exigent shall be awarded, to the names of the
defendants additions shall be made of their estate and degree or mystery, and
the Towns, Hamlets, Place, and Counties, in which they were or be conversant;
otherwise all Outlawries thereupon pronounced shall be null. And before these
Outlawries be pronounced the said writs and indictments shall be abated by the
exception of omitting the said additions.

Stat. 6. H. 6. 1. All Exigents and Outlawries upon indictments in the Kings
Bench of Felony and Treason, shall be void, if before the Exigent awarded a
Capias be not directed to the Sheriff of the County, whereof they be named in
the Indictment, having six weeks space (or larger, at the discretion of the
justices) before the return.

Stat. 8. H. 6. 10. In every indictment, or appeal of Treason, Felony, or
Trespass, after the first Capias returned forthwith (before the Exigent)
another Capias shall be awarded to the shheriffe of the County, where by the
indictment the party is supposed to abide ret^^able before the same Justices,
etc. containing the s^^ of three months (where the Counties be holden (...)
month to month) and of four months (where t^ be holden from six weeks to six
weeks) by which Cap^^ the Sheriff shall be commanded to take his body, if be
found in his Baliwick: If he be not found, the^ make proclamation (for his
appearance) in two Co^^ties before the return of the writ Any Exigent or
O^^lawrie otherwise pronounced shall be holden for no^

Stat. 10. H. 6. 6 The like is to be observed, when (...) indictment or appeal
(taken before Justice of Pe^^ or other having power) shall be removed before
(...) King in his Bench, or elsewhere by Certiorari, or oth^^wise.

Stat. 6 H. 8. 4. Upon every Exigent, a writ to m^^ three Proclamations
(returnable the day of the retu^^ of the Exignt, and the Proclamations to be
made, (...) two in the full County Court, and the third at the gen^ral
Sessions) shall go out to the Sheriff of every oth^^ County ( viz. then that,
where the action is brough^ where the defendant is said to be, or lately to
have bee^ if the Kings writ run there; otherwise to the Cou^^ next adjoining to
that, where he is said to be: Eve^^ outlawry to the contrary shall be avoided
by plea.

Stat. 37. E 3. 2. A writ Identitate nominis, give^^ those, whose lands, goods
or chattels be seized by (...) ofheer surmising them to be outlawed (where they
b^ not) because they bear such names as they who b^ outlawed for want of good
declaration of the Si^name.

Stat. 9. H. 6. 4. A writ of Identit ate nominis shall be ((...) this case)
maintainable by executors, as well as by the testato^ himself, if he were
living.

Rule 18. Stat. 5. E. 3. 12. where the Plaintiff h^^ recovered damages, and he
against whom damages are recovered is outlawed at the Kings suit, no Charter of
pardon shall be granted, except the plaintiff be satisfied for his damages.
When one is outlawed by p^ocesse before his appearance, no such Charter shall
be granted, except he yield himself before the Justices, from whom the Exigent
issued, who shall cause the party to be warned to appear before them at a day:
whereupon if the plaintiff appear, they shall plead upon the first original,
as if no Outlawry had been. If the plaintiff appear not, and the warning be
duly witnessed he that is outlawed shall be delivered by virtue of his Charter.

Stat. 31. El. 3 Upon every Exigent in a personal action, a writ of
proclamation shall go out of the same Court to the Sheriff of the County,
where the defendant at the time of the Exigent shall be dwelling, whereupon
three Proclamations shall be made, viz one in open County Court, another at the
Quarter Sessions, and the third one month (at least) before the Quinto exact at
the door of the parish Church where the defendant shall be dwelling at the time
of the Exigent, upon a Sunday, immediately after Divine Service. All Outlawries
otherwise executed shall be void.

But before reversing of any such outlawrie in this respect, the defendant
shall put in bail, not only to answer the Plaintiff in a new action, but to
satisfy the condemnation, if the Plaintiff begin his suit within two Terms.

Rule 20. Stat. 25. E 3. Stat 5. 14, The second Capias in case of Felony must
be returned three weeks after

Rule 24. Westminster. 2. 39 13 E. 1. The Plaintiff may aver that the Sheriff might
have returned greater issues, and thereupon shall have a Judicial writ to the
Justice of Assize to inquire of what and how great issue he might have answered
from the day of the purchase of the writ to the day of the return, and the
Sheriff shall be charged with the surplussage not returned.

Stat. 1. E. 3. Stat. 1. 5. The like averment of too small issues returned,
given against Bailiffes of Franchises, as well as against the Sheriff.

Rule 30. Westminster. 1. 17. 13. E. 1. the Sheriff or Bailif^^ may take the power
of the County or Baliwick, and beat down a Castle or Fortress, where such
beasts are enclosed, if he that took them will not make deliverance.

Rule 33. Westminster. 2. 11. 13. E. 1. Process of Outlawrie given in an action of
account.

Stat. 25. E. 3. Stat 5. 17. Such process shall be made in a writ of debt and
detinue of Chattells, and taking of beasts by Capias and Exigent, as is now
used in a writ of account.

Stat. 7. H. 5. 1. In writ, against forgers of false charters and muniments
like process shall be made by Capias and Exigent, as in writs of trespass.

Stat.. 19. H. 7. 9. Like process given in actions upon the case sued in the
Kings Bench and Common place as in actions of trespass and debt.

Stat. 23. H. 8. 14. Like process shall be had in every action, brought upon
the statute of 5 R. 2. 7. (concerning forcible entry) as in trespass, and like
process in every writ of annuity and covenant as in debt

CHAP. 38
Rule STat. 25. H. 8 20, for the election nomination, presentation, investing,
and consecrating of Arch Bishops and Bishops.

Rule 32. Stat. 5. R. 2. 2. Prohibits going beyond s^^ without license, but it
is repealed by 4. Ja. 1.

Rule 35. Stat. Carlisle 15. E. 2. The Dedimus potestatem shall be directed to
two of the Justices, or to one Justice and a Knight.

CHAP. 39.
Rule 5. Gloucester 5. 6. E. 1. An Action of waste is maintainable aginst tenant
by the courtesy, in dower, for life or years; and the party attainted thereof
shall lose the thing wasted, and recompense the party grieved thrice so much as
such waste shall be taxed at.

Westminster. 2. 14. 13. E. 1. the processes in a writ of waste shall be summons,
attachment, and distress; and if he come not, then a writ unto the Sheriff
(taking with him 12 men) to go to the place wasted, aed there enquire of the
waste, and upon that waste returned judgment shall be.

Stat. 11. H. 6. 5. Where the tenants grant over his estate, but
notwithstanding takes the profits, and commits waste, an action lies against
him.

Magn Cart. 4. 9. H. 3. The Guardian may not commit waste, in pain to lose the
Wardship: And ( Cap. 5.) must repair and sustain the houses of the profit of
the land.

Gloucester. 5 6. E. 1. If the Guardian commit waste, and the Wardship lost
answers not the damages before the heirs age, he shall render damages to the
heir otherwise.

Artic. super Cart. 18. 28. E. 1. An Escheator committing Waste upon Wards
lands, shall answer damages,

Stat. 36. E. 1. Stat. 1. 13. The heir shall have an action of waste against
the Escheator committing waste, as well within age, as when he is at full age:
See also 14. E. 3. 13.

Westminster. 2. 22. 13. E. 1. A writ of waste is given for one Jointenant or tenant
in common against another, wherein the defendant is to be at his choice, to
take his part in certain (and then to have for his part the place wasted) or to
agree from thenceforth to take nothing more, then his Companions do.

Gloucester 13 6 E. 1. Hanging a plea by writ, the tenant may not commit waste,
nor estrepment of the land in demand, and if he do, the demandant may have
awrit to cause the land to be kept, that no wast nor estrepment be done.

CHAP. 40
Rule 2. 36, E 3. 15. Declarations shall be good enough, if they have matter of
substance, though the terms be not apt.

Rule 10 Westminster. 1. 46. If a writ of novel disseisin be purchased, and the
disseisor die before the Assize be pasesed, the plaintiff shall have a writ of
entry sur disseisi^ against his heir: The like shall the heir of the disseisin
have, in case he die, etc. The nonage of the heir of the disseisor or disseisee
shall not prejudice in an Assize; If the Inquest pass against the heir of the
disseisee, he shall have an Attaint gratis.

Gloucester 2. 6 E. 1. Where an Infant is held from his Inheritance, whereby he
is driven to his writ, the Inquest shall pass, notwithstanding his nonage.

Exposition of the Stat of Gloucester 26. E. 1. Touching an Enquest to be made
for an Infant, that Statute shall run without limitation of time.

Westminster. 2. 40 13. E. 1. The suit of a woman or her heir (in a Cui in vita, or a
sur Cui in vita) after the death of her husband shall not be delayed by
minority of the heir, who ought to warrant the land.

Rule 31. Westminster. 2. 42. Certain cases, wherein vie^ shall not be granted

Stat. de visu terrae, and Essoyne de servitio Domini Regis 12. E. View shall
be granted in a writ of Ward, in a writ of Customs and services, in a writ of
Advowson of a Church (where there be more Churches then one in a Town, and all
of one Saint) in a writ of Dower, and in a nuper obiit.

Rule 32. West. 2, 3. The reversioner may be received in default of tenant for
life, dower, courtesy, etc. If Judgment be given by reddition, or default, the
reversioner shall have a writ of entry after the death of the Ter^or; so shall
the heir also, where the tenant was tenant in tail.

Stat de defensione Juris 20. E. The reversioner desiring to be received before
judgment, shall find surety (as the Court shall allow) to answer the value of
the issues of the tenant from the day of the receipt, till judgment, if it
pass for the demandant.

Sta. 13. R. 2. 17. The like receipt shall be for the reversione upon the faint
pleading of such a tenant, and he shall plead in chief without delay: and the
Judges (by discretion) shall give days of grace between the demandant and him,
that is received, without giving the Common day in plea of land, unless it be
by the demandants assent. Surety for the value shall be found (as before in 20.
El.) as well where the receipt is counter pleaded, as where it is granted.

Gloucester 11. Tenant for years shall be received before judgment rendered, to
say that the Action was by Covin.

Westminster 2. 3 Receipt is given to the Wife in her Husbands life time, if he lose
her land by default, and the tenant, that recovered against the husband, must
maintain his own right.

Rule 33. Westminster. 1. 39. What Counter-pleaders are good in Mortdancestor, nuper
obiit, Intrusion, and such like actions, and also in writs of Entry in the
degrees, etc. See also Stat. de vocat. ad warrant. 20. E. 1. 1. 4. E. 1. 18.
and Westminster. 2. 6.

Rule 48. After Sanctuaries were taken away for sundry offenses by diverse
Statutes at last by the Statute of 21 Jac. 28 They were totally annulled.

Rule 5 3. Gloucester. 3. The heir shall not be barred of his Mothers
Inheritance by the Warranty of the father, being tenant by courtesy, or
alienation without fine in the Mothers life time, excepe he leave Assets.

Rule 68. Westminster. 1. 12. Notorious Felons, which will not put themselves upon an
Inquest at the Kings suite against them, shall be put to a pain fort and dure as
those, that refuse to be tried by the law of the Land.

Rule 70. The Statutes, that concern Abjuration are Stat. de Artic. Cler. 10.
and 15. 21. H. 8 2. and. 21. 2. 8 12. and 24. but Sanctuaries being taken away,
that is now also out of use.

CHAP. 41.
Rule 18. Westminster. 2. 38. In an Assize there shall be but 14 summoned: And men of
the age of 70 years continually languishing, or sick at the time of the summons
shall not be put upon Juries.

Artic. super Cart. 9 and 34. E. 3. 4 Juries shall be made of the next people
of the County.

Stat. 11. H. 6. 1. None dwelling in Stews shall be of a Jury.

Stat. 9. E. 3. 5. A Deed pleaded in a Franchise shall be tried in the County,
where the action is brought.

Stat. 2. 3. E. 6. 24. Upon a stroke or poison in one County, the party dying
in another, an indictment and trial may be in the County where he dies, and
also an appeal sued there, and tried by 12 men of the same County: Likewise the
accessories in one County to a murder or felony in another County, shall be
indicted, arreigned, etc. in the County, where the offense of accessorie is
committed.

Stat. 33. H. 8. 20. The indictment and trial of Lunaticks, confessing
treason, etc.

Stat. 33. H. 8. 23. The trial of Treason, etc. confessed before the Lords of
the Counsel, shall be by commission out of the Chancery.

Stat. 27 H. 8. 4. and 28. H. 8. 13. Treason, Felony, etc. committed within the
Admirals jurisdiction, shall be heard and determined by commission directed to
the Admiral, and three or four others, etc.

Stat. 32. H. 8. 4. Treasons and misprisions of Treason in wales, shall be
tried there by such Commissioners, as the King shall appoint.

Stat. 35. H. 8. 2. Treason, etc. committed out of England, shall be tried in
the Kings Bench, or by Commisssioners, etc.

Stat. 1. and. 2. P. and. M. 10. Trials for Treason shall be according to the
course of the Common Law.

Stat 23. E. 33. No Indictors shall be put on Inquests upon the deliverance of
Indictees of Felonies or Trespass.

westminster. 2. 38 None shall be put in Assize or juries triable in their own
County, but such as have 20 s. per annum freehold, nor in Assize, etc. triable
out of their County, unless they have 40 s. per annum, etc.

Stat. de ponend. in Assis. 21. E. 1. None shll he put in Assize out of their
County, unless they have 5 l. per annum, now within their County, unless they
have 40 s. per annum.

Stat. 2. H. 5 3 Upon trial for the death of a man, and betwixt party and
party (when the debt or damages amount to 40 Marks) he shall have 40 s. per
annum.

Stat. 33. H. 8.13. In Corporations 40 l. in good suffices.

Stat. 2. E. 6 32. The 40 s. yearly value must be inferred in the Venire facias.

Stat 27. El. 6. Such a Jurour shall have 3 l. yearly value; Howbeit these two
lost Statutes extend not to Corporations.

Stat. 27. El. 7. The Jurour shall be returned by some addition, whereby he may
be known.

Stat. 8. H 4 3. every Jurour returned within the County of Middlesex. shall be
called the fourth day of the return.

Stat. 5. E. 3. 10. An Ambidexter shall never be of a Jury more.

Stat. 34. E. 3. 8. The party or any stranger may s^^ him for it.

Stat. 38 E. 3 12. And both the Jurours and the Embraceours, being thereof
attaint. shall pay ten times so much, as they have taken.

Westminster. 2. 30. when and how Assizes etc. shall be taken in the Country: See
also Statutum de finibus levatis 4. 21 E. 1. That Enquests thereof being taken
shall be returned into the Bench and there judgment shall be given thereupon, etc

Stat. Eberac. 3. 12. E. 2. Enquests in Pleas of Land, that require too great
examination, shall be taken i^ Country before a Justice of the place, when e the
plea depends, and a Knight there, or other, etc.

Stat. 42. E. 3. 11. Nisiprius shall not be granted before the name of the
Jurours returned.

Stat. 14. E 3. 16. The directing of Nisi Prius to be tried in the Country.

Stat. 18 El. 12. Trial of Nisi Prius for Middlesex, i^ the term time, or 4
days after.

Rule 19. Stat. ^5. H 8 6. Made perpetual 2 E. 6. 3^ Six sufficient Hundreders
shall be returned upon ever^ Jury.

Stat. 27. El. 6. If two sufficient Hundreders appear in any personal Action it
suffices.

Rule 20. Stat. 7. R. 2. 10. An Assize of novel disseisin, of rent issuing of
tenements in diverse Counties shall be in the Confines of the said Counties.

Rule 22. Stat. 28. E. 3. 3. confirmed by 8. H. 6. 28. In every suit between an
alien and a Denizen (though the King be a party) the one half of a Jury shall
be Aliens; if there be so many in that Visne? and if there be not so many, then
so many as be there, not parties.

Rule 23. Mag Cart. 29 A Peer of the Realm upon an Indictment of Felony or
Treason shall be tried by his Peers.

Stat. 20. H. 6. 9. Duchesses, Baronesses, Countesses, etc. sole or married,
shall be tried (in such cases) as Peers of the Realm.

Rule 37. Stat. 22 H. 8. 14. No person arraigned for petty Treason, Murder, or
Felony, shall be admitted to any peremptory Challenge above the number of
twenty.

Rule 38. Stat. 35. H. 8. 6. made perpetual 2. E. 6. 32, A Tales may be made up
before the Justices of Assize, or Nisi prius, of able persons of the same
County then present, at the prayer of the plaintiff or demandant.

Stat. 4. 5. P. M. 7. So likewise for the King upon request by any authorized
thereunto, or assigned by the Court, or by the Informer, that follows as well
for the King as for himself.

Stat. 14. El. 9. Such a Tales de circumstantibus shall be also granted at the
prayer of the defendant or Advowant

Rule 53. Stat. 21. H. 8. 3. The demand of a thing entire may be abridged
before Verdict, though thereby the writ become false.

Rule 60. Magn. Cart. 28. Wager of Law shall not be addmitted without credible
witnesses.

Stat 5. H. 4 8. In actions of debt upon arrerages of account faining (to the
Intent to put the defendants from their law) that the same was found before
their Apprentices or Servants, Auditors assigned therein, it shall be in the
Judges discretion upon examination of the Attorneis (or whom else they please)
to receive the defendants to their law, or else to try the same by Enquest.

CHAP. 42.
Rule 10, etc. Westminster. 2. 12. In an appeal of the death of a man no Essoin shall
li^ for the Appeallor.

Westminster. 1. 41. In Assize and Juries utrum, after the tenant has appeared, he
shall be no more essoyned so it is also for demandants in an Assize, by Westminster.
^. 28.

westminster. 1. 42. Perceners or Jointenants in a Praecipe against them shall have
but one Essoin: so likewise for a man and his wife by the Stat. of Gloucester,
10.

Stat. 9. E. 3. Stat. 1. 3. In a writ of debt against executors, they shall
have but one Essoin before, and another after appearance.

Westminster. 2. 27. No Essoin is allowed after day given by prece partium.

Marlbr. 13. After a man has put himself upon an Inquest, he shall have but
one Essoin.

wessm. 2. 17. After one has put himself upon an Inquest, an Essoin shall be
allowed him at the next day but never after.

Marlbr. 19. None shall need to swear to warrant (...) Essoin.

Westminster. 1. 43. The Demandant may aver against an Essoyn of being beyond Sea.

Westminster. 2. 17. He may aver that the tenant is not sick, nor in such plight, but
that he come before the Justices, etc.

Stat. 5. E. 3. 7. Essoyn of the Kings service or protection, shall not be
allowed in Writs of Attaint.

Stat. of Essoyns. 12. E. 3. 2. See many particular Cases where Essoyns lie not.

Rule 16. Stats de Anno Bissextili 21. H. 3. The day increasing in the
Leap-year, and that going before, shall be accounted for one day.

Dies communes in Banco, 51. H. 3. Days given in Writs shall have 9 returns.

Dies communes in Banco, and 32. H 8. 21. Common days shall be given in real
actions 9 returns; In Writs of Dower 5 returns.

Malbr. 12. In Dower, unde nihil habet, 4 or 6 days shall be given in the
year: In Assizes of Darrein presentment or Quare impedit, from 15 days to 15
days or from 3 weeks to 3 weeks, as the place shall be near or far.

Stat. 5. E. 3. 6. and 7. In an Attaint 5 days at least.

Rule 17. Stat. 1. E. 6. 7. By death of the King, no Action, Suit, Bill, or
plaint, shall be discontinued, or put without day, but shall proceed as if the
King had lived.

Rule 39. Stat. 14. E. 3. 14. The manner of search in suit by petition.

Rule 43. 27. El. 7. A Iuror shall not be returned without a true addition, of
the place where he dwells, and some other addition, whereby he may be known.

Stat. 35. H. 8. 6. What issues shall be returned upon Jurors.

Stat, 2, 3. E. 6 32. If the principal Jury appear not fully at the
nisi-prius, those that make default, shall forfeit their issue, though the Jury
be made up, de Circumstantibus.

CHAP: 43.
Rule 20. STat, de consultatione, 24. E. 1. A Consultation shall be awarded by
the Chancellor or chief Justice, upon sight of the Libel, at the Instance of
the Plaintiff.

Stat. 50. E. 3. 4. Upon a consultation the Ecclesiastical Judge may proceed,
notwithstanding any other prohibition, so the matter of the Libel be not
enlarged or changed.

Rule 23. Westminster. 1. 15. Persons outlawed, and such as have abjured the Realm,
Provers, and such as be taken with the manner, Ptison breakers, Theevers,
openly defamed and known, Appellees by proven (during the life of such provers)
house burners, Counterfeiters of the Kings Seal and coin, Excommunicate
persons, manifest offenders and Traitors are not bailable, etc. other Statutes
that concern Bail are 3. H. 7. 3. 1. 2, P. M. 13. and 3, P. M. 10.

CHAP. 44.
Rule 3. West. 2. 5. When the parson of any Church is disturbed to demand his
Tithes in the next Parish, by an Indicavit, the Patron shall have a Wtit to
demand the Advowson. See Stat. pro Clero, 18. E. 3. 7. and. 47.

Rule 6. Stat. 25. E. 3.18. The Lord may seize the body of a Villain,
notwithstanding that a writ de liberate probanda, be hanging.

Rule 10 Stat. 5, E. 3. 7. No protection shall be allowed in Writs of Attaint.

Rule 12. See Stat. 13. R. 26. The Statute of Protection, and 1. R. 2. 8.

Rule 14. A Creditor shall have an Action and Judgment against the Kings
Debtor, notwithstanding such a Protection, but not execution; unless he take
upon him to pay the King, and then he shall have judgment and execution of
both debts, as well of that due to the King, as to himself.

Rule 16. West. 2. 17. He may aver that he is not sick, etc. vide supra, Cap
42. Ru. 10.

CHAP 45.
Rule 7 STat. 14. El 8. Every fraudulent recovery against Tenant for life,
whereupon the Tenant for life is vouched, shall be void against the Reversioner
or him in remainder, unless it be by his own consent appearing of Record.

Stat. 21. H. 8. 15. Termers for years, or such as are in by Execution of
Statute staple, Statute Merchant, or Elegit may falsify recoveries for their
own term only as Tenants of the Freehold might have done at the Common Law.

Rule 13. 25. H. 8. 3, revived by 5. 6, E. 6 10. One arraigned upon an
Indictment of petty Treason, wilful burning of houses, murder, robbery, or
other felony, according to the meaning of the same Statute, if he stand mute of
malice or forward mind, or challenge peremptorily above 20, or will not
directly answer, shall lose his Clergy, in such manner as he should, if upon the
arraignment he had been found guilty.

Stat. pro Clero. 25. E. 3. 4. None convict of petty Treason shall have it.

Stat. 8. El. 6. Not in Rape, Ravishment, or Burglary, nor in the carnal
abusing of a woman within ten years of age.

Stat. 25. H. 8, 6. and. 5. El. 17. Nor in buggery.

Stat. 5. E. 6 9. Not for robbing a dwelling house, booth, or tent, etc.

Stat. 4. 5. P. M. 4. Nor for accessaries before the fact in petty treason,
murder or robbery in an house, or in or near the high way; or for the wilful
burning of dwelling house, or a barn with Grain.

Stat. 25. H. 8. 3. and. 5. E. 6. 10: He that does a Robbery or Burglary in one
County, and is taken with the goods so robbed or stolen in another County, shall
lose his Clergy there, as he should do, where the Robbery or Burglary was
committed.

Stat. 4. H. 7. 13. and, 1. E. 6. 11. It is grantable but once to one person,
unless he be within orders.

Stat. 4. H. 7. 13. He that askeh his Clergy the second time, shall at a
certain day bring his Letters of order or a Certificate.

Stat. 4. H 7. 18. He that has his Clergy shall be marked in the hand, viz.
with a M if he were convict of Murder, with a T if he were convict of other
felony.

Stat. 1. E. 6. 12. A Lord of the Parliament in all Cases, where Clergy lies
at the Common Law, or is restrained by Statute, shall upon his prayer be
adjudged as a Clerk convict, though he cannot read.

Stat. 1. El. 4. and. 18. El 7. After purgation he shall be put to answer to
any offense (committed before his admission to the Clergy) whereupon Clergy is
not allowable, and whereof before he was not indicted and acquitted, convicted,
or attainted, and pardoned, and shall be demeaned in all things, as if he had
never been admitted to his Clergy.

Stat. 18. El. 7. He that is allowed Clergy, shall not be deliverd to the
Ordinary, but after burning in the hand shall be forthwith delivered by the
Justices out of prison; yet for further correction they may detain him in
prison, so as it be not above a year.

Rule 24. Westminster. 2. 12. One being acquitted upon an Appeal or Indictment of
felony, may have the abettors inquired, and have a judicial writ for damages
against them, if the appellant be not sufficient.

Stat. 8. H. 6. 10. An Action upon the case given for him, that is duly acquit
by Verdict against every procurer of any judgment, or appeal of treason,
felony, or trespass: and like process shall be therein, as in a writ of
trespass, vi and armis.

Rule 37. Westminster. 2. 18. 13. E. 1. Where debt is recovered or knowledged in the
Kings Court, or damages awarded, it shall be from henceforth in the election of
the Plaintiff to have a writ of Fieri facias unto the Sheriff, to levy the
debt upon the lands and chattels of the debtor, or that the Sheriff shall
deliver to him all the chattels of the debtor, (except oxen and beasts of his
Plough) and the one half of his land until the debt be levied upon a reasonable
price or extent. And if he be put out of the land, he shall recover it again by
a writ of Novel disseisin, and after that by a writ of redisseisin. if need be.

Action Burnel. 11. E. 1. A debt acknowledged to a Merchant before the Major of
London, York, or Bristol, or before a Major or Clerk, (appointed thereunto by
the King) shall be enrolled; and if it be not paid at the day, the debtors
movables shall be prized and sold in satisfaction by the Major if he have any
within his jurisdiction, else by writ out of the Chancery upon a Certificate of
the Recognizance thither. The Apprisors are to take them at the price, if they
apprize them too high if the debtor have not movables sufficient he shall be
imprisoned, until, etc. The like processes against pledges, in default of
sufficient movables of the principal.

Stat. de Mercatoribus 13. E. 1. A debt acknowledged to a Merchant before the
Major of London, or chief warden of the Town, which the King shall appoint, or
other sufficient men (when they cannot attend) and before a Clerk; which the
King shall assign, shall be enrolled, and if it be not paid at the day, the
debtor if he be a Lay man shall be imprisoned by the Major, until etc. if he
be within their power, else by writ out of the Chancery, upon Certificate of
the Recognisance thither: And if he agree not with the Creditor within a
quarter of a year after, then all the lands which were the debtors (the day of
the Recognisance made) and also his goods shall be delivered to the creditor
upon a reasonable extent. And of these lands so delivered the Conisee, being
ousted shall have an assize or redisseisin.

The writ out of Chancery shall be returnable before the Justices of either
Bench, and upon a non est inventus returned, or that he is a Clerk, writs to
all the Sheriffs, where he has lands or goods, shall go forth to deliver the
same upon reasonable extent, and to what Sheriff he will to take his body, The
like Process shall be against the pledges, if the money be not paid at the day: If
the debtor or pledges die, the Creditor shall have execution upon the lands of
the heir as at his full age. The Stat. of the Staple 27. E. 3. Stat. 28 the
Major of the staple shall take recognisance, of debt before himself, and the
Constables of the Staple, whereupon (default of payment being made the debtors
body shall be imprisoned, and his goods sold in satisfaction of the debt (if
they be within the Staple) otherwise upon a Certificate in the Chancery, a writ
shall go out from thence to imprison his body, and seize his lands and goods,
which shall be returned into the Chancery and execution thereupon in all
respects, as in the Statute-Merchant, save that the debtor shall have no
advantage of the quarter of a Year.

Stat. 5. H. 4. 12. a Statute being once showed in the Common Place, and the
process afterward discontinued, yet execution may afterward be awarded
without showing it again.

Stat. 11. H. 6. 10. He that is in Prison upon a Recognisance, shall not be
delivered out of prison upon a scire facias against the party, and surety found
to the King alone, but shall find sureties severally as well to the King, as
to the other Party.

Stat. 23. H. 8 6. Either of the Chief Justices, or (in their absence out of
the term) the Major of the Staple of Westminster with the Recorder of London
may take Recognisances, and they shall be executed in all respects as a Statute
Staple.

Stat. 27. El. 4 Every Statute Staple or Merchant, not brought to the Clerk of
Recognisances, within 4 months next after the acknowledgement thereof, shall be
void against all persons, their heirs, successors, executors, administrators,
and assigns only, which for good consideration shall after the acknowledging
thereof purchase the land or any part thereof liable thereunto, or any rent,
lease or profit out of the same.

Stat. 32. H. 8. 5. Lands lawfully delivered in execution upon a judgment,
Statute Merchant, Staple, or Recognisance, being evicted without any fraud or
default in the tenant before he have levied the whole debt, and damages, and
Recoverer and Recognisee shall have a scire facias out of the same Court, where
execution was awarded, returnable there full forty days after the date: and
thereupon a new writ of execution (of the nature of the former) shall issue
forth to levy the rest of his debt and damages, if the defendant make default,
or show no good matter in bar.

Mag. Cart. 8. 9. H. 3. The King shall not take the lands or rents of the
debtor, if he have sufficient chattels.

Mag. Cart. 18. The goods of the debtor may be attached after his death by the
view of lawful men, that nothing be meddled with till the Kings debt paid.

Stat. 33. H. 8. 39. All obligations to the King shall be of the force of a
Statute staple.

Rule 48. Westminster. 2. 45. 13. E. 1. For all things recorded before the Kings
Justices, or contained in fines (as contracts, Covenants, Obligations,
Services, or Customs, acknowledged, or any other things enrolled) a writ of
execution shall be within the year; But after the year a Scire facias: The like
also is of a Mesne, who by judgment or recognisance is bound to acquit.

CHAP. 47.
Rule 9 Stat. 9. R. 2. 3. If tenant for life, or in tail after possibility of
issue extinct be impleaded, and judgment pass against him, the reversioner or
remainder man at the time of the judgment, shall have writ of error upon an
error in the record of the same judgment, as well in the life of such a tenant
as after his death: And if at the time of reversing the judgment the tenant
for life, etc. be alive, he shall be restored, etc. his possession with the
mean profits, and the reversioner, etc. to the arrerages of the rent, if any be
due: But if the tenant for life, etc. be dead at the time of reversing the
judgment, then the reversioner, etc, shall be restored to the possession with
the issues after the death of the tenant for life, etc. and also to the
arrerages due in his life: see the Marqu. of Winch. case. Co. 3. 4.

Stat. 31. E. 3. 12. Error in the Exchequer shall be reversed before the
Chancellor and Treasurer, taking to them such justices, and other sage persons
as they shall think fit, and afterward the roll shall be sent back into the
Exchequer, to make execution.

Stat. 31. El. 2. If either the Lord Chancellor or Lord Treasurer, or both the
Chief Justices come at the day of adjournment, in the Writ of error in the
Exchequer, it shall be no discontinuance.

Stat. 32. H. 8. 30. Made perpetual, 2. E. 6. 32. After a Verdict tried by 12
men or more in any suit in a Court of record, no Judgment shall be stayed or
reversed for any mispleading, lack of color, insufficient pleading
miscontinuance, discontinuance, misconveying of Process, misjoyning of, Issue
lack of warrant of Attorney for the party against whom the Issue is tried, or
any other default or negligence of the parties, their Counselors, or
Attourneys.

Stat. 18. El. 14. After a Verdict of 12 men or more in any suit in Court of
Record, Judgment shall not be stayed or reversed for default of form, or lack
of form, false Latin, variance for the register, etc. in any writ original or
judicial: Declaration, Bill, or Plaint, or for want of any writ original or
judicial, or by reason of any imperfect or insufficient return, or for want of
any warrant of Attorney, or by reason of any manner of default in process, upon
or after Aid prayer or Voucher.

Stat. 27. El. 5. After Demurrer joined or entered in any suit in Court of
Record, the judges shall proceed and give Judgment according to right, and the
matter in law appearing to them, without regarding any imperfection, defect, or
want of form in any writ, Return, Plaint, Declaration, or other pleading
whatsoever, except those only, which the party specially and particulary shall
set down and express together with his Demurrer: And no Judgment to be given
shall be reversed by writ of error, or by any such imperfection, defect, or
want of form, a^ aforesaid, except as is before excepted.

The two last Satutes extend not to suits of Felony or Murder, nor to the
indictment or presentment of them; or of treason, nor to the Process of any of
them, nor to any suit upon any popular or penal Staute.

Rule. 16 Stat. 27. E. 8. An error in the Kings Bench in an action of debt,
detinue, covenant, account, action upon the Case, Ejectione firmae, or trespass
first commenced there (where the King is no party) may at the parties choice be
reversed in the Exchequer chamber before the Justices of the Common place, and
such Barons of the Exchequer as are of the Coife, or six of them at least,
other then for error concerning the jurisdiction of the Kings Bench, or want of
form in a writ, Return, Plaint, Bill, Declaration, Pleading, Process, Verdict,
or proceeding whatsoever: And upon the judgment affirmed or reversed, the
Record shall be sent back into the Kings Bench, to proceed and award Execution
thereupon the party grieved with such reversall or affirmation, may have a writ
of error in the Parliament in such sort as is now used upon erroneous
judgments in the Kings Bench.

Stat. 31. El. 1. Any three of the Justices and Barons (if the full number come
not) may receive Writs of Error, award Process, prefix days for the
continuance of Writs of Error etc.

Rule. 12. West, 1 37. 3. E. 1. An Attaint is given in pleas of Land, or of
Freehold and of things that touch Freehold.

Stat. 1. E 3. Stat. 1. 6. It is given in Writs of Trespass, as well upon the
principal, as upon the damages.

Stat. 5. E. 3. 6 and. 7. In attaints no Essoin or Protection shall be allowed:
and a nisi prius is given in such Writs, as well as in others.

Stat. 28. E. 3. 8. An Attaint is given in trespass as well upon a Bill, as
upon a Writ, without having regard to the quantity of the Damages.

Stat. 34. E. 3. 7 An Attaint is granted in all pleas, as well real as
personal.

Stat. 9. R. 2. 3. It is given to the Reversioner during the life of his Tenant
for life upon a recovery against him, with restitution to the Tenant that left
his possession, together with the mean profits, and of the arrearages to the
reversioner, but if the tenant, that so lost, be dead, or were of covin with
the recoveree; restitution shall be made to the reversioner of the possession
it self with the mean profits arrerages, after such death or recovery by
covin; saving to the tenant his action by scire facias, if he will traverse the
Covin.

Stat. de Attinctis. 13. E. 2. If the petty Jury appear not at the first
distress against them, or a nihil be returned, the grand Jury shall be taken by
their default.

Stat. 23, H. 8. 3. Made perpetual by 13: El 25. In any suit before Justices
of Record (not concerning life) an Attaint is given against the Petty Jury, and
every of them, and the party himself; the process against the Petty Jury and
Grand Jury, shall be summons and Resummons, and distress infinite.

Open proclamation shall be made in the Court, where the distress is awarded,
more then 15 days before the return of the distress; and the Grand jury shall
be taken in default of the Defendant, or petty jurors, or any of them.

If any of the petty jury appear then the Plaintiff shall assign the false
Oath of the first verdict untruly given, whereunto the petty jury shall have no
answer if they be the same persons, and the Writ, Process, Return, and
Assignment be good and lawful, (except the plaintiff in the same attaint has
before been nonsuit or discontinued his suit or has had a former judgment
therein) but only that they made a true oath which issue shall be tried by 24.
of the Grand jury; and the party shall plead that they gave a good Verdict, or
any other matter which shall be a sufficient bar of the attaint:
Notwithstanding which plea, the grand Jury, shall without delay enquire of the
truth of the Virdict: such a day shall be given in a Process, as in a writ of
Dower, and no Essoyn or protection allowable.

By the death of the party, or one of the petty Jury the attaint shall not
abate, nor be deferred against the rest, as long as two of the petty Jury shall
live.

Every attaint shall be in the Kings Bench or Common place, and the Nisi-prius
granted upon the distress by the discretion of the Justices. Every of the
petty Jury may appear and answer by attorney. The Nonsuit or release of one,
when their be diverse plaintiffs or defendants in an Attaint shall not
prejudice.

Every one of the grand Jury must have 20 Marks apeice Land of freehold out of
ancient demesne, but if the value of the thing in suit be under the value of 40
l. then 5 Marks a year, or 100 Marks worth of goods suffices: For default of
such sufficient Jurors within the same County, a Tales shall be awarded unto the
next.

Stat. 11. E. 6. 4. The plaintiff shall recover Costs and Damages against the
Juror, or defendant, that pleads a feigned plea in delay.

FINIS.
A SUMMARY OF THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND. As it stood in force, before it was
altered by Statute or Acts of PARLIAMENT. Extracted (for the most part) out of
the French and English Copies of Sir HENRY FINCH, Knight. his Learned Treatise of
the LAW. And digested into certain Tablets for the help and delight o such
Students as affect METHOD. By E. W.

Methodus Memoriae Dux and Fulcrum. LONDON, Printed Anno Salutis, 1655.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
THE Science of the Common Law of England, has not only been in former times,
but even at this day, is accounted so Abstruse and Intricate, that it has
always seemed an Impossibility to reduce it to method: Howbeit, our learned
Author in his Treatise of the Law, has not only clothed it with a Logical
method, but with such an exact one, as may be paralleled with (if not extolled
above that of) Wollebius for Theology, Ramus for Geometry, Keekerman,
Alstedius, and other modern Writers, for Logic, Ethics, Physics, politics,
Mathematiques, etc. So as the Student having treasured up in his memory the
Common places of Law held forth in these Tables, together with their coherence
and dependence one upon another, may be thereby furnished in all the general
and necessary titles of Law, whereunto he may aptly refer any Case he meets
with, especially, having also before hand, by perusing the Treatise at large,
acquainted himself with the Definitions, Distributions, affections, Rules and
Examples, respectively belonging to ea h several Title, whereby he may more
perfectly understand the nature of them. Besides, if the Text be not read with
these Tablets, he will meet with diverse things in them which are now abrogated
by Statute, and so not law at this day, as Sanctuaries, which are now annulled by
21. Jac. 28. diverse Offenses (before) Petty Treason, now by statute made high
Treason, and the like. All which is left to his industry and discretion; the
Scope and design of this Summary being only to show him the Harmonicall frame
of the Original common law before it was altered by statute, Acts of
Parliament, and other Constitutions of State, according to the caution before
in the Title Page premised.

TABLE 1.
Of the Common Law of England observe 1. The Circumstances, viz. The Place
where it is used, viz. throughout the Realm of England, divided into Counties,
Hundreds, and Towns, within which there are diverse usage, differing from the
common Law, called Customs. The persons who are to use it, and they are to be
considered As one entire Body The King His Subjects. Barons Commons


As particular Persons Natural persons, as every man Bodies Politic At the
Com. Law The King alone, and by himself considered. The Rector of a Church or
Parson.
Grown of latter time, Temporal, as Major and Communalty, etc. Spiritual
Regular, as Abbot and Covent, etc. Secular, as Bishop and Chapter, etc.





2. The parts, See Tab 2. 3. The common Affection, viz. action Tab. 2^.
TABLE 2.
The parts of the Common Law are two, The One concerns Possessions, whereof
consider The General affections 1. To Possessions this is general, that they
may pass by Grant. Exchange. Prescription.
2. Sundry men possessing the same thing by purchase, are Joint Tenants, who
possess by the same Title. Tenants in common, who possess by several Titles.
3. A possession is either Restrictive, upon Limitation, which cease upon
doing or not doing of something. Condition, which is only defeasable upon the
doing or not doing of something.
Absolute, which is neither upon limitation or condition.
4 Tab 3.
The Species, or several kinds, Tab. 4.
The other, the punishment of offense, Tab. 12.

TABLE 3.
4. Possessions are either in Possession, viz. such as one does enjoy. Action,
touching which consider 1. How it arises, and that is in respect of a Right,
when wrong was done before. Title, when no wrong was done.
2. The Rules which concern it 1. A thing in action cannot be granted, but to
him in possession, and that by Release, which is the passing of the Grantors
Interest. Confirmation, which is the ratifying of the Grantees possessions.
2. The grant of a thing in action, and of such things in possession, as cannot
pass by livery of the hand, must be by Deed, viz. Deed Pol, which is the only
deed of the Grantor. Indenture, which is the mutual deed of both, and makes an
Estopel to both parties.




TABLE 4.
The several kinds of Possessions, and so a Pos. is An Hereditament whereof
consider The several Estates, viz. Particular, viz. Uncertain At sufferance,
when after lawful occupation he continues possession without Authority. At
will According to the custom, as a Copyholder. At pleasure, as a bare Tenant at
will.

Certain, which is also called a Term, whereof consider The dependants
Remainder, which is the residue of an Estate at the same time appointed over.
Reversion, which is the residue of an estate, not at the same time appointed
over. These pass with Attornment.

The several kinds. For years. For life In Deed after actual Seisin. In Law
before Entry. For his own life. For another life and these are Freehold





Inheritance, Tab. 5.
The several kinds, Tab. 6.
Chattel. Tab. 11.

TABLE 5.
Inheritance, whereof consider The estate called fee-simple, which is
Conditional, when an Hereditament is limited to the heirs of the body:
hither Frank-marriage may be referred. Absolute, which is a Fee-simple to one
and his heirs whatsoever.
The Incidents, Dower whereby a woman has the thirds in severalty. Tenancy by
the courtesy of England.
The diverse manners of possessing it, viz. in Deed. Law.


TABLE 6.
The several kinds of an Hereditament, and so it is Common, as A Teneme^t
which is a possession holden, and it is Land, which is a Tenement in manual
occupation, and here prescription has no place. An Advowson, which is the
Interest of presenting to a Church.
A bare Hereditament, Tab. 7.
Prerogative, Tab. 10.

TABLE 7:
A bare Hereditament, which concerns Land, and so it is Leviable by distress,
as A Seigniory which is a Service, whereby Land is holden, and such Services
are Common to all certain Estates Fealty. Rent service: Hither also may be
referred Frankalmoigne, and Divine Service.
Proper to Inheritance General Homage. Suit of Court.
Particular, whereby Lands are distinguished. The Services themselves, Soccage:
Knight-se^vice. In the Lords lifetime, as reasonable Aid. After his death, as
Wardship and Releif.




A Rent charge, which is a Rent with liberty to distrain, upon the Grant or
Reservation of a certain Rent to be issuing out of Land.
Such as cannot be distrained for, Tab. 8.
The persons, Tab. 9.

TABLE 8.
A bare Hereditament concerning Land, for which no distress can be taken, is
Rent-seck, which is a Rent without liberty to distrain. Common, which is a
profit to be taken in another land: whither also may be referred Estovers,
Houseboot. etc. Also a way over Land, liberty to Fish, Hunt, draw water, or the
like.

TABLE 9.
A bare Hereditament, that concerns the person, is Of the person himself, as a
Villain. By reason of the person, viz. An Annuity, which is a yearly Rent to
be had of the person of the Grantor. A Corody, which is a portion for ones
sustenance or clothing. An Office, which is a duty of attendance upon a charge.


TABLE 10.
A Prerogative hereditament, which is derived from the Kings Prerogative, and
is termed a Franchise, being a Royal privilege in the hands of a Subject; as
Markets, Fairs, Toll, and whatsoever liberties else, which (created at first by
the Kings special Grant, or of their own nature belonging to him) are given to
a common person to have an estate in: Of this sort also are Execution and
return of Writs, forfeited Recognizances, Fines, Post-fines, Issues,
Amerciaments, and other Green wax money within such a Precinct or Liberty. Also
power there to make a Coroner, Clerk of the Market, and other Officers; to have
therein Treasure Trove, Deodands, Wreck of the Sea, Waifes, Estrayes, the goods
of Felons, and outlawed persons, Royal mines, Royal Fish; to keep a Leet, to
take Conusance of Fines, to hold plea of debts and damages Sans sum, and the
like.

TABLE 11.
A Chattel, wherein their cannot be several Estates whereof consider The common
Affection, viz. That all ones own Chattels (whether in possession or action, as
debts, etc. may be devised by Testament, which is the appointment of an
Executor to administer them for him after his death. The several kinds, and so
it is Real, as a Term for years, or Wardship. Personal to which diverse things
belong. In general Bailment, which is the delivery of goods To keep, when only
the custody is committed to him, and that is. A simple bailment, when he
receives them to keep for another. A Pledge, when he receives them for
another thing had of him at the time.
To employ, as when the Bailee has the things to use for another profit.
Contract, which is a mutual agreement for the very property of Personal things.

In particular, viz. for the Interest of things uncertain, as Accord, which is
an agreement of the parties themselves upon satisfaction executed. Arbitrament
which is an Award of satisfaction by others.




TABLE 12.
Punishment of Offenses, which are Without force, as Trespass upon the Case
Common, as Misuses, when by wrong one is endamaged, as by slander, or the like,
amongst which serve Disturbance, which is the hindering of that, which belongs
to one to do. Nusanee, which is an annoyance done to ones Hereditament.
Deceit, when the damage grows by an undue slight, or the like. Conspiracy
to do one wrong, or the like.
Offenses in the nature of Trespasses upon the Case, which are (by the Kings
Prerogative) punishable like to them, viz. by amerciament, as Nonsuit in an
action; Fault in the Original Writ he brings; Or (by the Sheriff) in the return
thereof, making default, when he should appear; And whatsoever other Offenses
(not being with force) which offer no direct injury to a common person.
Real wrong, Tab. 13.
Coupled with force, Tab. 14.

TABLE 13.
A real wrong is Discontinuance, when one having an Estate Tail or Fee-simple
in another right, makes a large Estate of the Land, then he may. Ouster, when
one is put out of his Freehold Indeed, as by Disseisin of Land when one is put
or held out by a forcible Entry. Detainer
Rent, as In every rent by Incloser. Forstaller.
In rent service and rent charge by Rescous. Replevin.
In rentcharge and rent-seck, by denyer.

Usurpation, when the Church becomes full by the presentment of a wrong Patron.
In Law, as by Intrusion, which is after the death of the Tenant for life.
Abatement, which is after the death of one that had the Inheritance.



TABLE 14.
Wrongs coupled with force, and they are Not punishable by death, Trespasses,
and they touch Possessions, as in Goods, which is the wrongful taking of them
with pretense of Title. Land, when it is done upon an actual possession thereof.
The person, and so Trespasses are With pretense of violence, as Menaces, which
are threatening words of beating one, or the like, Assault, which is an
unlawful setting upon ones person.
With violence indeed, as False Imprisonment, which is an unlawful restraint
of liberty. Bodily hurts, and they are Outward violencies; Battery, which is
the wrongful beating of one. Maime, which is the wrongful spoiling of a member
defensable in fight.
Rape, which is the carnal abusing of a woman against her will.



Offenses against the Public, Tab. 15.
Punishable by death, Tab. 19.

TABLE 15.
Offenses against the public (termed Contempts) may be committed either
Against the King, as 1. To disobey the Kings Command By his Writ. By his
Proclamation.
2. Disobey any thing ordained by Statute.
Against the Commonwealth, viz. against 1. The peace thereof, as Riots, Routs,
unlawful Assemblies, breach of the Peace and Good behavior, false news,
Barreting, Ev^s-dropping, etc. Also all Trespasses with force, for which a man
may be both indicted and prosecuted at Law by the Suit of the Party. 2. The
strengh, as to send aid to the Kings Enemies, to go beyond Sea, without the
Kings License, etc. 3. The Justice, Tab. 16. 4. The Wealth, Tab. 17. 5. The
Passages, Tab. 18.


TABLE 16.
3. Public Offenses against the Justice of the Commonwealth, as 1: Perverting
of Justice, as corrupt Judges, who pervert Justice; corrupt or negligent
Officers, Enditors, corrupt Jurors, Extortion; Escapes, negligent and
voluntary, etc. 2: All force against the Justice of the Realm, as Rescous of a
Felon, or others; Affairs in disturbance of Justice, to go armed in the Kings
Palace: To strike in Westminster Hall, for which he shall loose his right hand;
so shall he that strikes a Juror in the presence of the Justices, and be also
committed to perpetual Imprisonment. 3. Conventicles, which comprehend
conspirators and Confederators, Maintenance, Champerty, etc. 4: Offenses in
favor of Malefactors, as Misprisions of Treason or Felony, which for Treason
is perpetual Imprisonment: Theftboot, when a man receives his goods from a
Thief, with purpose to favor and maintain him; here the punishment is Ransom
and Imprisonment, not assisting the Sheriff, Constable, or other Officer, etc.
5: Contempt of Justice, as he that flies for Treason, or Felony: He that in
case o^ Treason, or Felony tarries the Exigent, He that suffers himself to be
out-la^ed, etc. 6. Falsifying of Justice, as Perjury, Subornation, Forgery,
Embracery: all other Falsehood in matter of Justice etc.

TABLE 17.
4. Public Offenses against the wealth of the Commonwealth, and that may be
In the course of Trade, as 1. To transport the Commodities of the Realm without
the Kings License, and paying his Custom, Fore-stallers, Regradors, and
Ingrossers, Monopolies, Conspiracies of Merchants, false Weights and Measures,
etc. 2: Uttering corrupt Victuals. 3. Usury, and all Oppression.
Out of the course of Trade, as Depopulation, burning of Houses, Barns, etc.

TABLE 18.
5. Public Offenses against the Passages of the Commonwealth, as Bridges,
Cawseys, Highways, or Streets broken down or dug up; Unto which place may
also be referred Common Nusances, Purprestures, etc. Such Nusances any man may
abate: And as to Nusances, there is a Writ in the Register for any person that
will sue, when the VVayes, Streets, or Lanes, of any Town, City, or Borough
Corporate, or the Suburbs thereof are full of Dirt, Soil, or the like, whereby
infection may be caused. And this Writ may be directed to the Mayor, or the
like, to cause them to be cleansed and kept clean. There is also another Writ
for removing a Leper, to prevent Infection; both which Writs will come
hereafter to be mentioned in their proper places.

TABLE 19.
Wrongs or offenses punishable by death, termed also offenses against the
Crown, are F^lony, which is, Bare, Felony where consider The offense it self,
which is single, as Stealth, which is the wrongful taking of Goods, without
pretense of Title. Manslaughter Chance medley, which is Man slaughter, without
former malice. Murder, which is Man slaughter upon former malice.

Mixed, as Robery, which is stealth from ones person by assault in the Highway.
Burglary, which is the night breaking of a house, with an intent to steal or
kill, though nothing be stolen, or any body killed.

Other public Offenses occasioned thereby, as breaking of Prison, wilful
escape of a Felon, etc.
Petty Treason, Tab. 20.
High Treason, Tab. 21.

TABLE 20.
Petty treason, the punishment whereof is burning, and it is General against
mortal Creatures. Petty Treason (properly so calcalled) which is the killing
of one to whom private obedience is due. Sodomy, which is a carnal copulation
against nature.
against God. Heresy, which is an offense, immediately bent against the
Majesty of God. Sorcery, which is a consulting with Devils, and contains
under it Conjuring, Necromancy, and the like:

More particular in respect of the Kings Prerogative, as counterfeiting his
Coin, Seals, etc. to acknowledge any foreign Potentate, to bring false money
into the Realm, counterfeit to the money of England.

TABLE 21.
High Treason, which is an offense of the Crown directly bent against the
State; also to kill the Chancellor, Treasurer, a Justice of either Bench, a
Justice in Air, of Assis, o^ Oyer and Te^miner, being in their places, and
doing their Offices, is High Treason.

TABLE 22.
The common affection, viz. Action, whereof consider The places, where it is
transacted, viz. in Courts of Record, as The Parliament. Courts that have
ordinary jurisdiction, and they are General, whose jurisdiction extends
throughout the Realm. Circumstances, as Place, where they are holden, viz. at
Westminster. Time when viz in the Term of Michaelmas. Hillary. Easter. Trinity.

The several kinds Chancery. Kings Bench. Common place Exchequer.

Within some County. Through the whole County, The Sheriffs turn. The Coroners
Court.
Within Liberties, as A Leet. A Court of Pipowders.

Granted by the Kings Letters Patents. Courts by the Kings Commissions. Courts
by Charter in Corporations, etc.


Court Barons. The Lord, Of a Manor. Of an Hundred.
The Sheriffs, called the County Court:

The Parts, Tab: 23.

TABLE 23.
The parts of an Action are The suit, which has 2. parts, viz. The beginning
of the suit which has 2. parts, The first matter of the suit For every man By
Writ out of the Chancery, which is Original, which concerns Common Pleas, and
so it is Real, whereof consider The Common affections, as Tab. 24. The severa^
kinds, Ta. 25
Personal, Tab. 31
Appeals, Tab. 33.
Commissionall, Tab: 34.
By Plaint or Bill, Tab. 35.
For the King, Tab. 36.
The Original Process, Tab, 37.
The Proceeding, Tab. 40.
The Judgment, Tab: 46.

TABLE 24.
The common affections, as Possessory to recover a Possession In himself,
descended from his Ancestor.
In the Right to recover a Possession mixed in the right In himself, descended
from his Ancestor.


TABLE 25.
The several kinds of a real Original Writ, and so it is A Praecipe A
Praecipe quod reddat A Plea of Land A Writ of Entry, the several kinds thereof
will best appear, if we consider Against whom it is brought, viz. Against the
first party, In the degrees In the Per. In the Per and Cui:

How is grows, viz. without wrong at the first Upon the determination of the
first Estate, viz. by reason of A particular estate ended Ad terminum qui
preteriit. Entry, ad Communem Legem
A Condition broken, as Causa Matamonii praelocuti.
Upon disability of the person that made it Dum fuit infra aetatem. Dum fuit
non compos mentis.

Upon a wrong, Tab. 26.

A writ showing the Demandants Title, Tab. 27.
Another real praecipe quod reddat, Tab. 28.
A Praecipe quod faciat, Tab. 29.
A Si secerit tesecurum, Tab. 30.

TABLE 26.
Upon a wrong, viz. Upon a discontinuance: For the recovery of a woman's
Inheritance or Freehold, after her husbands alienation, and Death, as Cui i^
vita, and for he^ Heir, a sur cui i^ vita: Divorce, as a C^ ante divorcium:
For the Successor of a Bishop, or, etc. after the discontinuance of his
Predecessor, as a (sine assensu capituli:
An Ouster Upon an Intrusion, as a Writ of Intrusion for him in Reversion, or
Remainder: Upon a Disseisin, as a Writ of Entry in the Quibus, being a Writ in
the nature of 21 Assise:


TABLE 27.
A Writ showing the Demandants Title, which is Possessorie as a Writ of Ayel,
after the death of the Grandfather, or Grandmother: Besayell, after the death
of the great Grandfather, or great Grandmother: Cosinage, after the death of
the great, great Grandfather, or great, great Grandmother, etc:
In the right A Writ of right in his nature, as a Formedon in Remainder.
Reverter:
Writ of Escheat: Writ of Dower, unde nihil habet:
A Precipe in Capite, for the mere right of Lands holden in chief:


TABLE 28.
Another real Praecipe quod reddat, in respect of a Seigniory, as A Writ of
Right of Ward, to recover the Wardship: A Writ of Right for Disclaimer, for the
Lord to prove the Lands to be holden of him, when the Tenant in a Court of
Record disclaimeth to hold of him:

TABLE 29.
A real Praecipe quod faciat, which is either to recover an Heredittament, and
this is either In respect of a Seigniory: A Writ, de consuetudinibus and
servitiis. Secta ad molendinum.
To recover some other Herediament: A Quare Impedit. A Quod permittat: A Curia
claudenda.

Some real thing that concerns an Hereditament, as A Writ of Covenant, as to
levy a Fine of Lands, etc. Writs in the nature of a Covenant real A Writ of
Mesne. A Warrantia Cartae:



TABLE 30.
A real Si fecerit te securum. An Assise Of his own possession, as An Assise
of Novell D^seisin, An Assise of Nuisance.

Of his Ancestors Possession, as an Asise of Mortdancestor. Either of his own
or his Ancestors posession, as an Assise of Darrein presentment.
A Juris utrum, for a Parson or Vicar, upon his Predecessors alienation, Others
Such as be between Privies in blood; as A Partitione fa^enda. A Nuper obiit:
A Quo jure, to try for Common:

TABLE 31.
A personal Original Writ is also A Praecipe A Praecipe quod reddat Debt, and
a Writ of Annuity. Detinue:
A Praecipe quod faciat An Action o^ Account: An Action of Covenant:

A Si fecerit te securum, Tab: 32:

TABLE 32.
A personal si fecerit te securum. which is Without force Where the peace is
not broken 1: Rationabili part bonorum: 2. Valor Maritagii: 3: Writ or
forfeiture of marriage: 4: Intrusion of Ward: 5: Ejectione custodiae: 6: Quare
ejecit infra terminum: 7: Trespasses upon the Case, not against the Peace:
Where the Peace is broken, yet not Vi, as An Action of Deceit: An Action of
Conspiracy.

With force An Action of Trespass: Special Actions of Trespass, as De parco
fracto. Rescous: Ejectione firmae:



TABLE 33.
An Appeal which concerns life, and is the parties private Action,
prosecuting also for the Crown, in respect of a Felony, and this is given only
to the Heir of the party slain.

TABLE 34.
A Commissionall Writ, which is either Commissionary, as A Writ of right
Patent: A Justiciis An assise of petty Nuisance: Admeasurement of Dower:
Admeasurement of Pasture: A Nativo habendo. A Rationabilibus divisis. A Homine
re^legiando. A Replevin: Also many of the Actions th^^ went before; as
Consue^^^ nibus and Servitiis, Secta (...) molendinum, Quod permit^^ Mesne,
Dower, Unde (...) habet, Annuity, Debt, Detinue, Covenant, Trespas^ etc: to
what summ^ soev^^ be brought, and also dete^mined in the County by J^stices:

Mere Commissions, as Oyer and Terminer: Association: Si non omnes: Ad quod
damnum. Perambulatione faci^ de:


TABLE 35.
In Courts that hold plea without original Writ, the Suit may be by Plaint in
matters that conce^^ Common pleas: Bill, in Pleas of the Crown; a^ Officers of
any Court (by p^^viledge) may sue, or be (...) there, and not elsewhere by (...)

TABLE 36.
Suits for the King are A Quo warranto, for the trying of the right of
Franchises. As inquiry by a Jury, which is an Office to entitle the King to some
Possession, whereof consider The several ways how it may be found, viz.
Virtute officii brevis, and Commissionis The several Writs or Commissions used
therein concerning a Wardship, viz For finding of it Diem clausit extremum;
within the year after the ^enants death. Mandamus after the year. Devenerunt,
when the Ancestor dyed in Ward to the King:
For mending it Quae plura Melius Inquirendum. Datum est nobis intelligi.
For discharge of it An Aetate probanda. A Writ of Livery, for Lands in Capite.
An Ouster le main, for other Knight Service Lands.

How the party may be releived against it By Traverse, or Monstrans de droit,
when the King is entitled by Office only. By Petition, when he is entitled by
double matter of Record, as when the Office finds an Attainder of Treason, or
the like.

Presentment or Indictment, to find an Offense against the King, and for penal
Laws, an Information.


TABLE 37.
The Original Process, which is Proper Single By the Possessions By the Land
In all real Praecipes quod reddat: Summons i^ Land. Grand cape, i^ seize it
into the Kings hands.
A Mortdancester, juris utrum and da^rein presentment. Summons. Re-summons and
upon default the Inquest awarded.

By the Goods, as in Assizes of nove^ Disseisin and Nuisance, Attachme^^ by the
defendants goods, which h^ shall lose if he appear not, and up on default the
Inquest awarded
By the person (in Mayhem, Felony, and Treason) Cap. Exig. Outlawry.
Mixed By the goods and lands In all other real Actions, and in all personal
Actions (except Trespass and offenses against the public, and also in all
Justicies. Summons b^ the Goods. Attachment. Distress Inf^nite, and ^sues of
the Land.
In all Trespasses upon the Case (except Deceit and conspiracy) and in all
Offenses in the nature of Trespasses upon the Case. Attachment. Distres^
infinit^ and i^sues.

By the goods and person, as in Trespa^^ vi, Deceit, Conspiracy, and Offense
against the public; Attachment, D^stress infinite, and upon nihil return 3.
Capias Exigent, Outlawry.

Improper, Tab. 38.

TABLE 38.
Improper, which is not to bring any matter into Plea, or solemn Action, but
only to do, or leave undone something, and in is Commandatorie, as Dote
assignanda. Homagio capiendo. Scutagio habendo. De Corrodio habendo. De Annua
pensione hab. De Libertatibus alloc. De executione Judicii. De restitutione
Temporalium. De securitate pacis. De vi laica removenda. Of cleansing Streets.
De excommunicato capiendo. De excommunicato deliberando. De leproso amovendo.
De cautione admittenda. De haeretico comburendo. De Coronatore exonerando. De
Coronatore eligendo. De exoner. vi^: forest. De Electione vi^: forest. A Writ
for the Royal Assent, to elect an Abbot. De securitate invenienda. All Dedimus
potestatems, de fine leuando, de attornato faciendo, etc.
Prohibitory, Tab. 39.

TABLE 39.
Prohibitory, as 1: A Protection, cum clausula nolumus, to free ones
Possessions, that nothing be taken against his will for the Kings business. 2:
To discharge Spiritual Persons of Fi^teens: 3: Quod clerici non eligantur in
Officium B^livi, etc: 4: To forbid Tenant in Dower, by the Courtesy, or
Guardian by Knight service, o^ in Soccage to commit VVast, to the destruction
of the Inheritance: 5: A Quo minus, for Grantee of Estover, to restrain the
Grantors from committing VVast, so as he cannot have his Estovers. 6: De
exoneratione sectae, for Tenants by Suit of Court or other Services that they
be not distrained to do the same for such ti^^ as they ought to hold the Land
discharged. 7 D^ deonerando pro rata, to discharge the Tenant of parcel of the
Land according (...) the rate of his Land, when he i^ lawfull^ distrained for
all the Rent and Services: 8. De essendo quieto de Thelonio. 9. De non ponendo
in Juratis. 10. Ne exeas regnum.

TABLE 40.
The Proceeding, which consists in The Count, or Declaration. The pleading,
which Pleas are The Defendants first Pleas, viz. Dilatory, by taking Exceptions
In disability To the jurisdiction of the Court. To the person.
In Abatement To the Writ, as default of form, false Latin, etc. and here, if
the default be not caused by the Plaintiff, a new Writ may be had by Journies
Accounts. To the Count, as insufficiency, variance from the Writ, etc.

Foreign advantages In all Actions, as Oyer of the Writ, Condition, etc. In
real Actions, as View. Ayde-prayer: Voucher:
In certain personal Actions: Garnishment: Enter pleader, which may also be in
a Quare impedit:

Sanctuary, and there continuing, viz. for Treason, and other Capital Offenses:
To the action, as Pleas in Bar: Confessions, to which place Abjuration may be
referred, when one guilty of bare Felony, flies to the Church, etc: and there
before the Coroner confesses the Fact, and abjures the Realm:

The mutual pleas of Plaintiff and Defen: Tab: 41:
Other mean Acts, Tab: 42.

TABLE 41.
The mutual Pleas of Plaintiff and Defendant, viz. The delating before issue, as
Replication, Rejoinder, Sur-rejoynder, etc. The Issue it self Of the Fact, and
then the trial is 1: Of a matter done in the Country, by Jury, where
challenges are allowed, viz. To the Array. To the Poles.
2: In Writs of right or appeals for life by Battle. 3. In a Writ of Dower
(when the issue is taken upon the death of her husband) by witness: 4. By
wager of Law. 1. When the Tenant in a real praecipe quod read^ was not
summoned. 2. In mere personal actions growing without deed or privity of
others. 3. In Plaints in Coun^ Barons.

Of the Law, as a Demurrer, which i^ when (admitting the matters alleged
(either of them rests in the Judgment of the Law.


TABLE 42.
Other mean Acts, as 1. Appearance where, of essoins, which are Common, as
Essoine de mal venir. Special 1. Of going beyond Sea. 2. Of going ad terram
Sanctam. 3. Of the Kings Service. 4. Demalo lecti.

2. Continuance By Process. Upon the Roll Dies datus. Emparlance.

3. Judicial process A Mesne process, which is for any necessary act to be
done as against Vouchee, Prayee in aid, also 1. Upon a fine levied to compel
Attornment, as 1: Per quae servitia 2. Quem redditum reddit. 3. Quid juris
clamat.
2 In Petitions, a Writ of search. 3. In real praecipe, upon a default, petty
Cape. 4. Upon default, after Voucher, a petty Cape, ad valentiam. 5. In such as
are for other Hereditaments, upon default, a distress. 6. Against Jurors 1. A
Venire facias. 2. A Habeas Corpora. 3. A Distress infinite.

Process in nature of new Originals, Tab, 43.


TABLE 43.
Process in the nature of new Originalls, and they are Commandatory, viz. such
as command something to be done 1: Resummons, Re-attachment: 2: All
certificatory Writs: 3: A Certiorari, to remove a Record into the Chancery: 4.
Writs to remove Suits By Writ, as a Tolt, to remove a Writ of right out of the
Lords into the County Court: Pone, to remove out of the Lords Court into the
common place in all other causes:
By Plaint, as a Recordare, to remove Plaints in the County Court: Accedas ad
curiam, to remove Pl^ints in a Court Baron:

5: A Mi^timus to send a Record out of the Chancery into another Court of
Record: 6: A Procedendo, to proceed in Suits: 7: A Consultation, to proceed in
the Spiritual Court. 8: A Writ of Main-prise, to set one at liberty upon Bail:
9: A Recaption for him, whose Goods are distrained for the same thing: 10. A
Writ de Magna Assisa eligenda: 11: A Certificate of Assise to Jurors, to give a
more perfect Verdict: 12: A Proprietate probanda:
Prohibitory Writs, Tab: 45.

TABLE 45.
Prohibitory Writs, or Process, as 1. Prohibitions, of this kind is an
Indicavit. 2. A Supersedeas, of which kind are 1. A Writ of Peace. 2. A
Liberate probanda. 3. An Identitate nominis.
3. Protections Cum clausula uolumus, as Protectio quia profecturus. Protectio,
quia moratur, whither also may be referred, Protectio quia in prisona.
4. Essoine de malo lecti. 5. A Ne admittas. 6. A Quare incumbravit.

TABLE 46
Judgment which has Judicial Writs belonging to it, viz. Mere Judicial, and
they are Such as lie within a year and a day after the Judgment In real
actions 1. Habere facias seisinam, to pu^ him in possession upon a Freehold
recovered. 2. A Writ to the Bishop to admit ones Clerk.
In personal Actions to have Execution of his Possessions, as 1. Fieri facias,
to levy execution upon his Chattels. 2. Levari facias, to levy execution of
the profi^^ of his Land and Chattels. 3. Habere facias possessionem, upon
recovery of a term for years in a^ Ejectione firmae, etc. 4. A Distringas, for
the Kings Amerciaments, etc.
Bodily, as Capias ad satisfaciendu^ Capias pro fine Regis. Capias Utlagatum.
For the King


A Scire facias, to warn the Defendan^ afte^ a year upon recovery in real
Actions, to show cause why the Plaintiff should not have Execution.
New Originals, Tab. 47.


TABLE 47.
New Originals in the nature of Judicial Writs, to order some matters
concerning Judgments, and these are grounded Upon an Error A Writ of Error,
which is upon an Error in a Court of Record. A Writ of false Judgment, which
is upon an Error in a base Court.
Otherwise, as Attaint, which is to enquire whether a Jury of twelve men gave a
false Verdict. Audita querela, which is for one being, or to be in Execution,
to relieve him upon good matter of discharge which he has no means to plead.


A TABLE, showing the Pages in the English Copy of Sir Henry Finches Treatise
of the Law, from whence each Tablet takes it is beginning.
Table Page 1 77 2 95 3 106 4 111 5 116 6 130 7 134 8 155 9 159 10 164 11 167
12 184 13 190 14 198 15 205 16 These are taken out of the French Copy, being
omitted in the English. 17 18 19 20 206 21 218 22 221 23 225 24 249 25 252 26
264 27 266 28 269 29 272 30 284 31 294 32 303 33 310 34 312 35 320 36 322 37
343 38 490 39 502 40 356 41 390 42 427 43 441 44 446 45 450 46 459 47 478

FINIS.

