The Delectable History OF Poor Robin The Merry Sadler of WALDEN.

SHOWING Many merry Passages of his Life, of harmless Mirth, to lengthen
Delight, and drive away Melancholy.



Printed for J. Conyers, Bookseller, at the sign of the black Raven in
Fetter-Lane, near Holborn.

To his unknown Friend, POOR ROBIN, the Subject of this merry History.
SIR, you are happy thus to have your name
Enrolled in the Calendar of fame:
What others with much hazard scarce attain,
You by the kindness of your friend do gain.
You Will need no Monument over your Grave
To tell the world you were; this book will save
Such needless cost, and make your name survive
So long as any one shall be alive.
You by his pen have equal honor won,
With Scoggin, Archy, and the Knight o'th'Sun.
Come when it will, your deaths uncertain hour
Which over your Body only has a power;
Yet shall your fame survive, your name shall live
Such grace the Muses to these lines do give.
William Lawsintney.

The Delectable HISTORY of Poor Robin, The Merry Sadler of Walden.
CHAP. 1. The Birth of Poor Robin; how he was bound Apprentice to a Sadler, and
what a trick he served his Master.
POor Robin was born in Saffron Walden, in the County of Essex, of honest plain
Parents, who brought him up not as our nice Dames do now adays, by ejecting of
him how much he should eat, but as the fashion was then, full fed with gross
meats; to that in few years he grew a sturdy Lad and considering his growth and
manners, a man might well say, Better fed than taught: His Father being willing
he should be able to live in the World another day, ^ound him an Apprentice to
a Sadler, one who fitted Robins humor to a hair; for the Master loving strong
drink, he thought it should go hard if the man likewise did not sometimes wet
his lips with it. It fortuned one time his Master had brewed a Barrel of Beer
stronger than ordinary, to the drinking up of which poor Robin one night
invites five or six of his Comrades, who before the next morning drank it all
up: Poor Robin to excuse himself draws the Spigot out, and throws a Pail full
of small Beer, and two or three Pails full of Water under the Tap, and by a
wile gets a great Sow into the Cellar; so the next morning when his master
arose, all was quiet, and the Sow was blamed for what the Boar-Pig had done.

CHAP 2. How poor Robin served his Master for sitting up late at Night.
POor Robins Master had gotten a Custom that the man did not like of, which was
that after he had tippled all day, (sometimes till ten or eleven a Clock at
night) he would then come home, and fall asleep in a Chair: during which time
his man must not go to Bed, but wait until his Master awaked. Poor Robin to
break him of this evil Custom: one night when his Master came home soundly
fuddled, and fallen asleep in his Chair, as he was used to do, he made a great
fire, and then draws his masters Legs so near thereto, that his Toes touched
some of the Coals; which being done, he sits him down in the other corner, to
observe the sequel: long had he not sat, but his masters Shoes began to fry,
whereupon he suddenly awakes, and jumps about as if he had been mad: the man
all this while Counterfeits himself asleep, nor would not seem to awake for a
good space: at last seeming much to pity his Masters misfortune, they went to
bed: but never after that would his master sit up again to sleep in his Chair.

Chap. 3. How poor Robin served a Rich Miser.
IN the same Town lived a Rich Miser, who had wealth enough to have been
Treasurer of the Town, and Wisdom answerable for a Beadle of a Parish: this man
fuller of faith than good Works, would neither feast the Poor, to relieve their
wants, nor yet the Rich, to maintain Brotherly Unity. Poor Robin, who hated bad
housekeeping as he hated the Devil, resolved to put a trick upon him, the time
of year (being then Christmas) made fit for his purpose, and counterfeiting
himself to be the Gentleman's man, about ten or eleven a Clock at night, just
when people were in Bed, he calls at sundry men's doors, inviting them the next
day to his Masters (naming the Gentleman's name) to Dinner; whereupon the next
day appeared the number of two and twenty in their Roast-meat Apparel, but
contrary to their expectation, finding small preparation toward a Dinner, they
began to wonder wherefore he had invited them: the Gentleman as much wondered
wherefore they came: at last the truth being cleared on both sides, some
laughed, and some frowned, and so they all departed home.

CHAP. 4. How poor Robin married, and set up for himself.
POor Robin having served out his Apprentiship, would needs set up for himself,
and thereupon hires him a House and Shop; yet considering it was inconvenient
for him to live alone, and that two heads were better than one, he resolved to
do as many others have done, marry in haste, though he repented at leisure. But
yet his fortune was better than his deserts: for though she were but a homely
Woman with*whom he joined in Matrimony, yet was she provident to live in the
World* and for his own part, he stood not much upon beauty, but had rather have
a fat Purse than a fair Wife, seeing there was great profit in the one, and
less danger of being made a Cuckold by the other; never did couple agree more
lovingly together than did this pair at first; insomuch, that Duck and Lamb
were the ordinary terms he bestowed upon her: Whereupon a Wit* of the Town
hearing this loving language betwixt them, made this Epigram to be read by any
that can understand it.

Poor Robin thinks his Wife excells most Dames,
And calls her Duck and Lamb, with such kind Names;
A Duck's a Fowl, a Lamb's a Beast we know
Poor Robin's Wife's a foul Beast then I trow.
CHAP. V. How poor Robin served one of his* Companions a slovens trick.
POor Robin having set up for himself, (as you have heard) he would oftentimes
travel abroad into the Country, to get acquaintance amongst the Gentry; it
happened one time, being belated homeward, and his Brain intoxicated with the
juice of Bacchus, that he took up his Quarters in a Country Alehouse, where
notwithstanding he had gotten a lusty jag before, yet fell he to drinking of
Beer and Sider as if his belly* were bottomless: at length growing sleepy, he
went to bed, where it was his chance to be lodged in the same Chamber where one
of his Acquaintance was already in Bed: who as he lay down sooner than poor
Robin, so the next morning was he sooner got up, providing a Pot and a Toast
ready against poor Robin arose, but a foul mischance befell poor Robin in the
mean time, for the Wine, Beer, and Syder not agreeing together in his Body, he
very mannerly (sir reverence) beshit the Bed. Whereupon not knowing what to do,
and being loath to be discredited, a Crotthet came in his Crown, which he
presently put in Execution: he takes the stinking Sheets from off his own bed,
and lays them on his Friends, and then takes his and lays them on his own bed:
so spreading the Coverlid, as if nothing were amiss, he makes himself ready,
and down Stairs he goes; no sooner was he below, but his friend Arrests him at
Mr. Fox's Suit, and by all means would make him pay his Groat for being drunk;
poor Robin excused himself as well as he could, and would be judged by his
Landlord whether he was fuddled or no; whilst they were thus brangling about
paying the Groat, the Maid went up into the Chamber to make the beds; but*
finding the one of them in a pitiful pickly, she came chafing down, calling
the man beastly fellow, and nasty Knave, with other Billings-gate Language,
such as came first at her tongues end, the man imagined her to be mad, thus to
scold for nothing, till in the end she told him in plain terms, he had beshit
the bed. La ye now, quoth poor Robin, I will be judged by my Landlord, whether
of us was most fuddled last night: Truly, said the Host, I can judge no other
ways but that he was, else would he never a played such a nasty Trick: Whereupon
it was adjudged by all the company that the man should pay his Groat, and poor
Robin go scot-free.

CHAP. 6. Of a very sad disaster that befell unto poor Robin.
IT happened on a time during these late unhappy Wars, that all the Essex
Train-Bands were assembled at Walden, to Resist the Kings Forces, who in a
Bravado had made their Excursions as far as unto Huntington: amongst other
Military Weapons of Destruction, they brought with them a Drake, which they
planted just under poor Robin's Chamber window, to be shot off at nine of the
Clock in the night, for a warning to all people to repair home. Poor Robin and
his wife were at that time newly gone to Bed: now it is to be understood, that
the Chamber where they lay went but half way over the Room below, a Rail of
about some four foot high being set up by the side to ^^ep them from falling,
close by which Rail was poor Robins Bed: the season then being indifferent
warm, and poor Robin apt for Uenerial Exercises, he would needs have a touch
upon Cracket with his Wife, but whilst they were busy at their port, the Drake
was shot off, which poor Sarah his wife hearing* in a mavelous fright, gave a
sudden start, and threw poor Robin quite over the Rail into the Room below, and
very foully be wrayed the bed, poor Robin himself much bruised in body, and half
dead, at length got up, but his Courage was so cooled with the greatness of the
fall, that he had more mind to go to a Chyrurgion than a wench.

CHAP. 7. How poor Sarah was cheated of her Mutton.
POor Sarah on a time had made a very great Pie, wherein she had put a whole
Loin of Mutton, besides store of other Meat, so that it was valued to be worth
five or six shillings at seast; this Pie she sent to the common Oven to bake,
which being perceived by three or four mercy Blades, they resolved if they
could possibly to cheat her of the Pie, which at last they brought to pass, in
this manner: at such time as the Baker used to draw, two of them went and held
poor Sarah in a Tale, whilst the other sent one of her Neighbors boys to the
Bake-house with a Peal, a Nap^in, and Money for the baking. The Baker
mistrusting no Knavery, delivered the Boy the Pie, which was presently carried
to the next Alehouse, whither inviting some more of* their Companions unto
them, with much mirth and laughter they eat it up: and because the jest should
be publicly known, they set the Crier to work, (...) published the same in
every. Corner of the Town.

CHAP. 8. How poor Robin kissed his Wifes Backside instead of her Mouth.
POor Robin having been out very late one night, his understanding being
Eclipsed, he mistook himself, and went in at the Beds-feet instead of the head
of it: where remembering how by his ll husbandry he had offended his Wife, to
appease her anger, he falls to kissing her posteriors, imagining it had been
her Mouth, but finding the platform bigger than his face, he asks her the
question if her Cheeks were swelled: she for answer returns him a Foist, which
made him to ask her again, if her breath did stink: whereupon she bursting out
in a very great laughter, let fly such a crack, that the grains flew about his
face: whereupon in a great rage turning him on the other side, You beastly
queen (quoth he) must you spit in my face, the Devil himself shall kiss you,
e're I will kiss you again.

CHAP. 9. How poor Robin eat Dogs-stones instead of Lambs stones.
AS poor Robin was more addicted to flesh than to fish, so of all sorts or
flesh he loved a dish of Lambs-stones best: a merry-disposed Companion knowing
his Appetite, resolved to put a trick upon him: a Gentleman of the Town who
kept a park of Hounds, having gelt his Dogs, he gets the Stones, and with a few
Sweet-kreads, presents them to poor Revin as a dainty dish. Poor Robin very
thankful for so great a kindness, would not stay, but presently had them
dressed, making all the haste he could for fear any should come in to be
partakers with him in his Dinner: but having eaten them and understood the
truth, he fell on spewing as if his Gall would come up with it: Poor Sarah in
like manner disgorged her Stomach. that who should have seen them, would have
concluded them drunk with eating.

CHAP. X. A witty Jest that poor Robin gave to a Sergeant
THe Bleu Regiment of Train Soldiers being on a time at Walden, one of the
Sergeants to show his bravery, had gotten a great Bleu Scarf about his middle,
being as much or more than the Ensign had in his Colors. Poor Robin thinking
him to be too fine to fight, would venture to put a jeer upon him: and calling
to him, asked if he wanted any work, why, quoth the Sergeant, what makes you to
ask? O, cry you mercy, quoth poor Robin, I was mistaken in you, I took you at
first for a Shoo-maker, because you had gotten your Eleu Apron before you.

CHAP. XI. How poor Robin won five shillings by kissing his Hostess.
POor Robin with some other of his Mates, being drinking in an Alehouse where
was an exceeding tall Hostels, one of them proffered to lay five shillings,
(because poor Robin was low) that he should not kiss her as he stoo^^ upon the
ground: Poor Robin nothing daunted at his words, accepted the challenge and
covered the Money: but when he went to kiss her, his mouth would not reach much
higher than her Apron strings: Whereupon proffering as though he would put his
hand under her Coats, he made her stoop to put it by; then he clasping his Arms
about her neck, gave her a kiss, and so won the wager.

Chap. 12. Poor Robins sayings of Ambitious men.
POor Robin being in company with some Gentlemen, who were talking of the
Ambition of many men now a days, that would venture the loss of their Souls for
the gaining of a Kingdom: yea, (quoth poor Robin) but the success of many of
them is far different from King Readiness: for he in seeking for Asses found a
Kingdom: and they in seeking a Kingdom, find themselves to be Asses.

Chap. 13. Poor Robins Journey to London.
POor Robin having never been at London in his Life, and very desirous to see
the City. whose same rang so soud in every Man's mouth, he resolved to make a
Journey thither, and spend some time in viewing the Rarities of the same: but
because he was unacquainted with the City customs, he got a companion of his to
go along with him: no sooner were they past Aldgate, but poor Robin seeing such
a number of signs, he whispered with his friend, Certainly (quoth he) they must
needs he all drunkards that lives in this place, I never saw so many Alehouses
together in my Life: and thereupon beckoning to his Companion, enters into one
of the Shops, and calls for a Jugg of Beer: but they making him acquainted with
his error, how they Sold no drink, but if he wanted any thing else they could
furnish him with it: he presently without any studying, asks them to show him a
pair of Hedging Gloves: whereupon changing their opininion, instead of a fool
they took him for a jeering Companion: and to fit him for his Gloves, had him
to the Pump, and soundly vedrencht him from the head to the foot. Yet
notwithstanding this ^art^ Entertainment at first, having occasion to go
through Birching-Lane, and being asked by the Sales-men, Countryman, what
lack* you? Marry, quoth he, that which I fear you cannot furnish me withal: and
being importuned by them to know what it was, Why, (quoth he) that which you
have none of, I mean Honesty. Night approaching, Poor Robin and his walking
Mate repaired to their Inn, where after they had supt, and drank five or six
Juggs of Beer with the Host of the House and some of his men, (for Innkeepers
servants drink most of their Beer at other men's cost) his Friend loving no
Tobacco, and poor Robin himself defying that Heathenish Weed, to pass away the
time, they agreed amongst themselves, that every one of the Company should
either tell a Tale, or sing a Song. Poor Robin, who first mentioned the same,
beginning in this manner.

Chap. 14. A Tale of a Pack of Cards.
NOt many Ages since, a Parson of a Country Uillage, was accused to a Committee
that he was a great Gamester at Cards: being so addicted thereunto, that he
would oftentimes play on Sundays: the Committee thus informed, sent forthwith
for the Parson, to answer his accusation: who receiving the Warrant, made no
excuses or delay, but with all the haste he could, made his appearance before
them; with whom also came the Informer to justify his Accusation. Being thus
met together, the Committee began to school the Parson, that one of his calling
should be addicted to such Uice, as to be noted for a Common player at Cards.
Indeed, said the Parson, I am so far from the same, that I do not know what a
pair of Cards means. Sir, quoth. the Informer, if you please to search his
Pockets, I believe you will find a pair there at this present, for he seldom
goes without such tackling; whereupon the Committee commanding his pockets to
be searched, they found a pair of Cards there indeed: but the Parson denied them
for to be Cards, saying, they may be Cards to you, but to me they are an
Almanac: and being demanded how he could make it appear, he answered thus:
First (quoth he) here is as many suits of Cards as there be quarters in a year;
and as many Court Cards as there be months in a year; as many Cards as there
are weeks in a year; and as many spots as there be days in a year. Then when I
look upon the King, it puts me in mind of the allegiance that I owe to my
Sovereign Lord the King, looking upon the queen, puts me in mind of the like
Allegiance that I owe to the Queen; the ten puts me in mind of the ten
Commandments, the nine of the nine Muses; the eight of the eight Altitudes; the
seven of the seven liberal Sciences; the six of the six days we ought to labor
in: the five of the five Senses; the four of the four Evangelists; the three of
the Trinity; the two of the two Sacraments: and the Ace, that we ought to
worship but one God. Truly, quoth the Committee, if this he all the use you can
make of them. I can sind no great fault with you; but Mr. Parson, of all the
Cards that you have nominated, you have forgotten the Knave, pray what use make
you of him? O sir, said he, pointing to him that was his accuser) that I
suppose is your Worships Informer.

CHAP. XV. How poor Robin served a Bricklayer.
NOt long after, poor Robin having been late abroad amongst his Pot-companions
and being elevated with Beer, he resolved once more to counterfeit himself a
Gentleman's man, at the same time was a very deep Snow, whereupon he calls at a
Bricklayers house, telling him his Master (naming a Gentleman that lived some
two mile off, and where he knew that Bricklayer used to work) would have him
come on the morning, and bring. a bunch of Lath with him, to mend up a seiling
which the Snow had broken down; the next morning the Bricklayer got up be
times, and with a bunch of Lath on his shoulder, went to the Gentleman's house,
being each step almost up to the knees in Snow, but the weather was not more
cold than his entertainment, for the Gentleman thinking he came to jeer him,
swore at him like a Cutpurse. Whereupon the poor Bricklayer was forced to go
home again like a fool as he came.

Chap. 16. A Scottish Marriage.
WE don't use to Wad in Scotland as you wad in England; Jocky comes to the
Kirk, and takes sir Donkyn by the Rochet and says good morn sir Donkyn. What Is
the matter Jocky, what is the matter? a Wadding, a Wadding says he, Deant you
see the Hoppets and the Skippets, and all the Lads of the Gang? Ise do, Ise
come to you believe. Then Sir Donkyn Gangs to the Kirk; I spee, and I spee; ho
a Deal do you spee? Jocky of the high Lane, and Jenny of the long Cliff: if any
know why these two may not be wadded together, let them now speak, or hold
their tongues in the Deals Name. Jocky, will thou ha Jenny to thy wadded Wife?
I sha, Jocky san after me, I sha; Jocky will thou ha Jenny to thy wadded Wife,
forsaking all Soons, Lubbar-loons, swig-bellied Calves, black Lips, and blew
Noses? ay forsooth. If these two be not as well wadded as e're I wadded two
these seven years, the Deal and St. Andrew part them.

The wadding being ended, all the company went to bed; where we will leave them
till the next morning, to relate poor Robins perambulation about the City.

Chap. 17. Poor Robins perambulation about the City.
NO sooner did Apollo begin to appear in the Eastern Horizon, but poor Robin
shaking off melaneholly sleep rouzed his companion to prepare himself for their
intended perambulation: and having armed themselves with a pot of happy Ale,
they took their first walk to see the Royal Exchange, a most magnificent
structure, built by Sir Thomas Gresham, from thence they went to take a view of
Leaden Hall, but, the exceeding bravery of the Exchange had so dimned the
beauty of this place, that was nothing pleasing to poor Robins eye, he made no
tarrying there, but went presently down to the Tower, where having seen the
Lions, and from the Wharf taken a superficial view of the Bridge, as also of
some Ships, upon the River of Thames, weary of beholding such triaial matters
as these, he had far more devotion to go see a Puppet-play; where for one penny
charges he saw that which gave him far more content than any thing he had seen
before, so admirable pleasing to his fancy was it, to see how those little
pretty things hoped about: but lest he should take a surfeit with such
ravishing delights, his Friend persuaded him to go see the ancient Cathedral of
St. Paul, being at that present made a Horse-guard by the Soldiers, which poor
Robin beholding, What blessed Reformation, quoth he, have we here, for in our
Country can we scarce persuade men to go to Church, and here comes men and
horses too; but having quickly satisfied themselves with the sight of Paul's,
they would in the next place to visit Westminster, the rather because it was at
that present Term time; where beholding such a number of Lawyers in their
Gowns, Good God, said he, send me safe out of this place, if two or three make
such a quarter in our Town, certainly there would be no abiding there for men
in their wits. A Country Gentleman over-hearing hint, I remember (quoth he) I
overheard a story of a certain man, that went down into Hell, wherein he
beheld men of all professions, age, and conditions, saving only Lawyers, which
made him the more to wonder, because he imagined them all there, and asking the
Devil the reason thereof, he made this reply, We have them here though you see
them not, but we are forced to keep them in a Room by themselves, least they
should set all the devils in Hell at variance. Poor Robin laughed very heartily
at this tale, and having now satisfied his mind concerning London, he returned
to his Inn, and having discharged all reckonings, his friend and he returned
home.

Chap. 18. Many odd Whimsies and Conceits of poor Robin.
POor Robin daily frequenting the Tavern and Alehouse, had learned of his
Companions many drunken Whimsies and other odd Conceits, as the five properties
that belongs, to an Host, that He must have the Head of a Stag, the back of a
Nag, the Belly of a Hog, skip up and down like a Frog, and lie and fawn like a
Dog. As also. four ingrepients whereof a woman's tongue is made, viz. The sound
of a great Bell, the wagging of a Dogs tail, the shaking of an Aspen-leaf,
tempered with Running Water. These following Paradoxes were also very often
rehearsed by poor Robin.

Spurs would be out of fashion were it not for Horse-coursers.

True men would be scarce, were not Tailors so plentiful.

Many men are fore'd to climb the Gallows, yet few like Dogs are hanged for
their skins.

A Miller is a right time-observer, for he evermore turns with the Wind.

A silent Woman is a Creature to be admired, (if scarceness may breed
admiration.)

When poor Robin had gotten a cup in his crown, as it oftentimes happened, he
would be then playing the Poet, and nothing but rhyme should come out of his
mouth; for as one writes:

Poet and Pot do differ but one letter,
And that makes Poet love the pot the better
Amongst other of his Conceits, this following Comparison was much used by him.

Like a purse that has no chink in it,
Or a Celler, and no drink in it;
Like a Jewel never worn,
Or a Child untimely born:
Like a Song without a foot,
Or a Bond and no Hand to it:
Such does she seem unto mine eyes
That lives a Virgin till she dies.
Women, said he, are all in extremes, either too willing, or too wilful; too
forward, or too froward; too courteous, or too coy; too friendly, or too
fiendly, the mean they always meanly account of. This made (...) a Ruler in
Carthage, refuse to (...); saying. If I marry a Wife, she will be wilful, if
wealthy, then wanton; if poor, then (...); if beautiful, then proud; if
deformed, then loathsome, and the least of these is able to kill a thousand men.

FINIS.
Books printed for and sold by Joshua Conyers at the Black Raven in Fetter-lane.
1. THe Rules of Civility, or the Art of good Breeding and Behavior. 2.
Lillies new E^^a pater, or prognostication for ever. 3. The English
Fortune Tellers, describing by the Moles of the Face, and by palmistry by the
Lines of the hand, and Dreams, the good and bad fortune of Men and Women. 4.
The Shepherds new Calendar, a Book of Fortune. 5. A hundred notable things for
a penny. 6. The English Mountebanks new Book of Merry Conceits. 7. Second part
of Dr. Faustus. 8. The History of Fortunatus. 9. A new Academy of Complements,
with new Songs, sung at Court and playhouse. 10. A new parliament of Women.
11. Dr. Lillies last Legacy, a Book of choice Receipts of physic. 12. Dr.
Culpeper's English physicians daily practice, a Book of choice Receipts of
physic 13. Dr. Salvator Winter's new Book of choice Receipts of physic and
Chyrurgery. 14. The Ladies cabinet, a new Book of cookery 15. The History of
Reynard the Fox.
Where Chapmen may be furnished with all sorts of Books and Baltads.


