The Exact Constable: WITH HIS ORIGINAL and POWER IN THE OFFICES

Of Church wardens, Overseers of the Poor, Surveyors of the Highwayes,
Treasurers of the County Stock, and other inferior Officers as they are
established, both by the Common Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

By E.W. of Gray's Inn Esquire;

The second Edition, with many useful Additions.

Non Nobis nati sumus, sed partim Patriae.

LONDON, Printed for H. Brom at the Gun in Ivy-Lane, 1660

TO THE READER.
IT may seem an impertinent attempt, to loaob you with this Treatise, there
being already one in Print which carries the Face of the same design. But if
you compare the Time and positure of affairs, which produced that Schem of Laws
with the present, which gives being to this, you may Rationally conclude, that
those Rules for Government in the Civil and Ecclesiastical affairs are no more
proper now then (The keepers of the Liberty of England, etc.) are to be the
Supreme Magistrate: Those acts of Obedience and Religion which then were taken
for Graces, being now justly condemned for Errors and Vices. Not to reflect on
the Author of the former compilement, who being circumscribed by the wilful
Dictates of the persons then in power, was out of fear or somewhat else, forced
to tune the Law as much as he could to their Tyrannical ears. Were he now to
write on the same Subject, he could not, nor would have varied a Tittle in
substance from what is now exposed to your view. But the same Garment which was
made for a Monster, cannot fit a man. And therefore this which is here
published, care has been taken to comprehend all those Rules (and only those
Rules) which by the ancient and modern Laws, those Officers to whom it is
applied are obliged to observe. How well it is performed, is submitted to your
Judgment; The compiler having no other design, then to throw in his Mite
toward the establishing the desired and admirable Government of this Nation,
and to contribute his assistance to all those Loyal and Active subjects, who
conform to, and Act under the same.

THE CONTENTS.
Where High Constables and Petty Constables are Sworn. Page 6 Of the Sabbath,
and Holidays. p. 69 The Constables Oath. p. 76 Who be Rogues by the Statute.
p. 80 The manner of the Testimonial. p. 84 The Ministers Office. 102 A
Conventicle. p. 110 The Church Wardens Duty. p. 115 Of Quakers. p. 138 Of
Supervisors, Surveyors, and orderers of Highways. p. 143 Of the destruction
of Noisome Fowl and Vermin. p. 158
THis Author has in Print a very useful Piece, called Justice Revived; Or, The
whole Office of a Country Justice of the Peace.

The Offices and Duties of Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers of the Poor
and Highwayes, County-stock, Treasurers, and diverse other petty Officers, as
they are established by the common Laws of England.
Of Constables and their Antiquity.
Constables were first established by the Statute of Winston, 1. and by diverse
other Statutes since: their Office is to be Attendants upon the Commonwealth
for the maintenance of the Peace, and are to execute the Warrants and Precepts
issuing out of Court-Leets, from Justices of Peace and Coroners within their
precincts and liberties; Lamb. says, a Constable in a hundred and Franchise,
is the Kings Majesty's immediate Officer for the support and maintenance of the
Kings peace. There are two sorts of Constables; high Constables and petty
Constables; the high Constables are for the whole hundred; and comprehends many
parishes and villages: heretofore there were two high Constables in every
hundred, as you may read in Lamb. and Dalton; but at this day, there is but
one; the other kind are petty Constables, and are only for some part of a
Parish, Village, Hamlet or Tything within the Hundred; for in every Hundred
there is a High Constable, and every petty Tything within the Hundred has his
petty Constable, or Tythingman or some under Ofcer, and the petty Constables
command is in part of the High Constables jurisdiction, and his Office by the
ancient common Laws of this Realm is the same with the High Constable as far
as his Precincts extend; in diverse Counties they are called by several
appellations, as in Warwickshire Third borrow, in Kent Borsholder, and in
other places Burrowhead or tythingman; and he that is so sworn, is in effect
the petty Constable of the place.

In the beginning of Edw. 3 were first appointed petty Constables for the aid
and assistance of the High Constables of hundreds in their own Tythings or
Burrows; in some parishes there are Constables, but generally in all there are
Tythingmen or petty officers: in some places the Tythingman executes and
commands the precepts of the Lord of a Manor, and he is chosen and sworn at
the Lords Court, and some are chosen at the Court Leet by the custom, and they
are not compelled to do any thing, but what time out of mind, they have used to
do: yet all the aforementioned officers are comprehended in this word Constable.

Where High Constables and petty Constables are sworn.
THe making of high Constables, may be by Justices of Peace at quarter Sessions
or at the Leet, either by the Steward or the grand Inquest as the custom is;
heretofore they were Sworn in the Sheriffs Torn. Petty Constables are most
properly chosen by the Steward of the Leet himself or the Inquests presentment
in the Leet: yet they may be chosen by Justices of Peace in their quarter
Sessions, and as the custom of the place is, for one or two years, and do
usually take their Oaths where they are chosen, or may, Dalton. p. 37.38.
and sometimes take their Oaths before a Justice of Peace at another time.

A petty Constable may be made by one Justice of Peace out of Sessions, Lamb.
duty of Con. Cook 8.41, 42. Dal. 322, 323.
as where one is chosen: and upon good matter showed to the Justices, 21. Edw.
3.2.
is taken off, and another chose; Mant. ca. 10.
or by death of the former Constable the Justice puts in another, for a present
supply, especially when the Quarter Sessions or Leet are far off.

There must be fit persons chosen for the Constables Office, not Clergy men;
for if they be chosen, they shall be discharged by Writ.

He must be a lay person, not a woman; for although a maid be a housekeeper or
dwell in a house where the owner was usually to serve, the office is not to be
chosen no more then a Widow can do suit in a Leet.

He must be Idoneus, one that in some measure has knowledge to understand what
belongs to his place; therefore an Idiot or Infant cannot serve.

He must be of known honesty, one that will execute his Office without malice
or partiality; for a scandalous or contentious person cannot be fit, In Anno
1650.
neither can an old or decripted, sick, or an impotent or poor man; It was
commanded by the King as a special direction for the Justices to choose of the
ablest of the inhabitants; Which if observed, would be a great furtherance to
the course of Justice throughout his Majesty's dominions; but it is the common
course to put the Office upon the poorest and weaker sort, but they are
mistaken; for all are compellable to serve this Office that shall be
constrained to come to the Leet, except Sheriff, Lawyers, and Attournies, which
are to attend in their several places and vocations, and if they should, the
Law allows them Writs to discharge them.

Where one is under 21 years, he shall not be compelled to serve; nor an old
man above 70. years, but may sue out his Writ Denon ponend. in assisses. and
Jurat. vide ff. 2 Herb. Not. br. And where a man has Land in one Hundred, and
lives in another, and is chosen to serve in the place where the Land lies, if
he has no house where his land lies, he shall not serve; for they are bound to
serve in respect of their resiancy and not in respect of their Land; but if he
have house in either, and lives sometimes at one, and sometimes at the other,
he may be made one at either Leet.

If there be a man chossen either by Steward of the Leet, or by presentment
there that is unfit, or by one Justice of Peace out of the Sessons, the
Justices at the Sessions may remove him by their order, and a fit person shall
be there elected and sworn; but if he that is sworn at the Leet be a fit
person, he cannot be removed by the Justices, but by the Lord chief Justice of
the Judges of that Circuit, by the opinion of all the Justices; neither can
custom or prescription exempt any man that is so chosen at the Leet. And if
any man be fit and duly chosen in the Leet, he shall be there fined, if chosen
by one Justice out of Sessions, and he refuse to be sworn, he may be fined and
indicted at the Sessions.

A Constable may make a Deputy; for else how should the place be supplied in
case of sickness or other misfortune? but if there be negligence or misdemeanor
committed by the Deputy, the Constable shall be respondent and answerable for
them; Yet if the Deputy be a fit person and sworn into the place, the Deputy
shall answer for himself; yet it has been delivered for Law by the Judges,
that this is rather a Tolleration then Law.

High Constables of Hundreds are conservators of the Peace in their Liberties
and Precincts by the common Law of England. 3 Edw. 4.9. Crompt. b. and 122.11.
Hen. 7. fol. 18. Therefore the High Constables for any affray made at the petty
Sessions, may imprison the Offenders. Cook 11.43, 44.

In the Limits of their several Towns are conservators of the Peace; all petty
Constables Virtute Officii, Bro. Peace. fol. 127. Tit: Affray and forcible
entry; but they cannot take surety of the Peace, at the request of any man; yet
they may ex officio, cause such as are in their presence, and are about to
break the Peace, to find sureties for the Peace as well before the affray as
after. 12 Hen. 7.18. Crom. b. 222.

Any man that shall make an affray in the presence of the Constable or
Borsholder, threaten to kill or beat another, or ready in an affray to break
the Peace, the Constable or Borsholder shall commit them to the stocks or to
safe custody, and after carry them before a Justice, and refusing to give
surety, may commit them to the Goal. 3 Hen. 4.9, 10.

A Constable cannot take a Recognizance, because he is no Officer of Record; if
an obligation, the question is how it shall be certified an into what Court;
and that if should be inconvenient for to give Constables such authority, was
the resolution of the Lord Anderson; yet there were other justices of opinion,
that though they could not take bayl nor Recognizance; yet they might take
surety by obligation; for the Peace was preserved by constables long before
Justices of Peace; but the ancient way of the keeping of the Peace, was by Writ
out of the Kings Bench or Chancery.

Where a Constable had found any brake the Peace, by the ancient common Law it
was thus; all such Offenders the Constable might imprison in the stocks, or at
his own house, according to the quality of the person, until they had been
bound by obligation with sureties to the King for the keeping of the Peace;
which obligation was to be sealed and delivered to the Constable, to the Kings
use, and the Constable was to send it into the Exchequer or Chancery, from
whence process should be awarded to Levy the Debt, if the Peace were broken.
Vide Finch, Chapter 127.

Any Constable, petty Constables Sheriff, Coroner or Justice of Peace, may by
the ancient common Law, arrest or imprison all persons whatsoever that shall be
violators of the Peace, in any of their presences, by virtue of their Offices
within their Jurisdictions or Limits; but they are to meddle only with affrays,
assaults or batteries, or threatenings to break the Peace: and if they be
negligent in their Offices, may be indicted and fined for the same.

And if they have committed or bound over any or breach of the Peace, they must
attend the Goal delivery or Sessions of the Peace, to declare offenses for
which they were bound over or committed.

The Offices of Sheriffs, Coroners, Stewards, or the Sheriffs Torns of the Leet
and of the Court of Pypowders, and all Justices of higher courts were long
before the conquest. Vide Cook 49. pars in Praefacio.

In Lamb. 16.17. you may read of many others who were by common Law, that had
the custody of the Peace, and were nominated Custodes pacis; some were by
election, other by tenure, others were by the Kings Writ, and had their
duration for term of their lives, or quamdiu se been gesserint; bt they are
all antiquated and obsolete.

A Constable may Arrest any that shall make any affray; if he flies into a
House and shuts the doors, he may Justify his breaking open the doors; and if
he flies from thence in fresh suit, he may pursue him, though in an other
County; and where two be a fighting, though no hurt done, he may apprehend
them, and make them find sueties for the Peace; and if any be mortally wounded,
he may carry him to the Goal; for he is not Baylable, for the fact is felony in
case the Party dies within a Year and a day.

If any shall assault a Constable doing his Office, he may upon se defend,
Justify the killing of him, if he cannot otherwise avoid it.

If a man be taken in or near the high way Robbing, and be brought to a
Constable, he must forthwith bring him before a Justice of Peace to be
examined, and if he finds cause, have him to the Goal.

If any do suspect any of murder or felony, he ought to bring him to the
Constable, that he may have him before a Justice, with him that suspects him,
that upon examination if it be found that there is any probability in it, the
Constable may search for him; and a Constable may Arrest one that is indicted
of felony upon his own authority.

If any fly for felony, it is the Office of the Constable to seiz his goods;
for if they should be embezelled, he must answer for them; therefore it is best
to Inventory them with the testimony of his neighbors.

A Constable may commit any that he shall find in adultery or fornication, 1
Hen. 7.7.
taking company with him to bear witness; and where he has arrested any, or
has in his custody any that ought to be carried to Goal, he may raise
sufficient strength for his safe carriage, or in the interim commit to custody,
or to the Goal, and the Jailer shall have no fee at this reception.

When a Warrant shall be directed to the Constable, 27 Hen. 7.39.
stable, or any other inferior officer under him, he must use all expedition
and security for his apprehension, requiring him in the Kings name to go with
him; and if he shall deny, he may forthwith commit him to prison, and resisting
or making an attempt to escape, may justify the beating of him; and if he is
willing to go, he may choose what Justice he will go before; but in case it be
grounded upon a Writ of Supplicavit, the Delinquent is compellable to go before
that Justice from whom the Warrant came, upon which the Supplicavit is
grounded, and if he refuses, he may instantly carry him to the Goal; and if
the party goes before some other Justice of Peace, and puts in bayl in some of
the Courts at Westminster, whereupon he has a Supersedeas, the Constable or
inferior Officer must presently discharge him, keeping the Supersedeas, in
case he be questioned by the Justice from whom the Warrant issued.

The 21. Jac. 8. mentions all Supersedeases to be void, unless the process of
the Peace or good behavior, whereupon such Supersedeas is grounded, be granted
upon motion in Court, with able Sureties, toappear to the Judges of the same
Court, upon oath to be assessed at five pounds land, or ten pounds goods in the
Subsidy-book; the oaths, and names, and places of such sureties shall be
entered, and remain of Record in the same Court, unless it appears that the
Judges from whence the Supersedeas issued, does desire such Supersedeas, bona
fide, by some party grieved in Court from whence it came.

A Constable must take special care, having arrested any man, that he does not
wittingly or negligently let him escape; look what offense the party escaping
is culpable of, the same is the Constable or inferior Officer that apprehends
him; and it lies in the power of the Judges to assess what Fine in their
discretion they think fit; and if the offense be heinous, to the value of their
goods.

In London the Constables ought to be assistant to the College of Physicians
with seven miles thereof, 11 Henry 4.24. Stanf. 35 Physicians.
for the due Execution of such Statutes as do concern Physicians, Apothecaries
and Chirurgions, as you may read in the Statute of 14 Hen. 8. cap. 4, 5.23 Hen.
8.1.

A Constable may arrest any Purveyour that shall take any thing from any of the
King Subjects, (unless it be for the Kings household) and if he neglect his
office, Purveyour 23 Hen. 8.3.28 Hen. b. ca. 1.
he forfeits twenty pounds; neither can he take any thing of any person, but by
the delivery of the Mayor, Bayliffe, Constable, or other such Officer of the
place from whence the thing is taken.

Where any shall take any thing for the Kings house, it must be done by Tails,
or Indentures sealed between the Owner and the Taker in the presence of the
Constable or some other Officer, and the Owner to be satisfied for it, 10 Edw.
3. ca. 1.

No Taker shall take any kind of provisions whatsoever without a Commission,
and a blank for the County in which the said several things are taken, and the
prizes thereof shall be written, 1 and 2 Phil. and Mar. c. 9.
to which the Constable or other Officer shall put his Hand and Seal, and make
a breviate thereof in writing, 10 Edw. 3. cap. 1.
containing the provision so taken, upon pain of an hundred Marks, to give it
the Constable or other Officer, to deliver it to the Justices at the next
Quarter Sessions.

If a Purveyor shall seize any thing to the Kings use, 20 Hen. 6. cap. 8.
not exceeding forty shillings, and shall not pay ready money for it, the owner
of the goods taken may retain them; the Constable or other inferior Officer,
being required, ought to aid and assist the party, whose goods are taken, upon
the the penalty of the forfeiture of double the value.

Every Offender that shall be committed to the common Goal, his commitment
shall be at his own charge, his goods shall be sold, and the overplus paid to
him; 21 Jac. 28.3 Jac.
if no goods, a tax shall be made by the Constable, and Churchwardens, and two
or three other of the Inhabitants of the Parish where the Offender is taken,
which being allowed by a Justice of Peace, Concerning the conveyning of
Offenders to Prison.
if any that be taxed refuse to pay, by warrant from the Justice, the Constable
or other Officer may distrain and sell the goods, rendering the overplus.

Concerning the executing of the Statute 7 Jac. 4. Beggars and Rogues
against Vagabonds and Rogues, the Justices are to assemble twice a year; if
occasion be, oftener; and five days before the Justices may command the
Constables and other inferior Officers of all the Hundreds, Tythings and
Parishes, to search for such persons, or any other suspected, within their
Jurisdictions and Limits, and such as shall be found, bring to the said
Justices; if upon examination they shall be found of a loose and idle life, by
warrant they shall be sent to the House of Correction, there to be punished,
and set on work; and the Constables must give an account under the hand of the
Minister of the Parish, what dissolute persons they have punished, or sent to
the House of correction; and if they neglect their duty, the Justices shall
fine them, not exceeding forty shillings.

The Churchwardens of every Parish shall levy money for the relief of the Goal
Prisoners, Prisoners.
upon the penalty of five pounds to be paid every quarter to the High
Constables; and they must pay of the same at the next Quarter Sessions to the
Receiver that shall be appointed by the Justices at their Sessions, upon the
like penalty of five pounds.

High Constables ought to present to the Justices the defaults of Watches, and
the Kings Highways, that there be no ditches or bushes within two hundred
foot on every side of the Highways; and likewise if any shall lodge Strangers
for whom they will not answer; by the Statute of Winton. and 13 Edw. 1.

Upon pain of forty shillings, King's Bench and Marshalsey.
the High Constable must at every Quarter Sessions pay the money for maimed
Soldiers, and likewise such moneys to one of the Treasurers of the Shire, as
the Churchwardens have paid to him for the Prisoners of the Marshalsey and
King's Bench, upon pain of twenty shillings, 43 Eliz. 3.1 Jac. 25.

All popish Recusants shall be presented by the High Constables or
Churchwardens at the Quarter Sessions, Recusants
that come not to Church monthly, and the names of their children that are nine
years old and upwards, living with their Parents, and the names of their
servants, upon the penalty of twenty shillings for every default: And if they
be indicted and convicted, the Constable shall have out of their goods forty
shillings.

A Constable may compel any Innkeeper or Victualer to lodge any Traveller or
Stranger, Inholder
by the Statute 5 Edw. 4.3.3 Car. 1.

By the 3 Car. 3. Alehonses.
All that keep common Alehouses, that sell without License, shall forfeit
twenty shillings, which penalty, after warrant from the Mayor or Justices,
shall be levied by the Constables where the offense shall be committ4ed, to the
use of the poor of the same Parish by way of Distress, and in default of
payment to be sold within 3. days, rendering the overplus: It shall be a
conviction if in the view of such Mayor, or Justice, confession, or upon the
Oath of 2. Witnesses, which the Justices shall administer, and if the offender
have not goods, or pay not the penalty within six days, the Justices may
commit such offender to the Constable to be Whipped; and if the Constable or
Inferior Officer shall not execute the punishment, he shall be committed to
the Goal, until the offender be punished as aforesaid, or until the Constable
shall have paid for the neglect of his duty forty shillings, to the use of the
poor of the Parish.

Servants that are retained in Husbandry, Servants.
must be according to the Statute 5 Eliz. cap. 4. after such retainer, shall
not depart till the time is expired, or have a Testimonial under the hand of
the Constable, or other Officer, with two of the Inhabitants of the Parish
where they last served; and such Testimonial shall be dated by the Minister,
taking two pence for the Registring; and if he be retained in any other service
without such Testimonial, he shall be imprisoned till he procure one; if he get
none within twelve days next after his imprisonment, he shall be Whipped as a
Vagabond. Dabourers.


All Artificers or Mechanical Tradesmen the Constable shall set on work in time
of Corn or Hay Harvest, as are fit to labor by the day; and such as shall
refuse, such Officer may imprison in the stocks two days and one night, upon
the penalty of forty shillings.

The Statute 2, and 3 Phil. and Mar. and 5 Eliz. 13. Highwayes.
enables the Constables or other Officers, with the Churchwardens, yearly upon
Tuesday and Wednesday in Easter week, to call the Parish together, and to elect
two honest men of the Parishto to be Surveyors of the Highways, for the
repair of Highways leading to any Market Town, and to appoint six days for
the repair of those Highways before Midsomer next ensuing, and to give notice
the next Sunday after Easter six days, and by the Statutes above recited, must
have one part of the Estate indented, and may call the Constable to an account
for the forfeitures, for not amending the Highwayes, and may levy the same by
Distress, and sell the Distress, returning the overplus, according to the
Statute 18 Eliz. cap. 10. And if the Surveyers shall not have levied and
employed the same within a year after the offense committed, shall render an
account before two Justices of Peace.

By the Statute 18 Eliz. 7. Hedgebreakers.
Constables may, or any inferior Minister, Whip breakers of Hedges, and
robbers of Orchards and Gardens, stealers of Corn and Wood, as be committed to
him by the Justice, and if they neglect their duty herein, the Justice may
commit them to the common Goal till it be performed.

Every Constable by the Statute, Plague.
1 Jac. 31. that neglects their Office in the levying money, as they are
appointed by the Justices, or other head Officers of Towns incorportated, for
the relief of the poor infected with the Plague, as it has been Taxed,
forfeits for every offense twenty shillings, to the use of the poor infected;
and a Constable or other Officer, if the infection be out of the Town
Corporate, Privileged Place, or Market Town, may command persons infected to
keep their houses; and if the persons will wilfully go abroad, it is lawful for
the Watchmen with violence to enforce them; and if any person that is so
infected, or having a sore running upon him, go abroad, for the said offense he
shall be punished as a Vagabond, by the Statute 39 Eliz. 4. and to be bound to
the good behavior twelvemonths.

The Statute of 7 Jac. 11. Nets, and Setting-Dogs.
does give power to Constables and other head Officers, being warranted by two
Justices, to search the houses of persons suspected, except 40. l. per annum of
inheritance, or worth 400. l. in goods, for setting-Dogs, or that keep Nets to
take Pheasants and Partridges, and may take their Dogs, and cut their Nets.

The Statute of the 8 Hen. 6. c. 5. commands that there be in every City, Waits
and Measures
Borough, and Market Town, Weights and Measures sealed, at which the
Inhabitants may freely weigh. 11 Henry 7.4.

Such Merchandise shall be forfeited of any Wools, Merchandise.
or other Merchandise that shall be shipped in any suspected place adjoining to
the water, if there be not Indentures made between the owner, the Mayor, or
Constable of that place, 14 Hen. 6.5.

Every Mayor, Sheriff, Bailiff, Constable, or any other Minister of Justice,
within any of their Jurisdictions or limits, upon the pain of forty shillings
for every default, ought to search once every month at the least, the places
where any unlawful Games shall be used, and may arrest and imprison both the
Keepers and the Gamesters; and if any of the Officers aforesaid shall know of
any Tradesmen whasoever, Mariner, Fisherman, or Water-man, that does play at
Tables, Dice, Cards, Tennis, Quoiting, Logating, or any other unlawful Game out
of Christmas, or out of their Masters house in the Christmas, unless by the
Masters license, that has a 100. l. per annum, then such Officers may commit
them to Ward, till he be bound to the King in Such a sum as the Officer shall
think fit, not to use the same again. 23. Hen. 8.3.

By the Statute 21 Hen. 8.3. Bridges.
four Justices are authorized to make a Tax of money for the repair of any
decayed Bridge in the Highway; and this must be made by the Constable, or two
of the suffioientest Inhabitants of the Parish.

The 23 Hen. 8.4. gives power to all Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Vessels.
and Constables, (where no Wardens of Coopers be) to search, view, and gage
Barrells, Kilderkins, Firkins, and other Vessels to be made there, to have the
advantage as the Wardens of Coopers in the City of London has.

The 27 Eliz. cap. 14. Making Malt.
does enable the Constables of all Boroughs, or Market Towns, to view, search,
and servey all such Malt, to be made of sold; and if any made at any time
(except in June, July, and August) but it shall have at the least three weeks
in the sat floor steeping, and sufficient drying thereof in the months
aforesaid, seventeen days at the least; and if any sold that is good mingled
with bad, or made of Mow-burnt Barley, or spired, or not sufficiently well
trodden, rubbed, or fanned, where half a peck of dust, or more may be fanned
out of one Quarter, then may the Constable, with the advice of one Justice of
Peace of the same County, cause the Malt to be sold to such persons at
reasonable prices, under the common price of the Market, as to his discretion
shall seem meet.

The 13 Eliz. 2. and 3. County stock.
puts the power in the Constable and Churchwardens of each Parish, if the
Parishioners disagree, to Rate and allot within their parish, their Assesment
for the Shire-stock, wherewith the Parish was charged at the quarter Sessions,
and may levy the same, upon any of the Parishoners by distress and sale of his
goods, restoring the overplus to him.

By the 21 Jac. 7. Tippling
all Constables and Churchwardens shall in their Oaths be charged to present
the offenses against the statute, 1 Jac. 9. Of all Innkeepers and
Alehouse-keepers, that suffers any to continue Tippling in their houses (except
laboring men in dinner time, or lodger there, during their work, or upon
sufficient grounds to be allowed by two Justices) forfeits ten shillings to the
poor of the Parish; or that shall vend or sell less then a full quart of the
best Ale or Beer for a penny, forfeits twenty shillings to the said use, the
offenses viewed by the Mayor, Bailiff or Justice in their several limits, or
proved by the Oath of two witnesses, and according to the 21 Jac. 7. one
witness or his own Oath is sufficient to convict any; penalty is to be levied
by the Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish where the offenses are done;
in default of payment within six days, the distress to be apprized and sold,
and the overplus restored to the party, upon pain of forty shillings to the
use of the poor, if the duty be neglected.

The 1 Jac. 29. speaks that all Justices of Peace, Victualing houses.
Mayors, Bailiffs, Head-officers, and Constables, in Lent-time may enter into
all houses for Victualing, and where any flesh shall be suspected to be
dressed, and finding any dressed in Lent-time, or on Fish-days, (except
provided for Ships, or killed three days before Easter) may seize the same as
forfeited, and give it to the poor.

In the 3 Jac. 4. Presentment of Recusants.
the Statute enables Constables and Churchwardens to be present once every
year at the Quarter Sessions, to present the monthly absence of Recusants from
Church, and their Childrens Names, nine years old and upwards, living with
their Parents, with their Servants, and in default thereof, forfeits twenty
shillings; and if any of them be indicted and convicted, (not before convicted)
shall have forty shillings of the Recusants goods.

The 3 Jac. 12. instructs the Constables and Churchwardens of all
Market Towns, Parishes, and Liberties, where any offense is committed about the
erecting new Wears along the Seashore, or in any Harbor, Haven or Creek, for
the destruction of any Spawn or Seafish, in any Wear, or other Engine, within
five miles of the mouth of any Haven, or with fishing with any Haynet, or
Drag-net, under three inches meash, may levy the forfeiture by distress, or
sale of the offenders goods, returning the overplus.

The 7 Jac. 3. enjoynes the Parson or Vicar of all Towns and Parishes,
Appretices.
not incorporate, with the Constables and Church-warens, Collectors, with the
Overseers for the poor, concerning money given for binding Apprentices of the
poors Children within their Parishes, and they have the placing of them; and to
give such moneys with them as they shall think fit, according to the will of
the donor; and if they make default, then every one so offending forfeits three
pound: and the Master, Mistress, or Dame of such Apprentices, shall bne bound
with one or two sufficient sureties in double the sum they have received with
the Apprentices to the Parson, Vicar, etc. to repay the money so received at 7.
years end, or within three months next after. And if the Apprentice, Master or
Mistress, happen to die within the term, then within one year next after such
death the Parson, Vicar, or Constable, shall put forth such moneys within three
months after their receipt; and if there be not fit persons to be bound in the
Towns and Parishes, then in the next Parishes adjoining the poorest Children
may be placed by the discretion of the Parson, etc. And that no Apprentice be
above fifteen years of age to be bound; and the Parson, Vicar, Constable, etc.
shall every year in Easter-week, or within a month, give up his account before
four, three or two Justices of the Peace inhabiting in or next to the said
Towns and Parishes, for all such moneys as they have employed in binding of
Apprentices; and of all Bonds and Obligations for the payments thereof: and the
moneys remaining in their hands, they are at such accounts, or ten days after
to deliver it to their Successors, or such as are in their places, with the
bonds and moneys as they have in their hands not employed.

The 21 Jac. 29. Cursing and swearing
does enable all Officers, whether Justices of Peace, Mayors, Bailiffs,
Constables, etc. where any shall swear or curse in the hearing of any of the
aforesad Officers, or shall by two witnesses, or their own confession before
any officer where the offense is committed, be convinced by this Act to
minister an Oath; the offender for every offense shall pay one shilling to the
use of the poor of the said parish; and it is warranted by this Statute, that
the Constables, Churchwardens, and Overseers, may levy such sums of money as
shall be forfeited by distress or sale of the offenders goods, rendering the
overplus; and if he have no goods, and be above the age of 12 years, he shall
be set in the stocks three hours; if under the said age, and shall not
instantly pay the 12 pence, then by a warrant from the Justice or head officer,
etc. shall be whipped by the Constable, Parent or Master, in his presence; all
offenses against this Statute, shall be done within twenty days after the
offense committed.

By the 1 Car. 1. Profaning the Sabbath.
there shall be no meetings or assemblies of the people out of their own
parishes on the Lords day, for any sports or pastimes whatsoever, as
Bear-baitings, Bull-baitings, or other unlawful sports or pastimes; if any
offend herein, the forfeiture is 3s. 4d. to the use of the poor of the said
parish where the offense is committed; it is a sufficient conviction if it be
done in the presence of any officer, or coufession of the offender, or one
witness or more upon Oath: which the said Justice or any chief officer by this
Act is authorized to administer; and if any of the said Officers find any
person-offending, by warrant under his hand and seal, to the Constables or
Churchwardens of the parish where the offense is done, to levy the penalty by
distress or sale of Goods, rendering, the overplus to the offender; in default
of distress to put the offend or in the Stocks three hours; the offend or must
be prosecuted within one month.

The 3 Car. 1. punishes all Carriers, Carrier or Waggoner.
Waggoners, Carter, Wainman, or Drover that travels on the Lords day, with the
forfeiture of 20s. and all Butchers that kill or sell any victuals upon that
day lose 6s. 8d. The sums and penalties after conviction before a Justice of
peace, or any other head-officer by warrant from the Justice, may be levied by
the Constable or Churchwardens, to the use of the poor where the offense is
committed, by distress and sale of goods, rendering the overplus; here the
conviction shall be by view of the Justice or other head-officer, confession,
or upon oath of two or more witnesses; the offense to be prosecuted within six
months.

Of the Sabbath and Holy. days.
BY the Statute of the 2 and 3 of Edw. 6. cap. 19. 1 Car. 1. and and 3 Car. 11.
The Constable is enabled to restrain all concourses of people, that come out of
the limits of their own Parishes, for any pastimes whatsoever; And that there
be not any Barebaiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, Common-plays, or unlawful
Pastimes on the Lords Day, and if any offend herein, by the view of one Justice
of Peace in the County, or the chief Officer in a Corporation, by his own
confession, or one witness upon Oath, before one Justice, or such an Officer,
forfeits to the poors use, 3. shillings 4. pence, to be levied by distress and
sale of goods of the Offender, by warrant from the same Justice, or Officer, to
the Constable or Churchwardens of the Parish; and in case no distress, the
Offender is to sit in the stocks 3. hours. The prosecution upon this Statute,
must be within a month of the offense committed; and in case the Officer be
questioned, the General Issue is to be pleaded, and any special matter may be
given in Evidence, 1 Car. 1.

The 21 Jac. 7. says, Drunkenness.
all persons that shall be drunk, it shall be a conviction upon the view of any
Magistrate, confession, or one witness proving the same; the forfeiture is 5.
shillings to be paid within one week after the offense committed to the
Churchwardens of the Parish, to the use of the poor; in default of payment, to
be levied by distress or sale of the offenders goods, by warrant from the
Justice, before whom the conviction was; if the offender is not able, to be set
in the Stocks 6. hours; and if the Constable or other Officer neglect his duty
herein in punishing, or levying the forfeiture according to the Act, he
forfeits 10. shillings to the poors use, where the offense is committed, to be
levied by distress or sail of Goods, rendering the overplus to the offender; And
all persons that shall continue tiplingin any Inn, Victualling-house, or
Alehouse in the same City, Town or Village where he inhabits, excepting
handy-crafts-men and travelers, upon working days, one hour at dinner,
laborers and workmen, which for following their work, sojourn or lodge in such
houses, other then for urgent occasions allowed by two Justices, and the same
be seen by any Mayor, or other Head officer or J. of Peace within their limits,
or by Oath or two Witnesses; but by the Statute of 2 Jac. 5. the Magistrates
view, his own confession, or one witness is sufficient to convict him; the
forfeiture is 3s. 4d. to the poor use where the offense is committed, to be
levied as aforesaid; and if the Offender be not able to pay, to sit four hours
in the Stocks; all these offenses are to be presented by the Constables or
Churchwardens before the Justices of Assize in their circuits, Justices of
peace in Sessions, Mayors, Bailiffs, and other Head-officers of Cities and
Towns corporate, that have power to inquire of trespasses, and in Court Leets;
they that shall be convict the second time, shall be bound with two Sureties in
Ten pound, to be from thence of good behavior, but none shall be punished by
this Statute, unless he be presented, indicted, or convicted within 6 months
after the offense committed; and the oath of him that confesses the offense,
shall be a conviction against any that offends at the same time.

The Constables Oath.
YOu shall well and truly serve the Kings Majesty in the Office of a Constable,
and shall see the kings Peace to be well and truly keept to the utmost of your
power; you shall arrest all such persons as in your presence shall ride or go
armed offen sively, or shall commit or make any rito, affray, or other breach
of the peace; you shall do your best endeavor upon complaint to you made, to
apprehend all Felons, Barretors, or Rioters, or persons riotously assembled;
and if any such offenders shall make resistance with force, you shall levy Hue
ad Cry, and shall pursue them until they be taken; you shall do your best
endeavor that the watch in your town be duly kept, and that Hue and Cry be
duly pursued according to the Statute; and that the Statute made for punishing
vagabonds, rogues, and night-walkers, and such other idle persons coming within
your liberties, be duly put in execution; you shall have a watchful eye to such
persons as shall manage, or keep any common house or place where unlawful
Games are used, or such as shall frequent such places contrary to the Statute;
And you shall have a care for the maintaining of Archery. At your Assizes,
Sessions, or Leet, you shall present all the Offenses contrary to the Statutes,
made and provided for the restraint of inordinate haunting, and tiplingin Inns,
Taverns, and Alehouses, and other Victualing places for the repressing of
Drunkenness, and profane Swearing; you shall true presentment make of all
Bloodshedding, Affrayes, Outcries, Rescues, or other Offenses committed or
done against the Kings peace within your limits; you shall well and duly
execute all Precepts and Warrants to you directed from the Justices of Peace,
and others who have authority in this County; you shall well and truly,
according to your knowledge, power, and ability, do and execute all other
things belonging to the office of a Constable, so long as you shall continue in
the said office: So help you God.

Who be Rogues by the Statute.
ALL persons are Rogues above the age of seven years that shall call himself a
Scholar, Rogues.
and go about a begging; Sea-faring-men not suffering Shipwreck, or having a
Justices testimonial of or near the place where he landed, if he beggs, or
exceeds the time of his Testimonial; all that begs, or uses any subtle craft,
or unlawful Games or Plays; that pretends skill in Physiogonomy and Palmestry,
foretells Destinies or Fortunes, wandering persons, that call themselves a
Proctor, Procuror, Patent-gatherer, or Collector for any Goal or Hospital, all
Fencers, Bearwards, and Minstrels; all Juglers Tinkers, Pedlers, Petty-chapmen,
or Glass-men that wander abroad; all common laborers wandering abroad, not
having means to maintain themselves, being able of body to work, and refuse to
work for lawful wages; all freed from prison, and begs for Fees; all that
pretend loss by Fire; all (not being a Fellon) that call themselves Egyptians.
By the Statute 1 Jac. 31. such as go abroad wilfully, being infected with the
Plague, and are commanded to keep their houses, although no sore about them; by
the Statute of 39 Eliz. 4. they likewise are deemed, and taken to be
incorrigible Rogues: the Constables and Tything-men of all Hundreds and
Parishes shall upon the apprehending of such Rogues, with the aid of the
Minister, and one of the Parish, appoint such Rogues to be whipped until his
body be bloody, and send him from Parish to Parish, by the officers to the
place where he was born, if it may be known by his confession; if not, then to
the Parish where he or she last dwelt by the space of a year; if that cannot be
known, to the place where they passed last without punishment; and after such
whipping, such Rogues shall have a Testimonial sealed and subscribed by the
Constable or other Officer with the Minister, or any two of them; the substance
where of shall be Registered by the Minister in a book upon pain of 5. shillings.

The manner of the Testimonial.
N. W. a sturdy Rogue of middle stature, aged 16 years, describing the private
marks in his face, and the manner of his habit, with the place of his birth and
County, and the day of the month be was taken begging, and was there lawfully
whipped; and is to travel the direct way, naming the place; and is allowed
three days for his going home, and no more, at his peril; sealed and
subscribed the day and year above written.

By us A. B. Minister. W. A. Constable. W. E. Parishoner.


And such Rogues that fulfils not the contents of his Testimonials, then he or
she shall be whipped in all places where default is made, till they repair to
the place so appointed: And this Testimonial must be carried with them, and it
is required to put down the several marks on the bodies of such Rogues, that
the Officers may not be deceived: And if he will not be reformed, any two
Justices of the Piece may commit him to the house of Correction, one being of
the Quorum.

The Statute 1 Jac. 7. commands all persons to apprehend such Rogues or
Vagabonds, as shall come to their Houses to beg Alms, and them to carry to the
next Constable or Tythingman, upon the penalty of 20. shillings for every
default.

All Constables, Head-borrows and Tything-men, that shall make any default in
the executing of their Offices, shall lose for every default ten shillings. And
by the Statute, 1 Jac. 7. the Constable or Tything-man forfeits twenty
shillings. And any other person that shall disturb any Officer in the execution
of his Office against Rogues, shall forfeit for every default five pound, and
be bound to his good behavior.

All Constables and Tything-men, shall take and punish all Rogues and Beggars
that shall be set a shore here fgrom Ireland, Scotland, and the Isle of Man,
till he come to the next Port or Parish, where he was first Landed, upon the
forfeiture of ten shillings.

If a Rogue affirms that he was born in such a Town, in such a County, and it
appears to the contrary, the Statute then terms him an incorrigible Rogue, and
he is to be sent to the House of correction; and if there be no House of
correction, then to the Goal until the next Sessions, and there to be ordered
according to the Statute. If the Husband and Wife have a house, and they wander
up and down the Country, they must be sent to the Town where the House is; and
so must likewise Inmates: And the Wife and Children under seven years, must be
sent to the Husband; if he be dead, then with the Wife where she was born or
dwelt last; and the vagrant children above seven years of age, must be sent to
the place of their birth; and if the vagrant Parents with their children under
seven years old be placed at the place of their birth, or last place of their
abode, if it shall happen afterward that their Parents die there, or run away,
yet the children once settled must there remain, though they grow to the age of
seven years; and if the Wife be a vagrant Rogue, they must be sent to the
Husband, though a Servant in another place.

Where any not being Rogues, do travel with their children through any parish,
if Father or Mother die or run away, the place is not to keep them where they
die, nor send them away, but only in charity, except they become wandering
Beggars.

And where the Parents have work, they are to find their children with their
labor; But where there is not sufficient, the Parish must bind them
Apprentices according to the Statute.

None but vagrants shall be put out of the Parish where they dwell, nor
releived by the Town, except impotent people, but ought to set themselves at
work; if they cannot, the Overseers must set them at work; And all such persons
as be of ability to work, are not to be sent to their place of birth, or last
dwelling, by the space of a year, but to the house of correction, according to
both the Statutes of the Poor, and Rogues; but if they have any lawful means to
live on, though they work not, yet they shall not be sent.

If any Officer shall remove any out of the Parish, that ought not to be put
out, it is against the Statute that is provided for the relief of the poor, and
ought to be fined, and if any have been so sent, they are to be sent back.

Where any if sent to a Parish where he ought, and he is refused, whether a
sturdy Rogue or impotent, the forfeiture is five pound; and he that is so sent,
is to be left to the Churchwardens and Overseers; And all Rogues must be sent
by a Pasport and conveyed from Parish to Parish, as the Statute requires, upon
the penalty of five pound. And likewise where the Officer will not receive a
Rogue to convey him to the place where he was born or last dwelt, the
forfeiture is five pound.

None may be permitted to beg by the Highwayes, though in their Parish, nor to
take relief at any man's door, in the same parish, unless by the appointment of
the Overseers.

In the word Parents is meant a Father or a Grandfather, Mother or Grandmother,
being able persons; and in the word Children, is any Child or Grandchild; and
all Parsons or Vicars, may relief the poor of their parish as well as others
that dwell in the parish.

Where any man has an impropriation of any Tithes, Cole-mynes or Lands in
manual Occupation, is chargeable; and those that have saleable Woods, where
they receive any annual benefit, shall be taxed to all the aforesaid payments;
and where there is but one Churchwarden, it is sufficient to charge any person
with the Overseers.

No Justice of the Peace are to meddle in the chosing of a Constable, either in
Sessions, or out of Sessions, where it has been time out of mind used in a
Court Leet, unless there has been some neglect, or misgovernment in the said
Court. The King's Bench is to decide the difference, if any Justice of Peace
shall intermeddle to remove a Constable that has been chosen by the Leet, and
the Leet may put him in again. For there always has been a question of the
Justices power herein, as you may read, Trin. 9 Jac. Ban. Regis, and in the
Report of Styles 362.

But it has been agreed by all the Judges, if the Leet do not choose a fit man
Constable, or neglect to give him his Oath, or does any unlawful act in the
choosing him, the Justices may choose one; Steels Rep. 71. Mich. 22. Car. Ban.
Regis.

And if a Constable die or be removed, then the Leet, if near, may choose one
otherwise; it must be done by the Sessions, or out of Sessions, by the two
next Justices, and the Lord (if any miscarriage be proved) shall loose his
Leet; and this was the Resolution of all the Judges in 1633.

But now there is a provision made by the 14 Car. 2. that if such officer
either remove or die, any of two next Justices, or any other two Justices may
swear a new one to continue till the Leet or quarter Sessions, and then the
Steward of the Leet or Justices, are to choose or swear an other. Or,

And if a Constable have served his Office a year, the Justices at their
Quarter Sessions may discharge him of the Office, and put in another till the
next Court Leet.

You shall read Trin. 9. Ban. Regis. that where there is no Leet for the
Hundred, the Justices shall make High Constables, and this has been constantly
done by the Justices.

Crook 1. part 283. says, that all Attorneys are privileged from serving any
Office, and the reason is, because they attend the Kings Majesty's Courts, and
if any should be chosen, the Law allows them a Writ.

And likewise every Servant of the Kings Majesty's, in ordinary, are
privileged, because they are always supposed to be attendants upon his Person
in his Court or affairs. Vide Resol. of the Judges, 1633.

And if any be chosen to the Office of Constable, and refuses to serve, he
shall be fined or imprisoned for his contempt, and the Judges of the
King's Bench may compel him to it if he have not some legal impediment, Vide
Crook 1. 409.

The office of a Constable of a Hundred, may not make a Deputy for the
Execution of his Office, yet a Deputy may do many businesses in his Office in
the Constables name, but the Constable shall be respondent for the same. Vide
Resol. Judges in 1633.

Where in some Parishes or Towns, the custom of the place is, that the Office
shall go from house to house, is not good, but yet where there is a custom
that every man that is sufficient in the place, shall serve the Office, or find
a man to do it, may be good, Crook. 1.283.

A Constable of one Town shall not execute his office in another Town where he
is not Constable, and the person that is so chosen must be person a habilis and
idonea: Or else he may be removed. vid. le Statutae 10 Eliz. 4.18.

The Ministers Office.
THe Minister or Curate of every Parish ought to Register the Testimonial of
every Servant at his departure out of his service, and two pence is allowed for
the Registring.

He is to aid the Constable or Tythingman in the whipping of all Rogues, and to
Register them, and to send a Testimonial with the Rogue after he is whipped,
upon the forfeiture of five shillings for every default.

He has power to give License to any that is sick during the time of his
sickness, License to eat flesh.
to eat flesh upon days prohibited, and shall have four pence for Registring
the same in the Church book, if the parties sickness continues above nine days
after the License granted: But the Statute 1 Jac. 29. that no sick person by
virtue of 5 Eliz. 5. is warranted to eat any Butchers meat in Lent, or any
other days prohibited, but the sick person may incur the penalty of the said
Statute.

If any person shall after notice given by the Minister, Coming to Church.
Curate, or Churchwardens, maintain or keep in his house, or any where under
his tuition, any person that wilfully refuses to come to Church, forfeits ten
pound for every month; and by 35 Eliz. 1. the the Minister or Curate of the
Parish may require any person within three months after his conviction, to make
public confession and submission in the time of Divine Service on a Sunday or
Holy day.

The 35 Eliz. 5. gives power to the Minister or Curate of the Parish, and to
the Constable and Tythingman of any Town, to which any Recusant is sent, to
enter the same into a book to be kept for the purpose, and shall certify the
same at the next Quarter Sessions for that County.

By the Statute of the 3. of King Jac. all Ministers after morning Prayer or
Preaching, Solemnizing the 5. November.
shall publicly and distinctly read the said Statute concerning the miraculous
delivery of the King and State from the Powder Treason, giving to Almighty God
a Sollemn Thanksgiving annually, in all Churches within his Majesty's Dominions.

He that shall wilfully disturb a Preacher in his preaching, or shall rescue
him that has so done; a Justice upon complaint only, for six days, may commit
him to custody; but after the six days, two Justices must take the
examination, and finding it either by his own confession, or proof, or by two
witnesses that he is guilty, may commit him to prison for 3. months. Vide le
Statutae, 2 Phil. and Mar. cap. 3.

But this Act mentions not whether the evidence shall be by Oath, nor impowers
the Justice to give an Oath, and therefore it is the surest way, to leave the
Offenders punishment to the Sessions.

And if an Offender against this Act, does make an escape, the Town where he
escapes, shall be punished. But no mention is made in the said Act, whether
the evidence shall be by Oath; neither are the Justices empowered to give an
Oath; Therefore it is the best way to leave the Offender to the Sessions.

Where any man shall affront, threaten, or force any Minister to use any other
Service, or hinder him in doing the Service according to the Book of
Common Prayer (that is by sundry Acts established.) For the 1. offense, shall
pay 100. Marks, for default of paying within six weeks after conviction,
imprisonment without Bayl. For the 2. offense 400. Marks, nonpayment in six
weeks, 12. months imprisonment without Bayl. For the 3. offense, the loss of
all his Goods, and Chattels, and Imprisonment during life.

By the 2 and 3 Edw. 6. the first offense is ten pound, and for non-payment
after conviction, Imprisonment 3. months without Bayl. For the 2. offense, 20.
pound, which if not paid in six weeks after Conviction, imprisonment six months
without bayl. 3. Offense the loss of all his goods and chattels, and
impisonment during life.

A CONVENTICLE.
A Conventicle is described by the Cannon, The definition of a Conventicle.
to be a meeting of Ministers or others, to consult about any thing that shall
tend to the depravation, impeachment, or abuse of the Doctrine of the Church of
England, or of the Book of Common Prayer, or of any part of the Discipline, or
Government of the Church, and by the Cannon the punishment is Excommunication,
ipso facto Can. 73.

Vide le Statue 35 Elizabeth 1. punishes all persons that obstinately do refuse
to come to Church, and persuade others to impugn the Queens authority in the
Law Ecclesiastical, and to avoid the inconveniences of the dangerous practices
of seditious, schismatical and disloyal sectaries, or meetings of people, under
color or pretense of any exercise of Religion, contrary to the Laws and
Statutes, vide Lamberts Justice of Peace; in title Commission of the Peace:
There he describers it to be a meeting under color of exercise of Religion, to
oppose the Kings Authority in causes Ecclesiastical, or against the Laws and
Statutes of the Realm.

By this Statute, the Constable is commanded to go where he hears their
Meetings are, and to carry them before the next Justice, and after being
thereof convicted, is to be committed to Prison, and there to remain without
Bayl, till he conform or come to some Church, Chapel, or Place of
Common Prayer, to hear Divine Service according to the Laws and Statutes; And
being so convicted of this offense, shall refuse to conform, and come to
Church, and to make his submission within 3. months after, being required by
the Bishop of the Diocese, Minister of the place, or one Justice of the County
where he lives, then such person at the quarter Sessions, or Assizes, shall
there take his Oath to abjure the Realm for ever, unless Licensed by the King
and his Council to retune. And his Adjuration shall be certified by the
Justices to the Judges of Jail-delivery, and if he refuse to abjure, or
departing, return without the Kings License, shall suffer as a Fellon.

It is further explained by the said Statute, that he that shall abjure, or
shall refuse so to abjure, being required, shall forfeit all his good and
chattels for ever, and lose all his Lands and Tenements for life, and no
longer; but no loss of Dower or Corruption of blood, to be in this case.

The Churchwardens Duty.
BY the Statute 12 Hen. Their office by the commonlaw.
7. in fine Churchwardens by the common Law of England, are taken by way of
favor to the Church to diverse purposes, and as it were for a Corporation,
being enabled to take Moneys, Goods and Chattels, and may Sue and be Sued for
them to the use and profits of the Parish, so that any man may in the time of
his Life, or by his last will, give and bequeath moneys, or other moveable
goods, either to the Churchwardens, or to the Parishioners of a Parish for the
separation of the Church, or for the buying of Books, Communion Cups, or other
Ornaments for the Church; and the Law so favorably does take it, that its not
materially needful to express it in apt words or writing; as for example, if
one give a Bell, and hang it up in the Steeple, or make a Pew in the Church,
and makes no word of writing thereof, yet it is by this Dedicated and given to
the Church: Lib. intra. fol. 570. 11 Hen. 4.12. 8 Hen. 7.12.

The Churchwardens may maintain an appeal of Robbery, against him that steals
any thing out of the Church, being once in the possession thereof, or an action
of trespass, as you may read 37 Hen. 6.30. and 34.11 Hen. 4.12. 8 Edw. 4.16.
and and if the Parson or Vicar shall take any of the Goods belonging to the
Church, the Churchwardens may bring their Action, and recover damage to the
use of the Parish; and if those Churchwardens dye before the Action be
brought, or the Goods for which they sue be recovered, their suecessors may
bring their Action

And if any of the Churchwardens do waste the Goods of the Church, the Parish
may put out those and choose new, and the new churchwardens may bring an
action of Account against the old, and compel them to make satisfaction to the
parish for the wrong they have sustained during their office; and although the
custom of some parishes is to continue them, some one year, some two years,
some three years; yet upon any default in them, the parishioners may at any
time when they please proceed to a new Election, and call them to an account;
yet shall the former churchwardens have an allowance of all such sums of
money as they have needfully expended upon the church, or upon meet and lawful
Ornaments; and this they are compellable to do by the Laws Ecclesiastical; and
they shall have allowance of moneys upon their Accounts that they have paid for
the relief of prisoners in the common Goal, as you may see in the Statute 14
Eliz. cap. 5. and of any other thing the Law charges them to do; but in Lands,
or the profits thereof they must not meddle at all; as if the walls, windows,
or doors of the Church be broken, or trees in the churchyard be cut down, or
Grass eaten up; but this belongs properly to the Parson or Vicar, as you may
see in the Statute, 11 Hen. 3.13. 12 Hen. 7.77. 13 Hen. 7.9.

All persons shall repair to their parish Church, Coming to Church.
except they shall be hindered by sickness, or any other lawful excuse, or to
some other place where the Common Prayer is used upon Sundays or other days,
which are usually to be kept Holy, and shall then and there sit orderly during
the time of Common Prayer and Preaching, upon pain to be punished, according to
the Churches censure, and upon the forfeiture of twelve pence for every person
so offending, to be by the Churchwardens, levied to the poors use, of their
Goods, Lands, and Tenements; vid. 1 Eliz. cap. 2.

The Constables and Churchwardens of all Parishes, Highwayes.
shall every year on Tuesday and Wednesday in Easter week, call the
Parishioners together choosing then two honest Surveyors of the Highways, of
the said Parish, for the year ensuing, which leads to any Market Town; if they
refuse the execution of the office, they shall forfeit twenty shillings; The
Constables and Churchwardens shall then name six days for the amendment of the
said ways before Midsummer next, giving knowledge of the said six days the next
Sunday after Easter, and shall call the Constable to an account, having one
part of the Estreats indented.

Where any shall eat flesh, Eating flesh.
either in Lent, or any other days observed for Fish-days, he forfeits three
pound for every offense, or shall suffer three months imprisonment; and every
person in whose house any offense shall be done, being privy, and having
knowledge thereof, not disclosing the same to an officer that has power to
punish, shall forfeit for every offense forty shillings; the third part of all
the forfeits shall be to the use of the poor of the Parish, where the offense
is committed; after conviction, to be levied by the Churchwardens, as you may
read, 5 Eliz. cap. 5.

All Licenses that are to be given by the Bishop of the Diocese, License to eat
flesh.
or by the Parson, Vicar or Curate, in case of sickness, ought to be Registered,
if the sickness continue above 8. days after it is granted, in the Church-Book,
with the privity of one of the Churchwardens there, and the party that is
Licenced, shall give four pence for it. vid. 5 Eliz. 5. the duties of Ministers
before.

A Justice of Peace may appoint the Churchwardens, Poor.
and 4, 3, or 2 of the Parish, to be overseers of the poor; and they may by
consent of the Major part of them, take order for the setting married or
unmaried persons on work, that have no means or ordinary trade to live by; and
the Children of such Parents as shall be unable to maintain them, and may set
up any Trade or Mystery for that purpose, and may Tax as well Inhabitants as
Occupiers of Lands in the Parish to pay weekly such sums of moneys as they
shall think meet for a stock, for the releifof the impotent poor there, and for
to put out Apprentices of such Children; And they to whom they shall be put,
shall take, receive, and keep them as Apprentices, and may do any thing
concerning the premises, as they shall think meet, vid. 1 Jac. 51. 2 Jac. 28. 3
Car. 4.

The Churchwardens, and Overseers shall render an account before two Justices
of Peace of their Money, stock and other things concerning their Office, and
such Moneys as shall be remaining in their hands, to the new ones that are
chosen in their places, upon the forfeiture of twenty shillings, for every
monthly default, without cause to be shown and allowed by two Justices.

The Churchwardens and Overseers are empowered by the said Stature, by warrant
under two Justices hands, to levy all taxations by distress and sale of their
goods, as shall be found in default, rendering the overplus to the party, and
may with the License of the Lord of the Manor erect convenient houses for the
poor of their parish at their general charges; and when the yearly Stock is
assessed by the Justices at the quarter Sessions, it shall be by the agreement
of all the parish; and in default, by the Churchwardens and constables of the
Parish, or the Major part of them, who may levy the same by distress and sale
of the goods of such as refuse to pay their part, rendering the overplus to the
owners; and the Churchwardens or Overseers must pay it to the high Constable
within whose limit the Parish is situate ten days before the end of every
quarter Sessions, such Moneys as the Parish ought to pay for the relief of the
prison in the Marshalsey, and Kings Bench, upon the pain of ten shillings for
every default of payment.

By the 43 Eliz. cap. 3. Soldiers moneys.
if the Parishioners agree not to the rate for the maintenance of disabled
soldiers, the Churchwardens and Constables of the Parish, or the Major part
of them may levy such rates by distress and sale of their Goods, of any that
refuse to pay, rendering the overplus; which must be collected and paid over to
the High Constable, within whose Hundred the Parish is; and all such sums of
Moneys as are collected ten days before every quarter Sessions of the peace
upon the penalty of twenty shillings for every default.

The Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 9. says, that if Constables and Churchwardens
neglect their office in punishing Innkeepers, Victuallers, and Alehouses, by
the space of twenty days in certifying their defaults, they shall forfeit
twenty shillings to the poors use.

The Statute of 1 Jac. cap. 27. inhibits all persons to keep any Greyhound for
the coursing of any Hair or Deer, or any setting Dogs, or Nets for the taking
of any Phesants or Partridges; the Churchwardens have power by this Act, where
the offense is committed, to receive to the use of the poor of the Parish
forty shillings. 3 Jac. cap. 4. enables the Churchwardens and Constables of
all Towns, and Parishes, to present in the quarter Sessions, or at the Assizes,
the monthly absence of Recusants from Church; and they are to certify the
names of their children above nine years old, and the names of their Servants,
upon the forfeiture of twenty shillings; and if upon the Indictment they be
convicted, they shall have forty shillings out of their goods; and the
Churchwardens may be Warrant from one Justice of Peace, levy to the use of
the poor, the offenders Goods, by distress or sale, rendering the overplus; and
the forfeiture is 12. pence for every default, in not coming to Church every
Sunday, according to the Statute 1 Eliza. ca. 2.

By the Statute of 1 Eliz. cap. 2. Absence from Church.
the Churchwardens may levy to the use of the poor, where the default is,
twelve pence; by warrant from one Justice of Peace, by sale of the Goods of the
offender, rendering the overplus, for not coming to Church every sabbath day.

The Statute of 3 Jac. cap. 10. says, Offenders conveyed to prison.
that the Constable and Churchwarden with two or three of the Parishioners may
make a Tax, where an offender is committed to prison, and has not sufficient
for his conduction thither.

The Statute of 21 J. 18. Clothing
says, the Clothier that makes any cloth that is not good and warrantable by
that Statute, forfeits five pound by a warrant from two Justices or more; the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the poor of the Parish where the default is
committed, may levy the penalty for every cloth deceitably made, by distress
and sale of their Goods, rendering the overplus; the distribution is to the poor
of the said Parish; and where no distress is, the offend or shall be committed
to the Goal, until payment be made to the Churchwardens and Overseers, to the
use abovesaid: And they to be accomptable for those moneys, as they are for
other moneys, which is by them collected for the poor; vid. 43 Eliz. cap. 3.
and by the Statute 21 Jac. cap. 18. Two third parts of the forfeitures for what
of length, breadth, or weight of Cloths by any other Statute now in force,
shall be levied, distributed, and accounted as the forfeiture aforesaid.

Of Quakers.
THe Statute of the 14 Car. 1. cap. 2. says, The difinition of a Quaker
that Quakers by this Act, are such persons as holds dangerous Opinions, and
such as holds, that the taking of an Oath in any case whatsoever, although
before a lawful Magistrate, is altogether unlawful, and contrary to the Word of
God; And do refuse an Oath lawfully rendered.

That if any person who shall maintain, that the taking of an Oath in any case
whatsoever, before a lawful Magistrate is unlawful, and against the Word of
God, and shall wilfully refuse an Oath, bound to take, being duly tendered to
him; or shall persuade or endeavor to persuade any other person to whom it
shall be tendered, to refuse to take it; or shall by Printing, Writing, or
otherwise go about to maintain or defend that the taking of it is unlawful; or
the said persons called by the name of Quakers, shall go from the places of
their dwellings, and assemble to the number of 5. or more, of 16. years old and
upwards at one time, and in one place, under pretense of joining in a Religious
worship (not Authorized) by the Law of the Realm) being convict by the verdict
of 12. men, or his own confession, or the notorious evidence of the Fact; For
the first offense shall forfeit any sum, not above five pound, to be levied
by distress and sale of his Goods, by warrant of the parties before whom the
conviction, shall be for want of distress or non-payment in a week, to be
committed to the common Goal, or House of Correction for three months without
Bayl, to be kept at hard labor.

For the second offense, the forfeture is 10. pound by distress, to be levied
as aforesaid, for non-payment in that time, to be committed 6. months to the
places before mentioned; the moneys to go for a stock to the House of
Correction, as the Justices shall appoint. The 3. offense is Abjuration, after
a 2. Correction, or at his Majesty's pleasure to be transported to any of his
Plantations beyond Sea.

The Judge of Assize of Oyer, or Terminer, and Justices of Peace in their open
and general Sessions, may hear and determine these offenses, and as in cases of
trespass, and may make out process in order to their conviction; any Justice of
Peace, Mayor or chief Officer, may commit to the Goal, or bind over with
sureties to the quarter Sessions, any offending in the premises; and the
Constable is the immediate office to make diligent search in all places within
his jurisdiction, for the apprehension.

He that shall take the Oath that he formerly refused, giving security not to
meet again, although convicted, shall be discharged.

Of Supervisors, Surveyors, and Orderers for the Highways.
BY the Statutes 2 and 3 of P. and M. cap. 8.5. Eliz. cap. 13.18. Elia. cap.
18. Highways.
Every person upon six days appointed for working in the Highways, that has a
plough-land either in tillage or pasture, in occupation in the same parish, and
every other person keeping there a plough or draught, shall find and send at
every day and place appointed for the amending of the ways in the Parish
aforesaid, one Wain or Cart furnished with Oxen, Horses, or other cattle, with
other necessaries convenient for that purpose, and two able men with the same
upon forfeiture of ten shillings; and every Cottager and Labourer of the said
Parish, that is not a servant hired by the year, shall labor upon every of the
said 6. days: The default of every person for every day, is 12. pence; and if
there shall be no need of an of the said carriages, then the persons that
should have sent them, shall send to the said work, to able men for every
carriage so spared, upon the pain of one shilling for every one that shall make
default: bringing with them all things materials for such service; and all
shall work by the space of eight hours, unless they shall be other-ways
licensed by said Supervisors, or any one of them; and it shall and may be
lawful for any of the Supervisors, or any one of them, according to the 2 and 3
of Phil. and Mar. for the better amendment of the Highways, within the limits
of the said Parish, to give power to any to take and carry away any rubbish, or
any broken stones of any Quarry that shall lie within the Parish, without
license or controlement of the owner or owners, so much as in their discretion
shall seem meet and necessary; and for default of such Quarries, the
Supervisors or Overseers, may appoint any to dig gravel or sand in any grounds
lying next the Highways, within the said Parish, so much as they shall think
meet and necessary for the reparations aforesaid; or any stones, or other
stuff where heretofore they have usually dug.

It is provided in the said Act, House, Garden or Orchard.
that the Supervisors shall not dig in any Quarry or Quarries, but shall take
such rubbish or other materials, fit and useful for the Highways, as there
shall be found without the license and commandment of the owners; neither
empower any to digg and gravel, sand, of any other thing, in the house, garden,
orchard or meddow of any person or persons whatsoever; neither in any enclosed
ground, then only one hole or pit for gravel as before declared, in breadth or
length, above ten yards at the most; and then that every such pit so dug,
the Supervisor or Supervisors shall within one month after, cause to be filled
up with earth, at the cost and charges of the said parish, upon the forfeiture
of five marks to the owner or owners of the soil.

By the Statute 5 Eliz. cap. 15. Watercourse.
where any watercourse shall be in any ditch or ditches of the Highways, it
shall and may be lawful for the Supervisor or Supervisors, to to turn the same
into any man's ground, or soil in such ways, and manner, as to their discretion
shall seem most meet and convenient; and the Supervisor or Supervisors, by
force of this Act, may within one month after any default, present the said
offense to the next Justice of Peace, upon the forfeiture of forty shillings.

The 18 Eliz. cap. 10. Land in several Parishes.
declares that every person or persons, (except such as dwell in the City of
London) that shall be assessed to any subsidies in Kings books to five pound in
Goods, or forty shillings in Lands or above, during the time he shall stand so
charged, and being non of the parties so charged for the amendment of the
Highways, by any other Act, but as a Cottager, shall find two able men yearly
to labor in the Highways, as is limited and appointed by the said Acts; and
all persons that shall use or occupy either in tillage or pasture, any
plough-land that lies in several parishes, shall be chargeable to the ways in
the parish where he inhabits, as far forth as any person having a plough-land
in any one parish; and every person or persons, that shall use any plough-lands
in several Towns or Parishes, shall find in each Town or Parish one Cart-wain,
Dung-pot or Dragg, furnished for the amendment of the highways within the
several parishes where (...) and lies, in the same manner as if he were an
inhabitant in the said Parish.

The 5 of Eliz. makes mention, Scowling Ditches.
that every person or persons that repairs not, or scowrs not his Ditches or
Hedges adjoining to the Highway, or leading to any Fair or Market, or cuts
down or keeps under his Trees or Bushes growing next the Highways, shall
forfeit or lose for every default ten shillings.

And all and every person or persons that shall use any lands next the
Highway, or leading to any Fair or Market, that scowr not the Ditches as often
as need shall require, whereby the water may be conveyed from the Highway,
over the ground next adjoining, may pass over the ground next, upon the
forfeiture for every Rod next adjoining, not cleansed and scowred, twelve pence.

If any person or persons that shall cast any soil or make any dung in any
Highway leading to any Fair or Market Town, Banks in Highwayes
letting it lie there by the space of six months to the annoyance of the way,
the Inhabitant shall forfeit every load there lyeing twelve pence. And where
any has been cast into the Highway leading to a Fair or Market Town, so that
there is a bank between the land Way and Ditch, the Surveyours or Workmen
appointed for the amendment of the Highways, are to make Sluices or other
devices by their discretions to convey the water out of the said way into the
Ditch, any law, right, Interest, Custom or usuage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The Surveyor, Indesault of Surveyors, Constables or Churchwardens may.
or Surveyors have power by this Statute to levy every sum or sums of money
forfeited within the parish, by distres in the same manner as Fines, or
Amercements in Court-Leets have been used; and the money to be employed upon
the Highway that leads to any Fair or Market Town where the offense is
committed; if the Surveyors do not levy and employ it within one year after the
offense is committed; that then the sums or forfeitures shall be levied by the
Constables or Churchwardens of the Parish where the work ought to be done in
the Highways; and that then he or they that shall levy any such penalties or
forfeitures, shall make their account as the aforementioned Statutes recite.

The Statute 39 Eliz. 2. cap. 19. Ironworks.
enables the Surveyors within the County of Kent, Sussex, and Surry, where the
Highways shall be most annoyed, where the Justices have not assigned in what
place or places of the Highways there shall be carried Gravel, Stone, or
Chaulk, to appoint the Occupiers of the Ironwors to carry the same, upon the
penalty of fortieshillings; and the Surveyors shall make demands of all the
forfeitures of money to be paid in default of such Carriages; and shall make a
true presentment of all such defaults of payment at the next Quarter Sessions
of the County, upon the same penalty of forty shillings.

Of the destruction of noysom Fowl and Vermin.
THe Statutes 18 Eliz. cap. 15. 14 Eliz. ca. 11. 39 Eliz. cap. 18. 24 Hen. 8.
appoints distributors, and gives them orders to pay those that shall destroy
any noysom Fowl or Vermin in manner following; Any person that shall bring to
them any heads of old Crows, Choughs, Pyes, or Rooks, taken within their
several Parishes: Every three heads one penny; for the heads of every six
young Crows, Pies, or Rooks, taken as a foresaid, one penny; for every six
Eggs of any of them, one penny; for every 12. Stares heads, one penny; all
which shall be kept in some sitting place, and be brought forth once a month at
least, before the Churchwardens and Taxers, or any three of them, and then
shall make an account to them in writing, what money they have laid forth and
paid for such heads and eggs, and for the heads of ravenous birds and vermin,
as in the said Acts mentioned; for every Merton, Hawes, Furse-kite, Mold-kite,
Buzzard, Cormerant or Ring-tail, two pence; for two eggs of them one penny;
every Iron of Osprays-head, four pence, every Woodal, Pie, Jay, Raven, or Kite
one penny; every Kings-fisher one penny, every Bulfinch or Bird, that spoils
the buds of Fruit one penny, every Fox or Gray, 12. pence, every Fitchew,
Polcat, Weasel, Stote, Fair, Badger, Wildcat, one penny; every Otter or
Hedghog, two pence; every three Rats heads or Mice, one penny; Every Molewarp
or Want, an half penny; the head of all the Birds or Vermin last mentioned,
the distribution shall pay and give to the bringer of them, for every head
taken within their Parish, and shall keep the same to be showed forth upon
their account as aforesaid; all which said heads and eggs, shall be forthwith
after such account made in the presence of the said Churchwardens and Taxers,
or of three of them, burned, consumed, or cut in sunder.

And if upon account that there shall be any Moneys in the hands of any of the
distributors, the same shall then be delivered over to such persons as shall be
elected and chosen for the year ensuing, by bill indented as aforesaid;
provided always that this shall not extend to give any liberty, license or
authority, to any person or persons whatsoever to use or exercise any menas, or
enquire for the destruction of Crows, or Rooks, Choughs, or other Vermin
aforesaid, in any place or places, to the destruction or disturbance of the
building or breeding of any kind of Hawks, Hernes, Egrits, Paupers, Swans or
Shovelers, to the hurt and destruction of any Doves, Dove-houses, Deer, or
Warren, or Conies, nor to give or appoint any sum or sums of Money to be given,
paid or distributed to any person or persons of the Heads of any Buzzard,
Ringtail, Herne, Polcat, Fitchew or Stote, that shall or may be taken in any
Warren or ground employed for Conies, or to the taking of any Stares in
Dove-houses, neither to the destruction or bringing of any Kite or Raven killed
in any City or Town Corporate, or within two miles of the same.

There are two Statutes made in the aid and assistance of Constables and
Churchwardens; one 7 Jac. cap. 5. the other 21 Jac. cap 5. the sum and effect
of both which Statutes are as follows: The first declares that whereas there
are many causeless and contentious suits commenced against Justices of the
Peace, Mayors of Cities, or Bailiffs; of Corporate Twons, Head-burrows,
Constables, Collectors of Subsidies, and Fifteens, that have been molested or
troubled for the execution o their Office, by contentions and ill-disposed
persons, to their discouragement in the execution or doing their offices, it is
enacted by the said 7 Jac. cap. 5. that if any Action, Bill, or Suite, account
on the case, Trespass, Battery, or false Imprisonment shall be brought after
forty days next after the end of that Session of Parliament, in any of his
Majesty's Courts at Westminster or elsewhere against any Justice of Peace,
Mayor, Bailiff, of any City, or Town, Corporate, Head-burrow, Constable,
Tything-man, Collector of Subsidy or Fifteens, for or concerning any matter or
cause by them or any of them done by virtue of their or any of their office or
offices, that it shall be lawful to or for any such Justice of Peace, Mayor,
Bailiff, Constable, or other Officer or Officers before named, and all others;
that in in their aid and assistance, or by their commandment, shall do any
thing touching or concerning his or their Office or Offices, to plead the
general issue that he or they are not guilty, and to give such special matter
in evidence to the Jury, that shall try the same, which special matter being
pleaded, had been a good and sufficient matter in Law, to have discharged the
said defendant or defendants of the trespass, or the other matter laid to his
or their charge; and that if the verdit shall pass with the said defendant or
defendants, in any such actions, or the Plaintiff or Plaintiffs become
Nonsuite, or suffer any discontinuance thereof, that in every such case the
Justice or Justices, or other Judges, before whom the said matter shall be
tried, shall by force and virtue of this Act, allow unto the defendant or
defendants, his or their double costs, which he or they shall have sustained by
reason of their wrongful vexation, in defense of the said Action or Suite, for
which the defendant or defendants, shall have like remedy as in other cases,
where costs by the Laws of this Realm are given to the defendants. And this Act
is to continue for seven years, and from thence to the end of the next
Parliament, after the said Parliament.

The other Statute being 21 Jac. cap. 12. declares the before recited Statute of
7 Jac. cap. 5. to be perpetual. And that all Churchwardens and all persons
called Swornmen, executing the office of Churchwardens, and all overseers of
the Poor, and all others which in their aid and assistance, or by their
commandment shall do any thing touching his or their Office or Offices, shall
hereafter be enabled to receive, and have such benefit and help by virtue of
the said Act, to all intents and constructions and purposes, as if they had
been specially named therein.

And whereas notwithstanding by the said Statute, the Plaintiff is at liberty
to lay his account, which he shall bring against any Justice of Peace, or other
Officer in any foreign County at his choice, which has proved very
inconvenient unto sundry of the Officers and persons aforesaid, that have been
impleaded by some contentions and troublesome persons in Counties far remote
from their places of habitations: It is enacted by this Statute, that if any
Action, Bill, Plaint or Suit upon the case, Trespass, Battery or false
Imprisonment shall be brought after the end of this Session of Parliament,
against any Justice of Peace, Mayor or Bailiff of City or Town Corporate,
Head-borrow, Constable, Tythingman, Collector of Subsides or Fifteens,
Churchwardens and persons called Swornmen, executing the Office of
Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor, and their Deputies or any of them, or
any other which in their aid and assistance, or by their commandment shall do
any thing touching or concerning his or their Office or Offices for, or
concerning any matter, cause; or thing, by them or any of them done by virtue
or reason of their or any of their Office or Offices: That the said Account,
Bill, Plant or Suit, shall be laid within the County, where the Trespass or
Fact shall be done and committed, and not elsewhere: And that it shall be
lawful to, and for all and every person and persons aforesaid, to plead there
unto the general issue, that he or they are not guilty, and to give in such
special matter in evidence to the Jury, which shall try the same as in and by
the said former Act, is limited and declared: And that if upon the trial of any
such Action, Bill, Plant or suit, the Plantiff or Plantiffs therein shall not
prove to the Jury which shall try the same, that the Trespass, Battery,
Imprisonment or other fact or cause of his, her or their such accounts, Bill,
Plant or Suit, was or were had, made, committed or done within the County,
where such account, bill, plant or suit shall be laid: That then in every such
case the Jury which shall try the same, shall find the defendant and defendants
in every such Account, Bill, Plant, or Suit, not guilty, without having any
regard or respect to any evidence given by the Plaintiff, or Plantiffs, therein
touching the Trespass, Battery, Imprisonment, or other cause, for which the
same Account, Bill, Plant or Suit, is or shall be brought: And if the verdict
shall pass with the defendant or defendants, in any such Account, Bill, or
Plaint or Suit, or the Plantiff or Plantiffs, therein become Nonsuit, or
suffer any discontinuance thereof, that in every such case, the defendant or
defendants, shall have such double costs, and all other advantages and
remedies, as in and by the said former Act is limited, directed and provided.


