THE Law of Freedom IN A PLATFORM: Or, True Magistracy Restored. Humbly
presented to Oliver Cromwell, General of the Commonwealths Army in England. And
to all Englishmen my brethren whether in Church Fellowship, or not in
Church Fellowship, both sorts walking as they conceive according to the Order
of the Gospel: and from them to all the Nations in the World. Wherein is
Declared, What is Kingly Government, and what is Commonwealths Government.

By Jerrard Winstanley.

In thee, O England, is the Law arising up to shine,
If thou receive and practice it, the crown it will be thine.
If thou reject, and still remain a froward Son to be,
Another Land will it receive, and take the crown from thee.
Revel. 11. 15. -- -- Dan. 7. 27.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for the Author, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert
at the black Spred-Eagle at the West end of Paul's. 1652.

To His Excellency OLIVER CROMWELL, General of the Commonwealths Army in ENGLAND.
SIR,
GOD has honored you with the highest Honor of any man since Moses time, to be
the Head of a People, who have cast out an Oppressing Pharaoh: For when the
Norman Power had conquered our Forefathers, he took the free use of our English
Ground from them, and made them his servants. And God-hath made you a
successful Instrument to cast out that Conqueror, and to recover our Land and
Liberties again, by your Victories, out of that Norman hand.

That which is yet wanting on your part to be done, is this, To see the
Oppressors Power to be cast out with his person; And to see that the free
possession of the Land and Liberties be put into the hands of the oppressed
Commoners of England.

For the Crown of Honor cannot be yours, neither can those Victories be called
Victories on your part, till the Land and Freedoms won be possessed by them who
adventured person and purse for them.

Now you know Sir, that the Kingly Conqueror was not beaten by you only as you
are a single man, nor by the Officers of the Army joined to you; but by the
hand and assistance of the Commoners, whereof some came in person, and
adventured their lives with you; others stayed at home, and planted the Earth,
and paid Taxes and Freequarter to maintain you that went to war.

So that whatsoever is recovered from the Conqueror, is recovered by a joint
consent of the Commoners: therefore it is all Equity, That all the Commoners
who assisted you, should be set free from the Conquerors power with you: As
David's Law was; The spoil shall be divided between them who went to War, and
them who stayed at home.

And now you have the Power of the Land in your hand, you must do one of these
two things: First, either set the Land free to the oppressed Commoners, who
assisted you, and paid the Army their wages: and then you will fulfill the
Scriptures and your own Engagements, and so take possession of your deserved
Honor.

Or secondly, you must only remove the Conquerors Power out of the Kings hand
into other men's, maintaining the old Laws still: And then your Wisdom and Honor
is blasted for ever; and you will either lose your self, or lay the Foundation
of greater Slavery to posterity then you ever knew.

You know that while the King was in the height of his oppressing Power, the
People only whispered in private Chambers against him: But afterward it was
preached upon the house tops, That he was a Tyrant and a Traitor to Englands
peace; and he had his overturn.

The righteous Power in the Creation is the same still: If you, and those in
power with you, should be found walking in the Kings steps, can you secure your
selves or posterities from an overturn? Surely No.

The Spirit of the whole Creation (who is God) is about the Reformation of the
World, and he will go forward in his work: For if he would not spare Kings, who
have sat so long at his right hand, governing the World, neither will he regard
you, unless your ways be found more righteous then the Kings.

You have the eyes of the People all the Land over, nay I think I may say all
neighboring Nations over, waiting to see what you will do: And the eyes of your
oppressed friends, who lie yet under Kingly power, are waiting to have the
possession given them of that Freedom in the Land, which was promised by you,
if in case you prevailed. Lose not your Crown; take it up, and wear it. But
know, that it is no Crown of Honor, till Promises and Engagements made by you
be performed to your friends. He that continues to the end, shall receive the
Crown. Now you do not see the end of your work, unless the Kingly Law and Power
be removed as well as his person.

Jonah's Gourd is a remembrancer to men in high places.

The worm in the Earth gnawed the root, and the Gourd dyed, and Jonah was
offended.

Sir, I pray bear with me; my spirit is upon such a lock that I must speak
plain to you, lest it tell me another day, If thou had spoke plain, things
might have been amended.

The Earth wherein your Gourd grows is the Commoners of England.

The Gourd is that Power which covers you, which will be established to you by
giving the People their true Freedoms, and not otherwise.

The root of your Gourd is the heart of the People, groaning under Kingly
Bondage, and desiring a Commonwealths Freedom in their English Earth.

The worm in the Earth, now gnawing at the root of your Gourd, is Discontents,
because Engagements and Promises made to them by such as have power, are not
kept.

And this worm has three heads: The first is a spirit waiting opportunities
till a blasting wind arise to cause your Gourd to wither; and yet pretends fair
to you, etc.

Another spirit shelters under your Gourd for a livelihood, and will say as you
say in all things; and these are called honest, yet no good friends to you nor
the Commonwealth, but to their own bellies.

There is a third spirit, which is faithful indeed, and plain dealing, and many
times for speaking truth plainly he is cashiered, imprisoned, and crushed: And
the Oppressions laid upon this spirit kindles the fire which the two former
waits to warm themselves at.

Would you have your Gourd stand for ever? Then cherish the root in the Earth;
that is, the heart of your friends, the oppressed Commoners of England, by
killing the Worm. And nothing will kill this worm, but performance of
professions, words, and promises, that they may be made free men from Tyranny.

It may be you will say to me, What shall I do? I answer, You are in place and
power to see all Burdens taken off from your friends the Commoners of England.
You will say, What are those Burdens?

I will instance in some, both which I know in my own experience, and which I
hear the people daily complaining of, and groaning under, looking upon you and
waiting for Deliverance.

Most people cry, We have paid Taxes, given Freequarter, wasted our Estates,
and lost our Friends in the Wars, and the Taskmasters multiply over us more
then formerly. I have asked diverse this question, Why do you say so?

Some have answered me, That Promises, Oaths, and Engagements have been made as
a Motive to draw us to assist in the Wars; That privileges of Parliament and
Liberties of Subjects should be preserved, and that all Popery, and Episcopacy,
and Tyranny should be rooted out; and these promises are not performed: Now
there is an opportunity to perform them.

For first, say they, The current of succeeding Parliaments is stopped, which is
one of the greatest Privileges (and peoples Liberties) for Safety and Peace;
and if that continue stopped, we shall be more offended by an hereditary
Parliament, then we were oppressed by an hereditary King.

And for the Commoners, who were called Subjects, while the Kingly Conqueror
was in power, have not as yet their Liberties granted them; I will instance
them in order, according as the common whisperings are among the people.

For say they, The burdens of the Clergy remains still upon us, in a threesold
nature.

First, If any man declare his Judgment in the things of God, contrary to the
Clergies report, or the mind of some high Officers, they are cashiered,
imprisoned, crushed, and undone, and made sinners for a word, as they were in
the Popes and Bishops days; so that though their names be cast out, yet their
High Commission Courts Power remains still, persecuting men for Conscience
sake, when their actions are unblameable.

Secondly, In many Parishes there are old formal ignorant Episcopal Priests
established; and some Ministers, who are bitter Enemies to Commonwealths
Freedom, and Friends to Monarchy, are established Preachers, and are
continually buzzing their subtle principles into the minds of the people, to
undermine the Peace of our declared Commonwealth, causing a disaffection of
spirit among neighbors, who otherwise would live in peace.

Thirdly, The burden of Tithes remains still upon our Estates, which was taken
from us by the Kings, and given to the Clergy, to maintain them by one labors:
so that though their preaching fill the minds of many with madness, contention,
and unsatisfied doubting, because their imaginary and ungrounded Doctrines
cannot be understood by them, and yet we must pay them large Tithes for so
doing; this is Oppression.

Fourthly, If we go to the Lawyer, we find him to sit in the Conquerors Chair,
though the Kings be removed, maintaining the Kings Power to the height, for in
many Courts and cases of Law, the Will of a Judge and Lawyer rules above the
letter of the Law, and many Cases and Suits are lengthened to the great
vexation of the Clients, and to the lodging of their Estates in the purse of
the unbounded Lawyer: So that we see, though other men be under a sharp Law,
yet many of the great Lawyers are not, but still do act their will, as the
Conqueror did; as I have heard some belonging to the Law say, What cannot we do?

Fifthly, Say they, If we look upon the Customs of the Law itself, it is the
same it was in the Kings days, only the name is altered; as if the (...) of
England had paid their Taxes, Free Quarter, and shed their blood, not to
reform, but to baptize the Law into a new name, from Kingly Law, to State Law;
by reason whereof, the spirit of discontent is strengthened, to increase more
Suits of Law, then formerly was known to be: And so as the Sword pulls down
Kingly Power with one hand, the Kings old Law builds up Monarchy again with the
other.

And indeed the main Work of Reformation lies in this, to reform the Clergy,
Lawyers, and Law; for all the Complaints of the Land are wrapped up within them
three, not in the person of a King.

Shall men of other Nations say, That notwithstanding all those rare wits in
the Parliament and Army of England, yet they could not reform the Clergy,
Lawyer, and Law, but must needs establish all as the Kings left them?

Will not this blast all our Honor, and make all Monarchial Members laugh in
their sleeves, to see the Government of our Commonwealth to be built upon the
Kingly Laws and Principles?

I have asked diverse Soldiers what they fought for; they answered, they could
not tell; and it is very true, they cannot tell indeed, if the Monarchial Law
be established without Reformation: But I wait to see what will be done; and I
doubt not but to see our Commonwealths Government to be built upon his own
Foundation.

Sixthly, If we look into Parishes, the burdens there are many.

First, For the Power of Lords of Manors remains still over their Brethren,
requiring Fines and Heriots; beating them off the free use of the Common Land,
unless their Brethren will pay them Rent; exacting obedience, as much as they
did, and more, when the King was in Power.

Now faith the people, By what Power do these maintain their Title over us?
Formerly they held Title from the King, as he was the Conquerors Successor: But
have not the Commoners cast out the King, and broke the band of that Conquest?
Therefore in equity they are free from the slavery of that Lordly Power.

Secondly, In Parishes where Commons lie, the rich Norman Freeholders, or the
new (more covetous) Gentry, over-stock the Commons with Sheep and Cattle; so
that inferior Tenants and poor Laborers can hardly keep a Cow, but half starve
her; so that the poor are kept poor still, and the Common Freedom of the Earth
is kept from them, and the poor have no more relief then they had when the King
(or Conqueror) was in power.

Thirdly, In many Parishes two or three of the great ones bears all the sway,
in making Assessments over awing Constables and other Officers; and when time
was to quarter Soldiers, they would have a hand in that, to ease themselves,
and over-burden the weaker sort; and many times make large sums of money over
and above the Justices Warrant in Assessments, and would give no account why,
neither durst the inferior people demand an account, for he that spoke should
be sure to be crushed the next opportunity; and if any have complained to
Committees or Justices, they have been either wearied out by (...) and waiting,
or else the offense has been by them smothered up; so that we see one great
man favored another, and the poor (...) have no relief.

Fourthly, There is another grievance which the people are much troubled at,
and that is this; Country people cannot sell any Corn or other fruits of the
Earth in a Market Town, but they must either pay Toll, or be turned out of
Town: Now say they, This is a most shameful thing, that we must part with our
estates in Taxes and Free Quarter to purchase the Freedom of the Land, and the
Freedom of the Towns, and yet this Freedom must be still given from us, into
the hands of a covetous Norman Toll-Taker, according to the Kings old burdensome
Laws, and contrary to the Liberty of a free Commonwealth.

Now says the whisperings of the people, The inferior Tenants and Laborers
bears all the burdens, in laboring the Earth, in paying Taxes and Freequarter
beyond their strength, and in furnishing the Armies with Soldiers, who bear
the greatest burden of the War; and yet the Gentry, who oppress them, and that
live idle upon their labors, carry away all the comfortable livelihood of the
Earth.

For is not this a common speech among the people, We have parted with our
Estates, we have lost our Friends in the Wars, which we willingly gave up,
because Freedom was promised us; and now in the end we have new Taskmasters,
and our old burdens increased: and though all sorts of people have taken an
Engagement to cast out Kingly Power, yet Kingly Power remains in power still in
the hands of those who have no more right to the Earth then our selves.

For say the people, If the Lords of Manors and our Taskmasters hold Title to
the Earth over us from the old Kingly power, behold that power is beaten and
cast out.

And two Acts of Parliament are made. The one to cast out Kingly power, backed
by the Engagement against King and House of Lords. The other to make England a
free Commonwealth.

And if Lords of Manors lay claim to the earth over us, from the Armies
Victories over the King; then we have as much right to the Land as they,
because our labors, and blood, and death of friends, were the purchasers of
the Earths freedom as well as theirs.

And is not this a slavery, say the People, That though there be Land enough in
England, to maintain ten times as many people as are in it, yet some must beg
of their brethren, or work in hard drudgery for day wages for them, or starve,
or steal, and so be hanged out of the way, as men not fit to live in the earth,
before they must be suffered to plant the waste land for their livelihood,
unless they will pay Rent to their brethren for it? well, this is a burden the
Creation groans under; and the subjects (so called) have not their Birthright
Freedoms granted them from their brethren, who hold it from them by club law,
but not by righteousness.

And who now must we be subject to, seeing the Conqueror is gone?

I Answer, we must either be subject to a Law, or to men's wills. If to a Law,
then all men in England are subjects, or ought to be, thereunto: but what Law
that is to which every one ought to be subject is not yet established in
execution. If any say the old Kings Laws are the Rule, then it may be Answered,
That those Laws are so full of confusion, that few knows when they obey and
when not, because they were the Laws of a Conqueror to hold the people in
subjection to the will of the Conqueror; therefore that cannot be the rule for
every one: besides, we daily see many actions done by State Officers, which
they have no Law to justify them in, but their Prerogative will.

And again if we must be subject to men, then what men must we be subject to,
seeing one man has as much right to the earth as another, for no man now
stands as a Conqueror over his Brethren by the Law of righteousness?

You will say, We must be subject to the Ruler, it is true, but not to suffer
the Rulers to call the Earth theirs and not ours, for by so doing they betray
their trust, and run into the line of (...) and we lose our freedom, and from
thence (...) and Wars arise.

A Ruler is worthy double honor when he rules well, that is, when he himself
is subject to the Law, and requires all others to be subject thereunto and
makes it his work to see the Laws obeyed, and not his own will, and such Rulers
are faithful, and they are to be subjected unto us therein, for all
Commonwealths Rulers are servants to, not Lords and Kings over the people. But
you will say, Is not the Land your brothers? and you cannot take away (...)
man's Right by claiming a share therein with him.

I Answer, It is his either by creation right, or by right of Conquest: If by
Creation right he call the earth his and not mine; then it is mine as well as
his, for the Spirit of the whole Creation, who made us both, is no respecter of
persons.

And if by Conquest he call the earth his and not mine, it must be either by
the Conquest of the Kings over the Commoners, or by the Conquest of the
Commeners over the Kings.

If he claim the earth to be his from the Kings Conquest, The Kings are beaten
and cast out and that title is undone.

If he claim Title to the earth to be his from the Conquest of the Commoners
over the Kings, then I have right to the Land as well as my brother, for my
brother, without me, nor I without my brother, did not cast out the Kings, but
both together assisting with person and purse, we prevailed, so that I have by
this Victory as equal a share in the earth which is now redeemed as my
brother, by the Law of righteousness.

If my brother still say he will be Landlord (through his covetous ambition)
and I must pay him Rent, or else I shall not live in the Land, then does he
take my right from me, which I have purchased by my money in Taxes, free
quarter and blood. And O thou Spirit of the whole Creation, who has this Title
to be called King of Righteousness, and Prince of Peace; judge thou between my
brother and me, Whether this be righteous, etc.

And now, say the people, is not this a grievous thing that our brethren that
will be Landlords right or wrong, will make Laws, and call for a Law to be made
to imprison, crush, nay put to death, any that denies God, Christ, and
Scripture; and yet they will not practice that golden Rule, Do to another as
thou would have another do to thee, which God, Christ, and Scriptures, has
Enacted for a Law? are not these men guilty of death by their own Law, which is
the words of their own mouth? is it not a slat denial of God and Scripture?

O the confusion and thick darkness that has overspread our Brethren is very
great, I have no power to remove it, but lament it in the secrets of my heart;
when I see Prayers, Sermons, Fasts, Thanksgiving, directed to this God in words
and-shews, and when I come to look for actions of obedience to the Righteous
Law, suitable to such a profession, I find them men of another Nation, saying,
and not doing; like an old Courtier saying Your Servant, when he was an Enemy.
I will say no more, but groan and wait for a restoration.

Thus Sir, I have reckoned up some of those burdens which the people groan
under.

And I being sensible hereof was moved in my self, to present this Platform of
Commonwealths Government unto you, wherein I have declared a full Commonwealths
Freedom, according to the Rule of Righteousness, which is Gods Word. It was
intended for your view above two years ago, but the disorder of the Times
caused me to lay it aside, with a thought never to bring it to light, etc.
Likewise I hearing that M. Peter's and some others Propounded this request, That
the Word of God might be consulted with to find out a healing Government,
which I liked well, and waited to see such a Rule come forth, for there are
good rules in the Scripture if they were obeyed and practiced: thereupon

I laid aside this in silence, and said, I would not make it public; but this
word was like fire in my bones ever and anon, Thou shall not bury thy talent in
the earth, therefore I was stirred up to give it a (...), and to pick together
as many of my scattered papers as I could find, and to compile them into this
method, which I do here present to you, and do quiet my own spirit.

And now I have set the candle at your door, for you have power in your hand,
in this other added opportunity, to Act for Common Freedom if you will; I have
no power.

It may be here are some things inserted which you may not like, yet other
things you may like, therefore I pray you read it, and be as the industrious
Be, suck out the honey and cast away the weeds.

Though this Platform be like a piece of Timber rough hewd, yet the discreet
workmen may take it, and frame a handsome building out of it.

It is like a poor man that comes clothed to your door in a torn country
garment, who is unacquainted with the learned Citizens unsettled forms and
fashions; take of the clownish language, for under that you may see beauty.

It may be you will say, If Tithes be taken from the Priests and Impropriators,
and Copyhold Services from Lords of Manors, how shall they be provided for
again; for is it not unrighteous to take their estates from them?

I Answer, when Tithes were first enacted, and Lordly power drawn over the
backs of the oppressed, the Kings and Conquerors made no seruple of Conscience
to take it, though the people lived in sore bondage of poverty for want of it;
and can there be seruple of conscience to make restitution of this which has
been so long stolen goods? It is no scruple arising from the Righteous Law, but
from (...), who goes away sorrowful to hear he must part with all to follow
Rightcousness and Peace.

But though you do take away Tithes, and the Power of Lords of Manors, yet
there will be no want to them, for they have the freedom of the Common stock,
they may send to the Storehouses for What they want, and live more free then
now they do, for now they are in care and vexation by servants, by casualties,
by being cheated in buying and selling, and many other encumbrances, but then
they will be free from all, for the common Storehouses is every (...), not any
ones.

Is not buying and selling a righteous Law? No, It is the Law of the Conqueror,
but not the righteous Law of Creation: how can that be righteous which is a
cheat? (...) is not this a common practice, when he has a bad Horse or Cow, or
any bad commodity, he will send it to the Market, to cheat some simple plain
hearted man or other, and when he comes home, will laugh at his neighbors
hurt, and much more etc.

When Mankind began to buy and sell, then did he fall from his Innocence; for
then they began to (...) and cozen one another of their Creation Birthright:
As for example; If the Land belong to three persons, and two of them buy and
sell the Earth, and the third give no consent, his Right is taken from him, and
his posterity is engaged in a War.

When the Earth was first bought and sold, many gave no consent: As when our
Crown Lands, and Bishops Lands were sold, some foolish Soldiers yielded, and
covetous Officers were active in it, to advance themselves above their
Brethren: but many, who paid Taxes and Freequarter for the purchase of it, gave
no consent, but declared against it, as an unrighteous thing, depriving
posterity of their Birthrights and Freedoms.

Therefore this buying and selling did bring in, and still does bring in,
discontents and wars, which have plagued Mankind sufficiently for so doing.
And the Nations of the world will never learn to beat their swords into
plowshares, and their spears into pruning hooks, and leave of warring, until
this cheating device of buying and selling be cast out among the rubbish of
Kingly power.

But shall not one man be richer then another?

There is no need of that; for Riches make men vainglorious, proud, and to
oppress their Brethren; and are the occasion of wars.

No man can be rich, but he must be rich, either by his own labors, or by the
labors of other men helping him: If a man have no help (...) his neighbor, he
shall never gather an Estate of hundreds and thousands a year: If other men
help him to work, then are those Riches his Neighbors, as well as his; for they
be the fruit of other men's labors as well as his own.

But all rich men live at ease, feeding and clothing themselves by the labors
of other men, not by their own; which is their shame, and not their Nobility;
for it is a more (...) thing to give then to receive: But rich men receive all
they have from the laborers hand, and what they give, they give away other men's
labors, not their own; Therefore they are not righteous Actors in the Earth.

But shall not one man have more Titles of Honor then another?

Yes: As a man goes through Offices, he rises to Titles of Honor, till he comes
to the highest Nobility, to be a faithful Commonwealths man in a Parliament
House. Likewise he who finds out any secret in Nature, shall have a Title of
Honor given him, though he be a young man. But no man shall have any Title of
Honor till he win it by industry, or come to it by age, or Office-bearing.
Every man that is above sixty years of age shall have respect as a man of Honor
by all others that are younger, as is showed hereafter.

Shall every man count his Neighbors house as his own, and live together as one
Family?

No: Though the Earth and Storehouses be common to every Family, yet every
Family shall live apart as they do; and every man's house, wife, children, and
furniture for ornament of his house, or any thing which he has fetched in from
the Storehouses, or provided for the necessary use of his Family, is all a
propriety to that Family, for the peace thereof. And if any man offer to take
away a man's wife, children, or furniture of his house, without his consent, or
disturb the peace of his dwelling, he shall suffer punishment as an Enemy to
the Commonwealths Government; as is mentioned in the Platform following.

Shall we have no Lawyers?

There is no need of them, for there is to be no buying and selling; neither
any need to expound Laws; for the bare letter of the Law shall be both Judge and
Lawyer, trying every man's actions: And seeing we shall have successive
Parliaments every year, there will be Rules made for every action a man can do.

But there is to be Officers chosen yearly in every parish, to see the Laws
executed according to the letter of the Laws; so that there will be no long
work in trying of Offenses, as it is under Kingly Government, to get the
Lawyers money, and to enslave the Commoners to the Conquerors prerogative Law,
or Will. The sons of contention, Simeon and Levi, must not beat Rule in a free
Commonwealth.

At the first view, you may say, this is a strange Government: but I pray judge
nothing before trial. Lay this Platform of Commonwealths Government in one
scale, and lay Monarchy, or Kingly Government, in the other scale, and see
which give true weight to righteous Freedom and Peace. There is no middle path
between these two; for a man must either be a free and true Commonwealths man,
or a Monarchial tyrannical Royalist.

If any say, This will bring poverty; surely they mistake: for there will be
plenty of all Earthly Commodities, with less labor and trouble then now it is
under Monarchy. There will be no want, for every man may keep as plentiful a
house as he will, and never run into debt, for common stock pays for all.

If you say, Some will live idle; I answer, No: It will make idle persons to
become workers, as is declared in the Platform; There shall be neither Beggar
nor idle person.

If you say, This will make men quarrel and fight:

I answer, No: It will turn swords into plowshares, and settle such a peace in
the Earth, as Nations shall learn War no more. Indeed the Government of Kings
is a breeder of Wars, because men being put into the straits of poverty, are
moved to fight for Liberty, and to take one another Estates from them, and to
obtain Mastery. Look into all Armies, and see what they do more, but make some
poor, some rich; put some into freedom, and others into bondage: And is not
this a plague among Mankind?

Well, I question not but what Objections can be raised against this
Commonwealths Government, they shall find an Answer in this Platform
following. I have been something large, because I could not contract my self
into a lesser volume, having so many things to speak of.

I do not say, nor desire, That every one shall be compelled to practice this
Commonwealths Government; for the spirits of some will be Enemies at first,
though afterward will prove the most cordial and true friends thereunto.

Yet I desire, That the Commonwealths Land, which is the ancient Commons and
waste Land, and the Lands newly got in, by the Armies Victories, out of the
oppressors hands, as Parks, Forests, Chases, and the like, may be set free to
all that have lent assistance, either of person, or purse, to obtain it; and to
all that are willing to come in to the practice of this Government, and be
obedient to the Laws thereof: And for others, who are not willing, let them
stay in the way of buying and selling, which is the Law of the Conqueror, till
they be willing.

And so I leave this in your hand, humbly prostrating my self and it before
you, and remain

November. 5. 1651. A true Lover of Commonwealths Government, Peace, and Freedom,
Jerrard Winstanley.

To the Friendly and Unbyassed READER.
Reader,
IT was the Apostles advice formerly, to try all things, and to hold fast that
which is best. This Platform of Government which I offer, is the Original
Righteousness and Peace in the Earth, though he has been buried under the
clods of Kingly Covetousness, Pride and Oppression a long time.

Now he begins to have his Resurrection, despise it not while it is small;
though thou understand it not at the first sight, yet open the door, and look
into the house, for thou may see that which will satisfy thy heart in quiet
rest.

To prevent thy hasty rashness, I have given thee a short Compendium of the
whole.

First, Thou know that the Earth in all Nations is governed by buying and
selling, for all the Laws of Kings has relation thereunto.

Now this Platform following declares to thee the Government of the Earth
without buying and selling, and the Laws are the Laws of a free and peaceable
Commonwealth, which casts out every thing that offends; for there is no
pricking Briar in all this holy Mountain of the righteous Law, or peaceable
Ruler.

Every Family shall live apart, as now they do; every man shall enjoy his own
wife, and every woman her own husband, as now they do; every Trade shall be
improved to more excellency then now it is; all children shall be educated, and
be trained up in subjection to parents and elder people more then now they are:
The Earth shall be planted, and the fruits reaped, and carried into
Storehouses by common assistance of every Family: The riches of the
Storehouses shall be the Common Stock to every Family: There shall be no idle
person nor Beggar in the Land.

And because offenses may arise from the spirit of unreasonable ignorance,
therefore was the Law added.

For if any man abuse his neighbor, by provoking words, by striking his person,
by offering offense to his neighbors wife or children, or to his house or
furaiture there in, or to live idle upon other men's labors, here are Laws to
punish them sharply, and Officers to see those Laws executed, according to the
right Order of Commonwealths Government, for the peace of every familyin the
Land.

This Commonwealths Government unites all people in a Land into one heart and
mind: And it was this Government which made Moses to call Abraham's seed, one
house of Israel, though they were many Tribes and many Families: And it may be
said, Blessed is the people, whose earthly Government is the Law of Common
Righteousness.

While Israel was under this Commonwealths Government, they were a terror to
all oppressing Kings in all Nations of the World; and so will England be, if
this righteous Law become our Governor: But when the Officers of Israel began
to be covetous and proud, they made a breach, or as Isaiah said, The Rulers of
the people caused them to err; and then the Government was altered, and fell
into the hand of Kings, like other Nations, and then they fled before their
enemies, and were scattered.

The Government of Kings, is the Government of the Scribes and Pharisees, who
count it no freedom, unless they be Lords of the Earth, and of their Brethren:
But Commonwealths Government is the Government of Righteousness and Peace, who
is no Respecter of persons.

Therefore Reader here is a trial for thy sincerity; Thou shall have no want of
food, raiment, or freedom among Brethren in this way propounded: See now if
thou (...) be content, as the Scriptures say, Having food and raiment,
therewith be content, and grudg not to let thy brother have the same with thee.

Do thou pray and fast for Freedom, and give God thanks again for it? Why
know that God is not partial; for if thou pray, it must be for Freedom to all;
and if thou give thanks, it must be because Freedom covers all people, for this
will prove a lasting Peace.

Every one is ready to say, They fight for their Country, and what they do,
they do it for the good of their Country. Well, let it appear now that thou
have fought and acted for thy Countries Freedom: But if when thou have power to
settle Freedom in thy Country, thou tukest the possession of the Earth into thy
own particular hands, and make thy brother work for thee, as the Kings did,
thou have fought and acted for thy self, not for thy Country; and here thy
inside (...) is discovered.

But here take notice, That common Freedom, which is the Rule I would have
practiced, and not talked on, was thy pretense; but particular Freedom to thy
self was thy intent. (...) or else thou will be shamed, when Knowledge does
spread to cover the Earth, even as the waters cover the Seas. And so Farewell.

J. W.

THE Law of Freedom in a Platform; OR, True Magistracy Restored,
CHAP. I.
THe great searching of heart in these days, is to find out where true Freedom
lies, that the Commonwealth of England might be established in Peace.

Some say, It lies in the free use of Trading, and to have all Pattents,
Licenses, and Restraints removed: But this is a Freedom under the Will of a
Conqueror.

Others say, It is true Freedom to have Ministers to preach, and for people to
hear whom they will, without being restrained or compelled from or to any form
of worship: But this is an unsettled Freedom.

Others say, It is true Freedom to have Community with all Women, and to have
liberty to satisfy their lusts and greedy appetites: But this is the Freedom
of wanton unreasonable Beasts, and tends to Destruction.

Others say, It is true Freedom, that the elder Brother shall (...) Landlord of
the Earth, and the younger Brother a Servant: And this is but a half Freedom,
and (...) murmurings, wars, and quarrels.

All these, and such like, are Freedoms: but they lead to Bondage, and are not
the true Foundation-Freedom which settles a Commonwealth in Peace.

True Commonwealths Freedom lies in the free Enjoyment of the Earth.
True Freedom lies where a man receives his nourishment and preservation, and
that is in the use of the Earth: For as Man is compounded of the four Materials
of the Creation, Fire, Water, Earth, and Air; so is he preserved by the
compounded bodies of these four, which are the fruits of the Earth; and he
cannot live without them: for take away the free use of these, and the body
languishes, the spirit is brought into bondage, and (...) length departs, and
cease his motional action in the body.

All that a man labors for, says Solomon, is this, That he may enjoy the free
use of the Earth, with the fruits thereof. Eccles. 2. 24.

Do not the Ministers preach for maintenance in the Earth? the Lawyers plead
causes to get the possessions of the Earth? Does not the Soldier fight for the
Earth? And does not the Landlord require Rent, that he may live in the fullness
of the Earth by the labor of his Tenants?

And so, from the Thief upon the high way to the King who sits upon the Throne,
do not every one strive, either by force of Arms, or secret cheats, to get the
possessions of the Earth one from another, because they see their Freedom (...)
in plenty, and their bondage lies in poverty?

Surely then, oppressing Lords of Manors, exacting Landlords, and Tythe-takers,
may as well say, their brethren shall not breathe in the air, nor enjoy warmth
in their bodies, nor have the moist waters to fall upon them in showers, unless
they will pay them Rent for it: As to say, Their brethren shall not work upon
Earth, nor eat the fruits thereof, unless they will hire that liberty of them:
for he that takes upon him to restrain his brother from the liberty of the one,
may upon the same ground restrain him from the liberty of all four; viz. Fire,
Water, Earth, and Air.

A man had better to have had no body, then to have no food for it; therefore
this restraining of the Earth from brethren by brethren, is oppression and
bondage; but the free enjoyment thereof is true Freedom.

I speak now in relation between the Oppressor and the oppressed; the inward
bondages I meddle not with in this place, though I am assured that if it be
rightly searched into, the inward bondages of the mind, as (...), pride,
hypocriste, envy, sorrow, fears, desperation, and madness, are all occasioned
by the outward bondage, that one sort of people lay upon another.

And thus far natural experience makes it good, That true Freedom lies in the
free enjoyment of the Earth.

If we look into the old Scriptures,
We find, That when Israel had conquered the Nations, he took (...) of the
Enemies Land, and divided it by lot among the Tribes, counting the Enjoyment of
the Earth their perfect Freedom.

In the beginning of their wars they first sent Spies to view the Land of
Canaan, ( Numb. 13. 23. to 33.) for the enjoyment of that was the Freedom they
aimed at; for being so long in the barren wilderness, and children multiplying
upon them, they wanted Land to live upon, Deuteronomy. 1. 28.

And when the Spies returned, and showed them the fruits of the Land, and had
declared what a fruitful Land it was, they were encouraged and restless till
they were come thither; and when they heard bad tidings of the Land, their
hearts fell, and they were discouraged.

And when the spirit of wisdom, courage and providence in them had subdued
those Giants, and had given the house of Israel the Land of Canaan, the Rulers
and chief Officers of Isreal's Army did not divide the Land among themselves;
but being faithful spirited men, they forthwith divided the Land by lot, to
every Tribe his portion without exception.

And when Israel entreated the King of Syhon, to suffer him to pass through his
land, he would not suffer him, but gathered all his people together and sought
with Israel; And the Lord gave Syhon into Isreal's hand: And he took possession
of his land.

So that we see by Scripture proof likewise, the land is that which every one
place their freedom in.

If we look into the practice of Kings, and Conquerors,
Since the Scriptures of Moses were writ, we find they placed their freedom in
the enjoyment of the free use of the earth.

When William Duke of Normandy had conquered England, he took possession of the
earth for his freedom, and disposed of our English ground to his friends as he
pleased, and made the conquered English his servants, to plant the earth for
him and his friends.

And all Kings, from his time to King Charles, were successors of that
conquest; and all Laws were made to confirm that Conquest.

For there are his old Laws and Statutes yet to be read, that do show how he
allowed the conquered English but three pence, and four pence a day for their
work, to buy them bread of their Taskmasters; but the freedom of the earth he
and his friends kept in their own hands.

And as Kings, so the old Gentry, and the new Gentry likewise, walking in the
same steps, are but the successors of the Norman victory.

But are not the Normans and their power conquered, by the Commoners of
England; And why then should we not recover the freedom of our land again, from
under that yoke and power.

Then further, The Norman Conqueror made Laws, whereby this English earth
should be governed, and appointed two national Officers to see those Laws
performed.

The first Officer was the Lawyer; And his work is conversant about nothing,
but the disposing of the earth, and all Courts of Judicature, and Snits of Law,
is about the ordering of the Earth; according to his Law made by him and his
party.

The next Officer was the national Clergy; and their work was to persuade the
multitude of people to let William the Conqueror alone with a quiet possession
and government (...) the earth, and to call it his and not theirs, and so not
to rebel against him.

And they were to tell the people, (...) they would acknowledge William Duke of
Normandy and his (...) (...) be their Lord, King and Ruler, and would be
obedient to his Government; then they should live in the Haven, that is, in
peace; and they should quietly enjoy their land which they rented, their houses
and fruits of their labors without disturbance.

But if they would not acknowledge him to be their Lord, King and Ruler, nor
submit to his Government, then they should be cast into Hell; that is, into the
sorrows of prisons, poverty, whips, and death: and their houses and riches
should be taken from them, etc.

And this was a true prophetical and experimental Doctrine: for do we not see,
that the Laws of a King, while a King, had the Power of life and death in them?
And he who fell under the power of this Lord, must pay the uttermost farthing,
before he was released.

And for their pains for thus preaching, the King established by his Laws, that
they should have the tenth of the increase of all profits from the Earth, (1 Samuel 8. 15.) placing their freedom where he placed his own, and that is in the
use of the Earth brought into their hands by the labors of the enslaved men.

But in after times, when this National Ministry appeared to the people to be
but hirelings, and as the people grew in knowledge they discovered their
hypocrisy more and more, as they do in these days: Then this Clergy (the
spirit of the old Pharisees) began to divine and to deceive the people by a
show of holiness, or spititual doctrine, as they call it, difficult to be
understood by any but themselves; persuading the people to believe or fancy,
That true Freedom lay in hearing them preach, and to enjoy that Heaven, which
they say, every man who believes their doctrine, shall enjoy after he is dead:
And so tell us of a Heaven and Hell after death, which neither they nor we know
what will be: So that the whole world is at a loss in the true knowledge thereof,
as Solomon said, Who shall bring him to see what shall be after he is dead?
Eccles. 3. 22. and 6. 11.

The former hell of prisons, whips and gallows they preached to keep the people
in subjection to the King: but by this divined Hell after death, they preach to
keep both King and people in aw to them, to uphold their trade of Tithes and
new rased Maintenance: And so having blinded both King and people, they become
the god that rules: This subtle divining spirit is the Whore that sits upon
many waters: This is Nahash the Amonite, that would not make peace with Israel,
unless Israel would suffer him to put out their right eyes, and to see by his,
1 Samuel 1 1. 2.

For so long as the people call that a Truth which they call a Truth, and
believe what they preach, and are willing to let the Clergy be the Keepers of
their eyes and knowledge; that is as much as Nahash did, put out their eyes to
see by theirs, then all is well, and they tell the people they shall go to
Heaven.

But if the eyes of the people begin to open, and they seek to find knowledge in
their own hearts, and to question the Ministers Doctrine, and become like unto
wise-hearted Thomas, to believe nothing but what they see reason for:

Then do the Ministers prepare War against that man or men, and will make no
Covenant of Peace with him, till they consent to have their right eyes put out,
that is, to have their Reason blinded, so as to believe every Doctrine they
preach, and never question any thing, saying, The Doctrine of Faith must not be
tried by Reason: No, for if it be, their Mystery of Iniquity will be
discovered, and they would lose their Tithes.

Therefore no marvel though the National Clergy of England and Scotland, who
are the Tything Priests and Lords of blinded men's spirits, stuck so close to
their Master the King, and to his Monarchial oppressing Government; for say
they, If the people must not work for us, and give us Tithes, but we must work
for our selves, as they do, our Freedom is lost: I, but this is but the cry of
an Egyptian Task-master, who counts other men's freedom his bondage.

Now if the Earth could be enjoyed in such a manner as every one might have
provision, as it may by this Platform I have offered, then will the Peace of
the Commonwealth be preserved, and men need not act so hypocritically as the
Clergy do, and others likewise to get a living: But when some shall enjoy great
possessions, and others who have done as much or more for to purchase Freedom,
shall have none at all, and be made slaves to their brethren, this begets
offenses.

The glory of Isreal's Commonwealth is this, They had no Beggar among them.
As you read, when they had conquered the Canaanites, and won that Land, by the
purchase of the blood and labor, and by a joint assistance throughout the
whole Tribes of Israel; the Officers and Leaders of the people did not sell the
Land again to the remainder of their Enemies, nor buy and sell it among
themselves, and so by cheating the people set up a new Oppression upon a new
account; Neither did they fall a parting the Land before the crowning Victory
was gotten: But they forbore the disposing of the Land till the War was over,
and all the Tribes stuck close together till all the fighting work was done.

And when they saw the Enemies heart was broke, and that now they were the
Masters of the field, then they quietly took possession of the Land as a free
reward for all their hazards and labor.

The Officers and Leaders were careful to keep Promise and Engagements to the
people, and there was no treachery found in them, as to enrich themselves with
the Commonwealths Land, and to deprive others of the price of their Blood, and
Free Quarter, and Taxes.

But they made Canon with all the Crown Lands therein, and all other forfeited
Lands, which was gotten by a joint Assistance of person and purse of all the
Tribes. The Scriptures say, They made this Canon Land a common Treasury of
livelihood to the whole Commonwealth of Israel, and so disposed of it, as they
made provision for every Tribe, and for every family in a Tribe, nay for every
particular man in a family, every one had enough, no man was in want, there was
no beggary among them.

They did not divide this Land only to particular men who went out to War, but
they who stayed at home had an equal share; they did not make one brother a Lord
of Manor and Landlord, and other brothers to be servants to them: But seeing
the Enemies were beaten, not by the Counselors only, not by the Leaders of the
Army only, but by the common Soldiers also; and not only by them, but by the
Laborers who staid at home to provide Victuals and Free Quarter: Therefore did
the Counselors and chief Officers of the Army agree to make provision for
every one that assisted, either by person or purse; and this was pure
Righteousness.

And to those families in a Tribe which had many persons in it, to them they
allotted more Land; and to those families which had less number of persons,
they allotted less Land: So that not only the Tribes in general, but every
family and person in a Tribe, younger brother as well as elder brother, he who
wrought at home to provide food, as well as he that went to War, all had
sufficient, there was no want, the Oppression of Beggary was not known among
them; all burdens were taken of, and Israel in all his Tribes and Families was
made a free Commonwealth in Power, as well as in Name, 1 Samuel 30. 24. Josh. 16.
17, and 18. Chapters.

And thus the Land was divided, and the whole Land was the Common Stock, every
one had a brotherly freedom therein, for the freedom of the one was the freedom
of the other, there was no difference in that, they were men of true faithful
and public spirits, notfalse-hearted.

And so likewise when Esther prevailed with King Ahasuerus for freedom, she did
not seek her own freedom and interest, but the freedom of all her kindred and
friends; for common Freedom was that which men of righteous spirits always
sought after.

All that I shall say is this, O that those who pretend to set up a
Gospel-Commonwealth in England, Scotland, and Ireland, would not be worse then
Moses, but rather exceed Moses, knowing that if this our English Commonwealths
Government carry perfect Freedom in his hand, then shall the Law go forth from
England to all the Nations of the World.

This Foundation being laid from the Example of Isreal's Commonwealth, and
Testimony of Gods Word, I shall proceed how the Earth shall be governed for the
Peace of a Commonwealth: But by the way, to prevent mistake, I shall insert

A short Declaration to take of Prejudice.
Some hearing of this Common Freedom, think there must be a Community of all
the fruits of the Earth whether they work or no, therefore strive to live idle
upon other men's labors.

Others, through the same unreasonable beastly ignorance, think there must be a
Community of all men and women for Copulation, and so strive to live a bestial
life.

Others think there will be no Law, but that every thing will run into
confusion for want of Government; but this Platform proves the contrary.

Therefore because that transgression does and may arise from ignorant and rude
fancy in man, is the Law added.

That which true Ringhteousness in my Judgment calls Community, is this, To
have the Earth set free from all Kingly Bondage of Lords of Manors, and
oppressing Landlords, which came in by Conquest; as a Thief takes a true man's
purse upon the highway, being stronger then he.

And that neither the Earth, nor any fruits thereof, should be bought or sold
by the Inhabitants one among another, which is a slavery the Kingly Conquerors
have brought in, therefore he set his stamp upon silver, that every one should
buy and sell in his name.

And though this be, yet shall not men live idle; for the Earth shall be
planted and reaped, and the fruits carried into Barns and Storehouses by the
assistance of every family, according as is showed hereafter in order.

Every man shall be brought up in Trades and labors, and all Trades shall be
maintained with more improvement, to the enriching of the Commonwealth, more
then now they be under Kingly Power.

Every Tradesman shall fetch Materials, as Leather, Wool, Flax, Corn, and the
like, from the public Storehouses to work upon without buying and selling;
and when particular works are made, as Cloth, Shoes, Hats, and the like, the
Tradesmen shall bring these particular works to particular shops, as it is now
in practice, without buying and felling. And every family as they want such
things as they cannot make, they shall go to these shops, and fetch without
money, even as now they fetch with money, as hereafter is showed how in order.

If any say, This will nurse Idleness; I answer, This Platform proves the
contrary, for idle persons and beggars will be made to work.

If any say, This will make some men to take goods from others by violence, and
call it theirs, because the Earth and fruits are a Common Stock; I answer, The
Laws or Rules following prevents that ignorance: For though the Storehouses
and public Shops be commonly furnished by every families assistance, and for
every families use, as is showed hereafter how: yet every man's house is proper
to himself, and all the furniture therein, and provision which he has fetched
from the Storehouses is proper to himself; every man's wife and every woman's
husband proper to themselves, and so are their children at their dispose till
they come to age.

And if any other man endeavor to take away his house, furniture, food wife, or
children, saying, every thing is common, and so abusing the Law of Peace, such
a one is a Transgressor, and shall suffer punishment, as by the Government and
Laws following is expressed.

For though the public Storehouses be a common Treasury, yet every man's
particular dwelling is not common, but by his consent, and the Commonwealths
Laws are to preserve a man's peace in his (...), and in his private dwelling,
against the rudeness and ignorance that may arise in Mankind.

If any man do force or abuse women in folly, pleading Community, the Laws
following do punish such ignorant and unrational practice; for the Laws of a
Commonwealth are Laws of moderate diligence, and purity of Manners.

Therefore I desire a patient reading of what hereafter follows; and when you
have heard the extent of Commonwealths Government or Freedom, then weigh it in
the balance with Kingly Government or Bondage, and see whether brings most
Peace to the Land, and establish that for Government.

For you must either establish Commonwealths Freedom in Power, making provision
for every ones Peace, which is Righteousness; or else you must set up Monarchy
again.

Monarchy is twofold; either for one King to rule, or for many to rule by
Kingly Principles; for the Kings Power lies in his Laws, not in the Name: And
if either one King rule, or many rule by Kings Principles, much murmuring,
(...), troubles and quarrels may and will arise among the oppressed people upon
every gained opportunity.

But if Common Freedom be found out, and ease the oppressed, it prevents
murmurings and quarrels, and establishes Universal Peace in the Earth.

Therefore seeing the Power of Government is in the hands of such as have
professed to the World a godly Righteousness, more purely then that of
oppressing Kings, without doubt their faithfulness and wisdom is required to be
manifested in action, as well as in words.

But if they who profess more Righteousness and Freedom in words then the Kings
Government was, and yet can find out no Government to ease the people, but must
establish the Kings old Laws, though they give it a new name; I will leave the
sentence, worthy such a profession and such a people, to be given by the heart
of every rational man: And so I shall proceed how the Earth should be governed
for the Peace of a Commonwealth.

CHAP. II.
What is Government in general.
Government is a wise and free ordering of the Earth, and the Manners of
Mankind by observation of particular Laws or Rules, so that all the Inhabitants
may live peaceably in plenty and freedom in the Land where they are born and
bred.

In the Government of a Land there are three parts, viz. Laws, sit Officers,
and a faithful Execution of those Laws.

First, There must be suitable Laws for every occasion, and almost for every
action that men do; for one Law cannot serve in all (...), but every season and
every action have their particular Laws attending thereupon for the
preservation of right order: As for example;

There is a time to plow, and the Laws of right understanding attends upon that
work; and there is a time to reap the fruits of the Earth, and the Laws of
right observation attending thereupon.

So that true Government is a right ordering of all actions, giving to every
action and thing its due weight and measure, and this prevents confusion, as
Solomon speaks, There is a time for all things; a time to make Promises and
Engagements, and a time to see them performed; a right order in times of War,
and a right order in times of Peace; every season and time having its Law or
Rule suitable, and this makes a healthful Government, because it preserves
Peace in a right order.

Secondly, There must be fit Officers, whose spirits are so humble, wise, and
free from Covetousness, as they can make the established Laws of the Land their
Will; and not through pride and vainglory, make their Wills to rule above the
Rules of Freedom, pleading Prerogative.

For when the right ordered Laws do rule, the Government is healthful; but when
the Will of Officers rule above Law, that Government is diseased with a mortal
disease.

Thirdly, There must be a faithful Execution of those Laws; and herein lies the
very life of Government: For a right order in Government lies not in the Will
of Officers without Laws, nor in Laws without Officers, nor in neither of them
without Execution: But when these three go hand in hand, the Government is
healthful; but if any one of these be wanting, the Government is diseased.

There is a twofold Government, a Kingly Government, and a Commonwealths
Government.

What is Kingly Government or Monarchy?
Kingly Government governs the (...) by that cheating Art of buying and
selling, and thereby becomes a man of contention, his hand is against every
man, and every man's hand against him: and take this Government at the best, it
is a diseased Government, and the very City Babylon, full of confusion: and if
it had not a Club Law to support it, there would be no order in it, because it
is the (...) and proud will of a Conqueror, enslaving a conquered people.

This Kingly Government is he who beats pruning hooks and plows, into spears,
guns, swords, and instruments of War; that he might take his younger brothers
Creation birthright from him, calling the (...) his, and not his brothers,
unless his brother will hire the Earth of him, so that he may live idle and at
ease by his brothers labors.

Indeed this Government may well be called the Government of highway men, who
has stolen the Earth from the younger brethren by force, and holds it from them
by force; he sheds blood not to free the people from Oppression, but that he
may be King and Ruler over an oppressed people.

The Seituation of this Monarchial Government
Lies in the will of Kings, alias Conquerors, setting up Lords of Manors,
exacting Landlords, Tything Priests, and covetous Lawyers, with all those
pricking briars attending thereupon, to be Taskmasters to oppress the people,
lest they should rise up in riches and power to disthrone him, and so to share
the Earth with him, redeeming their own Creation rights again, which this
Kingly Government withholds from Mankind in all Nations; for he is the great
Man of Sin, who is now revealed, who sits in the Temple of God, ruling above
all that is called God, and both by force and cheating policy takes the Peoples
Freedoms from them, Exodus 1. 8. 2 These. 2. 8. 9.

This Kingly Government is he that makes the elder brethren freemen in the
Earth, and the younger brethren slaves in the Earth, before they have lost
their Freedom by transgression to the Law.

Nay he makes one brother a Lord, and another a servant, while they are in
their Mothers womb, before they have done either good or evil: This is the
mighty Ruler, that has made the Election and Rejection of Brethren from their
birth to their death, or from Eternity to Eternity.

He calls himself the Lord God of the whole Creation, for he makes one brother
to pay rent to another brother for the use of the Water, Earth, and Air, or
else he will not suffer him by his Laws and Lawyers to live above ground, but
in beggary, and yet he will be called righteous.

And whereas the Scriptures say, That the Creator of all things (God) is no
Respecter of persons, yet this Kingly Power does nothing else but respect
persons, preferring the rich and the proud; therefore he denies the Scriptures,
and the true God of Righteousness, though he pray and preach of the Scriptures,
and keep Fasts and Thanksgiving-days to God, to be a cloak to hide his
Oppression from the people, whereby he shows himself to be the great
Antichrist, (...) Mystery of Iniquity, that makes War with Christ and his
Saints under pretense of owning him.

The great Lawgiver of this Kingly Government,
Is Covetousness, ruling in the heart of Mankind, making one brother to covet a
full possession of the Earth, and a lordly Rule over another brother, which he
will have, or else he will inslave or kill his brother; for this is Cain, who
killed Abel: and because of this, he is called the great red Dragon, the god of
this world, the Oppressor, under which the whole Creation has (...) a long
time, waiting to be delivered from him.

The Rise of Kingly Government is twofold.
First, By a politic wit, in drawing the people out of Common Freedom into a
way of Common Bondage; for so long as the Earth is a Common Treasury to all
men, Kingly Covetousness can never reign as King: Therefore his first device
was, to put the people to buy and sell the Earth and the fruits one to another;
for this would beget discontents, and muddy the waters.

And when this spirit of Monarchy has drawn the people into the way of buying
and selling, and the people begin to vex one another, then began his
opportunity to reign.

For in that man wherein this Kingly spirit seats himself, he tells the people
that are wronged, Well, I Will ease you, and I Will set things to rights: And then
he went about to establish buying and selling by Law, whereby the people had
some ease for a time, but the cunning Machavilian spirit got strength thereby
to settle himself King in the Earth.

For after some time the people through ignorance began to multiply Suits of
Law one against another, and to quarrel and fight: Now says this subtle
spirit, Come follow me, to one sort of people that are oppressed, and stick to
me, and we will fight with those Who Wrong you; and if We conquer them, then We
Will govern the Earth as we please, and they shall be our servants, and We Will
make them Work for us.

Thereupon one sort of people followed one head, and another sort of people
followed another head, and so Wars began in the Earth, and mankind fell a
fighting, one part conquering and enslaving another: And now Man is fallen from
his innocence, and from the glory of the spirit of common Freedom, Love and
Peace, into Enmity; every one striving to be King one over another; every one
striving to be a Landlord of the Earth, and to make his brother his servant to
work for him.

But still here is disorder, therefore this subtle spirit of darkness goes
further, and tells the people, You must make one man King over you all, and let
him make Laws, and let every one be obedient thereunto: And when the people
consented thereunto, they gave away their Freedom, and they set up Oppression
over themselves.

And this was the rise of Kingly Power; first, by Policy, drawing the people
from a common enjoyment of the Earth, to the crafty Art of buying and selling:
Secondly, to advance himself by the power of the Sword, when that Art of buying
and selling had made them quarrel among themselves.

So that this spirit of Monarchy it is the spirit of Subtilty and Covetousness,
filling the heart of Mankind with enmity and ignorance, pride and vainglory,
because the strong destroys the weak; and so one Scripture calls this the Power
and Government of the Beast, another Scripture calls it the god of this World,
or the Devil: For indeed the Monarchial spirit is the power of darkness, for it
is the great thick Cloud, that has hid the light of the Sun of Righteousness
from shining in his full strength a long time.

And though this Kingly spirit does call buying and selling a righteous thing,
thereby to put the simple younger brother upon it, yet he will destroy it as he
pleases, by Pattents, Licenses, or Monopolizing.

Or else he will at his pleasure take away the riches which his younger brother
has got by trading, and so still lift up himself above his brother.

And as he rise to the Throne by the crafty Art of buying and selling, and by
the Sword, so he is maintained upon the Throne by the same means.

And the people now see, That Kingly Power is the Oppressor, and the
Maintainers thereof are called Oppressors by the ancient Writers of the Bible.

This Kingly Power is the old Heaven, and the old Earth, that must pass away,
wherein unrighteousness, oppression and partiality dwells.

For indeed we never read, that the people began to complain of Oppression,
till Kingly Government rose up, which is the power of covetousness and pride;
and which Samuel sets forth to be a plague and a curse upon the people in the
first rise of it.

He will take your sons and your daughters to be his servants, and to run
before his charets, to plant his ground, and to reap his harvest: He will take
your fields, your Vineyards and Oliveyards, even the best of them, and give to
his servants as pleases him: He will take the tenth of your seed, and of your
vineyards, and give to his Officers, or Ministers. 1 Samuel 8.

And this was that god, who appointed the people to pay Tithes to the Clergy.

And many other Oppressions did the Kingly Government bring upon the People, as
you may read at large in Samuel.

Read 1 Samuel 8. from Verse. 10. to 19.

The Winter's past, the Spring time now appears,
Be gone thou Kingly Tyrant, With thy Cavaliers.
Thy day is past, and sure thou do appear
To be the bond-mans son, and not the freeborn Heir.
Matt. 15. 13.

What is Commonwealths Government?
Commonwealths Government governs the Earth without buying and selling; and
thereby becomes a man of peace, and the Restoter of ancient Peace and Freedom:
he makes provision for the oppressed, the weak and the simple, as well as for
the rich, the wise and the strong: He beats swords and spears into pruning
hooks and plows; he makes both elder and younger brother Freemen in the Earth.
Micah 4. 3, 4. Isai. 33. 1. and 65. 17, to 25.

All Slavertes and Oppressions, which have been brought upon Mankind by Kings,
Lords of Manors, Lawyers, and Landlords, and the Divining Clergy, are all cast
out again by this Government, if it be right in power, as well as in name.

For this Government is the true Restorer of all long lost Freedoms, and so
becomes the joy of all Nations, and the Blessing of the whole Earth: for this
takes off the Kingly Curse, and makes Jerusalem a praise in the Earth.
Therefore all you, who prosess Religion and spiritual things, now look to it,
and see what spirit you do profess, for your profession is brought to trial.

If once Commonwealths Government be set upon the Throne, then no Tyranny or
Oppression can look him in the face and live.

For where Oppression lies upon brethren by brethren, that is no Commonwealths
Government, but the Kingly Government still; and the mystery of Iniquity has
taken that peacemakers name to be a cloak to hide his subtle covetousness,
pride, and oppression under.

O England, England, would thou have thy Government sound and healthful? then
cast about, and see, and search diligently to find out all those burdens that
came in by Kings, and remove them; and then will thy Commonwealths Government
arise from under the clods, under which as yet it is buried, and covered with
deformity.

If true Commonwealths Freedom lie in the free Enjoyment of the Earth, as it
does, then whatsoever Law or custom does deprive brethren of their Freedom in
the Earth, it is to be cast out as unsavory salt.

The situation of Commonwealths Government
Is within the Laws of common Freedom, whereby there is a provision for
livelihood in the Earth, both for elder and younger brother; and not the one
enslaving the other, but both living in plenty and freedom.

The Officers, Laws, (...) Customs hereafter mentioned, or such like, according
to such a method, may be the Foundation and Pillars of Commonwealths Government.

This Government depends not upon the Will of any particular man, or men; for
it is seated in the spirit of Mankind, and it is called the light, or son of
righteousness and peace. The Tyrants in all ages have made use of this man's
name, while he has lien buried, to cover their cheating mystery of Iniquity:
for if common Freedom were not pretended, the Commoners of a Land would never
dance after the pipe of self-seeking wits.

This Commonwealths Government may well be called the ancient of days; for it
was before any other oppressing government crept in.

It is the Moderator of all oppression; and so is like Moses and Joseph in
(...) Court, and in time will be the Restorer of long lost Freedoms to the
Creation, and delights to plant Righteousness over the face of the whole Earth.

The great Lawgiver in Commonwealths Government
Is the spirit of universal Righteousness dwelling in Mankind, now rising up
to teach every one to do to another as he would have another do to him, and is
no respector of persons: and this spirit has been killed by the Pharisaical
Kingly spirit of self-love, and been buried in the dunghill of that enmity for
many years past.

And if these be the days of his resurrection to power, as we may hope, because
the name of Commonwealth is risen and established in England by a Law, then we
or our posterity shall see comfortable effects.

In that Nation, where this Commonwealths Government shall be first
established, there shall be abundance of peacce and plenty, and all (...) of
the Earth shall come flocking thither to see his beauty, and to learn the ways
thereof; and the Law shall go forth from that Sion, and that Word of the Lord
from that Jerusalem, which shall govern the whole Earth. Micah 4, 1, 2.

There shall be no Tyrant Kings, Lords of Manors, Tything Priests, oppressing
Lawyers, exacting Landlords, nor any such like pricking bryar in all this holy
Mountain of the Lord God our Righteousness and Peace; for the righteous Law
shall be the Rule for every one, and the Judge of all men's actions.

David desired rather to be a door keeper in this house of God, or
Commonwealths Government, then to live in the tents of wickedness, which was
the Kingly oppressing Courts.

If any go about to build up Commonwealths Government upon Kingly principles,
they will both shame and lose themselves; for there is a plain difference
between the two Governments.

And if you do not run in the right channel of Freedom, you must, nay you will,
as you do, face about, and turn back again to Egyptian Monarchy: and so your
names in the days of posterity shall stink and be blasted with abhorred infamy
for your unfaithfulness to common Freedom; and the evil effects will be sharp
upon the backs of posterity.

Therefore seeing England is declared to be a free Commonwealth, and the name
thereof established by a Law; surely then the greatest work is now to be done,
and that is to escape all Kingly cheats in setting up a Commonwealths
Government, that the power and the name may agree together; so that all the
Inhabitants may live in peace, plenty, and freedom, otherwise we shall show our
Government to be gone no further but to the half day of the Beast, or to the
dividing of Time, of which there must be an over-turn. Dan. 7. 25. Rev. 12. 14.

For Oppression was always the occasion why the spirit of Freedom in the people
desired change of Government.

When Samuels sons took bribes, and grew rich upon; the common purse, and
forgot to relieve the oppressed, That made the people forsake the Government by
Judges, and to desire a Kingly Government, 1 Samuel

And the Oppressions of the Kingly Government have made this Age of the World
to desire a Commonwealth Government, and the removal of the Kings; for the
spirit of Light in Man loves Freedom, and hates Bondage.

And because the spirit in Mankind is various within it self; for some are
wise some are foolish, some idle, some laborious, some rash, some mild, some
loving and free to others, some envyous and covetous, some of an inclination to
do as they would have others do to them: but others seek to save themselves,
and to live in fullness, though others perish for want.

Therefore because of this was the Law added, which was to be a Rule and Judge
for all men's actions, to preserve common Peace and Freedom; as Paul writ, The
Law was added because of Transgression, one against another.

The Haven gates are now set open for English Man to enter:
The Freedoms of the Earth's his due, if he will make adventure.
CHAP. III.
Where began the first Original of Government in the Earth among Mankind?
THe Original Root of Magistracy is common Preservation, and it rose up first
in a private Family: for suppose there were but one Family in the World, as is
conceived, Father Adams Family, wherein were many persons.

Therein Adam was the first Governor or Officer in the Earth, because as he was
the first Father, so he was the most wise in contriving, and the most strong
for labor, and so the fittest to be the chief Governor. For this is the golden
Rule,

Let the wise help the foolish, and let the strong help the weak. Psa. 35. 10.
Romans 15. 1, 2.

But some may say here, That Adam was under no Law, but his Will was a Law to
him and his household; therefore from the root from whence Magistracy first
rose, it is clear, That Officers are to be under no Law, but their own Wills,
and the people are to be subject thereunto. I answer:

The Law of Necessity, that the Earth should be planted for the common
preservation and peace of his household, was the righteous Rule and Law to Adam,
and this Law was so clearly written in the hearts of his people, that they all
consented quietly to any counsel he gave them for that end.

Therefore not Adams Will only, but the Will of his People likewise, and the
Law of common Preservation, Peace and Freedom, was the righteous Law that
governed both Adam and his household.

But yet observe, That from the Father in a Family was the first rise of
Magisterial Government, because Children wanting experience of their own
preservation, therefore such as are experienced, are to propound the Law of
Government to them: and therefore from Adam to this day, the Law of common
Preservation is the Rule and Foundation of true Magistracy: and it is the work
of all Magistrates to help the weak and the foolish.

There are two root from whence Laws do spring.
The first root you see is common Preservation, when there is a principle in
every one to seek the good of others, as himself, without respecting persons:
and this is the root of the tree Magistracy, and the Law of Righteousness and
Peace: and all particular Laws found out by experience, necessary to be
practiced for common Preservation, are the boughs and branches of that Tree.

And because, among the variety of Mankind, Ignorance may grow up; therefore
this Original Law is written in the heart of every man, to be his guide or
leader: so that if an Officer be blinded by covetousness and pride, and that
ignorance rule in him, yet an inferior man may tell him where he goes astray;
for common Preservation and Peace is the Foundation Rule of all Government: and
therefore if any will preach or practice Fundamental Truths, or Doctrine, here
you may see where the Foundation thereof lies.

The second Root is Self preservation: when particular Officers seek their own
Preservation, Ease, Honor, Riches, and Freedom in the Earth, and do respect
persons that are in Power and Riches with them and regard not the Peace,
Freedom, and Preservation of the weak and foolish among Brethren.

And this is the root of the Tree Tyranny, and the Law of Unrighteousness, and
all particular Kingly Laws found out by covetous Policy to enslave one brother
to another, whereby bondage, tears, sorrows and poverty are brought upon many
men, are all but the boughs and branches of that Tree, Tyranny; and such
Officers as these are fallen from true Magigistracy, and are no Members
thereof, but the Members of Tyranny, who is the Devil and Satan.

And indeed this Tyranny is the cause of all Wars and Troubles, and of the
removal of the Government of the Earth out of one hand into another, so often
as it is, in all Nations.

For if Magistrates had a care to cherish the peace and liberties of the common
people, and see them set free from Oppression, they might sit in the chair of
Government, and never be disturbed.

But when their sitting is altogether to advance their own interest, and to
forget the asslictions of Joseph, or their brethren that are under bondage:
this is a so (...) of their own downfall, and oftentime proves the plague to
the whole Land.

Therefore the work of all true Magistrates is to maintain the common Law,
which is the root of right Government, and preservation and peace to every one;
and to cast out all self-ended principles and interests, which is Tyranny and
Oppression, and which breaks common peace.

For (...) the disorderly actings of Officers break the peace of the
Commonwealth more, then any men whatsoever.

All Officers in a true Magistracy of a Commonwealth are to be chosen Officers.
In the first Family, which is the Foundation from whence all Families sprang,
there was the Father, he is the first link of the chain Magistracy. The
necessity of the children that sprang from him does say,

Father, do thou teach us how to plant the Earth, that we may live, and we will
obey. By this choice, they make him not only a Father, but a Master and Ruler.
And out of this root springs up all Magistrates and Officers, To see the Law
executed, and to preserve Peace in the Earth, by seeing that right Government
is observed.

For here take notice, That though the children might not speak, yet their
weakness and simplicity did speak, and chose their Father to be their Overseer.

So that he who is a true Commonwealths Officer, is not to step into the place
of Magistracy by policy, or violent force, as all Kings and Conquerors do; and
so become oppressing Tyrants, by promoting their selfended Interests, or
Machiavilian Cheats, that they may live in plenty, and rule as (...) over their
Brethren.

But a (...) Commonwealths Officer is to be a chosen one, by them who are in
(...), and who judge him fit for that work.

And thus a Father in a Family is a Commonwealths Officer, because the
Necessity of the young children choose him by a joint consent, and not
otherwise.

Secondly, In a bigger Family, called a Parish, the body of the people are
confused and disordered, because some are wise, some foolish, some subtle and
cunning to deceive, others plain-hearted, some strong, some weak, some rash,
angry, some mild and quiet-spirited. By reason whereof offenses do arise among
brethren, and their common peace is broken.

Therefore as Necessity has added a Law to limit men's manners, because of
Transgressiens one against another.

So likewise does the necessity of common peace move the whole body of the
Parish to choose two, three, or more, within that circuit, to be their
Overseers, to cause the unruly ones, for whom only the Law was added, to be
subject to the Law, or Rule, that so peace may be preserved among them in the
planting of the Earth, reaping the fruits, and quiet enjoyment.

Thirdly, In every County, Shire, or Land, wherein the Families are increased
to a larger Commonwealth, the necessity of the people moves them still to
choose more Overseers and Officers to preserve common peace.

And when the people have chose all Officers, to preserve a right Order in
Government of Earth among them; then does the same necessity of common Peace
move the people to say to their Overseers and Officers,

Do you see our Laws observed for our preservation and peace, and we will
assist and protect you: And this word assist and protect, (...),

The rising up of the people by force of Arms to defend their Laws and Officers
against any Invasion, Rebellion, or Resistance, (...) to beat down the
turbulency of any foolish or self-ended spirit that endevors to break their
common Peace.

So that all true Officers are chosen Officers, and when they act to satisfy
the necessity of them who chose them, then they are faithful and (...) servants
to that Commonwealth, and then there is a rejoicing in the City.

But when Officers do take the possess ons of the Earth into their own hands,
lifting themselves up thereby to be Lords over their Masters, the people, who
chose them; and will not suffer the people to plant the Earth, and reap the
fruits for their livelihood, unless they will hire the Land (...) them, or work
for day-wages for them, that they may live in ease and plenty, and not work.

These Officers are sallen from true Magistracy of a Commonwealth, and they do
not act righteously; and because of this, sorrows and tears, poverty and
bondages are known among Mankind; and now that City mourns.

And surely if it be carefully looked into, the necessity of the people never
chose such Officers, but they were either voluntary Soldiers (...) Officers
chosen by them, who ran before they were called; and so by policy and force
they sat down in the chair of Government, strengthening one sort of people to
take the free use of the Earth from another sort; and these are sons of
bondage, and they act in darkness: by reason whereof the Prophet Esaias cries
out, Darkness has covered the Earth, and thick darkness the people; for the
Leaders of the people have caused them to err: I fear so, O England, etc.

All Officers in a Commonwealth are to be chosen new ones every year.
When public Officers remain long in place of Judicature, they will
degenerate from the bounds of humility, honesty, and tender care of brethren,
in regard the heart of man is so subject to be overspred with the clouds of
covetousness, pride, and vainglory: for though at the first entrance into
places of Rule they be of public spirits, seeking the Freedom of others as
their own; yet continuing long in such a place, where honors and greatness is
coming in, they become selfish, seeking themselves, and not common Freedom; as
experience proves it true in these days, according to this common Proverb,

Great Offices in a Land and Army have changed the disposition of many sweet
spirited men.

And Nature tells us, That if water stand long, it corrupts; whereas running
water keeps sweet, and is fit for common use.

Therefore as the necessity of common preservation moves the people to frame a
Law, and to choose Officers to see the Law obeyed, that they may live in peace:

So does the same Necessity bid the People, and cries aloud in the ears and
eyes of England, to choose new Officers, and to remove the old ones, and to
choose State-Officers every year: And that for these Reasons;

First, To prevent their own evils: for when pride and fullness take hold of an
Officer, his eyes are so blinded therewith, that he forgets he is a servant to
the Commonwealth, and strives to lift up himself high above his Brethren, and
oftentimes his Fall proves very great; witness the Fall of oppressing Kings,
Bishops, and other State-Officers.

Secondly, To prevent the creeping in of Oppression into the Commonwealth
again: for when Officers grow proud and full, they will maintain their
greatness, though it be in the poverty, ruin, and hardship of their Brethren;
Witness the practice of Kings and their Laws, that have (...) the Commoners of
England a long time.

And have we not experience in these days, that some Officers of the
Commonwealth are grown so mossy for want of removing, that they will hardly
speak to an old acquaintance, if he be an inferior man, though they were very
familiar before these Wars began? etc.

And what has occasioned this distance among friends and brethren, but long
continuance in places of honor, greatness and riches?

Thirdly, Let Officers be chosen new every year in love to our posterity; for
if Burdens and Oppressions should grow up in our Laws and in our Officers for
want of removing, as Moss and Weeds grow in some Land for want of stirring,
surely it will be a foundatian of misery, not easily to be removed by our
posterity, and then will they curse the time that ever we their forefathers
had opportunities to set things to rights for their ease, and would not do it.

Fourthly, To remove Officers of State every year will make them truly
faithful, knowing that others are coming after who will look into their ways;
and if they do not do things justly, they must be ashamed when the next
Officers succeed: And when Officers deal faithfully in the Government of the
Commonwealth, they will not be unwilling to remove: The Peace of London is much
preserved by removing their Officers yearly.

Fifthly, It is good to remove Officers every year, that whereas many have
their portions to obey, so many may have their turns to rule, and this will
encourage all men to advance Righteousness and good Manners in hopes of Honor;
but when money and riches bears all the sway in the Rulers hearts, there is
nothing but Tyranny in such ways.

Sixthly, The Commonwealth hereby will be furnished with able and experienced
men, fit to govern, which will mightily advance the Honor and Peace of our
Land, occasion the more watchful care in the Education of children, and in time
will make our Commonwealth of England the Lilly among the Nations of the Earth.

Who are fit to choose, and fit to be chosen Officers in a Commonwealth.
All uncivil livers, as drunkards, quarrelers, fearful ignorant men, who dare
not speak truth, lest they anger other men; likewise all who are wholly given
to pleasure and sports, or men who are full of talk; all these are empty of
substance, and cannot be experienced men, therefore not fit to be chosen
Officers in a Commonwealth, yet they may have a voice in the choosing.

Secondly, All those who are interessed in the Monarchial Power and Government,
ought neither to choose nor be chosen Officers to manage Commonwealths Affairs,
for these cannot be friends to common Freedom: And these are of two sorts.

First, Such as have either lent money to maintain the Kings Army, or in that
Army have been Soldiers to fight against the recovering of common Freedom,
these are neither to choose, nor be chosen Officers in the Commonwealth as yet,
for they have lost their Freedom; yet I do not say that they should be made
servants, as the conquered usually are made servants, for they are our brethren
and what they did, no doubt, they did in a conscionable zeal, though in
ignorance.

And seeing but few of the Parliaments friends understand their Common
Freedoms, though they own the name Commonwealth, therefore the Parliaments
party ought to bear with the ignorance of the Kings party, because they are
brethren, and not make them servants, though for the present they be suffered
neither to choose nor be chosen Officers, left that ignorant spirit of revenge
break out in them to interrupt our common Peace.

Secondly, All those who have been so hasty to buy and sell the Commonwealths
Land, and so to entangle it upon a new account, ought neither to choose nor be
chosen Officers, for hereby they declare themselves either to be for Kingly
Interest, or else are ignorant of Commonwealths Freedom, or both, therefore
unfit to make Laws to govern a free Commonwealth, or to be Overseers to see
those Laws executed.

What greater injury could be done to the Commoners of England, then to sell
away their Land so hastily, before the people knew where they were, or what
Freedom they had got by such cost and bloodshed as they were at? And what
greater ignorance could be declared by Officers, then to sell away the
purchased Land from the Purchasers, or from part of them, into the hands of
particular men to uphold Monarchial Principles?

But though this be a fault, let it be bore withal, it was ignorance of
brethren; for England has layn so long under Kingly slavery, that few knew
what Common Freedom was: And let a restoration of this redeemed Land be
speedily made by them who have the possession of it.

For there is neither Reason nor Equity, that a few man should go away with
that Land and Freedom which the whole Commoners have paid Taxes, Free Quarter,
and wasted their Estates, Healths and Blood to purchase out of Bondage, and
many of them are in want of a comfortable livelihood.

Well, these are the men that take away other men's Rights from them, and they
are Members of the covetous generation of Self-seekers, therefore unfit to be
chosen Officers, or to choose.

Who then are fit to be chosen Commonwealths Officers?

Why truly, choose such as have a long time given testimony by their actions to
be Promoters of Common Freedom, whether they be Members in Church fellowship,
or not in Church fellowship, for all are one in Christ.

Choose such as are men of peaceable spirits, and of a peaceable conversation.

Choose such as have suffered under Kingly Oppression, for they will be
fellow-feelers of others bondages.

Choose such as have adventured the loss of their Estates and Lives to redeem
the Land from Bondage, and who have remained constant.

Choose such as are understanding men, and who are experienced in the Laws of
peaceable and right ordered Government.

Choose men of courage, who are not afraid to speak the Truth; for this is the
shame of many in England at this day, they are drowned in the dunghill mud of
slavish fear of men; these are covetous men, not fearing God, and their portion
is to be cast without the City of Peace amongst the Dogs.

Choose Officers out of the number of those men that are above forty years of
age, for these are most likely to be experienced men; and all these are likely
to be men of courage, dealing truly, and hating Covetousness.

And if you choose men thus principled, who are poor men, as times go, for the
Conquerors Power has made many a righteous man a poor man; then allow them a
yearly Maintenance from the Common Stock, until such time as a Commonwealths
Freedom is established, for then there will be no need of such allowances.

What is the reason that most people are so ignorant of their Freedoms, and so
few fit to be chosen Commonwealths Officers?

Because the old Kingly Clergy, that are seated in Parishes for lucre of
Tithes, are continually distilling their blind Principles into the people, and
do thereby nurse up Ignorance in them; for they observe the bent of the peoples
minds, and make Sermons to please the sickly minds of ignorant people, to
preserve their own riches and esteem among a charmed, befooled and befotted
people.

CHAP. IV.
What are the Officers Names in a free Commonwealth?
IN a private Family, a Father, or Master, is an Officer.

In a Town, City, or Parish A Peacemaker. A fourfold Office of Overseers. A
Soldier. A Task-master. An Executioner.


In a County or Shire A Judge. The Peacemakers of every Town within that
Circuit. The Overseers and Soldiers attending thereupon.
This is called either the Judges Court, or the County Senate.

In a whole Land A Parliament. A Commonwealths Ministry. A Postmaster. An Army.


All these Offices are like links of a Chain, they arise from one and the same
root, which is necessity of Common Peace, and all their works tend to preserve
Common Peace, therefore they are to assist each other, and all others are to
assist them, as need requires, upon pain of punishment by the breach of the
Laws: And the Rule of right Government being thus observed, may make a whole
Land, nay the whole Fabric of the Earth, to become one family of Mankind, and
one well governed Commonwealth; as Israel was called one house of Israel,
though it consisted of many Tribes, Nations and Family.

The Work of a Father or Master of a Family.
A Father is to cherish his children till they grow wise and strong, and then
as a Master he is to instruct them in reading, in learning languages, Arts and
Sciences, or to bring them up to labor, or employ them in some Trade or other,
or cause them to be instructed therein, according as is showed hereafter in the
Education of Mankind.

A Father is to have a care that as all his children do assist to plant the
Earth, or by other Trades provide necessaries; so he shall see that every one
have a comfortable livelihood, not respecting one before another.

He is to command them their work, and see they do it, and not suffer them to
live idle; he is either to reprove by words, or whip those who offend, for the
Rod is prepared to bring the unreasonable ones to experience and moderation:

That so children may not quarrel like beasts, but live in Peace, like rational
men, experienced in yielding obedience to the Laws and Officers of the
Commonwealth, every one doing to another as he would have another do to him.

The Work of a Peacemaker.
In a Parish or Town may be chosen three, four or six Peacemakers, or more,
according to the bigness of the place; and their work is twofold.

First, In general to sit in Council to order the Affairs of the Parish, to
prevent troubles, and to preserve Common Peace, and here they may be called
Counselors.

Secondly, If there arise any matters of offense between man and man, by reason
of any quarrels, disturbance, or foolish actings, the offending parties shall
be brought by the Soldiers before any one or more of these Peacemakers, who
shall hear the matter, and shall endeavor to reconcile the parties, and make
peace, and so put a stop to the rigor of the Law, and go no further.

But if the Peacemaker cannot persuade or reconcile the parties, then he shall
command them to appear at the Judges Court at the time appointed to receive the
Judgment of the Law.

If any matters of public concernment fall out wherein the Peace of the City,
Town or Country in one County is concerned, then the Peacemakers in every Town
thereabouts shall meet, and consult about it; and from them, or from any six of
them, if need require, shall issue forth any Order to inferior Officers.

But if the matters concern only the limits of a Town or City, then the
Peacemakers of that Town shall from their Court send forth Orders to inferior
Officers for the performing of any public service within their limits.

Thirdly, If any proof be given that any Officer neglects his duty, a
Peacemaker is to tell that Officer between them two of his neglect; and if the
Officer continue negligent after this reproof, the Peacemaker shall acquaint
either the County Senate, or the National Parliament therewith, that from them
the offender may receive condign punishment.

And it is all to this end, that the Laws be obeyed; for a careful Execution of
Laws is the Life of Government.

And while a Peacemaker is careful to oversee the Officers, all Officers and
others shall assist him, upon pain of forfeiture of Freedom, or other
punishment, according to the Rules following.

One thing remember, That when any offender is brought before any of these
chief Peacemakers, then this is to be noted, that the offender has rejected
mercy once before by refusing to yield obedience to the Overseers, as is
explained further hereafter.

The Work of an Overseer.
In a Parish or Town there is to be a fourfold degree of Overseers, which are
to be chosen yearly.

The first is an Overseer to preserve Peace, in case of any quarrels that may
fall out between man and man: for though the Earth with her fruits be a common
Treasury, and is to be planted and reaped by common Assistance of every family,
yet every house, and all the furniture for ornament therein, is a propriety to
the Indwellers; and when any family has fetched in from the Storehouses or
shops either Clothes, food, or any ornament necessary for their use, it is all
a propriety to that family.

And if any other family or man come to disturb them, and endeavor to take away
furniture, which is the ornament of his neighbors house, or to burn, break, or
spoil wilfully any part of his neighbors houses, or endeavor to take away
either the food or clothing which his neighbor has provided for his use, by
reason whereof quarrels and provoking words may arise:

This Office of Overseers is to prevent disturbance, and is an Assistance to
the Peacemaker; and at the hearing of any such offense, this Overseer shall go
and hear the matter, and (...) to persuade the offender, and to keep peace; and
if friendship be made, and subjection be yielded to the Laws for the Peace of
the Commonwealth, the offender is only to be reproved for his rashness by this
Overseer; and there is an end.

But if the offender be so violent, that he will not refrain his offense to his
neighbor at this Overseers persuasion, but remain stiff and stubborn, this
Overseer shall then give out an Order to the Soldier to carry the body of the
offender before the Council of the Peacemakers, or before any one or more of
them.

And if the offender will not yield obedience to the Laws of Peace by the
persuasion of the chief Peacemakers neither, then this is to be noted to be
the second time that this offender has refused mercy.

Then shall the Peacemaker appoint him a day, and command him to appear before
the Judges Court, either in the City or Country, where the offense is given,
and there he shall receive sentence according to the rigor of the Law.

And if an Overseer should make peace, and do not send the offender to the
Peacemakers Court, yet this shall be noted the first time of such a ones
disobedience to the Laws.

And all this is to prevent quarrels and offenses; and the chief Peacemakers or
Counselors may not always be at hand at the beginning of such disturbance,
therefore this Overseer is an Assistance thereunto, and is a Member of that
Court.

One man shall not take away that Commodity which another man has first laid
hands on, for any Commodity for use belongs to him that first laid hands of it
for his use; and if another come and say, I will have it, and so offenses do
arise, this Overseer shall go to them, or give order to the Soldier to bring
the offender to him, and shall endeavor to make peace, either by giving the
Commodity to him who first laid hands on it, or else by taking the Commodity
from both, and bid them go to the Storehouses and fetch more, seeing the
Storehouses are full, and afford plenty of the same Commodities, giving the
offender a sharp reproof for offering to break the Peace, noting this to be the
first time that such a one offered violence to break the Laws of Peace.

And all persons whatsoever shall assist the Overseers herein; and if any
person strike or affront by words this Overseer, he shall give order to the
Soldier to carry him before the Peacemakers, and from them the offender shall
receive a Command to appear before the Judges Court, where he shall receive the
sentence of the Law without mitigation.

For when a Peacemaker or Conncellor does appoint an offender to appear before
the Judges Court, such an offender has refused mercy twice.

All this is to be done in case of small offenses; but if any offense be
offered by any which comes within compass of death, there shall be no
Peacemaker to be a Mediator aforehand, but the offender shall be tried by the
Law.

The second Office of Overseership is for Trades.
And this Overseer is to see that young people be put to Masters, to be
instructed in some labor, Trade, Science, or to be waiters in Storehouses,
that none be idly brought up in any family within his Circuit.

Likewise this Overseer is to assist any Master of a family by his advice and
counsel in the secrets of his Trades, that by the experience of the Elders, the
young people may learn the inward knowledge of the things which are, and find
out the secrets of Nature.

And seeing there are variety of Trades, there are to be chosen Overseers for
every Trade, so many Overseers as the largeness of the Town and City requires;
and the employment of this Overseer is not to work (unless he will himself,)
but to go from house to house to view the works of the people of every house
belonging to his Trade and Circuit, and to give directions as he sees cause,
and see that no youth be trained up in idleness, as is said.

And if this Overseer find any youth more capable and fit for another Trade
then his own, he shall speak to some Overseers of another Trade, who shall
provide him a Master, with the consent of his father, and appoint him what
family to live in.

And if the father of a family be weak, sick, or naturally foolish, wanting the
power of wisdom and government, or should be dead before his children should be
instructed; then the Overseers of this Trade, wherein the Father was brought
up, are to put those Children into such Families, where they may be instructed,
according to the Law of the Commonwealth.

One man may be an Overseer for twenty or thirty Families of Shoomakers;
another for Smiths, another for Weavers of Cloth, another for the Keepers of
Storehouses or Shops: for every Trade is to have an Overseer for that
particular Trade.

And truly the Government of the Halls and Companies in London is a very
rational and well ordered Government; and the Overseers of Trades may very well
be called Masters, Wardens, and Assistants of such and such a Company, for such
and such a particular Trade. Only two things are to be practiced to preserve
peace.

The first is, That all these Overseers shall be chosen new ones every year.
And secondly, The old Overseers shall not choose the new ones, to prevent the
creeping in of Lordly Oppression: but all the Masters of Families, and Freemen
of that Trade, shall be the chusers, and the old Overseers shall give but their
single voice among them.

And as there are to be Overseers for Trades in Towns and Cities:

So there are to be chosen Overseers in the Country Parishes, to see the Earth
planted; and in every Parish in the Country may be chosen four or six Overseers
of Husbandry, to see the Ground planted within their Circuits, and to see that
the work of Husbandry be done orderly, and according to Reason and skill.

Some Overseers to look after the Shepherds, and appoint out such men as are
skilled in that work. Some Overseers to look after the Herds-men. Some
Overseers of them who look to Horses. And some for the Daries. And the work of
these Overseers is to see, that every Family send in their assistance to work,
both in plowing and dressing the Earth, in that season of the year, in seed
time; and in reaping the fruits of the Earth, and housing them in Storehouses
in time of Harvest.

Likewise they are to see, that all Barns belonging to any Family, or more
public Storehouses belonging to a Parish, be kept in sufficient repair,
Likewise they are to see, that every Family do keep sufficient working tools
for common use, as Plows, Carts, and furniture, according as every Family is
furnished with men to work therewith: likewise Pickaxes, Spades, Pruning Hooks,
and any such like necessary instrument.

Likewise it is the work of this Overseership to see, that Schoolmasters,
Postmasters, and Minsters, do their several Offices, according to the Laws.

Likewise this Overseership for Trades shall see, That no man shall be a
Housekeeper, and have Servants under him, till he has served under a Master
seven years, and has learned his Trade: and the reason is, that every Family
may be governed by stayed and experienced Masters, and not by wanton youth.

And this Office of Overseership keeps all people within a peaceable harmony of
Trades, Sciences, or Works, that there be neither Beggar nor idle person in the
Commonwealth.

The third Office of Overseership is to see particular Tradesmen bring in their
Works to Storehouses and Shops, and to see the Waiters in Storehouses do their
duty.
As there are particular Trades requiring strength, and some men are strong to
perform such works; so there are some weak in body, whose employment shall be
to be Keepers of Storehouses and Shops, both to receive in Commodities, and
deliver out again, as any particular Family, or man, wants and comes for them.

As for example:

When Lether is tanned, it shall be brought into the Storehouses for Lether;
and from thence Shoomakers, and Harness makers, and such like, may fetch it as
they need.

So for Linen and Woolen Cloth, it is to be brought by the Weavers into the
Storehouses or Shops, from whence particular Families of other Trades may fetch
as they need: And so for any Commodity, as in the Law for Storehouses is
declared.

Now the work of this Overseership is of the same nature with the other for
Trades; only this is to be employed only about the Oversight of Storehouses
and shops.

And they are to see that particular Tradesmen, as Weavers of Linen and Woolen
Cloth, Spinners, Smiths, Hatters, Glovers, and such like, do bring in their
Works into the shops appointed: And they are to see that the Shops and
Storehouses within their several Circuits, be kept still furnished.

That when Families of other Trades want such commodities as they cannot make,
they may go to the Shops and Storehouses where such commodities are, and
receive them for their use, without buying or selling.

And as this Officer sees the particular Tradesmen to furnish the shops and
Storehouses, so they shall see that the Keepers of the shops and Storehouses be
diligent to wait, both to receive in, and deliver out again, according to the
Law, any commodity under their charge.

And if any Keeper of a Shop and Storehouse neglect his duty of his place,
through idleness, or vain conversation, or pride, whereby just offense is
given, the Overseers shall admonish him and reprove him: If he amend, all is
well; if he does not, he shall give order to the Soldiers to carry him before
the Peacemakers Court: and if he reform upon the reproof of that Court, all is
well: but if he does not reform, he shall be sent unto by the Officers to
appear before the Judges Court, and the Judge shall pass Sentence, That he shall
be put out of that House and Employment, and sent among the Husbandmen to work
in the Earth: And some other shall have his place and house till he be reformed.

Likewise this Overseer shall see to it, That the Keepers of Shops and
Storehouses do keep their Houses in sufficient repair: and when any house wants
repair, the Keepers thereof shall speak to any of the Overseers for Trades, and
they shall appoint either Brick-Layers, Masons, Smiths, or Carpenters forthwith
to take the work in hand and finish it.

Fourthly, All ancient men, above sixty years of age, are general Overseers.
And wheresoever they go, and see things amiss in any Officer or Tradesman,
they shall call any Officer or others to account for their neglect of Duty to
the Commonwealths Peace: And these are called Elders.

And every one shall give humble respect to these, as to Fathers, and as to men
of the highest experience in the Laws, for the keeping of Peace in the
Commonwealth.

And if these see things amiss, and do speak, all Officers and others shall
assist and protect them, to see the Laws carefully executed: and every one that
affronts or abuses these in words or deeds, shall suffer punishment according
to the sentence of the Judge.

And all these shall be general assistances and encouragers of all Officers in
the doing the work of their places.

And the Reason of all is this, That many eyes being watchful, the Laws may be
obeyed, for to preserve Peace.

But if any of these Elders should vent their passion, or express envy against
any one, and set up his own will above the Law, and do things contrary to Law,
upon complaint, the Senators at the Judges Court shall examine the matter, if he
be faulty the Judge shall reprove him the first time, but the second time he
does so the Judge shall pronounce, That he shall lose his Authority and never
bear Office nor general oversight more while he lives, only he shall have
respect as a man of Age.

What is the Office of a Soldier?
A Soldier is a Magistrate as well as any other Officer, and indeed all State
Officers are Soldiers for they represent power, and if there were not power in
the hand of Officers, the spirit of rudeness would not be obedient to any Law
or Government, but their own wills.

Therefore every year shall be chosen a Soldier, like unto a Marshal of a City,
and being the chief he shall have diverse Soldiers under him at his command, to
assist in case of need.

The work of a Soldier in times of Peace, is, to fetch in Offenders, and to
bring them before either Officer or Courts, and to be a protection to the
Officers against all disturbances.

The Soldier is not to do any thing without Order from the Officers; but when
he has an Order then he is to act accordingly; and he is to receive Orders
from the Judges Court, or from the Peacemakers Court, or from Overseers as
need shall require.

If a Soldier has brought an Offender before a Peacemaker, and if the
Offender will not be subject to the Law by his persuasion, and the Peacemaker
send him to the Judges Court, if the offense be under matters of death, the
offender shall not be imprisoned in the mean time; But the Peacemaker shall
command him to appear before the Judges Court at the time appointed, and the
Offender shall promise to obey: and this shall be for two Reasons.

First to prevent cruelty of Prisons. Secondly, in the time of his binding over
he may remember himself, and amend his ways, and by testimony of his own
actions and neighbors reports, his sentence may be mitigated by the Judge; for
it is amendment not destruction that Commonwealths Law requires.

And if this Offender run away from that Country to another, and so both
disobey the Peacemakers command, and break his own promise of appearance; then
shall the Soldiers be sent forth into all places to search for him, and if
they catch him, they should bring him before the Judge, who shall pronounce
sentence of death upon him without mercy.

And if any protect him or shelter him, after hue and cry is made after him,
all such protectors shall suffer the loss of Freedom for twelve months time,
as is showed hereafter what that is.

But if the offense should be matter of death, then the Peacemaker shall take
no promise from him for his appearance, but let the Soldier carry him to
Prison, till the next Judges Court sits where he shall have his Trial.

The Work of a Task-master.
The Work or Office of a Task-master is to take those into his oversight as
are sentenced by the Judge to lose their Freedom, and to appoint them their
work and to see they do it.

If they do their Tasks, he is to allow them sufficient victuals and clothing
to preserve the health of their bodies.

But if they prove desperate, wanton, or idle, and will not quietly submit to
the Law, the Task-master is to feed them with short diet, and to whip them, for
a rod is prepared for the fools back, till such time as their proud hearts do
bend to the Law.

And when he finds them subject, he shall then carry a favorable hand toward
them, as to offending brethren, and allow them sufficient diet and clothes in
hopes of their amendment, but withal see they do their work, till by the
sentence of the Law he be set free again.

The Task-master shall appoint them any kind of work or labor as he pleases
that is to be done by man.

And if any of these Offenders run away, there shall be hue and cry sent after
him, and he shall dye by the sentence of the Judge when taken again.

The Work of an Executioner.
If any have so highly broke the Laws, as they come within the compass of
whiping, imprisoning and death, The Executioner shall cut off the head, hang, or
shoot to death, or whip the offender according to the sentence of Law. Thus you
may see what the work of every Officer in a Town or City is.

What is the work of a Judge?
The Law it self is the Judge of all men's actions, yet he who is chosen to
pronounce the Law is called Judge, because he is the mouth of the Law, for no
single man ought to Judge or interpret the Law.

Because the Law it self, as it is (...) us in the letter, is the mind and
determination of the Parliament and of the people of the Land, to be their Rule
to walk by and to be the touch stone of all actions.

And that man who takes upon him to interpret the Law, does either darken the
sense of the Law, and so makes it confused and hard to he understood, or else
puts another meaning upon it, and so lifts up himself above the Parliament,
above the Law, and above all people in the Land.

Therefore the work of that man who is called Judge, is to hear any matter that
is brought before him; and in all cases of difference between man and man, he
shall see the parties on both sides before him, and shall hear each man speak
for himself without a Fee'd Lawyer; likewise he is to examine any witness who
is to prove a matter in Trial before him.

And then he is to pronounce the bare Letter of the Law concerning such a
thing, for he has his name Judge, not because his will and mind is to Judge
the actions of offenders before him but because he is the mouth to pronounce
the Law, who indeed is the true Judge; therefore to this Law and to this
Testimony let every one have a regard who intends to live in peace in the
Commonwealth.

But from hence has arose much misery in the Nations under Kindly Government,
in that the man called the (...) has been suffered to interpret the Law; and
when the mind of the Law, the Judgment of the Parliament, and the Government of
the Land, is resolved into the breast of the Judges, this has occasioned much
complaining of Injustice, in Judges, in Courts of Justice, in Lawyers, and in
the course of the Law it self, as if it were an evil Rule.

Because the Law, which was a certain Rule, was varied, according to the will
of a covetous, envious, or proud Judge, therefore no marvel though the Kingly
Laws be so intricate, and though few know which way the course of the Law goes,
because the sentence lies many times in the breast of a Judge, and not in the
letter of the Law.

And so the good Laws made by an industrious Parliament, are like good Eggs
laid by a silly Goose, and as soon as she has laid them, she goes her way, and
lets others take them, and never looks after them more, so that if you lay a
stone in her nest, she will sit upon it, as if it were an Egg.

And so though the Laws be good, yet if they be left to the will of a Judge to
interpret, the Execution has many times proved bad.

And truly as the Laws and people of Nations have been abused by suffering men
Judges to alter the sense by their Interpretation:

So likewise has the Scriptures of Moses, the Prophets, Christ, and his
Apostles, been darkened and confounded by suffering Ministers to put their
Inferences and Interpretations upon them.

And surely both the Judges for the Law, and the Ministers for Gods Word, have
been both unfaithful servants to man and to God, by taking upon them to expound
and interpret that Rule which they are bound to yield obedience to, without
adding to, or diminishing from.

What is the Judges Court?
In a County or Shire there is to be chosen A Judge. The Peacemakers of every
Town within that Circuit. The Overseers, and A band of Soldiers attending
thereupon.


And this is called the Judges Court, or the County Senate: This Court shall
sit four times in the year, or oftener if need be, in the Country, and four
times in the year in great Cities: In the first quarter of the year they shall
sit in the East part of the County, and the second quarter of the year in the
West, in the third in the South, and in the fourth in the North.

And this Court is to oversee and examine any Officer within their County or
Limits; for their work is to see, that every one be faithful in his place; and
if any Officer has done wrong to any, this Court is to pass sentence of
punishment upon the offender, according to his offense against the Law.

If any grievance lie upon any man, wherein inferior Officers cannot ease him,
this Court shall quietly hear his Complaint, and ease him; for where a Law is
wanting, they may prepare a way of ease for the (...) till the Parliament sit,
who may either establish that conclusion for a Law, if they approve of it, or
frame another Law to that effect; for it is possible that many things may fall
out hereafter, which the Lawmakers for the present may not foresee.

If any disorder break in among the people, this Court shall set things to
rights: If any be bound over to appear at this Court, the Judge shall hear the
matter, and pronounce the letter of the Law, according to the nature of the
offense.

So that the alone work of the Judge is to pronounce the sentence and mind of
the Law: and all this is but to see the Laws executed, that the Peace of the
Commonwealth may be preserved.

What is the work of a Commonwealths Parliament in general?
A Parliament is the highest Court of Equity in a Land, and it is to be chosen
every year; and out of every City, Town, and certain limits of a Country
through the Land, two, three, or more men are to be chosen to make up this
Court.

This Court is to oversee all other Courts, Officers, persons and actions, and
to have a full Power, being the Representative of the whole Land, to remove all
grievances, and to ease the people that are oppressed.

A Parliament has his rise from the lowest Office in a Commonwealth, viz. from
the father in a family: For as a fathers tender care is to remove all
grievances from the oppressed children, not respecting one before another; so a
Parliament are to remove all burdens from the people of the Land, and are not
to respect persons who are great before them who are weak; but their eye and
care must be principally to relieve the oppressed ones, who groan under the
Tyrants Laws and Power: `The strong, or such as have the Tyrant Power to uphold
them, need no help.

But though a Parliament be the Father of a Land, yet by the Covetousness and
(...) of Kingly Government the heart of this Father has been alienated from
the children of the Land, or else so overawed by the frowns of a Kingly
Tyrant, that they could not or durst not act for the weakest childrens ease.

For has not Parliaments sat, and rose again, and made Laws to strengthen the
Tyrant in his Throne, and to strengthen the rich and the strong by those Laws,
and left oppression upon the backs of the oppressed still?

But I Will not reap up former weaknesses, but rather rejoice in hope of
amendment, seeing our present Parliament has declared England to be a free
Commonwealth, and to cast out Kingly Power; and upon this ground I rejoice in
hope, that succeeding Parliaments will be tenderhearted Fathers to the
oppressed children of the Land.

And not only dandle us upon the knee with good words and promises till
particular men's turns be served, but will fill our bellies, and clothe our
backs with good actions of Freedom, and give to the oppressed childrens
children their birthright portion, which is Freedom in the Commonwealths Land,
which the Kingly Law and Power, our cruel step-fathers and step-mothers, have
kept from us and our fathers for many years past.

The particular work of a Parliament is fourfold.
First, As a tender father, a Parliament is to empower Officers, and give out
Orders for the free planting and reaping of the Commonwealths Land, that all
who have been oppressed, and kept from the (...) use thereof by Conquerots,
Kings, and their Tyrant Laws, may now be set at liberty to plant in Freedom for
food and raiment, and are to be a protection to them who labor the Barth, and
a punisher of them who are idle. But some may say, What is that I call
Commonwealths Land?

I answer, All that Land which has been withheld from the Inhabitants by the
Conquerot, or Tyrant Kings, and is now recovered out of the hands of that
Oppression by the joint assistance of the persons and purses of the Commoners
of the Land; for this Land is the price of their blood; it is their birthright
to them and their posterity, and ought not to be converted into particular
hands again by the Laws of a free Commonwealth.

And in particular, this Land is all Abbey Lands, formerly recovered out of the
hands of the Popes Power by the Blood of the Commoners of England, though the
Kings withheld their rights herein from them.

So likewise all Crown Lands, Bishops Lands, with all Parks, Forests, Chases,
now of late recovered out of the hands of the Kingly Tyrants, who have set
Lords of Manors and Taskmasters over the Commoners, to withhold the free use
of the Land from them.

So likewise all the Commons and waste Lands, which are called Commons, because
the poor was to have part therein; but this is withheld from the Commoners,
either by Lords of Manors, requiring quit Rents, and overseeing the poor so
narrowly, that none dares build him a house upon this Common Land, or plant
thereupon, without his leave, but must pay him rent, fines, and heriots, and
homage, as unto a Conqueror; or else the benefit of this Common Land is taken
away from the younger brethren by rich Landlords and Freeholders, who overstock
the Commons with Sheep and Cattle, so that the poor in many places are not able
to keep a Cow, unless they steal grass for her.

And this is the bondage the poor complain of, that they are kept poor by their
brethren in a Land where there is so much plenty for every one, if Covetousness
and pride did not tule as King in one brother over another, and Kingly
Government occasions all this.

Now it is the work of a Parliament to break the Tyrants bands, to abolish all
their oppressing Laws, and to give Orders, Encouragements and Directions unto
the poor oppressed people of the Land, that they forthwith plant and manure
this their own Land, for the free and comfortable livelihood of themselves and
posterities.

And to declare to them, it is their own Creation rights, faithfully and
courageously recovered by their diligence, purses and blood from under the
Kingly Tyrants and Oppressors Power.

The work of a Parliament, secondly,
Is to abolish all old Laws and Customs, which have been the strength of the
Oppressor, and to prepare, and then to enact new Laws for the ease and Freedom
of the people, but yet not without the peoples knowledge.

For the work of a Parliament herein is threefold.
First, When old Laws and Customs of the Kings do burden the people, and the
people desire the remove of them, and the establishment of more easy Laws.

It is now the work of a Parliament to search into Reason and Equity, how
relief may be found out for the people in such a case, and to preserve a common
Peace; and when they have found out a way by debate of Council among
themselves, whereby the people may be relieved, they are not presently to
establish their Conclusions for a Law.

But in the next place, they are to make a public Declaration thereof to the
people of the Land who choose them for their approbation; and if no Objection
come in from the people within one month, they may then take the peoples
silence as a consent thereto.

And then in the third place, they are to enact it for a Law, to be a binding
Rule to the whole Land: For as the remove of the old Laws and Customs are by
the peoples consent, which is proved by their frequent (...) and Requests of
such a thing; so the enacting of new Laws must be by the Peoples consent and
knowledge likewise.

And here they are to require the consent, not of men interessed in the old
oppressing Laws and Customs, as Kings used to do, but of them who have been
oppressed. And the Reason is this:

Because the people must be all subject to the Law, under pain of punishment;
therefore it is all reason they should know it before it be enacted, that if
there be any thing of the Council of Oppression in it, it may be discovered and
amended.

But you will say. If it must be so, then will men so differ in their
judgments, that we shall never agree. I answer:

There is but Bondage and Freedom, particular Interest, or common Interest; and
he who pleads to bring in particular interest into a free Commonwealth, will
presently be seen and cast out, as one bringing in Kingly Slavery again.

And men in place and office, where greatness and honor is coming in, may
sooner be corrupted to bring in particular Interest, then a whole Land can be,
who must either suffer sorrow under a burthensom Law, or rejoice under a Law of
Freedom.

And (...) those men, who are not willing to enslave the People, will not be
unwilling to consent hereunto.

The work of a Parliament thirdly,
Is to see all those burdens removed actually, which have hindered, or do
hinder, the oppressed People from the enjoyment of their Birthrights.

If their Common Lands be under the Oppression of Lords of Manors, they are to
see the Land freed from that Slavery.

If the Commonwealths Land be sold by the hasty Council of subtle, covetous,
and ignorant Officers, who act for their own particular Interest: and so has
entangled the Commoners Land again, under color of being bought and sold.

A Parliament is to examine what Authority any had to sell or buy the
Commonwealth Land, without a general consent of the People; for it is not any
ones, but every ones Birth Right: And if some through covetousness and self
interest gave (...) privately, yet a Parliament, who is the Father of a Land,
ought not to give consent to buy and sell that land, which is all the childrens
Birthright, and the price of their labors, moneys, and blood.

They are to declare likewise, that the birgain is unrighteous, and that the
Buyers and Sellers are Enemies to the Peace and Freedom of the Commonwealth:
For indeed the Necessity of the people chose a Parliament to help them in their
weakness; and where they see a danger like to impoverish or enslave one part of
the people to another, they are to give warning, and so prevent that danger;
for they are the Eyes of the Land: And surely those are blind Eyes that lead
the People into Bogs, to be entangled in Mud again, after they are once pulled
out.

And when the Land is once freed from the Oppressors Power and Laws, a
Parliament is to keep it so, and not suffer it by their consent to have it
bought or sold, and so entangled in bondage upon a new account.

And for their faithfulness herein to the People, the People are engaged by
Love and Faithfulness to cleave close to them, in defense and protection. But
when a Parliament have no care herein, the hearts of the People run away from
them like sheep who have no Shepherd.

All grievances are occasioned either by the covetous Wills of State-Officers,
who neglect their obedience to the good Laws, and then prefer their own Ease,
Honor, and Riches before the Ease and Freedom of the oppressed People. And here
a Parliament is to cashier and punish those Officers, and place others who are
men of public spirits in their rooms.

Or else the Peoples Grievances arise from the practice and power that the
Kings Laws have given to Lords of Manors, covetous Landlords, Tythe-takers, or
unbounded Lawyers, being all strengthened in their oppressions over the People
by that Kingly Law. And when the people are burdened herewith, and groan,
waiting for deliverance, as the oppressed people of England do at this day; it
is then the work of a Parliament to see the people delivered, and that they
enjoy their Creation-Freedoms in the Earth: They are not to dally with them,
but as a Father is ready to help his children out of misery, when they either
see them in misery, or when the children cry for help; so should they do for
the oppressed People.

And surely for this end, and no other, is a Parliament chosen, as is cleared
before: for the Necessity of common preservation and peace is the Fundamental
Law both to Officers and People.

The Work of a Parliament fourthly, is this.
If there be occasion to raise an Army to wage War, either against an Invasion
of a Foreign Enemy, or against an Insurrection at home; it is the work of a
Parliament to manage that business for to preserve common Peace. And here their
work is threefold:

First, To acquaint the people plainly with the cause of the War, and to show
them the danger of such an Invasion or Insurrection; and so from that cause
require their assistance in person, for the preservation of the Laws,
Liberties, and Peace of the Commonwealth, according to their Engagement when
they were chosen, which was this: Do you maintain our Laws and Liberties, and
we will protect and assist you.

Secondly, A Parliament is to make choice of understanding, able, and public
spirited men to be Leaders of an Army in this case, and to give them
Commissions and Power in the name of the Commonwealth, to manage the work of an
Army.

Thirdly, A Parliaments work in this case is either to send Ambassadors to
another Nation which has invaded our Land, or that intends to invade; to agree
upon terms of peace, or to proclaim War; or else to receive and hear
Ambassadors from other Lands for the same business, or about any other business
concerning the peace and honor of the Land.

For a Parliament is the Head of a Commonwealths power, or as it may be said,
it is the great Council of an Army, from whom originally all Orders do issue
forth to any Officer or Soldier.

For if so be a Parliament had not an Army to protect them, the rudeness of the
people would not obey their proceedings: and if a Parliament were not the
Representative of the People, who indeed is the body of all Power, the Army
would not obey their Orders.

So then, a Parliament is the Head of Power in a Commonwealth, and it is their
work to manage public affairs in times of War, and in times of Peace; not to
promote the Interest of particular men, but for the Peace and Freedom of the
whole Body of the Land, viz. of every particular man, that none be deprived of
his Creation Rights, unless he has lost his Freedom by Transgression, as by
the Laws is expressed.

The work of a Commonwealths Ministry, and why one day in seven may be a Day of
Rest from Labor.
If there were good Laws, and the People be ignorant of them, it would be as
bad for the Commonwealth as if there were no Laws at all.

Therefore according to one of the Laws of Isreal's Commonwealth made by Moses,
who was the Ruler of the People at that time:

It is very rational and good, that one day in seven be still set apart for
three Reasons.

First, That the People in such a Parish may generally meet together to see one
another faces, and beget or preserve fellowship in friendly love.

Secondly, to be a day of rest, or cessation from labor; so that they may have
some bodily rest for themselves and cattle.

Thirdly, that he who is chosen Minister (for that year) in that parish may
read to the people three things.

First the affairs of the whole Land, as it is brought in by the Postmaster,
as it is related in his office, hereafter following.

Secondly, to read the Law of the Commonwealth: not only to strengthen the
memory of the Ancients, but that the young people also, who are not grown up to
ripeness of experience, may be instructed, to know when they do well, and when
they do ill; for the Laws of a Land has the power of freedom and bondage, life
and death in its hand, therefore the necessary knowledge to be known, and he is
the best Prophet that acquaints men therewith. That as men grow up in (...),
they may be able to defend the Laws and Government of the Land. But these Laws
shall not be expounded by the Reader, for to expound a plain Law, as if a man
would put a better meaning, then the letter it self, produces two evils.

Fast the pure Law and the minds of people, will be thereby consounded, for
multitude of words darken knowledge.

Secondly the Reader will be puffed up in pride, to contemn the Lawmakers, and
in time that will prove the father and nurse of Tyranny, as at this day is
(...) by our Ministry.

And thirdly, because the minds of people, generally love discourses,
therefore that the wits of men both young and old may be exercised, there may
be speeches made in a threefold nature.

First to declare the acts and passages of former ages and Governments, setting
forth the benefit of freedom, by well ordered Governments, as in Isreal's Common
Wealth, and the troubles and bondage, which has always attended oppression and
oppressors; as the State of Pharaoh, and other Tyrant Kings, who said the earth
and people were theirs, and only at their dispose.

Secondly Speeches may be made, of all Arts and Sciences, some one day, some
another; As in Physic, (...), Astrology, Astronomy, Navigation, Husbandry, and
such like. And in these Speeches may be unfolded the nature of all herbs and
plants from the Hysop to the Cedar, as Solomon writ of.

Likewise men may come to see into the nature of the fixed and wandering stars,
those great powers of God in the heavens above; and hereby men will come to
know the secrets of Nature and Creation, within which all true knowledge is
wrapped up, and the light in man must arise to search it out,

Thirdly, Speeches may be made, sometimes of the Nature of Mankind, of his
darkness and of his light, of his weakness and of his strength, of his love and
of his envy, of his sorrow and of his joy, of his inward and outward bondages,
and of his inward and outward freedoms, etc. And this is that which the
Ministry of Churches generally aim, but only that they confound their knowledge
by imaginary study, when any one takes upon him to speak without experience.

Now this is the way
To attain to the true knowledge of God (who is the Spirit of the whole
Creation,) as he has spread himself forth in every form, and more eminently in
man; as Paul writ, The Creation in all the several bodies and forms are but the
Mansions or fullness of him who has filled all things with himself.

And if the Earth were set free from Kingly Bondage, so that every one were
sure to have a free livelihood, and if this liberty were granted, then many
secrets of God, and his Works in Nature, would be made public, which men now
adays keep secret to get a living by; so that this Kingly Bondage is the cause
of the spreading of ignorance in the Earth: But when Commonwealths Freedom is
established, and Pharisaical or Kingly Slavery cast out, then will knowledge
cover the Earth, as the Waters cover the Seas, and not till then.

He who is the chosen Minister for that year to read, shall not be the only man
to make Sermons or Speeches: but every one who has any experience, and is able
to speak of any Art or Language, or of the Nature of the Heavens above, or of
the Earth below, shall have free liberty to speak when they offer themselves,
and in a civil manner desire an audience, and appoint his day: yet he who is
the Reader may have his liberty to speak too, but not to assume all the power
to himself, as the proud and ignorant Clergy have done, who have bewitched all
the World by their subtle Covetousness and pride.

And every one who speaks of any Herb, Plant, Art, or Nature of Mankind, is
required to speak nothing by imagination, but what he has found out by his own
industry and observation in trial.

And because other Nations are of several languages, therefore these speeches
may be made sometimes in other Languages, and sometimes in our Mother Tongue,
that so the men of our English Commonwealth may attain to all Knowledges, Arts
and Languages, and that every one may be encouraged in his Industry, and
purchase the countenance and love of their neighborhood, for their wisdom, and
experimental knowledge in the things which are.

And thus to speak, or thus to read the Law of Nature (or God) as he has
written his name in every body, is to speak a pure language, and this is to
speak the truth as Jesus Christ spoke it, giving to every thing its own weight
and measure.

By this means, in time men shall attain to the practical knowledge of God
truly; That they may serve him in spirit and truth; and this knowledge will not
deceive a man.

I, but says the zealous, but ignorant Professor,
This is a low and carnal ministry indeed, this (...) men to know nothing, but
the knowledge of the earth, and the secrets of nature, but we are to look after
spiritual and beavenly things. I answer.

To know the secrets of nature, is to know the works of God; And to know the
works of God within the Creation, is to know God himself, for God dwells in
every visible work or body.

And indeed if you would know spiritual things, it is to know how the spirit or
power of wisdom and life, causing motion, or growth, dwells within, and governs
both the several bodies of the stars and planets in the heavens above; and the
several bodies of the earth below; as grass, plants, fishes, beasts, birds, and
mankind; for to reach God beyond the Creation, or to know what he will be to a
man, after the man is dead, if any otherwise, then to scatter him into his
Essences of fire, water, earth and air, of which he is compounded, is a
knowledge beyond the line, or capacity of man to attain to while he lives in
his compounded body.

And if a man should go to imagine, what God is beyond the Creation, or what he
will be in a spiritual demonstration after a man is dead, he does as the
proverb says, build castles in the air, or tells us of a world beyond the
Moon, and beyond the Sun, merely to blind the reason of man.

I Will appeal to your self in this question, what other knowledge have you of God,
but what you have within the circle of the Creation?

For if the Creation in all its dimentions be the fullness of him, that fills
all with himself, and if you your self be part of this Creation, where can you
find God but in that line or station wherein you stand?

God manifests himself in actual knowledge, not in imagination; he is still in
motion, either in bodies upon earth, or in the bodies in the heavens, or in
both; in the night and in the day, in Winter, in Summer, in cold, in heat, in
growth, or not in growth.

But when a studying imagination comes into man, which is the devil, for it is
the cause of all evil, and sorrows in the world; that is he who puts out the
eyes of man's Knowledge, and tells him, he must believe what others have writ or
spoke, and must not trust to his own experience: And when this bewitching fancy
sits in the chair of Government, there is nothing but saying and unsaying,
frowardness, covetousness, fears, confused thoughts, and unsatisfied doubtings,
all the days of that man's reign in the heart.

Or secondly, Examine your self, and look likewise into the ways of all
Professors, and you shall find, That the Enjoyment of the Earth below, which
you call a low and a carnal Knowledge, is that, which you and all professors (as
well as the men of the world, as you call them) strive and seek after.

Wherefore are you so covetous after the World, in buying and selling? counting
your self a happy man, if you be rich, and a miserable man if you be poor. And
though you say, Heaven after death is a place of glory, where you shall enjoy
God face to face, yet you are loath to leave the Earth to go thither.

Do not your Ministers preach for to enjoy the Earth? Do not professing
Lawyers, as well as others, buy and sell the Conquerors Justice, that they may
enjoy the Earth? Do not professing Soldiers fight for the Earth, and seat
themselves in that Land, which is the Birthright of others, as well as theirs,
shutting others out? Do not all professors strive to get Earth, that they may
live in plenty by other men's labors?

Do you not make the Earth your very Rest? Does not the enjoying of the Earth
please the spirit in you? and then you say, God is pleased with your ways, and
blesses you. If you want Earth, and become poor, do you not say, God is angry
with you, and crosses you?

Why do you heap up riches? why do you eat and drink, and wear clothes? why do
you take a woman, and lie with her to beget children? Are not all these carnal
and low things of the Earth? and do you not live in them, and covet them as
much as any? nay more then many which you call men of the world?

And it being thus with you, what other spiritual or heavenly things do you
seek after more then others? And what is in you more then in others? If you
say, there is; then surely you ought to let these earthly things alone to the
men of the world, as you call them, whose portions these are, and keep you
within the compass of your own sphere, that others seeing you live a life above
the world in peace and freedom, neither working your self, nor deceiving, nor
compelling others to work for you, they may be drawn to embrace the same
spiritual life by your singlehearted conversation. We Will, I have done here.

Let us now examine your Divinity.
Which you call heavenly, and spiritual things, for herein speeches are made
not to advance knowledge, but to destroy the true knowledge of God; for
Divinity does not speak the truth, as it is hid in every body, but it leaves
the motional knowledge of a thing as it is. And imagins, studies, or thinks
what may be, and so runs the hazard true or false: And this Divinity is always
speaking words to deceive the simple, that he may make them work for him, and
maintain him, but he never comes to action himself to do as he would be done
by; for he is a monster who is all tongue and no hand.

This divining Doctrine, which you call spiritual and heavenly things, is the
thief and the robber he comes to spoil the Vinyard of a man's peace, and does
not enter in at the door, but he climbes up another way: And this Doctrine is
two fold.

First he takes upon him to tell you the meaning of other men's words, and
writing by his studying or imagining what another man's knowledge might be, and
by thus doing darkens knowledge, and wrongs the spirit of the Authors who did
write and speak those things which he takes upon him to interpret.

Secondly he takes upon him, to foretell what shall befall a man after he is
dead, and what that world is beyond the Sun, and beyond the Moon, etc. And if
any man tell him there is no reason for what you say, he answers you must not
judge of heavenly and spiritual things by reason, but you must believe what is
told you, whether it be reason or no: There is a threefold discovery of
falsehood in this Doctrine.

For first it is a Doctrine of a sickly and weak spirit, who has lost his
understanding in the knowledge of the Creation, and of the temper of his own
Heart and Nature, and so runs into fancies, either of joy or sorrow.

And if the passion of joy predominate, then he fancies to himself a personal
God, personal Angels, and a local place of glory which he says, he, and all
who beleives what he has, shall go to, after they are dead.

And if sorrow predominate, then he fancies to himself a personal Devil, and a
local place of torment, that he shall go to after he is dead, and this he
speaks with great confidence.

Or Secondly, this is the Doctrine of a subtle running spirit, to make an
ungrounded wise man mad. That he might be called the more excellent man (...)
knowledge; for many times when a wise understanding heart is assaulted with
this Doctrine of a God, a Devil, a Heaven, and a Hell, Salvation and Damnation
after a man is dead, his spirit being not strongly grounded in the knowledge of
the Creation, nor in the temper of his own heart.

He strives and stretches his brains to find out the depth of that doctrine and
cannot attain to it; for indeed it is not knowledge, but imagination: and so by
poring and puzling himself in it, loses that wisdom he had, and becomes
distracted and mad: and if the passion of joy predominate, then he is merty,
and sings, and laughs, and is ripe in the expressions of his words, and will
speak strange things; but all by imagination. But if the passion of sorrow
predominate, then he is heavy and sad, crying out, He is damned, God has for
saken him, and he must go to Hell when he dys, he cannot make his calling and
election sure: And in that distemper many times a man does hang, kill or drown
himself: so that this divining Doctrine, which you call spiritual and heavenly
things, (...) people always when they are weak, sickly, and under any
distemper; therefore it cannot be the Doctrine of Christ the Savior.

For my own part, my spirit has waded deep to find the bottom of this
divining spiritual Doctrine: and the more I searched, the more I was at a loss;
and I never came to quiet rest, and to know God in my spirit, till I came to
the knowledge of the things in this Book: And let me tell you, They who preach
this divining Doctrine are the murderers of many a poor heart, who is bashful
and simple, and that cannot speak for himself, but that keeps his thoughts to
himself.

Or thirdly, This Doctrine is made a cloak of policy by the subtle elder
Brother, to cheat his simple younger Brother of the Freedoms of the Earth: For
says the elder Brother, The Earth is mine, and not yours, Brother; and you
must not work upon it, unless you will hire it of me: and you must not take the
fruits of it, unless you will buy them of me, by that which I pay you for your
Labor: for if you should do otherwise, God will not love you, and you shall not
go to Heaven when you dye, but the Devil will have you, and you must be damned
in Hell,

If the younger reply, and say, The Earth is my Birthright, as well as yours,
and God who made us both, is no Respecter of persons: Therefore there is no
Reason but I should enjoy the Freedoms of the Earth for my comfortable
Livelihood, as well as you, Brother.

I, but says the elder Brother, You must not trust to your own Reason and
Understanding, but you must (...) what is written and what is told you; and if
you will not believe, your Damnation will be the greater.

I cannot believe, says the younger Brother, that our righteous Creator should
be so partial in his Dispensations of the Earth, seeing our bodies cannot live
upon Earth without the use of the Earth.

The elder brother replies, What, will you be an Atheist, and a factious man,
will you not believe God?

Yes, says the younger brother, if I knew God said so I should believe, for I
desire to serve him.

Why, says the elder brother, this is his Word, and if you will not believe
it, you must be damned; but if you will believe it, you must go to Heaven.

Well, the younger brother being weak in spirit, and having not a grounded
knowledge of the Creation, nor of himself, is terrified, and lets go his hold in
the Earth, and submits himself to be a slave to his brother, for fear of
damnation in Hell after death, and in hopes to get Heaven thereby after he is
dead; and so his eyes are put out, and his Reason is blinded.

So that this divining spiritual Doctrine is a cheat; for while men are gazing
up to Heaven, imagining after a happiness, or fearing a Hell after they are
dead, their eyes are put out, that they see not what is their birthrights, and
what is to be done by them here on Earth while they are living: This is the
filthy Dreamer, and the Cloud without rain.

And indeed the subtle Clergy do know, that if they can but charm the people by
this their divining Doctrine, to look after riches, Heaven and Glory when they
are dead, that then they shall easily be the Inheritors of the Earth, and have
the deceived people to be their servants.

This divining Doctrine, which you call spiritual and heavenly, was not the
Doctrine of Christ, for his words were pure knowledge, they were words of life;
for he said, He spoke what he had seen with his Father, for he had the knowledge
of the Creation, and spoke as every thing was.

And this Divinity came in after Christ to darken his Knowledge; and it is the
language of the Mystery of Iniquity and Antichrist, whereby the covetous,
ambitious and serpentine spirit cozens the plain-hearted of his portions in the
Earth.

And Divinity cozens a plain heart two ways: First, If a man have an Estate,
according to the Kings Laws, he is made by this charm to give it, or bazle it
away to the Priests, or to religious uses, in hopes to get Heaven when he is
dead.

Or secondly, A man by running to hear Divinity Sermons, and dancing after his
charming pipe, neglects his labor, and so runs into debt, and then his (...)
professors will cast him into prison, and starve him there, and there Divinity
will call him a hypocrite and wicked man, and become a Devil to torment him in
that (...).

But surely Light is so broke out, that it will cover the Earth, so that the
Divinity Charmers, shall say, The people will (...) bear the voice of our
charming, charm we never so wisely: And all the Priests, and Clergy, and
Preachers of these spiritual and heavenly things, as they call them, shall take
up the lamentation, which is their portion, Alas, alas, that great City
Babylon, that mighty City Divinity, which has filled the whole Earth with her
forcery, and deceived all people, so that the whole world wondered after this
Beast; how is it fallen, and how is her Judgment come upon her in one hour? And
further, as you may read, Rev. 18. 10.

The Office of the Postmaster.
In every Parish throughout the Commonwealth shall be chosen two men (at the
time when other Officers are chosen,) and these shall be called Postmasters:
And whereas there are four parts of the Land, East, West, North, South, there
shall be chosen in the chief City two men to receive in what the Postmaster of
the East Country brings in, and two men to receive in what the Postmaster of
the West brings in, and two for the North, and so two for the South.

Now the work of the Country Postmaster shall be this, They shall every Month
bring up or send by tidings from their respective Parishes to the chief City,
of what accidents or passages fall out, which is either to the honor or
dishonor, hurt or profit of the Commonwealth; and if nothing have fallen out in
that Month worth observation, then they shall write down peace or good order
in such a Parish.

And when these respective Post-masters have brought up their Bills or
Certificates from all parts of the Land, the Receivers of those Bills shall
write down every thing in order from Parish to Parish in the nature of a Weekly
Bill of Observation.

And those eight Receivers shall cause the Affairs of the four quarters of the
Land to be printed in one Book with what speed may be, and deliver to every
Postmaster a Book, that as they bring up the Affairs of one Parish in writing,
they may carry down in Print the Affairs of the whole Land.

The benefit lies here, That if any part of the Land be visited with Plague,
Famine, Invasion, or Insurrection, or any casualties, the other parts of the
Land may have speedy knowledge, and send Relief.

And if any accident fall out through unreasonable action, or careless neglect,
other parts of the Land may thereby be made watchful, to prevent like danger.

Or if any through industry or ripeness of understanding have found out any
secret in Nature, or new invention in any Art or Trade, or in the Tillage of
the Earth, or such like, whereby the Commonwealth may more flourish in peace
and plenty; for which Virtues those persons received honor in the places where
they dweit.

When other parts of the Land hear of it, many thereby will be encouraged to
employ their Reason and industry to do the like, that so in time there will not
be any Secret in Nature, which now lies hid (by reason of the iron age of (...)
oppressing Government) but by some or other will be brought to light, to the
beauty of our Commonwealth.

The Rise of a Commonwealths Army.
After that the necessity of the People in a Parish, in a County, and in a
Land, has moved the People to choose Officers to preserve common peace, the
same necessity causes the People to say to their Officers,

Do you see our Laws observed for our common preservation, and we will assist
and protect you.

This word assist and protect, implies the rising of the people by force of
Arms, to defend their Laws and Officers, who rule well, against any Invasion,
Insurrection or Rebellion of selfish Officers, or rude people; yea to beat down
the turbulency of any foolish spirit that shall arise to break our common Peace.

So that the same Law of Necessity of common Peace, which moved the people to
choose Officers, and to compose a Law for to be a Rule of Government: The same
Law of Necessity of Protection does raise an Army; so that an Army, as well as
other Officers in a Commonwealth, spring from one and the same root, viz. from
the Necessity of common Preservation.

An Army is twofold, viz. A Ruling Army, or a Fighting Army.
A ruling Army is called Magistracy in times of Peace, keeping that Land and
Government in Peace by Execution of the Laws, which the fighting Army did
purchase in the field by their Blood out of the hands of Oppression.

And here all Officers, from the father in a family, to the Parliament in a
Land, are but the Heads and Leaders of an Army; and all people arising to
protect and assist their Officers, in defense of a right ordered Government,
are but the Body of an Army.

And this Magistracy is called the rejoicing of all Nations, when the
Foundation thereof are Laws of common Equity, whereby every single man may
enjoy the fruit of his labor, in the free use of the Earth, without being
restrained or oppressed by the hands of others.

Secondly, A fighting Army, called Soldiers in the field, when the necessity
of preservation, by reason of a foreign Invasion, or inbred Oppression, do
move the people to arise in an Army to cut and teer to pieces, either
degenerated Officers, or rude people, who seek their own Interest, and not
common Freedom, and through treachery do endeavor to destroy the Laws of common
Freedom, and to enssave both the Land and people of the Commonwealth to their
particular wills and lusts.

And this War is called a Plague, because that cursed enmity of Covetousness,
pride, and vain glory, and envy in the heart of Mankind did occasion the rise
of it, because he will not be under the moderate observation of any free and
right Order, unless he himself be King and Lord over other persons and their
labors.

For now the people do arise to defend their faithful Officers, against such
Officers as are unfaithful, and to defend their Laws and Common Peace.

The use or work of a fighting Army in a Commonwealth
Is to beat down all that arise to endeavor to destroy the Liberties of the
Commonwealth: For as in the days of Monarchy, an Army was used to subdue all
who rebelled against Kingly Propriety; so in the days of a free Commonwealth,
an Army is to be made use of to resist and destroy all who endeavor to keep up
or bring in Kingly Bondage again.

The work of this fighting Army is twofold.
The first is to withstand the Invasion, or coming in of a foreign Enemy,
whose Invasion is for no other end, but to take away our Land and Earth from
us, to deny us the free use thereof, to become Kings and Landlords over us, and
to make us their slaves.

As William the Conqueror, when he had conquered England, he gave not only the
Land in parcels to his Soldiers, but he gave all men, their wives and
children, within such a Lordship, to his Lords of Manors, (...) do with them as
they pleased: And for this cause now does an Army arise to keep out an Invasion
of a Forraigner, that by the defense of our Army, who is part of our selves,
the rest of our brethren in the Commonwealth may plow, sow, and reap, and enjoy
the fruits of their labors, and so live in peace in their own Land.

Or secondly, If a Land be conquered, and so enslaved as England was, under the
Kings and conquering Laws, then an Army is to be raised with as much secrecy as
may be, to restore the Land again, and set it free, that the Earth may become a
Common Treasury to all her children, without respecting persons, as it was
before Kingly Bondage came in, as you may read, 1 Samuel 8.

This latter is called Civil Wars, and this is the Wars of the Commoners of
England against King Charles now cast out, for he and his Laws were the
successive Power of that Norman Conquest over England.

And now the Commeners of England in this age of the World are rise up in an
Army, and have cast out that Invasion of the Duke of Normandy, and have won
their Land and Liberties again by the Sword, if they do not suffer their
Councels to (...) into slavery again upon a new account.

Therefore you Army of Englands Commonwealth look to it; the Enemy could not
beat you in the field, but they may be too hard for you by policy in (...), if
you do not stick close to see Common Freedom established.

For if so be that Kingly Authority be set up in your Laws again, King Charles
has conquered you and your posterity by policy, and won the field of you,
though you seemingly have cut off His Head.

For the strength of a King lies not in the visible appearance of his body, but
in his Will, Laws and Authority, which is called (...) Government.

But if you remove Kingly Government, and set up true and free Commonwealths
Government, then you gain your Crown, and keep it, and leave peace to your
posterity, otherwise not.

And thus doing makes a War either lawful or unlawful.

An Army may be Murderers and unlawful.
If an Army be raised to cast out Kingly Oppression, and if the Heads of that
Army promise a Commonwealths Freedom to the oppressed people, if in case they
will assist with person and purse, and if the people do assist, and prevail
over the Tyrant, those Officers are bound by the Law of Justice (who is God) to
make good their Engagements: And if they do not set the Land free from the
branches of the Kingly Oppression, but reserve some part of the Kingly Power to
advance their own particular Interest, whereby some of their friends are left
under as great slavery to them, as they were under the Kings; Those Officers
are not faithful Commonwealths Soldiers, they are worse Thieves and Tyrant
then the Kings they cast out, and that Honor they seemed to get by their
Victories over the Commonwealths Oppressor they lose again, by breaking Promise
and Engagement to their oppressed friends who did assist them.

For what difference is there between a professed Tyrant, that declares himself
a Tyrant in words, Laws and deeds, as all Conquerors do, and him who promises
to free me from the Power of the Tyrant if I Will assist him; and when I have
spent my estate and blood, and the health of my body, and expect my bargain by
his Engagements to me, he sits himself down in the Tyrants Chair, and takes the
possession of the Land to himself, and calls it (...), and none of mine, and
tells me he cannot in Conscience let me enjoy the Freedom of the Earth with
him, because it is another man's (...)?

And now my health and estate is decayed, and I grow in age, I must either beg
or work for day wages, which I was never brought up to, for another; when as
the Earth is as freely my Inheritance and birthright, as his whom I must work
for; and if I cannot live by my weak labors but take where I need, as Christ
sent and took the Ass coit in his need, there is no dispute, but by the Kings
and Laws, he will hang me for a thief.

But hear O thou Righteous Spirit of the whole Creation, and judge, who is the
thief. Him who takes away the freedom of the common-earth from me, which is my
Creation rights, and which I have helped to purchase out of the hands of the
Kingly Oppressor by my purse and person, and which he has taken for wages of
me:

Or I, who takes the Common-earth to plant upon for my free livelihood,
endeavoring to live as a free Commoner, in a free Commonwealth, in
righteousness and peace.

Such a soldier as this engagement breaker is neither a friend to the
Creation: nor to a particular Commonwealth, but a self lover and a hypocrite,
for he did not fight, to set the Earth free from the bondage of the Oppressor
as he pretended by his Engagements; but to remove that power out of the others
hand into his own. And this is just like the beasts who fight for mastery and
keeps it, not releaving, but still Lording and Kinging over the weak. These are
Monarchial soldiers, not Commonwealths soldiers; and such a soldier is a
murderer and his warfare is unlawful.

But soldiers of true noble spirits, will help the weak, and set the oppressed
free, and delight to see the Commonwealth flowrish in freedom, as well as their
own gardens. There is none of this true nobility in the Monarchial Army, for
they are all self lovers; the best is as a briar, and the most upright amongst
them is as a thorn held; speak you Prophers of old if this be not true.

A Monarchial Army, lifts up mountains, and makes valleys, viz. Advances
Tyrants, and treads the oppressed in the barran lanes of poverty.

But a Commonwealths Army is like John Baptist, who levels the Mountains to the
Valleys, pulls down the Tyrant, and (...) up the Oppressed: and so makes way
for the spirit of Peace and Freedom to come in to rule and (...) the Earth.

And by this which has been spoken, an Army may see wherein they may do well,
and wherein they may do hurt.

CHAP. V.
Education of mankind, in Schools and Trades.
Mankind in the days of his youth, is like a young Colt, wanton and foolish,
till he be broke by Education and correction, and the neglect of this care, or
the want of wisdom in the performance of it has been, and is, the cause of
much division and trouble in the world.

Therefore the Law of a Commonwealth does require, that not only a father,
but that all Overseers, and Officers should make it their work to educate
children in good manners, and to see them brought up in some trade or other,
and to suffer no children in any Parish to live in idleness, and youthful
pleasure, all their days, as many have been; but that they be brought up (...)
men, and not like beasts: That so the Commonwealth may be planted with
laborious and wise experienced men, and not with idle fools.

Mankind may be considered in a fourfold degree, his childhood, youth, manhood
and old age; his childhood and his youth, may be considered from his birth till
forty years of age; and within this compass of time, after he is weaned from
his mother, who shall be the nurse her self, if there be no defect in Nature,
his parents shall teach him a civil and humble behavior toward all men. Then
send him to School, to learn to read the Laws of the Commonwealth, to ripen
his wits from his childhood, and so to proceed in his learning, till he be
acquainted with all Arts and Languages: and the reason is threefold.

First, By being acquainted with the knowledge of the affairs of the world; by
this traditional knowledge they may be the better able to govern themselves
like rational men.

Secondly, they may become thereby good Commonwealths men, in supporting the
government thereof, by being acquainted with the nature of government.

Thirdly, If England have occasion to send Ambassadors to any other Land, we
may have such as are acquainted with their Language; or if any Ambassador come
from other Lands, we may have such as can understand their speech.

But one sort of Children shall not be trained up only to book learning, and
no other employment, called Scholars, as they are in the Government of
Monarchy, for then through idleness, and exercised wit therein, they spend
their time to find out (...) to advance themselves, to be Lords and Masters
above their laboring brethren, as Simeon and Levi do, which occasions all the
trouble in the world.

Therefore, to prevent the dangerous events of idleness in Scholars, it is
reason, and (...) for (...) peace, that after Children have been brought up at
Schools, to (...) their wits, they shall then be set to such Trades, Arts and
Sciences, as their bodies and wits are capable of; and therein continue till
they come to forty years of age.

For all the work of the Earth, or in Trades, is to be managed by youth, and by
such as have lost their Freedoms.

Then from forty years of age till fourscore, if he live so long, which is the
degree of manhood and old age; they shall be freed from all labor and work,
unless they will themselves.

And from among this degree of Mankind shall be chosen all Officers and
Overseers, to see the Laws of the Commonwealth observed.

For as all men shall be Workers or Waiters in Storehouses till they be forty
years of age, so none shall be chosen a public Officer till he be full forty
years of age: for by this time Man has learned experience to govern himself
and others: for when young wits are set to govern, they wax wanton, etc.

What Trades should Mankind be brought up in?
In every Trade, Art, and Science, whereby they may find out the Secrets of
the Creation, and that they may know how to govern the Earth in right order.

There are five Fountains from whence all Arts and Sciences have their
influences: he that is an actor in any or in all the five parts, is a
profitable son of mankind: he that only contemplates and talks of what he
reads and hears, and does not employ his Talent in some bodily action, for the
increase of fruitfulness, freedom, and peace in the Earth, is an unprofitable
son.

The first Fountain is the right planting of the Earth to make it fruitful, and
this is called Husbandry: And there are two branches of it;

As first, planting, digging, dunging, liming, burning, grubbing, and right
ordering of Land, to make it fit to receive seed, that it may bring forth a
plentiful crop: And under this Head all Millers, Maltsters, Bakers,
Harness-makers for Plows and Carts, Rope-makers, Spinners, and Weavers of
linen, and such like, are all but good Husbandry.

The second Branch of Husbandry is Gardening, how to plant, graft, and set all
sort of fruit trees, and how to order the ground for flowers, Herbs and Roots
for pleasure food, or medicinal. And here all Physicians, Chyrurgeons,
Distillers of all sorts of Waters, Gatherers of Drugs, Makers of Wines, and
Oil, and Preservers of fruits, and such like, may learn by Observation, what is
good for all bodies, both man and beasts.

The second Fountain is Mineral employment, and that is to search into the
Earth to find out Mines of Gold and Silver, Brass, Iron, Tin, Lead, Cannel,
Coal, and Stone of all sorts, Saltpeter, Salt, and Allom-springs, and such
like: And here all Chemists, Gunpowder makers, Masons, Smiths, and such like,
as would find out the strength and power of the Earth, may learn how to order
these for the use and profit of Mankind.

The third Fountain is the right ordering of Cattle, whether by Shepherds or
Herds men; and such may learn here how to breed and train up Cows for the
Daries, Bulls and Horses for the saddle or yoke. And here all Tanners, Hatters,
Shoomakers, Glovers, Spinners of Wool, Clothiers, Tailors, Dyers, and such
like, may learn how to order and look to these.

The fourth Fountain is the right ordering of Woods and Timber trees, for
planting, dressing, selling, framing of Timber for all uses, for building
houses or ships. And here all Carpenters, Joyners, Throsters, Plowmakers,
Instrument makers for music, and all who work in wood and timber, may find
out the Secret of Nature, to make Trees more plentiful and thriving in their
growth, and profitable for use.

The fifth Fountain, from whence Reason is exercised to find out the Secrets
of Nature, is observe the rising and setting of the Sun, Moon, and the Powers
of the Heavens above; and the motion of the Tides, and Seas, and there several
effects, powers, and operations upon the bodies of Man and Beast. And here may
be learned Astrology, Astronomy, and Navigation, and the motions of the Winds,
and the causes of several Appearances of the Face of Heaven, either in Storms,
or in Fareness.

And in all these five Fountains here is Knowledge in the practice, and it is
good.

But there is Traditional Knowledge, which is attained by reading, or by the
instruction of others, and not practical, but leads to an idle life; and this
is not good.

The first is a laborious Knowledge, and a Preserver of common Peace, which we
find God himself acting; for he put forth his own wisdom in practice, when he
set his strength to work to make the Creation: for God is an active Power, not
an imaginary Fancy.

The latter is an idle, lazy contemplation the Scholars would call Knowledge,
but it is no knowledge, but a show of Knowledge, like a Parrat who speaks words,
but he knows not what he says: This same show of knowledge rests in reading or
contemplating, or hearing others speak, and (...) so too, but will not set his
hand to work: And from this Traditional Knowledge and Learning life up both
Clergy and Lawyer, who by their cunning insinuations live merely upon the labor
of other men, and teach Laws which they themselves will not do, and lays
burdens upon others which they themselves will not touch with the least of
their fingers; and from hence arises all oppressions, wars, and troubles in the
world, the one is the son of contention, the other the son of darkness, but
both the supporters of bondage, which the Creation groans under.

Therefore to prevent idleness and the danger of Machivilian cheats, it is
profitable for the Commonwealth, that children be trained up in Trades and
some bodily employment, as well as in learning Languages, or the Histories of
former ages.

And as boys are trained up in Learning and in Trades, so all Maids shall be
trained up in reading, sowing, kniting, spining of Lynnen and Woollen, Music,
and all other easy neat works, either for to furnish Storehouses with (...)
and Woollen cloth, or for the ornament of particular houses with needle work.

And if this course were taken, there would be no Idle person nor Beggars in
the Land, and much work would be done by that now lazy generation for the
enlarging of the common Treasuries.

And in the manageing of any Trade, let no young wit be crushed in his
invention, for if any man desire to make a new trial of his skill in any Trade
of Science, the Overseers shall not hinder him, but encourage him therein; that
so the Spirit of knowledge may have his full growth in man, to find out the
secret in every Art.

And let every one who finds out a new invention have a deserved honor given
him, and certainly when men are sure of food and raiment, their reason will be
ripe, and ready to dive into the (...) of the Creation, that they may learn to
see and know God (the Spirit of the whole Creation) in all his works; for fear
of want, and care to pay Rent to Taskmasters, has hindered many rare
Inventions.

So that Kingly Power has crushed the Spirit of Knowledge, and would not suffer
it to rise up in its beauty and (...), but by his Club Law has preferred the
spirit of Imagination, which is a Deceiver, before it.

There shall be no buying and selling of the Earth, nor of the fruits thereof.
For by the Government under Kings, the cheaters hereby have cozened the plain
hearted of their creation birthrights, and have (...) themselves in the earth
and calls it (...) and not the others, and so have brought in that poverty and
misery which (...) upon many men.

And whereas the wise should help the foolish, and the strong help the weak;
the wise and the strong destroys the weak and the simple.

And are not all children generally simple and weak and know not the things
that belong to their peace till they come to ripe age, but before they come to
that understanding, the cunning ones who have more strength and policy, have by
this hypocritical, lying, unrighteous and cheating Art of buying and selling,
wrung the freedoms of the earth out of their hands, and cozened them of their
birthrights.

So that when they come to understanding, they see themselves beggars in the
midst of a fruitful Land, and so the Proverb is true, Plain dealing is a
jewel, but he who uses it shall dye a beggar. And why?

Because this buying and selling is the nursery of cheaters, it is the Law of
the Conqueror, and the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, which both
killed Christ and hindered his Resurrection, as much as darkness can to put out
light.

And these cunning cheaters commonly become the Rulers of the earth, and then
the City Man kind mourns, for not the wise poor man, but the cunning rich man,
was always made an Officer and Ruler, such a one as by his stolen interest in
the earth would be sure to hold others in bondage of poverty and servitude to
him and his party.

And hence arise oppression and tyranny in the earth upon the backs of the weak
younger brethren, who are made younger brothers indeed, as the Proverb is, by
their cunning elder brother; and as Daniel said, The basest of men under Kingly
government were set to Rule, who can command but not obey, who can take other
men's labors to live at ease, but not work themselves.

Therefore there shall be no buying and selling in a Free Commonwealth, neither
shall any one hire his brother to work for him.

If the Commonwealth might be governed without buying and selling here is a
Platform of Government for it, which is the ancientest Law of Righteousness to
Mankind in the use of the Earth, and which is the very height of earthly
Freedoms. But if the minds of the people, through Covetousness and proud
Ignorance, will have the Earth governed by buying and selling still, this same
Platform, with a few things subtracted, declares an easy way of Government of
the Earth for the quiet of peoples minds, and preserving of Peace in the Land.

For, as like a Tradesman, I ask the highest price,
Yet I may fall (if you will rise) upon a good advice.
How must the Earth be planted?
The Eirth is to be planted, and the fruits reaped, and carried into Barns and
Storehouses by the assistance of every family: And if any man or family want
Corn, or other provision, they may go to the Storehouses, and fetch without
money: Is they want a Horse to ride, go into the fields in Summer, or to the
Common Stables in Winter, and receive one from the Keepers, and when your
Journey is performed, bring him where you had him, without money. If any want
food or victuals, they may either go to the Butchers shops, and receive what
they want without money; or else go to the flocks of sheep, or herds of cattle,
and take and kill what meat is needful for their families, without buying and
selling. And the reason why all the riches of the earth are a common stock, is
this, Because the earth, and the labors thereupon, are managed by common
assistance of every family, without buying and selling; as is shown how more
largely, in the Office of Overseers for Trades, and the Law for Storehouses.

The Laws for the right ordering thereof, and the Officers to see the Laws
executed; to preserve the peace of every family, and the peace of every man,
and to improve and promote every Trade, is showed in the work of Officers, and
by the Laws following.

None will be an enemy to this freedom, which indeed is to do to another as a
man would have another do to him, but Covetousness and Pride, the spirit of the
old grudging snapping Pharisees, who gives God abundance of good words, in
their Sermons, in their Prayers, in their Fasts, and in their Thanksgivings, as
though none should be more faithful servants to him then they: nay, they will
shun the company, imprison, and kill every one that will not worship God, they
are so zealous.

Well now, God and Christ has enacted an everlasting Law, which is Love; not
only one another of your own mind, but love your enemies too, such as are not
of your mind: and, having food and raiment, therewith be content.

Now here is a trial for you, whether you will be faithful to God and Christ,
in obeying his Laws; or whether you will destroy the man-child of true
Freedom, righteousness and peace, in his resurrection.

And now thou will give us either the tricks of a Soldier, Face about, and
return to Egypt, and so declare thy self to be part of the Serpents seed, that
must bruise the heel of Christ; or else to be one of the plain-hearted sons of
promise, or members of Christ, who shall help to bruise the Serpents head,
which is Kingly oppression; and so bring in everlasting righteousness and peace
into the earth. Well, the eye is now open.

Storehouses shall be built and appointed in all places, and be the common
Stock.
There shall be Storehouses in all places, both in the Country and in Cities,
to which all the fruits of the earth, and other works made by Tradesmen, shall
be brought, and from thence delivered out again to particular Families, and to
every one as they want for their use; or else to be transported by Ship to
other Lands, to exchange for those things which our Land will not or does not
afford.

For all the labors of Husbandmen and Tradesmen, within the Land, or by
Navigation to or from other Lands, shall be all upon the common Stock.

And as every one works to advance the Common Stock, so every one shall have a
free use of any commodity in the Storehouse, for his pleasure and comfortable
livelihood, without buying and selling, or restraint from any.

And having food and raiment, lodging, and the comfortable societies of his own
kind; what can a man desire more in these days of his travel?

Indeed, covetous, proud, and beastly-minded men, desire more, either to lie by
them to look upon, or else to waste and spoil it upon their lusts; while other
brethren live in straits for want of the use thereof.

But the Laws and faithful Officers of a free Commonwealth, do regulate the
unrational practice of such men.

There are two sorts of Storehouses; general, and particular.
The general Storehouses are such houses as receive in all commodities in the
gross; as all Barns, and places to lay Corn and the fruits of the earth at the
first reaping: and these may be called Storehouses for Corn, Flax, Wool; for
Leather, for Iron, for linen and woollen Cloth, or for any commodity that comes
into our hand by Shipping; from whence particular Family or Shopkeepers may
fetch as they need, to furnish their lesser shops.

So likewise herds of Cattle in the field, flocks of Sheep, and Horses, are all
common Storehouses; so that from the Herds and Flocks every Family may fetch
what they want for food or pleasure, without buying and selling.

So likewise all Public Dayries are Storehouses for Butter and Cheese: yet
every Family may have Cows for their own use, about their own house.

And these general Storehouses shall be filled and preserved by the common
labor and assistance of every Family; as is mentioned in the Office of
Overseer for Trades.

And from these Public Houses, which are the general stock of the Land, all
particular Tradesmen may fetch materials for their particular work as they
need, or to furnish their particular dwellings with any commodities.

Secondly, there are particular Storehouses or shops;
To which the Tradesmen shall bring their particular works; as all instruments
of Iron to the Iron-shops, Hats to shops appointed for them; Gloves, Shoes,
linen, and woollen Cloth in smaller parcels, to shops appointed for every one
of them; and the like.

Even as now we have particular trade in Cities, and Towns, called Shopkeepers,
which shall remain still as they be, only altered in their receiving in, and
delivering out: for whereas by the Law of Kings or Conquerers, they do receive
in and deliver out by buying and selling, and exchanging the Conquerers picture
or stamp upon a piece of Gold or Silver, for the fruits of the earth; Now they
shall (by the Laws of the Commonwealth) receive into their Sops, and deliver
out again freely, without buying and selling.

They shall receive in, as into a Storehouse, and deliver out again freely, as
out of a common Storehouse, when particular persons or Familes come for any
thing they need, as now they do, by buying and selling under kingly government.

For as particular Families and tradesmen do make several works more then they
can make use of; As Hats, Shoes, Gloves, Stockings, Linen and Woolen cloth:
and the like, and do carry their particular work to Storehouses.

So it is all reason and equity, that they should go to other Storehouses, and
fetch any other commodity which they want, and cannot make: for as other men
partakes of their labors, it is reason they should partake of other men's.

And all these Storehouses and Shops shall be orderly kept by such as shall be
brought up to be waiters therein, as is mentioned in the Office of Overseers
for trades.

For as there are some men more ingenious to work, so other men are more
ingenious in keeping of Storehouses and Shops, to receive in and deliver out
commodities. And all this easy work, may be called waiting at such and such a
Storehouse. As some may wait at Corn-houses, some at linen and woolen houses,
some at Leather, some at iron-shops; and every general and particular commodity
shall be known where they are, by their houses and shops, as it is at this day;
so that Towns and Cities, and every Family almost are but Storehouses of one
commodity or other, for the uses of the Commonwealth, or to transport to other
lands.

Now this same free practice, will kill covetousness, pride, and oppression:
for when men have a Law to buy and sell, then as I said before, the cuning
cheaters get great estates by others men's labors; and being rich thereby,
become oppressing Lords over their brethren; which occasions all our troubles
and wars in all Nations.

Come hither now, all you who challenge your brethren to deny Christ, as though
you were the only men that love Christ, and would be true to him.

Here is a trial of your love: can you be as ready to obey the law of liberty
which is the command of Christ, as you would have others to obey your Kingly
laws of bondage? It may be you will either storm, or go away sorrowful; does
not Christ tell you, that if you have food and raiment, you should therewith be
content? and in this common freedom, here will be food and raiment, ease and
pleasure plentiful, both for you and your brethren; so that none shall beg or
starve, or live in the straits of poverty; and this fulfils that righteous law
of Christ, Do as you would be done by: for that law of Christ can never be
performed, till you establish Commonwealths freedom.

Therefore now let it appear seeing the child is come to the birth, whether you
will receive Christ who is the spreading spirit of freedom, righteousness, and
peace; or whether you will return to Monarchy, to embrace that Egyptian bondage
still. Well, here is life and death set before you, take whether you will; but
know, that unless your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Kingly and
Lordly Scribes and Pharisees, you shall never enjoy true peace in your spirit.

CHAP. VI.
The Kings old laws cannot govern a free Commonwealth.
THey cannot govern in times of bondage and in times of freedom too: they have
indeed served many masters, Popish and Protestant: they are like old soldiers,
that will but change their name, and turn about and as they were; and the
reason is, because they are the prerogative will of those under any Religion,
that count it no freedom to them, unless they be lords over the minds, persons,
and labors of their brethren.

They are called the Kings laws, because they are made by the Kings, If any say
they were made by the Commoners; It is answered, They were not made by the
Commoners, as the Commoners of a free Commonwealth, are to make laws.

For in the days of the Kings, none were to choose, nor be chosen Parliament
men, or law makers, but Lords of Manors, and Freeholders, such as held title
to their enclosures of Land, or Charters for their liberties in trades under
the King, who called the land his, as he was the Conqueror, or his successor.

All inferior people were neither to choose, nor to be chosen; and the reason
was, because all freeholders of land, and such as held their liberties by
Charter, were all of the Kings interest; and the inferior people were
successively of the rank of the conquered ones, and servants and slaves from
the time of the conquest.

And further, when a Parliament was chosen in that manner, yet if any
Parliament man in the uprightness of his heart, did endeavor to promote any
freedom, contrary to the Kings will, or former customs from the Conquest he
was either committed to prison by the King, or by his house of Lords, who were
his ancient Norman successive council of war; or else the Parliament was
dissolved and broke up by the King.

So that the old laws were made in times under kingly slavery, not under the
liberty of Commonwealths freedom, because Parliament men must have regard to
the Kings prerogative interest, to hold his Conquest, or else endanger
themselves.

As sometimes it is in these days: some officers, dare not speak against the
minds of those men who are the chief in power, nor a private soldier against
the mind of his officer, lest they be cashiered their places and livelihood.

And so long as the promoting of the Kings will and prerogative was to be in
the eye of the law makers, the oppressed Commoners, could never enjoy
Commonwealths freedom thereby.

Yet by the wisdom, courage, faithfulness, and industry, of some Parliament
men, the Commoners have received here a line, and there a line of freedom
inserted into their laws; as those good lines of freedom in Magna Charta were
obtained by much hardship and industry.

Secondly, they were the Kings laws, because the Kings own creatures made the
laws; or Lords of Manors, Freeholders etc. were successors of the Norman
soldiers from the Conquest, therefore they could do no other but maintain
their own, and their kings interest.

And do we not see, that all laws were made in the days of the Kings to ease
the rich Landlord? but the poor laborers were left under bondage still; they
were to have no freedom in the earth, by those pharisaical laws: for when laws
were made, and Parliaments broke up, the poor oppressed Commoners had no
relief, but the power of Lords of Manors, withholding the free use of the
Common land from them, remained still: for none durst make use of any Common
land, but at the Lords leave according to the will and law of the Conqueror,
therefore the old laws were called the Kings laws.

And these old laws cannot govern a free Commonwealth, because the land now is
to be set free from the slavery of the Norman Conquest; and the power of Lords
of Manors, and Norman freeholders, is to be taken away, or else the Commoners
are but where they were, if not fallen lower into straights then they were: and
the old laws cannot look with any other face then they did; though they be
washed with Commonwealths water, their countenance is still withered: therefore
it was not for nothing that the Kings would have all their Laws written in
French and Latin, and not in English, partly in honor to the Norman Race, and
partly to keep the common people ignorant of their Creation-freedoms, lest they
should rise to redeem themselves: and if those Laws should be writ in English,
yet if the same Kingly principles remain in them, the English language would
not advantage us any thing, but rather increase our sorrow, by our knowledge of
our bondage.

What is Law in general.
Law is a Rule, whereby Man and other creatures are governed in their actions,
for the preservation of the common peace. And this Law is twofold:

First, it is the power of Life (called the Law of Nature within the creatures)
which does move both man and beast in their actions; or that causes grass,
trees, (...) and all plants, to grow in their several seasons: and whatsoever
any body does, he does it as he is moved by this inward Law. And this law of
Nature moves twofold, viz. unrationally, or rationally.

A man by this inward Law is guided to actions of generation and present
content, rashly, through a greedy self-love, without any consideration, like
foolish children, or like the bruit beasts: by reason whereof, much hurt many
times follows the body. And this is called the law in the (...) warring against
the law of the mind.

Or when there is an inward watchful oversight of all motions to action,
considering the end and effects of those actions, that there be no excess in
diet, in speech, or in action break forth, to the prejudice of a man's self or
others. And this is called the light in man, The reasonable power, Or the law
of the mind.

And this rises up in the heart, by an experimental observation of that peace
and trouble which such and such words thoughts and actions bring the man into.
And this is called the record on high; for it is a record in a man's heart above
the former unreasonable power. And it is called the witness or testimony of a
(...) own (...).

And it is said To the law and to the testimony, etc. for this moderate
watchfulness is still the law of Nature in a higher resurrection then the
former (...) it has many terms which for (...) sake I let pass.

And this twofold work of the law within man, strives to bring (...) themselves
in writing to (...) numbers of bodies on their fides. And that power that
begets the biggest number, always Rules as King and Lord in the creature, and
in the creation, till the other part overtop him, even as light and darkness,
strive in (...) and (...) to succeed each other; or as it is said, the strong
man armed, keeps the heart of man, till a stronger then he came, and cast him
out.

And this written law, proceeding either from reason or unreasonableness, is
called the letter; whereby the creation of mankind, beasts, and earth is
governed according to the will of that power which rules. And it is called by
his opposite, the letter that kills, and by those of the same nature with it, it
is called the word of life.

As for example, if the experienced, wise, and strong man bears rule, then he
writes down his mind to curb the unreasonable law of covetousnes and pride in
unexperienced men, to preserve peace in the Commonwealth. And this is called
the historical or traditional law, because it is conveyed from one generation
to another by writing; as the laws of Isreal's Commonwealth were writ in a book
by Moses, and so conveyed to poposterity.

And this outward law is a bridle to unreasonableness, or as Solomon writ, it
is a whip for the fools back, for whom only it was added.

Secondly, since Moses time, the power of unreasonable coveteousness and pride
has sometimes rise up, and corrupted that traditional law.

For since the power of the sword rise up, in Nations to Conquer, the written
law has not been to advance Common freedom and to beat down the unreasonable
self-will in mankind, but it has been framed to uphold that self-will of the
Conqueror, right or wrong; not respecting the freedom of the Commonwealth, but
the freedom of the Conqueror and his friends only. By reason whereof, much
slavery has been laid upon the backs of the plain dealing man; And men of
public spirits, as Moses was, have been crushed, and their spirits damped
thereby; which has bred, first discontents, and then more wars in the Nations.

And those who have been favorites about the Conqueror, have by hypocrisy and
flattery pleased their king, that they might get what they can of the earth
into their possession; and thereby have increased the bondage of the paineful
laborer, if they could but catch him to act contrary to the Conquerers will,
called law. And now the City mournes: and do we not see, that the laws of Kings
have been always made against such actions as the Common People were most
inclinable to, on purpose to (...) them into their Sessions and Courts, that
the Lawyers and Clergy, who were the Kings supporters, might get money thereby,
and live in fullness, by other men's labors?

But hereby the true nature of a wel-governed Commonwealth has been ruined,
and the will of Kings set up for a law, and the law of righteousness, law of
liberty trod under foot and killed.

This traditional law of Kings, is that letter at this day which kills true
freedom, and it is the (...) of wars and persecution.

This is the soldier, who cut Christ's garment into pieces, which was to have
remained uncut and without seame; this law moves the people to fight one
against another for those pieces viz. for the several enclosures of the earth,
who shall possess the earth, and who shall be Ruler over others.

But the true ancient law of God, is a Covenant of peace to whole mankind;
this sets the earth free to all; this unites both Jew and Gentile into one
brotherhood, and rejects none: this makes Christ's garment whole again, and
makes the kingdoms of the world to become Commonwealths again. It is the
inward power of right understanding, which is the true law that teaches people
in action, as well as in words, to do as they would be done unto.

But thus much in general, what law is: hereafter follows what those
particular laws may be, whereby a Commonwealth may be governed in peace, and
all burdens removed; which is a breaking forth of that law of liberty, which
will be the joy of all Nations, when he arises up, and is established in his
brightness.

Short and pithy laws are best to govern a Commonwealth.
The laws of Isreal's Commonwealth were few, short and pithy; and the government
thereof was established in peace so long as officers and people were obedient
thereunto.

But those many laws in the days of the Kings of England, which were made some
in times of Popery, and some in times of Protestantism, and the proceedings of
the law being in French and Latin, has produced two great evils in England,

First, it has occasioned much ignorance among the people, and much
contention; and the people have mightily erred through want of knowledge, and
thereby they have run into great expense of money by suits of law, or else many
have been imprisoned, whipped, banished, lost their estates and lives by that
law which they were ignorant of, till the scourge thereof was upon their backs;
this is a sore evil among the people.

Secondly, the peoples ignorance of the laws, has bread many sons of
contention: for when any difference falls out between man and man, they neither
of them know which offends the other; therefore both of them thinking their
cause is good, they delight to make use of the law; and then they go and give a
Lawyer money to tell them, which of them was the offender. The Lawyer being glad
to maintain their own trade, sets them together by the ears, till all their
moneys be near spent; and then bids them refer the business to their neighbors,
to make them friends; which might have been done at the first.

So that the course of the Law and Lawyers has been a (...) snare to entrap
the people, and to pull their Estates from them by (...); for the Lawyers do
uphold the Conquerors Interest, and the peoples Slavery: so that the King
seeing that, did put all the affairs of Judicature into their hands: And all
this must be called Justice, but it is a (...) Evil.

But now if the Laws were few and short, and often read, it would prevent those
Evils; (...) every one, knowing when they did well, and when ill, would be very
cautious of their words and actions; and this would escape the Lawyers craft.

As Moses Laws in Isreal's Commonwealth: The People did talk of them when they
lay down, and when they rose up, and as they walked by the way; and bound them
as bracelets upon their hands: so that they were an understanding people in the
Laws wherein their peace did depend.

But it is a sign that England is a blinded and a snared generation; their
Leaders through pride and covetousness have caused them to err, yea and perish
too, for want of the knowledge of the Laws, which has the power of Life and
Death, Freedom and Bondage, in its hand. But I hope better things hereafter.

What may be those particular Laws, or such a method of Laws, whereby a
Commonwealth may be governed.
1. The bare letter of the Law established by act of Parliament shall be the
Rule for Officer and People, and the chief Judge of all Actions.

2. He or they who add or diminish from the Law, excepting in the Court of
Parliament, shall be cashiered his Office, and never bear Office more.

3. No man shall administer the Law for Money or Reward; he that does shall dye
as a Traitor to the Commonwealth: for when Money must buy and sell Justice, and
bear all the sway, there is nothing but Oppression to be expected.

4. The Laws shall be read by the Minster to the people four times in the year,
viz. every quarter, that every one may know whereunto they are to yield
Obedience; then none may dye for want of knowledge.

5. No accusation shall be taken against any man, unless it be proved by two or
three witnesses, or his own confession.

6. No man shall suffer any punishment, but for matter of fact, or Reviling
words: but no man shall be troubled for his judgment or practice in the things
of his God, so he live quiet in the Land.

7. The accuser and accused shall always appear face to face before any
Officer, that both sides may be heard, and no wrong to either party. (...)

8. If any Judge or Officer execute his own Will contrary to the Law, or which
there is no Law to warrant him in, he shall be cashiered, and never bear Office
more.

9. He who raises an accusation against any man, and cannot prove it, shall
suffer the same punishment the other should, if proved. An Accusation is when
one man complains of another to an Officer, all other accusations the Law takes
no notice of.

10. He who strikes his Neighbor, shall be struck himself by the Executioner
blow for blow, and shall lose eye for eye, tooth for (...), limb for limb, life
for life: and the reason is, that men may be tender of one another bodies,
doing as they would be done by.

11. If any man strike an Officer, he shall be made a servant under the
Taskmaster for a whole year.

12. He who endevo s to stir up contention among neighbors, by talebearing or
false reports, shall the first time be reproved openly by the Overseers among
all the people: the second time shall be whiped: the third time shall be a
servant under the Taskmaster for three Months: and if he continues, he shall be
a servant for ever, and lose his Freedom in the Commonwealth.

13. If any give reviling and provoking words, whereby his neighbors spirit is
burdened, if complaint be made to the Overseers, they shall admonish the
offender privately to forbear: if he continues to offend his neighbor, the next
time he shall be openly reproved and admonished before the Congregation, when
met together: if he continue, the third time he shall be whipped; the fourth
time, if proof be made by witnesses, he shall be a servant under the Taskmaster
for twelve Months.

14. He who will rule as a Lord over his brother, unless he be an Officer
commanding obedience to the Law, he shall be admonished as aforesaid, and
receive like punishment, if he continue.

Laws for the planting of the Earth, etc.
15. Every household shall keep all Instruments and Tools fit for the (...) of
the Earth, either for planting, reaping or threshing. Some households, which
have many men in them, shall keep Plows, Carts, Harrows, and such like: other
households shall keep Spades, Pick-axes, Axes, pruning hooks, and such like,
according as every Family is furnished with men to work therewith.

And if any Master or Father of a Family be negligent herein, the Overseer for
that Circuit shall admonish him between them two; if he continue negligent, the
Overseers shall reprove him before all the people: and if he utterly refuse,
then the ordering of that Family shall be given to another, and he shall be a
servant under the taskmaster till he conform.

16. Every family shall come into the field, with sufficient assistance, at
seed time to plow, dig, and plant, and at harvest time to reap the fruits of
the Earth, and (...) them into the Storehouses, as the Overseers order the
work, and the number of workmen. And if any refuse to assist in this work, The
Overseers shall ask the reason, and if it be sickness, or any distemper that
hinders them, they are freed from such service; if mere idleness keep them
back, they are to suffer punishment, according to the Laws against (...).

Laws against Idleness.
17. If any refuse to learn a trade, or refuse to work in seed-time, or
harvest, or refuse to be a Waiter in Storehouses, and yet will feed and clothe
himself with other men's labors; The Overseers shall first admonish him
privately; if he continue idle, he shall be reproved openly before all the
people by the Overseers; and shall be forbore with a month after this reproof:
If he still continues idle, he shall then be whipped, and be let go at liberty
for a month longer; if still he continue idle, he shall be delivered into the
taskmasters hand, who shall set him to work for twelve months, or till he
submit to right Order: And the reason why every young man shall be trained up
in some work or other, is to prevent pride and contention; it is for the health
of their bodies, it is a pleasure to the mind, to be free in labors one with
another; and it provides plenty of food and all necessaries for the
Commonwealth.

Laws for Storehouses.
18. In every Town and City, shall be appointed Storehouses for flax, wool,
lether, cloth, and for all such commodities, as come from beyond Seas, and
these shall be called general Storehouses, from whence every particular family
may fetch such commodities as they want, either for their use in their house,
or for to work in their trades; or to carry into the Country Storehouses.

19. Every particular house and shop in a town or city, shall be (...)
Storehouse or shop, as now they be; and these shops shall either be furnished
by the particular labor of that family according to the trade that family is
of, or by the labor of other lesser families of the same trade, as all shops in
every town are now furnished.

20. The waiters in Storehouses, shall deliver the goods under their charge,
without receiving any money, as they shall receive in their goods without
paying any money.

21. If any waiter in a Storehouse neglect his office, upon a just complaint
the Overseers shall acquaint the Judges Court therewith, and from thence he
shall receive his sentence to be discharged that house and office; And to be
appointed some other laboring work under the taskmaster; and another shall have
his place: For he who may live in freedom and will not, is to taste of
servitude.

Laws for Overseers.
22. The only work of every Overseer, is to see the Laws executed; for the Law
is the true magistracy of the Land.

23. If any Overseer, favor any in their idleness, and neglect the execution
of the Laws, he shall be reproved the first time by the Judges Court; the
second time cashiered his Office, and shall never bear office more, but fall
back into the rank of young people and servants to be a worker.

24. New Overseers, shall at their first entrance into their office, look back
upon the actions of the old Overseers of the last year, to see if they have
been faithful in their places, and consented to no breach of Law, whereby
Kingly bondage should any ways be brought in.

25. The Overseers for Trades, shall see every family to lend assistance to
plant and reap the fruits of the Earth; to work in their Trades, and to furnish
the Storehouses; and to see that the Waiters in Storehouses be diligent to
receive in, and deliver out any goods, without buying and selling, to any man
whatsoever.

26. While any Overseer is in the performance of his place, every one shall
assist him, upon pain of open reproof (or cashiered if he be another Officer)
or forfeiture of freedom, according to the nature of the business in hand, in
which he refused his assistance.

Laws against buying and selling.
27. If any man entice another to buy and sell, and he who is enticed does not
yield, but makes it known to the Overseer; the enticer shall lose his freedom
for twelve months, and the Overseer shall give words commendation of him that
refused the enticement, before all the Congregation, for his faithfulness to
the Commonwealths Peace.

28. If any do buy and sell the Earth or fruits thereof, unless it be to, or
with (...) of another nation, according to the Law of Navigation, they shall be
both put to death as traitors to the peace of the Commonwealth; because it
brings in Kingly bondage again: and is the occasion of all quarrels and
oppressions.

29. He or she who calls the Earth his, and not his brothers, shall be set upon
a stool, with those words written in his forehead, before all the Congregation;
and afterward be made a servant for twelve months under the taskmaster: If he
quarrel, or seek by secret perswation, or open rising in arms, to set up such a
Kingly propriety, he shall be put to death.

30. The Storehouses shall be every man's substance, and not any ones.

31. No man shall either give, hire, or take hire for his work; for this brings
in Kingly bondage: If any Freemen want help, there are young people, or such as
are common servants, to do it, by the Overseers appointment: He that gives, and
he that takes hire for work, shall both lose their Freedom, and become servants
for twelve Months under the Taskmaster.

Laws for Navigation.
32. Because other Nations as yet own Monarchy, and will buy and sell;
therefore it is convenient, for the peace of our Commonwealth, That our ships
do transport our English goods, and exchange for theirs, and conform to the
Customs of other Nations in buying and selling: Always provided, That what
goods our ships carry out, they shall be the Commonwealths goods; and all their
Trading with other Nations shall be upon the common Stock, to enrich the
Storehouses.

Laws for Silver and Gold.
33. As Silver and Gold is either found out in Mines in our own Land, or
brought by shipping from beyond Sea, it shall not be coined with a Conquerors
stamp upon it, to set up buying and selling under his name, or by his leave;
for there shall be no other use of it in the Commonwealth, then to make dishes
and other necessaries for the ornament of houses, as now there is use made of
Brass, Pewter, and Iron, or any other Metal in their use.

But if in case other Nations, whose commodities we want, will not exchange
with us, unless we give them money, then pieces of Silver and Gold may be
stamped with the Commonwealths Arms upon it, for the same use, and no otherwise.

For where money bears all the sway, there is no regard of that golden Rule, Do
as you would be done by: Justice is bought and sold: nay, Injustice is
sometimes bought and sold for money: and it is the cause of all Wars and
Oppressions. And certainly the righteous Spirit of the whole Creation did never
enact such a Law, That unless his weak and simple men did go from England to
the East Indies, and fetch Silver and Gold to bring in their hands to their
Brethren, and give it them for their good will to let them plant the Earth, and
live and enjoy their livelihood therein.

Laws to choose Officers.
34. All Overseers and State-Officers shall be chosen new every year, to
prevent the rise of Ambition and Covetousness; for the Nations have smarted
sufficiently by suffering Officers to continue long in an Office, or to remain
in an Office by hereditary succession.

35. A man that is of a turbulent spirit, given to quarreling, and provoking
words to his neighbor, shall not be chosen any Officer while he so continues.

36. All men from twenty years of age upwards shall have freedom of voyee to
choose Officers, unless they be such as lie under the sentence of the Law.

37. Such shall be chosen Officers, as are rational men of moderate
conversation, and who have experience in the Laws of the Commonwealth.

38. All men from forty years of age upwards shall be capable to be chosen State
Officers, and none younger, unless any one by his industry and moderate
conversation does move the people to choose him.

39. If any man make suit to move the people to choose him an Officer, that man
shall not be chose at all that time: If another man persuade the people to
choose him who makes suit for himself, they shall both lose their freedom at
that time, viz, they shall neither have a voice to choose another, nor be
chosen themselves.

Laws against Treachery.
40. He who professes the service of a righteous God by preaching and prayer,
and makes a Trade to get the possessions of the Earth, shall be put to death
for a Witch and a Cheater.

41. He who pretends one thing in words, and his actions declare his intent was
another thing, shall never bear Office in the Commonwealth.

What is Freedom?
Every Freeman shall have a Freedom in the Earth, to plant or build, to fetch
from the Storehouses any thing he wants, and shall enjoy the fruits of his
labors without restraint from any; he shall not pay Rent to any Landlord, and
he shall be capable to be chosen any Officer, so he be above forty years of
age, and he shall have a voice to choose Officers though he be under forty
years of age: If he want any young men to be Assistance to him in his Trade or
household employment, the Overseers shall appoint him young men or maids to be
his servants in his family.

Laws for such as have lost their Freedom.
42. All those who have lost their Freedom, shall be clothed in white woolen
cloth, that they may be distinguished from others.

43. They shall be under the Government of a Task-master, who shall appoint
them to be Porters or Laborers, to do any work that any Freeman wants to be
done.

44. They shall do all kind of labor without exception, but their constant
work shall be Carriers or Carters, to carry Corn, or other provision, from
Storehouse to Storehouse, from Country to Cities, and from thence to
Countries, etc.

45. If any of these refuse to do such work, the Task-master shall see them
whipped, and shall feed them with coarse diet: And what hardship is this? For
Freemen work the easiest work, and these shall work the hardest work: And to
what end is this, but to kill their Pride and Unreasonableness, that they may
become useful men in the Commonwealth?

46. The wife or children of such as have lost their Freedom, shall not be as
slaves till they have lost their Freedom, as their parents and husbands have
done.

47. He who breaks any Laws shall be the first time reproved in words in
private or in public, as is showed before; the next time whipped, the third
time lose his Freedom, either for a time or for ever, and not to be any Officer.

48. He who has lost his Freedom shall be a common servant to any Freeman, who
comes to the Taskmasters, and requires one to do any work for him; always
provided, that after one Freeman has by the consent of the Taskmasters
appointed him his work, another Freeman shall not call him thence till that
work be done.

49. If any of these Offenders revile the Laws by words, they shall be soundly
whipped, and fed with coarse diet; if they raise weapons against the Laws, they
shall dye as Traitors.

Laws to restore Slaves to Freedom.
50. When any slaves give open testimony of their humility and diligence, and
their care to observe the Laws of the Commonwealth, they are then capable to be
restored to their Freedom, when the time of servitude is expired, according to
the Judges sentence; but if they remain opposite to the Laws, they shall
continue slaves still another term of time.

51. None shall be restored to Freedom till they have been a twelve Month
laboring servants to the Commonwealth, for they shall Winter and Summer in that
condition.

52. When any is restored to Freedom, the Judge at the Senators Court shall
pronounce his Freedom, and give liberty to him, to be clothed in what other
colored cloth he will.

53. If any persons be sick or wounded, the Chyrurgeons, who are trained up in
the knowledge of Herbs and Minerals, and know how to apply plasters or Physic,
shall go when they are sent for to any who need their help, but require no
reward, because the Common Stock is the public pay for every man's labor.

54. When a dead person is to be buried, the Officers of the Parish and
neighbors shall go along with the Corpse to the grave, and see it laid therein,
in a civil manner; but the public Minister nor any other shall have any hand
in reading or Exhortation.

55. When a man has learned his Trade, and the time of his seven years
Apprenticeship is expired, he shall have his Freedom to become Master of a
family, and the Overseers shall appoint him such young people to be his
servants as they think fit, whether he marry, or live a single life.

Laws for Marriage.
56. Every man and woman shall have the free liberty to marry whom they love,
if they can obtain the love and liking of that party whom they would marry, and
neither birth nor portion shall hinder the match, for we are all of one blood,
Mankind; and for portion, the Common Storehouses are every man and maids
portion, as free to one as to another.

57. If any man lie with a maid, and beget a child, he shall marry her.

58. If a man lie with a woman forcibly, and she cry out, and give no consent;
if this be proved by two Witnesses, or the man's confession, he shall be put to
death, and the woman let go free; it is robbery of a woman bodily Freedom.

59. If any man by violence endeavor to take away another man's wife, the first
time of such violent offer he shall be reproved before the Congregation by the
Peacemaker, the second time he shall be made a servant under the Task-master
for twelve Months; and if he forcibly lie with another man's wife, and she cry
out, as in the case when a maid is forced, the man shall be put to death.

60. When any man or woman are consented to live together in marriage, they
shall acquaint all the Overseers in their Circuit therewith, and some other
neighbors; and being all met together, the man shall declare by his own mouth
before them all, that he takes that woman to be his wife, and the woman shall
say the same, and desire the Overseers to be Witnesses.

61. No Master of a family shall suffer more meat to be dressed at a dinner or
supper, then what will be spent and eaten by his household, or company present,
or within such a time after, before it be spoiled. If there be any spoil
constantly made in a family of the food of Man, the Overseer shall reprove the
Master for it privately; if that abuse be continued in his family, through his
neglect of family government, he shall be openly reproved by the Peacemaker
before all the people, and ashamed for his folly; the third time he shall be
made a servant for twelve Months under the Task-master, that he may know what
it is to get food, and another shall have the oversight of his house for the
time.

62. No man shall be suffered to keep house, and have servants under him, till
he has served seven years under Command to a Master himself; the reason is,
that a man may be of age, and of rational carriage, before he be a Governor of
a family, that the Peace of the Commonwealth may be preserved.

Here is the righteous Law, Man, will thou it maintain?
It may be, is, as has still, in the World been slain.
Truth appears in Light, Falsehood rules in Power;
To see these things to be, is cause of grief each hour.
Knowledge, why did thou come, to wound, and not to cure?
I sent not for thee, thou did me inlure.
Where knowledge does increase, there sorrows multiply,
To see the great deceit which in the Worlddoth lie.
Man saying one thing now, unsaying it anon,
Breaking all is Engagements, when deeds for him are done.
O power where art thou, that must mend things amiss?
Come change the heart of Man, and make him truth to kiss:
O death where art thou? will thou not tidings send?
I fear thee not, thou art my loving friend.
Come take this body, and scatter it in the Four,
That I may dwell in One, and rest in peace once more.
THE CONTENTS OF THE Order and Work of every Commonwealths Officer.
CHAP. I. THat true Commonwealths Freedom lies in the free Enjoyment of the
Earth. Page, 17, 18, etc. The Glory of Isreal's Commonwealth was this, They had
no Beggar among them. 21, 22 A short Declaration to take off prejudice. 23. 24
CHAP. II. What is Government in general. 25 What is Kingly Government, or
Monarchy. 26, 27, etc. What is Commonwealths Government. 29, 30, etc.
CHAP. III. Where began the first Original of Government in the Earth among
Mankind. 32 There be two Roots from whence Laws do spring. 33 All Officers in
true Magistracy of a Commonwealth are to be Chosen Officers. 34, 35 All
Officers in a Commonwealth are to be chosen every year. 36 Who are fit to
choose, and who fit to be chosen Officers in a Commonwealth. 37, 38
CHAP. IV. What are the Officers Names in a free Commonwealth. 39, 40 The work
of a Father or Master in a Family. 40 The work of a Peacemaker. 40, 41 The
work of an Overseer to preserve Peace. 41, 42 The work of an Overseer for
Trades. 43, 44 The Work of an Overseer, to see particular Tradesmen bring their
Works to Shops and Storehouses. Page 45. All ancient men above sixty years of
age are general Overseers. 46. What is the Office of a Soldier. 47. What is
the Office of a Task-master. 47, 48. What is the Office of an Executioner. 48.
What is the Work of a Judge. Ibid. What is the Judges Court, or County Senate.
49 What is the Work of a Parliament in general. 50 The first Work of a
Commonwealths Parliament. 51 The second Work of a Parliament. 52 The third Work
of a Parliament. 53 The fourth Work of a Parliament. 54 The Work of a
Commonwealths Ministry. 55 The Office of the Postmaster. 63 The Rise of a
Commonwealths Army. 64 An Army is twofold, viz. A ruling Army. Ibid. Secondly,
A fighting Army, and the use thereof. Ibid. How an Army may be murderers and
unlawful. 66
CHAP. V. Education of Mankind to Schools and Trades. 68. What Trades should
Mankind be brought up in. 69. There shall be no buying and selling of the
Earth, nor of the fruits thereof. 71. How the Earth is to be planted. 72.
Storehouses shall be built and appointed in all places, and be the Common
Stock. 74.
CHAP. VI. The Kings old Laws cannot govern a free Commonwealth. 76. What is
Law in general. 78. Short and pithy Laws are best to govern a Commonwealth. 80.
What are those particular Laws whereby a Commonwealth is governed in a right
order. 81, 82, etc.

These Books following, written by Jerrard Winstanley, are to be sold by Giles
Calvert at the black Spred-Eagle at the West end of Paul's.
I. The Breaking of the Day of God, or Prophecies fulfilled. II. The Mystery of
God concerning the whole Creation, Mankind. III. The Saints Paradise, set
forth for the comfort of such as are under Spiritual Burning. IV. Truth lifting
up its head above Scandals. V. The New Law of Righteousness.
FINIS.

