The New Law OF RIGHTEOUSNESS Budding forth, in restoring the whole Creation
from the bondage of the curse.

OR A Glimpse of the new Heaven, and new Earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

GIVING An Alarm to silence all that preach or speak from hearsay, or
imagination.

By GERRARD WINSTANLEY.

Out of the despised poor people, which are the stones and dust of the earth,
mankind, upon whom the children of the flesh treads, shall the blessing rise
up, that shall restore all things.

This is Sion whom no man regards, in whom the Father delights to dwell: This
is Sion out of whom we are to expect the deliverer to come, that shall turn
ungodliness from Jacob.

You learned and great men of the earth, take notice of this, and remember you
have been told.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle at the west end
of Paul's. 1649.

TO The twelve Tribes of Israel that are circumcised in heart, and scattered
through all the Nations of the Earth.
Dear Brethren,
THough you have been, and yet are the despised ones of the world, yet the
blessing of the most High (your King of Righteousness) is in you, and shall
spread forth of you to fill the earth. You are the field wherein the treasure
has lien hide; all the dark and cloudy days of the Beasts time, times and
dividing of time now expiring.

Though dark clouds of inward bondage, and outward persecution have overspread
you; yet you are the firmament, in whom the Son of righteousness will rise up,
and from you will declare himself to the whole Creation; for you are Sion whom
no man regards, out of whom salvation shall come.

That blessing ( which is the seed of Abraham) lies hid in you, that is and
must be the alone Savior and joy of all men, from inward and outward bondage,
and the restorer of the whole Creation from the curse it groans under.

He lies hid in you, he is hated, persecuted and despised in you, he is Jacob
in you, that is and has been a servant to Esau a long time; but though this
Jacob be very low, yet his time is uow come, that he must rise, and he will
rise up in you that are trod under foot like dust of the earth; he will
glorify himself ^oth in you and from you, to the shame and downfall of E^au.

The report of this blessed promised seed, shall go through the Earth in this
ministration of the Spirit that is now rising up, as well as that ministration
of the flesh and letter, that now begins to draw back, and his dominion, when
he begins to rule the Nations, shall reach from one end of heaven to the other;
the whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the Lord, and of his
Dominion there shall be no end. This is the consolation of Israel, it draws
near to be made manifest, wait for it with patience.

You whom I writ to are the seed of Abraham, and the blessing of Isaac and
Jacob; but (...) me tell you, not the seed of Abraham after the flesh: for
Ishmael and Esau, are not to share in this portion; Their portions was of the
earth, and they have received t^em, and spent them already by their
unrighteousness; your portion is the Lord himself which endures for ever.

The powers of the flesh are to be made servants unto the promised seed; and
now comes the time that the elder sons, that are born after the flesh, shall
serve the younger sons, in whom the blessing lies; this is the fall of Esau,
and the rising of Jacob, and shall be really done in the sight of the whole
Creation as the other was.

You are the Abrahamites in whom the blessing remains, that lives not now in
the type, but enjoyes the substance of circumcision; For he is not a Jew, that
is one outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew, that is one inward, whose
circumcision is of the heart: Whether he be born of the Nation of the Jews
extant in the world, or whether he be one born of other Nations in whom the
blessing remains; it is Abraham's promised seed that makes a Jew; and these are
they of whom it is said, Salvation is of the Jews.

What was that seed of Abraham, that is called the blessing?

It is the Law and power of righteousness, which made Abraham to forsake his
Isaac, his dearest relations in the flesh, rather then he would refuse the way
of his Maker; and herein Abraham found peace: So that this King of
righteousness, and this Prince of peace that ruled in Abraham, is the blessing
of all Nations, for this shall save his people from their sins, and free them
from all distempers of the unrighteous flesh. This is the one spreading power
that shall remove the curse, and restore all things from the bondage every
thing groans under.

This is called Abraham's seed, because Abraham sprang from him, as a tree grows
from the seed, which gave the tree its being and its name: And the Law of
righteousness and peace, dwelling and ruling in any one is the seed of
Abraham, and the several branches of men and women in whom that power rests,
are children and of the family of Abraham.

For it was not the man of the flesh that was called Abraham, but the Law of
righteousness and peace, that did rule and govern in that body, he was the
Abraham; the flesh is honored with such a name by him that dwelt therein; the
name of the flesh before this righteous power was manifest in it, was Abram.

As the humane body called Christ, was not the anointing, but the Spirit in
that body, was the Christ, or the spreading power of righteousness, which was
to fill the earth with himself. That body was but a house or temple for the
present work, which was to draw down Moses Law, and become the substance of his
types, and lambs, and sacrifices; for that body was the lamb, that did fulfill
the righteous will, by his voluntary and free will offering up of himself,
without forcing.

So then: This Law of righteousness and peace, is Abraham's seed; nay that
manifestation in that humane body, was Abraham himself; for Abraham is known to
the Creation, by acting in or from that power that ruled the flesh. And every
man or woman, born of Jew or Gentile, in whom this power rules and breaks
forth, are the children of Abraham, and the man Abraham in whom the spirit
dwelt in a less measure; for he has failings, was a type of the Man Christ
Jesus, in whom the Law of righteousness and peace dwelt bodily, for there was
no sin or unrighteousness in that body.

Therefore Christ has the honor above his brethren, to be called the
spreading power, because he fills all with himself; And because this power did
appear to the Creation first in Abraham of all men we hear of, therefore every
one that follows after him, and that are ruled by the same Law, are called
children of Abraham, or children of that seed.

But Christ the anointing he has the pre-eminence, for Abraham sprang from
him, and all Abrahamits are but a tree or vine that did spring from that one
seed: for indeed the spirit of life, lies in the bottom, which lifted up both
Abraham and his children, and is the one seed of righteousness and life, from
which every one springs, what name soever any righteous body is called.

Now this seed does promise himself to be the blessing of all Nations, and the
restorer of all things from bondage; but the Nations of the earth, since that
report was made, never yet enjoyed the benefit of it; for the curse has still
rested upon the Creation, and has been rather multiplied from year to year; so
that at this very day, those in whom the first fruits of restoration appears,
do see darkness, nay thick darkness do cover mankind: And the curse does
rest mightily in the fire, water, earth and air; all places stinks with the
abomination of the curse; So that a man can go into no place, but he shall see
the curse and enmity is that power that rules the creatures, that makes them
jar one against another.

Likewise miserry breaks forth upon mankind, from these four Elements of which
his body is made, and the curse rests within him, and the curse dwells round
about him; But Abraham's seed, is and must be the blessing of all Nations, and
shall spread as far as the curse hat^ spread, to take it off.

And this seed (Dear Brethren) has lien hid in you, all the time appointed,
and now is breaking forth. And the Nations shall know, That salvation or
restoration rather, is of the Jews, that King of righteousness and Prince of
peace, that removes the curse, and becomes himself the blessing, arises up in
you, and from you, and fills, and will fill the earth, both mankind, and the
whole Creation, Fire, Water, Earth and Air, for the blessing shall be every
where.

And though the seed of the flesh have cast you out for evil, and you have been
the despised ones of the earth, and the children of the flesh refuses to buy
and sell with you, yet now your glory is rising. And the ancient prophecy of
Zecharie shall be fulfilled, That ten men shall take hold of the skirt of him
that is a Jew, saying, Let us go with you, for we have heard that God is with
you.

This new Law of righteousness and peace, which is rising up, is David your
King, which you have been seeking a long time, and now shall find him coming
again the second time in the personal appearance of sons and daughters; he
will be a true Davider indeed, between flesh and spirit, between bondage and
liberty, between oppressors and the oppressed; he is and will be the
righteous Judge; he will lead your captivity captive, and set you down in
peace.

He is now coming to reign, and the Isles and Nations of the earth shall all
come in unto him; he will rest every where, for this blessing will fill all
places: All parts of the Creation in whom the curse remains shall be shaken and
moved, and the seed of the flesh shall find peace no where: He will throw down
the mountains of the flesh, fill up the low valleys of the spirit, he will
make rough ways smooth, and crooked ways strait, he will make the earth
fruitful, and the winds and the weather seasonable; he will throw all the
powers of the earth at your feet, and himself will be your governor and
teacher, and your habitations on earth shall be in peace, that so you that are
the City of the Lord, New Jerusalem, the place of his rest, may be the praise
of the whole earth.

If any one say: The glory of Jerusalem is to be seen hereafter, after the ^ody
is laid in the dust; it matters not to me what they say, they speak their
imagination, they know not what.

I know that the glory of the Lord shall be seen and known within the Creation,
and the blessing shall spread in all Nations; and Jerusalem indeed which is
Abraham's children, sprituall Israel gathered together, shall be the praise and
glory of the whole earth; and the restoration of all things is to be seen
within the Creation of Fire, Water, Earth and Air. And all bodies that are made
of the compound of these four Elements, are to be purged and delivered from the
curse; and all shall know that this almighty King of righteousness is our
Savior, and besides hi^^ there is none.

The swords and counsels of flesh shall not be seen in this work, the arm of
the Lord only shall bring these mighty things to pass, in this day of his
power; and the hearts of men shall tremble and fail them with fear to see the
misery that is coming upon the world, for the glory and riches of men shall be
brought low, and the Lord alone shall be exalted. Therefore all that I shall
say is this; Though the world, even the seed of the flesh despise you, and call
you by reproachful names at their pleasure; yet wait patiently upon your King,
he is coming, he is rising, the Son is up, and his glory will fill the earth.

And when you see the Doves flock to the windows (not to your Church-windows)
but to the teachings of the Father, for his discoveries are the windows that
lets the light of the Father shine into the soul: and these are dreams, voices
and revelations immediately from the Father himself, his own inward teaching,
without which the soul is hungry, and flocks unto the inward discoveries and
teaching of the Father for satisfaction, forsaking all other in point of inward
rest.

When you see or hear of the risings up of Israel, like the noise of mighty
waters, carrying all before them, then rejoice and say, Your redemption draws
near, and the reports from the Lord are true: wait with a meek and quiet spirit
for the consolation of Israel, even the coming forth of the deliverer, That
shall turn ungodliness from Jacob. Then shall Jacob rejoice, and Israel shall
be glad. So I rest

January 26. 1648. A waiter for the consolation of Israel JERRARD WINSTANLEY.

The New Law OF RIGHTEOUSNESS Budding forth, to restore the whole Creation from
bondage of the curse.
CHAP. I.
THere is nothing more sweet and satisfactory to a man, then this: to know and
feel that spiritual power of righteousness to rule in him, which he calls God.
For while the flesh through hasty and violent lusts, does rebel against the
spirit, it has no true peace, but is still pulling misery upon himself. But
when the created flesh is made subject to the law of righteousness, and walks
uprightly in the Creation, in the light of that spirit, then it lies down in
rest.

In other writings I have declared what I know, That Almighty power and ever
living Spirit is, which rules and preserves the whole Creation; fire, water
earth and air, and of every creature in these elements; or that is made up of
all these in a compound matter as all flesh is. And something I shall here add
to the rest, which I only hold ^orth to my fellow creature, man; not
customarily to make a trade of it, for fleshly ends, but occasionally as the
Light is pleased to manifest himself in me; 1 John 1. 3, 4.
that others from me, and I from them may be witnesses each to other, of our
Maker how he shines forth in his own light, through each other to the profit of
the Creation.

In the beginning of time the whole Creation lived in man, and man lived in his
Maker, the spirit of Righteousness and peace, for every creature walked evenly
with man, and delighted in man, and was ruled by him; there was no opposition
between him and the beast, sowls, fishes, or any creature in the earth: so that
it is truly said, The whole Creation was in man, one within, and walked even
with him; for no creature appeared to be a visible enemy to him: for every
creature gave forth it self, either for pleasure or profit of man, who was Lord
of all: And man lived in his Maker the Spirit, and delighted in no other; there
was an evennes between man and all creatures, and an evennesse between man and
his Maker the Lord, the Spirit.

But when man began to ^all out of his Maker, and to leave his joy and rest
which he had in the spirit of Righteousness, and sought content from creatures
and outward objects, then he lost his dominion, and the creature fell out of
him, and became enemies and apposers of him, and then rise up mountains, and
valleys, and hills, and all unevenness, both in man's heart, and in man's
actions. And as the man is become selfish; so are all the beasts and creatures
become selfish; and man and beast act like each other, by pushing with their
horns of power, and devouring one another to preserve self.

And truly as man might see all creatures lived at rest in him in the
beginning, so he may see all creatures in him now, but in a rest-lesse
condition, groaning under bondage, waiting for a restoration. The
covetousness, the subtilty, the cruelty, the pride, the envy, the devouring
power that is in the flesh of man are the very distempers that are in such and
such beasts and fowls: So that while man is ruled by such powers, and declares
no other actions but what is in the beast; he indeed goes in the shape of a
man, but properly he is a beast of such and such a ravenous principle. And this
now is the Curse, Man is gone out of his Maker, to live upon objects; and the
creatures are gone out of man, to seek delight in pushing and devouring one
another, and the whole Creation of fire, and water, earth and air; and all
bodies made of these are put out of order, through man's rejecting the Spirit to
live upon objects.

But now the time is come, that the Spirit will draw all things into man
again, to live and be at rest in him, as their Governor, as their Lord, and
man and the Creation shall become even again, and so man returning to his
Maker, to rest in peace in none but him. The whole Creation shall be governed,
preserved and comforted by the one spirit, the King of Righteousness, and all
bondage, curse and tears shall be done away: And this is that I wait for, being
assured it shall be accomplished, having received a taste.

But as the state of the world is, in the generality, I am made to see, That in
times past and times present, the branches of mankind have acted like the
beast or swine; And though they have called one another, men and women, yet
they have been but the shadows of men and women. As the Moon is the shadow of
the Sun, Rom, 8, 13
in regard they have been led by the powers of the curse in flesh, which is the
Feminine part; not by the power of the righteous Spirit which is Christ, Epbes.
2. 2.
the Masculine power.

But when they come to see the spiritual Light that is in every ceature, and
in that power and light do walk righteously toward other creatures, as well
beasts as mankind, that the creation as much as in them lies one by one,
Psalm. 36. 9.
may be upheld and preserved in its glory; then they begin to appear and act
like men; and rise up from the low earth of a beastly and swinish nature, to
acknowledge and honor their Maker in the light of himself.

Experience shows us That every beast does act in oppression and cruelty,
toward such creatures, as he can master at advantage. And thus does the flesh
of man, Rev. 13. 4
which is the King of beast: For when the wisdom and power of the flesh
raigns, which in deed is Adam, that man that appeared first to rule the earth,
mankind, and by his unrighteousness makes it a land of barrenness: For this
first Adam is such a selfish power, that he seeks to compass all the creatures
of the earth into his own covetous hands, to make himself a lord, and all other
his slaves.

And though he gets lands, moneys, honors, government into his hands, yet he
gives the King of righteousness, Romans 8. 21 ^2.
but a company of sawning words of love and obedience; for he makes
unrighteousness to dwell in heaven and earth, that is, in the whole Creation,
by his unrighteous government, and so he becomes the chief Rebel, the Serpent,
the Devil, the Murderer, oppressing the Creation, setting himself above all in
tyranny: And this power is the curse which the whole Creation groans under,
waiting for a restoration by Christ the King and law of rigteousnesse, who is
the restorer of all things.

And here first I shall declare what Adam the first man is, who to me appears
to be the wisdom and power of the flesh, carrying along the Creation, man, to
live upon creature objects, and to loath and despise the Spirit that made all,
and that dwells in all things according to the capacity of every single
creature: and all that Adam does is to advance himself to be, The one power; he
gets riches and government into his hands, that he may lift up himself, and
suppress the universal liberty, which is Christ. And if he preach, or pray,
or perform any service relating to the Spirit, it is for this end, that he may
get peace thereby, and so seeks to honor flesh by procuring his own peace, by
his own wit and policy if that would do.

So that this Adam appears first in every man and woman; but he sits down in
the chair of Magistracy, in some above others; for though this climbing power
of self-love be in all, yet it rises not to its height in all; but every one
that gets an authority into his hands, tyrannizes over others; as many
husbands, parents, masters, magistrates, that lives after the flesh, do carry
themselves like oppressing Lords over such as are under them; not knowing that
their wives, children, servants, subjects are their fellow creatures, and has
an equal privilege to share with them in the blessing of liberty.

And this first Adam is to be seen and known in a twofold sense.

First, He is the wisdom and power of the flesh in every man, who indeed is
the beast, and he spreads himself within the Creation, man, into diverse
branches; As into ignorance of the Creator of all things, into covetousness
after objects, into pride and envy, lifting up himself above others, and
seeking revenge upon all that crosses his selfish honors; and into hypocrisy,
subtilty, lying imagination, self-love; from whence proceeds all unrighteous
outward acting. This is the first Adam lying, ruling and dwelling within
mankind. And this is he within every man and woman, which makes whole
mankind, being a prisoner to him, to wonder after the beast, which is no
other but self, or upon every thing whereupon self is s^amped.

Secondly, The first Adam is the wisdom and power of flesh broke out and sat
down in the chair of rule and dominion, in one part of mankind over another.
And this is the beginner of particular interest, buying and selling the earth
from one particular hand to another, saying, This is mine, upholding this
particular propriety by a law of government of his own making, and thereby
restraining other fellow creatures from seeking nourishment from their mother
earth. So that though a man was bred up in a Land, yet he must not work for
himself where he would sit down. But from Adam; that is, for such a one that
had bought part of the Land, or came to it by inheritance of his deceased
parents, and called it his own Land: So that he that had no Land, was to work
for those for small wages, that called the Land theirs; and thereby some are
lifted up into the chair of tyranny, and others trod under the footstool of
misery, as if the earth were made for a few, no^ for all men.

For truly the common people by their labors, from the first rise of Adam,
this particular imterest upheld by the fleshes law to this day, they have
lifted up their Landlords and others to rule in tyranny and oppression over
them. And let all men say what they will, so long as such are Rulers as calls
the Land theirs, upholding this particular propriety of Mine and Thine; the
common people shall never have their liberty, nor the Land ever freed from
troubles, oppressions and complainings; by reason whereof the Creator of all
things is continually provoked. O thou proud selfish governing Adam, in this
Land called England! Know that the cries of the poor, whom thou lays heavy
oppressions upon, is hea^d.

This is unrighteous Adam, that dammed up the water springs of universal
liberty, and brought the Creation under the curse of bondage, sorrow and tears:
But when the earth becomes a common treasury as it was in the beginning, and
the King of Righteousness comes to rule in every ones heart, then he kills the
first Adam; for covetousness thereby is killed. A man shall have meat, and
drink and clothes by his labor in freedom, and what can be desired more in
earth. Pride and envy likewise is killed thereby, for every one shall look upon
each other as equal in the Creation; every man indeed being a parfect Creation
of himself. And so this second Adam Christ, the restorer, stops or dammes up
the runnings of those stinking waters of self-interest, and causes the waters
of life and liberty to run plentifully, in, and through the Creation, making
the earth one storehouse, and every man and woman to live in the law of
Righteousness and peace as members of one household.

And in the next place I shall declare the mystery of the Spirit in a twofold
way:

First, he makes the Creation, mankind, to see, loa^h and forsake this Adam,
this fleshly man* This devil or power of darkness that rules in the creatures,
and leads them into ways that brings misery, pain and death, which is hell, a
condition of uncomfortable darkness of the curse.

Secondly, He makes mankind to see, to love and delight in the Spirit Reason,
which is the law of Righteousness, that made them, and s^tles them in peace;
when in the light and power thereof, they are made to forsake the flesh with
all his ways of bondage; for truly when the flesh is made subject to Reason,
that light that inlightens every thing, then it has peace and liberty, and is
freed from those heart-aking pressures and sorrows, which the flesh pulls upon
himself by his violent, rash, unrighteous, and unreasonable actings.

The Almighty has declared three methods in discovering this mystery in the
compass of six days, or 6000 years near hand expired; in every one of which
he draws mankind higher and higher into himself, out of the power of the
Serpent or bondage. And when he alone is advanced, he draws all men after him,
which is the finishing up of the mystery.

The first Method is this: He was pleased to call forth Moses to be his
servant, and in, by and through him, he reveals himself to lie under types,
shadows, sacrifices; that mankind by them might be led to see his Maker; And
this was the Covenant of an outward testimony, which Moses, a man that was
mixed with flesh and spirit, was Mediator of. And this

Secondly did point out the Apostolical testimony which was to be manifested in
aftertimes; and that was to acknowledge honor, and bear witness of the Lamb
Jesus Christ, that was the substance of Moses. For the Apostles declare
themselves to be witnesses of Christ, the great Prophet, that Moses said should
come after him, Act. 3. 22.
to whom every man should hearken, and then leave the teachings of shadows,
which they receive from him.

Therefore say they, We eat and drank in his presence, we heard him speak, and
saw his miracles, and bear testimony to the world, that the Rulers of the Jews
slew him, and that he was raised from the dead by the Almighty power. And this
single appearance of the man Christ Jesus (for herein the righteous Law dwelt
bodily) was a more spiritual declaration then the former. And this types out

The third Method of Divine discovery, Ephesians. 4. 6.
which indeed does finish the mystery; and herein the Lord takes up all into
himself, even into the Spirit that governs the Creation; for he is in all, and
acts through all. And all power of righteousness that appears in any subject
is still but the Lord, in such or such a discovery; for as the man Christ Jesus
swallowed up Moses; and so the Spirit dwelt bodily in that Lamb, which was
spread abroad in the types; And mankind is to behold the Law of
Righteousness, in none, Romans 8. 22 23.
but in that his wel-beloved Son.

Even so that single body is a type: 1 Cor. 12. 13.
That the same Spirit that filled every member of that one body, should in
these last days be sent into whole mankind, Act. 2. 17.
and every branch shall be a joint or member of the mystical body, Jer. 31. 34
or several spreadings forth of the vine, being all filled with the one
Spirit, Christ the anointing, who fills all with himself, and so he becomes the
alone King of Righteousness and peace that rules in man. And the powers of the
flesh which is the Serpent or curse, shall be subdued under him, and mankind
shall be made only subject to this one Spirit, which shall dwell bodily in
every one, as he dwelt bodily in the man Christ Jesus, who was the Son of man.

Now as Moses declared, That the Lamb Jesus Christ should be that great Prophet
to whom every one should give ear, and delivered it in general terms, leaving
the particular discoveries of his new doctrine to the Lamb himself when he
came; and so did not go about to imagine matters that was above his circle; and
we see the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, when he came, far exceeded the Doctrine of
Moses; the one being the substance of the other, and so mo^^ spiritual makings
forth then the other.

Even so, the man Christ Jesus, the great Prophet, declared in general terms
what should be in later times, Joh. 7. 38.
leaving it to every son and daughter, to declare their particular experiences,
when the Spirit does rise up in them, and manifests himself to them. For they
that believe (says he) out of their bellies shall flow rivers (or plentiful
discoveries) of the water of life.

Therefore as Moses gave way to Christ; for when Christ appeared in flesh,
Luke* 9* 33 36.
Moses administration began to be silent and drew back, and set Jesus Christ in
the chair to be the great Prophet that should be the teacher in types after
him. And the ministration of these discoveries were to reign in the world,
their appointed times.

Even so the Lamb Christ Jesus, Joh. 16. 7.
or that single body, gives way to the holy Ghost, or spreading Spirit; If I go
not away, ^oh. 17. 21
the Comforter cannot come to you; for he that dwells bodily in me, is to spread
himself in you, that as the Father in me, and I in him are one: even so I in
you, and you in me, may become one wit^ the Father.

And the testimony of the Apostles declares as much: 2 Cor. 16.
Though we have known Christ after the flesh, (in one single body) yet now
henceforth know we him no more so; Col. 1. 27.
but we look after that mystery, which has been kept secret from ages and
generations past, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory. And therefore I
must tell you that yet live in dipping, in water and observation of
Gospel-forms and types; you live yet under the ministration of Jesus Christ
after the flesh, declaring the Lamb Christ to remain as yet in one single
person.

But know you, that as the ministration of Moses gave way to this; so this
ministration is to give way to the inward teachings of Christ, and the
spreading of the Spirit, Joh. 14.
in sons and daughters, which will more excellently declare the glory of the
mystery. The man Christ Jesus himself, told the woman of Samaria; Woman the
time is coming that neither in Jerusalem, nor in this mountain shall men
worship the Father, but they that worship him shall worship him in Spirit and
in Truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him.

By these words, The Son of man declares, that both outward forms, customs and
types of Moses worship under that ministration at Jerusalem, Luke 17. 21.
likewise all forms and customs, and types of this ministration of himself,
Joh. 6. 45
as the Lamb held forth at a distance to be our Mediator, should all cease and
give way to the spiritual worship of the Father in the latter days; or to the
spreading of the Divine power in men, the one Law of Righteousness, being the
teacher of all.

So that upon the rising up of Christ in sons and daughters, Joh. 16 7
which is his second coming, the ministration of Christ in one single person
is to be silent and draw back, and set the spreading power of Righteousness
and wisdom in the chair, of whose Kingdom there shall be no end. Dan. 3. 44.
So as all things were gone out from the Spirit, and were gone astray and
corrupted. The Spirit in this great mystery of truth being manifested in flesh,
burns up that dross out of the Creation, and draws in all things back again
into himself, and declares himself to be the alone wisdom and power of
Righteousness, that rules, dwells, that governs and preserves both in and over
the whole Creation. 2 Cor. 5. 19
And now the Son delivers up the Kingdom unto the Father; 1 Cor. 5. 24
And he that is the spreading power, not one single person, become all in all
in every person; that is, the one King of Righteousness in every one.

Here we may see what the dividing of time is, which is the last period in
which the Beast is to reign^ for now every ministration pleads his privilege,
Dan. 7. 25.
till the Law of Righteousness drown up all in himself. Moses yet pleads a
privilege in the practice of the Jews after the flesh. The Son of man, or
Christ in one single person ple^ds a privilege, and not only the true
ministration of the Son of man according to the Apostles declaration; But
likewise many false forms, customs and observations of Divine worship are
raised up, through a wrong understanding of those Scriptures, all plead a
privilege.

And lastly, the ministration of the Spirit, forsaking all types and ^ormes,
Ioh. 4. 23.
worshipping the Father in the substance of truth. This now pleads his
privilege, as his due right by course. So that you see here is the dividing of
time. But this last ministration is the sufferer for the present, as being
denied his right by the former, that ought to give way.

And as the worshippers in Moses ministration, envied and killed such as
worshipped the Son of man, the Lamb: So now, those that worship Christ at a
distance in their several Congregations and forms, and are most zealous
therein, are in these days the most bitterest enemies to the ministration of
Christ in Spirit and in truth.

But when this ministration of the Spirit spreads himself, he will make the
greatest separation that ever was. For though Isreal's separation out of Egypt
amazed the world, and the separation of gathered Congregations out of Parish
Churches (so called) did trouble the earth, though it is no more but going out
of one form into another, not into the unity of the one Spirit. Yet this
ministration of the Spirit now rising up by right of inheritance, will take
peace from the world much more: for he has begun, and he will and shall go on,
to gather the scattered of Isreal together, out of all Aegytian bondages, and
self-seeking oppressing government, and out of all forms and customs of the
Beast, to worship the Father in spirit and truth, being made to be all of one
heart and one mind: And this shall more and more appear, as the earth grows up
to be a common treasury for all.

Therefore let me tell you, That all your enmity will not uphold your ^orms,
your imprisoning, and reviving, and making law to suppress such as ^^e
contrary to you, will never work your will, but pull miseries and shame upon
your selves; as the zealous Scribes and Pharisees did in killing of Christ the
Son of man: Therefore be patient, look up for teaching in this dividing of
time, when the Law of Righteousness arises up; and makes himself more
manifest, he will reconcile all, make every one to be of one heart and one
mind; and no other power must be the restorer, but this King of Righteousness
and Peace: Acts 4. 32.
for this is he that makes men do as they would be done unto, Isa: 60. 16
And then envy and bitterness dies.

Now search the Scriptnres, you that stand up to be Teachers, that say I deny
the Scriptures, and let them judge me, Joh: 5 45.
whether I deny them or no; but one thing you shall find to your shame, that
those Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, which you seem to preserve with
such love and zealous tenderness, shall cast the first stone at you, to stone
you out of your Pulpits; for you do not profess those Scriptures in love to
them, Joe: 2. 15.
but in zealous covetousness to uphold your trade.

For now when Christ begins to arise up in sons and daughters, whereby the
Scriptures are honored and proved true Prophecies, Promises, Visions, and
Revelations; you deny their testimony, and cry out Visions and Revelations are
ceased; and so you will ever have people to be hearing you speak the
declaration, because you live by it; but if any receive the power from on high,
you cry out upon it, It is self-conceit, error and blasphemy: Well, he is at
work that will discover your shame; Wickedness shall slay the wicked, though no
man's hand be upon him.

CHAP. II.
THere are three more discoveries of Christ, to make the mystery of the Spirit
shine in its excellency. As

Frst, The great world, wherein are variety of creatures, as Sun, Moon,
Stars, Earth, Grass, Plants, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, and Man, the Lord over the
lower Creatures, all sweetly conjoined to preserve each other, is no other but
Christ spread forth in the Creation; and so upholding the Creation by hi^ own
wisdom and power; for he is the maker, the preserver and restoring Spirit,

Therefore his name is called, I, and I am, The Lord, and besides me there is
no Savior; But this is Christ very remote; for though he rule in the whole
Creation, yet no single creature could discern o^ spy him out, he is in every
one, and yet that single one knew him not.

And therefore this one Almighty power began to make forth himself in visible
descriptions before the creature^ causing every creature to hold forth the
light and power that is in them, that so the mighty Creator may at length be
known, I^h. 14. 17
in the clear sighted experience of one single creature, man, by seeing,
hearing, tasting, smelling, feeling, This one power of Righteousness, as he
rests in the Creation, that man may be the mouth that shall make a clear
discovery of Christ to others from the testimony that is in himself; for he is
to see Christ within himself, before he can see him in other creatures. And
therefore,

Secondly, The Sripture in their several declaration, types, prophecies,
visions, voices, revelations, actings of men, in patient doing and suffering in
righteousness, is no other but Christ in the letter, lying under the
experimental words of those Penmen, setting forth the one Almighty, in his
several actings, Col. 2. 9.
and his several conditions, wherein he has appeared to the view of the whole
Creation; but seen and known only, by the one creature, man, in whom he is
purposed to dwell bodily.

But still here is a large distance between Christ and the bulk of man kind;
for though some few particular ones have seen him, and could declare him, yet
others are ignorant of him: So that the universalitie of mankind may see
these two discriptions of Christ, that is in the Creation, and in the
Scriptures, both without themselves.

And when any attains to see Christ in these outward discoveries, it is full of
sweet delight, but this settles no true peace; for that delight that is
fetching in from things at a distance from us, may be lost again, and return
into its proper seat again: As the pleasant beams is of the Sun, which
refreshes the outward man, may be lost, for when the Clouds come between, the
beams return into the Sun again, which is their proper seat, and men loses,
the refreshing, wramth and hear. And therefore,

Thirdly, Christ or the spreading power of light, is drawing the knowledge of
himself, Ier. 31. 34.
as he lies in all things, Ioh. 8. 22.
into the clear experience of man, into whole man, yea, into every brench of
mankind and he the Son of Righteousness will not only shine into, but fix
hinself in every one. So that perfect man shall be no other but God manifest in
flesh: for every manifestation of this power in any creature, Romans 8. 22
shall be seen, known, rejoiced in, and be declared of by man.

The light, and heat, and Spirit of the Sun, shall be declared by the Son
of Righteousness in man: The sweet compliance of love in one creature toward
another; as the clouds to wa^er the earth, the earth to send forth the fruits
to preserve the living creatures, that feeds thereupon, shall be declared by
that living power, Love and Righteousness, that is seated in man toward any
creature.

So that, though this one Almighty power be spread in the whole Creation, yet
it will appear to have his chief residence in man, Ephesians. 1. 23.
that in, by and through man, 1 John 2. 12
that one spirit may rule and govern the works of his own hands in
Righteousness.

Every declaration of Christ in the Scriptures, shall be seen and known in the
clear experience of every son and daughter (when this mystery is finished)
for Christ, who indeed is the anointing, shall fill all, and all shall be the
fullness of the anointing: So that whatsoever a condition a man is in, Isa. 21.
13.
it is one or other condition that the child Jesus was in, growing upwards
toward manhood; there is child hood, youth and old^age in the anointing.

For the wisdom and power of truth, that was poured upon the head of the Son
of man, grows upwards toward perfection in sons and daughters: Even as we see
any tree, corn or cattle, grows up in the eye of man by degrees; for as these
creatures do not attain to perfectson on a sudden; neither does the spirit of
Righteousness rise up on a sudden perfection, but by degrees

And therefore, He that believes makes not have; The hasty flesh would have
all content on a sudden, but the spirit is moderate and rises up patiently, its
powerful and quick, and yet slow; its slow, but yet sure; it will sit down in
peace in a man, though it run through many thorns and briars first.

Yea, I say, whatsoever condition you are in Christ or the anointing being in
you, Isa. 53. 3.
appears in that condition in you. If you be in a condition of poverty, so was
Christ the Son of man, he had not whereon to lay his head. If you be hated for
Rigteousnesse sake, so was he, nay it is the anointing in you that is hated. If
angry, proud and tyrant-ruling flesh seek to imprison you and kill you, so they
dealt with him, and it is still the righteous man in you that is opposed.

If you be made to joy in the Father, the Spirit of truth; it is he within you
that rejoices in himself; if you feel a waiting, Ioh. 14.
meek spirit in you, it is still Christ in you, who is meek and lowly. If you
feel the power of love dwell within you, leading you to love enemies, and to do
as you would be done unto, it is Christ in you, who is the law of love and
Righteousness,

And in every condition you are in, this law of the Spirit meets with the
powers of your own flesh f^etting and fighting against him: For envy,
frowardness, self-love, covetousness are the power of darkness in you, that
fights against the Spirit, that sweetly seeks the preservation and peace of
all. But that opposing power in you is the devil, serpent and power of
darkness, which Christ the power of light, rising up in you; will destroy; and
so mortality shall be swallowed up of life.

And Christ will not sit down in peace, Ier. 2. 3. 5, 6
rejoicing in you, till he has subdued all these inward and outward enemies
under his feet, and himself become the alone King of Righteousness in you; for
he is that mighty King, that shall be established upon the holy hill of Sion;
that is, He shall be only King, unto whom every man and woman shall be made a
subject; This King shall reign for ever and ever: ^ These. 2. 7
And this is he you would call God; but indeed the power of darkness is the
god that rules in most men and women, both professors and others: and they
will subject to this their god of darkness, till the power of light Christ
take him away.

So that whatsoever estate a son or daughter is in, 1 Co. 15. 27
it is still but Christ combating with his enemies, in that estate, drawing all
into himself, and destroying all oppsing powers, that himself may remain to be
the one alone Almighty power, spread forth every where, and so doing the will
of the Father, brusing the Sarpents head in you; and that he himself, who is
the divine, may grow up, flourish, remain and bring ^orth abundance of fruit
in you, when your created flesh is purged from bondage, and made subject to him.

But if Christ and the Father be all one power and wisdom, why do you make a
distinction, as if they were two?

I answer, The Father is the universal power, that has spread himself in the
whole globe; The Son is the same power drawn into, and appearing in one
single person, making that person subject to the one Spirit, and to know him
that dwells every where.

There is not a person or creature within the compass of the globe, but he is
a son of the of the Father; or the breakings forth of that power in one body;
now every small creature is the light of the Father, though it be a dark one;
but man living in the light of the Father, is called The wel-beloved Son,
because that one power of Rigteousnesse dwells bodily in him, and the whole
Creation is drawn up into that one center, man.

And now the Lord a lone is exalted in this day of his power; for now the
Serpent is cast out of heaven, a^l powers of darkness are subdued, and the
Spirit remains conqueror in man, yet in single man; and so filling the living
earth, mankind in all his branches with himself, the one Spirit.

This spreading power is the Fathers house, in which there are many mansions,
or dwelling places; every crerture lives herein: for in and by him every one
lives, and moves, and has his being: This is to speak truth as it is in Jesus.
This is Sion that is above, where the Father dwells in his glory. Sinai is the
mountain of flesh, that is to be burned with fire, Ephesians. 1. 6.
that is, the Spirit of Righteousness is the fire, that will burn-up all
unrighteous powers in the flesh.

And to see this power of Righteousness spreading himself every where,
destroying death, and preserving the Creation, is to see him you would call
God, with open face; and you can never see him plainly and nakedly, till you
come thus to see him; therefore you Priests and zealous ptofessors, learn
hereafter to know what power it is you call God: for the word God, signifies a
Governor, and it may as well be attributed to the devil, as to the law of
Righteousness; for assure your selves, if covetousness, pride and bitter envy
do rule you, as it is apparent this dark power rules most of you, then the
devil is that god you worship; and you are strangers and enemies to the Spirit
of Truth that dwells every where, which you seem to call your God or Ruler.

CHAP. III.
ANd this is no new Gospel, but the old one; It is the same report that the
Penmen of Scriptures gave for the everlasting Gospel, God with us, or God
manifest in flesh. The Father exalted above all, and in all; for the Prophets
and Apostles declare these two things.

First, the Spirit spreads himself abroad in sacrifices and types, as in Moses
time, and then takes all into himself again; the Spirit manifest in* one
person, as in the son of man; For all the writings of old and new Testament,
are all centered in Christ, Ioh. 16. 7.
and are swallowed up into him: And this Christ is not only confined to the
Lamb Jesus anointed, but is the enlarging of the same anointing, in the
particular persons of sons and daughters, in whom the same spirit of truth
the comforter, is to be manifest in after times.

And this power shall not only fill mankind, and be all in all therein, but
all other creatures, of all kind according to their several degrees, shall be
filled with this one spirit, Romans 3. 22
anointing: As Paul's testimony reports, that the whole Creation of all kinds
of creatures, in whom the curse is spread through man's unrighteousness, does
all groan and travel, waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God.

When mankind shall be restored, and delivered from the curse, and all
spirited with this one power, then other creatures shall be restored likewise,
and freed from their burdens: as the Earth, from thorns, and briars, and
barrenness; the Air and winds from unseasonable storms and distempers; the
Cattle from bitterness and rage one against another. And the law of
righteousness and love shall be seated in the whole Creatton, from the lowest
to the highest creature. And this is the work of restoration.

So that all the glory and content that man takes in other creatures of the
earth, it is but a rejoicing in himself; or that spirit that is within him
being more and more filled with peace to see, feel, taste, smell and hear, the
power of the whole Creation, to have a sweet complyancy of love in him, and
with him.

For now all jarring, rashness, violent storms, barrenness of the earth,
corruption in fire and water, enmity in cattles, oppressing principles in one
man over another, are all kept and swept away like locusts, by this strong East
wind, the Lord himself at his coming. And every creature in his kind sings in
Righteousness, and man lives and rules in the strength of that Law, by reason
whereof all tears and are wiped away. And when this glory is finished, as it
must be; for it is begun to be made manifest, for the poor they do receive the
Gospel: and it is yet hid from the learned ones, the teachers and the rulers of
the world.

Then those writings are made good, Psa. 110. 1
That all enemies are subdued under the ^eet of the anointing, who is this
spreading power of Righteousness, and there is no opposite power remaining.
For the power that shall now appear, is no other but the Lord himself, dwelling
every where: And the whole Creation is his ga^den wherein he walks and delights
himself, And now the Kingdom is delivered up in^o the Fathers hand, 1 Cor. 1^.
24.
the one Spirit that fills all, and is in all.

And the distinction of dominion in one single person over all, shall cease* 1
Cor. 12. 13.
and no distinction shall be owned, but King of Righteousness, dwelling in
every one, and in the whole body of the Creation* all being sweetly and quietly
subject to him, and he sweetly and quietly ruling in them: And this shall be
that City Sion, of which glorious things are spoken.

And now in this new heaven and new earth, he himself who is the King of
Righteousness does dwell and rule; and this is the excellency of the work; when
a man shall be made to see Christ in other creatures, as well as in himself;
every one rejoicing each in other, Rev. 5. 13.
and all rejoicing in their King.

O ye hear say Preachers, deceive not the poeple any longer, by telling them
that this glory shall not be known and seen, til the body is laid in the dust. I
tell you, this great mystery is begun to appear, and it must be seen by the
material eyes of the flesh: And those five senses that is in man, shall partake
of this glory.

This is Christ rising up and drawing al things into himself. This is the
Spirits entrance into the Father; which is heavenly glory which rises, and shall
rise higher and higer in Israel, He that has part in the first Resurrection,
the second death, of the bodies laying down in the dust, shall have no power, to
break their peace, or hinder their glory, but shall further the increase of it.

But now that power of unrighteousness, that rules and fights in man kind
against this, shall be destroyed, subdued, and shall never be reconciled to,
nor partake of this glory.

My ^eaning is this, The power of pride, and the power of humility, shall never
dwell quietly in one heart together.

The power of love, tenderness and righteousness, and the power of envy,
hardness of heart, and covetous unrighteousness, shall never dwell quietly in
one heart together.

Uncleanness and chasticy shall not dwell in peace together: The son of the
bondwoman, rebellious flesh, shall not be heir with the son of the freewoman,
flesh made subject to the Law of Righteousness within himself.

There is no quiet peace in a man, til the Kingdom of darkness be conquered,
and the Serpent be cast out and so the heart made a fit temple or house for the
Spirit to dwell bodily in.

A man is not counted a man from the bulk of his body of flesh, Mat. 12. 29.
but the power that dwells in that body of flesh, is the man, either the
righteous man or the wicked: And if the wicked power rule in the body of the
flesh, this is he that must be burned up, subdued, destroyed, and never enter
into rest. This is Christ's enemy.

But if the righteous power do rule, or being weak, Isa. 6. 10.
and so is kept under by the other dark power does hunger and thirst after
righteotsnesse, that he might be King. This power is to be redeemed from
bondage, and set at libety, and sit down in rest and peace. This is Christ
rising out of the dust, and he shall wholly be raised up to live and dwell in
the Father, and the Father in him, and all opposite powers of bondage, that now
afflicts, shall be trod under his feet.

Therefore now yon zealous Preachers and Professors in all forms, if you have
eyes look within your selves, and see what power rules within the bodies of
your flesh; If you find that the inward power is envy, rash anger,
covetousness, self-honouring, secret pride, uncleanness of flesh, close
dissimulation, and the like; 1 Cor. 4* 4.
know you, that that power is your self, your very self, a devil, the serpent,
the subtle, and yet strong power of darkness, that would fain be counted an
Angle of Light.

And though you be called by the name of such a man, or such a woman, yet you
are but the father of lies, and of the power of bondage that must be destroyed
and perish: And that humane flesh, that you dwell in, being part of the
Creation, shall be cleansed off you, by the spirit of burning, till it be freed
from you, that are the curse, the bondage of it under whom it groans. And when
you are cast out, who is the serpent, it shall be a temple for the Father
himself to dwell in, a garden wherein he himself will take delight. For it is
thou, O thou wicked power that is the curse, I say, The thorns and briars that
troubles the Creation, and thou must be rooted out, and sorrow, and everlasting
weeping shall be thy po^tion, for thou shall never find the prince of peace.

Well, I know yon that would be Angels of light and are not, will count this
which I speak madness, but you shall find these words true. For all powers
that are opposite to the power of Righteousness, must, and shall be d^stroyed,
and the Lord alone shall be exalted in this day of his power, Jerem. 23. 6.
and this power of Righteousness shall be exalted in flesh, as well as over
flesh.

Who was it that put the Son of man to death? Was it ^he humane flesh? or the
power of darkness, that ruled in flesh?

Surely that power of darkness in the flesh did it; and that cursed power, was
the Scribes and Pharisees; And so now that power of enmity, that rules in those
bodies of yours, making your bodies of the flesh slaves to its lusts and will,
is still the Scribes and Pharisees, or devil, that fights against Christ, and
would not suffer him to rise up in flesh; but calls his power blasphemy, because
he crosses you; for if he rise flesh, you must fall in flesh; If he be King, as
he must be, you must be his foot stool.

Well, mind what power rules in you, whether it be a particular, confining,
selfish power, which is the Devil, the Scribes and Pharisees.

Or whether it be a universal spreading power, that delights in the liberty of
the whole Creation, which is Christ in you.

The particular selfish power, when it is either crossed or shamed, it grows
mad and bitter spirited, and endeavors either to kill that body it dwells in,
or some others that angers it.

But the Power of Christ, the Law of Righteousness ruling within, is not moved
to any such rashness, it is patient, meek and loving; and does act righteously
both to his own body, and to others, though they be his enemies.

CHAP. IV.
ANd truly here lies the chiefest knowledge of a man, to know these two powers
which strives for government in him, and to see and know them distinctly one
from the other, that he may be able to say, This is the name and power of the
flesh, and this is the name and power of the Lord.

For these two powers are the two Adams in mankind; they are Jacob and Esau,
striving who shall rule in the Kingdom, the flesh first.

Or these are the Son of the bondwoman, viz. The powers of the flesh, which is
the serpent, Devil, or power of darkness.

Or the Son of the free woman, which is Christ, the wisdom and power of
Righteousness, ruling in flesh, and making it free from the others bondage.

And here I shall declare, what I know the first Adam or son of bondage is. And
secondly, What the second Adam, or son of the freewoman is; both which Powers
I have seen and felt manifested in this body of my flesh.

First, I shall show, how the first Adam in his time of rule, has suppressed
and kept under the second man, the anointing.

And then secondly, how this second man in the time appointed of his rising,
does kill and crucify the first Adam daily, with all his lusts, and freeth me
from that slavery.

The first Adam kills and crucifies Christ in me, when I consent and make
provision to satisfy my pride over humility, covetousness over
contentedness, envy over love, lust before chasticy, esteeming the power of an
humble, loving and righteous spirit, toward the poorest creatute, but a low
and contemptible thing, or the like. Now Christ is crucified in me, he rules
not, he acts not in a lively power; but the first man of the flesh he governs
the Kingdom, my body in unrighteousness. And Christ lies buried in this
earthly tabernacle, under those cursed powers in my enslaved body.

But then secondly, When the fullness of time comes, that it is the Fathers
will, that Christ the spirit of truth shall arise above the power of
unrighteousness in me; that is, humility arises above pride, love above envy,
a meek and quiet spirit above hasty rash anger, chastity above unclean lusts,
and light above darkness. Now the second Adam Christ, has taken the Kingdom
my body, and rules in it; He makes it a new heaven, Isa. 65. 17.
and a new earth, wherein dwells Righteousness.

I shall explain these two Adams a little more:

First then, The first Adam, or man of the flesh, branches himself forth into
diverse particulars, to fetch peace into himself, from objects without himself.

As for example, covetousness is a branch of the flesh or first man, that
seeks after creature enjoyment or riches; to have peace from them.

Pride looks abroad for honor; Envy seeks the revenge of such as crosses his
fleshy ends, by reproach, oppression, or murder. Unclean lusts seeks to embrace
strange flesh.

Imagination flies abroad, to devise ways to satisfy the flesh in these
desires: Hypocrisy turns himself into diverse shapes; ye sometimes into an
Angel of light, a zealous Professor to compass these ends.

And self-love (which is ignorant of the universal power) lies couching in the
bottom, sending those six several powers of darkness abroad to fetch in peace
to delight self, that lies at home in the fleshy heart.

And all these powers make up but one perfect body of sin and death, one Devil,
or one complete power of darkness; or that whorish power, called the Beast
with seven heads.

And it is called the Beast, Rev. 13. 1.
because all those seven discoveries are of the flesh; and flesh is no other,
but a beast; and the wise flesh of man, is said to be the beast, the King of
beasts, that was to reign forty two mo^ths, or for a time, times, and dividing
of time, and then he should be destroyed by the man of Righteousness, Christ.

And truly upon every head there is ten horns, Revel. 12. 14.
that is, there are many branchings forth of powers from every head to satisfy
self; which are Kings indeed.

And they are called ten horns every head, encountering against the five senses
of the left hand man, and against the five senses of the right hand man of
righteousness, and so fights against every particular spreading forth of Christ

So that these Kings are not to be restrained to the Kings of the Nations;
Revel. 11. 18.
though that is true, such powers are enemies to Christ, and they must yield up
their Kingdoms unto him, and those that are angry against Christ are to be
destroyed.

But these ten horns are Kingly powers of the flesh, that rules within every
man, leading him captive under the body of the power of darkness; for there is
not the branching forth of evil in any kind to delight self, but it springs
forth from one or other of those seven heads, all joining to honor and advance
the Beast.

The man of Righteousness Christ, he is the second Adam, and he spreads
himself as far as the other, to undermine him, and to take the Kingdom (that
is, the created flesh, or the living earth mankind) out of that Devils hand.

For Christ is the spreading power of Righteousness; 1 Ioh 2. ^7.
and therefore he is called, The anointing, which was poured upon that humane
body, called by the name Jesus, the Son of man, and dwelt bodily there for a
time; but afterward was to spread in sons and daughters, many bodies.

As the oil upon Aarons head, Luke 17. ^1.
ran down to the skirts of his garments; if any one find rest and peace in
this precious Alabaster, which is the wisdom and power of the spirit, he finds
it not by looking upon him at a distance from him, but by seeing and feeling
that power, ruling within the body of his flesh.

As thus contentedness in all straits or poverty, to live upon providence, is
this second Adam in thee, killing thy discontented covetousness.

Humility and meekness is the same anointing which kills pride and loftines.

Love to enemies; yea, the law of love flowing forth to every creature, is
Christ in you, which kills envy and rash anger.

Chastity in the flesh, kills uncleanness; wisdom that is pure and plain down
right, kills a subtle overreaching Imagination.

Sincerity and singleness of heart (the same anointing) kills hypocrisy; and
love to others, doing as a man would be done unto; and so respecting the
public preservation of all creatures, does kill self-love.

And all these seven branchings forth of the pure spirit, makes but one body
Christ, or one Almighty power or Mercy and Justice, the holy breathing, or
Emanuel, God in us.

And every one of these seven eyes, Rev. 5. 6.
or seven attributes of the Divine, branches themselves forth into several
horns of power, to destroy the man of the flesh, and to deliver mankind from
his bondage. For let the first Adam run out in what shape he will; the second
Adam follows after to trip up his heels; to subdue him, and to take the Kingdom
from him; that so, when all enemies are subdued, the Almighty power of
righteousness, which is the Father, may become all in all.

And this now declares the meaning of that speech, That Christ saves his people
from their sins; not only in pardoning evil Actions, and removing the evil of
sorrow from them, but principally to kill and subdue the powers of the flesh,
and to make a man subject to the spirit; and now a man is saved from his sins,
and not till now. And this is to be made a new creature, in whom old corrupt
lusts are passed away, and every power in him is a new power.

Now there is no man or woman needs go to Rome, nor hell below ground, as some
talk, to find the Pope, Devil, Beast or Power of darkness; neither to go up
into heaven above the skies to find Christ the word of life. For both these
powers are to be felt within a man, fighting against each other. And in that
soul wherein Christ prevails, they know that this is truth, for they find peace
hi the salvation that comes out of Sion.

CHAP. V.
THis first man is he, Romans 5. 19.
by whose disobedience many are made sinners, or by whom the whole Creation is
corrupred; Therefore you Preachers, do not you tell the people any more, That a
man called Adam, that disobeyed about 6000 years ago, was the man that filled
every man with sin and filth, by eating an apple.

For assure your selves, this Adam is within every man and woman; and it is the
first power that appears to act and rule in every man. It is the Lord Esau that
stepped before Jacob, and got the birthright, by the Law of equity was more
properly Jacobs.

Though Jacob, who is the power and wisdom that made flesh did draw back, and
gave way* that the wisdom and power of flesh should possess the Kingdom, and
rule first; till Esau, by delighting in unrighteous pleasures, lost both
birthright and blessing; and left both in the hand of Jacob the King, that
rules in righteousness, that is to rise up next.

The Apple that the first man eats, is not a single fruit called an Apple, or
such like fruit; but it is the objects of the Creation; which is the fruit that
came out of the Seed, which is the Spirit himself that made all things: As
riches, honors, pleasures, upon which the powers of the flesh feeds to delight
himself.

And this is the mess of pottage which he prefers before righteousness, or
before righteous walking in the Creation toward every creature, which is
Christ, that power that appears in the fullness of time to take the Kingdom and
rule next.

Therefore when a man falls, let him not blame a man that died 6000 years ago,
but blame himself, even the powers of his own flesh, which lead him astray; for
this is Adam that brings a man to misery, which is the man flesh, or the strong
man within that keeps the house, till the man of Righteousness arise and cast
him out, who is the second Adam.

And this second man is he, Isa. 43. 11.
By whose obedience many are made righteous; that is, by the power of Christ,
mankind is purged from its dross; and this second man, I say, which is the
righteous power, does cast the other man (which is the unrighteous power) out
of the house, even the heart, and makes it a temple for himself to dwell in.

Now these two powers did the Father ordain should have their course to rule in
the earth mankind: And this is that day and night, the light and darkness,
Winter and Summer, heat and cold, Moon and Sun, that is typed out by the
Fabric of the great world; for within these two powers is the mystery of all
divine workings wrapped up.

The first power, Gal. 4. 29.
that is of darkness, or the Chaos of confusion proves selfish and hurtful to
others, tearing its own and the orher man's children, especially to pieces, by
cruelty, covetousness and oppression; For he that is after the flesh,
persecutes him that is born after the spirit.

And in the fullness of time; that is, When the first man has filled the
Creation full of his filthiness, and all places stinks with unrighteousness,
as it does at this day; then it pleases the Father, that his own wisdom and
power should arise up next to rule in mankind in rigteousnesse, Romans 8. 22
and take the Kingdom out of the others hand, and restore all things, and
establish the Creation in peace, and declare himself to be the alone Savior of
the world, and to be the most excellent, nay the almighty power.

The first man Adam, is called, The Son of God, a power that the Almighty was
pleased should be manifest; but this is the son of disobedience, the son that
goes astray, a son causing sorrow and shame, and so becomes the serpent, the
Devil, the power of darkness, the Beast, the Whore, the father of lies, the
murder of mankind, and the bottomless pit, out of which all unrighteousness
and misery rises up. Rev. 19. 2.


But the second Adam is called, His wel-beloved Son; the Son of his delight,
the Son bringing honor and peace; Why? Because by him the opposing power is
cast out, and the wisdom and power of Righteousness, which is the Lord, 1
Cor. 1. 24
is that wisdom and power that rules in and over mankind, and the flesh is
made subject hereunto without grumbling; and so all things becomes the Lords.

And this Son or second Adam is called, The Lord, The King of righteousness,
The Prince of Peace, The Savior, The mighty God, The Restorer of all things,
The Salvation, The Consolation of Israel, The Blessing of all Nations of the
Earth, The Power of Light or Reason.

And thus we see the Father has ordained, Phil. 2. 7. 2 These. 2. 4*
that the powers of dark flesh should rule over him that made him for a time,
and he who is the Father of all things would be a servant, and that dark flesh
should be the mystery of iniquity, or Antichrist, that should oppose and exalt
himself above all that is called God, till by the other greater power, the
Father himself arising up in the Creation, he be taken out of the way.

This teaches every son and daughter, to wait with patience and quietness of
spirit under all temptations, till the Fathers turn come, according to his own
appointment to rule in flesh; And then their sorrows shall be turned into joy,
Ephesians. 1. 5.
and their mourning into laughter: Joh. 16. 20
All tears shall be wiped away, and they shall be delivered from the bondage,
Rev. 21. 23.
and live in freedom and peace.

These two powers, I say, are typed out by Jacob and Esau; Jacob put forth his
arm first, and it is marked by the midwife, and then he draws if in again: then
Esau comes fully forth, and is called the elder brother.

Jacob is Christ, Isa. 44. 1, and Chap. 42. 1.
the elect or chosen one, or the Almighty power and wisdom, that first put
forth his arm of strength in making mankind; but the powers of the flesh,
which, is Esau, or the rejected one, the reprobate, steps before (by
permission) and gets the government of the Kingdom, (mankind) first; and he is
suffered to reign, till Christ supplant him, and takes both birthright and
blessing from him.

Or rather takes possession of his own Right and Kingdom, mankind; for he
appeared first, and so by the law of equity and reason, he is the elder
brother; though Esau or the powers of the flesh got the dominion to rule in the
Creation, by a violence, which the wisdom and power of the spirit, suffered and
ordained to be.

This second man is the spiritual man, Cor. 2. 15.
that judges all things according to the law of equity and reason, in
moderation and love to all, he is not a talker, but an actour of Righteousness.

But the man of the flesh, which would be counted an Angel of light, cannot
judge any thing in righteousness; for all his judgment and justice is
selfish, and confined to particular ends, not to the public safety and
preservation; he is a great Preacher and talker of righteous things, but no
actour of righteousness, or if he do, it is, very slowly, it is when Jacob
over-powers him, his judgment is hasty, unadvised rashness, at random, hap
hazard, right or wrong, he knows not. And sometime he is moderate, for by ends
to himself; and sometimes full of bitter censures to hurt others.

CHAP. VI.
THe man of the flesh, judges it a righteous thing, That some men that are
clothed with the objects of the earth, and so called rich men, whether it be
got by right or wrong, should be Magistrates to rule over the poor; and that
the poor should be servants nay rather slaves to the rich.

But the spiritual man, which is Christ, does judge according to the light of
equity and reason, That al mankind ought to have a quiet substance and
freedom, to live upon earth; and that there shall be no bondman nor beggar in
all his holy mountain.

Mankind was made to live in the freedom of the spirit, Genesis 1. 28.
not under the bondage of the flesh, though the lordly flesh has got a power
for a time, as I said before; for every one was made to be a Lord over the
Creation of the Earth, Cattle, Fish, Fowl, Grass, Trees, not any one to be a
bond-slave and a beggar under the Creation of his own, kind.

That so every one living in freedom and love in the strength of the Law of
Righteousness in him; not under straits of poverty, nor bondage of tyranny one
to another, might al rejoice together in Righteousness, and so glorifiie their
Maker; for suerly this much dishnoured the Maker of all men, that some men
should be oppressing tyrants, imprisoning, whipping, hanging their fellow
creatures, men, for those very things which those very men themselves are
giulty of; let men's eyes be opened, and it appears clear enough, That the
punishers have and do break the law of equity and reason, more, or as much as
those that are punished by them.

None will be offended at this, but the children of Lord Esau, the first man
flesh, which must perish for his unrighteous government, for thereby he has
lost himself, sold or passed over his birthright and blessing unto Jacob, the
King of Righteousness that is now rising up, to urle according to the pure law
of equity and reason.

And when this King raigns, the city that is, the heart of every one in whom
truth dwells, will rejoice; but while the man of unrighteosunesse raigns in and
over mankind, truly every body we see is filled with sorrow and
complainings, and it is not without cause.

As the powers and wisdom of the flesh has filled the earth with injustice,
oppression and complainings, by mowing the earth into the hands of a few
covetous, unrighteous men, who assumes a lordship over others, Dan. 4. 17
declaring themselves thereby to be men of the basest spirits.

Even so, when the spreading power of wisdom and truth, fills the earth
mankind, he will take off that bondage, and gives a universal liberty, and
there shall be no more complainings against oppression, poverty, or injustice.

When every son and daughter shall be made comfortable to that one body, Phil.
3. 2^
of Jesus the anointed, and the same power rules in them, as in him, every one
according to their measure, the oppression, shall cease, and the rising up of
this universal power, shall destroy and subdue the selfish power.

But this is not done by the hands of a few, or by unrighteous men, that would
pull the tyrannical government out of other men's hands, and keep it in their own
heart, as we feel this to be a burden of our age. But it is done by the
universal spreading of the divine power, which is Christ in mankind making
them all to act in one spirit, and in and after one law of reason and equity.

And when this universal power of Righteousness is spread in the earth, Rev.
18. 8
it shall destroy Babylon the great City of fleshy confusion in one hour; that
is he will pull the Kingdom and Government of the world out of the hands of
tyrannical, unseasonable acting flesh, and give the lands and riches that
covetous, unrighteous men has hoarded up within their own selfish power, Ps.
105. 45
into the hands of spiritual Israel; that so there may be no complainings, no
burdens, nor no poor in Canaan, but that it may be a Land flowing with milk
and honey, plenty of all things, every one walking righteously in the Creation
one to another, according to the law of equity and reason, as it was in the
beginning, And as Babylon measured out to others, so that it shall be, measured
to him again.

And suerly as the Scriptures threaten misery to rich men, bidding them Howl
and weep, for their gold and silver is cankered, and the rust thereof cries
unto heaven for vengeance against them, and the like. Suerly all those
threatenings shall be materially fullfiled, for they shall be turned out of all,
and their riches given to a people that will bring forth better f^uit, and such
as they have oppressed shall inherit the Land.

The rich man tells the poor, that they ofend Reasons law, if they take forth
the rich; I am sure it is a breach in that Law in the rich to have plenty by
them, and yet will see their fellow creatures men and women to strave for want;
Reason requires that every man should live upon the increase of the earth
comfortably, though covetousness ^ights against Reasons law.

The rich does lock up the treasures of the earth, and hardens their hearts
against the poor. The poor are those in whom the blessing lies, for they first
receive the Gospel, and their gifts of love and tenderness one to preserve
another, shall be the condemnation of the rich: And secondly, the inheritances
of the rich shall be given to those poor, and there shall be no beggar in
Israel.

And there is equity and Reason in it, for the King of Righteousness, did not
make some men to be tyrants, and others to be slaves, at the beginning, for
this burden rises up afterward, Esau stepped into the birthright before
Jacob, till the time come that he shall be taken away again.

In the first entrance into the Creation, Genesis 1. 28.
every man had an equal freedom given him of his Maker to till the earth, and
to have dominion over the beasts of the field, Romans 8. 22 etc.
the ^owls of heaven, and fish in the Seas. But this freedom is broke to pieces
by the power of covetousness, and pride, and self-love, not by the law of
Righteousness. And this freedom will not be restored, till the spreading power
of Righteousness and peace rise up in the earth, making all men and women to
be of one heart, and one mind, which must come to pass, for that Scripture was
never fulfilled yet.

The powers of flesh shall never partake of this privilege, for he is the
curse that must be removed; Selfish Councillors, Selfish Governors, Selfish
Soldiers, shall never be honored in settling this restoration; The Lord
himself will do this great work, without either sword or weapon; weapons and
swords shall destroy, and cut the powers of the earth asunder, but they shall
never build up.

For the Lawgiver in righteousness shall come out of Sion, that shall turn
covetous oppressing ungodliness from Jacob.

For surely the Father will give as large a liberty to his children to inherit
the earth, as he gives to the beast of the field; though they break over
hedges, and eat in any pasture, they do not imprison and hang one another, the
earth is a common livelihood for them, the restraint arises from selfish
covetousness, and lordly proud flesh, that has got the government, and says,
The spirit has given it him. Indeed thou have it for a time, not by right of
blessing, but by permission, that through thy unrighteousness thou may fall
and never rise again: And that righteous Jacob may arise, who has been thy
servant, and never fall again; and then the elder shall serve the younger.

I do not speak that any particular men shall go and take their neighbors
goods by violence, or robbery (I abhor it) as the condition of the men of the
Nations are ready to do in this fleshly settled government of the world, but
every one is to wait, till the Lord Christ do spread himself in multiplicities
of bodies, making them all of one heart and one mind, acting in the
righteousness one to another. It must be one power in all, making all to give
their consent to confirm this law of righteousness and reason.

For when the work is made manifest, Revel. 11. 15.
it shall be a universal Power that shall rise up in the earth (mankind) to
pull the Kingdom and outward government of the world out of the hands of the
tenant Esau, king-flesh; and this shall be made manifest in all the Nations of
the earth; For the Kingdoms of this world shall become the Kingdoms of the Lord
Christ.

And this universal power of a righteous law, shall be so plainly writ in
every ones heart, that none shall desire to have more then another, Heb. 8. 10.
or to be Lord over other, Act. 4. 32.
or to lay claim to any thing as his; this phrase of Mine and Thine shall be
swallowed up in the law of righteous actions one to another, Jam. 2. 13
for they shall all live as brethren, 1 Ioh. 3. 17
every one doing as they would be done by; and he that sees his brother in
wants, and does not help, shall smart for his iniquity, from the hand of the
Lord, the righteous Judge that will fit upon the throne in every man's heart.
There shall be no need of Lawyers, prisons, or engines of pun^shment one over
another, for all shall walk and act righteously in the Creation, and there
shall be no beggar, Hos. 3. 18.
nor cause of complaining in all this holy Mountain.

Therefere I say to all, Rev 6. 11
wait, be patient in your present bondage, till our brethren be brought in
likewise; Forsake the way of Babylon, and commit your cause to him that judges
righteously; The work of freedom is in the hand of Christ, and he is the
righteous freedom; he has begun to spread himself, and he goes on mightily,
and will go on. The poor receives the Gospel daily; Christ is drawing all men
after him, he is calling in the Isles and Nations of the world, to come to this
great Battle, even to deliver the oppressed, and ^o destroy the oppressor, to
spoil him that spoiled, and yet was never spoiled himself; And so to lead
captivity captive, and let the prisoners of hope go free.

CHAP. VII.
WHen this universal law of equity rises up in every man and woman, then none
shall lay claim to any creature, and say, This is mine, and that is yours, This
is my work, that is yours; but every one shall put to their hands to till the
earth, and bring up cattle, and the blesting of the earth shall be common to
all; when a man has need of any corn or cattle, Act. 4. 32.
take from the next storehouse he meets with.

There shall be no buying nor selling, no fairs nor markets, but the whole
earth shall be a common treasury for every man, for the earth is the Lords. And
mankind thus drawn up to live and act in the Law of love, equity and oneness,
is but the great house wherein the Lord himself dwells, Ephesians. 4. 5, 6
and every particular one a several mansion: and as one spirit of
righteousness is common to all, so the earth and the blessings of the earth
shall be common to all; for now all is but the Lord, and the Lord is all in all.

When a man has meat, and drink, and clothes, he has enough, and all shall
cheerfully put to their hands to make these things that are needful, one
helping another; there shall be none Lords over others, but every one shall be
a Lord of himself, subject to the law of righteousness, reason and equity,
which shall dwell and rule in him, which is the Lord; Zech. 14. 9
For now the Lord is one, and his name and power one, in all and among all.

Their rejoycings and glory shall be continually in eying and speaking of what
breakings forth of love they receive from the Father, singing Sions songs one
to another; to the glory of him that sits upon the throne, for evermore.

This universal freedom has never filled the earth, though it has been
foretold by most of the Prophets. This is the glory of Jerusalem, which never
yet has been the praise of the whole earth. And this will be no troublesome
business, Rev. 12. 9
when covetousness, and the selfish power is killed and cast out of heaven,
and every one is made willing to honor the King of Righteousness in action,
being all of one heart and one mind: Truly we may well call this a new heaven,
and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. And that prophecy will not
generally be fulfilled till this time.

If it be thus, then says the scoffer, men's wives shall be common too? or a
man may have as many wives as he please?

I answer, The Law of Righteousness and Reason says no: For when man was
made, he was made male and female, one man and one woman conjoined together by
the law of love, makes the Creation of humane flesh perfect in that particular;
Therefore a man shall forsake father and mother, and cleave only to his wife,
for they twain are but one flesh. Reason did not make one man and many women,
or one woman and many men to join together, to make the Creation perfect, but
male and female in the singular number, this is enough to increase seed. And he
or she that requires more wives, or more husbands then one, walks contrary to
the Law of Righteousness, and shall bear their shame: Though this immoderate
lust after strange flesh, rule in the bodies of men now, while the first Adam
is King, yet it shall not be so when the second man rises to reign, for then
chastity is one glory of the Kingdom.

But what if a man break that law of Righteousness, as many do under this
fleshly government which is yet extant?

I answer, He shall then become servant to others, and be as a fool in Israel;
the wrath of the Lord shall be upon him, and lose the privilege of Sonship,
till the law of righteousness in him become his King. And those that loses
that privilege, shall know they have lost a blessing. The proud, covetous and
unrighteous men, ere many years wheel about, will tell the world by their
lamentation and torment, what it is to lose the blessing of sonship.

The manifestation of a righteous heart shall be known, not by his words, but
by his actions; for this multitude of talk, and heaping up of words amongst
professors shall die and cease, Ier. 31. 34.
this way of preaching shall cease, and verbal worship shall cease, and they
that do worship the Father, shall worship him by walking righteously in the
Creation, in the strenghth of the Law of Love and equity one to another. Joh.
4. 23.
And the time is now coming on, that men shall not talk of righteousness, but
act righteousness.

And they that in these times, will not observe this Rule, to walk righteously
in the Creation, waiting quietly till Christ come to restore all things, he
shall have sorrows, troubles and discontents of heart within, vexing, grudging,
rash passions, he shall have no true peace, but be filled with confusion, and
be a slave to his lusts.

The Father now is rising up a people to himself out of the dust, Matthew. 11. 25.
that is, out of the lowest and despised sort of people, 1 Cor. 1. 27.
that are counted the dust of the earth, mankind, that are trod under foot. In
these, and from these shall the Law of Righteousness break ^orth first, for
the poor they begin to receive the Gospel, and plentiful discoveries of the
Fathers love flows from them, and the waters of the learned and great men of
the world, begins to dry up like the brooks in Summer.

When this restoration breaks forth in righteous action, the curse then shall
be removed from the Creation, Fire, Water, Earth and Air. And Christ the
spreading forth of Righteousness, shall be the only Savior, that shall make
Jacob to rejoice, and Israel to be glad.

There shall be no barrenness in the earth or cattle, Zach. 3. 4, etc.
for they shall bring forth fruit abundantly. Unseasonable storms of weather
shall cease, for all the curse shall be removed from all, and every creature
shall rejoice in Righteousness one in another throughout the whole Creation.

Thomas Dydimus, that is, the unbelief of your hearts cries out, When will
these things be? not in our time? I cannot believe such things till I see them?

Well, lay aside your doubtful questioning, and let every one set himself to
walk righteously in the Law of love one toward another, and wait the Lords
time; this work is to be done upon flesh, not by flesh. The Lord will have none
of your flesh wit, policy or strength to setle this work, for he alone will be
honored in this day of his power, it must be his own handy work, that must
bring this restoration to pass, yea, and he will hasten this work, as
speedily, as the Midianites Army was destroyed, and Sodom and Gomorrah burned,
and as speedily, and as unlooked for, Isa. 60. 22.
as plenty came into Sama^ia; men's unbelief cannot hinder this work of
Righteousness.

The Lord will do this work speedily, Babylon shall fall in one hour, Israel
shall rise in one hour; O when thi^ righteous Law shall rule in every one,
there will be springings up of joy and peace, Joh 7. 38.
and the blessing of the Lord shall rest every where.

The whole earth we see is corrupt, and it cannot be purged by the hand of
creatures, for all creatures lies under the curse, and groans to be delivered,
and the more they strive, the more they entangle themselves in the mud;
therefore it must be the hand of the Lord alone that must do it.

None can remove the curse from fire, water, earth and air, but the Almighty
power himself. And this work is called, the Restoration of all things; for all
things groan and travel in pain under bondage, waiting for this manifestation.

And seeing every creature that is burdened waits for the coming in of the
blessing, Genesis 18. 18.
then surely no flesh can settle this work, for all flesh is corrupt; this work
shall not be done by sword, or weapon, or wit of the flesh, but by the power of
the Lord, killing covetousness, and making mankind generally to be of one
heart and one mind.

But why has not the Lord done this all this time that is past?

I answer, Covetous, wise arid lordly flesh would reign in the Kingdom,
mankind first, and would be counted the only power to govern the Creation, in
an excellent order. And the Lord gave this dominion into his hand, bur withal
told him, that if he governed the Creation unrighteously, he and all the
Creation should die and fall under the curse.

Well, the powers of the flesh, Lord Esau was advanced, and has ruled with
such self-seeking ends, Romans 8. 21 etc.
that he has made all creatures weary of his government, and the whole earth
to stink and to groan under the burden of it, longing to be delivered.

For first, they that stand up to teach others, they teach for gain, and preach
for hire, and fills people with division and confusion, through their pride and
envy, and they do this by the Authority of the governing power, by which they
have engrossed the earth into their hands. A man must not take a wife, but the
Priest must give her him. If he have a child, the Priest must give the name. If
any die, the Priest must see it laid in the earth. If any man want knowledge or
comfort, they teach him to go to the Priest for it; and what is the end of all
this, but to get money: if a man labor in the earth to eat his bread, the
Priests must have the tenths of his increase, or else some oppressing
impropriatour, that shares the tithes between himself and the Priest; which Law
was brought in by the Pope, and still upheld by such as call themselves, the
Christian Protestants.

All which is high treason and mighty dishonorable to Christ the great
Prophet, whom they seem to show love to; here the earth stinks, because this
has been established by a compulsive binding power, whereby the Creation is
held under bondage: this is the fruit of imagination.

Secondly, For matter of buying and selling, the earth stinks with such
unrighteousness, that for my part, though I was bred a tradesmen, yet it is so
hard a thing to pick out a poor living, that a man shall sooner be cheated of
his bread, then get bread by trading among men, if by plain dealing he put
trust in any.

And truly the whole earth of trading, is generally become the neat art of
thieving and oppressing fellow creatures, and so lays burdens, upon the
Creation, but when the earth becomes a common treasury this burden will be
taken off.

Thirdly, For Justices and Officers of State, that should relieve people in
their wrongs, and preserve peace, they multiply wrongs, and many, if not most
times oppresses the poor, and lets the effending rich go free, by laying aside
the letter of their laws, as the Priests does the Scriptures; and acts by
subtle covetousness and smooth words to get money, or else ruling by their own
wills, through envy to imprison and oppress others, letting poor people lie in
prison half a year many times, and never bring them to trial at all.

And thus the people have been and are oppressed by false imprisonments and
punishments; not for the breach of any known law, but to satisfy the will of
the Justice, Bailiffs or Officer, against all reason and equity, as if the
people made Officers to be their Aegyrtian taskmasters: Nay, let all men speak
openly as they find, and I am sure they will say that the Justices and most
state Officers, does more oppress, then deliver from oppression.

And thus I see that the whole earth stinks, by the first Adams corrupt
Government; therefore it is the fullness of time, for Jacob to arise, extreme
necessity calls for the great work of restoration, and when the restorer of the
earth has a little more manifested himself, he wi^ make the earth a common
treasury, and sweep away all the refuge of lies, and All oppressions, by making
all people to be of one heart and one mind, and then the Law of Righteousness
and peace, shall be the King that shall rule in every man, and over every man,
who indeed is the Lord himself, who is and will be all, and in all.

And now seeing there is nothing found but complainings and tears under his
oppressions, it is the fullness or fittest time now for Jacob to arise, and
restore all things, who indeed is Christ: And for David to reign, who indeed
is Christ the great devider between flesh and spirit, and the great lawgiver
of peace and truth, For besides him there is no Savior; He indeed is the
blessing of all Nations, and the joy of the whole earth.

Therefore tremble thou Lord Esau, thou proud and covetous flesh, thou art
condemned to die, the sentence is begun to be put in execution, for the poor
begins to receive the Gospel; thou shall wast, decay and grow weaker and
weaker, til thy place be no where found in earth, and Christ the blessing of
the Creation, shall rise up and spread, and fill the earth, and all creatures
shall rejoice under his shadow.

Therefore you Tribes of Israel, that are now in sackcloth, every man with his
hands upon his loins, like a woman in travel, stand still and see the salvation
of David your King; this is called the time of Jacobs trouble; Ier. 30. 6
for indeed the Spirit that is in you, is oppressed under the burden of cursed
flesh, But he shall be delivered, the time of his resurrection is come, and his
rising shall be your glory, his light shall desperse your darkness, and cover
the earth with the knowledge of himself, for the blessing shall be every where.

Jacobs troubles formerly was twofold,

First, His kindred and friends endeavored to hinder him of his temporal
livelihood, and to make the earth to become a burden to him, by changing his
cattle, and taking those earthly blessings from him, which the Lord had given
him.

Secondly, when Jacob had a liberty to take wives, children, and cattle, and
to go live free of himself; his kindred runs after him, and tells him, he had
stolen away their gods; and for that, begins a fresh to trouble him.

And the same troubles are the portion of those in whom Jacobs spirit rests.
For,

First, Their kindred and neighbors endeavors to make them poor in the world,
and to oppress them with the burden of poverty and straits.

Secondly, Now the Father is drawing Jacob out of Babylon, and makes his
children to forsake the forms and customs of the National worship, to worship
the Father in Spirit and Truth. Now kindred and neighbors in the flesh cries
our, O these men steals away our gods, and by reproaches, imprisonments or
wrong dealing, seeks to oppress and suppress them. Well this is but still the
time of Jacobs troubles, but he shall be delivered out.

Well let the lordly flesh scoff and laugh and cry, O when shall this be! and
say with the Lord of Samaria, it is impossible, for it is madness thus to
speak; well, such may live to see it, but shall not enjoyne the blessing; for
when Jacob arises, that is now very low, and be must rise, then Esau shall be
his servant, The elder shall serve the younger, and thy portion shall be wraped
up in Jacobs lap, for all is his.

For now he Father is raissing up a people to himself out of the dust, and of
the stones, that is, poor despised people, that are trod upon like dust and
stones, shall be now raised up, and be made the blessing of the earth, and the
high mountains shall be laid low, the lofty looks of men shall be pulled down,
and the Lord alone shall be exalted in this day of his power.

CHAP. VIII.
AS I was in a trance not long since, diverse matters were present to my sight,
which here must not be related. Likewise I heard these words, Work together.
Eat bread together; declare this all abroad. Likewise I heard these words.
Whosoever it is that labors in the earth, for any person or persons, that
lifts up themselves as Lords and Rulers over others, and that does not look
upon themselves equal to others in the Creation, The hand of the Lord shall be
upon that labouror: I the Lord have spoke it and I will do it; Declare this all
abroad.

After I was raised up, I was made to remember very fresh what I had seen and
heard, and did declare al things to them that were with me, and I was filled
with abundance of quiet peace and secret joy. And since that time those words
have been like very fruitful seed, that have brough forth increase in my
heart, which I am much pressed in spirit in declare all abroad.

The poor people by their labors in this time of the first Adams government,
have made the buyers and sellers of land, or rich men, to become tytants and
oppressors over them.

But in the time of Isreal's restoration, now beginning, Ier. 23. 5. 6
when the King of Righteousness himself shall be Governor in every man; none
then shall work for hire, neither shall any give hire, but every one (...) work
in love: one with, and for another; and eat bread together, as being members of
one household; the Creation in whom Reason rules King in perfect glory.

He that calls any part of the Creation his own in particular, Act. 4. 32
in this time of Isreal's return from the mystery of Egyptian bondage, is a
destroyer of the Creation, a lifter up of the proud covetous flesh again, a
bringer in of the curse again, and a mortal enemy, to the Spirit.

For upon Isreal's return from captivity, Ier. 35. 38
the Lord himself will burn up the curse, Isa. 29. 20. 21.
and restore the Creation, Romans 8. 21.
fire, water, earth and air from that slavery, and make the earth to be a
common treasury to them all; Job. 6. 45.
for they are but one house of Israel still, though twelve Tribes; And they
have but one King, one Lawgiver one teacher amongst them all, even the Lord
himself, who is Reason. The King of Righteousness, they are all filled with
one spirit, and they shall all live comfortably upon one earth; and so the
whole earth is the Lords.

And this is the inward and outward liberty, Zech. 8. 3
which the Lord will give to Sion. And this work is begun, the foundation of
this spiritual building is laid, and the spreading of this one spirit in every
son and daughter, and the lifting up the earth to be a common treasury, will
make Jerusalem a praise in the whole earth, Isa. 62. 17
and the glory of the earth indeed, and so the Father of all things shall be
honored in the works of his own hands.

No man shall have any more land, then he can labor himself, or have others to
labor with him in love, working together, and eating bread together, as one of
the Tribes of families of Israel, neither giving hire, not taking hire.

He that is now a possessour of lands and riches, and cannot labor, if he say
to others, you are may fellow creatures, and the Lord is now making the earth
common amongst us; therefore take my land only let me eat bread with you, that
man shall be, preserved by the lobours of others.

But it any man have Land, and neither can work nor will work, 2 Tes. 3. 10.
Genesis 3. 19.
but will strive to rule as a tyrant, burdening the Creation, the hand of the
Lord shall fall upon him, either to destruction or torment; and if his life be
given for a prey, he shall be made to work and eat his bread with the sweat of
his own brows, not of others, til he know himself to be a member, not a lord
over the Creation; and thus he shall be dealt with, that has lost the benefit
of Sonship.

All the punishment that any one shall receive for any unrighteous act, whereby
he begins to bring the cause again upon the Creation, he sahll only be made a
Gibeonite to work in the earth, not in a prison, and the eyes of all shall be
upon him; and the greatset offense will be this; for any to endeavor to raise
up some few to rule over others, and so to set up particular interest again,
and to bring in buying and selling of land again, the sore displeasure of the
Lord shall be such a peoples portion.

Israel is not to imprison or torment and by death or smaller punishments, but
only to cause them to work and eat their own bread* for he or they that
inflicts any other punishment, upon fellow creatures, is an unrighteous actour
in the Creation, and shall himself be made a servant to all, till he by the
spirit in him, is made to know himself to be equal to every man, not a Lord
over any, for all men looked upon in the bulk are but the Creation, the living
earth.

This imprisoning, Mat. 7. 12.
punishing and killing, which is the practice of the first Adam, ye visible to
the world, is the curse. And it is a mighty dishonor to our maker, that one
part of the Creation should destroy another, it was not so from the beginning,
but it is an honor to our maker that every part of the Creation should lend a
mutual help of love in action to preserve the whole.

But is not this the old rule, He that sheds man^ blood by man shall his blood
be shed?

I answer, Rev. 11. 8
It is true, but not as usually it is observed; for first know, Dan 7. 25 2
Cor. 4. 4
That the Spirit is the man who has determined to suffer himself to be killed,
and lie dead in the streets or under the several forms of Babylon government,
three days or times and a half. The serpent is he, or the wicked man that kills
the man of Righteousness, or sheds his blood, for that space of time, which is
indeed the wisdom and power of the flesh, killing the wisdom and power of the
Spirit, and ruling in the Spirits, own house, the heart, for a time.

Therefore now it is declared, that the Serpent or beastly power of flesh, Genesis
3. 15
that kills the Spirit, shall himself be killed by the Spirit, when the Spirit
begins to rise; and I can tell you that the resurrection is begun, for all the
great fightings is between flesh and Spirit; The seed of the woman shall bruise
the Serpents head.

It is not for one creature called man to kill another, for this is abominable
to the Spirit, Exe 20. 13
and it is the curse which has made the Creation to groan under bondage; for
if I kill you I am a murderrer, if a third come, and hang or kill me for
murdering you, he is a murderer of me; and so by the government of the first
Adam, murder has been called Justice when it is but the curse.

Besides none can call himself a man, Luke 6. 56
till the man Christ or Spirit rule in him, Rev. 12. 4.
for til then; the greatest Lord of all, is but a Beast and one Beast kills
another; for a man will never kill a man; therefore said the man Christ Jesus I
came not to destroy but to save; therefore such as kill are far from being
Saints or children of Christ, for they are the children of the Serpent, whose
delight and work is to kill the man-child; but he that sheds this man's bloods,
by the same man shall his blood be shed, in the resurrection: Therefore O thou
proud flesh, that dares hang and kill thy fellow creatures, that is equal to
thee in the Creation, Know this, that none has the power of life and death,
but the Spirit, and al punishmens that are to be inflicted amongst creatures
called men, are only such as to make the offender to know his maker, and to
live in the community of the righteous Law of love one with another.

For talking of love is no love, Mat. 7. 12
it is acting of love in righteousness, which the Spirit Reason, our Father
delights in. And this is to relieve the oppressed, to let go the prisoner, to
open bags and barns that the earth may be a common treasury to preserve all
without complainings; for uhe earth was not made for a few to live at ease
upon, and to kill such as did not observe the Law of their own making, but it
was made for all to live comfortably upon, and the power of life and death is
reserved in the hand of the Spirit, not in the hand of flesh: None ought to
kill, but such as can make alive; therefore let every one walk righteously in
the Creation, and trust the Spirit for protection.

He that makes a zealous profession of the Spirit, as all professors do, and
yet does not act this universal power of Righteousness, in laboring the
earth for a common treasury, is a mere self-lover, and he professes but
himself, and is a complementing enemy to Reason the King of Righteousness: and
if still thou say, it is the Spirit, whom thou do worship, then make it
manifest to the world, what spirit this is that rules every where besides Reason.

And futher he that denies this community, Act. 4. 32
denies the Scriptures Likewise, whether the Preachers, prosessours, or rich
men, that upholds this unrighteous power of particular propriety.

Therefore you dust of the earth, that are trod under foot, you poor people,
that makes both scholars and rich men, your oppressors by your labors. Take
notice of your privilege, the Law of Righteousness is now declared.

If you labor the earth, and work for others that lives at ease, and follows
the ways of the flesh by your labors, eating the bread which you get by the
sweat of your brows, not their own: Know this, that the hand of the Lord shall
break out upon every such hireling labourer, and you shall perish with the
covetous rich men, that have held, and yet does hold the Creation under the
bondage of the curse.

This voice of the Lord, work together and eat bread together, does advance the
law of Reason and Righteousness; the rising of this is the fall of mistical
Babylon, the oppressing flesh: the living in the practice of this La^v of love,
declares the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles, to be a true declaration
of the Spirit, and no lie. He that denies the practice of this, lives in a
continual denial of those Scriptures.

Therefore your selfish tyth-taking Preachers, and all others that preaches for
hire, with all covetous professors, take notice that you are the Judahs that
betrayed Christ, and the Pharisees that put him to death, and you still pursue
the murder, by standing up to hinder Christ from rising and coming in sons and
daughters, his second time in flesh.

I have now obeyed the command of the Spirit that bid me declare this all
abroad, I have declared it, and I will declare it by word of mouth, I have now
declared it by my pen. And when the Lord does show unto me the place and
manner, how he will have us that are called common people, to manure and work
upon the common Lands, I will then go forth and declare it in my action, to eat
my bread with the sweat of my brows, without either giving or taking hire,
looking upon the Land as freely mine as another; I have now peace in the
Spirit, and I have an inward persuasion that the spirit of the poor, shall be
drawn forth ere long, to act materially this Law of Righteousness.

If mankind knew their liberty, which their Creator Reason, has given us;
none would be offended at this new Law, that is to be writ in every man's heart,
and acted by every man's hand.

They that submit in love, and offers what they have freely to further this
work, shall prosper and find peace, for they honor our Maker, by lifting up
the Creation in Righteousness. They that will not submit freely, the hand of
the Lord shall be as sure upon them as it was upon Pharaoh, who is their type.

O you great Adams of the earth, that calls the earth yours, and looks upon
others as servants and slaves to you, as if the earth were made only for you to
live at ease and honor upon it, while others starved for want of bread at your
feet, and under your oppressing government. Behold the King the Lord of Hosts
has sent his servants, to bid you let Israel go free, that they may serve him
together, in community off spirit, and in community of the earthly treasure.

Be not you more proud and hard hearted, then Pharaoh your type, if you be, as
it is like you will, for the antitype often times is more powerful then the
type; then assure your selves, plagues shall, multyply, and Israel shall be
pulled from under your burdens with a strong hand, Heb. 2. 7, 8, etc.
and stretched out arm, and you, and all your company shall perish together. The
Lord has spoke it, and he will do it.

All the men and women in England, are al children of this Land, and the earth
is the Lords, not particular men's that claims a proper interest in it above
others, which is the devils power.

But be it so, that some will say, This is my Land, and call such and such a
parcel of Land his own interest; Then says the Lord, let such an one labor
that parcel of Land by his own hands, none helping him: for whosoever shall help
that man to labor his proper earth, as he calls it for wages, the hand of the
Lord shall be upon such laborers; for they lift up flesh above the spirit, by
their labors, and so hold the Creation still under bondage.

Therefore if the rich will still hold fast this propriety of Mine and thine. let
them labor their own Land with their own hands. And let the Common People,
that are the gatherings together of Israel from under that bondage, and that
say the earth is ours, not mine, let them labor together, and eat bread
together upon the Commons, Mountains, and Hills.

For as the enclosures are called such a man's Land, and such a man's Land; so
the Commons and Heath, are called the common-peoples, Isa. 62. 8, 9
and let the world see who labors the earth in righteousness, and those to
whom the Lord gives the blessing, let them be the people that shall inherit the
earth. Whether they that hold a civil propriety, saying, This is mine. which is
selfish, devilish and destructive to the Creation, or those that hold a common
right, saying, The earth is ours, which lifts up the Creation from bondage.

Was the earth made for to preserve a few covetous, proud men, to live at ease,
and for them to bag and barn up the treasures of the earth from others, that
they might beg or starve in a fruitful Land, or was it made to preserve all her
children, Let Reason, and the Prophets and Apostles writings be Judge, the
earth is the Lords, it is not to be confined to particular interest.

None can say, Their right is taken from them; for let the rich work alone by
themselves, and let the poor work together by themselves; the rich in their
enclosures, saying, This is mnie; The poor upon their Commons, saying This is
ours, the earth and fruits are common.

And who can be offended at the poor for doing this? None but covetous, proud,
lazy, pampered flesh, that would have the poor still to work for that devil
(particular interest) to maintain his greatness that he may live at ease.

What do we get by our labor in the earth, Isa. 62. 8.
but that we may eat bread and live together in love and community of
righteousness, This shall be the blessing of Israel.

But as Esau has settled his Kingdom, they that work, live in straits; They
that live idle surfeit with fullness. and makes all places stink with
unrighteous envious oppression.

Well, when the Lord calls forth Israel to live in tents, which I believe will be
within a short time, he will protect them; This Trumpet is still sounding in me,
Ier. 25. 47 38
Work together, Eat bread together, declare this all abroad.

Suerly the Lord has not revealed this in vain; for I shall see the fruit of
righteousness follow after it, which will be the beginning of the great day of
veangence to the Oppessour, that has held the earth under the bondage of civil
propriety: ruling a Tyrant over others: forcing the poor to work for hire: But
in the day of restoration of Israel is not to eat the bread of a hireling in no
kind; he is neither to give hire, nor take hire.

Did the light of Reason make the earth for some men to ingrosse up into bags
and barns, that others might be oppressed with poverty? Did the light of Reason
make this law, that if one man have not such abundance of the earth as to give
to others he borrowed of; that he that did lend should imprison the other, and
starve his body in a close room? Did the light of Reason make this law, that
some part of mankind should kill and hang another part of mankind, that
could not walk in their steps?

Surely Reason was not the God chat made that law; for this is to make one part
of the Creation always to be quarrelling against another part; which is mighty
dishonor to our Maker.

But covetousness, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
that murdering God of the world, was that Lawmakers, And that is the God, or
ruling power, which all men that claim a particular interest in the earth, do
worship.

For the Earth is the Lords; that is, the spreading power of righteousness, not
the Inheritance of covetous, proud flesh that dies. If any man can say that he
makes Corn or Cattle, he may say, That is mine: But if the Lord make these for
the use of his Creation, suerly then the earth was made by the Lord, to be a
common Treasury for all, not a particular Treasury for some.

If any man can say, he can give life, then he has power to take away life:
But if the power of life and death be only in the hand of the Lord; then surely
he is a murderer of the Creation, Ex. 20. 13
that takes away the life of his fellow Creature man, by any law whatsoever:
For all laws that are made by any man to take away the life of man, is the
upholder of the curse.

But what if some steal or whore, or become idle, and will not work, but live
upon others labors, as rich men do, that call the land theirs?

I answer; If any manifest such a Achanish or Serpents power, as to endeavor
to bring in the curse again upon the Creation, he shall not be imprisoned,
hanged or killed; for that is the work of the Midianites to kill one another;
to preserve themselves, and self-interest, But the punishment of such shall be
this, he shall be set to work, and have land oppointed him to work upon, and
none shall help him: he shall have a mark set upon him all this time, that every
ones eye may be upon him, as upon a fool in Israel: he shall be a servant to
every one; til such time as the spirit in him, make him know himself to be
equal to others in the Creation.

If any do steal, what will they do with it? None shall buy or sell, and all the
while that every one shall have meat, and drink, and clothes, what need have
they to steal? Their stealing shall get them nothing, but to lose the benefit of
Sonship; And that is to be set alone, to eat his own bread, none having
communion with him.

For every one shall know the Law, and every one, shall obey the Law; for it shall
be writ in every ones heart; and every one that is subject to Reasons law, shall
enjoy the benefit of Sonship. Act. 4. 32
And that is in respect of outward community, to work together, and eat bread
together; and by so doing, lift up the creation from the bondage of self
interest, or particular propriety of mine and thine; which is the Devil and
Satan, even the God of this world, that has blinded the eyes of covetous,
proud flesh, and has bound them up in chains of darkness.

The universal spirit of righteousness has been slain by covetous, proud
flesh; this 1649 years ago: But now that spirit begins to arise again from the
dead, and the same Beast seeks to hinder his rising; or else watches to kill the
Manchild after he is brought forth. Covetous proud flesh will kill a Tyrant, but
hold fast the same Tyranny and slaverie over others in his own hand; Rev. 12.
4 2 King. 20 16
he will kill the Traitor, but liks well the Treason, when he may be honored or
lifted up by it.

Look upon the mountains and little hills of the earth, and see if these
prickling thorns and briars, the bitter curse does, not grow there: Truly
Tyranny is Tyranny in one as well as in another; in a poor man lifted up by
his valor, as in a rich man lifted up by his lands: And where Tyranny sits,
he is an enemy to Christ, the spreading spirit of righteousness: He will use
the bare name, Christ, that he may the more secretly persecute, and kill his
power.

Tyranny is a subtle, proud and envious Beast; his nature is selfish, and full
of murder; he promises fair things for the public; but all must be made to
center within self, or self interest not the universal liberty.

Well, to be short, Let every one know, if they wait upon their Maker they will
know, That the universal power of righteous Community, as I have declared, is
Canaan, the land of rest and liberty, which flows with milk and honey, Zach.
8. 3. to 12.
with abundance of joy and peace in our Maker, and one in another.

But the condition of the world, that upholds civil interests of mine and
thine: Is Egypt the house of bondage; and truly Pharoahs taskmasters are very
many, both Teachers and Rulers.

Therefore thus said the voice of the spirit in me, guiding my eye to the
powers of the earth three times, Let Israel go free: Let Israel go free: Let
Israel go free: Work all together, Eat bread altogether: Whosoever labors the
earth for any one, that will be a burdning Ruler over others, and does not look
upon himself as equal to others in the Creation, the hand of the Lord shall be
upon that labourer: I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it: Declare this
all abroad, Israel shall neither give hire, nor take hire.

Surely this is both full of reason and equity; for the earth was not made for
some, but for all to live comfortably upon the fruits of it: And there cannot be
a universal liberty, til this universal community be established.

All tears, occasioned through bondage, cannot be wiped away, til the earth
become in use to all a common Treasury: And then Jerusalem will become a praise
to the whole earth, and not til then.

At this time the barren land shall be made fruitful; Zach. 8. 11, 13.
for the Lord will take off the curse: And if any grumble and say, The Heaths
and Commons are barren, and the like, and so draw against the work: All that I
say, let them go their way; their portion is not here; they live in the low
flesh, not in the height of the spirit: And they know not the mystery of the
Lord, who is now restoring Israel from bondage, and fetching them out of all
lands where they were scattered, into one place, where they shall live and feed
together in peace.

And then there shall be no more pricking briar in all the holy Mountain, Hos.
2. 15.
This shall be the glory of all, Isa. 60 21
they shall lie down in rest: This is the Branch; This is Israel; This is Christ
spread in sons and daughters; This is Jerusalem the glory of the whole earth:
Where then will be the railing, persecuting Priest, or the Tyrant Professor,
that sucks after the blo^d and misery of those, that will not join (...) his
forms?

But indeed as yet, as the state of the world is while the first Adam yet sits
in the Chair, and corrupts the Creation by his unrighteous wisdom and power; I
say at this time, the feirce wrath of the King of Righteousness is threatened
over this Land called England, and indeed over all the whole earth, where
particular interest bears rule, and enslaves the Creation.

And if covetous, proud flesh still uphold this self-propriety, which is the
curse and burden which the Creation groans under: Then O thou covetous earth,
expect the multyplying of plagues, and the fulfilling of all threatening
prophesies and visions for thy downfall in misery.

But if thou would find mercy, then open thy barns and treasuries of the
earth, which thou have heaped together, and detains from the poor, thy fellow
creatures: This is the only remedy to escape wrath: and the door of acceptance
to mercy is yet open, if thou do this: The Judge of Truth and Right waits yet
upon thy coming into him.

Therefore, O thou first Adam, take notice, that the Lord has set before thee
life and death, now choose whether thou will, for the time is near at hand that
buying and selling of land shall cease, and every son of the land shall live of
it.

Divide England into three parts, scarce one part is manured: So that here is
land enough to maintain all her children, and many die for want, or live under
a heavy burden of poverty all their days: And this misery the poor people
have brought upon themselves, by lifting up particular interest, by their
labors.

There are yet three doors of hope for England to escape destroying plagues:

First, let every one leave off running after others for knowledge and comfort,
and wait upon the spirit Reason, til he break forth out of the Clouds of your
heart, Luke 24. 49.
and manifest himself within you. This is to cast off the shadow of Learning,
and to reject covetous, subtle proud flesh that deceives all the world by
their hearsay, and traditional preaching of words, Mat. 15. 14.
letters and sillables, without the spirit: And to make choice of the Lord, the
true Teacher of every one in their own inward expe, rience, The mystery of the
spirit, and the mystrie of Babylon.

Secondly, Let every one open his bags and barns, that al may feed upon the
crops of the earth, that the burden of poverty may be removed: Leave of this
buying and selling of Land, Act. 4. 32.
or of the fruits of the earth; and as it was in the light of Reason first
made, so let it be in action, amongst all a common Treasury; none enclosing or
hedging in any part of earth, saying, this is mine; which is rebellion and high
treason against the King of Righteousness: And let this word of the Lord be
acted amongst all; work together, eat bread together.

Thirdly. Leave off dominion and Lordship one over another, for the whole bulk
of mankind are but one living earth. Leave off imprisoning, whiping and
killing; which are but the actings of the curse: And let those that hitherto
have had no Land and have been forced to rob and steal through poverty;
hearafter let them quietly enjoy Land to work upon, that every one may enjoy
the benefit of his Creation, and eat his own bread with the sweat of his own
brows: For surely this particular propriety of mine and thine, has brought in
all misery upon people. For first, it has occasioned people to steal one from
another. Secondly, it has made Laws to hang those that did steal: It tempts
people to do an evil action, and then kills them or doing of it: Let all judge
if this be not a great devil.

Well: If every one would speedily set about the doing of these three
particulars I have mentioned, the Creation would thereby be lift up out of
bondage, and our Maker would have the glory of the works of his own hands.

They that offer themselves, and what treasure they have, 1. P. 5. 3. Judge. 5.
2. 9.
freely, to further this work, shall find mercy, and the blessing of all Nations
shall be his Comfortor: They that hinder this common interest of earthly
community, and will keep up the tyrannical government of old Adam still, the hand
of the Lord shall be upon that person, whosoever he be.

Thus says the Lord to all the great ones, that are clothed with objects, and
are lifted up flesh with honors in the government of the world: Let Israel go
quietly out of your bondage that they may serve me; If you will not let him go,
I will not come with 10 plagues, as upon Egyptian Pharaoh of old, but I will
multiply my plagues upon thee, thou stout-hearted Pharaoh, that makes show of
love to me, and yet all is but like Jehu, to lift up thy self over the remnant
in the Land.

Adam is the commer in of bondage, and is the curse that has taken hold of the
Creation: And he may well be called A-dam, for indeed he does dam and stop up
the streams of the waters of life and liberty.

When slaverie began to creep in upon the Creation, the Spirit might well cry
out in Lamentation, Ah-dam, A-dam, which draws together; a head of corrupted
waters, of covetous, proud and imaginary flesh, to stop the streams of the
waters of life and liberty.

But says the Spirit our Maker, The seed from whence the Creation sprang,
shall bruise that Serpents head, and open the dam again, and cause the waters
of the Spirit which is Life and Liberty to run free again without any
stoppage.

This A-dam stops up the waters or Life and Liberty in a twofold way.

Fir^^, he ties up the Creation, man, in chains of darkness within it self:
For there is not a man and womon ^ound, since Adam's rise (but the man Christ
Jesus, in whom the seed ruled in power) but they were bound up in bondage to
coveteousnesse, pride, imagination, and to all the powers of the flesh: So that
the free running streams of the Spirit of life were stopped, that they could
not run; which has made every one cry, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of sin or death? Here you see that knowledge,
liberty and comfort has been stopped or dammed up within the C^eation, man.

Secondly, this A-dam, being the power of covetous, proud flesh, he sets up one
part of the Creation, man, to rule over another, and makes Laws to kill and hang
thal part of the Creation, that will not submit to the ruling part And so he is
become a God, ruling in the spirits own house, not preserving the Creation, but
does set the Creation together by the ears, to k^l it self, to the mighty
dishonor of our Maker: Therefore when the people would have Saul to rule them;
the Spirit declared, that that outward ruling power was the curse; and he set
him up in his wrath to be a scourge, not a blessing.

Now whereas the Creation, man, should live in equality one toward another;
this A-dam has lifted up mountains and hills of oppressing powers, and there
by that, dammed and stopped up that universal community: Therefore at the
first rising up of this serpentine power to enslave the Creation, he might well
be declared by way of Lamenattion, A-dam Adam.

Covetousness, or self-love; is the dam; the letter A: before, declares, that
he is a preparer to misery, and is delivered by way of Lamentation, Ah: or
A-dam.

Dovetousnesse, or self-love, is the man of sin, that appears first. The
imagination arising from that covetous power is the woman, or Eve, which like
the Ivy, clings about the tree; and so covetousness and imagination, does
beget between them a supposed joy, pleasure and delight; but it proves a lie.

These two, Covetousness and Imagination, the man and the woman of sin, or
A-dam, and his Eve, or Ivy, does beget fruit or children, like both Father and
Mother; as pride, and envy, hypocrisy, cruelty, and all unclean lusts
pleasing the flesh. And now the dam-head is made up strong, to stop the streams
of waters of life and universal liberty: But in the fullness of time, the
Spirit will break down this dam-head again, and cause the waters of the Spirit
of life to flow again plentifully.

And herein you may see, how the public Preachers have cheated the whole
world, by telling us of a single man, called Adam, that kiled us al by eating a
single fruit, called an Apple.

Alas, this Adam is the dam that has stopped up the freedom of the Spirit
within and without; so that while he rules, a man can have no community with
the spirit within himself, nor community of love with fellow creatures, he does
so puff them up with covetousness, and pride, and desire of Lordly rule one
over another.

Do but look into every mean and woman, and into all the actions of the world,
and tell me whether that first Adam be one single man, as the public Preachers
tell you; or is not more truly that covetous, proud and imginary power in flesh,
that has dammed and stopped up the way of the spirit of life, and universal
liberty; and so he is that Father of lies, and Satan, that holds the Creation
under bondage, til the Son, which is the light in the Creation, shine forth,
and sets us at liberty: And if the Son set you free, you are free indeed.

This Son is the second Adam, which is A-dam indeed, that stops the streams of
bondage from running and sets the Creation at liberty again.

CHAP. IX.
WHat I have spoken, I have not received from books, nor study, but freely I
have received, and freely I have declared what I have received: And the
Declarations of the Lord through his servant shall not be in vain,

The beholding and feeling of the Law of righteousness within me, Amos. 6. 7. 2
fills my whole soul with precious peace, the favor of the sweet ointment; and
I know as this power of love spreads in all men's hearts, as it will spread, for
Jacob must rise: Then there shall be no beggar, no tears, no complaining, no
oppression: but the blessing of the Lord shall fill the earth: Then our swords
shall be beaten into plow irons, Mic 4. 3.
add our spears into pruning hooks, and then shall the Lord be known to be the
salvation of Israel, and the restoration of the whole Creation.

I^ any man be offended here, let him know, I have obeyed my Maker herein, and
I have peace in him.

When the Man, Jesus Christ, was one earth, there was a sweet community of
love between all the members of that humane body: For the spirit that was
within, made every member a servant to the other, and so preserved the whole
body in peace; one member did not reign over another in tyra^nie.

Even so, Luke 24. 49
when the humane body was laid in the earth, the Spirit, which indeed is
Christ, came again the second time upon the Apostles and Brethren, while they
were waiting for that promise at Jerusalem.

And as Christ then began to spread himself in sons and daughters, Act. 4. 32.
which are members of his mystical body, they did not rule in slavery one over
another; neither did the rich suffer the poor to beg and starve, and imprison
them as now they do: But the rich sold their possessions, and gave equality to
the poor, and no man said, that any thing that he possessed was his own, for
they had all things common.

But this community was a vexation to Esau, Rev. 11. 2 9.
the covetous proud flesh, and he strove to suppress this commnuity: Rev. 12.
14.
And the Lord he gives this Beast a toleration to rule 42 months, or a time,
times, and dividing of time; and in that time to kill the two Witnesses, that
is, Christ in one body, and Christ in many bodies; or Christ in his first and
second coming in flesh, which is Justice and Jugement ruling in man.

I, but now the 42 months are expiring, we are under the half day of the Beast,
or the dividing of time, and Christ, or the two Witnesses, are arising and
spreading himself again in the earth: And when he has spread himself abroad
amongst his Sons and daughters, the members of his mystical body, then this
community of love and righteousness, making all to use the blessings of the
earth as a common Treasury amongst them, shall break forth again in his glory,
and fill the earth, and shall be no more suppressed: And none shall say, this is
mine, but every one shall preserve each other in love.

As Christ does thus rise and spread, those that have riches, gold and silver,
and the like, and are taken into the oneness of this Spirit, they shall come,
and offer up their treasures willingly, not daring to keep it: Exo. 25. 2.
That those that have nothing may have part, Ezra 7. 16
and enjoy the blessing of the earth with themselves, Mat. 2. 11
being all members of that one body, unto whom the Kings of the East, called
the Wise men, offered gifts, gold frankinsense and myrrh while he was the
Child Jesus.

But those that do not come in and offer what they have, willingly, to the work
of the Lord, they shall be stripped naked of all, and shall either be destroyed
by the blagues that shall come upon the earth; or at best if their lives be
given them, they shall be servants, and not enjoy the benefit of Sonship, til
the Spirit of the Son rise up in them, and make them free.

So that this work is not done by wars councels, Ioh 8. 32
or hands of men, for I abhor it; though by those the government of Esau shall
be beaten down, Dan. 8. 25
and the enemy shall destroy one another.

But the Lord alone will be the healer, the restorer, and the giver of the new
law of righteousness, by spreading himself every where and so drawing al things
up into himself.

And the declaration of this law of righteousness shall rise out of the dust,
out of the poor people that are trod under foot: For, as the declaration of the
Son of man was first declared by Fishermen, and men that the learned, covetous
Scholars despised: so the declaration of the righteous law shall spring up from
the poor, the base and despised ones, and fools of the world; and humane
learning, and such as love the oppression of exacting Tyths, shall not be
honored in his business: For they that stand up to be public Teachers are
Judas, that come to the Magistrates, and covenants with them for the tenths of
every man's increase, and they will hinder Christ from rising, and betray him
into their hands; that so the covetous and proud flesh may rule in oppression
over their fellow Creature quietly. Mat. 23. 16


And assure your selves it will appear, that the public Preachers, 1 Ioh. 2. 27
that stand up customarily to make a living by their teaching others, Ioh. 6.
45.
as they call it: these are the curse, and the spreaders of that cu^se, and the
hinderers of Christ from rising; and the bitter Scribes and Pharisees to
suppress Christ where he rises, calling him a Blasphemer.

For the Father will have all men to look up to him for teaching, and to
acknowledge no other teacher and ruler but himself: but these men will have al
people to look for knowledge to come through them; and that none can have
knowledge but such as are taught by such Preachers as they: But covetousness
after a temporal living, and secret pride sets them to work, and they shall be
ashamed; for the Lord alone now shall be exalted, and he himself will darw up al
things into himself. Ioh. 10. 13


And all this great chang, or seting up of this new law of righteousness,
ruling in every one, and making every one to consent and act thus in love, is
but the ^^lfilling of Prophesies, and Visions, and Reports of the Scriptures:
Let the Record be searched, and let the public Preachers deny it if they can.

Well: this will be a great day of Judgment; the Righteous Judge will sit upon the
Throne in every man and woman: And that saying of the prophet, that he saw
every man with his hands upon his loins, like a woman in travel, is now
fulfilling; every cevetous, unrighteous heart shall smart with sorrow and shall
be ready to fail them to see the misery that is coming upon the earth: This
day of Judgment will be sharp and short, shortened for the Elects sake.

The man of the flesh, or King Esau, will struggle hard, before he give up the
body of his Army; he will put forth all the subtle wit, and opprss^ing
unrighteousness that he has, before he deliver up the Kingdom to Jacob: But
truly, Gaffer Dragon, you had better yield at first; for the longer thou stand
it out, the sorer shall thy torment be; for down thou must, and Christ must rise.

Do what thou will, speak what then wilt against Christ the Anointing, thou
shall come off a loser: threaten, reproach, imprison, whip, work
hypocritically, oppress, kill and stay, fawn and frown, do things out of fear,
or do things out of heavy rashness, or out of a watchful moderation, as thou
thinks, still thou shall lose ground; for all thou do, Dan. 11 36
is to advance self, and thou must perish, the Judgment is sealed, the things
that are determined against thee, are coming upon thee.

Thou shall find it shall not be as it has been, while the forty two months
where in being, thou prospered and increase in strength. Rev. 11. 2
But now it is done, it is done, it is done, time shall be no more to thee; for
now the man of righteousness shall take the Kingdom, and rule for ever and
ever, and of his dominion shall be no end; he has made himself manifest, he is
in the head of his Army already, gathering in the Isles and Nations of the
earth to himself. Justice and Judgment are his witnesses, and that Standard,
which he will maintain, and will tread al proud flesh under his feet, For the
poor receives the Gospel;

He has opened the salt-mines already, Mat. 5. 13.
the streams thereof runs apace, and begins to overrun the banks of rotten
stinking oppressing injustice, they will purge out corruption and bring the
earth (mankind) into a pleasant savor.

The windows of heaven are opening, and the light of the Son of Sighteousnes,
sends forth of him self, delightful beams, and sweet discoveries of truth, that
will quite put out the covetous traditional blear-eyes; but will mightily refresh
the single eyed Nathaneels: Light must put out darkness; the warm Sun will thaw
the frost, and make the sap ^o bud out of every tender plant, that has been
hid within, and lain like dead trees all the dark cold cloudy days of the
Beast that are past, and silence every imaginary speaker, and declare their
hypocrisy, and deceit openly,

Now the tender grass will cover the earth, the Spirit will cover al places with
the abundance of fruit, that flows from himself, young and old shall al honor
the Lord, and be taught of no other but him; the wheat fields which is the best
grain (the Fathers own people) shall flourish abundantly; the bean^ge of beastly
Ceremonies, forms, customs, abominable actings in unrighteousness shall cease,
there shall be less talking, preaching and prating, and more righteous acting,
The voice of mourning shall be heard no more, the birds shall sing merrily on
every bough.

O rejoice, rejoice, for the time, that the Lord God omnipotent will reign in all
the earth is beginning, and he will be servant to the Dragon, Beast, and man of
the flesh no longer, but will tread down that murdering power, and make him his
footstool.

This is the work of the Lord, that will stop the the mouths of all hearsay and
imaginary Preachers; Rev. 12. 9 etc.
All mouths shall be silent, and not dare to speak, till the power of the Lord
within give words to the mouth to utter. And when men that are full of wast
words, are made to see, they speak they know not what; when they shall see they
speak other men's words (like Parots) not their own, and sometimes they speak
words from their imagination, which may be false as well as true for ought they
know, for they have had neither voice, vision, nor revelation to warrant their
words, when they see this, Then they shall be ashamed and confounded in
themselves.

For now lip service is to be judged to death, and every one shall be fetched in
to worship the Father in Spirit and in truth, or else they shall perish; for
men's words shall grow fewer and fewer, their actions of Righteousness one to
another more and more, and there shall no love be esteemed of, but what is
manifest in righteous actions.

And this shall be the ruler that every one shall observe, to walk righteously in
the Creation, toward all Creatures, according to the Law of equity and Reason;
and this Law shall be writ in every ones heart; and he that has this law in his
heart is marked for a son or daughter: they that have it not are marked for
enemies and rebels to the Father, Rev. 11. 15. 18.
And such a one is a Cain.

The Kingdoms of the whole world must become the Kingdoms of the Lord Christ;
and this the Nations are angry at; Therefore count it no strange thing to see
wars and rumors of wars, to see men that are put in trust to act for public
good, to prove falls, to see commotions of people every where like floods of
water stirred up, raedy to devour and overflow one another; To see Kings storm
against the people; To see rich men and gentry most violent against the poor,
oppressing the and treading them like mire in the street, Why is all this anger?

But because the man of the flesh is to die, his day of judgment is come, he
must give up the Kingdom and Government of the earth (mankind) into the hand
of his neighbor that is more righteous then he, For Jacob now must have the
blessing, he is blessed, yea and shall be blessed, and Esau shall become his
servant; The poor shall inherit the earth.

CHAP. X.
ANd here now is made plain, That the first shall be last, and the last first;
The powers of the flesh or Adam in me, he appeared first, and trampled the
man-child, the power of righteousness and peace under foot.

I, but when the man-child begins to rise up to rule, the other falls and
becomes the tail, the last, nay must be destroyed.

Two Kings that claims interest in one Kingdom, can never live quietly
together, Light and darkness will be fighting, till the one be conquered. And
surely the man of Righteousness, or that last man that appears, shall be the
first, that shall be honored, and become the preserving and restoring power the
great Lawgiver, that shall rule in the new heaven and in the new earth in
righteousness.

Of further, The first, that is, the worshipping of God in types, ceremonies,
forms and customs, in set times and places, which are the invention of the
first man, which does slight and loath the way of inward Righteousness; for
they that live in established forms, are filled with dislike, and willingly
would neither buy nor sell, with those whom the Lord has drawn up to live in
him, they cannot endure the way of the Spirit, Genesis 4. 5. Rev. 13. 17.
let them say and profess what they will; for he that is strict in a formal
customarily way of worship, knows not what it is to worship in spirit and
truth, or to walk righteously in the Creation, Romans 9. 31* 32.
but is bitter spirited and merely selfish.

And this power appears first in a man, and makes people very zealous
professors of God and Christ, Romans 10. 2
in preaching, praying and hearing. But without knowledge, what God and Christ
is, and they know not what they do, nor the end wherefore they do so.

And their teachers in the same forms, are blind guides, and poor hearts, both
shall fall into the ditch, and be mired in their own inventions most
pitifully. And when you come to see your selves stick in confusion, and
disorder, and knowing that your teachers have deceived you.

Then you will remember these words, That the first must be last. Deu. 34. 4
Moses though he was a good man, yet he was not to enter into the la^d of
Canaan, which types out this to me, That the first man of the flesh shall never
enter into the Fathers rest.

Then likewise you shall see, that your zeal, was but zeal without knowledge,
and that heat in you, did but carry you along to advance self, not to advance
the Lord. And that covetousness was the Lord, chief Ruler in you, which being
crossed grew impatient, and that impatiency you called, it, The zeal of the
Lord, when experience teaches you silence, you will not be offended at these
words, but ashamed of your self.

And here likewise you may see, what it is to make a Sermon; for a Sermon is a
speech made from the man-seer, which is Chaist within; for this anointing sees
the Father in every thing.

And therefore Christ in that one body, The Lamb, was called a great Prophet or
Seer, Now that man or woman that sees the Spirit, Joh. 1 9.
within themselves, how he enlightens, Joh. 3. 11.
how he kills the motions of the flesh, and makes the flesh subject to
Righteousness, and so can see light in his light; this man or woman is able to
make a Sermon, because they can speak by experience of the light and power of
Christ within them, who is indeed the man Seer.

But now he that speaks from imagination, or from tradition (and not from
experience of what he sees) cannot make a Sermon, as the public Preachers
generally do, and so he is a deceiver, or false Christ, and false Prophet, that
runs before he be sent, put forward by secret pride and covetousnes, to get a
temporal living.

Therefore let none speak so discontentedly against Adam, the first man by
Creation, that they say lived on earth about 6000 years ago, as though he
brought in the misery upon all; for the Scriptures seem to declare, that there
were men in the world before that time.

For when Cain had killed his brother Abel, which in one verse Moses seems to
say, was the third man in the world, yet in a few verses following, writing of
Cains punishment, declares Cains own words, Thou have set a mark upon me, Genesis
4. 14
and every one that sees me, will kill me: And yet by the story before, there
were no more men in the world, but his Father Adam and he, now Abel being dead.

Therefore certainly this Adam, or first man that is spoken of, is he that is
within, as I have spoke of, which kills or surpresses Abel, who is the
anointing; I am sure I have sound him the cause of my misery, and I can lay the
blame of no man, but my self. The first power that appears and draws my body
into disobedience.

And this is he that is the causer of all your sorrow and tears, he is Adam
within, it is your self, your very fleshly self, be angry at none but your
self. The Self is the first Adam that falls from the Spirit; he is those
branching powers in created flesh that leads you from your maker; therefore
blame not Adam without you, but blame Adam the first man within you; he within
has disobeyed, and forsaken Reasons Law of Righteousness.

You are the man and woman that has eaten the forbidden fruit, by delighting
your self more in the objects of the Creation, then in the Spirit; for the
Spirit is the seed, the Creation is the fruit.

As the Apple is the fruit from the root of the Apple Tree, Genesis 3. 15.
so selfishdesse is the fruit of the fruit, it arises up (not from the Spirit)
but from the Creation. And this is the Serpent whose head must be briused, that
so the great maker of all things, may delight in the work of his own hands;
when all the branchings forth of selfishnesse is destroyed, and the Creation
made subject only to the will of the Creator.

And this will be the winding up of the great mystery spoken of, God manifest in
the flesh (nor selfishnesse manifested in flesh) for this I say is the Serpent
whose head must be bruised.

Now if you delight more in the objects of the earth, to please self, then in
the spirit that made all things, then you eat of the forbidden fruit, you take
the Apple, and become naked and ashamed, and is made afraid to own the spirit,
least you despise fellow creatures.

And likewise being ashamed and afraid of the law of righteousness, because it
does restifie of you, that your deeds are evil; and so begets sorrow and
trouble in your heart; you presently run and hide your self from him amongst
the creatures, and runs preaching, and praying, and sheltering your self in a
Congregation, as a member, and so does sow the figgeleaves of your own
observing forms, and customary invented Righteousness together, to hide your
soul from the face of displeasure, that you may not see your self; for the
sight of your self is your hell.

Whereas indeed you should fly to the Law of Righteousness, and act
righteously within the Creation, and so honor the Spirit by owning of him, and
wait upon him til he speak peace.

For nothing, will hide you from his presence: Reasons Law will shine forth and
torment your unrighteous self-seeking power, and bruise that Serpents head, all
his hidings will not save himself, for you must come to the fire, and that
dross must be burned up, before a Reconciliation can be wrought between him
and his Creation.

Adams innocence is the time of childhood; and there is a time in the entering
in of the understanding age, wherein every branch of mankind is put to his
choice, whether he will follow the Law of Righteousness, according to the
Creation, to honor the Spirit.

Or whether he will delight self, in glorying in the objects of the earth
unrighteously. Now if he choose to satisfy his lusts and his self-wil, and
forsake Reasons Law, he shall fall downwards into bondage, and lie under the
powers of darkness, and live no higher then within the circle of dark flesh,
that has no peace within it self, but what he fetches from creatures without
him.

But if he choose the way of Righteousness, and follow the light of Reasons
Law, then he shall partake of rest, peace and liberty of the Spirit, as if
there were no creature objects at all; for he that has peace within, uses the
world as though he used it not, and has content and joy, though he have no
creature to have communion with.

But seeing that the man of the flesh will and must appear to rule in the
Kingdom of mankind first; All men are gone astray, and all flesh have
corrupted their ways, and the curse is spread abroad through the Creation: And
therefore the whole Creation wait for a Restoration, or for the rising up of
Christ the second man, the blessing, who must bruise the head of bondage, and
reconcile al men to peace and liberty. Genesis 18. 18.
And as the curse is seen and felt within, so the blessing of freedom and life,
must rise up, and be seen and felt within.

Therefore let not your blind guides deceive you any longer; Do not look
beyond your selves to Adam, a man that died 6000 years ago, though they bid
you; but look upon Adam within your-self, who has wrought your woe. And for
the time to come, wait upon the rising of the second Adam, the Law of
Righteousness within you, to deliver you from the bondage of the first power.

And here you may see the deceit of imagination and fleshly wisdom and
learning; it teaches you to look altogether upon a history without you, of
things that were done 6000 years ago, and of things that were done 1649 years
ago, of the carriage of the Scribes and Pharisees then against the son of man.

And so carrying you first to one age of the world, then to another age of the
world, traveling Sea and Land to find rest; and the more that human learning
and his professors travels abroad, the further off from rest they are, for
they meet with nothing but confusion and starits, and no true peace: And why?

Because that which a man seeks for, whereby he might have peace, is within the
heart, not without. The word of life, Christ the restoring spirit, is to be
found within you, even in your mouth, and in your heart: The Kingdom of heaven
(which is) Christ is within you, and disobedient Adam is within you; for this
is Esau that strives with Jacob in the womb of your heart to come forth first.

And this let me tell you, Isa 32. 9. to 16.
and you shall find it true, Go read all the books in your Universitie, that
tells yon what has been formerly, and though you can make speeches of a day
long from those readings yet you shall have no peace, but your hearts still
shall be a barren wilderness, and increase in sorrow till your eyes return into
your selves, and the spirit come from on high to make you read in your own book
your heart.

Wherein you shall find the mystery of iniquity, The man of sin, that first
Adam, that made you a sinner. And the mystery of godliness, the second Adam
Christ, who, when he arises up therein, he makes you righteous and restores you
again to life.

And hence it is, that many a poor despised man and woman, Phil. 3. 10* 11.
that are counted blasphemers, by the understanding Pharisees of our age, as
the learned Pharisees of old called Christ, and people are afraid to buy and
sell them, but casts out their names for evil; yet these have more sweet peace,
more true experience of the Father, and walks more righteously in the Creation,
in spirit and truth, then those that call themselves teachers and zealous
Professors.

And why? Because these single hearted ones are made to look into themselves,
wherein they can read the work of the whole Creation, and see that History
seated within themselves; they can see the mystery of Righteousness, and are
acquainted every one according to his measure, with that spirit of truth that
is to be the blessing of the whole earth, and that enlightens all that come into
the world; these are the dust and stones so the earth, that are trod under
foot: But out of this Sion whom no man regards, shall the Deliverer come.

But now those that are called Preachers, and great professors that runs a
hearing, seeks for knowledge abroad in Sermons, in books and Uuniversities, and
buys it for money, as Simon Magus would have done, and than delivers it out
again for money, for a 100 l. or 200 l. a year. And those men that speak from
an inward testimony of what they have seen and heard from the Lord, are celled
by these buyers and sellers, Locusts, ^actions, blasphemers, and what not, as
the language of Pulpits runs, but the Lord will whip such traders out of his
Temple.

And truly the whole world wanders after the Beast, and though the people many
of them, do see that their Prheachers are blind guides, bitter spirited:
proud and covetous, yet they are ashamed and afraid to disown them, O great
bondage under the devils.

And hence it is that they think they are wise and learned, and the only men
sent of God to preach the Gospel, til the power of Righteousness come and
declare before all the world, that they are enemies to the Gospel, and knows
him not, for the anointing is the glad tidings, which are manifest within the
heart, not a distance from men.

And so Christ takes these wise and learned in their own crafty covetousnes and
pride, and declares them to be very silly men, the most ignorant of all, blind
guides, painted sepulchers, Prophets that run before they be sent, and the
great fools of the world, and troublers of* Israel, and the Scribes and
Pharisees that stand up to hinder Christ from rising, or to cast reproachful
dirt upon him, where he rises, as much as they can to keep him down, and hold
him under as a servant still; and this they will do till they be swept away
amongst the refuge of lies, as part of that treasure, for that must be your
portion.

Nay let me tell you, That the poorest man, that sees his maker, and lives in
the light, though he could never read a letter in the book, dares throw the
glove to all the humane learning in the world, and declare the deceit of it, how
it does bewitch and delude mankind in spiritual things, yet it is that great
Dragon, that has deceived all the world, for it draws men from knowing the
Spirit, to own bare letters, words and histories for spirit: The light and life
of Christ within the heart, discovers all darkness, and delivers mankind from
bondage; And besides him there is no Savior.

CHAP. XI.
WEll, in the next place, I must declare to you, that all that which you call
the history, and have doted upon it, and made it your idol, is all to be seen
and felt witin you, before you cast often true peace.

Adam and Christ you have heard are both to be seen within the heart, Col. 1.
27.
Cain and Abel is to be seen within: Abraham (a power that prefers the honor
of Righteousness, before a beloved Isaac) is to be seen within Meek spirited
Moses, that rules your bodies by an outward Law of Righteousness, is to be
seen within you; killing of Sacrifices, and offering them up, is to be seen
within you. Israel, or one that is a wrestler is to be seen within you. And
this is Christ the elect one that fights against your lusts.

The Canaanites, Amalekites, Philistines, and all those armies of the Nations,
even troops of untighteous powers, one following another, are to be seen within
you, making war with Israel, Christ within you.

The Land of Canaan, the habitation of rest, is to be seen within you,
traveling and drudging in the wilderness, and then coming to rest upon the
seventh day, is to be seen within you.

Judas, a treacherous self-loving and covetous spirit. The Commanders of the
Jews (the chief powers that are within the flesh) first condemning, then
killing, then buying Christ, is to be seen within you.

Christ lieing in the grave, like a corn of wheat buried under the clods of the
earth for a time, and Christ rising up from the powers of your flesh, above
that corruption and above those clouds, treading the curse under his feet, is
to be seen within.

The stone that lies at the mouth of the sepulcher, your unbelief, the removing
of that stone, setting you at liberty, is to be seen withing you.

Heaven and hell, light and darkness, sorrow and comforts is all to be seen
within, the power of darkness, and the power of light and life is to be seen
within you. Good Angels (which are divine discoveries or sparks of that glory)
And bad Angels (which are the powers of the flesh let loose out of the
bottomless pit^selfishnesse, and so working its own misery) are to be seen
within.

For mankind is that Creation, in which the great Creator of all things will
declare and manifest himself; Therefore it was said, That God was in Christ.
That one anointed humane body, reconciling or drawing all things into himself,
and so making peace.

For while al things are out of that one power of Righteousness, jarring and
flashing against him; there is no peace in the Creation, but sorrow, tears and
vexation; but when all things are made to lie down quiet in him, and
acknowledge him in all, and are subject to him, the alone King of
Righteousness, now there is rest and peace every where.

Therefore if you look for heaven, or for manifestation the Fathers love in you
in any place, but within your selves, you are deceived; for what glory soever
you shall be capable of to see with your eyes or hear with your ears, it is but
the breakings forth of that glorious power that is seated within for the glory
of the Father is not without him, but it is all within himself, or rises up
from within, and is manifested abroad; The Kings daughter is all glorious
within: All that glory which declares heaven, is seen within that spirit, that
rules within the Creation mankind.

And further, if you look for any other hell or sorrows in any other place,
then what shall be made manifest within the bottomless pit, your very fleshly
self, you are deceived, and you shall find that when this bottomless pit is
opened to your view, it will be a torment sufficient, for from hence, does the
curse spread, and all that misery you are or may be capable of, it is but the
breakings forth of that stinking dunghill, that is seated within you, and is
that power of darkness, that rules within the Creation, your body.

If the power of Righteousness and peace take possession and rule in you, Rev.
21. 23.
then you shall live in rest, and be free from hell and sorrow, death and
bondage, If the Lamb be the light of your heart, all tears shall be wiped away,
and you shall be in peace.

But if the selfish power rule your heart; then as you live now upon
uncertainties, in confusion and vexation: so this manifestation of hell,
darkness and sorrows, shall multiply within you; and when your body goes to
the Earth, you multiply the curse upon the Creation, and so you enter into the
body of the Serpent, that must be burned and consumed by the power of the Lord.

Hell and the curse does rule within c^eated flesh in every family of the
earth, and will rule till the feed of Abraham (the blessing of the Lord come)
and burn up that serpent, and deliver the Creation from that burden.

And let me tell you, That this seed, This blessing of the Lord is rising up in
every family that lives after the flesh; Whether Parents, brethren or sisters,
they do hate, grudge and persecute those in whom the blessing begins to rise
up, and tramples upon them like dust; but out of that dust of the earth
(mankind) shall the deliverer come that shall turn ungodliness from Jacob. A
few years now will discover more, and then that prophecy shall be materially
fulfilled, Then ten men shall take hold of him that is a Jew, saying, we will
go with you, for we have heard that God is with you, Zech. 8. 23.

The heart of man is the place wherein heaven and hell, for nature and kind are
both to be seen, that is, when the Law of Righteousness rules, there is Christ
or the Kingdom of heaven within, even the manifestations of the Father appears
in glory to the sweet rest and peace of that soul.

But when the power of unrighteousness rules in the heart, which is the
Serpent, Dragon or God of this world; this is hell or kingdom of darkness; for
first the man sees and feels himself in bondage to his lusts, and to the powers
of his flesh. This is death, and the curse that he lies under.

And then secondly, The man sees himself under bondage of sorrows and torment,
and the increase of this sensiblenesse, is and will be an intolerable misery.

As it is said, That the King of Righteousness takes delight in nothing, but
what is within himself, and what proceeds out of himself: So the Heaven of an
enlivened heart is not a local place of glory at a distance from him, but the
seeing and feeling the Father within, dwelling and ruling there; and to behold
the glory of that power proceeding forth of himself, to which he is made
subject, through which he walks righteously in the Creation, and in which he
rests in peace.

Even so, the souls that are lost and ashamed in their work, are not tormented
by any terror without them in any local place, but their hell or place of
torment is within themselves, seeing and feeling themselves chained up in
bondage, to fears, terrors: ^^rrows, afrightments, intolerable vexations, and
powers of lust, and under all that cursed darkness, ^^till the judgment of
the great day.

And what misery or torment does or shall appear ^^^m outward objects, it is
but the breakings forth of their own cursednesse, that creates misery to
himself, and so goes forth to fetch in torment from without.

For he that has a troubled conscience, turns every thing into gall and
wormwood to terrify himself, thinking every bush to be a devil to torment
him, he says, he sees fearful shapes without; but they arise from the anguish
of his tormenting conscience within, for they be the shapes and apparitions of
his own caused flesh that is presented to him, which comes not from any other
but out of the bottomless pit, the Serpents power, but rules and dwells within
him, and the sight of this is like the misery of tender flesh burning in the
fire.

Let a man lie upon his sick bed, and to the view or others the chamber is
quiet, yet he says, he sees devils, and flames, and misery, and torments.
Well, this is but the rising up of his own unrighteous heart, the flames of the
bottomless it that appear to himself.

For certainly unrighteous flesh is hell, the appearance or risings up of
un^ighteous flesh to its own view, is the torments of hell, Pride, lust, envy,
covetousness, hypocrisy, self-love, and the like, being crossed by the spirit
of Light, are the particular devils that torment the soul in hell, or in that
dark condition.

Or if so be a man be tormented by visible bodies of f^ry, and ugly shapes, as
he apprehends, they be all the creatures of his own making, and rods which the
flesh has made to whip and punish himself withal; for a man suffers by no
other but by the work of his own hands.

And as he has acted envy, venom and poison in strange ways of oppression,
walking unrighteously in the Creation: Even so, when his soul comes to be
judged, he shall apprehend snakes, scorpions, toads, devils in bodily shapes,
and flames of fire and direful noises, and pits of darkness, which are
creatures of his own making, or the shapes and fashion of those unrighteous
turnings, and windings, and actings of his unrigh^eous soul, that now appear in
their own colors to his own torment, and this is ^ell.

For if the flesh be righteous within, there is nothing without can trouble it
When the bodies of men are laid in the grave, we have a word, That he is either
in heaven or hell: Now the senses of the body are not sensible of either such.
But now the power that ruled in that body righteously or unrighteously, is
fully manifested to it felt, if the power of Righteousness did rule. Now it
enters into the Spirit, the great Ocean of glory, the Father himself: If the
power of unrighteousness did rule, now it enters into the curse, and increases
the body of death, corruption and enmity, and becomes the bondage and Burden of
the Creation, that ^^^st be purged out by fire.

If there be a local place of hell, as the Preachers say there is, besides this
I speak of, time will make it manifest but as yet none ever came from the dead
to tell men on earth, and till then, men ought to speak no more then they know;
when I speak, I speak from what I have in some measure seen within me, and as I
have received from the Lord in clear light within my self.

But is not hell the execution of Justice? And is not God the Author of that
wrath? As (...) is said, Is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not
done it?

I answer, This is warily to be understood, left we dishonor the Lord, in
making him the Author of the creatures misery, as one of late in his Pulpit,
an Universitie man in my hearing did relate, and by his multitude of words,
darkened knowledge mightily; therefore I shall deliver what I have received
concerning this.

First know, that there is mention of three Gods in the Scriptures.

1. The Magistrate, I said ye are gods.

2. The Devil, The god of this world has blinded your eyes.

3. The King of Righteousness is called God, The Lord God omnipotent reigns.

Now the Magistracy is ruling power, called God, by their righteous Government
a Kingdom may be kept in peace, but by their unrighteous Government, they
trouble every body, and the people may say, Thou, O our God, have destroyed us.

Secondly, The devil or the powers of the flesh in every man and woman is a
ruling power, called god, that brings misery to every body, and corrupts the
whole Creation, fire, water, earth and air.

1. By drawing the Creature into unreasonable ways: which ways and works.

2. Becomes the creatures own tormentours, when by the light of the Sun of
Righteousness, man is made to see himself; for all men's sorrows are but the
risings up of their own works against themselves. Therefore people may say to
the devil, or their unrighteous flesh. O thou, our God, thou have destroyed
(...), thou have deceived us, O god, thou promisedst peace, and afterward
writest bitter things against us. Our own works are our tormenting devils.

Then thirdly, The King of Righteousness is the ruling power, called God; but
he is not the Author of the creatures misery, for his dealing with unrighteous
flesh, is twofold, which is the righteous Justice and Judgment of the King.

First, he suffers man to take his own course and to act his own will, and to
follow his own l^sts, letting him alone, and permitting him a time to do what
he will, for wise, proud and covetous flesh thinks himself to be a god, or an
Angel of light, and that his wisdom and power is the only power. And now if
the righteous King should not give him this liberty, he would say he had wrong
done him, therefore Reason lets him have his will to act his principles, that
when the time comes that he shall be made to see himself and his works, he may
be left without excuse.

This declares the Almighty power of patience, love and meekness in the King
toward his creature, that he can suffer himself to be a servant to that cursed
power in the flesh to this end, that he may take that fleshly wisdom in his
craft, destroy that curse, and save his creature, man, from that bondage; That
after that man has had trial of his own wisdom and power of his flesh and
finds it a devil, and that there is no blessing in it; he may then come to lie
down in the wisdom and power of the King of Righteousness in rest and peace.

Secondly, In the solnesse of time; that is, when all flesh has corrupted his
ways; then the King or Sun of Righteousness arises up, and lets man in his
light to see himself to be a devil. The King lays no hand upon him, but lets
him see himself; and the man's own works become the devils that torment him. If
a man have sore eyes, and look in the Sun, his eyes smart; now that smart comes
not from the Sun, but the venom of the eyes rises up and torments it self,
when the Sun cause it to see or feel it self.

This declares the wisdom, power, Justice and holiness of the King, that when
he rises he can make flesh to see it self, and needs do no more, but shine
forth and burn in his brightness, by whom that curse or dross in the flesh is
consumed and cannot stand; therefore if flesh were righteous it would stand
before the righteous Law; but seeing it cannot stand, it appears unrighteous,
to be a devil and no Angel of light. And this method of the Father brings glory
to his own name, that he alone is the one almighty power and wisdom.

This is Justice in the righteous Judge, and shows, him to be the pure Law, and
flesh kills and torments it self.

I but when the waters drowned the world, and the fire burned Sodom, this was a
Judgment more then letting flesh see his own unrighteousness.

I answer, The overflowings of the water in that manner to drown, and the
breakings forth of the fire in that manner to burn waste and consume, were the
rising up of the curse that was in the water and fire, to destroy the
unrighteous flesh of man, that caused it.

For when the Father made the Creation, he made all Elements to uphold one
another in Righteousness, and one creature to preserve another; therefore it
was all very good. But this rising up of creatures to destroy one another, is
the curse; which unrighteous man, that is, the Lord of the creatures has
brought upon the Creation.

I but how comes the fire and water to break forth to destroy at some times
more then another?

I answer, When the fullness of time comes, that earth begins to stink with the
abominations of man, then the Father arises up and shows himself within the
Creation of fire, water, earth and air. And the curse that is brought upon this
by man cannot abide the presence of the Lord, but rises up and runs together
into a head to oppose the Lord; but indeed it destroys man that was the cause
of it. So that the risings up of waters, and the breakings forth of fire to
waste and destroy, are but that curse, or the works of man's own hands, that
rise up and run together to destroy their Maker, and torment him that brought
the curse sorth.

While water and fire are useful, the blessing of the Creation lies in them,
and comes from them to preserve the Creation for the glory of the Maker.

But when they break forth to waste and destroy, this is the curse, the burden
of the Creation, that breaks forth to destroy unrighteous man that caused it.

And it does break forth when the Lord appears in the Creation; as I said, when
the Sun shines the venom in sore eyes rises up and smarts: So when righteous
power begins to move in the fire, and upon the water, the curse that is in
these Elements arises up and disturbs the Creation, to the destruction of man
whose work it is.

I but one man kills another by wars, and such like, Is not this the wrath of
God upon them?

I answer in the same manner as I did before; for as the cursed flesh in one
body torments it self, when he sees himself a devil.

So multitudes of bodies of men, are still but one flesh, or one earth: And
when the Sun of Righteousness begins to shine into this earth, the venomous
parts rise up to kill and destroy light, but in the end the flesh destroys it
self.

Let the power of humility and Righteousness appear to a proud, unrighteous,
covetous man, and show him his evil, as in these days it does, he swells
presently, and rises up to make war to maintain himself to be an Angel of
light; and pride being dispersed into diverse bodies, cannot yield one to
another, to preserve one another, but rise up to destroy each other in the
light of the Sun: The Sun shines, and the dunghill casts up his stinking smell:
The Lord he shines, and proud flesh kills one another; flesh kills but it self.

And truly I must tell you, That all these wars, and killing one another, are
but the rising up of the curse: destroying Armies of men, are but the curse,
the burden which the Creation groans under: For in the beginning, all was very
good, and the Creation at first was made to preserve it self; and this rising
up to destroy the Creation, is the curse.

And the Spirit of the Father, that dwells in any humane body that is killed,
does run into the Ocean of life, and purifies the Creation from the curse.

But did not God send the Chaldeans and Sabeans to punish Job? Yes, the god
Devil did; but not the God or Righteousness: For the Devil desired a liberty
to try Job, and the righteous power, Reason, gave him leave; only told him, he
should not touch his life; and then the Devil sends these enemies, and burns
his house, and kills his children; give but liberty to the curse, and he does
much mischief.

Who was it that the god Devil did afflict? Not an enemy to the King of
Righteousness, but a body in whom he dwelt: Yea, the Father did but suffer
himself to be persecuted by the Devil, in that humane body Job: That at last,
that power of darkness, which is the Accuser of the Brethren, and the bondage
of the Creation, might be made manifest in the light of the Sun, and so be cast
out justly.

Now the end of all is this, that unrighteous flesh that thinks himself an
Angel of light, and the only power, may be proved to be a Devil, and so be
cast out of the Creation and perish: That Jacob, the King of Righteousness,
the blessing of peace, might arise up and reign for ever in the Creation, when
all enemies are subdued under his seet.

There is a time appointed of the righteous Judge, that all flesh shall see it
self in its own colors; and when the flesh does see it self in his own beastly
shapes, he will appear so deformed, so piteous a confused Chaos of misery and
shame, that the sight thereof shall be a great torment to himself.

Therefore take notice of this, you proud, envious, covetous, bitter-spirited,
and unrighteous men and women; this self-satisfying glory in which you live,
and seem to have rest, shall become your hell-torment, when you are made to see
your unrighteous, treacherous self, as you must when the Judge sits upon the
Throne.

You that are now ashamed to own the righteous spirit, and fear to offend men,
lest they should either reproach you, or injure you: And so will do any thing,
though unrighteous, to preserve the good words of devilish men; you shall then
see you are not men, not Saints, but Devils and cursed enemies, even the
Serpents power, that must be burned.

CHAP. XII
ALl these declare the half hours silence, that is to be in Heaven; Rev. 8. 1.
for all mouths are to be stopped, by the power of Reasons Law shining within
the heart: ^er. 31. 34.
And this abundance of talk that is amongst people, by Arguments, by disputes,
by declaring expositions upon others word and writing, by long discourse,
called preaching, shall all cease.

Some shall not be able to speak, they shall be struck silent wit shame, by
seeing themselves in a loss, and in confusion: Neither shall they dare to
speak, til they know by experience within themselves what to speak; but wait
with a quiet silence upon the Lord, til he break forth within their hearts, and
give them words and power to speak.

And this shall be a mark of a covetous, proud and close Hypocrite, to be full of
words, preaching by arguments and expositions, putting a meaning upon other
men's words and writings, telling stories by hearsay of what they have read and
heard from men, as the fashion is now in public work.

For none shall dare to speak (unless it be those that are sealed to
destruction) but what they understand in pure experience; every one speaking
his own words, not another man's, as the Preachers do, to make a trade of it;
for he that speaks from tradition and imagination, and makes a trade of his
preaching to others, to get a living by, is a child of the curse, and
covetousness is his Lord,

Men must leave off teaching one another, and the eyes of all shall look upwards
to the Father, 1 loh. 2. 27*
to be taught of him: And at this time, silence shall be a man's rest and
liberty, it is the gathering time, the souls receiving time, it is the
forerunner of pure language.

None shall be offended at this, but the covetous and proud Serpent; and he will
vex and fret, if the people will not hear him preach; and think: he has much
wrong done him, if he be slighted. Well Judas, thou must be slighted, thy
preaching stinks before the Father, and he will draw his people out of thy
confusion, and leave thee naked and bare, and thy shame shall be made manifest
to the whole Creation, for indeed thou art the curse.

While a man is buying his head in studying what has been done in Moses time,
in the Prophets time, in the Apostles, and in the Son of man's time* called
Jesus the Anointed, and does not wait to find light and power of righteousness
to arise up within his heart.

This man is a pireous, barren creature, though he have all the learning of
Arts and Sciences under the Sun; for the knowledge of Arts is but to speak
methodically of what has been; and conjecture what shall be; both which are
uncertain to the Speaker: But he that speaks from the original light within,
can truly say, I know what I say and I know whom I worship.

This silence shall be both particular in every son and daughter, and general in
the practice of all before their eyes; and lo^king upwards and waiting for
teaching from the great and only Teacher, Christ, the great Prophet; for truly
the time is come, that all flesh shall be made silent, and leave off multiplying
of words without knowledge before the Lord, both in p^eaching and praying.

And your Preachers shall be all the objects of the Creation through which the
Father will convey himself into you, and manifest himself before you: these shall
be your outward Preachers.

And the same word of power speaking in, and to your hearts, causing your
hearts to open to his voice, shall be your Teacher within: And that mouth that
stands up to teach others, and does not declare the Lord in a pure language,
shall bear his shame, whosoever he be.

None shall need to turn over books and writings (for indeed all these shall
cease too) to get knowledge; but every one shall be taken off from seeking
knowledge from without, and with an humble, quiet heart, wait upon the Lord,
til he manifest himself; for he is a great king, and worthy to be waited upon.

His testimony within, fills the soul with joy and singing; he gives first
experience: and then power to speak forth those experiences, And hence you shall
speak to the rejoicing one of another, and to the praise of him that declares
his power in you; he that speaks his thoughts, studies and imagination, and
stands up to be a Teacher of others, shall be judged for his unrighteousness,
because he seeks to honor flesh, 2 Cor. 12. 13.
and does not honor the Lord.

Behold the Anointing that is to teach all things, is coming to create new
Heavens, and new Earth, wherein Righteousness dwells; and there shall not be a
vessel of humane earth, but it shall be filled with Christ.

If you were possible to have so many buckets as would contain the whole Ocean,
every one is filled with the Ocean, and perfect. water is in all; and being put
all together, make up the perfect Ocean, which filled them all.

Even so, Christ, who is the spreading power, is now beginning, Ephesians, 1. 23.
to fill every man and woman with himself; Chapter 4. 5. 6.
he will dwell and rule in every one, and the law of reason and equity shall be
Christ in them; every single body is a star shining forth of him, or rather a
body in and out of whom he shines; and he is the Ocean of power that fills all.
To. 8. 23.


And so the words are true, the Creation mankind, shall be the fullness of him
that fills all in all: This is the Church, the great Congregation, that when the
mystery is completed, shall be the mystical body of Christ all set at liberty
from inward and outward straits and bondage: And this is called the holy
breathing, that has made all new by himself, and for himself.

Before this truth be believed in by mankind, you shall see much troubles in
the great world; the first Adam will strive mightily before he loose his
Kingdom; he can pretty quietly hear, that Christ will role in sons and
daughters that are scattered abroad.

But to hear that the Kingdoms of the world shall be Christ's Dominions
likewise, and that the material earth shall be his possession, as well as the
earth mankind; O this cu^s Adam to the heart; all the world will storm and be
angry, Rev. 11. 15. 18.
when this is made known.

Wars and rumors of wars will multiply; Father will be against Son, and Son
against Father, the love of many shall wax cold; and zealous professors, that
live without the spirit, shall become the most bitter enemies to Christ, and
prove very treacherous, self-seeking, self-loving, full of subtle policy to
waste and wear out every one that seeks to advance Christ, by their bitterness
and oppression: But all in vain, for Christ must rise, and the powers of the
flesh must fall.

CHAP. XIII.
FRom what has been hitherto spoken, if there were no experience to prove it,
it appears, that the first Adam or fleshly man, seeks life, peace and glory to
himself, from creatures and things that are without him. 1 Cor. 3. 12
As first, he seeks content and peace from wife, children, friends, riches,
places of dominion over others, and from such like: But that peace that is
built upon such hay and stubble-foundations, will fall and come to nothing.

Secondly, the fleshly man seeks content and peace from Sermons, Prayers,
Studies, Books, Church Fellowship, and from outward Forms and Customs in Divine
Worship: But that peace that is built upon this foundation of gold, silver and
precious stones, To. 9. 31.
will fall and come to nothing likewise. Isa. 28. 9.


All creatures teats are to be dried up, that the soul can suck no refreshing
milk from them, before the Lord teach it knowledge.

Some there are, nay almost every one, wonders after the Beast, or fleshly man;
they seek for new Jerusalem, the City of Sion, or Heaven, to be above the
skies, in a local place, wherein there is all glory, and the beholding of all
excellent beauty, like the seeing of a show or a mask before a man: And this
not to be seen neither by the eyes of the body till the body be dead: A strange
conceit.

But, poor Creatures, you are deceived; this expectation of glory without you,
will vanish, you shall never see it; this outward heaven is not the durable
Heaven; this is a fancy which your false Teachers put into your heads to please
you with, while they pick your purses, and betray your Christ into the hands of
flesh, and hold Jacob under to be a servant still to Lord Esau.

Well, what a man sees or hears to day, may be gone to morrow; all outward glory
that is at a distance from the five senses, and taken in by a representation,
is of a transient nature; and so is the Heaven that your Preachers tell you of.

But when the second Adam rises up in the heart, he makes a man to see Heaven
within himself, and to judge all things that are below him: He makes many
bodies to be the declarers of him, who is the one power of righteousness that
rules therein: And this is Heaven that will not fail us, endurable riches,
treasures that shall not wax old, and where moth and rust cannot corrupt, nor
thieves break through and steal: This Christ is within you, your everlasting
rest and glory.

And as the man of the flesh fetches in comforts from without, seeking content
in and from Creatures, and Creature-objects; so he envies every one that
crosses his desires; cross him in his pride, covetousness and uncleanness,
and he grows extreme angry at every body; tell him that his formal and
customary preaching and praying, is but self-seeking, not setting up the Lord,
and he is filled with rage against those that tell him so.

But he never looks within to check himself, he takes no remedy there at all,
and lets those Devils lie quiet within; and if any be sent, I say, from the
Lord, to disturb those his lusts, he will disturb that messenger, if he can;
but he will cherish himself within: He thinks that whatsoever he does is good,
and that whatsoever crosses that power that is in his heart, does cross the
Lord.

But truly it is no other but the Serpents power, which must be destroyed; he
fetches in content from the Creatures that are without him; and his envy and
discontent runs after things and Creatures that are without, which crosses his
fleshly desires.

But now the man of righteousness, Christ, when he rises up in the heart, he
loves all that are without him; and he envies none but the Serpent within,
which troubles the Creation; and so is quite different to the other.

For as soon as Christ is rose up in a man, the first thing he does, he takes,
revenge of the pride, lust, envy, covetousness, which ruled within the flesh,
and casts that Serpent and Dragon out of Heaven: That is, out of that part of
the Creation; and makes a man to cry out upon himself, and to hate and abhor
his cursed lusts, which lead him captive.

He makes a man to look abroad with the eye of pity and compassion to
Fellow Creatures; but to look with the eye of hatred and loathing upon the
Serpent, his unclean lusts, desiring nothing so much as the death of the body
of sin within. Zach 4. 7
So that the law of righteousness may reign in peace in his soul: O thou
cursed envy, cursed rash anger, cursed uncleanness: O cursed Devil, cursed
Father of lies, that will not suffer Christ to rise up and reign: O thou enemy
of all rightousnesse, thou wicked one, thou curse, thou power of darkness,
thou fleshly power, thou shall be destroyed and subdued under Christ's feet,
whom thou fightest against.

The greatest combat is within a man, when the King sits upon the Throne,
judging unrighteous flesh, and bruising that Serpents head, And though this be
trouble and torment for a time to the Creature, Rev. 4. 2.
yet Christ at last will sit down in him, who is Prince of peace, and King of
righteousness.

The created flesh of man is the Beast, the King of Beasts; the same principles
as are in other Creatures, are in humane flesh: The difference between man and
other beasts, is this, The flesh of man is made an understanding Soul, capable
to know Reason, and to walk in his light: Other beasts cannot.

Now the wise flesh is merely selfish, he seeks himself in every thing he does,
and would be a Lord and Ruler, not only over the Beasts of the field, but over
creatures of his own kind, whom his Maker made equal to himself; and so
strives to fetch in all other Creatures, to advance his content, though it be
to the loss and misery of other men.

This is the Beast, Lord Esau, the wise and covetons, self-seeking flesh, that
has sold his birthright and blessing to Jacob, for the pleasure of
unrighteousness a small time: And now he must be turned out, and deliver all
up to Jacob, and he is extremely vexed, and will not yield quier possession, but
stand out stiffly, till he be cast out, by the universal power of Reasons law.

Now the rule and dominion of Jacob does not bring loss and misery to any;
Genesis 18. 18.
his law is so established in love, that the whole Creation finds peace under
it, sorrow and tears, beggary and oppression shall be done away, and the
blessing of the Lord Jacob shall fill the earth.

So then we see, Rev. 19. 19.
that the great battle of God Almighty, is between thy selfish power, the
Beast and fleshy man; and the universal power, Chirist, the man of
righteousness; for the flesh would be wiser then its Maker: for though his
Maker would have the whole Creation, and every creature to enjoy the benefit of
their Creation, and no live free from straits comfortably: Yet the wise and
converous flesh seeks to live free in honor and quiet in himself, and makes
laws to imprison, kill and waste every one, that will not conform to his
selfish Government.

Now the Father will destroy the Beast in the open field by fair play, and has
given him all advantages as may be; for he has given the Beast thedominion,
and himself is a Servant under his dominion, and will undermine the wise and
covetous Beast, by righteons susterings, and action as a Servant: And the
Father encounters with the Beast or Dragon, in a threefold posture of war.

As First, by the Sacrifices under the Law, the Spirit thereby declared the
destruction of the Beast; and the Spirit lay hid under those types and shadows,
fighting against the Beast; and the wise flesh in those days sought against
his Maker; This is a distance of Cannon shot.

Secondly, In the prison of Jesus Christ, the Lamb, the Father fought against
the Beast: and killed him; for the Dragon was cast out of that Heaven or
Creation, in whom the Father dwelt bodily; for that flesh was wholly made
subject to the Spitit; this was at a closer distance closing in the Front: But
the wise flesh has many strong holds, even the multitudes of men and women,
which he fortifies against the Spirit.

And therefore in the third posture, which is now begun, the Father encounters,
and will encounter with the Beast every where: that is, with the wise but
covetous, unrighteous flesh, in every son and daughter, and so bruise that
Serpents head in the whole body of his Army.

And before he has done, he will fire all the strongholds of this murder, so
that he shall not have a place to keep garrison in; for the Father will subdue
the whole bulk of mankind, and make all that living earth subject to him self,
and all with holy breathing: This is the spreading of the Anointing: This is
the glory of the Elect One; glorious things are spoken of thee, O though City
of God.

This holy breathing is the Kingdom of Heaven within you, when he rules within
you, and the Kingdom of Heaven without you likewise, when you see the same
glory rule in others, in which you rejoice: And this is the last encounter the
Father will have with the Dragon. This is the great day of Judgment (judging and
condemning, and putting the Serpent to death every where) This is the day of
Christ power, in which he will subdue all his enemies under his seet, and
deliver up the Kingdom to his Father

Therefore marvel not to see the people turn from one way of worship to
another; for the Father is driving this people through all the ways, and forms,
and customs, and reformation, and governments of the Beast, to weary them out
in all; that so they may find rest for the soles of their feet no where, in no
outward form of worship; til they come to lie down in him (forsaking all forms)
to worship the Father in spirit and trurh; that is, to walk righteously in the
Creation.

And this restlesnesse of people, running from one form and custom to another,
meeting with confusion and curse every where, is no other but the dividing of
time, the half day or image of the Beast, which is the last period of his time:
Then faith the Angel, It is done, time to the Beast shall be no more.

And while it is thus, Psa. 40. 2.
poor Creatures they are in bondage within, for they know not what to do; the
way to Sion is not yet clear, and they are filled with sighings and secret
mournings, to see themselves in confussion and losses to stick in the mire, but
cannot come out: This is inward slaverie, under which they lie.

Then, poor Creatures, they are under an outward bondage, under the hand of
Tyrant flesh, that rules the Kingdom, and that divises the several fleshy forms
and ways of government, to which if any refuse to conform, then they must be
imprisoned, reproached or tortured by punishments, in what kind or other, by
the hands of fellow Creatures, that are the oppressing Task masters under the
Tyrant flesh; so that weak spirits are kept under in awe, either by fear or
shame: And thus Jacob has been very, low but he must rise.

For the Antichristian Captivity is expiring, many have attained to inward
freedom already, they wait upon the Lord for outward freedom, that the yoke may
be taken off their backs: Israel's Captivity in the 70 years in the Bahylon
was but a type of this Antichristian slavery under L. Esau, the powers of the
flesh, that compasses mankind about with many straits and dangers, for
acknowledging his Maker.

But as every thing has his growth, his reign and end, so must this slavery
have an end; The proud and covetous hearts cry, what slavery is this? we know
not what he speaks: It is true you do not know; but they who have less or more
attained to the resurrection of the dead know what I say; and shall rejoice in
the declaration of this power, waiting the Lords leisure with a calm silence,
til he has gathered together our brethren that must partake of the blessing
with us.

CHAP. XIV.
TO see the Divine power in the Creation-objects is sweet; but to see him
ruling in the heart is sweeter: The first sight is at distance far off, as to
see him in mear, drink, clothes, friends, victories, riches, prosperity, to see
him in the Sun, Moon, Stars, Clouds, Grass, Trees, Cattle, and all the Earth,
how he has sweetly cause every one of these to give in assistance to preserve
each other Creature: Or rather how he himself in these gives forth preservation
and protection from one another, and so unites the whole Creation together, by
the unity of himself.

Or further, to see the Divine power in prayer, in Discourse, in Communion of
Saints, in Reading, in every sweet; and refreshnigs that a man meets within all
these, is the Almightly Comforter: But this is to behold that glory abroad, to
see and meet him from home, to behold him in Creatures without us: which sight
and enjoyment is often, and may be totally lost and the soul left alone again,
and so filled with mourning in his absence, O when shall I see my beloved, whom
my soul loves.

The Spouse had seen Christ in the manner aforesaid, but she had lost him
again; for if she had never seen him, she could not have called him her
Beloved, and mourn in his absence. Let a man eat never so hearty a dinner, yet
within a few hours he will be empty again and ready to languish; and thus all
comforts that are taken in from any creature without us, may be, nay will be,
must be lost, that so a man may come to know the Lord.

But now to see the King sitting in his banqueting-houses, to see the Law of
Righteousness and peace ruling and dwelling in the heart, and to be refreshed
with those sweet smelling spices, the discoveries of the Fathers love within;
This is the Word of God; This is sweeter then the honey or the honeycomb, for
this is to see him near at hand, even within the heart ruling and resting there.

This is the Kingdom of heaven within you; This is the city of refuge that will
not sail a man; This is the Rock of defense and offense; This the power that
makes a man bold as a Lion; If a man be cast into any straits, his heart dies
not like Nabals the man of the flesh; but he feels peace and content within,
and so is at rest.

Let come what will come, the man knows it is the will of the Father it shall be
so, and he feels a quiet peace compass his heart, so that he sees and feels
peace within; and rejoices in the excellency of it, he sees and feels love
and patience within, and rejoices in the glory of that sweet ointment, that
does cast a delightful favor all his soul over.

Now though this man be in prison, be in straits, be forsaken of all his
friends in the flesh, none will buy nor sell with him, because they count him a
man of strange opinions and blasphemies, call him an Atheist, a sot, a Papist,
a blasphemer that has forsaken God and goodness, because he will neither
preach nor pray, nor say grace when he sits down to meat, as the custom of
Professors are.

Yet this man is not alone, for his Father is with him, The Father lives in
him, and he lives in the Father.

The Father will have his people, whom he draws up to worship him in spirit and
truth, to be secret and silent; to be flow of speech for a little season, yet
quick-sighted and Eagle-eyed, though they be silent, they are not sottish
drones, they shall discern and judge others righteously, though others shall
not discern and judge them, but by rash censure, which is not righteous.

The righteous actions and patient silence, of those that are drawn up to wait
upon the Lord, shall be the greatest shame and condemnation to the ignorant
professors, and talking people that ever broke out. The wise flesh that would
be an Angel of light, is full of towords, but dead to the Law of
Righteousness, The Saints must die to waste words, but he made alive to
Righteousness, walking uprightly in the Creation, to the glory of the Maker of
all things; hereby Lord Esau will be under-mined, and his house and Kingdon will
fall about his ears.

For though the man of the flesh be altogether for outward preaching, praying,
observation of forms and customs, and knows not how to worship, if these be
taken away: he has no peace if these be gone.

But now the man of Righteousness sees death in all outward forms, if the
inward power be wanting; therefore his eye is still inward, to see the Law of
Righteousness ruling there, and guiding the body to be a profitable member in
the Creation. And this is the most excellent sight, to see the divine power in
ones self, ruling, dwelling and living within; which if it do, that body
wherein it dwells, shall be wholly subject in all his to that Law of Rightenesse.

They that know what the power of love and the Law of Righteousness is, they
know what I say, and can understand me; but to others these reports sound
strangely, and may draw words of reproach and slander from them; but it matters
not, they cannot hurt.

They that live in the light, they see the Lord abroad, and they see him at
home, they see him in other creatures, and they see and feel him in their own
hearts, in patient and quiet submitting, to what is his will; so that there is
a sweet agreement between the disposing hand of God without, and his power
within.

He that thus sees the Lord, the ancient of days, the one Almighty power, does
mightily honor him; when nothing can be done abroad, either in adversity or
prosparity, but the divine power that rules in the heart, consents, rejoices
and grudges not. And now the Lord is one, and his name or power one, every
where.

The sight of the King of Glory within, lies not in the strength of memory,
calling to mind what a man has read and heard, being able by a humane capacity
to join things together into a method; and through the power of free utterance,
to hold it forth before others, as the fashion of Students are in their Sermon
work; which a plough man that was never bread in their Universities may do as
much; nay, they do more in kind (as experience shows us) then they that take
Tyshes to tell a story.

But the sight of the King within, lies in the beholding of light arising up
from an inward power of seeling experience, filling the soul with the glory of
the Law of Righteousness, which does not vanish like the taking in of words
and comfort from the mouth of a hear say Preacher, or strength of memory.

But it continues like the Sun in the firmament shining forth, from that
established power of the divine within, and the enlivened heart shall as soon
be separated from glorying in the Law of Righteousness that dwells in him; then
the heat and light of the Sun, can be separated from the Sun.

And truly let me tell you, That as a man finds abundance of sweet peace in his
heart, when he is made to live in the Kingdom of heaven: So the words hat this
man speaks from this power within, are very profitable to others, and are good
seed, wheresoever they are sown, they will spring up and bring forth fruit, for
words spoken from the light of experience, have a twofold operation upon the
heart of the hearers.

For first, if I lie under straits and bondage in my spirit, by reason of some
inward and outward troubles, but especially by reason of the enthraldome to my
own lusts that over powers me, so that I cannot do what I would.

Then the words of experience from the mouth of one that has been in that
condition, and is passed through it, sounds liberty and life to my weary soul; I
speak what I have felt in this particular.

Secondly, If I delight in any way of the flesh, as to seek peace in creatures
abroad without me, or to seek satisfaction to my envy, self-will and lust; and
in the midst of this my folly I do occasionally hear the words of experience
from some other, declaring such actions and motions to be the powers of the
flesh and devil, and not of the spirit of righteousness.

Presently those words take peace from the earth; that is, from proud flesh;
and fill the whole soul with anger, distemper, grudging, and torment. And this
is another operation that pure language produces, which is a launcing of the
dead flesh that the disease may be cured.

For this wounding is nor to the mine of the creature, but it is a medicine
sent from the Lord to heal him; to take away the evil peace from the flesh,
that so the created part may lie down in rest, and be at peace in Christ, which
cannot be moved.

For every comfort that is of the flesh shall be shaken and removed, but Christ
the one power of Righteousness and peace, shall not be shaken nor moved, but
stand firm for ever. And by this you may see the difference between the kingdom
of the flesh and devil, which must be shaken to pieces and fall: And the
kingdom of heaven or of God, that endures for ever, and is that Rock due cannot
be moved.

CHAP. XV.
WHat do you mean by the kingdom devil or flesh?

I answer, Covetousness, the selfish power ruling in a man, is the kingdom of
darkness in that man: And as this power has corrupted the Creation (mankind)
so it rules, or has ruled in every single one more or less; but is the curse.
And every one that has lain under the bondage of this selfish power, and is in
any measure delivered, he can from that experience declare, what the power of
darkness is in whole mankind, as I have showed how secretly and closely this
selfish power branches himself forth in every one, till by the right of Reasons
Law shining within, he is discovered and cast out.

But what is it for a man to live in the kingdom of hell, devil or darkness?

I answer, when a man takes delight in nothing, but in satisfying of the lusts
of his own heart; when the way of the flesh is pleasing, and the way of the
spirit of Righteousness is a burden to him; when he glories in himself, and
feeds with delight upon his covetousness, pride, envy, lust, self-will, and in
every thing that pleases flesh.

And if he can but overcome that power that checks or crosses his will, O then
this man is in his Kingdom, he rejoyecs and is very well pleased, but it is
the kingdom of the flesh, that must be shaken and removed; This is no other
but the glorying in that which is a man's shame.

What is the kingdom of Heaven, or of Christ?

Answ. The Law of Righteousness and peace, ruling and dwelling in, mankind, is
the kingdom of heaven, this is the universal power bearing rule, treading the
flesh-power under his feet.

What is it for a man to live in the kingdom of heaven?

Ans. When mankind or any single person is so made subject to the King of
righteousness, that all his delight is to walk according to that law toward
every creature in the Creation, through love to the Fathers honor that made
al. He glories in that law of righteousness, which he finds seated in his
heart, and finds content no where else; and when the Spirit is honored, this
man is in his kingdom, he has what he would have.

While the kingdom of darkness rules in a man, if he knows it not, his sin is
the less, but when he comes to know the lusts of his flesh, and delight
therein, in opposition to the righteous Law which he sees some light in also;
this makes the man exceeding sinful, for now he sins against the law of light
shining in him, and causing him to see himself.

Even so when the divine power rules in a man, and he knows it nor, as it may
be in some measure, this man's joy is but small; for a man may act from the
power of love and righteousness, and yet not see nor know the excellency of
that power which guides ^ him.

But when a man is made to see and know the law of love and righteousness
within him, and delights to act from that power of life and liberty, which he
sees and feels seated in him. Now this man is carried on with much joy and
sweet calmness, meekness and moderation, and is full of glory. This is the
excellency of the work of Christ, not only to make flesh subject to
rigeteousnesse, but to know himself made subject, and to rejoice in the sweet
enjoyment of that prince of peace, to make a man rejoice, and to know the groun
(...) of his joy is unmovebale.

What do you mean by divine, and divine power?

I anwer, The divine is the spreadinq power of righteousness, which is Christ
that fills the whole Creation with himself.

And he is called a tree or a vine, because he does not lie in one single
person, but spreads himself in mankind, and every single body in whom he
breaths, is but a bough or bud of the vine.

So that look upon all together in whom Christ is spread, and they make up but
one vine, knit together by that one spirit, into one body; whether they be poor
or rich; learned or unlearned; and therefore those rich men that despise the
poor; and those learned University men that despise the unlearned, are pricks
of the thorn-bush, not branches of the vine; they be the curse that is now near
to burning.

And every single one alone in whom Christ breaths, is but a parcel of the
vine, in whom the divine power dwells and rests Even as every branch of an
Appletree, is filled with the sap, which is the life of the whole tree.

Christ is said to be the divine, because he grows and flourishes in the time
of light; he is the Son himself; he is a vine or tree that grows by day in
the heat of light, and so brings forth abundance of fruit to the glory of the
Father; Trees that grow in the heat of the Sun bring sorth pleasant fruit.

So those that are branches of this vine, that grows in the heat and life of
one spirit the King of Bighteousnesse, bring forth abundance of the fruit of
Righteousness, according to the nature of the vine they grow from.

Therefore the Saints are called, Children of the day, not of the night; for
they speak what they know in experience, and what they have received feelingly
from the Lord; and their actions and words are not at random, for they act
Righteousness within the Creation, from the law of Reason and Righteousness,
which they feel seated within.

Every one that does act or speak from the light and power of the day-vine
within himself, can give an account of his words and actions: But this is the
glory, that Adam, the man of the flesh hides himself from: This is the Law of
Righteousness, which fleshly Israel could not behold: This is the new Covenant
which our Clergy is unacquainted with.

Now opposite to this Divine, which is Christ, there is a night-vine, which is
the power of selfishnesse, or the bottom esse pit spread abroad in mankind; And
every man and woman that is guided by this selfish power of darkness, are but
branches of the night-vine.

And this nigt-vine which I called Lord Esau, or fleshly man, has filled the
whole earth with darkness (under pretense of his learning and fleshly
Government) so that he is a spread tree. But he is called by the Spirit, the
Thorn-bush.

The fruit that he brings forth is sour and bitter, and good for nothing but
the dunghill; for trees that grow always in the shade or place of darkness,
where the heat and light of the Sun does not cooperate, brings forth unpleasant
fruit.

Now this night-vine (but rather Thorn-bush) is the branching forth of the
wisdom and power of selfish flesh, every bud from it, is a sharp prickle:
treacherous and covetous Judas, is one branch from that root, and he has risen
up to a mighty great tree; for every treacherous and covetous heart, is but the
buddings forth of Judas.

So envious Scribes and Pharisees, are other branches from the same root, and
these have risen up into mighty spreading trees; for every one that is zealous
without knowledge, making a profession of the spirit of righteousness, and yet
grudging and ^aring the way of the spirit, are but the buddings forth of the
Scribes and Pharisees, that killed Christ after the flesh, and now is spread in
every Land and Family, to hinder Christ from rising, or else to suppress and
kill him again if they could after he is risen up in sons and daughters.

So covetous Demas, proud Simon Mugus, froward Nabal, unrighteous Elimas, and
such like, are all the buddings forth of the thorn-bush, and have covered the
earth with their branches, to keep it in darkness, and to hide the Sun of
Righteousness from it.

And all these are centred in the Clergy, the Universities are the standing
ponds of stinking waters, that make those trees grow, the curse of ignorance,
consusion and bondage spreads from hence all the Nations over.

The paying of tithes, the greatest sin of oppression, is upheld by them;
pride, covetousness, idleness, bitterness of spirit, despising and treading
all under-foot; in whom the spirit of the Lamb appears, is upheld by them;
these are the standing enemies against Christ.

Their Churches are the successors of the Jews Synagogues, and are houses of
bondage, their Universi^ies are successors of the Scribes and Pharisees houses
of learning. And though they persecuted Christ and the Apostles, and would own
none of their Doctrines; yet when they found that Christ's Doctrines began to
fill the earth, and to make the way of the Law odious, and their trade began to
fail.

Then did those houses of learning begin to take in and own the writings of the
Apostles, and to own that doctrine, prevailing with the Magistracy through the
deceit of their subtilety, to establish tithes in their hands still for their
maintenance (though Christ's doctrine threw down that oppression.) And then
from legal Sacrificers, they became hearsay-Preachers of the Gospel, not from
any testimony of light within themselves, but from the writings of the
Apostles, which they profess great love to, and keep charily, for their tithes
sake; and by the one they deceive the souls of people, for they preach the
letter for the Spirit, and by the other they pick their purses.

And this is very manifest by their carriage; for though those writings which
they live by, were not writings that proceeded from any Scholars, according to
humane art, but from Fishermen, Shepherds, Husband men, and the Carpenters son,
who spoke and writ as the Spirit gave them utterance, from an inward testimony.

Yet now these learned scholars have got the writings of these inferior men of
the world so called, do now slight, despise and trample them under feet,
pressing upon the powers of the earth, to make laws to hold them under bondage,
and that lay people, tradesmen, and such as are not bred in schools, may have
no liberty to speak or write of the Spirit.

And why so? Because out of these despised ones, does the spirit rise up more
and more to clearer light, making them to speak from experience; and every
fresh discovery of the Father, shines more glorious then the old, till at last
the creature is made to see the Father face to face in his own light.

But now the learned scholars having no inward testimony of their own to
uphold their trade by a customary practice, they hold fast the old letter,
getting their living by telling the people, the meanings of those trades-mens
words and writings; but alas, they mightily corrupt their meaning, by their
multitude of false expositions and interpretations; for no man knows the
meaning of the spirit, but he that has the spirit.

And if the- Father send forth any of these tradesmen, to declare the testimony
which is in them, as in these days he sends forth many. And these true
laborers shall increase, let the Universitie men do the worst they can; yet
the Scholars seek to suppress them, calling them new-lights, factious,
erroneou^, blasphemers, and the like.

And why do they all this? Because the light of truth that springs up out of
this earth, which the scholars tread under feet, will shine so clear, as it
will put out the candle of those wicked learned deceivers.

And therefore many of them that are more ingennous or subtle then the rest,
seeing light arises much amongst the people, begin to comply with the people,
and give people their liberty to speak as well as they, and deny the tithes
upon this condition, the people will give them a free contribution, and own
them as the chief Preachers and Prophets sent of God, and to look upon
themselves as underlings to the scholars.

And therefore stir up people to gather into Congregations, and to make choice
of one man to be their Preacher, though they shall have a liberty to speak in
the Congregation as well as he. But, all this is but deceit of the flesh, to
draw people under a new bondage, and to uphold the hearsay-preaching, that in
time matters may be wheeled about again, to advance the scholars, and give
them the supremacy in teaching.

And what is the end of all this; but only to hinder Christ the great Prophet
from rising, and whereas people should all look up to him for teaching, and
acknowledge no other teacher and ruler but Christ, the Law of Righteousness
dwelling in every man's heart; the scholars would have the people to look up to
them for teaching; and truly let me speak what I find, the more that you look
upon them, or any men for teaching, the more you shall be wrapped up in
confusion and bondage.

And therefore the upshot of all your Universities and public Preachers, and
men-teachers, is only to hinder Christ from rising, and to keep Jacob under,
and make him a servant and a slave to the man of the flesh.

So that all this do in the world about, hearsay preaching and settled forms of
worship, is no other but the spreadings forth of the thorn-bush, the fleshly
man, to hinder the worship of the Father in spirit and truth: And all those
strict and zealous. Preachers and Professors of other men's words and writings,
and upholders of forms and customs, are no other but the Scribes, Pharisees and
Judas, that still pursue Christ in enmity.

And this is the Reason, why mankind are so ignorant, and cold-spirited, in
the acknowledgment of the Father; because the night-Vine, or blanches of the
Thorn-bush, are so mighty great and thick, that they hide the light and heat of
the Sun of Righteousness from it.

This is the man of sin, the mystery of iniquity, that lets and must let, till
he be taken out of the way: Indeed this Thorn-bush does so prick, that none
dares meddle with it, unless he be well clothed with Christ.

This Thorn-bush or night-Vine grows in the cold time of the night, while the
Sun of Righteousness is under the Clouds; and the fruit it brings forth is
unpleasant, as pride, covetousness, envy, self-love, hypocrisy, confusion,
bondage, and all the misery under the power of darkness, to make Lord Esau a
complete Tyrant; and they that act from this Vine, are called children of the
night.

Now from hence it appears, what horrible proud men the Clergy are, that call
themselves Divines; or Christ that grows in the light of the Father, when alas
their light is but a candle stolen from the Apostles and Prophets writings, it
is not their own light, it is but hearsay in them.

Surely their pride and covetousness declares them to be the false Christ's and
false Prophers, and that they are branches of the Thorn-bush, that are full of
sharp pricks, in regard they endeavor to uphold a forced maintenance from the
people, whether they will or no; and force the people to be silent, to hear
them preach hearsay: and not to gainsay or question what they say under pain
of punishment, or being counted factious, or sowers of sedition.

This is the bondage the people are under, by these public Preachers: First,
they are filled with confusion, by their saying and unsaying, for they know not
what they say, they darken knowledge by their words. Secondly, they are like to
be crushed in their estates, by the power of corrupt Magistrates, if they
oppose these Preachers.

Does not their shame almost appear to all men? ^f it do not, it will do ere
long; assure yourselve, you Priests, you must fall, and be turned out as ludas,
Simon Magus, and the Scribes and Pharisees, that are the greatest enemies to
Christ, the spreading power of righteousness.

The Father does not send hearsay men, to be Laborers in his Vineyard, but
such as he first fills with the Divine power, and then sends them to work in his
Vineyard: So that still it is but Christ in them, that is, the one man that is
sent of the Father; for the Father sends none but his beloved Son. who is the
law of righteousness and peace, the spreading power.

And you shall find, you proud and covetous Priests ere long, that poor
despised ones of the world, that have this law in their hearts, are the
laborers than are sent forth; and you that call your selves Divines, and
Laborers, you are Traitors and Enemies to the spirit; you have had warning
enough, you are left without excuse; you are the men whose mouths must be
stopped; not by the hand of Tyrannical, humane power, as you have stopped the
mouths of others, I abhor it; for the Lord himself, whom you dishonor by your
hypocrasie, will stop your mouth with shame and sorrow, when he makes you to
see your selves to be Devils, Deceivers, Scribes and Pharisees Simon Magaus's,
Demas's, and Judas's, that are Traitors to the spirit.

But if you say? you do not assume the name of Day-vines, but of Divines, as
you whrite your selves, you are as bad under this description, of Divines, or
Diviners, are witches sorcerers, deceivers, as Balaam was; and as the maid that
got her Masters much gain by divination.

Suerly you are no other but Witches and Deceivers, for you hold forth letter
for spirit, make people believe that your words of hearsay are the testimony
and experience of the spirit within you; and you pick their purses extremly by
this divination and sorcerie.

Well, your word Divinity darkens knowledge; you talk of a body of Divinity,
and of Anatomyzing Divinity: O fine languague! But when it comes to trial, it
is but a husk without the kernall; words without life; the spirit is in the
hearts of the people whom you despise and tread under foot: You go on selling
words for money to the blind people whom you have deceived; and the spirit is
not in your service, for your public service stinks before him; your
preaching, praying, and yours and the peoples joining in your public Worship,
is abomination to the Lord: For you are the men and people that draw ^igh God
with your lips; but your hearts are removed: Love and righteous acting within
the Creation, is not to be found in your hands.

And therefore to conclude; seeing the alone peace of the heart lies in seeing
and feeling Christ the Divine power, to arise up and rule within; and every
foul is in confusion, bondage and sorrovv, till he have true light and feeling
hereof, as I have declared my own experience.

Then suerly it commands all mouths to be silent, that speak from hearsay, and
to wait for the resurrection of Christ within; for he that speaks from
hearsay, and yet says, Thus says the Lord, he lies, and he dishonours the
Lord: And Secondly, he wrongs the soul of the heater, by deceiving them, and so
walks unprofitably in the Creation, by making them believe, that his divination
are words of knowledge spoke from a pure testimony.

Suerly if the Lord himself did not become the Teacher of his poor despised
people, we should have been overspread with the Egyptian darkness, as the
Universitie men are by whom the earth is corrupted, and overspread with thick
darkness.

Well, you have prophesies and promises in the writings of Prophets and
Apostles, wait upon the Lord till you see the fulfilling of them within your
selves, or to your clear experience: And leave off your much talk about words
and sillables for by this nultitude of waste discourse, people are blinded,
that they neither mind the Prophesies of Scriptures, nor wait for their
fulfilling.

Truly I can speak in expevience, that while I was a blind Professor to a
strict goer to Church, as they call it, and a hearer of Sermons, and never
questioned what they spoke, but believed as the learned Clergy (the Church)
believed; and still forgot what I heard; though the words they spoke were like
a pleasant song to me, while I was hearing; And this I know is the condition of
all your publipue zealous Professors, let them say what they will, for they
live in cenfusion, ignorance and bondage to the fleshly man.

While I was such a one, I say, I was counted by some of the Priests, a good
Christian, and a godly man, though all that was in me, was but zealous
ignorance: But since it pleased the Father to reveal his Son in me, and cause
me to speak what I know from an inward light and power of life within.

Now both the same Priests, and the Professors, whom they have deceived; my
former acquaintance now begin to be afraid of me, and call me a blasphemer, and
a man of errors, and look upon me as a man of a another world; for my own
particular, my portion is fallen to me in a good ground; I have the Lord, I
have enough.

I look upon them with the eye of pity and love, seeing them as yet to lie
under those strong delusious, and powers of darkness, which I my self did lie
under, waiting upon the great restorer of all things, till he manifest himself
in them, and then we shall become one again, and never be divided.

O my dear friends in the flesh, despise not this word I speak; wait upon the
Lord for teaching; you will never have rest in your souls, till he speak in
you: run after men for teaching, follow your forms with strictness, as you
know I have done, you shall still be at loss, and be more and more wrapped up
in confusion and sorrow of heart: I speak what I have found.

But when once your heart is made subject to Christ, the law of righteousness,
looking up to him for instruction, waiting with a meek and quiet spirit, till
he appear in you: then you shall have peace, then you shall know the trurh, and
the truth shall make you free; then you shall know that I speak truth.

Well, I will conclude, and leave this writing in the hand of the world; Some
may be offended at it, if they be, I care not: Some may have their joy
fullfilled in seeing a conjuncture of experience between me and them: Though my
words may seem sharp to some, yet I do not write them out of any envy to any
man, but out of love to all; and so doing to my fellow creatures, as I would
they should do to me; walking (in this particular, as my endeavor is in all
other) uprightly and righteously in the Creation; speaking the truth as it is
in Jesus; that is, speaking my own words, what I see and feel in my own
experience, from that light of Christ within, and not by hearsay or
imagination, whereby humane learning in matters of Divine things, deceives all
the world, and laps every man up in darkness: So I rest.

FINIS.

