Vindiciae Medio-Saxonicae, OR, Tithes totally Routed, BY MAGNA CHARTA IN A
Reply to an Answer of Middlesex Letter and Petition, in the latter end of a
Tract, called, A Treatise of Tithes.

WHEREIN The Invalidity of the said Treatisers Arguments are fully manifested,
and the said Letter and Petition clearly vindicated from Error and Mistake.

BY AUG. WINGFIELD, A Member of this present PARLIAMENT.

LONDON, Printed by F. L. for William Larnar, at the Blackmore near
Fleet-Bridge, 1653.

Tithes totally routed, by Magna Charta.
HAving perused a Treatise of Tithes penned by way of Answer to its Opponents,
by one, as it is conceived, of the long Robe; we thought fit to give timely
admonition, that though he pretend to be a well wisher to Religion and
Propriety, yet when he speaks fair, men believe him not; for there are, it is
to be feared, seven Abominations in his heart, who though his Sophisticated
Arguments be covered with deceit, yet shall his wickedness be showed before
the whole Congregation. Prove. 26.25, 26.

In his Epistle to the Reader, he discovers both his spirit and his pride,
censuring his Antagonists, as clamorous malicious ignorants, though perhaps in
the judgment of unbiased Moderators, more learned, peaceable, and more
Evangelically spirited than himself. But fearing lest his great Diana Tithes,
the Nursery of contention and strife, should in these days of Reformation, and
restoration of public Freedom and liberty, like Dagon before the Ark, fall
to the ground and come to naught; he has therefore, out of his worldly wisdom,
judged it very opportune (both in reference to himself and also to his Clients
the Tith-taking Priesthood and Impropriator) in this extremity of time, to
force into his Aid a Catalogue of Acts of Parliament, though to little purpose,
since few of them before the Statutes of H. 8. intimate so much as a right,
much less command the payment of Parochial Tithes to Priests or others, as if
this Respondent would make us all believe, that Ubi nomen Decim^, ibi
argumentum Decimand^, that wheresoever in any Statute the word Tith is found,
there is an argument for Tithing: though by his leave in some of them by him
quoted there is not so much as the name (...) Char. c. 1^. Ma^^. c. 5.25. ^.1.
(...)
: But although he and his Tith-taking Brethren have a long time, like Simeon
and E^vi, confederated together, not only to make us ignorants, but still to
keep so, by persuading of us and our fore fathers, That Tithes were first due
by Divine Law, then by Canon Law, and now by Statute Law: yet are we and the
good people of England resolved to be no longer deluded by them with their
Paralogisms, and deceitful reasonings.

And therefore that we may no longer digress by way of preface, we shall now
come to reply, and to examine those two grand objections, which the Author of
the said Treatise raises against the Middlesex Letter and Petition in the
Expository opening of those two Statutes of Magna Charta. chapter 29. and 1. R. 2.
chapter 14. where this Respondent says page 13. That for the Penner of the said
Letter and Petition to make the People believe, that the payment of Tithes is
against Magna Charta, is such an exposition as was never made upon that
Statute, and therefore to rectify this Error (as he calls it) he has
labored, though in vain, to overthrow the said exposition, and those
invincible arguments built upon it, and to set up his own contrary
interpretation and false assertion, (viz.) That Tithes and the payment thereof
by the people, were confirmed by Magna Charta, chapter 1. under the Notion of
Church rights.

And first for proof thereof he says, page 14. That by the Common Law of this
Land, at the confirmation of Magna Charta, Ecclesiastical persons had remedy to
recover their Tithes in the Spiritual Court, and then concludes, that the Law
gives no remedy but where there is a right: which assertion is very untrue. For
Cook upon Tithes faith, That by the Common Law Lands are undecimable, and if
undecimable, then certainly by that Law there can be no Church right to Tithes,
neither to be recovered by virtue thereof in the Spiritual, or Popes Court,
Since the people of England were not bound in Law by his Cannons. Neither is
Cook single in his opinion, For Seldom fo. 291 says, That Arbitrary
disposition of Tithes used by the Laity, as well de jure, of right, (as the
positive Law then received and practiced was) as de facto, of deed and
practice, is that which Wickleff remembered in his Complaint to the King and
Parliament under R. 2. The substance whereof in brief, is, That the proud and
pompous Priests did constrain the poor People of England ( viz. by Popish
Canons) to pay their Tithes unto them, whereas within a few years before, they
paid their Tithes and Offerings at their own free will and pleasure. Which is
also attested by Ludlow a Judge of Assize in E. 3. who says, That in ancient
time a man might give his Tith to what Church he would; which is true says
Judge Brook in Abridging the case. Seldom fol. 252.

And the said Author further says, fo. 290. That under Innocent the 3d. it was
usual in fact for Laymen by the practice of the Law at that time both Common
and Canon, to convey the right of their Tithes, as Rent-charges or the like, to
what Church or Monastery they pleased, and such Conveyances were clearly good.
And whereas the Author of the said Treatise, p. 14. quoteth Mr. Seldom for his
Authority of Parochial right, he is clearly mistaken, since Mr. Seldens
judgment in the same place immediately following is clearly to the contrary,
and that which is here alleged as the Treatisers main Argument, is nothing but
the opinion of the Canonists recited by Mr. Seldom, and by him in the same and
following pages fully confuted, page 144, 146.

Moreover Magna Charta is, by Act of Parliament made in 25 E. 1. called, the
Confirmation of the Charters, adjuged and declared to be the Common Law of the
Land; which if true, as it is most true, then Tithes being not so much as
named, much less confirmed by Magna Charta, are not due by the Common Law, (as
the said Respondent weakly supposes) and so not at all under Ecclesiastical
cognizance.

But he objecteth and says, That Tithes are contained in these words, The
Churches Rights, Mag. Char. cap. 1. for further satisfaction whereof, see Cooks
exposition upon the very same words, where he says, that Ecclesiastical
persons shall enjoy their lawful jurisdictions, and other their rights (but
not one word of Tithes) without diminution, and that no new Rights were given
unto them hereby, but such as they had before confirmed: Now if no new Rights
were given, then not Tithes, since the Author of the said Treatise confesses
p. 14. that the Common Right of Tithes due to the Rector of the Parish, is but
from the time of K. John, and then, as M. Seldom (whom he quoteth) p. 146.
declares, not so much as in opinion established, whereby it is evident, not
only by Seldom and his own confession, but also in the judgment of Cook, that
at the confirmation of Magna Charta, Tithes were not at all comprehended in the
Rights of the Church.

Which will yet more fully appear if we consult Mr. Seldens book of Tithes, and
the Roll of Winton. In the first whereof page 137. It is delivered for a clear
truth, that there never was any Canon of any General Council as yet found, that
purposely commanded payment of Tithes, nor any that expressly supposed them a
duty of Common right, before the Council of Lateran, under Pope Innocent the
3d. 1615: So that at the Council of Lateran, which was in the latter end of K.
John, and but 12 years or thereabouts before the confirmation of Magna Charta
by H. the 3d. Tithes were not due by common right, that is by Common Law, and
so consequently no rights of the Church. And if not then due by Common Law,
then certainly not at the confirming of Magna Charta, since in the judgment of
all, both Canonists and Common Lawyers, 12 years is not a competency of time,
either for custom, or prescription, the one allowing 40 years at least, the
other time out of mind.

And yet to proceed, this Respondent does further acknowledge, p. 14. that
there was no Parochial Right of Tithes till after the Council of Lateran
aforesaid, 1615. and that after the Decretal Epistle of Innocent the 3d sent to
the Archbishop of Canterbury in the year aforesaid, the right of Tithes was
allowed (but you must know by whom, (viz.) the Pope and his Clergy, not the
People) and so became Lex Terrae, a Law of the Land, which are likewise the
words and judgment of Cook: Now of what force and validity, a Right of Tithes,
grounded upon a Canon of the Pope, and diametrically repugnant to Magna Charta
can be, let all men judge; since Cook their Oracle has declared in his Chapter
of Tithes, that all Canons which are against the Common Law, or Custom of the
Land, are of no force.

Now as to the Roll of Winton, called by some Doomsday Book, which was a survey
of all the Lands and Revenues both of Clergy and Laity, exactly taken by
Commiss. in every County throughout the Nation, and returned into the Exchequer
about the latter end of the Conquerours Reign, It is there Recorded in
particular what the Revenues and dues of every Presbyter and Church were, but
yet notwithstanding very rarely, if at all, are any Tithes found among the
Church Revenues. So that hence it is most clear, First, that in William the
Conquerors time, Tiths were no Revenus nor rights of the Church; nor yet
Secondly, in H. 2. his time, fee the Letter and Petition, p. 5. And lastly, by
the Authors own confession they became due only but from the latter end of K.
John's Reign, and that grounded merely upon a Popish Canon, contrary to Magna
Charta, which is acknowledged by the Learned, to be the Common Law of England,
both before and after the Conquest.

The second and last objection which the Author of the said Treatise makes, is
upon our exposition of the Statute of 1 R. 2. cap. 14. which we shall here
make good to be most genuine and true, notwithstanding his false calumniation;
and that his Anti-exposition is most absurd and false, and such as had not
Custom wrought another Nature in him, to speak and write untruly, could never
have fell from him. Now the question between us is, whether the Averment there
spoken of be Lay Averment, and so to be made by the Plaintiff, according to his
exposition, or Church Averment, and so to be made by the Defendant, according
to our exposition: whether of which is most true, we shall leave to every one
to judge, by opening unto you the Nature of Averment out of the judgment of the
Learned, and by holding forth such reasons as shall in brief be produced.

And first Cowells Interpreter says, That Averment signifies (according to
the Author of Terms of the Law) an offer of the Defendant to make good or to
justify an exception pleaded in abatement or bar of the Plaintiffs Act. And
Sir Hen. Smith in his book of Law fo. 359 also says, That Averments must be
offered to be proved true in Bars. 1. Answers, Replications, Rejoinders, etc.
but not in Counts and Declarations. And of the same judgment is Sir Edw. Cook,
in his first part of Institutes fo, 362. So that it is evident, Averments are
properly to be made by Defendants in their answears, or in after pleadings, and
not by Plaintiffs in their Declarations: unless in some few particular cases,
of which this is none, as is evident, not only by the Grammatical, and Logical
Construction of the said Statute, but even in the judgment of Learned Rastal,
a Justice of the Common Pleas, in Q. Mary's days; who to out the question out
of doubt has set it down in the margent of his Abridgement of the Statutes, to
be Church Averment, which we conceive to be a final determination of the
question.

And as (...) your Ordinance of Nov. 1644. for the payment of Tithes, we ^y
conceive it to be the judgment of all the learned, that it is of no longer
validity than during Parliamentary Session which is now dissolved upon sure
grounds of Piety, Public ^^^dome, right reason, and honesty: and that
notwithout the General consent of the major part, either precedent, or
subsequent, of the Supreme Authority, the People.

Now by what has been said it will easily appear who does most abuse and
mislead the People, and whether exposition of Magna Charta and the other
Statute of R. 2. is most true. That of the Letter and Petition, backed with
right reason, and the Authorities of great Lawyers and learned Judges, or that
of the Author of the Treatise, being a fancy of his own brain, and raised out
of implicit Terms, which he that believes, had need of of a Popish and
implicit faith.

FINIS.

