HONEST PLAIN DEALING: OR, MEDITATIONS AND ADVERTISEMENTS OFFERED To Public
Consideration. By JOHN WINTER, Curate of East Dearham in Norff.

If I forget thee, oh Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning,

Psalm. 137.5. Qui non vetat peccare, cum possit, jubet.

Sen. Tro. Imprimatur.

Ex Aed. Lambeth. May 10. 1663. Guil. Brabourn. S. S. T. P. Rmo. in Cto. Patri
ac D. D. Archi-Episc. Cant. Sacellantus Domesticus.



LONDON, Printed by A. M. and are to be sold by William Oliver, next Door to
the Castle and Lion in Norwich. 1663.

To the Reader.
LIving in an Age for the purpose, amongst many I have also adventured a little
Ink and Paper. I should be conscious to my self of negligence, unless I should
do something of this nature; and of folly, should I do much, in a time, wherein
the Press daily groans with superfaetations of Wit and Learning.

My present business is, neither to please the curiosity of Critics, not to
pretend an Addition to the Judicious; but to better the minds, and inform the
judgments of the Generality, whose Genius is most suitable to my plain Pen, and
mean abilities.

And whereas of other Authors, some aim at florid Eloquence, some at spruce
facetious Conceits, and others at sublime Mysteries: my design is merely, to
speak to every capacity, in an upright way, and downright terms, the words of
truth and honesty.

Nevertheless, I do not utterly despair to give some satisfaction, to some of
the best rank of Approbations. A worthy Friend will make a shift, to carve
himself content, out of a few broken Dishes of common Meat, set before him with
a good Heart, and true Welcome. It is true, One man's meat is another man's
bane; and it is possible, that some of my Fragments will displease some
Palates. And much good may it do them; it is such as I was able to affoard them.

Some perhaps may think it strange, that I come abroad without a Patron. But of
this (not to say that Patrons are not so plentiful as Guardian Angels) take
these two Reasons: First, The Work needs not any, as it is just; Secondly, It
deserves none, as it is small. And (as Cato said of Statues) I had rather men
should ask, why I had none? than, why I had any?

Protected therefore by God Almighty, I humbly offer this poor Trifle to
Public View; whereby may I do any service to God, the Church, the King, and
the People; (as I heartily wish) it is enough for

East Dearham, Feb. 21. 1662. Norff. John Winter.

MEDITATIONS AND ADVERTISEMENTS.
MEditation is a nimble excursion of the soul from the suburbs of this world,
to the Court of Heaven; a loose from the reins of the flesh, and the curb of
terrene concernments; a momentany manumission from the bondage of mortality; a
lawful magical charm, which without villainy, or treason, makes the beggar a
Prince, and the Prince a beggar.

And blessed, and for ever praised be he, 2 Cor. 8.9.
who became poor to make us rich; through whose grace, we enjoy by
contemplation, what nature has denied us in actual possession: this worlds
good, the next worlds goodness.

In this a retired solitude excells humane society; and what is rare in the
multitude, a man alone may compass; according to Pyrrho's practice: who being
asked what he did by himself, answered, Laert.
Meditor esse probus, I study how to be honest.

Whatsoever is meant by St Peter's Cope, it is a great blessing to live within
St Paul's Scope; as poor, yet making rich; 2 Cor. 6.10.
as having nothing, yet possessing all things. If a cup of cold water be a
largess worthy of a Disciples acception, and Christ's recognition; then having
food and raiment, I must not only be content, Mat. 10. last.
but think my self very rich, much dignified by God, and even for this
exceedingly obliged.

Merit and Reward.
WHen I had less wit, and worth than now, (and that is too little of all
conscience) observing how many set the Cart before the Horse; how they looked
to catch the bird without beating the bush; and to reap reward, where they
never sowed pains; it put me into a re-cogitation, how my parts and endeavors
should be considerably gratified. But happily and happily falling upon the words
of the Apostle, where he enjoyneth Children to requite their Parents; 2 Timothy
5.4.
by finding my self unable to satisfy that particular, I found my self
satisfied in all particulars, for all my past and future possible labors. For
he who cannot requite his natural Parents, can much less strike off accounts
with God and the Church. I can never do, or suffer enough for that God, who
has done and suffered so much for me; nor take sufficient pains and care, in,
and for that Christian Church, which took the care and pains to make me a
Christian.

A. a. b.
THus usually begin our English children to learn to read. The Christians
Primmer, and the Turks Alcoran are nothing alike in their face.

Train up a child in the way he should go, Prove. 22.6.
(says Solomon) and when he is old he will not depart from it. Christ is the
way, the truth, and the light; and he that will come to him, must go by the
cross. A cross in the way directs the Passenger; and the cross guides the
Christian scholar. Schola crucis, schola lucis, the cross teaches true
wisdom; and true wisdom teaches how to bear the cross: without which
proficiency, a man may have cause to say with Nero, Mallem nescisse literas, I
had rather never to have known letters.

Certainly, it is neither false Latin, nor bad Discipline, to teach a child to
say, God be my speed, before he pronounces his A. B. C. And even the greatest
Clerks may gather this lesson out of their first Elements, namely, that the
true end of all learning, and its utmost perfection, is to know Christ, and him
crucified.

What Christians ever did wear in their foreheads, that (I think) their Books
without offense may bear in their Frontispieces. For Christ, who would have us
to own his Cross, did never declare that we should disown, or be ashamed of the
Sign of it.

Profaneness is no antidote for superstition, who vilifies what another has
too much magnified, does not rectify, but multiply abuses. For my part, as I
believe the more pure and Primitive Christians, did not make a magical spell
of the Sign of the Cross to fright the Devil: so I verily conceive, that they
never thought that the Devil could have frighted Christians, from the laudable
use of the Sign of the Cross.

I love not to see zeal self-consumed in fruitless opposition, nor retrograde
devotion. I wish even the Antipodes Christians, but would not have Christians
become Antipodes in their opinions.

That Constantine the great saw the Sign of the Cross in the air, Soc. Eccl.
hist. l. 1. c. 2.
and these words with it, In hoc Signo vinces, in this Sign thou shall
overcome, as a preamble to his conversion, we have so fair a tradition, and so
venerable authority for it; that modesty and good morality dare not doubt it.
To which may be added, the sign of the Son of man coming to Judgment, Matthew.
24.30.
interpreted by the ancient Fathers, to be the Sign of the Cross; which
exposition was never yet by the Church exploded for heretical.

Whether that be the Sign there meant, God knows; and that day shall reveal it.
But this is certain, that the enemies to the Cross, have been the greatest
enemies to Learning, and the enemies to Learning, have been the greatest
enemies to the Cross. Et crimine ab uno disce omnes, And take one example for
all in Julian the Apostate, who profiting above most his contemporaries, did by
his learning find out, That there was no directer way to overthrow the
Christian Religion, Soc. l. 3. c. 10.
than by preventing their literate education: And therefore he forbade
Christians the use of humane learning, and the reading of profane Authors,
least they should beat the Pagans with their own weapons.

Oh how would Infidels have gloried in those days, could they have seen
Christians abhor the Sign of the Cross; or quarrel with one another about it!
Oh let not the Sign of his Cross be any cause of Christians separation from one
another; Ephesians. 2.16.
seeing Christ by his Cross intended and wrought the worlds general
reconciliation.

Vt litera verba, sic mores homines.
AS letters make words, so manners make men; education like pronunciation, (for
the most part) giving each man his accent, whereby he is either asper, aut
lenis, fierce or gentle.

The praise of Literature, which the Boy at School cant's in jest, the man
afterward proves and approves in earnest; emollit mores, nec sin it esse
feros, it softens the wild nature of men, and suffers them not to be brutish.
It is a weighty treasure without a burden; it is gladius delphicus, an engine
fit for all occasions; in prosperity an ornament, in adversity a refuge.

This benefit Aristippus (as he said) reaped by Philosophy, Laert.
that he could speak freely to all men; to the great men without fear or
flattery, and without pride to the poor. And this comfort Dionysius junior
sound, when he was deposed, that Philosophy had enabled him to bear the check
of fortune.

And as in letters, Plut.
there are consonants and vowels, liquids and mutes; so among men, some more
liberally talkative, others more deeply reserved: And the learned Solomon
points to the golden mean, saying; There is a time to keep silence, and a time
to speak; Eccl. 3.7. and chap. 8. ver. 5.
And a wise man's heart will discern both time, and judgment.

Indeed learning instructs a man to both, as Socrates witnesses; Steb.
who demanded of his nimble tongued Shollar Carco a double price: one to learn
him how to speak well; another to know when to hold his peace.

One with another do well, learning and good manners; and we see scarce any who
hate the first, attain the latter. But on the contrary, many who would not be
brought to their A. B. C. have brought themselves to Plautus his long letter,
that is, in plain terms, to the Gallows; and though formerly they did despise
the Calling, yet then they would gladly have had the benefit of the Clergy;
which favor of the Law speaks as highly for the honor of Learning, as can be
thought; seeing it supposes that malefactor only capable of mercy, who can
read; and Learning to be as much worth as a man's life.

The Barbarian boy, who had learned only to say (like a Parrot) Alpha, Beta,
Gamma, Coel. Rh.
by being three or four days at Athens, at his return into his own Country
was applauded, carried in triumph, and judged by the ignorant to excel an
eminent Orator.

Whether a man should more pity the case of such an Orator, admire the
confidence of such a Novice, or laugh at the folly of such an Auditory, may be
a difficulty. He has a hard task, that must both tell his tale, and find ears;
or preach like venerable Bede to a heap of stones, in hope that they shall say
Amen to him.

It is not long, since Englishmen were as mad as those Barbarians, preferring
pitiful boys before skillful Orators, before Grave Divines, and Reverend
Bishops. Yea, such a nauseous loathing had debilitated the stomachs, and
vitiated the palates of the many, causing a disgust, reluctance, and belching
against all Sciences and Languages; that within a few years (without a
sovereign remedy) ignorance would have gotten the upper hand so far in this
Nation, that who so should have uttered Alpha, Beta, Gamma, should either have
been adored (as that boy was) for a profound Scholar; or else have been stoned
to death like Dr Lamb for a Conjurer.

Oh, but have a care of the Language of the Beast; and that (they say) is
Latin. And yet I believe, none of them know, what Language the Beast spoke,
which Balaam rode on. I dare say, it was not Latin.

But to be serious; the wise Alphonsus being told of a certain King of Spain,
who depraved and spoke ill of Learning, answered, Vox illa Bovis, that is the
language of a beast and not of a King. And he who calls upon Kings to be wise,
and Judges to be learned, Ps. 2. Ps. 32.
commands the people not to be like horse and mule which have no understanding;
whose mouth must be holden with bit and bridle, lest they fail upon men.

The language of the Beast consists not in the National Dialect wherein men
speak, but in the unwholesome matter which they utter. To blaspheme Gods sacred
Attributes, or to vilify his Ordinances, or to contemn his gifts, this is the
language of the beast.

Christ's Cross bare the Inscription in Hebrew, Jo. 19.20. Rev. 7.9.
Greek, and Latin; and the Kingdom of Heaven is a select extraction out of all
tongues and people. And as the division of tongues in the Old Testament is
recorded for a judgment on the world: Genesis 11. Act. 2. 2 Cor. 12.
so the gift of many tongues in the New, for a mercy to the Church. What
confounded Babel, serves to build up Sion.

It is no marvel, though blind men cannot judge of colors, Tull. Tuscu. 5.
and fools despise instruction. Democritus, who pulled out his eyes to
strengthen his wit, did in that show neither wit, nor manners; and I wish no
man to follow his example, unless he thinks it a happiness to be led by the
nose.

Much Learning did not make St Paul mad; but too little made Festus think so:
And though Festus knew not how to value St Paul nor his learning; Act. 26.
yet St Paul's learning taught him to give a due respect to noble Festus.

Good morrow; Good night; God save you;
God speed; and God be with you.
By your leave neighbor Quaker.
THese are the ancient forms of salutation. This was the old way of educating
and principling man, woman and child. And the old way is the good way. Jer.
6.16.
The very words themselves are so sound and hearty, that none but a Judas, a
damnable hypocrite can trunk them forth, and not intend them.

He who knew the heart said, Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks; Mat. 12.34.
by which rule, that man can have but a small stock of good in his hear, that
cannot afford to bestow a good word on his neighbor, or to breath out a
blessing on them he meets with.

Belles paroles n'escorchent pas la langue, Good words hurt not the tongue,
says the French Monsieur. And he who told us, That evil words corrupt good
manners, Cor. 15.
did thereby intimate that good speeches would be a proper means to refine
them. A brisk gale of wind purges the foggy air, and makes it healthful. God
hears us in, and helps us by our mutual prayers: Psalm. 109.16.
but he that loves not blessing, it shall be far from him.

Because the Pharisees loved salutations in the markets, may not good
Christians use them in their occasional congresses? Yes surely. For Christ did
not blame them for using, Mat. 23.7.
but for their ambitious affectation of them. They loved to take, and not to
give; to receive honor of all, and to give honor to none but men of their own
sect: And so do they, who now deny respect to others. And [Salute no man by the
way] is a Text as much tortured as the other to defend a rude Zealot; Luke 10.4.
and I wish the Context may go along with him, (if he delights it) neither
purse, nor scrip, nor shoes. I know not whether our wild people ground their
humor more upon our Saviors words, 2 King. 4.29.
or on the Prophet Elisha's to his unlucky servant; but who so shall look well
on their faces, will think them rather to resemble Gehezi, than any of the
seventy Disciples.

Gehezi was sent to raise the Shunamites child to life; and the words to him
signified no more but all possible haste in his journey: And the particular
exception for that time, shows the restraint to be contrary to the Prophets
custom.

The like is to be said of Christ's Commission to the Seventy; a case that will
square to none now. For they were sent to the Cities and Villages of Judea. The
time was not then come, Salutem in Domino dicere Gentibus, to speak health and
salvation in the Name of the Lord to all Nations. Then was no time to do it;
but now there is no color for omitting it. Besides, even then, they who were
prohibited congratulations by the way, were enjoined their Ave, at their
journeys end, saying, Peace be to this house; and that is in effect, God be
here.

And let us take good examples along with solid reason, and then we have Gods
holy Angels, and good men, his faithful servants, practical proofs for these
our customary salutations.

The Angel saluted Gideon at his good Husbandry, threshing wheat, Dominus
tecum, The Lord is with thee, Jud. 6.12,
thou mighty man of valor. The Angel Gabriel before he delivered his
transcendent message to the blessed Virgin, Luc. 1.28.
saluted her with a (...), Hail thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with
thee. The holy man Boaz saluted his Reapers, Ruth 2.4.
saying, The Lord be with you; and they re-saluted him, saying, The Lord bless
thee. There was his God speed; and their welcome.

And to urge no more particulars, that the general practice of the Church was
thus, St Paul's Epistles both first and last do declare; and especially the
close of that to the Romans.

And as good Angels and good men were ever free and frequent in salutiferous
benedictions; so on the contrary, the Devil never used any: not that he loves
plain dealing, but hates good manners; encountering even our blessed Savior
without all respect, in the familiar terms, Mat. 4.
Thou, and Thee.

Our salutations are mutual precations, and therefore never unseasonable;
because there is not a minute in our lives, wherein we stand not in need of
Gods mercy, and one another prayers.

Sodom saw the morning Sun, and thought themselves sure of the day; but a
shower of fire and brimstone brought on them an eternal night before noon. There
they wanted the Angels and Lots Good morrow, Genesis 19.
God save you, and, God be with you.

The Egyptians passed away the day and part of the night, and then were
overwhelmed in the midst of the Sea. Ex. 14.
The servants of Job were working, Job 1.
and his Oxen plowing, when the enemies fell upon them, and made an utter spoil
of them. They wanted a God speed, and a God be with you.

And whatsoever men think of it, God speed the Plough is a salutation, which
extends from the Prince to the peasant, and concerns all manner of persons.
Eccles. 5.9.
For the profit of the earth is for all; and the King himself is served by the
field. And of all other, the Husbandman (in my mind) may justly challenge a God
speed, from my lips; nor dare I deny him: for without his labor I might go fow
up my mouth.

Nor do I find any debarred the benefit of these Christian courtesies, but men
perniciously, and actually mischievous; as the professed enemies of the Church:
Ps. 129.
whom the Psalmist wishes like the grass on the house top, which has neither
mower, nor binder, nor passenger to say, God speed. 2 Ep.
And the like reception St John appoints for the heretical seducer.

To words men usually add gestures, to beautify, and amplify their
salutations; as uncovering and declining the head, bowing the body, and bending
the knee. And God who has commanded all men to honor him, has in a
subordination commanded us to honor all men, 1 Pet. 2.17.

As for the manner or outward gesture, the civil custom of a Nation should be
a rule to every native; unless men be crossebyaz'd like the Cynick Diogenes,
who ever contrived to enter in, when the multitude crowded out of the places of
public Convention; and willed at his death, to be buried contrary to all men,
with his face downward, in hope to lie right, when the world should be turned
upside down. I hope by this time his worship is laid as he should be.

The men of China (as stories say) affecting to be unlike other men, when
others pulled off their hats to them, then they pulled off their shoes. This
was something of complement, though at the wrong end. But this Generation
afford us a new strain of Humorists, who in the morning block their Beavers for
all day; and put on their hats to affront their Betters, and shame their
friends, as Soldiers put on their Helmets to fight with their enemies. And in
this they excel the men of China; for they had a foot, though not a head to
uncover: but these have neither head nor foot in their devices, neither hat nor
leg; but are complete Clowns, Cap a pe.

The Poet tells us, That it was accounted a capital crime, Juvenal.
even among Heathens, Si juvenis vetulo non assurrexerat, If a young man had
not risen up, and given honor to his Elder. And therefore in all their
Schools, they taught them manners, as well as letters. And that both the one
and the other are very good, this is a clear and unanswerable argument, namely,
because none have them by nature, nor attain them without instruction and
industry. Such respect therefore had Alexander the Great for his Tutor, that he
publicly professed, He was more engaged to Aristotle his Tutor for his
education, than to King Philip his Father, for his life and Kingdom. And
scarce any thing lies a greater blot upon the memory of that accursed and
hypocritical Tyrant Nero, Anton. in Meliss. and Max.
than the murder of his Tutor Seneca.

With what strict discipline, in how great humility, and with what observance
of their Betters the Jews educated their youth, Philo the Jew and others have
declared; namely, that the Masters sitting in seats for the purpose, the
Scholars sat upon the ground at their Masters feet, inclining themselves, and
humbling themselves even to the dust. And that great Doctor of the Gentiles St
Paul declares plainly, that he had such an education, being brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel. Act. 22. Luke 10.39.
And Mary sat at Jesus feet, and heard his words.

Telecrus being asked, Plut.
why the Spartans made their children show such great respect to strangers?
answered, to imprint in them the more exact obedience to their parents, And we
find by sad experience, that from irreverence toward strangers, people have
proceeded to contemn their Parents, Natural, Spiritual, and Civil; contrary to
the tenor of the fifth Commandment.

And that is not all the mischief; but by keeping on their hats to the
dishonor of man, many have gotten a habit of dishonouring God, covering their
heads at prayers, thanksgivings, and the like holy exercises; a thing flatly
condemned in the word of God, by the Apostle who says, That every man praying,
1 Cor. 11.3, 4.
or prophesying, with his head covered, dishonors his head. And that Head of
every man, which is thereby dishonored, is Christ.

Let men then learn to walk more humbly with their God, and more respectfully
to men, who bear the Image of God; and that the rather, because God Almighty
(if men rightly consider it) has exceedingly dignified the nature of man, by
his Son Christ Jesus his Incarnation. For shame at least, let men uncover
their heads, and show their faces to the honor of God; lest God cover them
with shame and confusion of face.

Grace before, and Grace after meat.
THere is as much need of good manners, as of our daily bread, and more of
Grace than of meat. Grace may be without meat; and that is no fault of the
person: But to take meat without Grace, is both a sin, and a plague. He is
worse than a beast, that knows not his keeper. Ingratitude is a monster it
self, and it makes a man a monster.

Men flying to their meat tooth and nail, without benediction and thanksgiving,
have (as we say) more sauce than pig; and yet are indeed more hogs than men.
They are like Ulysses his companions, who were turned into swine by Circes
enchantment.

And of all unclean beasts, none but swine, trampling pearls under their feet,
and renting their feeder, Mat. 7.
are bad enough to parallel those tongue-tied persons, who are past grace. Ps.
104. Ps. 127.
For the young Lions seek their meat from God; and the young ravens call upon
him that feeds them.

It is an usual saying among men, That many gape for that which they never
have; and that they are never sure of their meat, until it be in their belly.
But indeed without Gods blessing procured by prayer, they are sure of nothing.
Their table may become a snare; death may be in the pot; thinking to devour a
Camel of dainties, they may strain and be choked with a gnat. Once a great
person perished by a little fly in a draught of water; which I do not cite
uncharitably, as a judgment upon him, but as a motive to piety for us.

We may have meat before our eyes, and not have power to taste it; as that
distrustful Lord had in the gate of Samaria. 2 Kin. 7.2.
Men may have meat in their mouths, and not live to swallow it: as the
Israelites fared with their dainty birds: the plague of God being fit sauce for
those Quails, which were obtained by murmuring, Number. 11.
and not by prayer; and sacrificed to lustful wantons, and not bestowed upon
hungry souls. Yea, men may have meat in their stomachs, and not digest it; and
then their disgorge will be more of pain, than their ingurgitation was of
pleasure.

The Jews not unmindfull of these contingencies, Drusius. P. Fagius.
and of the necessary concurrence of divine influence upon the weak elements of
our vital subsistence, had not only their grace before and after meat; but also
a distinct blessing for the Cup, and another for the bread.

In their grace after meat, as they gave thanks for their present food, so they
forgate not to mention other both corporal and spiritual mercies, as their
deliverance from Egypt, and Gods Covenant; closing with a prayer for the
prosperity of all Israel, for a blessing on mount Sion, and for the attainment
of life everlasting. Upon which custom of theirs, when we seriously reflect
(considering likewise that Tyrants bring people to eat their own dung, and
drink their own piss, whereas under gracious Princes every man eats the fruit
of his own fig tree, and drinks the water of his own cistern) we shall have
just cause to applaud and imitate the practice of our forefathers; who taught
their children at the end of their thanksgiving to pray, God save his Church,
our King and Realm, and send us peace through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

And as it becomes well the just to be thankful; 2 Timothy 3.2.
so unthankful persons are ranked and placed between disobedient to parents,
on the one hand; and unholy on the other. Prayer and thanksgiving are
relatives; and wheresoever petitions precede, there grateful returns should
succeed conferred favors. This is evident by our Saviors words concerning the
ten Lepers. Lu. 17.18.
They that began alms give thanks for it as soon as they have it; and this is
the case of all Christians, who are taught and commanded to pray, to Our Father
which is in Heaven, that he may give us our daily bread.

When Joseph brought his two sons to ask their Grandfather blessing, (where
note by the way, that of old, godly persons taught their children to honor
their aged parents, and to crave their blessing) the holy man Jacob in the form
of his benediction, Genesis 48.15.
remembered with thankfulness, how God had fed him all his life long.

When Saul enquired for Samuel, the young maids which went to draw water, told
him, that he should find him at the Sacrifice, in the high-place, whether the
Prophet and the people were to go up to eat. 1 Samuel 9.13.
For the people will not eat (said they) until he come; because he does bless
the Sacrifice, and afterward they eat that be bidden. Israel had their
Sacrifices to God; and they had their Love Feasts among themselves. And Samuel,
as he was the proper person in his time to consecrate the first; so where his
presence was, the people thought him meetest to bless the latter. And so well
disciplined were that people, that even the poor servants that carried water,
were able to give an account of it.

And behold a greater than Samuel, even Christ; who as he was careful to feed,
so to teach the multitude: lest the multitude should be better fed than taught.
He being Lord of all, became his own and the peoples Chaplain. For being about
to feed at one time five thousand persons and upward, and at another time four
thousand, he looked up to heaven, and blessed, before he gave a morsel of
bread to any Accumbent. Matthew. 14. and chap. 15.
By this he gave them non tam caenam, quam disciplinam, not so much corporal
food, as spiritual furtherance; that people may know whence they have every
piece of bread, and whether to render thanks for it. And it were a shame for
the servant to omit this humble duty, seeing his Lord and Master did perform it.

Besides, seeing it is the will of God in Christ Jesus, that we should in every
thing give thanks; 1 Thessalonians. 5.18.
then must we not neglect this duty at the perception and reception of our
daily necessaries. And seeing civil customs tie men to remember their friends
and benefactors at their meals; much more does sacred duty obliege them then
to remember their God, In whom they live, move, Deuteronomy. 6.12.
and have their being: especially considering, that the most dangerous time for
men to forget God, is when they have eaten, and are full.

Even the heathens eating and drinking, did praise their gods, Ceres and
Bacchus; and they are worse than heathens, who give thanks to none: and they
are accursed, who give glory to any, but to the only true God. The Apostles
rule is, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do else, do all to the glory of God.
And though he indulgeth the weak brethren as to meats, yet not as to giving of
thanks. And if this be a good argument of his, Romans 16.4.
He that eats, eats to the Lord, for he gives God thanks; then it will
follow, He that eats, and gives not God thanks, eats not to the Lord. And
they have but an untoward nursery, that feed the Devil.

But now come in our Mutes with a mental reservation, and tell us, that though
they say nothing when they go to meat, yet they tickle it with thinking. Oh,
they give thanks in their hearts! And is that enough? why then do they not eat
only in their hearts? why do they not chew the cud? why do they not live only
by ruminating on dishes in their thoughts? As they would be loath God should so
serve them; so I advise them, that they would not so serve God: And as they
would not willingly have the world feed them with such empty dishes; so let not
them feed the world with such frothy fancies. Are their mouths made only for
meat and drink? If men's lips will do more to serve their belly, than to honor
their heavenly Lord; is it not clear that their belly is their God? He that
gives man a heart wherewith to believe unto righteousness, Romans 10.10.
gives him also a tongue, wherewith to make confession unto salvation: And
where the Lord opens a man's lips, Psalm. 50.15.
that man's mouth will show forth his praise.

Quisque suam vocationem, Every man look to his Calling.
AMbiguous terms need Explication, and evil times Application. We live in an
age that has made a great noise, and no little stir about men's Calling.

Calling is either

Civil, or Sacred.
A civil Calling is a settled course of life, wherein a man is profita ble to
himself and the public; and helps to bear up, after a due proportion, the
fabric of the land of his nativity. And this is best done, when every man
keeps his station, as a firm stud or pillar. Ar. Pol. l. 1.
For according to Aristotle, it is not meet for the same man (...), to be a
Music master and a Shoemaker; and he determines that he must be a Rogue by
consequence, who lives sine tribu, sine lege, sine lare, without tribe,
without Law, and without a fixed residence. And Christian polity herein agrees
with humane, according to the Apostles rule; Let every man abide in the same
calling, 1 Cor. 7.20.
wherein he was called: that is, in the same calling or trade of life, wherein
he was called to be a Christian. Had this advice been followed, our Church and
Kingdom had uninterruptedly unto this day flourished.

But here was the misery, and the beginning of forrows; the people thought the
Lord was not amongst them, except all the Lords people were Prophets: and many
imagined they could not be Christians, except they left their Shops, to get
into the Priests Desk, and leaped from the Loome into the Pulpit. But God has
now let the world see, that they who could well mend Shoes, did but mar the
Text; and were utterly unfit to be Scripture-translators.

And does any man ask why those men, who had never any calling from God and the
Church, [which two must not be separated] did notwithstanding presume to be
Teachers and public Preachers? The reason is evident; therefore they presumed
to teach, because they had never rightly learned: and therefore made they
themselves Preachers, because they scorned to be Christ's Disciples. For he has
called us to peace; 1 Cor. 7.15. and chap. 14.33.
And God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all the Churches
of the Saints.

Sacred or heavenly calling is,

General, or Special.
The general call to faith and holiness, is made to the world by the preaching
of the Gospel, and administration of the Sacraments.

The special calling is made by grace wrought in the hearts of men, and that
by the operation of the holy Ghost, upon the Preaching of the Word, and
administration of the Sacraments. Thus as St Aug. says. Ex peccato evocat
omnes communiter, sed suos excitat singulariter, God calls all men generally,
but he stirs up his own singularly.

But now the great business, whereabout many have been troubled, is to know the
certainty of their true calling unto bliss. And indeed this is a weighty
Quaere, and requires mature deliberation and contemplation. It is not for
nothing, that we are called upon, To give diligence to make our calling and
election sure, Which making sure, bears reference to our consciences, 2 Pet.
1.10.
not to Gods purposes; Romans 11.29.
For the calling and gifts of God are without repentance.

In this enquiry, let all persons beware, that they be not mistaken with bare
words; as many of late have: who thought every new fangled doctrine, a call
from heaven; and instability to be a mark of proficiency.

Christ's sheep will not follow strangers, but flee from them. But many a one
(the more pity) by being apt to follow every voice, Jo. 10.5.
have gone to the slaughter; like the two hundred in Jerusalem, who were called
by Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.11.
and went in their simplicity, and knew nothing.

Others laboring to satisfy themselves in this business, began at the wrong
end; troubling themselves with the curious particulars, close locked up in the
Cabinet of Praedestination: of which God never lent any man a Key, nor made him
a schedule. Consolatory arguments for weak souls are not to be drawn from Gods
secret counsel; but from the apparent fruits of their election, and the
promises of his superabundant grace and mercy.

The men of Bethshemech had been safe, 2 Samuel 6.19.
had they not been presumptuously curious; and they gate nothing by prying into
the Ark, but the destruction of fifty thousand, threescore and ten persons. And
the rash handling of predestination (it may justly be feared) has been the
ruin of many thousands.

Briefly to the point; let every man examine his heart for faith; his life for
obedience. The best assurance is hid, and it is within a man; as the late
Archbishop of Canterbury said at his Martyrdom.

Men know that Jesus Christ is in them, 2 Cor. 13.5.
except they be reprobates. He that has faith and charity, cannot be without
hope. He that believes in Christ's merits; endeavors to live after his
Commandments; has a zeal for his glory; a love to all men, and especially to
the household of faith; and a constant sense and sorrow for his own failings:
such a one makes his calling sure.

The rejoicing of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 1.12.
and of his fellows, was the testimony of their conscience; and so it will be
every good man's. Whom conscience makes to rejoice, all the world cannot much
afflict; but whom conscience torments, all the world cannot case. Heb. last. v.
18.
And this is a sign of a good conscience, when men are willing in all things to
live honestly.

This is the plain man's plain way to come by an assurance of his calling. It is
too voluminous a task for me at this time, and too busy at any other, (and
perhaps more consounding than edifying to the generality) to produce sixteen or
seventeen proofs and marks of an effectual calling. I humbly conceive (with all
due respect to persons of vast abilities) that a man may go a nearer, and a
more direct way; and to this purpose, I crave leave to tell a story, and that a
true one, upon my own knowledge.

There was sometimes in this County a certain Clergyman, (and I pray God there
be not now too many such in this Nation) who loved to follow the Law, more than
to Preach the Gospel; and for his delight in contention, might have been
surnamed Norfolk. He was exceedingly proud, covetous, and malicious; and the
mischief was, the cursed beast had long horns: for he was very rich. And as the
greatest Clerks are not always the wisest men: so he being one of the wisest
men (as wise men go now adays) was none of the greatest Clerks. This man had
to his servant a near Kinsman, very poor, and very ingenuous; whose propinquity
of relation, made his Uncle the more bold with him, to make him a slave,
according to the mode of wretched worldlings. This Uncle Parson, with fair
words and strong delusions, made his Nephew man spider-like, even work out his
heart and bowels, to increase the muck heap, and fill the bag. For why should
he not believe his Uncle, promising him a good part of the fruit of his hands,
seeing God had denied his Uncle the fruit of his own body? But see the event;
the Uncle makes his Will, disposes his Estate into many hands, and dies; and
the poor drudge, this Kinsman, was turned off, with his labor for his pains.

It chanced after a long time, this poor man among others, being at a neighbor
Gentleman's house, one of the company (for want of better discourse) asked him,
(as usually they speak of the dead) how long since God called his Uncle? Alas
(said he) you are mistaken; God never called my Uncle at all. For my Uncle did
often vow, and protest, and call God to witness, that whenever God called
him, I should be made much the better for him; But, I was never yet the better
for him one penny in this world: And, therefore I am sure God never called him.

There is an argument ab effectu, or, a consequente; a plain argument of a
plain fellow. And now I would have all my brethren, and countrymen examine
their calling, by the correspondence of their actions, with their sacred and
civil protestations, obligations and engagements: And then I believe they will
find, that the poor Kinsman in this point, may pass for a sound Logician, and a
good Divine.

Conscience, Conscience; all the world for a Good Conscience; have a care of a
Tender Conscience; And let us have Liberty of Conscience.
THese be the cries of the present times; like those of London, up street and
down: And I pray God there be not as much a cheat in them.

The large reign of hypocrisy, now unmasked by inordinate licentiousness, has
made many think, that there is not, nor ought to be any such thing, as
conscience. But they will one day find, because they have not cherished it as a
lamb in their bosom, it will tear them like a vulture at the heart.

Conscience; the word and the thing is as it is used; like Aesops tongues: the
best and the worst dish at the table. Men of merry hearts; or according to the
Hebrew, men good at the heart; Prove. 15.15.
or, as St Hierom reads, men of a quiet mind; such have a continual feast.

This (...), conscience is maximum in minimo, the greatest thing in a little,
as Periander said. It is a true glass, giving the true reflection of all
objects and colors, without counterfeit or flattery. Conscience under God is
All in All in the Isle of Man. It is a Judge holding an Asuzes within every
man, and giving sentence without partiality; it is a thousand witnesses giving
true evidence concerning the matter of fact, speech or cogitation; it is a
Sergeant either to plead or implead according to equity, and that freely
without money; and it is an Executioner to torment and destroy without mercy.

The dominion of conscience reaches through all Nations, Jews and Gentiles.
Romans 12.15.
Heathens are subject to it; Their conscience also bearing them witness, and
their thoughts the mean while, either accusing or excusing one another. And as
conscience reigns far; so there is no power, or jurisdiction above it, but
that of God himself. Conscience is the Jury of life and death; and there is
small hope, that the Judge will save them, whom conscience smally casts off,
Joh. 3.20.
If our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knows all
things. If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God, doing
those things that are pleasing in his sight.

Now there being nothing in this world better than a good conscience; and
nothing worse than a bad one: it will be a man's great business, to know how a
good conscience is gotten, and how kept.

Every one by nature, and in the state of corruption, has an evil, a deadly,
and a filthy conscience. And therefore primarily a good conscience, and a pure
and lively is obtained by the blood of Jesus Christ, and by faith in his merits.

The blood of Jesus Christ, who through the eternal Spirit, Heb. 9.14.
offered himself without spot to God, does purge a man's conscience from dead
works, to serve the living God.

And these words, [To serve the living God,] as they denote the true end
wherefore Christ by his blood did make our consciences pure and good; so they
show us the right means of keeping and preserving a pure and a good conscience:
namely, by serving the living God. His service is perfect freedom, and his
service is taught us in the Moral Law, the Ten Commandments, which set forth
our duty toward God, and toward man. And beyond this holy Rule, or contrary
to it, there cannot be any such thing as Christian liberty, or liberty of
conscience.

Herein did the Apostle exercise himself, Act. 24.16.
to Have always a conscience void of offense, toward God and toward men. And
he that is so exercised, has a tender conscience. And whatsoever is not
repugnant unto some part of the Law of God contained in the Ten Commandments,
(though perhaps it may go against men's humors and fancies) cannot be said to
be against conscience; and so neither against Christian liberty: because the
divine Commandment is a perfect Law of liberty. Ja. 1.25.


No question, it is a great sin to tyrannize over poor souls, and to impose
upon men's consciences, things to make them stumble, to weaken their faith, Romans
14.21. 1 Cor. 8.9.
and to corrupt their judgments and manners: And God forbid that any should do
so.

But all persons pretending conscience, before they profess public dissent
from the Injunctions, Canons, and Constitutions of Authority, should do well to
be of a sure ground, that the things they dissent from their brethren in, are
demonstratively of such a nature: otherwise their liberty will appear, to be
but a cloak of maliciousness; and that they prefer their own private
conceits, and perverse humors, before either the peace of the Church, or Gods
honor. And surely, as all sin defiles the conscience: so none more than a
schismatic uncharitableness.

I could never yet see, (nor any other man I believe) by what analogy, or
rational argumentation, the discourse of St Paul to the Romans persuading to
indulge the weak brethren about days and meats, or that of his to the
Corinthians, about eating things offered to idols, could be made, (as many
would have it) a common place against all order and discipline in the Christian
Churches. For the Apostle in the one dealt about Judaisme, and in the other
concerning Gentilisme and Paganish Idolatry. And either of those bear as little
reference, or likeness to our Worship of God, and Orders in the Church; as
there is concord between Christ and Belial, or as there is coherence in our
adversaries discourses.

There were in those Churches Jews and Gentiles mixed; and many of the new
converts of the Jews did still retain some of the Mosaicall observations, and
could not suddenly be weaned from them; and some of the Gentile converts also
had some smacks and sentiments of their old superstitions. And the Apostle
advised and enjoined the more perfect and well grounded Christians, to favor
the others as much as lawfully they might, and not to be bitter against them
for their infirmities.

But the Apostle dealt not so with Hymeneus and Alexander; 1 Timothy 1. v. last.
Tit. 1.11.
nor yet does he advise Titus to deal so gently with the seducers in Crete, who
subverted whole houses. And surely a gentler hand is to be carried toward new
converts, than to inveterate refractarians, and wilful Apostatas. Let
conscience (in the Name of God) have its liberty: But then let that liberty
have a conscience.

Men make much talk of tender consciences; but it is (for the most part) but a
talk: Jacobs voice and Esaus hands. Quid verba audio, cum facta video? Men show
their conscience, as well as their faith, by their works.

I believe Abraham had a tender conscience; Genesis 13.
because for peace-sake he gave way to his inferior: But I cannot think so of
Corah and his party; Numb. 16.
because they opposed their betters.

Abraham's conscience could not vary from his oath, to take from the King of
Sodom, Genesis 14.
so much as a thread or a shoe-latchet: But I remember who swear, and forced
others to swear hand over head; by virtue of which oath they scarce left the
King or his loyal Subjects, the worth of a thread, or a shoelatchet.

I believe David had a tender conscience; 1 Samuel 24.5.
because his heart smote him for cutting off Saul's skirt: But I dare say,
Baanah and Rechab had not so, because they slew Ishbosheth, and cut off his
head at his own house. 2 Samuel 4.4.


I am fully persuaded Josiah had a tender heart and a good conscience; 2 Chronicles.
34. and Chap. 35.
because be restored the worship of God, wept at the reading of the Law, and
set the Priests and Levites in their places and charges. But I am sure Jeroboam
had an evil heart, and a bad conscience; because he corrupted the worship of
God, and made Priests of the basest of the people. 1 King. 13.33.


The conscience of the Saints in David's time, led them to worship, fall down,
and kneel before the Lord their maker. Ps. 95.
Many tell us now, their conscience will not suffer them to do so. Then their
conscience did prompt them unanimously to go up together into the house of the
Lord: Ps. 122.
Now conscience is pleaded against coming thither.

In St Paul's days conscience taught men to be subject to Magistrates, Romans
13.5. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13. Heb. 13.17.
and to be ready to every good work; to submit themselves to every Ordinance of
man for the Lords sake; and to obey them that had the spiritual rule over them,
and watched for their souls: Now conscience is only named by a great many, to
shift off all duty, and to affront all Authority.

What? an Antidote against Caesar? Shall we have conscience against conscience?
Conscience against God? Conscience against Godliness? Conscience against
public worship? Conscience against Common Prayers? Conscience against Baptism
and the Lords Supper? O tempora! O mores!

And how long shall the world be deluded? Is it not apparent, that the chief
sticklers for licentiousness under the name of Liberty of conscience, when the
power was in their hand, did neither use conscience, nor grant liberty to them
that were truly conscientious? By the liberty they then took, we may know what
liberty they now seek; and by the conscience they did then use, what indulgence
they now deserve.

In Ecclesiastical, as well as in martial Discipline, it will hardly be granted
to err twice. And surely, that God who once delivered us into the hands of our
enemies, and in great mercy has set us free; will hardly do it the second
time, in case we wilfully suffer our selves to be again captivated, by their
feigned words, of whom we have had so late, and so woeful experience.

And I pray God guide his sacred Majesty, that their serpentine charms may
never so far impose upon his gracious Lenity; as that he should believe their
consciences tender, who strain at Gnat-scruples, and swallow Camel-sins; who
stumble at strawceremonies, and leap over block villainies.

When no conscience was practiced, then no plea was heard for it: But now that
God has begun graciously to shine upon the Church and Kingdom; now begins the
clamor of tender conscience to play the second part.

There is no surer way to discover every man's diet, manners, and appetite, than
to make every man his own Carver. And (as I remember) this course has been
once taken to purpose.

Alas poor weak brethren, and tender consciences! It is pity that ever a pair
of Lawn-sleeves should hurt them; who could well digest the soil of the
Revenues of the Antichristian Bishopticks, and make no bones of the Churches
patrimony. Alas, that ever a Surplice and a hood should choke those pure
Levites, that have lately swallowed down Churches and Steeples, Parsonages and
Vicarages, Glebes and Tithes, and eat up man, woman and child, as fast as they
did the Tythe-pigs! Fie upon it, who would be troubled with such a conscience?
What? steal a Goose, and scruple a feather? Oh the tender conscience of a pack
of Committees, and a bundle of Sequestrators! Oh the mercy and tender pity of a
Wolf, a Tiger and a Bear! From all these kinds of beasts, wild and tame, Libera
nos Domine, Good Lord deliver us: And let all the people say, Amen.

Suppose I should go to a friends house, and carry with me such a companion as
Wood the great eater of Kent was, and should desire my friend to take special
care of him, and let him have that which is pure and of light digestion; for
the man has but a feeble stomach (forsooth) a very weak appetite, and any
thing that is gross might endanger his life: And my weak natured Guest shall
call for, and eat up a fat sheep of sixteen shillings price at a meal or thirty
couple of Rabbets; and so should do three or four meals; and still I should
desire my friend to have a great care of him, telling him, that the man has a
very poor stomach, and is but weak and tender, whatsoever he thinks on him.
Would not my friend (think you) be ready to kick me and my Guest out of doors?
Would he not tell me that I were either mad or worse? And that I either went
about to play the fool or the knave?

And as much may some body say to them, who labor to persuade men of their
tender consciences, who have murdered the innocent, devoured the fatherless
and widows, drank the blood of Nobles, pickled upon the carcass of a Church,
and made a merry meal of a Kings head. He that loves God, the King, the Church,
the Country and himself, let him never speak a word of these men's tender
consciences.

It pitieth my heart to think, into what strange Labyrinths many gangs of
people were led by their admired Teachers, who tickled their ears with a
pleasing sound of conscience, and tenderness, and self-denial, and getting
acquaintance with Christ, and a glorious liberty, and the like; whilst by
their omission, connivence and palliation, they lulled them into a security,
and cast them into a deadly slumber of Rebellion, and disobedience, schism and
uncharitableness. Was not this to clap a plaster upon a festered place, and
never to search or cleanse the wound? Miserable comforters are all such. Oh let
the righteous smite us friendly, and reprove us; but let not such precious
balms break our heads.

Such Pastors give a poor soul, as much satisfaction, as Pope Martin gave the
Sicilian Ambassadors, to whom thrice praying, Aguus Dei, qui toll is peccata
mundi, miserere nobis: Oh Lamb of God which take away the sins of the world,
have mercy on us: He thrice answered, Ave Rex Judaeorum, and dabant illi
alapas, Hail King of the Jews, and they smote him on the face. Had his
Holinesses hand gone with his tongue, giving each of them a round box on the
ear, they should have been as much beholding to him, as the men of Gotham were
to the Gentleman, who restored their lost man, supposed to be drowned, by
giving them every one a sound blow on the back with a Cudgel.

There will be but little conscience made of any Laws Civil or Ecclesiastical,
or respect had to Magistrate or Minister, should Authority grant Dispensations
to the prejudice of its own honor, and to the rebatement of the vigor of
injunctions, as fast as some men will forge cavils, and make pretensions.

The fellow that was bitten by the legs, thought the City madly ordered, where
stones were tied up, and dogs let loose: But that Nation should be worse, where
Doves should be punished, and Crows set free; where the peaceable and tractable
should be circumscribed, and proscribed by penalties, and the extravagant and
perverse indulged by faculties.

The Christian Prince, who shall be persuaded to let loose his people to their
own will worship, may pull down all the Churches in his Dominions, and hang up
the Priests. But God be thanked, who has given our gracious Sovereign another
manner of heart, and a discerning spirit, to know both from the word of God,
and from sad experience, that as in those days when there was no King in
Israel, Jud. last.
every man did that which was right in his own eyes: So in these days, to let
every man do that which is right in his own eyes, will soon make again no King
in Israel.

William the Conqueror took the right course to make a sorrest, when he
ruinated and laid waste the Churches and Chapels; but I dare not commend his
project, because the world has observed two fatal marks set upon it, in the
loss of two sons of his slain therein: the one at his hunting of a Deer; the
other by an Arrow shot at a Deer, but diverted from its intended scope, by a
glance on a tree.

There is no such ready way to turn a Christian Nation into a Wilderness, and
the people into wild beasts; as by laying waste the places of Gods worship, and
making them desolate. But who so shall attempt it, may justly fear to be
smitten with the keen Arrows of the Almighty, both in person and posterity;
yea, and to be destroyed, even by those brute creatures, which they shall
nourish and cherish to Gods dishonor.

And therefore as some people would have the King giveliberty to all men's
consciences; (which is impossible where consciences look so many contrary
ways) so I hope their Civility will give them to suppose, that of all
consciences, his Majesty will be most tender of his own. And then, they may be
well assured, that he will never grant any thing prejudicial to that Faith,
whereof he writes himself Defender; or to that Church, whereof God has made
him the nursing Father.

And most infallibly, it would conduce more to the glory of God, and the
Nations happiness, that all the Subjects would rather look to the exactness
of their own consciences, then to press so much upon their gracious
Sovereigns, to increase their own remissness. This would be a work, that would
save the King much labor, and his Honorable Parliament many an hours
consultation.

And in Gods name, where judgment by divine appointment must begin, there let
conscience begin also; at the house of God. 1 Pet. 4.17.
Let those whom he has appointed over his household, as faithful Stewards of
the manifold grace of God, give unto those under their charge, their souls meat
in due season; that they may be found hoc agentes, so doing: that the Ministry
may not be blamed, by reason of blameworthy Ministers. Let them value the
flock more than the fleece; and know, that if Jacob for twenty years together,
Genesis 31.38. and 40.
was consumed (as he said) with the scorching heat by day, and the sharp frost
by night, and the sleep of his eyes departed from him; and all to save the
brute creatures of his uncle Laban: then the pains cannot be small, the care
cannot be little which must be taken, nor the account ease which must be given
up to Christ, by the Pastors, Act. 20.28.
for that immortal flock of souls, which he has purchased with his own blood.

They had need be thrice well assured, that they love Christ, who undertake to
feed his Sheep and Lambs, Joh. 21.
seeing he made St Peter make a threefold profession of his sincere affection.

Fidelity and dexterity must be resulgent in the Pastors, that they may feed
Sheep and Lambs; have milk for babes, and stronger meat for men: And that they
may teach their people to the lise, their life must teach their people. To the
prayers of faith, and Word of truth, they must add the lively Oracles of
Charity: for as with such performances the poor are benefited, and with such
examples the Church is profited; Heb. 13.16.
So with sach Sacrifices God is well pleased.

They had need above all things put on charity, Col. 3.14. Lu 12.15.
and take heed and beware of covetousness; whom God has taught so to teach
others. Let them not climb into the Fold, and make a shift to get into the
Church, 2 Cor. 11. last.
as St Paul did to get out of Damascus, at a window, in a basket: Nor like
Ariosto's young shaveling, with three ends of Latin, a letter of Command, and
the Devil in a bag. St Augustine did not love to see men pass, per laicalem
portam, by a back door.

And as the unworthy should study to deserve, before they aspire at preferment;
so conscience ought to rule the most worthy, both informing them when they have
enough; and signifying to them, that it is possible for them to have too much
of this worlds honor, wealth, and dignity. And then (as the Herdsman said) If
the Devil get the Duke, what shall become of the Archbishop of Colen?

Vt honos, it a onus; as the honor and emolument increases, so should the
Pastors care, his pains, his diligence; otherwise the world will easily see,
that pride and covetousness are the only qualifications: two qualities as
commendable in a man of the Church, as those I once heard a plain Countreyman
give a Knights Tobacco; who being asked his approbation, answered, Your
Worships Tobacco is excellent good; for it has the two right properties of
Tobacco; it makes a great smoke, and a filthy stink.

Pluralities and unions came into being and fashion in the Christian Church, by
sad mischances; As by depopulations, spoils and invasions made by prevalent
Barbarians, Hist. Conc. Trid.
and hostile Adversaries; and their intendment, ex part Ecclesiae, was in
favor and benefit of the generality of souls, and not designed for the mere
advance of particular persons wealth and dignities. And let not the Rivers rob
the Sea; nor the main end be lost in the pursuit of the less principal.

There are (no question) double Honors due to the Reverend Ecclesiastics, but
they must be such as rule well, and especially labor in the Word and doctrine.
And God increase such men, 1 Timothy 5.17.
and their Honors, to his own Glory, and his Churches happiness.

And as Conscience does well in the Incumbent; so likewise in the Patron: For
were there no Receivers, there would be no Thieves. It was never Christ's mind
(surely) that Simon Magus should have to do with those Keys, which he gave to
Simon Peter. But there are such Patrons now in the world, (or Latrons rather)
that if St Peter himself should come to them for a presentation, in the words
he used to the Creeple, Silver and Gold have I none; They would soon bid him,
Walk, Act. 3.
and be gone. Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? And thou
that teach a man should not steal, Romans 2.
do thou steal?

Well fare the resolution of the Emperor Severus, no less prudent, than noble;
who would never suffer preferments to be bought: Because (said he) they who buy
will sell. And so they will sell indeed (when opportunity serves) their place,
their office, themselves, and their Benefactors.

And conscience would do well at Court too, among Lords and Ladies, except it
be either out of fashion for its antiquity; or too mean, as being worn by poor
Plebeians. They who wear soft raiment, and are in Kings houses, in Princes
favors, and profitable Offices, should do well to think upon those, who want
clothes and habitations; of whom not a few (perhaps) for merit and virtues
might have vied with many of them, had not Fortune parted them with a bare pair
of sheers.

They should do well (and God expects it at their hands) to promote, and
further such persons suits and supplications gratis; and not to be like
Vultures ready to seize upon the dying, and as brambles to rend off their
skins, whose fleece was gone long before.

What shall men be all complements, and no conscience? God deliver us from such
a high point of breeding, as to despise the poor, or to forget our friends, old
acquaintance, and their good offices.

I once knew (I do not propound him for imitation) a Gentleman Pensioner to
that glorious Prince of ever blessed memory King Charles the First (that good
King had too many such servants) who having been often liberally entertained, and
adored by a simple honest Countryman; as often professed, binding himself
with desperate oaths (whereof he had always a great stock at command) to do
him remarkable favors upon all occasions. It fortuned that the Country man
fell into an unhappy Lawsuit, which beyond his expectation led him to
Westminster, where casually meeting with his old Courtier, who was every man's
humble servant, and no man's true friend, he took the boldness to scrape
acquaintance on him, supposing that he had been the same man, he formerly was
in the Country: But this Grand Seignior with an ugly look, and a rough greet,
made his modest Gaius face about, and revoke acquaintance; and having so shaked
him off, he said to a person standing by; Do you see this rude impertinent
fellow? This Hob-nail-slave (said he) is so ill bred, that he is not able to
disting uish between a Gentleman's words, and his meaning.

God defend us from such nice distinctions, unworthy actions, narrow hearts,
and large consciences.

And in all Courts and places of Judicature, conscience would do exceedingly
well, and might befriend many a man, more than a penny in his purse. Could we
see the poor man's case defended, we should be fully persuaded, that there were
such a thing, as a Court of Equity and Conscience. But he that sues in forma
pauperis, seldom prevails contra materiam divitis; but keeps his old form, it
faring with him in his case, as with man in his birth and death: Naked he comes
in, and naked he goes out. Yet we have an Advocate General with God the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous; 1 John 2.
who ought to be imitated by all Advocates, considering no man shall be able to
plead his own case without him: And he takes delight to help the helpless and
the oppressed; and made himself poor to enrich his clyents.

I shall not descend into all particulars, because Inferiors would think it
honorable to be conscientious, might they see conscience honored by the
practice of their Superiors.

Oh it is a precious thing to have a good conscience; as once said a Member of
a Court of high Injustice. Indeed he was able to tell, how good a thing it was,
by the want of it; and he knew the price of it, having parted with it upon
terms, felling himself to work wickedness.

Thus have I been too long, (and yet not enough) upon this subject. I hope,
good people will pardon my plainness. It is a case of conscience; and when I am
in, I love to speak my conscience.

Quarite Deum, Seek God.
A Great task, and a general; Catholic for time, place, and person: which
whosoever performs not, does nothing; for the man that finds not God is lost for
ever. This duty must be exercised early, earnestly, constantly and rightly; and
where one of these circumstances fail, the seeker is deficient in his duty.

1. Early. Early in the life; early in the day. Oh God, Psalm. 63.1. Matthew. 6.33.
thou art my God, early will I seek thee. Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and
his righteousness. But the worldlings rule is taken out of the Ethnic Poet, O
Cives, Cives, quaerenda pecunia primum est, virtus post nummos. Oh Politicians,
Politicians, seek ye money before all things; and let virtue follow after pelf.

2. Earnestly. Thou shall find him, Deuteronomy. 4.29.
if thou seek him with all thy heart, and with all thy soul. They who seek him
by halfs, find him not at all; for as God is not divided, so will he not be
deluded.

3. Constantly. Seek the Lord and his strength, Psalm. 105.4.
seek his face evermore. Not that we should be so ever seeking, as never
finding; like those ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth: But so ever seeking, 2 Timothy 3.7.
as ever finding some comfort and contentment, and because ever finding,
therefore ever seeking. For no man so well knows the Lord, and his goodness;
but that he may and ought, every day more and more grow into his knowledge,
favor, and acquaintance.

4. Rightly. For God will not be found of them that seek him indirectly. They
that seek for glory, and honor, Romans 2.7.
and immortality, their way is laid out unto them, through patient continuance
in well doing: And at their journeys end is promised them, that eternal life.
But they that seek a contrary way, are there told they shall find a contrary
thing. Quaeram te Domine invocans te, Cons.
and invoeem te credens in te, says St Aug. Oh let me seek thee (Lord) calling
upon thee, and let me call upon thee believing in thee. Indeed, it is in vain
for men to honor God with their lips, when their hearts are far from him.

And now we cannot but sadly remember, how this Nation has been abused, with a
mock-seeking of God, upon all evil occasions, and wicked enterprises. We
cannot forget what fastings, prayers, and humiliations we had appointed; and
all to seek God; that the poor silly people might be amazed at the sound of
enchanting words, and made believe, that God by the mouth of mercinary false
prophets, as by an infallible oracle, did speak clearly in favor of the most
pernicious practices, and high impieties, that ever were acted amongst a
Christian people.

It was not enough to abuse me; but they must needs put tricks upon the
Almighty, and entitle him to all manner of villainy.

For the erecting of arbitrary power, and cutting asunder the sinews of Laws
and Government; (which are the safety of a people,) for the pillaging of the
subject, and stripping him of goods and liberty; for the murdering of the
innocent and loyal; for the destruction of King and people; for the subversion
of the Church; for all and every of these designs, still the word was given
out, such a day ye must seek the Lord.

I know not unto what to liken this kind of language, proceeding out of such
mealy mouths, and hollow hearts, but to the canting of Gypsies and Cutpurses;
who when they go about to pick men's pockets, have a dialect by themselves to
abuse the common people, and evade justice. And as the Dunce, that his Father
put out to School, made Latin for every thing in bombast ending in bus, and
bas, and orum, and arum; so these men made these two words, [Seek God] serve to
signify every thing that the Devil and themselves projected and acted. When
Saul sought his fathers asses, he found not them, but he found a kingdom, 1 Samuel 9.
beyond his expectation: and the asses were found by another hand.

These men had something of Saul's success; for they found a kingdom; though
they enjoyed it but a little time: No more did he. But he had a better title;
for they had neither Gods, nor Samuels word for it, notwithstanding all their
seeking. And therefore it is be feared, they lost a better kingdom in pursuit
of this. And this must be confessed, other men's folly advanced their craft,
raised their esteem for wise men, and therewith their dignity. For had not the
Asses been found, and brought to their hand; they had never gotten the kingdom.
I hope the whole Land hereafter will beware of such seekers, and avoid such
seeking.

And what shall I more say of them? they sought Christ, Matthew. 2.
as Herod did with his men of war, in hypocrisy, and malice; and not finding
him, they murdered and massacred the innocent.

They sought God, as the mad fellow in the Fable sought his Wife, that fell
into the River and was drowned. He sought, and sought, and raked, and groped;
but he went such a way, that he was sure never to find her; for he went up the
River, and so always sought quite against the stream: so these men sought God
against the stream and current of Scriptures, Commandments, Laws and Customs,
Canons, Councils, and Fathers, and against the practice of all Primitive and
Modern Christians. Oh seek not death in the error of your life, Wisd. 1.12.
nor pull upon your selves destruction by the works of your own hands.

THe height of impudence, the depth of maliciousness, the length of
wilfullness, and the breadth of licentiousness, are the four Dimensions of a
Fanatic body; which has neither right side, nor right end.

FINIS.

