JOCO-SERIO.

STRANGE NEWS, OF A DISCOURSE BETWEEN Two dead Giants, expressed in an Epigram,
to one Inquisitive for News, and was composed by occasion of a scurrilous
Pamphlet, ENTITLED, A DIALOGUE BETWEEN COLBRANT and BRANDAMORE,

The two Giants in Guild Hall London.

Which Pamphlet was not only intended to abuse this Author, and some particular
persons by name, but the said City also, in the late Election of their
Parliamentary MEMBERS.

Thereto is added an Antidote against all Ill News whatsoever, which proving
effectual to many lately reputed Phanaticks, may possibly be vertual to some
other.

Jeers will be self-condemned,
And sting less if contemned.
G. W.

London, Printed 1661.

JOCO-SERIO. Strange News, of a Discourse between two dead Giants, expressed in
an Epigram to one inquisitive for News, and was composed by occasion of a
scurrilous Pamphlet, entitled, A Dialogue between COLBRANT and BRANDAMORE, the
two Giants in Guild Hall, LONDON, etc.
FRiend, there is now, no Good news to be had,
And, I intend to publish none that is bad;
For, as Affairs yet stand, it may be treason
To speak the Truth, if spoken out of season;
And, though in season spoken, he that speaks it,
May suffer by his folly who mistakes it.
Yet (now I think upon it) a little scrap
I met withal this morning, by mere hap,
Which may be safely told: for nor to State
Or Church, but to my self it does relate;
And, it has made me smile, with scorn, to see
What heed, Great men, begin to take of me.
The Lord Mayor, and some Aldermen have known me
Long time; yea, men of all degrees do own me
With good respect, for whose esteem I care;
And some, who of the best Extraction are.
But, that is no News; or, none, at least, compared
To that which now shall be to thee declared:
For, be it known, that, though obscurely born,
I am now honored with a Public scorn
(Divulged in print) as if reputed one
Who has deserved to be thought upon
Among those persons, who are in these times
Renowned for those Virtues, or those Crimes
Which in this Age must punishment receive,
Or honor; and next Age their judgment have,
When they, who are no parties in the cause,
Shall judge men, both by Gods and Natures Laws.
Mean while, their censures must be undergone
Who neither know me, nor what I have done:
For, they, who never heard of me; who never
Did see me, nor shall hear of me for ever,
Take notice of me, to my wonderment,
And, not a little to my good content;
Since, peradventure, it may shortly bring
My person to be known unto the King,
Who, if he truly know me would conceive
That, usefully to serve him I might live,
Although traduced I am by some of them,
Who, in another mode, have served him.
If thou have read in Legends heretofore
Of big-bon'd COLBRANT and great BRANDAMORE
The Giants in GVILD-HAL; be pleased to know
That, in a Dialogue betwixt those two
My name is mentioned, with as much applause
As I could wish, from Champions of that Cause
For which they stand; and to as good effect
As I can possibly from those expect,
Of whom I never yet much notice took,
And, to whom, in my life, I never spoke.
These two Goliahs (things, as big almost
As he, who once defied Isreal's Host,
(And had his Cockscomb cracked by little David,
Because himself so rudely he behaved)
These Ascaparts forsooth, I know not how,
Pretend to be of my acquaintance now;
And, this is such a Novelty to me
That I have sent the same, as News to thee.
For, News it is to me, and strange News too,
That BUGGS with whom I never had to do,
Should show themselves, in my Affairs as witty
As in the great Concernments of their City,
Where they have had a place to them assigned
At Public meetings, now time out of mind.
It Is News to me, that, creatures of their frame,
To any purpose, should repeat my name,
Since, probably, they do not know their own,
But, are the greatest Block-heads in the Town,
Except it be those foolish Pamphleters
That, use to write such Dialogues as theirs;
(Or, base Invectives tending to the increase
Of Discord, by the breach of civil peace)
And, who, men's honest fames to overthrow,
Shoot poisoned Arrows from an unseen bow,
For, these are much more blockish; and this Nation
Will never thrive, whilst these have toleration.
However, this perhaps forewarn me may,
That some as mighty, and as wise as they
Will mention me ere long, to worse effect,
And with a more malicious dis-respect,
Than these Detractors hitherto have done,
Though me, they seem not, yet to think upon.
But, be it, as it must be; Scorns and Jeers,
Have hung so long, as Jewels at mine ears,
That, whether my Reproach be less or greater,
I shall my self esteem, nor worse, nor better
For what, by others, is done, spoke, or thought,
Whilst I, think, speak, and do the things I ought.
He, that takes heed, what to himself relates,
Needs not care what the world, without him, prates
This, is my best News, at this present time;
That which it wants in Reason, take in Rhyme.
Farewell.

A Postscript.
BUt, take this Post script too (which, whilsta taper
One lights to seal it) shall fill up this paper.
Know, this was not intended to Retort
Or Vindicate; but, only, writ in sport.
He that asperseth me, himself does hide
Like those Bandetti by the highway side,
Who, cowardly do shoot unseen, and flay
Before they dare to seize upon their prey;
Yet, though I knew him, I have lately got
So tried a Charm against all Paper-shot,
That, only, smiling on him with disdain
(To let him know he shoots at me in vain)
I scarcely should, by way of complement
Spare him so many words, as Marshal spent
On his Traducer, when, this Verse he flung him,
Nos, ab hac scabie, tenemus unguem.
Whose sense is (in the Language of this Isle)
To scratch this SCAB, my nail I Will not defile.
Know also, that the Cause I do not dread
Those fearful Rumors which are lately spread,
Is not, for that, I think, or do foresee
Such things, are things impossible to be,
For, when I heed, that still the self-same path
Is trodden, which an evil tendance has;
And, that, most men rush forward in that Round
Wherein their Predecessors ruin found;
When I perceive the Vices heretofore,
Not only to be still the same, but more;
That, nor GODS Judgments, nor his Mercies, whether
Past, present, single, or joined both together
Regarded seem; nor wholesome counsels given
By men, or timely warnings daign'd from heaven,
But, that, still, wicked wishes, hellish prayers,
Revengeful Projects, Jealousies, Despairs,
And cursed speakings, daily aggravate
That Animosity and secret hate,
Which at the first begun our sad Distractions;
And are fomented still in several Factions,
Through that neglect of Justice and Compassion
Which might effect true Reconciliation;
I fear, what may to other men befall,
But, fear not in my own respect, at all,
Because, that, whereto things now feared tend,
Have brought my hopes already to an end,
As they concern this world; except, refin'de
GOD shall restore them, when they are calcined.
The Rumors which I hear, to me seem toys,
Like Squibs and Crackers which affrighten boys,
For, his Protection I am sheltred under
Who speaks in love, even when he speaks in thunder.
His Judgments are upon us, but the flame
Will burn them, who are kindling of the same;
For, by the paths which I see by them trod,
I find our Foes, are not the friends of GOD;
And, that when all our dross, away is fumed,
They shall be purged too, or else consumed.
He that secures me, will secure all those
Who shall their confidence in him repose.
No cause have any men to fear ill tidings,
Who underneath GODS Umbrage have abidings:
For, whatsoever succeeds, yea, come what will,
It comes to them for Good, and not for Ill.
That will new-make them, which their foes destroies,
Disgrace shall honor them, grief bring them joys;
Even Death it self, shall be true life's possessing,
And every Curse be turned into a Blessing.
Then, all we have to do, is, down to sit
Beneath this shade; all things to GOD commit.
Pray to him for our selves, our friends and foes,
And praise him heartily for all he does.
If this be done, we shall be free from fears,
Although the world does all it can, or dares.
G. W.

FINIS.

