(...) Planctus Unigeniti: ET SPES RESUSCITANDI. OR, The bitter sorrows for a
Firstborn, sweetened with the hopes, of a Better RESURRECTION. WITH
Consolations, MORAL, and DIVINE, against the Death of Friends, suited to the
present Occasion. DELIVERED, In a FUNERAL SERMON, at FELSTED in ESSEX, MAY, 23.
1664. At the Solemn Interment of the Right Honorable, CHARLES Lord RICH, the
Only Child, of the Right Honorable the Earl of WARWICK. By A. WALKER, D. D.
Rector of Fyfield, in the same County, and one of His MAJESTY'S CHAPLAINS.

Jer. 6.26. Fac tibi Planctum unigeniti, Luctum amarum.

St. Luke 8.52. Weep not, She is not dead, but sleeps.

Contristamur nos, in nostrorum mortibus, necessitate amittendi, sed cum Spe
Recipiendi; Inde tristamur hinc consolamur, inde infirmitas afficit, hinc fides
reficit, inde dolet humana conditio, hinc sanat Divina promissio; Sanctus
Augustinus.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb, for Samuel Ferris, at his Shop, in Cannon
Street, over against London Stone, 1664.

To the Right Honorable, CHARLES Earl of WARWICK, Baron of Leez; And his
Eminently Religious Consort, MARY, Countess of WARWICK; And the most Virtuous,
and Excellent Lady, the Lady ANN RICH, Dowager.
Right Honorable;
THough I find my present Attempt, not unlike the great Instance of
Difficulties in Philosophy, to divide an Attome, and make two of the least, and
last, Unite in Nature; To distribute amongst You, a Trifle, so Infinitely less,
then the whole should be, for every of Your Honors: Yet am I pleased the
better with it, by how much the more it Corresponds, with this dark Providence;
which is a compendious heap of Intricacies: and seems designed, as an
Experiment, what Hard-ships, Great, and Noble minds, supported with Virtue, and
Religion, can conflict with, and Conquer.

To Extricate my self out of this straight, I am Constrained, to beg Your
Honors, (By the prevailing Argument of His Dear Urne) to accept this hasty
Monument, (which My Zeal to His Memory, first Offered at, by Your Commands, and
by the same Influence, has now made Public) to be to You, (in that Respect,)
as His Sweet Lordship was; Who was so Singly, and Entirely, Every of Your
Honors, as if You had had no Joint, or Common Interests in Him.

And may I, my Lord, be blameless, in assuming the Confidence, to speak in the
Great Apostles Language; Now I rejoice, not that You are made sorry, but that
You sorrow after a Godly manner; and that this deep Channel, now made in Your
Soul, is so happily filled, with the Waters of the Sanctuary.

And if I be Rude in Speech, I am not so in Design; though I whisper so loud in
Your Lordships Ears, that the World overhear me; that nothing can more rejoice
Your Soul-Friends, and Servants, then to behold Your Christian Submission, to
so smart a stroke, without other Indenting with the Almighty; Then that this
Heartbreaking blow, may End in a broken heart; and in Your own Significant,
though short Expression, that if this DO, it will be the Happiest Loss, that
ever Man had.

All which, (without presumption;) I may Vouch, the Lord takes not amiss, to
have imposed upon Him; the very Errand of His Judgments being, to bring His
Children nearer to Himself, and such a Frame.

My Lord, sad Providence do then prove sad indeed; when we are forced to taste
the bitter Rind, and Husk; or break our teeth upon the harder Shell; but feed
not upon the sweeter Kernel: Partake not the Blessing, God intends us by them.
But then are they sweet, and solid mercies, when God does teach us, with, and
by his chastning: that this may be such, I know no surer means, then that Your
Lordship, Humbly Remember the Vows of God which are upon You, which You made
while the Wound was fresh; and that You Awefully regard, the Resolutions of
Your own Heart, and Mouth: And My Confidence You will do so, Incourages Me to
this Boldness, which Your Lordships Goodness will not call Rudeness; but
Accept, as a Testimony of My Duty, and Faithfulness.

And You Great Madam, whose Modest and Retired Goodness, cannot Abscond it
Self, but all the English-World, Sees, and Reveers it.

Go on, to Raise the Eternal Glories of the Son of God, upon the Temporary
Ruins, of a Dearest Son; And make the Incredulous, to See, and Know, what
Wonders, Solid, and Sincere, Christianity can Work.

What the Wise Moralist Observed so long ago; that, A good Man, contending
with bad Fortune, is a sight worth Gods own looking on; I never understood so
fully, as since I had the Honor to behold, with what Masculine, Composed,
Grave, and which is more then all, what Christian Fortitude, Your Ladyship boar
up, above these Swelling, Boystrous, Waves.

Those who have any measures of a Mothers heart, may guess at Yours; But We
that have the Honor, and Happiness, to be Acquainted, with the Sweetness of
Your Temper, and the Fervours of Your Tenderness, in Others Sorrows; how
Inexpressibly You were concerned, when first Your Noble Son fell Sick; How You
Attended him, in all his Illness, and warmed his very Linnens on Your Heart!
What Agonies of Soul You Suffered for Him! and how You Wept, and Prayed, and
Watch't, and could not bear, the supposition of His loss; are put to the Wonder
of David's Servants, when the Child was dead.

What is this thing that thou have done? -- And plainly see, it was the
Strength of David's God, which helped You, as well as his Wisdom, that
instructed You, to bear his hand.

My Only Solicitude, for Your Ladyship, is, least Your Sorrow worsted in the
open Field, and plainly vanquished, by Grace and Reason; should Lie in Ambush,
and Surprise You afterward, with greater danger: To prevent it, watch it: Still
keep Your Eye on Heaven, and that will keep You safe; It Is not easy, to
benight a Christians heart, with any very dark cloud, while there is
brightness, and serenity, in the face of Christ; But if it swell, and flow to
an excess, and will not be stanched; then breath a vein, and give it some
diversion, take an advantage of it, and turn it into Godly sorrow, and all
shall be well.

And You Sweet Madam; whose loss of so Dear, and Kind a Lord, had been
Invaluable, had it been never so late (who was so good in all Relations, and
whose Indearing Excellencies, in that He bore to You, were Eminent, as that
Relation is, above all others:) Yet is it aggravated now, beyond expression, by
its early, and unseasonable, surprising of You, in so tender years, not yet
acquainted with, nor trained up in the School of sorrow; Will, I hope,
therefore accept the Cordialls I bring, because You so much need them.

It were an Unpardonable Rudeness, to Request, that he may ever live, in Your
Ladyships best thoughts, and have Your Noble breast, His Dearest Monument; For
how can He ever be forgotten by Her; who was not his Bargain; but his Choice?
Not his content and satisfaction only; but his Souls most raised, and lasting,
Ravishments; from whom, He was never well, whose Absence was his constant
sickness, and the parting with whom, (...)

No Madam, I do not beg You to Remember Him, You will do that unaskt; But that
You would Remember Him to Spiritual Advantages.

Wean Your Affections, and forget Him, in all those regards, in which,
henceforth, You shall know Him no more; and Remember Him in those may not
perplex, or hurt You, but help, and do You good.

When Husbands dye in debt, their Widows should discharge and pay it. He has
not left You under other Encumbrances; Only He made Himself Gods debtor, on his
Deathbed (a Note of which Debts, Your Ladyship may find, in the following
Sermon) And if You will Administer, and take these Debts upon You, and
discharge them; were I worthy to be Your Counter-Security, I would be bound, in
all I have, or am, You would be Eternally the Richer for it; and bless, and
hugg his Memory, for this choice Legacy, more then for all, His, more then
Noble, Presents.

And Madam, to help You pay these Debts, He has left Your Ladyship, (beside
Your Honorable Dowre) such a Jointure, as you could have had by none, but him;
an Interest in that Real, and Solid Idea, of all that is Excellent, with Men,
and Christians; His, and by Him, your Ladyships Dear Mother; whom if you
voluntarily loose, as you have done him necessarily, you double your Misery;
and leave Charity it self no excuse to make for the Error; But that your first
loss, has not only bereft you, of the Object of your Affections; but by its
greatness, has amazed your Judgment too.

Now let me join your Honors once again, to Beseech your Joint Patronage, of
this imperfect Copy, of so rare a piece. The better is the face, the hardlier
does the Painter hit it; One deforming mark, (which is seldom mist by a rude
Pencill) makes all the rest, seem like. I had no such unhappy Advantage here;
(though I complain not of that want.) And my have was such, I had scarce time
to prime my Canvas, and to let it dry; to bear the Impressions of a leaden
Pencil: you are my witnesses beyond exception; that your Consternation was not
off enough, in half the week, to give me my summons, for the following Monday.
Such pieces do require the second, and third sitting; beside the finishing
strokes, unless, Immature Sermons best suit with Immature Funerals.

Involuntary slipps, have their pardon of course, and the flatter touches of an
hasty Pencil, all Ingenuity Indulges. The rest must endure its fate, in an
unkind World, which still is such, that I truly reckon it among your Comforts,
that our Noble Lord is got well out on it. His now secure Hearse, must be my
Shrine; and if your Honors accept it, (which is the Only Boon I Crave) you
then Engage your Greatness, and your Goodness for my Protection: The Confidence
of which, shall be the Security, and Ease, of

My very Good Lord, and Ladies, Your Honors Most Devoted Orator, and Lowest
Servant ANTHONY WALKER.

Planctus Unigeniti.
St. Luke, Chap. the 7th. Verses 12, 13. -- Behold there was a Dead Man Carried
out, the only Son of his Mother, and she was a Widow, and much People of the
City was with her.

And when the Lord saw her, he had Compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep
not.


IF it were but a Venial Solicisme, to Preface that Sermon with Sighs, and
Tears; the Text of which forbids our Weeping, or less Ominous to my Design of
Comforting others, then some men phansy stumbling at the Threshold. My
Preaching (without a Parable) should be a Mourning to you; Luke 7.32. We have
mourned to you, and you have not wept.
And just astonishment should strike me dumb, which were the only Eloquence on
this occasion. And by a meet Metathesis my Lips, and Eyes should change their
Offices, and these should be your Orators (for tears are very Vocal) and in
the Prophets Phrase, should Drop my Words; (though soft and silent, Ezech.
20.40.
yet warm and melting ones) and my Doctrine (not in a metaphour) Should
distill like the Rain, Deuteronomy. 32.2.
and descend upon You as the Dew.

Neither should I despair of drops enough, if not to soften, yet to smooth the
stoniest, and most unnatural breast; And to be pledged abundantly by those, To
whom the Lord has given tears to drink in so great Plenty, Psalm. 80.5.

But this were, at once, to be both Rude and Cruel; and to Vpbraid your
Humanity, and hazard your safety. The one as little needing Provocation to
more sorrows, as the other can bear it, after such Floods of grief, Oculi mei
reforbebant fontem suum usque ad siccitatem. Aug. Confess. Lib. 9. Cap. 12.
whose eyes have drained their very Fountains dry; as St. Augustine of himself
upon his Mothers Death.

Yet if there be any eye so strangely Anomolous to all the Laws of Nature and
Civility, like Gideons Fleece (which yet was not without a Miracle) to continue
dry, while all about is bedewed and drencht in tears. I Will try his Obstinacy,
and tempt his Stoicisme with the Dark and Cloudy side of my Text; -- Behold a
dead man was carried out, the only Son of his Mother, and she was a Widow.
(...) Says St. Gregory Nyscene, Cap. 25. De opificio hominis.
The mere Narration is a great and manifest Lamentation; what say thou
Friend, can thou hear this and not Lament? Has the Holy Spirit set so
mournful an Asterick upon it, and can thou read it, unmoved, and
unconcerned? Where are thy Bowels? What Ostrich have thou changed them with?
Or from what Tygre were they derived to thee?

But if thy Ear will not affect thy Heart, thy Eye will doubtless: and that
thine Eye again. See then before thee, in that solemn Hearse the Killing
Resurrection of this Mournful Story, the darker Scene of this black Tragedy.
Behold here a Dead Man, a young Man, in the blossom of his Manhood, scarce in
the Flower of his Youth, and not arrived at the Zenith of his Age or Honor,
and the only Son, Yea, Sauciabatur anima mea, and quasi dilaniabatur vita quae
una facta fuerat ex mea and illius. Aug. Conf. Lib. 9. Cap. 12.
the only one of his Right Honorable Parents, whose very Lives were bound up
in his; being inexpressibly Dear to them in numberless regards. Snatched from
the closest Embraces of a Dearest Consort, and rent from the tenderest bosom,
yea, from the very Soul, of the best of Mothers, who Loved him, with a Love,
Better, and Greater, then the Love of Women; If thou beholdest this with dry
Eyes, surely thou art somewhat more then Man, an Angel; or rather somewhat, yea
much less, a Brute, a Stock.

You easily see, there lie two mournful Texts before us, the one in the Volume
of Gods Book, the other in the Book of Providence; And the Second, alas, too
full a Counterpaine of'th First, and too too sad an Exemplification of it. I
shall touch them both in Order, and Order Commands me, and Invites you first,
to the words I have Read; which are parcel of a very Remarkable History of one
of the most Signal Works of Christ, which stand upon Record in the Sacred
Registers. The raising of the Widows Son of Naim, and worthily are they ushered
in with that quickening incitement of our attention, Behold. For if single
wonders command our rediest notice, then much more this, which is like Ezekiels
Vision, Ezekiel. 1.16.
a Wheel in a Wheel, a Miracle in a Miracle, a miracle of Compassion in a
Miracle of Power, a miracle of Greatness in a miracle of Goodness, Relieving
Pity, meeting dispairing Necessity, and preventing even requests, as much as
exceeding hopes of help.

Omnia adeo minute narrantur, ut fidem augerent Historiae Maldon.
Many Circumstances offer, and almost force themselves upon us, tending to the
Verifying, and Magnifying of the work; to manifest both how True, and how Great
it was; but I must resist their importunity in my present have, and fixing this
fourfold remarke upon the Whole, single out the Branch I am engaged to pursue.

Observe first the kind of Christ's Miracles; Healing, Inlivening, the sweetest
Emblems of that Grace and Gospel which they were wrought for Confirmation of;
Moses, the Law, was a Minister of death, the Letter kills, so did his
Miracles, Blood and Storms, Exodus 7, 19.9.22.10.21.12.29.
Fire, Darkness, Desolation, Death, were those he wrought.

He made but one Dead thing Alive, which was a Rod before, but then became a
Serpent; In cujus morsu mors, Exodus 7.9, 10.
grew from a Smart Instrument of Correction to a more Nocent one of Destruction
as Rehoboams Scorpions were more cruel then the Rods of Solomon, Exodus 7.9, 10.
2 Kings 12.11.

2. This Miracle exemplifies the Strength and Greatness of his Grace, as well
as the Sweetness and Goodness of it; A dead man is the lively Picture of a
Sinner; Sin is the greatest death, Amplius est resascitare semper victurum,
quam suscitare iterum moriturum. Aug. Ser. 4. dever. Domi. Initio Tom. 10.
it kills the Nobler part, the Soul, and a dead man carried out, is the Copy
of a Sinner, not newly such, but a good while lying in it, ready to stink above
ground in his noy some Lusts; Yet such can Christ raise up, as here; Yea, them
who are Entombed in the customs of Sin, and rott and stink with Lazarus;
Augustinus ubi supra.
Liberat enim and de mala Consuetudine Dominus quatriduanos mortuos

3. This Miracle proclaims the superlative preventing Goodness of him who is
found of them who seek him not, Isa. 65.1.
Romans 10.20.
and made manifest to them who enquire not after him, Non Rogatus adest.
Mal.(...).


Those whom Christ helped while he was on Earth, are ranck't into this
threefold Order.

1. Some upon their own importunate, and earnest Prayers, as blind Bartimeus,
Crying, Mark 10.47.
Jesus thou Son of David have mercy on me; And the Leper, Mark 1.40.
who beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, said; Lord if thou will thou
can make me clean. Blind Sinners! let the first be your Letany, and the last
your daily Collect your unclean ones.

2. Some upon the Requests and Intercession of others, as him sick of the
Palsy, Mark 2, 3.
brought by his Friends; St. Luke 7.2. 8.41.
the Centurions Servant for whom his Master and the Jews interceded, and
Jarus's Daughter whom he raised at the humble Importunity of her destressed
Father. Learn hence you that have Servants, Friends, Children to go to Christ
for them with Faith and Prayer for Spiritual Health and Life, and engage Good
Christians with you, as he did the Jews, and be full of good works, that they
may not want Arguments to plead before the Lord in your behalf, as they -- Lord
he loves our Nation, and has built us a Synagogue. St. Luke 7.5.


3. Some without other motions made to him then the silent Oratory of their own
deep Misery, which cried prevailingly in the ears of his Mercy, Ipsa pro
miseris miseria, vociseratur.
as this Woman whom he saw and Pitied, and Comforted, and Helped, and all
unask't; and how much more will he relieve those who Cry unto him Day and
Night? Luke 18.7, 8.
And whose Condition is as sad as hers? I tell you, he will assuredly relieve
them.

Lastly, This Miracle declares the exact watchfulness of Divine Benignity,
which comes so pat, so seasonable, just when the Corpse was carrying out. This
never comes too soon, this never stays too late, but is always ready where
and when it is necessary, stays till there is need, that help may be the sweeter,
but never stays longer then it is fit and safe; Therefore you that wait for
help, give not over looking, nor say Complainingly, Mine eyes fail while I
wait for thy Salvation; Psalm. 69.3.
But, though it tarry, wait for it, Habb. 2, 3.
for it will come, and will not tarry (longer then is meet) and it will speak,
and will not lie; and that in so apposite, so sweet, so fit a manner, time and
place, that it will make thee cry out with wonder; Behold what has the Lord
wrought; as the Holy Penman ushers in this Narrative; Behold -- Que particula
Ecce, temporis unitatem and loci propinquitatem significat. He cannot express
it without holy admiration, that Christ should come so seasonably, so pat, as
we use to speak; just then, in the very Nick and Article of time, When the dead
man was carried out, who was the only Son of his Mother, and she a Widow, and
much People of the City was with her, And when the Lord saw her, he had
Compassion on her, and said unto her, Weep not.

Which words are Chequer-Work of Black and White, like Moses Pillar, party per
pale Darkness and Light, as David's Song of Judgment and Mercy, Exodus 14.20.
and we may use St. Paul's Language whilst we view them, Psalm. 101.1.
behold the Severity and Goodness of God. Romans 11.22.
So that my Text is a Tragy-Comedy begins with a mournful Prologue, but ends
with a joyful Epilogue; a rayny, lowering day, breaking up into a bright and
pleasant Evening.

She comes forth weeping and bearing Precious Seed, Corpora sanctorum Semen
laetae resurrectionis. Psalm. 126.5, 6.
the seed of the Resurrection, and she has an early, sudden, unexpected
Harvest, and carries home a Sheaf in her Bosom, which she reapt with
ravishments, and ecstasies of joy.

The whole of the Text may genuinely be reduced to these two heads.

1. Man's Misery. 2. Christ's Mercy.
Humane Passion, Divine Compassion.

The First, in Verse the 12. which presents us with a sad and doleful Object.

The Second, ver. the 13. which gives us an account what impression that object
made on Christ, who came so seasonably to behold and help.

Or if you will; Observe, 1. A Solemn and Mournful Funeral. 2. A seasonable and
Comfortable Cordial.


In the First, the Funeral, are presented to us.

1. The Hearse; a dead man carried out. 2. The Mourners; his Mother the chief,
and much People with her. 3. The process of the whole, they carry him forth.
In the second, the Cordial.

1. The Cordial it self, Weep not. 2. The Holy Lymbeck, from whence it is
distilled, the tender bowels of Jesus Christ; He was moved with Compassion; --
3. The fire that gives it operation; the seeing of this pitiful object; a
Desolate, Disconsolate Mother When he saw her; -- Then he was moved with
Compassi n, and when he was so moved, then he said, Weep not.
I begin with the First; the Funeral, and in that, 1. The Hearse, 2. Then the
Mourners, and this order, Custom approves, Nature Compells, Ceremony appoints,
and Necessity constrains; the Hearse leads, the Mourners follow; Our Noble Lord
is gone before, we must go after.

1. The Hearse, And that as harsh and dark as if the Pall, were of the Coursest
Hair-Cloath, and made more black and Heavy, with these six sable Escutcheons,
which are its load and burden, rather then its Ornament.

1. A Man dead. 2. He a Young Man. 3. That young man, a Great man. 4 That Great
man, an Only Son. 5. That only Son, as Childless at his death, as his decease
did leave his Mother. 6. That Mother a Widow, like to continue Childless,
Heirless, concluded and shut up under despair of having more to comfort, and
relieve her Solitude.
Each circumstance calls for an heavy accent, and needs a mournful circumflex,
let us drop them with our tears in Order, that every Escutcheon may be Guttee,
only suppose those drops of Pearl and Argent, to charge the dispairing Sable
Field of Death, with brighter hopes of an approaching Resurrection. 1 Timothy 2.7.
(...) preco Caduceator, predicator (...) predicare public laudare.
Excuse this phrase; a Preacher is properly an Herald: but chiefly so, at such
a time. Each word, like a slip of Ciprus, sprouts up into a mournful Stem, the
Blazon of each Escutcheon is a doleful Sentence, in Order thus,

1. Man is Mortal.

2. Even Young men may dye, and often do.

3. Great Men must fall as well as others.

4. Onely-Children cannot escape.

5. Whole Families may fail in Childless Heirs.

6. Former Sorrows do not excuse us from Succeeding Ones; She that was made a
Widow by her Husbands death, may yet be rendered more desolate by the loss of
Children. One comfort gone secures not the rest.

By the glimmering light which these six dim and lowering Tapers cast about the
Hearse, you may distinctly read, the Impress of each Shield.

1. Man's Mortal. This truth's so obvious, we cannot suppose the Ecce prefixed
to it. The wonder is greater that any man out-lives his Mothers travel, then
that he dies so soon.

The many witty Emblems of our frailty, devised and used by gravest Sages,
Ethnic and Christian are abundantly excused from all suspicion of Hyperbole's,
by what the holy spirit speaks so frequently in the same Argument; Isa. 40.6,
7. Psalm. 103.15. Job. 13.25. 1 Pet. 1.24. Jam. 4.14. Job. 7.7. Psalm. 144.4.
Isa. 40.17.
comparing man to Grass, to Flowers, to dried Leaves, and Stubble, to Dust, to
Vapors, to Wind, to Vanity, to less then vanity and nothing.

And no truth is written in Gods Book, with more Indelible, and larger
Characters, then that It is appointed unto all men once to dye; A time to be
born, a time to dye; Mark how close they stand together, nothing parts them.
Jos. 23.14. 1 Kings 2.2.
It Is the way of all the Earth, an universal Rule that does admit of no
Exception, Genesis 5.5, 8, 11, 14, 17, 20,
the constant conclusion of all men's History: -- And he dyed. So that the
challenge was very safe; What man is he that lives, and shall not see death,
Psalm. 89.48.
and shall he deliver himself from the hand of the Grave? And the determination
as warily made, No man can give to God a Ransom for himself, or Brother, Psalm.
49.9.
that he should still live for ever, and not see Corruption.

2. And it is as obvious to common notice, we need not Revelation to persuade
our Credence, they give assent, who never saw the Bible, and it is become a
Proverb, nothing so sure as death; where seeing is believing, there need no
other Topics, to make a demonstration.

3. And Natural Reason gives its perfect suffrage, that must decay, whose
foundation is in the dust, as ours is, who are but the sub-divisions of Adams red
Clod, crumbled into multiplied Atoms; the stream cannot ascend beyond the
Altitude of the Fountains Situation. From Corruptible Principles no Product
can proceed, Incorruptible; Man that is born of a Woman, is of few days, it
carries its own Evidence, because he is so born.

A Tabernacle patcht together of sappy sticks, Job. 14.1.
and rotten straw, and mouldring dirt cannot stand long, especially exposed to
Storms without, and Fire from within; and such is man's body, (...). -- Greg.
Nyss. Orat. de Mortuis.
tossed and consumed with daily strife, of hot and cold, moist and dry, and which
soever Conquers, leads life it self a Captive to its Victory, (...) -- Greg.
Nyss. ubi supra.
-- And Dust returns to dust.

4. And there is a Moral cause in the Soul, as mortal as any Natural one in the
Body, Eze. 18.20. Genesis 2.17. Romans 6.23.5.12.
the Soul that sins it shall dye, In the day thou eatest thou shall dye the
death, death is the wages of sin, which shall be surely paid. By one man Sin
entered into the World, 1 Kin. 8.46.
and death by sin. And in as much as no man lives and sins not, you may
conclude that no man lives, Mors interficit omnes quos natura presentem
perducit ad vitam; ducit Reges, trahit Populos, gentes impellit, non divitiis
redimi non flecti precibus, non lachrimis molliri, non viribus potuit illa
unquam superari, Chrysologus Sermon. 118.
and dies not.

With what words then shall we bewail, or upbraid rather, the Atheistical
security, and stupid madness of those men, who will not be persuaded of this
truth? or, which is ten times worse, under convictions and confessions of it,
live here, as if, they should live here for ever; and tempt us to believe they
judge their Souls are Mortal, they take so little care to save them; and their
Bodies Immortal, they heap up so long provisions for them.

2. Even young men may dye, and often do. Ours in the Text is expressly called
so, (...) in the ver. next following, your common saying is, Old men must dye,
and Young men may, Senibus mors in januis, Juvenibus in obsidiis, says St.
Bernard. It Is very remarkable how the Scripture Records the Death of Haran, And
Haran dyed before his Father Tera, Genesis 11.21.
in the Land of his Nativity. Most Children dye before their Parents, not one
of an hundred that are born, lives to be old, and consequently, far the
greatest part of men dye young. Death passes upon them who have not sinned,
after the similitude of Adams Transgression; Romans 5.
that is actually, and therefore dye whilst young. Rachells Children are not,
while she remains to bewail them, because they are not. Death keeps no turns,
observes no order, that they should go first, who came so, but in this it is
often, The last shall be first, and the first last. Not only man, but man in
his best Estate is altogether vanity; It Is an Arabian Proverb, Psalm. 39.5.
the old Camel often carries the young Camells Skin to Market; And the Jewish
Scholar told his Master, as an Argument, to urge him, to teach him betimes the
Art of dying well; that there were little graves in Golgotha. When Jonahs gourd
was fresh and green, Jon. 4.
fullest of sap and verdure, then the worm smites it, and it is gone. And no
wonder, for their less confirmed constitution, is sooner discomposed, and out
of temper; Their fresher blood is more susceptive of Infection, their warmer
and agile spirits more easily blown up into a Feverish heat and flame, and in
a word, are so much less safe from death, by how much they are the fairer marks
for him to Level at.

Awake then presumptuous Youths! Sleep not so soundly in the Lap of Dalilah,
without the thoughts and care of rest in Abraham's bosom; Put not the evil day
far from you, upon such slight and slender grounds, Make no agreements with the
Grave, nor covenants with death and Hell, Isa. 28.18.
least he forbid the banes, and disanull it, in whose hands your breath is; but
Remember your Creator in the days of your youth, Eccl. 12.1.
and learn to live betimes, yea and dye too, (for you may dye betimes) and seek
God early, while he may be found, knowing they are most welcome who come
soonest, and remembering the young Disciple, was the best beloved Disciple. Put
not off, no not a day, Nescis quid serus vesper trabat Adag.
a work of such concernment, because thou know not what a day may bring
forth, least thou be put to worse complaints then his, who bitterly bewailed
his stay, Too late O Lord did I begin to Love thee; Nimis sero te amare caepi,
and least if thou think the Morn and Flower of thy age too good to give, God
judge the dreggs and twigh-light of it too bad to be accepted, and take no
pleasure in those days, Of which thy self shall say, I have no pleasure in
them, Eccl 12.1. O know in this thy day, the things that concern thy peace;
Vide Gr. Nyss. Contra Bap. delat. Sed dices tu qui es Juvenis, nondum consenui.
Noli ergo decipi, non definitur mors certo tempore aetatis, neque timet eos qui
sunt in ipso flore aetatis in solos autem senes obtinet dominium. Hujus enim
accipe magistrum quotidianam experientiam. Vides enim quo mortui efferuntur
feretrum quam in aequaliter and ut contingit omnem effertae tatem hodie senem
cras florentem and elegantem adolescentem paulo post cui caeperat lanugo
apparere, russus virum robustum valentem viribus and russus vetulam simul and
virginem.
Si non nunc, quando?

3. Great Men must fall as well as others, this in our Text was such an one;
his Mother is termed Primaria Civitatis Matrona, one of the Chief Ladies in the
City where she dwelt. We dye, as Men, as Sinners, and what makes them greatest,
makes them not more then men, nor less then sinners. Therefore he who calls
them Gods, yet says that they must dye like men; Psalm. 82.6, 7.
The lofty Cedars of Lebanon, and goodliest Oaks in Bashan, must down as sure
as the Sycamors in the Valley, or Willowes by the Water-Brookes.

Job told us long ago, Job 34.19, 20
that God accepts not the Persons of Princes, nor regards the Rich more
then the Poor, for they are all the work of his hands; In a moment they shall
dye, and the Mighty shall be taken away without hand.

Man though in Honor abides not; Psalm. 49.12.
when God takes away the breath of Princes, even they return unto their dust,
and their thoughts perish. Though the Rich Man's Wealth be his Tower, Pro. 10.15.
and a strong hold in his conceit, yet Death can scale his Walls, and storm
his Fort, or pick his Locks, and creep in at his Windows, or slide in at a
Loop-hole; and Riches cannot bribe him, nor a Golden Shield bear off his darts.
That Rich Fool in the Gospel, who blessed himself with Barnes-full, as if nothing
would destroy but starving, was confuted with a vengeance when the summons
came, Stulte hac nocte, Thou Fool, Luke 12.21*
this night thy Soul shall be required of thee. Solomon and Craesus, Alexander
and Caesar, Constantine and Charles, and all the Magni and Maximi, are such
loud Instances of this, it were superfluous to weary you with more.

Be wise now therefore O Ye Kings, Psalm. 2.20.
be Instructed Ye Judges of the Earth, Serve the Lord with Fear, Kiss the Sun
least he be angry, and when you dye, (as dye you must,) you dye again, and
perish Everlastingly. Know ere it be too late, Prove. 11.4.
that Riches will not profit in the day of wrath, or be accepted as your
Ransom, and therefore trust not in them, Psalm. 62.10.
and when they increase, set not your hearts upon them. I shall shutt up this
with those Golden Words of St. Augustine, which conclude the third Tome of his
Works.

Thou pridest thy self in thy Riches, and the Nobility of thy Ancestors, thou
boastest of thy Country, and the Beauty of thy Body, and the Honors conferred
upon thee; But consider thy self, that thou art Mortal, that thou art Dust, and
must return to dust; Look upon them, who before thee, glistered with like
gayeties; Where now are those who were incircled with a train of Citizens?
Where the Inconquerable Emperors? Where those who called, and could appoint
Public Assemblies, and Solemn Meetings? Now all is Dust, all is Ashes. Now a
few Verses comprehend their story. Look now into their Graves, and see which
was the Servant, which the Lord, which the Poor Man, which the Rich,
distinguish if thou can, the Captive from the King, Divitiis, floribus and
majorum Nobilitate te jactas, and exultas de Patria, and pucritudine corporis,
and Honoribus qui tibi ab hominibus deferuntur: respice te quia mortalis es,
and Terra es, and in terram ibis. Circumspice eos qui ante te similibus
spendoribus fulsere. Ubi sunt quos ambiebant Civium Potentatus? Ubi in
Superabiles Imperatores? Ubi qui conventus dishonebant and Festa? Ubi equorum
spendidi invectores? Ubi exercicituum duces? Ubi Satrapae Tyrannici; Nunc omnia
pulvis, nunc omnia favillae, nunc in paucis versibus eorum vitae memoria;
Respice Sepulchra, and vide quis Servus, quis Dominus, quis Pauper, quis Dives,
Discern si potes Vinctuma Rege, Fortem a Debili Pulchrum a Deformi; Memor sis
itaque ne extollaris aliquando. Memor autem eris, si te ipsum respexeris.
the Strong from the Weak, the Comely from the Deformed; think of this, and it
will keep thee humble, and thou can not but remember it, unless thou forget
thy self.

4. Only Children cannot escape; (...) Vnigenitus, Quod plus est quam unicus,
quem solum genuerat, The only begotten on her that bare him; these are our
Darlings, as we translate (...) Vnicam meam. Psalm. 22.20.
No Argument moves pity more, then when those are taken from us; yet Death
knows none to spare them to us; the Widow of Sarepta's Only Son dies, 1 King
17.17.
and so does Jarus's Only Daughter; St. Luke 7.42.
and Abraham must Offer up his Only Son Isaac whom he Loved, Genesis 22.
and Jephtha his Only Daughter. Jud. 11.39


Death aims so right, he will hit a single mark, and needs not shoot at Herds;
and God often guides his Darts this way:

1. Because they are Over-loved, and stand so full betwixt their Parents heart,
and Him, He cannot be Loved Himself, till they are Removed out of'th way.

2. To Try their Obedience, Faith and Patience, Genesis 22.1.
as He Tempted Abraham.

3. To Honor them before the World, and make it known how quietly they will part
with any thing He pleases to call for, though never so dear.

Lastly, to fit them by so deep a sorrow for some more Excellent and lasting
Good, and Joy, He has in readiness to give them in Exchange; It being Gods
usual Method, as Luther Observes, when He has some Eminent Comforts to
bestow, or some Signal Service to employ us in, to Usher them in with some
great Trial, and Temptation.

Oh therefore let not those, whose Store is so Compendious, too fondly hug
those dearest Pledges, least God grow jealous, and be forced to deal with them,
as he is used to do with his Rivalls; and those who stand in Competition with
Himself.

5. Whole Families may fail in Childless Heirs. Death takes root and branch,
and does not only deal by Retale, Tota cum Regibus regna populique cum
gentious tulere satum futum, Sen.
but slayes by Wholesale, and with compendious and stupendous strokes, mowes
down a Family at one blow, and sweeps away the hopes of all Posterity, as if he
gap't for the Inheritance and all, and had resolved with those bloody Rebels,
St. Mat. 21.38.
Come, this is the Heir, let us slay him, that the Inheritance may be ours.

Thus failed the two Young Sons of Greatest Alexander, Heirs of their Fathers
Conquests, all the World; Thus half the Provinces Escheated into the hands of
the People of Rome when they were Lords-Paramount of the Earth; Vespasian,
Antoninus Philosophus, Severus, Valerian. Domitian Commodus, Bassianus,
Gallienus.
and of Forty Emperors, from Julius Caesar to Constantine the Great; but four,
left Heirs of Lineal Descent, and all of them the Worst, which ever wore the
Roman Purple; Their Fathers Vomicae and Carcinomita, Soars and Ulcers, as
Augustus called his Daughters, Faelix Infortunio qui caret liberis, Sen.
three of whom had been happy unto Envy, had they dyed Childless, as Augustus
wished he had Lived.

Oh! therefore let not your Inward thoughts be, that your Families shall
continue for ever, and your Dwelling-Places bear your Names to all Generations;
Their way, is their folly who do so, Psalm. 49.13. But know that Riches are not
for ever, neither does the Crown Endure to all Generations. Prove. 27.24.
And let not such blows too much deject those on whom they Light, because
nothing is befallen them, but what is common to Man, 1 Cor. 10.13.

6. Former sorrows do not excuse us from succeeding griefs. The poor Mother in
the Text, whom the last Funeral made a Widow, is made Childless too by this.
All thy Waves and Billows are gone over me, Psalm. 42.7.
one in the neck, or on the back of another; troubles are often born out of the
Womb of Providence, as Esau and Jacob came from Rebecca, linckt together, and
holding each other by the heel.

Take we heed then we flatter not our selves, nor say with Agag, The bitterness
is past, nor listen to a Desperate and Blasphemous suggestion, now let him do
his Worst, Not wickedly, as the Poet wittily. Nil quod istic agat tertia tussis
habet, Mar. Mich. 6.9.
I have no more Marks left for his angry Arrows, nor other Blots to hit; but
with Submisse and Humble Reverence, lets hear the Rod at present, and fear it
for the Future, and by the first lash, be warned to prepare for, or to prevent
the second, and so to stand in awe, that we sin not, Psalm. 4.4. John. 5.14.
least a worse thing come upon us, and what we judge the worst, prove but the
beginning of our sorrows.

I might have added (and the rather because, the case is Parallel.

7. That this Great, Young Man dyed not in the Country in some Remote Obscure
Ville, the Relatives of them who dye so, 2 Chronicles. 16.12.
being ready with Asa's Spirit, to say to some Great Physician, as Martha did
to Christ; Sir, John 11 21.
If thou had been here, my Brother had not dyed. But in the City, Inter
Turbam Medicorum, where probably no Aid was wanting, which Able, Skillful
Physicians could afford.

And 8. In his Mothers House, and Bosom, who now was his Nurse, the second
time her self; and therefore he wanted not most Careful looking too, it is not
for want of Physic, or good Nurses, that Men are cast away, or lost, as some
too often speak; but where ever they be, and whatever help they do enjoy, whom
Death comes for, he will not go without them; but will force them out of the
most Skillful, Faithful, Painful, Careful, Loving and Tender hands, and all
the Strongest Guards which those can set about them.

Thus have you seen the Hearse pass by, and heard its Scutcheons Blazoned;
we will view the train of mourners with a quicker glance. And that deep mourner
following next-the- Beir, is his Distressed Mother, close-hooded, with a Cloud,
of thick, and blackest sorrow; and over that, a veil of Love, of Woman's Love,
of Mothers Love, of Mothers Love unto an Only Son, (...)? Nyss. in func* Palch.
the truest Mourning dress; and over all, a dark Vmbrella, made of the Shadow
of Death, supported by the fatal Sisters. She Is the Chief Mourner, not in Pomp
and Cerimony, but in deep Anguish, and bitterness of Soul. She brings him
forth; -- And this is the second time she Travells of him (and no Travells so
difficult as of dead Children) he came from her Womb before, but now, and never
until now he comes from her Inmost Bowels, St Luke 2.35. A Sword shall pierce
through thy own Soul.
her former Pangs might rend her Flesh, these smarter throws do Rack and Tear
her very Heart and Soul; and as before, he was born for her Ease, though with
her Pain, so now does she bring him forth for her Safty, though with great
Danger; she is in danger to weep to death at parting, yet must they part; If
she will not send out him, he will sent out her; one House cannot hold them now, such
is our sad necessity, Genesis 2.34.
We must bury our dead out of our sight and smelling; but she is resolved to see
him Housed and Lodged, in his Long home; and while he passes thither, the
Mourners go about the Streets. Much People of the City was with her.

It Is a Custom without date, and might have urged prescription many Ages since,
Antiquorum p^storum (...) curati sunt, and exequiae celebratae, and sepultura
provisa. Aug. de cura pro murt.
for Friends to give attendance at the Obseques of their disceased Worthies;
this we read practiced, and approved, both, in Sacred and Common Story; thus,
at the death of Abraham, his Sons are said to bury him, so Isaac, so Jacob, of
whom it is Recorded, Genesis 25.9.25.29, 50, 7, 8.
that Joseph went up to bury his Father, and with him went up all the Servants
of Pharaoh, and the Elders of his House, and all the Elders of the Land of
Egypt; And all the House of Joseph, and his Brethren and his Fathers House;
and they went up with Chariots, and with Horsemen, and it was a very great
Company, and they Mourned with a very great and sore Lamentation.

2 Samuel 25.1. 1 Kings 14.13. 2 Chronicles. 24, 15, 16. Acts 8.2.
So all Israel Lamented Samuel, and buried him, so David and Jeroboams Young
Son, and Jehojada, and Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.25.

So St. Stephen in the New Testament, Whom devout men buried, and made great
Lamentation for him. Not that this avails them any thing as to their state in
the other World; For Corpori humano quicquid impenditur, non est presidium
salutis, sed humanitatis officium.

But 1. Is for their Honor here, being a decent Respect we pay to their Name
and Memory, it being a favor to live Desired, and dye Lamented, and a Curse,
and Reproach to be buried, Jer. 22.19.
with the burial of an Ass, as was threatened against Jehojakim, and others,
They shall not be lamented nor buried, Jer. 6.4.
but be as dung upon the face of the Earth, which is an Earnest that their
Names shall Rot.

2. Charitatis ergo, In Charity to the Living for their Comfort, and
alleviating of their sorrow, while their burden is made lighter, by many
helping them to bear it, as the Jews came lovingly to Comfort Martha and Mary
because of their Brother Lazarus. Curatio funeris, John 11.31.
conditio Sepulturae, pompa exequiarum, magis vivorum solatia sunt, quam
subsidia mortuorum. August. Ubi Sup^ra.


3. Pietatis ergo, For their own advantage, and increase of piety; It Is good to
go to the House of Mourning, Eccl. 7.3.
for by the sadness of the Countenance, the heart is made better, while the
living lay it to their heart. The House of Mourning is the School of Wisdom,
the Grave has a Teaching, as well as a Devouring mouth, and the Coffin is a
Pulpit from whence the Dead yet speak, and warn us to behold our mortality in
their frailty, and to prepare to follow them, to dye to this uncertain World,
to mortify our sins that they may dye before us, and to make sure of the first
Resurrection, that as we must dye once, we may dye but once.

4. Fidei testisicandae ergo, Propter fidem resurrectionis Astruendam.
to testify our Faith in that great Article of the Resurrection of the dead,
which is the Basis of a Christians Comforts, Tota spes Christianorum
Resurrectio mortuorum; For, 1 Cor. 1^.
if in this life only we have hope, we are of all men most Miserable.

Now in this Solemn Equipage these Mournful Friends bring forth this Corpse,
Hinc coll^ge ^deos Sepulch^ sua habuisse non in Urbe sed extra Urbem idque tum
obnitorem tum ob^n^ cada^era s^o foetore and pu^dine a^ ^cerent (...) Lap.
are carrying him out of the City, both as the Jews and Romans used to bury;
Ob nitorem, sanitatem, legalem munditiem.

1. For Decency and Splendor that the Graves and Sepulchers might not deface
the comeliness and beauty of their Cities.

2. For Safety and Health, that the fetent exhalations, and noisome and noxious
vapors of the Graves might not infect the air, and hazard the health of the
Living.

3. For legal purity and cleaness, that neither themselves nor habitations
might be defiled by the dead; and our present custom of burying in or about
our Churches and places of our Solemn Assemblies for Gods Worship, was brought
in upon Opinion that it would advantage the dead to be buried near some holy
Martyr, over whose Graves usually those Basilicae, Stately Edifices were
Erected; and the answering of that case, propounded to him by Paulinus Bishop
of Nola, Vtrum prosit alicui pest mortem, quod corpus ejus apud sancti alicujus
memoriam sepelitur, gave occasion to St. Augustine to Write that Book, De Cura
pro Mortuis gerenda, in the 4th Tome of his Works, where he resolves it in the
Negative.

Thus have you past the cloudy side of the Text, which has besprinkled you
with showers of sorrow, whilst you were viewing of the Hearse, the Mourners, and
their Solemn March, while they attend deaths Chariot, that's carrying home his
prisoner to the house of darkness.

And now we have compast it so long, until the brighter side begins to glimmer
and appear, for Behold, yea behold and wonder at the seasonable mercy, the Lord
of Life and Death most unexpectedly appears; Jansenius in Loc.
Christ, Cujus occursus and obtutus, semper faelix est and faustus, Comes and
meets them at the very Gate, and brings relief and rescue, and gives a cordial
to the fainting Mother, -- Weep not.

The Order is thus,

1. He meets the Object seasonably, both the Course, and Mourners, -- He saw
her.

2. That moves his heart effectually, -- He was moved with compassion.

3. That commands his tongue to speak good words and Comfortable; -- Weep not.
Observe. Affectum cordis, affatem oris effectum operis commitatur. Bonivent.


1. The Lord is near, and ready, in our greatest streights.

2. Christ was exceeding full of tenderest humanty and Bowels.

3. Christ's compassions are active and relieving, full of help, He pitties,
then He speaks.

1. The Lord is near, -- not in his essence only in which respect he is never
far from any; Acts 17.
For in him we live and move and have our being, but in his gracious
compassions, willing to meet us, in our moans and plaints. Yea, ready to
prevent us, and before we call, to answer. Our streights are often such they
cannot bear those tarda molimina, those succors which are slow, though sure.
He knows, that hope deferred, destroys, therefore will not defer, but comes on
Eagles wings, and often does un-askt, what we are taught to ask him; O God
make speed to save us, O Lord make have to help us. He that has charged us,
Not to with hold good from them to whom it is due, when it is in the power of
our hand to do it, Prove. 3.27, 28.
nor to say to our Neighbor, go, and come again, and to morrow I will give,
when thou have it by thee; will not do so himself.

2. Christ was exceeding full of tenderest bowels; He wept over Lazarus, and
He wept over Jerusalem, -- Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that thou had known the
things which do concern thy peace; Mat. 9.36.14.14.
-- His Bowels yearned here, and He was moved with Compassion often toward
others.

Christ in the Flesh, is the Visible Image of the Invisible God, Psalm.
111.4.112.4.
and to our sense and sweetest experience he makes it manifest, that the Lord
is good to all, and that his tender mercies are over all his works; that the
Lord is full of Compassion and Gracious; and while he sees the Mother weeping,
and not able to forget her Son, it minds him of his promise, Isa. 49.15.
Can a Woman forget her Child, that she should not have compassion on the Son
of her Womb? Yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget thee. Leo, ut
fortissimus, ita clementissimus, Says the Naturalist.
He is the Lamb, the Dove, the Lion, (which is as kind as strong) Emblems all
of Clemency.

It argued great sweetness to vouch-safe to look on mournful objects, when he
met them, and more to go and find them out, as here. Casu and fortuito si
causas secundas spectes occurrit Christo sunus, sed Christo hic occursus erat
previsus, provisus and destinatus ut mortuum sanaret. He came not by chance,
but on design to help.

Oh then, let us not despond in any of our sorrows; It Is well worth while to be
distressed, to have the Lord Compassionate us; and doubtless he is as ready now
to do it, As St. August. Of his Mother.
as when he was on Earth. Absit ut vita faeliciori factus sit credelis, God
forbid we should suppose him less kind by being more Glorious and Happy;
though he be in Heaven; from Heaven he beholds the Children of Men, and
considers not our sins only, but our Sorrows also; We have him still, such an
High Priest, As can be touched with our Infirmities, though he be Passed into
the Heavens, As the Apostle expressly Speaks, Heb. 4.14, 15.

And Let the same mind be in us which was, Phil. 2.5.
and is also, in Christ Jesus; Let us not turn away our eyes with Cruel,
Proud, or Coy disdain from the sorrowful objects which meet us in every
Street; Turn not thine eye away from thine own Flesh.

Let our eye affect our hearts with Sympathy, Lam. 3.51.
and let us have compassion on one another, 1. Pet. 3.9.
and Love as Brethren, and be Pitiful and courteous.

3. Christ's compassions are Active and R lieving.

First, He Pitties, then He Comforts, then He Helps.

His Office is to comfort them that mourn in Zion, to bind up the
brokenhearted, Isa. 61.1, ^, 3.
and to give the Oil of gladness for mourning, and he is faithful, and will
discharge his Trust, and his Title is, He that comfort them who are cast
down? He has not only a Bag for our Iniquities, to seal up them, but a Bottle
for our tears to put them up. He does not delight to grieve us, and when he is
constrained to do it, In all our Affliction he is Afflicted, and Sympathizeth
with us, and the wounds he makes, he heals, and binds up, and causes the
bones which he has broken to rejoice. Prove. 12.25.


And because a good word makes glad the heart, which stoopes with heaviness,
and is the earnest of farther help, therefore he speaks good words, and
comfortable words: Woman, why weepest thou? be of good cheer, Desiste mortuum
fl^re, qu^m mo^ vivum ^surg^re videbis, A Lap.
-- Weep not, -- and many more like these. He dry es her eyes with his Word,
whose heart shall be relieved by his work: these words, weep not, do not forbid
Natural Affection, but inordinate passion, not tears simply, but their excess,
(for all excess is sin) not tears of Sympathy and parentall tenderness, and
pious Bowels, for he wept for Lazarus himself; but repining tears, dispairing
tears, the tears of them who sorrow as Men without hope; and he that said unto
her, Weep not, was resolved to give her Cause, to take his Council, and to
sluice up effectually those griefs, he there endeavors to assuage.

And although from this particular and special case and Miracle we cannot argue
that we may expect the same or like in kind; yet, in it may we read his heart
and hand, and be assured both of his Ability and Willingness to help in
greatest streights; yea of his Wisdom too, that he knows how and when to do
it, so as shall be best; and that he will not suffer us to be tempted above
what we are able to bear, but will fit our burdens to our backs, or else our
back to our burden, and will counterpoize our sorrows, with some equivalent
joys, or will so strengthen our Faith, increase our patience, and calm and
sedate our minds with silent Acquiescence, and through Resignation, that all
the Uneasiness, and discomposing Molestation of our heaviest burdens, shall be
removed. Quia hoc auxilium est extraordinarium miraculum nos sane non habemus
specialem promissionem quod Deus tali extraordinario modo nos velit sublevare.
Sed hoc miraculo confirmatur generalis promissio and fides quod habemus talem
pontificem qui conspectu nostrarum calamitatum ad sympathiam commovetur, quique
licet differat tamen fidelis est, nec sinit nos tentari ultra quam possumus, 1
Cor. 10.13. Sed vel liberat, vel mitigat, vel cor consolatione perfundit,
patientia confirmat, fide erigit, and sustentat and haec est vera explicatio
istius, beati qui lugent quia consolationem accipient.


GUARD TA FOY.

engraving of an effigy on a tomb, with coats of arms JAY GUARD LA FOY. 2. Tym:
4:7. Ex Hoc momento Aeternitas. 1664



I now come to my other Text, a Text indeed, dark and most intricate; Though
all the Texts of Providence are hardly commented, yet some are more abstruce;
and needs must th^s be such, which is an entangled complicated heap of
difficulties; a Text that is written in Text Letters (the blackest of all
Characters) in the Volume of Gods works. You have heard One Sermon, and if your
Ears be tired, let your Eyes relieve them; (but I must confess it is sad
relief) come see another; and, As, we have heard, so have we seen, St. Luke
4.21.
t^is day is this Scripture fulfulled in your cares, and eyes. Lo, here is an
heavier Comment on our heavy Text alas, but too exact a Counterpayne of that
sad Narrative! the Sermon translated into such a Language, as your eyes can
understand. A Sacrament added to the Word, to convince you, and confirm your
Faith, of Man's Mortality, beyond recoyle or hesitancy; En magnum fragilitatis
humanae Sacramentum, the word confirmed by visible signs. My Text of Death so
painted to the Life, that he, that runs may read it; If e're twere true, it is
now, that, Pictures are Idiots Books; Look on that doleful Picture of fading
Youth and Greatness; and you that can never a Letter in the Book, may spell the
whole Story, word for word, without Instructor.

Oh you Ingenious, but Fruitless, and so unhappy searchers, for an universal
character, which may with still and silent glances, conveigh and whisper to our
Intilect, the natures and notices of things. (...), we find alas too soon, what
you have sought too long. Though I were dumb, or had forgot my Text, one glance
repeats it unto them, recalls it unto me.

In paucis verbis quantae calamitates and miseriae?
In that visible Sermon; Behold, A Dead Man. A Young Man. A Great, a Noble Man.
An Only begotten Son. An Heir without an Heir. -- Each w^rd's a wound.
Here are all the mournful circumstances but one, Quot verba, tot vulnera;
and blessed be God that we meet a full stop, before we read to the end of the
line. -- And she was a Widow, let us lay hold on it as a better Omen, there may
be yet a blessing in it; Let this a while sustain you till I can run, and
fetch you some more Cordialls; which you must stay a little for, because my way
lies round the Hearse again, the viewing which, will stop my have.

1. That Mournful sable Pall, tells us sad tidings, that a Man is Dead, and
shrouded under it; and it is alas too true, the dead remains of him, who this day
Seven-night was alive, and this day Fort-night was a Lively, Likely Man to
live; Verily every Man living is altogether vanity. Hear what advice he
whispers, Watch, for what is my case to day, may be thine to morrow; Hodie mihi,
eras tioi.
Be ye therefore ready also, for the Son of Man comes when you think not, St.
Luke 12.40.
and in an hour when ye are not aware.

2. A Young Man in the Flower and Blooming of his Age, not fully yet of Age,
not of Disposing Age, in the Laws and Style of England; Yet at Age to be
disposed of in the Chambers of Death: An Ear, nay, an whole Sheaf, nay, an
whole Field, Reapt by Death's Fatal Sickle, before 'twas ripe, or set, or
Kern'd; As if in an immature Harvest, you should reap to Being in May.
morrow; a Rose Bud gathered ere 'twas blown; a Torch puffed out, not half
consumed; (...). Greg. Nyss. de Pulch.
an Hourglass dash't, and pash't in pieces, and all the Sand spilt, and lost,
before it was a third part run: What Age is safe from Fate? In the very midst
of Life we are in Death; Of whom may we look for help, but from thee O Lord,
who for our sins most justly are displeased? Psalm. 90.12.
Oh Teach us to Number our days, that we may apply our hearts to Wisdom, and
that we may know how frail we are.

3. But those Coat Armours, Ruby and Topas, Diamond and Pearl, speak him some
Noted Personage. Nobilis quasi noscibilis.
I need not ask the Question here, which David ask't over Abner's Hearse; Know
You not that a Prince and a Great Man is fallen this day? You know it well,
unto your Cost and Sorrow; and see, by Dear Experience; In this Fourth doleful
Instance, in one Family, all of Recent, and Fresh-bleeding Memory; that
Earldoms, and Perage Nobility, and Honor, Lordships, and Manours, Possessions,
and Apparances, Gold, and Silver, Palaces, and Parks, and store of Richest
Lands, and Tallest Timber; and what ever else the World calls Noble, Grand, and
Stately; cannot shade, or hide their Lords from Death, are no good Brest-Works
against his Bullets; nor best charged Shields, security against the Arrows of
Mortality. Death with his ill-match't-pair, of Pale and Sable Hackneyes,
out-drives the goodliest Sets of Sixes.

'Twere as impertinent, as the Philosopher's reading a Lecture of Warlike
Discipline in the presence of Hanniball; for me to unfurle his crimson Ensigns,
and Unfold and Display his Splendid Banners, or paint out, and Deliniate his
thrice Honorable Stem, amongst those to whom they have been now so long
Familiar; and as superfluous to Blazon his Scutcheons in that Country, which
has to long been irradiated in every corner, with the Illustrious Rays of his
cross-Crossets Sol, in their Field Mars; or enriched and secured by those Ruby
Shields, glistering with Topaz.

'T would but Adorn Deaths spoils, and more Inhaunce his Triumphs, to tell you
that his Captive, was the Onely-Son of an Ancient Hereditary Earldom; By
Blood, and Marriage, The Son of Two, the Grandchild of Four Eminent Earls; and
as many Countesses; and Nephew to more Peers, then all Arithmetic has Digits;
Derived from, or Allied to, almost all the Noble Blood, that runs in English,
and in English-Irish Veins.

A Branch of two Families: The One the Grand Nursery of Ancient Piety: His
Mother was the Lady Mary Boil, Daughter to the Earl of Corck.
the Other the Happy Source of Newest Ingenuity; a Society of virtuosi within
themselves; the Original, and Architypes of those, Insigniz'd with that Noble
Character; In a word, the Son of Two Bloods, which I may boldly call; not the
least Ornaments, of two Great Kingdoms: And endued, with all those Generous,
Lovely, Innobling Excellencies, which might Retribute what he Borrowed from
such Blood, and would (Oh unhappiness he has not!) have Transmitted it to his
Posterity, Inrich't (if it be capable of more, and has not attained its Acme)
with increased glory; Yet now must lie down in Obscurity and Dust, under the
Dishonours, Reproaches and Squallidness, of Death; Stripped and Desrobed of all
his Amiable, Manly, Goodly, Beauty, Proportions, Features; calling Corruption,
Rottenness, and Worms; Mother, Brother, Sister.

Cease then from Man whose breath is in his Nostrills; Isa. 2.22.
for wherein is he to be accounted of? Psalm. 146.3, 4.
And Trust not in Princes, nor in any Son of Man; for when his breath goes
forth, he returns to his Earth, in that very day his thoughts perish: Surely
all Flesh is Grass, yea, the goodliness thereof, as the Flower of the Field.

4. The next Impaled Shield, tells me he was a Son, and those unwelcome Labells
hint immature death; nay an Only One, yea an Only Begotten One; (griefs in a
cluster,) huic illae lacrymae, this gives the killing Accent.

What the good Woman feared in a Parable, is here fullfilled without one, 1 Samuel 14.7.
and his perplexed Mother, may with anguish of distress cry out, My coal that
was left is quenched, and to my Husband is not left Name or Remainder upon the
Earth: This is so deep a Key, no Base can touch it, but the hoarsest sobbs and
groans; A Note so superlatively above Ela, no female trebble's shrill enough to
Reach it, and keep Tune; 'Twill crack our sorrows into Schreeks and Squeling,
but to venture at it; and would be some Apology, if Rachell like, his dearest
Mother, should be obstinate in sorrow, and refuse to be comforted.

Fugientis naturae in successore pignus remanet, and extinquentis jam luminis
lucerna ex part accensa.
5. Childless too himself; more sorrow still, had he but left an Heir, and lived
a vicarious life; lived in another, though he had dyed himself; left but an
Hostage in his steed; racked up one spark to kindle more, we could have spared
him better; had he Knit on an end, Nodosa aeternitas successio liberorum.
Aetatis incrementum.
to lengthen out his Line, and fixed one Linck to keep the Chain entire, the
Wound had been Curable, and the breach more Reparable.

Jer. 15.18.
But now the pain is perpetual, therefore will we Wayle, Mich. 1.8.
and Howl, and go stripped and naked, and make a Wayling like the Dragons, and
Mourning as the Owls.

But Lastly, because no Sorrows are Superlative, which want the Emphesis of
Widow (that ours may be more then such) that is here with full Advantage. Though
his Right Honorable Mother be not so; yet is his Sweet, and Dearest Lady such,
with so much forer agravation, as her tender years are less accustomed to
endure it: and be distressed, with the doleful Epithet of Dowager, so
immaturely. So soon, so suddenly, is she bereaved of him, as if she had only
had him to be made miserable by loosing of him: and in him such an Honor, and
Happiness, as his High Rank, and Higher Sweetness, Kindness, Nobleness of
mind, possessed her of in Him. The smart and sorrows of our losses, have no true
Standard, but the content and joy, we had in their fruition.

But I forget my Self and You, it is Cruelty to gall your bleeding hearts
afresh; To Rake in your wounds, and longer vex those eyes, are half wept out
already; and draw more sluices, when all the Banks run over; Claudite jam rivos;
what I have drawn already, was not to hurt, but help you, to give your sorrows
vent, least they should fester inward.

Tears help to swage our grief, Sedatur lacrymis, egeriturque dolor, Ovid.

And yield us some relief.
Now let me hasten to refresh you, and reassume, the ^ht side of my Text; Weep
not; at least, No more, when we have wept enough already: Not that he can soon,
or easily, be sufficiently bewailed; but we must not shed so many tears as he
deserves, least we shed abundance more then he needs, or we can spare, or God
allows.

Nihil difficilius quam magno dolori paria verba reperire. Senec.
And though the task, be hard to counterpoize your sorrows, yet Accept these
Anodines, which may dissolve, and mollify the tumor, assuage the smart, and
ease the throbbing; they are Collyria fitted for such eyes. And let me speak as
if more of the most-concern'd were present; (...)
for if any thing be spoken worth the carriage, you that are present, may
transmit it, to the absent; As Gregory Nyssen spoke in his Funeral Oration for
Young Pulcheria.

But because they must digg deep, who will build sure; and begin below, who
would ascend. I will lay the First Stone under ground; within the Earth of his
Mortality; and lead you gradually to higher Comforts.

Utrum stultius, mortalitatis legem ignorare, an recusare?
Weep not; for he was Mortal, he must have died ere long: What wise man sheds
his tears, because his Roses shed their leaves? He came into the World under
this Law; Seneca.
Nulli contigit impune nasci; No man is born on cheaper terms, then a necessity
of dying. He answered as became a Gallant man; who entertained the Message of
his Sons discease, with, Ego cum genui tum moriturum scivi; I knew when I begat
him, he must dye; huic rei sustuli. (...) it is but a little, Maximum solatium
est cogitare id sibi accidisse, qu d ante se passi sunt omnes, omnesqu^ pass^i
and ideo mihi videtur rerum natura quod gravissimum fecit, commune fecisse, ut
crudelitatem fati consolaretur aequalitas. Sen. ad Polys.
little sooner that he is gone. A few more changes of the Night and Day, and
fewer of the Summer and Winter, would have brought him, and will bring us,
where we shall change no more. We all must follow in the Order set us; had you
a View, (larger then that which Xerxes) took, of all Mankind at once; You
might conclude with him, not one of them should be alive, within an hundred
years. Fate's impartiality, makes some amends, for it is Severity. Yea, the end
of all things seems to hasten, and not to be at such a distance, as secure
Atheists. would fain persuade themselves.

Weep not; he dyed not in a Foreign Land, Ubi non licuerit matri ultima filii
oscula gratumque entremi sermonem oris. haurire. Sen. ad Martiam.
at a neglected distance (the Seas returned him safe;) But in a Mothers Bosom,
where she both might, and did, assist his Soul and Body with the most pious
tenderness; and was her own witness, with what faithfullness and Care,
Chaplain, Physicians, Nurses, all Attendants, performed toward him.

Weep not; He dyed not suddenly, by a surprise, or ambushment of Death; which
grants no liberty to trim a Lamp. He dyed not in a Broyle or Duel; Mat. 25.7.
he dyed not Flagrante Crimine, in any Notorious Sin, or with symptoms of
unusual Vengeance; but in the way of all the Earth, the common death of all
Men; Numb. 16.29. Number. 27.3.
Et sua and sicca morte; In his own sin; as Zelophehad's Daughters, spoke of
their Father, in opposition to dying for any signal provocation.

Weep not; He Is gone unsoyled, Redditur illi aequale testimonium omaiam
hominum, desideratur in tuum honorem laudatur in suum. Seen. ad Mort.
free from reproachful blots of Scandalous Enormities, and needs no tears to
rinsh him. He did not outlive a good Report, but has left a Memory behind
him, Clean, and Unstained: a Lovely Shadow of his Lovely Person, and his
Fairer Mind. His Part was Acted well, and He Is gone off the Stage, as Great
Augustus Caesar thought he did; and may with him require your Plaudite.

2 Kings 22.20. In hoc tam procelloso and in omnes tempestates ex posito mari,
navigantibus, nullus portu. nisi mortis est. Seneca.
He Is come into his Grave in Peace, which was the Great Promise to Gods Friends
of Old.

He has escaped the storms, and is Arrived in the Port with safty. He Is laid
to rest with Honor, and his Unstained Ashes, are shrined in immortal Vrns;
whose Gold no rust can cancker, and which will Try and Vex, the teeth of Time
it self, to injure; and the most spiteful Malice, dares nor attempt, once to
besmear his Marble.

Weep not; He Is taken from an Evil World, which is very full of sin, and
therefore cannot be void of sorrow; Evasit omnia vitae incommoda. Though he
has left some good, Quis divinat an mors inviderit, an consulucrit?
he has escaped more evils; and Death did consult his Ease, and Safety, more
then Envy his Felicity: With the wings of a Dove he is flown away, (...). Nyff.
and is, out of the reach both of Temptation and Trouble, and shall no more
offend a Good God; nor be offended by bad men. He is taken from the Evil to
come, and shall not hear or see, what may make our hearts to ache, and our Ears
to Tingle, to hear the Relation of; Si been computes plus illi remissum, quam
ereptum; Non miser quod amisit sed Beatus quod non desiderat.
If you reckon right, you will find him gainer by his loss; It Is better not to
need, then to enjoy whatever he has left; to be above them, then to have them.

Weep not; for he is not Extinguished but Removed; Non amissus, sed praemissus;
He cease not to be, Ciprian:
but to be here. The House indeed's pulled down, in order to repairing, and
raising up, more glorious and splendid. But the Inhabitant was neither crushed
with its Ruins, nor soyled with its dust: The Bird, the Angel flew away, at
the disturbance of the Nest; And the Immortal Man, made his escape, when Death
unlock't the Prison Doors. The Spirit is returned to God.

It Is a good Observation, one of the Ancients makes upon that passage of God's
rewarding Job. Chap. 42.10. The Lord gave Job twice as much as he had before;
or, as it is in the Hebrew, Ad^ed all that had been unto Job, unto the double;
for h^ had Fourteen Thousand Sheep, for his Seven Thousand and Six Thousand
Camells, for his Three Thousand; Job. 1.3. with 42.12.
and a Thousand Yoke of Oxen; and a Thousand Shee-Asses; for Five Hundred of
Each. But He gave him but Seven Sons, and Three Daughters, the even Number
which he had before; Greg. Nyss. Oratione fu^eb, pro pulcheria in fine,
Compare Chap. 1, 2. with Chap. 42.13. And he gives the reason of it; because,
(...). -- He gave him twice as many Cattle, as he had before; but only the Even
Number of his Children, because they perish't not, (as did the Cattle) though
they dyed; and so the Equal Number proved Double in Effect; and Job had twice
Ten Children, half in another World, and half in this, at the same time; though
in so distant place. I need not heap Arguments, to prove the Souls Existence,
after Death; St. Luke 12.4. St. Mat. 10.28.22.32.
when Christ has so plainly told you, It cannot be killed. And that He who is
the God of the Living, not of the Dead, is still the God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob; who therefore do still live.

1 King. 17.21.
The Prophet prayed, that the Child's Soul might return again into him, not a new
one be made for him; And St. Paul, speaks most expressly, that when we are
absent from the body, we shall be present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8. and
therefore desires to be dissolved, that he may be with Christ, Phil. 1.23.
Which were a most absurd Argument, if the Soul should bear the Body company in
dying. And the Souls under the Altar call for vengeance against them who shed
their blood. De consolatione ad Marti. Cap. 24.


Seneca could tell disconsolate Mercia; Imago duntaxat Filii tui periit, and
Effigies non similima, ipse quidem aeternus, meliorisque nunc Status est;
despoliatus oneribus alienis, and sibi relictus. The Image only of thy Son is
perished, and the Picture (which was not very like him neither) is defaced; But
he himself is Eternal, in a better state eased of his uneasy burden, and now
at freedom to enjoy himself.

Arguments for the Souls imortality and Existence after death.
And if I may suggest an Argument or Two: It would be a Chasma and Hiatus in
Nature, if some Creatures being wholly Immortal, others wholly mortal; there
were not one made up of both, Fibula utriusque mundi, the Button and the Buckle
of both Worlds, which knits and clasps them into one; Connubium visibilis and
invisibilis; The Beast and Angel mixed into one, which makes a medium betwixt
both, and contains both.

Does the Image of the King Perpetuate his Coin, and render it Treasonable to
Melt it down? And shall not Gods Image, much more preserve, what that is
stamp't upon, from perishing?

It acts without the body, and above it, here, that is an Earnest it can be
without it afterward; It is a Spirit, consists not of Contrarie's, of
Corruptible, of Self-destoying Principles; therefore abides for Ever. Has Vast
and Everlasting Expectations; which Nature would never have impressed, if they
had been in vain: Lastly, consent of Nations Seals to this Truth: These, if
neither most nor best, are such as lay uppermost amongst my sudden thoughts,
and may suffice.

Weep not; for He shall Rise again; Non solum representata, sed expectata
resurrectio, luctum nobis minuere debet ob mortuos, Grotius.
He shall not continue Death's Everlasting Captive, or the Graves Eternal
Prisoner: Thy Husband, Son and Friend is but asleep, he shall do well, and
wake. The Grave has been forced and broken up, and our True Sampson, has
carried away, the Gates, the Bars, and Posts, of this Philistian Gaza. O Death
where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy Victory? And when that glorious Morn,
draws back the Curtains, and dispells the Night, then shall he wake Refresh't;
and Rise, and Dress himself, and be re-married to his Flesh.

Each Mornings Sun, each Summers Verdure is a loud instance, and presage of
this; both Testaments, the Old, and New confirm it, as well in Examples as
Predictions: Christ is risen as a Man, to show it is possible, as an head to
assure it is certain; And God is Just, therefore the dead must Rise; that what
has been so much a amiss in this Life, may be amended, and better ordered in
the Next; where it shall be, Bonis Been, Malis, Male.

They that need more to satisfy their reason, or confirm their Faith; let them
consult the 1 Cor. 15. Chap. at their leisure, where they shall find good
measure, Pressed, and Heapt, and Running over.

Illud te non minimum adjurerit si cogitaveris nihil profiturum dolorem tuum,
nec illi nec tibi: percamus lachrimis nihil proficientibus, Sen.
Weep not; Your sorrows now are fruitless; wherefore should I fast, Now he is
dead, can I bring him back again? Was the wise Argument of Holy David, 2 Samuel
12.23. Could you weep Aquafortis, your tears would not dissolve the chains of
Death. Si fletibus fata vincuntur eat omnis inter luctus dies, sed si nullis
planctibus defuncta revocantur, desinat dolor qui perit; Was the grave Council
of the Sage Moralist^; let Reason master Passion, and spare those Tears you
know are Fruitless, and but spent in vain.

Weep not; Tears may hurt you, though they bring him no help, 2 Cor. 7.10.
and kill your selves, though they will not quicken him; The sorrow of the World
works Death; Facilius nos illi dolor adjiciet, quam illum nobis reducet; Too
many tears reproach you both, Him, as if he needed them, and dyed like Absalom,
whose Body only he resembled, not his Manners, Mind, or End. Your selves, for
their Excess no less upbraids your Manhood, then their defect would have
reproached your Humanity; Non sentire dolorem non est hominis non far, non
est viri: Yea, your Patience, Faith and Christianity, as if you sorrowed like
those who have no hope.

Weep not; A^ hac te infamia vindica, ne videatur plus apud te valere unus
dolor, quam tam multa Solatia.
Least you provoke the Lord to Multiply his stripes; as Children often suffer
more for sullingness, and sobbing, then for the first occasion of Correction;
take heed you forfeit not the mercies which are left.

Weep not; For it is the Work of God. Lev. 10.3. Psalm. 39.9.
Aaron held his peace, in a case more difficult; and David was dumb with
silence, because God did it; 1 Samuel 3.13.
and Good Eli thus submitted, It Is the Lord, let him do what seems him good.
He that has Ruled the World now near Six Thousand Years, and never yet
committed over sight or error, guided this blow. He called him back, Iniquus
est qui muneris sui arbitrium danti non relinquit, avidus qui non lucri loco
habet quod accepit, sed damni quod reddidit Ingratus qui injuriam vocat finem
voluptatis. Senec.
who gave him, and had more Right and Title to him, then a Wife or Mother; and
they too ungratefully forget God, and themselves, who reckon it an Injury for
him to take his Own. Gods absolute, and Indisputable Sovereignty, his
Infallible, and un-erring Wisdom, and his constant and faithful Goodness,
should at least make us lay our hand upon our heart, and mouth; that we may
neither speak, nor think amiss, (...). Nyss.
of what he does; Knowing that he does all things well: But rather say with
Holy Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord has taken away, as it pleases the
Lord, so come things to pass, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

But because sorrow is very querulous, witty to afflict it self, and pregnant
^f Arguments to aggravate its burdens; And he says little to the purpose,
(talk he never so much) who takes not the Mourners Tears and Sighs, from their
own Eyes and Lips, and measures out returns proportionable; Let us suppose we
heard them (as we have heard them) thus complaining.

he Dyed Young, in the very Spring and Flower of his Age, when all their
Comforts were expected from him; and these budding pregnant hopes, are nip't
and blasted, and suffer a sad Abortion, Nimis cito periit and immaturus; (...).

wound is tender, and will not bear such handling, therefore I shall not Answer
so roughly, as to say, Optimum non nisci, proximum quam citissime mori.
the sooner he dyed, the better; because the First best is not to be born, the
next best after that, is to dye as soon as may be: But I will refer you to what
the Author df the Book of Wisdom speaks concerning Enoch. Honorable Age is
not that which stands in length of time, Chap. 4.8.
nor that is measured by number of years; Quicquid, ad summum pervenit ad
exitum properat. Eripit se, ausertque ex oculis perfecta virtus. Nec ultimum
tempus exp^ctant, quae in privio maturaerunt. Indicium imminentis exitis
Maturitas.
but Wisdom is the gray hair unto men, and an unspotted life is Old Age.
Speedily was he taken away, least wickedness should alter his understanding, or
deceit beguile his soul: He being made perfect in a short time, fulfilled a
long time; for his soul pleased the Lord, therefore hasted he to take him away,
from amongst the Wicked; and admit this be not the true Solomon, yet He has
told us, Eccl. 7.1.4.1.
The day of Death is better then the day of ones Birth; and again, I praised
the Dead which are already dead, more then the Living which are yet alive.

He dies not too soon, who dies in the time that God has set; and so dyed he,
and this should stay your hearts. Job. 7.1.14.5.
Is there not an appointed time to man upon the Earth? his days are determined,
the Number of his Months is with thee, thou have appointed his bounds which he
cannot pass; and the Philosopher could see this; Nemo nimis cito moritur, qui
victurus, Soluitur quod culque promissum est, Habebit quisque quaetum diis
Primus ascripsit, Ser,
diutius quam vixit, non fuit, sixus est cuique terminus: manebit semper ubi
positus est: No man dies too soon, because no man has less of life, then was
designed, and promised from the first.

And because Examples of the like sufferings, soften those strokes, which are
most pungent, when they are conceived least common, and Esteemed Singular. Take
these few Instances in a Case, where multitude has made our choice more
difficult.

Thus dyed Blessed Abell, the First that ever dyed, and Consecrated Early Death;
Thus the Good Son of that Bad Father, Jeroboam; Thus dyed the Holy Josiah,
Octavia and Livia altera soror, Augusti altera uxor, amiserunt filios juvenes,
utraque spe futuri principis certa. Octavia Marcellum, Livia Drusum.
like whom was none in Zeal for God; Thus dyed Marcellus, and Drusus,
successively both Heirs Apparent to Augustus Caesar, and the Worlds Empire;
Thus dyed sweet Titus, Deliciae generis humani, the Darling and Delights of
Mankind; Thus dyed that Glory of the Roman Caesar; Alexander Severus, Paganus
Christianizans; and Happy had it been for Nero had he dyed so, and his
Quinquennium and his Life had had the same Period; and the kinder hand of Death
had drawn a preventing Veil, after the Glory of those rare beginnings, Quam
multis diutius vixisse nocuerit?
to cover the Reproach of what succeeded, in the Obscurities of Everlasting
Night.

But to come nearer home; So dyed that Miracle of Grace and Greatness, Edward
the sixth; So dyed Prince Henry le boon, le grand; So dyed of Later Date, the
much Admired Young Lord Hastings, and that Early Confessor, Son of the Royal
Martyr, the thrice Illustrious Duke of Gloucester.

Sed ridiculum est mortalitatis exempla coll^gere; and therefore I conclude
with him, whose Example is above all Parallel; So dyed our Blessed Savior Jesus
Christ, in the very Strength and Vigor of his Age.

And notwithstanding sorrow, mostly st^ps its ears, against the charms of sober
reason: yet let me modestly debate the Case.

Nihil est ^am fallax quam vita humana; nihil tum infidiosum: non m^h^rcle
quisquam accepisset nisi daretur in scii, Sen.
What is the life that he has parted with, you so bemoan his loss? look back
and see what Comforts it afforded You; What had You lost, if You had dyed as
Young? would it quit cost, to live it over, if you might, again: Has the World
been so kind a Stepdame to your Selves? Was your Apprentiship so sweet, and
gentle, you grudge so much his Earlier Freedom? What is it, but a constant
hurry, and a druging Bondage? A wearisom delight, and vexing vanity; A
little-ease; a great Temptation; a slippery Good, which slideth through our
fingers, and leaves nothing, Quid aliud in mundo quam pugna adversus diabolum
quotidie geritur, -- cum avaritia nobis, cum impudicitia, cum ira, cum
ambitione co^gressio est, cum carnalibus vitiis, cum illecebris saecularibus
assidua and molesta luctatio est, Cipra.
but its slime upon them; A Glutinous and clammy Evil, which stains us with a
guilt, that sticks faster to us, then our Skinns. A leakie ship, and an
infected house; a peevish neighbor, and insulting master, which like to Joab,
2 Samuel 2.14.
makes our miseries and torment, his sport, and play; which daily keeps us
floating, on the unconstant waves, of fears, and hopes, of grief, and anger, of
fainting joys, and sullenest despair: Now tell me, is it not a mercy;
Beneficium mortis contra tot vitae injurias habere? To lie still, and to be
quiet, Job. 3.13, 17, 18.
to sleep, and be at rest; to be where the Wicked cease from troubling, and
where the weary be at rest; where the Prisoners rest together, and hear not the
voice of the Oppressor.

And with the great Bishop of Nyssa, Vide Nyss in funere pulcheriae.
let me demand yet farther, -- (...).
(...) -- Tell me what good, and loveliness, thou see in old Age, to render
thee so fond on it? Is it a shrivel'd cheek, and wrinkled brow, a toothless
mouth, and faultring tongue, a head grown bald, and crazed; A stooping back,
and trembling legs, and every part made impotent, and all unable for their
Offices? To be an Hospital of pains and aches, a bagg of Rhumes, and Phlegm,
the constant Prisoner of the Gout, or Stone: Only the Ruins and Reproach of
thy own Comeliness, the Confutation and Revers of former Usefulness and Beauty.

To be, in paenam vivax, to outlive thy Senses, Fancy, Memory, and Judgment;
and to live Blind, and Deaf, and, tantum non, to Dote, to be a Burden to our
selves, a Trouble and Temptation unto others; to be our own moving Sepulchers,
and to conclude our strength, Psalm. 90.10.
in Weakness, Labor, Sorrow: In a word, to have so long a Reckoning, and
Account to make; and to go late to Heaven: as if that were only a reserve, when
we can stay no longer here, and not a place of Choice.

He was our All, and all is gone in him, and we are undone. Not so: All is not
gone, while God and Christ's not gone; Though He be Dead, yet the Lord Lives,
and Blessed be the God of our Salvation. His Life or Death had no Affinity with
your Eternal State. No loss undo's us, but the loss of Christ; It Is a
Miserable Happiness, which stands upon so weak a bottom, as the Life of Man.
He that gave Him; can give another; Eve once observed, that God gave her
another Seed in the stead of Abell; and Jobs submissive patience was rewarded
with a Full Return. Abraham believed God to very good purpose in no unlike a
case; With God nothing shall be impossible: A Phoenix may arise out of the
Ashes; the harder is the straight, the more is He engaged to Relieve, who
seldom does Extraordinary Things, in Ordinary Cases; By how much our sorrows
are more smart and pressing, by so much the more we may expect his help.

All those we read of Raised by Miracle, in Scripture, were Only Children,
except Lazarus; and he was to Mary and Martha, as is an Onely-Son unto the
tenderest Mother: The Widows Son of Zereptha, 2 Kings 17.
raised by the Prophet Eliah; the Shunamites by Elisha; 2 Kings 4.
Jarus's Only Daughter, and this in my Text, who was a Widows Only Son; and
though we have no ground to hope for help in kind; yet may we in proportion;
The Key of the Womb is in his hand; or He can give a Name and Place within his
Sanctuary, Isa.
better then of Sons and Daughters. He can vouchsafe to be instead of all
Relations, who calls them Mother, Sister, St. Mark 3.35.
Brother that obey his word. He can give Faith, and Patience, and a Sanctified
advantage by our Trials. He can make a Bee-hive of the Lions Carcass, Jud.
14.8.14.
and bring forth meat out of the feircest eater; and leave us gainers in the
issue, by our soarest losses: and it is like he will; Our deepest, and our
hollowest miseries, send up the loudest Eccho's in the Ears of Mercy; and,
magno vulneri, majora Adhibebit remedia; He has greater remedies, for greatest
wounds.

But now the Family is dead, and fallen with Him, Line, and Name, will fail,
by his departing Childless.

That Is more then any man can tell; hope the best, then apprehend the worst: He
Treats himself unkindly, that antidates his fears. But suppose it true; then
He, nor His, shall never taint the Blood, nor foul his Shield with any Stainant
Colors, nor blot his Honorable Impress. GUARD TA FOY.
Twere Endless, to Recount how many Noble English Families have seen their
Period: In hoc uno se ceteris exaequari hominibus, non injuriam, sed jus
mortalitatis judicaverunt
Two Right Honorable Earls, have None betwixt them Now, whose Patents and
Creations, (I have been assured) differ Two Hundred Years; and None Remain of
those, who were Created, in so long a space; Hic habere se dolet liberos, hic
perdidisse; And if Children cause us grief, that is least uneasy, which
concerns their want.

Do we rejoice when single persons have performed handsomely? and shall we do
less for Noble Families, laid up unblemish't in the Bed of Honor, and whose
Names are sufficiently Embalmed with Renown, and Virtue, (...).
and Entered in the Registers of Fame and History, to be Coevall with the Sun
and Moon? and need not Succession to Eternize them.

most, that I sinned him away, and it is for my Transgression, that God has
snatched him hence.

Holy, and a commendable fear; and not unseasonable at such a time. Art thou
come to call my sin to Remembrance, and to slay my Son, said the poor Widow, 1
Kings 17, 18.

I am well content you listen to the Rod, take its Alarum's, and would promote
your doing so, unto my power. Right hand Errors, are least dangerous. We had
better ten times admit that supposition, which will make us hate our sins; then
that but once, which will incline us to indulge them. While your heart is hot,
pursue the Murderer, and be avenged of whatever sin, you can suspect as
accessory to a Sons, an Husbands, or a Kins-mans Death.

But let me add, we sometimes are too curios, with the Disciples, in the blind
man's case; Who sinned, this Man or his Parents, that he was born blind? St.
John. 9.2, 3.
To whom Christ Answered; Neither has this Man sinned, nor his Parents, but
that the Works of God might be made manifest in him: Not but they all were
sinners, but it was not for any Extraordinary sin that that blindness happened to
him, as Saint Chrysostom Observes.

Sometimes too Censorious, both of our Selves, and Others, to aggravate our
sorrows, and add Affliction to the Afflicted, instead of the alleviating of
them; which evil Spirit, Christ twice rebukes, in one Chapter. St. Luk 13.2.4.
Suppose you these Gallileans were sinners above all the Gallileans, or those
Eighteen upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell; -- I tell you now nay; -- And with
the like words would I comfort you: No wise, or sober Christians, will make
dishonorable reflections upon such a Providence, but Sympathize, and tenderly
Compassionate you; Be not you too severe upon your selves.

but I have better comforts yet, and 'twas from Christ's Example, that I
Learned, to keep the best Wine unto the last; the former were Collyria to cool
your Eyes, these are Cordiacall's to warm your hearts. 1 Tues. 4.13.
I would not have you Ignorant concerning them that sleep, that you sorrow not
as men without hope.

I shall speak first in Hypothesi, upon the Charitable supposition that he dyed
in Christ; and then give you the Grounds upon which that supposition is
bottomed.

Rev. 14.13.
Weep not; for him that is gone to rest; Blessed are the dead that dye in the
Lord, for they rest from their labor; Beatum deflere Invidia est. He Is nearer
our envy then our pity. Gaudendum potius, quam dolendum; Nec accipiendas esse
nobis atras vestes quando illi alba indumenta jam sumpserunt, Cipria. de Most.
as Saint Cyprian. Our blacks should not be of too deep a Dye, when they are
Clothed in their long white robes, and are incircled with Golden girdles under
their Papps. It Is very incongruous, to blur our faces with excess of tears, for
them, from whose Eyes all tears are wiped, and from whom sighing, and sorrow
shall fly away; which is the happiness of all in Heaven; if we believe this,
how can we mourn? if we believe it not, how are we Christians? but, Fidei and
spei nostrae prevaricatores, as St. Ciprian; but the cheats and abuses of our
hope and confidence; If we will weep, it is fitter, that we do it for our
selves, then them; not that they are gone before, but that we stay still
behind; They have obtained, what we have but in hope; though we be Elder, yet
are we Minors, they of Age, though Younger; and have attained to the
Inheritance, Incorruptible and undefiled, (...) Greg. Nyss. de Mortu.
and which fades not away; which we must yet breath after, wait and pray for;
That state knows neither Widow-hood, nor Orphanage, where God is all in all;
they who are ever with the Lord, shall never feel woe or want, but are
possessed of that Fullness of joy, which is in his presence, and drink of those
Rivers of pleasure, Psalm. 16. ult.
which are at his right hand for evermore.

And that he is one of those: what follows is a ground of hope: (...). Gr.
Nazian Orat. deci. ia laudem Caesa. frat.
You know the Family from whence he sprang; what Education and Example he was
Nursed up under? what Womb he lay in; (though grace be not extraduce) 'twas well
for Augustine that holy Monica was his Mother; Her Zeal, (next to free grace)
first Canonized him, and her Blood was the blessed earnest of his following
Saint-ship; well did St. Ambrose assure her, that a Child of so many Prayers
(and such Prayers as hers) could not miscarry; and we speak modestly enough,
while we depress our present case, to be but Parallel.

I might here touch his Natural accomplishments, and Moral Excellencies: In
that Fair mansion, of his Goodly Body, Dwelt happily a Fairer, and move Lovely
Mind; Humble, Modest, Pregnant, Civil, Truly Noble; Large, not with swelling
pride, but Solid Worth; Free yet not frolic, Reserved, but not Morose;
Courteous, where not Familiar, Kind, though Great; which could keep distance,
yet without disdain; A Conversation clear from soul deboyshe's; which 'slave,
and debase, not few of Highest Birth; No Unclean Riots, or Blaspheming Oaths
Vnman'd him, as too many, into to beast, or feind: And because Relative duties
well discharged, best speak us Real Christians; He was Eminent in these.

A most Obedient, and Obsequious Son; A Chaste, Affectionate, and Tender,
Husband; A Civil, Faithful, and Obliging Friend.

But that our hopes may be the more Explicit, the good discoveries he gave of
better then all this, were neither late, nor faint, nor forced from him. Accept
of these few Instances; He freely gave up himself to God, and was not
solicitous for any thing in the Event, but Life Eternal; professing himself
most willing to dye, and would Indent with God for Nothing, but the pardon of
his sins, which he was sensible he wanted, and begged most heartily, and joined
with them, who sought it for him, Earnestly, and Pressed them to do it frequently.

He made firm Resolutions (of his own accord) that if it pleased the Lord to
spare him, he would spend four hours every day, in Reading, Prayer, and
Meditation, and such like Holy Exercises, as might concern his Soul's
Salvation. And when with a Holy Jealousy his Pious Mother Answered: But I fear
Child, when thou ar't well, thou wilt think it tedious, and forget this promise,
and alter the number; He with some passion (but 'twas devout and holy passion)
replied; by the Grace of God Madam, if I ever change the number, it shall be to
make them more. And we humbly hope God took him at his word, and has Enlarged
his Vacancy, and changed his Four, into Twenty Four; fetching him thither,
where they serve him continually, the whole of every day, and never cease, or
sin. And as he seriously professed, he should for ever take more Contentment and
delight in his Good Mothers Company, and such as are like to Her; in whose
Converse, he should be always Hearing and Seeing what might promote his
Everlasting Good; Now God, we hope, has taken him to Better Company, the
Family of the Firstborn in Heaven.

And as a loud Testimony, how little Worldly things were to Him, He Sacrificed
his Youthful Friends (which usually are the dearest pieces we possess) which
he Expressed with such an Emphasis, and Force, as is too hard to imitate. I now
well see, what little good, my Feathered-Friends can do me, and what they
signify.

It was the Law for Sacrificing Fouls, that the Feathers should be cast beside
the Altars, Levit. 1.16.
by the place of the Ashes; and full so low he laid the Vanity, and Gayness, of
himself and others. Saint Anselme, used to compare the Soul, into the Body; to
a Bird with a string about its leg, and a weight tied to it; His String's
uniyed, His Snare is broken, and as a Bird he is escaped, yea like a Dove,
whose wings are of Silver, and her Feathers of Yellow Gold; He Is hastened to the
winged Cherubims, to sing for ever in the Lords presence, and to be sheltred
under the most immediate Protection of his Feathers.

It Is true, his hopes were very modest, somewhat verging upon fears and doubts;
which his Sollicitous inquiries discovered. Whether his delaying, (for he
bewailed, his not conforming sooner, and more thoroughly, to his Good Mothers
pious Admonitions) could be forgiven: and whether God would accept his late
Repentance, and the Resolv's made on a Bed of Sickness? And when these, and the
like, were Answered, with Prudent, and Faithful Caution; and then with such
Encouragements, as the manner and heartiness of his Expression seemed to
Entitle him to. He Answered, Well! Then I will Cast my Self on God. And he is a
God, who casts not them away, that do so in good Earnest; Therefore with Him,
we will leave him, and Conclude;

Beseeching you to bear from him, what possibly you would not bear from me; the
free discovery of your Vanities, and let this pull down your Plums, and make
you serious.

And You that survive Him, do Him the Kindness, and Your Selves the Right; to
Act what He Resolved. Spend every day some good Proportion of your time, as all
Good Men, and Wise, shall spend Eternity. Delay not your Return to God. Submit
to wholesome Councils Early; Delight in Company, may make you Better. Sue-out
most Earnestly, the Pardon of your sins; Solicit those, who are the Favorites
of Heaven, to assist you in it. Adorn as he, all your Relations: Study his
Hearse, and listen what he whispers thence; and when you se't, Remember, that
be'st thou Young, or Great, or Darling of thy Dearest Parents, Stem of thy
Family, or whatever else, that is Man, thou certainly must dye; therefore
prepare: for, Ex Hoc momento Aeternitas.

Upon this moment do Depend,
The Joys, or Woes, that never End.
LORD Teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to saving
Wisdom; And forgive us our many sins, at, and against the frequent Funerals
we attend, that so many warnings may not be lost, and leave us unprepared,
least they aggravate our guilt beyond excuse. Write upon our hearts the word we
have heard; and Sanctify this awakening Example to us all; And most Eminently,
to those Right Honorable Personages, most nearly Concerned in it; whose Wound,
and Breach, we Beseech thee, (who ar't Able to do above all that we can Ask,
or Think) of Thy Infinite Goodness to repair and bind up, with Thy All-Healing
hands, in Thine own Time, and Way. And all for his sake, who dyed far our sins,
and rose again for our Justification, and sits at thy right hand making
Intercession, whereby he is Able to save to the uttermost, all those who come
to Thee by Him. To Him, with Thy Majesty and Blessed Spirit, be Adoration,
Submission of our Selves, and Ours, to be at Thy Dispose, Praise, and
Everlasting Glory; AMEN.

EPITAPHIUM.
WIthin this Marble does Intombed Lie,
Not One, but All a Noble Family:
A Pearl of such a Price, that soon about
Possession of it, Heaven, and Earth fell out;
Both could not have Him, So they did Devise
This Fatal Salvo, to divide the Prize:
Heaven Share's the Soul, and Earth his Body take's,
Thus We lose all, whilst Heaven, and Earth part stakes:
But Heaven, not Brooking that the Earth should share
In the least Attome, of a Piece so Rare,
Intends to Sue Out, by a new Revize
His Habeas Corpus, at the Grand Assize.
JOHN FLOWER.

Frontispicii Speculum. The Mind of the Frontispiece:
Would thou Amazed Friend, a Reason have;
Why Squalid Death, is Trimmed, so Gay and Brave?
This is her Nuptial Day; That is the Bed,
To which, Great Warwick 's Heir is Captive Led;
But 'twas Rude Woeing, and a Stolen Match,
An Uncouth Rape, in which the She did catch
The Male; who though persu'd, by wanton Death,
Was Chaste, and Yielded not, till out of Breath.
On It this retrive the Banes? No! 'twill not do,
She Got a License; And, they are Bedded too*
But to disguise the unfitness, and prevent
Just scorn; to paint, alone, she is not content
But steal's His Colors for it; and all she can
To make Him like Her-self; halfe-Na'kt, and Wan.
And yet, 'cause Guilty, fearing an Assault,
With His Own Shields, She Guarded has the Vault,
But She Is past blushing, and will not Confess
Her Wrong; His Right, to Cornet, Coat, or Cross,
Cry's All Is mine Own; and if You proof require,
For the Left Crest; The Serpent was my Sire:
And for the Dexter one, That venomed wing
Feathers my Arrows; And his Tayle's, my Sting:
The Coronet without dispute's mine Own,
For She that Conquers, may Command the Crown:
The Coat's may Proper bearing: from such Losses,
Your Selves Blaze me to be, The Cross of Crosses.
And for the Motto, You dare not Deny,
That none Keeps Faith, more Firm, then Destiny.
Yet those who Keep the Faith of Christ toth' Last;
Will Be too Quick for Thee, for all thy have.
And when the Glorious Morn, Restores them Light;
Bid Thee with Scorn, Eternally Goodnight.
Aliter
Our Text in Mottoes, is displayed:
(...) Motto in a Text obeyed.
A. Walker.
GUARD LA FOY.

engraving of an effigy on a tomb, with coats of arms JAY GUARD LA FOY. 2. Tym:
4:7. Ex Hoc momento Aeternitas. 1664




