AN IMPROVEMENT Of Imprisonment, Into Real Freedom; Of Disgrace, Into Honest
Reputation; Of Poverty, Into Perdurable Riches; Evidenced in a few Crumbs and
Scraps Lately found in a PRISONERS-BASKET AT NEVVGATE; And Saved together, by a
Visitant of Oppressed Prisoners, for the refreshing of himself and those who
are either in a worse Prison, or (who loathing the dainties of the Flesh)
hunger and thirst after Righteousness.

HE, who, five thousand hungry Souls had fed
With two small Fishes, and five Loaves of Bread,
Would have the Fragments saved; for, that is sweet
To some, which others trample under feet;
This Prisoners late Experiments may be,
Of use to them, who know much more than he:
For, men to credit those, are soonest moved;
Whose Words to be sincere, by Deeds, are proved.
By GEORGE WITHER.

London, Printed in the Year, 1661.

THE AUTHOR OF THESE Fragments, TO THE Humble, the Poor in Spirit, and to all
those Afflicted-Ones, who disdain not these CRUMMS.
EXperience, though to Fools it Mistress be
Often, makes men Wise; For, some effects on me
To that end it has had: and though with mocks
Most entertain my Triple-Paradox,
It will, by what ensues (I hope) appear
That, Truths, by me, therein averred were;
And, that, whatever shall succeed thereon,
My Words, and Actions, do concur in One.
Those few, who did here visit me, in love,
Seemed, with so much contentment to approve
Their homely Entertainment with these Scraps,
That, they were pocketed; and some, perhaps,
Them, will Communicate: Which if they do,
So let it be, and much good do it them too:
I wish, for their sakes, that they better were,
But, if, as they did mine, their hearts they cheer,
I, may to Constancy, encouraged be
By their Example, more than they by me
At present are: and mutual Ayd's, ere long,
Shall make the weakest of us, to grow strong;
For, by GOD's Providence, (not seldom) springs
Noblest Effects, from most contemned things.
" Let, all, who of these Fragments, Coppies had
" These Lines (to be perfixt before them) add.
CAPTIVITY IMPROVED INTO FREEDOM By the Grace of God.
GEORGE WITHER, to his Friends, who have inquired after him, since the late
seizure of his Person, Books and Papers.

WHere I now am, you much desire to hear,
What, I am blamed for; what, I want, or fear;
Which, this will briefly tell you: I am well,
(In Purgatory, between Heaven and Hell.)
My Fact, (which I acknowledge, in good sooth,
May some offend) is only writing Truth;
And, that is, in prevaricating times,
Much more offensive, then some heinous Crimes.
I nothing Want, that is truly needful, save,
Due thankfulness to GOD, for what I have,
Who hitherto, in an unusual wise,
Without my care, vouchsafes me supplies;
Which hereby, I acknowledge, to this end,
That, others may in straits, on him depend.
All, I need now to fear, is, that before
I shall be freed,, I way be made so poor
The Messenger, will hardly get his fees,
Or,, that the Remnant of a Loaf and Cheese,
Which at my now forsaken Chamber lies,
Will moldy be, or eaten by the Mise.
I do not fear, that what I have expressed
Or published, will not abide the Test,
Unless my Judges, do, by looking back
The Gen'ral-Pardon, ineffectual make:
For, that, which I last wrote, was but fruit torn
Out of the Mothers Womb before 'twas born,
Which, whether Life, or Death receive it should,
No man with certainty, determine could;
And, if (according unto my Appeals)
That, which I purposed for the Publick-weal,
And honor of the King, may be perused
Entirely, and not palpably abused,
By taking from, or adding thereunto,
I do defy the worst, this World can do;
Well knowing, that, if she conceal what is done,
From Public view, yet passes doomes thereon
Which may be to my wrong, 'twill be revealed
And judged by GOD, to whom I have appealed.
Though now there be not left with me, one Line
Of what I last wrote, I no whit repine:
For, Providence will further my intent,
Thereby, much better, than the course I meant;
Or, else will raise up, if that be calcined,
A sprightlier Product of the self-same kind,
Which to obliterate, none shall presume,
Nor time abolish, nor the flame consume,
Till it has took effect to that good end,
For which I did at first, the same intend;
And, Joseph-like, when I shall tried be,
Either the King, or GOD, will set me free,
To whose Free-mercies only, I appeal
Even in those things, which I intended well:
For, extreme Justice, is a dreadful thing,
Whether pronounced by GOD, or by a King:
And, otherwhile, men of an upright-way,
Permitted are, in somethings to mis-say,
That Spirits may be tried, and those things known
Which are of GOD, from that, which is our own.
I have not purposely, one Paper hid
To cloak the worst, that er'e I said or did;
And if men would but at my frailties wink,
I Will tell them, when they please, even all I think,
Although against my Life it might offend
So, their Demands to public welfare tend:
For, to that purpose, if it needful were,
I dare say more, than many dare to hear,
(As would be known by what is now surpised,
might it be read in public, undisguis'd)
Yet, not exceed my limits ne'r-theless,
Or, bounds of Reason, or of Soberness.
I have discharged my Conscience, as I thought
The present times required that I ought,
Considering, that otherwise, such Tools
May be of use; and, men reputed Fools
Speak things, as pertinently in some cases
As they, who are imployd in Wise men's places.
I am not ignorant, with what disdain
Our Pantaloons my Poems entertain;
Nor ought displeased, that what I have writ
Seemed Frothy-stuffe, unto a Flashy-wit,
My sour Herbs are as pleasing to some pallats
As Apricocks, Muskmillions, or sweet Sallets
To wanton Appetites; and wholsomer
Than that, wherein they more delighted are.
My Verse, to them, seems Vanity to be;
So seem They, and all Earthly things to me.
By them, I numbered with Phanaticks am,
And they, by me, reputed are the same.
My Muse, harsh sounds unto their ears applies,
Their Manners do as much offend mine eyes;
And, if I merit Punishment, who chid them
For things misdone, what merit they who did them?
Should none Reprove, but persons wholly free
From Sinfulness, no Sin Reproved should be;
And where our general Reproofs offend,
Few men, their private Errors will amend.
All that is in my Thoughts, my Words or Deeds
Approvable, from GOD's free Grace proceeds,
And none deserves blame, but I alone
(If I do) for what now is thought misdone.
Yet, come not at me, till you may be sure
Your Visits may no detriment procure
Unto your selves; for (though that I am zealous
Of public Safety) many are so jealous
Of our Sincerity, whom they shall find
From them, in some things, of a differing mind,
That they, who walk by Gospel and by Law,
May chance to suffer like Jack Fletcher's Daw,
Which taken among Pigeons, Pies and Crows
For whom a Net was laid, did speed like those:
And, to help keep an Innocent from starving
May censured be, by some an Ill-deserving,
Which paradventure may be now my Lot.
(If Christian Charity prevent it not)
More to their shame than mine, who, now have here
Been their Remembrancer, nigh fifty year.
But, for me, take you neither care nor grief;
Death, will much more advantage me than Life:
I walk not blindly, in the Paths I tread,
And they will make me safe, alive, or dead.
I am assured, that his Providence
Which orders things of much less consequence
(Whether concealed or published) will make
That which I Have written, good effects to take;
And also by their means, perhaps, who be
As yet displeased, both with my Book and me.
Grant me but NATURE'S Freedoms, and let then
The Privilege of COURTS and SINGLE-MEN
Do what they can: for, I have broke no Law
Whereof, a sober Man should stand in aw;
Nor need I Patrons; nor ought have I done
To make me be afraid, through want of one.
I, reverence the Powers that are Supreme,
And, know so well, what does belong to them,
That, I cannot offend by Libelling
Either against the Parliament, or King
As many may suppose; for, VICE may be
Reproved, yet, they kept from Aspertions free;
As will appear, when I have open laid
What, for my Vindication may be said.
I love and honor more, a Foe, that is just
Than him, who saves my life, and breaks his trust:
And, will not thank them, who, shall see wherein
I merit blame, yet palliate my sin;
Or, shall excuse me from due punishment,
When I shall know my fault, and not repent.
Nor will they be excused, in future times,
(Though yet they may) who make our DUTIES crimes
Mine, is (if any) no more but Omission
Of somewhat; or, at worst, but a Misprision:
And, my Case now, may be resembled well,
By what, unto a Northern Less befell,
Who, having been corrected very sore
For calling of her younger Sister Whore,
Which was indeed untrue; her Mother, said
Unto the lesser Girl, tell truly Maid,
Did she not call thee Whore? She answered, NO,
(She did not) but, she thought to call me so.
I know there are those, who consider can
What use there may be of an honest Man
Who seeks not for Honors, or for Pelf;
Hates none; affects his Neighbor as himself;
Fears naught but GOD, and his own heart; his King
Does reverence, and can in Prison sing:
When more desire to be affected thus,
It will be better both for them and us:
And, he who makes these things his chief ambition
Though Wrongs he feel, can never fear Perdition.
If less than formerly, I am befriended,
I, and my Sufferings, quickly shall be ended.
If I find favor, you shall hear that from me
Which, to acknowledge, it will well become me:
Till then therefore Adieu; and hereby know
That I am pleased, and well, if you be so.
Chr. oUr reDeeMer Lives.
Aug. 12. 1661. From Mr. Northrops, one of the Kings Messengers in Westminster,
where I am civilly used.
George Wither, His first Meditation, upon his Commitment to Newgate, Aug. 22.
For his Poem called Vox Vulgi, neither Published nor Finished.
I.
SO; I do now begin to be preferred;
And from an Owl within an Iviebush,
Advanced am, to be a Newgate-Bird,
As fast incaged, as my foes need wish.
My Feathers have so plucked already been
That, no more I can lose now, but my skin,
And when that is torn away, I may presume
My Flesh and Bones, in short time, will consume.
II.
I was restrained before, but, not so strait
Was my Restraint, nor in so close a place;
I had my load, but not such overweight,
Nor seemed I, so exposed to disgrace.
My Friends were overcharged with me before,
And will, this way, be now oppressed more:
For, that whereof my Judges me condemn,
Falls not so much on me, as upon them.
III.
But, is this Newgate, whereof so afraid
Offenders are? Is this the dismal place,
Wherein, before I came, I heard it said
There Is nothing, but grief, horror, and disgrace?
I find it otherwise; and, doubtless, either
It is belied; or, they who are sent hither,
Within themselves, when to this house they come,
Bring that, which makes it seem so troublesome.
IV.
I no worse here, then where I was before
Accommodated am: for, though confined
From somethings, which concern my Body more
Then formerly, it has enlarged my mind.
Here, by degrees, with what the world most fears
(With Tormeuts, and their Executioners)
I may be so acquainted, if I please,
That, things which threaten pain, shall bring me ease.
V.
Here, I can see the bottom of that Pit
Which gapes to swallow me: here, I can view
What some, who have more prospect, see not yet,
Nor will, till they their fears cannot eschew.
Here, I find Objects to prepare me for
That, which my Flesh and Blood, does most abhor;
And, am assurd, that, to what place soever
I, hence am sent, that GOD, will meet me there.
VI.
Though here, my outward-being, seems no better,
But, in appearance daily worse to grow,
My Inward comforts and my hopes are greater,
And, will be greatest when they make least show*
Although my Oil and Meal does not increase
Since I came hither, it is no whit the less:
Yea, though I am at more charge every day,
Then did of late, a weeks expense defray:
VII.
For that cost, they supplied have, to whom
My life, it seems, is dearer, then to me;
And, they engaged for me are become;
LORD! whence proceeds this kindness, but from thee?
So is it, that, I now can hardly tell
Whether, my Friends, to save me, show more zeal
Or they more malice, who have sought of late
To ruin both my Person, and Estate.
VIII.
I find already, by what I have noted,
My best Expressions will concealed be.
My Verses (as the Devil Scripture quoted)
Produced by Scrapps, to disadvantage me.
I see my self opposed by no small odds,
Frowned on, by mighty men, and mortal Gods
Who sit so high, that they nor feel, nor know
What things are suff'red, by poor-men below.
IX.
Not only Railing Foes, on every side,
But my Acquaintaince also, and mere Strangers,
Unjustly, me defame, Jeer, and deride;
Threats follow me behind, before, lie dangers.
Yet to no mortal for support I send,
Nor make complaints by Letter, or by Friends;
Nor will, except to them, to whom belongs
The Judging of my Actions, and my wrongs.
X.
My soul, these things consider well, and whence
They do proceed: consider why, likewise;
Who, puts into thy heart, this confidence;
Who, by unknown hands, each days want supplies;
Who, comforts does augment as griefs increase;
Who, clothes and feeds thee in this Wilderness,
And, when Terrestrial ayds, are quite bereaven
Rains on thee, Quails and Manna down from heaven.
XI.
Mark, how this Realm is here Epitomized,
As to a Blessed, and Reprobate condition:
How Mercies, and how Judgments are despised,
By most men, at the brinck of their perdition;
How few, be wrought upon, in either place,
By Threatenings, or by promises of Grace.
How many, laugh, sing, swear, curse and Blaspheme
Even when, Hell, ready seems to swallow them.
XII.
Here, thou shall see, that mere Stupidity
And gracelesness, transporteth many a man
To outface Death, with less Timidity
Then some with all their Moral Virtues can:
Here, thou shall learn, that if thy Prosecutions,
Thy zeal, thy Courage and thy Resolutions
Spring only, from a Natural Estate,
Thou, with all these, may be a Reprobate.
XIII.
Let therefore, these Experiments, which are
Be enteraain'd; and, if henceforth God should
(As he perhaps will) common helps withdraw,
Let them quite go, and catch on him fast hold.
For, if thou then despair, or shall distrust
His Love, who never was to thee unjust,
This, will then prove to be a carnal-boast,
And, thou, with all thy vain hopes wilt be lost.
XIV.
Since also, thou do feel thy heart more prone,
By smiles and favors, to be drawn aside,
Then by harsh usage, to be wrought upon,
Let thy weak'st Bulwarks be most fortified,
Lest, they, who have not strength enough to win
The Fort by force, by Stratagems get in;
And, thou then ruined, be past all repair,
As many are, by those, who speak them fair.
XV.
That Spirit, try, which thy Resolves begets;
For, other while, as resolute are they
Who are possessed but with Ranting-Fits,
As any, in whom Passion bears no sway.
Contempt of Torment, sometimes springs from Madness,
Stoutness, from Anger, or despairing-sadness:
Martyrs, and men, of Reprobated sense,
Bear sufferings, with small outward difference.
XVI.
Search thou thy heart, therefore, with prudent care,
That, Malice, Pride, nor Vengeance lurk therein:
That Love of GOD, and all mankind be there,
Linckt with a detestation of all Sin;
And, if thou find it so, be not afraid
What e're against thee shall be done or said:
For, Resolutions built upon that Rock,
Will, of all raging Storms, endure the Shock.
XVII.
Though Princes in their Supreme Councils blame thee,
And such as are profane, FANNATICK call thee;
They shall not able be, to fright or shame thee,
By any consequent which may befall thee:
And, if so prudently thou guide, thy Pen
That, when it strikes at faults it spares the men,
The Wise will form the Fools, themselves devide,
And, every Just-mans Vote, be on thy side.
XVIII.
Though it always proves not, do not grieve
Nor vex thereat: for, what GOD calls thee to,
To put in Execution thou shall live,
In spite of all this froward world can do;
And future times, will laugh to scorn the storms
And Mountains, raised by Giants, against worms
When they shall see, (which they will see at last)
The Towers of Babel on their Builders cast.
XIX.
Make Jesus Christ, to be the sole Foundation,
Of thy Affection, of thy Hope and Trust,
Of thy Belief, of thy Sanctification,
Of all thy Musings, and of all thou do:
For, nothing Justifies, but, does Condemn,
That is not, In, for, from, and by him,
Without respect to any Interest,
Except, what, with his Glory, may consist.
XX.
LORD, thou have, by renewing, in some measure
My much depraved Will, inclined me,
In all things, to submit to thy good pleasure,
Let what is defective, now, made perfect be,
That, known it may be to this Generation,
Man may attain to such a Resignation,
That, he shall more delight, thy will to do,
Then, that, which his own will, provokes him to.
XXI.
Praised be thy Blessed Name, who, as thou did
For Joseph (when he was in Prison bound)
For me, in my Imprisonment provid'st,
And, by thy servants, every where art found:
Be with me, as to be thou have begun,
Until my Generation Work is done,
And, when that is finished, for which I was born,
Let me with Joy, into thine Arms return.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the rest of the Commissioners of
the Peace and Jail-delivery, for the City of London, now Assembled in a General
Sessions.
The Humble Petition of George Wither.
THe said Petitioner, having six and thiry years now past (before the great
Pestilence raged) lived in this City (about half that time, after he came to
mature Age) did in Affection thereunto, make here, his Voluntary Residence,
when hundreds of thousands forsook their Habitations, that if GOD spared his
life during that mortality, he might be a Remembrancer of his Judgments and
Mercies, both to this City, and the whole Nation; which he performing according
to his ability, has hitherto (with his life only, and a good Conscience)
escaped the Plagues of War, Poverty, Pestilences, and Parliaments; and is now a
Prisoner in your Jail of Newgate, in order to be tried, by the House of
Commons, at their next Meeting, for intending to offer to the private
consideration of the Lord Chancellor of England, a Poem called Vox Vulgi,
surprised (before it was finished) in this Petitioners hands; who being lately
so Totally deprived of a considerable estate as not to be left worth this piece
of Paper, is in danger through want of necessaries, to perish within your
Walls, before the time of his Trial will come, unless GOD (as he has lately
done) shall Extraordinarily provide him his daily bread, by the Charity of
some, who, perhaps are scarce able to provide for themselves and Families.

The said Petitionor therefore, (conceiving himself obliged by the Law of
Nature, to do what he can to preserve his life (though there be nothing therein
considerable, for its own sake) humbly prays your Honors that, if he can
procure Bail, it may be accepted for his appearance, when it shall be required,
before the said House of Commons; who being the Representative of them, whose
welfare he has preferred before his own, and the Court to whose doom he seems
to be referred by the Warrant for his Commitment hither, the said Petitioner,
will patiently submit thereunto.

If it be in your Power, and may stand with your good pleasure to vouchsafe him
this humble request, the said Petioner thankfully acknowledging your Justice
and compassion, will pray for you as in duty he is bound.

George Wither.

The foregoing Petition, being dilivered to the Lord Mayor at the Sessions, and
no Bail allowed to the Petitioner, he forthwith composed this Epigram.
To the City of London.
Were I, a Person, who had power to better
Thy Trade, or make thy Privileges greater,
Or take away the Citizens Estates,
Thy Walls dismantle, or break down thy Gates,
I had been looked upon, though I had done
To thee no kindness, neither meant thee one.
But, of his love, there is no value made
Who naught can to to thy wealth or greatness add,
Though he his life should hazard for thy sake,
That, thee for ever, he might happy make.
BAII, will not be vouchsafed; but, I must lie
Among thy Rogues, exposed to live or die;
To starve or beg; and wholly be debarred
Of Liberty, unpitied and unheard
For doing what was honestly intended;
And, wherein, I against no Law offended.
This is, I must confess, nor less nor more,
Then, I had reason to expect before:
Yet, all my labor, is not cast away,
For, it occasion gives me, thus to say.
I wished thee well, and will, what ever shall
To me, in my extremities befall;
For, here is a number yet within this place,
Who are of those in whom the Seeds of Grace
So fructify, that GOD has superseded
For their sakes, that for which his Justice pleaded;
And I have in my personal distress
So tasted of their Charitableness,
That, thereby I, enjoying health, and life
(My self not seeking, but thy peace in chief)
Expect that Justice only, from thy hands
Whereon thine honor and thy welfare stands;
Which neither is thy Riches, or thy Power
For, these may come to nothing, in one hour;
And, if to them, thou overmuch incline,
I will not change my poor estate for thine.
Among the Prodigies, by many seen
This year, I, might for one, have numbered been,
If I, should all Particulars relate
Which do concern my Person and Estate:
But, they must now Phanaticks counted be
Who, either do believe what they shall see,
Or dare take notice, of those things that vary
From GOD's proceed, in courses ordinary;
And, therefore, I think fitting to conceal them,
Till that, which is to follow, does reveal them,
To manifest, without all Dubitation,
That, God has spoken to this Generation.
Mean while, I Will suffer: for, our Peace must now
Not from our Actings, but, from sufferings flow.
Yet, whether, I deserve respect or blame,
Know LONDON, since I now thy Prisoner am,
That, if I have not wherewith to subsist
Thou art obliged, to find me bread, at least,
Whilst here I shall confinement undergo,
Though I had always been thine open foe;
And, that it is Tyranny (what ere they are)
To lay on any, more they can bear.
Know likewise, that, if here I shall miscarry
Through lack of what, for life is necessary
Thou, thereby forfeitest, (as I conceive)
A better Charter, then the King can give:
Because, through want of Charity to foes,
Much more to Friends, our part in Christ we lose.
What I have been to thee, it has been shown;
What thou to me art, it will now be known.
And, possibly, another Creation
Will heed, that I am somewhat to this Nation,
Deserving better, then that lie I should
Within a Jail, at seventy three years old,
For acting and designing nothing worse
Then, how to save them from a greater curse.
Look to your selves; For, whether bond or free
I am; I know, my GOD, will look to me;
And, I and mine, shall be both clothed and fed,
When they who slieghted us, want Robes and bread.
So believes George Wither.

Another Meditation, (or Ballad as the World perhaps, will call it) composed by
the same Prisoner since his Commitment to Newgate.
I.
MY Soul, since we are left alone,
In our Confinement here,
Where we disturbed are of none,
To God, come, draw we near.
For, part of his three dreadful WOES,
Are now, so carrying on,
That, if to him, we cling not close
We may be quite undone.
II.
Our selves, let us examine so,
That though our foes condemn,
We may, for what we did misdo,
Make now our Peace with him;
Lest, when the world has fully tried,
How, here we may be vexed,
We, greater miseries must abide
Where, she will throw us next.
III.
SIN, to full ripeness, is not come,
nor malice, to her heights;
And, we e're they receive their Doom
May look for more despights.
These, which we have endured yet,
Have been sustained with ease;
But, GOD, it may he will permit
Much harder things then these.
IV.
It Is but the Suburbs unto Hell,
whereto, we now are sent;
And (for the future) none can tell
What, hereto us is meant.
To better men, worse things befall
Then seem to be our Meed;
And, our Afflictions are but small,
To those, which may succeed.
V.
We have not that dark Dungeon seen
Wherein, is endless Night;
Nor in those, Lousy lodgings been
Which every sense affright;
We feel not that, which many lack;
Nor Bolts, nor Gives we wear,
Fit things for Belly and for Back,
As yet, supplied are.
VI.
With sickness, we are not oppressed,
In body, or in mind;
No outward cares disturb our rest
No Inward fears we find.
For, all the sufferings wherewith we
As yet, afflicted seem
Are only such as grievous be,
In other men's esteem.
VII.
But, should I, (being old and poor)
Diseased grow within,
With Aches, have my Limbs made sore,
Or, with an Vlcer'd skin
Be turned into the Common Jail
To lie upon the ground,
And, all those outward helps quite fail
Which I have lately found.
VIII.
Should this befall us, where might then
Our hope and courage be?
This, happens often to Righteous men,
And, this, may fall on me.
What, but complaints and mournful cries
Would then, be in this place;
Hearts aching, or still weeping eyes,
Scorns, and despair of Grace?
IX.
These will be then the best Reliefs,
That, Flesh and Blood can see,
To cure or Mitigate their Griefs
Where such Desertious be.
Yet, be of naught (my Soul) afraid,
For, by his Angels, then,
Shall GOD's Assistance be convaid
When thou art left of men.
X.
They came unto the Rich man's doer
At which the Lazar died,
And, him to rest Eternal bore
To whom, he Crumbs denied;
And when Elias had of bread
The means deprived quite,
He by the Ravenous Fowls was Fed
At Morning, and at night.
XI.
Their GOD is mine; and if in him,
My Trust, I still repose,
He, will to me, be as to Them,
To save me from my Foes.
Or, if of that deprived I am
which fed me to this day,
I know he will supply the same
As well, another way.
XII.
The Earth is his, with her increase,
And wasted were her store,
He has within a Richer place,
Enough, to send me more;
And, till it comes; That which does starve,
Discomfort and destroy;
My life (whilst useful) shall preserve,
And more increase my Joy.
XIII.
The Plagues, which others to Despair,
And to Blaspheming move,
Shall stir me up, to Praise, and Prayer,
And fill my heart with Love.
Yea, that which on the Kings of Earth
Will dreadful horrors bring,
Shall make me with Triumphant Mirth,
A HALLELVJAH Sing.
XIV.
The Purging Fire, which them does burn,
Who, therein Raving, lie,
Thy Dross (my Soul) to Gold shall turn,
Thy Silver, Purify.
And, when thy Fiery-tryal's past,
No loss will come to thee,
If thy works Fixed on CHRIST, thou have,
Though built of Straw they be.
XV.
Resolves, which I had not before,
These Musings do beget;
And though, her Furnace seven times more,
The World, henceforth shall heat,
My Soul, return thou to thy Rest;
For, GOD, has me assured,
That, where I ten times more oppressed,
It should be well endured.
XVI.
How blessed is that Heavenly Place,
Where thou, Oh CHRIST, does dwell!
If thou can bring such Joy and Peace,
Into this Earthly Hell?
He, with whom, thou still present art,
What ere on him is laid,
If, thee he loves with all his heart,
Needs, no where be afraid.
Mewgate, Sept. 3. 1661.
A Return, in Answer to some of them, who sent to know how it fares with me in
my Imprisonment.
GOD, gave me Grace; by Grace I did conceive
A saving Faith; by saving Faith I live.
My life of Faith, has had a preservation,
By Hearing, Acting, and by Meditation.
By Meditation, I reduce to Words
What my Experience in this life affords.
By that Experience which I have attained,
A Patience in my troubles I have gained;
My Patience has such hopefulness begot,
That, this disgraceful Prison shames me not.
Though I am poor (and, as our Proverb says)
As poor as Job) unto my God be praise,
I am no Beggar; for, I have not yet,
Been forced to ask for Money, Clothes, ot Meat;
Nor tempted (having daily bread) to borrow
Through fear of wants, that may befall to Morrow:
And, well remembering, who was pleased to say
There Is Care enough belonging to each Day,
I, for a day to which I may not live,
Will not of what I have, my self deprive.
With my Condition, I am pleased, and merry,
Of my long-suff'rings I am not grown weary.
And wish those who pursue me with most hate
No worse, then to enjoy the like estate,
Except my Bands. I have acquired this rest,
By those Means and Degrees, before expressed,
And, this, unfeignedly, to you declares
How, at this present time, with me it fares.
Sept. 7. 1661. from Newgate. George Wither.

A Pass-By, in Relation to those, who seem offended at my Frequent-Scriblings,
as they call them.
ME thinks, I hear some say, who look upon
These Papers; will this fellow never have done?
Which Questionists, I, with a smile contemn,
Supposing, labor lost, in answering them:
For, nothing is more pleasing to their ears
Then Scurril Pamphlets, Bawdy Rimes, and Jeers.
To them alone, therefore, who take delight
In wholesome words, I Will show why still I write;
Presuming, that my Reasons will not seem
To merit, altogether, disesteem.
Although my former Poems, and my Musings
Had not until of late Days, those perusings
Which I expected, nor now valued be
Of many, they have much refreshed me;
And, otherwile, for supplements have stood
Instead of sleep, of Raiment, and of Food.
In Troubles, me, they more content have made
Then Wealth, Repute, and all the Friends I had.
They cause me to be fearless of my Foes;
When I am vexed, my spirit they compose;
When I am Poor, they are in stead of Wealth.
When I am Sick, they help repair my Health;
When I am Well, they are my Recreation,
When tempted to Despair, Hopes Reparation.
Thereby, when Sadness comes, to Mirth I turn it;
When I am slieghted, they do make me scorn it.
In Prisons, when my Body is confined
They do so many ways enlarge my Mind
That, doubting whether will for me prove best,
The Freedom lost, or that which is Possessed,
I use the means of Both; but, wholly leave
The choice to GOD; and what he gives receive.
They are Companions, when I Am left alone;
They find me work to do, when I have none.
By day, me from ill Company they keep;
Make nights less tedious, when I cannot sleep.
They ease me, when I am oppressed with wrongs;
When I want Music, they do make me Songs.
To Friends, who like them (where is no better cheer)
They, acceptable Entertainments are:
Often, likewise, I make use of them, instead
Of Charms, when, I of Fools would fain be rid;
For, if I read them, but a page or two,
They strait, grow weary, and away they go.
They fix thoughts, which would quite slip out of mind,
And, when writ down, I them, know where to find;
Yea, other men, thereby, have often received
Refreshments, if their words may be believed:
And (which is more then all this) to GOD's praise,
They are, and may be useful, sundry ways.
For these respects, whoever shall appear
Pleased or displeased, to me my Musings are
Considerable; and if any one
They do offend, them, he may let alone;
For, though they have been tendered unto many,
I never, yet, enforced them on any,
Against their wills; except perhaps it were
To save them, whose destruction I thought near;
And, (I will not be shie the Truth to say)
No men, have worse requited me, then they:
But peradventure, if that dead I were,
None daring to be their Remembrancer,
(As I have been) they may more mischief'd be
Through want of one, then troubled now by me.
George Wither's Appollogy for composing the Poem called Vox Vulgi; being a
Welcome home from the Counties, Cities and Buroughs, to their Prevaricating
Members; saving the honor of the House of Commons, and of every faithful and
discreet Individual member thereof; which Poem was surprised before quite
finished.
The Contents.
The Author, here makes his defense;
Clears his asspersed Innocence;
And frees himself, from Just suspicion,
Of acting ought, without Commission.
HEre, I have time to meditate upon,
What, I my self, and other men have done,
Occasioning my suffering, at this time,
And, in relation to what is thought my Crime:
Lest, therefore, I may him offend who gave it,
I will improve this Leisure, whilst I have it;
For, when my Musings, are expressed in words,
The better means to Scan them it affords;
And to declare, what I shall now express,
I may hereafter, want both Time, and Place;
Or, being dead, before my Tryal-day,
My false Accusors, to my charge may lay,
What they shall please; and none be certain, why
I was committed in this Jayl to die.
GOD give me strength, to finish this; and than,
Let all my foes, do, and say, what they can.
I am not only questioned, for a thing,
Presumed misdone, but also, for the Spring
Whence it is derived; and pleased some are, to say
That rending of my whole Estate away,
Had me provoked unto an angry-fit,
Which was the Cause, of what I lately writ;
And, that I had a scurrulous intent.
To cast asspertions on the Parliament.
To make it so appear, deprived I am,
Of what best proves, that, I deserve no blame.
My last Conception, (which, before to Light
It could be brought, was snatched out of my sight)
May forced be to speak, what I never thought,
Or, else, be smothered, as a birth'worth naught:
Or, (that an ill intention may appear)
Some Verses may be picked out here and there,
(Without those Qualifyings, which precede,
Or follow, to illustrate what they read)
Whereby, some Inferences may be made,
That, on Good-manners, I, entrenched had,
In summing up, and personating that
Which I have heard, the Common-voice relate:
Thus much to be intended does appear,
By what, I do already see and hear.
Which falsehood, if, but barely I deny
I shall in words alone, retort the Lie;
And, Reason may be born down by the noises,
Arising from plurallity of Voices,
Yield forth by them, who shall intrude to do,
That, which nor GOD, nor Good-men calls them to.
I, therefore, will produce a Vindication,
That may be justified by demonstration;
Or, by such Reasons as will do me right;
Unless they shall be kept from open sight,
Or clipped; or, I not suffered be to say
That, which to clear, my self produce I may:
And, if so; by the consciences of them
I shall be quit, whose words will me cendemn.
My Cause, may for the present, injured be;
But, all the World can do no harm to me.
Though that which is without me, wronged has been
And may be still, all shall be safe within,
So long as GOD, assisteth me, by whom
I, with this confidence, am armed become;
And peradventure, they who think to spoil,
This confidence, may give themselves the foil.
Their scandal, in the first place, I Will assay,
To wipe off, who suppose my losses may
Provoke me, or, that my oppressions had
Prevailed, to make me grow a little mad;
But, they mistaken are in that surmise;
For, to the world-ward, I am so wise,
To be by them distempred, in a mood
Like those, who trust in Riches more than GOD;
And, by what I am like to undergo,
It will be proved, whether it be so.
I am not so in love, as men conceive,
With that, whereof the World can me bereave,
As to engage, for such poor Interests,
My quiet in this life, by those contests
Which I adventure on, if I saw naught,
That much more worth such hazards, I had thought:
And, this mind, if my Actions did not show,
In former times, those will that shall ensue,
When, more undoubtedly those things appear,
Which of my Writings, the chief motives were.
And will show whether, I did ought intend
To drive on an ignoble, or self-end.
It may he known, by what was heretofore
Divulged, that, nothing now befalls me more
Then I expected; That, I did foresee
What lately seized on other men and me:
That, having been here, in the Worlds great School
So long a time, I was not so much Fool,
As not to know, how, Friends, and means to make
In seasonable time to save my stake
And mend my Game; if I unto that end
Had played it, which most other men intend;
Or, if I thought those men, who look on me
With most contempt, were better then they be.
I knew as well as any, how to Fawn,
And flatter; what to give, and what to Pawn
For my advantage, if I could have thought
That, worth my seeking, for which most men sought.
But though I find it an imperfect Light
Whereby at first, I walked, it gave me sight
Of much more then the World believed, I saw,
And, kept me of mine own heart so in awe,
That, notwithstanding I did for a season
Often stagger to and fro, 'twixt Faith and Reason,
(And stumbled otherwhile, into those things
Which Ruin, unless Grace prevention brings)
I, in the main, pursued a Good Design;
(Not, I confess, by any power of mine)
And by some Symptoms, at the last, perceived,
That, till of my Estate, I was bereaved,
My work, would neither well be carried on
(When that time came, wherein it should be done)
Nor, take so good effect, as it would then,
Upon my Self, or upon other men.
For, which cause, when I saw it must be so,
Without reluctance, I, let all go,
And without nourishing, a secret spleen
Against their persons, who my foes have been.
This, future things, much better will display
Then all which at this present, I can say;
As also, that, they who from me of late,
Have torn unmercifully, my Estate;
By far worse motives thereunto were led,
Then those, which me inclined to what I did.
Loss to prevent, or to regain what is lost,
I did adventure no more pains or cost,
Then Reason warranted, and obligations
Which bound me to have care of my Relations;
Or might, then, by pursuing of that course
Assure me, how much bettered, or grown worse
Men, by those Judgments and those Mercies were,
Which GOD, had variously dispensed here;
And, having thereby learned what GOd meant
I, with my losses was as well content
As is a Christian when by Turks pursued
(Who overpower him by their multitude)
He wracks his Vessel on a friendly shore,
Where, he has Life and Freedom, though no more.
Why, should I angry be to see that gone
Which if I had not lost, had me undone?
Which also, will undo them, who now have it,
And (if good heed he take not) him that gave it?
Or, which will be restored again to me,
If, for GOD's Glory, and my good it be?
Why, should I be displeased to be bereft
Of that, whose loss has an assurance left
Of better things? Of that, which, whilst possessed,
Increast my troubles, and disturbed my rest?
Of that, which I must shortly leave (though mine)
And, know not (when the same I must resign)
Whether, it to their Weal or Woe, shall tend,
To whom, when I am dead, it will descend?
These things considered, all wise men know
That, nor these, nor my former Musings flow
From discontentments, or from wrath that springs
From loss of inconsiderable things:
And Wisemens, good esteems, if keep I may,
A rush I care not, what fools think or say,
On whom, the less impression it will make,
The more I rationally write, or speak.
But, that, whereby most blame to me may come,
(And, which will probably be charged home)
Is an Impeachment for a heinous thing
That some are pleased to call a Lybelling
Against the COMMONS; which, if proved true
I Will ask no favor: For, I think none due;
And, if it be an unjust imputation
I for my sufferings claim a Reparation,
Expecting (which ought not to be refused)
That, what is called a Lybel be produced
To open view, and sight of every one
Who may concerned be, in what is done:
And, that, none may usurp a Privilege
Thereon to pass a Sentence as my Judge,
Who shall not read, or hear the same throughout*
For, Solomon has freed it so from doubt
That, to averr, I shall not be a feared,
He, that does Censure what he never heard,
Deserves shame; And I shall rather laugh
And Jeer thereat, then either grieve or chafe;
Because, (at worst) I, then a Doom shall have,
Much like as if, a Fool had called me Knave.
If left to Public view, my Poem be,
And finished as intended was by me
No worse construction, thereof can be made
Then this, that, I have called a Spade a Spade;
And, means devised, whereby men may appear
Unto themselves, what others know they are.
By fained speakers, I have only said
What was to me by Common-fame conveyed
And murmured in most places, to worse ends
Then that, wheteto my harmless Poem tends:
And, if I may presume the Truth to tell
I am rewarded ill, for doing well:
For, thereby, I not only turned aside
That general reproach which was applied
To all the House of Commons, and, alone
To them confined it, who brought blame thereon;
But, likewise, without personally blaming
(Or marking any forth) to their defaming,
Have sought to bring it to their Cognizance,
Who might thereby, the Public weal advance;
And, who, if it proved worthy Approbation
Might useful make it for the Reformation
Of that, which else, will have a Cousequence
More hurtful, then my Innocent-Offence,
For, though by publication, I had done
What might have seemed a fault; (and now is none)
The Generality but little more
Had thereby known, then what most knew before,
When to worse ends, and more apparent wrongs
'Twas tossed, upon the Rackets of men's Tongues;
Who, so dissatisfied seem to be
By what, they lately feel, and hear and see,
That very frequently they are offended
Even with what for their welfare, seems intended;
Because, they having often been deceived
Suspect, some future mischiefs then conceived:
Yea, then, are things, when plausibly projected,
The less believed, and the more suspected;
Not by those only, who now called are
Phanaticks, but, by those likewise that were
Distinguished by the name of Cavalier;
Yea, and our Jacks indifferent, do begin
To be more Talkative then they have been,
Because, they find themselves in danger (whether
They are of this, or that side, or of neither)
So long, as things which Reason order might,
Shall pass by number only, without weight.
To intimate, that, Parliaments had been
Disturbed, by some of those, who were brought in
A surrepticious way; and, that by them
The People were abus',d is no great crime;
Nor is affirming, that they were deceived
Unfitting to be spoken, or believed,
When generally avowed; nor to averr
A Parliament in gross, may sometimes err,
Since, neither to be wise, or Innocent,
Is, an inseparable Accident
Of Parliaments; as has apparent been,
By that, which we in our own days have seen:
For, that, they may with Treason, and with Murder,
Be charged, we shall need to look no further
Then, unto those Transactions which have past,
Both in this Parliament, and in the last.
What have I then misdone in making known
How foolish, mad, or wicked some were grown?
How much oppressed men are; how grieved; and how
Exasperated, more and more, they grow?
What fault commit I, when I hear men say
What Is done, and what I see done every day,
If I declare ( sedition to prevent)
That I perceive most men are discontent,
And froward? since I neither made them such,
Nor, therein am concerned half so much
As other men? nor did intend a course
Thereby, to make what is evil, to be worse?
And, since, by that, which lately written was
By me, no mischief can be brought to pass,
Unless, by accident befall it may,
As when Heat melts Wax, and hardens Clay.
It seems hard usage (therefore) to be thrown
Into a Jail; of all that was mine own,
In my old Age dispoil'd; shut up alone,
Where, sick or well (attended on by none)
I must in longest nights the hazzards take
Of what may happen, sleeping or awake;
Not impudent enough, to beg or borrow,
Nor having certainty of bread, to morrow,
If Charity should fail: which, is a case
Much worse, then often befalls in this place,
To Thieves and Murderers: yet, this is not
Here mentioned as repining at my Lot;
For, whereas I am only lodged there,
Where Murderers and Thieves confined are,
The Son of GOD, who for my Ransom died
Was twixt a Thief and Murderer crucified:
And, in my present sufferings I am eased,
By being well assured, that GOD is pleased
With what befalls; and that I shall at last
Be filled with sweetness, by what had a taste
Of Bitterness at first; and, that to them
Who, me and my endeavor now contemn,
Things may hereafter profitable be,
Which are at present, mischievous to me.
Despised Instruments will be of use
To bring to mind, that which will help reduce
Confusion into order, when applied
By Meekness, and not spurned at by Pride;
And, things which by the world, as much were Jeered
As Josuah's Rams-horns, when he first appeared
Surrounding Jericho, will bring about
As great a Miracle, as then was wrought;
Though no Examples, yet, nor good advice,
Nor private Admonitions make those wise,
Who have not Eyes to see, what they behold
Nor Ears, to hear a Truth, when it is told.
The hour is not yet come, which I expect
May probably give this a good effect.
But, there are times wherein that will content
For which, we shall at other times be shent.
My Poem, styled OPOBALSAMUM,
(Though) more offensive, then my last, to some)
The Commons (named the Long Parliament)
Did winck at, without show of discontent:
Yea, though in plain terms, I made bold to tell
Wherein, their faulty-members did not well.
I, then (as in the last) had so divided
The Goats from Sheep; and had so well provided
To save their honor, who least guilty were
That (though when that first Poem, did appear,
I was to them a Prisoner, for telling
What some of them to hear of, were unwilling)
They me enlarged, and vouchsafed me more
Respect in show, then e're they did before.
For, prudently observing, that the shame
Which they in chief deserved, who were to blame,
Was upon all, without distinction flung,
(Till, unto those to whom it did belong,
I had confined it) not one word was spoken
To me, which their displeasure might betoken;
And, some good use was made, (though I confess
Not very much) of what I did express:
And, when, by time, that out of mind was wore,
I, had as little favor as before.
And, so I have had also, ever since;
For, still, some at my writings took offense,
And more my wrongs, by one foe, one day, were
Then all my Friends, could right in twenty year.
I may have hope, the Commons before whom
I must be tried, as prudent will become.
The Privilege of WATERFORD affords,
The Freedom of explaining their own words
To all her Citizens. If my words are
Allowed but that Sense only, which they bear
Grammatically, I no more desire,
So that my Poem be preserved entire,
And perfected with my last thoughts thereon
According to my mind when 'twas begun.
For, no great credit again thereby they shall
Who weigh a matter, till they hear it all,
And, they will much bewray their ignorances,
Who heed not Causes, with their Circumstances.
There was before my Book, as Epigram
Whereby, I wholly Vindicated am
From that which is pretended; and, I hear
That will not be permitted to appear.
If so, I find it, there is mischief meant
Which I shall find a Medium to prevent,
Unless there be, in some an impudence
Much more deserving blame then my offense.
That Epigram did evidently show
My Book designed for the private view
Of Clarendon, (supposed so wise and just,
That, him, the King is pleased to entrust
Even with his Conscience) to receive his Doom
Before, that forth in Public it should come:
Because, that, I was hopeful it might bring
By means of him, some notions to the King
Whereof his Wisdom, would have made some use
To further, what shall to his Weal conduce;
And, if that Epigram concealed be
It both dishonours him, and injures me.
For, liable it makes him, to suspect
That, me, in Ill designs, he does protect;
The wrong to me is without precedent,
For, e're I had expressed what I meant
With my imperfect Poem, I was seized;
Accused of whatsoever others pleased,
And here, unto an ignominious Jail
Committed am unheard, and without Bail.
I hope for better usage, when the Ring
Of sufferings I have trod, till me it bring
Before my Judges: (for what e're is thought)
Their honor, I have not infringed in ought.
Their charge, against me, I, yet know not how
May honestly be proved; but, this I know,
The House of Commons may much honor get
By well approving that which I have writ
(Considering, I therein have appealed,
To GOD, and men) if, it be not concealed.
From open view, and mulcts upon me laid
For mentioning in private, what was said,
In public by the People; who, thereby
And, therein, are concerned as much as I;
Because, my purpose, in that Poem, tends
To common good, without sinister ends.
And, if we to our selves, may not relate,
Our thoughts in words, and them Communicate
To Peers entrusted by the Supreme Power,
(For Preservarion of their peace and our)
We are in danger, shortly, to become
The veriest slaves throughout all Christendom.
But, (as I said in that which was surpised)
The Prudent Commons, will be so advised
When they with seriousness, have that perused
Whereby, they are supposed by me abused,
That, finding none reproved save only those,
Who them in their debatings did oppose;
And, that they likewise (after next October,
Who were half mad in June) wise, and grown sober,
Will mend their former manners, and become
As helpful, as they have been troublesome;
Both Parties then, will, peradventure be
Thenceforth, as fully, reconciled to me
As I to all men am; and, what was not
Ill-meant, shall be well taken, or forgot.
If, it be so; It will a Symptom prove
Of an abatement, if not of remove,
Of some oppressions, to prepare the way
For what is reserved, until another day.
But, to what end is this Apology?
Not merely, from this place wherein I lie,
To free my Person; or, from that, which may
To me befall upon my Tryal-day.
No; those effects, must from an abler spirit
Proceed: All I can say, or do, or merit,
To add a contribution thereunto,
So, little, will to such a purpose do,
That, rather, provoke more my Foes, I shall
And deeper, into their displeasure fall:
For, it is not pleading in the fittest Season
A Righteous Cause, with Arguments Reason;
Nor is it our well-doing; or our saying
The Truth; nor Preaching; nor unto them, Praying;
Nor our long-suff'rings; nor (when past they are)
Good services to them, how great so e're,
That so much moves, as Flattery, making Friends,
Large Gifts, and serving of their present ends.
I, therefore, have but an occasion took
Thereby, to mention somewhat, yet unspoke
A Nobler Cause concerning then mine own,
(And whereon, Words will better be bestown)
Wholly to GOD committing the success
Make that, the chief aim of what I express.
For, hearing what is done, (by common Fame)
And partly knowing, that, obliged I am
Not by my Natural faculties alone,
On me conferred for that end, (or none)
But, also, by my Christianity,
(And, not a little, by a Moral-Tie)
To speak, and write, and do the best I may,
To bring them who are out, into their way;
And, I Will express, what e're to that effect
I do believe may tend; without respect
To Persons of a high or low degree;
Or, any Powers on Earth, who e're they be.
Councills and Parliaments, and Sovereign Kings,
I do acknowledge to be Sacred things,
Whose Reputation, whilst (at least) they are
In being, ought with conscientious care
To be preserved; because on them depends,
That, which to public woe or welfare tends.
Yet, He, from whom all Powers their Being had,
And they, for whose sakes only they were made
Ought so to be preferred, that, naught be waved
Whereby their dues, and honors, may be saved.
We have often seen and felt, in our own times,
That, they of such Confusions, and such Crimes
Has been the cause at least in letting in
Much more destructive Plagues, then all the Sin
Of Privare Persons; and, that which we know
Was heretofore, may be hereafter so.
Yea, may and will, in every Age grow worse
Unless there be provision of some course
To regulate them; and, a free consession
(To Persons qualified with discretion)
To mind them of their duties, who have dared
When they to Public places were preferred,
Employ those Privileges as their own
Which were for Public services bestown;
And, often do abuse them, to the wrong
Of them, to whom of right, they do belong.
It Is now high time, that Earthly Kings and Judges,
Should wiser grow; and use their Peiviledges,
To better purposes then heretofore:
For, his great Kingdom, now is at the door,
Which will destroy those Empires that begun
In NIMROD, and through various forms did run
Until the Tyrannies, beginning than
Shall have an end in that Misterious-man,
Who, by the Dragon, Scarlet-Whore and BEAST,
(Though mystically) truly is expressed.
Then, shall those Tyrannies, and Usurpations
Whereby he, long time, has oppressed the Nations,
And therewith, every Branch that sprung therefrom,
Unto an everlasting Ruin come;
Though some of them are seemingly Besainted,
And with fair shows of Holiness Bepainted.
For, I believe (although it does appear
To few men, yet) Divine Records declare
As Well the Term of NIMROD'S Emperies
As of Mysterious Babels Tyrannies,
Whose time, Six hundred sixty six is known
To number out: and, which must be ov'rthrown
With that, from whence it sprung, when ripe it is grown.
That, to be All in all, GOD, may be known.(grown.
And (as I Have often inferred) they, who belong
To that new Empire, which will then grow strong,
Shall now way need their Persons, to engage
By violent Actings; but, to bear the rage
Of their opposers with a patient heart;
For, suffering only, will be their chief part.
And, he who in the Assyrian host did smite
Fourscore five thousand Persons, in one night,
Shall by the Power and virtue of his Word
Perform that work, without their hand or sword.
The CUP of Fornication, so bewitches
With love of Pleasures, Honors, and of Riches
The great men of the Earth, that, they think none
Are sober men, unless they dote upon
Those Vanities, and prosecute those Ends
To which, their Policy and Power tends,
Until they grow as mad or drunk as they;
And, then perhaps, for wise men, pass they may.
As David says, They will not Understand;
They will not heed what GOD has now in hand;
But, obstinately still adhere to those
Who, tempt them on, unto their ov'rthrowes,
Till Ruin comes: For, they are not aware
How cheated by those Mountebanks they are;
Nor how those Parasites increase their store,
Even to excess, by making of them poor:
Nor heed they, how, these cause them to destroy
Those men, by whom they safety might enjoy
With Love and Honor, if they did not lend
Their Ears to those, who no Good-men befren'd.
They shut their Eyes, and therefore cannot see
Into what dangers they approaching be;
And, those as much they hate who cross their will
To save them, as if they did come to kill.
That, which they call, the Reason of the State,
Too far insisted on, is often that
Which proves the bane of Kingdoms; and yet still
Either false Prophets, Priests, or their self-will
Therewith besots them; though they have bin told,
What thereon has ensued in times of old
When, Princes, GOD's directions had despised;
And acted that, which their own hearts devised
Although they by experiments had seen,
What, of their Policies, the fruits have been.
These were of old examples: Saul, thereby
Deprived was of Life and Sovereignty.
King Solomon, by something like that Knack
(To please his Wives) in honor suff'red Wrack.
So, Jeroboam, though, GOD promised him,
And to his seed, a lasting Diadem,
By that State Policy, whereby he sought
To keep the Throne, the loss thereof was wrought.
Jehu, regardless of GOD's promises
The same course following, had the like success.
High places, Altars, Groves, and Priests of Baal
Were chief occasions of King Ahabs fall,
The bringing of the Gods of Edom home,
In hope that they a strengthening might become
Unto his Kingdom, was the overthrow
Of Amaziah, and of many more.
State Policy, made Judah's King contemn
The Prophets Counsel, when Jerusalem
Was first destroyed, and the Jews inslaved
Who, might then, from that Bondage have been saved;
And, they who truly sought their preservation
Reputed were (as now) Foes to their Nation,
Disloyal to their King, seized as supitious,
And punished as Factious or Seditious.
State Policy, caused breaking of that Oath
For which GOD was with Zedekiah wroth,
And punished in such a Signal wise
That he lost both his Kingdom and his Eyes:
And, Politic enlarging of Possessions
Or Power, by loading Nations with Oppressions,
To further State-Designs (until it wracks
Their Loyalties, and then their patience cracks)
Has been, and will be, in all times, and Nations,
The cause of Wars, Rebellions, desolations
And changing Governments: But, now ere long
When human Policy, has made most strong
The MISTRESS of Terrestrial Potentates,
By Counsel, Strength, and by Confederates,
Combined as they intend (and when their might
Has raised Expectation to the height)
Then; She, and They, shall be unto each other
A mutual Plague, and be destroyed together,
With every Person, Family, and Nation,
Which is a Member of that Corporation:
And then, those PEDLERS who are now so jolly,
Shall, packing up the Tokens of their folly
Run to seek out where they their heads may hide,
From that, whereby, they shall be terrified.
Let him, that has an ear to hear this, hear it;
Let proud men tremble; Let the mighty fear it;
And let the Meek rejoice; For, GOD will turn
Their Sorrows into Gladness, who now Mourn.
It is not only, now, of much behoof,
But, necessary too, that sharp Reproof
Advice and Admonition, should be given
To all Estates and Princes under Heaven,
Yea, and particularly be applied
By some, and in some cases, when aside
They from the way of safety, stray so far
That, to apparent danger, nigh they are;
(How ere they take it, or what ever shall
Thereby, to their Premomters befall)
Because, by States, if wickedly inclined,
The greatest Plagues do fall upon mankind.
This made Elia's to become so bold
When Ahab, of his wickedness he told
Unto his face; and when, to like intent,
A Writing, he to King Jehoram sent.
This, to reprove King Asa, without dread,
The SEER Hanani encouraged.
This, made the Prophet Samuel so to School
King Saul, that in effect, he called him Fool;
And, John the Baptist, speak as plainly too,
Of Herod, as now they termed Quakers do
To some with us: This, also, did induce
King David, who observed the abuse
Of Courts and Councils, to cry out on them
To this effect; how long! will ye condemn
The poor and Innocent? how long! oppress
The man, afflicted, and the Fatherless?
How long! will ye unrighteously neglect
The cause that is just, for personal respect?
Do Justice, and vouchsafe compassion more
Hereafter, then ye have done heretofore;
For, (if it be not) to you, be it known
You walk in darkness; you have overthrown
The worlds Foundations; wilfully enforce,
All things to move out of their proper course;
And, that, though GOD himself has called you Gods
A difference making (with no little odds)
Twixt you and common men, yet, die you shall
Like them; yea, die such Death's, as did befall
To wicked Princes, who, unto their place
Went down, with greatest horror and disgrace.
Although such rough Reprooss on silken Ears
Grate harshly, and are thought by Flatterers
To sound like Blasphemy: This in old times
The Language was, in which great Princes crimes
Rebuked were; This was the usual mode,
Till slavish men, feared mortals more then GOD.
Thus, David spoke unto the Congregations
Of mighty men; Thus, through all Generations
To them should Truth be told, as need required,
By those who, to that purpose are inspired:
Republics, Kings, and Councils, Objects are
Of such Reproofs, and so reproved were,
And, how enraged soever they are grown
GOD, will be King; his pleasure he will make known
By whom soever he pleases, that their crimes
May now, as well as in preceding times
Reproved be; For, States and private men
Are every whit as guilty, now, as then.
The same at this time, or, the like Omissions,
The like Exorbitances, and Oppressions
In this our Generation may be found;
And more and more, are likely to abound
If not prevented; for, the things we should:
We neither do, nor suffer those who would,
And, if we can but force men to profess
As we do, though against their Consciences,
We think we have secured them to our side;
Whereas, when such men's Truths come to be tried,
Who are for fear, or for advantage won
To act what is against their Conscience done,
(They, being both to GOD, and Men unjust)
In them, there is of all other, the least trust:
For, how long? or to whom? or unto what
Will they be true, who Conscience violate?
Doubtless, without a speedy Reformation,
It wholly, will corrupt this Generation,
Fit us for nothing, but, for what is Evil,
And, to be serviceable to the Devil.
As therefore it is unfit that every one
Should States, reprove, it is as unfit that none
Perform that Work, and brutish, to conceive
That, GOD, the Worlds last and worst Age, should leave
Without Premonitors; or, that the days
Most wicked grown, required not stranger ways
Of Admonition, then have been in use
When, of GOD's Grace there was much less abuse:
For, Providence, that nothing does omit
Which, either Work or Season, may befit,
(Although, but little heed thereof be took)
Has lately, to this Generation spoke
By many Prodigies: Each Element
Has very plainly Preached GOD's intent:
Yea, many Dispensations, which to us
Seem to be wicked, or ridiculous,
Have somewhat in them, which relates unto
That, which we have done, or else ought to do
Or have Omitted; or else to be Signs
Of that, whereto this later Age declines:
And, that such things as those, in these last Ages
Should be, we have Authentical Presages.
But, Visions, Revelations, Prophesies
Or such like, now, the common-voice decries
As at an end: which I, confess, is true
As they concern revealing Doctrines new
To saving Faith relating: yet, of that,
Which may concern the Temporary State
Of CHRIST'S Church Militant, or his Elect
In Actings or in Sufferings to direct;
Or, of unfolding Prophesies to them,
Which were sealed up, till an appointed time,
GOD, has vouchsafed in season, Revelations
As need required in all Generations,
By whom he pleased; and frequently, by such
As, by the world, were not esteemed much.
Some think, that nothing meriteth regard
Save what by Ancient Prophets, was declared,
Who were immediately inspired from Heaven,
By special Warrant and Commission given.
Be not deceived; the same Commission, still,
Is extant with us, under hand and Seal,
In Execution to be put, by all
Whom, for time being, GOD shall please to call
To be his Prophets; who, as well may now
As heretofore, be called from the Plow,
From Herds, Fruit gathering, Fishing, from a Trade
Which, in the World small reputation had,
Or (as when Christianity began)
From being an extorting Pablican;
This, may believed be; for, what is else
The meaning of that Scripture which foretells
Their Sons and Daughters in the later times,
Should Prophecy? That, old men should have Dreams,
And young men Visions? Mind too (if forgot
It be) and know it, if you know it not,
That every one, who has in Interest
In CHRIST, is now, King, Prophet and a Priest,
(Anointed, at renewing of his Birth,
To do him services here upon Earth;
And stands obliged, as he occasion sees
To execute all these three Offices
According to the measure of GOD's Grace
Bestown, and in his proper Time and Place;
And, these empowered by his Commissions are
To Parliaments, and Councils to declare*
(At least in general terms) what may prevent
Dishonouring God, or common Detriment;
And be Remembrancers, of such like things,
As need requires, unto the greatest Kings.
Kings, also, should have still attending them
Such SEERS, as to David in old time
The Prophet Nathan was. But, in the stead
Of such, Baffoons, or Jesters do succced,
In Princes Courts; by whom, they sometimes are
Informed of useless truths, by way of Jeer;
And, other while, perhaps, a formallist,
So far as it with Courtship may consist,
Will mind them of such duties as they see
By them performed; but, such as wholly be
Neglected, and by whose neglect they may
Be quite destroyed, they, not a word will say.
On many Kings; their lies a heavy charge;
Their Kingdoms are both Populous and large;
There, likewise, are so many thousand cases
Which do concern their Persons, or their places
Or other men; and such a few there are
To represent them to a Royal Ear
And, likewise of those few, there are so few
Who represent unto them what is true,
That, whilst a freedom is allowed to none
To show them what is destructively misdone,
Or, what is famed; All their Prerogatives
May not secure their Honors and theit lives:
Especially, at such a time as this
Wherein GOD searches after what is amiss;
And, has already, both begun to cast
Into his fiery Furnace, and to blast
All Humane Wisdom, Power and Righteousness
(Yea all, wherein their confidence men place)
That, they may know, all Evils do from them
Proceed, and all things, that are good, from him.
Moreover, that, which long since was foretold,
Some of this Generation shall behold,
In differing States, and with as different Passions
According to their differing Inclinations;
And by the Men, and means the world despises,
In spite of all that Hamane wit devises
It shall be brought to pass; And, they who did
Defend the noblest Cause, then, best shall speed.
Obliged, for these respects, is every one
To do, what in his place is to be done,
That GOD's Will, so far forth as Power is given,
May here be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven:
A safe condition, they are always in
Who trust not in their merits; hate their Sin;
And their endeavors labor to improve
In Faith, and Meekness, Patience, Hope and Love;
That this may be effected, whatsoever
It costs them, in pursuing that endeavor.
For, Privileges of the Humane Nature,
More Sacred are then those of any Creature
Beneath the GODHEAD; and, to all Mankind
He is a Traitor, who has ought designed.
Against that Interest; and therefore, I
Vow, in defense thereof, to live and die.
In order thereunto, I now employ,
The Faculty and Talent I enjoy,
Which, GOD has made proportionable to
The works, and men, with whom I have to do.
That, which I suffer for, on this Account
Was done; By GOD's Commission I have done't.
If truth I write, I am no whit to blame,
If it be false, I an Imposter am;
And, let the Commons, when that next they meet,
Deal with me for it, as GOD shall permit.
I have discharged my Conscience: And, if me,
He will not save, I, saved will not be;
Nor will I, in this Cause plead one word more,
Then, this, and what I Have written heretofore.
I know the World; she also knows her own
And, we shall both ere long be better known:
Mean while, this my Imprisonment to me
Will my Teipsum nosce, prove to be.
This also, and what is formerly expressed
Of me, and of this Age, will be a TEST.
Now, I Will retire unto my self, and sing
To GOD, be glory; and God save the King.
They, who are wise will observe these things; and shall understand the Loving
kindness of the LORD.

Psalm. 104.43.
Another Meditation in Newgate, somewhat alluding to this old verse in Seneca,
Nunquam non Potest, esse Virtuti locus.
Which implies, that no Place, or Time can disadvantage an Honest-man.
There Is difference in the self same Times and Places,
As GOD conferreth, or withdraws his Graces;
Or, as our Cause is; or, as we shall find
Our hearts, to be ought more or less inclined,
To bring the Flesh into a due subjection,
Unto the Spirits Dictates and direction.
For, this Place, I perceive to be the same
To me, which I unto my self, now am,
And, not that, which it is to most of them
Who are with me confined at this time.
By Burdens (though as great) are made more light,
Then theirs are unto them; The day or night,
Are no whit tedious; nor unpleasing make
My sleep, nor Cares renew, when I awake:
But, I as well contented am become,
In all respects, as ever I was at home;
Although, as well by my Intelligence,
I, my Afflictions feel, as by my Sense:
For, even those things, which in themselves are bitter,
To cure Distempers, prove not only fitter,
But sweeter too, then that which in times past
Was more defir'd, and did most please my taste.
The want of sleep here, and of such like things
As else where, and at other Seasons, brings
Pain to the Flesh, and to the Soul vexations,
Are either made to me sweet Recreations,
Or give Instruction, in another mode,
And more effectually, then things abroad.
Last night, as in my Bed I musing lay
How Time and Life, and all things pass away;
How needlessly our selves we vex and pother,
Destroy, afflict, and persecute each other;
What cost, and pains, and time, we spend to build
That, which will in a little while be spoiled;
And, how, the quiet of our lives we trouble
About our structures of wood, straw and stubble;
Which, when our several Fiery Trials come,
Will into smoke and Ashes, quite consume;
It made me take into consideration
What I had Built, and upon what Foundation,
That, I my self, might therein be secure
Although my Works, the flame should not endure.
And, thereof, having an assurance got
The loss of all my Works disturb me not:
For, I, a thousand times more pleased am grown
With his on whom I Build, then with mine own.
My Soul then, (which in her complantings,
Flies like an Eagle mounted on her wings
Through ways, which to no other can appear)
To various Objects, scattered here and there,
Her Flights directing; at the last descri'd
That Flame, whereby the works of men are tried;
To which, mine Eye of Contemplation turning,
To see each single humane structure burning,
It was to me, a much more pleasing sight
Then Bon-fires on a Solemn Day at night
When young and old men round them in a Ring
Do sit and hear a Fiddler play and sing;
And, amongst all things, which to the Fire then yielded,
The Paper works which have been lately builded
Did make the greatest Blaze; and to mine eyes
Appeared to be the best Burnt-sacrifice
That had been off'red in this Age by men,
By, at the least, nine and a half in ten;
Because, they have a prime occasion been
Both of our present Plagues, and of much Sin:
And, grieved I was not, that, some of mine own
Must into that refining fire be thrown,
For, though that useful they might be some way,
Much of them, have (I fear) too much alay.
There are among our Papers-Edifices,
Some useful, sanctified, and harmless Pieces
Which may be helpful to preserve those Notions
Whereby, our Faith, our manners and Devotions
May be improved, and likewise to clear
The Lanthorn, which the saving Light does bear,
From those bedaubings, which the Foggs of Time,
And mists of Ignorance, have made so dim,
That, many things, it very dubious makes
And does occasion manifold mistakes:
But, they are buried so in heaps of trash,
So choakt, with intermixed Balderdash,
And, so suppressed by them who hate the Light,
(Or, persecute the Authors with despite)
That, they are but like here and there a spark,
Which lies at Bopeep, twinkling in the dark;
And, would be quite quenched, if not often revived.
By him, from whom, they were at first derived.
Yet (like the Fire which in a Wat'ry-Pit,
(Was hid) although such sparks be clouded, yet
They will break forth; and kindled by the blast
Of GOD's out-breathings, raise a flame at last,
That shall quite burn up, those huge Piles of vain
And Pestilent contrivements of the Brain.
For, they are, and have long time, been the Tinder
Of Pride and Lust, and Discord. They, do hinder
The Public Peace; The growth of Truth and Love
They do obstruct; All wickedness promove,
And all Profaneness; Ignorance they cherish,
Destructive Animosites they nourish:
Yea, have so filled the world with Books of lies,
Patcht up with forged probabilities,
That, it is impossible the Time succeeding
Should know the Truth of any thing by reading,
Without a more then common Intellect
Or, some Divine Assistance to direct.
For, they have put on most things, such disguises,
That, Virtues, hardly can* be known from Vices,
Or Truths from Heresies, or wit from folly,
Or things profane discerned from what is holy;
Nor cheating Sophistries, from soundest Reason,
Nor Right from wrong, nor Loyalty from Treason;
Nor Reprobates from Saints; nor Saints from Devils,
Nor saving Doctrines from destroying Evils,
Except some help which has vouchsafed been
From GOD, shall much improve the Light within.
This notwithstanding, pleased be to know,
(Although there is to them pronounced a Woe
By whom offenses come) it fitting were
That, if an Evil be, it should appear:
And, (since GOD does permit it for Probation
That good and evil in each Generation
Sholdu manifest it self) that by the Crimes
Of others, men Approved may know the Times,
We with a sanctified heart should heed them
And, to those ends improve them when we read them
For which they were permitted. Thus, from Acts
That evil are, the prudent man extracts
Good uses, as Physicians when it needs,
Extracteth Physic out of poisonous Weeds.
Thus far, my Muse before I was aware
Had rambled; But, I Will cast the Lure up, here.
These, and such thoughts as these, me waking kept
Whilst, many Dreamed of other things, and slept.
This, of the last nights Musings, portion was;
(Which, if you please, may for a Vision pass)
And, when the morning came, thus, into words
I put, as much as memory affords.
Newgate, the 27th. day of the 7. Month, 1661.
A Meditation, occasioned by the same Prisoners calling to mind, Jeremies
Prophecy to Ebed-melech, the Blackmore, Jerem. 39.15.
I Am obliged, as much as I am able,
To be to other men as comfortable
As they have been to me; and, though (as John
And Peter said long since) Gold I have none
Nor silver) what I have, I will repay,
And, that, perhaps, may useful be some way.
What was Ebed-melech, but, one of those
Who, Nationally, were esteemed Foes,
To GOD, and to his Church? which way, can we
By what is writ of him, advantaged be
More then by other Common Histories,
If, from what is mentioned in such Peophesies,
We may not with good warranty, apply
The same rewards of Faith and Charity,
(To every man in every Generation)
Which was recorded by the Jewish Nation,
Both to infuse and warrant, the same hope
Which was confirmed to this Aethiope?
But, doubtlesly we may; since, for our learning
For our direction, comfort and forewarning,
All those things, principally, were ordained
Which, in the holy Scriptures are contained.
This person, represents to us, our state
By nature, and as men regenerate.
The life of Jeremiah he preserved,
Who, else, within a Dungeon had been starved:
Him, forth out of a loathsome Pit he drew,
When, nor Prince, Peer, or Priest, nor any Jew
To him vouchsafed mercy: he, alone,
Did more then any Isra'lite had done,
Although a Gentile, and a Courtier too,
Who, seldom, works of Charity, will do.
And, this, was so accepted of the LORD,
That by the self same Prophet, he sent word
(Even whilst that he detained in Prison was
As I am now) that, when upon the place
Of his abode, the dreadful doom foretold
Inflicted was, he should the same behold;
And, that, to him, on their destruction day
His life, should be vouchsafed, for a prey.
This Signal Mercy to my mind was brought,
In this place, pertinently, (as I thought)
Why, from this Pattern therefore, may not I
Who, for declaring truth, imprisoned lie,
Show forth that mercy which I have received
And whereby, I am hitherto reprieved
From what to me, might probably have been
As bad, as that which Jeremy was in?
For, Age and Poverty, in such a place,
Might quickly have destroyed one in my case.
My Soul, for this Compassion, praise thou him
Who has vouchsafed it; and bless thou them
My gracious GOD, who were the Instruments
In that, which my destruction here prevents:
Although, they of a foreign Nation are not
They, Neighbors, Kinsmen, or Familiars were not
But all of them (except a very few)
Such, as until of late, I neither knew
In Person, or by name; some of them be
In judgment also, differing from me
In some points; which, infallibly does prove
Their Faith is true, and perfected by Love.
Their Charity. (This I dare boldly say)
GOD, will reward, upon their Trial day;
And, in those future dreadful Visitations
Which, likely are, to come upon these Nations
Preserve their lives, to see them, who oppress,
Receive their portions with the merciless.
As sure, as I yet live, it will be thus;
Or, they, at least, when Christ calls them, with us,
Before his Judgement-throne; repaid will be
What they have here vouchsafed unto me;
For, mercy, though extended to a Beast
(Much more to man) with some reward is blessed,
And, though I were a more unworthy wretch
Then was by Nature, that Ebed-melech,
Yet, forasmuch, as me they have received
As one of Christ's Disciples, and relieved,
(What er'e I am) he, Charity regards,
And, they, accordingly shall have rewards.
Newgate, Sept. 26. 1661.
An Antidote against Fear, composed upon the Citizens being unexpectedly in
Arms, Sept. 28. 1661. at night.
GOD, keep all safe abroad; I Am in my Bed,
And, see no danger yet, or cause of dread.
Emanuel my Protector is become,
He, keeps all Pannick-fears out of this Room,
And, though the Devil and my Foes together
Confederated, they can bring none hither.
Here Is naught, that any way does me disease,
Unless, it be a few poor starveling Fleas,
Which, I perceive are more afraid of me,
Then cause I have of them afraid to be:
For, if I do but shrugg, where it does itch,
They skip into a hole, and there they couch.
No Thief, I think, to rob me dares appear,
Within these Walls, the Gallows are so near;
And, likewise, I believe, it is known full well,
I Have naught to lose, nor ought for them to steal.
I no Back-biters had, since to this house
I my Commitment had, except, one Louse
Which now is dead, (not having left behind
A son or daughter, that I yet can find)
And, though I were assaulted with a score
(As here, some are oft-times with many more)
I am assured, my Landress has a gift
To rid them; and it is a cleanly shift.
I do suspect, that, thus it does not fare
With all men, who rejoice that I am here;
But, that, although they speak big words and grin,
They have more fears without them, or within;
And, that, some thousands who yet walk the street
With more, and with worse misadventures meet:
For, Terrors are abroad, and every where
It does in Language, or in looks appear.
I, just now, hear a sound like to Alarms;
Drums beating, and the ^lattering of Arms;
I (as they pass along, hear Soldiers voices,
Words of Command, and Military Noises,
Which, by the time, and darkness of the night,
Does many of the Neighborhood affright,
And makes me think (although I cannot tell
What is amiss) that, all things go not well.
What should the matter be? I hope, the men
Whom we saw dead, are not alive again;
For, though I live yet, (and live longer may)
I did expect to rise, as soon as they.
Most hoped, they, er'e now should have been free,
From that, wherewith disturbed they still be;
But, many see, here is daily an increase
Of what, may more infringe the Common-peace.
The Citizens, I hear, strict watch do keep
This night, in Arms: I hope, were they asleep
We should be safe; and that, this will hereafter
Yield much less cause of sorrow, then of laughter:
For, all our Factions are now of each other
So fearful, that they will hardly come together,
Unless affrighted in the dark they are,
And fall foul on each other, unaware.
Men might (if there withal they could be pleased)
Of pains and cost and troubles, be much eased,
(With much more safety, and more, honor too)
Yet, make no night Alarms as now they do.
He, that is a pious, and an honest liver,
Needs not the Mores Bow, nor the Parthians Quiver,
Nor, to be singly, much less double guarded:
For, Innocence is by it self, well warded;
And, when she is most maliciously surrounded,
Then, soonest, her Oppressors are confounded.
Of all the Foes, that are, or ever were,
There Is none so bad, or ^^ngerous as Fear:
For, it not only many a man distresses,
When Plenty, Power, and Honor, he possesses,
(And all the pleasures of his life destroys,
Whilst every thing he seemingly enjoyes)
But, makes Plagues also, which will never come
To be a greater torment unto some,
Then they are, or, then they can be, if all
Whereof they are afraid, should them befall.
Moreover, it is such a foe as none
Can easily escape when seized upon.
Nor Power nor Policy, nor Walls of Brass
To keep it out, can strengthen any place;
Nor Flesh and Blood, by Sratagem, or Ginn
Expel it can, when it has broken in.
Were all the Wealth and Weapons in the Land,
And all the People, at one Man's Command,
They could not fortify his heart from fears;
For, Terrors will creep in even at the ears,
And passage make through every other Sense,
In spite of all resistance and defense.
That Fear is such a Terror, I well know
For I have felt it, though I do not now,
Save, as a natural passion, which, if well
We moderate, is, what a Sentinel
Is to an Army; and by Flesh and Blood,
Though, possibly, it cannot be withstood,
(Especially, when by a wilful Sin,
Against Good Conscience acted, it breaks in
And grows enraged) yet, by Grace we may
Subdue it; And, this, is the only way.
Take Fear and Love, well tempered together,
(As much, as may sufficient be of either)
Fire quenches Fire; The oil of Scorpions, heals,
The Scorpions sting; and, if, of all things else
You would be fearless, you must fear GOD, so
As man ought; Do, as to be done unto
You would expect, and to that Fear, add Love;
For, Love expels every other Fear
(If placed on right Objects, and sincere)
Plucks up all Vices, and plants in their places
Habitual Virtues, and Celestial Graces.
The Love of GOD, with Filial Fear begins,
And with a detestation of all sins.
The knowledge of our Natural Estate,
In us, Desires to cure it will Create.
The Love of GOD in Christ, then, being known,
(And, what, when we incurable were grown
He has done for us) will more Love beget
If we no false suggestions do admit;
That Love, will also, daily stronger grow
If we GOD's nature truly learn to know.
And, not as Eve did, him suspect of Evil;
Ascribe to him, what is proper to the Devil;
Suspect the Promises which he does give us;
Nor think that he intends to deceive us.
For, if we love him, we will then believe him,
In all his Attributes due Glory give him.
We then will do, and not disputing stand,
Of that which he forbids, or does command.
Nor fear, nor stagger, from that Resolution
(Who ever countermands their execution)
But, love him so, as having understood
That all his Works, and his Commands are good:
So love him, that, we love his whole Creation,
Naught hating, but what is his abomination.
We will not then permit Humane Tradition
With his known will, to stand in competition;
Lay bonds on them, whom he from Bondage frees;
Charge him, with Ordinances and Decrees
Which he did never make; but forged were
By him, who, lays for every Soul a snare;
Or, by his Instruments, whose Merchandises
And Pomp, are much advanced by those devises:
We will not, when he graciously invites,
To penitence, reject him with despights,
And, foes implacable, to them appear
Who zealous of their Weal and Safety are.
These are the Well-springs of those many errors
Distractions, miseries, and Pannick Terrors
Which are among us. That, which chiefly here
Begets troubles and augmenteth fear,
Is, want of such a Fear, and such a Love,
As may become effectual to improve*
Those Judgments and these Mercies, which our eyes
Have seen; and whereby, (though we see GOD tryes
These Nations to this day) nor Prince, nor Peer
Nor Priest nor People, does as yet appear
So mindful as they ought to be of that
Which, was, for, or against them, done of late:
Nor see I any Fruit which thence proceeds,
Save Thorns and Brambles, Thistles, tares or weeds.
But, they who stop their Ears and shut their Eyes,
Against those Wonders and those Prodigies,
Which have been lately sent to startle them
From that security, wherein they Dream;
And they who are not much displeased alone
With Publication of what God has done,
But, also with his Word; shall see and hear,
Those things, ere long, with trembling and with fear,
Which will not be concealed; but, befall
So openly, as to be known to all.
These, have the causes been, that Christendom
Is lately, an Acheldama become;
For, these are those things, which advance the works
Of Antichrist, and make way for the Turks.
Let us repent therefore, whilst we have space,
Lest Fields of Blood, be turned to Golgotha's.
Let us, in this our Visitation day
Give ear unto GOD's Voice, whilst yet we may;
Not like Bruit Beasts pursuing one another,
But, lincking fast in Charity together,
Be reconciled to GOD, with Loving-awe:
For, that sums up the Gospel, and the Law.
Do this, and if of ought your fearful be,
Let all, that you can fear, fall upon me.
A short Excuse, rendering some Reasons why this Prisoner makes no Adresses for
his Release, to great Persons for their Favor in his Cause.
I Am informed, by men of good report,
That, there are Noble Pers'nages in Court
Who hate Injustice, and, are of their Tribe,
Who love not baseness, flattery, or a Bribe;
And, that, should I my self to these Adresse,
I might perhaps obtain a quick release.
It Is possible; But, I may much endanger
Their Quiet; and, am now grown such a stranger
To Courtship, that I cannot Complement,
Or, act effectually, to that intent;
Nor think it prudence (were I moved that way)
To seek a Needle, in a Trusse of Hay.
It Is not my Principle (though other while
I have been overruled, to beguile
My understanding) that course to endeavor;
And, having found it unsucesful ever
Resolve now (be it for my gain or loss)
To signify my Cause, to them in gross,
In open Courts, to whom it does belong,
To be my Judges of what is right or wrong:
For, if impartially, they will not hear
My cause at large, and do me Justice there,
I will not be obliged to any one
To do for private ends, what should be done,
For Justice-sake; because, where one man shall
Be so corrupt, it may corrupt them all;
And in each Case, by turns, for unjust ends,
They may Bribe one another for their Friends,
As heretofore they did, and, as they may
Hereafter, whatsoever I do or say.
Not much esteem of any thing I make,
Which other men, can either give or take.
Nor Safety, Wealth, or Honor pleases me
But that which will inseparable be
From me; and which I may attain unto,
And, also keep, whether men will or no.
Virtue's the Fountain whence true honor springs;
Not Popes, Grand Segniors, Emperors or Kings,
For, what they give to make men Honorable,
To me appears to be so dispicable
That, though most men, do their chief darling, make it
If they would give it me, I would not take it:
What, is there likely for me to be done,
By those, who suchlike Baubles dote upon?
I, never hitherto, a kindness had
By any Friend, which I my self have made;
But, by such only, as God had inclined
(Without a by-respect in any kind)
To do me Justice, or to show compassion,
Moved by their own Heroic inclination:
And, to that end, GOD, often heretofore,
Has from among mere strangers, raised me more
True Friends at need, my cause to undertake,
Then I deserved, or had power to make;
And, as it me contented much the better
So, thereby, was their honor made the greater*
Most seek the Judge; but, I believe his word,
Who said, The Judgment comes from the LORD;
And, unto me, it seems an indirect
Aspersion, or a Symptom of suspect,
A Judge, in private to preoccupate,
And, him by Friends, or Gifts to captivate;
For, in great Counsels, men should nothing do
In love to Friends, or hatred to a Foe.
I have observed, that, Judicial Courts
Whether they be of good or bad reports,
(Or, whether, what is actually there done,
Seem just, or to the wrong of any one)
Are guided by a Spirit, which directs
To what is always Righteous, in respects
Unto GOD's Justice, though perhaps it may
A Humane Righteousness infringe some way;
Or, though they, to whom Judgment is referred,
Through Ignorance, or Wickedness, have erred.
I Will therefore, make no Friend, nor fear a Foe,
But, when the COMMONS call me I will go
To hear their Charge, for which I have begun
To suffer, er'e it is known what I have done;
That, least I break or die before the time
In which I must make payment for my crime,
(If crime it prove) they, rather, overweight
May lay; then, that, which is a Dram too light;
For, punishments are usually well paid,
Though other debts till Dooms Day are delayed:
And, Innocence, is often pursued further
Upon suspect, then real Theft or Murder.
In that, for which unheard, some precondemn
My Person hither; I, TO GOD and them
Whom it may most concern, Appeals have made
Whereon, I ought a Trial to have had
Before I suff'red. My Appeal preferred
To GOD, has betwixt him, and me, been heard
Within his Court of Conscience in my heart;
And, there am quit of what may on his part
Be brought against me for what I have writ.
He sees it, though the world concealeth it;
And, read it must be by the Commons too,
Even quite throughout (if Justice they will do)
Before they censure it; Needless it were,
If just and conscientious men they are,
To Court them to their Duties; and so strong
No Charm of mine can be, whereby a wrong
May be prevented, if to take that ill
They be resolved, which flowed from Good Will.
At all adventure, wholly to the Laws,
And to their Conscience, I Will refer my Cause;
Allege for my defense, what I can say,
And bear that, which will follow, as I may.
A Composure, for his private Refreshment made by the same Prisoner, upon
considering the said outward Condition of his Dearest Relations in the Flesh:
after which is added the Narrative of a sudden distemper thereupon ensuing.
MY Contemplation every hour so travells,
In new pursuits, and into all things Ravells
With so much restlesness, as if she meant
The whole world in a Mapp to represent.
One while she makes inrodes on my Foes,
To bring me some Intelligence from those;
That, I consid'ring what they go about
Their malice, may the better weather-out.
Another while, to me she represents,
What mischiefs, troubles, fear and discontents
There are abroad; that, I may thereby see
How, they are troubled, who have troubled me;
How 'twixt the two shoars, Pharohs Army reels;
How, GOD has taken off their Charret Wheels
How, he obdures the Insolent and proud;
How dreadfully, he looks out of the Cloud
Which he has placed, betwixt them and those,
Whom they pursue to their own overthrowes.
Sometime, she brings to my consideration
GOD's Love, and inexpressible compassion,
Who, in an extraordinary wise,
Not only has vouchsafed me supplies
By those who to my Person strangers are,
But also, with such love and tender care
Of my safe-being, that I may of them
(As Christ did, when his kindred asked for him)
Say, These my kindred are; These, are my Mothers;
These, are my real Sisters and my Brothers.
My Dear'st Relations in the Flesh, among
Those Friends, this day, appeared in the throng
To be considered; and, I must confess
My Bowels yern'd, to think on their distress,
And, moved with pity, it compelled my Muse,
To clothe in words, that, which now next ensues.
I.
All sufferings, that have tended
To my probation, here,
Cannot be comprehended
In what my words declare;
For, though to help expression
I have a knowing-sense,
The sum of my Condition
Cannot be gathered in thence.
II.
In Pleasures, and in Sorrows,
I have had no small share;
Sad Nights, and joyful Morrowes,
My Portion often were;
That, which with Joy affects me,
Is far above the Sky,
And, that, which yet afflicts me
As deep as Hell does lie.
III.
My near'st, and dear'st Relations,
Unmention'd though they be,
Among my Meditations,
Are not forgot by me.
For, though I would not mind them,
My heart, them so retains,
That, there, I still shall find them,
As long as life remains.
IV.
Lest that might have miscarried
Which, to neglect I feared,
Like one, quite dead and buried,
I have to them appeared:
And by my late employments,
Despairful they are made,
Of me, and those enjoyments
Which else, they might have had.
V.
Reciprocal Indearments,
Are by my troubles crossed;
The means of their Preferments
With my Estate are lost.
These times, have quite bereft them
Of that which gave content,
And, in their power naught left them,
New mischiefs to prevent.
VI.
My Blossoms are quite withered,
My Leaves are much decayed;
My Fruits, by those are gathered
Who nothing for them paid;
I, from whom (when they need them)
They should supplies have had,
Have neither Fruits to feed them,
Nor boughs to give them shade.
VII.
We could, when we were troubled,
Each others hearts have eased;
Converse, our pleasures doubled,
When we with ought were pleased;
Such Comforts, now to give them,
Companion they have none,
But, they (what ere does grieve them)
Must sit, and grieve alone.
VIII.
In Mercy, LORD, look on them,
And pity their Estate;
The wrongs that I have done them,
Proceeded not from hate;
I did, what I conceived
Does to thy work belong,
But, that is thereby bereaved,
Which is to them a wrong.
IX.
Thereof, be therefore heedful,
Them, favor not the less,
Supply with all things needful,
In this their great distress;
And, when thou me shall gather
Out of this Land of life,
Be thou my Childrens Father,
A Husband to my Wife.
X.
When I with them must never
Speak more, by Tongue or Pen,
And, they be barred for ever,
To see my face again.
Thy Loving kindness show them,
Lost comforts to receive,
Instead of what I owe them,
And pay not whilst I live.
XI.
Let all my former failings,
Through frailties, in time past,
And, what may cause bewailings,
Quite out of thought be cast;
And, only recordation
Of those things be expressed,
Whereby their consolation
May daily be increast.
XII.
Preserve them from each Folly,
Which ripening into Sin,
Makes Root and Branch unholy,
And brings destruction in.
Let not this World bewitch them,
With her besotting Wine,
But, let thy Grace enrich them,
With Faith, and Love Divine.
XIII.
And, whilst we live together
Let us, upon thee call;
Help to prepare each other,
For what, may yet befall;
So just, so faithful hearted,
So constant let us be,
That, when we here are parted
We may all meet in thee.
This being writ, and once or twice sung over,
My Reason, did sufficient strength recover
Those Passions to repel, which did begin
Upon my heart at that time to break in:
But, ere they were alay'd, an Accident
Fell out, which that good issue did prevent;
I have so much of common Manliness,
(Which might more profit me if it were less)
That, all the frailties of the Humane Creature
(Co-incident since my depraved Nature)
Still so attend me, that do what I can
I fall into distemper, now and then;
And ere that day was wholly overpast,
I, by a sudden accident was cast
Into a Passion, which did give occasion
Of this ensuing sad Ejaculation.
LORD, help me now; assist me now, to bear
That, unexpected brunt of Hope and Fear,
To which I on a sudden am exposed,
(Whilst other mischiefs have me round enclosed)
For, great and many, though my troubles be
They, hitherto have not distempered me.
But, now I feel my Constancy to shake,
My Flesh to tremble, my sad heart so ache,
That, if thou do not speedily apply
A Cordial, I may droop, and faint, and die.
My Treacherous Flesh and Blood, how false are you!
To me, and to your own selves, how untrue!
How quickly to revolt do you begin!
How cowardly have you my Foe let in
At his first summons? how have you conspired
To give him that advantage he desired?
And whilst I for your safety did prepare
Join to surprise me ere I was aware?
LORD, let them not prevail; but, help me rally
My scattered Forces, and to make a sally
On those who my weak Citadel beset:
For they have seized but on my Outworks yet,
And, if but over me, thou please to hover,
(Though at a distance) I shall soon recover.
Therefore, at this Assault, for me appear;
From me, this Black Cloud, by thy presence, clear;
Renew my courage in this day of trouble;
Increase my Faith, my former Hope redouble;
And let thy Spirit teach me so to pray,
That what I shall request, obtain I may.
Be likewise pleased the chatterings of the Swallow,
And mournings of the Turtle, so to hallow;
That those things which are now expressed by me,
May be both acceptable unto thee,
And unto those who hear them not in vain,
Though to my private sufferings they pertain:
For peradventure, that which me oretakes
Has partly been permitted for their sakes;
That they, by heeding what on them at length
May fall, might by my weakness gather strength;
For, what is in it self a single Trouble,
By circumstances, may be sometimes double.
My best Friends peradventure, now will wonder
How, I am thus, as with a clap of thunder,
Struck suddenly; and my Foes, with a scoff
Will Jeer, to see me so soon taken off
From my late courage and high Resolution,
(Whilst I was putting it in Execution,)
When they shall know, that, but concerns my Wife,
Which breaks through all the comforts of my life,
And thus disorders me: But, when they hear me
Even some of them, who at the first will Jeer me,
(If they have any Manhood left in them)
Shall me of no such levity condemn,
As yet they may, when all the circumstances
I have declared to cure their ignorances:
For, one of GOD's choice Prophets, had a Trial
Not much unlike this, of his self-denial,
When he (as I do) in his Generation,
Bore witness of their great abomination:
Which (if ought more) had little more effect,
Then I may, at this present day, expect.
He (whilst GOD's work he followed) to the heart,
Was pierced (through his Wife) with sorrows dart.
She (as the holy Scripture testifies)
Was unto him, as precious as his eyes,
The comfort of his life, and far more dear
(As I believe) then all things transcient were.
And peradventure he had grieved more
Then yet I do, had not the day before
GOD, both foretold her death, and charged him too,
Not to bewail the Wife he loved so.
What, this to me does intimate, I shall
Forbear to tell now; but, if that befall
Which I may fear, it will have an effect,
Whose demonstration, I shall not neglect
If so long I survive, as to declare
That Sequel, for which, it will way prepare.
Mean while (since hope has taken race with sorrow)
For some few days, that little time I Will borrow,
To make it known, how, by a Pannick dread
I am at present, so distempered;
And in such sober Language will declare it,
Without Hyperboles, that, if men hear it
With like sobriety, it will perchance
Their edifying in some kind advance.
When, I had finished those Meditations
Last mentioned (which concern my dear'st Relations
As to the world) A messenger of sorrow
That very day, (I, looking for, next morrow
My Wives arrival) brought, not news alone
That sudden sickness, her had seized upon;
But, that, she likewise in a Fever lies,
With which are complicated Maladies
Portending death: and Death desired so
That, they about her, can with much ado
Preserve her life. This news, as soon as told,
Laid instantly, upon me such fast hold,
That, er'e I could into my heart retire
I seemed to be wholly set on fire:
And (being for surprizal, the more fit
By what, that day, for better use was writ)
Instead of that, which might have quenched the same
I snatched up oil, and threw't into the flame.
So frail I am not (though made of such Mettle
That I am sometime soft and sometime Britle)
As to be shaken merely with a fear
Of things which every day expected are;
But, many sad concomitants attended
This Message, not till then so apprehended;
For, at that instant every thing pressed in
Which might a doleful Tragedy begin,
With such confusion, that, what entered first
I knew not, neither which disturbed me worst.
So that, I naught could call to mind, but that
Which my Afflictions, did more aggravate.
Imprisonment, I felt not till that day,
Wherein I found, that I was kept away,
Where, I to her could no assistance give,
For, whose sake, I did most desire to live;
My Fancy represented to my sight
In how disconsolate and sad a plight,
She there was left, dispoil'd of all she had,
Excepting, what might make her heart more sad*
With foes surrounded, not one to befriend her,
Not servants in that weakness to attend her,
No good Physician living there about,
Scarce any thing within doors, or without,
For food or Physic: for, while she had health
Her courage did supply her want of Wealth,
And all things else, with help, of what from Heaven
Was by his providence in all wants given,
Who has been my support; By him alone
She has in many straits been carried on,
And all oppressions with such courage bore
As if she had been rich by being poor:
Which her despightful neighbors heeding well
(And, that she fared like trodden Camomel)
Words unto this effect, were heard to speak
Will not, with all this loss, her stout heart break?
GOD, was, and still, her helper he will be;
But, for all this, what thanks is due to me?
What help am I who should a help have been,
When such extreme Affliction she was in?
Dear BETTY, how inhumanly oppressed?
Art thou? and oh! how is my Soul distressed
Now, I here think upon thy high desert,
And, how discomfortably left thou art!
If it might comfort thee, would thou, did know
(Else not) what tears out of mine eyes do flow:
For, I, from whom the worlds despights can strain
Nor sighs, nor tears, from tears cannot restrain.
Woe's me (my Dear) my life I would resign
Might it accepted be, to ransom thine,
And were at my dispose; for, cause am I
Of that sad plight, wherein thou now do lie;
Since, what the world has done, is nothing more,
Then thou have always looked for heretofore.
Yet, take it not unkindly; for, to thee
No ill was meant, in what was done by me:
He, (as I thought) to whom my self I owe,
(And, who did thee, and all I had bestow)
Required the services that brought upon me
That, which to thy undoing, has undone me;
And he will either back again restore
What Is lost, or give us better things, and more
This, knowing thou believ'st, and do confide
In him, has much my Passion qualified;
And makes me hopeful, GOD, will bring thee hither,
Or, me to thee, that, we once more together
May praise his Name, and live till we can part,
Without the least distemp'rature of heart.
Whilst this hope lasts, lest notice being taken
That, I with one small puff of wind am shaken;
Lest also, this begets a fear in some,
That I may totally be overcome,
When the^ perceive, that he, who has professed
So much, has with so little been oppressed;
And, lest they also may discouraged be,
(If I sinck under that which lies on me)
I will, for that cause, hence occasion take,
(As Well, for their, as for mine, and her sake)
So plainly, what befalls me to express,
That, no heart which has any tenderness,
Beseeming men, shall think a greater Trial
Of humane patience, in a self-denial
Can ever in the Flesh be undergone,
Then this* which they suppose a slender one,
I have a just occasion too, by that
To render her, that honor in the Gate,
Which is her due; and whereto I do stand
Obliged by King Lemuels Command;
And, from what I express, perhaps, likewise,
There may some other good effects arise.
What could the malice of the Devil invent,
To make more grievous my Imprisonment
Then at this time, wherein (for ought I know)
The last, and needful'st duty that I owe
Unto my dearest Friend, ought to be paid,
To be unjustly in a Prison staid?
Were I detained but from such a one,
As many have, ( a Wife in name alone)
I should be glad perhaps, I now am here,
Or, though within a far worse place it were:
But, if I may with modesty express,
What I believe, I can affirm no less
Then this; Though many women have done well,
Mine, with the best may be a parallel:
And, since my power to nothing else extends
Which may, for what she suffers make amends,
In words, at least, I Will give her what is due
And say no more, then I believe is true.
Perhaps, when told, it will so far exceed
What is according to the common Creed,
That, many will suspect it; But, know this
There is in that man very much amiss
Who, of his consort, does not so believe
In some degree, as I of mine conceive.
For, if he finds her not a helpful Wife,
Either, for this, or for the other Life;
The fault's his own, though she may faulty prove;
And he ingratefully requites GOD's Love.
GOD gave her not, but, he himself acquired her,
By some ill means; or, for those ends desired her
Which make no Marriages, but what are evil,
And, were made by the World, Flesh and the Devil.
Else, he would honor Providence Divine,
By praising of his Wife as I do mine.
Or, by confessing freely, as he ought,
That, GOD is just, in giving what he sought.
Whether mine live or die, let none who hear them
Grudge her these praises, for her worth will bear them.
At first, I loved her, for his sake that gave her;
Of him, I sought her, and from him I have her,
If she be yet alive, (which I yet hope,
And, that he to my fear will put a stop.)
That, we each other might affect the better,
(And, to be mutual helpers prove the fitter)
As EVE from ADAM, GOD did, as it were,
First, make her out of me; then, me by her
He made more perfect; And since Eve was made
No man on earth a fitter helper had.
If any woman may Charactred be
By Lemuels pattern, I think this is she:
For, having oftentimes compared them,
Betwixt them, little difference did seem.
She is a Prize, worth every precious stone
In India, were all their worths in One.
My heart in her has trusted so, that yet
I never, since I knew her, felt a fit
Of Jealousy or doubt, in any kind,
Which brought the least distemper to my mind.
She, at all times, much good to me has done,
But, evil, in her life time, did me none.
With courage, her Affairs she went about
By Day; at Night, her Candle went not out.
She was among the last, who came to bed;
The first, who in the Morning raised her head;
And, that no duty might be left undone,
Martha, and Mary, she still joined in One.
In all Domestic Business, she was skilled,
Both in the house, and likewise in the Field:
And whilst my time was otherwise bestown,
Dispatched both my affairs, and her own.
She was no Prodigal, nor basely sparing;
All things were done without vexatious caring;
She chid those, who (when chiding was in season)
Were to be quickened more with noise, then Reason;
And, when to angry words they did provoke,
Her anger ended, when the words were spoke;
When, also, they were grieved, who did misdo,
She pardoned, and with them, often, grieved too.
All her Affairs, she managing with Reason,
Appointed work and meat, in their due Season
To every servant; and good notice took
Both of what was well, or Ill done, or spoke.
She feared GOD, and honor gave to them
Who were invested with a Power Supreme;
Her life, she squared by GOD's holy Word,
According to the Light he did afford;
And, had her self so exercised therein,
That, often she my Concordance has been;
Yea, and in Humane Histories, to me
Been in the stead of my MNEMOSYNE.
A better Woman, Mistress, Mother, Wife,
I never saw, nor shall see during life.
Rebecca like, she gave me still to eat
As Well most savory, as wholesome meat;
And, when GOD sent me food, good care she took,
The Devil should not send me in a Cook.
To me, to mine, and our poor neighborhood,
She, in the stead of our Physician stood;
She, still according to her power was ready
To give what things were needful to the needy;
Who did not wilful Beggarship profess,
That, they might live in sorded Idlenese;
And, purchasing her own food with her sweat,
Abhorred the bread of Idleness to eat:
She could speak well, yet readier was to hear;
Exceeding Pleasant, and yet as severe
As Cato. Though Corporeal Beauties be
Worn out with Age, she is the same to me
She was at first, and it was no mean perfection,
Which, in my Youth, surprised my Affection.
This is her Character, and in the word
Of Truth, this is thereof, a true record.
In her, I did as much contentment find,
As if I had enjoyed all Womankind:
For, though a poor man's Consort she has been,
She had a spirit might become a Queen;
Yet, knowing how to want and to abound,
Could make it stoop even to the very ground;
And, if she die, I shall but little care
For any thing she leaves behind her here,
Except her Children, and that which relates
To GOD, and to our Spiritual Estates.
The deprivation of her company
And, of thar joy in her society
Which I have had, is far a greater loss,
Then, all those many Baubles and that dross,
Whereof the world deprives me; or, of them
(Had they heen mine) which others most esteem.
This separation is the great'st despite
That malice could have done me at her height;
And might we live, where we might live alone
To talk of that, which GOD for us has done,
(And means to do) my Joy would be much more
With competence, then with the worlds whole store,
Were I deprived of her; who, might be here
So necessary a Remembrancer.
Now, Judge (if you or I, do this believe)
Whether I had not cause enough to grieve,
That we were so, divided from each other,
Left hopeless, we again should meet together.
Though such in every point, she may not be,
Yet, since that she does such appear to me;
Think, if by fear of loosing such a Prize,
A man who is far stronger, and more wise,
Might not, when thereby suddenly oretaken
As much with like distemp'ratures be shaken:
And, whether (taking to consideration
The sense I have of every Humane Passion)
Ought may befall, as I am Flesh and Blood,
That could more difficultly be withstood.
But, notwithstanding what is expressed, let no man
Suppose I have forgot she is a Woman.
I am not so Uxorious, or unwise,
To think that she has no Infirmities;
Or, that to any other she does seem
So worthy as she is in my esteem.
The rough hard shells in which rich Pearls do lie,
Show not their Beauty to a strangers eye.
And Virtues, when that they most perfect are,
Sometimes, like faulty Actions may appear
To lookers on, who have not means to know
How done, nor to what end, nor whence they flow;
And then especially, when their Spectators,
Are Envious, or their Foes, or Virtue's haters.
The mildest Medicine, sore eyes, diseases,
A sickly Stomach wholsom'st meat, displeases;
And so the best and noblest Dispositions,
Are most disliked by men of base Conditions;
Because their Virtues, if they neighbors are,
Do make their Vices greater to appear.
Her precions Balms, have sometimes made me smart,
But, I confess, the cause was on my part,
If she administered a bitter pill
In love, to make me well, when I was Ill.
And well she might sometimes occasion find,
To give me wholesome Physic of that kind,
By cautions and remembrances applied
In season, when my wit was foolifi'd:
For, nothing purposely, from her I hid
That, in my life, I said, or thought, or did.
And (that she might, at full, be privy to
My whole Affairs, and all I had to do)
No Letter unto me in absence came,
But leave I gave her to break open the same.
Which freedom (with such) mutually bestown
Made me to her, and her to me so known,
That, what the outside of my Actions be,
My Conscience hardly better knows then she.
Small use of an Affection can be there,
Or proofs of Friendship, where no failings are.
There Is hardly possibility of living,
With any one, who never needs forgiving;
For, he, who in his Consort finds no blame,
When he fails, will confounded be with shame.
By these Expressions, which have shown in part,
My Passions, I have somewhat eased my heart.
And, though impertinent, they seem to be
To others, they are pertinent to me,
In showing me my weakness, and from whom
My helps, in all extremities must come.
My Passion is the same; but, this, makes way
For Reason, to command, which did obey;
And, this Divertisment a stop, brings in
To that, which else, might have destructive been.
Yet, Instrumental, though my Reason was
Herein, the Efficient is Preventing Grace:
And therefore, Him, from whom this Mercy came,
I, thus Petition to complete the same.
My God! my heart, thou have now touched nearly,
And do in that, which I affect most dearly,
Begin to try my Faith; That Faith of mine
Which (if a true Faith) was a gift of thine;
It was by thee, upon my Soul begot:
Into Temptation, therefore lead me not
Beyond my strength; But LORD deliver me
From Evil, that, I may not foiled be:
Thy only Son, to thee, taught me to pray
In words to this effect, when any way
I was oppressed; Compassion therefore take
On me, (though not for mine) LORD, for his sake;
And me dismiss not, in this sad Condition,
Without a kind reply to my Petition:
For, as Lot said of Zoar, LORD, the boon
I new request is but a little one;
And, peradventure, should my foes perceive
Thou do of every comfort him bereave
Who has desired to magnify thy Name,
It might occasion give them to blaspheme,
Or, make thy servants to begin to Fear
That, thou regard'st not how oppressed they are.
That Helper, which thou did on me bestow,
(And, Whose assistance is much needed now)
Thou seem to call upon me to resign,
As one, who must no longer now be mine.
Be not displeased LORD, if I shall say
Thou take the comfort of my life away;
And that, I do expect thou should not leave me
Quite comfortless, if thou of her bereave me.
Why do thou Dictate to my heart this Prayer,
If thou intend'st, to leave me in despair?
It cannot be, thou move me should to crave,
That, which thou do not purpose I should have.
I do depend on thee, and hazarded
Both her, and all that in this world I had
For thy Cause, if my heart be not untrue:
Though therefore, nothing is by merit due,
Vouchsafe, (if with thy will accord it may)
Her life with health, and for a longer day,
That, we with thankfulness, in praises giving,
May show thy Mercies forth, among the living.
With Tokens of thy favor, make us glad,
According to the Troubles we have had.
And, make thy other servants hopeful be
Of that Salvation, which thou show to me.
Make it appear unto this Generation
That, we have the same GOD, the same Salvation
In these our days, that was in former times,
As Well, as such like Tyrrannies and Crimes.
Make it appear that thou have love for us
As Well as heretofore for Lazarus;
That, thou, who did hear Hagar for a Son,
And, Hannah's Prayer, when she begged for one,
Do not despise my Prayer for the life
Of my beloved and Afflicted Wife;
Or, have less pity now then heretofore
Thou had of other some, who did deplore
Their dead or dying Friends; and when they mourned,
Had them into their bosoms back returned.
Let it be known to those who do begin
To think, thou art not that which thou have been,
Because that this Age has produced occasions
To show thy self in other dispensations.
Though to run back to Egypt, we are ready;
As froward, as Rebellious, and as giddy.
As they whom thou broughtst thence; though, every way
As false, as faithless, and as apt as they
To set up golden Calves: Though, as were then
There be among us here, such wicked men
As Jannes, and as Jambres, who resist
Not Moses, but a greater, JESUS CHRIST;
And, strive by their Enchantments how to bring
Us back to bondage, and seduce the King
By cursed sorceries; yet, make it known;
That, thou in Britain do a People own:
That as when Israel was from Pharoh saved;
That, as thou were with Moses and with David,
And with thy People who in thraldom were
At Babel, thou art present with us here.
(LORD! I beseech thee mind thou not the less
My private suit, although my zeal to this
Diverts me from it: for, I Will further yet
Pursue that, though thou me should quite forget)
Apparent make it, that, some yet inherit
A Portion of the self same powerful Spirit
Which filled Elias; and if need require,
That thou have Prophets, who can call down Fire,
Hail, Thunderbolts, and other dreadful things
Upon the Troops and Armies of those Kings
Who Persecute thy Saints; and Heaven constrain
Either to let fall, or withhold the Rain,
As to thy service it shall appertain!
For, this, though, hardly yet believed of any,
Will shortly be made manifest to many;
And thy vouchsafeing this request of mine,
May make it, to this Age, perhaps, a sign
That, thou, as heretofore, do lend an ear
At need, to every private sufferer,
As well as unto Public Grievances,
And, that, when ripened are Iniquities
A greater Conquest will be got by Words,
Then ever was in any Age, by Swords.
My Dear Redeemer, if it may be thus,
Be pleased to Mediate this boon for us.
That suit, for which this Prayer was begun
I will renew, now this digressions done;
Yet, neither this, nor ought else I Will require,
(Though rather then my life, I this desire)
But, what, with thy Good pleasure may consist:
And, thou have nothing openly expressed
To make me doubtful that may not be done;
For, then, I therein thus far, had not gone.
All, things thou seem to will, accord not to
That, which thou have decreed for us to do,
As being absolutely necessary:
For, some of them are but Probationary:
Things, by us, rather to be willed, then done,
As when, to Sacrifice his Only Son
Thou did command thy servant Abraham;
And, when that our obedience is the same,
With us, it otherwhile, does so succeed
That, thou the Will, acceptest for the Deed;
And, may another Sacrifice, this day
Accept in her stead, for whom I now Pray.
This, moves Dust and Ashes, now, to do,
What Natural Affection prompts me to:
Make her and me, so perfectly resign
Our selves, that our will, may be one with thine;
And, Pardon this bold pleading; for, had we
No will, which may be said our own to be,
There could be no obedience. Good nor Ill,
Can be, in him, that is not free to will.
LORD! this my Consort, is as dear to me
As Isaac unto Abraham could be;
Yet, if thou will resume her at this time,
(Although with me thou deal not as with him)
As absolutely, as he did intend
His Sacrifice; I, her to thee commend.
From thee I had her; up to thee I give her;
I, wholly unto thy disposure leave her;
And, whether thou shall keep, or give her back,
I Will wear it as a Favor, for thy sake.
And, this, is all I Will absolutely crave,
(Wherein, I know, I may request shall have)
If, with thine honor, it may to her good
Conduce, to let her make with me abode
A little longer time, that time allow;
Or else with all my heart, resume her now.
For, save to serve thee, and our Generation,
According to the end of our Creation,
(And for thy Glory) neither she, nor I
(If I do know her) wish to live or die.
If, her appointed labor now be done,
(And I must here abide to work alone,)
Take her into thine Arms before she go;
Make her not barely, to believe, but know,
That, this our sad and sudden Separation
Is for thy Glory, and for our Salvation:
(For, from the life and Death of greatest Kings
But seldom so much real honor springs
To glorify thy Name, as does from some
Who fill on earth, a despicable Room.)
Give her an earnest, that she shall possess
Thy love, in everlasting happiness;
And, that, we, whom she leaves afflicted here,
(Continning in our love to thee sincere)
Shall by the Mediatorship of him
Who bought us, meet at thy appointed time,
Where we shall never part; where, Tyrannies,
Of others, nor our own Infirmities,
Nor any thing which is to come, or past,
Deprives, of what for thine, prepared thou have:
And, if she live, so let our deeds express
Whilst here we live, what we in words profess;
That others, may, until my dying day
Believe there is truth, in what I write and say,
To that end, keep us pleased with our Lot;
Though little, much, or nothing shall be got
Of what we had; my GOD preserve us too
From stumbling, and from reeling to and fro,
Or stagg'rings in our Trials, whereby they
Who are in like Afflictions, stagger may:
But, with true Joy, so let thy Holy Ghost
Replenish us, that, (although all be lost
Belonging to this world) thy Saints may see
That, there is All Sufficiency in thee.
Now, live or die my DEAR, GOD's will be done;
He fills my heart, and my Distemper's gone.
Since, GOD has freed me from this Carnal Fear,
Let World, and Devil henceforth do what they dare.
The greater weights they shall upon me lay,
The sooner, I from them shall escape away.
If, me, they shall into a Dungeon throw,
Both dark and deep, that none may come to know
What, I say, think or do; yet, what is done there,
By these my Scraps and Crumbs, it will appear,
Though scribled hastily, yea, help prevent
What, peradventure, is the Worlds intent;
And hint, that, though Close-Prisoner me they keep,
I shall not wholly spend my time in sleep.
For, doubtless, to my GOD, there, speak I shall
Like Jonas, in the Belly of a Whale,
And (as the Blood of Abel did) speak then,
That, which will more prevail then Tongue or Pen.
Isaiah 38. The living, The living (O GOD) shall praise thee as I do this day.
(YET) Blessed are they who die in the LORD; for they shall rest from their
Labors, and their works follow them. Revel. 14.13.
October. 6.1661.
Another Spiritual Song composed, by occasion of the last mentioned Distemper.
I.
When in the Morn we rise,
Alas! how little think we on,
What through our ears or eyes,
May pierce our hearts, ere that day's gone?
I, did but borrow
From what, next Morrow,
I hoped to have enjoyed;
And that, has quite
The whole delight
Of both days, now destroyed.
II.
My thoughtful heart grew sad,
And represented unto me,
Such things as in the shade
Of Death's approaches use to be:
With many a doubt,
(Which Faith keeps out)
My Fancy fills my head;
And clouds are come,
Which with a Gloome
This day, have overspread:
III.
If, whilst the Sun gives light,
Become so dark, so soon, it may,
How black will be the Night
That shall ensue so dark a day?
My Soul, I see
Betrayed we will be,
By our own want of care,
To have prepared
A daily guard,
To keep out carnal Fear.
IV.
No power was in the World
Whereby a Passion like to this,
On me could have been hurled,
Had naught, been in my self amiss:
By day or night,
(Be 't black or bright)
The Devil has no power
Which can procure
Distemp'rature,
Without some fault of our.
V.
How frail a thing is man,
That, lifeless words, aray'd in white,
This Morn affright him can
Who, seemed fearless yester night?
Dread of ill news,
Too plainly shows
That, with us all is not well:
For, if it were
We need not Fear,
Though stormed by Death and Hell.
VI.
For, if beneath GOD's Wing
Our safe repose we sought to make,
None, such Ill news could bring,
That, much our Courage it could shake*
Of, Plagues that smite
By day or night
We need not stand in awe
Of poisonous things,
Of Serpents stings,
Nor of the Lions Pawe.
VII.
Therefore, my Spirit rowze
(Our Foes, we see, are not asleep)
Let us, no longer drowze,
But, better watch hereafter keep;
Come, Courage take,
And we shall make
These Bugg-bears take their flight*
For, it is our Fear,
No strength of their
That now does us affright.
VIII.
The Passions of the mind
Are but the fumes of Flesh and Blood,
Which make the Reason blind,
By mispresenting Ill, or Good.
If, unto these,
We closly press,
And, wistly on them look,
They will appear
Such as they are,
And, pass away like smoke.
IX.
And, yet, my Soul, beware
Thou bring not to assault these Foes
Goliah's shield or Spear,
Nor in his Headpiece trust repose.
No, nor unto
What Self can do,
But, take thou David's sling,
And, what he took
Out of the Brook,
Of Grace, among them fling.
A Meditation whilst he was taking a Pipe of Tobbacco.
THough some, perhaps will think the things I do,
Much less then Idleness, amount unto;
Yet, to have no work troubles me, at least,
As much, as therewith to be overprest;
And, then to be quite Idle, I had rather
Pick strawes, catch Flies, or shells, and Pebles gather,
Or, (as I sometimes do) the time to pass,
Number my steps, or tell the panes of glass,
And often when a trifling act is done,
Make some good use of that, which promised none.
Here, all alone, I by my self have took,
An Emblem of my Self, a Pipe of Smoke:
For, I am but a little piece of Clay
Filled with a Smoke that quickly fumes away.
This Vanity, our Clymat never knew
Till near the time, in which, first breath I drew;
And otherwhile, it is of wholesome use
(Though, for the most part subject to abuse:)
Since first I smookt it, after (it came hither)
I laid it by, nigh thirty years together,
And for my healths sake, then, did reassume
That Bauble wherewith we Tobbacco fume;
(Not hitherto disabled to forgo it,
If any way offensive I should know it)
And, that in mind, as well as bodily
I might he someway profited thereby,
Such Meditations come into my thought,
As these, which now, unto my mind are brought.
Even as this Pipe was formed out of Clay,
And may be shapeless Earth again this day,
So may I too. So brittle, that one touch
May break it, this is; I, am also such.
When it is broke, made whole it cannot be
By Humane Art; so will it fare with me
When I to dust shall be reduced by Death,
Until revived by an Eternal Breath.
This brittle ware, we, often have strangely seen
Preserved from breaking: and so I have been.
When foul it grows, it must be purified,
By Fire; I, in like manner must abide
Those Fiery-Tryals, which will purge away
That filth which is contracted every day.
Moreover, when therein, this Herb's calcined,
Such things as these, it brings into mind;
That Custom, by degrees, prevails still,
To draw us, both to what is Good and Ill;
For, when this customarily is taken,
It can by very few, be quite forsaken,
Or, heeded, how they turn unto abuse,
That, which is otherwise, of some good use;
Yea, so it them deludes, that often they think
That, is well scented, which does always stink;
Yet, me it makes, with thankfulness to heed,
How, GOD wraps up, a Blessing in a Weed:
And, how (when I have weighed things together)
He makes one vanity to cure another;
Turns that to Good, which was, perhaps, for Evil,
At first, sent in among us, by the Devil.
It minds me too, that, as this Herb by fire
Must be consumed, so, must all our desire
Of Earthly things; and, that wherein we took
Most pleasure, turn to Ashes and to Smoke.
When I had writ thus much, of what I thought,
My Candle, and Tobbacco were burnt out.
A Hint, of that, which may hereafter (if not despised) conduce to the Settling
of Peace and Concord in Church and State.
This Scrap, though some will not digest,
Is cast in here, among the rest.
ELia's like, I thought my self alone,
A while ago, and of my mind, knew none:
But, many I now hope, here living be
Who, join in one Faith, and one love with me.
My Soul, I long time, seemed to possess,
As when the Baptist in the Wilderness
Was to be Disciplined, and there prepared
For, that, which he performed afterward.
As when he Preached Repentance, in his days,
High Priests, nor Lawyers, Scribes nor Pharisees,
Nor of the gay Herodians, any one
(Nor many, but the Vulgar sort alone)
Regarded it; so, likewise, I might say
Of all my Premonitions, to this day;
And may (for ought I know) without regard
Pursue my Work, till I have his reward:
If so it happen, I am well content
To follow such a holy Precedent.
I, am now (as it were) one in exile,
Like John, when banished into Pathmos Isle;
And, to the seven Churches in these Nations
As he then, to the Asian Congregations
Had somewhat to express; so, I from HIM
(As I believe) who sent his mind to them
By that Disciple, have a needful Errant,
To be delivered, by Authentic Warrant,
Which, must lie Dormant, until them to hear it
GOD, shall prepare, and fit me to declare it.
Mean while, I cast in this Preoccupation,
To be a furtherance to that Preparation
Whereto GOD's Grace will ripen me, and The^
(Hereafter, in his own appointed time;
If nothing that shall be Co-incedent
Does intervene, that purpose to prevent)
Thus Christ, did to a future time adjourn
What, he had then spoke, might it have been born;
And, his example does instruct my Reason,
To choose for every work, a proper Season.
I have a Love for all the whole Creation,
Much more, for every Christian Congregation:
I, for each Member of them (whatsoere
Infirmities, I see in them appear)
Have such a Love, and so enlarged, that
I can with every Church Communicate,
In all Essential duties, though they may
Be sometimes, much abused with an Allay:
Because, what me therein offends, I,
Without offending others, can pass by;
And, at another time, in private, seek
To make them understand what I dislike;
And, by a meek compliance in what is good,
Bear with a failing, not well understood.
Their Ignorance, or misled Consciences,
Give me no cause of Personal offenses,
So, they the Fundamental Truths, profess
Without malicious minds, or wilfulness;
Or by approving, or continuing in
Prophanness, and committing open Sin.
For, since he that knows most, knows but in part
And, has a Cloudy Region in his heart,
They, of my Pity, rather Objects be
Then of my hate. They, so much hurt not me
As damnifie themselves: And, I, thereby
Have of my Meekness, Faith and Charity,
Those Exercises, for which (if I have them
In true sincerity) GOD, chiefly gave them.
And, which way can they better be employed
Then, that a common good may be enjoyed?
And that we to our Brethren may extend
That mercy, when we think they do offend,
Which GOD's long suffering does vouchsafe to us?
And, since he did command it should be thus?
The Church Catholic, is a Corporation,
Whereof, the several Churches in each Nation
Are Bodies Corporate, as here we see
In LONDON, many Corporations be
Members thereof distinct, governed by Laws
Peculiar to themselves, as they found cause
To constitute them; yet, unto all these
Belong the Cities general Privileges;
And every Individual Person; there,
Conforms unto those Laws which proper are
To this whole City; and they live together
In Peace, without intruding on each other.
What hinders (but our Ignorance, Ambition,
Our Avarice, and Love to Superstition,)
That, Christian Congregatious may not thus
Be formed, and regulated so with us,
That, we may live henceforward in true Peace,
Morality and Piety increase?
Prophanness be suppressed? and, no more, here,
Affairs Divine, and Civil interfere?
What hinders this, but, want of that true Love
And meeknes, which our knowledge might improve?
And, whence flows Discord, but from intermedling
With what concerns us not? fooling, and Fidling
About those things impertinent, which, whether
Their tendance be to this, or that, or neither
It Is not material, so, that may not be
Infringed, which to all, ought to be free?
That Peace may be preserved; men kept in awe
From violating of the moral Law,
And, GOD permitted to possess alone
The Conscience as (on earth) his Proper Throne?
For, he from none, will an account receive,
According to what other men believe,
Or shall command; but, answerable to
What he commands us to believe and do,
According to the Light he shall afford,
By his assisting Spirit, and his Word:
And, therefore, they, who, out of slavish Fear,
Of those who peaceably inclined are,
Force Innocents, to any hard Condition
(Thereby to free themselves from their Suspicion
Which is incurable) are Tyrannous,
And foes to GOD, unto themselves, and us.
In my late Trial, I have had a shake,
But, it has deeper driven in the stake;
And has, I hope vouchsafed by that FIT,
An earnest, he so fast will settle it;
That, all the Tempests which in future days
The World, the Flesh and Devil have power to raise,
Shall more increase my courage; and, by mine
Some other, to the like Resolves incline.
GOD, give us Grace, with seriousness
These things in time, with what else may
There is a way, how that, may yet be done
Which hitherto, is little thought upon;
And, thereof, in what is expressed here,
A Hint, if well observed, may appear.
A Hymn of Thanksgiving to Almighty GOD; composed by this Prisoner, for the
gracious restoration of his Wives life and health; who, lying mortally sick (as
was supposed) at 52. miles distance during his Imprisonment, in a sad
disconsolate condition, and reputed to be dead, about the space of an hour, was
miraculously restored.
To the Tune of the 148. Psalm.
I.
HOw soon, my gracious GOD,
Have thou my Prayer heard?
How just, how kind, how Good,
Have thou to me appeared?
Blessed, be this Day:
For, what did fright my heart last night,
Thou do allay:
The Clouds, that made, this Morning sad,
Are blown away.
II.
As when his moan to thee
The good Centurian made,
Though I unworthy be,
Like favor I have had
Vouchsafed to me;
Nay little less, in my distress
Received I have,
Then She, whose Son, and only one,
Was near his grave.
III.
At least, I, so much Grace
Of thee, this day have had,
As daign'd to Jairus was
Whose Daughter thou foundst dead,
Upon her Bed:
For, when my Wife, deprived of life
Had long time lain,
Thou, heeding there, our Prayers here
Gav'st life again.
IV.
Thus she, who first was thine
(And so shall always be)
Has now, been twice made mine,
And, is enjoyed by me;
For which, to thee
A double praise, LORD, all my days,
I ought to give;
Assist I pray, this due to pay
Whilst here I live.
V.
And, let all, who now hear
What, thou for me have done,
Help me thy praise declare;
For, not to me alone
Extends this boon;
This Act of Grace, vouchsafed was
That, they thereby
Might at their need, know where to speed
As well as I.
VI.
LORD, I have naught to give
For all thou have bestown,
But, what I did receive
And was, and is thine own;
Oh! now therefore
This Sacrifice, do not despise
For, I am poor;
Therewith, I shall give self and all,
Who can give more?
A Penitential Hymn, composed by occasion of a Dream the 19th. of October. 1661.
about Midnight.
I.
MY GOD, thou did awake me,
This night out of a sad and fearful Dream,
That, sensible did make me
Of Sins, which heretofore small Sins did seem;
And, ere I perfect heed could take,
Whether I slept, or was awake,
He, that is watching every hour,
Whom he may mischief, and devour,
Sought, how he might thereby advantage make:
Rebuke him, for my Dear Redeemer's sake.
II.
Permit thou no Transgression,
Whereof, I heretofore have guilty been,
Nor great, nor small Omission,
Which I forgotten have, or overseen,
(Either through want of penitence
Or of confessing my offense)
To rise against me, great or small;
For, LORD, I do repent them all:
And, likewise, (be it more or less)
Renounce all trust, in my own Righteousness.
III.
As Job complained, such Visions
To me seemed represented this last night
Of my falings, and Omissions
That, sleeping, they did much my heart affright;
Me thought a Spirit passed by
Not to be seen with mortal eye;
And, I was minded by a Voice
(That, spoke unto me without noise)
Of things preceding, which (then quite forgot)
So, as I ought to do, I heeded not.
IV.
Oh God! most kind, most holy,
Remember not the errors of my life;
Call not to mind my folly
To add a new Affliction, to my Grief.
World, Flesh and Devil, my foes are,
And, much more then my strength can bear
On me, they have already cast,
Unless, that thou compassion have;
Oh! throw my sins out of thy sight therefore,
That, they may not be seen, or heard of more.
V.
My Soul does now abhor them,
Thine only Son, has with his precious blood
Made satisfaction for them;
Thou, did accept it; I believe it good:
And, therefore, though they sometimes make
My heart to tremble and to ache,
My Soul is confident they pard'ned are
As if they never committed were;
Confirm it so, that, sleeping and awake
Sweet rest in thee, I may for ever take.
VI.
Dear GOD, of my Salvation,
Preserve me by thy Love and mighty Power
From perilous Temptation,
In Weal, in Woe, and at my dying hour:
Me, let thy Guardian Angels keep
When I do wake, and while I sleep,
From shame without, and fear within;
From evil thoughts, and Actual Sin,
That, Friends and Foes and every one may see,
No man in vain, does put their trust in thee.
A Requiem to the Soul.
I.
MY Soul, vex not thy self at those,
Who, to all Godliness are Foes,
Although they make fair outward shows,
And spread and flourish like the Bay;
For, deplorable is their case,
They, as the scorched Summer Grass,
Shall soon into oblivion pass,
And all their Beauty fade away.
II.
I have been young, and old am grown
And, many changes I have known,
Whereby, it has to me been shown
Whereto, their wicked courses tend:
With Honor I have seen them Crowned,
With Power and Riches to abound,
Whose Place no where can now be found;
For, all their Pomp is at an end.
III.
With shadows they themselves beguile,
And, GOD, does at their folly smile;
With patience therefore wait a while,
And, grudge them not their Portion, here;
Destruction, toward them is hasting,
Their Time is short, and daily wasting,
But, thine will be for everlasting,
And, Griefs, as if they never were.
IV.
Employ thy self in doing well,
And, GOD, with thee shall kindly deal;
Thou, in the Land shall safely dwell,
Well fed and clothed, all thy days.
And when the Glory of their Name
Is blur'd out, with an evil Fame,
Then, shall thy Poverty and shame
Be mentioned unto thy praise.
V.
Let wordlings feed upon their Chaff,
Their Cups of Fornication quaff,
And at thy sufferings grin and laugh;
A midst thy Foes lie down and sleep.
Whilst in their malice, they persist,
In GOD's Protection take thy rest,
For, though thy Body be oppressed
Thee, safe, in spite of them, he will keep.
He, whosoever he be, that speaks this Charm,
Unto his Soul in Faith, shall have no harm;
Therefore, as a Receipt approved, take it:
For, for my self alone, I did not make it.
A Meditation upon the many Prodigies and Apparitions, which are mentioned by
Public writing, or common Fame.
WE are informed, by questionless Presages
(Vouchsafed to instruct succeeding Ages)
That warnings of Christ's coming, should be given
By signs and wonders manifest from Heaven:
And, we have seen, in Histories recorded,
That, Providence, in all times has afforded,
Some Premotions of those Desolations
Which fell on Persons, Places, States and Nations,
Before they came: For, our most gracious GOD,
(As does a loving Father) shows the Rod
Before he whips, that he thereby may fright
To Penitence, ere he begins to smite;
And, frequently, prevail, if that means may,
Us to reclaim, he flings the Rod away:
Which kind Indulgence, is in these times, more
Enlarged then, it has been heretofore.
New Prodigies, we hear of every day,
And, likewise hear, how they are puffed away
As but mere Fictions. If we find them so,
This, justly, thereupon infer I do,
That, more presumptuous we in these times are
Then ever any other People were:
For, very much corruption it implies
To be in those who make and publish Lies.
If there be Truth, in any of those Visions,
Or Extraordinary Apparitions,
Which are affirmed; It Is no less wicked daring,
So to affront GOD's visible appearing
In Signs and Wonders, as, both to contemn,
And seek by all means, how to smother them:
But, it is worst of all, to publish Lies
Of purpose, to discredit Verities,
As if we meant, to do the most we can
To try the Patience both of GOD, and Man.
If, we believe the things that are aver'd;
Why of GOD's Judgments, are we not afeard?
And, either seek to pacify his Wrath,
Or, magnfie his Mercy, who, so has
Forewarned, of what is likely to ensue,
That, we his Indignation may eschew?
If we suspect, what publicly is told,
Why do not they, who are in Power (and should)
Search out the Truth, that, by due punishment,
They such like Provocations may prevent?
For, out of question, to connive at Lies,
Or smother Truths, worse things presignifies,
Then all the Apparitions, that have been
These twenty years, in this our Climate seen;
(Though nothing doubted of) and will go nigh
At last, to turn all Truths into a Lie.
I must confess, that, though unto my Ears
There have been brought within these twenty years
So many strange Reports, of sights and Voices,
Earthquakes and Thunders, dreadful Storms and noises;
Of Ebbs and Tides, of Suns, and Moons, and Stars,
And Armies in the Clouds, portending Wars,
With such like, as would have perhaps, amounted
Unto a hundred, if I them had counted;
Not one of those I saw: yet, so unjust
I am not, as those good men to distrust
Who have aver'd them: for, though Prodigies
And such miraculous Appearances,
Are daign'd in chief, to Infidels, and those
Who in God's word, no confidence repose;
Yet, they are likewise, otherwhile, revealed
To true Believers, lest, they be concealed
From those whom they concern; or lest, by them
Quite slieghted, who, the Works of GOD, contemn;
They, also their own welfare so neglect
That, they be totally without effect.
On trust, I therefore take them: for, if we
Confirmed by their Witness may not be,
Whose Conversations are to us well known;
How, can we any Affirmations own
For Truths, Historically writ, by those
Whose Conversation, no man living knows?
For, my part I have with my carnal Eyes,
And, otherwise, beheld such Prodigies
In Words and Deeds, that, although none of that
Were true, which I hear other men relate,
I (at the least Mysteriously) discover
All those old Miracles, new acted over,
In my time, which in Pharaohs days were wrought,
When Israel out of servitude was brought;
And, many a such like wonderful proceed,
As we recorded in the Scriptures read.
I Have seen the Inchanter's (yea, and Aarons) Rod,
Turned into Serpents; Waters into blood.
I have seen Froggs sent, and removed again,
And, yet, we as hard hearted still remain.
I have observed, (at least once or twice)
Our Dust, to be transformed into Lice.
Plagues, which resembled Locusts, Flies, and Hail,
Yet not a jot upon our hearts, prevail.
The People, even as Murrains do our Beasts,
A Sin that is Epidemical, Infests;
And, so with Blaines and Byles we smitten be,
That, in a moral sense, mere Scabs we be.
Egyptian Darkness too, has here, among
Our other Plagues, continued very long,
With likelihood to be as gross, as there,
Unless, the Sun of Righteousness appear;
Yea, I have seen our Firstborn also slain,
Yet, still, we in obduracy remain.
I, therefore, wonder not, if private Visions,
Prodigeous sights, and Dreadful Apparitions,
(Discerned but here and there) have naught effected,
Since, things more Signal, are so much neglected.
Where, Moses and the Prophets are not heard,
One from the Dead, will find but small regard.
In vain are Dumb-shewes, where, a speaking sign
Can to no heedfulness, men's hearts incline.
When CHRIST's own Words, will not with credit pass,
In vain, will be the speakings of an Ass:
Yet, speak must, when GOD shall his tongue untie;
And, whatsoere succeeds, so will I.
A Riddle for Recreation, not impertinent to this Place.
INto a Park, I lately came,
Wherein are many herds of Game,
Whereof the Keepers take no care,
And yet, they in abundance are.
They are a Cattle of strange Breed
Which, on no Browse, nor Grass do feed;
Are Found, before that they are sought;
As Well in sleep, as waking caught:
So silently, they hunted are
That, neither Hound nor Horn we hear
When chatc't: They, are the only things,
Left free for Beggars and for Kings
To Hunt at will: and, all that we
Assured of by our Charters be.
What Park is this? What Game are these?
Tell me, and Hunt there, when you please.
A Proclamation made by this Prisoner, with the advice of his Privy Counsel,
the Muses.
OH Yee's, Oh Yee's, Oh Yee's: if any man
In Country, Court or City tell me can
Where my last Poem called Vox Vulgi lies,
(Seized lately in my Chamber by surprise)
On penalty, of what else follow may,
Let him produce it, e're my Trial day;
(Which, yet, I am not certain, when, or where
It will be, neither do I greatly care.)
He, who to me, the same will timely bring,
Shall be rewarded: So, GOD Save the King.
Given, this 17th. of the 8th. Month, 1661. At my Head Quarters in Newgate,
which is, at present, all the places of abode upon earth, which the Prince of
this World and his Prelacie have left me. Geo. Wither.

A Concluding Epigram.
With these Cards, I, an After-game have played,
But, there is one Card, by shuffling, so mislaid,
That, now my fore-game's lost; yet, if I may
Just Dealing find, Fair Gamesters, and Fair-play,
What ever happens, I no question make
But, I at last, may thereby save my stake;
And, when the Set is ended, win much more
Then ere I got by Play, or Work before.
If any good Effects, hereby ensue,
A Thanks to GOD, is for my Troubles due:
For, had he not made way to send me hither,
These Fragments, had not thus been scraped together.
Those Papers, which are hitherto suppressed,
Shall that occasion, which will manifest
(At last) a more effectual operation
Then, if they might have had free Publication.
If, also, God, me, here shall exercise
With greater Trials, better Fruits then these
They will produce: Therefore, they shall to me
Be welcome, when, or whatsoere they be.
Yet, for the sakes of other men, well pleased
I should be, from my Troubles to be eased;
Because, until mine shall have some redress,
Their sufferings, are not likely to be less.
LORD, therefore, if thou please, make it a sign,
Their Troubles will soon end, by ending mine.
I, thereof, am a little hopeful made,
By some foretokens, which I newly had.
Three likely signs thereof, he daigned has;
For, my Beloved Consort, he from death,
Was pleased to raise (even whilst within this place
I have remained, exposed to disgrace
And Poverty) he, for my Children too,
Whilst this was writing, has provided so
That, without Portions, to their good content,
They married are, without disparagement;
All parties, Christian confidence professing
Of their dependence on GOD's future blessing.
He, in the presence, and amidst my Foes,
Has spread my Table; and, such bounty shows,
That, these are nothing, but the Scraps and Crumbs
Of that supply, which, daily, from him comes.
Appello DEUM, REGEM, POPULUM, PARLIAMENTUM.
I do, appeal, to judge of my intent,
To GOD, King, People, and the Parliament:
For, one of these, I Am sure, my Friend will be,
And, I hope well, of all the other three;
But, they know not my heart, so well as he.
A Postscript to the Readers.
THese Pieces, being communicated to several Persons in writing, were sent back
to me imprinted; by what Printer I know not. Two or three large Cantles, are
thrown in among them; which, though you would have disliked, in respect of
their Quantity, I should have made no shorter; for, I could with more
contentment have lengthned them. So much was necessary to exercise my own
spirit, and strengthen my Faith and Patience, during the pressures which lie
upon me. Therefore, if they begin to seem tedious, give over the perusal: For,
they were intended to be communicated to those only, who were voluntarily
desirous of them, to whom I beseech GOD to sanctify them in the reading. They
were distilled out of me, by that Fiery-tryal, which will extend to many other
before it be ended, and which will evidence that they are no counterfeit or
Sophistical Extractions, though they may seem trivial to some, because they
relate chiefly to my self; for, they will be found useful to many of them, who,
are or shall be, exercised with like Passions and Afflictions.

That, which tends to the Vindication of the Poem occasioning my Commitment
hither, will concern others as well as my self; So, may also that which
expresses my sudden distemper, at the first hearing of my Wives Sickness,
lying at 52. Miles distance in a very disconsolate Condition, as to all outward
things: And they who are as truly sensible of a Conjugal and Paternal Affection
as I am, will perhaps, think when they read what I have written, that it may be
of use to some of them, when they consider well the struglings between my Flesh
and Spirit during that Trial; and, in regard it is in probability, the
strongest Temptation whereby the world and the Devil shall have power to
afflict me. But, whatsoever shall be thought of that, of the rest of these
Parcels, or of me, I sent them to those in writing, who desired to have Copies
of them, and to pass further, as God should give leave.

To write no more, I long since did intend;
But, none but GOD knows now when I shall end,
For, still, I find, when I think all is done,
As much to write, as when I first begun.
Your true Friend, and Brother in the best Consanguinity, who thinks it no
dishonor, to subscribe himself, GEORGE WITHER, of Newgate, in the City of
London, Prisoner.
The 19th. of the 8th. Month, 1661.
An Appendix in Relation to what concerns his Wife.
MY Consort, (who still means what ere she says)
Perusing what is here mentioned to her praise;
Protests, her modesty is so offended,
To find her self in such a strain commended,
That, she is ashamed to live; and, to be dead
Had rather, then to see it published.
To be avenged for this dislike, therefore
I Will to the rest, ad this one Virtue more,
Which had been alse forgot; and if she do
Therewith find fault, I Will then, ad twenty more.
For, I forbore her Praises till I feared
That, them, she never should have seen, or heard,
And, had exposed them to Publication
Before I was quite cured, of my Passion.
A Table of the several things contained in this Book.
1. THe Epistle of the Author. Page 3. 2. A Missive to his Friends, who
enquired for him, after the apprehension of his Person and the seizure of his
Books and Papers. Page 5. 3. His first Meditation after his Commitment to
Newgate. Page 11. 4. His Petition at the Sessions, that Bail might be accepted.
Page 17. 5. An Epigram to the City of London. P. 19. 6. This Prisoners second
Meditation in Newgate. Page 22. 7. Answer to some Friends who sent to know how
it fared with him after his Commitment. Page 27. 8. A Pass-by, to them who
seemed offended with his frequent scriblings (as they call them) Page 28. 9.
The Authors Apology, for his writing that Book which occasioned his
Imprisonment. Page 30. 10. Another Meditation, alluding to this Verse in
Seneca, Nusquam non potest esse Virtuti locus. P. 55. 11. A Meditation upon
Jeremies Prophecy to Ebedmelech, the Ethiopian. Page 59. 12. An Antidote
against Fear. Page 62. 13. A short excuse, why he makes no Adresse to great
Persons for their Favor in his Cause. Page 68. 14. A Meditation upon his
considering the sad outward Condition of his Relations in the flesh. P. 71. 15.
A Passionate expression of a casual and sudden destemper, upon hearing of his
Wives being mortally Sick, as he was credibly informed. Page 76. 16. A
spiritual Song composed upon the last mentioned distemper. Page 95. 17. A
Meditation whilst he was taking Tobacco. Page 98. 18. A Hint, conducing to the
Settlement of Peace and Concord in the Church and State. Page 101. 19. A
Thanksgiving for his Wives restoration to life and health. Page 105. 20. A
Penitential Hymn. Page 107. 21. A Requiem to the Soul. Page 110. 22. A
Meditation upon the late Prodigies and Apparitions. Page 112. 23. A Ridle. Page
115. 24. A Proclamation by the Muses. Page 116. 25. A Concluding Epigram. Page
117. 26. A Postscript. Page 118.
THE END.
The Authors Dream, the night before the Imprinting of this Book, and (as he
believes) the true Interpretation thereof.
I Am awake: GOD's blessed Name be praised,
That, he to see the Light, my eyes has raised:
For, sleep, I see, which we repute the best
Of Temporal things pertaining to man's Rest,
(Next to a quiet Conscience) may become
A Torment, very near as troublesome,
If he, that gives his Beloved sleep,
Did not, within a Bound, nights terrors keep.
My Soul, so toiled, and tired out, has been
With what, this night, in Dreamings I have seen,
That, peradventure, if I waking, had
Been so oppressed, it might have made me mad:
For, from the twelfth hour, to the fourth, well nigh,
I have been struggling, in an Agony,
With such Confusions, that, if I would tell
How, I have been turmoyl'd, I, might as well
Another World endeavor to Create
Out of a Chaos, as the same relate:
And, not a littie troubled is my mind,
Now I am waking, how, I forth may find
What it presignifies: For, I believe
Those Notions, I did not in vain receive:
And, therefore, (since no Daniel I do know,
Who, either can to me my Vision show,
Or, what it means) I Will, by GOD's Grace, assay
To make the best use of it, that I may;
Not doubting, but, that he will condescend
To show some glimpse, of what, he does intend.
It happened (which, forget not to remember)
The day before the Kalend's of November,
The first year (and may be the last) wherein
I had infranchised in Newgate been,
For offering to Record, what I have heard
By common Fame, and, was by me declared
To no worse end, then, that, prevent it might
Such like Confusions, as me thought, this night
To me were represented. And, who knows
But, that, this Dream, a Consequent foreshowes
To that relating, which, fulfilled will be
Either, upon these Nations, or on me,
Or both of us, if God, averts not from
The best of us, that, which is like to come;
And, as dreadful our waking Dreams may be
As this was in my sleep, last night to me.
This very day, moreover, (as I hear)
Those Musings, which by me composed were
Since my Commitment hither, pass the Press;
And, our confusions, will be more or less,
As they shall take effect. GOD's Will be done,
(What ere, he pleases shall succeed thereon)
For, he, who waked me out of this sad Dream,
Will, when, at their worst, raise me out of them;
Or, when the Resurrection morning comes,
Save, me, at least, from all destructive Dooms,
This, (though my Dream admits no explanation)
I take to be a true Interpretation.
But if, that any finds me out a better
I will approve it, and remain his debtor.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 17. read Appeal, page 14. line 30. for which are, r. with awe, l.
34. r. entertained, p. 16. l. 13. r. Though so, p. 23. l. 3. r. be for he, p.
26. l. 23. r. do for does, p. 32. l. 18. r. not so. p. 36. last l. r.
contrived. p. 39. l. 26. r. first, that, p. 42. l. 14. r. grown wise and sober,
l. 33. r. more provoke, p. 43. l. 2. r. of Reason, p. 44. l. 5. r. of letting,
l. 11. r. concession, l. 28. for is, r. are, p. 59. l. 6. r. extract good. p.
75. l. 22. r, Revive, p. 79. l. 15. for race, r. truce. p. 51. l. 30. r. every
for very. l. 26. blot out now, p. 96. l. 13. r. we for we will. p. 102. l. 9. for
their r. them. p. 108. l. 23. blot out my, p. 110. l. 2. r. his trust.


