England this fable plainly shows,
a strong Allie no partner know's.
The Bull the Goat, and patient Sheep one day,
Leagued with the Lion, sought a common prey;
A pray they took, an high and mighty heart;
of which each thought to have his equal part:
Soft, quoth the Lion, I the first shaire claim,
Cause Lion King o'th forest is my mane;
The second you shall give me as my due,
Cause I am valiant, able to subdue:
The third I take by force, and for the rest,
Touch it who dares; yield it all, you had best.
Speculum Speculativum: OR, A CONSIDERING-GLASSE; Being an INSPECTION Into the
present and late sad Condition Of these NATIONS; With some CAUTIONAL
EXPRESSIONS made thereupon, by GEORGE WITHER, Immediately after His MAJESTY'S
Restoration: To preserve in himself and others a Christian Obedience to GOD's
various Dispensations. Hereby also are some Glimmerings discovered Of what will
probably ensue hereafter.

Fiat Justitia, Ruat Coelum:

Rather than Justice should be made a scorn,
Let all the Planets, from their Spears be torn.
And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When come to Babylon, thou shall read these
words; and when thou have made an end of reading this Book, thou shall bind a
stone to it, and cast it into the midst of Euphrates, and say, Thus shall
Babylon sink, Jer. 51. 63. London, Written June XIII. MDCLX. and there
Imprinted the same year.

To the KING'S MAJESTY, If this Considering Glass comes accidentally to his
View.
SIR, Blessed is he that in Gods Name does come,
In which Name I pronounce your welcome home;
And, for your Health more heartily do pray,
Than any one who drinks it every day.
As often too, I have you in my thought
As they, who with the first your favor sought;
Which, if my heart you could as plainly see
As what you now read, would believed be.
When I had first composed what here ensues,
I wished it, where you might the same peruse:
For men unknown (or known without respect)
So justly are affronted with neglect,
For proffered Services to those, that have
More Offerings daily than they can receive,
That, I commitred this to his Dispose,
Who orders every thing that comes or goes.
If Providence has brought this to your hand,
Give up to REASON straight, the sole command
Over all your Passions; Make her of your Isle,
(Your Isle of MAN) Queen-Regent, all the while
You are perusing it; and let it be
Read through, else it will wrong both You and Me.
(Or you like Caesar, unperus'd perchance,
May leave that, which your welfare might advance)
To be her Subject, but so long endeavor
As till that is done, and then, be King for ever,
(Reigning with her) as absolute a Prince,
As ever had over men pre-eminence:
For, then, shall that, to you more glory add,
Than hitherto from any Pen you had;
And, be to you, a true Mnemosyne,
When, peradventure, none so dares to be.
This Glass (though formed it be of Common matter
And, made by him, who knows not how to flatter)
If, to a Prince, who needs it, it were sold,
Were worth to him three times his weight in gold,
If he knew how to use it as he should:
Yet I had rather you for nothing had it,
So that it wrought the effect for which I made it,
Than, from another, to receive that price
In ready money paid me over twice:
For, then, this Book (which has not to your praise
One single Page) thereto should Trophies raise
More glorious, than, your LONDONS wealth could rear
If wholly, thereupon consumed it were.
Your Happiness and Honor it intends:
By not commending, it much more commends,
Than all their Panegyricks who bestrow
Those men with praises whom they do not know;
And, magnify, when they ascend the Throne,
All Kings alike; which praise is less than none;
For, it is a Mock, deserving but returns
Of sharp reproofs, or of neglect and scorns.
If, wise and pious, you I had not thought,
I, such like Gew-gaws could to you have brought
To put out of your mind, what GOD for you
Has lately done; and what you ought to do
For Him and His. But neither self-esteem,
Nor verbal Attributes can perfect him
By whom, here, shall be an Establishment
Of Justice in a Righteous Government.
For, none else, but a self-denying King,
Shall that great Blessing to these Nations bring;
And, his Name will be thereby honored more
Than all his Predecessors heretofore.
And, they, who then live shall fulfilled behold
What Britains Genius, long ago foretold:
For, I believe, that such a one will be,
And also, much desire, you may be he.
A King you are, who, now twice born has been
To Royalty; and therefore, by that Mean
A Child of honor, by Regeneration
You seem to be: and in the common fashion
To celebrate your double birth, it could
With your condition no proportion hold;
For that Cause in a path, by no man trod,
I seek to do you honor in this Mode,
Which if accepted, your true praise will be;
And, peradventure no disgrace to me.
For as a Lady looking in a Mirror,
Puts on her Dress, and Jewels without error,
Heeding what is mis-placed, or forgot,
And to her Handmaid always trusts not;
So, by this Glass, you may have by reflection
A sight of what pertains to your perfection.
See, not with others, but, with your own eyes,
Whether true Ornaments, or some Disguise,
Be put upon you, which may render you
Less lovely, when you come in open view.
Herein, a Catalogue to you is shown
Of many long-lost Jewels of the Crown;
And such as add the most Essential Glory
Unto those Crowns that are but transitory.
A Course is offered here, whereby you may
Outdo, all that, which Flatterers can say:
(Or, by but so far forth endeav'ring it,
As Humane Frailties will the same permit)
To praise you here, I do not undertake;
But, that your self praiseworthy you may make
Is my design by bringing things to mind,
Which written in your own heart you shall find.
This shows the Means to make you honorable
With what should always be inseparable
From your own person, and does also tend
To your Immortal Glory, without end:
It, such an honor gives, as will increase
In their despite, who seek to make it less:
An honor which depends not on men's tongues,
Which Envy blasteth not, nor Malice wrongs;
Which neither Degradations, nor Advances,
Or, any humane Changes or Mischances
Can blemish: for, it will be much more clear
Than that Star, which within our Hemisphear
Shined on your Birthday, whilst the Sun at height
Displayed his beams to hide it from our sight.
Somewhat, by that, perhaps, portended was;
So will there be by this Considering-Glass.
God grant my meaning be so understood,
That, now it may an Omen be for Good.
By great Afflictions you were lately proved,
Which are in mercy totally removed.
At present, by as great prosperities,
Your Temper, and your Faithfulness God tries.
And that things useful slip not out of thought,
This, to your hands, by Providence was brought.
Be pleased seriously to look thereon,
For, you will find it a true Lydian-stone;
And, if you bide the Touch, WORDS are too poor
To celebrate your Worth; who can say more?
Your Majesty's Loyal Subject, GEO. WITHER.

In stead of a Dedication, or an Epistle to the Reader, this Expostulation of
the Author with Himself, is here inserted.
GEORGE, were it not fit, ere from thy hands it pass
To dress thy self by thy Considering-Glass?
It has now six months been exposed to show
And some say, Forth in public let it go.
Some, cry, Conceal it; for it may undo thee,
Or at the best, bring outward mischief to thee.
Say, shall, or shall I not divulge the same?
Shall it be spared, or given to the flame?
Quickly, resolve, before it be too late,
And Cautions needful, grow quite out of date.
Do thou believe, that many men will read it?
Or, if they do, that any much will heed it?
Except it be, to seek how to abuse thee,
Or, find out somewhat whereof to accuse thee;
What ever thou shall write, Self-interest
No more will entertain, then shall consist
With her own Principles. Thou, to the SOT
Writ'st Greek: the worldly-wise regard it not;
And if, among Swine, thou thy pearls do cast,
They Will tear thee, or defile thee at the least.
Yet, if thy Conscience does incline thee to it,
More fear thou to neglect it, than to do it;
For, from thy Duties thou art not excused,
Although thy pains be slighted and abused.
And, it were better, mischief should befall
Unto one single person, than to all:
He perishing with an ill Conscience too,
Because, he did not, what he ought to do.
To make this, and transcribe it, I confess,
Much pains required not, and the cost is less.
In Ink and Paper: yet, perhaps, it may
Be better worth, than to be thrown away:
And though to my particular offense
It may redound a tenfold Recompense,
It will repay thy Country by return:
And, for thy self alone, thou art not born.
My Country! Why perhaps my Countrymen,
Think, they need not my service; and, what then?
Am I obliged, if they be minded so,
To serve them still, whether they will or no?
I, fifty years, have served them in my turn,
To that end, for which (I think) I was born,
For no reward, but injuries and scorn.
They, my Good Meanings, have repaid with ill,
And, can it be expected, I should still
Serve them on such hard terms? Then, so I will.
Have thou composed, without fear or wit,
What, may men's discontented humors fit?
Scribled enough, since here the Scoene did alter,
To purchase Newgate, or, to win a Halter?
If so, and that which is deserved follows,
That will, perhaps, attend thee to the Gallows:
There, either rail upon thee, or, else say,
Thou were a bold fool, and so go their way.
And, if thou writ'st but sober Truth and Reason,
Or, that, which wise men think to be in season,
They will be all the world will give thee for it,
She Will say that, Thou, not worth the hanging art.
Not, worth the hanging! Hah! that is somewhat tho;
And may be worth as much, for ought I know,
As to be made a Viscount, or an Earl,
A Marquess, or a Duke
For, great my Earthly Expectations are not,
And, if they come to nothing, much I care not.
I know, which way, to make mine honor greater
Than that, for which I must become a Debtor
To other men; and, can augment the same
By that, which some do think, will do me shame.
But, hark! in policy a while delay
To publish, this; thou have a Game to play
For Prelates Lands, which lately purchased were;
Thy Claims thereto, now in great hazard are,
And, thou, wilt both to borrow, and to pay,
Disabled be, if they be took away:
Thy other Lands, by Cheaters were bereft,
And, if thou lose these too, there is nothing left.
Their Temp'ralties, must be restored again,
And, thou concerning them, writ'st here, such plain,
Such downright Truths, that if there should be found
Surviving (or, new made) on English Ground
A Bishop who will then thy cause befriend,
It may presage that all the rest will mend:
And, that, here constituted, we shall see,
Such Bishops, as Saint Paul said they should be:
(Which our Scotch-Brethren, I suppose, will grant
To be within, our Solemn Covenant)
But, that, is in great hazard; therefore, try
Their Holiness, and their Humility:
And, if, as may be wished, thou shall not speed,
Then, with what thou intendest straight proceed.
Out! Out Upon It! this Motion is so evil,
That, it is a mere suggestion of the Devil.
This, is that foolish policy, that brings
Destruction upon Nations and their Kings.
It Is in effect, as if my heart should say,
Do, as most Worldlings do; and when that way
Thou proved have, and thereby reap'st no good,
From thenceforth, put thy trust alone in GOD.
No, no; I bought those Lands without offending
My Conscience, or a wrong to them intending:
And, either still mine by GOD's help I Will make them,
Or, let the Prelates, if it must be, take them;
Although I know them no Appurtenance
To them belonging by GOD's Ordinance.
A Covenant within his sight I took,
Which, though by some it slighted be, and broke,
I dare not slight it so, but, to this hour
Have kept it (and will keep it) to my power.
Art thou then thus resolved? Yes, and till death
Resolved am, whilst I have Pen or Breath,
Thus, to be still resolved, unless GOD leaves me,
Or else to change my mind his warrant gives me.
I Will trust GOD in the first place, not the last
Alone, and when all other hopes are past.
If Prelates, Parliaments, and Kings bereave me
Of all I have, He, helpless will not leave me.
But probable it seems, that, if hereby
Imprisonment, or extreme Poverty
Befalls now thou art old, that they who most
Thy hazard urge, will leave thee to be lost:
What if they do? thou have a better hold:
GOD leaves no man because he is old;
And never had he firm Dependences
On him, that is frighted with such Toys as these.
Recall to mind, that many years ago,
When such Adventures thou were urged unto
It fell out otherwise. But there is yet
Another fear: Therefore consider it.
Thou have Relations, who to thee are dear;
May these. not suffer more than they can bear,
By what may come? Alas! I Will not dissemble,
My fears for them, do make my flesh to tremble;
And, when I mind their hazards and their fears,
'Spight of Philosophy I let fall tears.
But why, my Soul, art thou dejected so?
My Heart, why sad within me, dos^ (...) grow?
Still trust in GOD, for he will be th^^^ aid.
Of these vain Bug-bears be thou not afraid;
For they are GOD's much more than they are thine:
To him therefore the charge of them resign.
This needless care, is but for Three, at most,
And, to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
If thou commit them, be will raise up Friends
To make for all their losses large amends.
But, they have said, and so do many say,
That men are much estranged at this day
From what they were: that, in these latter times
They are grown much more hardened in their crimes,
And far less sensible than they were then
Of Sufferings, which befell to honest men,
Who (when their pains might that way be bestown)
Preferred the common good before their own:
And that their number too, who now are grieved,
Is more than theirs, by whom to be relieved,
They may have hope. Alas! if it be thus,
GOD only can, and he must succor us.
If it be so, our case is very sad:
Yet fear not, Balm in Gilead may be had.
Thy Pains, and this Adventure such times need:
On good Intentions, good effects succeed;
And, he at last will find it so, who scatters
His Bread, although it be upon the Waters:
For God is still the same; his Truth will never
Be Falsehood, but continue Truth for ever.
He, who thee has preserved so many years
Amid so many Dangers, Foes and Fears,
As thou have passed through (and thy Oppressors
Destroyed from time to time with their Successors)
Will still prese^^^ thee; or, else, thither take thee
From them, (...) he will secure for ever make thee;
And, be to Wife and Children at their need,
A Husband and a Father, in thy steed.
Well; I believe this; with my self, therefore
Hereof, I will expostulate no more.
I have so well, in my Considering-Glass,
Viewed, what my heart now is, with what it was,
And, for what may befall, prepared it so,
That, whither GOD will send it, let it go:
Take it among you, Newters, Friends and Foes,
And his Will be fulfilled, WIN or LOSE:
Who since I am excused from the cost
Of Publication (because, all I Have lost)
Will in the best time, some man's heart incline
To add his Contribution unto mine;
That, what now six months has perused been
In private, may more publicly be seen.
GEO. WITHER.
December. 13. 1660.
SPECULUM SPECULATIVUM: OR, A CONSIDERING-GLASSE; Composed, June XIII.M.DCLX.
The Contents.
OUr Modern Prophet (so did Paul,
A well known Heathen Poet call)
Does, in the Muses Mode relate
This Nations past and present state.
Shows us, in this Considering-Glass,
What, shall hereafter come to pass,
According as, we do fulfill,
Or, cross GOD's manifested Will.
Shows by what light he does behold
Those things that are by him foretold.
Praics for the King, and minds him too,
In praying for him, what to do.
Some things, which to himself pertain,
He intermixeth (not in vain)
Which will as much advantage them
Who slight them not, as profit him.
And by the number of the Beast,
Bounds the last year of Antichrist.
THough of my Friends, I may almost profess,
As did Elias, in another case,
I know not one (not one of those at least,
Who friendship for mere civil ends professed)
Yet here this day, may many thousands be
Who are my real friends, unknown to me:
Yea peradventure many among those
Who at this present time are thought my Foes.
To them therefore, I wishing Grace and Peace;
Do now, where ere they live, these Lines address
To fortify their Faith, and them incline
By their endeavors to help strengthen mine;
And that by our Petitions jointly made,
We may get safety where it can be had;
For, whether of a low degree, or high,
To trust to men, is trusting to a Lie.
I am surprised with another FIT,
But what it will produce, I know not yet.
Confusedly things tumble in my breast,
And if confusedly they be expressed,
You must be pleased to take them as you find them,
(And, as begun, before I had designed them)
Since when few knew what is best for them to do,
That will be done which they are forced unto;
And may perhaps too, have as good success
As that with which more freedom I express:
(At leastwise) when men's manners, and the times
Shall make them heed the Reason of my Rimes;
For nothing I Will insist on, but what shall
Tend to GOD's glory, and the good of all.
Of no men's Persons whosoever they are,
Will I accept, in what I shall declare:
(Not of mine own, in any thing that may
Wrong Justice, or my Conscience any way)
Nor be so fearful, or so over-bold,
So over-hot, so lukewarm, or so cold,
That any justly shall my words despise,
That Is honest, sober, generous or wise:
But plainly tell things as I find they are,
And then concerning them my thoughts declare;
Not limited by Method like to those
Who make expressions of their minds in prose;
But by Digressions, as the Muses do,
When sudden Raptures them incline thereto;
And in such Language as may evidence
The Truth, without affected Eloquence.
Yet, nor the better, nor the worse effect,
Whether I write, or write not, I expect
As to my Self; save, as I hope to raise
Thereby a Groundwork for GOD's future praise
From things observed; with which work to dispense
I dare not, neither can without offense:
For GOD is much concerned in things now done;
As also, in what may succeed thereon;
And if well known, and well weighed, all things were
Which, to me pertinent at this time are,
As with those Lepers who distressed sat
'Twixt WAR and FAMINF, at Samaria's Gate;
So should I seem to fare: for, whether they
Continued in that place, or went away,
Their hazards were the same; and so are mine,
Whether to WORDS, or Silence, I incline.
They at the last resolved were to try
That course which they thought best; and so do I.
Which if no man regards, it is but the lot
That, I, and better men have often got.
Assist, Oh GOD! in what I seek to do;
For, when that MAZE, I wistly look into
Which we are in, I am afraid almost
That I in some dark passage may be lost.
Our Follies have so wrapped us in a Gin,
Composed both of Righteousness and Sin,
Of Truth and Falsehood, of Nonsense and Reason,
Of Good and Ill, of Loyalty and Treason;
And disagreeing Judgments and Affections,
Have broken us into so many Fractions;
Our heads enforcing into such cross Angels,
Whereby the Net still more and more intangles,
And fastened it with such a snarled knot,
That, to unty it, if thou help them not,
All humane powers will be employed in vain,
To set us at full liberty again.
But notwithstanding, here is hardly ought
That, is not wholly out of order brought;
Yet, if thou list, when likeliest means do fail,
Thou can make things unlikely to prevail.
Thy purpose, thou as well to pass can bring
By my Goose-quill, as by an Angels Wing:
And, though on all sides all have so mis-done
That, I am like to give content to none;
If I may do thy Will, I shall not care
What else, ensues, or who displeased are.
Men's Failings and their Duties being shown,
Thy Justice and thy Mercies will be known.
And, hoping, to that end, thou guid'st my Pen,
I Will without fear, make my Address to men.
For, doubtless, I may boldly do mine Errant
To Kings and Nations, when I have thy warrant.
Full eighteen years and one month, very near
Since we began to ring the Changes here
Are past away; and since by often turning
We, have been broyling, to escape a burning:
But, what are we the better, now, unless
We shall discover what things were amiss;
And when we find them, seriously intend
Our courses, for the future, to amend?
For, how can they have ease, who bear about them,
And in them, what they seek to cure without them?
Or, to obtain it shall be still so mad,
As to expect it, where none can be had?
Or, how can possibly that Body be
From great Distempers, or Destruction free,
Whose Head and Members are from one another
Divided? or so cruel to each other
As not to let each part, enjoy that dole
Which Nature gave them to preserve the whole?
Our King's returned: but we, to him from whom
Our perfect Peace, and saving-health must come,
Are not as yet returned; and whilst we are
As we now be, things will be as they were.
We shall be cheated, if we do suppose
Wasps will turn Bees, or Doves proceed from Crows,
Till GOD himself, whose proper work it is,
Shall bring to pass that Metamorphosis,
Which has been long expected by this Nation,
And, will require a longer Expectation,
Even till we more endeavor it, from him
Who may to us, as to Jerusalem,
Cry out, How often have I sought your good,
And as a Hen that is careful of her brood,
Would fain have brooded you? but, you would not!
His Mercies we have slighted, or forgot:
This negligence, (or, I might rather say
This wilfulness) has made us at this day
So wretched, that no hope does now remain
But that which quickly may be lost again:
For, we do find, whatever is pretended,
That, like Sour Ale in Summer we are mended;
And, that as since we innovated first,
At every Change, the last proved always worst.
(Whether things were presented to our sight
In Habits old or new, in black or white)
So still, it is like to be, till we adhere
To Righteous Actings, with hearts more sincere,
By what vow, promise, or fair show soever,
The Politician works on his Believer:
Yea, though the King should do the best he can,
And act beyond the sphere of mortal man:
For, here Hercule an labors find he shall,
And, that he is come now to the Aeugaean-stall,
Which must be cleansed (as the Poets say
That was) by turning Streams another way.
I, round about me, hear a found of Peace;
But I (as yet) discover nothing less;
Although, I do not see as heretofore
Swords drawn; or hear so often, the Canons roar.
That, which some dream we have, I cannot find;
Either, I see too much, or they are blind.
I see it possible; and with closed eyes
See also, how it may be otherwise,
Unless both Prince and People join as One
In doing that, which is yet left undone.
We have a King (GOD prosper him:) but hark!
He, has a people too will find him work.
He may perceive before this year wheels round,
That, with a wreath of thorns, they him have crowned;
And, that among their Sweetmeats, taste he shall
A little Honey mixed with much Gall.
What can the Masters Art, at Helm prevail
To save the Ship, that spreads every sail
Amongst Rocks in a storm, from being sunk,
When all his Mariners are sick or drunk?
What can the wisest Single person do,
Although King Solomon and David too
Were of his Council? Joshua General,
Sampson his Champion, and his Lifeguard all
Like David's Worthies, till men understand
Their own estate, heed, what GOD has in hand;
What he expects, and better can discover
What Grace is offered, and what Plagnes hang over?
Or, what can any Nations do, whose Kings
And Governors are heedless of such things?
These Duties, few of us regarded have,
But multiplied our Feasts; made our selves brave;
Neglect, as others did, our day of Trial,
And sing unto the Lute, the Harp, or Viol,
Even whilst our Brethren sharply punished are
For sins whereof their Judges are not clear:
For I, nor You, nor any one of them,
Who with severity, their faults condemn,
Could be excused, if GOD should be severe
In questioning what has been acted here.
As therefore, GOD shall bring them to my mind
To treat of those things I am now inclined,
Whereby, Dooms threatened may be turned from
These Realms, or born with meekness when they
But, I will first inform you, by what light come.
I see those things, whereof I have a sight,
In hope it will the better, then be known
If Truth I write, or Fancies of mine own.
Immodestly we must not pry into
GOD's secrets: yet, what he intends to do,
He, not alone does by his Word reveal
With what to Sins, to Duties, VVo, or Weal,
Relates: (...) Medium's also has bestown
Whereby, some future things may before-known;
And, he expects, that we with industry
Should to the search of them our selves apply
According to that means: because, each thing
Which Disquisition may to knowledge bring,
Will either hurt or profit, less or more,
As (for the most part) it has been before
Sought, shunned, hoped, feared, and well considered on;
And that makes me oft-times to muse upon
Things that may be, as well as those that are;
And, things past, with things present to compare,
That I might know, as much as Reason can,
With help of Grace, my duties as a man.
And, though it be of many disregarded,
GOD has my pains, in that kind, often rewarded
With such Discoveries, that (if timely heeded)
They might have Plagues prevented, that succeeded.
Whereof, lest you still doubt, here I will show
By what means I some future things foreknow.
That, you may prove, if those which I declare
Either Phanaticks, or Impostures are.
My Muse acts by a Glass of Speculation,
VVhereto applying, what my Observation
Lays hold on, I do otherwhile foresee
Some things, which either may, or may not be,
As that shall be omitted or fulfilled
Which is by GOD, conditionally willed.
Enthusiasms, I know, most men contemn;
No further therefore, I pretend to them
Than POETS may; though in all Generations
GOD may, and does vouchsafe both Revelations
And Visions too (for ought yet known to me)
Which may to us Premonitory be:
Since, frequently, prenotions I have had
(By some Impressions on my spirit made)
Of what ensued, which I could not have known
By any Light, or Virtue of mine own.
If therefore, you shall be inclined unto
My way of Divination, then, thus do:
Withdraw your selves to some place all alone,
Where you shall interrupted be of none:
(The Woods, your Closet, or the fragrant Field,
Conveniences for such a purpose yield)
When you are there, place GOD before your eyes,
And, minding he your deeds and thoughts espies.
Cast backward, so far from you every thing
(As possibly) which an offense may bring
To such a Majesty; chiefly, those ends
Whose prosecution neither truly tends
Unto GOD's honor, or to edify
Your selves or others; but, to vanity;
To satiate your Avarice or Pride,
Or such like Lusts. Thus, having sanctified
Your Persons, place upon the right hand side
GOD's Oracles, by which all things are tried.
You shall in them, expressed at large, behold
All Acts and Sufferings, which in times of old
Concerned Him, or his People, with all those
To them relating, who were Friends or Foes,
So far forth, as to you their cognizance
Pertains, and as your Weal it may advance.
These, by GOD's Providence transmitted were
To future ages, to be every where,
(Even to the very utmost end of Time)
That URIM and that THUMMIM unto them,
Whereto they might repair, when they of ought
That needed Resolution, stood in doubt.
Therein, you all Occurrences may find,
Which necessarily, in any kind,
Shall unto Faith or Manners appertain,
So long as in this world men do remain.
There are exemplifide, all humane failings,
All Changes, Hopes, Fears, Losings and Prevadings,
Of Enemies or Friends: Things Good and Evil;
The Practices and Projects of the Devil;
Things Metaphysical, products of Nature
And Grace, with what concerns every creature;
All Promises and Threatenings, which belong
To Faith or Unbeleef, to Right or VVrong,
With all things else that pertinent may be
To every Faculty, and each Degree.
When with this GLASS, you are acquainted grown
So that your Self, may to your self be known;
(For, it will show more plainly, than your face
You ever, yet beheld in any Glass
What Is in your heart; and also let you see
What things are wanting, which there ought to be)
And, when by practice you enabled are
To know to what heads, those things to refer
Of which you would enquire, place opposite,
What you have by your hearing, or by sight
Discovered, to that Subject pertinent,
Concerning which, you seek to know the event,
Or good or ill condition of the same,
And what you may conjecture without blame.
Then, well consider all the Circumstances
That qualify, and all Appurtenances
That aggravate, to make men capable
Of Mercies, or to Judgments liable;
As likewise, all Essentials to that thing
Whose Nature, Merit, or demeriting
You seek to understand; or else what Meed
Or punishment is for the same decreed
According to the Rules, and Judged Cases,
Recorded in that Map of common places.
This being done, be confident (if you
Have not for Truths received things untrue)
By parallelling Objects which you see,
Upon your left hand placed, with such as be
Upon the right, it will to you appear
Whether or not approveable they are;
And, what on Humane Actions, will ensue
Whereof you had an undeceived view;
Except, an intervening change takes place
By secret sins, or unseen Acts of Grace.
Nay, otherwhile, it pleases Providence
To hint things not deducible from thence,
Concerning both the manner and the time
Of future Consequences, unto them
Who seek not out of Vanity or Pride
For hidden things; and they are verified
Accordingly, when by what is fore-discerned
The welfare of GOD's people is concerned.
This, merely, is a work of Contemplation,
Not practical without much Observation;
And will as harshly sound in most men's ears,
As Love-songs, to an aged Usurer's;
And, teachable it is not, save to those
Whom GOD shall by his Spirit pre-dispose
For such a search: but, it is attained then
As Soon by mean wits, as by wisest men;
And, better answers what their Queries are,
Than if the Influence of every Star,
With all their Constellations they could know,
And, more confirmed thereby their Faith will grow.
Now, what of our Affairs, I pre-conjecture
By this GLASS, I intend to read a Lecture
As pertinently, as my shallow wit,
And those confused Objects will permit
Which press as hard within me to come out,
As those Oppressions hemming me about
Strive to break in upon me: for 'twixt these,
My soul and body lie in Little-ease.
Oh GOD, thine aid I once again implore,
That my Design make not our breaches more,
Nor quite complete my ruin now begun;
At least till I thy work have wholly done:
For, I am of no Faction, but profess
To King and Country with true heartiness,
Both Loyalty and Love, with an intent
Destruction and Disunion to prevent,
By offering to men's due considerations,
Some Objects of my private Observations
With those Products, which may arise from thence;
And which may likewise have an influence
On other things, that will relation have
To Thee and thine, whose interests to save
I so obliged am, that I would neither
Should be dishonored, or wrong done to either:
And, LORD, as this, my chief design to be,
Thou know, so vouchsafe to prosper me.
Betwixt Mount Gebal and Mount Gerazim,
At this day, to be placed, we do seem,
And, it is yet in suspense, whether or not
A Blessing or a Curse will be our lot:
The strst I hope for, and the last I fear,
Considering how still qualifide we are:
And what a little change is in us made
By all the changes we have lately had.
If raging singly, Avarice, Ambition,
Self will, Profaneness, Envy, Superstition,
Hypocrisy and Malice we have found,
Scarce tolerable; what when they abound,
And are united, can be here expected,
(Or, may be rationally then effected)
But multiplied Injuries and Scorn,
Not easily expressed, much less born?
If here shall be with wicked Canaanites,
A mixture of as wicked Israelites,
Whose sins will be as many (if not more)
And greater, than they have been heretofore,
How can our expectations be much better,
Than either former punishments, or greater?
So bad, so mad, our prosecutions be,
(By all that yet appears unto me)
As if we wilfully resolved had been
Against all spoke without us, or within,
Or whatsoever to us Examples teach,
Or Conscience, by our hopes or fears does preach:
But, if those Juglings which observed are
By me, should unto every one appear,
All Juglers would unto contempt be brought;
They, who seem very wise, would fools be thought,
And many in themselves grow doubtful whether
They to be pitied were, or scorned rather.
As great, as many, are the wrongs, the crimes,
The cruelties and falsehoods of these times,
As ever; and will such continue still,
Till Truth and Error, and till Good and Ill,
Have played their Master-prize; to which intent
Their forces universally are bent
Against each other. From false hearts proceeds
Falsehood in words, and wickedness in deeds;
And whilst we talk of Righteousness and Peace,
They, who concealed their maliciousness
With fair deportments do anew begin
So to declare what they have always bin,
As makes, in many, inlets to some fear,
That, till it ends in a Massacre,
No Vengeance will their projects terminate,
Or set a lasting period to their hate.
A bloodless Massacre here is already
Begun among us, and it will be bloody
When you perecive admittance of those Strangers,
Who first begun out plagues, renew our dangers;
And then, they who supposed their persons free,
Will with the rest, in equal perils be:
For, boundless lustings, mischiefs will beget,
Which lie within the womb unheeded yet,
Where Sin and Death are twins conceived together,
Though born a little while before each other;
And, will in very ugly shapes be found
In many places, ere this year goes round;
Portended, and attended in strange wise,
With Ominous Events, and Prodigies.
We shall see Gown-men tread on Men of War,
High Courts of Justice called to the Bar;
Those, of whom no man lately stood in dread,
Arraign the Living, and condemn the Dead:
Make Martyrs, Saints and Reprobates of those
Whose good or bad conditon no man knows;
And act such things as never yet were done
Within this Clymate since the world begun.
Yet, heed this, you, who with a sober mind
Seek peace, and are not factiously inclined,
(And you, whose principle is to repair
What is decayed, with no worse Tools than Prayer)
With Christian patience bear the Visitation
Which is allotted to this Generation;
And know, that as now Nature runs the race
By her designed, so shall also Grace
Pursue her course, to purge us in these fires,
For that perfection whereto Faith aspires.
Strive by renewing of your self-denials,
To bear with constancy your fiery trials,
Which must be undergone: for they appear
In show more painful than in proof they are;
As their experience found, who in times past
Have into Babels Fornaces been cast,
When they were seven times heated; and as we
May peradventure find, ere long 'twill be.
Be not afraid of your own sins; for they
On your repentance will be done away:
Nor be discouraged, though your Foes at large
Shall sum them up, and lay unto your charge
False imputations also: for, with ease
Both Saints and Reprobates of whom they please
The Vulgar make: and, if profane men shall
Be Judges betwixt David and King Saul,
The sins of David might be made appear
As many, and much greater than Sants were;
And He, upon whose side GOD sentence gave,
Amongst most men, the least esteem would have.
But, GOD observed his heart; purged what did slow
From humane frailty, as he purges now
With sharp corrections, the late crying crimes
Of Saints prevaricating in these times.
Judgment, in our days, at GOD's house begins,
Who takes such notice of our many sins,
That since we would not mend when we were chidden,
He will no longer now let them be hidden
Or go unpunished: but we, that each other
Provoked to sin, shall punish one another.
Me blame not then, if I touch here and there,
Those failings on all sides which causes were
Of what we suffer: for, GOD will be known
By doing Justice; and we ought to own
Our great Transgressions, and not seek to hide
Those Crimes, for which he lays even Kings aside,
As well as other men; that all may know,
He gives equal dooms to high and low.
Though, therefore, we sometimes a vail may cast
Over faulty Rulers, whilst their power does last,
To keep them from contempt, lest their disgrace
May cause infringement of the Common Peace,
We must not counter-act what GOD will do,
When he reproves them, and removes them too:
But, suffering with them by commiseration,
As being worthy of like condemnation,
Give GOD the glory, with our Pens and Breath,
For what is intended by their shame or death.
A sickness which is Epidemical
(In some degree) has seized upon all,
And, ease we cannot have, till that has wrought,
Which to procure a remedy is brought.
When Cures are to distempers first applied,
We must expect, more torments to abide
Than if we felt our Maladies alone,
Without a Medicine working thereupon.
Of our malignant humors to be eased,
To take some poisonous Drugs we must be pleased;
For our Physician, who does truly know
Their and our Natures, has prescribed so.
Diseases otherwhile need letting blood,
Though with what is corrupt, that which is good
Seems also lost: Gangrenes require sometimes
To save the Whole, by cutting off of Limbs.
Yea, otherwhile a welfare does redound
In common, when that suffers which is sound;
And, once when sick to death the Body lay,
'Twas cured by taking of the Head away.
GOD, who of evil things can make good uses,
And, by what is unwholesome, Health produces,
Vouchsafes to make passage now and then,
To signal Blessings, by the sins of men;
As when the sons of Jacob, who inslaved
Their Brother, were thereby, from Famine saved.
Which teaches us, to be contented still
To let him act, both when and how he will;
To search into our own corruptions nearly,
And not to censure any too severely.
Since unto every one it may be known,
That, no man's fault, so harms him as his own:
Let over -bitter Censures be suspended,
When you perceive a Brother has offended
By rashness, or through frailty, (though in that
Which to our Common Welfare does relate)
Spare not the sin a jot, but spare the man
(VVhoe'er) as much as possibly you can,
Till some Concomitancies or the Event
Assures that malice was in his intent:
And, though that may appear, assume not then,
A power to judge, belonging not to men:
Because, for ought you know, God might bereave him,
Of counsel, or unto himself then leave him,
For our Transgressions past; and to let in
A public mercy, by his private sin;
Thereby to humble us, and make us know
That all our Weal from his mere Grace does flow;
And, that the sins of others to our peace
As helpful were, as our own Righteousness.
In former times and causes, it was so,
The Egyptian Mid-wives, Rahab, Jael too,
Did things which in their nature sinful are,
Yet not alone by GOD made useful were
To save his people, but he also says,
That even those actions were products of Faith.
And, in these times perhaps here have been such,
Whereon, if I with modesty shall touch,
Let me be blameless; for, with good intent
What GOD permits for our experiment,
I here will mention, and to make it known,
That there is nothing merely of our own,
Or which is in us either good or evil,
By Nature or suggestions of the Devil,
That stops or furthers ought which GOD will do,
Though our concurrence he requires thereto
So far, as with his Will he us acquaints,
Or, bounds, by unresistable restraints:
For, when we are enjoined to that or this,
It is for our advantage, not for his,
Of us required; yea though we bounded be
By Precepts, Rules or Laws, so is not he.
As he himself shall please he can effect
His Ends, whatere we do, or shall neglect;
And, when against us any Foe prevails,
It is because we, not because he fails.
In all our late contests, it is hard to say,
Whether our Vice or Virtues made best way
To that Design, whereby to pass were brought
Those, which our best Aschievements have been thoughts;
Or, whether led'by Folly or sound Reason
By Fraud or Force, by Faithfulness or Treason
We prospered most: and it is not yet agreed
By all men, who our prosecutions heed,
Whether that which befell us at the first,
Or at the last, will prove the best or worst.
The Louse or Lion, Black Dogs, or the white,
Most mischievously either fawn or bite;
Which Party most needs pardon for their Sin,
Upon which side there has most Traycors been:
Or, whether their Deserts are worst or best
Who shall be honored most, or most disgraced;
For, though we know what Causes men did own,
With what heart they did act them, it is unknown.
Prodigious Fruits in these times have been born;
Crabs on the Vine, and Grapes upon the Thorn;
And, Men and Causes, whether good or bad,
Of Weal and Woe, by turns, like shares have had,
To teach, that our late Changes have succeeded
For some ends, which ought better to be needed.
By one Irregularity, we see
That, here in two months more progressions be
In order to the Temporary peace
Which most men are desirous to possess,
Then all our Powers and Virtues, Wit and Cost
Had brought to pass, in twenty years almost;
And we according to late promisings,
See creeping Motions toward some such things
As are expected: but, they to and fro,
Forward and backward, in their motion go
So doubtfully, that it is as yet uncertain
What resolutions are behind the Curtain.
As doubtful it is, whether more praise or blame
To them belong, who first contrived the same;
Whether the Consequence, or that which first
Thereto made pasage, will prove best or worst;
And whether want of pre-conditioning
Will bring at length, most damage to the King
And his Old Party, or else unto those
Who did his Entrance heretofore oppose:
For Acts unjust, are oftwell carried on,
And many righteous things unjustly done:
Some things likewise there be resmebling Sand,
Which he that graspeth with an open hand,
May therewith lode his palm: but, if he gripe
Too hard, 'twill all between his fingers slip.
Concerning that proceed, which brought to pass
The Change, which lately here effected was,
Some scruplings have been made: But, on the Fact,
Or upon them who put the same in Act,
I Will nothing peremptorily declare,
Though therein, an Obliquity there were;
Because, means failed me, whereby to inspect
Ought further, than into the single Act;
That, by the Circumstances I might see
What Motives to their hearts proposed might be;
What Spirit led them, and what straits they past
To that, which was resolved on at last:
For, in such Cases, what they ought to do,
Wise men are often to seek, and good men too.
If they who were chief Instruments in that
Which wrought the Change, that we have seen of late,
Sought only and unfeignedly that end,
VVhereto all Trusts and Actions ought to tend,
And were but Circumstantially to blame,
In plotting or pursuing of the same,
Their fault (if any) is a Venial Crime,
For which there may be made another time
Amends to Sufferers; that perhaps may more
Secure them, than they were secured before.
Their Fault was but the error of a man,
Which well the King may pardon: for, I can;
Because, I know, what ere they did intend,
GOD will have glory by it, in the end;
And, all these Nations future welfare too,
If they neglect not, what is yet to do.
But, they whose Trust these Trustees did abuse,
Them, cannot peradventure so excuse:
And (I believe) more wise than heretofore,
Will henceforth never trust Good Fellow more;
Nor Peasant, Peer, Priest, Prince, or Parliament,
With that which may produce a Detriment
To common Interest (till by some condition
To them secured, they shall secure fruition
Of such Concernments) if, once more they may
Recover that which they did fool away.
But, that is impossible, as things now stand;
And, should GOD take the power out of his hand
Who grasps it now, they who shall next enjoy it,
No better peradventure would employ it
Than others did, GOd therefore, keep us from
Another Change, until his Kingdom come,
Except a change of hearts; and at this time,
Or his probation, let his Grace, in him
Be so effectual, that he may endeavor
To settle here, a righteous Throne for ever.
For, every man that lives (at first or last)
Before a Final Doom on him is past,
Has in his lifetime, once (at least) an hour
Wherein our gracious God, vouchsafes him power
To ask and have; and to elect that path
Which leads to weal or woe, to life or death:
Yea, always at such times, GOD, who first loves,
The soul of every humane-creature proves;
And, those, who then, by giving him their heart,
(Though with much failing) do perform their part,
He will enable, and assist them still
By his preventing Grace, to do his will.
For they, as often as they go astray,
Shall either hear a VOICE within them, say,
(Or else behind them;) Of that course beware;
Return, or thou art lost; thy way lies there,
Which leads to safety. Thus the Spirit preaches,
And by means extraordinary teaches
Where common means fail: and till men contemn
His Holy Spirit, God forsakes not them:
But, afterward, indeed, although the same
He sometime speaks, it is to increase their shame,
Or others to instruct: for, then such Voices
Are so drowned by the Whisperings and Noises
Of carnal things, that all is spoke in vain,
Which to their weal or safety may pertain.
The King by such temptations, and so many
Beleagur'd seems, as never were by any
With constancy and without foil withstood,
Save by him, who was GOD with Flesh and Blood:
For he stands now exposed to every evil,
(Even in the Front) whereby World, Flesh, or Devil,
May him assault; and with him 'twill go hard,
Unless, GOD sends him in, an Angel-guard;
Which (if it be his pleasure) that he may,
My heart unfeignedly does often pray,
And that, at this time he submit his will,
The mind of God, sincerely to fulfill:
For, I believe, that as it did with Saul,
(On his probation-day, long since befall)
These Kingdoms will established be to him,
As he with GOD complyeth at this time.
Fair Opportunities this present day
Are offered, which if he let slip away,
We have but hitherto a course begun,
Whereby we may at last be more undone:
And though he should become ten times as strong
In things which to a carnal strength belong,
It will to settle him prevail no more,
Than such powers have prevailed heretofore:
Nor will it, when most mighty he appears
To others, from his own heart, keep out fears
Of things not to be feared; but at length
Make him, perhaps, afraid of his own strength:
And that which by a Trifle has been lost,
Will be recovered with as little cost
As when 'twas won, as soon as their despite,
Their sins and insolences are at height,
Who shall by petulant exasperations,
(Beyond the common patience of these Nations)
Abuse his Grace, and turn their late success
Into oppression, pride, and wantonness.
This seems by some endeavored (having ends
Repugnant unto what the King intends)
Who do proceed (as if that for the nonce)
To make all Suff'rers desperate at once,
By gelding and delaying of the Grace,
For wihch the King spontaneously did pass
His Royal Word: And this may an Event
Produce, at last, whereof some will repent
When it is too late; since, Mastives brook it worse
To be o're-much provokt, than Fawning Curs.
All vengeance does to GOD alone belong:
But, few remember this, when they have wrong.
An English temper does that life disdain
Which is deprived of what should Life maintain:
And whatso'er is menaced or follows,
Some, in despite of Hangman, Rope and Gallows,
Will any thing attempt, to vindicate
Themselves from scorn, when robbed of their Estate:
And they have little prudence, who conceive
Bees will be quiet, when both from their Hive
And Honey they are forced: or, that small things
(When they are many, and have many stings)
Are safely slighted; for, there has succeeded
Much mischief where this Caution was unheeded:
And probable it seems, that if the King
Deters what is hoped for, now, but till next Spring,
Destroying many thousand Families
By vacating their just Securities,
(For what was bought or lent, to save these Lands
From desolation, when into their hands
The Supreme Power did slip by GOD's permissions,
Who then had cast him out of his possessions)
It will not be the next way to that peace
Which many yet are hopeful to possess;
Or have a consequent, to answer that
Great Mercy, which GOD has vouchsafed of late.
If, for performing that which both Divine,
And Humane Laws did warrant and enjoin,
(To wit, obedience to those Powers that were
In being) he from Innocents does tear
Their Livelihoods; and their posterity
Exposes unto scorn and beggary,
For having done their duties unto them
Whom GOD advanced by debasing him,
(And when he so unable was to give them
Protection, or from their hand to reprieve them,
That at the same time, he himself was glad
To seek a Refuge where it might be had)
It will not seem to be an Act of Grace,
That corresponds with what expected was
Before Monck gave us up into his power;
And made our Trustees much more his, than our.
If he shall lay an over-heavy weight
On those, whom he had left in such a straight,
Without their fault (except a fault it were
To lose, what they to keep unable were)
Or, if he shall, as other men have done,
Lose those Advantages that he has won
By Angling for a Frog, till from his Net
The Fishes now enclosed forth shall get;
Young Counselors may prove to him as bad
As those which foolish Rehoboam had.
But this is more than probable (although
The Priests and Prophets dare not tell him so,
Who now most fawn upon him) that, even all
GOD's Condescentions are conditional;
And, that now or hereafter, their success
Will to his Weal or Woe add more or less,
Accordingly as he, and as these Nations
Improve at this day, His and their Probations.
Which Truth most men believe not, or forget;
And, that makes me so often mention it.
GOD gave unto his people, on conditions,
The Land of Promise, to be their possessions;
And, for their not performing of the same,
They Vagabonds throughout the world became.
Upon conditions also, Solomon
Had promise of an everlasting Throne;
Which he neglecting, ere the third descent,
Ten parts of twelve were from his Kingdom rent.
Yea, wicked Jeroboam might have had
A settlement on him for ever made,
Upon the like conditions: and, so may
This King; but never any other way.
If he comes hither with the self-same heart,
With which, he did, in likelihood depart;
New covered over with a fairer skin,
And fully fraughted with Revenge within:
If he shall make his Royal Word a snare,
If he by hopes delayed nourish fear
Instead of love; by mental Reservations,
(Or by deceivable Equivocations)
His promise vacates; or, if what he swore
In presence of his Sovereign heretofore;
Or, if he shall confine to others breasts
Those Acts of Grace, which to his Interests
Will most advantage give, when it is known
The pardons which he grants are his own:
If he refers his Justice to their Zeal,
Who may prefer their Ends before his Weal,
Until it shall unhappily destroy
That new-sprung hope which many yet enjoy;
And by converting it into despair,
Blasts that in Autumn, whereof blowings fair
Appear this Spring; we may thereby perchance,
Ere many Springs, compelled be to dance
Another Matachin. If, GOD so please,
I wish and pray it may be otherwise;
And that this might be weighed: for, on this BALL
None are so firmly fixed but they may fall
If Righteousness and Truth support them not,
What other prop soever they have got.
We have a sight of this days joy and sorrow,
But no man knows what will befall tomorrow:
And should GOD be as rigorous as men,
That which is done, would be undone again.
I do believe, that (not excepting any)
All men of great Offenses, and of many
Are guilty. And, I do suppose the King
Has not been free from blame in every thing.
To him there may, either by Men or Heaven,
Be somewhat on the scores, to be forgiven,
As well as to the People: secret crimes
May be informer, or in latter times
Committed, wherein either he mis-did,
Or his Progenitors, which yet are hid,
And must be expiated, ere that Rest
Where at we aim, wilfully be possessed;
And have an Expiation by mere Grace,
Or by that penance through which others pass.
In order whereunto, GOD now perchance
Him, to his Fathers Throne does re-advance;
Either a new Progression to begin,
Or else to fill the measure of their sin;
And punish us, till ripened, he, or we,
Or both, for Grace, or for Destruction be.
If penitence allay not that fierce wrath,
Whereto our wickedness provoked him has,
There will impartial search be made, by GOD,
As well for common, as for Royal blood;
Yea, search on both sides, both for blood and treason,
When equal Retributions are in season:
And, as much guiltiness if he shall then
In Kings discover, as in common men,
Their Judges vindicate from guilt he shall,
Though them we murderers and traitors call;
And, their blood, if it guiltlesly be shed,
Will cry as loud to GOD as Abels did.
What will it profit then, if there be none
To question them on earth, for ought mis-done,
When they shall know, and truly understand,
On what sad terms they fall into GOD's hand;
Who shall the more offend, because they were
More by him priviledg'd than others are?
GOD will not then be mocked, whatever they
Shall dream, who put the thought thereof away;
Or whatsoever a Prophet in Lawn Sleeves
Or Kings and their Immunities believes;
And though their Nobles also flatter them,
As Iudahs did King Joash in his time.
Hereof I would be his Remembrancer,
If in the place of some of those I were
Who ought to do it: yea, as now I am,
I had adventured to perform the same,
But that I lately have conceived a thought,
These Lines will timely to his view be brought,
By such a hand, as from it with respect
It may be taken, and have good effect.
And, if these Cautions he shall not contemn,
(Expressed in true Loyalty to him)
I may have hope, that Justice to obtain
Which I have elsewhere sought long time in vain;
And find it to be made a real sign
Of his, and public Peace, as well as mine.
For, all I shall expect will be no more,
But, that, he make me neither rich nor poor;
And me within that Grace would comprehend,
Which he to some of those does yet extend,
Who both by their Examples and Command
First drew me with his Opposites to stand;
And who, if I mis-acted, did thereby
Contract ten times a greater guilt than I.
But, so the public Peace advanced may be
Hereby, let what GOD will befall to me.
To make their merits and demerits even,
They should love much, to whom much is forgiven:
Yet, some to whom he has forgiven least,
May love as well as they who love him best;
And, better too perhaps, when they behold
He executes that Justice which he should;
With constancy pursuing, what, more tends
To public Welfare, than to serve his ends.
How these things may concern him, he best knows
Next GOD, who will (I hope) his heart dispose
To choose the way proposed at this time,
And to pursue the same, enable him.
Because, unless at this time, that probation
For which GOD has vouchsafed his Restoration,
Produces what with those ends may accord,
For which he was by Providence restored,
He Will turn the wheel, which has so often gone round,
Till men according to his heart be found
To rule his People; to direct his Sheep;
To act his Will, and their own Vows to keep.
Herein has been much failing: and, I fear,
Even for that Covenants breach, which many jeer,
And impudently slight, GOD from this Land
Will not remove his now correcting hand,
Till to a true repentance he shall bring
For that sin, People, Parliament and King.
A Judgment at this present is begun,
Which will extend to all ere it be done;
Even unto those who execute his doom
On them, on whom it is already come;
(Yea, signally, in some respect or other,
To persons or estates, to friend or brother)
If they whom it concerns do not amend
What is mis-done; wave, what they mis-intend;
And hearken to GOD's Voice in this their day
Of Trial; and as (if they will) they may:
For GOD, though much provokt, still gives space
'Twixt every Judgment, for preventing-grace:
And now, to be a Cautional to him,
(As his Corrections lately were to them
Who reigned last) this King, shall see them scourged
Who scourged him, until their sins be purged.
God having cast his Predecessors out,
For their, and also for our sins (no doubt)
Them, with an Iron Rod begins to strike;
To show, that sin he hates in all alike,
And make it known that he will no man spare,
(Though one of his own Household he appear)
If he shall scandalously give offense
In any kind, without true penitence.
A dreadful Judgment he has brought on those,
Who made of Piety the fairest shows;
And they, as traitors to their King are now
By those pursued, whom they did pursue
As traitors to their Country; and their Laws,
Yea their own Swords, turn Foes unto their Cause:
And they who lately, nor to friend nor foe,
But for by-ends, would either Justice do,
Or Mercy show, shall find in their distress,
That others will to them be merciless.
They, who were called Saints; and may be such,
Although their failing has been very much;
Seem now the chief mark of GOD's indignation,
And censured are as sons of Reprobation;
Because, they often had forewarned been,
(Twice were cast out of grace, and twice took in)
Are now deprived, a third time, of that power
Which they abused to their own harm and our:
They are exposed to such extreme disgraces,
Such hazards of their goods, lands, lives and places,
And to such scorns, that never was there more
Contempt cast upon any heretofore:
For, they, who as their Chiefs acknowledged them
(To their own shame) their persons did contemn;
And, far beyond all presidents, revile
The Authority they owned, even the while
It was in being; though they did in that
Make, as it were a Close-stool of their Hat.
Of all esteem, they are now quite bereft,
And, in so sad a plight have thousands left,
Who trusted them with every thing they had,
That their own selves alone, they have not made
Thereby contemptible to Foes and Friends,
(Lost their estates, their safeties, and their ends)
And such confusions brought; that few or none
Are sure, they shall not thereby be undone,
Or damnified; but given cause likewise
To this, and times to come, so to despise
An English Parliament, that, if it get
No better credit than it has, as yet,
It is in hazard to become a thing
As much abhorred, as the name of King
Was once in Rome; for their prevarications,
Their self ends, falsehoods, and dissimulations
With King and People so destructive were,
And both to Roundhead, and to Cavalier
(As then distinguished) that, if there be any,
Few names are left, whereof there be not many
Undone, or at least damnified, either
In credit or estate, or both together:
And, by those many thousands now undone,
That mischief, so, from man, to man, does run,
That it infects three times as many more,
And may bring beggary to every door,
Besides, those quarrels which it may beget,
Whose sad effects lie unperceived yet.
Some, who had been most faithful to their side,
They much oppressed whilst they were dignified;
And, often when they did pretend a course
To cure their Grievances, they made them worse.
Then, what by such oppressed men from those
Can looked for be, whom they pursued as foes,
But to be kicked out of the world, or trod
Into the dirt? Except our gracious GOD
Has now brought home the King to be a friend
To all men who did honestly intend?
And who, though in some things they did amiss,
Sinned not with malice, or with wilfulness?
The Kings work will be now, both to relieve
And to correct, as cause, he shall perceive,
Without respect to persons, or wrongs done,
Before a Reconcilement was begun;
Except so far forth only, in relieving,
In recompencing, honoring, or giving,
As he is to those men, who with him engaged
In charity, and gratitude obliged,
Without destroying any in these Nations
Who were submissive to GOD's Dispensations;
And, who, were moved to that which they have done
By Conscience, or by Ignorance alone,
Without malicious purpose or design,
Against a known Law, Moral or Divine.
And therefore, where respect is to be had
To suff'rers, and to satisfaction made;
The best expedient to prevent debates,
And ruining of many men's estates,
Will either be, if we had such Trustees,
Who by this change, life nor estates do leese,
(And by confederating long together
With public spoils enriched one another,
Or, may be proved guilty of a Cheat,
Which formerly did friend or foe defeat
Of his estate; or, to the public wrong
More power assumed, than did to them belong)
To cause, that, they to whom these gave offense,
May out of their estates have recompense;
For, why should great Revenues be enjoyed
By them, whose guilt has guiltless men destroyed?
Or rather, since that many among these
Were intermixed (who their miscarriages
Opposed to their power) whom none knows how
From persons guilty, to distinguish now.
Why should not for the Credit of the Nation
(For Justice sake) and for the preservation
Of common Peace, all parties help to bear
Their heavy burdens, who oppressed are?
For every man among us, more or less,
Is some way guilty of this wickedness:
And GOD, if this course long defer we shall,
His Vengeance will divide among us all.
Let therefore none, who in these suffering-times
Shall escape the punishments due to their crimes,
Insult over them that suffer, or suppose
Their prosp'ring from their well-deserving flows.
Let them remember, and consider well,
That they on whom the Tower of Silo fell,
No greater sinners judged were than they
On whom it fell not; and think at this day
Some men may perish, who have been more free
From guiltiness, than most that saved be.
The King, together with his Parliament,
May pardon every kind of punishment
For faults against themselves; or any one,
Except for what is wilfully mis-done
Against our Maker; but, nor he nor they,
Can take the guilt of any sin away;
And though he may connive at some offenses,
Or be deceived as to men's innocencies,
Who by their cunning have found means of late
Themselves with him to re-indintegrate:
Yet, thousands know so well what they have done,
And felt so much of what ensued thereon,
That, though in charity, they do forgive
Their falsehood, they will remember't whilst they live.
Let them remember too, what they have done,
Lest GOD bring Vengeance when we call for none.
Can any Peer or Commoner suppose,
Who, in the supreme Council sat with those
Who did the late unhappy war begin,
And by their Declarations drew us in,
(As men obliged in duty, to adhere
To them, in what they prosecuting were)
That, they are guiltless, though now blamed less
Than others, who the same Cause did profess?
Can they be blameless, who did with the first
Begin the Quarrel, and till nigh at worst
Continue it; not leaving on Record
Ought, whereby their dissent might be declared?
Nor sought for them, a saving, or protection,
Who might be ruined by their defection?
Does it not greatly their crime aggravate,
That they vouchsafed not to capitulate,
That, Innocents, by their default abused,
Might to some safe condition be reduced?
But rather, to their own designs made way,
By leaving them, to be the Spoilers prey?
Though they forgot us, I suppose it fit
To mind them; lest themselves they may forget
When I am dead, and, therefore, I will here
Leave somewhat to be their Remembrancer.
Let them remember with consideration,
With true repentance, and with due compassion,
How many thousands (whilst they live at rest)
Are either quite destroyed, or oppressed,
Either in Person, Credit, or Estate,
Whose aid they did not only often entreat,
But also (thereby to promote their end)
Compelled to contribute, pay and lend;
Yea, to engage their Persons in their Cause,
Under pretense of Piety and Laws,
Whom they have now made innocently poor,
And forced to beg, or else to suffer more;
Whilst they from all those miseries are clear,
Whereof their failings chief occasions were:
Not only, making that an Instrument
To ruin them, which ruin should prevent;
But also (probably) by their endeavor,
To make, and keep the people Slaves, for ever.
To write plain Truth, why should I be afraid?
By what man may it not be justly said,
Our public Faith has been the shameless'st Debtor,
And throughout all these Realms the greatest Cheater
That ever was; and that our Parliaments
Have been beyond all former Presidents.
The worst Security (and never more
Will be confided in, as heretofore)
If unconfirm'd they leave what has been bought,
And, what was justly sold (as then 'twas thought?)
Or if they make not recompense at least
To those, who by their actings are oppressed?
For this is the same Nation, though the Cause,
The Governor, and in some part the Laws
Are changed now; GOD, who the wrong does see?
Is yet the same, the same will always be,
And both for what is suffered, and was done,
Will prosecute the Judgment that is begun.
By mere Cheats, many thousand Families
Destroyed are, and with complaints and cries,
So fill men's ears, that they make all to grieve,
Save those, who sense of no Afflictions have
But of their own. The Children, do bemoan
Their Aged Parents helplesly undone;
Who, now have nothing left of what was theirs
To recompense their pity, but sad tears:
And, he, who thinks Life a gratuity
In such a case, loves Life much more than I,
Supposing that is a Mercy, which to me
A barbarous cruelty appears to be.
Oh GOD! how are thy kindnesses requited?
How in our sufferings are our foes delighted?
How justly do thou many now condemn,
And punish, for wrongs done to some of them?
How are the Just and Unjust, wrapped together
In one Snare, to torment and plague each other?
It is believed, that many men there were,
When Innovations, were beginning here,
Who, being in themselves malevolent,
(And for some private causes discontent)
Designed and practiced, how to bring to pass
That, which their own, and our Destruction was:
But, here were many more, who did endeavor
To qualify the late infectious Fever
Which had distempered us; and to retain
The Loyalty that seems renewed again:
Yet, now an Epidemical Disease
Has brought Confusion upon some of these
As well as upon them, who fined perchance
Much more through wilfulness, than ignorance.
They, who did neither by their deeds or words,
By counsel, by their pens, or by their swords,
Begin those Innovations in the state,
Which have been prosecuted here of late;
No, nor so much as by a secret thought,
Contribute to those Changes which were brought
Upon these Islands, till they were effected
By other men: they, who themselves subjected
Either but passively, to those in power,
To escape those mischiefs which might them devour;
Or, merely act vely, to help prevent
An Anarchy, and Evils imminent;
Which is no more than God's law does command,
When he makes alterations in a Land;
And has been also, practiced by all Nations
In every Kingdom, through all Generations,
When either by his grace, or his permission,
He brings a people into our condition.
Even they who did no more, are made to share
With those, who wilfully transgressors were,
And Murderers, and Traitors be reputed;
As if the Kingdom, which was constituted
Before these Changes had continued on,
And all which has by GOD and men been done,
Were but a Dream, of which, now they awake,
Men may at will, Interpretations make:
Or, as if Actings, in a time of War,
Were bounded, as in times of Peace they are:
Whereas it is known, that, War does silence all
Laws, either Civil or Municipal:
And, that, what then Necessity constrained,
May by the Law of Nations be maintained,
As justly, as those contracts which are made
In times of peace by Laws which then we had;
Though they, perhaps, who shall have po'wr to do
What they themselves please, will not have it so.
But, though we get not that, whereat we aim,
We thereto will continue still our Claim,
And plead our cause; in hope, that truth and reason
May at this present, be declared in season.
If prudent men collect and weigh the matters
Which here my Muse confusedly now scatters,
(Because at once within me I retain
More Notions, than by words I can make plain)
They may by them, if put together well,
And duly heeded, my true meaning spell.
They, who with no side factiously, took part,
And only in sincerity of heart,
Came to secure the Sovereign Magistrate,
When called by those, who were co ordinate
With him in power; they, who had no intent
To make a breach 'twixt King and Parliament,
But, faithfully did serve them both together,
To have preserved their lawful Rights to either,
And cannot be by conscience, law or reason;
Delinquents any way (much less for Treason)
Against their Prince, for giving aid to those
Whom he himself authorized to be chose
For his chief Council, and whom likewise, he
Made everlasting Senators to be,
Empowered to make Laws everlasting too,
Until their own Act should themselves undo:
They, who did those obey, whom to withstand,
(Although made active by the Kings command)
Has punished been with Death; even some of these
Though acting also, with good Consciences,
For this Obedience, suffered with the first,
And may have also Lots among the worst
On both sides; which to me appears, at least
Injustice, or no Mercy, at the best.
GOD may correct us thus, and justly too
Though to our King and Country we have true
Continued in the Main, for, in his sight
There are demerits in the most upright,
Which needs the Rod; and he chastises those
Whom he befriended, by their greatest Foes;
Because, not seldom times they gave to them
Who were his Foes, occasions to blaspheme,
His grace and his long-sufferings much abused
His timely Premnonition often refused.
For, very often, and very many ways
They had Fore-warnings, of what in these days
Is brought upon them; and, as many times
As GOD forgave them, they renewed their Crimes.
When therefore they had long without dis-regard.
GOD's Messengers in ordinary heard;
When, such as they themselves did most esteem,
And those who preached in season unto them
Upon their solemn Fasts, or feasting-dayes.
They only thankt, but followed on their ways.
Then (as he does, at first, with Infidels)
By signs prodigious, and by miracles,
He proved them; but Pagans heretofore
Have by that means, been wrought upon much more
To warn them, and reprove them, he sent, then
A company of despicable men,
Who, though despised and houted at, they are
(And to the greatest number do appear
Phanaticks) were the Messengers of God,
And such, as he found fit to send abroad
To such a People, and at such a season
As this, wherein, Rhyme works as much as Reason;
And manifests, it is such a time with us,
As when GOD's Prophets seemed ridiculous
Unto the Jews, by acting before them
Such Signs, as made them more their words contemn.
Among such like, he has permitted me,
Not only their Premonitor to be,
But, likewise, to see, what I fore-exprest
Fulfilled; and hear it, by themselves confessed:
For, I took once, or oftener, every year,
Occasion to be their Remembrancer;
And, publicly declared what I knew
To be misdone, and what things would ensue
If not prevented; but most did deride
My timely Cautions: Vanity and Pride
Made ineffectual all my pains to be,
And, not a little mischievous to me.
Yet, still I persevered in declaring
What they were doing, and GOD was preparing.
Now fourteen years ago, with small regard,
My English Opobalsamum declared,
What would befall them; and, there, is recorded
Among such like Expressions, one, thus worded,
Opobalsamum Anglicanum, Page 20. -- Which side soever shall prevail,
We have a Mischief se ling by entail
On us, and on our heirs: For, in heart
You do unite (though corporally apart)
And join by close Compliances in one,
In hope to compass what you have begun,
Which is nor worse nor better, but to raise
Your houses, both by good and evil ways:
And for that end, to ruin you would bring.
Law, Gospel People, Parliament and King,
But ere this hope effected you shall see,
Hark, Traitors, what your destiny shall be,
Heed and observe it, for it is the Doom,
Will, will without all peradventure come
Upon your heads, who have your trust betrayed,
Oppressions on your faithful Servants laid;
And multiplied your wealth with greediness,
By preying on your Country in distress.
And, this it is; He, that such wrongs requites,
Will give you portions among Hypocrites.
Your Pride shall suddenly by shame be followed,
You shall spew up the Gobbets you have swallowed;
Your way shall perish etc.
Unto that book, wherein this is expressed,
I will refer you to peruse the rest.
The preface to my SALT on SALT, records
A Hint to that end, in these following words.
Last year I sent a Flash which is let pass
Unheeded, as a thing that never was;
Now follows the Report, or, Clap of Thunder,
Which have been seen and heard, thus far asunder,
To give the longer Warning: for, the Shot,
And Thunderbolts (if Grace prevent it not)
Will next year flee among you. God, amend us,
And then I am affur'd, he will defend us.
Moreover, I, ten months, now past, foretold
That nine months longer if defer they should
Their Duties, and neglect the Grace twice shown,
They, and their Projects will be overthrown,
As now they are; and that they should be in
That Purgatory which does now begin.
The premonition published last year
To that effect, shall be repeated here.
See Epistolium Vagum-prosa-metricum Page 20. Let them remember, he that stands
may fall,
That every promise is conditional;
And, that God's promises will be to them
Performed, as they to others and to Him
Perform their promises: for though a wrong
He often forgiveth, and forbeareth long,
There is a set time, which now draws near,
Wherein, he will no longer so forbear.
Let no man slight this Caution, though by him
Divulged, who may despicable seem:
For in these days, it often comes to pass
That God speaks (as to Balaam by his Ass)
To wisest men, by those whom fools they deem;
To Kings, by persons that ignoble seem;
And, if their Wills, as wilfully as he
They still pursue, like his their ends will be.
This Power now ruling, reigns by God's Commission,
Yet, not without a fore-premis'd condition:
For, by Unrighteousness it shall not stand,
Though it were as the Signet on his hand.
If they themselves with outward washings flatter,
And, shall not cleanse the inside of the platter:
If those Defects of Justice and Compassion
Which lately brought confusion on this Nation,
Be not forth with repaired in some degree
(As means by God's Grace will vouchsafed be)
And if a Model truly genuine,
This August sixteen hundred fifty nine,
Be not conceived and fully born, before
The time exceeds the end of nine months more,
With all the essential parts of such a thing
As may receive a timely perfecting
To qualify the rage that will increase
The breaches made into the Common peace;
Then all that this power thenceforth can endeavor,
Will either be a Nullity for ever,
Or else, a furth'rance to that horrid pother
Which will make facile entrance for another
Oppressing Hand, that, will but Justice do
So far as Vengeance does extend unto.
But lest you think it was by Accident
That this presage has had a Consequent
Just at the time foretold, the same book showed
In what mode also, that which has ensued
Should visit them; heed therefore, and compare
What Is now begun, with what these Lines declare.
In the Book last mentioned, Page 24. To cure those Frenzies for his future
glory,
GOD is preparing a New Purgatory
To purge what may be purged from the dross,
That of the pure Gold there may be no loss;
The Judgments now beginning shall go round,
And through these Islands, till all those are found
Who have been false in that which they professed
To GOD or to the public interest.
From house to house, from man to man, they shall
Procession make, till they have seized on all,
All shall be proved, whether poor they be,
Or rich, or of a high or low degree,
By outward or by inward fiery Trials,
Till they are brought to real Self-denials;
'Twixt GOD and them, through Mercy to repent
Their Failings, or to outward punishment.
Those who shall in this Island escape his hand,
Vengeance will seize on, in a Foreign Land;
The foes of Peace among the common Rout,
A Pestilence or Famine shall find out:
They who have shuffled from the Soldiers fury,
Shall fall into the mercy of a Jury;
And, when they from the sword are in some hope
To escape, shall then be hampered in a Rope.
The Mischiefs which they shunned in the Street,
Within a secret Chamber they shall meet.
Those men whom nothing publicly pursues,
Their Consciences in private shall accuse.
They, who immoveably do think to stand,
Shall fall without the motion of a hand;
And when the things they feared, cannot annoy them,
That, which they slight, and feared not, shall destory them.
I told them likewise that their gross neglect
Of Justice as to me would have effect
Upon themselves, that, what to me and mine
They suffered to befall, would be a sign
Of what their lot must be; and when it should
So come to pass, my SALT on SALT foretold.
In these words, Page 47. That this bears date the last day of September,
In sixteen hundred fifty eight remember;
And that, a Reconcilement be before
We have provoked GOD's patience one year more,
Lest I my self be made another sign
Of what the former Symptoms pre-divine:
For, those Confusions which distract this State,
Are typified in my outward Fate.
And printed on me by that violation
Of Justice, which defiles this Generation.
They that seem to have enough in outward show,
To bear their Part, and pay the Debts they ow,
And for the future a sufficiency;
So also, if I had my right, have I.
As (notwithstanding this) with much ado
They now subsist; so fares it with me too.
As at the present, their Expenses be
More than their Incomes, so it is with me.
I have more Foes than Friends; and much I am
Deceived, if they may not say the same.
My Foes and troubles in another year
Will ruin me, and so will also their,
If he, on whose assistance I depend,
Prevents not what their foes and mine intend,
Before another year wheels round, I may
Enjoy an outward peace, and so might they,
If they embrace the means that will be shown,
And follow not devices of their own.
If timely Justice be vouchsafed to me,
By timely Mercies they secured shall be.
If I permitted am to be aestroy'd,
Their power, will not long after be enjoyed.
Moreovet, my DARK-LANTERN fore-declar'd
As plainly (as such things might be averred
In such like times) what, Cromwell had designed,
That they in power (had they been so inclined)
Might have prevented it, when show he made
To give up that Commission which he had.
And had they been so prudent to have tookt,
They, his White Lion, at that time had dockt.
These were my words:

A homebred Lion, of a Hair unknown
In Africa, by being overgrown,
And dreadful to his Keepers, shall thereby
Increase the rage of smothered Jealousy,
And lose his Tail, except betwixt his paws
He couch his head, and hides his teeth and claws,
Or else grows Rampant; what will follow then?
Ask those you credit, they are cunning men;
Of me you ask in vain, for it is my fate
Never to be believed, till it is too late.
I, likewise did by parable express
In that book with what servile flatteries,
They fawned on their own Creature, whom they had
Hewed out of Common blocks, and Idols made,
With what would follow it; and my intent
Was not, by my Perpetual-Parliament
To make that such (as some have thought I meant)
But, rather that Designment to prevent
By some Diversion; for, full well I knew
That my proposals they would not pursue.
And, they who my Poetic fury read,
Which was by me last winter published,
May thence collect, that I did then foresee
The Kings Return, and how it so would be,
Though I my preconjectures did express
(As then I thought) with some ambiguousness,
To be excused; because of that Relation
Which then I had, and my Faiths preservation:
For, though that Poets in the worlds first ages,
Were Prophets, Priests, and Magisterial Sages,
And, in all former times (as in Commendam)
Have been allowed a Quid libet audendum;
Yea, though there does to sacred poesy,
Belong a necessary Liberty
In Language, not so pertinent to those
Who hammer their Conceptions out in prose,
Yet, that Good Spirit, which directs their Muses,
Therewith, a prudent wariness infuses,
That Malice may not thereat take offense
To do them wrong, without much impudence,
Or gross Injustice; and, for which wrong he,
Will take Revenge, by whom inspired they be,
When he shall pleased be to call them to
That work which he prepared them to do.
And though my musings hitherto appear
But dreaming Fancies, whereat many jeer;
They who observe, what at the foresaid time
Befell to me, and afterward to them,
And also knew, that all true Christians be
Kings, Priests and Prophets too, in some degree,
Shall find at last, that this Age Prophets had,
And sober men (though they were judged mad)
Whom God stirred up, to set before their eyes
Those needful Cautions which vain men despise,
Because it pleases him to give them pass
By Instruments more scorned than Balaams Ass.
There are some at this day, on whom nicknames
Are cast; and, whom, the Vulgar much defames;
Who (though they failings have) are by Gods warrants
Authorized to do such needful Errants
As to these times relate, and to deride
Our complements, our vanities and pride:
And, whatsoever Spirit them has moved,
We (not without cause) are by them reproved
Of things, whereto our consciences, with them
Bear witness, though their persons most contemn.
Among these (as aforesaid) I am one
By whom the work of GOD is to be done;
And he thereto is pleased to make use
Of poesy (at this time) when the abuse
Of that gift, has profaned it, much more
By Ribaldries, than ever heretofore.
It may be too, I serve my Generation
Thereby (although not wealth nor reputation
It gets me) and my GOD, as well as they
Who seek to take my purchased Lands away,
As sanctified to them; for, even by these
My scriblings (as to term them some do please)
Occurrences, which else would be forgot,
(And passages which many minded not)
Will so remembered be, that GOD shall have
Some glory by them, and men good receive.
And though I take no care at all to trick
My Poems up, with flowers of Rhetoric,
A day will come, wherein with due respect
They shall more heeded be, and take effect.
You, who believe this, and each Dispensation
Of GOD's, to merit your Consideration,
Improve them as you ought, in what strange ways,
Or, in what form soever he them conveys:
And though you suffer many persecutions,
Or losses, in the various Revolutions
Which do or may befall, be of good cheer;
Yea, whatsoever you shall see or hear,
Be not afraid of ought, which this last Turn
May threaten to bring on, or to adjourn:
Nor be discouraged what ere the King
Permits, omits, or acts, which may bring
Harm in estate or person; for he comes
To do GOD's work, and executes his dooms
With, or against his will, and shall proceed
No further, than has been by him decreed.
His power and heart are always in his hands:
As well as we, accomptable he stands
For all that he shall do; and, GOD of him
Now proof is making, as he did of them
Who reigned last. Yea, peradventure now
In proving him, is also proving you
And me, and all these Nations, that his Grace
And Justice one another may embrace.
In which TEST, if we meekly wait the Event,
Till we behold how far this Parliament
Will stretch their mercy; and then, till we see
How far, the Kings Grace will extended be,
(Of his mere Goodness, and Self-inclination,
Beyond their narrow limited Compassion)
You, either shall by him, have an effect
To answer what you justly may expect
Or by GOD's Providence, who, if he please;
Can turn your losses to advantages.
For Consequents will follow to requite
Your long-long sufferings in the worlds despite.
GOD will appear, for your just vindications,
Who truly sought the welfare of these Nations
In order to his glory; and so do it,
That, to be his own Act, most men shall know it.
And, by the King that Grace vouchsafe will he,
Except his heart as hard as Pharaohs be;
Or, is by such Inchanters led aside,
As Jannes and as Jambres typifide.
Try all things ere you counter-act, and heed
Whether or no from GOD they do proceed;
For, by their work if well the same you mark,
Are workmen known, and workmen by their work
As truly as a Tree is by his Fruit,
His bark, his leaves, his blossoms, and his root.
Since all is in GOD's hand, rest well assured
That your chief interest will be secured
In his best times, although the Royal power
He more exalts, and brings the people lower.
For, his way, to the highest exaltations,
Is by Debasings, and by Degradations.
And, whether more or less, he gives or takes,
To, or from him, or them, its for their sakes
Conferred or withdrawn, to whom pertains
That Kingdom, within which, no Tyrant reigns.
GOD is our King, and does but him depute
To be here for a time, his Substitute:
We are his people, and his pasture-sheep,
Whom he is sent to govern, feed and keep;
Not to oppress, to fleece, or to devour,
And GOD retains us always in his power.
What, can we have, or wish for, more than this?
In whose hand are we safe, if not in his?
Whether we have a Government or none,
Whether it be by Many, or by One:
In him External and Internal peace
Must sought for be; In his especial Grace
Is our Well-being, and without the same,
All Governors, by whatsoever name
Distinguished, and every Government,
Which all the wit of mankind can invent,
Will be destructive; and when left we be
Unto our selves, such, to our selves are we.
When we have Kings, and hope that they will save us
From wrongs, they often endeavor to enslave us.
The more power we upon them do confer,
The more thereby at last enslaved we are.
For, they of wealth and Power admit no measure
That Is not as large as their own will and pleasure.
If you confine them by a thousand laws,
They break those bonds as easily as straws;
And often, when large in promise them we find,
Their own advantage chiefly is designed.
When on a Parliament our trust we laid,
We thereby were oppressed and betrayed;
And, may set up (as things are carried on)
Four hundred Tyrants in the stead of one;
Or, make that which our bondage should prevent,
Help to inslave us by our own consent.
If rather, in an Army we confide,
They Will either turn unto another side,
Or else prolong their service, till it shall
Effect their ends, or eat us out of all.
If on the common people we depend,
They heed not that which to their Weal does tend
In common; for, their individual cares
Are to increase, or keep their private shares.
And to enjoy their Lusts a year or two,
Will all their own posterity undo.
If to themselves they should assume their power,
They could not use it prudently one hour;
So scattered lies, through many heads, their brain,
That half a Nut-shell will their wits contain:
And fire and water, may as well agree,
As they, who of so many Judgments be.
The Nobles would deserve our trust no better;
For, they would still endeavor to be greater,
By making others less; and breed distractions
Incurable, by everlasting Factions.
Most men, the trust on them imposed, abuse,
As well the chusers, as, they whom they choose:
The first so slavish and so brutish are,
They Will sell their birthrights for Roast beef and Beer,
(As they but lately did) and, so, expose
Our Lives, Estates, and Freedoms unto those,
Who look more like our tumblers and our players,
Then Senators, by whom our Grand Affairs
Should be determined, The Last with zeal
Make show a while, to serve the Commonweal,
Till thereby some Advancement gain they may,
And, then, their zeal is turned another way.
If, our chief City, we our Trustee made,
She, to enlarge her Charters, and her Trade,
To make her self more powerful, and more rich,
Has ever been inclined so overmuch:
And, to and fro, her self so often winds,
To this, and that, as she occasion finds,
That, when in her we do repose our trust,
We shall have charters written in the Dust.
Yet, for the love which thereunto I bear,
Or, rather for the sake of those in her,
Whose prayers, faith and tears, have h'therto
Preserved her, I shall, still, as now I do,
Make my Petition for her preservation,
And, that she may by Justice and Compassion
Break off from those sins, for which I discover
A Cloud of Judgments to be hanging over:
And, which e're since the last great plague has been;
Sometimes approaching, though by few men seen;
And which, whilst she to power and wealth aspires,
Will be unheeded; immaterial fires,
Consume her dwellings, and decay her Trade,
Unless atonement speedily be made
By works of mercy, and that sacrifice
Which GOD has promised he will not despise.
These Trustees, will at last deceive us whether
We trust them singly, or else all together.
If then, we should to this conclusion draw,
Be governed by the Letter of the Law;
That, in it self, is grown so questionable,
So like a Nose of Wax, so variable,
And so uncertain made, as Lawyers please
To make them speak for their advantages
Who most advantage them; that, we shall there
Continue as unsettled as we were,
Till we are certain in what sense to take them;
Which will not be as long as Lawyers make them,
Who take more care to drive their own ends on,
Than to provide that Justice may be done.
Let me be bold to write Truths without blame,
(Which I know may be written without shame)
No person, persons, or that Government
Which wisest men by general consent
Shall constitute, is able to bring hither
Both Truth and Peace, to settle them together,
Until Almighty GOD shall to this Nation
A means discover for the Regulation
Of those who for their private interests,
Confine both Law and Gospel to their breasts:
For, from them chiefly, most of all that springs,
Which either to this people or their Kings,
Has hurtful been; and till this be amended,
Our Plagues may be adjourned, but never ended:
For, by this means (mark if it be not so)
Humane Affairs, thus, for the most part go.
Councils and Parliaments do counter-act
Unto themselves, in Judgment, and in Fact.
And the same person, by the self-same Law,
For the same deed, they honor, hang, and draw.
However the Power in being forms the Cause,
For that, straight speaks Divinity and Laws.
Let but another Power assume the Throne,
Which quite contraries what the last has done,
Both Law and Gospel straight confirms the same,
Even by their tongues from whence the Judement came
Which ratifide the former, and had laid
Strict penalties to make their Votes obaid;
So, that which was the last year Truth and Reason,
Is made the next year Heresy and Treason;
And, Judges act that guilt which they condemn.
In others, whilst they are condemning them.
Oh Impudence! how! how! is Justice lost?
How are poor men, like Dogs in blankets tossed?
What great Revenews have been yearly paid,
And what vast sums bestowed to be betrayed!
Or, were at best, upon blind Guides conferred,
Who knew not, whether they went right, or erred?
GOD bless the King, and teach him what to do;
GOD bless the People, and GOD bless me too;
And keep us with our several Interests,
From being wronged by Lawyers, and by Priests;
And, from Aspersion, keep them also free,
Who, in those Callings, just and honest be.
These things I have observed: let us therefore
Trust to our selves, or other men no more;
But, wholly leave to GOD our grand affairs,
Lay by our Swords: betake us to our Prayers,
And learn to use such Weapons which will shatter
Such Fortresses, as Canons cannot batter;
Lest, else, as lately, we do fight again
Our selves, out of one mischief into twain;
Which into twenty more may be improved,
Before it shall be totally removed.
A Conquest by the Sword we lately had,
But, that, our sins and follies frustrate made:
We were by GOD's aid made victorious then,
By letting forth the blood of other men:
But the next Victory to be bestown,
Must purchased be, by shedding of our own:
Yea (mind this well) it to the Saints pertains,
To bind in fetters and in iron chains
Both Kings and Peers, and that these also may
Break off those bands, and cast those cords away:
If to assume that Power the Saints begin
Unseas'nably, or lose it by their sin;
Or, if they shall pursue the will of GOD
With carnal Weapons, in a carnal mode,
Seeking their own ends, when they his pretended,
For, with sad Sequels those ways are attended.
And, they will worthily be then corrected,
With that, which must upon them be inflicted.
But, when Repentance, and a fleshly doom,
Has purified them, they shall overcome
By being vanquished, and prevail much more
By loosing, than by winning heretofore.
Men have their failings; but a fiery Trial
Will purge the dross, which want of self-denial
Within them left; and when that is fumed away,
They will be Gold refined without allay.
In our own places, let us truly do
What duty to Superiors calls us to.
(An absolute Obedience unto none
My conscience ows, save unto GOD alone;
Yet, to what Sovereign power adjudgeth fit,
I Will actively or passively submit)
Let Soldiers fight; give Pilots room to steer;
When we move, let us move in our own sphere,
Our safety, from henceforth, expecting, from
No Mountain, but from that, whence it must come.
We had ere while a Power, which to our cost
We mis-employ'd, and therefore now it is lost.
We, lately, active were even unto blood;
But, now such activeness will do no good,
And, we must passive be, till GOD shall please
Our sins to pardon, and to give us ease:
And he will show us then what must be done,
If him with patience we attend upon.
What we desired, he did not deny us;
And, by what we desired, he now will try us.
We have a King again: and since God gave him
Upon such terms, as most desired to have him,
We ought not to repine or to receed
From that which we to him have promised;
For, we our duties are obliged to do,
Whether he keep his promises, or no.
Leave him, unto that Covenant which was made
'Twixt GOD and him, when he admittance had:
For, GOD on our behalf, when that was done,
Premised terms, though we our selves made none,
(Even such, as long ago upon record
Expressed were, in his revealed word)
And, if he keep them not, 'twill worse succeed
With him, than if his signed and sealed Deed
He should to us infringe (though Dispensations
He had, from all the Prelates in these Nations,
And Rome to boot) which, I should fear to say,
If somewhat did not warrant me I may.
His power now is great; yet, had been more
Than ever English King had heretofore,
(A^ ^onceive) had he content remained
With what was providentially obtained
Not looking backward, to hedge in the time,
Which will be no advantage unto him.
Had he not sought his Honors Reparation,
By building it upon the old Foundation
On which it stood; not thought it best to own,
That Interest, which GOD had overthrown,
(And Humane policy inclined him to)
He might have done more than he now can do.
For Conquest gives rather more than less
Than he did by Inheritance possess;
And his Re-entry was equivalent
To Conquest, though gained by assent:
For Free Assent was given by no more
Save those who were of his own side before;
Until they saw he had that power supreme
Which warranted Allegiance unto him;
And that he had acquired interests
In what they claim, by plowing with their Beasts:
For, where WAR is, till peace, renewed shall be
In terminis, a Conqueror is he,
Who victory by Stratagems has gained
As truly, as when by the sword attained.
And his Admittance (whatsoever is thought)
Was by none else, but his own paerty wrought
Through GOD's permission, who, befooled them
Who had been false unto themselves and him.
It is a Conquest, which the Lord of Hosts
Conferred on him (although no blood it costs)
And they who do admit, without condition,
A Foe professed, can challenge no fruition
Of any right, which was enjoyed before,
But that which he is pleased to restore;
Till for Omissions, or for things misdone,
GOD takes from him again what he had won,
As, but a few months past from them he did,
Who in this Government did him preceed:
And, this point I insist on to declare
That (since of us our Trustees had no care)
How much to GOD we shall obliged be,
If from our Hazards he shall set us free
By moving this Kings heart, us to restore
To those enjoyments which we had before.
When first the Norman by the Sword came in,
A part of what the peoples right had been
Was by contract secured: when Solomon
Was dead, although the Kingdom to his son
Fell by inheritance; yet, maugre that,
The Israelites came to capitulate
With Rehoboam, and (as it appears)
The Kingdoms, and his Fathers Counselors
Advised admittance of Capitulation,
As no less needful for his Confirmation,
Than to content the people: but, he leaves
Their counsel, and to giddy Fellows cleaves,
Companions of this youth, by whose Bravado's
(Expressed with insolent Rodomontado's)
He lost ten Tribes of twelve. But no man thought
Our Cause (it seems) worth speaking for, or sought
To save our Interests, though we had those
Empowered, who to that intent were chose,
And much confided in. And, GOD did thus
For his own glory pre-dispose of us,
That we might see the vanity of them
In whom we trusted, and trust more in him.
It had not else been so; for through the Land,
There was not sword nor spear in any hand
But what we thought our own: nor power appearing
For Charles without it, which was worth the fearing,
If Providence had not transferred this power
Into his hand, which we supposed our.
So, all our freedoms, Life, Lands, goods and treasure,
Were actually to this Kings will and pleasure
Resigned up: for, nothing does appear
That we of any thing secured are,
Save by his Grace, though some a power then had
To get Conditions usual to be made
In such like Cases: which, if they had done,
They had not thereby well discharged alone
Their public Trust, and, rather more than less,
Might thereby have advanced the common peace;
But, saved unto the King much labor too,
Which now he must be forced to undergo,
Yet, peradventure when that he has done
The best he can, please very few or none:
For it is impossible the blessed fruit
Of perfect peace without power absolute,
Should be produced, as we are now distracted,
And as things will in likelihood be acted;
'Cause such a Flower (as most wise men do know)
Upon a single Root, does always grow;
And that, naught perfect Unity can breed,
Save that, which from one spirit does proceed.
If, as he from these Kingdoms was expelled
By Conquest, he re-entring, them had held
As by Re-Conquest (which he might have done,
Consid'ring how Affairs were carried on)
He might have brought most things to good conclusions,
Without those interruptions and confusions
Which will ensue; for, he obliged then
By none, but GOD's and Natures Laws had been;
And should have had a large means to express
His Mercy, Piety, and Righteousness,
By prudent modelizing and contriving
(Restoring, adding, giving and forgiving)
As need required, without such restraints,
Or giving these occasions of complaints,
As now occur: whereas he coming in
By that Right, which before had claimed been,
(As interrupted only) he seems bounded
By those Laws, whereon formerly 'twas founded.
And (as at present it appears to me)
So dubious Laws and Parliaments now be,
That by the course intended to be taken,
The Peace we hope to settle will be shaken
When we suppose it fixed; by failings, found
Hereafter, in some Principles unsound;
Or else, because some actings will appear
Not homogeneous to those Laws that are:
And, as things are, with us it is little better
Then if we conquered were, for, we are debtor
Unto the King, for all in our possessions
By his spontaneous Act, and Free Concessions;
And whatsoever we can do or say,
If, now he will be Absolute, he may.
There be enough, who for their private ends,
Will drive on whatsoever he intends,
Whether it be to do us right or wrong;
And thereunto, our sins will make them strong,
Till GOD again deliver us, who has
Now made us, justly, Objects of his wrath.
For, if they are our Trustees duly chose,
Who now of us and our Affairs dispose,
(And us into the Kings hand wholly gave
Without Reserve) then, every thing we have
Is His; and more it boots not than a Rush
Now to deny it: for, within a bush,
We shall our Heads but like the Woodcock hide,
Whom by his Tail, the Fowler has espide.
We are reduced unto a conquered State,
Though we our selves are pleased to wink thereat.
The CUP pretended stolen to have been,
(By whose device soere it was put in)
Is found within our sacks; and we this day
Like Joseph's Brethren, to the King must say:
We are thy servants: Providence Divine
Has for our sins made our possessions thine:
For, we can challenge nothing as our own,
But what of thy free Grace has been bestown:
Or what thou shall be pleased to afford
Upon Request: or, of thine own accord.
This we must say, how loath soere we are:
And, without scruple, this affirm I dare,
That, till the self-same Providence, or He,
Or both together, join to make us free:
(Which will vouchsafed be, with, or without
His will, when our probation-time is out)
We never shall be freed; but, without rest,
Be more and more inslaved, and oppressed.
Then, let none think I wrong this Nation, tho
I say it is conquered: nor, by being so,
Fear they so much will disadvantag'd be,
As, by a vain suppose that they are free;
Since, by not making this acknowledgement,
GOD, of due thanks and glory we prevent:
For, had the King assumed the Sovereign power,
(As being made by him, a Conqueror)
With no worse purpose, than to constitute
A righteous throne (to which Power Absolute
Is so Essential, that without the same,
Less Power, in great Confusions will be lame)
He possibly might have effected that,
Which to attempt, now it is perhaps too late.
This, was the mind of GOD (as I believe)
When he to him did that advantage give;
And, I am hopeful, he will bend that way
The Power that is left, as far forth as he may:
For, he is neither Heathen, Jew, or Turk,
Impow'red to do only his own work;
Nor we, I hope, as were the Canaanites,
To be destroyed, nor those Amalekites
With whom God purposes a War for ever,
Unless we in impenitence persever,
To make us liable to such a doom
As did on that and other Nations come.
But, by this King, GOD rather does intend
Our much depraved Manners to amend:
And deals with us, as he has always done
With his own people, since the world begun.
When they by murmurings for flesh provoked him;
He, in displeasure gave them Quails, and choakt them:
And he with us, in some things parallel
Thereto has dealt, if we observe them well.
When he by Moses them from bondage brought,
(To lead them back again) they had a thought
To choose another Captain; for which crime,
He kept them in the Desert a long time:
Even till all that Rebellious Generation
Was quite worn out for that prevarication.
This, let us well consider of, and learn
How much (and in what) it may us concern.
A King like other Nations they would have,
And what they asked, GOD with a vengeance gave:
Yet, by his mercy from his wrath did save them,
And plagues and blessings therewith mixed gave them.
When by the Sword of Nebuchadnezzar,
The Jews were subjugated (as we are
For our transgressions) though their Conqueror
Was not of their own Nation, as is our:
(Or, of their Faith, so much as a pretender,
Either to be Professor or Defender)
GOD by Him, and by his Successors brought them,
Not only to be humbled, till they sought him;
But also, gave them favor in their sights;
Made some of them their chiefest Favorites:
Yea, to repair enabled them, at last,
Their Temple and their Cities, which lay waste;
And to possess again that Land, from whence
They were ejected by impenitence.
Why then should we not hope, since to these Nations
Our present King has manifest Relations:
(The same Faith holds, and of his own accord
To be propitious has engaged his Word)
That, GOD, by him, will, at the least, restore
All that which he possessed heretofore?
Why should we not believe, that God's intent
Is to be gracious in his chastisement?
And may apply unto us Lenitives
By this King, when he has with Corrosives
First made us curable; somewhat I declared
Among such other things (without regard)
Now, thirty five years past, that does appear
Upon Record in my Remembrancer,
Which now, perhaps, begins way to make
For what my Britains Genius did fore-speak;
And, GOD, in Judgment, minds us, as yet,
In Mercy, though his kindness we forget.
Yea, if our sins make not his purpose void,
That, whereby some now fear to be destroyed,
Shall save us from that mischief which we fear,
When unavoidably it seems near.
For, notwithstanding, for their sins and our,
Our former Governors did lose their power;
Though they, and we have justly forfeited
Those Freedoms which we lately challenged,
And did possess (when after our Appeal,
We were empowered to form a Commonweal)
The change which now befalls will be of use
Hereafter, better sequels to produce.
We have but only lost, upon the wheel
A broken pot, and work men without skill.
GOD, has not wholly, us of Grace bereaved,
Although, to Grace, the King he has received;
Nor has he at this present brought him home
At our cost (without bloodshed) to become
A Tyrant, but our King, and unto us
To be as gracious, as to him, he was,
In thus restoring him with Conditions,
Unto his late lost Honor and Possessions.
GOD has from Mesech lately brought him hither
Not that this People should be forced thither;
Or that their Burdens he should more increase,
Now that is removed which did him oppress.
GOD, did supply his wants, and him restore
To Riches lost, not to make others poor;
Nor from afflictions him redeemed, that he
Should for past injuries avenged be;
Or have a Kingdom here, like one of those
Which Satan on his Homagers bestows.
But, such a Kingdom, that his people might
Submit unto him, with a true delight,
And worship their Creator without fear,
In holiness, and in uprightness here.
And, if his Power be not this way employed,
The best men's hopes, will be a while made void:
And his for ever (though he should recover
Ten times more strength and gild his acting over
With quaint pretenses, and the fairest Paints
Of Politicians, or dissembling Saints.)
For, though the Rabble, who were yesterday
His open Foes, now make professions may,
Of being loyal, and to morrow should
Swear to become his slaves, they frustrate would
His best hopes; for, they are a flood that flows
This way, and that way, as the next wind blows.
The Essence of a Kingly interest
Does in, and by the Common good consist,
Even in the whole, and not in any part
(Although as noble as the Head or Heart)
And to indulge ought further then it shall
Tend really unto the good of all;
Destroys the whole, turns Royalty to Faction,
And breeds at length a general Distraction:
For, when the limbs, the head or heart surpass
Their due proportions, they make others less;
And all the body will not only grow
Deformed, but unserviceable too:
So, likewise, Kings, if liberty they grant
To any part to be exorbitant,
Or in themselves be so, 'twill quite destroy
That compound being, which they shall enjoy.
They further should promote no interest
Than with the public good it may consist;
And that each individual, without wrongs,
May that possess, which to the same belongs.
By Justice he should cause a Restoration;
Of all Encroachments made by Usurpation;
And recompense for every Injury
Sustained by Supreme Authority,
How ere acquired, if the Sufferer
In conscience, thereunto obedient were;
And no way active in that innovation,
Which was the former Powr's Eradication.
No party or profession whatsoere,
Neither the Prelate, Priest or Presbyter,
Or other Sect, nor King nor Parliament
Should be indulged to common detriment;
For, that would be destructive to that end,
Whereto all Constitutions ought to tend.
It Is mercy, and performing righteous things
That strengthens Kingdoms, and preserves Kings;
And they are their best Subjects who adhere
To Piety, and sound in Manners are:
Not they who think the glory of a Throne
Consists in the Guilding laid thereon:
Or, in such Vanities as did begin
To spring up when the King first entered in:
For, though those Fools (who such enjoyment crave
As Soon, as of prevayling, hopes they have)
Insult, Jeer, brag, and insolently brave it,
Cry, Now it is as we our selves would have it,
And run out into that Licentiousness
Which evidently may to all express
What they desire; he, that, on such relies,
Himself, with Snow-balls only fortifies;
And will by their assistance be at length
As old Rome was, oppressed by his own strength.
And, if abused, the Grace now offered be,
Some, yet may live another change to see:
For, One unheeded sits above our heads,
Who men's Phanatick vanities derides;
And Judgments in dark Clouds concealed are,
Which will surprise us, ere we be aware,
Unless we with more prudent moderation
Shall from henceforward manage that occasion
Which GOD has given of a happy close
Betwixt them, who have overlong been foes,
For, to that end (though not well heeded yet)
The King and we are in this posture met.
If, he be now King by the Grace of GOD,
(As we entitle him) sent for our good,
And not in wrath: if, as his Title says,
He be a true Defender of the Faith,
(Which is my hope) he, seriously will heed,
How in his chief concernments, men proceed:
And, if he then finds, that, more in despite
To those whom they hate, than to do him right,
Some things by some are acted: and the spoil
Of others rather aimed at, then this Weal,
(By prosecutions over-violent
To his dishonor and indangerment)
'Twill bring forth an unlooked-for effect
To those, upon whom he without suspect
Does yet depend; and make him plainly see,
That, from thenceforth, his confidence must be
In GOD, and in those, who, with him partake
For GOD's, for Justice, and for Conscience sake;
And not in those who value not those things
Which most essential are to Sovusraign Kings;
Though they pretend to suffer for GOD's cause,
And his; or, fain obedience to his Laws;
Much less trust them, who did assist the Boys
With Shouts, Drums, Guns and Squibs to make a noise
About their bonfires, hemmed in with Dances
Scarce modest, and sometimes with petulances
As scandalous, as if those men had best
Their Loyalty and Gratitude expressed,
Who, when he was proclaimed, most rudely swagger'd
Drunk to his Health, until they spewed and staggered;
Consumed that, on one beast, which to the poor
Distributed, might have refreshed a score:
And, when they should have praised GOD, for the grace
To them vouchsafed, blasphemed him to his face.
If such prevarications do presage
A settled power, or a Reformed Age,
I am deceived; and wholly had despaired
To see our Breaches in my time repaired;
But that the King has given hopes of late,
By some proceeds, that he does aim thereat;
And by his Proclamation startled them
From that, which many did expect from him:
Yea, I have feared, that I might have lived
To see all Heathenish Vanities revived.
(With all old Superstitions) and, I pray,
This fear may wholly be removed away:
For, what some have expected all along,
And, from what Root, their zeal to Kingship sprung;
By many 'twas fore-shown, who did aspire
To public trust. That, which they now desire
Confirms it also; and perhaps it may
Be manifest to all another day,
When they shall either miss their expectations,
Who welcomed him with loudest acclamations,
Or else, when they enjoy them; which to see,
I should be griv'd, and so, I hope would he.
But if to those things, which do now begin
In every place already, to flow in,
He puts not stop, ere further they proceed,
His power, perhaps, it shortly will exceeded;
And, we shall here behold (with new additions)
Profaneness, and exploded Superstitions,
Not only countenanced without aw
Of GOD, and Men, but settled by a Law:
For, this (or I am much deceived) is that
Which is by very many aimed at.
It was not (as these did pretend) to bring
From his late banishment, their lawful King;
Nor love unto his Person, or his Cause,
Or zeal to true Religion or the Laws,
Which made so many, who had active been
To drive him out, make have to fetch him in:
Nor, that they could better be content
With Kingship or some other Government,
Or persons then with those that ruled before:
But some did hope to have enjoyed more
A Liberty, whereby, without control
They might in brutish lusts at pleasure roll.
Some had a hoping of raising their Estate;
In some hope sprung from Envy or from hate,
Conceived against those persons who acquired
Those honors or some profits they desired:
And, not a few, who were at no expense
In this Kings service, or to make defense
Of him or his cause, hopeful were to get
(By suing to him, and pretending it)
Repair of those consumed Estates, which they
Had either drunk, or whor'd, or gam'd away.
Some, other, thereby, hoped for fruition
Of their beloved Mistress Superstition;
Freedom, to swear GOD damn them, without a we
Of Magistrate, or mulct imposed by Law;
To wast, the day, and night, in drinking, gaming,
In cheating, roaring, whoring, and blaspheming,
Without reproofs. Some looked for increase
Of Trading, or of making Taxes less;
And, othersome (another way affected)
Together with a King, returns expected
Of Masks and Revels, Tournaments and Plays,
May-poles, Wakes, Church-ales and those holy days,
Wherein young men might have permitted been
As heretofore, to dance upon the Green,
With suchlike liberties as may be used
Sometimes (if soberly) and not abused:
And, some, it may be, had an expection
The Lords day should a day of recreation
Be made again; and preaching twice a day,
By some new Canon would be took away;
That all men (as they have internal motions)
Might have time for their pleasures or devotions.
These were strong motives to some late Expresses
Of loyalty, as also to the addresses
Subscribed not long before by many a one
To OLIVER, and likewise to his Son,
Whom quickly they deserted, though they had
To live and die with them professions made
Without enforcement, at the first, to make them,
Or at the last, so tamely to forsake them.
As much they magnifide them in their Lyricks,
Heroic Poems, Odes, and Penegyricks,
As they extol the King. No flattering pen
Could more ascribe to any mortal men:
And, though such dawbings cannot keep from shame
Their persons, nor from infamy their name,
(As now appears) yet this magnificat
The world still sings. This common strain is that
Which most men do affect and in this wise
Flattry still sings to all Stars when they rise:
Yea, all their songs unto this present day,
Are but the same, new set another way:
And, their composers do deserve no more
Then begging Fiddlers begging at the door.
Who if it might their servile ends advance,
Would, to the same tune play the devil a dance.
Such are too many, who do make a show
Of loyalty by their expresses now.
As little worth regarding is their love;
And, doubtless very fickle it would prove,
If GOD should be provoked to estrange
His favor, and permit another change.
They who against one party lately cride,
Hang, hang the Rogues; against the other side
Would then cry out as loud, Hang, hang them all:
And, those whom they now praise, as much mis call:
For, what their chiefest expectations are,
They make it evidently to appear
By Words and Deeds; and there are symptoms too,
What things, if cause were given, they would do.
Hornets and Wasps, begin to show their stings.
The butterflies display their pointed wings
In every Garden, and there, spawn the seed
which Palmer worms, and Catterpillars, breed.
They, who were lately Maggots are grown Flies,
In our ears buzzing, fleering in our eyes;
And, up were set, the worlds Gods altogether
As soon as ere the King approached hither;
Who, probably, in Flanders had remained,
If, otherways, their ends they could have gained,
And Dick, perhaps, GEORGE, Jack, or any thing,
With popular app'auses had been King.
But, these Insecti, though they greatly swarm,
Can do the King not so much good, as harm:
Nor can those who through want of wit and courage
Will sell their birthrights for a mess of Porredge,
To this establishment contribute ought,
Till they be better disciplined and taught:
It is not they in Linen Ephods, neither
Those Chimerims who now conspire together;
Nor those vain and fantastical baboons
Who jet in Feathers and in Pantaloons,
Who fix a King; but, those grave men among
Our Nobles. And the civil uulgar throng,
Who love the Public peace, and do profess
A Loyalty in truth and soberness,
Without regard of any Interest,
Save that, which may with other men's consist.
The rest (if well considered) are a number
Of animals, which more confound and cumber,
Then settle Governments; and are to Kings
But troublesome unprofitable things.
I have observed them well: and long ago
(Perceiving what they likely were to do,
Who know the way, as often as they please
To bring to pass, their own Designs by these)
Upon Occasions given, was so bold,
That what I pre-conjectur'd, I foretold;
And how these acting singly, or together.
To public Damage, made use of each other.
This often I did before the Parliament
Became their self-destroying instrument)
In plain terms, or Aenigma's; as the time
Would bear it; and as well in Prose as Rimes:
I did the like to him, and to his son,
Whom GOD permitted to usurp the Throne,
(As two addresses, which I did prefer
To their own hands, yet extant may declare)
And whereby, such advantages I got
As usually they get who flatter not.
During the last power (in an oblique way)
As touching him, who reigns at this day,
I hinted that, which now is come to pass
In such wise, as I might in such a case
At such a time as that; with what Events,
To his beginnings would be consequents,
If on the Giddy Vulgar he depended,
In prosecuting what should be intended:
Or, if he sought a Kingship to erect
Like what mere earthly Princes do effect:
Wherein, although I had no worse Design
Then with the public weal to wrap up mine,
I am, for my plain dealing, as a Foe
Both scandalized and oppressed so.
That all the Mercy some vouchsafe me would,
Is Life deprived of all things that should
In me and my relations Life uphold.
Which is a cruelty, and such away,
Of killing men a hundred times aday,
That GOD with due avengement will repay:
For, though men are not so, yet he is just;
The measure, which they gave, receive they must.
Yea, measure running over, and pressed down,
Unless God show more grace then they have shown.
I have not much deceived been, in ought
Which with Pre-meditation I forethought,
And heretofore divulged relating to
These Nations, in the things they ought to do;
Or, unto that, which would require their heed,
How therein they go backward, or proceed.
I, lately pre conjectured and foretold,
That London was a Mount whence issue should
A wind, which hither likely was to blow
A change, that of our greatest weal or woo,
(As likewise of her own) would be the cause:
And, by her aid, that change is come to pass.
Let her so mind it now, that GOD may bless
Her future actings with a good success;
For, that to them this Caveat give I may,
Thus purposely I stepped out of the way.
My Muse once more shall here likewise recall
What I presaged would to my self befall;
Yea, though I touched upon it heretofore,
I will illustrate it a little more.
Me therefore, to insist thereon permit,
For as it me concerns to mention it,
It may concern you to, and does declare
That poor men's wrongs by GOD observed are.
Upon my heart I strong impressions had,
That I, should of their fall a sign be made;
Who for my faithful service me oppressed;
And, they, who last the supreme power possessed,
This day, both see, and feelingly perceive,
That Is come to pass which they would not believe
To them I told, both jointly and apart,
(But seemed to speak to men without a heart)
That, they in reason had good cause to fear,
If they should offer still, a Deaf man's Ear
To my complaints, a very sad reward,
Would be the sequel of their Dis-regard.
Yet, though with humbleness I them implored
By every means, which those times, did afford,
(Save bribes and flattery they would seldom hear
Ought which concerned me, except it were
An accusation; or to grant an Order,
Which more my Ruin, then Relief did further;
Or, do me Justice during my oppressions,
Nigh eighteen years complained of by Petitions,
And, by addresses, tenter'd unto them
(Not seldom, by some hundred at a time)
Nor to me their Engagements made they good;
Nor those discharged by which engaged I stood
For them; nor for their Debts detained from me
Three times six years, although made due they be
By Ordinance and Orders: nor would they
Vouchsafe as much as interest to pay,
By them allowed; (though I much did need it,
Both to relieve me, and preserve my Credit.)
Nor could I that enjoy, which I had bought,
And they had sold, (as I in Justice ought;
Till my Estate and Credit was overthrown
By them, through their neglecting of their own;
Though they were not alone obliged unto it,
But likewise had both power and means to do it.
A single foe, could do me in one hour
More injury, then all my Friends had power
To right whilst they reigned, though I seemed befriended
Of many, who to Righteousness pretended.
Though early at their doors, and also late,
As at Bethesda-pool the Cripple sat)
I waited on them, I went every day
Both without Help, and with small Help, away;
No more prevailing, then if still I had
To blocks or statutes, my Petitions made.
These Grievances, increasing every year,
Raised at the length, my Damages well near
To twice five thousand pounds; and so increast,
My debts, by troubles, suits, and interest,
That wants, thereby, still multiplying more,
I was, at last, made somewhat worse then poor:
From seven hundred pounds per annum, brought
To be some hundred pounds less worth then naught,
So loosing my repute, with my estate.
(Which many new perplexities begat)
To every wrong, I liable was made,
When no means left for my defense I had.
And, most men then perceiving that the Doom
Which I foresaw would come, was then nigh come,
And likely to destroy them in whose hands
Lay all my whole Estate in Debts and Lands,
And, that the Title which thereinII had,
Would, as they stood or fell, prove good or bad;
My Creditors grew thereby so afraid,
What I then owed them, never would be paid,
That, more to pay one debt, then would pay two,
Was thereby (maugre all that I could do)
Straight torn away: and I, could neither set,
Nor sell, nor borrow, neither payment get
Of what was due, to buy things necessary,
Or save my credit till it did miscarry,
By forfeitures and burdens, cast upon me,
So mercilesly, that it has undone me,
As to the world; unless GOD shall prevent
That, which now threats a further Detriment;
For, when the CURS which did before but bawl,
(As when you see a hunted Stag does fall
By alber Dogs) immediately fell in,
And from the flesh began to tear the skin.
To make complaints, I saw it was in vain;
For, none I know to whom I might complain,
With hope of help; and certainly perceived,
That, though by them, I seemed to be bereaved
Of my Estate, yet GOD's hand was therein,
And, that the Judgment which does now begin
At his own House, did mark me out for one,
Upon whom Execution must be done:
Therefore, forthwith, examining my heart,
And, finding that far less then my desert
Was brought upon me; to his Chastisement
I humbly do submit, and will present,
Ere I proceed, this my Confession,
With Praises intermixed, and Contrition.
A HYMN Of CONFESSION and PRAISE.
1.
LORD, Thou from dust did raise me,
When I no being had,
And I in flesh to praise thee,
A living Soul was made:
That, therefore, I may praise thee,
as I am bound to do,
Still henceforth let me praise thee,
In Soul and Body too.
2.
To have thy Will fulfilled,
To thee, I often have prayed;
Which, that I truly willed,
Now, comes it to be tried;
And, that, my Soul obeys thee,
as thou thy Will make known,
I am resolved to praise thee,
by laying down mine own.
3.
Thy Servants are confunded,
this day with shame of face,
And with their Plagues surrounded
for their neglects of Grace;
On us therefore to praise thee
a Judgment is begun,
In which, my heart, to praise thee
still cries, thy Will be done.
4.
And, since by my Transgressions,
the breach was wider made,
I will by my Confessions
unto thy Glory add;
Oh! make thou them to praise thee
so hearty and sincere;
That, other men to praise thee
their failings may declare.
5.
Me, thou have not corrected
with worse or sharper things.
This are sometimes inflicted
upon the greatest Kings:
By Charity to praise thee,
their wants thou then supplid'st;
And, now to make me praise thee,
that way for me provid'st.
6.
Naught heretofore I wanted
wherewith to give thee praise;
But, what to me was granted,
I wasted otherwise:
And, since I did not praise thee
when I enjoyed most,
I now am come to praise thee
when all I had is lost.
7.
Often, when my Conscience chid me,
I, in my sins went on;
She therefore lately led me
to what has me undone;
Yet, that, at last will praise thee,
for which, I suffer must;
And I confess to praise thee,
that all thy ways are just.
8.
The portion by thee given,
I, on my Lusts have spent;
Sinned against Thee and Heaven,
for which, I now repent:
And since I did not praise thee,
as I obliged have been,
I meekly now do praise thee
In sufferings for my sin.
9.
Of earthly Joys and Pleasure
that most desired are,
To me in ample measure
thou did vouchsafe a share;
But, I for them to praise thee
performed not my part;
And therefore, now I praise thee
with sad and contrite heart.
10.
An honest Reputation
on me thou have bestown,
That, to this Generation
thy praise I might make known.
But by what I should praise thee,
I sought a fruitless fame;
And therefore now I praise thee
for my Reproach and shame.
11.
Of Good Men, much esteemed
I rend'red was by thee;
But, better often I seemed
then I could truly be:
I therefore now do praise thee
that my Defects were hid,
And, that, some now dispraise me
for what I never did.
12.
To thee I am a Debtor
for what I most esteem;
(No earthly blessing better
deserving Thanks does seem)
And for the, same still praise thee,
though lately for my sin,
That, for which now I praise thee,
a bitter-sweet has been.
13.
But sharp and sweets together
(through all my lifetime past)
And, single shares of either
so timely, deigned thou have:
That, I not only praise thee
for what most sweet appeared;
But, also, truly praise thee
for what I shunned and feared
14.
Thou did with Robes adorn me,
which men of Honor wear,
That Fools the less might scorn me
when I thy praise declare:
But, what thou gav'st to praise thee,
I did to folly turn:
And therefore, now I praise thee
in Garments thred-bare-worn.
15.
To, thousands, much delightful,
my Youthful days were made;
My Heart was blithe, and sprightful
thy praise the more was spread
But, I with them to praise thee
did not what should be done;
For which, I Am left to praise thee
all day and night, alone.
16.
My private Faith infringed
to others and to thee,
Thou lately have avenged
by public breach to me:
And therefore now I praise thee
for that just doom of thine;
Oh! make them also praise thee
whose sins have punished mine.
17.
Inspight of their Oppressions
who my Destruction sought,
Thou gav'st me large possessions,
which now are come to naught:
And since I did not praise thee
when I enjoyed more,
I justly now do praise thee
in Wants, Distress, and Poor.
18.
I, heretofore, had fullness
of every pleasant meat,
Which brought on me a dullness,
that made me thee forget:
And therefore now to praise thee,
Affliction, bread prepares;
And thou do make me praise thee,
in drinking of my tears:
19.
Like Baruch, out of season
things for my self I sought;
Missed by Carnal Reason,
lent, borrowed, built, and bought
But, left the way to praise thee
that is taught me in thy Schools,
And therefore now to praise thee
I, numbered am with Fools.
20.
Yet, as to sinck me lower,
Scorns, wrongs, and Wants increase;
So, daily Faith gets power,
Hope thrives, and Fears grow less;
To move me to dispraise thee,
the more my Temper tries,
My Spirit, still, to praise thee,
a pitch the higher flies.
21.
Though I myself have nothing,
in thy hands all things be:
And harbor, food and clothing
thou will provide for me:
For thou have means to praise thee
stirred up in every Town,
Whereby each man may praise thee
who has not of his own.
22.
And for Reptue or Treasures
I will not thee implore;
For friends, lands, goods, and pleasures
enjoyed heretofore,
I, rather, ask to praise thee,
what most extolls thy Name,
Although it be to praise thee.
in Sorrow, Death, and Shame.
23.
Whilst here my sins benight me,
still cause thy face to shine:
For what will more delight me,
then Corn, and Oil, and Wine.
And though oppression weighs me
quite down unto the ground,
I, with more joy shall praise thee,
then when wealth did abound.
And whatsoever betide me
I will not change my Case,
With any who derides me,
nor shall distrust thy Grace,
My soul desires to praise thee,
and loves thy praise so well,
That, might I there best praise thee
thee, praise I would in HELL.
25.
For, Thee to love thou mov'st me,
which shows thou love Me,
And doubtless whilst thou love me,
even Hell a Heaven would be:
Since, Love enough to praise Thee,
he, that could thither bear,
Should make the Devils praise thee,
And, quench the Fires there.
26.
For LOVE all things created,
subdued Hell and Death;
Thy Law it has completed,
outlasteth Hope and Faith.
Thou, when that love does praise thee,
give best respects thereto;
And, till in love we praise thee.
in vain is all we do.
27.
Were I therefore bereaven
of all that is called mine,
Of Body, Soul, and Heaven,
my love should live in thine:
And, as I then did praise thee,
when I no being had;
So I again shall praise thee,
When I am quite unmade.
28.
But, never comprehended
Can be thy Love to me;
And therefore never ended
My Songs of praise must be:
A Hymn wherein to praise thee
I have on earth begun;
And better hope to praise thee
When this short life is done.
29.
Then, when asleep Death lays me,
LORD, let me from the Grave
(Where Dead-men cannot praise thee
A Joyful Rising have:
Let those likewise who praise thee
With me, whilst I am here,
Where Saints and Angels praise thee,
(To praise thee) meet me there.
Two other Meditations here I Will add,
Which though such Musings mean esteem have had
In latter times, may now as useful be
To some, in my case, as they are to me.
1.
BUt are in my Riches gone?
and all those fled away
Whose love depended thereupon?
for ever, Farewell they.
Since these have gotten wings,
I will not them pursue;
But set my heart on better things,
and bid them quite adieu.
It Is GOD that gives and takes,
whose love remains the same;
And whether rich or poor he makes,
still blessed be his Name.
With sufferings to comply,
loath was I to begin,
But better thoughts of them have I,
since they have proved been.
3.
For, what I dreadful thought
when first the same appeared,
Has joys to me by sorrows brought;
and hopes by what I feared.
To be despised and poor
if in my GOD I trust,
Will me at last advantage more
then if I nothing lost.
4.
Long time I have professed
in words a Christian Creed,
And now am-with occasions blessed
to show it forth by Deed.
We, holy men would seem,
and up for Saints are cride,
But now comes that Probation time
In which we must be tried.
5.
Whilst Riches I enjoyd,
They made me but a drudge,
To be on their affairs imployd,
and on their Errands trudge.
Me poor my plenties kept;
made me engage my Friends;
And often wake whilst others slept,
to wait upon their ends.
6.
They filled me with Desires,
whose Lusting endless was,
And only brought forth thorns and briers
to choke the seeds of Grace.
They made me fearful too
Of Tyrants and of Knaves,
Yea (which is ten times worse then so)
Made me a slave to slayes.
7.
My heart then be content,
let wealth and honor go,
For, better things to thee are meant
then these can raise thee to.
Let those who on them dote,
by our deportment see,
That in those Gods we trusted not
which their chief Idols be.
8.
Though my despightful Foes
Now my Estaie is gone,
(I having nothing else to lose)
my body seize upon,
Therefore take thou no care,
for GOD thy help will be,
And put on them a greater fear
then they can put on thee.
9.
And to increase that load
which I at present bear,
Though they say Where now is thy God,
of whom thy boastings were?
He will of me, of me be found,
and also make it known,
(When open shame shall them confound)
that he my Cause does own.
10.
Thy Cross with patience take,
do not there at repine,
But bear it stoutly for his sake
who bore his Cross for thine.
Still meekly in thy way
therewith proceed thou so,
That others it encourage may
to what they see thee do.
11.
The Lot of Saints has been
Afflictions, Wants, and Scorns;
And he that is the best of Men
was mocked and crowned with Thorns.
No House to him they gave
wherein to rest his head;
Him also in a borrowed Grave,
they laid when he was dead.
12.
Yea, he that is LORD of all
when first with flesh arrayd,
Was meanly housed in a Stall,
and in Manager laid.
A Guest so poor he was,
that whilst he lodged there,
The laboring Ox, and toyling Ass
his Chamber-fellows were.
13.
Yet Wisemen from the East,
were guided by a Star,
To bring to this despised Guest
Gold, Frankincence and Myrrh,
They fooled for his sake
a Tyrannizing King;
GOD'S Angels, care of him did take,
and round about him sing,
14.
To him, allide am I,
and he will send to me,
Howere obscurd, the like supply,
as often as need shall be.
For timely he relieves
all those that trust in him,
And charge unto his Angels gives,
to be a guard to them.
15.
In Stables, Barns and Stalls,
the poor as much he heeds,
As those that are in Princes halls,
to help them at their needs.
Yea, unto them he comes,
and will their sufferings mark,
Although they lie in nasty Rooms,
or Dungeons deep and dark.
16.
A portion more secure
then Goods or Lands is he,
An Heritage that will endure
when Kingdoms lost shall be.
And when exposd to shame
their Bodies we behold,
It shall more magnify their name,
then Statues made of gold.
17.
But this to them will seem
who dote on outward things,
No better then an idle Dream
which no assurance brings.
If pompously they live,
and in rich Tombs may lie,
Themselves they happy men believe,
although like beasts they die.
18.
And I am half in fear
when this is sung among
Those who in love with riches are,
'twill seem a Bedlam-Song:
For, seldom we perceive
that when his Mammon's gone,
A Rich Man's able to believe,
he is not quite undone.
19.
It makes them almost mad
to hear another preach,
That joys and comfort may be had
whereto they cannot reach.
LORD help their unbelief,
and mitigate their fears;
For, though they pity not my grief,
yet, I do pity theirs.
20.
Preserve in me that Grace
which now infused I find:
And let not time, events nor place,
hereafter change my mind:
For in them good or bad,
External things have naught;
But, as Good, or ill use is made,
Or else, as got or sought.
Another Meditation relating to the Authors present Condition.
1.
MY Foes, you have your hearts desire,
a spoil of me you make;
And (as I hear) you now inquire
what Course I mean to take.
I now am brought so low, you say,
so destitute and poor,
That well assure your selves you may
I shall arise no more.
2.
You, naytheless may be deceived,
and of your aims have mist;
For, in those things which are bereaved,
my wealth does not consist:
And I have that within my view
which if pursude it be,
May make me as much laugh at you,
as you now laugh at me.
3.
But, though it makes you to be glad
to see my griefs encreast,
I have for some of you been sad
when you were less oppressed.
And if you shall go forward still
in doing causlesse wrong,
I, who now at your folly smile,
may weep for you ere long.
4.
The greatest harm I wish my Foes
when me most wronged have,
Is, that themselves they may not lose
by what they seek to have.
And when that they shall come to try
what they have brought me to,
That they nuoght else may loose thereby
but what would them undo.
5.
Man lives not by Bread alone
and that (should it be told)
Which now my life depends upon
your eyes cannot behold.
You robbed me of External Things,
but what the worse am I,
If I have in me Living Springs
that never will be dry.
6.
From that, which you debar me from,
me, long you cannot keep;
My Noon is past, my Night is come,
and I shall shortly sleep.
At first, to Wither I was born
(though then a springing Tree)
And now my leavss away are torn,
I can but Withered be.
7.
The Birds do live, the Lilies grow,
and are well clothed and fed;
Yet can not spin, nor plow, nor sow,
to get them Clothes and Bread:
I, therefore am without despair,
that he who clothes the Grass,
And feeds the small'st Fowls of the Air,
will heed my present Case.
8.
But if my Lot reserve she shall
until another Life,
The worst that can to me befall,
will bring more Joy then Grief:
As Nightingales in summer do,
i will sing all Night and Day;
And so shall in a month or two,
sing Care and Life away.
Refreshed by these pertinent Digressions,
Which fertifie my faith against oppressions,
I will proceed to make an application
Of what pertains to my last Narration.
The main breach made upon me (and which drew
Those mischiefs that did afterward ensue)
To me did happen some few days before
That Parliament was last shut out of door,
By whom those Grievances on me were brought,
And, then that fell on them, which I fore thought
And did foretell; perhaps that others may
Be wary, how they needlessly delay
That justice which to poorest men belongs,
When much opressed by continued wrongs;
Which GOD will execute, at first or last,
Hereafter as he has done in times past.
In this Relation, I, nor Poetize;
(As some may fancy) nor Hyperbolize:
But, here, in simple plainness have set down
The naked truth, that when it shall be known,
GOD may be better praised, and these Nations
Thenceforth take heed of wilful provocations.
For, greater mischief then to most appears,
(And very many complicated snares)
Entangle thousands, who destructively
Oppressed are this day, as much as I:
To whom the grace intended can derive
Naught else, but such a life as I would give
Ten times away, to free them from Oppression,
Who suffer with me, by my sad condition;
And, whose complainings, end soul-piercing words,
Lie pricking at my Heart, like Darts and Swords.
How GOD has fore-determin'd to dispose
Of me, from this time forth, he only knows;
And, his will shall be mine: but, if this change
Brings good to me, it will be very strange:
For, men profane esteemed, would then appear
More just, then they who saints reputed were;
My foes much kinder, then they who professed
To be my friends, and whom I served best.
As yet, he has retained me in their power,
Who day and night, are hunting to devour;
And, lets loose upon me such a Herd
Of brutes, as David heretofore compared
To Dogs, Bulls, Lions, Serpents, and to those
From out of whose mouths, Adders Poison flows;
Whose throats are like devouring graves; whose tongues
Are Mints of slanders and oppressive wrongs;
In secret, on a sudden shooting words
More sharp then arrows, or two-edged swords;
And were these only Foes professed, their scorn
Or malice, might with much more ease be born:
But, some of them, are those who many days
Walked with me friend-like in the self same ways;
And, Neighbors and acquaintance do begin
To be to me, as his to him had been:
My love to them, with hatred they requite;
For kindnesses, returning me despite.
Of me, their scurrile Songs the drunkards make,
With whom the scoffers in their jeers partake.
They, who as yesterday, pretended had
Some kindness, are maliciously grown mad,
Combining and conspiring, how they may
My Life, Estate and Credit take away;
As if until I wholly were destroyed
Their expectations could not be enjoyed:
Although I know no good that can arise
To them, by what against me they devise:
Or why such wrongs by them to me are done,
Except it be, because I did them none:
Or, else, for that their ways I look into,
More, then they are well-pleased I should do.
For, be it known, they who are thus enraged
Are not of those who formerly engaged,
In that cause which I lately did oppose;
No, no, so justly, these are not my Foes:
But, men, (if they deserve that name) whose base
Dissembling Heart false Tongues, and steeled Face:
Inclines them to make show, as if they never
Did any thing against the King endeavor:
Whereas, a chief of that debauched crew,
With his drawn Sword the late King did pursue;
And boasted heretofore (with his own breath)
Of personal assistance at his death:
Another of them, that he might endear
Himself to those who last inthroned were,
Made Headless this Kings picture; vowing then,
So to have done to him, had he there been.
These are my persecutors; these are they
Who help spread snares and mischiefs in my way:
And, some of those who yet in power a bide,
(By playing fast and loose on either side)
Are their abettors; for no cause to me
Yet known; unless they know I see
Their Juglings: or perhaps, because they fear
I may hereafter make them to appear.
Whereas, I rather (for my Countries sake)
To GOD, for their Conversion, prayers make,
That, timely, they their malice may repent,
Their own, and our perditions to prevent;
And that by our malitiousnesse they bring
No Damage to these Realms, or to the King,
To superfiede that Mercy, which I find
GOD, te confer on us, is now inclinde,
Because our weal and woe will be involved,
Within each others, as we are resolved,
And, as for time to come we shall persever
In Union, or neglect a good endeavor.
Though by our sins, and by the sins of those
Who were acknowledged (however chose)
For our Trustees, our late immunities
Are wholly forfeited, whilst GOD shall please;
There is an open Gate, through which I view
A better way, then we do yet pursue,
To re-obtain them, and to settle that
Desired Peace which we have aimed at.
There is a hope, this King will be so just
(When those in whom the common people trust
He thoroughly has tried) to let us see,
That, he shall prove at last our best Trustee,
Next under GOD, and for us do much more
Then all our Parliaments did heretofore,
Or will do now; for, they often do those
Resemble so, by whom they have been chose,
That, we in probability shall never
Accomplish that for which we do endeavor,
Till GOD shall other instruments provide
To do his work, and throw all these aside.
He, those that are in being, does permit
To be therein with him, Co-workers yet:
And there is a course that may with ease be taken
To build a Throne, which never shall be shaken;
For, if that be performed, whereupon
The King is readmitted to the Throne;
And, if due glory to the King of Heaven
Shall for the mercy now vouchsafed be given,
His chastisement (nigh twice so many years)
Continuing as Nebuchadnezzars)
Will make way in this day of probation,
To much more, then was by that Restoration
Vouchsafed to him; for, he establish may
A Throne to last until the Judgment day;
Whereby, shall be continued (so far forth
As may concern Christ's Kingdom here on earth)
The Majestracy and the Ministry,
(If we loose not this opportunity)
Reformed and vindicated (in short time)
From those contempts which have been cast on them.
Yea, if this King neglect not now to do
That, whereto providence does prompt him to,
And would assist him in; the more he found
At his Return confusions to abound,
The more he shall be magnifide thereby,
If, by his wisdom and his industry,
With GOD's assistance, he shall so restore
Those Powers, that they may interfere no more:
For, then they shall apart, and both together,
Be active and a strengthening to each other,
To those good ends for which they were ordained;
Which was, that wickedness should be restrained;
And that each other men might not oppress,
But, in uprightness and in holiness
Live lovingly, and serviceable here
To GOD, and each to other, without fear.
My Genius many times inclines me
Of these things his Remembrancer to be:
But, I have neither place to undertake
That Office, nor a fluent tongue to speak;
And should I write, I have so often tried
That course and found my writings cast aside,
(Though want of will, or leisure to peruse them,
Or else referred to those who did abuse them)
That, seldom times, the good effects they wrought,
Which by them I have rationally sought;
And they have not alone been often scorned,
But also to my advantage turned.
Beside, Kings will not easily forgo
What they resolve to act, or not to do:
So wedded are they to their Policies,
And so bedazled are their Carnal Eyes
With that bewitching splendour and false glory
Which Satan put on kingdoms transitory,
That, as to Jeroboam it befell
Though I should with a threefold miracle
My word confirm; a sequel might succeed
As ineffectual as at that time did.
But, to neglect ought, which I think (in reason)
Tends to secure the King, may be high treason:
On his behalf therefore, to GOD in prayer,
(To whom I can more easily repair)
I will address my self, without delay,
In words both weighed and measured for him pray,
And spread them on that Paper, to remain
For those that will to pray them over again;
Till that which I on his behalf have prayed,
Shall some way to his knowledge be conveyed.
GReat King of Kings, to whom are chiefly given
All praises; who, in Hell, in Earth, in Heaven,
Have Sovereign Power: who Kingdoms do bestow,
Change Governments, set up and overthrow
As thou shall please and always art both just
And merciful in every thing thou do:
Since thou, by Interchanges of thy Grace
And Judgments, have a long time in this place
Vouchsafed Experiments which do declare
What Thou art, and what, in our selves we are.
(Informed us of what is now at hand
By signs upon the waters and the Land,
As also in the air by peace and battle
By judgments upon Men, and upon Cattle)
And pleased art (as we behold this day)
To bring our King into a likely way
Of settlement upon his Fathers Throne:
Perfect, I pray thee, the work thou have begun.
Let thy vouchsafing him a Restoration,
Unclog'd with aa Explicit obligation,
No disadvantage to thy people bring,
But rather add more honor to the King,
By manifesting that his actings be
Products of Virtue, from compulsion free:
And lest they fall into that great offense
Which may obdure into Impenitence,
(As Jeroboam and his people did
When their Idolatry thou did forbid)
Permit thou not his Failings or his Sin,
To frustrate what thy Mercy does begin.
Let all these Nations on their part endeavor
To make this Reconcilement firm for ever,
By that Obedience joined with true Affection,
Which may deserve his Fatherly Protection:
And let their welfare be to him as dear,
As if they Children of his body were:
For, no Bond of Allegiance firm abides,
If equally not fastened on both sides;
Nor can their mutual Ties long lasting be,
Unless their Duties they perform to thee,
Their Sovereign Paramount who, search do make
What course thy Viceroys, and their subjects take:
And always do a wicked People bring
To be enslaved by a wicked King;
Not long preserving any Kingdom clear
From Rebels, where the Princes Tyrants are:
For, thou acceptest no Person, as to that
Which unto Common Justice does relate;
Though slowly, many times, thy Judgments come,
That Mercy may have time to bring them home.
Since he who governs men ought to be just,
On his part let the King perform his Trust
On him imposed, and sincerely do
All things that really conduce thereto;
Shunning such Flatterers, and such Whisperings
As by degrees may tempt him to those things
Which will at last divide them from each other
Whom now thy Providence has brought together,
Lest they by Fraudulent Equivocations
Annihilate each others Expectations.
With Wisdom and with Grace, his Heart enlarge,
The Duties of his Calling to discharge,
Without pretending more than he intends;
Which practice always in dishonor ends.
When once the promise of a King is broken,
Few afterward regard what shall be spoken
By him, what probable excuse soever
To vindicate himself he shall endeavor:
And though in his Designs a while he speeds
That Is one in Words, another in his Deeds;
Yet, he who by that practice gains most,
Gets nothing at the last whereof to boast.
Let him take counsel from thy Written Word,
How he should weild the Scepter and the Sword,
Lest they may prove worse Tools, than if he had
Been born to use the Mattock and the Spade.
Incline him also to enure his Ear,
The Voice of Truth in her own terms to hear,
Lest of such things as to his Weal pertain,
He may sometimes in ignorance remain.
And since he is thy Steward both by Name
And Office, let him execute the same,
As one who knows, that he for all things done
Must give account, and no man knows how soon.
For tho, thou call'st Kings Gods, yet dye they must
Like other men, and mingle with their Dust.
Him, keep thou mindful, that thou did not make
These Nations for his ends, or for his sake,
But him to be their Servant; and to own
No Privileges upon him bestown
But for their VVelfare; and that he should do
To all men as he would be done unto.
True-hearted men, to serve him, let him take,
Or them by his example such to make,
Instruct him, LORD, for, one of these will be
More useful, than of others, two or three.
What he is in Himself, let it be known
By those, on whom his Favors are bestown,
Though undeserved, he vouchsafe to some
His Grace, that they more gracious may become;
As thou do oftentimes, when we transgress
Through frailty, and not with maliciousness.
Make him consider well, things lately past,
With what at present thou vouchsafed have,
And what may yet ensue: Make him to mind
(If thereof, him forgetful thou shall find)
Through what wants, to abundance thou have brought him;
What Lessons, by Affliction thou have taught him;
What Snares and Dangers, thou have freed him from,
To what security he now is come,
Without premised Conditions, or engaging
Himself with others; or, by what the waging
Of War might have required, or by complying
With those, who for self ends, at watch were lying:
What Hopes, and Fears, and Doubts, he had that night
In which he made escape from Woster-Fight;
As also, when he Sanctuary took
Within the Body of a Hollow Oak;
What secret Vows and Promises were made
By him to thee, when he Direction had
Unto that LANE, whereby he found a pass
Out of those hazards wherein then he was:
Make him therewith consider, to what end
That great Deliverance thou did intend,
And what thou may expect this day from him
For all by thee vouchsafed since that time.
Moreover, make him take especial heed,
Why thou with him and others did proceed
As we have lately seen: wherefore, all those
And their Adheres, who, most did him oppose,
Thou giv'st into his hands: why, from the Throne
Thou flung'st him; why, again setst him thereon;
Lest else, False Prophets, or Court-Parasites,
Detractors, bold Impostors, Hypocrites,
Or such like, may divert him by Delusions
To that which is pursude with sad conclusions,
And not so much to his Well-being tends,
As to accomplish their own wicked ends:
Or, lest an Overweening may persuade him,
That his own Wisdom prevalent has made him;
And that thou have vouchsafed a good success
To his Desires, for his own Righteousness.
Let him some way, provide a Reparation
Of Public Faith, by whose late violation
These Nations are defamed; and (which is worse)
Made liable unto a dreadful Curse
Which may extend to him. Unsafe is he
With People that anathemized be.
His Person, though their sufferings reach not to,
To those, who now to him relate, they do;
And, those Oppressions which are lately cast
On thousands, will extend to him at last,
If he endeavor not what in him lies
To cure their Grievances, and stint their Cries:
For well enough it does appear to thee,
That, neither all Men, nor their Causes be
Such as to him they represented are;
Or, as unto the World they yet appear.
As mercy, therefore thou have shown to him
So let him also mercy show to them
Who now are in his power: for, although thee
They have offended, they, thy people be;
And I desire it should by him be heeded,
That whosoe'er against such have proceeded
Beyond thy Limits (to pursue their own
Revenge or Ends) do so incur thy frown,
That on themselves it brings at latter end
Those mischiefs which to others they intend.
Let him take also conscientious heed,
He makes that pardon which is promised,
(So far as thou allow'st) so full and free,
As he expects, thine unto him should be;
Else, Recknings, 'twixt you two will not be even,
For, as he pardons, he shall be forgiven.
Discerning give him, betwixt Rights and Wrongs,
To whom a Frown, to whom a Smile belongs;
Betwixt usurpt Prerogatives, and those
Through whose Defects, Pow'r-needful he may lose;
'Twixt Formal and Essential Pieties,
True Doctrines, and deluding Sophistries;
Betwixt Nathaniel, and an Ananias,
Men biased, and men without a Byas;
Betwixt thy Prophets, and the Priests of Baal,
By whatsoever, Names themselves they call:
Lest peradventure, some of those he takes
Into his bosom, may at last prove Snakes.
Give him an understanding heart, to judge
Betwixt true and pretended Sacrilege;
Lest such as heretofore befooled Kings,
By placing Holiness in Common Things,
Turn thy true Worship into Superstitions,
To multiply their temporal Fruitions;
Abuse his Piety as much (or more)
As they abused Princes heretofore;
Besainting them for their misplaced Zeal,
When it is but such as was in Jezabel,
Who fed four hundred Prophets every day
From her own Table; such, perhaps as they
Who in these days do arrogate to be
Thy Prophets, or Apostles sent from thee:
or, what are they ought better, who now dare
To count those Holy Things which offered were
To Devils; and, would that, as sacred hold
For which the souls of men were bought and sold?
Such Merchants may among us now be found,
And therefore (lest ere long they more abound)
Enable and incline the King to try
All spirits; that, with none he may comply,
Who may by his indulgence undermine
His Throne, and set the MAN of SIN on thine.
Thy Pastors teach him to distinguish from
Those Thieves, who in at window use to come:
And make him cherish those that are sincere
In thy Profession, by what name soever
They shall be called; since, things may be the same
Essentially, which differ in the Name.
LORD! it is thy Cause, for which I have begun
This Pleading; I will therefore plead it on.
Let him of Demas and Diotrephes
Take special heed: for, perilous are these;
And so are also they who do suppose
Religion does consist in mimick shows,
Or, in those Gaudy Furnitures, with which
The Scarlet-Strumpet, Nations did bewitch:
Or in observing things indifferent,
As if Essentially pertinent;
Or in opposing or neglecting them
Contentiously; or, with the mind of them
Who said, What needs this waste? for, nor their use
Nor their dis-use, but only their abuse,
Gives just offense: yea, it is not our abating,
Or adding; but, it is our necessitating
Indifferent Things, which renders them to be
Offensive to thy Saints, or unto thee.
Let him take heed of those, who with pretense
To Piety, affect Pre-eminence:
For, those began the Quarrel whence did spring
The Breach betwixt this People and the King.
And these, Oh GOD! if thou prevent it not,
Will re-beget what they at first begot.
The King was young when he departed hence,
And could not know them then; they, ever since
Were in a posture, which suppressed their pride,
And made them lay their haughtiness aside:
But when their late plucked wings are overgrown
With Feathers, they will perfectly be known.
Vouch safe him such a sanctifide discerning,
That neither their Formalities nor Learning,
Their Fawnings, their Dissembled Sanctity,
Or their pretendings to Antiquity,
Deceive him; for, by such like specious sleights
The Great Deceiver brought in his Deceits.
We Old Impostors have, as well as New,
And Truth is made a baud to things untrue
When men rely on men; and, by Records
Of their own forging, dare arraign thy words
Before their Bar; whereas, they should be tried
(When they are questioned by none else beside
Thy Spirit and their Peers: which Privilege
(If they might have before an upright Judge)
Would end a thousand Quarrels, which will never
Till then have end; but multiply for ever.
I know no prudent Christian, who dislikes
The Name or Officer, termed by the Greeks
Episcopos (and we in English call
An Overseer) if Episcopal
He truly be, and seeks not to obtrude
On other men a carnal servitude.
All Presbyters (as by thy Word appears)
Are Bishops, and all Bishops Presbyters;
And thou conferr'dst precedence on none,
Except it be for Orders sake alone,
To prosecute such things as have relations
To thy Affairs, in several Congregations,
As when that we, confusions to prevent,
A Prolocutor, or a President
In Synods, and in Counsels constitute,
To whom a double honor we impute.
For such like ends (if used soberly)
To some, belongs a Precedence;
Yea, thy Church, being of a large extent,
Must have both Overseers eminent,
And super-eminent, that so she may
With speed and ease, in a well ordered way,
(As need requires) those things communicate,
Which either Universally relate,
Or to Particulars. And, to pursue
This Order, there is doubtless also due
To such, proportionably, both respect
And maintenance, to give it an effect,
With which all persons duly qualifide
For that high Calling, will content abide;
Although it otherwhile amounts to less
Than when Corruption sprung from an Excess;
And thy Apostle has declared from thee,
That thus a Bishop qualified should be.
A man that lives an unreproved Life,
The Conjugal Companion of one Wife,
One watchful, temperate, and hospitable,
One well composed, and for instruction able;
A man, that from excess in Wine refrains,
That seeks not to be rich by sordid gains:
That neither is malicious, nor a striker,
Nor of ought avariciously a seeker,
But just, no Novice; one that without blame
Guides his own house, and has an honest fame.
And thou have showed us, how he should be chose
When Judas his Apostleship did lose.
If, I mistake thy Paterns, make them, LORD,
Such as may therewith every way accord;
And so the Kings Heart toward them dispose,
That as Matthias was, they may be chose:
For, whilst for their admittance they depend
Upon men's pleasures, they will more intend
Their services than thine: but, when they be
Elected by their Peers, and then by Thee,
As heretofore; they shall defy the BEAST,
And overthrow the Throne of Antichrist.
Let him no Power usurp, whereby these may
Election have, by any other way
Than is agreeable to his intent,
By whom his Messengers at first were sent:
For, by that means, into thy Church were brought
Such Overseers, as much more have sought
To serve themselves than thee; much scandalized
Thy Congregations, and made Truth despised.
Such, as unlike to those Apostles be
Which were ordained by they Christ and Thee.
Their Pomp and Habit, Avarice and Pride,
Their Language, and some other marks beside,
Are Symptoms which do make it very plain,
To whom, and to what Kingdom they pertain;
And that they seek not thine; unless, Oh GOD,
Thy Holy word I have mis-understood.
I did believe the Kingdom of thy Son,
Which was at first in poverty begun
By him, who had all Riches at command,
With all things in areadiness at hand
That might at once have made his Kingdom here
More glorious than the Popedom does appear,
Would not have left it struggling for that glory
Which is completed by things transitory,
Nigh sev'nteen hundred years had they been so
Essential, as some think they are thereto.
In my simplicity, I rather thought
That he who to advance his Kingdom sought
By Piety and Meekness, did intend
That way to glorify it to the end
Of Carnal vanities, and should have had
Such Officers and Overseers made
As rather therewith suited, than with those
Whose Kingdoms Satan has at his dispose:
And that they should have had throughout all ages
The self-same Badges, Liveries and Wages
As at the first, not such as some do now
Usurp and challenge as a sacred due,
Making them seem Ambassadors to be
Sent from the great Turk, rather than from thee.
Thus I believed, LORD, this, believe I still
To be according to thy sacred Will:
And thou do know, that what I now express,
Flows from no self ends, or maliciousness.
Without Compliances with such as these,
The King may reign with honor, if he please:
And with more safety, than if they acquired
That whereunto they lately had aspired.
But, I confess, a power he cannot have,
Both Soul and Body so much to inslave,
As by their help, who in these latter Ages,
Have got two Masters, and two sorts of Wages;
And, by whose aid, the Throne of Antichrist
Does not a little, at this day, subsist.
LORD, therefore, to maintain the Pageantry
And Lusts of an exploded Prelacy,
Let not the KING expose to desolation
So many thousand persons in this Nation,
As now are like to suffer, by a Rabble
Both unto Thee and Him unserviceable.
They, who are useful Officers of thine,
According to that Ancient Discipline,
Which from thy Holy Word we do derive,
And from the practice of Times Primitive,
May be provided for, without that cost
Which has for many years on them been lost;
Without incurring needless violations
Of Contracts, or the Engagements of these Nations;
Without exposing many Families
To suddenly-destructive Miseries;
And without hazarding of those Events
Which to such harshness may be Consequents.
The Temp'ralties and Lordships they possessed,
Belonged not to the Calling they professed.
When first they were conferred, they brought perdition
To Piety, increase to Superstition,
And Mischief to the Saints; for which they are
Ejected from them by that Civil War
Which they occasioned; and though re-possession
They may have for a while, by thy permission,
I have a thought, that at their Restoration
(As at new laying Jericho's foundation)
Some signal thing will then be done that shall
Declare, thou art not pleased therewithal;
Which, from thy purpose if it disagree
Pardon this babbling of my thought to thee.
That thus, Oh LORD! my heart is now inclined
Concerning these, to speak to thee my mind,
It Is not because thou need'st it should be told,
But, that hereby, some other better should
Consider what by their means may befall,
Both in things ghostly, and things corporal.
Thou know that it is not my estate,
Which is by these in hazard now of late
To be bereft: for whether unto these,
Or unto me, to give it thou shall please,
I am content; since all the world is thine,
And so much as is needful, shall be mine.
Thou likewise know, that of none of these,
I judge the Persons, or the Consciences;
But, that I am in charity with all,
And, leave them by thy Doom to stand or fall.
The various Forms of worshipping of thee;
Within thy Church are no offense to me;
Because there may be possibly Salvation
Through Christ, in every Christian Dispensation,
To those, who with a conscientiousness,
Believe and practice what they do profess.
The Prelates, not thy Bishops, I oppose;
Nor Prelates, if they naught on me impose,
For, when they less esteem Things Transitory,
They may be instrumental to thy Glory;
And, to thy Congregations will dispense
Thy Sacred Mysteries, without offense:
When we a little more are rubbed together,
To scour away the Rust from one another.
Although the Name of Bishop does offend,
Thy Son his Congregations did commend
To Overseers, as well as to Preachers;
(To Deacons, and to ordinary Teachers)
And doubtless, though Ambition strained further
That Discipline, a Primacie of Order
Is now so needful, that when thou have broke
The Bile of Pride, and quite away have took
From that Imposthumation all the Core,
Thy Church will governed be as heretofore.
The Prelates being grossly led aside
By their O'er-weening, Avarice and Pride,
Would have thy Church, LAODICEA-like,
Her Glory, in External Pomp, to seek;
Their Faction only they conceive to be
That Holy Church, which is approved by thee:
Like her, she boasts that she nothing needs,
That all Reformed Churches she exceeds,
And, much triumphs now, in the restitution
Of her adored Rags of Superstition:
But if their Prelacy aside they lay,
Therewith, will all their Trinkets fall away:
The Treble, Mean, the Tenor and the Base,
And Counter-tenor, to a Diapase.
Thou then shall bring, and to this people give
The Grace, as well to love and to believe,
As hear and do; and every differing String
Shall to the Music such a Concord bring,
That, what at present does obstruct our Peace,
Shall to thy Praise hereafter add increase.
This I believe, LORD, let us wait upon
Thy will with patience, till this shall be done.
Meanwhile, preserve the People and the King,
From those ensnarings, which these, else, may bring
Upon the Conscience; or, lest we by them
May be withdrawn from thy Jerusalem,
To Babylon; Let such before our eyes
Unmasked stand, by whatsoever disguise
They are concealed: For, much I am afraid,
A Game is dealing now, which may be played
To thy dishonor, and Wolves forth be sent
Among thy Lambs to frust rate his intent,
Who sent Lambs among Wolves: for as of old
We were fore-warned, that some Deceivers would
Say, Here is CHRIST, and there is CHRIST, that they
Might set a false Christ up: So, at this day,
That undiscerned the Antichrist may be,
Some, tell us This, some, tells us, That is He:
But, by such signal marks him thou have shown,
That he to many thousands is well known.
Reveal him also to this King, and show,
How they to whom there is Double Honor due,
May with all Necessaries be supplide,
More to the advance of Piety than Pride:
That other Nations, by that good Example,
May join in building thy Essential Temple
With such Materials as may not confound
The Parts thereof, or make the Whole unsound.
And cause this King a Pattern to become
Of Justice to all Kings in Christendom.
To that end I implore thy Majesty
(For thine own Honors sake which else thereby
May be eclips' d) that he usurp not on
The Consciences of Men, which is thy Throne;
Nor suffer any other in thy Name,
And with false Warrants to usurp the same.
For, by that Rule whereby intrude they shall
On one indifferent thing, they may bar all;
And ere they leave encroaching thereupon,
Of Christian Liberties, not leave us one.
Inslaving of the Conscience, to all evil
Sets open Gates: and only for the Devil
Or Antichrist, it makes Proselytes,
And, does but fill the world with Hypocrites.
Therefore, to all, who Faith in thee profess,
Who keep thy Moral Law, and common Peace
Endeavor to preserve by word and deed,
Let such a Freedom be by him decreed;
That Truth and Error, whilst within those Lists
They keep themselves, may for their Interests,
Contend at will; and let those punished be,
Who break those Lists, as Traitors unto thee.
For, whereso'er this prudently is done,
The fall of Babylon is there begun;
And Christ will give true Judgment betwixt them
Who yet contend, in his appointed time.
For this King's likewise, and this People's sake,
Both Him and Them, henceforth, so wary make,
That neither Vow, nor Covenant, nor Oath,
They violate: for, thou so much do loath
Unfaithfulness, that when thy People made
A Covenant, which thy prohibition had,
(Yea, notwithstanding all Conditions were
Obtained by fraud) a punishment severe
Thou for the wilful breach thereof, did bring,
Both on thy chosen People, and their King.
A Vow likewise, by Jonathan infringed
(Unwittingly) severely was avenged:
And breach of Oaths in every Generation,
Has been pursued by thee, with Indignation,
Though made to Infidels, and unto those
Who were as well thine, as thy peoples Foes.
Yea, though men are in durance when they make them,
Thou will severely punish those who break them;
As by that dreadful Vengeance which appeared,
(To make all future perjured Kings afear'd)
Thou brought on Zedekiah; and, of late,
Upon some Christians, who did violate
A Contract with the Turk. Yea, said it was
(As if thereof they were a special cause)
For Oaths, the Land does mourn: and much I fear
That of our Mournings, they, chief causes are.
LORD, Cautious also make this King to be
Of wronging Justice, and displeasing thee,
By his imposing Oaths, which may give cause
Of Clashings, 'twixt Divine and Humane Laws;
Or, which ensnare, and rarely do produce
Effects equivalent to their abuse:
For, to impose such Oaths as may ensnare,
Which, dubious in their acceptations are;
Which, Ignorant Deponents may engage
In, or to that whereof they cannot judge,
Or which their Conscience checks at, is an end
To which thou never did an Oath intend,
And is a wicked and a cursed Gin,
By Tyrants and by tyranny brought in.
Oh! make the King, mind and consider it;
That, fast and easy, his new Crown may sit.
If thou have sent him hither in thy Wrath,
It Is what our wickedness deserved has
So justly, that the same we well may fear;
And that in our Corrections he may share,
It Is also possible, as soon as he
Has dealt among us what our Dole must be:
And then, our Executioners must sup
The Dregs, at bottom of our Bitter Cup:
As also they, who with a barbarous noise
Over us, in our Afflictions now rejoice.
Thee, in humility, I, now therefore
With all the affections of my heart implore,
To let with Judgments, Mercy come along,
To make our Patience and our Faith so strong,
That, He and We, our Trials may improve,
To turn thine Indignation into Love;
And not as We and our late Rulers did,
Provoke thee still in anger to proceed:
Or, as they did, who, when thy Wrath on them
Was poured forth, did grow furious and blaspheme:
But, to avert the danger we are in,
Join in repentance, as we did in sin.
Give to the King, a Spirit fit to do
That signal Work, which thou have called him to;
And give us meekness to be wrought upon
By that, which must by Thee and Him be done:
For, such and so great our Distempers be,
That they are curable by none but Thee,
Or those with whom Thou shall cooperate
Our manifold Confusions to abate.
It is a Power to Thee alone confinde
To make all in one Household, of one mind,
Much more it is thy peculiar, to atone
Three Nations, that, in him they may be One.
Enable him therefore with every thing
Which to effect, thy purposes may bring.
Assist him at this time, that he may 'bide
That Test, whereby he now is to be tried;
Lest his Return (ere many turns about)
A worse Turn prove, than his last turning out.
From Sycophants preserve him, and from those
Who hide their Private Malice, under shows
Of Public Ends. From every man's unjust
Pretending, who departs from his trust,
Protect him: for, he that was false to them
Who gave him credit, will be false to him:
Yea, he that is a Traitor to a Stranger,
If he may get Reward, and escape the Danger,
Will to betray his Country, Prince, or Friend,
One time or other, some just Cause pretend.
But, principally, LORD, preserve him from
That Self-Will, which Self-Ruine does become
To all who cherish it, and makes void
All means which to preserve him are employed.
If from those Places where he lately sought
His Refuge, any Leven he has brought,
Which working on the Frailties of his Youth,
Has sowr'd the Doctrines of thy saving Truth,
By him professed; purge it by thy Grace.
Lest it may poison him, and all his Race.
Great have been his Temptations; great likewise
Have been their many Opportunities,
Who sought to work upon him; and if home
A Conqueror over all this, he is come,
It will of him, to all these Nations, be
A Testimonial signed and sealed by thee:
And, to be thy CONFESSOR he will more
Deserve, then did King EDWARD heretofore.
Make him consider, that, to be a King,
Is not to be an Independent Thing;
Two ways, at least, a Relative is He;
Thou, and his People, Antecedents be:
That, for their sakes in chief, not for his own,
His dignity of Kingship, was bestown.
That, he has no just Power, but what they gave,
Or, thou permittest him in wrath to have,
To punish, when against thee they rebel;
Or else in order to their commonweal,
That Ordination was for Good, not Evil,
Save when made by themselves, or by the Devil,
Which, sometimes GOD permits (for many Ages)
So pay his Executioners their Wages.
This, well consid'ring, let him not intend,
Or Kingship claim, to any other end
Then thou design'st; nor practice to grow strong
By offering violence, or doing wrong;
Lest thou let loose those Mastives which will tear
Those Royal Robes, which he in peace might wear.
Those Beasts an ancient Hierogliphick are,
Of Englishmen: By thee chained up they were,
When he came in; and though they then were pleased,
And fawned, they will be mad when they are teas'd,
And fly on any thing, fearlesse of dangers,
Or odds, especially, if teas'd by Strangers.
This to prevent, let him not now provoke them,
But rather, with a soft hand, gently stroke them;
Assure him that no people can disgust,
Or disoblige a KING that shall be just.
Since, when a true respect to them is shown,
It makes not only their Estates his own,
(And will enrich him more then if he could
Turn all our Mountains into Ophir-Gold)
But, also builds him in their Heart, a Throne
Of Perfect Love, for him to rest upon.
Make him but of this mind, and I shall seem
Henceforth as worthy of his good esteem,
For these Remembrances, as they that in
His suffering have with him partakers been;
And much more to his honor it will add,
Then if a PANEGYRIC I had made.
Make him but thus affected, LORD, to be,
And in thy Name, I Will warrant this from thee,
That, henceforth it shall more and more increase
His honor; settle Him in perfect peace;
All present fears and jealousies remove;
End all our Quarrels in an endless Love;
Convert all that which will be found in Story
Of our late failings, to thy future glory;
And, make that useful to preserve from blame
Hereafter, that was heretofore our shame.
But, if that he and they, whom 'twill concern
Now to be just and prudent, shall not learn
What thou intend'st; but act as they have done
Who lately were ejected from the Throne;
If, yet, the King and Judges of the Land
Kiss not thy SON, and timely understand
What Is threatened now, but prosecute their lust,
And be as merciless, and as unjust
As others were; I will once more be bold
To tell them what to others I have told,
Even in thy Name: That, though a while they flourish,
They, and the Course they prosecute, shall perish.
And, this my Prayer (though they slight it shall)
Will prove at last to be Prophetical
In every Branch, as well as Precatory:
But be it what shall most be for thy glory.
LORD, hear me, and vouchsafe that those Conditions
On which thou condescend'st to such Petitions,
May be performed, and acceptance have,
(Although they cannot merit what I crave)
For, Prayers can for no man take effect,
Who wilfully his Duty shall neglect.
In mercy too, remember Me, and Mine:
Increase our faith; keep close our hearts to thine,
In all our Trials: Be not so severe
To heed the murm'rings, the distrusts or fear
Whereto we tempted are, but pardon all
Our Failings, that we stumble not to fall.
Grant, that these Prayers may as well prepare
Both me and every one who shall them hear,
To mind our Duties, as be helps to crave
Of thee, those Mercies which I ask to have.
One word more, for my dear Relations sake,
Be pleased to hear: Compassion on them take:
And since by my Adventures they are left
Quite comfortless, (of every thing bereft
Whereby they may subsist) some Hearts prepare
Of them, in their Desertions, to take care:
Or, since that they are thine, vouchsafe thou rather,
To be to them a Husband, and a Father:
For, though they may hope well, they cannot know
What Spirit it is, from whence my Actings flow;
And therefore cannot my Partakers be,
In those Refreshments which I have from thee;
As well, because they see men often bereft
Of Reason, and to their own Fancies left;
As also, for that by our separation
We are deprived of mutual consolation.
As for my self, I ask no more of thee,
But that Grace which will all-sufficient be.
Life is preserved with a little matter;
And, he that with course cloth, and bread and water,
Content remains, neither can be poor,
Nor miserable, though he has no more.
To this endeavor give some good effect;
And, so to prosecute it, me direct,
That without fruit, my pains be not bestown
Through other men's defaults, or by my own:
And, pardon it, if I, my self, have sought,
By minding my own Cause, more then I ought;
Whereof (I do confess) I am afraid
I may be guilty, by self-love o'er-swaid)
But, humbly to thy Grace, my Soul appeals,
Which will suffice for that, and all faults else.
For what I have done well, the praise be thine:
For what is amiss, let all the blame be mine.
Thus in a plain petitionary mode,
I have been wrestling as it were with GOD,
For King and People: For whose sake I made
This GLASS, which else no being should have had.
I must confess, my own sad Cause broke in,
As soon as ere I did therewith begin;
And would not suffer me to persevere,
Unless it therewith interwoven were.
Fain would I have forgot it; but I may
As well, if broyling on hot coals I lay,
Resolve I would not feel them, as I then
Could from it totally refrain my Pen:
For (as I have yet) I had then my share
With such, as this day most oppressed are.
Yea, moved I was, these Musings to compose,
When Scorns, Wrongs, Wants, and multiplying Foes,
Had overwhelmed me so, that they had cracked
My Brains, if this Employment I had lackt.
Like Balast in a Ship, it kept me steady,
When I had else been over-set, or giddy.
And, my Afflictions have permitted been,
Perhaps, not altogether for my sin;
But partly, that together with mine own,
The grievances of others might be known;
And that for no respects I might forbear
My thanklesse Office of Remembrancer,
For which GOD had with Health, and Food, and Raiment
Vouchsafed me extraordinary payment,
Till I neglected it, on vain surmises,
Appearing in some rational disguises.
At first I lazy grew; then, fell in doubt
Whether the work I was employed about
Were GOD's, or rather somewhat, which to do,
Not Duty, but my Fancy led me to.
Then I began to think it might be spared,
Because I saw that neither much regard
My Musings had nor any such effect
As I by them did formerly expect:
And at the last, I feared if I went on
With what I purposed, I should be undone.
Thus, though in Conscience I was called unto it,
I did neglect it, till GOD whipped me to it;
And therefore now am justly thrust among
Those thousands, who complain of helpless wrong.
I dreaded, that it might increase my Troubles;
And therefore, them upon me GOD redoubles.
I feared that some Losses might befall;
And therefore worthily have now lost all.
My Duties, I deferred to be done,
Till I should have more Rest; and now have none.
My Wives and Childrens ruin I did fear;
And therefore I and they now beggered are:
Yea, so much more then beggered, as my Debt
Amounts unto, (for ought that I know yet.)
This, by my Carnal Prudence I have got;
And this in like case, will be each man's Lot
GOD, will have this work done for love or awe;
And since I did it it not whilst I had Straw,
I now must gather Stubble. I was fain
To prosecute this (not without much pain)
When I had but a very little left,
And often threatened was to be berest
Even of that little. Scarce one man I knew
Who cared for my soul; and very few
To whom I my condition might relate,
Or unto whom I might communicate
These Lines, without a mischief or a jeer,
When I conceived they most useful were;
For have I where with to the Press to send them,
Though I for publication do intend them;
Nor have I in my power a certainty
Of what should necessary things supply;
Nor know from whence it shall to me be given
For time to come, except it rain from Heaven:
And (which of these Afflictions is the chief)
I freedom want to seek for my relief.
And whilst this was composing, the despite
Which long was riping, grew to such a height,
That evil News like Job I did receive,
As if the World from GOD had gotten leave
To try my Patience as she pleased should be,
Preserving only Life and Health in me:
For by their Censures many did assay
To take my Confidence in GOD away:
Objecting, That my scribbling to make known
The Times Corruptions, flowed but from mine own:
That, Malice, Envy, Pride, or private Spleen,
The Fountains are, whence issued they have been:
And pressed it so, as if it were a Crime
More capital, then any of our Time:
Which makes me unto GOD, sometimes to cry,
Search thou my heart, and give the world the lie.
She daily seeks occasion to defame me,
To make me miserable, and to shame me:
She practices all means that may deject me,
And how she by despairings, may afflict me.
Yea, as if knowing I were musing now,
On somewhat which her Projects might o'erthrow,
Her Friend the Devil, does afflict me more,
Then all that I have mentioned before,
By strongly tempting them, whose nigh relations
Can most augment my inward perturbations,
To be afraid, that I so much prefer
My own Designs, before my Weal and their;
That, what at this time I pursue, will be
The total Ruin both of them and me;
And, that what I resolve, does rather flow
From VVilfulnesse, then Duties which I owe;
Or, at the best, from some Fanatic Fit
Proceeding from a boldness without wit:
And to convince me of what they allege,
They thereof make my greatest Foe the Judge:
Which more perplexed me; and my patience tried
A great deal more then all the world beside:
For neither World nor Devil could invent
A Remora like that, to my inten.
I, notwithstanding, still proceeded on
To do, what I think needful to be done;
As all men should, who know obliged they are,
Their Deeds by their own Consciences to square,
And not by other men's; because, that none
Must answer for their faults, but they alone.
If this be not my Work and that work too,
Which I was principally born to do,
I know not wherefore I was born, or why
I lived, but to eat, and drink, and die;
Which made me in condition, at the least,
As low, if not much lower then a Beast,
Considering what Faculties they be
Wherewith my Maker bath endowed me:
And if such Works as these, are fit for none
But perfect men, they never can be done.
Was I enabled this way to express
My mind so plainly and with easiness,
In my distracting troubles, to no end
But Time, and Ink, and Paper to mispend?
Are we, by GOD, so often called upon
To heed what he, and we our seves have done,
(And stir up others to perform the same)
For nothing but to be exposed to blame,
Or to mis-censures, when we undertake
That thankless Office, for mere Conscience sake?
Is Poesy, which wise Men have believed
A Gift from GOD, even in the womb received,
(And, whereby David did both Trophies raise
To his REDEEMER 's everlasting Praise,
And leave behind him for our imitation,
Reproofs of Tyrants, in his Generation)
Is that now grown quite useless, in all those
To whom a portion thereof he bestows,
Except Lust to inflame? To cast disgrace
On Virtue, or extol a painted Face?
Is it in these days, not to be allowed,
Unless it be to Idolize the Proud:
Or flatter Fools? I Will wonder then no more:
Why Poets are less prized then heretofore.
No marvel they are slighted; and, perhaps,
Cherish't like Parrots, or maintained with scraps.
Like Spaniels, and must think much honor done them,
If their great Patrons please to grin upon them:
For, they deserve no better need then so,
If that be all the work they have to do.
This way it is and shall be well employed
By me, although I thereby am destroyed:
And, though it is an old adjudged case,
That Poets must be poor, I Will not be base.
My poverty is without president,
For I am poor by Acts of Parliament.
I was not in that condition thrown,
Till they who cracked my credit lost their own;
And if the King pleases, he may make me rich,
Yet loose no honor, nor in treasure much;
For, had I but mine own, my Debts to free,
I should suppose my self as rich as he.
From GOD, if this proceed not, I shall have
The recompense I merit to receive;
Which will be at the worst an outward trouble,
And loss of that which I have built with stubble:
But, if it flows from him it will produce
Effects which to his glory shall have use;
And, he will bring it forth at such a time,
As, serviceable make it will to him.
Yea, though in the Thames it should be thrown,
Like that which being tide unto a Stone
Was sunk in Euphrates (and no more seen
After in Babel it once read had been)
And will be made available to that
Which, in composing it, I aimed at.
Till that time, therefore, I will lay it by,
Not doubting such a time is drawing nigh.
If this King (as I hope) be hither sent,
As well for Mercy, as for Chastisement,
(For, we need both) it, such effects will bring,
That we in Judgment shall of Mercy sing.
For my part, whatsoere my Portion be,
I Will take that thankfully which falls on me,
As sent from GOD, whoere he be that brings it,
Yea, though at me, in rage, the Devil flings it:
For (be it known and heeded) not in vain
Die they, who in the forlorn Hope are slain:
Nor useless to a Victory are they,
Who are supposed to throw their Lives away
By desperate attempts; since Providence
(Whose way transcendeth man's intelligence)
Acts very many times, by things which we
Think may to her own ends repugnant be.
They who were slain when first the Fight begun,
And they who fought until the Field was won,
May (whatsoere to others does appear)
In work and honor, merit equal share.
Nay, signal Victories are got sometime
By that which has been punished as a Crime.
To me and many other men beside,
May, peradventure, such a Lot betide;
However, I submit unto his pleasure,
Who acts in his own time, by weight and measure;
And, forasmuch as I have no defense
Against my Foes, but naked Innocence,
(Or words, which are amongst them sometimes shot,
To let them understand I fear them not)
I, (that my Flesh my be preserved from
Dejection in her mode, till succors come)
My fortress keeping, their Affronts despise,
Shoot back their stones, and dirt into their eyes;
Believing, they to peace will now incline,
Or, be reduced to harder streights then mine,
As they but lately were, who did contemn
The Sequels, whereof I forewarned them.
And, if by Storm, they take my life away,
(Which, I as little do regard, as they)
It, in their Souls may leave a Sting behind it,
Which, will with Torment, make them sometimes mind it.
But, here I yet remain; and for a Close
(In reference to our Antichristian Foes)
I Will add this Corollary by the way,
Whilst on his Horns, the B E A S T is tossing Hay:
For, if deceived I am not, our Disease
Chiefly proceeds, underhand, from these.
And though (a farther-off removed Cause
Pretending) they bescratch us with the Paws
Of other Beasts: it plainly may be seen
By whom our troubles have contrived been.
I, therefore, make but a Defensive War
With such as mine own adversaries are;
And (to his Captains as the Assyrian, King
Once gave command) intend no Dart to fling,
To be destructive to Foe great or small,
Whose hate to me, is only personal;
But, at those only, whose hate does extend
To HIM, and HIS, on whom I do depend.
To act the last Scoene which precedes their Doom,
They, now new vampt upon the Stage are come;
And though that with the KING, as if his Friends,
They seem to side, they come to other ends,
Which, he not yet discerning, in his grace
Vouchsates them a considerable place;
And, of prevailing they already boast,
As if they saw the LAMB, and all his Host
Quite overthrown; which, me as confident
Has made, that GOD their proud hope will prevent;
And overthrow that Tyranny outright,
By what they think shall raise it to its height.
But, many trials must the Saints abide,
And very much their patience will be tried
Here and elsewhere, before that Act is done,
Which with an Anti-mask is now begun.
Our Friends inhabiting beyond the Waters,
And who were of our Tragedies Spectators
Now twenty years (though they perceive it not,
Or seem not to perceive it) in that Lot
Which these have cast for us, designed are
(Or in what follows next to have a share:
For, Hamans PUR's on foot; not only here,
But, like wise almost every other where;
And these think, that to take them by his Gin
With most speed, is, with us, first to begin.
But, there is a Counter mine, which will be sprung,
To blow up them, and all their Mines, ere long.
Six hundred sixty six, draws on apace,
And not one day beyond that, shall they pass:
It is the number of that MAN OF SIN,
VVhereto his Kingdom has confined been
By him that cannot lie: and, long ago
To many, that Epoch I did shows,
From whence his Reign begins; and, by a light,
(As I believe) which shines without deceit,
It numbers out his Reign as certainly
As women reckon the Nativity
Of Children in their wombs, which has success
Within a very few days more or less:
And of that Mystery, what heretofore
I have expressed, I Will here express once more;
Because, those Nations which may much be needed,
Cannot be too often told, nor too well heeded.
To former times, this Mystery was dark,
And lay a long while, covered like a spark
In ashes, lest perhaps what at this time
Will comfort us, might have discouraged them
Who lived then: for, men rejoice to hear
The day of their deliverance is near:
But nothing save discomfort could they gain,
By knowing Tyranny so long should reign.
Herein, I circumstantially perchance
May somewhat ere through humane ignorance;
But, as to that which was essentially
To us intended by this Mystery,
I shall not fail of; which is, to presage
That Babylon shall fall in this our Age.
Sev'n Numerals the Roman Empire had,
Whereby of old they Computations made;
And in them was their Destiny fore-shown,
(Though to themselves perhaps it was unknown.)
These, placed singly, as they valued are,
Do truly (though misteriously) declare
How long that Empire, with what sprung therefrom,
Should last, when to the full height it should come:
For, M.D.C.L.X. with V. and I.
Do number up, in Chronogrammistry,
Years Sixteen hundred sixty six; and, that
Will be of Roman Tyrannies the date.
No other Number either more or less,
If none of these you double or displace,
Can be by them expressed. If you ask when
This Number did begin; I say, even then
When Rome declined first, from her height of pride,
Which was, when Jesus Christ was crucifide:
For, at that time her glory did abate.
This Number therefore you must calculate.
From, or about, the known time of Christ's Passion,
Not from the first day of his Incarnation.
A silence (as it were) seemed to have been
In heaven, during the interval between
His Death and his Ascension, as if caused
By seeing that done which had much amazed
The whole Creation, when that they did see
The LORD OF LIFE hang dead upon a Tree.
The Devil, probably, at that time too,
Was at a stand, and knew not what to do.
But, soon perceiving that the snare he wrought
Was broke, to make another, straight he sought;
Which, to prevent, an Angel in a Chain,
(His other powers, him suffering to retain)
Did for a thousand years restrain the Devil
From setting up that Mystery of Evil,
Which in Paul's time he was at work upon.
But when those thousand years were fully gone,
He raised it up; and GOD permits him,
To manage his own Engine for a time,
That, Truth and Error might here for a space,
Make trial of their strengths; and, that each Grace
And virtue of the Saints, by exercise
Improved might be, to fit them for the prize
Prepared for those, who shall engage with CHRIST,
And overcome the Dragon and the Beast.
A thousand years sharp Trials they withstood;
Yet then they strugled but with Flesh and Blood;
And, for the most part, all their Combats then,
Were like Saint Paul's at Ephesus, with Men
Resembling Beasts: but since Iniquity
Was set up veiled with a Mystery,
(As in these latter Times) with greater Evils
The Saints do grasp: for they contend with Devils
In shape of men, in temporal Confusion,
Made terrible by spiritual delusions;
And therefore GOD allotted unto him
Who tyrannizeth now, a shorter time;
And to a certain day his reign did fix,
Which ends at six hundred sixty six:
And he who knows on what day it begun,
May know the day on which it will be done.
Which I believe, will visibly appear
In, or about the sev'nteenth hundred year.
And thus much only, therefore to foreknow,
(With how nigh to an end it seems now)
May make us hopeful, and our faith uphold,
As well, as if year, day, and hour were told:
Yea, and it better serves to exercise
Our Constancy, then if 'twere otherwise;
And if well heeded, peradventure may
Keep some upright, who might else fall away
In these back sliding days; wherein, they see
The Beasts late deadly wound nigh cured to be.
They on a sudden are become as jolly
As if they thought it to be cured wholly;
And, to impose their Mark, will now begin
To be more strict then ever they have been;
So that ere long, few men shall live in peace,
Bear Office, or a free Estate possess,
Where they have power, unless they marked are
In hand or forehead, with their Character.
But, if that, whereof some imperfect views
Far-off, appear, accordingly ensues,
There will, to th wart their hopes, a New Star blaze
Within the West, that shall the world amaze;
And Influences through the Universe
So quickly, and prodigiously disperse,
That, aided by concurring Constellations,
It shall have some effect, upon most Nations,
And cause such Changes, as will make a stand
In those Attempts which they have now in hand.
Yet know, it will but a Diversion be,
Not that which must from Bondage set us free.
And know likewise, that this which last of all
I have expressed, is but conjectural,
And springs from Notions merely rational,
That possibly may, or may not befall.
Those Notions, which may variously relate
To me and others, in our twofold state,
Are summed up for a General Forewarning;
GOD, give my Readers spirits of discerning,
And so much Grace and Meekness, as to heed
His Truth, from whomsoe'er it shall proceed.
Such Contemplations are not in my power
At all times; for, my Flesh often draws me lower;
And I am forced to please her otherwhile,
By Strains, that harmlesly may her beguile
With hopes of what she looks for in her mode.
Till that comes, which essentially is good.
And if these both together can maintain
My Faith in patence, it is not work in vain:
For, such so great, so many are my Foes,
(And frailties too, more then my own heart knows)
And so maliciously do they contrive
My ruin (more perhaps then some believe)
That, often I Am forced to answer (I confess)
The Fool according to his foolishness;
And when surpised, upon my guard to stand,
With any lawful Tool that comes to hand.
GOD, has in bidding to the world defiance,
Preserved me hitherto without compliance
In any base mode (though by brining on me
Great Mischiefs, she has now three times undone me;
And, I am hopeful, he is with me still
As he has been; and therefore, to his will
And free disposure, I will all things leave
Which may to me or mine relation have:
And in contempt, of what my foes intend,
These Musings, this ensuing Jigg shall end;
Which blame not, if you find it somewhat long:
To shorten Grief, I lengthen out my Song.
The Contented Man's Morice.
1.
FAlse World, thy Malice I epsy
with what thou have designed;
And therein with thee to comply,
who likewise are combined:
But, do thy worst, I thee defy,
Thy Mischiefs are confined.
2.
From me, thou my Estate have torn,
by Cheatings me beguiled:
Me thou have also made thy scorn;
with Troubles me turmoiled:
But to an Heritage I Am born,
that never can be spoiled.
3.
So wise I am not, to be mad,
though great are my Oppressions;
Nor so much fool as to be sad,
though robbed of my Possessions;
For, Cures for all sores may be had,
and Grace for all Transgressions.
4.
These words in youth my MOTTO were,
and mine in Age I Will make them;
I neither have, nor want, nor care;
when also first I spoke them:
I thought Things would be as they are,
and meekly therefore take them.
5.
The Riches I possess this day
are no such Goods of Fortune
As King can give or take away,
or Tyrants make uncertain:
For, hid within my self are they
behind an unseen Curtain.
6.
Of my Degree, but few or none
were daily so frequented;
But now I Am left of every one,
and therewith well contented:
For, when I am with GOD alone,
much folly is prevented.
7.
Then why should I give way to grief?
Come, strike up Pipe and Tabor;
He that affects GOD in chief,
and as Himself his Neighbor,
May still enjoy a happy life,
although he lives by labor.
8.
Not me alone have they made poor,
by whom I have been cheated;
But very many thousands more
are of their hopes defeated;
Who little dreamed heretofore
of being so ill treated.
9.
Then if my courage should be less
then their who never prized
The Resolutions I profess
(and almost idolized)
I well deserved in my distress
to be of all despised.
10.
Our sad Complaints, our Sighs and Tears,
make Meat nor Clothing cheaper:
Vain are our earthly Hopes and Fears,
this Life is but a Vapor:
And therefore indespight of Cares,
I Will sing, and dance and caper.
11.
Though Food nor Raiment left me were,
I would of wants be dreadless:
For then, I quickly should be there
where Bread and Cloth are needless:
And in those Blessings have my share,
whereof most men are heedless.
12.
I then should that attain unto
For which I now endeavor;
From my False Lovers thither go,
where Friendship fails never:
And through a few short pangs of Woe,
to Joys that last for ever.
13.
For Service done, and love expressed,
(though very few regard it)
My Country owes me Bread, at least,
but, if I be debarred it,
Good Conscience is a daily Feast,
and sorrow never marred it.
14.
My Grand Oppressors had a thought,
when Riches they bereaved,
That then, my Ruin had been wrought,
but they are quite deceived:
For, them the Devil much mis-taught
when that weak snare they weaved.
15.
If in those Courses I had gone
wherein they are employed,
Till such Atchievments had been won,
as are by them enjoyed,
They might have wager'd ten to one
I should have been destroyed.
16.
But, Proofs have now confirmed me
how much our Vice offends,
And what small helps our Virtues be
to that which GOD intends,
Till he himself shall make us free,
and our Defects amendeth.
17.
Not one is from corruption clear;
men are depraved wholly:
Mere Cruelties their Mercies are,
their Wisdom is but Folly;
And when most righteous they appear,
then, are they most unholy.
18.
There is no Trust in Temp'ral Things,
for they are all unsteady:
That no assurance from them springs,
too well I find already;
And that even Parlaments and Kings
are frail, or false, or giddy.
19.
All stands upon a tottering Wheel,
which never fixed abides;
Both Commonweals and Kingdoms reel:
he, that in them confideth,
(Or trust their Faith) shall Mischiefs feel,
with which soever he sideth.
20.
This Wit, I long ago was taught,
but then I would not heed it:
Experience must by Fools be bought,
Else they will not think they need it.
By this means was my Ruin wrought;
Yet, they are Knaves who did it.
21.
When to the ground deprest I was,
our Mushroms and our Bubbles
Whom neither Truth, nor Wit, nor Grace,
but Wealth and Pride ennobles,
As cruel were, as they are base,
and jeered me in my troubles.
22.
And, when their hate, these had made known,
new mischiefs it beg at me,
For, every Raskal durty Clown,
Presumed, to amate me;
And all the CURS about the Town,
Grinn'd, snarl'd, and barked at me.
23.
Since therefore it is not in my power,
(though often I fore-discern them)
To shun the worlds despights one hour,
thus into mirth I Will turn them;
And neither grieve nor pout, nor lowre,
but laugh, and sing and scorn them.
24.
This FIT, at sev'nty years and two,
and thus to spend my hours,
The worlds contempt, inclines me to,
whilst she my state devours;
If this be all that she can do,
A Fig for all her powers.
25.
Yet I and she, may well agree,
though we have much contended;
Upon as equal terms are we,
as most who are offended:
For, I slight her, and she sleights me,
and there is my Quarrel ended.
26.
This only does my mirth allay,
I am to some engaged,
Who sigh and weep, and suffer may,
whilst thus I sing incaged:
But I Have a GOD, and so have they,
by whom that Care's assuaged.
27.
And he that gives us in these days
new Lords may give us new Laws;
So that our present Puppet-H^ys,
our Whismies, Brauls, and Gew-gaws,
May turned be to songs of praise,
and holy Hallelujahs.
Thus I have added some few Ballads more
To those, which my Deriders heretofore
Have scoffingly so called: and, though I please
To sing Defiance in such words as these,
(To make them somewhat wiser (if I might)
Who are yet wise, but in their own conceit)
It Is no revengeful or malicious scorn,
Which back upon my scorners I return.
My Jollities, my Caprings and Advances,
Are not like those you see in Morrice-Dances;
Nor is my mirth like their, who cheat their souls
With Music, Banquets, and overflowing Bowls:
It Is no mere outward or corporeal sense
Of Pleasures or Immunities, from whence
My Joys do spring: nor are they such as their
Who by long-Suffring stupefied are:
(For, few men living, of all Humane passions,
Have deeper sense, or of their Aggravations)
But, my Exultings flow from apprehension
Of that, whereto my Faith has an extension;
And of those Objects which I make those ends
To which my actings and my suffering tends,
As does a wounded Conqueror, who cries,
Courage, my Mates, the day is ours; then dies:
Or rather; like a Martyr on the Rack,
Who when his Flesh tears, and his Sinews crack,
Casts on the Tyrant a disdainful smile,
And in GOD'S Love, rejoices all the while.
That which is purposed by my Caresses,
And sparklings from my soul in these Expresses,
Is partly to preserve in my own heart
Those Resolutions, which might else depart:
Whereat grudge not, as if you thought I heeded
That which my self concerns, more then needed;
For, moderate Self-love, is that whereby
We must to others measure Charity.
It Is partly too, for others informations
That I so often insert Pre-occupations
Relating to my self, and to prevent
Annihilating of that good intent
Which I pursue; by taking that away
Which prejudice allege in private may.
If these Expressions no advantage be
To other men, they are of use to me.
It Is not amiss, least I forgetful grow,
To mind my self sometimes of what I know,
And make to others known, that they who keep
Good Consciences, may sing themselves asleep
Amidst their greatest Foes; and without fear
Awake, when they by them alarmed are:
That, he on whom God makes his face to shine,
May be as glad as they, whose corn and wine
Does still increase, and with content be crowned,
Which way soever the Rolling wheel goes round;
For, he that acts in sufferings what he teaches,
Moves more, then when but verbally he preaches.
But, most men so a bound in their own sense,
And rather so incline to take offense
At such Expressions, then them to regard;
That much of this perhaps might have been spared.
However, neither much more pains or cost,
Can I now loose, then is all ready lost;
Since therefore what she likes, the world has got
From me, I Will give her what she likes not;
For not much longer am I now to bear
Her burdens, or the scorn of Fools to hear;
And in my Grave, when I am laid asleep,
These Mussings will believed memorials keep,
Of things which to GOD'S glory shall pertain,
Till his Trump calls me to awake again;
For, though Truths will to our posterities
Conveyed be among a heap of Lies,
They will to those who love them, shine as clear
As Diamonds which mixed with Charcoals are:
And therefore, till death quite depriveth me
Of seeing that which in the Flesh I see,
And Faith foresees; to my eternal King
To this effect, I Will Hallelujah sing.
1.
GOD sits where he does see and hear,
Where Kings and Lords consulting are,
And heeds what is intended there:
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
To make them better understand
His Will, and what he has in hand,
He wonders acts at Sea and Land:
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
2.
His Mercies here were lately shown,
They who abused them are overthrown,
And now by Judgments he is known:
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
He several ways men's hearts has tried,
He fools their Wit, he shames their Pride,
And by their shame is glorifide;
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
3.
To trials every man he brings,
He spares nor Commoners nor Kings,
And of his deeds the whole earth rings.
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
Such marvels as in times of old,
Have either written been or told,
We did with our own eyes behold:
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
4.
He stirs and stils the winds and seas;
Yea, Kings and Nations can appease,
Things, often, less tameable then those;
sing therefore Hallelujah.
He wounds and cures, he builds and breaks,
He kills and saves, he gives and takes,
And as he finds cause, mars or makes:
sing therefore Hallelujah.
5.
He by contention ends firife;
By leaving helpless, gives Relief;
And, by death brings unto life.
sing therefore Hallelujah.
He for well-doing and for ill,
Does promises and Threats fulfill,
And is both just and gracious still.
sing therefore Hallelujah.
6.
By doing Right he cures wrongs,
Turns mournful cries to joyful songs;
To all gives what to them belongs.
sing therefore Hallelujah.
He gives ease, by making sore;
He makes men rich by being poor,
And loosers win, by loosing more:
sing therefore Hallelujah.
7.
To crown all this, and cure the fear
Which does in many Saints appear,
His Kingdom now is drawing near:
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
For GOG and MAGOG join in one,
Their General Musters are begun,
And their destruction comes on:
Sing therefore Hallelujah.
8.
As he foretold us heretofore,
Revenge pursues the Scarlet whore,
And she ere long shall be no more
sing therefore Hallelujah.
The Kings and Captains of his Foes
Shall then be Carrion for the crows,
And all who do the LAMB oppose;
sing therefore Hallelujah.
9.
That we more watchful might be made,
We lately three Probations had;
And now he does another add.
sing therefore Hallelujah.
New offers of his grace mave we;
And though yet obstinate we be,
Still merciful to us is he;
sing therefore Hallelujah.
So, farewell Friends. I will not say for ever;
For though I lately purposed, that I never
In this mode more would write the Event has shown
I had then work undone, to me unknown;
And therefore, till he thereto puts an end
Who knows my Task, his pleasure I Will attend,
And prosecute it, until he shall say,
Thy Labor now is finished; COME AWAY.
Mean while, that I my SOUL may ready make,
For such a CALL, and willingly forsake
Mhis place; I Will sometimes hearten her along
With this that follows, or some suchlike SONG.
1.
MY Soul, come let us go,
In Sodom longer linger not;
look not behind thee so,
But call to mind the wife of LOT.
Let nothing here
To thee be dear,
Or captive thy desires;
GOD will thereon,
When we are gone,
Rain down consuming Fires.
2.
Though with a glorious light,
The SUN thereon begins to rise,
A dreadful Storm ere night,
Her careless Dwellers will surprise.
Come, come away,
Without delay;
Quite cast her out of mind:
For worth thy thought
In her there is naught,
Which thou shall leave behind.
3.
GOD's mercies they condemn;
His Kindness with despights repay;
still when he speaks to them,
They turn their heads another way.
When he entreats,
Reproves, or threats,
To heed it they disdain;
Or with a scoff
They put it off,
And obstinate remain.
4.
GOD here has pitched his Tent;
And here, had they his counsel took,
To dwell for ever meant;
But they, alas! have him forsook.
This, which a place
Like EDEN was,
Is now defiled with sin;
Still Fruit it bears,
That fair appears;
But it is all dust within.
5.
Then from this cursed Plain
Flee, to those Everlasting Hills,
where safe thou may remain,
And whereon thy Redeemer dwells.
here make no stay:
for though there may
In ZOAR safety seem,
when such Storms be,
secure are we
No where, except in him.
6.
This is their fatal day,
Which day perhaps, may last a year;
and true Repentance may
Avert the DOOM approaching near.
but, I much doubt,
that trifled out
This Day of Grace will be.
Therefore in fear,
And danger here,
Our stay, will always be.
Now my last Public work I hope is ended;
Blessed be he that is therewith not offended:
For, whatsoever it seems, I shall expect
A CONSEQUENT, as this does take effect.
My Exercise without me, and within,
Afflictions and distractions, long have been;
If therefore, what in have I did indite,
When those disturbances were at their height,
Confused appears; the better 'twill declare
What mine, and other men's conditions are.
And, if therein, ought seems to merit blame,
They who are Candid, will excuse the same.
G. W.

A POSTSCRIPT In answer to some cavilling Objections, made against the Author
of this Considering-Glass, since the composing thereof.
I Hear my snarling Censurers Object,
That, all I write, is to the same Effect;
And, that the most part of what is here expressed,
Is but cold Dishes, sent forth newly dressed.
Mis-censures might be spared, though this were true.
For, where the Matter's old, the Occasion's new:
And they will here see, if they heed it more,
Thrice Fifty Pages, never seen before.
But were it otherwise, how much transgrest
Had I therein, more then that Country Priest,
Who, having (or pretending it) a Call
Such to inform, as I often meet withal,
Preached but one Sermon many years together,
And, till they had learned that, would preach no other?
Another of their cavilling Objections
Is this; that there are many Contradictions
In my Affirmatives. This true may be
To those men paradventure, who can see
But with one eye; Or, look but on one side
Of that, whose Verity is to be tried:
Yet, all my Affirmations will be true,
When they are heeded with judicious view.
This is the same, which often such as they
Abusively, of Holy Scriptures say
Because they neither heed nor understand
How Circumstances, and the Points in hand,
May warrantize that to be verified
In some respects, which ought to be denied
In othersome: as in the Controverse
'Twixt FAITH and WORKS; or such: which to rehearse
Would be but labor lost, by adding more,
To manifest what most men knew before.
These my Detracting Readers, do moreover,
A Pers'nal Vanity in me discover
(As they think) which much levity implies.
Good Souls! how modest are they, and how wise
I seek for, and I do assume, they say,
(At all times, in all places where I may)
Occasions to communicate and show
What I have writ, and what I seem to know,
To all men, whether Friends or Foes they be;
Wise Men or Fools; of high or low degree.
Which I Will confess: for, to my self alone
The harm which thereby can ensue is done:
Does any Prudent Man a Book compose,
Only to teach himself, the things he knows?
Or, for their sakes alone, who learned be,
And better know those things, perhaps, then he?
Should not the weal of every one be sought?
As well the poorest, as the rich be taught?
And do not the Profane, and Fools, as much
Good Cautions need, as they who are not such?
Does any one, that is noot a Fool at least,
His Candle light, to lock it in a chest?
Does any, when a Town on fire appears,
Call out for help, were he knows no man hears?
Or think it only needful to repair
At such times, to the Aldermen and Mayor,
When two poor Laborers may do as much,
In an Emergency, as twenty such?
If there be any of this mind, who pass
For Prudent Men, let me thought an ASS.
Though in my Pocket, I no Orders carry
Like those, who Preachers are in Ordinary,
I have them in my heart; and, in my way,
Obliged to preach GOD's Truths, no less then they,
Take up my Auditors, where I can find them;
And there, in my mode, of their Duties mind them.
For I have often observed (and so may these
Observe it likewise often, if they please)
That, they whom some count despicable men,
Make better use of those means, now and then,
Which to GOD's glory pertinent do seem,
(Or common good) then men of more esteem;
And that sometimes, the work of GOD we do,
By what is thought impertinent thereto.
We know, the Gospel first to them was brought
Whom worldly wise men, base and foolish thought:
That, very many Publicans and Sinners
Were some of Christianities beginners:
And that the Saints then thought it was but reason,
To do their Duties in, and out of Season.
These benefits are also reaped from
My reading what I write, to all that come.
Some things, I otherwhile, thereby collect
From those who neither me nor that respect:
For in discourse, before they are aware,
They let slip words which cautionary are.
To them who like my Lines, it Treatments makes
As acceptable as Ale, Wine and Cakes:
To those who like them not, they serve my turn
Their Interruptions, quickly to adjourn:
For, they pretending Business to be done,
Requiring have (and that they must be gone)
Straight bid Adieu; and Farewell I reply:
Glad are these they are gone, and so am I.
More might be said, to what has been aver'd
By such as these: But little they regard
What may in reason give them satisfaction,
Whose principal designment is Detraction:
And fruitless are all rational Replies,
To what, Pride, Hate, and Folly may devise.
THE Shepherd of BLEDONHAM HIS CASE.
Who was lately ejected out of his Possessions, by the Successors of the
Flamins, and Arch-Flamins; falsely pretending a Divine Right to the said
Possessions.
The said Case is truly stated, in a Pastoral Prosopopeia, by an intermixture
of Literal and Metaphorical Expressions.
AT BLEDONHAM, among malicious Clowns,
a Shepherd kept a Flock upon the Downs;
Beloved as well, till there he did reside,
As any of his Rank, 'twixt Them and Tweede.
Not many in this Isle, were better known;
He managed few Affairs, except his own:
He was a Friend to all men, save to those
Whose Vices made them his malignant Foes;
And never was his Enmity extended
Unto their persons, with whom he contended.
Him, their Companions, men of honor made,
And he by honest means, possessions had
Of such a fair Estate, that many more
Supposed him to be rich, then thought him poor:
For, he had Fields and Groves Flocks, Herds and Corn,
Enough to keep him, both from want and scorn.
But, that Wheel turning, which does now and then.
Overthrow great Kings as well as Common men,
It, with a quick whirl, on a luckless day,
So swept his Crops, Goods, Flocks and Herds away,
That he of all, was well-near quite bereft,
And had but one good Ewe, and two Lambs left,
Which every day at his own Table fed,
And every night, lodged in, or near his bed.
As soon as this Disaster was begun,
Another forthwith followed thereupon.
A petty Nimrod (as with an intent
To hurtsome Beasts of prey, which did frequent
The Fields where these Lambs fed) attended on
By those, who, where a Mischief may be done,
Take most delight, did often, with his Hounds,
So much disturb their quiet in those grounds,
That having thereby much affrighted been,
The Lambs became unproveable ane lean.
The Ewe alone, still undismayed, held out,
And being fat, well fleshed, and very stout,
Preserved her own, till an uncivil rout
Of neighboring Churls, with Cur-dogs pulled the Fleeces
From off their backs, and tore them into pieces.
What these Lines mean, but few of those who read them,
Can know, save they who felt the wrongs, or did them
For, they were acted with more barbarousness
Then we can by this Parable express;
Even by that Spirit, which did first engage
These Nations into that unhappy rage
Which is not yet allayed; and will hold on
Whilst they are cherished, by whom 'twas begun.
When this befell, the Shepherd was from home,
To stop another mischief like to come;
And hearing his poor Flock was worride so,
A deep figh fetched; yet, since their wool might grow,
And, Time, increase their number to a greater,
(In hope things might succeed hereafter better)
Some Consolation for a while received:
But, thereof also, quickly was bereaved:
For not alone decreased his cattle be
From very many bundreds unto three,
In perishing estate; but, seized now
Are those Possessions too, from whence might grow
Subsistence and increase: and (which is worse)
Not on him singly, falls this heavy curse,
But they whose Prosecutions made him poor,
Will make a hundred thousands Beggars more;
Whose Poverty may those Oppressions add,
Whereby that number double will be made.
By these Mishaps, this Pastor in one year
(And less) is made a poor Philosopher;
Who now does bear about him all his stock,
And to themselves, is forced to leave his Flock,
Expecting nothing henceforth but Oppressions
From those, who have usurped his Possessions:
For, they who on his Livelihood now seize,
Successors are to those old Druides,
And to those Flamins and Arch-flamins, here,
Who Prelates of the Pagan Priesthood were:
And, probably, will be to him and those
Who serve his GOD, unreconciled Foes;
Because they do pretend themselves to be
Prelated above others in degree,
As Supreme Priests and Pastors unto PAN,
The Prince of Shepherds, and both GOD and MAN.
On that account, those superstitious things,
And Heathenish Ceremonious Trinketings,
Which in the worship of false gods were used
By them, are without warrant introduced
In to the Christian Church, as sanctifide;
And to maintain that Carnal pomp and pride
Which these affect, they claim, and take, and hold
What Is due to Him, as due to them of old.
This, under color of a Deodand
They challenge; and therein, a Royal hand
Supports them yet, because he knows them not:
But, when such information he has got,
Whereby they may to him be truly known,
It Is hoped that each man will enjoy his own:
In which hope, many thousands now undone,
Take up their Cross, and patienty walk on.
This Shepherd (not deluded by their folly)
Who heed a Ravens croaking from the Holly
Or such like Auguries: foresaw by whom
And why, those which now befall, are come.
He therefore, when they came, stood undismayed,
And looking up to Heaven, thus meekly said:
GOD gives and takes, and blessed be his Name;
Though I am not, yet he, is still the same;
And on him fixed, my trust unshaken stands
Even whilst I am in my Oppressors hands;
Expecting my Deliverance from him,
And nothing but Revenge and Scorns from them.
If unto one, he shall vouchsafe to grant
But so much Grace, as many of them want,
I shall possess, bought at another cost,
An Heritage, that never will be lost;
And ere this Generation is quite gone,
That, which has long been hoped for, will be done.
Believing this, he wholly cast away
Vexatious Care, permitting these to play
Their pranks at will, till they with cruel scorn
From Him and His their whole Estate had torn;
Yet, he no more fears their despights to him,
Then they do fear what he can do to them:
And may perhaps, yet pipe them such a strain,
As ere next Sheepshear will fetch back again
Some part of what is lost: for, twill be found
His late Possessions were but Fairy-ground,
And not so sanctified, that all those
Who walked upon it, must put off their shoes;
Unless there be a Sophistry in Schools,
That Is able to turn wise men into fools,
If they do merit to be credited
Who in that Mannor-house inhabited,
From which the Shepherd's cast; they, there were frighted
With Sounds and Apparitions, when benighted;
And that therein (before that he came thither)
Zim, Jim, with such Hobgoblins danced together.
And these perhaps, will thither come again,
As to a place which does to them pertain
By Tenant-Right, now their Old Lords are come
To re-admit them to their dancing-Room.
It may be too, till by him repossest
They who intrude, may there take little rest;
Or, till they shall that wicked charge withdraw,
That makes a sin, where none is made by Law;
And impudently therewithal dare brand
Not only purchasers of prelates-land
Opposed now by them, but also fling
That Guilt, both upon Parliament and King,
In whose defense, the Shepherd does defy
Not one alone, but all the prelacy;
And if they prove, before an equal Judge,
That, purchasing their Lands, is Sacrilege;
Or more a sin, then marketting of Eggs,
He will resign his claim, for two Tithe Piggs.
Nay, if of Sacrilege he prove them not
To be more guilty when those Lands were got,
And whilst that they in their possession were,
Then any of their purchasers now are,
He will submit to be anathamiz'd
By them, and of all honest men dispis'd.
For, were a faithful Demonstration made
Of what beginning prelacy first had;
By what ways, prelates usually aspire;
How, they their large Revenues did acquire;
How they have been from time to time enjoyed,
How often to the public harm employed;
What persons owned them, and to what ends
Their Constitutions principally tends,
With suchlike; which are left upon Records,
Whose credit doubtless evidence affords;
It plainly manifested would appear,
That, none so truly sacrilegious are;
That, few have acted more destructively
To civil peace, and real piety;
Or oftener upon Kings intrusions made,
By whose Indulgence they their being had.
They, who now heed the posture they are in,
And how pedantically they begin
To act their parts, since they have been new-shelld
Within those walls, from whence they were expelled,
Do wonder much, that men of their profession
And parts, should fail so much in their discretion:
For, their untimely Avarice and Pride,
Even their best friends and favorers deride,
With fear, that their Ambition will not cease,
Till it destroys again they common peace;
And they who love the King, begin to see,
That unto him they mischievous may be.
Most of their Conversations are on earth;
What is this Pars'nage, what that Vic'rage worth?
Are their chief Queries, or which way to make
Their Markets, and Advantages to take
Without regard, whose right they do enjoy,
How many Families they do destroy;
Or what disturbance or disreputation
They bring on King, Parliament or Nation.
To such ends, they have bawld of Sacrilege,
Til they have set most hearers teeths on edge,
By their continual grating on that bone
Which their own Jaws will break, ere they have done.
That Scarecrow now affrighteth none but fools,
Who are but lately crept out of their schools:
For, that which they have charged the people with,
Does yet stick fast between their tongue and teeth,
And will he proved by a holy Text,
The Thirtieth day of Fedruary next.
If those Revenues we examine shall,
Which they the Churches patrimony call,
The great Diana, for which some with us
Cry out, as once they did at Ephesus,
Is but an Idol; and their Outcries made,
Are only to preserve a sordid Trade,
Whereby those Crafts-men seek to be enriched,
Who with their Drugs have silly men bewitched.
The price of Dogs, and wages of a Whore,
Might owned have been as justly heretofore
For holy things, if offered they had been;
Yea, with less impudence, and with less sin:
For, some of them (as in despite of Heaven)
Were Merchandizings for men's souls, and given
In high contempt of him, whose heart-blood bought
That, which they to a worthless price have brought,
Yet sold too dear; because the Buyers lost
As well their own safe-being, as their cost.
Mere simple and despairing Malefactors
Were by the Devils Brokers and Contractors,
Abused with Mock-pardons: Heirs defeated
Of their Estates; Widows and Orphans cheated;
And many a poor soul with a Pasport sent
To Heaven, as he thought, when to Hell he went.
This way, had those Pessessions their advance,
Which now are termed GOD's Inheritance;
And what can be a greater Derogation
From him then this? Or, what a Provocation
More daring, then for men to challenge that
As his, which he does more abominate
Then Dogs or Strumpets? Or, what can in reason
More properly reputed then high Treason
Against the King, then to engage him for
And Interest which GOD does so abhor?
And which insensibly may draw him in
To be a partner with the MAN of SIN
In guilt and punishment; by (to their emds)
Perverting, what he piously intends.
Let this be well observed: for, GOD does yet
Their Prosecutions hitherto permit
But for Probation only, that he may
Try, who will turn to him; who fall away;
Who, will not unto his Govenant adhere;
Who, for preferment, profit, or for fear,
Will wave the same; how far forth those Pretenders
Will active be; and how far their Defenders
Will patronize them; that those things which are
Yet doubtful, may undoubtedly appear;
That, those plants which God planted may bear fruit,
Those which he planted not, be rooted out;
And that cost may no longer be bestown
On fruitless plants which he did never own:
Such is the Prelacy, which did proceed
From mixture both of good and evil seed:
As may declared by their Etraction be;
For, this appears to be their Pedigree.
Not very long time, ofter Noah's Flood,
When old Idolatries began to brood,
The forenam'd DRUIDES, who from the Oak
Which they much rev'renced, their name first took,
In these Parts of the world, usurped upon
Men's Consciences (as many since have done)
Even in this Isle (if that which may be read
In old Records be true) and being spread
Into the neighboring Continent from hence
In France next settling their chief residence,
Did there, an uncontrouled power retain,
Until the days of Claudius Caesar's reign.
The Flamin-Prelacy, which did begin
Before that time; then by degrees did win
Pre-eminence and reverenced was,
Till Pontifical-Prelacy took place;
From that, the papal prelacy derived
Their being; and a Hierarchy contrived,
Accommodated with a Discipline
From Gentiles, Jews and Christians hetrogene:
For, though composed of pieces patched together,
From all these taken, it was like to neither.
For, that the Christian worship might not seem
To be inglorious in the worlds esteem;
Or rather, that themselves advance they might
Unto a princely and a pompous height
In temporal enjoyments, they took in
Such Pageantries as had affected been
By carnal Worshippers, by alteration
In some things; and in some by imitation:
So, by degrees, they totally threw off
That soberness and meekness with a scoff,
Which was in true sincerity professed,
Before the birth and reign of Antichrist.
The Spouse of CHRIST, because she did appear
In outside poor, though rich her Linings were,
With dis-respect they turned out of door,
And, in her stead, trimmed up a painted Whore:
So, mere will worship was set up at last,
And in the Throne of GOD, an Idol placed.
From those, the prelates came; and when these Nations
Intended to reform their Innovations,
A carnal prudence, dreaming, that, if they,
With their External pomp was took away,
(Whereby some thought God's worship was adornd)
Religion and Devotion should be scorned;
The Prelacy, upon that vain surmise,
Was here continued in a new Disguise;
Till that imposture was by Providence
Made manifest; and then, it was from hence
By GOD expelled, as both dishonorable
To him, and to his Church disserviceable;
To those intending no affront at all,
Whose Function simply is Episcopal.
But, this Expulsion, being for our sin
Reversed, and Prelates now again brought in,
That, and a Sacra-fames (in Excess)
(Not thirst and hunger after righteousness)
Has so enraged them, that, they all devour,
Who fall within their new-restored power,
With high contempt (at last without regard)
Of what the KING has graciously declared.
And those whom they of their Estates despoil,
With insolent upbraidings they revile,
As meriting nor livelihood, nor place
With them; and as incapable of Grace
From GOD or men: But, cry, are not these they
Who lately took from Holy Church away
Her Dowry? spoiled GOD'S Houses in the Land?
On sacred things laid sacrilegious hand?
And vilifide his Servants? Thus, they crow:
But, they injurious are, in doing so;
And have as much in their blasphemings failed,
On Hezekiah: for, GOD, did not own
Those Altars or High Places overthrown,
And then mis-called his; nor owneth he
For Bishops, those who now so termed be;
Nor those impertinent Appurtenances,
Which Prelates please to term GOD'S Ordinances.
And, though they should, when they see Babel's fall,
Their dreadful howlings, and their weepings call
The Churches sighs and tears; no whit availing
To them, would be their howling and bewailing.
And, though some think this constitution brings
Advantage to the Thrones of lawful Kings,
'Twill prove, when thereinto they better look,
It strengthens them, as Ivy does an Oak;
And, that, of Men, no one sort under Heaven,
Cause and Occasions have so often given,
Of private Quarrels, Discords and Debates,
And Wars, 'twixt Realms and Nations, Kings and States.
The Shepherd therefore, hopes this, will by those
Who can distinguish between Doves and Crows,
Considered be; and manifest it then,
That, greatest Clerks, are not the wisest men;
Or, that, wise men through Avarice and Pride,
By wealth and honor, may be led aside.
And, though this hope should fail him in the main,
It will not altogether be in vain;
But, for the present, shall at least suffice
To feed that part which upon Smoke relies,
Till with essential nourishment supplied
By that, which GOD hereafter will provide.
Yea, though this charming should not prove so strong
To fetch back that which does to him belong,
Thenceforth, content, his Ewe and Lambs, and he,
To live upon the Commons then will be.
However, other hopes may have success,
His best hopes will be rather more then less:
For, they are built on him, who best can judge
'Twixt what is, and what is not Sacrilege;
And if his Judges partially shall deal,
From them, to that great Judge he will appeal,
Who cannot be deceived. But no distrust
Has he of their Uprightness, who here must
Be Judges in his Cause; for, they have seen
What did befall them who unjust have been;
And hereby now, though he be much pre-judg'd,
May know what on his part may be alleag'd.
That which is claimed, GOD will perhaps divide
Betwixt both Parties when their Claims are tried:
For, out of that which they erewhile possessed,
The Prelates for their sins were justly cast:
The Shepherd was for his expelled too,
By him, whose just doom he submits unto;
As therefore GOD shall please he is content
To share in Mercy and in Chastisement,
Till he under that Heritage is brought,
Which at another cost, for him, was bought;
And whereto, he vouchsafes him by his Grace
A better Title, in a better place.
If all be judged, which he has purchased here
The Prelates due; he will take his portion there;
For, though it be a little while delaid,
'Twill prove the better share, and be will paid.
This, is the Shepherds Case, and this the Course
He means to take: pray, use him never the worse:
For, he had not expressed it in this mode,
But that the Covenant PRELATES to explode,
He conscientiously adheres unto,
And dares not slight the same, as others do;
Because, he can discern Truths from Delusions,
And knows their late Re-entries, are Intrusions.
FINIS.

