Tuba-Pacifica. Seasonable Praecautions, whereby is sounded forth a Re-Treat
from the War intended between England and the United-Provinces of Lower GERMANY.

By GEO: WITHER, a Lover of Peace, and heartily well-affected toward both
Nations.

Nimis Cautela non nocet.

Matthew 5. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God

ANNO. 1664. Imprinted for the Author, and is to be disposed of, rather for
Love then Money.

TUBA-PACIFICA. Sounding a Retreat from the War intended between England and
the United Provinces.
AN Ancient Emblem, relating to the said Nations.

Si Collidimur frangimur,

If we knock, we are broke.



An hour is come, in which must be renewed
That Work, which I have hither to pursude;
And, I to utter what I have to say,
Will take the Kue that is offered whilst I may,
In hope that they, whose Prudence can descern
Those things which their well-being do concern,
Will hear and heed them, e're it be so late
That Premonitious will be out of date:
For, Opportunities may slip away
To morrow, which are offered us this day;
And it is all one to Wisemen, whether Strangers
Or Friends, premonish them of likely dangers,
Or, whether unto them, Alarums from
A Silver, or a Rams-horn Trumpet come.
To me there are but two ways known, by which
Men may speed well or ill, grow poor or rich*
To wit, by prosecuting Good or Evil,
By cleaving close to God, or to the Devil
And, they are two such Masterships, that, neither
Is pleased with him, who serves them both together;
Because, what is endeavored for the one
Obstructs what for the other shall be done.
Presuming therefore, you depend alone
On him, whom I serve, thus proceed I on.
A commom Fame Reports there will be War
Betwixt the English and the Hollander
And, by their preparations, I conceive
We may with probability, believe
It will be so. Their many panick Fears,
Their groundless hopes, their bitter Scoffs and Jeers,
Cast on each other, are plain symptoms too,
Of what, in likelihood, they mean to do.
We likewise, by the Truths and by the Lies
Which to divide them wicked men devise,
And, whereby such Partakers on both sides
Augment that hatred which still more divides,
May fear, as well as by their other deeds,
The mischief will go on, as it proceeds,
Until the power does rest in GOD alone,
To undo, what is wilfully misdone.
But, that, which most confirms it, is the sin,
The Crying Crimes, that both continue in
Without Repentance: For, among the rest
These I enumerate are not the least,
(Nor any whit abated, since GOD made
The late Breach up, which them else ruined had)
Such, as their bragging vaunts of that frail strength
Which will destroy their foolish hopes at length;
The confidence, the sottish vulgar gathers
From Ships and Armies, long hair, Muffs and Feathers;
Their hot contestings which shall have the hap
To wear the greatest Bauble in their Cap.
Or, whether 'twill at last, be brought to pass,
That the Ass shall ride the Man, or Man the Ass.
These, and some other things, that are perceived
Now acting, or about to be contrived,
Have made me, with small difference to deem
Most of them are as mad as they do seem.
And, is it even so? must you now lash
Each other, and your earthen Pitchers dash?
Must you, that have so long been Friends, now knock
Until you into Potsherds quite are broke?
None taking heed or care how to prevent
That mischief which appears eminent,
And was presaged about the ninetieth year
Now past, by this your well known Emblem here?
Have you not one among you, rich or poor,
So wise as he, whose Counsel heretofore.
Preserved a City, and did then receive
The same reward, which men in this age give
For suchlike services? Has neither, place
A man so prudent as that Woman was
Who raised the siege from Abel, by her wit,
When Joab with an host beleagur'd it?
But, are you all of wisdom so bereft,
That, no Expedient seems to be left
Whereby to act until the sequels are
Ignoble Peace, or a destructive war?
If it be so, from whence could it proceed
But from your failings both in word and deed?
From sordid Avarice, Pride, and Self-will,
Enticing Fleshly Lustings to fulfill?
For, these deprave the Judgments of most Nations*
Cause them to fall away from their Foundations;
Then, fly to Refuges patcht up with Lies,
Seek Power and Riches by those vanities
Which multiply Oppressions and increase
Confusions to the ruin of that Peace
They might enjoy: For, then their strength consists
In, and by those corrupting Interests,
Which will engage them to rush further on
In their Oppressive ways long since begun,
Till they grow deaf to all that can be said
To make them of their just deserts afraid.
And should they then, their crooked paths forbear,
Most private Tradings at a nonplus were;
Yea all those Incomes whereupon depend
Their Formal Grandeur would soon have an end*
For, many thousands, who did vast Estates
Get and uphold, by cherishing Debates,
By multiplying and delaying long
Vexatious suits, to many a poor man's wrong,
Would think themselves undone, if every State
Their Courts of Justice should reduce to that
For which they were ordained; and Tyranny
Would Want fit Tools to bring to flavery
The common people. Very few know how
They may to GOD and their Superiors now
Perform their duties, and not both displease
Or the one or the other; For, what is by these.
Commanded, is not seldom, either quite
Repugnant, or obliquely opposite,
As they Interpretations of them make
Who to be Judges of them undertake.
Yea, those Professions, and those Trades whereby
Most live, are subject to such vanity
That honest men are difficultly able
To use them with a Consence warrantable.
It is no easy matter to devise
What would become of all those Batter-flies
Who flutter up and down in Princes Courts,
If their oppressive Projects of all sorts
Were took away; and what case were they in
Who at this day do live upon the sin
Of one another? But they will be supplied
What ever to the Public shall be tide;
And at the last, (although their Friends they seem)
Destroy those Governments that nourished them,
Unless, according to what is just and true
Themselves they modulize, with speed, a new;
Which, how, and by whom, that might well be done
Were an Expedient worthy muzing on.
Perhaps, if you did seriously take heed,
How this concerns you, and what would proceed
From such a Constitution, you might know
From whence the quarrellings between you flow,
And how to reconcile those differences
Which now increase your dangers and expenses.
Perceive you not, that your Prevarications,
Your Falsehoods, and your gross dissimulations
With GOD, and with each other, so provokes
His anger, who on all men's actions looks,
That it is impossible you should have Peace
With him, your selves or others, till you cease
From provocations, and bring forth such fruit
As with a real Reformation suit,
And with those Churches which are truly Christ's?
Yea, that your hopes will fail, though flattering Priests
Do promise peace, and impudently, too,
Persuade, that GOD is pleased with what you do?
Observe you may, by what ensues thereon,
How, GOD abominates what is misdone
In managing the Mysteries of State,
And heeds what is in secret aimed at
By fair pretendings; and how, they thereby
So long have sought themselves to fortify
That, most men are inclined to believe
Lest Good is meant, when sweetest words they give;
And that they have forgot on what conditions
Or, to what end God gave them their Commissions.
Know you not, that a spirit of delusion,
To bring upon you merited confusion,
Was Licensed to go forth and delude
Those Prophets, by whose counsel are pursued
Unrighteous Actions, that you may be sent
On Voyages like that which Ahab went?
Are your eyes wholly blinded? heed you not
That, such another Spirit is begot
'Twixt you, and 'twixt the People every where
Within your several Borders, here and there,
(And at this time as active) as was that
Which GOD permitted to infatuate
Abimelech and Sichem, till it had
Destroyed them; all their Counsels frustrate made,
And brought upon both Parties that reward
Which for blood-thirsty persons is prepared?
If these things you have heeded, be not still
By those deluded who intend you ill;
But, wake out of your deep security,
And from that Trance wherein you seem to lie.
Consider seriously, what you intend;
E're it begin, think well how it may end;
What an intolerable heavy load
'Twill lay on most at home, on some abroad,
What Treasure, and how much blood will be spent;
How, both your Countries will be thereby rent
And shattered; beside, what not yet foreseen,
Is likewise possible to intervene,
From them, who watching to enjoy the spoil
By your contendings, laugh and jeer meanwhile;
Which to prevent; I sound out this Retreat
From that War, wherewith you each other threat.
I nothing aim at, or design to do
But what I know GOD has inclined me to,
And which you too, may know, if you well weigh
What I have written, with what I might say;
And, I believe, that man (who ere he be)
Who shall obstruct what is offered now by me
Shall thereby suffer as one who withstands
The mercy he intends to both Lands*
With naught I charge you* but what the one or th other
Is singly guilty of, or both together;
Nor ought whereto, unless you feared are,
You in your selves a witness do not bear:
For my part, I shall neither gain nor loose
By Peace or War, or by that which ensues;
Because, he that on GOD his whole heart sets,
Will be the same, what ever he permits.
I love both Nations, truly wish them well,
And therefore shall not any thing conceal
That may concern your safety, though with scorn
My Premonitions you should back return:
Permit me then, to speak a word in season;
For, sometimes, he that is a Fool speaks reason.
Though Joseph was a slave in deep disgrace;
A Prisoner more neglected then I was
In my late Thraldom; (no whit less in danger
By false Accusers, because, more a stranger;)
A heathen King, disdained not to take
Good Counsel from him, when her reason spoke
Though he in him, no more of GOD could see
At first, then you at this time do in me.
I, no such Revelations will pretend
As give no warrant on them to depend
Save his own word who tells them; neither ought
Advise, but Truths, which GOD himself has taught
As well to you as me, by his known word,
Or by the Olive Branch, or, by the Sword.
His Justice or his Mercy; which have spoke
That often, whereof you little heed have took.
To fright you, no predictions I will fain
As many do, pumpt out of their own brain;
Nor speak in Riddles, nor such things declare
As you cannot without crakt patience hear,
If I may but that freedom have to speak,
Which harmless Fools, and licensed Jesters take.
As Moses, from a principle of Love
Said unto those two Israelites who strove,
So say I unto you who disagree;
Wrong not each other, for, you Brethren be
By Nature; yea, by Grace too, so professed:
Be therefore Christ^ans or be men at least.
Like barbrous heathen wherefore should you strive,
And by dissension to your selves derive
A mutual Plague? Act that which is designed
By them who to destroy you are inclined;
And, probably, can no way else effect
That mischief which their Malice does project?
Consider what Advantages you had
By concord, how safe thereby you were made;
What you professed when you agreed together;
What heretofore, you have been to each other;
How strengthened, and how powerful you became
Whilst your Designs were in effect the same;
To your Alies how helpeful; and to those
How terrible, Who dared to be your Foes;
Even when the pow'rfulst of your neighboring Nations
Seemed so assured of their expectations,
That their Sea Forces, in a proud bravado,
Were termed an Invinsible Armado;
Till GOD befriending you, did with one puff
Bring down their Pride, and blow their Malice off.
Power, wealth, and honor, ever since that day
He, likewise, heaped on them, many away,
Whilst you continued Friends, though you had many
Backslidings and defects as gross as any.
As to your outward welfare, all things, yet,
To prosper, GOD does graciously permit.
Some of you, have by loosing all, got more
Then ever they enjoyed heretofore;
Some other, though of all; no less bereft
Are twice as rich as they, now nothing's left,
By having thereby learned to prize that most,
Which being gotten never shall be lost*
And, they who this worlds wealth do more desire
Have means enough their longings to acquire.
The chiefest Foreign Trade to you is given
In all the Realms and Countries under heaven.
Your Ships are numberless, your Merchants more
And richer, then the Tirians heretofore.
Your Warehouses are stored by your Commerce
With all things precious through the Universe;
For which you were envyed by all those
Who either seemed your Friends or are your Foes.
Your Naval Forces if you timely might
Persuaded be sincerely to unite,
In Righteousness, would balance all the rest
Between the Orient Indies and the West
And both the Poles, enabling you to give
Those Laws to all men, who by Traffic live,
Whereby, there might, for all, sufficient Trade
In safety, and with equity be had;
Without which, whatsoere you shall obtain
Will prove but an unprofitable gain.
And, (which is more considerable, far,
Then all your honors, power and riches are)
GOD, has among you, sown the feeds of Grace
More plentifully then in any place
Below the Sun: his Plants refreshments wanting
Though set in blood and Fire, at their transplanting
Into your Borders, so well thrived there
Even then, that millions from them sprouted are;
And, more from them continually shall sprout
In spite of those who seek to root them out;
Yea, though you by your folly forfeit those
Advantages which he on you bestows,
For their sakes* whom some of you do revile
Oppress, and from their native Lands exile.
For, GOD has made your Country, to become
The strongest Bulwork in all Christendom,
Both against GOG and MAGOG covered Foes
And such as openly, the Saints oppose;
That* saving Truth and sincere innocence
Might thereby be preserved from violence;
Especially, from their hate, who pursue
The precious seed of Christ in them and you,
By Antichristian wiles, which hatched were
In your own wombs, and nursed up now are
By seeming Friends, who hide their fallacies
With gaudy vails, and vain formalities,
Until the souls for which they traps prepare
Are hunted unto death, or to their snare.
These Ingineers, within your bosoms lie,
And, what their chief aims are, no doubt have I.
Think on these things, and whether it is from me
Or from God, that you minded of them be;
For, what I had to write when I begun
I knew not; nor shall I know when it is done,
What, by my Prompter, I was moved unto
Until I read it over as you do,
To see what is of God in every line
As if those writings had been none of mine.
When GOD, by despicable means and men,
(As he to do is pleased now and then)
Speaks to a King or Nation, it does carry
A show of somewhat extraordinary
To be considered on with serious heed,
And it imports somewhat to succeed.
When waving men trained up in learned Schools
He speaks to them, by those whom they count fools,
Makes others (as of old some Prophets were)
Actors in things that scandalous appear
To most Spectators, yea, ridiculous
To sober men (as often of late with us)
Rendering them signs unto their generation
Of what is to come; it is worth consideration;
(Especially when injuries and scorn
Are patiently with sober stoutness born,
For conscience sake and all men, truly wise
Although such dispensations fools despise)
Are deeply sensible, of what on those
The ignorance and hate, of some impose,
To whom, it will be manifest ere long,
That, they have injured those, to their own wrong.
If yet you know it not, now be it known
That, by the power which is on you bestown
To be on all occasions, whilst you have it
Employed for his honor who first gave it)
You were entrusted, and enabled so
As you have been, not your own will to do;
Or, that you to exalt your selves above
Your Neighbors, GODS donations, might improve
Into such an exorbitance of power
That, at your pleasure, you might them devour,
Oppress your Brethren, and advantage them
Who Adversaries are to you and him:
For, they were given to preserve their Peace
Who, under you, in love and righteousness
Desire to live; the same Faith have professed,
And by Usurping Tyrants are oppressed;
Which Grace if you shall turn into oppression
Or wantonness, will hasten your perdition;
Make many of your truest Friends grow sad
And me, who of your welfare should be glad,
Be forced ray work to close (in imitation
Of Jeremiah) with a Lamentation.
You will but give your foes just cause to laugh
To see you quarrelling for straw and chaff
VVilst they get opportunity to burn
Those Granards down, whereby the precious corn
Might be preserved, wherewith your bread of life,
May be supplied, if you desist from strife.
Who can assure you that the provocations
Whereby, now very many in both Nations,
Exasperated are, will not afford
Fit opportunities by your discord
Some such contrivances then to project
And prosecute as prudence may suspect?
For, though what Faction moves mad men to do
Will ruin them at last, so 'twill you too.
What, men who have good consciences will shun
Will by men without consciences be done
When God shall let them loose, or call together
All sors of sinners to correct each other.
It Is likewise possible, that many things
Pretended causes of your quarrellings
If they were well examined would be found
Mere scandals raised without real ground,
To make misactings on both sides appear
(By Aggravations) greater then they were.
For, in both Nations, there is such a Rabble
(By their ill manners much more despicable
Then by their Fortunes) who, for servile ends,
In hope of profit, (or to make them friends
Of those whom they sought to exasperate)
Did some misactings much more aggravate
Then there was cause; and so, that which was bad
Was by their falsehood, more offensive made:
This, has been kindling 'twixt you many years
A smothering Fire, which now to Blaze appears;
But hitherto these had not power to blow
The flame so high as they have raised it now:
For, GOD did but permit them for probation
And though it was of long continuation,
Has so your wealth increased, that as 'twixt Lot
And Abraham, it now has strife begot.
GOD, by his grace, direct you to a course,
The consequent thereof may not be worse.
Your force united has been heretofore
A terror to the vassals of that Whore
Which rides the Beast: yea, often such a dread
To her, when she at highest bore her head
That, she is enraged to see you have so long
Against her Soceries continued strong;
Though to supplant you she laid many a Train
Which had not then contrived been in vain,
Had you been so divided as this day
You are, or as perhaps e're long you may.
But Unity did make you so compact
A Body, that her wiles could not distract
Your prudent Counsels, neither from your course
Divert you, by her cunning joined with force*
This* by experience found, she does begin
To work upon you by another Gin
Which will extend to many far and near
Who deem they thereby unconcerned are:
For, they who foolishly, themselves now flatter*
That they by fishing in your troubled water
Shall get Advantages, will be bereaved
Of those expectancies, now preconceived:
For, that which follows, be it whatsoere
Will further* GODS designments, but not their;
And, though you may by folly, loose your ends
She shall not bring to pass, what she intends.
If she by this Division, break your power
She thinks that she shall easily devour
The scattered Churches, which in hazard lie
Within the limits of her Sov'raignty;
Then, those that stronger are (though more remote)
As Soon as opportunities are got
To practice on them, by the force of Arms
Or, by the power of her besotting Charms*
And if they take effects, her work is done,
Until GODS Counter-work shall be begun,
Who, though man's working with him he expects,
Shall no advantage lose by their defects
Who give Advantages unto his Foes,
By trifling that away which he bestows,
To do him service. But, they shall become
Partakers with Apostates in their doom.
That grand Impostris now resolves to play
Divisions, making all those whom she may,
Dance to her Fiddle; and to bring about
Her purposes, has very little doubt:
For, as a wasted Candle when it sinks
Into the greasy socket (and there stinks)
Sends greater flashings forth, and blazeth more
A little while, then any time before;
So, she does now, with her whole force pursue
The mischief she has long designed for you;
And, not much wanting seems to complete
That, whereupon her heart has long been set:
For, to that end, were sent forth before hand,
Her Emissaries into every land,
With Dispensations (as occasion haps)
To make use of all courses, forms, and shapes:
And these have into all Societies
All Constitutions and Fraternities,
(Divine or Civil) all Affairs, Relations,
And Interests, what ever in both Nations,
Screwed, such a party, that, chief sway they carry
In things divine, civil, and military;
So, that, as once it was profanely said,
Should GOD stand neuter, till her game were played,
She would prevail against you, at this time,
Because, no aid shall be withheld from them
Who malice you, nor any furtherance
Her power and sinking Throne to readvance
Which Antichrists confederates can add,
Or, from prophanest persons may be had.
Be therefore heedful that by your dissension
You make not feizable her ill intention
By trusting to the Complements of those
Who are her vassals, and your secret foes,
And (as you, often do) speak fair, but to deceive
That they without suspicion may contrive
Your whole destruction, and recover power
To re-enlarge their Babylonian Tower*
Which, is this day as truly their design,
As those thoughts, whereon, now I think, are mine.
Blessed let them be who seriously endeavor,
To reconcile you; cursed, they who sever
Whom GOD has joined; For no outward curse
To any can befall; that will be worse
Then that which will in likelihood betide
To these two Nations if they long divide;
But, they who of the breach most guilty are
The greatest burden of that curse shall bear.
I am no Person who confederates
With homebred malcontents, or Foreign states
Either to get revenge for wrongs received
Or that some gain may be thereby derived
Unto my self: For, whatsoere it be,
That which best pleases GOD, best pleases me;
And having no designments of mine own
Can wait with patience till his will be shown.
I, being one who having often foreseen,
And foretold things that have fulfilled been,
Endeav'ring to prevent the prosecutions,
Of wicked actions and rash Resolutions,
Am by a power which I dare not oppose
Once more stirred up, to preadmonish those
(As heretofore) who now seem rushing on
In that Career, as other men have done,
Which tends unto that end which befell
To those, who slighted, what I did foretell:
And, I to speak again must not forbear;
Vouchsafe therefore to me a patient ear*
Be wary, that your Avarice and Pride,
Prove not to be a motive to divide
At this time, though when you divided last
Your likely hazards were soon over-past,
And plagues removed ere any penitence
Had testified remorce for your offense,
Lest, greater evils follow, and the trouble
Removed then, returns upon you double*
For, Nations to expose to wars unjust
Merely to satisfy a private Lust,
And those enforce the greatest weight to bear,
Who no way guilty of transgressing are
Of that which in a War ingages them,
Is questionless, a sanguinary crime
From which, no temporary privilege
Can vindicate, before a Righteous Judge:
But, it will bring down Vengeance in due season
From him whose Justice cannot be called treason
Although your High Priests, and some others too,
The boldness may assume to term it so.
If wrongs be done, let all good means be used
To judge between the Accuser and Accused
E're sentence pass; and do not then prolong
Due recompense to them who have had wrong;
Lest by delaying what you should restore,
Instead of righting him, you wrong him more.
Ere battle you begin, let peace be offered,
Accept a good expedient, when it is proffered.
Remit small faults where you find penitence:
Upon the same terms, let the great'st offense
Be pardoned also, when the perpetration
Of wrong, exceeds all means of expiation;
In that, you will imitate the King of heaven
Who often has such Crimes to you forgiven.
Make not the Sword your Umpier, till you see
A remedy, no other way can be*
Your just Rights to preserve, do what you can,
But, fight not to inslave another man;
Nor venture your own Countries to inflame
That you may get a fruitless aerie fame;
Much less to grasp a power, which when acquired
Will in your hands, be like Granados fired;
Yet, to avoid the mischief and the Curse
Of War, make not a Peace that shall be worse.
Nor when you are at rest provoke his wrath
Who, quietness to you vouchsafed has,
By cheating them of their just expectations
Who truly wish the welfare of both Nations,
Adventuring their persons and estates,
To save what to your interest relates;
And then entrusted you with their defense,
Thereby, but as a second consequence.
If you would keep Rebellious men in awe,
To every one his birthright due by Law
Preserve impartially; and unto none
Deny that which is due to every one;
Lest, whilst abroad engaged you become
In warfare, there may be worse fraies at home:
For* that Allegiance which is in all Lands
'Twist Prince and People, upon two feet stands,
So, that if the one fails in what it should do,
In equity, so will the other, too;
Men who are much oppressed against reason,
Will not much fear to act what you call Treason;
And, then, from questioning, on whom there lies
The greatest guilt; small profit can arise.
Which way soever, therefore, GOD shall daigne
To make you Friends, and give you Rest again,
With moderation, and with Justice use
That Mercy; for if you the same abuse
This, without question, will ensue thereon;
Both, shall one way or other be undone.
The conquered shall inslaved be; and they
Who conquer, be made slaves another way*
Make not your Rest to be a snare or Stale
As Fowlers do, to cath Birds there withal.
Nor means, your selves with such vast power to arm,
As helps not so much, to do good* as harm;
For GOD will heed it, and you shall be caught
Even in those Traps, which your own hands have wrought,
And as old Rome was you shall be at length
Orewhelm'd and destroyed, by your own strength.
To mine own Countrymen, I Will write or say
Naught at this time, which any justly may
Apply to them alone; lest, some once more
May term it scandalous as heretofore,
Or call me Libeller, for being bold
To tell them Truths (although in season told.)
I, Have, so often in particular
And so long time been their Remembrancer
With small regard (except from such as do
Love simple Truth, and suffer for it too)
That, I to them, will nothing mention here,
Save that in which, an equal part to bear
Both Nations may be said, without my blame;
Because, thereby, I somewhat hopeful am
To raise thence an expedient to escape
The being caught again, in my old Trap.
But I Will apart, a word or two express
To our Dutch Neighbors in true friendliness.
Remember what of old the English Nation
Has been to you; and with how much compassion
They, your Protection timely undertook
When you extremely by the Spanish yoke
Oppressed lay; and whether the pursuing
Of those things which are at this present doing,
May not at last reduce you back to that
Deplored condition, or a worse estate;
And bring you once again, enslaved to lie
Beneath such an unbounded Monarchy
As you abhor: Your Senators are wise,
They in their heads, I know do bear their eyes
And* if they be not hoodwinckt* need by none
Be minded, what should be considered on:
Yet, since but men, let them not be offended
With what is by a stranger recommended
Unto their serious heed, and let my caution
Be acceptable unto your whole Nation*
Consider, whether all they who pretend
Your Country, Cause, and Intr'st to befriend
May not more complemental prove then real,
When time shall bring their Friendship to a trial,
And be as false to you, as you have seen
Most States and Princes, often to have been
Unto each other, though aly'd by blood,
By Aides in times of need, Leagues, neighborhood,
And all engagements whatsoere, which might
Devised be, them, firmly to unite.
Think, whether such have not a party now
Among you* which as things to ripeness grow,
Will help improve them, to set up a power
Tending to their advantage more then your:
Yea, whether, you already may not see
That, some to such a purpose, active be,
This day among you; and, take timely heed,
That, what you would prevent, may not succeed.
Ill words corrupt good manners; and I hear
That, you no scurrile language do forbear
Which either heighten may the indignation
And fury kindled in our English Nation,
Or, make them to be hated of your own;
As if you wholly resolute were grown,
So to divide both, that by no endeaver,
They might be reconciled again, for ever.
This fault, which to the vulgar I impute
Will questionless produce a poisonous fruit,
And, therefore, though I truly may confess
My Countrymen have not offended less,
In that kind (and may peradventure take
Occasion from these Lines, a change to make
Within themselves) I, heartily entreat
Both you and them, his love to imitate
Whose doctrines we profess, and bridle more
Their rude tongues, then they have done heretofore
That, from good words, there may at last proceed,
True reconcilement both in Word and Deed.
Of one thing more, put you in mind I would
(Which now to your remembrance bring I should)
Were I not hopeful you often mind it so,
As it becomes you, and repent it too,
And that, we shall give mutual satisfaction
For every scandal and injurious action,
On either charged, for which, to make even
It Is in our power; the rest must be forgiven.
Lord GOD, vouchsafe thy mercy to these Lands
And, if with thy good pleasure it now stands,
T he Plagues for their demerits due, ad^ourn,
That Peace with Grace united may return
Before the madness of this Generation
Has frustrated their means of preser^ation.
By Judgments, and by Mercies interwove,
By chastisements in anger and in love,
By threatenings and by gentile invitations,
Thou, to reclaim us from prevarications
Have often assaied; adding unto these
Whisperings in secret to our consciences;
Spoke to our ears by men, unto our eyes
By Apparitions and by Prodigies:
Yea, whilst I Am writing this, there does appear
A Blazing Star within our hemisphere,
As Well unto our neighbors as to us
Made visible: And wherefore Glares it thus
With an Aspect so dreadful at this time,
But, to point at, and for warn us and them
Of some approrahing mischief, whereof heed
Is to be taken by us, with all speed.
Lord, let us not, still obstinate remain
Rendering (as heretofore) at quite in vain,
That Is seen, or said, or done, till none for ever
By Word, or Deed, our safety shall endeaver*
That time is not yet come, I Will spend therefore
In hope of good success, a few words more*
And, look to be excused if I shall thrice,
Write that, which I have writ already twice;
For, neither can hard flints or knotty blocks
Be shaped without reiterated strokes.
Why should you quarrel? what are now your wants,
But, Grace and Faith to use well what GOD grants?
The World is wide enough, the Seas have room
Sufficient for your Ships to go and come:
Expedients will be found which may procure
An honorable peace that will endure
Without a disadvantage unto either
If to make proof thereof you join together.
Impartial Justice brotherly compassion
Love, me kness, piety, humiliation
Faith, prayer, penitence, with such like things
Are those, whence wealth, and peace, and honor springs
To them who will persuaded be to do
To others as they would be done unto;
As jealous to redress a neighbors wrongs
As in that which to their own ease belongs;
As forward, an oppressed man to hear
As cruel Tyrants to afflict him are;
And could forbear intruding on GODS right
A settled peace thereby enjoy they might,
Without fear; yea, without a just suspicion
Of Treasons, Insurrections or Sedition:
And, they whom you distrust, will be more true
Then they, in whom you trust, shall be to you,
If you endeaver to contract a peace
And keep it, by unfeigned righteousness:
Although such mediums are but scoffed at
Or slighted, by most Ministers of State.
But, such a Blessing, never can he got
Or kept, by that whereon most Nations dote.
The constitution of whose Governments
Are made according to such presidents
As Jeroboam left, and lost thereby
That Kingdom which on his posterity,
Should have been fixed, had he not counsel took
From flesh and blood, and Gods advice forsook.
Not those men, whose Advantages are least,
Or most, shall thrive* but, they who use them best;
Make GOD alone their Refuge, and contend
That cursed strife, in blessed peace may end.
It Is not your carnal policies, or forces,
Your Forts, Ships, Armies, Guards of men and horses;
Your fair pretending what was never meant,
Your heavy Taxes beyond president,
Your flattering Parasites or your Buffoones,
Your roaring Hectors, and your Pantaloones,
Or Oaths enforced, or great Brags and lies,
Nor their complyings whose Hypocrisies
Are much depended on, that will effect
Those Conquests and those Triumphs they expect
Who boast before their Armor is put off,
And, at the weapons of the spirit scoff:
For, what by vanity may be obtained
Shall thereby, be devoured* as soon as gained.
You have betwixt you (as implied before)
Half of all Foreign Tradings, if not more.
Your many Manufactures, are become
Staple commodities, that bring you home
Three times as much in* value every year
As those things, which among you growing are
Amounted to unwrought; and you are grown
As rich in Foreign wares as in your own*
The Seas have been your Fish Ponds, and afford
Enough to make both rich, could you accord
And both, alike were frugal. Means of Trade
Is in a thousand places to be had,
Which to employ you will sufficient be,
When you like Christian Brethren shall agree,
Or, but like moral men; nay, if but so
As many Infidels, and some Beasts do;
And, GOD and Natures Laws, would you direct
Aright, if, them, you did not wilfully neglect,
Make your own Will a Law, and were inclined
To that, which has corrupted all Mankind*
Rendering, what for man's real weal was given
The greatest outward Plague on this side heaven.
So wilfully pursuing your own ways
For your self ends; that he who does not praise
Your folly, or with silence pass it by,
Is thought no Friend, if not an enemy,
And, to reprove Vice is become a Crime
Judged Capital among you at this time.
If you consider these things as you ought,
(And shall not be displeased to hear them brought
Thus bluntly to remembrance) I have hope
I may still escape the Gollows and the Rope
For speaking Truths in season, unto them
Who, their well-willers causesly condemn*
And, from their Native Countries, banish those
For whose sakes, GOD has kept them from their foes,
Waiting with long-long-suffering, when to him
They will return, that, he may turn to them.
This you may do; And I have hope of it:
For, GOD is resident among you, yet.
His Canal sticks are not from you removed;
Within your Borders, of his best beloved
Are many thousands, for whose sake, he has
Remembered Mercy, in his hottest wrath.
Good Laws you have; some, likewise, who profess
And practice them, in truth and righteousness
Though from your first Loves, you are fallen much
And, your defects are at this present, such
As in the seven Asian Churches were
When first the Mystery was hatching there
Which now ore-spreads the world* you have not that
Complied with, but, the same abominate;
And therefore, that you may, return to him
GOD has premonish'd you as he did them,
Expecting that you better should improve
Then heretofore, his patience and his love,
Lest else, you speedily may be bereft
As they were, of what, yet appears left.
A moral Charity retains a place
Among you, though grown colder then it was.
You have a form of GODliness, whereon
If you depended not as you have done,
That, which essential is, would more have been
Improved, and the power, thereof more seen.
Among your many Vices, blended are
Some Virtues, which, if you would take more care
To cherish, God would such assistance give
That they should, for the future better thrive.
Though you have multiplied prevarications
By many carnal, gross abominations,
And, are with Jezabel (that Sorceresse)
(Who counterfeits herself a Prophetess)
Open Confederates; some of you hate
Her Heresies, and their, who imitate
The Nichola^tans: God, now therefore
Hanges forth to you a Flag of Truce, once more,
(Into a Comet formed) and sets it there
Where, it, at one view, may to both appear;
That you might speedily and jointly, do
Through Fear, that which Love could not win you to.
For, though the Wisards of preceding Ages
And, some how deemed no despicable Sages,
Think these prodgious Meteors called Stars
Are constituted of such Characters
And shapes, as do undoubtingly fore-shew
What things particularly will ensuce,
(Because such consequents have ofter been
Observed, they are much deceived therein.)
There Is no such virtue proper to their natures;
For, they are only serviceable creatures
Employed by Providence, to such an end
As we by fired Beacons do intend,
When an Invasion's threatened; They declare
In general, that foes approaching are;
Stir up the Nation to a timely heed
But, who their Foes are, what plagues will succeed,
How long they will continue; upon whom
They first will seize, at what time, they will come;
Or such like things by them we cannot know:
For, they no more then Beacons can fore-show.
So, this late Exhalation does portend
Some Judgment on offenders will descend
Ere long, to make them watchful, and prepare
To do those duties which expected are*
But in particular presignifies
Nor this, nor that; nor any terrifies
Who more desires to know* how by GODS grace,
To do his will, then what will come to pass.
He that is so affected, seldom fears
The influence of Comets, or of Sta^s;
Whereas, they who in folly are benighted
Often, With a harmless Glowworm are affrighted.
Thus far, my mind I have once more expressed
And hopeful am, ere long to be at rest
From all my Labors; for, my life, almost,
To bring this seasonably forth, it cost.
But, some perhaps will now say, what is he
That your Remembrancer presumes to be?
To those, I make this answer; I am one
Who stands instead of such a Block or Stone,
As Charity did set up heretofore
By highway sides, and sometime at each door,
To save men from the violent approaches
Of drunken Horsemen, Wagons, Carts and Coaches,
And in that service, often are abused
Cursed, broken, cracked, hackt, cut, flasht, knocked, and bruised
By those, who stumbling on them, heedless are
To what good purpose they were fixed there.
And, if this be my Lot, I as I may,
Will bear it, as I have done till this day.
For, that which follies has to many seemed
Has by much wiser men, been well esteemed:
And, I despare not, though confused noises*
Should at this time drown and confound the voices
Of sober men: For, when the raging water
Does loudest roar; winds, make the tacklings clatter,
Raffle the sails, and keep the greatest bustle,
The storm is peirced by the Boat-swains whistle;
So that all heedful Mariners, thereby
Perceive whereto their hands they should apply.
So, likewise, though the Rumor of that War
Which many hope for, and as many fear,
With other such confusions, as our sad
Distractions at this present thereto add,
Will make these Lines, a while, of small regard
With many, and with difficulty heard;
They shall, ere long, by some, with good respect
Be entertained, and have good effect;
For days will come wherein, that, shall from them
Be echoed forth, which all will not contemn;
And, from whence, at the last, a Voice will come
That shall out-sound the rattling of a Drum;
Yet fright no soul but that man's, who depends
On carnal weapons, and has carnal ends.
Praecautiones aenigmaicae per omnes personac terminationes, Modi Imperativi
declinatae, numero singulari and plurali.
Cave MBR. and ED. Cavete V. Caveto A, Caveto B. Cavetote A. Caveat P. P. P. P.
and P. Caveant O.

Jam qui rident Ha, ha, he,
Mox clamabunt. Heu, Vah, Vae.
Caveamus ergo, ac Amemus, ni perimus.
A COROLLARY.
Some think, I, an Apology may need
For daring thus to bid my Friends take heed;
And, so perhaps I may; For, not long since,
I suffered for as blamless an offense;
And, heretofore, informed was of ONE,
Who said; that to be totally undone
Much less displease him would, then if that he
Should from undoing, be preserved by me;
And, shortly after (with no little shame)
That, which he might have escaped, upon him came.
I hope they wiser are whom, to take heed
I now advise and that they will better speed.
What e're succeds; Praise will to GOD belong,
And of the Saints, this shall be then the Song.
A Hallelujah, alluding to the 150 Psalm.
Come praise the LORD, come praise him
Where Saints assembled are,
As he is Almighty praise him
His Righteousness declare.
In his excellings praise him
With Trumpet and with Flute,
With Harp and Psaltery praise him,
With Viol and with Lute,
Let nothing that can praise him
Unactive be* or mute.
Upon the Timbrol praise him
In songs his praise advance;
Upon the Organs praise him
And praise him in the Dance;
On tingling Symbals praise him
That, make the loudest noise
And let each crature praise him
That sense or breath enjoys,
Yea, let privations praise him
Although they have no voices.
The Mystical sense of what is literal expressed by the Metaphorical and
Allegorical contexture of the proceeding Hymn, in the Original Text, according
to the Authors under standing thereof, is as follows.
BY the Sanctuary is meant the Congregations of the Saints. By the Firmament of
Gods power, the unchangeableness of his Almightiness. By his mighty acts, his
unresistible Justice. By his excellent greatness. his Mercy, which is said to
be over all his works, and his most excellent Attribute. By the Trumpet or
Flute, we are exhorted to praise him in our martial expeditions. By the Psaltry
and Harp, in our spirimal rejoicings. By the Viol and Lute in our corporeal
and civil recreations. By the Timbrel in those actions which are of a spiritual
and natural mixture. By the Dance in all those things wherein we move together,
and counteract apart, by deeds, words, and dissenting opinions; for in a Dance,
are various motions, sidings, turnings, returnings, and moving all one way. By
Ten steinged I^struments and the Organ* the faculties of our souls and the
members of our bodies. By Cymbals, and loud Cymbals, the internal breathings,
and external ejaculations of the heart and voice in prayer and praising God.
The last two lines of both the foregoing Stanza's, consisting of ten a piece
are but a Supplement to my Paraphrase of the 150 Psalm, and not found in the
Original. This is in brief my private judgment, not totally excluding the Sense
and Interpretation of other pious men.

FINIS.

