Poor Robins CHARACTER, Of an Honest Drunken Curr: With a Relation of the
Frollicks of his Life, and Conversation AND HIS EPITAPH.

With Permission.

London, Printed by E. C. for C. Hussy, at the Bible in Iewen street. 1675.

Poor Robins CHARACTER, Of an Honest Drunken Curr.
He Is a Pickel'd Youth to be sure, for he always lies steeped in his own
Liquor; of which like a Whale, he carries so much about him, that when ever he
Disgorges, he may Swim away in his own Flood. Clap but a good Sucker into his
Belly, and he makes an excellent Parish Pump: and if you add but a Pipe to his
Muzle, he may pass for a Water Engine, and do good service in time of Fire; you
need not fear Drawing him dry, so long as all the Alehouses, and Taverns in
Town, like little Rivulets, supply the decrease; He contains about as much as
those in Churches; but is so uncooth a Trough, he is twice as hard to be Gauged:
yet by frequent experience, he can guess his Measure to a Pint, specially if
you except Leakage: His Veins are so thronged, and his Blood so tainted with
Scurvey, Gout, and Dropsy, (and a smatch of the Frenchman to boot, which he
got when he was Drunk, and does not know who to lay it too.) That he defies the
intrusion of any other Distemper: wherefore he Stalks in as much State through
a Pestilence; as a well Armed Soldier through a shower of Bullets, for his
forementioned Diseases have taken such large Possession of his Body, that
there is no room left for Infection.

He has drunk himself into a Jelly, and is so moist, that if you squeese him,
he drops like an Orange.

His Body a perfect Still, which he Fuells with Brandy, instead of Char-coal;
being thoroughly heated, you may discern the sweaty Distilation tricle from his
face, as from the Lid of a Limbick, and if any chance to drop on his Nose, you
may hear it hiz as if it fell upon heated Bricks. In fine though he always
lives Joakingly and Merry, he hates nothing more then a dry Jest.

Thus having acquainted you with his Constitution, I shall only consider him in
his Conversation, and Friendship, and so leave him to sleep out his nap.

And first for his Conversation, to take him in the Morning (for who can find
him all the Day after) he prevents his Prayers with a Pipe of Tobacco, and
Smoaks at such a Rate as if he pr^fer'd Sacrifice to Devotion. A Tinder-box is
as necessary to him, as a green Bagg to an Atturney's Clark, with which he
seems as ravished as Alexander with the Odisses, for he cannot sleep unless it
lie under his Pillow. In that little night he makes, he cannot so properly said
to sleep, as to chew the Cudd (...) often disturbs the repose of a Family, with
Muttering a Repetition of his Oaths, and Healths when he awakes, he stares
about with such wild Curiosity, as one would fancy Adam did immediately after
his Creation; for he generally makes himself so Drunk over Night, drowning his
past actions in Liquor and Oblivion, that he scarcely knows the Morning from
the Resurrection, and is hardly persuaded that ever he lived before.

But after he is convine'd of the affirmative spends about a quarter of an Hour
in examining the Bed-posts and Windows, before he discovers whether he be in
his own Lodging: And afterward remains as doubtful how he got thither.

Then Bed-staves, and Slip-shoo's go to Wrack, for clattering on the Bed-stead,
like Boys at the Bear-Garden; he calls up the People as Country Wenches do
Swine, by knocking; and after a Petition for a Cup of Settle-Brain, begs them
to resolve his Quaerie: Whereupon they tell him the truth, which indeed is that
either he came the old Porterly way, Crutch'd with a brace of Watchmen; or
else the Modern and more Genteel way, viz. On Pick-pack, instead of a Sadan.

Now although my Honest Drunken Curr be guilty of many Vices, which like
Younger Brothers hang on this great one which has got possession: Yet (Give the
Devil his aue) I think the World has Sullied his Reputation with diverse
Scandals of which he is no wise Guilty: Wherefore because I only intend his
Convertion not his Consumption; Like an honest Historian (since I Write his
Life) I ought not to see him wronged, but rather to rescue him from those
C(...) on him (...)

The first imputation therefore that they impose on him is that he is proud,
And why forsooth? but because when he has a D(...)op in his Eye, he brags and
vapors as if he were a better man than his Neighbors. A stout reason indeed?
as if any man might not do as much that were either Lightheaded, or in a
Fevour; Nay, a Passion alone makes the wisest of us Bethlehems. But let us do
as we would be done by, and take him when he is himself, (that is in a
Morning,) and then I am sure he is as free from Pride, as a Quaker from good
Minners or Ribbons: For would Custom admit, I am confident he would never go
to the Alehouse Naked, than undergo the hard Penance of Sobriety the while he
dresses himself.

Secondly, They call him an Idle fellow; a good fellow all the World knows he
is, but as for Idleness, let me dye if I know any one more free from it than
he; What would they know of him trow? he rises early, sits up late; and I dare
Swear he grudges himself his very Sleep, because it keeps him from his
Business: When he is at it, no man more expeditious than he, for as if his
minutes, like his Estate, ran away too fast, you shall frequently see him with
an Ale-Glass in one hand, and a Looking-Glass in the other, which betokens both
speed and frugality.

The third and most fallacious Accusation is that they say, He Is Prodigal, and
Pisses his Estate against the Wall. But I am confident he enriches nor Perfumes
the Walls no more than others; only this I know he does, that whereas Usurers
use to hide their Riches in Earth Pots, he puts his Estate in a Pewter one
(which one would think were the safer Cabinet) so that it is not the Honest
Drunken Cur, but the Impudent Rogues, Drawers, and Tapsters, that imbezle and
make it away.

Much more might be said of him both in his Vindication, and in Commendation
also: For he is one of the quietest Subjects his Majesty has, and most
submissive to Monarchyal Government: He would not be without a King, if it were
for no other Reason than merely Drinking his Health. He hates Coffee as
Mahomatizm, and thinks it a Lesser sin to go to Bed Drunk, than to Drink it to
make him Sober.

He hates a Studious man as Caeser did a Lean one, and for the same Reason, for
he is so confident he is hatching of Treason, that he could find in his Heart to
impeach him at adventure.

As for his Friends he never troubles his Head to pick and cull them, but takes
them as superannuated Maids do Husbands, or Fish-women do Mackerel, as they
come next to hand: For fixing himself in the next Alehouse or Tavern he comes
at; at first he sits as sullenly as a degraded Courtier, or an Insurer upon
Advice of a Loss* And no less than a Quart of Purle-Royal, or Two Kicks in the
Guts can remove his Morosity. After he has digested either of them, perchance
he will vouchsafe to bless you with a Smile, especially if you will purchase it at
the expense of a Bawdy Song; to which you shall see him turn head, and listen
as heedfully as a Lynnet to a Flaijolet, but infinitely more easy to be Taught.

When you have done, it is twenty to one but he comes and hugs you; swearing you
are the most accomplished Gentleman that ever he met in his Life; and tho he
never saw you before, from that time you may date his Friendship: He makes
Friends faster than Children do Babies; and like them too, he often forgets
where he has left them.

His Reason like a bad Shopkeeper is seldom at home, or rather like a Country
Gentleman, has left the Manor of his own Body; and is gone to dwell in strange
Lodgings: So that it is no wonder, he is Hobgoblin'd by his fiery Nose to any
Debauchery, or that Men call him Beast; since by giving Rains to his I
Sensuality, he makes so perfect a Swine of himself, that he Drinks till he can
hardly Grunt. However, since the Church allows him Christian Burial, I Will
Hopkins and Sternhold him with

An Epitaph.
Here Lies Drunken Tom,
Whom Heaven in mercy save,
He stumbel'd over his Death,
And reeled into his Grave.
FINIS.

