ECHOES FROM THE SIXTH TRUMPET. Reverberated by A Review of Neglected
Remembrances: Abreviating Precautions and Predictions heretofore published at
several Times, upon sundry Occasions, to forewarn what the future Effects of
Divine Justice would be, as soon as our Sins were full ripe, if not prevented
by timely Repentance.

Most part of the Predictions have been already seen or heard verified, both by
the Author yet living, and by many others, who observed at what Times, in what
manner, upon what Persons, and in what Places they were literally or Mystically
fulfilled.

Collected out of the said Authors Printed Books, who conscienciously observed
on what Divine Prophesies the said Predictions were grounded; as also GOD's
late frequent intermixture of Judgments and Mercies, to reclaim this Generation.

The First Part.

Matthew. 13. 52. Every Scribe which is instructed unto the Kingdom of Heaven, is
like unto a Householder, who brings out of his Treasure things new and old.
Imprinted in the Year Chronogrammically expressed in this Seasonable Prayer
LorD haVe Mercy Upon Us.

A PREFACE to the following REVIEW, offering somewhat therewith considerable.
THis Preface, and the following Review, were not without good reason
personated as written by a Third person; yet perhaps may make it questionable,
Whether they were done by the Author of the Books abreviated, or by another
hand; but that is not material: For, they express nothing save what may be by
him justified in every circumstance; and therefore it shall so pass. He was
Thirteen years old when Queen Elizabeth reigned; and even at that time begun to
observe both the Works of GOD, and the Actions of Men; so continuing to do,
from time to time, whereby (with GOD's gracious assistance) he was preserved
from grossly falling into, and persevering in those sins whereto he was
naturally prone; and came into the world at a time which gave him such an
Experimental knowledge both of GOD and Men, as he could not have had in many
preceding Generations; for he has lived to see Eleven Signal Changes, in
which, not a few Signal Transactions Providentially occurred; to wit, under the
Government of Queen Elizabeth, King James, Charles the First, the King and
Parliament together, the Parliament alone, the Army, Oliver Cromwell, Richard
Cromwell, a Council of State, the Parliament again, and now King Charles the
Second; during all which times, he lived in those Places, and in such midling
Stations, between persons of the highest and lowest degree; exercised in
Employments, which gave him opportunity to heed what was done, both by those
who were above and below him. GOD had also bestowed upon him a Faculty, which
(though it be despised, and he therewith but meanly endowed) would not permit
him to be altogether idle or silent; for, it compelled him to a conscientious
exercise of his Talent, in that, which he thought required at his hand; and to
take all occasions from time to time happening, to commemorate, and offer to
consideration, those things whereby GOD might be glorified, and his Countrymen
benefited in some degree; which duty (though not so well as he would) he has
so well as he could prosecuted to this day.

He begun very early, by expressing and publishing those Conceptions which the
Affections and Inclinations of Youth had awakened in him; endeavoring to
season them with as much Morality and Piety, as Subjects of that nature are
capable of; suiting them to capacities of young men, who delight to see their
own Natural Passions represented as it were in a glass; wherein, they not only
met with some better things then they looked for, but, with such Notions also
therewith mixed, as insinuated into their hearts that seasoning, which made
them much delighted with his Poems, and rendered him so generally known, that
many thousands were desirous to peruse his future Writings, and to take better
heed of that, whereof else perhaps they had taken little or no notice, though
expressed by a more elegant and learned Author. It likewise encouraged him to
assume all Occasions to prosecute that, which might most redound to GOD's
Glory, and the edifying of men in Faith and Righteousness, though it were to
his personal disadvantage in carnal concernments. And GOD has given him
comfort therein, carrying him on hitherto through all difficulties occurring,
though by impartially discharging his Conscience in such a mode as had provoked
many powerful persons to prosecute him with Indignation; for, his frequent
reproofs have been very offensive, notwithstanding they were in general terms
only, without personal aspersions, and with as much charity, and tender
respect to every man's infirmities, and unwilling failings, as to his own.

Length of time has given him so many several occasions to declare what he
thought necessary or expedient, that his Published Poems and Writings amount
now to about a hundred, besides many never Printed; In which, though he has
expressed much to the same purpose (in various forms and words) yet the same or
like occasions warrant the application of the same or like matter and words, as
the practice of the holy Prophets and Apostles has evidenced to be sometimes
necessary. For, that Medicine which operates not at one time, does work
effectually at another, on the same persons, or upon those of another
constitution: Meats also, variously dressed, are pleasing to their appetites,
and well digested by their stomachs, who almost loathed them when often eaten
cook't the same way. And so it is in this case. Wherefore he has endeavored
to put his Matter into such a dress (otherwhile in Prose, and otherwhile in a
Poetical Mode) that it may suit with vulgar capacities, and not be despised by
the most Judicious; mixing so far forth as may be decent, Delight and Profit,
according to this old Verse, Et prodesse solent, and Delectare Poetae.

His presuming to give counsel to them who neither desire it, nor care for his
advice, has much offended many, and made them heedless of that which might
have prevented their sorrow; but it has pleased and benefited some; and that
makes him slight their Proverb, which forbids coming to give Counsel before we
are called. And he has nevertheless prosecuted the multiplying of Doctrinal
Remembrances, Exhortations, Precautions and Predictions, (to prevent that which
the neglect of them will produce) until they amounted to that numerousness
which appears in those Books whereof this is an Abridgment. And by considering
upon whose Promises and Threatenings they are grounded, he has not been afraid
to predict conditionally those Mercies and Judgments which are promised and
menaced in those Books here abreviated. And some will find, that which is not
yet verified upon Wilful Delinquents, to be at last as truly fulfilled, as
those which they have seen; though the world has made it one of her Principles
to believe and profess, That Prophesying has long time ceased; because her
wise men think as the Apostle Peter said profane men would do in the later
times, who scoffingly say, Where is the Promise of his coming; for, since the
Fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were from the Creation, 1 Pet.
3. 4. Indeed, Prophesying is at an end, as touching saving-Faith, or any new
Fundamental Articles thereto pertaining. But, the Spirit of Prophecy, as
foretelling what shall come to pass in relation to those Mercies or Judgments,
which shall be the reward of welldoing, and the punishment of evildoers, in
this life, is not taken away or ceased, as it has been manifested in and by
many, who have had in our days Revelations of such things before they came to
pass, and have been living Witnesses of their predicting them beforehand; as
also of their being afterward fulfilled; and in particular, of that Judgment,
whereby the glory of London was this year consumed, (though that will not come
into every man's Creed:) For, before the said Fire, this Author was informed by
a credible person, (who was afterward a great Sufferer thereby) of a Vision
representing such a Conflagration in London as there befell soon after. He
himself also, had confused preapprehensions of the like effect, when he sent
forth his Warning-piece to London, published 1662, occasioned by a sudden Fire
in the Night at Lothbury, near the middle of that City, which then consumed the
House of an eminent Citizen, with all the Inhabitants therein. Dr. Gell, a
Learned and Conscientious Preacher to this City, seemed also to have had the
like impressions upon his heart, both by what he communicated to some Friends
in private, and by a Printed Sermon of his, preacbed before the Lord Mayor upon
that Text, Mat. 24, wherein the coming of the Son of Man, is paralleled with
the coming of the Flood in the days of Noah. The same Sermon contains a
Narrative (which he averrs was attested by many Witnesses) to wit, That about
two years before his Preaching of that Sermon, The sign of the Son of Man, even
of Christ on the Cross, wounded in his hands and feet, and Angels round about
him, appeared at Frankendale in Germany, to the view of Thousands, Three hours
together at midday. Moreover it is credibly avowed, That a Book was brought to
be published a little before the said Fire, fore-declaring what we have seen
come to pass, and was refused by the Printer, because not Licensed; and that
the same Printer being afterward busy to help quench the Fire, and then seeing
that same person passing by, told him, he suspected his hand to be in the
kindling thereof: Whereto the man answered, That had he been accessory to such
a a wicked Purpose or Action, he should not have offered that to publication,
whereby it might probably have been prevented; adding these words, That ere
long there would be a more dreadful Execution by the Sword, then that was by
the Fire; (which, whosoever that man was, or upon what ground soever he spoke,
it may probably come to pass) and a Famine follow that, if God should deal with
us according to our demerits.

This Review is in the first place entitled, An Echo from the Sixth Trumpet;
because, it allusively reverberateth, and Echoes, as it were, to what was
predicted should come to pass between the sounding of the Sixth and Seventh
Trumpet, upon pouring forth the Sixth Viol, the sad Effects whereof are partly
felt at this day, by many who consider not from whence they proceed, that they
might have been as effectual to make them happy, as they will also be to make
them more miserable both here and hereafter. Now if upon the whole matter it
should be questioned (as perhaps it may) upon what warrantable grounds this
Author presumes this Generation is guilty of such and so many Provocations, as
have rendered it liable to Gods Judgments conditionally predicted in his former
Writings; he thereto answers, That beside his personal knowledge thereof
acquired by long experience, (and the witness which he believes the Spirit of
GOD bears in his heart thereunto) Common Fame is a good concurrent Evidence
(especially in this case;) for, though in many things Fame is a Liar; yet in
such cases as this, Vox Vulgi is Vox Dei, The Voice of the People is the Voice
of GOD to their Consciences, bearing witness against themselves, as justly
meriting all the Judgments predicted by his Prophets, against such sins as
they have committed; and they always carry in themselves (though seldom
heeded) their Accusation and Sentence of Condemnation.

It is no marvel, if GOD's long-suffering is little regarded, whilst he is slow
to wrath, and executes fore threatened Plagues upon some Persons and Places with
less terror and severity then upon some other, or upon the same persons at
other times: For, now when they came thick, fell heavily and more dreadfully
upon them, than heretofore, the greatest number are so far from being reformed;
that they grow more impudent Malefactors, as it was predicted it would be in
these last times, wherein they on whom the Viols of Wrath should be poured
forth, blasphemed when they should have repented. But this excuses not those
whom GOD qualifies for such Services (though they shall be bemired and rent in
pieces by some) if they shall not seasonably proclaim and reiterate Precautions
and Exhortations as often as just occasions are offered; and therefore this
Review of Neglected Remembrances, is thought pertinent at this time, though
they were heretofore scoffingly termed Prophesies, and will at this day be as
little regarded by many; and it is hoped also, this labor will not be quite
lost, but have a kindly operation on those who are not hardened into a final
impenitence by customary sinning, and wilfully despising GOD's Judgments and
Mercies; and that they may be likewise helpful to prevent the like obduracie in
those who are not totally depraved.

Many who are forgetful or heedless of forewarnings, Counsels and Precepts,
which concern their present duties, are so much inclined to listen after those
Predictions which presage their happiness or unhappiness hereafter, that, if
the contrary were not apparent, it might probably be thought, they were less
careful to secure their present, then their future enjoyments; for, they rake
together all Predictions new and old, which have a show of presaging that which
they fear or hope for; entertaining each other at their Meeting-places, with
mutual Repetitions of what they last heard to such purposes, how frivolous or
improbable soever. This Vanity, the Seducer of Mankind, and the Deceitfulness
of men's hearts, makes use of to divert the prosecution of their Duties to GOD,
to themselves, and to other men; and to frustrate those rational and seasonable
Predictions and Precautions, which might have prevented the greatest Plagues
conditionally menaced by the most holy Prophets. By delighting more to hear
what is to come, then what men ought to do; they seem to think all good
Counsels and Endeavors less pertinent to their cognizance and practice, than
an unprofitable, uncertain foresight of what is but conditionally predicted,
and shall only come to pass according as the conditions are performed or
neglected. But, toward the cure of this distemper, humane Prudence can extend
no further than the circumference of its own Sphere.

Predictions expressed in ambiguous Terms, and having neither certain
signification or dependence upon ought following or preceding, are ignorantly
insisted upon as pertinent to those Persons or Places whereto they had probably
no relation. Such are many groundless Figments cried about the Streets, and
picked out of Gypsie-like Prognostications, to the abusing of ignorant people.
Such are also the ridiculous Welsh Impostors, entitled Taliefen, the Fiction
termed the Panther-Prophesie; and Mother Shiptons Prophesies, so called, are
thought considerable by some who suppose themselves no fools; and hereby
Predictions and Premonitions grounded upon sound Reason, and Divine Truth, are
unheeded or neglected.

However, there is and shall be a Remnant preserved, who can distinguish
between serious and trivial Precautions; and to them, that which is here
collected, will at some times be of good use, though the Author be yet in
contempt, and in a suffering-condition. Let those therefore, into whose hands
these come, be pleased to accept and improve them as they find cause, giving
praise to God, who vouchsafes timely fore-warnings to all Places, Persons and
Societies in every Age; and Memorials of that which brings on Confusion and
destruction, to the glorifying of his Righteousness, to the shame of
presumptuous Transgressors, and to make future times more cautious; speaking as
well by the simple and mean, as by the wise and honorable, in terms fitted
unto every capacity; as also in such various Modes as might rouse them up out
of security. And, now of late, seeing both dreadful and calm Voices have been
long slighted or neglected, he has spoken to us by all the Elements; yea, by
Pestilence, War, furious Hurricano's, and devouring Fire, joined together in a
terrible Consort: To which is added a concurrent Presage in the hearts of most
men, portending a general Ruin, by their agreeing in that fear, how differing
soever their, Affections and Judgments be in other things; and doubtless a
final execution of Judgment is not far off, in regard their grand Affairs in
most places, begin to resemble the Constitution of that Senate whereof it was
said, That all the rest of the Senators were ordered according to the pleasure
of one among them; he governed by his Wife, she by her Child's Nurse, and the
Nurse by her Nursing.

According to our vulgar Computation, this is the Thousandth six hundred sixty
and sixth year after our Savior's Birth, and will questionless, be a signal
year, according to the pre-conjectures of many; yet, not extend to the total
extirpation of his Malignant Kingdom, whose Reign is to end in the 666th year
after he was completely enthroned upon the Seat of that BEAST, which was to
continue a Thousand years in a declining estate, until the Mystery of Iniquity
should be raised out of it to the full height; which time, (though they heeded
it not) was mystically foredeclared in their own Numerals, which in an orderly
conjunction, according to their simple valuation, extends no further than to
make MDCLXVI, comprehending the whole term limited to the Fourth Monarchy, with
what should arise out of it, from the highest exaltation both of the First and
Second Beast. The highest pitch of the First, the Author believes (as he has
frequently hinted in his Writings published upon several occasions) was even
then at full, when the Lord of Life was crucified under that Power; for, till
then it flourished. The number of years comprehending the Heathenish and Papal
Antichristian Tyrany, being MDCLXVI in the whole, was not to be reckoned as
beginning immediately after Christ's birth, but after his crucifying or
ascension; allotting the greatest Numeral M, to wit, a Thousand years, to the
said First Beast, and DCLXVI years, to the Second Beast, that being the number
of the Name, or Power of that Mystical Man of Sin, whose Reign will probably
determine in or about the Three or four and thirtieth year yet to come, if
Chronologers have truly informed us of the times past; and History rightly
stated the Progress of the Second Beast, to the height of his Power, that we
may know from what year to begin that number: But this is certain, though nor
the year, nor the day can be precisely known, he has not long to reign; for,
all predictions will ere long end in one; and as it was said a little before
the Flood, GOD will not much longer strive with Flesh; but, for the sakes of
his Elect, shorten the time of Antichrist, which might else have been lengthned
out to the end of 6000 years after the Creation, but that his fury will hasten
his own destruction.

This -- 66 th year shall be a preparative thereunto, though the Romanists
insult, as if the Saints have mistaken the time of their Visitation; for, the
late Execution of Judgment by devouring Fire, (the like whereof (considering it
was not accompanied with the Sword) was never, or very seldom heard of since
the consuming of Sodom and Gomarrah) as are also other Epidemical Judgments,
prosecuted upon those of GOD's own House, not to destroy, but to purge it. When
their fierce Trial has consumed the Hay, Stubble and Wooden Structures, which
they have erected; when self-love, hypocrisy, the Relics of Idolatry, and
such other Babylonish Corruptions (as of old, or newly crept in) are purged
out; when the abominable Pride, Idleness and Excess, which have here abounded,
to the parallelling of Sodom, (considering what they wanted of what we had) are
consumed, which nothing can burn up, except such irresistible Fires as that of
late, or somewhat thereto equivalent; and, when the Saints have drunk so much
of this bitter Cup, as will suffice to cleanse them; Then shall the Scarlet
Whore, and her vaunting Confederates, swallow down the Dreggs, finding
themselves deceived in the expectation of those Consequents which their
Emissaries have predicted in silly Rimes dispersed since the said Fire, to
insinuate that the Executions now in Act, will be destructive to them only who
are departed out of their Babylon, and protested against it. For, though the
purifying of Gods Family is thereby principally intended, the same Judgments
will have concurrent effects from year to year, toward the completing of that,
which will be the final Doom of Rome's Babylon, when 666 years, as aforesaid,
are determined after their Mystery of Iniquity was at height.

This Author believes, That the Saints last Purgatory is now commencing, and
that it is made signal by the Fire which in this year has eclipsed the glory,
and defaced the Beauty of London, which is to our Israel of GOD, the same which
Jerusalem in Palestine was to his Israel at that time. London was the greatest,
the most famous, and the most potent of all the Cities wherein the Protestant
Religion was visibly professed in opposition to the Papacy; and among other
considerable circumstances, that Mercy whereby the execution of Divine Justice
was managed, during this years Visitation hitherto, do manifest, that they have
a special relation to Gods Inheritance. The most Magnificent, and the Noblest
part of this Ancient City was wholly and suddenly consumed; her sad Inhabitants
looking on, were disabled to quench it, till it had destroyed (with many
thousands of other Structures great and small) above a Hundred Temples and
Oratories, besides Colleges, Schools and Halls; one of her Temples being
reputed the greatest in Christendom, and wherein the Gospel had been preached,
and GOD worshipped, and (though not at all times by all according to the purity
of his Sanctuary, yet) by some with as much sincerity, (according to the
degrees of their understanding) as by any other National or Congregational
Assemblies; until Humane Authorities presumed to set up their Posts by GOD's
Posts, and Magisterially imposed more than was enjoined or required by him;
which presumption was aggravated by falling from their first love to Christ and
their Brethren; which Love is the most signal mark of his Disciples; yea an
over-peremptory and too stiff an adhering by all parties dissenting in
Judgment, to their single Opinions as touching things indifferent in their own
nature, has partly (if not principally) occasioned that overflowing and
complication of Plagues wherewith we are now afflicted throughout these three
Nations, and in this our Head-City, in which (if we may believe Travelers)
both her own Citizens, and Strangers were preserved in more safety by night and
by day, and as well and civilly governed according to Moral Principles, and
External Forms of Piety, as in any City throughout the world, so great, and so
populous; yet the fury of the late Fiery Storm most raged, and made the saddest
spect acle, and the most deformed marks of Desolation, even in that part of
this City wherein they lived who were then reputed among the most generous, the
most civil, the most charitable, and the most pious of her Inhabitants; and
though the best men had not the least share in that Calamity, it was made
tolerable by so many Mercies wrapped up therewith, as do evidence, that God had
a considerable number therein, and that the generality were no greater sinners
then they whose Dwellings escaped that Judgment. The Out-parts (except at the
West end) were graciously spared, as Zoar was heretofore, for the sake of Lot,
to be for the present time a Refuge both to them who were chased away by the
Fire, and to their Brethren, whose habitations were preserved for their joint
comfort; and of this Mercy the best and worst of men had equal portions, in
some respects, because their time is not yet come, wherein GOD will be fully
avenged on his and their Enemies.

Though probably that Fire was both kindled and increased by wicked hands,
Divine Providence (who permitted those to be his Executioners) carried it on as
well against the Wind, when it blew very strongly, as with it; and by taking
away their hearts who were succesfully active at other times in preventing such
beginnings, permitted it to proceed so far: And when GOD's Fiery Messenger was
in the height of his Career, bounded his rage at Paper-buildings, after it had
broken irresistibly through thick and strong Edifices of Brick and Stone. It is
considerable also, That this Fire was not permitted to extend into those
Contiguous Buildings, Streets and Allies, wherein the greatest Oppressors, the
most profane, the most impudent, the most debauched, and the most irreligious
persons were commonly famed to have their dwellings intermixed with such as were
of a civil and pious conversation; for few or no places were then touched by
the Fire, wherein either a public Theater, or a common Gaminghouse, or a
notorious Brothel-house, or a May Pole, or a Popish Chapel was at that time
standing, which it may be some think, so hallowed the places, that the Fire
could not prevail against them; whereas it rather demonstrates, That this
Visitation extends primarily to GOD's own People; and that the utter
extirpation of Antichrist, and his profane Associates, is deferred until a
time yet to come. Yet, in the mean while, (though few lay it to heart) GOD will
inflict upon every particular Member of that wicked Society, in his generation,
so much of their temporal dooms as will amount to the whole at their lives end;
and therefore seeing their last doom (for ought they know) may be too morrow,
or this present hour, it will be dangerous to defer penitence, because they
think the last day of Judgment may be far off. This, and the preceding
Affirmatives will peradventure be distastful to those Time-pleasing Parasites,
(as also to them who delight in gross flatteries) who preach Peace, and
prognosticate glorious Consequences to the Proceedings of this Generation. But
the Wrath of such will not prevent the failing of their unwarrantable
Expectations.

GOD's Promises and Threatenings, unto all
Predicted are, with a Conditional
Express or Tacit; and (although they seem
Pronounced absolutely, at some time)
May be reversible according to
Our Faith, and acting what we ought to do:
For, we are taught by many Presidents,
That, like Proceedings will have like events,
Till somewhat interveneth to dispense
Judgment and Mercy with a difference.
Most part of what this Author did predict,
Has variously already took effect:
And, if ought is deferred, or abated,
Of that which was by him prognosticated
Against this Generation, or this Place,
It Is merely an effect of GOD' s free grace,
By him vouchsafed, for their sakes, by whom
A seed must be preserved till he shall come,
Whose coming, and whose reign will put an end
To all their sufferings, who for him attend
In faithful patience, and he will enable
To bear mean while, what seems intolerable.
That, nothing contained in the following Review, may justly be suspected, as
thereinto lately shufled, a Catologue of the Imprinted Books, out of which it
was gathered as they come to hand, (being gotten together with much difficulty)
shall be added in the close, with a direction to the pages wherein their
abreviation is begun, corrected in those places, where faults have escaped at
the Press, there being very many, by reason of the Authors not being present,
and there are some such gross mistakes, that he could hardly make out his own
meaning. It shall mention also the years wherein the said Books were the first,
or a second time imprinted; in which it is to be heeded, that the Booksellers
usually postdate the first Impressions, that the Books may seem new a little
the longer.

This is as much as shall be offered for a Preludium to the following Review;
concluded with humbly desiring their Prayers to whom this shall come, that
this, and all the Authors endeavors may be sanctified to the glory of God, and
to the rendering of his Judgments and Mercies effectual to the salvation of our
souls, by true Faith, hearty Penitence and mutual love in Christ Jesus; and
they are also desired not to impute to a corrupt self-end, his now purposed
with drawing from this City: For, he has been this Isles Remembrancer, and
continued with this City both in her sicknesses and health, in War and Peace,
almost sixty years together, (with a little absence at some times) taking all
occasions hitherto offered, to remember her from time to time, of such things
as he thoughts might probably conduce to her welfare; insomuch, that he now
knows not what he can say or do, more than he has already said or done to that
purpose; he not having so much regard vouchsafed for his good intentions, from
any of her Chiefs, as might have been expected for penning one Speech to
illustrate her Lord Mayor's Pageants; though he was often (for no
ill-deserving) a close Prisoner within her Jurisdiction, so despoiled of all
whereby to clothe and feed him, that he had then perished, if a few Strangers,
and some of her Midling and Inferior Citizens had not by GOD's Mercy, been
charitably inclined to compassionate his condition: That Strait being still the
same, and many of those now dead, some impoverished, and the remainder, for the
most part, so scattered since the late Pestilence and Fire, that nor he nor
they now know where to find each other without much difficulty; he being
wearied, and almost worn out, is constrained to prepare a Retreating place for
himself and his Consort, which he has prepared at a lonely Habitation in his
Native Country, (where he neither had, or looked for much respect) Thither he
resolves to retire with as much speed as he can, there to wait upon Gods future
Dispensations during the remainder of his life, or until Providence otherwise
disposes of him; not doubting, but that he shall rest therewith gratefully
contented, wheresoever it shall be, because he has had assurance by many
demonstrations of GOD's good will to the whole humane Nature, of a special love
to him; and well knows his Eternal Mercy to be Infinite over all his works.

Though Lot a while in Zoar stayed,
There long to abide he was afraid;
And many now begin to fear
There will be little safety here;
Because they see, hear and believe
What makes them both to fear and grieve.
Yet, in his place let each man stay
Until God calls him away,
By straitning of his path-wayes here,
Or, by enlarging them elsewhere.
And, let him careful be, that whither
He moves, he bears not our sins thither;
For, to what place soever we go,
The same sins bring the same Plagues too.
And, there is means of saving-Grace
For Penitents, in every place.
A Review of Neglected Remembrances.
Being a Breviate of the most considerable Remembrances and Predictions
dispersed in the Books hereafter specified, and published at several times,
upon such various Occasions as inclined the Author to those Prophetical
Expressions.
THis Collection begins with a Review of the Poem called BRITANS REMEMBRANCER,
written during the great Pestilence raging in the year 1625. The Title Page of
that Book is a considerable Prediction both Emblematically, and in Words. for
therein was represented a Black Cloud hovering over this Island, with Justice
and Mercy thereon seated, attended with an Host of Plagues; and in the opposite
page the meaning of that Title expressed in these following words:

Behold, and mark, and mind ye British Nationt
This dreadful Vision of my Contemplations:
Before the Throne of Heaven I saw, methought,
This famous Island into question brought;
With better Ears then these my body wear,
I heard Impartial Justice to declare
GOD's Benefits, our Thanklesness, and what
Small heed his Love or Judgments here begat.
I heeded how Eternal Mercy strove
GOD's just deserved Vengeance to remove;
But, so our sins increased, and cried so loud,
That, at the last, I saw a dismal Cloud
Exceeding black, as from the Sea ascending,
And over all this Isle it self extending,
With such thick foggy vapors, that their steams
Seemed for a while, to darken Mercy's beams,
Within that dreadful Cloud, I did behold
Most Plagues and Punishments that name I could;
Expecting, with a trembling heart, each hour,
GOD should that Tempest on this Island pour.
Yet better hopes appeared; for, lo the Rays
Of Mercy pierced the Cloud, and made such ways
Quite through those Exhalations, that mine eye
Did this Inscription thereupon espy
BRITANS REMEMBRANCER, and somewhat said
These words, me thought, The storm is yet delaid;
And, if you do not Penitence defer,
This Cloud is only a Remembrancer:
But if you still affect Impiety,
Expect ere long what this may signify.
This having seen and heard, it seemed nor fit
Nor safe for me to slight or smother it:
And therefore, thus, both to your eyes and ears,
I offer here what unto mine appears;
Judge, Readers, as ye please, of this or me,
Truth will be true, how ere it censured be.
In the last Page of the Epistle to the King, before that Poem, there is a
confident Presage relating both to the said Poem, and to the Author thereof,
hitherto made good; the words are these:

-- I know, what ere the spite of man
Against this Poem speak or practice can,
It shall continue when all they are rotten,
Or live in Infamy, or dye forgotten,
Who shall oppose it. I more over know,
That dead or living, I esteemed shall grow
For what they blame, etc.
To maintain confidence in the Authors prosecution of his duty, it was thus
presaged unto his heart, as it is recorded Canto 5. fol. 155.

Thou have from Heaven, an Arrant yet to do,
Which (unless GOD prevent) will call thee to
New Troubles, and more mischiefs bring upon thee,
Then all thy former Messages brought on thee:
And be assured the Devil will devise
What may disparage thee, to scandalize,
And ineffectual every thing to make,
Which, to good purpose, thou shall undertake.
Thou must prepare thy self to hear the Noise
Of causeless Threatenings; and the foolish Voice
Of Ignorant Reprovers; and expect
The bitter Censures of each giddy Sect:
Thou must contented be to hear great Lords
Talk without reason, big imperious words;
Although with meekness thou shall make repair,
When thou art summoned, to the Scorners Chair,
Where they with jeers and flouts, will take in hand
To censure what they do not understand, etc. --
-- But, fear them not, for he that in all places,
From every danger, and from all disgraces,
Has hitherto preserved thee, will secure
Thy person now. That hand which did procure
Relief from thy close Thraldomes, and maintained
Contentment when from liberty restrained,
Will be the same for ever, etc. --
For to this Realm and City thou art sent
To warn them that they speedily repent:
To show them for what failings and offenses
GOD sends Famines, Wars and Pestilences;
And, to pronounce what other Plagues will come,
If their transgressions they depart not from, etc.
In folio 106, and in the following leaves, this Author declared how desolate
that Plague had made many places in and near London; particularly, the Kings
House, the Innes of Court, Westminster Hall, and the Parliament House; which
produced this expression, amounting to a Presage:

-- there did I
Behold two Traitors heads which pearcht on high,
Did show their teeth, as if they had been grinning
At our Afflictions, which are now beginning;
For their wide Eye-holes, me thought, star'd, as tho
They looked to see that House should overthrow
It self, which they with Powder up had blown,
Had not GOD them, and their device overthrown.
Also in the 107 th leaf, he taking notice of the desolate Houses of the
Citizens, Peers and Lawyers, at that time, has words to this effect:

-- wish I shall,
That they their ways to mind would better call,
Lest both their Country and their City-Piles
Be smoking seen, and burning many miles, etc.
-- or else lest there,
Some fear Arrestings, where no Sergeants are;
For, this portends, that, if they who profess
Our Laws, continue on their practices,
Till they (as heretofore the Clergy were)
Are more in number than the Land can bear;
Their goodly Palaces will spue them forth
As Excrements that are of little worth;
And be disposed of, as now they see
Old Priories and Monastaries be.
In the 120 th, and in many following leaves, the said Author having
contemplated how numerously the Fields near London were frequented for
Recreation, with people of all sorts, before that Infection; how desolate they
then were, and what sudden effects would probably ensue, if GOD should withdraw
that Plague before we were truly penitent; other future Judgments are there
mentioned, as implicitly presaged in these words:

If GOD should whistle for those armed Bands
Which now are wasting other Christian Lands,
To put in action on our Commick Stage
The Tragedies of War, and brutish rage,
What Lamentations would here then be made,
And calling into mind the peace we had?
Should we in every house at board and bed
Have Soldiers and rude Captains billeted,
That would command and swagger as if they
Kept all the Townships where they lodge, in pay,
To wait upon their pleasures? Or should see
Our own Defenders our Devourers be?
Should we behold those Fields where now we sport,
Cut out in Trenches; here a Warlike Fort,
Another there; a Sconce not far from that,
A new-raised Mount, etc.
After many other pre-supposals to this effect, he thus proceeded, fol. 123.

As heretofore the unpeopled Fields I walked,
To this effect my thoughts within me talked;
Yea, when all present Objects gave content,
My heart did such Idea's represent
Of Judgments likely to be cast upon
So great a City, and a sinful one;
That much I feared, I should live to see
Some such Afflictions as here mentioned be.
According to what his heart had presaged, and was then presupposed, he lived
to behold about Eighteen years after, such Insolences committed by the Armies,
such Forts raised, and such Trenches in the Fields round about London.

Many other fore-expressions to the same purpose were dictated to this Author,
as more at large appears in several pages of the same Book; and after
enumerating several Transgressions and Provocations of GOD's Wrath, it was thus
predictated in the 8 th Canto, fol. 255:

If thou, oh Britan, dreaming all is well,
Shall slight this Message which my Muses tell,
And scorn their counsel, etc. --
-- hear then what I am bold
To tell thee, as now fitting to be told;
For, I will tell thy Fortune, which, when they
Who are unborn shall read another day,
They will believe then, that GOD did infuse
Into thy Poet a Prophetic Muse:
Moreover know, that he did him prefer
To be, to this Isle his Remembrancer;
And that if wilfully thou stop thine ear,
Or burn these Rowles, in which recorded are
Thy just Inditements, they shall written be
With new additions, deeply stamped on thee,
Iu such Characters, that no time shall raze
Their fatal Image from thy scarred face.
-- though thou watch and ward,
And all thy Forts and Havens strongly guard;
Though thou shall multiply thine Island-Forces,
Double thy Trained Bands, and Troops of Horses:
Though like an Eagle, shall thy wings display,
And (high thy head advancing) proudly say,
I sit aloft, enthroned so, that none
Can pluck me from the place I rest upon:
Yet, sure thou shall be humbled, and brought low,
Even then, when least thou fear it will be so.
Till thou repent, all Preparations made
For thy Defense, or, others to invade,
Shall be in vain; and still the greater cost
Thou do bestow, the Honor thereby lost
Shall be the greater; and thy wasting strength
Bring on thee a Consumption at the length.
The Treaties which for Peace or Profit be,
Shall neither Peace nor Profit bring to thee.
For, if Endeavors prosper for a while,
GOD will permit it only to beguile
With foolish hopes, alluring them to run
Those courses which will bring new mischiefs on:
Yea, thy prevailings will but fuel be
To feed the folly which bewitches thee;
And, make against thee, those the more enraged,
Who shall for thy Corrections be engaged.
What heretofore, by GOD, has threatened bin
Against a wicked Natiou for their sin,
Shall seize on thee; his hand shall be for ill
Upon each little, and high raised Hill:
Thy lofty Cedars, and thy sturdy Oaks,
Shall feel the fury of his thunder-stroaks
Upon thy Fleet's, thy Havens and thy Ports;
Upon thine Armies, and thy strong-wall'd Forts,
Upon thy Pleasures and Commodities,
Upon thy Handicrafts and Merchandise,
Upon the Fruits and Cattle in thy Fields,
On what the air, the earth or water yields:
On Prince and people, on both weak and strong,
On Priest and Prophet, on both old and young:
Yea, on each Person, Place, and every thing,
His just deserved Judgments, GOD will bring.
What thou have hoped for, he frustrate shall,
And make that which thou fear, on thee to fall.
This pleasant Land wherein how plenty grows,
And wherein Milk and Honey overflows,
Shall for thy peoples wickedness, be made
As barren as the Soil which never had
Such blessings in it. GOD shall drive away
The Flocks of Fowls, and Sholes of Fish that play
Within thy waters now; and for the store
Whereof, thy Neighbors would have praised him more:
The Rivers which have made thy Valleys rich,
To thee shall be like streams of burning pitch:
Thy dust as Brimstone, thy Fields hard and dry
Like Iron, and the Firmament on high,
Like Brass, affording neither showers nor dew
In season, wasted blessing to renew.
A leanness Shall thy fatness quite devour;
Thy wheat shall yield thee bran instead of flowr:
Thou shall, when Harvest comes, reap the thorn,
Or weeds and thistles where thou look for corn.
Robbed shall thy Groves be of their pleasant shadows,
And of their grass, thy fertile flowery Meadows.
Sheep on thy Downs, or Shepherds on the Green,
Shall then be few, and not so often seen.
Thy Garden-Walks, and many a pleasant plot,
Shall be like places men inhabit not,
Thy Villages which now well peopled are,
Shall stand as if no dwellers in them were.
Thy Cities and thy Palaces, wherein
Most neatness and magnificence has bin,
Shall heaps of Rubbish be; and (as in those
Demolisht Abbeys, wherein Daws and Crows
Now make their Nests) the bramble and the nettle,
Shall in the Halls and Parlours root and settle.
Thy Princely houses, and the Streets and Courts
Now filled with men of all degrees and sorts,
Shall in them few Inhabitants retain,
Except a Fisherman, or Countrey-swain;
Who, of thy pride and glory, when they see
Such marks, with wonderment surpised shall be,
As often they are, who deep foundations find,
Of Towns and Cities perished out of mind.
The places where much people meetings had,
Shall Vermine-holes, and Dens for beasts be made,
Or haunts for Sprights, which do in loanly rooms
Affright the passenger who thither comes.
Instead of mirth and laughter lamentation
Shall there be heard; abhorred desolation
Instead of Company, and where men heard
Sweet Melody, they shall be made affear'd
With hideous cries, and howlings of despair;
Yea, then thy Climate, and well temp'red air
Shall lose their wholsomness for thy offenses;
Breed here infectious Fevers, Pestilences,
And all diseases. They who up were trained
In ease, and with soft pleasures entertained,
Leaving their idle games, and wanton dances,
Shall practice how, to handle Guns and Lances,
And be compelled from the dear embraces
Of friends, to end their lives in unknown places.
Or, thy face with their own blood to defile,
In hope to save thee and themselves from spoil.
Thy Beauteous women (whose pride is now more:
Then theirs, whom Esaias mentioned heretofore)
Shall in the stead of paintings, costly scents,
Or glittering Gems, and curious Ornaments,
Wear foul deformities upon their faces;
And robbed of all their sweet and tempting graces,
Feel stinks, diseases, wants, and all such things,
As loathing, to a wanton Lover brings.
Thy GOD, shall for thy multiplied Vices
Scourge thee with Scorpions and with Cockatrices,
Whose tails with such envenomed stings are armed,
As neither can be plucked out, nor charmed.
Thou shall not be sufficed, when thou art fed;
Nor suffer only scarcity of bread
Corporeal, but want likewise of that
Whereof each faithful soul desires to eat.
That curse of ravenous Beasts which GOD has said
Upon a wicked Nation shall be laid,
He will inflict on thee, for although here
No Tigers, Lions, Wolves or Bears now are,
To Beastly-minded men thou shall be made
A prey, which will be (if not worse) as bad.
Instead of Lions, Tyrants thou shall breed,
Who nor of Conscience, nor of Law take heed;
But, on the weak man's portion lay their paws,
And make their pleasure to become their Laws.
Instead of Tigers, men of no compassion
(A furious and a wilful generation)
Shall fill thy Borders. Thieves and Outlaws vile,
Shall haunt thy Ways, and hunt the Woods for spoil.
A subtle, false, dissembling, cheating crew,
(Who will with fraudful coz'nages pursue
The simple sort) shall here increase their breed,
And in their craftiness the Fox exceed.
That Hoggish Herd which always nozling are
In filth and dirt, (from whence they seldom rear
Their grunting snouts, to fix an eye on Heaven,
To look on him from whom good things are given)
Even, Swinish livers, having a desire
To feed on draff, to wallow in the mire,
To drink in puddles, rather then sweet springs,
To tread on, and pollute the precious't things,
Will more destructive be unto thy Fields,
Then all the wild-Boars that the Desert yields.
Whilst thou continuest-in thy sins, thou art
Like Egypt, and the hardness of thy heart
Will at the last, bring down upon thee all
Those Plagues, which long since did on Egypt fall:
Blood, Frogs and Lice, great swarms of stinging Flies;
The infectious Murrain whereof Cattle dies;
Biles, Scabs and Blains, cold Hail, hot Thunder-storms,
The Locust, and the fruit-devouring Worms;
Gross Darkness, and the Death of them that be
Thy darlings: All these Plagues will seize on thee,
According as the Letter does implie,
Or, as they Mystically signify.
Thy Rivers shall be turned into blood;
Thy Fountains which were savoury and good,
Grow nasty; and shall in thy Nostrils stink;
Thy Children shall but little eat or drink,
Until a portion of their blood it cost,
Or, every drop in hazard to be lost.
Most loathsome Froggs, that is, men of impure
Of base condition, of birth as obscure
As Frogs that are in Fens and Ditches bred,
Shall with a Clownish rudeness overspread
Each pleasant place, thy fairest rooms possess,
And make unwholesome by their sluttishness,
Thy Kneading-troughs, thy Ovens and thy Meat,
Whereof thy Children most desire to eat:
Yea, this Brood shall presume to croak and sing
Within the Privy-Chambers of thy King;
There exercising their harsh-sounding throats,
With ill-composed and unpleasing notes,
To wit, Vain boasts, reviling's, ribaldries,
Lies, curses, and ungodly blasphemies.
The Land shall breed a loathsome Generation,
Unworthy either of the Reputation.
Or Name of men; for they as Lice shall feed
Upon that Body whence they did proceed.
Here shall moreover, diverse baneful Flies
Ingend'red be in thy prosperities.
The Flesh-flye shall thy pamp'red flesh corrupt;
Musketoes, honest Lab'rers interrupt;
The lazy and unprofitable Drones,
The Wasps, the Hornet, and such angry ones
As do them represent, whose buzzing tongues,
And stings are active to their neighbors wrongs:
The Butterflies will vex thee too; even they
Who do in idle flutterings wast away
Their precious time, and their Estates consume
On gaudy Clothes, till beggars they become.
As Beasts destroyed by the Murrain be,
So they who are of Beastly life in thee,
By lewd example shall infect each other,
And, in their foul diseases rot together.
Men shall grow over-hot, or over-cold,
And very few an equal temper hold;
But like tempestuous Exhalations, will
Thy Borders with a thousand mischiefs fill.
The Locust also, and the Palmer-worms
Shall prey on what escapes from the Storms;
Even those destructive Locusts too, which from
The bottomless infernal pit did come.
Then shall a darkness follow, much more black
Then when the Sun and Moonlight thou do lack;
For grossest ignorance o'reshadowing all,
Shall with so thick a Fog upon thee fall,
That thou a blockish Nation wilt be made:
Still stumbling on in a deluding shade;
Distrusting Friends, the way to safety showing,
Most trusting Foes, who labor thy undoing;
And, shall be daily vexed with doubts and fears,
Like him that Outcries in dark places hears.
Yet, then his hand, GOD shall not from the turn,
Till he has also smote thine Eldest Son;
That is, until he has removed quite
Those in whom now thou take most delight;
And filled every house throughout the Nation,
With Deaths unlooked for, and lamentation.
Such will be thy confusions, and thy shame,
That when the neighboring Kingdoms hear the same,
Their ears will tingle; for when that hour comes
In which GOD shall inflict deserved Dooms,
It will be then a day of gloominess,
Sad, dreadful, and exceeding comfortless;
For then will thy beloved vanities,
Thy Gold and Silver Idol-Deities,
With all those Reeds on which thou have depended,
Deceive thy trust, and leave thee unbefriended.
Thy Kings, thy Priests and Prophets then shall mourn,
And peradventure, formally return
To him who would have saved them; but, they
Who will not hearken to him whilst they may,
Shall cry unheeded; for, he will despise
Their vows, their prayers, and their sacrifice.
A Sea of troubles will thy hopes up swallow,
As wave on wave, Plague upon Plague shall follow;
And every thing that was a blessing to thee,
Shall to a Curse be turned, which may undo thee.
Thy King, who as a Father should have been,
And by whom Peace should be preserved in
Thy Sea-girt limits, shall not much befriend thee,
Nor then in thy professed Faith defend thee.
Thou haft at present, goodly hopes of him
Who lately did put on thy Diadem;
But know, that until thou reformed art,
Thou shall in his Deservings have no part:
His Princely Virtues to his own avail
May prove; but they to profit thee shall fail.
His Clemency shall seem to thee severe,
His greatest favors injuries appear;
And when thy sins are fully ripe in thee,
Thy King and People both alike shall be.
Thou shall have Babes to be thy Kings; yea worse,
Those Tyrants who by cruelty and force,
Of all their ancient Liberties will quite
Bereave their Subjects. They shall then delight
In their oppressing them; yet they who are
By them enslaved, shall murmur, and not dare
To stir against them. By degrees they shall
Deprive them of their Privileges all,
And force them (as in other Lands this day)
For their own meat, and their own drink to pay.
-- To such intents
Their Nobles will become their Instruments;
For men reputed of the noblest Races,
Will be exposed gradatim to disgraces,
Dispoil'd of power; and in their stead arise
A Brood advanced by Impieties,
By flat'ry, and by brib'ry, and by that
Which men of noble principles do hate.
Without desert (from beggarly possessions,
And stemmes obscure) they shall by their ambitions
Mount Seats of Justice, and those Titles wear
Which honored most in those Dominions are.
And having gained these heights hope to make strong
Oppressive Grandeur, by increasing wrong.
For, themselves, these will unto those unite,
Who to such Dignities pretend most right;
(With no less ill-deserving) and by such,
Destruction will be hastened forward much:
For these will Kings abuse, with tales and lies,
With feigned love, and servile flatteries;
Persuading them, that they may justly make
Their Will their Law, and at their pleasure take
(As warranted by their Prerogatives)
Their Subjects goods, their persons and their lives;
And instrumental these will then become,
In practicing to raise by some and some,
Their Monarchies to Tyrannies; yea, shall
Abuse Religion, Honesty, and all:
And shall to compass their Designs, devise
What ever may effect them, Truth or Lies:
Those grave deportments which do best befit
The Majesty of States, they shall omit:
Fawn or dissemble, threaten, rail or storm,
When they pretend Abuses to reform:
And, in those High Courts wherein sober, grave
Admonishments or Censures men should have
If they offend; they shall be taunted there,
Or scoft, or jeered, though innocent they are:
For in those times (which nearer are then some
Do yet believe) such Rhetoric will come
In practice; and Law, Equity and Reason,
For their defense be pleaded out of season.
Folly will then seem Wisdom, and go nigh
To bring contempt on all Authority.
The Council Table shall a snare be made;
They against whom no just complaints they had,
At first Convention shall be urged to say
Such words, perhaps, ere they depart away,
As will expose their Prudence unto blame,
And make them guilty seem, who guiltless came.
All that which from the People they can tear,
Exact or borrow, shall be (as it were)
A lawful Prize, and taken from a Foe;
Few shall make conscience what they say or do,
Injurious to another, so it may
Fulfill their Lustings for the present day.
But to accomplish it, they will endeavor,
Although they know it will undo for ever
Their own Posterity, and still persist
In what will ruin their self-Interest.
This, will by darkning their Intelligence,
Bring them to such a Reprobated sense,
And blind them so, that when an Ax shall be
Seen hewing at the Root of their own tree
By their own handy strokes, they shall not grieve
For their approaching downfall; or believe
Their fall approaching (to assume that heed
Which may prevent it) till they fall indeed.
Thy Princes, BRITAN, in those days will be
Like roaring Lions, making prey of thee.
GOD shall deliver thee into their hands,
And they shall act their pleasure in these Lands.
Thy Kings, as now thou wallowest in excess;
Shall take delight in Drink and Wantonness.
They, who reputed are thy Noble ones,
Shall to the very marrow gnaw thy bones.
Thy Lawyers wilfully pervert thy Laws;
They to the ruin of the Common cause,
Shall misinterpret them, in hope of Grace
From them, who may dispoile them of their place.
That, whereunto they are obliged both
By their professed Calling, and their Oath,
They shall to put in execution fear,
And leave them helpless, who oppressed are.
Thy Prelates in the public spoils will share.
Thy Priests, in manners, as profane appear
As the prophanest; and their Prophesies
And Preachings, mixed with Heresies and Lies.
The truths they speak, shall spoken be in vain;
So little knowledge shall with them remain,
That they shall cause the means of Saving-grace
To be removed unto another place.
Mark, BRITAN, what I have yet more to say,
And do not slightly pass my words away;
But be assured, that when GOD begins
To bring those Judgments on thee for thy sins,
Which do portend a total overthrow,
Thy Prophets and thy Priests will slily sow
The seeds of that dissension and sedition,
Which time will ripen for thy sad perdition.
They who in former times were of thy Peace
The blessed Instruments, will then increase
Thy sorrows; and as when of old the Jews
Their truth-presaging Prophets did abuse,
GOD suffered Impostors in his Name
To preach those falsehoods which at last became
To them destructive: So, if thou go on
To make a scorn (as thou have often done)
Of those who seek thy welfare, he will send
False Prophets, who thy ruin shall intend;
Say nothing but what thou would have them say,
To lull thee fast asleep in thine own way.
If any brain-sick-fellow (whom the Devil
Inspireth) shall to thee intend what is evil,
And (heeding what thou art inclined unto)
Persuades to that which may at last undo
Both Prince and People; thou shall like and follow
H^s Counsels; thou that covered hook shall swallow
Which will destroy both; and thine ignorance
For those disservices, will him advance:
Whereas, if he who truly seeks thy Weal,
Inspired with truth, and with a sober Zeal,
Shall tell thee what concerns thy real good,
That Messenger shall stiffly be withstood;
That Seer shall be charged not to see;
His Message shall displease, and slighted be;
Instead of good respect, he shall be sure
A Prison, or worse usage to endure;
To death, perhaps, condemned with disgrace
Among disturbers of the Common-Peace.
But not unless the Priests thereto consent;
For, in those days but few men innocent
Shall suffer in that mode by ought wherein
Thy Clergy has not some way active been.
If ever in thy Fields (which GOD forbid)
The blood of thine own Children shall be shed
By Civil Discord, they shall blow the flame,
Which will increase thy sorrow, and thy shame.
And thus it shall be kindled, when the times
Are nigh at worst, and thy loud-crying Crimes
Almost full ripe, the Devil shall begin
To bring strange Crotchets and Opinions in
Among thy Teachers, which will breed disunion,
And interrupt the visible Communion
Of thy established Churches. In the steed
Of zealous Pastors, who their Flocks did feed,
There shall arise within thee, by degrees,
A Clergy, that will more desire to fleeze
Then feed their Flocks. A Clergy it shall be
Divided in it self; and they shall thee
Divide among them into several Factions,
Which will both rend, and fill thee with distractions.
All of those, in appearance, will pretend
GOD's glory, and to have one pious end;
But under color of sincere Devotion,
Their chief aim will be temporal promotion;
Which, will among themselves Dissentions make,
Wherein all sorts of people shall partake,
As to the Persons, or the Cause they stand
Inclined, through every quarter of the Land:
One part of these, will for Preferment strive,
By raising up the King's Prerogative
Above it self: They shall persuade Him to
More then by Law or Conscience he may do;
And say, GOD warrants it: His Righteous Laws
They shall pervert, to justify their Cause.
With blushless impudency, they shall dare
Ascribe to Monarchs, things which proper are
To none but Christ: and mix their flatteries
With such like Attributes and Blasphemies,
As Heathens did, to make their Kings believe,
That whomsoever they oppress and grieve,
They do no wrong; and that one though oppressed
Should seek by their own Laws to be redressed.
Such Counsel shall thy foolish Kings provoke
To cast upon thee Rhehoboam's yoke;
And they, not caring, or not taking heed,
How ill, that misadvised King did speed;
Shall multiply the causes of distraction!
And then, shall of those Priests, the other Faction
Bestir themselves. They will in outward shows,
Those whom I last have mentioned, oppose;
But, in their aims agree, with lowly zeal,
An envious pride of heart, they shall conceal.
And, as the former to the King will teach
Mere Tyranny; so shall the other preach
Rebellion to the People; and then strain
The Word of God, Sedition to maintain.
Oh! therefore be thou watchful; and when here
Those Lambs with Dragons Voices, do appear;
Repent thy sins, or take it for a token
That such a Bulwark of thy Peace is broken,
As if it be not soon repaired, all
The grandeur of thy Glory down will fall.
Beware then of those Prophets who will strive
Betwixt thy Prince and People to contrive
A Breach; and what event soever come,
Thy due Allegiance never start thou from.
For (their Oppressions though we may withstand
By pleading Laws or Customs) not a hand
Must move against him, but the hand of GOD,
Who makes the King a Bulwark, or a Rod,
As pleases him. Oh take therefore good heed
Ye Subjects, and ye Kings, what may succeed
By those Impostors, of the last, beware
Ye Subjects, for their Counsels wicked are;
And, though they promise Liberty and Peace,
Your Thraldom and your troubles they increase.
Shun oh ye Kings, the first; for they advise
What will your Crowns and Honors prejudice.
When you suppose their Prophesies befriend you,
They shall but unto Ramoth Gillead send you,
Where you shall perish; and poor Micha's word,
Though disesteem'd, more safety will afford.
This Author has been censured, as having deviated from his Principle
expressed in the last foregoing Caveat, when (upon their Command) he took up
Arms with the Long-Parliament: But, he declared by the Motto in his Cornet, Pro
lege, Rege grege, that he purposed nothing contrary thereunto, or against the
King; and he is also sufficiently vindicated from that aspersion, by what he
long since published to justify both his actings and intentions under that
Power, which was called and authorized both by King and people, to regulate and
settle their joint and distinct Interests.

After that, and the rest of the foregoing Precautions and Predictions, the
said Author having considered this Nation, and how it had paralleled the Jews
heretofore, he proceeded to declare what would follow thereupon, if they
paralleled them also in their final obstinacy, fol. 269. p. 2.

What here is mentioned, if thou shall heed*
Oh BRITAN, in those times that will succeed,
It may prevent much loss, and make thee shun
Those mischiefs, whereby Kingdoms are undone.
But, to thy other sins, if thou shall add
Rebellion, as false Prophets will persuade
When that time comes, wherein thou likewise shall
In thy profession, as to Godward, halt,
Then will thy King and People scourge each other,
For their offenses, till both fall together,
By weakening of their Power, and making way
To their ends, who expect that fatal day.
Then shall disorder every where abound,
Justice or Piety be rarely found
Each man shall to his neighbor be a thorn,
By whom he shall be either scratcht or torn.
Thy Princes will to little condescend,
Save for accomplishing their own self-end,
Either in multiplying of their Treasures,
Or satiating of their fleshly pleasures.
Few Causes will without a bribe be tri'de,
Few Friends will in each other dare confide.
The Parents and their Children shall despise,
Hate or neglect each other. She that lies
Within her Husbands bosom, shall betray him;
They who the People should protect, shall slay them.
Old Age shall honored be by few or none;
The Poor shall by the rich be trod upon;
Such Insolences, almost, every where,
Shall acted be, that good and bad shall fear
In thee to dwell; and wise men to assume
The Magistracy, when that time is come,
GOD, shall then call, and whistle from afar
Those hither, who the most malicious are
Of all thine Adversaries; they shall from
Their dwellings, like a whirlwind, on thee come;
Sharp shall their Arrows be, and strong their Bow:
To thee their faces will as dreadful show,
As roaring Lions: They on thee like thunder
Shall furiously break in, and tread thee under
Their Iron feet. They shall devour thy bread,
And with thy Flocks both clothed be, and fed.
Their Children they shall carry from their own,
To Countries which their Fathers have not known:
And thither shall such mischiefs them pursue,
That they who seek the Pit-fall to eschew,
Shall in a snare be taken: them who shall
Escape the Sword, a Serpent in the wall
Shall sting to death; and tho they have the hap
To shun a hundred Plagues, they shall not escape;
But with new dangers be still chas't about,
Until they shall be wholly rooted out,
The Plowman shall be then afraid to fow;
Artificers their labor shall forgo.
The Merchant-man shall cross the Seas no more,
Except to fly hence to another shore.
The stoutest heart shall fear; the wisest then
Shall know themselves to be but foolish men;
And they who built and planted by oppression,
Shall leave their gettings to their Foes possession:
And yet GOD will chastise thee seven times more
With seven times greater Plagues then heretofore
For thy Allies their Friendship shall withdraw;
They, who of thy Grandeur stood in aw,
Shall say in scorn, Is this the Valiant Nation
Which had throughout the World sush Reputation
By Victories on Land? Alas! are these
The men, who were once Master of the Seas,
And grew so powerful? yea, that petty Nation
Which seemed scarce worthy of thine indignation,
Shall slight thee too, and all thy former fame
Will be forgot, or mentioned to thy shame.
Mark how GOD's Plagues were doubled on the Jews
When they his mild corrections did abuse.
Mark what at last upon their Land was sent,
And look thou for the self-same punishment,
Lest he in anger unto us protest,
That we shall never come into his rest.
For we have followed them in all their sin;
Such, and so many have our Warnings been;
And, if GOD still prolong not his compassion,
To us belong the self-same Desolation.
Then, woe shall be to them that heretofore
By joining house to house, expeld the po're;
And Field have unto Field incorporated,
Till Villages were nigh depolulated.
For, desolate their dwellings will be made,
The Lord shall in their bowels sheath his blade;
And, they who have by their oppressive wiles
Erected Palaces, and costly piles,
Shall see the stones and timbers in the wall
Arise against them, and for vengeance call.
Then woe shall be to them that early rise
To eat and drink, to play and wantonni^^,
Still adding sin to sin: They the distress
Shall feel of hunger, thirst and nakedness;
And be the servile slaves of them that are
Their Foes, as to their lusts they captives were.
Then woe to them who darkness more have loved
Then light, and wholesome counsel disapproved:
For, they shall wander in a crooked path
Which neither light, nor end, nor comfort has.
Then, woe to them who have corrupted bin,
To justify the wicked in their sin,
Or, for a bribe the Righteous to condemn:
For, as the Chaff, a Wind shall scatter them;
Their bodies on the Dunghill shall be cast,
Their finest flow're be dust, their substance wast,
And all the gaudy Titles they have worn,
Shall but augment their sorrow, shame and scorn.
Then woe to them, who (when they were afraid
Of mischiefs threatened) sought unlawful aid;
Or, setting GOD's protection quite aside,
On their own strength and wisdom have reli'de.
For, he their foolish hopes will bring to naught,
Till all they fear, shall be upon them brought;
And, all their wit and strength shall not suffice
To heave that burden off, which on them lies.
Because fore-warnings they do neither heed
Or mind, till GOD to execution does proceed;
And of his long-forbearance careless are,
Till in consuming fire he shall appear.
Yet we still set far off the evil day,
In dull security we pass away
Our precious time, and with vain hopes and toys
Build up a trust which every puff destroys:
And therefore still when healing is expected,
New and unlooked for troubles are effected.
We wished for Parliaments, and them we made
Our GOD; for all the hopes that many had,
The mischiefs which we feared to prevent,
Was by the wisdom of a Parliament.
Well, Parliaments we had, and what in being
Succeeded has, but greater disagreeing,
With greater Grievances then heretofore?
And reason good; for we depended more
On second causes, then on him who sends
What to our evil, or well-being tends.
Know then, that should our Parliaments agree
According to our wish; should our Kings be
So gracious, as to condescend to all
Which to the Public Weal propose they shall:
Even that Agreement, till our sins we leave,
Shall make us but secure, and help to weave
A Snare, by whose fine threads we shall be caught,
Before we see the mischiefs thereby wrought;
Whilst for self-Interests we chiefly seek,
By Parliaments, the King shall do the like;
Yea, till in mutual Aides we can agree,
And, our endeavourings unfeigned be,
In laboring for a Christian Reformation,
Each meeting shall beget a new vexation.
In the 191 folio, and in many following leaves, the Prevarications of persons
in several other Callings* having been mentioned, the Author added this, and
much more, in relation to the Clergy.

Nor came the Priests and Prophets much behind
The worst of these, but pass them in some kind;
For, though a learned Clergy now thou have,
And knowledge is here lately much encreast;
Though' likewise, I believe thou have in thee
Some Pastors, from a just reproof as free
As any Nation has; yet thou have more
Prevaricators now, then heretofore.
A heap of Teachers entertained thou have,
Resembling empty vapors, or a blast
That breaths no comfort. What GOD never meant
They preach for Truth, and run e're they are sent.
The Peoples wounds they salve with pleasing speech;
When there is no peace at all, of peace they preach;
Or, like Dumb Dogs consume their time in sleep,
And some so look, that they affright the sheep.
Like hungry Curres they always gormundize,
Yet never can their appetite suffize.
In bribing, and in hunting for Promotion
More is their zeal, and much more their Devotion,
Then to discharge their Duty. They delight
In flat'ries, and the fawningst Parasite
In all the Courts of Europe, cannot prate
More heath'nishly, or more insinuate
Then some of these, etc. --
There is no Avarice that theirs exceeds;
No Malice that a Mischief sooner breeds.
No Pride so surly as the Clergy-pride,
Except among the Beggars when they cri'de.
They, who a few years past would half have broke
Their Kindred to have purchased them a Cloak,
And in poor threadbare Cassocks came to preach
Beneath an Vnder-Curate, and to teach
The Children of a Farmer for their meat,
And, scarcely worthy seemed so much to get:
Even some of these have so well acted out*
Their parts, of seeming honestly-devout;
And have so quaintly humoured and pleased
The present times, that they at last have seized
On what they aimed at, and now over-pe're
Their Heads, by whom they first advanced were.
And if you mark, how proudly now they bear
Their lofty heads, how insolent they are;
How barb'rously ungrateful unto those
By whom they from the Dunghill first arose;
How they at least neglect, if not contemn
Their old Friends, and betwixt themselves and them,
What distances they set; unto their Kin
How harsh, and how ill-natured they have been,
How peevish they are grown, and how unquiet;
How choice in their Attendance, and their Diet;
If it were well observed with what strain
Of Pride and Loftiness they entertain
Their Brethren of the Clergy, when they are
By their own Officers called to appear
Before their Lordships; with what Pope-like phrase
They seek to terrify, and to amaze
Their humble Suppliants; how on those they play,
Who their Superiors were the other day.
Were these things heeded, with some passages,
Which name I could, as worthy heed as these:
A man would hardly think that these had been
Those Priests whom they a while before had seen
So beggarly, and so exposed to scorn,
But, that they had at least been Prelates born,
Few could have else thought that these men are they
Who lately did so bitterly inveigh
Against that Pride Episcopal, etc.
O Lord! awaken those, I humbly pray,
Whom Pride and Vanity has led away.
And, oh ye House of Levi! warning take ye,
Lest GOD, for times to come, examples make ye;
As he that Clergy an example made,
Whose monstrous Pride, the Age foregoing had
So great a fall. The Priests and Prophets sin
Was signal in the bringing those Plagues in
Which overwhelmed the Jewish Commonweal:
And, if what is threatened GOD shall not repeal,
Your sins will be the means to hasten hither
That Vengeance which will ruin all together, etc.
Excuse me worthy Prelates, etc. By these last words, whereby the Author begins
to plead an excuse for his sharp Reproofs, it appears he at that time thought
not Prelacy to have produced such evil Consequents as he now does; for he did
not then (nor now) conceive that Episcopacy gives to the Ministers of the
Gospel a precedence of Dignity before their fellow-Commissioners, but a
pre-eminence of Order only: And of that Judgment he believes those Bishops to
have been, who underwent Martyrdom for Conscience sake, and owned the title of
a Prelate in no other sense then he intended it, who thinks the Office of a
Bishop to be a Divine Institution, being regulated, and the persons qualified
according to St. Paul's Character, 1 Timothy 3. This Precaution being added, the
Abreviation of his Remembrances thus goes on.

Believe it, BRITAN, howsoever some
(Who should forewarn thee of what is to come)
Endeavor to persuade thee that thou have
A hopeful time, and that the worst is past;
I will be bold to tell thee thou have nigh
Out-worn GOD's patience by impiety.
But, what am I, that me thou should believe,
And unto my Predictions credit give?
It may be, this adulterous generation,
Expects fore-tokens of their Desolation;
And therefore, I will give them signs of that
Which they are now almost arrived at:
Not Signs so dubious as were some of old,
Whereby the Jews Destruction was foretold;
But Signs as evident as are the day,
For what the Prophets heretofore did say,
Jerusalem's destruction did foreshew,
They spoke to every State that should ensue.
And that they naught of her, or to her spoke,
For hers alone, but also for thy sake.
In the 269 th folio of the Remembrancer, and in the Eight pages next following
it, are Ten Signs recorded, grounded upon the holy Prophets, as presignifying
the desolation of those Kingdoms and Republics, which should parallel the
Jewesh Prevarications; to the perusal whereof, the Reader is referred, to
shorten this Collection, and only the last of these Ten Signs is here inserted.

The last black Sight that I will now repeat,
Which does to Kingdoms desolation threat,
Is when the hand of GOD Almighty brings
A People unto bondage to their Kings.
I say, when their own King shall take delight,
Those whom he should protect, to rob and smite.
When they who feed the Flock, the sheep shall kill,
Devour them, and suppose they do not ill.
When th^is, h Britan, shall befall to thee,
An evident Prognostic it will be
Of GOD's displeasure; and a certain token
Thou by a Foreign Power shall be broken,
Or, by thine own divided strength at home,
Which will the more destructive Plague become.
GOD will (unless we shall repent) perchance,
In time to come, a Shepherd here advance,
Who shall not plead for what his young men say
Is his; but, take the same perforce away.
An Idol-shepherd, who shall neither care
To find or seek out those who straying are;
Nor feed the Lambs, nor cure what has a wound,
Or cherish those who firm to him are found:
But take the Fatlings, rob them of their fleeces;
Devour their flesh, and break their bones in pieces.
I might more Signs then these, enumerate,
To show GOD's patience is nigh out of date.
But, these are Signs enough, and so apparent,
That twenty more will give no better warrant
Of what will come; yet, if these false appear;
That Is one Sign more of what is drawing near.
Be watchful therefore, whilst it is to day,
And let no good occasion slip away.
Now rent your hearts, ye Britans, wash and rinse them
From all corruptions, from all evil cleanse them:
Go offer up the pleasing Sacrifice
Of Righteousness: From folly turn your eyes;
Seek Peace, and follow it with strict pursuit,
Relieve the needy, Justice execute;
Refresh the weary, right the fatherless,
The strangers and the widows wants redress.
Give praise to GOD for all; with lowly faith
On him depend; mind what the Spirit says.
Remember what a price your Ransom cost,
And now redeem the time that has been lost.
It was feigned, That a Shepherd said of what had misbefallen to him, Saepe
nobis malum hoc praedixit ab Ilice Cornix,

A Raven from a Holly tree
Did often presage this ill to me.
And perhaps, upon the perusal of this Review, this Author will be likened to
those Ravens, which presage nothing but mischief; for, some have said already,
That he has been a troubler of the people; and as Ahab said Micah did of him,
That he predicted no good to this Nation; but it is apparently false; for he
has conditionally presaged as well Mercies as Judgments, intermixing
Threatenings and Promises fore-declared by his Prophets, to prevent what is
pronounced against wilful Transgressors; seasoning all his Predictions with
many Precautions and Exhortations, to beget and confirm true Faith and
Penitence; such as these next following.

Return, return thou, oh backsliding Nation,
And let thy tears prevent thy desolation.
As yet thou may return; for GOD's embrace
To thee is open, if thou shall have grace
To give it meeting. Thy repentance may
Prevent the future Mischiefs (which this day
Are threatened) if so be thou shall in time
According to thy power comply with him.
For, thereupon his dreadful Judgments all
Predicted here, to Mercies change he shall.
I cannot say, it shall excuse thee from
All Chastisements, so that no blow shall come:
But, of thus much thou may assured be,
That every Judgment then, which falls on thee,
Shall be a Mercy, if he shall not stay
What Is threatened, now, the strokes which he does lay
Will fall the lighter, and produce a blessing,
Thy future happiness much more increasing
Then all the great prosperity and rest
Which has long time together been possessed.
Yea, BRITAN, if thou timely shall reform
Thy manners, it will stop the dreadful storm
Appearing now, and they who triumph would
Thy utter desolation to behold,
Will either change their minds, or live to see
The Judgments which descending are on thee,
Removed to them; for, when from sin men cease,
GOD makes their Enemies and them at peace.
Then, thou shall have again in thy possessings,
All inward Graces, and external Blessings;
Thy Herds in every Pasture safe shall feed,
Thy Soil shall plentifully increase thy seed:
Thy Flocks good Shepherds shall not want, or meat;
Clean Provender thy stalled beast shall eat.
There shall be Rivers in thy Dales, and Fountains
Upon the top of thy most barren Mountains,
The Moon shall cast upon thee beams as bright
As did the Sun; and with a sevenfold Light
Thou shall be blessed. He that Raigns in thee
Shall neither jealous of his People be,
Nor they of Him; but he by Righteousness
Shall with the Peoples Love, the Throne possess;
And to each other, both as kind appear
As Loving Parents and good Children are.
Thy Magistrates with wisdom shall proceed
In all things, by them acted or decreed.
As Rivers are to places over dry;
As Harbors when winds blow tempestuo usly;
As shadows when we are oppressed with heat;
As to the hungry stomach, wholesome meat;
So acceptable shall thy Rulers be,
When GOD shall find true Penitence in thee.
Thy Priests shall preach truth only in thy Temples,
And make it fruitful by their good examples.
Christ with his Righteousness shall them array,
And they shall guide thy footsteps in his way;
Thine eyes, which are now blinded, shall be clear;
Thine ears, at present deafned, then shall hear;
Thy faultring tongue speak timely truth and plain;
Thy heart true understanding shall retain;
Peace will return, no laboring man shall want
A blessing on what he does sow or plant.
Thy poorest people shall at full be fed,
The meek man of no Tyrant stand in dread.
Thou shall have Grace and Knowledge to avoid
What may bereave the Mercies yet enjoi'd.
All promised Blessings, GOD upon thee shall
Confer, and hear thee still when thou do call.
These and many other Mercies, as well as Judgments, were conditionally
predicted in the said Remembrancer, upon several occasions; to the perusal
whereof more at large, the Reader is referred, this being but a Breviate, to
make this Generation the more heedful thereof. To which end here shall be
likewise added a part of what the Author expressed in the conclusion of that
Book, touching his Resolution to discharge his duty, and depend on GOD alone
for protection and supply in all straits whatsoever; which Resolution was
expressed in these words, fol. 284.

So now, though not so fully as I ought,
My Vow is paid, and to conclusion brought
This Work, for which GOD pleased my life to spare,
When Thousands round about me slaughtered were,
And live or dye, I care not, for I see
But little usefulness henceforth of me.
Yet since none knows what GOD will call him to,
I Will not say absolutely what I Will do
Or not do; though I now intend no more
To exercise my Muse as heretofore:
For if this profit not, I think in vain
I shall hereafter touch this string again.
If these do not prevail, I shall suppose
Words are not wanting here so much as Blows;
And that the filthy will be filthy still,
Till they the measure of their sins fulfill;
Or, till GOD shall, to free us from pollution,
Proceed to some unusual execution.
Fol. 285. Page 2.

My outward hopes have not my tongue unloos'd,
Nor can my mouth by outward fears be closed:
What I would do, is done, and I am eased,
And glad, however others will be pleased.
Let them who shall peruse it, praise or laugh,
Revile, or scoff, or threat, or swear, or chafe,
All Is one to me, so I within am still,
Without me, let men make what noise they will.
For, I am sure, though they my flesh confound,
What I desire to save, shall be kept sound;
And, likewise know, that nor the brutish rages
Either of this, or of succeeding Ages,
Shall root this Poem out; but that to all
Ensuing times, the same continue shall,
And be perused in this Land, as long
As here they shall retain the English tongue;
Or whilst there shall be sinners and offenses,
Disorders, Discords, Wars and Pestilences.
And if our gross sins we depart not from,
Before the day of our destruction come,
This Book shall to the times ensuing show
What Crimes they were that wrought our overthrow.
And testify to others, for their learning,
That Vengeance seized us not without fore-warning.
After the Author's insisting upon many other particular circumstances in the
pages next following, to make his Precautions and Predictions the better
heeded, he thus proceeds.

The King has shown me favor. At this hour
I do not know that living man whose Power
Or Person I envy or disaffect;
Or whom, of any malice I suspect
To me or mine: With me all those are friends
Who were at odds; and to obtain my ends
In my Affairs, I never had a day
So probable as now, if I would stay
This Message: And this peradventure shall
My hopes defer, or quite destroy them all.
Yet, is this bluntly told, that you may see
My hopes were greater then my fears could be:
And that it may be known my heart disclaims
All those poor ends at which some think it aims.
Such arguments and words, therefore, as may
Anticipate, I here beforehand say,
Not that I think it possible by them,
To work on those who will this Book contemn,
(For it is not in the power of Argument
Or words, to make the wilful provident)
It lies not in serious protestations
To nullify malicious Combinations,
No, nor in Miraclcs, till GOD shall please,
Who of all hearts does keep the Locks and Keys.
I therefore these Precautions do infert
To evidence the hardness of his heart
Who shall be obstinate; and fore-declare
Those things that shall be done, ere done they were,
That men may know, when they are come to pass,
Naught did succeed but what expected was;
And that the better working this may have
On those who shall GOD's Messages receive
By this Remembrancer: for he has sent it,
Though I who am unworthy, do present it.
This misadvisedly composed I not,
Nor was it by a Miracle begot;
To fit me for this purpose, I have thrice
Imprisonment endured, Close Prison twice:
Much trouble on my first Essays ensued
Through want and scandals, not a few I shrewd;
And being guarded by GOD's Providence,
Was lately carried through the Pestilence;
Both saw and felt what Nature does abhor,
To harden me, and to prepare me for
This Message. Therefore they who dream they shall
With frowning looks, or big words me appale,
Must look more grim then Death, more ugly far
Then Vizards or the Devils Pictures are;
Breath stronger poison then a Plague-fill'd Grave;
And stamp, and roar, and tear, and rage, and rave
More dreadfully, and louder then a man
Infected with six Pestilences can:
Else, I to play with terrors being born,
Shall slight them, and laugh all their rage to scorn:
Yet, I am naturally (and I do
Ingenuously confess it) subject to
Such fears and passions as make better men
To startle from their duties now and then.
By what is done, may troubles come upon me,
But not performing it, had quite undone me;
Since I deterred by what might befall me,
Had that neglected, whereto GOD did call me:
For, of his calling me the means and ways
Whereby he did my weakness thereto raise,
Unquestionable Evidences give;
And they who do not, yet the same believe,
Will think so too, perhaps, when they shall see
Themselves assaulted with new Plagues to be.
This I believing, and considering
What hazard that neglect therewith might bring,
And what assurances I did possess,
I had contracted a grand guiltiness
By disobeying; and more had therein
Transgressed against God, then by a sin
Against the State, though such Truths uttered were
As they shall most displeasing be to hear.
What ever others think, this is my fear,
And to my Soul so terrible a thing,
The wilful disobeying that great King
Appears to me, that I should never sleep
In peace again, if silence I should keep:
Now therefore, neither all the Royal Graces
Of Kings, nor Gifts, nor honorable places
Shall stop my mouth; nor will I smother this,
Though twenty Kings had sworn to make me kiss
The Gallows for it, lest my Conscience should
Torment me more then all men living could:
Yea, though this did proceed from Ignorance
Or Fancy, as it will be thought perchance;
Yet, since that Fancy may present to me
As hideous frights as things that real be;
I Will rather hazard twenty deaths to dye,
Then to be tortured by my Fantasy;
For, I had rather in a Dungeon dwell
Five years, then in my soul to feel a Hell
Five minutes; and whilst GOD and I are Friends,
I shall not care how many this offends.
Now because this Remembrancer was long ago imprinted, and is not easy to be
gotten, the Contents of every Canto, as they were at first published, are here
inserted, that the general scope thereof may be known to them who desire it.

The Contents of the first Canto.
OUr Author first with GOD begins,
Describes his anger for our sins;
Of all his Judgments muster makes;
Declares how Mercy undertakes
The pleading of this Kingdoms Cause,
To bring GOD's wrath unto a pause;
And (for the common Reader) suites
High things, with lowly Attributes.
Then steps into a praiseful strain
Of Charles His new-beginning Reign;
Emplores, that well succed it may,
And for His Weal makes Mercy pray.
He Justice also introduces,
Complaining on our gross abuses;
Who proves so our sinful Nation
To merit utter Desolation,
That all GODs Plagues had us enclosed,
If Mercy had not interposed.
But, after pleading of the Case
With Justice, Mercy does embrace;
Who (that our sins may punished be)
To send the Pestilence agree;
Their other Plagues a while suspending,
To prove how that will work amending.
The Contents of the Second Canto.
Our Muse defends her lowly style,
And (having flown aside a while)
Tells how the Plague first entered here,
What Means to stay it practiced were.
Some vulgar Tenants are disputed,
Some rectified, some refuted.
She from the Nature and the Cause
Of that Disease, conclusions draws;
Declares how it runs and creeps,
And what uncertain paths it keeps;
How long strict Orders useful stood,
The fruit of Christian Neighborhood:
And many other things betwixt
These mentioned, are intermixed.
She shows (also) means assured,
By which this Mischief may be cured:
How to apply that means; how those
Who use it, should themselves compose:
How violent the Plague did grow;
Who from it might, or might not go:
How much 'twas feared, how men fled;
How ill, in flying, many sped:
And lastly, (as occasion moves)
She grieves, she counsels; and reproves.
The Contents of the Third Canto.
The House of Mourning, which most fear,
(And fly so much) is praised here.
It shows, that outward Joys and Care,
Nor merely good, nor evil are,
But things indifferent, which the wise
Nor over-praise, nor under-prise.
The strife within our Authors breast
About his stay, is next expressed.
Then does it orderly recite
What Reason argued for his flight;
What Faith alleged to reprove
The Motives urging his remove:
What Arms for him she did prepare
To hide the shock of Death and Fear.
What proof she to his Conscience made,
That he a lawful calling had,
In midst of this great Plague to tarry,
By Warrant extraordinary.
What, thereupon he did conclude,
What Joy and Confidence ensu'de:
How much this Favor he does prise
Above Earths glorious'st Vanities:
How he his time desires to spend;
And so this Canto has an end.
The Contents of the Fourth Canto.
Our Muse in the Fourth Canto writes
Of Melancholy thoughts and sights:
What Changes were in every place,
What Ruins in a little space:
How Trades, and how Provisions failed,
How Sorrow thrived, how Death prevailed;
And how in triumph he did ride,
With all his Horrors by his side.
To London then she does declare
How suiting her Afflictions were
To former Sins; what good and bad
Effects this Plague produced had*
What Friendly Champions, and what Foes
For us did fight, or us oppose:
And how the greatest Plague of all
On poor Artificers did fall.
Then from the Fields new grief she takes,
And useful Meditations makes:
Relates how slowly Vengeance came,
How GOD forewarned us of the same:
What other Plagues to this were joined:
And here and there are interlined
Vpbraidings, Warnings, Exhortations,
And pertinent Expostulations.
The Contents of the Fifth Canto.
The Author justifies again
His Method, and his lowly strain.
Next, having formerly made known
The common Fears, he tells his own:
Shows with what thoughts he was diseased,
When first the Plague his Lodging seized:
Of what GOD's Justice him accused:
Upon what doubts or hopes he mused:
On what, and how he did resolve,
And who from Death did him absolve.
The Plagues increase he then expresses;
The Mercies of the LORD confesses:
Emplores that he himself may never
Forget them, but be thankful ever:
Then mounting Contemplations wings,
Ascends to high and useful things.
From thence his Muse is called down,
To make Great Britan's errors known;
Wherein, he does confess a failing;
And (his infirmities bewailing)
Is fitted and resolved anew,
His purposed Message to pursue:
And, having first anticipated,
His Arrant is in part related.
The Contents of the Sixth Canto.
The Poet (weighing well his Warrant)
Goes on with his enjoined Arrant:
Impartially he does relate
This Islands good and bad estate:
What several sins in her have place;
How gross they are, how they increase
He also tells; and then he shows
That nor the Gentiles nor the Jews
Were checked or plagued for any Crimes,
Which are not reigning in these times.
Next that, he boldly does approve
The course in which our Nobles move:
Derides their folly, blames their sin,
And warns what danger they are in.
Our Gentry then he reprehends,
Their foolish humors discommends:
And (having brought them to their sights)
Upon the guilty Clergy lights:
On Lawyers that abuse the Laws;
On Officers, and on the Cause
Of most Corruptions: Last of all
On some Enormities does fall,
Which are in Court and City found;
And runs this Canto there on ground.
The Contents of the Seventh Canto.
First, of himself he somewhat speaks:
Then of the Cities Errors makes
A larger Scrowl; and therewithal
Inserts Abuses general.
He shows, by reason of her sin,
What Misery this Land is in:
What ill success, and what dishonor
Is, for her follies, come upon her
In Foreign parts, and here at home:
How senseless also, she is become.
What several ways against this Land,
GOD has of late stretched out his hand:
And how the blame of what is amiss,
From one to the other shifted is.
By many Symptoms he declares
How sick this Commonweal appears.
Disputes the late Distemper bred
Betwixt the Body and the Head,
And lays the blame where lie it should;
Yet therein proves not over-bold.
Then aims he at some imperfections,
In Burgesses, and their Elections;
And, briefly points at the way
By which our Cure effect we may.
The Contents of the Eighth Canto.
Our Poet having touched again
What frailties in himself remain;
Declares, that many Plagues do steal
As well on Church as Commonweal:
Relates what Crotchets do possess
Some who Righteousness profess:
What noisome Plants, what Tares and Weeds
Are sprung to choke the holy Seeds:
What feigned Zeal and affectation
Has fooled this formal Generation:
And, how from some, great scandal grows,
Who bear the Keys that bind and loose.
Next, he delivers Predictions
Of Plagues, of Sorrows and Affictions,
Which on this Island will descend,
Unless our manners we amend.
And whenever Civil Jarres,
Or mischiefs, by the rage of Wars
Oppress this Realm, his Muse does show
Who shall oceasion it, and how.
Which fearful Judgment to prevent,
He calls upon her to repent;
By ten apparent Signs has shown
GOD's Patience nigh expired is grown.
Then for the Public Weal he prays,
Then for himself; and there he stays.
The Authors Motto, Nec Habeo, nec Careo, nec Curo, Imp. 1618.
THE said Motto, and the Descant thereupon, may perhaps appear to some Readers
a careless, rather then a serious Composure, because expressed in an unusual
and extravagant strain. Nevertheless, it hints many good Principles, which the
Author thought would be best insinuated in that Mode; and he was not therein
deceived; for, it then so well pleased, that about thirty thousand Copies
thereof were imprinted and published within a few months. The Book is so
common, that no more shall be here mentioned, but a few lines out of the
Descant upon the last Word, wherein is a passage relating to an overcurious
Inquisitiveness after Things to come; and wherein is implicitly wrapped up a
Prediction, which may be considerable. The words are these:

I do not care to be inquisitive,
How many months or weeks I have to live:
For, it is unlikely I shall better grow
When I my self to be long-lived, do know,
If I dare act a wickedness, and yet
Know I may dye whilst I am doing it.
Let them whose brains are cracked with that Disease,
Depend upon their Ephimerides,
Search Constellations, and themselves apply
To find the Fate of their Nativity;
I Will seek within me, and if there I find
The Stars, that should illuminate my mind,
Rise far, and seasonably me direct
Through my Life's Progress by a good Aspect;
And, in Conjunction, shall discover there
True Piety, and Honesty sincere
Confirm^d in me (by those Influences
Which Grace to regulate our course dispences)
I Will fear no Fortunes, whatsoever they be,
Nor much care what the Stars portend to me:
For, he who to this state of Grace attains,
Above the power of Constellations reigns,
And gets a Resolution therewithal,
Which fits him so for what e're may befall,
That he becomes a happier man then he
Who can but tell what shall hereafter be.
I start not at a Friars prophecy,
Or, those with which we Merlin do belie:
Nor am I frighted with the sad Narrations
Of any near approaching Alterations:
For, things have ever changed, and ever shall,
Until there does a Change run overall:
And he that bears an honest heart about him,
Needs not to fear what Changes are without him.
The Eastern Kingdoms had a time to flourish;
The Grecian Empire rising, saw them perish:
That sunk; and then the Roman Pride began,
Now bounded by the Race of Ottoman:
And, if Vicisitudes a Round must run,
Till all things end where they at first begun,
What is it to me, who peradventure must
E're that befalls, be mouldred into dust?
What if America's large Tract of ground,
And all those Isles adjoining, lately found,
(Which we more truly may a Desert call,
Then our well-till'd and civilized Pal^)
What if now there, that Wilderness does lie,
To which the Woman and her Son must fly
To escape the Dragons fury? and there 'bide
Till Europes thankless Nations for their Pride
And other crying sins, o'rewhelmed be
With such like Barbarousness as there we see.
If thus GOD please to do, and makes our sin
The means of bringing those rude Nations in
To be his People, (as vouchsafed it was
The Gentiles calling should be brought to pass
When he cast off the Jews for unbelief)
Why should his pleasure be to me a grief?
Oh! let his Name on Earth more honored grow,
Although my Ruin helps to make it so.
Campo-Musae, or, Field-Musings; Imprinted 1644.
THis Poem was written whilst the Author was in Arms for the King and
Parliament, to reunite them, not to divide them, as appears by this Impress in
his Cornet, under the figure of a Sword and Pen, Pro Rege, Lege Grege. It was
partly composed to vindicate himself from their Aspersions, who imputed unto
him the deserting his Principle relating to the Royal Power; and partly to
evidence, That he had neither actually or intentionally infringed it. But many
other particulars were thereby offered to consideration, whereof some are here
abreviated.

The Contents of the said Field-Musings.
A Question presupposed, the Muse
Makes Answer, and her Freedom shows.
Tells with what heart, with what intent
This War her Poet under went:
Avers that Reason and the Laws
Will justifi him in his Cause.
The Public streights he does express,
Lamenteth, and implores redress.
Fights Combats with Dosive Reason,
His Party to acquit from Treason;
Them he encourages to do
What GOD and Reason calls them to.
Then mentioning a Voice of Peace
That she has heard, and there dooh cease;
Intruding, ere she does proceed,
To make some proof how this will speed.
Having touched upon many Omissions and Commissions which occasioned several
Expostulations, Caveats and Predictions, (to which the Reader is referred) this
follows, page 20.

Our speedy Reconcilement hasten shall
The Churches Triumph, and Great Babels fall.
Her date is near, if I aright have hit
The meaning of the Number, left to be
A trial and probation of their Wit
Who seek the fall of Antichrist to see.
He is, with his Partakers, at this day
In public and in private carrying on
The cunning'st plot which they have yet to play,
And when that is acted out, their Play is done.
Till then their Fraud will so some Saints beguile,
That they to their Design will furth'rance bring;
Yea, they shall help promote it for a while,
Who favor nor the Persons, nor the Thing.
But, lest your hearts may faint by long delay,
Heed for your comfort what my Muse will say.
That Year in which Rome's long-lived Emperie
Shall from the day in which it was at height,
Sum up M, D, C, L, X, V, and I,
In order as these Letters here incite,
That Year, that Day, that Hour will put a date
To her Usurped Power, (reserving neither
Top, Root or Branch of that accursed State,
Nor Hand, nor Body, Limb, Horn, Claw or Feather.
For here are all the Numerals of Rome
In order, as they are in valuation,
And cannot make a less or greater sum,
Without disorder, want, or iteration.
Nor shall it longer stand, or sooner fall,
If I mistake not him who governs all.
In number, weight and measure works he,
Allotting to each man the bound and season,
Which may both correspond with his Decree,
And somewhat also suit with humane Reason.
In Egypt, thus a certain time to stay
Was to the Seed of Jacob there assigned;
Thus likewise to a fore-appointed day
The Reign of Baltashazer was confined;
Thus from the time of Daniels Supplication,
The time when Christ should come, foretold appears
To be a preordained Limitation,
Until the end of Seventy weeks of years.
And thus Rome's declination may (no doubt)
Be numbering till her Numeral^ are out.
Two famous Numbers are in them contained,
The first declares the length of time wherein
The Devil was by Providence restrained
From setting up the Mystery of sin:
The later is the number of the BEAST,
Which when the LET was taken quite away,
(Whereby he was a thousand years suppressed)
Does number out his Kingdom to a day.
It is the number of the Name or Power
Even of a Man, of that Mysterious Man,
By whom that Mystery is at this hour,
Continued, and by whom it first began.
And, he that can begin the Thousandth year,
Shall find the Ruin of both Beasts is near.
To search that out, it seems not hard to me,
Who do believe, that when of her chief sin
Rome to be guilty did appear to be,
Her declination did then first begin.
And sure, of all her sins the greatest Crime
Was, crucifying of the Lord of Life,
And her unjustly persecuting them
Who tendered Saving-Grace to their belief.
Then, I presume, she first to fall began,
And, that GOD measured, weighed, and numbered out
How many backward rounds her wheel should run,
Before it should the last time turn about.
Thus in those numerals which are her own,
Joined all together, was her Fate writ down.
To bring to pass that work there was a LET
To be removed, of no mean consequence;
Which was removed at the time fore-set,
And her new offspring has reigned ever since.
But with exceeding infamy and scorns,
The Beast, which now so powerful seems to some,
Shall lose his Head, and moult away his Horns,
And to the world a laughing stock become.
Then many Juglings hitherto concealed,
(And which to blind the heedless Christians eye,
In seven dark Mysteries, have long been sealed)
Shall to the faithful soul uncovered lie.
That Kingdom which the Jew did long ago
Mould out according to his erring brain;
(And whereof many zealous Christians too
Unwarrantable Fancies entertain.)
That Kingdom (whereof now in types we hear)
Shall to the world essentially appear.
Be patient therefore, ye that are oppressed;
This Generation shall not pass away,
Till some behold the downfall of that Beast,
Which yet among us with his Tail does play.
Then will the Lamb of GOD begin to take
The Kingdom to himself, and every King
That of his Right shall Usurpation make,
To Judgment and destruction he shall bring.
No Kingling then, assume the boldness shall
Blasphemously (for know it is no less)
To style himself the King Catholical,
As if Earths Universal Globe were his;
For, though another has Usurpt thereon,
That title does belong to Christ alone.
And, it is no wonder if the Potentates,
Kings, and the Rulers of this world combine
By Policy to strengthen their Estates,
And with the Beast, with GOG and Magog join.
No marvel if enraged they appear,
Through jealousies, and fear of losing that
By which their Pride and Lusts maintained were,
And which base fear and flat'ry first begat:
For all those Kingdoms and those Emperies
Throughout the world, which their beginning took
By humane wit, fraud, force and tyrannies,
Shall pass away, and vanish into smoke.
An Army whereof here is yet little hope,
Shall wrest the Scepter both from Turk and Pope.
Religion, and mere shows of Piety,
Have been so long the Masks of base Designs;
The great Vicegerents of their Deity,
Have made such Politicians of Divines;
And these together, have so fooled and cheated
The Consciences of persons well inclined,
That, of all Freedoms they are nigh defeated,
Belonging to the Body and the Mind;
Yea, they have so mocked GOD, and on his Throne
And his Prerogative so far encroach't,
That, of his Honor being jealous grown
Much longer bear he will not such reproach.
But, to the Saints their Liberties restore,
And give those Kings their portion with the Whore.
Do You startle at it, as if I had spoke
High Treason? or, as if what I now say
Without a warrant I had undertook
To publish, as perhaps you think I may.
If so; know, that I had this Information
Not from a private Spirit, but from his
Well known and unsuspected Revelation,
Who to his Church long since revealed this.
They who will to the Lamb their Crowns resign,
And shall (the Beast opposing) be content
To reign according to Christ's Discipline,
(And his Command) shall keep their Government.
The rest cast off, shall wail and curse their birth,
With Tyrants, and the Merchants of the Earth.
Christ and his Law shall then bear all the sway,
By Governments, resembling that perchance,
For which the Jews GOD's yoke did cast away,
The Kingship of the Gentiles to advance.
And as his People foolishly did crave
(Instead of his mild Scepter to retain)
A Heathenish Monarchy, which does enslave
And seek by Arbitrary Powers to reign;
So shall all Nations be content to leave
Their Ethnic Bonds, and with his holy Nation
Christ's Precepts and his Discipline receive,
And joint partakers be of their Salvation.
And when this glorious Kingdom does begin,
The fullness of the Gentiles will come in.
GOD has so long deferred the possession
Of that great Mercy, because Worldliness,
Hypocrisy and Discord keep the blessing
From ripening into such a happiness:
Some in unrightcousness the Truth retained,
And make the same thereby the less believed;
Some by an outward Sanctity have gained
The means to have their Heresies believed.
Whilst some pursue the Antichrist without them,
An Antichrist arises up within;
Which if they look not warily about them,
New work for Reformation will begin.
But GOD will finish what he preordains,
When Penitence for sin the means obtains.
In the Sixty third page of this Poem, the Author for illustration of that
Mystery, adds this that follows.

And lastly, I have weighed, that not alone
A plot is laid these Kingdoms to undo;
But likewise, in their spoil to have undone
All other true Reformed Churches too.
I see GOD's glory, and the servitude
Of all his People in this Cause concerned;
And whatsoever others do conclude,
I these conclusions with good warrant learned,
That those whom in this warfare we resist,
Are neither worse nor better then those bands,
And those Confederates of Antichrist,
Which are this day his Champions in these Lands:
And, that who ever fights on their side,
When this is known, have GOD and Christ denied.
I see as plainly as I see the Sun,
He draws near who on the white Horse rides;
The long expected Battle is begun;
The Beast to muster up his Kings provides:
With him h^s bloody Edomites conspire,
The ^eeds of Hagar, and the Sons of Lot,
Philistia, Gebal; Moab, Ammon, Tire,
And all who with his mark themselves bespot.
To meet these, those white Regiments I see,
That on the Lord of Hosts, and King of Kings
Attending in triumphant habits be:
And, whilst I contemplate the aid he brings,
Methinks I hear his Angel call the Crows,
To eat the Kings and Captains of his Foes.
To strengthen the Faith, and confirm the Patience of the Saints, this Mystery
is insisted upon in many other of this Author's Writings, as occasions were
offered; and are thought not impertinently expressed in a various Mode to the
same effect, because the ignorance or heedlesness of many, require both
reiteration and plainness, to prevent mistakes. There are also many other
Neglected Remembrances contained in the aforesaid Poem, to the perusal whereof
more at large, the Reader is referred.

The DARK LANTHORN, Imprinted 1650.
THis is a Parabolical and Enigmatical Poem, containing, with some plain
Precautions and Remembrances, many dark Predictions; and begins thus:

He, from whose perfect Light, all true Lights come,
Spoke Parables; yea, spoke naught else to some:
And Providence by many various ways
Of Dispensation, to the world conveyes
The means of carrying on those works which tend
To man's perfection at his latter end:
And, to the wonderful accomplishment
Of what eternally is his intent,
Brings about often times the self-same things,
(Or such like) toward their accomplishings,
That prudent men might apprehend thereby
What he designs, and therewithal comply, etc.
And in the Seventh Page he proceeds thus;
I may perhaps be, among others, one
Who was designed for service to be done
In order thereunto (as I conceive
I am, and as (when I am gone) some will believe,
Though few so think now; for although I dress
The Mind and Matter of my Messages
In measured words (and trimmed with such Fancies
As are allowed in Poetic Frencies,
To pass for sober Garbs) yet, now and then
I blunder out that which mere worldly men
Count madness; and what often the best men too
Sometimes, do think becomes not me to do.
But I best know my warrant, and proceed
As I am moved (with little fear or heed,
What others judge) and that which makes me dare
What seems madness, helps to prepare
Such strains, as other while produces heeding
Of what had not else been thought worth the reading:
And, these my Ridlings now, are an Invention
Which partly were designed with that intention;
And partly likewise to amuse those Readers
Who to my Principles are counter-pleaders.
When many think the Times afford me may
Enough to speak of, I have naught to say.
When I to ought am called, I cast by
My own Affairs, and to that Call apply
As I occasion find; venting sometimes
My thoughts in Prose, and otherwhile in Rimes;
One while in sharp and bitter strains reproving;
Sometimes by Admonitions calm and loving;
Yea, Jiggs of recreation sometimes fidling,
And now I Am fallen into a fit of Ridling.
Riddle my Riddles then, you that have heard
Truths often, and plainly spoke without regard,
(Except it were in malice to combine
Against their peace, who cast their Pearls to swine)
Riddle them if you can; for in them lies
A Dark Character of our Destinies.
Those things within these Problems couched are,
Which I once thought more plainly to declare;
But, from that purpose have now changed my mind,
That seeing you might see, yet still be blind:
That you might read, and yet not understand
The works which GOD and Men have now in hand.
Till those Events befall to you, which may
Produce those good effects which you delay.
To which intent, that which I would unfold,
Shall Herogliphically now be told.
Page the 21, after many pre-occupations to confirm himself in prosecuting what
he intended, he thus again proceeds.

But I will wheel about, and with the Rein
Turn Pegasus into his path again:
Though he in his digressions (as we say
Of Beggars) never is beside his way.
Once on a time (thus did old Tales begin
Ere I was born, or thought so to have been)
A foolish People, (overmuch at ease)
Their wantonness and vanity to please,
Among their May-games, brought home from the wood
Trees, which had else till now unheeded stood.
Of these they made, by hewings, knocks and smoothing,
That look like something, which resembled nothing.
And out of shapeless, knotty Loggs, did hew
Some Statues, not uncomely to the view.
These, ere quite finished (with some jeers and mocks)
They set up higher over other Blocks.
Them so repollishing, and painting so,
That of what stuff they were, few men could know.
Beginning then their own work to admire,
They raised them higher, and a little higher,
Till Idols they became; with whom they grew
At first familiar, and did them bestrew
With flowers and garlands; shortly after they
Bowed humbly down before them every day.
Till custom had their Judgment quite befool^d:
For, when they them inshrined did behold,
Sparkling with Jewels, and with Gold arrayed,
They of their own Creations grew afraid;
And, at the last (as at the last such do,
Who after their own Fancies whoring go)
They much repenting their fond Superstition,
Bewailed the slavery of their condition;
With some appearances of an intent
To grow more wise, as well as penitent.
Yea, to blaspheme their new-made Gods they spared not,
And would have-pull'd them down again, but dared not.
For, by their flat'ring Attributes long given,
They had advanced them to a Sphere (or Heaven)
Where uncontrolled, a Power they exercis^d
According to their Will; and them despised
Whose hands had made them, and whose breath had blown them
Too high for their Ambitiousness to own them.
Their Incantations by degrees had brought
Strange Spirits into what their hands had wrought,
Alluring, and enabling them unto
Those actings which their Makers might undo.
Yet still these Block-heads persever'd, and will
To make such Idols, and adore them still,
Till both they and their Puppets are destroyed,
Unless the GOD of Gods make just fears void:
For, most men being of a slavish mind,
Are so much unto slavishness inclined,
That to fulfill their slavish lust they will fawn
Upon a Dog, and lay their souls to pawn.
Riddle this Riddle, if you can, and tell
What People this may be, and where they dwell,
Which I believing you with ease may do,
Will add this following Parable thereto.
There was a time when silly Bees could speak,
(A People of much industry, though weak)
Among themselves, these lately made great moans,
As being much oppressed by their Drones,
Who (having made incursions among those
That had an uncontrollable dispose
In their Republike) did in various wise,
Encroachments make on their Proprieties,
And greedily unto themselves derive
The fatness and the sweetness of the Hive.
Complaints in private no redress obtaining,
Increase to open and avowed complaining;
Which finding like successes, they begun
To buz, as when a swarming time comes on:
Then to shut up their Cells, to shake their wings,
To leave their wonted work, and show their stings.
At first the Drones were frighted much thereat,
But (being not so wise as they were fat)
Neglected still the course which might prevent
The mischiefs then appearing imminent.
Which when I saw, I would no longer stay,
But said, God help them, and so came away.
This Parable, if rightly moraliz'd,
Affords a meaning not to be despised.
And so does what next follows. As I went
On Pilgrimage unto the Parliament,
I there attending saw some of the Cocks
(Which kept our Hens and Capons from the Fox)
With broken wings, with backs without a Feather,
To hide their naked bodies from the weather.
With plumeless tails, with scarred necks and breasts,
With empty bellies, with their combs and crests
Quite worn away, and scraping with their feet
On Dunghils for their food, and in the street,
So despicably, that it could appear
By nothing (save their spurs) what once they were:
And Popinjayes and Parrots clad and fed
With what the valor of these purchased;
These trimmed up in their Feathers, strutting by
Did cast upon them a disdainful eye,
Which heeding, I suppose (I tell you true)
To be no good Presage. Pray what think you?
News, if you look for, I but little know
Save such as this next Parable does show,
A fair Ship now lies floating on the Floods,
Well fraught with Pass^ngers, well filled with goods,
Laboring to fix an Anchor on the strand
Of her wished Harbor, which lies near at hand.
By many storms much tackling she has spent,
Her Masts are shattered, and her Sails are rent:
Her Ammunition, and her stores are wasted,
Her bread and beaverage is evil tasted,
Her Keel springs leaks, through her uncawked seams,
Her Knees are weakened, broken are her beams,
Her Pump is cracked, no Cable sound has she,
And Anchor's have been slipped, till none there be.
Her Helm hangs loose; her Card has great defects,
Her Compass likewise often interdicts,
And every where she craziness does feel
From Prow to Stern, from Topmast to the Keal.
In this condition to and fro she drives,
And on the Waves with much ado she lives:
For, now of late again, the Sea grows high,
A stiff gale blows, and she exposed does lie
To many hazards close without a Bar
Betwixt two Fore-lands which in kenning are.
If she to Seaward forth again should stand,
There Pirates threaten her; if then to Land
She makes, the Rocks lie scattered here and there,
In which as great or greater dangers are.
And which is worse, they who should be her guide,
Are false, and mutinously qualified.
Some ignorant, some treacherous, and some
Ambitious how possessors to become
Of what belongs to others. Some of those
Who have this Public Ship at their dispose,
Have in delays their time and stores misspent,
For private ends, and for accomplishment*
Of worse Designs, and in this great distress,
(Partly through fear, in part through guiltiness)
So much amused, and so amazed are
That, they are at a loss what course to stear
Both to secure themselves, and their Design,
Without which, to no course they will incline, etc.
But maugre all these hazards, she at last
In her wished Harbor shall an Anchor cast,
And take in both good Pilots and Recruits,
When her Fate seems to promise no such fruits.
You therefore, who conceive your Interest
To be concerned, by what is here expressed,
Praise GOD alone, when safe this Ship shall be,
For to secure her there is none but He,
And, let not any to whom this relates,
Slight what the Parable insinuates,
Which next ensues: For, it has some use
That much to their advantage may conduce:
A home-br^d Lion (of a hair unknown,
In Africa) by being overgrown,
And dreadful to his Keepers, shall thereby
Awake the rage of smothered Jealousy,
And lose his Tail; except between his paws
He couch his head, and hide his teeth and claws,
Or else grow Rampant; what will follow then?
Ask those you credit, they are cunning men;
Of me you ask in vain; for it is my Fate
Seldom to be believed, till it is too late,
This was interpreted as a Relative to Oliver Cromwell, then Lord General of the
Army, whose Arms was a White Lion. It follows thus:

-- They who have took delight
In deeds of darkness, will put out the light
By which the footsteps of their Foes are known,
And, whereby they might see to guide their own.
Instead thereof, they raise and follow shall
An Ignis fatuus, which will hazard all;
And Providence to each man shall dispose
That which for his chief happiness he chose.
The Dogs unto their vomit shall retire:
The Swine, who love to wallow in the mire,
Themselves with their beloved filth shall fill;
And they who are unclean, shall be so still.
The wilful Adders who do stop their ears,
And will not heed the Charmer whom he hears,
Shall feel a voice within them, which will shake them
Out of their dumps, and from their deafness wake them
When it is too late (it may be) to prevent
The dint of their forewarned detriment.
The Leaches shall by Salt a vomit take,
Or else continue sucking till they break.
The Bubbles, who in emptiness do find
Most pleasure, shall be puffed up with wind,
Till blown up into nothing, there appear
No signs that in the world such Bladders were.
The Sons of Earth, who with the GODS make war,
Shall heap up Hills on Hills, till crushed they are
By their own handy-works. The Shrubs now grown
More lofty than the Cedars, they broke down;
Among their thorns and leaves a fire do hide,
Which on a sudden will consume their pride.
The Grubbs and Maggots (but ere while so small,
So poor and weak, that they could hardly crawle)
Have got bulk, strength, new forms, aspiring wings,
Yea, dreadful teeth, and horns, and claws, and stings;
But, by a storm, whereof they have no dread,
They shall consume as fast as they were bred.
Out of the putrified barbed Steed,
Shall generated be a numerous breed
Of noisome Hornets, which abroad will fly,
Much mischief acting, and next Winter dye.
The blasted Orange, and the crooked Vine,
With other Plants on either side of Rhine,
Shall twist together, that beneath their shade,
A shelter for the Thistle may be made,
Till they perceive what Plagues are in pursuit
Of that ejected Plant, Branch, Root and Fruit:
Then will they wiser grow, lest they become
Exposed justly to the self-same doom.
Mean while the Tawny Olive shall assay
His Roots into these Valleys to convey.
From whence it was removed, and effect
Thereby what very few do now suspect,
Except the Willow and the Oak foresee
What for their mutual weal should acted be,
Whereby they frustrate may a grand Design
Which is on foot, both States to undermine;
And they who thereunto first Movers are,
Shall of that Blessing reap the greatest share.
Observe this well; If you hereafter fee
(Which peradventure may permitted be)
The Red-Cross from its former height decline,
And for a time the Half Moon Northward shine
With an ill Influence upon the Seas,
Beyond the Pillars of great Hercules,
And not be retrograde, till it has more
Effects that way, then ever heretofore;
Expect some consequence will then ensue,
Which many who yet dream not of, will rue.
But losses are sometimes a gainful prize;
By oversights men grow to be more wise;
And they who heed not now what does concern
Their welfare, will perhaps more wisdom learn,
When more Experience makes their Judgment stronger.
By suffering loss and shame a little longer.
We on this side the Water are not yet
Confused enough, that order to beget
That must reform us; and shall here therefore
Pursue self-interest yet more and more,
Till such as are in Power vouchsafe to hear
The Counsel of their slighted Ingineer.
The Old Robe with New Cloth will patched be,
Though Rents thereby still wider made they see,
Till every Rag is quite worn out, and then
They with a whole Robe shall be clothed again;
And they who own it, be secured more,
And much more dignified then heretofore.
When they who would effect it, make their choices
As well by Lot Divine, as humane voices;
Whereto self-seekers never will agree,
Till by some straight it shall enforced be.
But when this comes to pass, there will appear
A new Light shining in our Hemisphear
That will disperse the Clouds and Fogs which make
So many cross each other, and mistake
The way to safety. Then, we shall perceive
Our Opposites desire to interweave
Their Interest with ours, and if sincere,
They shall, in what will be produced here
Partake; and both together then possess
Each other, and the world, in Christian Peace,
Till he appears to ascend the Throne,
Who must unite all Nations into one.
Then shall the glaring Comets which have seemed
Fixed Stars, (and so by many are esteemed)
Even they of greatest magnitude, down from
Their heights be cast, and more despised become
Then Gloworms, or those rotten Chips that glare
In darkness, as if real lights they were:
Then every single Person shall be brought
Unto his Test, and that which he has wrought,
To trial comes; moreover they who now
By spoils and by oppression powerful grow,
Will then become the scorn of every one,
Whom they oppressed, desp^s'd and trampled on.
Then they who large Indulgencies contrive
For others, that themselves they may forgive;
Who cunningly at fast and loose do play,
Who take to morrow, what they give to day;
And make their seeming favors means unto
Those mischiefs which their malice could not do;
Who, Spider-like, weave Cobwebs with pretense
To catch the Flies alone, which give offense;
When none but harmless Bees their Engines take,
For Wasps and Hornets passage through them make.
They who do sacrifice unto the dead,
That wherewithal the living should be fed;
Who justify the wicked in their way,
And unto death men innocent betray;
These then, and all such like, shall to their doom
With horror, fear, and with amazement come.
Page 33, it thus follows:

Then from the buried Ox will forth arise
A swarm of thrifty Honey-making Flies,
That shall with sweetness and with plenty store
These Islands from the Midland to the shore,
And spread their Floating Hives on all the Seas,
'Twixt both the Tropicks, to the Antipodes,
To make Preparatives for that which brings
Into one body all dispersed things.
Some other things of no mean consequence
I do foresee approaching, not far hence;
But so obscurely, that I cannot say
Without all doubtings, whereto tend they may;
For far beyond my apprehension lies
The Chain of those remote Contingencies,
Which draw on future things, because my Glass
Through which the notions of them are to pass,
Is so defective, that they do perchance
Misrepresent them in some circumstance.
Yet by the enlightnings which the Sacred Writ
On Sanctified Reason does beget,
(If we well heed, consider and compare
What things have been, with such as present are
To GOD and Men relating) we of some
Things future, may aright informed become.
The Perpetual PARLIAMENT, Imprinted 1650.
IN this Poem the Author having More Poetico, expressed a Contemplative Vision,
preparative to what he intended, he thus proceeds, page 44.

-- By what has represented been,
By well consid'ring what I had seen,
By spelling out what every Character
Holds forth, to evidence those things that were
Thereby intended, I found out therein
Where that great Work must first of all begin,
Which may make up our breaches, when thereto
Our selves we settle, as we ought to do.
I saw that on a future settlement,
And constitution of a Parliament
Upon a just Foundation laid, with speed,
A means of Restoration might succeed,
That introducing therewith, which might bring
Into right Order every other thing,
Our outward Weal promoting, if we take
That course whereof proposal I now make.
I am likewise persuaded (even without
So much as any shadow of a doubt)
That by this Parliaments misconstitution,
We are incapable of that fruition
Which we expect; that (for the most part) thence
Proceeds the cause of all our Indigence,
And that this Parliament is naytheless
The Chief, (if not sole means of our redress)
Even this; which many at this day do seek
To bring (by disrespect) into dislike,
And to a nullity, as if thereby
They had no hopes of our recovery:
For by this Parliament GOD would effect
The future Settlement they do expect.
If they too long delayed hot the pursuit
Of an impartial rational Recruit.
Although the Body of it, being made
Of Members, which among them long have had
(And yet has over-many) so corrupted,
That they have not alone much interrupted
Their activeness who discontinue sound,
But now are also likely to confound
The whole at once, by seeking how to please
Their Lusts or Friends; yet we might maugre these,
Restored be by those who have been just,
And to their utmost power performed their trust:
It is from those that we denominate
This Parliament, in them is lodged our Fate
Conditionally; yea, whatsoever they seem,
This is (as things are) that which must redeem
Our Honor lost; and if then it shall
Dissolved be, down will their Structures fall,
Not to be raised without the cost of more
Then has been spent upon it heretofore.
But, as they are, what prudent man can think
It will be long ere totally they sink?
For while they shall endeavor to subsist,
Without preserving of their Interest
Who chose them, or permit their dissolution,
With our late hardly gained Constitution;
(Which now without enforcement can by none
Effected be, but by it self alone)
They shall henceforth for ever be unable
To gain a Government that will be stable,
Unless a Phoenix, yet unhatcht, arise
Out of their Ashes, with renewed Supplies,
Which seeing that may probably be never,
They some Expedient must with speed endeavor.
In this, and after the 45 th page in the Imprinted Copies, the sense in many
pages was so mistaken by the Transcriber, or the Printer, that the Expedient
thereby intended, is confusedly expressed; the result whereof was to this effect
before expressed; and it thus follows, page 50.

Let them take notice, that the Peoples rage
At their delays, is likely to engage
In some disorderly Resolve, unless
They see that followed with more seriousness,
Which they expect either in a Parliament
New-moulded, or by what is equivalent.
For, it is conceived their sufferings may thereby,
And thereby only, meet a Remedy:
Which Cure, if misadvis'd I have not been,
Must with the Parliament it self begin.
There is a Course, whereby without disgrace
Or danger, they may bring a work to pass
That will fecure from hazards, cost and pain,
Which without thanks or profit you sustain,
Afflicting others too, by those confusions
Which are increased by irresolutions.
Until a better, therefore, shall appear,
Be pleased this Expediment to hear;
And if thereby you find a likelihood
Of ought conducing to your future good.
Take heed that no Self-Interest divert
That approbation whereunto your heart
Inclines you; for, GOD will find it out,
And cross the Counter-work you go about.
In England and in Wales there is a Shire
For every Week that is numbered in the year:
According to the Months, by Twelve divide
The Counties, with the Persons qualifi'de
For Knights and Burgesses, proportioning,
As near as may be, to an equalling
The number of the whole, so, or so many
Unto each Month, (without omitting any.)
As certain then, the Month and Day wherein
Each Twelfth part an Election shall begin.
(The middle of the Week appearing best,
As being farthest from the day of Rest)
On the first Wednesday of each Month, let those
By whom their Deputies are to be chose,
(Respectively) convene in every Shire,
Upon that Month and Wednesday every year,
Which is to them assigned; then, having chosen
(At Months end) let each twelfth part of the dozen
Send up their chosen men to represent
Their Shires and Buroughs in the Parliament;
And, on that very day in which they come,
Let all their Predecessors give them room.
Thus one Month some, and Month by Month for ever,
Let each Twelfth part still orderly persever
To take a turn, till every Shire has had
A Month in every year; then having made
Their choice, let them still enter, and withdraw,
Successively, by a Perpetual Law,
No man a place of Trust supplying there,
By one Election, longer then One year.
Thus, as the Thames does still continue one,
And, is the self-same River, though there run
A new supply of waters every day
Along her Channel; you continue may
The Parliament by Annual Supply
To be the self-same everlastingly,
(With very little change or molestation
To them, who choose or represent the Nation.)
Thus may the Parliament be both together
Successive and Perpetual; yet neither
Enjoying such a Perpetuity
As can occasion future Tyranny,
Or present Grievances (save such alone
As wholly can prevented be by none:)
Nor shall we be endammag'd by Succession,
Or by Parliaments long Intermission;
But form a Constitution which will add
All Power which may be for advantage had,
Either to gain what best men would effect,
Or to prevent the Mischiefs they suspect.
What I intend, may plainly be conceived,
And, to that end, some things may be contrived
Much better, if your Wisdom shall refine
The rudeness of my proffered Design;
And by Authority strict Rules provide,
Whereby the Elected may be qualifi'de,
And their Electors too; for 'twere unjust
In things of this Concernment those to trust
Who have disturbed your Peace, until a time
For their Probation is allotted them;
And, till they likewise by their good desert
Make manifest a reconciled heart;
Their Merits being well weighed by such Judges
As may suspend usurped Privileges.
And since, even they who are the best affected
To common Welfare, often have elected
Such as deceive their Trust; since there is no eye
But GOD's, that sees the hearts Hypocrisy;
And, since we find it left upon Record,
(Even in the Volume of the Sacred Word)
That LOT's were needful in the choice of those
To whom they did a Supreme Power impose;
Since likewise when the purest Congregation
In all the world, had with deliberation
Elected two; a Lot was also cast
(Before an approbation thereon past)
To send forth him who was to be employed
In execution of the place then void,
That GOD might also have his choice therein,
It was no doubt vouchsafed to have been
Exemplar, that we might with warranty
In this approved President comply:
For GOD by his Election joined with our,
Will probably upon the Elected pour
His Grace. This will moreover give content
To prudent men, and frequently prevent
The choice of those whom for sinister ends,
A numerous corrupted Party sends.
Why may not then? Why should not Two be chose
For every place that is void, and one of those
By Lot? that GOD therein may have a voice,
And join with men, in perfecting their choice?
Since they who do th^s Nation represent,
Are GOD's Vicegerents in the Government,
As well as our Trustees, who would not more
In such a Choice confide, then heretofore
In their Elections? or then they will do
In Those hereafter not Elected so?
Why was it not, why should it not be thus,
If this the Kingdom be of GOD WITH US?
But that, Self-seekers know, were this admitted,
They by reputed fools, should be outwitted?
And not so easily obtain a power,
Hereafter to oppress and to devour.
To no good end have LOTS been from among
All such Elections shufled out so long;
Usurpers and Intruders do well know
Lots would their Kingdoms quickly overthrow;
Make them afraid, that Christ will reign indeed,
(As they with discontent often hear and read)
And that without control, in time to come,
They should not rant and revel in his Room
As now they do, and will, till we begin
A better course then that which we are in.
If timely some provision might be made,
To our Elections, Lots henceforth to add,
Much Reformation would thereby redound,
And great advantages therein be found.
So might there also, if that whensoe're
The Elect to perform their duty were,
Some short speech might be made, or cautions read,
Whereby it should be offered to their heed,
How much it will concern them to take care
What choice they make, and what the dangers are,
Which may ensue, when some Sinister ends
The dread of greatness, or respects to Friends,
Makes them misplace their trust, and cast away
Themselves, and all, for ever, in one day.
This to prevent, 'twere fitting to make known
What Trust that is which is on them bestown.
What Benefits may gen'rally arise,
By choosing men courageous, honest, wise,
And fearing GOD: what perils will ensue,
(Which by forepast examples we may show)
If Cowards, fools, ungodly men, and vicious,
Or to the present Government pernicious,
They should elect. They may likewise, declare
How qualified such persons should appear;
And warn them, that they never do unhallow
Their Choice with any, such as these that follow.
Men over-talkative, affecting much
To hear themselves speak; for, not many such
Can keep or give good Counsel; and they will prate
Much precious time away in vain debate.
Your Common-Gamesters, for they are not just
Unto themselves, and them we should not trust
With other men's Estates, who have been known
To lose, or hazard desperately their own.
Men to their pleasures overmuch addicted;
For Public Work will be by them neglected.
Choose not men evidently avaricious,
Or of Promotion greedily ambitious;
For if their ends thereby obtain these may,
They will be bribed their Country to betray;
Or quite neglect their Trust to court their Whore,
And shame their fellows, if they do no more.
Of Irreligious Persons make no choice,
For these will very seldom give their voice
But in the Negative, to any motion
That may be for advancement of Devotion.
Choose none who are defamed in any kind,
For such as they will an occasion find
To hinder all enactings that restrain
Ill manners, or to sober life pertain.
Elect not Children, for it is unfit
That in your Supreme Councils they should sit
To vote in Grand Affairs, whom Law restrains
From managing what to themselves pertains.
Choose none who are observed to withhold
Their long due debts, when they discharge them could:
Nor Outlawed persons; for unfit are they
To make us Laws, who would not Law.
Choose none who shall solicit or propose
That they for your Lawmakers may be chose.
Nor such as their Electors by the abuse
Of Feastings, Wine and Banquetings seduce:
For they who shall ( uncalled) themselves advance
To that great Work, have much more arrogance
Then real worth; and it is ten to one
They for themselves have somewhat to be done, etc.
There are many other particulars pertinent to the Trust mentioned in this
Poem; as also, other precautions and predictions of the good and evil
consequences likely to ensue, in that Poem hinted, with a purpose only to
bring those things to consideration, which wiser men may improve, according to
the Author's intention, by a better method then is here proposed: therefore to
the perusal thereof, the Reader is referred.

The AUTHOR's EMBLEMS, Imprinted 1634.
THis Book, written by the said Author in his younger years, is a Poem in
Folio, containing two hundred Figures engraven in Copper, and illustrated with
Morals, and a Lottery annexed, the better to insinuate into young Readers,
those Divine Morals, and Civil Documents, which are thereby tendered to
consideration. Out of those, a few only are collected, the rest may be perused
in the Original.

In the First Book of Emblems, page 2, is a Laureat head fixed upon a Basis of
Stone.

Still fixed, and with triumphant Laurel crowned,
Is truest Wisdom, which expressed thus
Among some old Impressa's we have found,
And much this Emblem has instructed us.
From hence we learn, that Prudence does not flow
From those unconstant men, whom every blast,
Or slight occasion turns to and fro,
But from a settled head that stands fast.
Who ever shoulders him, he gives not place;
What storm soever his Times or Fortunes breath,
He neither hides his brow, nor turns his face,
But keeps a look undaunted even in death.
The Laureat Head upon a Pillar set,
This intimates, and his Bay-wreath does show
That Constant Wisdom shall a Conquest get,
When Giddy Policy prevails not so.
If therefore, thou art willing to be taught,
Propose good Ends, with honest means thereto;
And therein constant be, till thou have brought
That to perfection, which thou have to do.
Let neither flat'ring Pleasures, Fear, Disgrace,
Nor Scoffing Censures, Threatenings, or the Slights
Of fawning Sycophants, obstruct that Race
To which a blameless Prudence thee invites.
Though others plot, conspire and undermine,
Keep then a plain right path; let not their Course
Make thee without just cause to alter thine,
Though for the present it may seem the worse.
He that thus acts, puts Policy to Shool,
And makes the Machavilian prove a fool.
In the same Book, page 5. A Spade, a Serpent, and a Wreath of Laurel.
Suppose you, Sirs, those mimick Apes you meet
In strange fantastic habits, or the Rabble
That with gay Clothes embroyder out the street,
Are truly Worshipful or Honorable?
Or can you think, that to be born the Son
Of some rich Alderman, or ancient Peer,
Or, that the Fame your Predecessors won,
May claim such Wreaths as due deservings wear?
Is honor due to them who ^^end their days
In courting one another or consuming
Their Fortunes and themselves ^n Drabs and Plays,
In sleeping, drinking, and Tobacco fuming?
Not so; for (though such Fools, like children, place
Gay Titles on each other) Wise men know
What slaves they be how despicably base,
And where such Attributes would better show:
An idle body clothes a vicious, mind,
And what at best is purchased by the same,
Is nothing else but stinking smoke and wind,
Or frothy bubbles of an empty fame.
True Glory none did ever purchase yet,
Until he to be Virtuous did attain;
And all their Virtues are but counterfeit,
Who labor not for what they would obtain.
And this Impressa does infer no less;
For, by the Spade is Labor here impli'de;
The Snake a virtuous Prudence does express,
And Glory by the Wreath is typifi'de:
For where a virtuous Industry is found,
It with a Wreath of Glory shall be crowned.
In the same Book, page 8. The Emblem is a Skeleton, with this following descant
Why, silly man, so much admirest thou
Thy present Fortune; over-valuing so
Thy person, or the beauty of thy brow,
And in fantastic habits clothed go?
Why do thou live in riotous excess,
And boast as if the flesh immortal were?
Why do thou covet so, why so oppress,
And over thy Fellow Creatures dominere?
Behold this Emblem, such a one was he
Whom this does represent, as now thou art;
And such a fleshless Rawbone thou shall be,
Though yet thou seem to act a comelier part.
Observe it well, and mark what ugliness
Stares through the sightless eye-holes from within;
Note those lean Crags, and with what gastliness
That horrid countenance does seem to grin.
Well heed it; and when thou have seen the same,
Pluck down that Pride which puffs thee now so high.
Boast not of shape or features, but (for shame)
Repent of all thy former Vanity;
And, having learned that all men must become
Such bare Anatomies (that such a Fate
No mortal Power or Wit can guard thee from)
Live so, that Death may better thy Estate.
Consider who created thee, and why;
Rowse up thy Spirit, ere thy flesh decays,
Pursue things honest, with true Piety,
And seek thy welfare in thy Makers praise:
So when of life and form death shall deprive thee,
Life with Eternal Glory GOD will give thee.
In the same Book, page 11. The Figure of one rolling a Stone up a steep Hill.
A Massy Millstone, up a tedious Hill,
With endless labor Sisiphus does roll,
And down (when raised aloft) it tumbleth still,
To keep employed his afflicted soul.
On him this toil is feigned to be imposed,
To be (though vain) perpetually assayed;
But, some there be, by no such straight enclosed,
Who on themselves as endless tasks have laid:
Yea, knowing not (or without care to know)
How they are worn and wearied out in vain.
They plunge themselves into a world of Woe,
To seek uncertain ease, in certain pain.
Such fools are they, who dream they shall acquire
A mind content, by scrabling still for more;
For wealth increasing, does increase desire,
And makes less contentation then before.
Such also they, who their endeavor stretch
To climb by Titles to true Honors height;
For having gotten one Ambitions reach
Another, comes perpetually in sight.
And their stupidity is nothing less,
Who fancy, flesh and blood may raised be
Unto the top of perfect Holiness:
For at the best, corrupt and vile are we.
Yet, we are bound in Faith, with love and hope,
To roll the stone of good endeavor still,
As near as may be, to perfections top,
Though back again, it tumbles down the hill.
For then, what works had never power to do,
GOD by his Grace will freely bring us to.
In the same Book, p. 13. A man in a Boat with Sails and Oars.
No wonder he a prosperous Voyage finds,
Who has both Sails and Oars to serve his turn,
And still assisted with propitious Winds,
Is to his wished Harbor timely born.
Nor is it very strange, if they who lack
Those helps on which the Common Faith depends,
And from their hoped for Aims repelled back,
And miss of that to which their labor tends.
Not in the Ships, the Winds, the Oars or Sails,
(Nor in the want of outward means) alone,
Consists it, that our hope succeeds or fails,
But most in that which men least think upon.
Some well endeavor, and their pains are blessed
With Gales that are so prosperous, that they
Fly safe and swiftly on among the best,
Whilst others toil hard, and are cast away.
Some long time on this Worlds wide Ocean float,
And, seldom Winds or Tides assistance have;
Nor Sail, nor Oar, nor Anchor, nor sound Boat
Enjoying, neither skill themselves to save;
And yet escape. Some other too there are,
Who neither want fit means, nor do neglect
Good Industry, nor are without due care,
Or active skill, yet find small good effect.
However, let still thy Intent be just,
Then add what means thou can to compass it;
and, though means fails, admit of no distrust,
But fearlesly to GOD thy ways commit.
For he, where Faith and Honesty he finds,
Turns loss to gain, and storms to prosperous winds.
In the Fourth Book, p. 257. The Figure is an Hourglass, and the Sand almost
run out.
This Glass declares how Time does pass away,
And if the annexed Motto truth does say,
The Time that is gone, is lost. This to be true,
Experience too does manifestly show.
How fast their time departs, they least perceive,
From whom it steals before they take their leave
Of what they love; and their last hour is run
Before they do suppose it is begun.
Therefore, how fast it slide, let them be taught
Hereby, who foolishly put out of thought
Their latter end; or always do presume,
Or overlargely hope on time to come:
The present hours nor thankfully enjoying,
Nor prudently or honestly employing.
Else these will peradventure too late find,
When better understanding brings to mind
How foolishly they hitherto have spent
Time past, that it is not to their detriment
Lost only, but which is much worse then so,
Lost with a thousand other losses too:
Which to redeem, nor Wit, nor Wealth, nor Power
Can purchase them one minute of an hour.
Consider this, all ye that spend the prime,
The Moon-tides, and the Twilights of your Time,
In Play-games, or inquest of needless things,
As if ye could at pleasure nip Times wings,
Or turn his Glass, or had a Life or twain
To live, when you had fooled this out in vain.
Short is the present, lost times passed be,
And Time to come you are not sure to see.
It would make this Review too long to be called a Breviate, if it should be
enlarged with any more of these Emblems; and it may be hoped these few gleaned
out of them, will suffice to make that heeded which is precautioned and
predicted in those Four Books; and that some also who did read them heretofore
either negligently, or in sport only, will peruse them to better purpose.

An Interjection, occasioned by a sudden Ejaculation, whilst this Review of
Neglected Remembrances was transcribing; which shall here stand inserted,
thought it be no part of what was heretofore expressed, or intended to be
hereunto added.
ALAS! in this Review, to what good end
My words, my time and labor thus to spend
Am I enforced? Why am I troublesome
To others and my self, of things to come
Or past, still to make mention? since I see
Nor Judgments, whereof sensible men be
(From day to day) nor Mercies, which betwixt
Those Judgments intervene, or intermixed,
^^ch heeded are? although they such have been,
As are not in one Age or Place often seen.
Oh Times! Oh Manners* how far will these Nations
Proceed at last in their Prevarications,
If GOD thereto a bounder shall not set,
And they seek him no more then they do yet?
Our Posture at this present is the same
With Isr'els when they forth from Egypt came.
Two Mountains on both sides of them they had,
Over which no Pass in safety could be made;
Before them was a Sea, where Ship or Boat
To waft them over, could not then be got.
Behind them, Pharaoh with a dreadful Host
Pursu'de them, to recover what was lost,
And to reduce them to that servile state,
Which they were hopeful had been out of date;
Or to destroy them quite, where did appear
No likely hope of a Deliverer:
For means of safety they could none espy,
Within the prospect of a carnal eye.
They, thus affrighted, to the LORD then cri'de,
Not as they should, who do in him confi'de;
But with more fear then faith; nay, worse then so,
They murmured, and upbraided Moses too,
In an uncivil and ungrateful mode,
As if without a warranty from GOD
He had imprudently pursued a course
Which they foresaw; and told him would make worse
Their bad Condition; yea, expressed a will,
Slaves (as they had been) to continue still.
Yet he (the meekest person who then lived.)
As if he neither at that time perceived
How him they injured, or how jus^^y they
Deserved what seemed probable that day,
(Or how much base, unmanly slavishness
Their own tongues did apparently express)
He waved their murmurs, whilst they were afraid,
As if naught had amiss by them been said:
And, like a loving Father, speaking to
His Children, (knowing not when they mis-do)
Said gently thus: Fear not, stand still and see
With patience, how yeshall delivered be:
For these Egyptians who are now before
Your eyes this day, shall never fright you more:
And so befell it; for next morn they saw
Their foes lie dead, of whom they stood in awe,
Drowned by the waves, and on that Seashore cast,
Through which they dry-shod, and in safety past.
Yet both that, with those Mercies which before
GOD had vouchsaf^d (with very many more
Soon after) seemed to be so forgot,
As if they them, or him regarded not.
Now at this present time such is our case,
We are beleaguered as that People was;
With hazards upon every side confin'de;
With dangers both before us, and behind;
Not only having many Foreign Foes,
But some likewise at home as bad as those;
And, worse within us also, who have brought us
To greater streights then all our Foes without us.
Those Jews we parallel in every thing,
Who injured Moses by their murmuring:
And, are as thankless unto GOD, who has
Here acted, both in Mercy and in Wrath,
As many Wonders as by him were shown
In Egypt when King Pharoh was overthrown;
(Though they appear not such unto their sense,
Who shut the eyes of their Intelligence)
We as distrustful are as they, as giddy
In every Trial too; we are as ready
To make a Golden Calf, and to prefer
That Idol before our Deliverer.
As much as they, we long to repossess
The Fleshpots of our Lusts, our Slavishness,
(Which we did cry to be delivered from)
As soon as into any straight we come.
Yet, GOD has been to us (and at this time)
Continues the same GOD he was to them.
Though their example, which should make us better,
Has made our Provocations much the greater,
He with us deals, as a Father mild,
Whose heart is grieved by a froward Child;
And, as he did with stubborn Ephraim
When Anger and Compassion moved him
To cry out thus, What shall I do to thee?
For at a stand with us he seems to be,
Both by his frequently himself estranging,
And by his often returning, and often changing
His Judgments and his Mercies, that we may
Be changed, and reform our crooked way.
We have this day (though in another mode)
The daily Presence of our gracious GOD
To lead us through that Wilderness of Sin
In which we have a long time wandering been:
He guides, guards, and provideth us Supplies
In all our wants, (though in another wise)
And is with us as wonderfully here,
As when his People brought from Egypt were.
The self-same Cloud and Pillar we have had,
(Though varied) and, as effectual made
To all intents and purposes, as they
Then had; and to refresh us in the way
Unto the Land of Rest, we have that Rock
Whereof they drank, unto that purpose broke:
And, though we often stray, shall to what we tend
Attain, when we are at our Journeys end;
If we believe, and persevere to do
So much as GOD enableth us unto.
For, he requires not from any one
A scruple more then may by him be done;
Nor does expect from any to receive
More then what he at first, or last shall give;
Because of all omissions and mis-actions,
He has in full accepted satisfactions
By his Deservings, who secure us may
From whatsoever Debts we cannot pay;
If on his Mediation we depend,
With Faith and Penitence at our lives end;
That Mark retaining, which distinguishes
Christ's chosen Sheep from Goats, in Life and Death;
To wit, that love to him, and to each other,
Which knits for ever, GOD and Man together.
This is that everlasting Gospel which
We were foretold, an Angel was to preach
To every Kindred, People, Tongue and Nation
Throughout the earth to bring men to Salvation:
And, for a preparation thereunto,
He cried aloud, (as all true Prophets do)
Fear God; to Him, and to the Lamb give praise,
For now the hour is come, (these are the days)
Wherein his Judgments must be poured on them
Who shall not glorify and worship him
By whom Heaven, Earth, the Fountains and the Seas
Created were, and every thing in these.
The fear of God is that which first lets in
True Wisdom; that brings Penitence for sin:
By these within the heart of man is wrought
Such Faith and Grace, that they then taking root,
Do seasonably bring forth such blessed fruit,
As by degrees destroys the thorns and weeds
Which either choke or starve the holy Seeds,
From whence the means of those enjoyments springs
Whereof to us that Gospel tidings brings.
This method long ago was practiced
By John the Baptist, when he ushered
Christ and his Everlasting Gospel in,
By preaching of true penitence for sin:
And thereby did prepare before his face,
The way intended, to soul-saving Grace.
Such Consequents, as promised are to spring
From Christ and his apostles publishing
This Gospel (whether it shall come abroad
As preached in the ordinary mode,
Or by the Holy Ghost, which often conveighs
The same by extraordinary ways)
Are without fail to them vouchfaf'd for ever,
Who entertain it; and shall still endeavor
Conformity, sincerely, that to do
Which Grace and Nature them inables to.
But everlastingly it shall not be
Preached in this World: For this believe must we,
That his Commission, who Authorized
Those men, by whom it was first published,
Is nigh expired; and that it shall not last
One minute longer, when that date is past;
Which will be in that Moment wherein all
Shall die, or changed be; but sooner shall
Be so to them, who summoned are away
By Death, before that Grand Assizes day.
If it be so, let us take timely heed
What Doctrine thence, does by result proceed:
For Christ himself, is he who did predict
The Judgments which we both feel and expect.
He is that Angel in a Mystery,
Who through the midst of the Heavens did fly.
It Was he, whom 'twixt the Heavens of the Law
And Gospel many Prophets flying saw,
To bring the News and Means to every Nation
Of Peace on Earth, by reconciliation
'Twixt GOD and Man. We have already seen,
Some of those Tokens, which foretold have been,
To signify to us the General Doom,
That should soon after their appearance come;
And should they be commemorated here.
It very evidently would appear,
That hitherward it speedily advances
To them who heed well the known Circumstances
In GOD's and humane Actings. He has poured
The Viols forth, whereby some are devoured,
And some tormented; yet, most men grow more
Blasphemous, and more wicked then before.
And had we no sign else to predeclare
The sounding of the Seventh Trump, is near,
Save that, and those Divisions, which of late
Republics, Realms, and Persons separate
From others, and themselves; we need not show
Another Symptom of what will ensue.
To hasten such Dooms (among other Crimes
Which are predominant in these our times)
One I have seen reiterated here
With impudence in public every year,
Which will not go unpunished, though the Nation
Has entertained it with much veneration:
But I have yet no warrant to declare it,
And therefore till I have so, will forbear it.
With these, there is likewise one special Sign
Concurrent, mentioned in Records Divine,
(Not least considerable) it is a defection
By wanting of that Natural affection
Which constitutes the Manhood; for that sin
Does to be Epidemieal begin;
Yea, even the natural Act of Generation,
Which was ordained for our preservation,
So is corrupted into an excess
Of brutish Lustings, beyond beastliness,
And filthiness, grown up to such a height,
That many in their sins take less delight
Except they lawlessy be carried on,
And shall be likewise impudently done.
To which end, even our honest Recreations
Are lately scandalized by these Nations,
And often abused; yea, the Tunes and Songs
Which to a sober merriment belongs,
Are so estranged now from what they were
In former times, (and within Sixty year)
That in my apprehension there does seem
So vast a diffrence betwixt these and them,
As 'twixt the croakings of a Ravens throat,
And Linnets, or a Nightingales clear note.
Which unto me appears to portend
Our pleasant things are drawing to an end;
And, that our sins, and their deserved doom
Are now almost to their last period come.
One Sign more I will add unto those many
Forementioned, which as signal is as any:
Some of the true Christ do begin to doubt,
And where to find another, hunt about;
Not wanting such as will be undertaking
To bring them unto one of their own making.
Thus much, as I believe, his words implies,
Who said false Christ's and Prophets should arise
In latter times; for I have in my days
Seen that to be fulfilled many ways.
The greatest number Christians now professed,
Send one another unto Antichrist,
And say that is he: In Turkey at this day,
He is expected, (as reports do say*)
And many last year were in expectation
To hear thereof, ere now, a confirmation.
And I, because I credit not that Fame,
A man of little Faith reputed am.
Some confidently tell us he is here,
To wit, in this Church whereof now we are;
And, so I hope, although it may be thought
We have not entertained him as we ought;
Nor are so charitable unto them,
Who conscientiously do worship him.
Some say, he is there, in such or such a place
Wherein a secret Meeting is, or was;
Some other send men to the Wilderness,
Affirming he is there; perhaps by this
Intruding, that he by the Humane Creature,
May found be in his own wild until'd Nature:
But this believe not, for till thither he
Comes of himself, found there he cannot be,
Nor any where, save where that Love resides
Which does expel that self-love which divides
His Flocks, and causes men no care to take
Those breaches to repair, which Pride does make,
Not many take into consideration
How to improve aright this Visitation;
They do both good and evil things mis-name,
The wicked they acquit, the righteous blame;
Their Interests sometimes confound together,
To the one sometimes apply what is due to the other;
And, as the Jews (their type) did justify
Themselves in acting that Impiety
For which they are corrected; we begin
To say, like them, the troubles we are in,
And loss of all the good things now bereft,
Befall us only because we had left
Such Idolizings, as when Spice-Cakes given
For an Oblation to the Queen of Heaven,
By them omitted were. Such thoughts have we
Of GOD, and of those Judgments which now be
On us inflicted; yea, their parallel
We are in all, wherein they did not well.
I am not able to enumerate
The many ways whereby we separate
From one another; nor dare say how few
Go right, if there be but one way that is true.
Nor know how to be safe, unless there were
As well a preaching to the heart, as ear:
For, most what now proceeding from the mouth
Is, only counter-pleadings between Truth
And error; which both sides, to fortify
With so much confidency do apply
The words or meanings of Gods holy writ,
That, had we no way to ascertain it
But these, or those men's, or my yea or no,
None could know what they should believe or do.
For, as well Supreme Powers as private men
Are Patrons of gross errors now and then;
And by Authority that is suppressed
Which was by like Authority professed.
With every windy Doctrine flur'd about,
Some are not half so zealously devout
And resolute professors of what is true,
As of what is Heretical and New:
And others oldest and sound Truths condemn,
Because they are but Novelties to them.
Some term all those Phanaticks who dissent
From them in Judgment, although innocent.
Some call them Saints and Martyrs, who by some
Are judged the cause of all the Plagues now come.
The Romanists, unto our Separation
From them, ascribe this present Visitation.
Some others say, it is our toleration
Of their Idolatries, which plagues this Nation.
Some to entrenching on men's Consciences
Impute it. Some to our tolerating these.
Some to expelling of the Hi'rarchy:
Some to suppressing the Presbytery.
Some to Rebellious actings against Kings;
Some other unto quite contrary things.
And the result of all summed up together,
Is this, Each shifts his guilt off to another.
But, GOD before the Round has wheeled about,
Will find the principal Offenders out,
Either while time runs on, or, when he shall
To universal Judgment summon all.
That which should have two feet to stand upon,
We cripple, by allowing it but one:
Some zealous are for Temples built with stones;
Some for those spiritualized in flesh and bones.
Some are for Conquests by the temp'ral Sword;
Some to be Victors by the Two-edged Word.
Some look for Christ in that Jerusalem
Which was in Palestine; and some for him
(In that Jerusalem which does descend
From Heaven) do in Faith and Hope attend:
And, too too often also, they who be
At union in their Judgments, disagree
So long (for By-ends) timely to improve
Their knowledge, faith and works, by Christian Love,
That in all, whereby they to merit thought,
Their Labor's lost, and all for which they wrought.
Delusions now so many are, and such
In these last times, that they endanger much
Even GOD's Elect; and do presignifie
The day of Vengeance is approaching nigh:
And partly seems to be charactared
By what the best men hope, and worst men dread.
However, let no soul despair that has
Sad apprehensions of the day of Wrath;
By this, or what in my Review you find
Conditionally predicted, to remind
What was neglected; for, among us here
Christ's everlasting Gospel to our ear
Is preached yet; and, not yet is the day
Of Reconcilement passed quite away.
Come, let us therefore, ere it shall grow dark,
To escape the Storm and Fire, fly to the Ark
Which has been slighted; there is yet a place
For Mercy, and an open door for Grace.
When Penitence brings Reformation in,
It makes a Blessing, what a Plague had been:
Yea, then 'twill to her future weal be turned,
That this great City was to ashes burned:
She Phoenix-like, shall gloriously arise
Out of that Rubbish wherein now she lies;
And I, which now am disrespected here,
Shall have a Monument erected there.
GOD all advantages to save us, takes,
Forsakes none, till him he first forsakes;
Made not one man (though some so please to say)
To be a sinner or a castaway:
But all in love, that they might be by him
Possessed with delight, and he by them.
For, when the sin of one had all destroyed,
That his Love should not thereby be made void,
He to redeem them gave his only Son,
Who ransomed all again, excepting none.
Still by his actings in the dispensation
Of Judgments and of Mercies to this Nation,
(Even by the late Plague of devouring fire)
He manifests, that he does not desire
Our total Ruin; but, takes all occasions
Allowed by Justice, for our preservations:
And though our sins as red as Scarlet show,
He can and will make us as white as snow,
If we repent them; or, if we but would
Endeavor it so far forth as we could:
For, he in sinners deaths takes no delight,
Or, any without cause to grieve or smite:
But in pure love dispenses his correction,
To bring our happiness unto perfection.
This is my Creed, which should I not confess
To glorify GOD's Love and Righteoussness,
(When by occasions thereto moved I am,
That others may likewise believe the same)
I merited to be shut out from those
To whom GOD everlasting Mercy shows:
For, could we see, or apprehend how near
He stands, when far off he does appear,
Cooperating for, and with us too,
(In that which for our selves we cannot do)
We would more love then fear him (though his blows
Are very sharp) since intents by those,
Is hammering the self-love of the Creature
Into the Will and Temper of his Nature,
To make true Union, which till then, will be
Impossible; for, nothing can agree
With ought so perfectly as to unite,
When diametrically opposite,
As those two Natures be; because the other
The one would destroy, if till then knit together.
Repine not therefore, at what GOD shall do,
What ere it be; but willingly thereto
Submit your selves, and heartily repent
Your Provocations. Let us all lament,
Not thereto frighted by a slavish fear
(Of Judgments which now felt or threatened are
By this Review) but in pure love to him
Whose Mercy saves, when Justice might condemn;
And persevereth to redintegrate
By Love, even those who persever'd in Hate.
Do thus, and then the Judgments which in part
Now executing are, GOD will divert.
Repent what you have done, and he will too
Repent of what he threatened has to do.
For such Repentance well consists with that
Immutability which does relate
Unto the Deity; and will accord
With Attributes ascribed in his Word.
Yea, though from my Predictions you escape free,
I shall then counted a true Prophet be;
And this my Interjection will appear
Not so improperly inserted here,
As I my self supposed, when 'twas begun,
It would appear to many, being done:
For, till I had compos^d what here is penned,
I knew not all whereto it might extend;
Nor know I yet: and therefore I do leave it
To such effects as GOD shall please to give it.
But how my soul! how came it so to pass,
That this Ejaculation, with Alas,
(And with sad Musings) was begun at first?
Since thou do know, that when things are at worst,
GOD then comes in, and often does repair
Our Breaches, when brought near unto despair?
The Aid delayed a while, he brings at length,
(Even when we have no likely means, or strength
To help our selves) why then should thou be sad,
Who frequently experiments have had
That Mercy has to thee been more then doubled,
When others thought thee most extremely troubled
Thou were vouchsaf^d the greatest inward Rest,
When in thy Body thou seem'dst most oppressed;
And to be kept unharmed in the flame,
Is more then preservation from the same.
Then what thou have persuaded others to,
Continue (as thou have professed) to do:
In what GOD's glory may advance, persever;
Depend on him; be pleased with whatsoever
He either shall permit, or has decreed,
And to discharge thy Conscience still proceed,
Not fearing that thy labor or thy cost
In doing of thy Duty, will be lost:
For fully recompensed thy pains would be,
Though thou should edify but two or three.
The World, the Devil, yea mine own flesh too
(Offended much with what I say or do)
Conspire together, and Confederates be
Both to discourage and disparage me;
Pretending they have somewhat to produce,
To prove me blamable without excuse:
(And may destroy me, if naught intervene,
To bar the prosecuting what they mean)
Yet I desie them both to act and say
The worst they either would effect, or may;
For, though they find me many grains too light,
I have a white Stone that will make up weight,
And such a Friend as has on me bestown
A Righteousness more perfect then mine own.
He cheers me with assurance that he will
To me what he has been, continue still;
By GOD's free-gift this hope, this faith I have,
And they will send me safe beyond my Grav^.
VATICINIUM CAUSUALE, Imprinted 1655.
THis being composed upon a special Occasion, whilst Oliver Cromwell was in
Power, the following Prediction was therein expressed, page 12.

And now great Oliver, to thee likewise
Let this be known, and do thou not despise
The Publisher. GOD does expect to have
Honor from him to whom he honor gave:
That such as bear Rule over men be just,
That they their Vows infringe not, nor his Trust:
That they consider he bestows large Measure
Of Power upon them, not to act their pleasure,
Or to fulfill their, Lusts; but does enlarge
His Bounty, that their Place they may discharge
With Courage: That he Riches does provide,
Lest Avarice might draw their hearts aside,
Or wants, to do Injustice them compel:
That he gives Honor, not to make them swell
Above their Brethren; but them to exempt
From what may mis-befall them by contempt.
And, that all these things are on them bestown
Much more for others sakes, then for their own.
Know, Sir, that GOD, from persons in your Place
Expects all this, and to that end gives Grace
And Power for asking; and what ere some say,
That he no man compels to go astray,
Nor leaves nor hardens any (not the worst)
Till love to selfuess makes them leave him first.
If this, thou well considering, shall act
Accordingly, performing thy Contract
With GOD, and with his People, he shall then
Give thee the loves and hearts of all good men:
Fix thee as firmly as the Rocky shores,
Which slight the Ocean when it foams and roars.
Thy Name shall spread and glorify much more
Then all thy Predecessors heretofore.
Yea, in Fame's Book thou may enrolled be,
The first who made this People truly free;
Be Firstborn of those Viceroys who shall take
Their Thrones from Him, whose Kingdom down will break
All Monarchies of Tyrants, with all those
Who help patch up the Clay and Iron Toes,
The Relics of that Image which has been
The Prop of him that is called the Man of Sin.
All this may be, and if thou strive to go
The way that open lies, it shall be so.
Oh! lose not this advantage for a Bubble,
Which in vain hope begins, and ends in trouble.
And lastly, be it known, not by event
(Which may be to thy future detriment)
But by Precaution, that if fail thou shall
(Without this Peoples obstinate default)
Of what they justly from thee may expect,
(Who art advanced their Freedom to protect)
Or, shall abuse thy Power them to oppress;
Or, leave them unreliev'd in their distress,
So that they shall be forced to cry and call
To GOD for aid; he hear and help them shall;
Search what is misdone, and (though their former sin
Has great and full of Provocations been)
He, for the present time, will pass it by,
And on thy failings only cast an eye,
Avenge their Cause, call thee account to give
Of all those favors which thou did receive,
Of that late Mercy too, among the rest,
(Which did occasion what is here expressed)
And with much indignation cast thee down,
When to its height thy confidence is grown.
There were several Addresses made to Oliver Cromwell, and his Son Richard by
this Author, whilst they exercised the Supreme Power, amounting to above Two
Quires of Paper; in which were many Seasonable Precautions and Remembrances to
them tendered with a sober boldness; as also many Predictions of what would
succeed, if they neglected what was thereby precautioned, which are now
observed to have been verified: But these being delivered (sealed up) into
their own hands, and not imprinted, are all omitted in this Review.

Verses to the King's Majesty: Written immediately after His Restoration, and
imprinted Anno 1662.
IN the sixth page, the Author thus proceeds with what he had begun.

I had presumed a personal Address
Long since; but difficult is an Access
For such as I appear, who hazard blame
And disrespect enough, where I now am,
Because that which to do, my Conscience calls,
Is by some numbered among Criminals.
In that regard this Paper must make way
For gaining an admittance, as it may,
And will perhaps presented be by some
Who shall have entrance where I must not come.
I cannot write strong lines with swelling words,
Whose Elegancy scarcely room affords
For sober sense; nor muster up their Names
Whom History, or whom Tradition fames
For brav'st Achievements since time first begun,
And then say, You have all of them outgone;
And think my foolish Words may add unto
Your honor, more then your own Deeds can do.
Or, that there is any wise man who gives Creed
To what they in a flat'ring Poem read.
It it is not in the Power of any other
By Pen or Tongue to clear up, or to smother
Your true Deserts; for in Your Self that lies,
Which either them be clouds or Dignifies.
No other thoughts I entertain of You,
But such as I may think, and you allow.
Yet to extol Your Worth, I shall not dare,
Till I know truly what Your Virtues are.
For though to Flat'rers, all Kings seem to be
Of like Desert; they seem not so to me.
I Will serve You faithfully in what I may,
And You, as King, love, honor and obey:
I would conceal, not publish Your Defects
If I knew any; and give due respects
To all Your Merits; but I will not own
One Line that praises them, till they are known.
For, till I know I give but what is due,
I am a Liar, though my words be true.
Since equally both good and evil things,
Are famed of the best and worst of Kings.
A stranger likewise, You have been long time
To most of Your own Subjects in this Clime;
And, I was neyer where I did behold
Your face, since you were two or three years old;
What good soever therefore I aver
Of You, I shall but seem a Flatterer:
Yea, You Your Self would think so, should I add
Those Virtues which You know You never had;
And, Praise which is ascribed to any one
I^n that mode, is a little less then none.
But little credit also has a Poet,
To celebrate Your Worth when he shall know it,
Or counterpoise or silence Contradictions,
Since most esteem his Writings to be Fictions.
And You would have more honor then from them
By these blunt Lines, if they had Your esteem.
I therefore so shall study to increase
Your Honor, that I may not make it less;
And, whatsoever I can say or do,
(Although You give a Countermand thereto)
I Will say and do it, when I shall be sure
Your Life, or Peace, or Honor 'twill secure:
And if this be a fault, I do intend
To be thus faulty till my life shall end.
I know well, Royal Sir, who it is that says,
To please great men, deserves not meanest praise.
I see how it is approved, and what they gain,
Who can that thriving Faculty attain;
Yet I shall wave that Art, and will assay
To do You honor in another way,
By giving You occasions to express
Your Justice, Mercy, and Your Prudentness,
That You Your Self may make the World to see
Your Virtues more, then words can say they be.
To that end much might in my Caese be shown,
But rather for Your sake, then for mine own,
Is this Address; yea, rather to prevent
What may be Your Harm, then my Detriment:
I Will therefore wave that too, that no self-end
May frustrate what I chiefly do intend, etc.
Page 20, it thus follows.

-- lest my good intent
To You, some future Casualties prevent,
I will so far forth as my Chain does stretch,
(And my own shortened Arm and Hand will reach)
Exhibit such Expedients, as from time,
And other Herbs, I Have sucked within our Clime;
And wanting better Gifts, will offer You
This little Cluster of those Grapes which grew
Upon my Withered Vine; for though they are
But sow'r, Your Kingdom yields none wholsomer,
If you shall seasonably press out the Juice,
And then assume it without prejudice.
This Time is Critical, the ways be rough,
And many of those Chariot Wheels fly off,
By which Your Marches expedited seemed;
And, lost Advantages must be redeemed,
Lest when You think that they are come to hand,
Your main Expectances are at a stand,
Or put so far back, that You may survive
Your hopes, and Your own happiness outlive.
I wish it otherwise, and know it may
Be as I wish, if you the means assay,
Not giving ear to those who will withstand
Your good, and that which GOD has now in hand.
I have discharged my Conscience, and so shall,
What ever for so doing does befall;
And hope that will not wholly be despised,
Which now shall be in faithfulness advised.
To those men do not overmuch adhere,
Who think all Wisdom lies within their Sphere.
For Honors, Riches, and Self-Interest,
Have made wise men as brutish as a Beast.
Heed other while, what Common Fame does say,
As well as what Your Courtiers whisper may;
Lest You be ignorant of many things
Whose cognizance is pertinent to Kings.
Make no man Your Chief Confident, but he
That is discreet and honest famed to be;
Lest he deceives Your Trust, and in the close,
Destroys Your old Friends, and begets new Foes.
Let Justice be your Scepter; and Your Crown
Be Mercy; and if You would keep Your own,
Give that to others which to them belongs,
And free the poor and fatherless from wrongs;
Especially Your main Endeavors bend
To make and keep Your Sovereign Lord Your Friend;
And if You would be settled on Your Throne,
Take care that His Usurped be by none.
Enjoy Your Conscience, whatsoever it be,
So other men may have their Conscience free;
And hang me for a Traitor, if hereby
You then enjoy not more Security
Then what Your strength by Land and Sea now gives,
And all that Humane Policy contrives.
Let Truth and Error fight it out together,
Whilst Civil Peace disturbed is by neither;
Which may be so provided for, that none
Shall justly be displeased with what is done;
Nor You thenceforward be (for evermore)
Disturbed, as You have been heretofore.
If You neglect this, and I disobey,
'T will be with much grief, and no other way
But only passively; and whatsoever
I suffer, will Your Welfare still endeavor.
To be of this mind, thousands I believe,
Whom You to favor do not yet receive;
And whilst they are excluded (though in peace
They live) suspicions daily will increase,
By which You may have trouble, and they blame,
Who shall be no way guilty of the same.
Your taking timely opportunities
Now offered (from what yet before You lies)
May render You a blessed Instrument
In making smooth way to that Government
Which Tyrants and ungodly men most fear,
You and Your Subjects mutually endear,
More glorious make Your Temporary Throne,
Then ever English King yet sat upon;
And Your Name to be terrible to those
Who to Christ's Kingdom shall continue Foes.
Herein I Have spoke according to my Creed
Wishing my just hopes may thereon succeed;
And, that upon Your heart it may work more
Then what I Have spoke to others heretofore.
But, GOD's time is at hand, within his Power
Are all men's ways, yea both Your heart and our;
And I will patiently submit unto
What either he or you shall please to do;
Not asking (whatsoever I seem to want)
Ought more then You spontaneously shall grant;
For what I may expect, if You deny,
So far as need shall be, GOD will supply.
The Liberty I covet to enjoy,
Is that which no man living can destroy.
The Wealth I aim at, is nor less nor more
But to be well contented, rich or poor;
And if I had a will my Wits to strain,
That I to Earthly Honors might attain,
I should to no such Vulgar Heights aspire,
As now are Objects of most men's desire;
Or to a style of so mean Consequence
As is an Earl, a Marquess, Duke or Prince;
Or to be called Your Cousin. For, no less
Would satisfy my large Ambitiousness,
But such a Dignity as did commend
His Loyalty, whom David called Friend;
And means enough to make a Parallel
Of every Traitor with Achitophel.
For, then you should in very short time see
That no man more deserves esteemed to be
Your Loyal Subject.
A THANKFUL RETRIBUTION, Imprinted 1649.
THis was written to express the Author's gratitude to some few Members of
Parliament, who without his seeking, had propounded an Expedient whereby to
satisfy his just Demands; but being without effect, that which was neglected,
is here again revived, as pertinent to consideration at this time.

Though Wishes are but words, Thanks are no more;
And my Oppressions make me not so poor,
But that I have yet Thanks enough to pay
For Fifty thousand Wishes in one day;
And I much thank you --
Page the Second.

But truly I expect not yet to see
The World neglect her own, to think on me;
Nor do I ought for my Advantage crave,
Whereby the Public may disprofit have:
I rather wish, That what is truly known
By Service and by Grant to be mine own,
Might be conferred, or means at least, whereby
My Labors might support my Family
Till I received my dues. For that would please
My longing more, then all those Offices
Which others covet, and wherein few can
At once grow rich, and be an honest man;
And, wherein (as Affairs are managed now)
He that would fain be honest, knows not how.
I value not my self so high, to set
My heart on what I am not like to get:
No, nor so low, but that (if I had wings
To reach them) I would fly at the highest things
Your House could give me, or the world could show me,
Yet set them at a distance far below me:
For, he who of himself esteem shall make
By those things which the World may give or take,
(Or he who by his Trappings, or his Place
Does prize himself) his Manhood does debase.
If I well know my heart, I seek no more
Of this Worlds Honor, or of her vast store,
Then what suffices to defray the Debts,
Which Duty and Necessity now sets
Upon me; or which may yield means to do
Those Works which God may seem to call me to,
And keep up that frail part of me which dies
Or lives unactive, without due supplies.
Yet when I did perceive with what disdain
Some did your friendly motion entertain,
And how they jeered thereat, it tempted me
To wish your Motion might vouchsafed be,
That I might see how mad the Fools would grow
With Envy, if they lived to see it so.
One said the Place was fitter to reward
A Member of your House; and it appeared
Thereby to me, that he had quite forgot
(As others do) the Self-denying Vote.
Some seem to think, that seeing I am poor,
(Whatever they owe me) they should give no more
Then suits my present Fortune; as if I
With my Estate had lost my Dignity,
And he had got it, who since the other day
Is grown Sub-Grandee from a beggar-boy,
By such an Occupation, as has yet
Neither improved his Honesty or Wit:
But, let these make the best of their New Lot,
So mine they wrong not, I envy them not;
And, it is my honor, rather then my shame,
Now to be poor; because I poor became
Not by mine own default; and in a time
When to be very rich, implies a crime.
For, who with honor to great Wealth can rise,
When all the Land is full of poor men's cries?
Or, what shame thereby him can seize upon,
Who wants, when Kings and Kingdoms are undone?
Or poor became, because he lent and gave
His whole Estate the Neighborhood to save?
And what at last will unto such succeed,
Who, when they may, relieve not that man's need?
I covet not the Place proposed for me,
(Although as capable thereof as he
Who did possess it) for, I know too well
Wherein that man his Neighbors must excel,
Who has an aim so high, except there shall
Some extraordinary Change befall:
And, me (I think) it would advance no more
Then did that Office I held heretofore.
For, in these Isles I have already had
A Place more honorable (though not made
So much account of) then it is to supply
The greatest Office in your Chancery.
Yea, more then to possess the place of him
Who in that Court is Officer Supreme.
And as a mark of Honor, bears about
A Silver Seal in an Embroidered Clout.
I have been honored to draw up Records
For him that is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords;
To be unto this Isle Remembrancer,
And, as it were, a Public Register
To that Supreme, High and most awful Court
From whence proceeds no Sentence, no Report,
No Order or Injunction, no Decree,
Edicts or Dooms, but such as Righteous be;
And where the Judge will to no side be swayed
By Eloquence, or Force, or bribed, or prayed
To be more merciful, or more severe
Then Justice and true Clemency may bear.
Yea, although at this present heeded not
By many, (and by others quite forgot)
I have enrolled, and registered to stand
Upon Record, what Mercies to this Land
Have been vouchsafed; what ought to have bin done
To keep away the Judgments coming on:
Shown how the King, and how the People might
Have escaped the hands which both of them now smite:
Foretold the War before it came to pass;
Who should begin the Quarrel in this place:
What sad Effects would follow; what regard
My words would find, how they should me reward,
With many other things, which will appear
In those Records, whilst men speak English here:
And thousands will in future time confess
Those things fulfilled which I did fore-express,
Who shall, it may be, likewise live to see,
That GOD observes who have abused me.
For hitherto, though I despised appear,
He spares my life, upholds my Spirit here;
Feeds me by his own hand, sometimes by men,
By Ravens and by Angels now and then.
Twice when my powerful Foes had by their might
Deprived me of my Subsistence quite,
He did supply my wants when I nor knew
Nor thought how Oil or Meal I could renew;
Against proud Prelates, and corrupted Peers,
He did maintain about me many years
A Watchful Guard, which kept me from their Power
When me they did endeavor to devour;
And from my troubles did release me too,
By doing what some though would me undo:
Yea, when the greatest Lion loudly roared,
And roused against me; when the bloody Sword
Was drawn upon me; when a Poisonous Pest
Breaths killing Vapors; when I was oppressed
On every side; and when I was forsook
Well nigh of all, GOD notice of me took;
Saved me from spoil, from slaughter, from infection,
And honored me, even by his own protection.
This being so, my Scorners whom I hear
At your Proposal do both grudg and jeer,
Have no such cause (as their misdeemings may
Suppose they had) your motion to gainsay:
'T was fear, perhaps, I might have made the Place
Henceforth less profitable then it was,
For if that Register shall conscience make
At every Hearing such true Notes to take
Of what is Ordered, and so careful be,
To draw up every Sentence and Decree;
As not to leave that doubtful which the Court
Intrusts to his discretion and report,
Ambiguous Orders would not so enlarge
The Clients trouble, and his needless charge,
Either by words too many, or too few,
(Or of less weight then to the sense was due)
New motions to beget, and thereupon
New Orders, till both parties are undone.
When to prevent this, due care shall be took,
You will not so much for great Places look,
To gratify your Friends, as you will then
To execute them, seek out fitting men.
No Place will then be thought too good for those
Who for your sakes have made their friends their foes
They shall then get, at least, their own again,
Who hitherto have spent themselves in vain;
And out of zeal unto the Common Good,
Adventured Liberty, Estates and Blood,
Whilst others (by their patience, cost and sweat)
Grow, to their Countries damage, Rich and Great.
Then they who have been innocently wife,
Will see in what their Wealth and safety lies;
And, then it may be, some fair Lot among
My Brethren, will befall me short or long.
When such a Change I find, I shall begin
To doubt almost, what Climate I am in.
I shall not, for a good space after, take
The boldness to profess I am awake,
Or, that a Reformation in has crept,
Whilst I was either in the dark, or slept;
And shall of our distractions hope to see
A better end, then likely now to be.
Then those things which we yet hear and behold
With fear and sorrow, shall with joy be told;
And then shall I no whit displeased grow,
Whether I sit higher, or more low;
Or, whether they who me should think upon,
Give me that Office, or a worse, or none.
For whatsoever befalls, I shall be fed,
And so shall mine, whilst other men have bread.
From your well-wishings these expressions flow;
From these perhaps another fruit may grow;
From that another, and from those again
Another, till your wishes you obtain,
And our Endeavors (though what we intend,
Succeed not) shall be prosperous in the end.
BONI OMINIS VOTUM: Imprinted 1656.
THis (as a Symptom of a Good Omen) was occasioned by the summoning of
Extraordinary Grand Juries out of the eminent Baronets, Knights, Esquires and
Gentlemen, to serve in their respective Counties, at the Summer Assizes 1656,
which because it offers what is fit to be considered and remembered, (and is
also very short) shall be here inserted without Abreviation.

Good speed to this Republic, and increase
Of Happiness to those who seek her Peace.
Sad things are threatened, and a lowering Sky
Seems to portend great storms are drawing nigh:
But look above them, and good courage take,
The Sun still shines, although the Clouds be black,
And beamings through their darkest parts appear,
Whereby discernable Good Omens are,
With symptoms of the Blessing we expect,
If we our selves obstruct not their effect,
And turn them to ill-signs; which to prevent,
That which yet follows gives a needful hint.
As both abroad and here within this Land,
Public and private men's affair now stand,
This Year is likely to be Critical,
About the time in which the leaves will fall;
And if Conjectures may be builded on,
We from what is acted, with what is left undone,
Spelled both together, somewhat may deduce
To teach us what ere long will be in use.
Whether it were the Policy of some
In hope it an obstruction might become
To Concord; or the Prudence of the Shrieve,
Or Special Providence, which did contrive
By those Grand Juries so to represent
Their Counties, we shall best know by the event:
For, whether cheerfully they meet and do
That Service which their Call invites them to;
Or, by a wilful Nonappearance, wave.
That Duty which the Common Cause does crave,
It will be signal; and to many one
A Test, as virtual as the Lydian Stone:
And, likewise give an Intellectual View
Of some Result, which thereon will ensue
At their next Meeting, who to represent
This Nation, shall be by Election sent.
For those Grand Jurors are now chosen forth
Of them, whose Gifts, Estates, Degree or Birth,
Has rankt them with the best, yea, out of those
(Excepting only open active Foes
To this Republic) who have been suspected
Mere Neuters, or else persons disaffected,
As well as from among them, whose true zeal
Has kept them constant to this Commonweal,
That they who heartily well minded are,
Themselves henceforward some way might endear
Thereto; and thereby for the future stand
Enrolled among the Patriots of this Land:
Endowed with all their Liberties, and freed
From those Distinguishments which either breed
Or nourish secret hatred, to the increase
Of Quarrels, and diminishment of Peace.
And, who can tell what Providence by these
(Though diffring in their Judgments) will now please
To make Effectual for the preservation
Or settlement of Peace throughout this Nation,
When things are acted by a moderate
Expostulation, in a joint Debate?
Where every one may freely speak his thought,
And when it is consid'red as it ought,
That no man can of safety be assured,
Until the Public Safety be secured.
We know, that diffring Simples put together,
So qualify and so correct each other,
(Though some are poisonous) that they purge away
Malignant Humors, which would else de^^roy
The life of man; so they who formerly
Did in their singular Capacity
And private Judgments, sometimes act or speak
What did at least endanger, if not break
The Common Peace; may when they gathered are
Into one fellowship, be helpful there
To benefit their Country ten times more'
Then they have been, or could be heretofore.
Yea, as the fat Lime, and the barren Sand
When they well mixed are, do make a band
To bind together rough or hewed stone,
(Which neither of them could have done alone)
Even so by them who are Dissenters now,
Our Public Buildings may the firmer grow,
When they into One Structure shall be fixed,
Well qualified, and rationally mixed.
This peradventure may some good presage
To them who are convened to engage
Within a higher Orb, or shortly must
Become our Trustees in a greater Trust:
For he who has consid'red it, believes
That if those Petty Representatives,
By loving Prudence, shall prepare a way
Thereto, (as in good likelihood they may)
That Nobler Body, which to its perfection
Are (for the most part) raised by their Election,
Might be so modaliz'd, and tempered so,
That Discords into Sympathies would grow,
And all our Fears and Dangers in the close
Quite vanish, to the terror of our Foes.
It may be thus, and will be thus, if yet
Men's Wilfulness has left them any Wit:
For, why should they who now may be at rest,
Run hazards to advance their Interest,
Whom nothing else can satisfy but Power,
All others at their pleasure to devour?
And spoilers of their own Estates become,
To make a Fortune for they know not whom?
Or seek to have that Game afresh begun,
By which all may be lost, and nothing won?
I hope they shall be wiser, and that we
In this Expedient shall so wary be,
That whatsoever others may intend,
We shall endeavor to promote that End
We ought to prosecute; and at the last
Our Anchor in a peaceful Harbor cast.
I wish it heartily; and (since I see
Wishings are vain where no endeavors be)
That, those whom it concerns, provoke I may
To seek this blessing, and to help make way
To that I wish for, I composed this Spell;
Let him who moved me to it, speed it well;
And make it so considered by this Nation
(Before things grow beyond consideration)
That Words which to their safety do pertain,
May not be always spoke to them in vain;
For they are fools who still pursue a Course.
Which makes a sickly being to be worse:
And they are also little less then mad,
Who would exchange a good one for a bad:
Or put in hazard a possessed Lot,
In hope to get what never can be got.
A Si quis, or Queries, with other Verses annexed. Imprinted in the Year 1648.
HEre should have been inserted Collections our of an Address entitled, A
Speech without door; but it is quite lost. The following Si quis presented to
the Members of Parl^ament in their single Capacities, related to the Author's
particular Interest, and was composed in an unusual mode, in hope it might have
inclined some of them to provoke the rest to take notice of that which had been
often presented unto them in an usual and more serious manner. Much may be
thereby collected to evidence how most Parliament men stood affected as to the
Execution of Justice about that time. This was laid down at the Parliament door.

That day in which Victorious Cromwell sent
His first Express (to your great wonderment)
Of Hamilton's Defeat; which whilst a Scot
Then living, lives, will not be forgot;
Even on that day, before your feet I spread
A sad Petition, humbly prefaced
By these ensuing lines:
He that is prostrate on the floor,
Lies there whence he can fall no lower;
So does this Orator of your.
Petitions he has often conveyed
Into your hands, yet finds no aid;
These therefore at your feet are laid.
There let them not neglected lie,
Nor unregarded pass them by,
But view them with a gracious eye.
And let our Parents not provoke
Their Children, till offense be took,
By which their patience may be broke.
Consider those who lie below;
For you shall reap what you do sow,
And find such Mercy as you sow.
Refresh their Spirits who are sad;
As GOD this day has made you glad
By those good tidings you have had.
Among the rest, this Beadsman hear,
Who feels the wants which they but fear,
Who dread the effects of this moist year.
And blame him not, that thus he shows
His Cause as well in Verse as Prose,
And in a path untrodden goes:
For, scarce Earth, Water, Air or Fire
Enjoyes he, or wherewith to hire
That Pittance Nature does require.
And men in danger to be drowned,
Lay hold on any trifle found,
To reconveigh them safe aground.
Then this annexed Paper view,
And let him favored be of you,
As that which he avers, is true.
Or, if for what he here prefers
His Suit, there stand Competitors,
Let it be neither his nor theirs,
But as most equitable it appears.
To my Petition fixed, I for your view
Left this upon the Pavement, and withdrew,
In hope some kind hand would have been extended
To take it up, that it might be commended
To free debate. But six days now are gone,
And GOD since then the Mercy lately shown,
Has more then doubled on you; yet here I
Still at your door unheard, unheeded lie,
And have as yet not so much favored bin
As to be told who took my Paper in
Of private Scrutenies grown therefore weary,
I have in public now set up this Query.
Your House receiving notice twelve months since,
Of my long suffering, and my Indigence,
(Occasioned in your Service) thought it fit
To some Selected Members to commit
The finding an Employment to supply
Subsistence, till my great necessity
Might be removed, by discharging that
Which is to me yet owing by the State.
I (having long without success attended)
Stand at this present by them recommended
Unto a Place named, wherein there appears
With me, nor few, nor mean Competitors;
And some (to vacate your intent thereby)
Have also termed it a Monopoly.
I humbly make Queries.
"First, Whether he that is well known to have bin
"Foe to the Cause you are engaged in,
"Standing Competitor with him that is known
"To hazard for it all that was his own,
"Can be preferred without a wrong to you,
"And an entrenchment on the other's due?
"Next, Whether a Competitor defamed
"For breach of Trust (by whomsoever named)
"Ought rather by your Votes to be befriended,
"Then he who to your House is recommended
"By her own Members, and against whom no man
"Exhibit justly an Impeachment can?
"Then whether he your Grace deserves best,
"Who has for you lost all his Interest
"In outward things; or they whose Wealth is more
"Since our distractions then it was before?
"And lastly, Whether ought may be comprised
"Among things judged to be Monopoliz'd,
"When all the Profits which from thence arise,
"Are brought into the Public Treasuries,
"And whereof neither one alone, or few,
"But all men likewise have their proper due?
Consider well, I humbly pray of these
Few Queries; and then do as you shall please.
For, though my hopes in these poor Suits may fail,
I shall in what is my chief aim prevail.
Yea, ere this Land has Rest, a day will be,
In which there shall be some regard of me;
And then, that which is now perused with Jeers,
Shall fill their scornful Readers full of fears.
These Verses next following, were upon the same Occasion presented to several
Members of the House of Commons, repairing thither the 23d of December 1648,
being the next day after their Humiliation, with an Imprinted Petition thereto
annexed.
THey who at Rich men's thresholds begging lie,
(Though long neglected) will prolong their cry
Till they an answer get, and so will I.
I know it is not Eight and thirty year
Since first I was an humble Suitor here;
And yet to me it seems as if it were.
Days, Months and Years I sadly waiting stand,
Yet no man speaks a Word, none lends a Hand
To help me, though but Justice I demand.
And therefore, such as know me, and my Case,
Observe it to the scandal of that Place,
Whose guilt I blush for, as my own disgrace.
But now I hope the Pool which heretofore
Cured some days none, or one, (and few days more)
Is moved so, that one day will cure a score.
And that he prosecutes not his Affairs
Unseasonably, who to a Means repairs
New sanctified, with Fastings and with Prayers.
Excuse me then, that thus I do forelay,
And (as it were) arrest you in the way
Unto the House of Parliament this day.
And (whatsoever this morning is designed
To be debated there) some minutes find
To hear that Prayer which is herewith joined.
Yea, spare a little time to do him right,
Who (having served you with a heart upright)
Seeks but his own, that you enjoy it might.
For, it is a loss to you, that he or they
Who could, and did for you lend, give and pay,
Should scarce have bread sufficient for the day.
And it is to your dishonor too, that such
Who to secure you, Goods nor Lives did grutch,
Should want, whilst your betrayers are grown rich.
If you in your Grand Work the worse succed
For doing of this Charitable deed,
Leave me hereafter quite out of your Creed.
Or, if they long thrive, who as heretofore
Shall still defer to hear and help the poor,
Kick me and my Petitions out of door.
It Is now within your Walls, and I expect
It will be there this day with good effect,
Though some should think it merited neglect.
For of that Crisis 'twill a groundwork be,
Whereby I shall undoubtingly foresee,
What will become of other men and me.
Things present at some points of time foreshew
Things future; and unless mistake I do,
That which this day produces, will do so.
That which was predicted in the last lines, has accordingly succeeded, and
justly; for that expressed in the Petition annexed to the preceding Verses, was
in effect that which next follows.

The Effect of the Author's Petition.
IT showed, That after several Accounts upon Oath examined, stated and reported
by the Commissioners of the Navy, an Ordinance was passed the 22 d of March
1647, for payment of 1681 l. 15 s. 8 d, out of the Excise in Course, without
Interest, which was to that day wholly unpaid, though 60 l. had been spent in
soliciting for it, and Interest had also been paid by him for 700 l. thereof,
which was by him borrowed for the Parliaments Use, upon credit of the Warrant
from the Committee of Safety, in May 1643, for immediate payment of 1327 l.
wholly unpaid to that day. That he had also no recompense for 57 l. respited
upon the Public Faith by the Committee of Accounts; nor for that money (though
allowed to others) which was deducted of his Pay, for Trophies. That whereas
1800 l. was upon another Account granted by an Order of both Houses, March 15,
1647, out of Delinquents Estates to be discovered at Haberdashers-Hall, that
Order brought on him cost and trouble, without benefit; and that what he was
possessed of by orderly seizures, was taken away again by Compositions at
Goldsmiths-Hall, and by other Committees, to his damage and disgrace, instead
of benefit. That it being proved also upon Oath, how he was damnified (about
six years then past) by the loss of his Stock, his Lease, and an Employment
which might probably (for sixteen years to come) have produced 400 l. per an.
That though recompense was promised by the Parliament, his repair was
nevertheless neglected, till he had spent all superfluous things in his
possession, and was imprisoned for what he had borrowed, as aforesaid, for the
States Service, till he was compelled for discharge of that Debt, to fell 40 l.
per an. in Reversion, and 100 l. per an. in Possession, for certain time to
come; which, with a little Household Stuff, was all the Estate he had then left.
More might be alleged of this Petitioner's Losses; but he has had patience to
suffer, more then you have leisure to hear.

In consideration of the premises, he humbly prays, That the said 1681 l. 15
s. 8 d. may be paid with Interest, as allowed to others. That the 700 l.
borrowed for the State, and for which he has paid Interest five years, may be
made payable accordingly, with the 57 l. respited, and the 300 l. by him
already disbursed; as also the said 1800 l. made payable by the said Ordinance
of both Houses, the 22^ of March 1647, out of the Excise, or out of
Compositions at Goldsmiths-Hall, with Interest, until all shall be paid, to
relieve his Wants, to proceed with his Contracts, and to disoblige him from his
Creditors,

To this effect was the annexed Petition; but all this was neglected, even when
the Petitioner was thereby constrained to live upon Charity, (as appeared by
his Poem, called Westrow revived.) until GOD providentially beyond his hope,
almost in a miraculous way, enabled him to purchase a considerable Estate, by
means of their acting against him, who thereby intended their own benefit and
his ruin. And that Estate was also lost again by their self-seeking and
Injustice, who thereby lost likewise their Power, as that Petitioner often
predicted it would come to pass. For, after preferring the foregoing Petition,
the said Parliament sold unto him a Manor worth about 300 l. per an. in
consideration of a part of his Debt, and of about 1600 l. more by him paid. The
Deeds were sealed, Possession delivered, and he enjoyed it a while;
nevertheless they sold it again to a Member of their own, who pretended to a
concealed Mortgage thereof, (probably forged) whereupon by a suit in Law, this
Petitioner was ejected without any satisfaction, having lost, besides his
Purchase-money, about a Thousand Marks in charge of Suit, with other
inavoidable Expenses, and the loss of the whole Purchase, without likelihood of
one penny toward satisfaction for ever. Moreover upon further consideration,
the Parliament allowed Interest for the aforesaid 1681 l. 15 s. 8 d. charged
upon the Excise, with 300 l. formerly due for Interest; which 300 l. with much
difficulty was procured by Oliver Cromwell's Order; but all payments out of the
Excise Office being retrenched for the Public Service, the Petitioner having
forborne that great sum almost twenty years, never received more of the Interest
or Principle-money, and the said Parliament being quite dissolved, gave over
that Debt as quite lost for ever; yet he lost not all, for he had thereby a
true feeling of that whereof he had experience formerly by sight and report
only; as also both of GOD's Justice and Mercy.

The Tired PETITIONER.
THis being a single sheet, was imprinted without a date, about the same time
with what last precedes; and offers to remembrance some neglects not
inconsiderable. But it may be thought by many, that this Author has in these,
and the Verses next foregoing, insisted too much in particulars relating to
himself; therefore this short excuse was added. He was (as he believes)
providentially engaged by Public Services interwoven with his private Affairs,
that he might have means and opportunities to gain a personal Experience of the
chief Transactions in those times; which if he had taken up on trust, and by
report only, he could not have been so assured of, as by being made sensible
how those persons, were qualified, by whom the Work then in hand was carried
on; nor what Occasions were from time to time justly offered, to prosecute that
which he thought pertinent to his duty in relation to GOD and his Country, as
he did, and might do by knowing, and being known to most persons of Quality
then active in those Public Affairs, with which his private Concernments were
linked throughout the progress of that Parliament, from the strange and
unexpected beginning thereof, to the no less strange end of it. For by his
personal sufferings under that Power above twenty years, with little
intermission, (notwithstanding his faithfulness thereunto) it did the better
appear how great many of their Grievances were, who had neither that likely
means either to prosecute Remedies, or to make them so well known; to prevent
the like heedlesness and want of compassionating private men's Oppressions
hereafter; This he hopes will sufficiently Apologize for him to all rational
men; and therefore here shall be added some part of that which he offered upon
the forementioned occasion, to those Members of Parliament whom he thought his
Friends.

Sirs, if this Paper find you (who to me
Are not so fully known as you should be)
It comes to move, that my Petitions may
Obtain your Answer without more delay;
Lest by attendance (as my Neighbors do)
With my Estate, I lose my Patience too.
For, I have waited, and endured so long,
That no Result can do me greater wrong
Then lingering hopes; and were I quite undone,
I possibly another course might run
To be repaired again, ere I obtain
That Benefit which I had hope to gain:
Or, else might find some other likely way
To fit me for the part I have to play.
Some say my Friends are more then I do know;
And I am hopeful that it may be so:
For, if kind language and much complement
Are signs thereof, nor Christendom nor Kent
Knows any man who may himself apply
Unto your House with better hopes then I:
But, if by real deeds it must be known
What Friends I have, their number small is grown:
Or, else their Power attaineth not unto
Those friendly offices they wish to do:
And peradventure they obstructed be
In their endeavors, by defects in me.
It may be it is observed I want Relations,
Gifts-qualifying, or those Commendations
That should advance my Suits; and which might make
Those active who men's Causes undertake;
And I half think it so; for ere this day,
Some one or other else had gotten way
For my Petitions; or appeared able
To make my Suits and me considerable:
Since others who have neither lost nor spent,
Nor for the Public hazarded or lent
Life, Limb or Money, find means to be heard
With expedition, and with good regard.
But hitherto my hopes do not succeed
According to my sufferings and my need.
Two Months upon one Suit I have bestown;
Upon a former, thrice three Months and one;
Upon another, four times three, and nine;
Yet still some other Cause out-justles mine:
And even by favors hitherto obtained,
More Mischiefs then Advantages are gained;
Because in the execution they have wanted
That influence whereby they first were granted.
This, with uncrazed patience I can bear
So long as my desires delayed appear,
By those Affairs which profitable be
Unto the Public, though they hinder me;
Since whilst that thrives, I cannot be bereft
Of all my hopes, nor comfortless be left.
But, if I still perceive my Suit delayed,
Or crossed, for private ends, I am afraid
My Grievances will make my Plaints outroar
The Cries of all the Women at your door.
Preserve I would, according to my might,
My Private Freedoms with our Public Right;
And, wise men will consider, that unless
They heed some time, a single man's distress,
(At least in his extremes) that one by one,
The Generality may be undone:
And that a bruise upon the smallest toe
May gangreen to the bodies overthrow.
In me (although my Sufferings are despised)
The Common Grievance is epitomis'd;
And, as this day the Kingdoms Cause does lie
Distressed between two Factions, so do I:
For, what some would have granted for my sake,
Is crossed for their sakes who the motion make;
Because but few men are by those made strong,
With whom they side not both in Right and wrong.
But whatsoever shall to me betide,
Whether my Suits be granted or deni'de,
By your endeavourings; it shall not wrest
My thoughts for any private Interest,
To murmur at it; so you will befriend
My Suit so much, to bring it to an end:
That from your Labyrinths I may retire,
And be again at leisure to enquire
What will become of me; and what of Them
Who take the Courses which good men condemn:
For to retreat, and gotten ground to yield.
Is otherwhile the means to win the field;
And he that would turn Floods another way,
Must dig his Drain before he builds the Bay.
He that has Money to promote his Ends,
Needs neither strain his Wits nor tire his Friends.
He that has Friends his Matters to contrive,
May (though he have nor Wit nor Money) live.
He that has Wit, and wants the other twain,
May live, but not without some want and pain.
He that has two of these, and wants one,
Cannot be very rich, or quite undone.
He that has all of these, might be a King,
Were he ambitious to be such a thing;
And he that is deprived of all these three,
May be as happy as I seem to be.
SE DEFENDENDO. Imprinted without Date.
THis was an Apology written by the Author in Prose, to vindicate himself from
such Aspersions as had been injuriously, and without any probable Cause cast
upon him by Malicious Detractors, as well to hide the unjust dealing with him,
as to disparage his Endeavors relating to the Public Service. It contains
many particulars, which being timely well heeded, might have prevented such
mischiefs and disadvantages as afterward befell, and continue to this day. The
date is not mentioned in the Imprinted Copies: But the time may be well enough
known by the Contents. The matter is such as cannot be abreviated without
dismembring and making the whole invalid; and therefore the Book is referred to
their perusal unto whose hands it may come.

JUSTITIARIUS JUSTIFICATUS, Imprinted without Date.
THis is also an Apologetical Discourse, the imprinting whereof is very well
known to some; For, it was burnt by the hand of the Common Hangman; and the
Author (though he neither published it, nor intended the distributing thereof
to any but Members of Parliament, to whom cognizance of the Cause most properly
pertained) was both fined and confined for it, neither being called to answer
for himself, nor having knowledge of his Impeachment, until sentence was past
against him. But this Innocence was so well known to the greatest number of the
most conscientious Members of that Parliament, whereby he was censured, that
(though the Accusation was brought in early in the morning, upon a day set
apart for debating a Cause relating to the Scots) so many of the said Members
then present, so abominated what they perceived to be then intruded; that the
whole day was spent before the Authors Enemies could prevail against him: So
many of them also, had been ear and eyewitnesses, of an impudent injustice,
whereby he was oppressed by their Committee of Examinations in another Cause;
that it occasioned the Voting down of that Committee, within a day or two
afterward: And the same Parliament, upon better Consideration, having also made
trial of the Authors patience in suffering, about the space of a whole year,
discharged him both from the said Fine and Imprisonment, without his
Petitioning or Mediation for it: For, at that time his Friends by Gods
Providence, had a seasonable Opportunity to move on his behalf, there being a
considerable number then present, who were jealous to do Justice, and discharge
the Trust reposed in them by their Electors.

This is all that shall be inserted touching the contents of that Book;
because, there are persons therein mentioned by Name, whose failings he
desires may be forgotten, in hope they are as truly to him reconciled, as he
is to them.

VOX PACIFICA. Imprinted 1645.
THis was a Voice tending to the Pacification of Gods wrath, and to make some
such Proposals as might help to reconcile those by whom the Common Peace was
infringed; and offered many particulars to consideration, which are still as
needful, and as much neglected now as at that time. It consists of four
Cantoes, containing about 200 Pages, two Cantoes more being intended, but not
finished, bebecause the Author thought his labor would be quite lost, here are
inserted a few particulars, in hope it may invite them to whose hands the Book
comes to peruse it at large. In the Page before the Title, and engraven
Frontispiece, the meaning of it is thus expressed.

A Trumpet sounds a Parlee to this Isle,
And over it a Hand displaies the while
A Flag of Peace, that this new Sign at door
May draw you on to see a little more.
We hung it forth, that these besotted Nations
May heed the seasons of their Visitations.
And grow more careful to conform their ways
To what this Voice, and their known duty says;
Though yet the most, our words no more have marked,
Then if a Cat had mewed, or Dog had barkt, etc.
The Epistle before the said Book, intended to the King, Parliament and People,
thus begins.

Not to Petition King or Parliament,
Or court the People suit with his intent
Who sends out this; nor is he come to crave
Your Favors, or your Patronage to have.
It is almost too late; and 'twas too soon:
At this time therefore, he expects that Boon
From one who better knows him, and from whom
This Voice does both to sight and hearing come:
He, had he always thus resolved, had lost
Less labor, and escaped with less cost.
He has no will to flatter; if he had,
To flatter at this time, were to be mad.
And peradventure also, he has now
As little cause as mind to flatter you.
Yet, that the same affection may appear
With which by him you always served were;
And that he may not give a just offense
By seeming careless of the Reverence
Belonging to your Grandeur, he professes,
That merely for the sake of these Expresses,
The freedom of bold Language he assumes, etc.
The News he brings, though thus declared it be,
Will warrantize the Speaker to be free;
And, if it be despised, he conceives,
Some will ere long grow bold without your leaves,
To make you hear with ruder Complements,
A blunter Language, and to worse intents:
For dreadful things are murmured; and unless
Men more conform to that which they profess,
You Will find at last, he dares without fear,
To speak more Truth then many dare to hear.
What ever he or his rude Language seems,
Your persons none more loves, or more esteems;
None seeks your Honor or your Safety more
Then he does now, or has done heretofore.
None oftener his own blame has ventured on,
That others might not wholly be undone.
He has no aim herein at ought which tends
To his own personal or private ends.
And thus professes he, that you might grow
The more advantaged by believing so;
And that his purposes no other are,
Then he professes, plain it will appear
To men of Ingenuity and Wit,
Who weigh what is past, with what henow has writ.
For whosoever has observation took
With what impartial freedom he has spoke
The Truth to each side (sparing Friend nor Foe)
(Nor caring who displeased or pleased should grow)
Can never draw a false Conclusion thence,
Without much folly, or much impudence.
Be wary therefore that this Voice you heed,
Before to any Censures you proceed
Condemning It, or Him from whom it came,
Lest you your selves incur the greatest blame.
For if this Voice be welcome to your ear,
The blessed way of Peace it shall prepare;
And you shall by the Charmings of this Song,
Perceive the rage of War allayed ere long:
The wicked Spirit shall be conjured down,
By whom the Seeds of Discord have been sown.
The Haggs and Furies which have danced here,
No longer to affright you shall appear;
But all the sacred Virtues, and the Graces,
Shall beautify your desolated Places.
But, if this Voice you either shall contemn,
Or him for speaking it, (what ere he seem)
Time shall, by GOD's permission, spread the same,
In spite of your detractions to your shame,
To bear a testimonial of your Crimes,
And your Impenitence, to future times;
Or, for a warning to those yet to come,
Or to exalt GOD's Justice in your doom;
The least of which will yield a rich Return
For all his pains, though his good will you scorn.
Page the 39th, after many fore-expressions by way of preparation, in order to
what was intended by that Poem, this follows.
You look for Peace, (and he who well could sing
That Song, deserves highly to be prized)
But, what can hither such a Blessing bring,
Whilst most Conditions thereof are despised?
Or, what as yet have they to do with Peace,
Whom their Corrections move not to repent?
Whilst wickedness does rather more increase,
Then seem abated by their Chastisement?
Who can expect that fretting Corrosives
Shall be removed from a fest'ring sore,
Until the skilful Surgeon first perceives
It may with healing-salves be plastred over;
Unless he rather has a mind to see
The Patient quite destroyed, then cured to be?
How few are yet observed, whose former course
Is bettered by those Plagues which now lie on them?
How many rather do appear the worse,
And to be more corrupt then we have known them?
In what perpetual broiles are they involved
Who for the Public Welfare most endeavor?
How friendless are they who seem best resolved,
And in good Resolutions do persever?
Howmany into Parties quickly band,
A questioned Delinquent to protect?
How few men for that Innocent will stand,
Whom Malice does accuse, or but suspect?
And, who now lives, and loves the Common Right,
Who suffers not some insolent despite?
Though most men see destruction hanging over
Their giddy heads; their Tragedy begun,
And round about them nothing can discover
But universal Ruin drawing on:
Ambition, Malice, Avarice and Pride,
Self-will, Self-love, Hypocrisy and Guile,
As arrogantly still on Horseback ride,
As if no Plague had seized on this Isle.
This man for Place, that striveth for Command,
Pretends the Public Weal, but seeks his own;
And cares not, if he profit by the hand,
If Law and Gospel too, be overthrown.
And he who their Preserver would become,
Finds furious Foes abroad, and worse at home.
In every Shire, in every Town and City,
This Kingdoms Discords are epitomized,
In every Corporation and Committee,
Some Engine of Division is devised.
Occasions daily spring; each man engaging
To side with, or stand leanning to some Faction,
And by new quarrels more and more enraging
Their Fury, to the heightning of Distraction:
An Emblem of which madness he might draw,
Who saw within an old thatched Barn on fire,
Poor beggars quarrelling for lousy straw,
(Or Dunghill rags or clouts raked from the Mire)
Who will not heed their harms, or cease to brawl,
Until the Flame consumes Rogues, rags and all.
How can calm Peace be timely wooed thither,
Where men grown beast-like are in their dissentions;
And where the means of knitting them together,
Are still occasions made of new contentions?
How can these Isles have peace that are so vicious,
And who have Factious Spirits raised in them
As wilfully disposed as those Seditious,
Who brought destruction on Jerusalem?
How can they look for Peace, while they contrive
Designs enlarging still their discontent?
Whilst Policy does wedges daily drive
'Twixt every Joint, to make a cureless Rent?
And, whilst to mend the breaches of this Land,
There Is nothing brought but peble stones and sand?
How can these miserable Isles have Peace,
Whilst Justice nor Compassion find regard?
Whilst they who should protect, do most oppress;
When sin scapes blame, and Virtue wants reward?
How can he hope for Peace, who would enjoy
His Will on any terms, and for the shade,
The Substance of those Mercies quite destroy,
Which might by patient industry be had?
Or how can he be worthy of that blessing,
Who knowing how much it has lately cost
In blood and treasure, lets the repossessing
Of that dear Purchase, for a toy be lost?
And does for evermore himself undo,
To satisfy his lust a year or two?
Who knows not, that more dread most men have,
Lest of Estate or Person they should lose
The loved Freedoms, then to be a slave
To him whose Tyranny the soul undoes?
You chiefly for self ends give, lend and pay;
To that intent strict Covenants you make;
To that end you sometimes do fast and pray;
To that intent much care and pains you take.
Yea, many goodly things to that intent
You often do, and many more intend;
But your Peace Offerings all in vain are spent,
Till you direct them to their proper end,
And till the Peace which you desire to make,
Shall be desired for Truth and Conscience sake.
Who sees not, that a Peace you now desire,
For naught but that you might again enjoy
Your Lusts, and to those Vanities retire,
Wherein you did your former days employ?
Who sees not, that like to those Isra'lites
Whom from the Egyptian Bondage GOD redeemed,
You have the pleasing of your Appetites
Much more then your Deliverer esteemed?
Their Garlike and their Fleshpots left behind,
They thought on more then on their servitude
From which they came; and more then they did mind
The Wonders and the Mercies which God showed.
And you have acted as in imitation
Of that perverse and foolish Generation, etc.
After the mentioning of many other Actings and Omissions obstructive to
Peacemaking, he proceeds, Page 49.

As Soon shall he who Westward always goes,
Meet him that still an Eastward point does steer,
As your two Factions in a firm Peace close,
Till they in their chief Aims approach more near.
For the one is bent the other to enslave;
The other is resolved to be free:
The last would keep what GOD and Nature gave;
The first would se^ze what ought not theirs to be:
And these from reconcilement are so far,
That all their kindness is but to betray:
When most they talk of Peace, they purpose War;
When they embrace, they mean to stab and slay.
And when perhaps you think the War is done,
The greatest Mischiefs will be but begun.
For as yet nor the one, nor the other side,
Nor King, nor People, Commoners, nor Peers,
Nor Flocks, nor Shepherds have the Course yet tri'de
By which you can be saved from your fears.
A Treaty might complete it; but, before
You venture that, you must be fit to treat:
For then the Work were half way done, and more;
And till that be, no step you forward get.
In heat of Quarrels, nothing done or spoke
Can reconcile; a Friends words move you not:
The more you talk, the more the peace is broke,
Till you your lost considering Caps have got:
Till your hot blood is cooled, till rage is gone,
And Reason does examine things alone.
Then peradventure, etc. --
See further, Page 51.
Until both parties do at least agree,
In all those Common Principles whereby
Human Society preserved may be
With Natures Rights, and Christian Liberty,
All Treaties will be mischievous, or vain,
To men adhering to the better course;
For, by such Treatings, Politicians gain
Advantages to make your being worse:
Yea, by that means these find occasions may
To gain, or give intelligence; to make
New Plots and Friends; to hasten or delay
As cause requires, and other ways to take
For their avail; which else they had not got,
And which true honesty allows not.
This Precaution is added, Page 139.
Take serious heed that zeal to Innovations.
Or causeless fears or hopes incline your mind
To subjugate these Kingdoms and these Nations
To Governments of any Foreign kind:
But rather use your utmost diligence,
To rectify those things that are amiss
In that which is established; and from thence
Cast and purge out what ever therein is
Repugnant to those Charters which by Grace
Or Nature were conferred; and let your care
Be so to settle all, that you make place
The Throne of Christ among you to prepare:
Lest when his Kingdom comes, you must be fain
To pluck your new devices down again.
Take likewise heed you no just means neglect,
Whereby the King may be recalled, and won,
GOD's Honor, with your Safety to respect,
And do the duties he has left undone.
For, by rejecting Him, how just soever
The Cause may seem, you shall delay the Peace
That is desired, and make the Quarrels here
With much more difficulty to decrease.
But, if your Prudency shall win him home,
And he return sincerely to his Charge,
It shall a blessing to these Isles become;
Your Honor and your Joy it shall enlarge.
And as Christ's Viceroy he shall sit upon
A Righteous and an everlasting Throne.
Walk therefore prudently in this straight path,
And turn not to the left hand or the right:
That Power which God to you committed has,
Improve for him according to your might;
Him in the reasonable Means attend
With Faith and Patience, that he may at last
Your King new molded back unto you send,
Or him out of his ruined Kingdoms cast.
If his misactings timely he repent,
GOD will restore him; and if you amend,
Then that which hitherto has made a Rent
Betwixt you, shall in sweet agreement end.
If both conform, both shall true Peace enjoy;
If both be wilful, GOD shall both destroy, etc.
See the 198th Page, where it thus follows.
Let serious care be took, and quickly too,
That her due Rights the Commonwealth enjoy:
That private men their duties better do,
Lest they by their divisions all destroy.
Let not those foolish Toys who do besot
Themselves with arrogance, presume to prate
As if a Parliament had them begot
To be now Heirs apparent to the State.
Permit you not Religious Melancholy,
Phlegmatic Avarice, or Zeal Choleric,
Nor suffer an Excess of Sanguine folly
To make both Church and State grow deadly sick,
Or rather mad, and in their mad distractions
To tear themselves into a thousand Fractions.
Let not your King and Parliament in One,
Much less apart, mistake themselves for that
Which is most worthy to be thought upon,
Or think they are essentially the State.
Let them not fancy that the Authority
And Privileges upon them bestown,
Conferred were to set up a Majesty,
A Power or a Glory of their own.
But let them know, that for another thing,
Which they but represent, and which ere long
Them to a strict account will doubtless bring,
If any way they do it wilful wrong:
For that indeed is really the face,
And they but as the shadow in a Glass.
Moreover let them know this, that if either
They still dividing, grow from bad to worse;
Or without Penitence unite together,
And by their sin provoke him to that course,
GOD out of their Confusions can and will
Create a Means, and raise a Lawful Power
His Promise to his People to fulfill;
And his and their Opposers to devour.
Yea, bid both King and Parliament make have,
In penitence united to appear;
Lest into those Confusions they are cast,
Which will affright them both, yea make them fear,
And know there is on Earth a greater thing
Then an unrighteous Parliament or King.
Because the Poem is large, and hard to be gotten, to supply that defect here
are added the Contents of every Canto, as they are in the imprinted Book.

The Contents of the First Canto.
First, here is to your view preferred,
When, where, and how this Voice was heard:
What kind of Musings were the ground,
What Worlds and Wonders may be found
Within our selves; what safe Retreats
From those Oppressions, Frauds and Baits
Which are without; how little fear
Of Terrors which affright us here:
How plainly there a man may see
The Villainies that acted be
For private Ends, with feigned shows:
How general Corruption grows:
Why to acquaint you with this Voice,
GOD by so mean a man makes choice.
Then shows how our great hopes deceive us,
And prays his aid who can relieve us.
The Contents of the Second Canto.
This Cantoes Preface being done,
The Voice to these effects goes on:
Tells how unworthy we are yet,
For Peace desired how unfit:
How vain, how harmful Treaties be,
Till both sides in one Third agree;
And (laying by ignoble Ends)
Use likely means of being friends.
Shows that the Peace which most pursue,
Will be nor permanent, nor true:
Then that some Cures may be appli'de,
Declares what Parts are putrifi'de,
Which must be purged without delay,
Or cauteriz'd, or cut away,
If we will, ere it be too late,
Repair this weak, this dying State.
The Contents of the Third Canto.
Here, whether you be pleased or no,
This Author makes bold to show
That portion of his private wrongs,
Whose knowledge and recess belongs
To Public Interest; that her eye
May through his wounds her scars espy.
The Voice then speaks again, and schools
In him, all other froward fools,
Who with impatiency do vent
Their private wrongs, or discontent;
And look their Trifles should be heard,
When Kingdoms cannot find regard.
It shows our Senate blameless is,
Of many things which are amiss:
And where the fault and fountain lies
From whence our present Plagues arise.
The Contents of the Fourth Canto.
Whilst here the Author does recite
His Musings after Naseby Fight,
The Voice returns, and does begin
To tell us what must usher in
Exiled Peace: Then told are we
How kept our Vows and Covenants be:
How we Reform, and Fast, and Pray,
What Thanklesness we do repay.
What must in general be done,
What by each individual one.
What Course both King and People take,
Ere they their Peace with GOD shall make.
What he expects from these Nations,
From Cities, Towns and Corporations;
And every House in some degree,
Before true Peace will settled be.
Carmen Expostulatorium, Imprinted 1647.
THis was intended to prevent the engaging these Nations into a Second War,
when the dividing of the City and Army was then by some endeavored, and likely
to be effected.

The same Precautions are at this day pertinent to consideration; and are
therefore here abreviated.

Though I have written heretofore in vain,
And may do now; yet I will write again,
In hope that what by Reason and by Rhyme
Was not effected, may be done in Time;
And, that although my pains be lost to some,
It shall not fruitless unto all become.
Hark! how the Drums beat, and the Trumpets are
Sounding Alarams to a Second War
Before the first is done; and whilst yet green
The wounds upon your bodies may be seen.
Behold, that which was coming long ago,
Draws now so near, that none shall need foreshow
What at the last will thereupon ensue:
For we without a Glass may plainly view
Such things in kenning, that unless our GOD
To them shall please to set a period,
(Or make some such diversion as no man
Conjecture of by any Symptom can)
An Universal Plague will on us seize,
Instead of Remedies for our Disease.
How then can I in time of need withhold
That which my Conscience tells me should be told?
Why should I keep those Premonitions back,
Which I conceive my Friends at this time lack?
A poor man's Counsel once (as we hear say)
Did save a City; so perhaps this may.
Excuse me therefore if (much grieved at
Your rash proceedings) I expostulate
Concerning that, whereby it seems to me
The War may now again renewed be.
Renowned Citizens, what do you mean
To make your City the unhappy Scoene
Whereon there shall in probability
Be acted now the bloodiest Tragedy
That e're this Island saw? are you grown mad?
And is there no Physician to be had
For this distemp'rature, but must it here
Be Cuckow-moon, or Dog-dayes all the year?
Have you no Drugs that may lost wits restore?
Can Patience, Herbagrace, nor H^lebore,
Nor any other Simple or Confection,
Work out that noisome humor and infection
Which has besotted you, till ye grow fit
For Bedlam, where are no such mad men yet?
Page 3, it thus follows.
Have you not yet discovered who be they
That cheat you, and for whom this Game you play
By your divisions? And when others find
Their falsehood for you, will you still be blind,
Or wink, as careless of the things you heed,
Till by long winking you grow blind indeed? etc.
Cannot you yet discover through the mist,
Those Juglings which the Spawn of Antichrist
(False Priests and lying Prophets) practice now,
To raise themselves, and work your overthrow?
Nor with what impudence they publish lies,
(Their bitter jeerings, and their blasphemies)
To make new breaches, or to widen those
Which Love and Prudency begun to close?
And which ere this time closed up had been,
Had they not cast untemp'red dirt between?
Page the Fourth.
Is it a time your Quarrels to renew,
When all is hazarded that is dear to you?
Observe ye not Three Factions like to them
Which were the ruin of Jerusalem,
At strife within your Walls? Do you not see
What spightful sparklings in their eyes there be?
How sharply they against each other whet
Their sland'rous tongues? how grinningly they set
Their gnashing teeth? Observe ye not how they
With Pens dipped in black poison, do assay
To re-ingage you, and with cursed words
Provoke the reinsheathing of your Swords,
That every Son and Father, Friend and Brother,
May sheath them in the heart of one another, etc.
Have you concluded never to retire
In your Career, till all is on a Fire?
And you and yours lie sprawling in the plashes
Of your own blood, or in your Cities ashes?
Or till you see this goodly stately Frame
(The work of many Ages) in a Flame?
Have you so often heard it said from him
(Whose true Presages no men will contemn
But Reprobates) what miserable Fate
Attends that House, that City, and that State
Which is divided? Have his Prophesies
So often been fulfilled before your eyes?
And are they at this day so likely too
To be ere long fulfilled upon you?
And yet will you a New Division run,
As if you studied how to be undone?
Or, as if you resolved to keep that path.
Which to avoid, your GOD forewarn^d ^ou has?
After many other Expostulations, and neglected Precautions, tending to their
Welfare, and which are now as pertinent to us, the Author thus proceeds again,
p. 13.

What makes you, and our Army now to be
So jealous of each other, as we see,
But that Self-love and Pride which you and they
Pursue in others? and because each day
You more and more in manners grow like them
Whose guiltiness you rail at, and condemn?
For most of those among you who pretend
To Reformation, do but seek to mend
Some faults in other men, that they to make
Themselves thereby, may an advantage take.
When zealously they labor to remove
A Tyrant, it proceeds but from Self-love,
That they may by possessing of his Room,
As active in like Tyrannies become;
As 'twere not probable that we should see
Suppressed Tyrants every day to be
Outvi'de by their Successors; and outgone
By those who blamed most what they had done.
It Is not because you seek the Public Good,
That you renew this War; for, letting blood
(Especially now when the Dog Star reigns)
So near unto the heart, and in those veins
Now likely to be opened, seems to me
Not Physic, but mere Butchery to be.
It Is not for GOD that you do now promove
This Quarrel; for you know that GOD is Love:
And, when he does engage us in a War,
It always evidently does appear
How it conduces to the preservation
Of Amity and Union in a Nation;
And, that we cannot otherwise avoid
The Consequence of being quite destroyed,
With all that is dear unto us: But in this,
Of such a Common Good no Sign there is, etc.
All your Contentions rather do arise
From fleshly Lusts, and carnal vanities,
Then from the Cause pretended; and there is none
Will doubt it, if you wilfully go on
In bloodshed, not endeavoring for Grace,
By making Fury give Discretion place.
It Is not the errors, or the imperfections
Of your Opinions, but of your Affections,
Which heighten Discord; and a will to please
Backsliding Demas, and Diotrophes,
Which has surprised you. It Is a disregard
Of Justice in Chastisements, and Reward;
And that respect of Persons which each side
Is guilty of, if both be not belied.
For if by Symptoms we the truth may gather,
The City and the Army too had rather
Adventure their safe being, by denial
Of yielding up their Minions to a trial,
Then to permit that Justice should proceed
Impartially. Both are, it seems, agreed,
What ever their Well-willers do propose
To save their Malefactors, though they lose
Themselves and all their Tribe, (as for that Crime
The Benjamites did once in former time)
And (which more aggravates) even thus they do,
Though they have seen the King for doing so,
Sit half beside his Throne; yea, though they see
This Parliament endangered to be
Even for the self-same fault. So hard a thing
It is even for the best of men, to bring
Their Will, and their Affections to submit
To Justice, though they cannot fly from it.
We will add no more, but leave the rest to be
perused in the Printed Copy, to avoid tediousness.
Letters of Advice touching the Election of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in
PARLIAMENT. Imprinted 1644.
AMong other things offered by this Author to be heeded, as pertinent to the
Common Welfare, he published a Book so called, touching the Choice of Knights
and Burgesses, to represent the Commons in Parliament, and other Public
Ministers; to which purpose he offered somewhat in his Perpetual Parliament,
mentioned in this Review. Therefore this being overlarge to be wholly inserted,
no more shall be here added, but some part of what is therein contained, in
relation to the due Qualification both of the Electors, and Persons to be
Elected which perhaps will give occasion of better heeding what has been
heretofore neglected. It was thus expressed, page 2, in Prose.

Being woefully experienced in the manifold Mischiefs whereinto this Nation has
been plunged by the Corruption or Insufficiency of Persons heretofore chosen
(or presumptuously intruding upon that Trust) and perceiving no public means
provided for preventing the like Mischief hereafter, nor any thereto privately
contributing his Advice, I have hastily sent abroad these Letters, not
arrogating a sufficiency to give such directions as may not be excepted
against, but rather in hope it would give occasion to some of better Judgment
to perfect what I have imperfectly begun according to my Talent:

Lest by that Course which we at present run,
Both Good and Bad together be undone.
That my Proposals may be the more willingly entertained and prosecuted, I will
briefly offer to heed, first, The Mischiefs we incur by inconsiderate
Elections, and how traitorous thereby we are to our Country, and to our
selves. Secondly, I will present you with the necessary Qualifications of those
who are to be Elected. And lastly, By what Expedient I conceive Abuses in that
kind may be best prevented, if we are not grown so corrupt a Body, that we
neither will nor can be represented by honest and discreet persons.

I need not particularize into how many Mischiefs this Nation is now, and has
been heretofore plunged by the rottenness and giddiness of some formerly chosen
to represent the Commonalty; or how perfidiously they have disserted or
betrayed their trust, to an endangering of our being everlastingly exposed to
the slavery of temporal and spiritual Tyrannies, no less accursed and
intolerable then the Egyptian Bondage: For, we give them power not only to
make us Slaves, Beggars, and liable to the Hangman at their pleasure; but to
subject us also unto those Decrees which may (gradatim) bring us or our
Posterity to be Papists, Turks, Pagans, and Vassals to the Devil, if the
Professors of Popery, Turcism, or of any other damnable Impieties should obtain
a temporal Sovereignty over us. If this* you believe not to be possible,
(because not yet come to pass) believe at least, that which you see of their
practice and condition who have been unworthily and unwarrantably chosen; and
how far they have already brought back upon us those Antichristian Slaveries
which we thought past fear of reviving.

But perhaps Mischiefs and Inconveniences of less concernment will stir up some
to be more cautious in their Elections then these. Let such take notice, That
by beedlesness in this duty, they shall make Fools and Tyrants Lords over them,
who will fawn and court them, till they are in Power, and then scorn and
trample them under foot; putting such immeasurable differences between
themselves and others, as if the respect due to the whole Nation, were due to
their single Persons. And they will then so take upon them, and so demean
themselves, as if to favor the Clients, to suppress those whom they disaffect,
to strengthen their own Faction, and to maintain their Usurped Personal
Privileges (though to the utter ruin both of all Public Liberties, and true
Piety) were the chief End of their Power; What good can be expected from such a
Choice? or what better Choice can be made, unless you more seriously, more
prudently, and more conscienciously manage your Elections?

When Wolves are by the Sheep for Guardians chose,
Who marvels if their Skins and Lives they lose.
The only means in Humane Prudence to be delivered from such mischiefs, is by
humbly supplicating Divine Mercy by truly repenting our sins, and by taking
more heed hereafter, that we be not Traitors to our selves, in foolishly giving
the disposure of our Estates, Lives, Liberties, and Consciences, to them who
will sell us for old Shoes; and serve us only to serve their own turns,
though to our destruction. Therefore I beseech you to be wary whom you shall
now and hereafter Elect; and make us not irrecoverably unhappy, by listening to
the Insinuations of unworthy persons, who will importune you by themselves and
others, to put our Bodies and Souls into their hands; complying with all shows
of Courtesy and Humility, till their purposes are obtained; and never afterward
regard our Petitions, our Cause, our Miseries, or our Persons; but overlook us
with such pride, as if they had neither received their Power from us, or for
our Welfare; but merely to exalt their own vanity, etc.

Therefore to remedy present Evils, and to establish your just Privileges, for
preservation of the Common Interest hereafter, let your care be to avoid the
choice of such as these:

I. Men overlavish in speaking, and in taking extraordinary pleasure in hearing
themselves talk; for a man full of words is neither good to give, or keep
Counsel.

II. Notorious Gamesters; for, I never knew a prudent or just man, a Common
Gamester: How can they be just, whose practice is to cheat other men of their
Estates? Or prudent managers of public Treasure, who expose their own Estates
to the uncertain hazard of Chance?

III. Men much addicted to Hunting or Hawking; for most of these, so they may
preserve and increase their Game, and enlarge Privileges for their own
pleasure, will not much care though it were to the depopulating of the
Country, and to the multiplying of wild Beasts destructive to the Nation.

IV. The Household Servants, or dependants on such Peers, as expect from their
Creatures the promotion of their own Designs and Interest, how repugnant soever
to the General Good.

V. Courtiers depending merely on the King or Queens Service; for the
enlargement and continuance of their Favor, depend on that which they call
Royal Prerogative; and the more that may be improved to an infringement of the
Subjects Right, the richer and the more powerful these will grow.

VI. Choose not such as are evidently Ambitious or Covetous; for how prone these
will be to sell their Country and Religion too, for Titular Honors and Wealth,
we have had too frequent experience.

"The Peoples Trust and Freedoms to betray,
"To be a Lord is now the nearest way.
VII. Elect not persons enslaved to Wantonness, and impudently persevering in
Carnal Uncleannesses; for such will not only give away your and their own
Estates to satisfy their Lusts, but betray also their Country, and their
Savior, to please their Dalilahs.

VIII. Take heed of choosing men superlatively proud: For they will be so puffed
up with their Legislatorship, that after they have sat a while in the House,
you will hardly know how to speak unto them, or of them, without being
questioned either for transgressing against good manners, or for breach of
their Personal Privileges; which they prefer before the Privileges of the
whole Nation.

IX. Choose not men overmuch affected to Popularity, or factiously oppugning
Sovereignty; for they will not be just or true to the Interest of King or
People, but so far only as it may advan^e their own Will.

X. Choose none generally reputed vicious in any kind; for they will be open or
secret Opposers of all Laws or Ordinances restraining Enormities, and hinderers
of bringing Delinquents to condign punishment.

XI. Make not choice of Irreligious persons, or such as are inclined to ancient
Superstitions, or modern Novelties; for these will not willingly assent to the
establishment of ought save what may advance their private Fancies.

For how can he affect true Reformation,
Who neither has right Rule or firm foundation?
XII. Make not choice of Children under Age; for we ought not to commit the
management of the most weighty Affairs of the Commonwealth to them who are not
capable by Law of disposing their own Estates; especially seeing the major part
of Voices, (which an ignorant Child may help to make up) will be sufficient
sometimes to confirm a Resolution to the Public Damage.

XIII. Choose not Persons Outlawed; or so far endebted, that they dare not walk
abroad without a Protection; for what can be more unjust, then to let them sit
as Lawmakers, who submit not to the Laws in force, and to render the Fountain
of Justice obstructive unto it self.

XIV. Lastly, Avoid the choice of those who make means to have themselves
chosen; for it discovers so much arrogance and self-conceit, that they are
worthy to be rejected; and doubtless they more intend that which may advantage
themselves, then to be serviceable to their Country. The Deliverers of GOD's
People in distress, were such as modestly sought rather to put off, then to
intrude upon Public Employments; yea, Saul was fitter to reign when he hid
himself among the stuff, then when he took care to be honored before the
people.

"The cursed Bramble sought not to be chose
"The King of Trees, till they did him propose.
There were also some Proposals and Caveats concerning those who are Electors,
and as touching the making choice by Lot; to the perusal whereof you are
referred in the Original Tract.

A Cause Allegorically Stated. Imprinted 1657.
THis was published among other things, during Oliver Cromwell's Reign, with an
Appeal therein to all Impartial Censurers.

A Goodly Ship, with precious Lading fraught,
Late in a dark night, nigh to Land was brought.
Through many dangers, and much blustering weather,
GOD's Providence had safely brought her thither;
And by the Waters motions, and the humming
Among the Shrouds, another storm seemed coming.
The Place arrived at, was a dangerous Bay,
From which, into the Port, two Channels lay,
Divided by a Quick-sand, with great store
Of Shelves, and sharp Rocks upon either shore.
She had a choice Commander, Merchants many,
Stout Seamen, Pilots too, as good as any;
With Passengers of all sorts, among whom
Some could (had need been) have supplied the room
Of well-experienc'd Seamen, and advised
Such things as Prudence would not have despised.
But these, among themselves divided were, (steer;
Through which of those two Channels they should
One Party thinking that the safest way,
In which the other thought most danger lay;
And in the dark it could not well be seen
In which the greatest hazard would have been.
Nor were they in less hazard to lie there
At Anchor, till the daylight did appear.
A poor old man was at that time aboard,
To whom GOD had been pleased to afford
A Faculty to see things in the dark,
Which others could not view, or did not mark:
He knowing what great streights the Ship was in,
(And what their loss was likely to have been)
Called out to those there had chief Command,
And said, There stands a Rock, here lies a Sand;
Another yonder; and a Whirl-pool there:
Be very careful therefore how ye steer;
Bear up a little while into the Wind,
(Although a show of danger there you find)
And take heed that a causeless fear or doubt,
Makes you not over-soon to Tack about,
Lest in the way you strike upon a steep
Sharp Ridg, and over-set into the Deep.
First, on the Starbordside a compass fetch
Half way to yon Point, to avoid that Breach;
And then upon the Larbordside again
Wheel off, and you the Harbor shall attain.
Thus spoke the old man; for although 'twere night,
He saw as well as when the Sun gives light;
And they who had a willingness thereto,
Did that which he advised them to do.
The greater part not heeding what they heard,
(Nor knowing their own danger) grin'd and jeered,
And from the Hatches crept into the Hold,
Leaving the Ship to what befall it should.
But they who more desired to have their Will,
Then to be counseled, whether well or ill;
Disdaining (as it were) to be advised
(Though for their weal, by one whom they despised,
Did not alone pursue him with despite,
But with Oppressions also him requite:
Now therefore, in what this man stands obliged
To those, let it impartially be judged:
And* whether such as they deserve not all
Those Plagues which now are feared may befall,
Till that Ingratitude they shall repent,
Which justly merits that sad Consequent
This is a Case (though heeded but of few)
To some known, as expressed here, to be true.
MERCURIUS RUSTICUS. Imprinted without Date.
THis was composed in or about the first year after the late unhappy War
between the King and Parliament, in imitation of the Weekly Intelligencers,
then published; being a Rustic Discourse, offering between jest and earnest,
some particulars to consideration, relating both to Civil and Military
Transactions; and hinted Notions then pertinent to those Times, and not wholly
impertinent to these. But no more of it shall be here inserted save the
beginning of the Book; and that also to no other purpose, but to distinguish it
from a Book of the same Title, published by another man; which this Author now
having seen, is unwilling to have it imputed to him, (as he has heard it is)
how worthy soever it may seem to be owned. His Book (which he thinks none will
be ambitious to father) thus begins.

By your leave Gentlemen; when seriousness takes not effect, perhaps trifling
may. Every man has some Toys in his head; and I have too many. One will now
discover it self, which has itched in it ever since last night. Mars had
lately tired me with long Marches and Skirmishes. Jupiter has cast such ill
Aspects upon me, that I cannot be jovial. The Moon is in the wain; Venus
retrograde; Apollo would not lend me his Fiddle to prevent my being oppressed
with Melancholy by the Influences of Saturn; and therefore I compli'd with
Mercury in making a Rustic Progress, and (now understanding that variety of
News is much desired) I am bold to present you with such gleannings as I
gathered up in the Country.

And though I am not so witty as my Friend Britanicus; nor bring you Narratives
that so well deserve the Whetstone as Monsieur Aulicus; nor come so furnished
with Novelties as Master Civicus; nor so supplied with Passages as the Weekly
Intelligencer; nor am at leisure to sum up all Occurrences, as the Accomptant;
nor so large in Promises as the Scout, the Informer, and the rest of your
diligent Mercuries; nor so impudent as to aver I present you with nothing but
Truth: Yet I have brought you that with which you may perhaps be for once well
contented to read or hear, though they be but such gatherings as I had from the
Mill, the Alehouse, the Smiths Shop, or the Barbers; for these are our Country
Exchanges, wherein we talk of a many things with as little good success as they
do at Westminster; and otherwhile also to as ill, and to as good purposes.

This being sufficient to distinguish his from the other Book bearing the same
Title, no more shall be here inserted.

What Peace to the Wicked. Imprinted 1646.
THis is an Expostulatory Answer to a Derisory Question concerning Peace; and
here is with little omission inserted, because it was so long ago Imprinted,
that it cannot be easily procured.

One who has seldom in these days,
From Fool or Knave got love or praise,
(And who by many men is known
With cheerfulness to have bestown
His Wit, Pains, Person and Estate,
The Common Right to vindicate)
A long Imprisonment has had
For calling of a Spade a Spade,
Which (if a Court-Card) might have been
Next to the King, except the Queen.
While he in that Confinement lay,
One asked him the other day,
When he supposed this War should end,
And what successes would attend
Our hopes of Peace: Which Question tho
From Levity it seemed to flow,
(Or scoffingly to be expressed)
Received this Answer not in jest.
Why ask ye when this War will cease,
And when this Kingdom shall have Peace,
As if you thought I could foreshew
All that hereafter shall ensue?
Or as if when the Truth were told,
You value or believe it could,
Who nor esteem nor use have made
Of those Fore-warnings which you had?
They who will know what shall succeed,
Must of things past take serious heed;
And glean Instructions whilst they may,
From actions of the present day:
For, past and present time declares
What for the future GOD prepares;
And, till these quicken their fore-sights,
Men sit in darkness till he smites.
If to this Question you would know
An Answer which for Truth may go,
(And not with ^hab-like Desires)
Wish all your Prophets may be Liars:
Then ask your Consciences, and they
Will tell what things expect you may;
For, let my Troubles never cease,
If ever you have other Peace
Then what your Conscience might foresee,
Though King and Parliament agree.
But lest the Conscience may be seared,
Or lest Delusions have appeared,
Which promise Peace when she is fled,
(And Vengeance hanging over head)
Ask your own Fears and Human Reason,
What they conjecture of the season.
Ask them what sign it is of Peace,
When Wickedness does more increase?
What may be hoped for, of that Nation
That slights her day of Visitation;
That mendeth not for words or blows,
That in Reforming, worser grows;
That suffers them who serve her best,
To be most wronged and oppressed;
And on them every Token has
Of Desolation, and of Wrath?
What Peace can we expect, whilst they
Who spoiled us, not only may
Find Mercy (which we could allow)
But, so imperious also grow,
As to reproach them to their faces,
(Even in their Privileged places)
Who once thought better Fruits would come
From that which they had parted from?
What likelihood is there that Peace
Will follow, when your Friends decrease,
And they who served you heretofore,
Shall be as mad as they are poor?
If yet you cannot well discern
When Peace will back again return;
Get knowledge timely, if you may,
What Game you are about to play;
How far you have as yet to run
That Wild-Goose-Chase of late begun:
What can be hoped for of those
Who are irrationally Foes:
What you in safety can propound,
Where little save Deceit is found:
Or, what good Harvest can be mown,
Where mischief only has been sown:
For, when these things are truly weighed,
What will succeed, needs not be said.
Get knowledge, if ye can, how long
Divisions will be raised among
The Lords and Commons; and when we
Shall find both Houses to agree,
That to the Public detriment,
Nor House nor Member shall dissent,
Or be united, but insist
Upon the Common Interest:
For, you have heard what Lot betides
A House or Kingdom that divides:
And know what is likely to succeed,
Till our Peacemakers are agreed.
If waste Jerusalem was made,
Who therein but Three Factions had:
This Island how may we deplore,
Wherein are Three times three, and more?
Some with the Parliament partake;
Some for the King a Party make:
Some would a Popular Estate:
Some Aristocracy create:
Some are a Faction for the Pope:
Some to maintain the Prelates hope:
Some for the Presbyterians vote:
Some Independency promote:
Some strive for this, and some for that:
Some neither know, nor care not what,
So War goes on, and get they may
Free Quarter, Plunder, and their Pay.
Some fight their Liberties to save;
Some, that they others may enslave.
Some for Religion, and for Christ,
Some that they may do what they list:
Some for the Commonwealths avail,
Some for Themselves with tooth and nail;
And they who have the basest end,
As fairly as the best pretend:
Not caring whether their desire
Obtained be by Sword or Fire,
By Truth or Lies, with Love or Hate,
By Treachery, or fair Debate:
This is our Posture; and whilst we
So foolish, false, and factious be;
Or, whilst it shall continue thus,
Who knows what will become of us?
Ask those who now of Peace do dream,
Who shall procure the same for them,
Since many are become their Foes,
Whom they to be their Champions chose;
Since they our Substance have bestown,
To make new Fortunes of their own;
And Public Injuries increase,
To gain themselves a private Peace.
Yea, since the People doubtings have
What to refuse, or what to crave,
Do still irresolute abide,
Long constant unto neither side;
Not in themselves resolved are,
Whether they would have Peace or War,
Or whether readmit they shall
Charles to be King, or not at all;
For, doubtless if thus matters go,
(As many now much fear they do)
A wise man needs not break his brain,
To search what Peace we shall obtain,
Since whilst thus blind and mad we be,
What will ensue, a Fool may see.
Yet lest you may be fooled more,
Then either now, or heretofore,
Observe the Commons, if of them
None serve two Masters at a time;
Nay, whether none among them be,
Who Servants are this day to Three,
And false to all; observe of those
Whom we for Public service chose,
How many fail the Peoples Trust,
To private persons how unjust
They are; how little good effect
The King or People can expect,
Concerning Peace, while such as they
The Cunning Ambodexters play.
Ask them who sit to take Accounts,
To what their two years pains amounts?
Or, what the Commonwealth it betters,
When they have found who are her debtors;
If when their falsehood shall be known,
(And published throughout the Town)
A Cheating Shark may outface them
Who justly have convicted him,
And be employed as before,
Or else where he may cheat us more.
Ask if they have not power to call
As well the great Thieves, as the small,
To give account; those whom we hear
Cumprivilegio, as it were,
Have plundered at an easy rate,
Coin, Jewels, Household Stuff and Plate:
And if you find they have not leave
To question all men who deceive
The Public Trust; know we are yet
For Peace with Righteousness unfit.
Then mark what Favors many have,
Who sought this Nation to enslave;
How some exposed are to scorn,
Who of this War the brunt have born;
And having heedfully survay'd
How Good with Evil is repaid,
Mind well the Doctrine, and the Use,
And what that may at last produce.
Enquire moreover how you find
To works of Mercy men inclined;
How honest Causes are preferred,
How grieved Petitioners are heard;
How Offices conferred be;
Whether some have not two or three,
Who for the Public neither spent,
Nor gave, nor hazarded, nor lent,
When many better men had none,
Who in your service were undone.
Observe those Pensions how you share,
Which for Relief allotted are;
How little best deservers get,
How many of them not a whit;
How often ill, how seldom well
Rewards and Punishments you deal;
Which are the Pillars whereon stand
The Peace and Honor of the Land.
Observe, if when we spend a day
In praises, or to fast and pray,
If more Hypocrisy therein,
Then true Devotion, has not bin^:
If Preaching tend not more to strife,
Then to sound Doctrine, or good Life:
If more we seek not to fulfill
Our sensual humors, and our will,
Then to perform a Thank-oblation,
Or duties of Humiliation;
Or if the Worship we profess,
Be not an Outside Holiness,
No deeper rooted then the tongue,
Or fruits that fade as soon as sprung:
For, as it proves when you see
These things to trial brought shall be,
You may without much failing guess
What likelihood there is of Peace.
An ear, an eye sometimes too have ye
Upon the Army and the Navy;
An eye severely to behold,
An ear to hear what has been told
Of some who much entrusted were,
With Stores, Arms, and Provisions there;
Or had Commissions to Array,
To furnish, fortify and pay
Ships, Forts or Men; and those in chief,
Employed for Ireland's first relief,
And your first Armies; (even when all
Did lie at stake, and seem to call
For faithful, stout and honest men)
Observe how they discharged then
The Trust reposed; how some were made
Commanders, Pay and Titles had,
But scarce a Man: How others now
Defraud the Public; and if you
(As Fame reports) among them find
Deceit in this accursed kind,
Excuse not them; yea, though at last,
Acts of Oblivion should be past
For open Foes, no Grace provide
For men untrue to their own side;
Lest, as your Peace they have deferred,
They mar it likewise afterward:
For, where employed such are found
When Peace is made, 'twill not be sound.
Enquire (if you can tell of whom
To make Enquiry) what is become
Of all the Public Protestations,
Engaged for private Reparations;
What of that Vow which did profess
A mutual Aid in all distress:
What of the self-denying Vote,
Which goodly Hopes in us begot:
What of those Orders whereupon
Some trusted till they were undone.
What of the Public Faith, in which
We thought our selves exceeding rich,
Though all were lost, so that remained
Inviolated, and unstained.
Enquire (I say) throughout the Land,
In what condition these now stand;
For, when of these you have obtained
That Certainty which may be gained,
It will undoubtedly appear
What we may either hope or fear.
Enquire yet further (lest you may
Expect perhaps a Sunshine day,
And meet a Storm) in what good mind
That sort of People you shall find,
Ycleep'd the Clergy; for the stem
Of our late Troubles, was in them.
Their Factions, Avarice and Pride,
Did first of all these Isles divide:
From them at first, the Firebrarnds came,
That set this Empire in a flame:
When 'twas nigh quenched again, they blew
Those coals which did the flame renew.
The Nations they did re-engage,
The Peoples vexed minds enrage,
By feigned Wiles, and false pretenses,
Abusing tender Consciences:
The Course long since by them begun,
Is to this day continued on:
And therefore take this Truth for me,
(For you shall find it Truth to be)
That till you see these much estranged
From what they are, their posture ehang'd,
Till they shall better their Conditions,
Confine^ themselves to their Commissions,
Leave off to jangle, fool and fiddle
With what they should not intermeddle,
And be as pious, and as wise,
As they are outwardly precise,
(Or, as those few among them are,
For whose sakes GOD abates this War)
Nor King, nor Peers, the Commons neither,
Nor these united altogether,
Shall able be that Peace to make,
Which their Contentions will not shake.
Make one Enquiry more to see
And search what most of those men be
On whose Endeavors you depend,
To bring our troubles to an end.
Mark how their Duties they attend
In private, how their time they spend:
What Company they most frequent,
What matters give them best content:
What by their neighbors they were thought,
Till they obtained what they sought;
And to what purpose they employ
The Power and Places they enjoy.
Then cast an eye upon the Rabble,
And, taking view (if you be able)
Of all together, great and small,
Mark well the Tantamount of all.
Mark if we be not like an Host
That Is routed when the Battel's lost.
And if we deal not gifts and blows,
Like mad men, both to Friends and Foes.
Mark how those Hypocrites, who here
Promoters of the Truth appear,
Walk in their Masking Suits abroad,
As if they thought to cozen GOD
As they do men; mark too, that Crew,
Which is profane in open view,
How blindly, and how daringly
(Even where GOD's Thunderbolts do fly)
They still offend; and whether we
May not to them compared be,
Who sawing are those Planks asunder,
Whereon they stand, when Hell is under.
When these Enquiries you have made,
To see what light may thence be had;
And, when you know as well as I,
Those hind'rances, and Reasons why
That Voice of Peace yet goes not on
Which this time twelve Months was begun;
And, shall observe with due regard,
Whath has been since done, and declared;
It will disclose a great deal more,
Then I have told you heretofore:
But not till then. Yet lest some may
Despair or faint before that day,
I will deliver, ere you go,
A comfortable word or two.
"There may be Peace at last, though yet
"We nor know how, nor merit it:
"For GOD often shows great Mercies where
"The greatest of all Sinners are.
"And, if Self-seekers be discri'de,
"Before this Isle they more divide;
"If Factions, wrongs, and discontent,
"Endanger not this Parliament;
"And if the Faithful Members can
"But cast out from them now and then
"A Trouble-house, and timely swage
"The vexed Peoples rising rage,
"By offering out of their Committees
"(What reign in Counties, Towns and Cities)
"But two or three such Peace-oblations,
"As that was of the EXAMINATIONS,
"And by their Prudence act it so
"That honesty more prized may grow;
"That Priest and People down may lay
"The works of Stubble and of Hay,
"Their Names and Terms of Separation,
"And meekly seek the preservation
"Of Truth in Love: Then in one year
"If Peace be not established here,
"My Loans and Losses yet unpaid,
"With my Arrears three years delai'd,
"I Will forfeit wholly to the State,
"And live still as I do of late,
"By swallowing wrongs and empty Air,
"And Patience kept through faith and prayer.
Thus to the Question made* you have
That Answer which your Prisoner gave,
Who other News will tell, if he
Much longer shall a Prisoner be.
Your Spaniels beaten, at your feet will lie,
Your English Mastives at your face will fly.
Remember that also.
An ADDRESS to the Members of PARLIAMENT in their single Capacities. Imprinted
1657.
THE Author having been compelled to make use of such Extravagant Means as
this, during the sitting of the Long Parliament and thereby left unrelieved;
was constrained to prosecute the like ordinary and extraordinary Expedients
during those Parliaments which were called by Oliver Cromwell, and his
Successor; among which, this was one, left at their Threshold, thus
superscribed, To that Member of Parliament who shall take up this Paper.

SIR, if you are not of this Parliament,
Hereby to greet you, it is not my intent.
But, if a Member of this House you are,
Your taking up these Papers (as it were
By Lot) engages you to manage those
Petitions, which I therewith did enclose,
As you would have another use his Power
For your avail, if now my Case were your:
Whereof take this Account why I thus play
My Cards confused, in this unusual way.
I shall hereby at least guess at the length
Of my Oppressions, or how well my strength
May be improved to bear them; how Contracts,
Sales, Bargains, and your other Public Acts
Will be performed; That as I by presage
Of many things to come, foretold this Age
Before fulfilled; so I might likewise tell
The next Age what I saw done ill or well.
I have often wooed you to entertain
My just Requests, but hitherto in vain;
Though I have many several ways assayed,
To gain respect to what was humbly prayed.
Now therefore, having at your door attended
Six Months at least together unbefriended;
And seeing to obstruct me, every day
New Suitors so increase to stop the way,
That I had little hope with Friends to meet
To hand this in, I laid it at your feet
Who pass in thither, hoping that it may
For an Admission make the quicker way,
And not be kept here waiting at your Gate,
Till hearing and relief shall come too late.
He who shall take this up, and get it read,
Where it shall with respect be answered,
An Obligation will (by doing so)
Impose both upon me, and many more:
For, if my Suits obtain deserved heed,
Some other will have hope as well to speed,
Who now almost despair Relief to have;
And, future Cost and trouble I shall save.
Three Parliaments (the eldest of which three
Might, had it pleased our Lord, have outlived me)
Are dead and gone, since first I did complain
Of Grievances, which unredrest remain:
And now to see a Fourth I have survived,
Which I fear has it self almost outlived,
Unless GOD grant it Power and Will to do
What they in duty are obliged unto;
That they from wrongs the wronged may release,
Proceed with Honor, and conclude in Peace.
To such Achievements there is a middle way
'Twixt This and That; 'twixt Haste and long delayed:
Which if mistaken, or not timely found,
May (as it has done) lead into a Round,
(Or Labyrinth) whereby we may be brought
To Pits and Snares, which have no passage out;
And multiply distractions, till our Prayers
Are turned to Indignation, or Despairs;
Which is their drift, and not their least Design,
Who seek our Liberties to undermine.
When Public Wants with speed must be supplied,
A Private Plaint may then be laid aside;
But not too long deferred, lest it become
A festring sore, not meanly perilsome.
For since an universal Weal consists
Of many Individual Interests,
A perfect Body cannot be enjoyed,
Where one by one the Members are destroyed;
And when the Eye or Ear unheedful grows
Of what afflicts the Fingers and the Toes:
Much less when they neglect what appertains
To keep it from an Ulcer in the Brains.
The Cures therefore, of private Wants, betwixt
Public Transactions, should be intermixed
(At least sometimes) in those emergent things,
Wherein delay of Justice, losses brings
Beyond Repair; or when the State at last
Must bear the damage, when the Care is past;
Or else in point of Honor, suffer more
Then all the Public Treasure will restore.
I grudg not, when GOD's Glory is at stake,
That they who of his Honor Conscience make,
Should take the freedom to debate at large
What may their duties unto him discharge;
Or, when the Common Safety does appear
In hazard, though my Life in danger were:
But, when those brunts are over, if men please
For their mere pleasure, profit, or their ease,
To leave us in a perishing condition,
Then of their Faithfulness they give suspicion,
And I more grieved for what I thereby see
Befalls my Country, then for wrongs to me.
There Is time enough in all straight whatsoever,
For all things, if it well divided were:
And, for our not opportioning aright
The Time we have, (as wise men know we might)
GOD cuts off half the days we should have had,
And our Designments are abortive made.
As we from week to week, from day to day,
Do put off those who for our sorrows pray,
So likewise we our hopes and suits put by
By him on whose Assistance we rely.
An hour therefore, should other-while be spent
To give Reward, as well as Punishment:
As well to make Repayments, as to borrow:
To think on them who help us in our sorrow,
We are obliged, and forth our fruits to bring
In season, like trees planted by a Spring;
Not nine or ten years after they are dead,
(Who by our timely fruit should have been fed)
Lest we be felled by the Wood-man's hand,
Or, like the Fig Tree, wither where we stand.
One day is as well spared sometimes to save
An honest man, as nine to doom a Knave.
Of useful Plants we should have as much care,
As from the good Corn to weed out a Tare.
Some private acts of Justice, with our zeal
To Piety, and to the Public Weal;
And Works of Mercy sprinkled here and there
Among them, like Embroydries would appear
On Flowers of Gold, with Silver interwove,
And helpful be your Grand Work to improve.
But, where few Private Grievances are heard.
God gives their Public Prayers small regard;
And few are in that Commonwealth much joy'd,
By whom their whole well-being is destroyed;
Or which is senseless of their sad estate
Who did help save it from a sadder Fate.
Among such Suffrers, I may self am one,
Who gladly would be better thought upon;
I have as many years already spent,
As are to two men's lives equivalent,
To seek for Justice, with such cost, such trouble,
And loss of time, as makes my Losses double.
So that if but one Suit more at this Rate
I had depending, ten times my Estate,
And ten men's lives, would not afford me time
And means enough, whereby to finish them:
For, my Petitions either were deferred
From month to month, from year to year unheard,
Or answered so, that when my Suit seemed done,
My Case proved worse then when it first begun:
And to obstruct the Justice I implore,
They voice me to be rich, who make me poor.
With mock-shews of Relief I have been fed,
With stones in my distress, instead of bread,
Which had ere this day starved me, but that GOD
Turned many of them into wholesome food,
And raised me a subsistence out of that
Which was designed to ruin my Estate.
If I who had a few Friends, have thus fared,
Alas! how speed poor men whom none regard?
And who from none can claim an obligation,
Either by Friendship, Faction, or Relation?
But now new Misadventures me beset,
Which by delay of Justice do beget
Increasing Mischiefs, that admit no cure
Save what must from a Legislative Power
Derived be; and this befalls so
Perhaps, that I in every Change may know
The general temper, by the pulse that beats
Both in Superior and inferior Seats;
That I and other men may timely see
How little confidence reposed may be
In Lords or Commons, Parliaments or Kings,
Or in the best of all Terrestrial things;
And that henceforth we might depend upon
GOD's Providence, and upon him alone.
If this displease, it cannot make me more
Exposed to sufferings, then I was before.
They who to neither side, nor back, nor further
Can move themselves, need no Restraint by Order:
Nor greatly be afraid what next will come,
Their just Resolvings to divert them from:
And that whereto Necessities compel,
Is done excusably, though not done well.
If much Oppression cracks a wise man's brain,
Who knows whereto it may a fool constrain?
Or how it may the meekest men provoke
To that whereby the Common Peace is broke?
They whom delay of Justice does make poor,
Do lose but their Estates, and may get more;
If otherwhile they are of Life deprived,
They feel not what to feel they might have lived:
But he who does in lifetime, thereby lose
Estate and Credit, shall to Friends and Foes
Become a scorn; whereat if mad he be,
And makes ten thousands grow as mad as he,
Who knows whereto it may at last extend,
Or what will thereon follow in the end?
The fault is theirs who without Mercy stretch
A weak man's Patience further then 'twill reach,
As if he of his Sufferings, sense had none,
Because they no more feel them, then a stone.
My Principle (for which I am abused)
Injoins me, when I scurvily am used,
Where I expect Relief, to show my wrongs,
And Vengeance leave, to whom the same belongs;
But all men cannot be content to stay
GOD's leisure; or, for Justice in his way:
And, what their Wants, Neglects, and Indignation
May tempt them to, is worth consideration.
There is to all things an appointed date,
And they are not wise, who are wise too late.
"One sin remains unacted to the height,
"Which when complete, will ruin all outright.
"And that is this; There are yet in the gap
"Some standing, who with life do yet escape;
"If these removed were, that Abomination
"Which next precedes an utter Desolation,
"Will be set up; and then shall be inflicted
"At full, all those Plagues heretofore predicted.
"Oh God! prevent that Grand, that fatal Guilt,
"I humbly pray; and I believe thou will,
"By raising still to stand before thy face,
"An acceptable number in this place,
"For whose sake thou will spare it from the dooms
"Now threatened, till our great Deliv'rer comes;
"And keep them constant to true self-denial,
" Faith, Love and Patience in their fiery trial:
"For, nor thine, or their Glory it advances
"So much, as when they have deliverances
"From Sufferings in their height, and when they are
"Within a burning Furnace, as they were
"Who had it heated for them seven times more
"Then ere it was at any time before.
This, as were all this Author's other Addresses, were tendered to the late
Parliaments without success, whether expreffed in a serious or extravagant
Mode. And thereby perhaps the true constitution of those times will the better
appear to the glorifying of GOD's Justice; because the personal experience
which he had by feeling those oppressions whereof many others complained, were
to him much more evidenced thereby to be real, then they could be, by what he
seemed to see, or to hear only by report.

HALELVJAH. Or, Britan's Second Remembrancer. Imprinted 1641.
THis First Part of a Review of Neglected Precautions, Predictions and
Remembrances, was begun with the Author's first Book, called Britans
Remembrancer; and this Second Remembrancer shall conclude it: For, though
composed in a Mode much differing from the former, it was an Expedient which
might have produced good Effects, had it not been as much neglected as all
other good means are to this day. It is our duty to make trial of another way,
when one fails; and the Prophets are herein exemplary to us, who often declared
the same Truths in various dressings, and otherwhile in the same words, when
the same or like Occasions were given. That Book containing Two hundred thirty
three spiritual Hymns and Songs; is too large to be abreviated; and therefore
to instance the usefulness of the rest, here shall be inserted but two or three
Hymns out of each Book, the first relating to particular Occasions; the second
to Times; the third to Persons; that all men of all sorts, might be thereby
minded of their Duties at all Times, and upon all Occasions, as appears by this
brief Narration.

A Friend of the Author's, much affecting that Expedient, (as tending to the
advance both of Morality and Virtue, distributed many of the Books among his
Acquaintance, at his own cost, and recommended one of them to a Person of
Quality, who loved Song and Music; but before he had read two lines thereof,
he rejected it with much contempt; whereupon the other somewhat grieved, asked
the reason of his dislike, and received this Answer; Such a Character of it
has (said he) been given by a Learned and Pious Divine, upon whose Judgment I
rely, that I will not lose time in perusing it. Yet at last being importuned,
he took it up, and turning to a Song which was to him instanced as
demonstrating the frothiness of all the rest, he began to read it aloud in
slighting manner, and in a ridiculous Tone; but after the reading of a few
lines, changing his voice, sat still a good space, perusing it in silence;
then suddenly starting up, said thus to his Friend, I heartily thank you for
this Book, and for importuning me to read it; I hope also, it shall teach me
whilst I live, not to depend upon the Judgment of other men, (how religious or
judicious soever they shall be reputed) in those things wherein I ought to use
my own understanding as well as theirs. This is the effect of what was told the
Author, and it is here inserted, in hope it may make some other as wise as that
Gentleman.

The Author in his Epistles before the whole, and each particular Book of that
Volume, has expressed by way of Preoccupat^on, somewhat to prevent prejudice*
and if it had been contemplatively and actually made use of according to his
intention and proposals, might perhaps have reduced this Generation to a better
temper then Precepts without Practice have effected; and made those vain Songs
less delighted in, which are become so numerous, and so affected, that pious
Meditations are nigh quite out of fashion with many; for, not in private only,
but at public Feasts and Meetings also, scurrilous and obscene Songs are
impudently sung without respect to the presence of Matrons, Virgins,
Magistrates and Divines; yea, sometimes are in their despite called for, sung,
and acted with such abominable gesticulations, as are offensive to all modest
hearers and beholders; and befitting only the Solemnities of Bacchus, Venus,
and Priapus; for the abolishing of which Abuse, the Author was a Petitioner
that some provision might be made; and prepared also this Expedient to promove
it; but the carnal profaneness of some, and the sullen Religiousness of others,
who causlesly pretended a Superstitious Design to be therein couched, has
hitherto vacated both his hope and pious Endeavors, notwithstanding all his
Precautions.

An Occasional Hymn when we first awake in the Morning.
DEar GOD! who watch do keep
Round all that honor thee,
To thy Beloved give sleep,
When Rest shall needful be.
My Soul returns thee praise,
That thus refreshed I am,
And that my Tongue a Voice can raise,
To praise thee for the same.
2 As now my soul does shake
Dull sleep out of mine eyes,
So let thy Spirit me awake,
That I from sin may rise.
The Night is past away,
Which filled us full of fears,
And we enjoy another Day,
Wherein thy Grace appears.
3 Oh! let me therefore shun
All Errors of the Night;
Thy Righteousness let me put on,
And walk as in the Light.
Protect me from his Power,
(Since I on thee rely)
Who walks in darkness to devour,
When our long sleep draws nigh.
4 Grant when the Trump shall sound
A summons from the Grave,
My Body then may from the ground
A blessed rising have.
That whatsoever the dreams
Of my Corruption be,
The Vision of thy glorious Beams
May bring full joys to me.
A Hymn when daylight appears.
LOok forth mine eye, look up and view
How bright the daylight shines on me;
And, as the Morning does renew,
Mark how renewed GOD's Mercies be.
Behold, the splendors of the Day
Disperse the shadows of the Night;
And, they who late in darkness lay,
Have now the Comfort of the light.
2 Nor Twilight-Plagues, nor Midnight-fears,
Nor mortal or immortal Foes,
Had power to take us in their snares;
But safe we slept, and safe arose.
And to those days which we have had,
He that is Lord of Day and Night,
Another Day vouchsafes to add,
That our lost hours redeem we might.
3 It is too much to have made void
So many days already past;
Let this therefore be so employed,
As if we knew it were our last.
Most creatures now themselves advance,
Their Morning-sacrifice to bring;
The Herds do skip, the Flocks do dance,
The Winds do pipe, the Birds do sing.
4 Lord, why should these that were decreed
To serve thee in a lower place,
In thankful duties us exceed,
Who have obtained special Grace?
We are obliged much more then those,
Our Voice in thankfulness to raise;
Therefore, oh GOD! our lips unclose,
And teach our Tongues to sing thy praise.
5 Let heart, and hand, and voice accord
This day to magnify thy Name;
And let us every day, oh Lord!
Endeavor to perform the same.
So, when that Morning does appear,
In which thou shall all flesh destroy,
We shall not then awake in fear,
But rise to meet thy Son with joy.
A Hymn when we are putting on our APPAREL.
LORD, had not man sought out by sin
What was untimely known,
His nakedness unfelt had bin,
And wiser he had grown.
But in the stead of what he thought
By lawless means to know,
The knowledge of those things was taught,
Which brings sense of woe.
2 Had he as forward strove to be,
The Fruit of Life to taste,
As on the Death-procuring-Tree
A lustful eye to cast,
The happiness for him prepared
In soul he had obtained,
And in his Body also shared
The bliss for him ordained.
3 But since the flesh did press to see
Her wants before the time,
Both soul and flesh afflicted be
For that presumptuous Crime.
And cumbred so with pain and care,
For Clothing and for Food,
That little their Endeavors are,
To seek their chiefest good.
4 Lord, with a Rose of Innocence,
Thy Servant so array,
That it may take the painful sense
Of outward wants away.
So clothe me with thy Righteousness,
That (though defiled I am)
I may not by my nakedness
Exposed be to shame.
5 Let not the Garments which I wear
My tender flesh to hide,
Be either made a lustful Snare,
Or nourishments of Pride;
But be remembrances to show
The folly of that deed
By which man fell, and fell so low,
As those base Rags to need.
The Second Temporary Hymn. A Temporary Hymn for the First Day of the Week,
commonly called the Lord's Day, or Sunday.
GReat Lord of Time, great King of Heaven,
Since weekly thou renew'st my days,
To thee shall daily thanks be given,
And weekly Sacrifice of Praise.
This day the Light (Time's eldest born)
Her glorious Beams did first display;
And then the Evening and the Morn
Did first obtain the Name of Day.
2 The Depth with Darkness then empal'd,
(That out of which the World was made)
And, which deep Waters thou have called,
Upon this Day beginning had.
And, as upon this Day it was
In which Creation first begun,
So on this Day the work of Grace
In every circumstance was done.
3 For, on this Day thy Christ arose,
And Victor over Death became*
This Day he conquered all his Foes,
And put them to perpetual shame.
Upon this Day it pleased thee
Thy holy Spirit down to send,
That men with Gifts might furnished be,
Thy Gospel's Preaching to attend.
4 This day therefore we set apart
For holy Rest, and holy Rites;
And every sanctified heart
To celebrate this day delights.
Except thereto compelled by need,
Works for the Body we forbear,
That in those works we may proceed,
Which for the souls health needful are.
5 Therefore that now to thee, oh Lord,
A due Oblation bring I may,
Thus to thine Honor I record,
And sing the Blessings of this day.
So let me sing, so mind them still,
And all my life so thankful be,
That when my Course I shall fulfill,
I may acceptance find with thee.
6 Discretion grant me so to know
What Sabbath-Rites thou do require;
And Grace my duty so to do,
That I may keep thy Law entire.
Not doing what should not be done,
Nor ought omitting, fit to do;
Nor over-burth'ning any one
With more then thou enjoin'st them to.
7 But, let me rest my body so,
That to my Soul I do no wrong;
Or, in Devotion heedless grow,
What to my Body's rest belong:
That both in Soul and Body, Lord,
I may still hallow every day
According to thy Holy Word,
And have true Rest in thee for ay.
The Third Temporary Hymn. For MONDAY.
THis Morning brings to mind, oh GOD,
Thy forming of this Airy Sphere,
And spreading of that Orb abro'd,
Wherewith we now surrounded are.
It was the Fabric which thy hand
Vouchsafed upon this day to frame;
And, bounding Waters under land
From those which are above the same.
2 This Airy Firmament both keeps
All breathing Creatures here below,
From suffocation in those Deeps
Whereon, till then, no wind did blow.
To us this Firmament convayes
Those Dews and Showers which often we need,
And all those pleasant Summer-dayes
Whence Profits and Delights proceed.
3 Yea, by this Firmament we gain
The Vision of refreshing Light;
And thereby do as well obtain
The use of hearing, and of sight.
For this days Workmanship, oh Lord,
I praise thee now, and humbly pray,
That I may thankfully record
Thy daily Blessings every day.
A Personal Hymn for a Sovereign PRINCE.
BY me, or by my Father's House
Deserved it could not be,
That I, or any one of us
Obtained this Degree.
But GOD who deals forth his own,
As him it likes best,
On me those Honors has bestown,
Whereof I am poffest.
2 Great hazards many undergo,
Such Titles to acquire,
Yet neither find content below,
Or means of rising higher.
What therefore can I less repay,
To him whose Gift it is,
Then otherwhile to sing or say
Some such like Hymn as this?
3 Let me, O Lord, my Diadem
Unto thy Glory wear,
And be a Blessing unto them
Who my Liege People are.
Let not thy favors make my heart
To swell with wanton Pride;
Or, from those Precepts to depart,
Which ought to be my Guide.
4 But make me still in mind to bear,
From whom this Throne I had,
And that they my own Brethren are
Who Ruler I was made.
Yea, cause me evermore to heed
That I and they are thine,
Although to serve the Public need,
Their Goods and Lives are mine.
5 Since every Subjects Cause to me
Should equally be dear,
In Judgment let the poor man be
As precious as the Peer.
And, lest for them we snares may make
At my chief Council-bo'rd,
Lord let me daily Counsel take
From thy Truth-speaking-Word.
6 Those Traitors chase out of my Court,
Who dare pervert the Laws,
Or, cause me by a false report,
To wrong an honest Cause.
And, let thy Judgments them devour,
How high soever they stand
Who shall abuse my Royal Power,
To hinder thy Command.
7 Within my Realms let no man dare
My Statutes to gainsay;
And, let me live in as much fear,
Thy Laws to disobey.
So I and they whom thou on me,
For Subjects have bestown,
Shall in each other blessed be,
And keep Sedition down.
8 Preserve to me my Royal Dues,
And Grace vouchsafe me still,
My just Prerogative to use
According to thy Will;
That evil men may dread my frown,
The Righteous comfort find,
And I obtain a better Crown
When this must be resigned.
Here ends the First Part of this Review, to which a Second Part shall be added
as GOD enables and permits.
A POSTSCRIPT.
THE uncertainty and changeableness of all temporal things, make us accordingly
mutable in our Purposes. And whereas the Author of the several Books here
abreviated, intended a Retirement to a solitary Habitation in the place of his
Nativity, (upon such Considerations as were expressed in the Preface of this
Review) his Friends resident in and near London, not approving thereof, have
persuaded him to the contrary, by making it probable, That future
Inconveniences would be thereby rather multiplied then diminished: Now
therefore, by considering therewithal, That where GOD's Judgments are most
visible, his Mercy will be there as much evidenced to all who love and trust
unfeignedly in him, he resolves to continue where he is, until he can stay
there no longer, lest he may bury himself alive by removing far from them, by
whose Charity GOD has hitherto preserved him.

There are Faults escaped in the Imprinting or Transcribing of this Review;
which the Author's late Sickness disabled him to take notice of: The Readers
are therefore desired to correct and amend them according to their own
discretion.

The Names of those Printed Books heretofore written by GEORGE WITHER, out of
which this First Part of this Review of Neglected Remembrances, Precautions and
Predictions was collected; mentioning the years in which they were the First or
Second time Imprinted.
BRitans Remembrancer, Imprinted 1627. page 1. The Author's Motto, Nec Habeo,
Nec Careo, Nec Curo, Imprinted 1618. p. 47. Campo Musae, or Field-Musings,
Impr. 1644. p. 49. The Dark Lanthorn, Imprinted 1650. p. 57. The Perpetual
Parliament, Imprinted 1650. p. 69. The Author's Emblems, Imprinted 1634. p. 78.
An Interjection, being a sudden Ejaculation cast in, at the Collecting of this
Review, p. 85. Vaticinium Causuale, Imprinted 1655. p. 100. Verses to the Kings
Majesty, Imprinted 1662. p. 103. A Thankful Retribution, Imprinted 1649. p.
109. Boni Ominis Votum, Imprinted 1656. p. 115. A Si Quis, or Queries,
Imprinted 1648. p. 119. The Author's Petition, Imprinted 1648. p. 125. The
Tired Petitioner, Imprinted without date p. 128. Se Defendendo, Imprinted
without date. p. 132. Justitiarius Justificatus, Impr. without date. p. 131.
Vox Pacifica, Imprinted 1645. p. 132. Carmen Expostulatorium, Imprinted 1647.
p. 146. Letters of Advice, Imprinted 1644. p. 152. A Cause Allegorically
stated, Impr. 1657. p. 159. Mercurius Rusticus, Imprinted without date. p. 161.
What Peace to the Wicked, Imprinted 1646. p. 163. An Address to the Members of
Parliament, imprinted 1657. p. 175. Halelujah, or Britan's Second Remembrancer,
imprinted 1641. p. 183.
FINIS.

